Publisher:Mr. Ajit C. PatelMahavideh FoundationTri-Mandir, Simandhar City,Ahmedabad-Kalol Highway, Adalaj,Dist-Gandhinagar-382421,Gujarat, India.Tel. : +91 79 3983 0100E-Mail : info@dadabhagwan.org©:All Rights Reserved Mr. Deepakbhai DesaiTri-Mandir, Simandhar City, Adalaj-382421Dist.-Gandhinagar-, Gujarat, India.First Edition : 1500 copies,  February 2013Price:Ultimate Humility(leads to Universal oneness)  andAwareness of "I Don't Know Anything"Rs. 100.00Printer:Mahavideh Foundation,Basement, Parshwanath Chambers,Nr. RBI, Usmanpura,Ahmedabad-380014, Gujarat, India.Tel. : +91 79 27542964Aptavani - 4As expounded by theGnani Purush "Dada Bhagwan"8765Originally Compiled in Gujarati by :Dr. Niruben AminPublisher:Mr. Ajit C. PatelMahavideh FoundationTri-Mandir, Simandhar City,Ahmedabad-Kalol Highway, Adalaj,Dist-Gandhinagar-382421,Gujarat, India.Tel. : +91 79 3983 0100E-Mail : info@dadabhagwan.org©:All Rights Reserved Mr. Deepakbhai DesaiTri-Mandir, Simandhar City, Adalaj-382421Dist.-Gandhinagar-, Gujarat, India.First Edition : 1500 copies,  February 2013Price:Ultimate Humility(leads to Universal oneness)  andAwareness of "I Don't Know Anything"Rs. 100.00Printer:Mahavideh Foundation,Basement, Parshwanath Chambers,Nr. RBI, Usmanpura,Ahmedabad-380014, Gujarat, India.Tel. : +91 79 27542964Aptavani - 4As expounded by theGnani Purush "Dada Bhagwan"8765Originally Compiled in Gujarati by :Dr. Niruben AminTrimantraThe Three Mantras that Destroy All Obstacles in LifeNamo VitaragayaI bow to the One who is absolutely free from all attachmentand abhorrenceNamo ArihantanamI bow to the living One who has annihilated all internal en-emies of anger, pride, deceit and greedNamo SiddhanamI bow to the Ones who have attained the state of total andfinal liberationNamo AayariyanamI bow to the Self-realized masters who impart knowledge ofliberation to othersNamo UvazzayanamI bow to those who have received the Knowledge of the Selfand are helping others attain the sameNamo Loye Savva SahunamI bow to all saints everywhere who have received the Knowl-edge of the SelfEso Pancha NamukkaroThese five salutationsSavva PavappanasanoDestroy all demerit karmaMangalanam cha SavvesimOf all that is auspiciousPadhamam Havai MangalamThis is the highestOm Namo Bhagavate VasudevayaI bow to all who have attained the absolute Self in human formOm Namah ShivayaI bow to all human beings who have become instruments forsalvation of the worldJai Sat Chit AnandAwareness of the Eternal is Bliss(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Note About This TranslationThe Gnani Purush Ambalal M. Patel, also commonly knownas Dadashri or Dada, had said that it would be impossible totranslate his satsangs and the knowledge about the Science ofSelf-realization verbatim into English because some of the mean-ings would be lost in the process. Therefore, in order to under-stand precisely the science of Akram Vignan and Self-realizationHe stressed the importance of learning Gujarati.Dadashri did however grant his blessings to translate hiswords into English and other languages so that spiritual seekerscould benefit to a certain degree and later progress through theirown efforts.This is a humble attempt to present to the world, theessence of His Knowledge. This is not a literal translation butgreat care has been taken to preserve His original words and theessence of His message. For certain Gujarati words, severalEnglish words or even sentences are needed to convey the exactmeaning; hence, many Gujarati words have been retained withinthe English text for better reading flow. At the first encounter, theGujarati word will be italicized followed by an immediate expla-nation of its meaning in brackets. Thereafter the Gujarati wordwill be used in the text that follows. This serves as a two-foldbenefit: firstly ease of translation and reading and secondly it willmake the reader more familiar with the Gujarati words criticalfor a deeper understanding of this science. A glossary of all theGujarati words is provided at the back of the book. For addi-tional glossary, visit our website at :www.dadabhagwan.orgMany people have worked diligently towards achievingthis goal and we thank them all. Please note that any errorsencountered in this translation are entirely those of the translators.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)34TrimantraThe Three Mantras that Destroy All Obstacles in LifeNamo VitaragayaI bow to the One who is absolutely free from all attachmentand abhorrenceNamo ArihantanamI bow to the living One who has annihilated all internal en-emies of anger, pride, deceit and greedNamo SiddhanamI bow to the Ones who have attained the state of total andfinal liberationNamo AayariyanamI bow to the Self-realized masters who impart knowledge ofliberation to othersNamo UvazzayanamI bow to those who have received the Knowledge of the Selfand are helping others attain the sameNamo Loye Savva SahunamI bow to all saints everywhere who have received the Knowl-edge of the SelfEso Pancha NamukkaroThese five salutationsSavva PavappanasanoDestroy all demerit karmaMangalanam cha SavvesimOf all that is auspiciousPadhamam Havai MangalamThis is the highestOm Namo Bhagavate VasudevayaI bow to all who have attained the absolute Self in human formOm Namah ShivayaI bow to all human beings who have become instruments forsalvation of the worldJai Sat Chit AnandAwareness of the Eternal is Bliss(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Note About This TranslationThe Gnani Purush Ambalal M. Patel, also commonly knownas Dadashri or Dada, had said that it would be impossible totranslate his satsangs and the knowledge about the Science ofSelf-realization verbatim into English because some of the mean-ings would be lost in the process. Therefore, in order to under-stand precisely the science of Akram Vignan and Self-realizationHe stressed the importance of learning Gujarati.Dadashri did however grant his blessings to translate hiswords into English and other languages so that spiritual seekerscould benefit to a certain degree and later progress through theirown efforts.This is a humble attempt to present to the world, theessence of His Knowledge. This is not a literal translation butgreat care has been taken to preserve His original words and theessence of His message. For certain Gujarati words, severalEnglish words or even sentences are needed to convey the exactmeaning; hence, many Gujarati words have been retained withinthe English text for better reading flow. At the first encounter, theGujarati word will be italicized followed by an immediate expla-nation of its meaning in brackets. Thereafter the Gujarati wordwill be used in the text that follows. This serves as a two-foldbenefit: firstly ease of translation and reading and secondly it willmake the reader more familiar with the Gujarati words criticalfor a deeper understanding of this science. A glossary of all theGujarati words is provided at the back of the book. For addi-tional glossary, visit our website at :www.dadabhagwan.orgMany people have worked diligently towards achievingthis goal and we thank them all. Please note that any errorsencountered in this translation are entirely those of the translators.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)34Introduction to The GnaniOne June evening, in 1958 at around six o’clock, AmbalalMuljibhai Patel, a family man, and a contractor by profession,was sitting on a bench on the busy platform number three atSurat’s train station. Surat is a city in south Gujarat, a westernstate in India. What happened within the next forty-eight minuteswas phenomenal. Spontaneous Self-realization occurred withinAmbalal M. Patel. During this event, his ego completely meltedand from that moment onwards, he became completely detachedfrom all of Ambalal’s thoughts, speech, and actions. He becamethe Lord’s living instrument for the salvation of humankind, throughthe path of knowledge. He called this Lord, ‘Dada Bhagwan.’To everyone he met, he would say, “This Lord, Dada Bhagwanis fully manifested within me. He also resides within all livingbeings. The difference is that within me He is completely ex-pressed and in you, he has yet to manifest.”Who are we? What is God? Who runs this world? Whatis karma? What is liberation? Etc. All the world’s spiritual ques-tions were answered during this event. Thus, nature offeredabsolute vision to the world through the medium of Shree AmbalalMuljibhai Patel.Ambalal was born in Tarasali, a suburb of Baroda andwas later raised in Bhadran, Gujarat. His wife’s name was Hiraba.Although he was a contractor by profession, his life at home andhis interactions with everyone around him were exemplary, evenprior to his Self-realization. After becoming Self-realized andattaining the state of a Gnani, (The Awakened One, Jnani inHindi), his body became a ‘public charitable trust.’Throughout his entire life, he lived by the principle thatthere should not be any commerce in religion, and in all com-merce, there must be religion. He also never took money fromanyone for his own use. He used the profits from his business totake his devotees for pilgrimages to various parts of India.His words became the foundation for the new, direct, andstep-less path to Self-realization called Akram Vignan. Throughhis divine original scientific experiment (The Gnan Vidhi), heimparted this knowledge to others within two hours. Thousandshave received his grace through this process and thousandscontinue to do so even now. ‘Akram’ means without steps; anelevator path or a shortcut, whereas ‘Kram’ means an orderly,step-by-step spiritual path. Akram is now recognized as a directshortcut to the bliss of the Self.Who is Dada Bhagwan?When he explained to others who ‘Dada Bhagwan’ is, hewould say : “What you see here is not ‘Dada Bhagwan’. Whatyou see is ‘A. M. Patel.’ I am a Gnani Purush and ‘He’ that ismanifested within me, is ‘Dada Bhagwan’. He is the Lord within.He is within you and everyone else. He has not yet manifestedwithin you, whereas within me he is fully manifested. I myself amnot a Bhagwan. I too bow down to Dada Bhagwan within me.”Current link for attaining the knowledge ofSelf-realization (Atma Gnan)“I am personally going to impart siddhis (special spiritualpowers) to a few people. After I leave, will there not be a needfor them? People of future generations will need this path, willthey not?”    ~ DadashriParam Pujya Dadashri used to go from town to town, andcountry to country, to give satsang and impart the knowledge ofthe Self as well as knowledge of harmonious worldly interactionto all who came to see him. During his final days, in the fall of1987, he gave his blessing to Dr. Niruben Amin and bestowed hisspecial siddhis upon her, to continue his work. “You will have tobecome a mother to this whole world, Niruben” He told her ashe blessed her. There was no doubt in Dadashri’s mind that Nirubenwas destined to be just that. She had served him with utmostdevotion day and night for over twenty years. Dadashri in turn hadmolded her and prepared her to take on this monumental task.56Introduction to The GnaniOne June evening, in 1958 at around six o’clock, AmbalalMuljibhai Patel, a family man, and a contractor by profession,was sitting on a bench on the busy platform number three atSurat’s train station. Surat is a city in south Gujarat, a westernstate in India. What happened within the next forty-eight minuteswas phenomenal. Spontaneous Self-realization occurred withinAmbalal M. Patel. During this event, his ego completely meltedand from that moment onwards, he became completely detachedfrom all of Ambalal’s thoughts, speech, and actions. He becamethe Lord’s living instrument for the salvation of humankind, throughthe path of knowledge. He called this Lord, ‘Dada Bhagwan.’To everyone he met, he would say, “This Lord, Dada Bhagwanis fully manifested within me. He also resides within all livingbeings. The difference is that within me He is completely ex-pressed and in you, he has yet to manifest.”Who are we? What is God? Who runs this world? Whatis karma? What is liberation? Etc. All the world’s spiritual ques-tions were answered during this event. Thus, nature offeredabsolute vision to the world through the medium of Shree AmbalalMuljibhai Patel.Ambalal was born in Tarasali, a suburb of Baroda andwas later raised in Bhadran, Gujarat. His wife’s name was Hiraba.Although he was a contractor by profession, his life at home andhis interactions with everyone around him were exemplary, evenprior to his Self-realization. After becoming Self-realized andattaining the state of a Gnani, (The Awakened One, Jnani inHindi), his body became a ‘public charitable trust.’Throughout his entire life, he lived by the principle thatthere should not be any commerce in religion, and in all com-merce, there must be religion. He also never took money fromanyone for his own use. He used the profits from his business totake his devotees for pilgrimages to various parts of India.His words became the foundation for the new, direct, andstep-less path to Self-realization called Akram Vignan. Throughhis divine original scientific experiment (The Gnan Vidhi), heimparted this knowledge to others within two hours. Thousandshave received his grace through this process and thousandscontinue to do so even now. ‘Akram’ means without steps; anelevator path or a shortcut, whereas ‘Kram’ means an orderly,step-by-step spiritual path. Akram is now recognized as a directshortcut to the bliss of the Self.Who is Dada Bhagwan?When he explained to others who ‘Dada Bhagwan’ is, hewould say : “What you see here is not ‘Dada Bhagwan’. Whatyou see is ‘A. M. Patel.’ I am a Gnani Purush and ‘He’ that ismanifested within me, is ‘Dada Bhagwan’. He is the Lord within.He is within you and everyone else. He has not yet manifestedwithin you, whereas within me he is fully manifested. I myself amnot a Bhagwan. I too bow down to Dada Bhagwan within me.”Current link for attaining the knowledge ofSelf-realization (Atma Gnan)“I am personally going to impart siddhis (special spiritualpowers) to a few people. After I leave, will there not be a needfor them? People of future generations will need this path, willthey not?”    ~ DadashriParam Pujya Dadashri used to go from town to town, andcountry to country, to give satsang and impart the knowledge ofthe Self as well as knowledge of harmonious worldly interactionto all who came to see him. During his final days, in the fall of1987, he gave his blessing to Dr. Niruben Amin and bestowed hisspecial siddhis upon her, to continue his work. “You will have tobecome a mother to this whole world, Niruben” He told her ashe blessed her. There was no doubt in Dadashri’s mind that Nirubenwas destined to be just that. She had served him with utmostdevotion day and night for over twenty years. Dadashri in turn hadmolded her and prepared her to take on this monumental task.56From the time of Pujya Dadashri’s mortal departure onJanuary 2 1988 to her own mortal departure on March 19th2006, Pujya Niruma as she lovingly came to be called by thou-sands remained true to her promise to Dadashri to carry on hismission of the world’s salvation. She became Dadashri’s repre-sentative of Akram Vignan and became instrumental in spreadingthe knowledge of Akram Vignan throughout the world. She alsobecame an exemplary of pure and unconditional love. Thou-sands of people from all walks of life and from all over the worldhave attained Self-realization through her and are established inthe experience of the pure Soul, while carrying out their worldlyduties and obligations. They experience freedom here and now,while living their daily life.The link of Akram Gnanis now continues with the currentspiritual master Pujya Deepakbhai Desai whom Pujya Dadashrihad also graced with special siddhis to continue to teach theworld about Atma Gnan and Akram Vignan. He was furthermolded and trained by Pujya Niruma who blessed him to con-duct Gnan Vidhi in 2003. Dadashri had said that Deepakbhaiwill become the decorum that will add splendor to the Lord’sreign. Pujya Deepakbhai, in keeping with Dada’s and Niruma’stradition travels extensively within India and abroad, givingsatsangs and imparting the knowledge of the Self to all whocome seeking.Powerful words in scriptures help the seeker in increasinghis desire for liberation. The knowledge of the Self is the finalgoal of all one’s seeking. Without the knowledge of the Selfthere is no liberation. This knowledge of the Self (Atma Gnan)does not exist in books. It exists in the heart of a Gnani. Hence,the knowledge of the Self can only be acquired by meeting aGnani. Through the scientific approach of Akram Vignan, eventoday one can attain Atma Gnan, but it can only occur by meetinga living Atma Gnani and receiving the Atma Gnan. Only a litcandle can light another candle.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)78FOREWORDThe universe undergoes constant changes on the basis ofone evidence interacting with some other evidence (nimit). It isthe spontaneous result of the circumstantial interactions of theoriginal eternal elements. All living beings (jivas—embodiedsouls) desire the nullification of these extra, unintended results(vishesha parinam), and a return to the steadiness of the Self(Atma).The liberation occurs only through an instrument (nimit).And the one and only nimit that gives such liberation is the‘Gnani Purush’, in whom the Soul (Atma; Self) has manifested,and who has the absolute experience of the Self. The fact thatthe liberation does occur is the definite experience of countlesspeople who have met the Gnani Purush (The Enlightened One,and is able to enlighten others).The knowledge that is commonly called knowledge, in thevision of the Gnani Purush, is in fact, intellectual knowledge.The exact knowledge: the knowledge of the Self (Atma; Soul),is millions of miles away from the worldly knowledge about theSelf. It is in the form of the science of the Soul (Atmavignan).The one who knows the science of the Soul becomes free fromwandering life after life (jivanmukta - freedom while living).Many, who have met the Gnani Purush, have attained a stateof the jivanmukta. The desire is that everyone attains that state. The Soul is wordless; speechless, and yet the knowledge-laden words that have arisen, having touched the manifest,absolute Self (Parmatma) – touch the heart, break downinfinite veils of illusion, and enlighten the self from the initial stage,all the way to the absolute  knowledge (Kevalgnan). Thatincomparable speech has been compiled in the Aptavani, andthis is a humble attempt to present it to the seeker of theknowledge of liberation.From the time of Pujya Dadashri’s mortal departure onJanuary 2 1988 to her own mortal departure on March 19th2006, Pujya Niruma as she lovingly came to be called by thou-sands remained true to her promise to Dadashri to carry on hismission of the world’s salvation. She became Dadashri’s repre-sentative of Akram Vignan and became instrumental in spreadingthe knowledge of Akram Vignan throughout the world. She alsobecame an exemplary of pure and unconditional love. Thou-sands of people from all walks of life and from all over the worldhave attained Self-realization through her and are established inthe experience of the pure Soul, while carrying out their worldlyduties and obligations. They experience freedom here and now,while living their daily life.The link of Akram Gnanis now continues with the currentspiritual master Pujya Deepakbhai Desai whom Pujya Dadashrihad also graced with special siddhis to continue to teach theworld about Atma Gnan and Akram Vignan. He was furthermolded and trained by Pujya Niruma who blessed him to con-duct Gnan Vidhi in 2003. Dadashri had said that Deepakbhaiwill become the decorum that will add splendor to the Lord’sreign. Pujya Deepakbhai, in keeping with Dada’s and Niruma’stradition travels extensively within India and abroad, givingsatsangs and imparting the knowledge of the Self to all whocome seeking.Powerful words in scriptures help the seeker in increasinghis desire for liberation. The knowledge of the Self is the finalgoal of all one’s seeking. Without the knowledge of the Selfthere is no liberation. This knowledge of the Self (Atma Gnan)does not exist in books. It exists in the heart of a Gnani. Hence,the knowledge of the Self can only be acquired by meeting aGnani. Through the scientific approach of Akram Vignan, eventoday one can attain Atma Gnan, but it can only occur by meetinga living Atma Gnani and receiving the Atma Gnan. Only a litcandle can light another candle.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)78FOREWORDThe universe undergoes constant changes on the basis ofone evidence interacting with some other evidence (nimit). It isthe spontaneous result of the circumstantial interactions of theoriginal eternal elements. All living beings (jivas—embodiedsouls) desire the nullification of these extra, unintended results(vishesha parinam), and a return to the steadiness of the Self(Atma).The liberation occurs only through an instrument (nimit).And the one and only nimit that gives such liberation is the‘Gnani Purush’, in whom the Soul (Atma; Self) has manifested,and who has the absolute experience of the Self. The fact thatthe liberation does occur is the definite experience of countlesspeople who have met the Gnani Purush (The Enlightened One,and is able to enlighten others).The knowledge that is commonly called knowledge, in thevision of the Gnani Purush, is in fact, intellectual knowledge.The exact knowledge: the knowledge of the Self (Atma; Soul),is millions of miles away from the worldly knowledge about theSelf. It is in the form of the science of the Soul (Atmavignan).The one who knows the science of the Soul becomes free fromwandering life after life (jivanmukta - freedom while living).Many, who have met the Gnani Purush, have attained a stateof the jivanmukta. The desire is that everyone attains that state. The Soul is wordless; speechless, and yet the knowledge-laden words that have arisen, having touched the manifest,absolute Self (Parmatma) – touch the heart, break downinfinite veils of illusion, and enlighten the self from the initial stage,all the way to the absolute  knowledge (Kevalgnan). Thatincomparable speech has been compiled in the Aptavani, andthis is a humble attempt to present it to the seeker of theknowledge of liberation.Aptavani in a book-form is the indirect medium, but thelive energy of the presently manifest Gnani Purush will touchthe heart of the reader and lead him to the portal of the rightvision (samyak darshan). This new vision of the awakenedSelf, if attained through meeting the Gnani Purush, willultimately lead to the experience of the absolute Soul.In this forth series of Aptavani, is presented acollection of the spoken knowledge that imparts deep andresolving explanations which the world has never before knownor imagined. In a simple, straightforward, plain and nativelanguage, that has emanated from the auspicious lips of the mostrevered Gnani Purush Dadashri, in whom ‘Dada Bhagwan –the absolute Self’ became manifest in 1958.That which the world commonly refers to as awareness;the Gnani calls ‘sleep’. That, which is perceived as the ‘seer’,is only the ‘scene’. The one who has the awareness that, ‘I amaware’ is only the inanimate (non-Self) part. The Self iscompletely separate from that.There is such intense experience of oneness of the‘relative’ and the ‘real’, that up to ninety-nine percent (almosttowards the end), the two run parallel, in which the original ‘real’mirrors the illusory ‘relative.’ Their proximity to each othermanifests as one, until the time when the two are separated atthe final link. The secret of all of this is disclosed only by the‘Gnani Purush’, who himself has had the experience. Onlythen, one experiences the great difference between the illusoryawareness (bhrant jagruti), and the awareness of the pure Soul(Atma jagruti).For a long time, for the purpose of clarification, attemptshave been made to differentiate between destiny (prarabdha),and independent effort or free will (purusharth). The differencehas already been told by the experienced ‘Gnanis.’ But becauseof the prevalence of the indirect knowledge, its properunderstanding has virtually become fragmented. Commonly, theawareness of ‘doership’ attempts to attain that ‘doership’, andthe results of those attempts, is believed to be independent effortor free will (purusharth). In the Gnani’s vision, all of that iscompletely destiny (prarabdha).Anything that is experienced through the five senses andthe mind is all destinies (prarabdha). The independent effort(purusharth) part is subtle, and it is difficult to fathom. Theindependent effort of human beings is illusory. Time cycles ofcause and effect remain in motion, uninterrupted, on account ofthat illusory independent effort of human beings. When the rightindependent effort (purusharth) is done, this comes to an end.The right independent effort is possible only after one hasbecome the Self (Purush). This happens after Self-realization.Right independent effort is continual (akhand), unending(avirata), and non-dependent (niralumb). A perpetual state ofliberation prevails through the alertness of this effort.In the universe, there is no shortage of things. However,they are not attained, because of the obstruction created byone’s own ‘self’. The secret of these hindrances, and all thehidden keys that help one to remain aware about them, havebeen simply and effortlessly clarified by the manifest ‘GnaniPurush.’What is karma? What is it that binds one with karma?What gives person liberation from karma? Who is the motherof karma? Who is the father? These and other deeper questionsare very difficult to resolve. The scriptures have told useverything, but it is like instruction with a pointing of finger.Because of change in vision, when the indication is towardsNorth, it is perceived as South, so that the person proceeds inthat direction. How then can one reach one’s destination? Eventhe scriptures are not capable of explaining the meaning. Onlythe Gnani Purush can give you this. The revered Dadashri has910Aptavani in a book-form is the indirect medium, but thelive energy of the presently manifest Gnani Purush will touchthe heart of the reader and lead him to the portal of the rightvision (samyak darshan). This new vision of the awakenedSelf, if attained through meeting the Gnani Purush, willultimately lead to the experience of the absolute Soul.In this forth series of Aptavani, is presented acollection of the spoken knowledge that imparts deep andresolving explanations which the world has never before knownor imagined. In a simple, straightforward, plain and nativelanguage, that has emanated from the auspicious lips of the mostrevered Gnani Purush Dadashri, in whom ‘Dada Bhagwan –the absolute Self’ became manifest in 1958.That which the world commonly refers to as awareness;the Gnani calls ‘sleep’. That, which is perceived as the ‘seer’,is only the ‘scene’. The one who has the awareness that, ‘I amaware’ is only the inanimate (non-Self) part. The Self iscompletely separate from that.There is such intense experience of oneness of the‘relative’ and the ‘real’, that up to ninety-nine percent (almosttowards the end), the two run parallel, in which the original ‘real’mirrors the illusory ‘relative.’ Their proximity to each othermanifests as one, until the time when the two are separated atthe final link. The secret of all of this is disclosed only by the‘Gnani Purush’, who himself has had the experience. Onlythen, one experiences the great difference between the illusoryawareness (bhrant jagruti), and the awareness of the pure Soul(Atma jagruti).For a long time, for the purpose of clarification, attemptshave been made to differentiate between destiny (prarabdha),and independent effort or free will (purusharth). The differencehas already been told by the experienced ‘Gnanis.’ But becauseof the prevalence of the indirect knowledge, its properunderstanding has virtually become fragmented. Commonly, theawareness of ‘doership’ attempts to attain that ‘doership’, andthe results of those attempts, is believed to be independent effortor free will (purusharth). In the Gnani’s vision, all of that iscompletely destiny (prarabdha).Anything that is experienced through the five senses andthe mind is all destinies (prarabdha). The independent effort(purusharth) part is subtle, and it is difficult to fathom. Theindependent effort of human beings is illusory. Time cycles ofcause and effect remain in motion, uninterrupted, on account ofthat illusory independent effort of human beings. When the rightindependent effort (purusharth) is done, this comes to an end.The right independent effort is possible only after one hasbecome the Self (Purush). This happens after Self-realization.Right independent effort is continual (akhand), unending(avirata), and non-dependent (niralumb). A perpetual state ofliberation prevails through the alertness of this effort.In the universe, there is no shortage of things. However,they are not attained, because of the obstruction created byone’s own ‘self’. The secret of these hindrances, and all thehidden keys that help one to remain aware about them, havebeen simply and effortlessly clarified by the manifest ‘GnaniPurush.’What is karma? What is it that binds one with karma?What gives person liberation from karma? Who is the motherof karma? Who is the father? These and other deeper questionsare very difficult to resolve. The scriptures have told useverything, but it is like instruction with a pointing of finger.Because of change in vision, when the indication is towardsNorth, it is perceived as South, so that the person proceeds inthat direction. How then can one reach one’s destination? Eventhe scriptures are not capable of explaining the meaning. Onlythe Gnani Purush can give you this. The revered Dadashri has9101112INTRODUCTION[1] Awakened AwarenessOne is the Atma (Self) and is capable of illuminating theentire universe. As the Self, one has infinite energy (anant shakti).Even so, all the helplessness, suffering, pain and insecurity areexperienced by the ‘self’. How unusual is this! What is thereason for it? It is because, one is not aware of the Self(swaroop), One’s own energy (shakti; power), and the realm(satta) of the Self. Once the Self becomes awakened (jagrut),there prevails the bliss of the ‘Owner’ of the entire universe.The whole world is entrapped in asleep to the Self(bhaavnindra). The lack of awareness, as to what is beneficialand what is harmful in this world, and in the world hereafter:anger, pride, deceit, greed; disputes, and worries, are allperpetuated because of the prevailing bhaavnindra. Whereasthe whole world is preoccupied with the pleasures of the non-Self complex (pudgal), the Gnani is in the state of theawareness of the Self, and in the bliss of the Self (Atma-ramanata). Perfect awareness is the absolute knowledge(Kevalgnan), when the awareness reaches one hundred percent,absolute knowledge arises.Awareness (jagruti) is truly the mother of liberation(moksha). As the awareness about the worldly life increases,one realizes its meaningless futility. Ultimately this results in thehighest dispassion towards all worldly pleasures (vairagya).And the one who has reached the height of awareness of theknowledge of the senses, is not divisive as a result of differencesof opinions with anyone, but is ‘everywhere adjustable.’However, the birth of anger, pride, deceit, greed (kashays–inner enemies) only occurs in the absence of awareness. Theone who has no awareness of kashays is very much in anignorant state. The one, who is aware of them, is slightly alert.explained a very intricate and profound subject like karma, ina simple and easy way.By saying for the first time that, speech is a ‘tapedrecord’, Dadashri has fractured all ownership of speech. Howdoes this ‘record’ play? How is this ‘record’ made? What arethe results when it is played? He has revealed these, and otherdeepest of the deep secrets. With a very simple explanation heelucidates the entire complex science behind speech!The underlying mysteries of many similar subjects havebeen exposed. Attempts are made to publish as many of themas possible. It is hoped that for those who are ‘positive’, life-oriented thinkers, philosophers, ‘seekers’, and those who desireliberation, this Aptavani (authentic speech of the GnaniPurush) will impart moment to moment awareness.In an attempt to convert the direct speech that hasemanated from the very mouth of the auspicious Gnani Purush,into this indirect presentation, we sincerely ask for forgivenessfor any errors made in its contents.- Dr. Niruben Amin(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)1112INTRODUCTION[1] Awakened AwarenessOne is the Atma (Self) and is capable of illuminating theentire universe. As the Self, one has infinite energy (anant shakti).Even so, all the helplessness, suffering, pain and insecurity areexperienced by the ‘self’. How unusual is this! What is thereason for it? It is because, one is not aware of the Self(swaroop), One’s own energy (shakti; power), and the realm(satta) of the Self. Once the Self becomes awakened (jagrut),there prevails the bliss of the ‘Owner’ of the entire universe.The whole world is entrapped in asleep to the Self(bhaavnindra). The lack of awareness, as to what is beneficialand what is harmful in this world, and in the world hereafter:anger, pride, deceit, greed; disputes, and worries, are allperpetuated because of the prevailing bhaavnindra. Whereasthe whole world is preoccupied with the pleasures of the non-Self complex (pudgal), the Gnani is in the state of theawareness of the Self, and in the bliss of the Self (Atma-ramanata). Perfect awareness is the absolute knowledge(Kevalgnan), when the awareness reaches one hundred percent,absolute knowledge arises.Awareness (jagruti) is truly the mother of liberation(moksha). As the awareness about the worldly life increases,one realizes its meaningless futility. Ultimately this results in thehighest dispassion towards all worldly pleasures (vairagya).And the one who has reached the height of awareness of theknowledge of the senses, is not divisive as a result of differencesof opinions with anyone, but is ‘everywhere adjustable.’However, the birth of anger, pride, deceit, greed (kashays–inner enemies) only occurs in the absence of awareness. Theone who has no awareness of kashays is very much in anignorant state. The one, who is aware of them, is slightly alert.explained a very intricate and profound subject like karma, ina simple and easy way.By saying for the first time that, speech is a ‘tapedrecord’, Dadashri has fractured all ownership of speech. Howdoes this ‘record’ play? How is this ‘record’ made? What arethe results when it is played? He has revealed these, and otherdeepest of the deep secrets. With a very simple explanation heelucidates the entire complex science behind speech!The underlying mysteries of many similar subjects havebeen exposed. Attempts are made to publish as many of themas possible. It is hoped that for those who are ‘positive’, life-oriented thinkers, philosophers, ‘seekers’, and those who desireliberation, this Aptavani (authentic speech of the GnaniPurush) will impart moment to moment awareness.In an attempt to convert the direct speech that hasemanated from the very mouth of the auspicious Gnani Purush,into this indirect presentation, we sincerely ask for forgivenessfor any errors made in its contents.- Dr. Niruben Amin(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)1314And the one who ‘washes’ them off after they occur throughrepentance (pratikraman) is awake and alert (jagrut). And theone who is exceptionally alert will turn the kashays around evenbefore they occur. Furthermore, the one who ‘fuels’ the kashaysis terribly ignorant.The vision that sees one’s own faults is the measure ofawareness. The vision that sees faults of others shrouds one’sawareness with serious ‘veils’ (coverings).  The Gnani sits onthe summit of awareness. His subtler (sookshmatar) andsubtlest (sookshmatam) mistakes, hurt no one; he sees them inGnan and he ‘washes’ them away. He is faultless (nirdosh) andhe sees the world as being faultless – this is called the state ofawareness. The highest awareness is that while conversing withsomeone, he has the continuous awareness (laksha) that theother person is pure Soul (Shuddhatma).In the Kramic path, the traditional step-by-step path toSelf-realization,  the awareness of the intention (bhaav jagruti,‘cause’ karma) is considered the best of all; whereas in the pathof Akram Vignan, the current, unique, non-sequential and directpath to Self-realization, the Self-awareness which is beyondintent or non-intent (bhaav-abhaav), is easily gained by thegrace of the Gnani! The constant presence of the completeknowledge in the form of Gnata (the ‘Knower’) and the gneya(object to be known) is called complete awareness! Toceaselessly remain in the special directives (Agnas) of theGnani Purush is considered a high level of awareness! Theapplication of seeing pure Soul in every living being is also a highlevel of awareness.Initially, the awareness arises in the worldly interactions(vyavahar). After that, one ‘sleeps’ in the worldly interactionsand awakens to the awareness of the Self (nischay). Whenthere is no conflict anywhere, when there is no dissension as aresult of differing opinion, one is said to be in the awareness ofthe worldly interactions (vyavahar). In this awareness, there aremany kashays; whereas in the awareness of the Self (nischay),these kashays (anger, pride, deceit and greed) have becomerootless! Being aware of each and every act of the antahkaran(the inner complex of the self comprised of mind, intellect, chitand ego), is the true awareness.In the early stages of awareness, nobody suffers at anytime because of us. Subsequently, we have no suffering at anytime, because of others. In the stages of awareness, there isnatural oneness with the pure Soul.The awareness of awakening Kundalini (yogic power;corporeal energy) or traditional methods of meditation do nothelp increase awareness, but they do increase the ego.‘Meditation’ is a form of intoxication primarily for the ego(maadakata). There is a possibility for awareness to flourishduring a situation of internal ‘burning’ (due to kashays), but theintoxication of ‘meditation’, covers the awareness with ashes.It is possible to attain the awareness needed for liberationthrough the worship of the Souls with the awareness; beginningwith the one who has just attained the Self, and going all the wayup to the one who has reached the state of absolute knowledge(Kevalgnan). Through the Gnani’s grace, one can make aconnection with the current living Tirthankar – Shree SimandharSwami, who dwells in Mahavideh Kshetra. He has AbsoluteAwareness and He is a vital instrument for our liberation(moksha). Through His continuous worship, it is possible for usto go there from here, and reside at His lotus feet (in the nextlife), and thereafter, attain liberation (moksha).In the mundane worldly matters, where the world isawake; the Gnanis are ‘asleep’, and in spiritual matters, wherethe world is ‘asleep’, the Gnanis are awake! The worldlyawareness is with the ego; whereas with awareness without theego, there is liberation (moksha)!1314And the one who ‘washes’ them off after they occur throughrepentance (pratikraman) is awake and alert (jagrut). And theone who is exceptionally alert will turn the kashays around evenbefore they occur. Furthermore, the one who ‘fuels’ the kashaysis terribly ignorant.The vision that sees one’s own faults is the measure ofawareness. The vision that sees faults of others shrouds one’sawareness with serious ‘veils’ (coverings).  The Gnani sits onthe summit of awareness. His subtler (sookshmatar) andsubtlest (sookshmatam) mistakes, hurt no one; he sees them inGnan and he ‘washes’ them away. He is faultless (nirdosh) andhe sees the world as being faultless – this is called the state ofawareness. The highest awareness is that while conversing withsomeone, he has the continuous awareness (laksha) that theother person is pure Soul (Shuddhatma).In the Kramic path, the traditional step-by-step path toSelf-realization,  the awareness of the intention (bhaav jagruti,‘cause’ karma) is considered the best of all; whereas in the pathof Akram Vignan, the current, unique, non-sequential and directpath to Self-realization, the Self-awareness which is beyondintent or non-intent (bhaav-abhaav), is easily gained by thegrace of the Gnani! The constant presence of the completeknowledge in the form of Gnata (the ‘Knower’) and the gneya(object to be known) is called complete awareness! Toceaselessly remain in the special directives (Agnas) of theGnani Purush is considered a high level of awareness! Theapplication of seeing pure Soul in every living being is also a highlevel of awareness.Initially, the awareness arises in the worldly interactions(vyavahar). After that, one ‘sleeps’ in the worldly interactionsand awakens to the awareness of the Self (nischay). Whenthere is no conflict anywhere, when there is no dissension as aresult of differing opinion, one is said to be in the awareness ofthe worldly interactions (vyavahar). In this awareness, there aremany kashays; whereas in the awareness of the Self (nischay),these kashays (anger, pride, deceit and greed) have becomerootless! Being aware of each and every act of the antahkaran(the inner complex of the self comprised of mind, intellect, chitand ego), is the true awareness.In the early stages of awareness, nobody suffers at anytime because of us. Subsequently, we have no suffering at anytime, because of others. In the stages of awareness, there isnatural oneness with the pure Soul.The awareness of awakening Kundalini (yogic power;corporeal energy) or traditional methods of meditation do nothelp increase awareness, but they do increase the ego.‘Meditation’ is a form of intoxication primarily for the ego(maadakata). There is a possibility for awareness to flourishduring a situation of internal ‘burning’ (due to kashays), but theintoxication of ‘meditation’, covers the awareness with ashes.It is possible to attain the awareness needed for liberationthrough the worship of the Souls with the awareness; beginningwith the one who has just attained the Self, and going all the wayup to the one who has reached the state of absolute knowledge(Kevalgnan). Through the Gnani’s grace, one can make aconnection with the current living Tirthankar – Shree SimandharSwami, who dwells in Mahavideh Kshetra. He has AbsoluteAwareness and He is a vital instrument for our liberation(moksha). Through His continuous worship, it is possible for usto go there from here, and reside at His lotus feet (in the nextlife), and thereafter, attain liberation (moksha).In the mundane worldly matters, where the world isawake; the Gnanis are ‘asleep’, and in spiritual matters, wherethe world is ‘asleep’, the Gnanis are awake! The worldlyawareness is with the ego; whereas with awareness without theego, there is liberation (moksha)!1516[2]Dhyan (Meditation)What is meditation (dhyan)? Meditation is not somethingthat one has to ‘do’. Meditation (dhyan) happens naturally.Meditation is a result. What the world calls meditation, is notmeditation (dhyan), but it is concentration (ekagrata).Vitarags (the fully enlightened beings who have noattachment or abhorrence), have described four types ofmeditation: When someone insults you, and you experiencewrath at that time, the resulting anger is called raudradhyan(adverse internal meditation that hurts the self and others), andthe effect of this result will hurt the ‘self’ and will reach others!However, if it affects only you and no one else, then it isartadhyan (adverse internal meditation that hurts the self).Artadhyan also comprises worries such as, “What will becomeof me?” and worries about the future, etc.In events that cause an effect on us, when a personregards them as: “This is the manifestation of the unfolding of myown karma. The other person is simply instrumental (nimit) init; he is faultless (nirdosh)”; when such a state results within, itis called dharmadhyan (virtuous meditation; absence ofartadhyan or raudradhyan). If it remains in one’s awareness(laksha) that, “I am pure Soul (Shuddhatma)”, and others areseen as pure Soul, then that is called shukladhyan (meditationas the Self).Once the goal (dhyeya) is decided and one becomesthe dhyata (one who meditates on the goal) and when the two(dhyeya and dhyata) make a connection, then meditation(dhyan) at the time, is simultaneous and occurs naturally. Theego is present when the goal (dhyeya) is being decided, but itis absent during meditation. There is ego in doing actions, butnot in meditation. Doing actions is not meditation, but that whichresults from the act of doing is meditation, and here, the ego isabsent. Meditation (dhyan) is not ‘done’ (it cannot be ‘done’);it happens (naturally). Artadhyan and raudradhyan just happenby themselves. There is no ‘doer’ in dharmadhyan.Shukladhyan (meditation as the Self) is a natural state.After artadhyan occurs, if there is the belief that, “I am doingartadhyan,” then the ego of ‘doership’ is present. The ego is thedhyata (the one that meditates) in artadhyan, raudradhyanand dharmadhyan. In shukladhyan, however, the ego is notthe dhyata, so therefore it is a natural state. It is the state of theSelf (Atma-parinati).For the purpose of attaining moksha, no other meditationis as important as the meditation of pure Self (Atmadhyan orshukladhyan). The meditation of the Self (Atma) keeps one inconstant bliss.To remove attachment-abhorrence, meditation is notrequired. If the science of the Vitarag is known, attachment-abhorrence departs naturally.[3]Prarabdha – PurusharthWithout understanding the line of demarcation betweendestiny (prarabdha) and self-effort (free will; purusharth),how can one understand one’s own ‘doership’ or ‘non-doership’? The whole world is engulfed in this unsolvedproblem. Who else can show you the difference between thetwo, other than the Gnani Purush, who has attained the exactstate of real purusharth? In the world, in this day and age ofthe time, the subtlest differences between destiny and self-effort have been exposed through the speech of the deeplyrevered Gnani Purush Dadashri. It opens up a new way forthe seekers!Whatever is done through the five senses is not self-effort(purusharth), but destiny (prarabdha).  From morning till1516[2]Dhyan (Meditation)What is meditation (dhyan)? Meditation is not somethingthat one has to ‘do’. Meditation (dhyan) happens naturally.Meditation is a result. What the world calls meditation, is notmeditation (dhyan), but it is concentration (ekagrata).Vitarags (the fully enlightened beings who have noattachment or abhorrence), have described four types ofmeditation: When someone insults you, and you experiencewrath at that time, the resulting anger is called raudradhyan(adverse internal meditation that hurts the self and others), andthe effect of this result will hurt the ‘self’ and will reach others!However, if it affects only you and no one else, then it isartadhyan (adverse internal meditation that hurts the self).Artadhyan also comprises worries such as, “What will becomeof me?” and worries about the future, etc.In events that cause an effect on us, when a personregards them as: “This is the manifestation of the unfolding of myown karma. The other person is simply instrumental (nimit) init; he is faultless (nirdosh)”; when such a state results within, itis called dharmadhyan (virtuous meditation; absence ofartadhyan or raudradhyan). If it remains in one’s awareness(laksha) that, “I am pure Soul (Shuddhatma)”, and others areseen as pure Soul, then that is called shukladhyan (meditationas the Self).Once the goal (dhyeya) is decided and one becomesthe dhyata (one who meditates on the goal) and when the two(dhyeya and dhyata) make a connection, then meditation(dhyan) at the time, is simultaneous and occurs naturally. Theego is present when the goal (dhyeya) is being decided, but itis absent during meditation. There is ego in doing actions, butnot in meditation. Doing actions is not meditation, but that whichresults from the act of doing is meditation, and here, the ego isabsent. Meditation (dhyan) is not ‘done’ (it cannot be ‘done’);it happens (naturally). Artadhyan and raudradhyan just happenby themselves. There is no ‘doer’ in dharmadhyan.Shukladhyan (meditation as the Self) is a natural state.After artadhyan occurs, if there is the belief that, “I am doingartadhyan,” then the ego of ‘doership’ is present. The ego is thedhyata (the one that meditates) in artadhyan, raudradhyanand dharmadhyan. In shukladhyan, however, the ego is notthe dhyata, so therefore it is a natural state. It is the state of theSelf (Atma-parinati).For the purpose of attaining moksha, no other meditationis as important as the meditation of pure Self (Atmadhyan orshukladhyan). The meditation of the Self (Atma) keeps one inconstant bliss.To remove attachment-abhorrence, meditation is notrequired. If the science of the Vitarag is known, attachment-abhorrence departs naturally.[3]Prarabdha – PurusharthWithout understanding the line of demarcation betweendestiny (prarabdha) and self-effort (free will; purusharth),how can one understand one’s own ‘doership’ or ‘non-doership’? The whole world is engulfed in this unsolvedproblem. Who else can show you the difference between thetwo, other than the Gnani Purush, who has attained the exactstate of real purusharth? In the world, in this day and age ofthe time, the subtlest differences between destiny and self-effort have been exposed through the speech of the deeplyrevered Gnani Purush Dadashri. It opens up a new way forthe seekers!Whatever is done through the five senses is not self-effort(purusharth), but destiny (prarabdha).  From morning till1718evening, a person runs around, preoccupied with his job orbusiness, respires, reads books and scriptures, meditates, doeschanting of God’s name (japa or mantra) and penance. That isdestiny (prarabdha). After we eat our food, what purusharth(self-effort) do we make for its digestion? Nature runs our ‘innermachinery’ so pleasantly, without any interference in our part, sowill it not run the ‘outer’ matters as well? But because of theignorance about it, one cannot help one’s egoism of, ‘I am thedoer’!In the running waters of the river Narmada, if a rock turnsinto the shape of an idol (shaligram), who did what sort of self-effort there? And if the other rocks remained stones and sunk inthe ocean, is it because of their ‘laziness’? Who is the ‘doer’here, and how much ‘doership’ is there? Things happenaccording to whatever circumstances one encounters! In thepath of natural and spiritual evolution (samsaran marg), all theliving beings, some after infinite collisions and wanderings, takebirth in India. And there, if one meets the Gnani Purush, andby his grace, attains the Self-realization, one becomes an idol(shaligram)! Only after Self-realization does one become the‘Self’ (Purush) and does the ‘real’ ‘Self-effort’ (purusharth).Until then, it is called deluded or illusory self-effort (bhrantpurusharth). Real Self-effort is when there is no attachment-abhorrence in the resultant effect of the non-Self complex(pudgal).Because of the existence of ego, the seeds (causes) ofkarma are being sown. And when they yield fruits (effects); theresult is either bitter or sweet. Now it is considered deludedself-effort (bhrant-purusharth) to change an improper ‘effect’to a proper one! Whatever circumstances that present themselvesis destiny, and self-effort is needed to maintain equanimity. Tomaintain steadiness in ‘slippery’ circumstances, is self-effort. Tochange artadhyan and raudradhyan into dharmadhyan is self-effort.The ‘Akram Vignani’ (the ‘scientist’ of the direct path tothe Self) has removed the web of misunderstanding aboutdestiny (prarabdha) and self-effort – free will (purusharth) andunraveled the right understanding about ‘who the doer is’,through his discovery of vyavasthit shakti (‘ScientificCircumstantial Evidence’). This helps the Self-realized to reachthe state of the absolute Self! As long as there is the awarenessof, ‘I am the ‘doer’,’ the understanding of ‘Scientific CircumstantialEvidences’ is like a golden dagger! Where there is ego; the ‘self’becomes the ‘doer’. Where there is no ego, the ‘doer’ is‘Scientific Circumstantial Evidences.’Pure, applied, awakened awareness of the Self (shuddhaupayog) is the ‘real’ self-effort (purusharth). The victory overkashays (anger, pride, deceit and greed) is called self-effort(purusharth). And absolute equanimity (samata) has beencalled the state of the Self that arises from Gnan. Self-control(yama), disciplines (niyam), and restraints (saiyam) have beencalled self-efforts. What is the difference between restraints(saiyam) and penance (tapa)? There is no penance (tapa) insaiyam; whereas in penance (tapa) there is ‘heat’; the mind isbeing heated! To obey the Gnani’s Agnas (special directivesgiven by the Gnani Purush that sustains the enlightened stateafter the Gnan Vidhi) is Self-effort – that is the only religion.Neither destiny nor self-effort is the higher; the one whounderstands them both is the higher, so says the Gnani Purush.To eat junk food is karma of destiny (effect) and to getdysentery is the result of destiny karma (effect of effect). Eatingjunk food is the result of the accumulated karma (sanchitkarma) of the previous life! So now, how can this result ofdestiny karma be changed? Change can only be made while theaccumulating karmas are being ‘charged’ or created.That which happens in this life (dravya), is all destiny, andintent (bhaav) is all self-effort. In the state of illusion (non-Self-1718evening, a person runs around, preoccupied with his job orbusiness, respires, reads books and scriptures, meditates, doeschanting of God’s name (japa or mantra) and penance. That isdestiny (prarabdha). After we eat our food, what purusharth(self-effort) do we make for its digestion? Nature runs our ‘innermachinery’ so pleasantly, without any interference in our part, sowill it not run the ‘outer’ matters as well? But because of theignorance about it, one cannot help one’s egoism of, ‘I am thedoer’!In the running waters of the river Narmada, if a rock turnsinto the shape of an idol (shaligram), who did what sort of self-effort there? And if the other rocks remained stones and sunk inthe ocean, is it because of their ‘laziness’? Who is the ‘doer’here, and how much ‘doership’ is there? Things happenaccording to whatever circumstances one encounters! In thepath of natural and spiritual evolution (samsaran marg), all theliving beings, some after infinite collisions and wanderings, takebirth in India. And there, if one meets the Gnani Purush, andby his grace, attains the Self-realization, one becomes an idol(shaligram)! Only after Self-realization does one become the‘Self’ (Purush) and does the ‘real’ ‘Self-effort’ (purusharth).Until then, it is called deluded or illusory self-effort (bhrantpurusharth). Real Self-effort is when there is no attachment-abhorrence in the resultant effect of the non-Self complex(pudgal).Because of the existence of ego, the seeds (causes) ofkarma are being sown. And when they yield fruits (effects); theresult is either bitter or sweet. Now it is considered deludedself-effort (bhrant-purusharth) to change an improper ‘effect’to a proper one! Whatever circumstances that present themselvesis destiny, and self-effort is needed to maintain equanimity. Tomaintain steadiness in ‘slippery’ circumstances, is self-effort. Tochange artadhyan and raudradhyan into dharmadhyan is self-effort.The ‘Akram Vignani’ (the ‘scientist’ of the direct path tothe Self) has removed the web of misunderstanding aboutdestiny (prarabdha) and self-effort – free will (purusharth) andunraveled the right understanding about ‘who the doer is’,through his discovery of vyavasthit shakti (‘ScientificCircumstantial Evidence’). This helps the Self-realized to reachthe state of the absolute Self! As long as there is the awarenessof, ‘I am the ‘doer’,’ the understanding of ‘Scientific CircumstantialEvidences’ is like a golden dagger! Where there is ego; the ‘self’becomes the ‘doer’. Where there is no ego, the ‘doer’ is‘Scientific Circumstantial Evidences.’Pure, applied, awakened awareness of the Self (shuddhaupayog) is the ‘real’ self-effort (purusharth). The victory overkashays (anger, pride, deceit and greed) is called self-effort(purusharth). And absolute equanimity (samata) has beencalled the state of the Self that arises from Gnan. Self-control(yama), disciplines (niyam), and restraints (saiyam) have beencalled self-efforts. What is the difference between restraints(saiyam) and penance (tapa)? There is no penance (tapa) insaiyam; whereas in penance (tapa) there is ‘heat’; the mind isbeing heated! To obey the Gnani’s Agnas (special directivesgiven by the Gnani Purush that sustains the enlightened stateafter the Gnan Vidhi) is Self-effort – that is the only religion.Neither destiny nor self-effort is the higher; the one whounderstands them both is the higher, so says the Gnani Purush.To eat junk food is karma of destiny (effect) and to getdysentery is the result of destiny karma (effect of effect). Eatingjunk food is the result of the accumulated karma (sanchitkarma) of the previous life! So now, how can this result ofdestiny karma be changed? Change can only be made while theaccumulating karmas are being ‘charged’ or created.That which happens in this life (dravya), is all destiny, andintent (bhaav) is all self-effort. In the state of illusion (non-Self-1920realized; bhranti), all human beings have continual intent-basedself-effort (bhaav purusharth), on account of which the bondsof karma for the next life are created; moreover, theythemselves are not even aware of this![4]Shraddha (Faith)Those who make a mockery of blind faith (andha-shraddha) do not know how much blind faith they themselveshave! On what faith is the act of drinking water done? Whatproof is there that there is no poison in it? What is the proof thatan insect or a tiny lizard has not fallen in the food? Does anyoneinquire about this? Are people not moving on, with blind faith?Thus, not a single step is taken without blind faith, so how canone criticize anyone else’s blind faith?[5]OpinionVision (drashti) is created on the basis of opinions(abhipraya), and then one ‘sees’ according to that vision. It isnot the fault of the vision if one feels uneasy with a certainperson. The mistake is being made by the opinion that has ledto such a vision (drashti).The vision with “prejudice” creates the worldly life (theperpetual cycle of birth and death). In spite of being aneyewitness to a theft, the one who does not have anyprejudice in vision is a Gnani (the enlightened One). Whatproof is there that tomorrow the thief will not become honestand respectable?There is nothing to object to. If the senses relish a tastymango, but afterward if the memory of it lingers on; it isdetrimental, because behind the memory there is the opinion that“this mango is good,” and that opinion will result in attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh).A strong opinion focused on one particular thing will resultin a major obstruction (atkan). Comparatively the effect of theobstruction of many scattered opinions will be significantlyterrible.“The sensual pleasures (vishay) do not have attachment- abhorrence; only the belief of the opinion has attachment-abhorrence.”    ~ DadashriThis quote of the Gnani drives away the notion of doingrelentless exertion to become free from sensual pleasures. Bysaying it is ‘like an elephant’s bath’ (elephants after bathing inwater, spread dirt on themselves); it makes one alert towardsremoving the root cause: the wrong belief about the opinion, ofthere being any lasting happiness in the pleasure of the senses.Once it is decided that opinions are to be broken, theystart to break down. Opinions that are very deeply entrenched,can be depleted after doing pratikraman (repentance andasking for forgiveness for the error) everyday for two hours!The one who has attained the Soul (Atma), the one who hasbecome Self-realized (Purush), is capable of any endeavor(purusharth) or extraordinary effort (parakram)!Whatever one’s opinion, such will be the non-Selfcomplex of mind, speech and body (pudgal) that forms in thenext life.It is necessary to detach and remove the opinion, aboutthe opinion that has remained in a subtle form.Who makes one make opinions? Only societal influence(loksangnya; worldly peer pressure), because one’s belief isbased on popular knowledge, and accordingly, the intellectmakes the decision as to how one behaves. Once the‘knowledge of the Gnani’ (Gnani-sangnya) is followed, theeffect of the knowledge of people (loksangnya) becomesextinct!1920realized; bhranti), all human beings have continual intent-basedself-effort (bhaav purusharth), on account of which the bondsof karma for the next life are created; moreover, theythemselves are not even aware of this![4]Shraddha (Faith)Those who make a mockery of blind faith (andha-shraddha) do not know how much blind faith they themselveshave! On what faith is the act of drinking water done? Whatproof is there that there is no poison in it? What is the proof thatan insect or a tiny lizard has not fallen in the food? Does anyoneinquire about this? Are people not moving on, with blind faith?Thus, not a single step is taken without blind faith, so how canone criticize anyone else’s blind faith?[5]OpinionVision (drashti) is created on the basis of opinions(abhipraya), and then one ‘sees’ according to that vision. It isnot the fault of the vision if one feels uneasy with a certainperson. The mistake is being made by the opinion that has ledto such a vision (drashti).The vision with “prejudice” creates the worldly life (theperpetual cycle of birth and death). In spite of being aneyewitness to a theft, the one who does not have anyprejudice in vision is a Gnani (the enlightened One). Whatproof is there that tomorrow the thief will not become honestand respectable?There is nothing to object to. If the senses relish a tastymango, but afterward if the memory of it lingers on; it isdetrimental, because behind the memory there is the opinion that“this mango is good,” and that opinion will result in attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh).A strong opinion focused on one particular thing will resultin a major obstruction (atkan). Comparatively the effect of theobstruction of many scattered opinions will be significantlyterrible.“The sensual pleasures (vishay) do not have attachment- abhorrence; only the belief of the opinion has attachment-abhorrence.”    ~ DadashriThis quote of the Gnani drives away the notion of doingrelentless exertion to become free from sensual pleasures. Bysaying it is ‘like an elephant’s bath’ (elephants after bathing inwater, spread dirt on themselves); it makes one alert towardsremoving the root cause: the wrong belief about the opinion, ofthere being any lasting happiness in the pleasure of the senses.Once it is decided that opinions are to be broken, theystart to break down. Opinions that are very deeply entrenched,can be depleted after doing pratikraman (repentance andasking for forgiveness for the error) everyday for two hours!The one who has attained the Soul (Atma), the one who hasbecome Self-realized (Purush), is capable of any endeavor(purusharth) or extraordinary effort (parakram)!Whatever one’s opinion, such will be the non-Selfcomplex of mind, speech and body (pudgal) that forms in thenext life.It is necessary to detach and remove the opinion, aboutthe opinion that has remained in a subtle form.Who makes one make opinions? Only societal influence(loksangnya; worldly peer pressure), because one’s belief isbased on popular knowledge, and accordingly, the intellectmakes the decision as to how one behaves. Once the‘knowledge of the Gnani’ (Gnani-sangnya) is followed, theeffect of the knowledge of people (loksangnya) becomesextinct!2122The vibrations of even the slightest adverse thought aboutanother person will reach that person and give results. Heredoing ‘shoot-on-sight’ pratikraman will prevent those vibrationsfrom reaching that person, or else erases the vibrations that mayhave reached that person. And once the opinion is erased,speech and conduct towards that person become natural, to theextent that they cannot even ‘touch’ the other person. Conversely,the view with the opinion of seeing faults, casts its shadow onthe mind of the other person. And it is because of that, that onefeels uneasiness in that person’s presence.To change the opinion, one has to supplant it with itsopposite opinion. To erase the opinion, that someone is a thief,one has to say that he is an honest and respected man andultimately, the vision that he is really ‘pure Soul’ (Shuddhatma)has to be applied!Opinion is the reason (cause) for speech with the link ofcontinual hurt (tantili vani—speech associated with lingeringeffect); whereas, suspicion (shanka) is one of the reasons(cause) for opinion.“Opinion is dependent upon the receptacle of theintellect (buddhi no ashaya)”     ~ DadashriThe opinion depends on where the intellect has perceivedhappiness to be. If one thinks happiness lies in a French haircut,one’s opinion for a French haircut develops.What hinders the state of the infinite bliss of the Self, afterSelf-realization in Akram Vignan?  – Opinion! Once two to fivemajor opinions are gone, a state of liberation prevails!The seed (of karma) is sown, not by action (kriya), butby motive (hetu–intention behind action); by opinions! The onlyopinions worthy of welcome are those for celibacy(brahmacharya), and for the fact that the physical body is thegreatest of deceivers (dago)! Opinion is made up of subatomicparticles (parmanus) of the ego. Opinion shows personalities: italters one’s vision completely. There is no objection to ‘lifeless’opinions; however, opinions backed with insistence, veil theGnan.To be free from the opinions about the inanimate(achetan) is relatively easy once you decide to do so. Whereas,even if you give up the opinions about the mishrachetan (powerchetan; the relative self, other living beings), the other personwill still not leave you alone! By forming opinions about otherhuman beings, whose faces contort with anger and revenge,what grave results are invited!Opinion invites obstacles (antaray). There are terribleperils from the obstacles caused by opinions; they increasinglybind one in places where one needs to be free.This human body complex, works according to theopinion of the ‘charged’ self (pratishthit atma; the relative self),within which the Self is only giving presence as the One withdevoid of worldly attachment (udaseen bhaav).[6]The Blindness of ‘Know-How’He that knows nothing in this world is a ‘Gnani.’ TheGnani, who appears to others as ‘highly intelligent’, is actuallyabuddha (free from the use of intellect). The Gnani says, “Evenat age seventy, I still do not know how to shave.” Those whobelieve that they are “experts” are cheating themselves andeveryone else. No one is capable of becoming an “expert”.Being an expert, is a natural gift. A Gnani is an expert in thescience of Soul (Atmavignan).A person has come into this world and brought with himall that is necessary for the mind, and all that is necessary for thechit (inner component of knowledge and vision), intellect andego. Nature supplies them all. In this, where does one’s own2122The vibrations of even the slightest adverse thought aboutanother person will reach that person and give results. Heredoing ‘shoot-on-sight’ pratikraman will prevent those vibrationsfrom reaching that person, or else erases the vibrations that mayhave reached that person. And once the opinion is erased,speech and conduct towards that person become natural, to theextent that they cannot even ‘touch’ the other person. Conversely,the view with the opinion of seeing faults, casts its shadow onthe mind of the other person. And it is because of that, that onefeels uneasiness in that person’s presence.To change the opinion, one has to supplant it with itsopposite opinion. To erase the opinion, that someone is a thief,one has to say that he is an honest and respected man andultimately, the vision that he is really ‘pure Soul’ (Shuddhatma)has to be applied!Opinion is the reason (cause) for speech with the link ofcontinual hurt (tantili vani—speech associated with lingeringeffect); whereas, suspicion (shanka) is one of the reasons(cause) for opinion.“Opinion is dependent upon the receptacle of theintellect (buddhi no ashaya)”     ~ DadashriThe opinion depends on where the intellect has perceivedhappiness to be. If one thinks happiness lies in a French haircut,one’s opinion for a French haircut develops.What hinders the state of the infinite bliss of the Self, afterSelf-realization in Akram Vignan?  – Opinion! Once two to fivemajor opinions are gone, a state of liberation prevails!The seed (of karma) is sown, not by action (kriya), butby motive (hetu–intention behind action); by opinions! The onlyopinions worthy of welcome are those for celibacy(brahmacharya), and for the fact that the physical body is thegreatest of deceivers (dago)! Opinion is made up of subatomicparticles (parmanus) of the ego. Opinion shows personalities: italters one’s vision completely. There is no objection to ‘lifeless’opinions; however, opinions backed with insistence, veil theGnan.To be free from the opinions about the inanimate(achetan) is relatively easy once you decide to do so. Whereas,even if you give up the opinions about the mishrachetan (powerchetan; the relative self, other living beings), the other personwill still not leave you alone! By forming opinions about otherhuman beings, whose faces contort with anger and revenge,what grave results are invited!Opinion invites obstacles (antaray). There are terribleperils from the obstacles caused by opinions; they increasinglybind one in places where one needs to be free.This human body complex, works according to theopinion of the ‘charged’ self (pratishthit atma; the relative self),within which the Self is only giving presence as the One withdevoid of worldly attachment (udaseen bhaav).[6]The Blindness of ‘Know-How’He that knows nothing in this world is a ‘Gnani.’ TheGnani, who appears to others as ‘highly intelligent’, is actuallyabuddha (free from the use of intellect). The Gnani says, “Evenat age seventy, I still do not know how to shave.” Those whobelieve that they are “experts” are cheating themselves andeveryone else. No one is capable of becoming an “expert”.Being an expert, is a natural gift. A Gnani is an expert in thescience of Soul (Atmavignan).A person has come into this world and brought with himall that is necessary for the mind, and all that is necessary for thechit (inner component of knowledge and vision), intellect andego. Nature supplies them all. In this, where does one’s own2324self-effort come in? Therefore, one should keep the chit in itsnatural state and not waste its energy. One will have tounderstand the essence of this life, yes?[7]Obstacles‘I am Chandubhai’. Once you say this, an obstacle(antaray) arises. You are the absolute Self (Parmatma) andyou call yourself ‘Chandubhai’? You are the master of theuniverse, the owner of infinite energies, and capable of attainingwhatever you want; yet in spite of that, why you cannot getanything? It is because of obstacles. Obstacles veil the energy(shakti)! Desire (ichchha) invites obstacles. When there is nodesire for air, is there any obstacle for it? The Gnani has nodesire (nirichchhak) and is in an obstacle-free state (nirantaraypad). He does not have ‘want’ for anything at all.How is an obstacle created? When someone is donatingsomething and you interfere by saying, ‘Why are you doingthat?’ then in your next life, you may be hindered from receivinga donation.In the state of ignorance, one protects hurtful and negativethoughts when they occur; whereas in the state of Gnan(knowledge of the Self), one does repentance and ask forforgiveness (pratikraman) immediately when such thoughtsarise. Approval and support for the good or positive actionsbecome beneficial for one’s self and for the rest of the world. Ifapproval and support is given to others, they will reciprocate! Ifone calls the other person ‘stupid,’ it will create an obstacle toone’s own intelligence.If there is a strong determination (nischay) against theobstacles arising in the path of liberation (moksha), the energyof the Self (shakti) will grow. Obstacles occur when there isa lack of determination. Determination (nischay) breaks downthe obstacles (antaray). Once the ultimate determination(nischay), ‘I am the Self’ is attained, all obstacles come to anend.Obstacles that arise because of the worldly intellect arelike knots. And obstacles that arise from the intelligence ofreligion are like big complex knots because; they make onewander around for infinite lives. The belief or sense of, “I knowsomething” is the biggest obstacle in the path to the Self. It isevident that nothing is known where there is artadhyan(adverse internal meditation that hurts the self) or raudradhyan(adverse internal meditation that hurts the self and others).The biggest obstacle is one which impedes one’s attainmentof the knowledge of the Self (Gnanantaray). It is one’s innersense that says, “In matters of spirituality and Soul, I am the onlyone who understands, and everyone else does not understandanything at all.”Another obstacle is to interfere in the process wherebysomeone’s attainment of Self-knowledge is hindered.Or even if after meeting a true ‘Gnani’ one thinks, “I haveseen many such ‘Gnanis’.” All of these sow the seeds ofobstacles to the knowledge of the Self (Gnanantaray).However, even, if a person were to feel, “A ‘Gnani’ is close by,but I am unable to go and see him!” it would break down theobstacles.“How can there be moksha within just one hour?” Oncethis is vocalized or felt, there will be an obstacle to one’s ownmoksha! This universe is such that it cannot be measured byone’s intellect.Obstacles to one’s skill are created with, “I don’t knowhow to do it.” And with a firm, “Why can’t I know how to dothis?” the obstacles (antaray) will break down.2324self-effort come in? Therefore, one should keep the chit in itsnatural state and not waste its energy. One will have tounderstand the essence of this life, yes?[7]Obstacles‘I am Chandubhai’. Once you say this, an obstacle(antaray) arises. You are the absolute Self (Parmatma) andyou call yourself ‘Chandubhai’? You are the master of theuniverse, the owner of infinite energies, and capable of attainingwhatever you want; yet in spite of that, why you cannot getanything? It is because of obstacles. Obstacles veil the energy(shakti)! Desire (ichchha) invites obstacles. When there is nodesire for air, is there any obstacle for it? The Gnani has nodesire (nirichchhak) and is in an obstacle-free state (nirantaraypad). He does not have ‘want’ for anything at all.How is an obstacle created? When someone is donatingsomething and you interfere by saying, ‘Why are you doingthat?’ then in your next life, you may be hindered from receivinga donation.In the state of ignorance, one protects hurtful and negativethoughts when they occur; whereas in the state of Gnan(knowledge of the Self), one does repentance and ask forforgiveness (pratikraman) immediately when such thoughtsarise. Approval and support for the good or positive actionsbecome beneficial for one’s self and for the rest of the world. Ifapproval and support is given to others, they will reciprocate! Ifone calls the other person ‘stupid,’ it will create an obstacle toone’s own intelligence.If there is a strong determination (nischay) against theobstacles arising in the path of liberation (moksha), the energyof the Self (shakti) will grow. Obstacles occur when there isa lack of determination. Determination (nischay) breaks downthe obstacles (antaray). Once the ultimate determination(nischay), ‘I am the Self’ is attained, all obstacles come to anend.Obstacles that arise because of the worldly intellect arelike knots. And obstacles that arise from the intelligence ofreligion are like big complex knots because; they make onewander around for infinite lives. The belief or sense of, “I knowsomething” is the biggest obstacle in the path to the Self. It isevident that nothing is known where there is artadhyan(adverse internal meditation that hurts the self) or raudradhyan(adverse internal meditation that hurts the self and others).The biggest obstacle is one which impedes one’s attainmentof the knowledge of the Self (Gnanantaray). It is one’s innersense that says, “In matters of spirituality and Soul, I am the onlyone who understands, and everyone else does not understandanything at all.”Another obstacle is to interfere in the process wherebysomeone’s attainment of Self-knowledge is hindered.Or even if after meeting a true ‘Gnani’ one thinks, “I haveseen many such ‘Gnanis’.” All of these sow the seeds ofobstacles to the knowledge of the Self (Gnanantaray).However, even, if a person were to feel, “A ‘Gnani’ is close by,but I am unable to go and see him!” it would break down theobstacles.“How can there be moksha within just one hour?” Oncethis is vocalized or felt, there will be an obstacle to one’s ownmoksha! This universe is such that it cannot be measured byone’s intellect.Obstacles to one’s skill are created with, “I don’t knowhow to do it.” And with a firm, “Why can’t I know how to dothis?” the obstacles (antaray) will break down.2526The Gnani Purush can break down obstacles toknowledge (Gnanantaray) and obstacles to vision(darshanantaray). Nevertheless, in matters related to the breakdown of the ‘religion’ of humility (vinaya dharma), even the‘Gnani’ is not able to help. There should not be a singlenegative thought about the ‘Gnani.’ In order to break theobstacles that prevent one from meeting the ‘Gnani,’ one canbeseech the Gnani to break down the obstacles through hisprayers (vidhi). Obstacles can be broken through intentions(bhaav)! Intentions break obstacles. They happen when thetime is right.For the ‘Atmagnani’ (the Self-realized One), the obstaclesare in the form of circumstances (saiyog) which by their verynature, have the tendency to dissipate (viyog). The Self has nocircumstance (asaiyogi); therefore, it does not dissipate.[8]Contempt – Dismiss with ScornThere is fear for that which is disdainful (scornful;tiraskar). Fear is born out of scorn. Disdain for the courts orfor the police, will create fear of them.Scorn (tiraskar) brings about a ‘mild’ result, whereas,contempt (tarchhod) creates dreadful obstructions. One shouldbe extremely aware, and avoid any contempt towards anyone.For the one who has been contemptuously rejected (tarchhod)by us will close his doors to us forever. Contemptuous rejectioncaused by speech, will inflict deep wounds which will not heal!Know for sure that a single ‘wound’ of contempt to even onehuman being, will impede your moksha. There is grave liabilityin contempt.[9]The Aura of the IndividualThe personality of a ‘Gnani Purush’ is extraordinary. Hislove is nowhere else, but in the Self. He conducts himself as theSelf; completely separate from the mind, speech and body. Inspite of conducting business, his conduct is without attachmentor abhorrence (vitarag). Just look at the achievements of suchan ‘Akram Vignani’ (The scientist of the direct path toliberation)!He did not take any vows (vrat), and the only disciplines(niyam) he observed, were chovihaar (the practice of eatingfood before sundown) and drinking boiled water. He also readand meditated on the ‘Vachanamrut of Shrimad Rajchandra’and scriptures of all the religions.This wonderful science of Akram Vignan manifestednaturally! One evening in 1958, while sitting on a bench at theSurat (city in Gujarat, India) train station before the enlightenmentoccurred; amidst the noisy din of the vast crowds, inner stillnessand peace prevailed. Even then, this was still intermingled with theego! There was a supreme effulgence of the light of the absoluteSelf! In this light of Gnan, he “saw,” the universe in its entirety. Heexperienced complete separation from the body, mind andspeech, and attained a state of absolute Knowledge and absoluteVision (Keval Gnata-Drashta), and eternal bliss (parmanand).The most glorious day had dawned in the history of the world!From that day, the ego was gone! The ‘My-ness’(mamata) was gone!! And from his auspicious mouth flowedwords that were void of any attachment or abhorrence (vitaragvani). These words, that are proof of absolute spiritualperfection, symbolize the eleventh wonder of this Kaliyug(current era of the time cycle characterized by lack of unity inmind, speech and conduct), Akram Vignan (step-less path toSelf-realization) - Asaiyati Puja (Worship of an enlightened oneliving a worldly life; non-ascetic worship); could not remainhidden from the world. In the course of twenty or so years, thisAkram Vignan (the spiritual science of the step-less path to2526The Gnani Purush can break down obstacles toknowledge (Gnanantaray) and obstacles to vision(darshanantaray). Nevertheless, in matters related to the breakdown of the ‘religion’ of humility (vinaya dharma), even the‘Gnani’ is not able to help. There should not be a singlenegative thought about the ‘Gnani.’ In order to break theobstacles that prevent one from meeting the ‘Gnani,’ one canbeseech the Gnani to break down the obstacles through hisprayers (vidhi). Obstacles can be broken through intentions(bhaav)! Intentions break obstacles. They happen when thetime is right.For the ‘Atmagnani’ (the Self-realized One), the obstaclesare in the form of circumstances (saiyog) which by their verynature, have the tendency to dissipate (viyog). The Self has nocircumstance (asaiyogi); therefore, it does not dissipate.[8]Contempt – Dismiss with ScornThere is fear for that which is disdainful (scornful;tiraskar). Fear is born out of scorn. Disdain for the courts orfor the police, will create fear of them.Scorn (tiraskar) brings about a ‘mild’ result, whereas,contempt (tarchhod) creates dreadful obstructions. One shouldbe extremely aware, and avoid any contempt towards anyone.For the one who has been contemptuously rejected (tarchhod)by us will close his doors to us forever. Contemptuous rejectioncaused by speech, will inflict deep wounds which will not heal!Know for sure that a single ‘wound’ of contempt to even onehuman being, will impede your moksha. There is grave liabilityin contempt.[9]The Aura of the IndividualThe personality of a ‘Gnani Purush’ is extraordinary. Hislove is nowhere else, but in the Self. He conducts himself as theSelf; completely separate from the mind, speech and body. Inspite of conducting business, his conduct is without attachmentor abhorrence (vitarag). Just look at the achievements of suchan ‘Akram Vignani’ (The scientist of the direct path toliberation)!He did not take any vows (vrat), and the only disciplines(niyam) he observed, were chovihaar (the practice of eatingfood before sundown) and drinking boiled water. He also readand meditated on the ‘Vachanamrut of Shrimad Rajchandra’and scriptures of all the religions.This wonderful science of Akram Vignan manifestednaturally! One evening in 1958, while sitting on a bench at theSurat (city in Gujarat, India) train station before the enlightenmentoccurred; amidst the noisy din of the vast crowds, inner stillnessand peace prevailed. Even then, this was still intermingled with theego! There was a supreme effulgence of the light of the absoluteSelf! In this light of Gnan, he “saw,” the universe in its entirety. Heexperienced complete separation from the body, mind andspeech, and attained a state of absolute Knowledge and absoluteVision (Keval Gnata-Drashta), and eternal bliss (parmanand).The most glorious day had dawned in the history of the world!From that day, the ego was gone! The ‘My-ness’(mamata) was gone!! And from his auspicious mouth flowedwords that were void of any attachment or abhorrence (vitaragvani). These words, that are proof of absolute spiritualperfection, symbolize the eleventh wonder of this Kaliyug(current era of the time cycle characterized by lack of unity inmind, speech and conduct), Akram Vignan (step-less path toSelf-realization) - Asaiyati Puja (Worship of an enlightened oneliving a worldly life; non-ascetic worship); could not remainhidden from the world. In the course of twenty or so years, thisAkram Vignan (the spiritual science of the step-less path to2728Self-realization) has been bestowed upon some twenty thousand,very fortunate persons. And that is a phenomenon in itself!What is the daily routine of the ‘Gnani’? The ‘Gnani’ isalways present in the “activity” of the Self (Atma-charya; todwell in the Self); he is in the state of liberation. By referring tohis own speech as a ‘taped record,’ he severs the ties ofownership! Such a competent nimit (instrument) will accept anydeficiencies in our qualification for the attainment of Self-realization.Without love, devotion (bhakti) cannot begin. God is notforgotten at any time when devotion is filled with love.The Gnani Purush, after himself becoming faultless(nirdosh) and making the vision faultless (nirdosh drashti), seesthe entire world as being faultless. The pure Soul will beconsidered ‘faulty’ if the pure Soul has faults. But the pure Soulis a ‘non-doer’, so how then can the faults be seen? In the“discharge” of karma, how can anyone be at fault? Even if asingle person is seen as having fault, there is no purity, but onlythe knowledge that is prescribed by the senses (indriya-gnan).Here, the knowledge of the pure Soul (atindriya-gnan) isabsent! A person who hurts others through his intent (bhaav;thought) commits a fault of Nature; while the one who actuallyhurts others, commits a fault of the world. They will both receivejustice for sure. The one, who hurts others with his thoughts,becomes guilty in the next life; whereas the one, who actuallyhurts others in this life, gets punished in this life. This is the waykarma is settled.There is no problem in saying, “I ate,” but there should bethe knowledge within as to ‘who is eating.’“What I received is not Atmagnan (knowledge of theSelf), but what has manifested within me, is Atmagnan.”                            ~ Gnani Purush DadashriTo follow the Gnani’s Agnas (special directives) willbring about the grace (krupa) of Gnani.How can you describe such a Gnani when words havelimitations; where one’s understanding falls short, and in theabsence of any comparison, he is himself unfathomable; hesolely resides in the Self, where there is absolutely no room forthe ego, and therefore he lives not in the mind, neither in thespeech, nor in the body; the very places that are host to the ego.He is free of all anger, pride, deceit and greed. His humility,although a ‘given’ as far as a Gnani Purush is concerned, isimmaculate. He is egoless; he blesses even those that curse orinsult him. The Gnani is not void of interest (nispruha), butneither is he with interest (saspruha; with inclination); he issaspruha-nispruha (with interest-without interest). He isnispruha towards others’ worldly happiness and saspruhatowards their liberation.The Gnani’s speech has vitaragata (void of anyattachment). It is not possible for anyone to attain mokshawithout listening to such speech! In his speech, there is nodisapproval of anyone’s viewpoint, nor is there any evidence ofhis own opinion! There is no opposition to anyone, nor isanyone told, “This is wrong”. Speech that is syadvaad isaccepted by all and hurts no one. In such speech, there is nodebate (vaad), dispute (vivaad) or discourse (samvaad). It ispurely dependent on the person who is instrumental (nimit;questioner). The Gnani Purush’s speech arises from greatdepths and flows spontaneously and constantly.[10]Akram PathThe Gnani Purush, in whom the Lord of the fourteenregions (lokas) of the universe has manifest, and who is Himselfthe embodiment of the absolute Self. Once his grace is received,there is nothing that needs to be done, but to remain in his2728Self-realization) has been bestowed upon some twenty thousand,very fortunate persons. And that is a phenomenon in itself!What is the daily routine of the ‘Gnani’? The ‘Gnani’ isalways present in the “activity” of the Self (Atma-charya; todwell in the Self); he is in the state of liberation. By referring tohis own speech as a ‘taped record,’ he severs the ties ofownership! Such a competent nimit (instrument) will accept anydeficiencies in our qualification for the attainment of Self-realization.Without love, devotion (bhakti) cannot begin. God is notforgotten at any time when devotion is filled with love.The Gnani Purush, after himself becoming faultless(nirdosh) and making the vision faultless (nirdosh drashti), seesthe entire world as being faultless. The pure Soul will beconsidered ‘faulty’ if the pure Soul has faults. But the pure Soulis a ‘non-doer’, so how then can the faults be seen? In the“discharge” of karma, how can anyone be at fault? Even if asingle person is seen as having fault, there is no purity, but onlythe knowledge that is prescribed by the senses (indriya-gnan).Here, the knowledge of the pure Soul (atindriya-gnan) isabsent! A person who hurts others through his intent (bhaav;thought) commits a fault of Nature; while the one who actuallyhurts others, commits a fault of the world. They will both receivejustice for sure. The one, who hurts others with his thoughts,becomes guilty in the next life; whereas the one, who actuallyhurts others in this life, gets punished in this life. This is the waykarma is settled.There is no problem in saying, “I ate,” but there should bethe knowledge within as to ‘who is eating.’“What I received is not Atmagnan (knowledge of theSelf), but what has manifested within me, is Atmagnan.”                            ~ Gnani Purush DadashriTo follow the Gnani’s Agnas (special directives) willbring about the grace (krupa) of Gnani.How can you describe such a Gnani when words havelimitations; where one’s understanding falls short, and in theabsence of any comparison, he is himself unfathomable; hesolely resides in the Self, where there is absolutely no room forthe ego, and therefore he lives not in the mind, neither in thespeech, nor in the body; the very places that are host to the ego.He is free of all anger, pride, deceit and greed. His humility,although a ‘given’ as far as a Gnani Purush is concerned, isimmaculate. He is egoless; he blesses even those that curse orinsult him. The Gnani is not void of interest (nispruha), butneither is he with interest (saspruha; with inclination); he issaspruha-nispruha (with interest-without interest). He isnispruha towards others’ worldly happiness and saspruhatowards their liberation.The Gnani’s speech has vitaragata (void of anyattachment). It is not possible for anyone to attain mokshawithout listening to such speech! In his speech, there is nodisapproval of anyone’s viewpoint, nor is there any evidence ofhis own opinion! There is no opposition to anyone, nor isanyone told, “This is wrong”. Speech that is syadvaad isaccepted by all and hurts no one. In such speech, there is nodebate (vaad), dispute (vivaad) or discourse (samvaad). It ispurely dependent on the person who is instrumental (nimit;questioner). The Gnani Purush’s speech arises from greatdepths and flows spontaneously and constantly.[10]Akram PathThe Gnani Purush, in whom the Lord of the fourteenregions (lokas) of the universe has manifest, and who is Himselfthe embodiment of the absolute Self. Once his grace is received,there is nothing that needs to be done, but to remain in his2930Agnas (special directives) and to follow him. Such a GnaniPurush has manifested in this time period. Once his grace isbestowed upon the recipient, and through this path of AkramVignan (the step-less path to Self-realization) one needs only tojump on the elevator to the highest peak of Self-knowledge andreach there within just one hour! Wonderful and amazing is theaccomplishment of this exceptional path!In this Kalikaal (the current era of the fifth time cycle),this step-less path has manifested magnificently! This is theunprecedented stage of spiritual science! Lack of controversy isevident in the entire speech of the Gnani Purush at all times.Here is where the wrongful deeds of infinite lifetimes are washedaway within one hour and Self-realization is attained, where theawareness or non-awareness of one’s readiness for Self-realization is not heeded, where the seeker attains a state of thehighest of awareness as a result of the auspicious event ofmeeting a tremendously powerful instrument (nimit): the Gnanihimself, whereby all the kashays (anger, pride, deceit, greed)are eradicated, where the ego (ahamkar) and ‘My-ness’(mamata) end, where no ‘doership’ remains, and where oneonly experiences the absolute bliss of the Self. He who bestowssuch a state is not a Gnani, but a ‘Scientist’. Just look at theunimaginable special spiritual power and energy (siddhis) of hisstep-less path![11]The Atma and The Ego “I am ‘Chandubhai’, I am the husband of this woman, Iam the father of this boy, I am a businessman, I am fat, I am fair-skinned…etc.” These and many such countless ‘wrong beliefs’have been covering up one’s own ‘right belief’, one’s own purevision and pure knowledge. The Gnani Purush fractures those‘wrong beliefs’, and unveils all the covers: opening thatmagnificent portal to ‘right vision’ – Self-realization!The ego is the ‘ignorant’ proclamation of “I did”, whereone is not the ‘doer’. And because of the ego, there is bondageof karma, bondage of body, bondage of mind, and bondage ofspeech. Any bondage of the non-Self complex (pudgal) isattributed to the ego.To worship the Soul (Atma) and the absolute Soul(Parmatma) as being separate, is the way of the worldly,‘relative’ religions. And to worship the Atma and Parmatma asone (not separate), is the religion that transcends beyond theworld (alaukik); and from the ‘real’ religion comes Moksha! Inthe real religion, there is no merit karma (punya) or demeritkarma (sin; paap); there is no ‘doership’ of anything at all!    One becomes ‘certified’ for moksha, when one’sworldly pleasures and happiness become a heavy load of painand suffering! The Gnani Purush gives one moksha, becausethe Gnani Purush is the ultimate liberator.[12]Arrangement of VyavasthitThe regulation of the universe happens naturally and on itsown. The ‘Akram Gnani’ calls it “vyavasthit shakti orscientific circumstantial evidence”. This “scientific circumstantialevidence” has no control over the six eternal elements in theuniverse. All the elements are independent; they do notrecognize each other, they do not obey each other even thoughone of them the element of the Self (chetan), is the Parmatmaitself!!!If surrender and ‘selfless service’ went hand in hand, thatwould be excellent. But the result of service is merit karma, andnot moksha. Yes, if there is Self-realization, there is no‘doership’ and therefore no bondage of karma. The world is replete with bloodshed, cruelty, violence,fighting, massacres and the agonizing outcome of world wars.2930Agnas (special directives) and to follow him. Such a GnaniPurush has manifested in this time period. Once his grace isbestowed upon the recipient, and through this path of AkramVignan (the step-less path to Self-realization) one needs only tojump on the elevator to the highest peak of Self-knowledge andreach there within just one hour! Wonderful and amazing is theaccomplishment of this exceptional path!In this Kalikaal (the current era of the fifth time cycle),this step-less path has manifested magnificently! This is theunprecedented stage of spiritual science! Lack of controversy isevident in the entire speech of the Gnani Purush at all times.Here is where the wrongful deeds of infinite lifetimes are washedaway within one hour and Self-realization is attained, where theawareness or non-awareness of one’s readiness for Self-realization is not heeded, where the seeker attains a state of thehighest of awareness as a result of the auspicious event ofmeeting a tremendously powerful instrument (nimit): the Gnanihimself, whereby all the kashays (anger, pride, deceit, greed)are eradicated, where the ego (ahamkar) and ‘My-ness’(mamata) end, where no ‘doership’ remains, and where oneonly experiences the absolute bliss of the Self. He who bestowssuch a state is not a Gnani, but a ‘Scientist’. Just look at theunimaginable special spiritual power and energy (siddhis) of hisstep-less path![11]The Atma and The Ego “I am ‘Chandubhai’, I am the husband of this woman, Iam the father of this boy, I am a businessman, I am fat, I am fair-skinned…etc.” These and many such countless ‘wrong beliefs’have been covering up one’s own ‘right belief’, one’s own purevision and pure knowledge. The Gnani Purush fractures those‘wrong beliefs’, and unveils all the covers: opening thatmagnificent portal to ‘right vision’ – Self-realization!The ego is the ‘ignorant’ proclamation of “I did”, whereone is not the ‘doer’. And because of the ego, there is bondageof karma, bondage of body, bondage of mind, and bondage ofspeech. Any bondage of the non-Self complex (pudgal) isattributed to the ego.To worship the Soul (Atma) and the absolute Soul(Parmatma) as being separate, is the way of the worldly,‘relative’ religions. And to worship the Atma and Parmatma asone (not separate), is the religion that transcends beyond theworld (alaukik); and from the ‘real’ religion comes Moksha! Inthe real religion, there is no merit karma (punya) or demeritkarma (sin; paap); there is no ‘doership’ of anything at all!    One becomes ‘certified’ for moksha, when one’sworldly pleasures and happiness become a heavy load of painand suffering! The Gnani Purush gives one moksha, becausethe Gnani Purush is the ultimate liberator.[12]Arrangement of VyavasthitThe regulation of the universe happens naturally and on itsown. The ‘Akram Gnani’ calls it “vyavasthit shakti orscientific circumstantial evidence”. This “scientific circumstantialevidence” has no control over the six eternal elements in theuniverse. All the elements are independent; they do notrecognize each other, they do not obey each other even thoughone of them the element of the Self (chetan), is the Parmatmaitself!!!If surrender and ‘selfless service’ went hand in hand, thatwould be excellent. But the result of service is merit karma, andnot moksha. Yes, if there is Self-realization, there is no‘doership’ and therefore no bondage of karma. The world is replete with bloodshed, cruelty, violence,fighting, massacres and the agonizing outcome of world wars.3132The Gnani Purush sees these as ‘scientific circumstantialevidences’ (vyavasthit)! Who pays attention to the violence anddeath occurring in the ocean amongst the big fish and small fish?Is that also not ‘scientific circumstantial evidences’?[13]Religion of the World: Religion of the SelfWorldly religion is where one receives pleasure fromgiving pleasure to others, and if one gives pain, one will receivepain in return.  Do people not get security for their lives whenthey follow the rules of traffic laws? If one does hurtful action(adharma), he will have a ‘collision’ and get into an accident!Thus, to get the security of happiness, one gives happiness toothers, and therein lays the secret of the “relative” religions! Inthe “real” religion (Atma-dharma) however, one has to attainthe Self. When there is a solution available in all circumstances, itis called ‘real’ religion. When there is a solution or even a lackof solution, it is called ‘relative’ religion.While looking for eternal happiness, and in not finding it,a living being (jiva), springs into imaginary happiness, andbecause that imaginary happiness results in pain, he attemptsvarious ‘imaginary’ endeavors, only to become more and moreentangled! Eternal bliss exists only within the Self! To attain truehappiness or eternal bliss, one has oneself to become ‘true’. Toattain worldly happiness, however, one has to become ‘worldly’!Once a living entity enters the passage of flow in theuniverse (samsaran marg), it experiences relentless internalburning and suffering. One’s worldly life ceases when this‘burning’ is quelled.As long as there is a balance between inner happiness andouter happiness, there will be peace in one’s worldly interactions.The outer happiness is enjoyed at the cost of inner happiness.As a consequence, a person loses his mental stability, to theextent that he becomes reliant on sleeping pills.Where there is not the slightest vestige of pain; there is theSelf (the Soul).With wrong vision (viparit darshan) there is pain: withthe right vision (samyak darshan) there is bliss, bliss, andnothing but bliss!Complete surrender under the Gnani’s protection is thevehicle for moksha; however, for the worldly happiness oneshould serve one’s parents and one’s guru.In people’s understanding, happiness lies in loksangnya(related to other peoples’ beliefs). In the Gnani’s understanding,happiness lies in the Atma.Saints (santo) take pleasure in pain whereas the ‘Gnani’takes pleasure in the Self. Saints proceed believing pain aspleasure. To derive pleasure from the body (pudgal; non-Selfcomplex) is a ‘borrowed’ transaction that you will have to‘repay’. When the son jumps onto his lap saying,“Daddy…daddy,” the father enjoys ‘borrowed’ pleasure. Butwhen the same son grows up and says, “Dad, you have nosense!” the time has come for that borrowed pleasure to be‘repaid’! So why not be cautious from the very start? Thepudgal is itself vitarag (without attachments and abhorrence)but when the ‘self’ (relative self) acquires, the transaction ofborrowing begins![14]The True Understanding of ReligionThe traditional worldly (laukik) religions give worldlyhappiness and the real (alaukik; beyond the world) religiongives eternal bliss. All actions carried out in the presence of3132The Gnani Purush sees these as ‘scientific circumstantialevidences’ (vyavasthit)! Who pays attention to the violence anddeath occurring in the ocean amongst the big fish and small fish?Is that also not ‘scientific circumstantial evidences’?[13]Religion of the World: Religion of the SelfWorldly religion is where one receives pleasure fromgiving pleasure to others, and if one gives pain, one will receivepain in return.  Do people not get security for their lives whenthey follow the rules of traffic laws? If one does hurtful action(adharma), he will have a ‘collision’ and get into an accident!Thus, to get the security of happiness, one gives happiness toothers, and therein lays the secret of the “relative” religions! Inthe “real” religion (Atma-dharma) however, one has to attainthe Self. When there is a solution available in all circumstances, itis called ‘real’ religion. When there is a solution or even a lackof solution, it is called ‘relative’ religion.While looking for eternal happiness, and in not finding it,a living being (jiva), springs into imaginary happiness, andbecause that imaginary happiness results in pain, he attemptsvarious ‘imaginary’ endeavors, only to become more and moreentangled! Eternal bliss exists only within the Self! To attain truehappiness or eternal bliss, one has oneself to become ‘true’. Toattain worldly happiness, however, one has to become ‘worldly’!Once a living entity enters the passage of flow in theuniverse (samsaran marg), it experiences relentless internalburning and suffering. One’s worldly life ceases when this‘burning’ is quelled.As long as there is a balance between inner happiness andouter happiness, there will be peace in one’s worldly interactions.The outer happiness is enjoyed at the cost of inner happiness.As a consequence, a person loses his mental stability, to theextent that he becomes reliant on sleeping pills.Where there is not the slightest vestige of pain; there is theSelf (the Soul).With wrong vision (viparit darshan) there is pain: withthe right vision (samyak darshan) there is bliss, bliss, andnothing but bliss!Complete surrender under the Gnani’s protection is thevehicle for moksha; however, for the worldly happiness oneshould serve one’s parents and one’s guru.In people’s understanding, happiness lies in loksangnya(related to other peoples’ beliefs). In the Gnani’s understanding,happiness lies in the Atma.Saints (santo) take pleasure in pain whereas the ‘Gnani’takes pleasure in the Self. Saints proceed believing pain aspleasure. To derive pleasure from the body (pudgal; non-Selfcomplex) is a ‘borrowed’ transaction that you will have to‘repay’. When the son jumps onto his lap saying,“Daddy…daddy,” the father enjoys ‘borrowed’ pleasure. Butwhen the same son grows up and says, “Dad, you have nosense!” the time has come for that borrowed pleasure to be‘repaid’! So why not be cautious from the very start? Thepudgal is itself vitarag (without attachments and abhorrence)but when the ‘self’ (relative self) acquires, the transaction ofborrowing begins![14]The True Understanding of ReligionThe traditional worldly (laukik) religions give worldlyhappiness and the real (alaukik; beyond the world) religiongives eternal bliss. All actions carried out in the presence of3334ignorance of the Self (mithyatva), materialize in the worldly life.Religion that is beyond the world is not found in renunciation(tyaag) nor is it found in pleasure (bhoga). ‘That which isrenounced, will be met with ahead.’ One can accumulate asmuch burden as one can carry! True renunciation, is that whichhelps get rid of artadhyan (adverse internal meditation that hurtsthe self), and raudradhyan (adverse internal meditation thathurts the self and others)!That which protects you in your troubled times is religion(dharma)! At the time of artadhyan and raudradhyan, truereligion will be ever present for our protection! For endlesslifetimes, people have followed religion but if they did notreceive any protection in their time of need, how can one callthis following a religion?  If one experiences worries, then it canbe said that one has not understood religion at all.Whatever becomes religion, and yields results, is calledreligion. Whenever someone shouts abuse or curses, religion isthere to help us! Religion yields results; whereas non-religiondoes not. One, who maintains equanimity in times of trouble,receives the stamp of approval to attain liberation (moksha).One does not have to ‘follow’ (ritualized activity) religion;one has to remain sincere to religion (dharma). While doing theLord’s darshan in a temple if at the time the person ‘sees’(thinks about) his shoes that he left at the entrance, or thinksabout his shop, how can he be considered sincere? True religionis one that gives one freedom from all types of pain. The one and only path to moksha is through Gnan(knowledge), vision (darshan), conduct (charitra) and penance(tapa): there is no other path. For infinite lifetimes, one paid devotional observation(darshan) to the ‘form’ (murta – the physical; tangible form).If only once, the darshan of the ‘formless’ (amurta) occurswithin a person, the losses of infinite lifetimes are made up.When can all these losses be made up, and that too in thisinsolvent Kaliyug (the current fifth era)? That is why one shouldjust accept the Gnani’s protection (sharanu) and ask him forliberation. Only then can everything be resolved in a short time.[15]Dharma in One’s ConductThe Lord does not look at the conduct (activity of mind,speech and body), but He does give significance to the intent(bhaav). Conduct (aacharan) is “discharge” karma, and the“charge” (of new karma) happens according to the intentbehind the action.The constant contemplation of ‘Life as a human shouldnot go in vain’ will someday bear fruit.To be free from conflict is the greatest religion. There isno religion where there are clashes, and there are no clasheswhere there is religion.Show kindness (daya), remain peaceful (shanti), remainin equanimity (samata). These dictates of religions, are futile inthese current times. What can be done when they cannot beobserved even after millions of attempts? That is why the GnaniPurush shows us a new path, in a new form; one that isattainable even by the common person.When anger, pride, deceit and greed (kashays) happen,it is not a problem, but one should do repentance (pratikraman)for them. If you commit a theft, it is not a problem, but you mustdo pratikraman for it. If you just abide this one Agna (specialdirective) of the Gnani, you will attain the essence of allreligions. There is no other higher religion, than to please theGnani. Nothing else pleases the Gnani more than if you followhis Agnas! Only the Gnani’s Agnas can take one to the ultimatemoksha!Knowledge itself brings action. As soon as the knowledge3334ignorance of the Self (mithyatva), materialize in the worldly life.Religion that is beyond the world is not found in renunciation(tyaag) nor is it found in pleasure (bhoga). ‘That which isrenounced, will be met with ahead.’ One can accumulate asmuch burden as one can carry! True renunciation, is that whichhelps get rid of artadhyan (adverse internal meditation that hurtsthe self), and raudradhyan (adverse internal meditation thathurts the self and others)!That which protects you in your troubled times is religion(dharma)! At the time of artadhyan and raudradhyan, truereligion will be ever present for our protection! For endlesslifetimes, people have followed religion but if they did notreceive any protection in their time of need, how can one callthis following a religion?  If one experiences worries, then it canbe said that one has not understood religion at all.Whatever becomes religion, and yields results, is calledreligion. Whenever someone shouts abuse or curses, religion isthere to help us! Religion yields results; whereas non-religiondoes not. One, who maintains equanimity in times of trouble,receives the stamp of approval to attain liberation (moksha).One does not have to ‘follow’ (ritualized activity) religion;one has to remain sincere to religion (dharma). While doing theLord’s darshan in a temple if at the time the person ‘sees’(thinks about) his shoes that he left at the entrance, or thinksabout his shop, how can he be considered sincere? True religionis one that gives one freedom from all types of pain. The one and only path to moksha is through Gnan(knowledge), vision (darshan), conduct (charitra) and penance(tapa): there is no other path. For infinite lifetimes, one paid devotional observation(darshan) to the ‘form’ (murta – the physical; tangible form).If only once, the darshan of the ‘formless’ (amurta) occurswithin a person, the losses of infinite lifetimes are made up.When can all these losses be made up, and that too in thisinsolvent Kaliyug (the current fifth era)? That is why one shouldjust accept the Gnani’s protection (sharanu) and ask him forliberation. Only then can everything be resolved in a short time.[15]Dharma in One’s ConductThe Lord does not look at the conduct (activity of mind,speech and body), but He does give significance to the intent(bhaav). Conduct (aacharan) is “discharge” karma, and the“charge” (of new karma) happens according to the intentbehind the action.The constant contemplation of ‘Life as a human shouldnot go in vain’ will someday bear fruit.To be free from conflict is the greatest religion. There isno religion where there are clashes, and there are no clasheswhere there is religion.Show kindness (daya), remain peaceful (shanti), remainin equanimity (samata). These dictates of religions, are futile inthese current times. What can be done when they cannot beobserved even after millions of attempts? That is why the GnaniPurush shows us a new path, in a new form; one that isattainable even by the common person.When anger, pride, deceit and greed (kashays) happen,it is not a problem, but one should do repentance (pratikraman)for them. If you commit a theft, it is not a problem, but you mustdo pratikraman for it. If you just abide this one Agna (specialdirective) of the Gnani, you will attain the essence of allreligions. There is no other higher religion, than to please theGnani. Nothing else pleases the Gnani more than if you followhis Agnas! Only the Gnani’s Agnas can take one to the ultimatemoksha!Knowledge itself brings action. As soon as the knowledge3536that ‘It is fun to steal’ becomes instilled, one will begin to steal.The action always changes as the knowledge changes! Withoutchanging the knowledge, the actions will never change, evenafter millions of lifetimes! For knowledge of ignorance (worldly knowledge), theenergies are easily facilitated by the pudgal (body or non-Selfcomplex). This energy is easily wasted in theft, violence andcarnal pleasure. However, for the attainment of Gnan (knowledgeof the Self), prayer and independent efforts are necessary!Prayer means asking for the higher meaning of it all, and one canask for this from one’s own Self or from the Gnani. In the‘ignorant’ stage (when one has not attained Self-realization), onecan pray to one’s guru, an image of God, or one’s favorite deity.A true prayer, done by a person with a pure heart, will alwaysbe successful.[16]Relative Religion: Spiritual ScienceWhere there is impartiality, there is the religion of theVitarag (one who is free from attachment and abhorrence). TheVitarag religion is the religion of siddhants (irrefutable principlesthat accomplish the ultimate). That which is experienced by thesenses, is “relative”. And the ‘relative’ has arisen only becausethere is the Real! The ‘relative’ is in the form of situations(avastha) and the ‘real’ is in the form of eternal elements(tattva swaroop).Relativity – Mudhatma; the state of the Soul in theignorance of the Self involved in religion or non-religion.Reality – Gnanghan Atma (The Self with Knowledge;antaratma; the interim soul that is awakened to the Self).Absolute – Vignanghan Atma (The Soul with theKnowledge of Science; the Parmatma – The Absolute Soul)The essence of the world (jagatsaar) is the enjoyment ofsensual pleasures. The essence of religion (dharmasaar) is tobe free from artadhyan (adverse internal meditation that hurtsthe self) and raudradhyan (adverse internal meditation thathurts the self and others). The quintessence (marmasaar) of allthis, is moksha. The essence of time and the Atma (samaysaar)is to be established in the Self.Religion (dharma) is ‘relative’ and science (vignan) is‘real’. Science is without controversy; it is with principles thatlead to liberation and automatically effective in itself.[17]Knowing God Through the Vision of GnanWe are not a portion of God; God cannot be fragmented.We are complete and absolute. It is only a matter of time for theveil of ignorance to be removed and the Self to express!If God is in every particle, then where should we look forHim? Where can we defecate? And if this were so, then therewould be no difference, between the inanimate (jada; lifeless)and the animate (chetan; living). God is in each and every livingbeing.Where the ownership of something is established and if itsremoval causes the owner pain, it is called sankalpi-chetan. Infact, both Gnan (knowledge) and vision (darshan) are presentin the chetan.[18]Understanding the Knower Three things are necessary for the path of moksha:1. An intense desire to attain the Soul (Atma; Self).2. An intense desire to meet and know a Gnani Purush.3. If one cannot meet the Gnani Purush, then tocontinue to have the profound intention to meet him.                             ~ Gnani Purush Dadashri3536that ‘It is fun to steal’ becomes instilled, one will begin to steal.The action always changes as the knowledge changes! Withoutchanging the knowledge, the actions will never change, evenafter millions of lifetimes! For knowledge of ignorance (worldly knowledge), theenergies are easily facilitated by the pudgal (body or non-Selfcomplex). This energy is easily wasted in theft, violence andcarnal pleasure. However, for the attainment of Gnan (knowledgeof the Self), prayer and independent efforts are necessary!Prayer means asking for the higher meaning of it all, and one canask for this from one’s own Self or from the Gnani. In the‘ignorant’ stage (when one has not attained Self-realization), onecan pray to one’s guru, an image of God, or one’s favorite deity.A true prayer, done by a person with a pure heart, will alwaysbe successful.[16]Relative Religion: Spiritual ScienceWhere there is impartiality, there is the religion of theVitarag (one who is free from attachment and abhorrence). TheVitarag religion is the religion of siddhants (irrefutable principlesthat accomplish the ultimate). That which is experienced by thesenses, is “relative”. And the ‘relative’ has arisen only becausethere is the Real! The ‘relative’ is in the form of situations(avastha) and the ‘real’ is in the form of eternal elements(tattva swaroop).Relativity – Mudhatma; the state of the Soul in theignorance of the Self involved in religion or non-religion.Reality – Gnanghan Atma (The Self with Knowledge;antaratma; the interim soul that is awakened to the Self).Absolute – Vignanghan Atma (The Soul with theKnowledge of Science; the Parmatma – The Absolute Soul)The essence of the world (jagatsaar) is the enjoyment ofsensual pleasures. The essence of religion (dharmasaar) is tobe free from artadhyan (adverse internal meditation that hurtsthe self) and raudradhyan (adverse internal meditation thathurts the self and others). The quintessence (marmasaar) of allthis, is moksha. The essence of time and the Atma (samaysaar)is to be established in the Self.Religion (dharma) is ‘relative’ and science (vignan) is‘real’. Science is without controversy; it is with principles thatlead to liberation and automatically effective in itself.[17]Knowing God Through the Vision of GnanWe are not a portion of God; God cannot be fragmented.We are complete and absolute. It is only a matter of time for theveil of ignorance to be removed and the Self to express!If God is in every particle, then where should we look forHim? Where can we defecate? And if this were so, then therewould be no difference, between the inanimate (jada; lifeless)and the animate (chetan; living). God is in each and every livingbeing.Where the ownership of something is established and if itsremoval causes the owner pain, it is called sankalpi-chetan. Infact, both Gnan (knowledge) and vision (darshan) are presentin the chetan.[18]Understanding the Knower Three things are necessary for the path of moksha:1. An intense desire to attain the Soul (Atma; Self).2. An intense desire to meet and know a Gnani Purush.3. If one cannot meet the Gnani Purush, then tocontinue to have the profound intention to meet him.                             ~ Gnani Purush Dadashri3738When one says, “I ‘see’ all the living beings in the universeas Godly forms (Bhagwat swaroop)”, then it would also includeall the ‘relative’ religions of the world. The Self can be studied(swadhyaya) once the Self is known. Whatever is done withoutknowing the Self is the study of paradhyaya (study of the non-Self)!It is considered as awakening to the Self, when that whichwas believed to be the ‘Knower’ (Gnata) for an infinite periodof time, comes to be known as gneya (that which is to beknown).Liberation from ignorance of the Self is the religion ofmoksha (moksha dharma). After liberation from ignorance, thescience (vignan) that arises is moksha![19]The True Path of WorshipUntil the God that sits resplendently within, is experienceddirectly (pratyaksh darshan), the indirect (paroksh) prayer ofsomeone who sits in front of an idol, will reach the present God.For that reason:‘Oh Vitarag Lord! You reside within me, but I am unableto experience that; therefore, I am doing Your darshan. TheGnani Purush has taught me this, so I am doing the darshanaccordingly. Please grant me Your grace so that I may know‘my’ own ‘Self’.’            ~ Gnani Purush DadashriThis is how the darshan should be done everywhere.For the purpose of attaining God, whatever is donethrough the five senses, is bhakti (worship). One can attain Godby doing direct worship (pratyaksh bhakti). With indirectworship (paroksh bhakti), there is a gradual progress upwards.Direct worship means to worship the one in whom God hasmanifested fully. This will result in moksha.There are subtle differences in worship. The chanting of aname (naam jaap), is overt worship; veneration of the idol issubtle worship (sookshma bhakti); with dravya (worship withthe external physical substances) is subtler worship, and thesubtlest worship is, that which is done with intent (bhaav).Does moksha occur by following the path of worship, orby following the path of knowledge? When one rail of the pathof knowledge is laid and there is another rail of the path ofworship, parallel to it, then this train will reach moksha! Asmuch knowledge that is attained that much worship willspontaneously arise. Worship done without the knowledge ofthe Self yields its results for the worldly life; however, when both(Self knowledge and worship) are done together, there isattainment of moksha! Where the intellect creeps into worship,it becomes a worldly form of worship (apara-bhakti).Nevertheless, the highest form of worship is the worship of theSelf (para-bhakti), and the result of that is moksha (FinalLiberation). The manifestation of this highest form of worship isthe priceless gift of the Akram marg (the step-less path toLiberation)![20]The Guru and The GnaniOnce a person establishes his guru (religious leader,teacher, guide), that guru should not be denounced even ifcircumstances indicate that he may be delirious. Not only shouldthere be no criticism, but there should not be even a singlenegative thought about him; this would be considered atremendous disservice. It can take one all the way to hell.The one who teaches you what is good and what is badinthe world is a guru. And the one who frees you from good andbad, and places you in the pure (shuddha), Self, is a Gnani.How much need is there for a guru? Without a guru, not3738When one says, “I ‘see’ all the living beings in the universeas Godly forms (Bhagwat swaroop)”, then it would also includeall the ‘relative’ religions of the world. The Self can be studied(swadhyaya) once the Self is known. Whatever is done withoutknowing the Self is the study of paradhyaya (study of the non-Self)!It is considered as awakening to the Self, when that whichwas believed to be the ‘Knower’ (Gnata) for an infinite periodof time, comes to be known as gneya (that which is to beknown).Liberation from ignorance of the Self is the religion ofmoksha (moksha dharma). After liberation from ignorance, thescience (vignan) that arises is moksha![19]The True Path of WorshipUntil the God that sits resplendently within, is experienceddirectly (pratyaksh darshan), the indirect (paroksh) prayer ofsomeone who sits in front of an idol, will reach the present God.For that reason:‘Oh Vitarag Lord! You reside within me, but I am unableto experience that; therefore, I am doing Your darshan. TheGnani Purush has taught me this, so I am doing the darshanaccordingly. Please grant me Your grace so that I may know‘my’ own ‘Self’.’            ~ Gnani Purush DadashriThis is how the darshan should be done everywhere.For the purpose of attaining God, whatever is donethrough the five senses, is bhakti (worship). One can attain Godby doing direct worship (pratyaksh bhakti). With indirectworship (paroksh bhakti), there is a gradual progress upwards.Direct worship means to worship the one in whom God hasmanifested fully. This will result in moksha.There are subtle differences in worship. The chanting of aname (naam jaap), is overt worship; veneration of the idol issubtle worship (sookshma bhakti); with dravya (worship withthe external physical substances) is subtler worship, and thesubtlest worship is, that which is done with intent (bhaav).Does moksha occur by following the path of worship, orby following the path of knowledge? When one rail of the pathof knowledge is laid and there is another rail of the path ofworship, parallel to it, then this train will reach moksha! Asmuch knowledge that is attained that much worship willspontaneously arise. Worship done without the knowledge ofthe Self yields its results for the worldly life; however, when both(Self knowledge and worship) are done together, there isattainment of moksha! Where the intellect creeps into worship,it becomes a worldly form of worship (apara-bhakti).Nevertheless, the highest form of worship is the worship of theSelf (para-bhakti), and the result of that is moksha (FinalLiberation). The manifestation of this highest form of worship isthe priceless gift of the Akram marg (the step-less path toLiberation)![20]The Guru and The GnaniOnce a person establishes his guru (religious leader,teacher, guide), that guru should not be denounced even ifcircumstances indicate that he may be delirious. Not only shouldthere be no criticism, but there should not be even a singlenegative thought about him; this would be considered atremendous disservice. It can take one all the way to hell.The one who teaches you what is good and what is badinthe world is a guru. And the one who frees you from good andbad, and places you in the pure (shuddha), Self, is a Gnani.How much need is there for a guru? Without a guru, not3940even the alphabet can be learned. So then, how can oneworship God without a guru? Even if a person wants to go toa railway station, and is lost, he will need a ‘guru’. A guru isneeded, every step of the way. But for moksha, only a Gnaniis needed!Where there is no ‘doership’ left, there is the grace ofthe Gnani. The one who bestows liberation (mukti) is aGnani.A true worldly guru is the one who points you to the rightpath, just like a ‘point man’. Those who change the course ofthe path and lead you in the wrong direction are the gurus oftoday’s world. ‘Guru’ means heavy. And ‘heavy’ means that notonly does he drown himself, but he also drowns others who sitin the same boat with him. If a guru has a ‘guru-key’ (gurukilli);he does not let his disciples drown. “I am the disciple of thewhole world,” is the gurukilli!  The one who does not have theawareness of, ‘this is my disciple’, even for a second, has theauthority to make disciples.Once the guru’s place is established in the heart, the truedisciple will not refute any adverse developments in the guru’sbehavior, speech or even his delirious or crazed state. Onlyone’s uninterrupted sincerity will take one to moksha! It is verytreacherous to refute the guru after accepting him as your guru.The guru is the fifth ghati (destroyer) karma. No one shouldsee anything negative in his guru; otherwise, it is better not toaccept the guru in the first place. It is acceptable for one to notbe devoted to one’s guru, but one must not refute him. Humanbeings nowadays, have this affliction from their previous lives:they cannot remain quiet, they cannot refrain from finding faultsin the guru, or even criticizing him!You do not make someone a guru; the guru happens toyou. The one who settles and pleases your heart, as soon as youcast your eyes on him, is the one that should establish the ‘guru’splace’ in your heart. Otherwise, who has developed the abilityto examine and establish the guru?The one who helps you to walk the auspicious path in thisworld is the guru, and the one who gives direct moksha is theGnani![21] The Purpose of PenanceHow much need is there for chanting of mantra (japa),penance (tapa) or for vrat (taking religious vows)? Do you useall the medicines from the pharmacy? Only those that areprescribed for you are the right ones. However, there is noreason to say that the other medicines are wrong. There areother ‘patients’ for whom chanting mantra and penance, etc.,result in binding auspicious karma.The current time is not one for doing penance throughinsistence or even deliberately. This is the time to do penancethat comes naturally before you, and to settle it with equanimity.For those people who, because of the lack of the effect of meritkarma, when there is a shortage of grain, kerosene, sugar andmilk, they distress over it day and night: what more penance canthere be?For the Gnani, renunciation or acquisition is not possible.He will settle with whatever circumstance that may come beforehim! The Lord did not say that the renunciation of material thingsis renunciation. He has said that the renunciation of intenseattraction (murchha) for material things is renunciation. God willonly see the root cause of the problem!The one who can do the agiyaras (observance offasting done on the eleventh day of the lunar cycle), inaccordance with the revered Dadashri’s instructions andapproval, will definitely attain salvation. True agiyaras is whenthe gnanendriya (Five senses; Sense organs of knowledge3940even the alphabet can be learned. So then, how can oneworship God without a guru? Even if a person wants to go toa railway station, and is lost, he will need a ‘guru’. A guru isneeded, every step of the way. But for moksha, only a Gnaniis needed!Where there is no ‘doership’ left, there is the grace ofthe Gnani. The one who bestows liberation (mukti) is aGnani.A true worldly guru is the one who points you to the rightpath, just like a ‘point man’. Those who change the course ofthe path and lead you in the wrong direction are the gurus oftoday’s world. ‘Guru’ means heavy. And ‘heavy’ means that notonly does he drown himself, but he also drowns others who sitin the same boat with him. If a guru has a ‘guru-key’ (gurukilli);he does not let his disciples drown. “I am the disciple of thewhole world,” is the gurukilli!  The one who does not have theawareness of, ‘this is my disciple’, even for a second, has theauthority to make disciples.Once the guru’s place is established in the heart, the truedisciple will not refute any adverse developments in the guru’sbehavior, speech or even his delirious or crazed state. Onlyone’s uninterrupted sincerity will take one to moksha! It is verytreacherous to refute the guru after accepting him as your guru.The guru is the fifth ghati (destroyer) karma. No one shouldsee anything negative in his guru; otherwise, it is better not toaccept the guru in the first place. It is acceptable for one to notbe devoted to one’s guru, but one must not refute him. Humanbeings nowadays, have this affliction from their previous lives:they cannot remain quiet, they cannot refrain from finding faultsin the guru, or even criticizing him!You do not make someone a guru; the guru happens toyou. The one who settles and pleases your heart, as soon as youcast your eyes on him, is the one that should establish the ‘guru’splace’ in your heart. Otherwise, who has developed the abilityto examine and establish the guru?The one who helps you to walk the auspicious path in thisworld is the guru, and the one who gives direct moksha is theGnani![21] The Purpose of PenanceHow much need is there for chanting of mantra (japa),penance (tapa) or for vrat (taking religious vows)? Do you useall the medicines from the pharmacy? Only those that areprescribed for you are the right ones. However, there is noreason to say that the other medicines are wrong. There areother ‘patients’ for whom chanting mantra and penance, etc.,result in binding auspicious karma.The current time is not one for doing penance throughinsistence or even deliberately. This is the time to do penancethat comes naturally before you, and to settle it with equanimity.For those people who, because of the lack of the effect of meritkarma, when there is a shortage of grain, kerosene, sugar andmilk, they distress over it day and night: what more penance canthere be?For the Gnani, renunciation or acquisition is not possible.He will settle with whatever circumstance that may come beforehim! The Lord did not say that the renunciation of material thingsis renunciation. He has said that the renunciation of intenseattraction (murchha) for material things is renunciation. God willonly see the root cause of the problem!The one who can do the agiyaras (observance offasting done on the eleventh day of the lunar cycle), inaccordance with the revered Dadashri’s instructions andapproval, will definitely attain salvation. True agiyaras is whenthe gnanendriya (Five senses; Sense organs of knowledge4142namely: hearing-ears, touch-skin, sight-eyes, taste-tongue, andsmell-nose), karmendriya (five organs of action) and the mind(mun), as the eleventh ‘sense’, are deprived of ‘food’. If the‘fast’ is done with the right applied awareness (upayog), themind, body and speech will be purified! Aayambil, eating foodmade from only one variety of grain, should be done withdiscretion and limitation, by the person that practices it. It isuseful for a person to fast, if he suffers from indigestion, untilhis indigestion is cured.As a matter of fact, the Self is such, that it cannot befound through the practice of penance, chanting or fasting.There is no penance like unodari (eating less food thanwhat one has appetite for). Dadashri did not fast even once inhis life. Yes, but for his entire life, he did unodari.What is the result of fasting if after a hundred thousandfasts, the kashays (anger, pride, deceit and greed) are not gone?Tremendous loss is incurred if one fasts and does kashays at thesame time. If food is not available till two o’clock, tell the mind,‘Today is the day for fasting’ and remain in equanimity. There isno other fast like it![22]Worldly ReligionsIf there is even the subtlest desire in religion, then thatreligion is not religion; it is a business!He who earns in the ‘relative’: loses in the ‘real’. Thereshould be no robbery in religion. The perils are beyondimagination.Without first understanding the siddhants (irrefutableprinciples that accomplish the ultimate), that are to beundertaken with devotion and understanding, how can one dospiritual practice (sadhana; spiritual endeavor; undergoingself-discipline for spiritual development)? Moksha and partialitycontradict one another. There is no other solution except thewords of the Vitarag. It is impossible to attain mokshawithout a Gnani.[23]The Goal Is to Attain MokshaThe state of the Siddha is Supreme Soul (Parmatma).Nothing is to be done there. It is the natural state of being theKnower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta), and being in the absolute bliss(parmanand)! There in Siddha gati (location of the Siddhas),one is in eternal and endless bliss.Moksha is the ‘feeling’ of liberation. Firstly, there isfreedom from the worldly miseries. And then there is liberationfrom all the karma. Moksha is attained from he who isliberated.Where there is no beggarly need of any kind, such aswant or desire for wealth, fame, sexual pleasures, disciples,temples or respect, all the power of the world will becomesubmissive!Moksha occurs when there is mistake-free understanding.The intellect that is involved with the pudgal (body complex) isindeed the worldly life (sansar), and the intellect that issubmissive only to the Atma (Self) is moksha.Moksha is not a state to be reached or attained. It isone’s own natural state. One is already in the state of moksha;only the awareness of it is lacking. The Gnani Purush awakensyou to the Self within you, and thereafter the experience ofmoksha begins!If there is the easiest thing in this world, it is the way tomoksha. An ox will go from the farm to the home easily, but itwill have to be forcibly pulled to the farm. Moksha is our own4142namely: hearing-ears, touch-skin, sight-eyes, taste-tongue, andsmell-nose), karmendriya (five organs of action) and the mind(mun), as the eleventh ‘sense’, are deprived of ‘food’. If the‘fast’ is done with the right applied awareness (upayog), themind, body and speech will be purified! Aayambil, eating foodmade from only one variety of grain, should be done withdiscretion and limitation, by the person that practices it. It isuseful for a person to fast, if he suffers from indigestion, untilhis indigestion is cured.As a matter of fact, the Self is such, that it cannot befound through the practice of penance, chanting or fasting.There is no penance like unodari (eating less food thanwhat one has appetite for). Dadashri did not fast even once inhis life. Yes, but for his entire life, he did unodari.What is the result of fasting if after a hundred thousandfasts, the kashays (anger, pride, deceit and greed) are not gone?Tremendous loss is incurred if one fasts and does kashays at thesame time. If food is not available till two o’clock, tell the mind,‘Today is the day for fasting’ and remain in equanimity. There isno other fast like it![22]Worldly ReligionsIf there is even the subtlest desire in religion, then thatreligion is not religion; it is a business!He who earns in the ‘relative’: loses in the ‘real’. Thereshould be no robbery in religion. The perils are beyondimagination.Without first understanding the siddhants (irrefutableprinciples that accomplish the ultimate), that are to beundertaken with devotion and understanding, how can one dospiritual practice (sadhana; spiritual endeavor; undergoingself-discipline for spiritual development)? Moksha and partialitycontradict one another. There is no other solution except thewords of the Vitarag. It is impossible to attain mokshawithout a Gnani.[23]The Goal Is to Attain MokshaThe state of the Siddha is Supreme Soul (Parmatma).Nothing is to be done there. It is the natural state of being theKnower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta), and being in the absolute bliss(parmanand)! There in Siddha gati (location of the Siddhas),one is in eternal and endless bliss.Moksha is the ‘feeling’ of liberation. Firstly, there isfreedom from the worldly miseries. And then there is liberationfrom all the karma. Moksha is attained from he who isliberated.Where there is no beggarly need of any kind, such aswant or desire for wealth, fame, sexual pleasures, disciples,temples or respect, all the power of the world will becomesubmissive!Moksha occurs when there is mistake-free understanding.The intellect that is involved with the pudgal (body complex) isindeed the worldly life (sansar), and the intellect that issubmissive only to the Atma (Self) is moksha.Moksha is not a state to be reached or attained. It isone’s own natural state. One is already in the state of moksha;only the awareness of it is lacking. The Gnani Purush awakensyou to the Self within you, and thereafter the experience ofmoksha begins!If there is the easiest thing in this world, it is the way tomoksha. An ox will go from the farm to the home easily, but itwill have to be forcibly pulled to the farm. Moksha is our own4344home. The world is a ‘farmer’s field’ to be ploughed; excepthere, there are the horrible physical difficulties, obstacles, andthe complications of the interfering intellect (buddhi). And in ourown ‘home’, there is no vikalp (the belief of ‘I am Chandubhai’);there is absolute bliss, and there is no ‘doership’!The Self has always been free, and has never been bound.Bondage seemingly appears because of illusion. By the grace ofthe Gnani, this illusion is dispelled and the awareness ofliberation occurs![24]Conviction On the Path to MokshaTo attain moksha:What is the religion?Religion of the Self.What is the attire?Any that you like.What is the place?Place of the Vitarag (One whois free from attachment-abhorrence)!In what state?In the state of Vitaragata!In which sect?Where there is no partiality!How to identify theOne who is continuously thesadguru?Self;  the ultimate guru! Hisspeech is unprecedented,unparalleled and yet it leadsone to the experience of theSelf.What is the convictionThere the wandering Soul rests.(pratiti)?What is the characteristicA state free of kashays (innerof moksha?enemies of anger, pride, deceitand greed).In these times, where isThe Revered Gnani Purushthe end?Dadashri.How to attain it?With absolute humility (paramvinaya).Where can one attain rightFrom the sadguru, who is freevision?from kashays.How can one practiceFrom a kashay-free sadguru.religion?What is the tool ofBeing ready and aware forreligion?liberation.What is the definition ofThat which reduces kashays.religion?What is the easy way toTo serve the kashay-freemoksha?Gnani.What are the means through Through the Knowledge of thewhich to get moksha?Self.Does the worldly lifeNo, Ignorance of the Self is theobstruct moksha?obstruction.In the path to moksha, is   Yes, to prevent obstructions in thethere a need to worship thepath.ruling deities?In Jainism, is the fourth day correct or the fifth, for fasting?The one that is suitable is correct. Whichever one thatleads to religion (dharma) is correct. The one that causesadharma is wrong.Who is considered a Jain?The one who has heard thespeech of the Jina or the Jineshwar (absolute Self-realized).Having heard it, having faith in it, and following it completely,is a saint (sadhu). The one who follows it partially is a devoutfollower (shravak).4344home. The world is a ‘farmer’s field’ to be ploughed; excepthere, there are the horrible physical difficulties, obstacles, andthe complications of the interfering intellect (buddhi). And in ourown ‘home’, there is no vikalp (the belief of ‘I am Chandubhai’);there is absolute bliss, and there is no ‘doership’!The Self has always been free, and has never been bound.Bondage seemingly appears because of illusion. By the grace ofthe Gnani, this illusion is dispelled and the awareness ofliberation occurs![24]Conviction On the Path to MokshaTo attain moksha:What is the religion?Religion of the Self.What is the attire?Any that you like.What is the place?Place of the Vitarag (One whois free from attachment-abhorrence)!In what state?In the state of Vitaragata!In which sect?Where there is no partiality!How to identify theOne who is continuously thesadguru?Self;  the ultimate guru! Hisspeech is unprecedented,unparalleled and yet it leadsone to the experience of theSelf.What is the convictionThere the wandering Soul rests.(pratiti)?What is the characteristicA state free of kashays (innerof moksha?enemies of anger, pride, deceitand greed).In these times, where isThe Revered Gnani Purushthe end?Dadashri.How to attain it?With absolute humility (paramvinaya).Where can one attain rightFrom the sadguru, who is freevision?from kashays.How can one practiceFrom a kashay-free sadguru.religion?What is the tool ofBeing ready and aware forreligion?liberation.What is the definition ofThat which reduces kashays.religion?What is the easy way toTo serve the kashay-freemoksha?Gnani.What are the means through Through the Knowledge of thewhich to get moksha?Self.Does the worldly lifeNo, Ignorance of the Self is theobstruct moksha?obstruction.In the path to moksha, is   Yes, to prevent obstructions in thethere a need to worship thepath.ruling deities?In Jainism, is the fourth day correct or the fifth, for fasting?The one that is suitable is correct. Whichever one thatleads to religion (dharma) is correct. The one that causesadharma is wrong.Who is considered a Jain?The one who has heard thespeech of the Jina or the Jineshwar (absolute Self-realized).Having heard it, having faith in it, and following it completely,is a saint (sadhu). The one who follows it partially is a devoutfollower (shravak).4546[25]I and My “Separate ‘I’ and ‘My’ with the Gnani’s ‘separator’. ‘I’is immortal. ‘My’ is mortal.”~ Gnani Purush DadashriWherever there is the attachment of ‘My,’ if thatattachment is removed, then in the end the absolute ‘I’ is found.“‘I’ is God and ‘My’ is illusion.”~ Gnani Purush DadashriThe Gnani establishes the line of demarcation between‘I’ and ‘My.’[26]Memory Is Dependent on Raag-DweshMemory is dependent on attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh). One will feel harassment from the memory of attachmentor abhorrence.The one, who has no memory of anything other than ofthe Self, is Vitarag. Because the Gnani is always established inthe Self, he has no memory of the world, but he can ‘see’everything in his vision. Memory is the energy of the non-Selfcomplex (pudgal). Vision (darshan) is the energy of the Self.That which comes in the memory is acquisition (parigraha).However, if the Gnani comes in one’s memory, that attachment(raag) is prashasta raag (attachment of the highest quality). Itis this attachment that will remove the ‘My-ness’ (mamata)from the world, and place it into the Gnani. Therefore, thatattachment becomes the reason for moksha.When there is no attachment for those who offer flowers,and no abhorrence for those who utter obscenities, it is calledequanimity (samata). The intention to remain in equanimity(samata bhaav) may lead to an error, but the Knower-Seerstate (Gnata-Drashta) will impart constant awareness.There is satisfaction (santosh) in the worldly life, but there isno contentment (trupti). With satisfaction new seeds can be sown.[27]Open and StraightforwardTrue straightforwardness (nikhalasata; purity) is wherethere is the Knowledge of the Self (Atmagnan). There is noneed to read the scriptures. There is the need to become pure!An extraordinary person would be one who is helpful toevery single living being! Such a person rises above the forcesof the non-Self complex (prakruti). Such is the one who attainstrue liberation![28]The Laughter of the Liberated OneThe liberated smile (mukta hasya) is the permanentradiance on the face of the completely liberated One (Purush)!The inner tug of war about various things, and the whims ofetiquette, keep the smile tensed up. The freedom of a smile isproportionate to the simplicity and fault-free state! Where thereis Vitaragata, there is the entirely liberated smile![29]Worry: EquanimityWorries create ‘causes’ for a life in the animal kingdom.When the Gnani is sitting, he touches God; while theperson who sits near the Gnani, is sitting very close to God!What else can be there, other than pure blissful silence and peace?[30]Saiyam ParinamThe Lord does not consider external restraints as saiyam.4546[25]I and My “Separate ‘I’ and ‘My’ with the Gnani’s ‘separator’. ‘I’is immortal. ‘My’ is mortal.”~ Gnani Purush DadashriWherever there is the attachment of ‘My,’ if thatattachment is removed, then in the end the absolute ‘I’ is found.“‘I’ is God and ‘My’ is illusion.”~ Gnani Purush DadashriThe Gnani establishes the line of demarcation between‘I’ and ‘My.’[26]Memory Is Dependent on Raag-DweshMemory is dependent on attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh). One will feel harassment from the memory of attachmentor abhorrence.The one, who has no memory of anything other than ofthe Self, is Vitarag. Because the Gnani is always established inthe Self, he has no memory of the world, but he can ‘see’everything in his vision. Memory is the energy of the non-Selfcomplex (pudgal). Vision (darshan) is the energy of the Self.That which comes in the memory is acquisition (parigraha).However, if the Gnani comes in one’s memory, that attachment(raag) is prashasta raag (attachment of the highest quality). Itis this attachment that will remove the ‘My-ness’ (mamata)from the world, and place it into the Gnani. Therefore, thatattachment becomes the reason for moksha.When there is no attachment for those who offer flowers,and no abhorrence for those who utter obscenities, it is calledequanimity (samata). The intention to remain in equanimity(samata bhaav) may lead to an error, but the Knower-Seerstate (Gnata-Drashta) will impart constant awareness.There is satisfaction (santosh) in the worldly life, but there isno contentment (trupti). With satisfaction new seeds can be sown.[27]Open and StraightforwardTrue straightforwardness (nikhalasata; purity) is wherethere is the Knowledge of the Self (Atmagnan). There is noneed to read the scriptures. There is the need to become pure!An extraordinary person would be one who is helpful toevery single living being! Such a person rises above the forcesof the non-Self complex (prakruti). Such is the one who attainstrue liberation![28]The Laughter of the Liberated OneThe liberated smile (mukta hasya) is the permanentradiance on the face of the completely liberated One (Purush)!The inner tug of war about various things, and the whims ofetiquette, keep the smile tensed up. The freedom of a smile isproportionate to the simplicity and fault-free state! Where thereis Vitaragata, there is the entirely liberated smile![29]Worry: EquanimityWorries create ‘causes’ for a life in the animal kingdom.When the Gnani is sitting, he touches God; while theperson who sits near the Gnani, is sitting very close to God!What else can be there, other than pure blissful silence and peace?[30]Saiyam ParinamThe Lord does not consider external restraints as saiyam.When not a single evidence or result of the non-Self arises, thenit is called complete saiyam (control of kashays: anger-pride-deceit-greed). The result that is there when there is no anger,pride, deceit or greed is called saiyam parinam (absence ofkashay reaction). It is only through saiyam that the energy ofthe Self manifests.[31]The Laws of Fulfilling DesiresThe nature of the mind is to find something new each day.When all kinds of desires arise within, Nature says, “All yourrequests will be granted, but at our (Nature’s) convenience!” Ifsomething becomes available upon desiring it, then it will takeone on a downward path. On the other hand, if there is a desirefor something that is not easily available; it will take one on anupward path.[32]The Habit of Watching Television (TV)The human body is attained after great and strenuouseffort and yet, one spends it according to one’s understanding.Lord Krishna has said the same thing in the Gita that people arewasting their time in meaningless activities. Because of lack ofunderstanding, precious human lifetime is snatched away and allthe time is wasted.[33]GreedThe one who has everything, but is still searching formore, is called greedy. The knot of greed is broken by saying,“Whatever is there for me in the ‘scientific circumstantialevidence’, let it be.”[34]Let Go of the ReinsEven for a moment, one cannot let go of the reins of the‘horses’ of the five senses. On a downward slope, one loosensthe reins, instead of tightening them, and at an incline, instead ofloosening the reins, one tightens them! This is why the GnaniPurush gives you the practice of handing over the reins tovyavasthit (‘scientific circumstantial evidence’); while all youhave to do is just ‘see’.By practicing this every Sunday of the week, you will beginto understand ‘scientific circumstantial evidence’ in its exactness:what one’s conduct is like, what type of ‘record’ is playing inone’s speech. One has to ‘see’ all that; ‘see’ the mind and ‘see’the ‘Self’. Absolute knowledge (Kevalgnan) unfolds in relation tothe degree to which the mind, speech and body are ‘seen’ asseparate. One does not have to dismiss or change the activity ofthe mind, speech and body; one only has to ‘see’ them!  How can‘discharge’ (dissipation of karma) be changed? When one only‘sees’ the effects of one’s own pudgal (non-Self complex), oneis in the realm of absolute Knowledge. To continuously ‘see’ whatis happening, is the final saiyam of the Gnanis.[35]The Theory of KarmaWhere there is closure (samadhan), there is religion;where there is no closure, there is no religion.What is karma? If you are a ‘Gnani’ (Self-realized), thekarmas are not Yours: if you are ignorant of the Self, then thekarmas are yours.One is bound by karma because of intent (bhaav): asense of ‘doership’ (karta bhaav - the belief of “I am doing”).The assertion with the belief (aropit bhaav) of, “I did it”, bindskarma. “I am Chandubhai” is in itself karma. The Self is not the‘doer’ of karma. It appears this way, because of illusion(bhranti).  Once the illusion dissipates, there is no ‘doer’ ofkarma, and there is no karma. Who is the ‘doer’ of karma?Is it the pudgal (non-Self complex) or is it the Self? Neither one4748When not a single evidence or result of the non-Self arises, thenit is called complete saiyam (control of kashays: anger-pride-deceit-greed). The result that is there when there is no anger,pride, deceit or greed is called saiyam parinam (absence ofkashay reaction). It is only through saiyam that the energy ofthe Self manifests.[31]The Laws of Fulfilling DesiresThe nature of the mind is to find something new each day.When all kinds of desires arise within, Nature says, “All yourrequests will be granted, but at our (Nature’s) convenience!” Ifsomething becomes available upon desiring it, then it will takeone on a downward path. On the other hand, if there is a desirefor something that is not easily available; it will take one on anupward path.[32]The Habit of Watching Television (TV)The human body is attained after great and strenuouseffort and yet, one spends it according to one’s understanding.Lord Krishna has said the same thing in the Gita that people arewasting their time in meaningless activities. Because of lack ofunderstanding, precious human lifetime is snatched away and allthe time is wasted.[33]GreedThe one who has everything, but is still searching formore, is called greedy. The knot of greed is broken by saying,“Whatever is there for me in the ‘scientific circumstantialevidence’, let it be.”[34]Let Go of the ReinsEven for a moment, one cannot let go of the reins of the‘horses’ of the five senses. On a downward slope, one loosensthe reins, instead of tightening them, and at an incline, instead ofloosening the reins, one tightens them! This is why the GnaniPurush gives you the practice of handing over the reins tovyavasthit (‘scientific circumstantial evidence’); while all youhave to do is just ‘see’.By practicing this every Sunday of the week, you will beginto understand ‘scientific circumstantial evidence’ in its exactness:what one’s conduct is like, what type of ‘record’ is playing inone’s speech. One has to ‘see’ all that; ‘see’ the mind and ‘see’the ‘Self’. Absolute knowledge (Kevalgnan) unfolds in relation tothe degree to which the mind, speech and body are ‘seen’ asseparate. One does not have to dismiss or change the activity ofthe mind, speech and body; one only has to ‘see’ them!  How can‘discharge’ (dissipation of karma) be changed? When one only‘sees’ the effects of one’s own pudgal (non-Self complex), oneis in the realm of absolute Knowledge. To continuously ‘see’ whatis happening, is the final saiyam of the Gnanis.[35]The Theory of KarmaWhere there is closure (samadhan), there is religion;where there is no closure, there is no religion.What is karma? If you are a ‘Gnani’ (Self-realized), thekarmas are not Yours: if you are ignorant of the Self, then thekarmas are yours.One is bound by karma because of intent (bhaav): asense of ‘doership’ (karta bhaav - the belief of “I am doing”).The assertion with the belief (aropit bhaav) of, “I did it”, bindskarma. “I am Chandubhai” is in itself karma. The Self is not the‘doer’ of karma. It appears this way, because of illusion(bhranti).  Once the illusion dissipates, there is no ‘doer’ ofkarma, and there is no karma. Who is the ‘doer’ of karma?Is it the pudgal (non-Self complex) or is it the Self? Neither one4748of them is the ‘doer’. It is the ego itself does the karma. Fromthe ‘relative’ viewpoint (vyavahar; worldly perspective), the selfis the ‘doer’, but from the ‘real’ viewpoint (nischay) the Self isnot the ‘doer’.The Self is the ‘doer’ of its own nature (Knowing andSeeing). But because of the wrong belief, “I am Chandubhai”,one binds karma. The ego and the intent of ‘doership’ arise inthe presence of the Self. It is because of this that the pudgal(non-Self complex), becomes active (sakriya). Once the ego isgone, all this ends! After the Gnani Purush bestows upon youthe knowledge of the Self, you will bind no more karma.   The meaning of the karma of infinite past lives is that itis not the aggregate of all the karma of all the lives, but it is thebalance of all the karma that is carried forward! A person findspleasure in the enjoyment of the effects of merit karma (punya),and pain when he has to face the effects of demerit karma(paap).The results of overt (sthool; perceptible) karma, i.e.,karmas those are experienced with the five senses; are experiencedin the here and now. And the results of subtle (sookshma)karma, those that are not visible, and those that are not knowneven to the ‘doer’, are experienced in the next life.Giving a donation is an overt karma; its results will surelybe rewarded immediately by people, in the form of praise andfame. However, at the time the donation was being given, whatwas the prevailing inner intent (bhaav) of the giver? Was it, ‘Ihave to give this donation, because the mayor pressured me intoit; otherwise, I would not have given anything’? Or was it, ‘If Ihad more, I would have given more’? Whatever the prevalentintention, will determine the results for the next life. The‘charging’ of subtle karma is done by the opinion or inner intent(bhaav) behind the visible and overt actions. The visiblekarma is in the form of ‘discharge’; they are in the naturalmode of action, and no one is the ‘doer’ of the ‘discharge’karma; whereas, the ‘doer’ of subtle (intent) karma is theego. The Akram science, says that through the intent of, “Idid”, one binds karma. Your everyday life is run by ‘scientificcircumstantial evidences’ (vyavasthit shakti), and not bykarma. The karma is already there behind the actions, butwhat brings it into action is vyavasthit shakti (scientificcircumstantial evidences). Karma is just one component of thescientific circumstantial evidences!The power of the energy of the Self is such, that thewrong belief gives rise to vikalp; ‘I am this’ and so instantaneouslythe subatomic particles (parmanus) which, by their very nature,are prone to activity, become ‘charged’, and they wrap aroundIt (the Atma; the Self). This is what is known as karma.Whatever is done without hesitation, and with completeunity of the mind, speech and body, results in the binding ofterribly ‘sticky’ karma. It is very difficult to be free of this. Theonly way out of this is through alochana (acknowledgment ofmistake), pratikraman (repentance) and pratyakhyan (remorseand avowal to not repeat the mistake). When you do theserepeatedly over and over, countless number of times, it will freeyou from karma.Whatever karma is done with the belief of ‘I amChandubhai’, regardless of whether it is done without expectationof its outcome (nishkaam), such a karma is binding. Unless onebecomes the ‘non-doer’, how can nishkaam karma be done?Unless the answer to “Who am I?” is decided, how can one donishkaam karma? As long as there is the existence of anger,pride, deceit and greed, how is nishkaam karma possible?How can the belief of, “I am doing nishkaam karma,” beremoved? Nishkaam means to do karma without expectationof its outcome. Who is capable of doing this?The instigation (anumodana) given to the doing of karmais of two types. In the first type, the action is done precisely and4950of them is the ‘doer’. It is the ego itself does the karma. Fromthe ‘relative’ viewpoint (vyavahar; worldly perspective), the selfis the ‘doer’, but from the ‘real’ viewpoint (nischay) the Self isnot the ‘doer’.The Self is the ‘doer’ of its own nature (Knowing andSeeing). But because of the wrong belief, “I am Chandubhai”,one binds karma. The ego and the intent of ‘doership’ arise inthe presence of the Self. It is because of this that the pudgal(non-Self complex), becomes active (sakriya). Once the ego isgone, all this ends! After the Gnani Purush bestows upon youthe knowledge of the Self, you will bind no more karma.   The meaning of the karma of infinite past lives is that itis not the aggregate of all the karma of all the lives, but it is thebalance of all the karma that is carried forward! A person findspleasure in the enjoyment of the effects of merit karma (punya),and pain when he has to face the effects of demerit karma(paap).The results of overt (sthool; perceptible) karma, i.e.,karmas those are experienced with the five senses; are experiencedin the here and now. And the results of subtle (sookshma)karma, those that are not visible, and those that are not knowneven to the ‘doer’, are experienced in the next life.Giving a donation is an overt karma; its results will surelybe rewarded immediately by people, in the form of praise andfame. However, at the time the donation was being given, whatwas the prevailing inner intent (bhaav) of the giver? Was it, ‘Ihave to give this donation, because the mayor pressured me intoit; otherwise, I would not have given anything’? Or was it, ‘If Ihad more, I would have given more’? Whatever the prevalentintention, will determine the results for the next life. The‘charging’ of subtle karma is done by the opinion or inner intent(bhaav) behind the visible and overt actions. The visiblekarma is in the form of ‘discharge’; they are in the naturalmode of action, and no one is the ‘doer’ of the ‘discharge’karma; whereas, the ‘doer’ of subtle (intent) karma is theego. The Akram science, says that through the intent of, “Idid”, one binds karma. Your everyday life is run by ‘scientificcircumstantial evidences’ (vyavasthit shakti), and not bykarma. The karma is already there behind the actions, butwhat brings it into action is vyavasthit shakti (scientificcircumstantial evidences). Karma is just one component of thescientific circumstantial evidences!The power of the energy of the Self is such, that thewrong belief gives rise to vikalp; ‘I am this’ and so instantaneouslythe subatomic particles (parmanus) which, by their very nature,are prone to activity, become ‘charged’, and they wrap aroundIt (the Atma; the Self). This is what is known as karma.Whatever is done without hesitation, and with completeunity of the mind, speech and body, results in the binding ofterribly ‘sticky’ karma. It is very difficult to be free of this. Theonly way out of this is through alochana (acknowledgment ofmistake), pratikraman (repentance) and pratyakhyan (remorseand avowal to not repeat the mistake). When you do theserepeatedly over and over, countless number of times, it will freeyou from karma.Whatever karma is done with the belief of ‘I amChandubhai’, regardless of whether it is done without expectationof its outcome (nishkaam), such a karma is binding. Unless onebecomes the ‘non-doer’, how can nishkaam karma be done?Unless the answer to “Who am I?” is decided, how can one donishkaam karma? As long as there is the existence of anger,pride, deceit and greed, how is nishkaam karma possible?How can the belief of, “I am doing nishkaam karma,” beremoved? Nishkaam means to do karma without expectationof its outcome. Who is capable of doing this?The instigation (anumodana) given to the doing of karmais of two types. In the first type, the action is done precisely and4950directly, on the basis of direct or indirect ‘command’ orinstigation (anumodana); this carries more liability. And in thesecond type, there is only a “yes, yes” (approval). However, inthe latter, even if the ‘yes’ is not there, the action will not differ;this type of instigation does not carry that much liability. Thewrong type of encouragement or persuasion that may be givenin matters of religion, will bind karma of very seriousconsequence.[36]Bhaav, Bhaavya and BhaavakThere are the bhaavako that make one do intentions(bhaav). The Self however, does not ‘do’ intentions. Within usthere are bhaavako that make one ‘do’ intentions (bhaav): a‘krodhak’, which makes one ‘do’ anger (krodh); a ‘lobhak’,which makes one ‘do’ greed (lobh); the ‘nindak’ which makesone ‘do’ hurtful gossip (ninda) and even the ‘chetak’ whichmakes one become cautious (chetak). When the bhaavakmakes one ‘do’ the intent (bhaav), the self becomes involved(bhaavya - one doing the intent). This is because the self hasnot become awakened and aware! When the self (bhaavya)mixes with the one that makes one do bhaav (bhaavak), theseed for the next life is sown. If he can remain separate, withoutmixing with the bhaavak (which makes one do bhaav-intention), and is restricted to the ‘seeing’, there will be nobondage of karma. Only this much of science of the Self needbe understood.The bhaavak the one that makes one do bhaav(intention) that is not the one who suffers, nor is it a vikalp (falsebelief). It is not a part of the antahkaran (the inner complex ofthe self: the mind, intellect, chit and ego). Even the innerinstrument of the self (antahkaran) is directed by the bhaavak(which makes one do intention). When the bhaavak makes onedo intentions, the worldly self (not the realized Self), becomescovered with illusory attachment (murchhit – deluded; unawarespiritually). That which changes every second, cannot be theSelf. That indeed is the bhaavak.The level of knowledge one (The Self—pramaata)possesses is proportionate to the matter to be known (gneya -projection - prameya). As one’s prosperity and worldly intentgrow, so do one’s projection and projector grow proportionately.The true projector (pramaata) is the One whose Atmailluminates the entire universe. This projection (prameya; gneya)is for the whole universe (lok).[37]The Energy of Action: The Energy of IntentOnly the energy of intention (bhaav-shakti) is withinone’s control: the energy of action (kriya-shakti) is not.Therein, too, it is not worth making intentions for anythingother than those for attaining moksha. Whatever intentions aredone, they are deposited into Nature, and Nature helps bring all theother circumstances together, to help one bring it into action (effect).Intent is a very subtle thing that cannot be seen byanybody except the Gnani! From intent is created a plan thatgives results in the next life. Desire is a result: intent (bhaav) isthe cause. When it is decided that, ‘I do not want anything in thisworld’; the intent is sealed. After one attains knowledge of theSelf (Atma; the Soul), the desires that arise are only in the formof effects.There is a vast difference between thought and intent(bhaav). Without Gnan, intent is the only thing that cannot betruly understood. Thought is an effect. Intent is a cause. Aftera very long time, intent (bhaav) materializes into effect(dravya). Intent goes as input into ‘the computer’, and for itto materialize into results, all the other circumstances have tocome together.5152directly, on the basis of direct or indirect ‘command’ orinstigation (anumodana); this carries more liability. And in thesecond type, there is only a “yes, yes” (approval). However, inthe latter, even if the ‘yes’ is not there, the action will not differ;this type of instigation does not carry that much liability. Thewrong type of encouragement or persuasion that may be givenin matters of religion, will bind karma of very seriousconsequence.[36]Bhaav, Bhaavya and BhaavakThere are the bhaavako that make one do intentions(bhaav). The Self however, does not ‘do’ intentions. Within usthere are bhaavako that make one ‘do’ intentions (bhaav): a‘krodhak’, which makes one ‘do’ anger (krodh); a ‘lobhak’,which makes one ‘do’ greed (lobh); the ‘nindak’ which makesone ‘do’ hurtful gossip (ninda) and even the ‘chetak’ whichmakes one become cautious (chetak). When the bhaavakmakes one ‘do’ the intent (bhaav), the self becomes involved(bhaavya - one doing the intent). This is because the self hasnot become awakened and aware! When the self (bhaavya)mixes with the one that makes one do bhaav (bhaavak), theseed for the next life is sown. If he can remain separate, withoutmixing with the bhaavak (which makes one do bhaav-intention), and is restricted to the ‘seeing’, there will be nobondage of karma. Only this much of science of the Self needbe understood.The bhaavak the one that makes one do bhaav(intention) that is not the one who suffers, nor is it a vikalp (falsebelief). It is not a part of the antahkaran (the inner complex ofthe self: the mind, intellect, chit and ego). Even the innerinstrument of the self (antahkaran) is directed by the bhaavak(which makes one do intention). When the bhaavak makes onedo intentions, the worldly self (not the realized Self), becomescovered with illusory attachment (murchhit – deluded; unawarespiritually). That which changes every second, cannot be theSelf. That indeed is the bhaavak.The level of knowledge one (The Self—pramaata)possesses is proportionate to the matter to be known (gneya -projection - prameya). As one’s prosperity and worldly intentgrow, so do one’s projection and projector grow proportionately.The true projector (pramaata) is the One whose Atmailluminates the entire universe. This projection (prameya; gneya)is for the whole universe (lok).[37]The Energy of Action: The Energy of IntentOnly the energy of intention (bhaav-shakti) is withinone’s control: the energy of action (kriya-shakti) is not.Therein, too, it is not worth making intentions for anythingother than those for attaining moksha. Whatever intentions aredone, they are deposited into Nature, and Nature helps bring all theother circumstances together, to help one bring it into action (effect).Intent is a very subtle thing that cannot be seen byanybody except the Gnani! From intent is created a plan thatgives results in the next life. Desire is a result: intent (bhaav) isthe cause. When it is decided that, ‘I do not want anything in thisworld’; the intent is sealed. After one attains knowledge of theSelf (Atma; the Soul), the desires that arise are only in the formof effects.There is a vast difference between thought and intent(bhaav). Without Gnan, intent is the only thing that cannot betruly understood. Thought is an effect. Intent is a cause. Aftera very long time, intent (bhaav) materializes into effect(dravya). Intent goes as input into ‘the computer’, and for itto materialize into results, all the other circumstances have tocome together.5152The world cannot help reacting with antagonism oropposing intent (pratipakshi bhaav) to what has been saidwith, “Why did this person say that to me?” However, to theone who has attained an extraordinary spiritual understandingand inner vision (parakram bhaav), this same incident willappear as: “This is an unfolding of my own karma.” Antagonisticintents, occur when, not just the mind, but the whole antahkaran(the inner complex of the self comprised of mind, intellect, chitand ego) become spoilt. If the mind is spoilt it can be restoredby doing pratikraman (repentance and apology).One does not see any vestige of intent in the Gnani’seyes. Not only is there no trace of adverse intent, but there isabsolutely no intent of any kind. Therefore, upon doing darshanof such a being, one is filled with tranquility and blissful innersilence (samadhi).If the ‘form’ for intent was filled out, it would procure aresult instantaneously, after all other ‘evidences’ come together. Ifa person  does not want to get married, and he remains steadfastin his intention of not getting married, that person will meet withthose very ‘evidences’ (of not getting married)! But if the ‘seed’(of intent) was never sown to begin with, how would it grow, nomatter how much rain has fallen on the ground? Just as there isno growth in a rotten seed, an irresolute intent will not materializeand will be blown away without producing any results.After attaining the Knowledge of the Self, the causekarma (bhaavkarma; charge karma) does not occur, and allthat remains is the intent from the previous life (‘effects’ for thislife). The intent for the future (bhaavi), ceases; whereas thepresent intent prevails in the Self !In the ignorant state, one is bhaavatma (state of ‘I amChandubhai and these are all my intents’). And in theenlightened, awakened state of the Self, one is Gnanatma(Interim state of the Self, ‘I am pure Soul’).The intents that occur in the self has authority to dointents, go through the self and into Nature, which in turn,changes them into a non-Self complex that will materialize as aneffect in one’s next life. The Self does not participate in any‘doership’ or activity (sakriyata) in this at all. Only the ‘scientificcircumstantial evidence’ (vyavasthit) will ‘adjust’ it all.When the intent to remain in brahmacharya (celibacy)becomes persistent and constant, one becomes bhaav-swaroop(absolute intent filled state) in this life, and in one’s unfoldingkarma for the next life, will then be one of extraordinarybrahmacharya. With the continual and constant intent of, ‘Howcan I bring about the salvation of the world’, one becomes abhaavatma of jagat kalyan (salvation of the world). At first,one becomes the ‘causal’ Tirthankar, and then one becomesthe Tirthankar in ‘effect’. Vikalp (‘I am Chandubhai’) givesbirth to intent (bhaav)! Whatever the subatomic particles(parmanu) within one demand, scientific circumstantial evidences,procures everything to fulfill it. Intent is, the winding of the stringaround a spinning top (bhaav or ‘cause’), and the unwinding ofthe ‘top’ is result (dravya or effect of the cause).The pure Soul (Shuddhatma) does not have any intent atall, but the ‘relative self’ (pratishthit atma) does. An intenttranslates into form or action, when it becomes strong.In the Kramic path (the traditional step-by-step path toSelf-realization), one has to keep breaking down the external‘effect’ (dravya). In the path of Akram Vignan (the step-lesspath to Self-realization), the external ‘effect’ (dravya) and theintentions (bhaav), are both set aside, and thus the state of thepure Soul (Shuddhatma) prevails.The ‘intent-mind’ (bhaav-mun, the ‘causal’ mind) arisesbecause of illusion (bhranti), and the ‘effect-mind’ (dravya-mun) is ‘physical’. The causes (bhaavkarma) of the previouslife are the effects (dravyakarma) of this life.5354The world cannot help reacting with antagonism oropposing intent (pratipakshi bhaav) to what has been saidwith, “Why did this person say that to me?” However, to theone who has attained an extraordinary spiritual understandingand inner vision (parakram bhaav), this same incident willappear as: “This is an unfolding of my own karma.” Antagonisticintents, occur when, not just the mind, but the whole antahkaran(the inner complex of the self comprised of mind, intellect, chitand ego) become spoilt. If the mind is spoilt it can be restoredby doing pratikraman (repentance and apology).One does not see any vestige of intent in the Gnani’seyes. Not only is there no trace of adverse intent, but there isabsolutely no intent of any kind. Therefore, upon doing darshanof such a being, one is filled with tranquility and blissful innersilence (samadhi).If the ‘form’ for intent was filled out, it would procure aresult instantaneously, after all other ‘evidences’ come together. Ifa person  does not want to get married, and he remains steadfastin his intention of not getting married, that person will meet withthose very ‘evidences’ (of not getting married)! But if the ‘seed’(of intent) was never sown to begin with, how would it grow, nomatter how much rain has fallen on the ground? Just as there isno growth in a rotten seed, an irresolute intent will not materializeand will be blown away without producing any results.After attaining the Knowledge of the Self, the causekarma (bhaavkarma; charge karma) does not occur, and allthat remains is the intent from the previous life (‘effects’ for thislife). The intent for the future (bhaavi), ceases; whereas thepresent intent prevails in the Self !In the ignorant state, one is bhaavatma (state of ‘I amChandubhai and these are all my intents’). And in theenlightened, awakened state of the Self, one is Gnanatma(Interim state of the Self, ‘I am pure Soul’).The intents that occur in the self has authority to dointents, go through the self and into Nature, which in turn,changes them into a non-Self complex that will materialize as aneffect in one’s next life. The Self does not participate in any‘doership’ or activity (sakriyata) in this at all. Only the ‘scientificcircumstantial evidence’ (vyavasthit) will ‘adjust’ it all.When the intent to remain in brahmacharya (celibacy)becomes persistent and constant, one becomes bhaav-swaroop(absolute intent filled state) in this life, and in one’s unfoldingkarma for the next life, will then be one of extraordinarybrahmacharya. With the continual and constant intent of, ‘Howcan I bring about the salvation of the world’, one becomes abhaavatma of jagat kalyan (salvation of the world). At first,one becomes the ‘causal’ Tirthankar, and then one becomesthe Tirthankar in ‘effect’. Vikalp (‘I am Chandubhai’) givesbirth to intent (bhaav)! Whatever the subatomic particles(parmanu) within one demand, scientific circumstantial evidences,procures everything to fulfill it. Intent is, the winding of the stringaround a spinning top (bhaav or ‘cause’), and the unwinding ofthe ‘top’ is result (dravya or effect of the cause).The pure Soul (Shuddhatma) does not have any intent atall, but the ‘relative self’ (pratishthit atma) does. An intenttranslates into form or action, when it becomes strong.In the Kramic path (the traditional step-by-step path toSelf-realization), one has to keep breaking down the external‘effect’ (dravya). In the path of Akram Vignan (the step-lesspath to Self-realization), the external ‘effect’ (dravya) and theintentions (bhaav), are both set aside, and thus the state of thepure Soul (Shuddhatma) prevails.The ‘intent-mind’ (bhaav-mun, the ‘causal’ mind) arisesbecause of illusion (bhranti), and the ‘effect-mind’ (dravya-mun) is ‘physical’. The causes (bhaavkarma) of the previouslife are the effects (dravyakarma) of this life.5354This ‘effect’ karma (dravyakarma) is in the form of a‘veil’; a ‘vision’ of eight categories of karma. New intents ariseas a result of viewing through this ‘vision’ (chakshu). Theseintents automatically attract the subatomic particles (parmanus)of the body which latch on to it and bring corresponding effect(dravya). When the parmanus are caught, they becomeprayogsha (charging parmanus), and they remain within, asmishrasa (mixed–awaiting to give effect) parmanus. Thesemixed parmanus leave after yielding bitter or sweet results andgo back to the vishrasa (pure parmanus, in original state)state! But if one becomes absorbed (tanmayakar) in it at thetime of karmic effect, then the new ‘charging’ of parmanus(prayogsha) occurs and the cycle continues. Since there is noinvolvement or absorption in the Self-realized state, the processof ‘charging’ comes to a halt. If a person does something wrong, and it stays on hisconscience/mind as, “This was wrong”, it is considered pratibhaav(intent of opposition). Gnanis do not have pratibhaav.[38]The Power of the Self Is Only in the Domain of theSelfIf one is engrossed in a situation, one will becomeconfused and entangled. When one remains in the Self, there isclarity and alertness.[39]The Nature of Gnan: The Nature of TimeEvery human being is bound by destiny (prarabdha); thisis the reason for life after life. Akram Vignan is such that afterreceiving the Knowledge of the Self, there is no binding ofdestiny (effect) for the next life. The Gnani Purush always remains in the present(vartaman)! Therefore, He is beyond time![40]The Nature of SpeechThe speech that comes forth comes from a ‘taped record’(a recorded tape). It is not the self that speaks. However, onedoes the ego that says: “I spoke”. The Self does not have theattribute of speech, and neither does the pudgal (non-Selfcomplex). Words are a phase of the non-Self complex (pudgalparyaya). It is similar to the sound that is made by the frictionof the subatomic particles (parmanus) in a horn!The Gnani’s speech is also a ‘taped record’; it is notalive. But it emanates after touching the Self (chetan)! TheGnani’s speech is syadvaad, (that which accepts all viewpointsand never hurts anyone’s viewpoint) and does not disruptanyone’s standard normality whatsoever. It is spoken withabsolute awakened alertness, and it is only for the otherperson’s benefit. There is no worldly intent (bhaav) in it,whatsoever.By listening to the speech of the Gnani, repeatedly andjoyfully, one’s speech also becomes like that of the Gnani.When all karmas come to an end, when all the kashays(anger, pride, deceit, greed) have been eradicated; when thewhole science of the vitarag is present, that is when theexperience of the Self becomes distinctly clear.  And when therole of the ego has ended, and when the entire world is seen asfaultless (nirdosh); that is when the syadvaad speech will arisewith all its grandeur! In the meantime, it is just the talk of intellectand worldly interaction. And to preach on the path to moksha,is considered a dangerous liability.Where there is no discussion (vaad) or controversy(vivaad) but only syadvaad speech; only such a person cantalk about moksha. There is no discussion or argument when itcomes to understanding the Eternal (Sat).5556This ‘effect’ karma (dravyakarma) is in the form of a‘veil’; a ‘vision’ of eight categories of karma. New intents ariseas a result of viewing through this ‘vision’ (chakshu). Theseintents automatically attract the subatomic particles (parmanus)of the body which latch on to it and bring corresponding effect(dravya). When the parmanus are caught, they becomeprayogsha (charging parmanus), and they remain within, asmishrasa (mixed–awaiting to give effect) parmanus. Thesemixed parmanus leave after yielding bitter or sweet results andgo back to the vishrasa (pure parmanus, in original state)state! But if one becomes absorbed (tanmayakar) in it at thetime of karmic effect, then the new ‘charging’ of parmanus(prayogsha) occurs and the cycle continues. Since there is noinvolvement or absorption in the Self-realized state, the processof ‘charging’ comes to a halt. If a person does something wrong, and it stays on hisconscience/mind as, “This was wrong”, it is considered pratibhaav(intent of opposition). Gnanis do not have pratibhaav.[38]The Power of the Self Is Only in the Domain of theSelfIf one is engrossed in a situation, one will becomeconfused and entangled. When one remains in the Self, there isclarity and alertness.[39]The Nature of Gnan: The Nature of TimeEvery human being is bound by destiny (prarabdha); thisis the reason for life after life. Akram Vignan is such that afterreceiving the Knowledge of the Self, there is no binding ofdestiny (effect) for the next life. The Gnani Purush always remains in the present(vartaman)! Therefore, He is beyond time![40]The Nature of SpeechThe speech that comes forth comes from a ‘taped record’(a recorded tape). It is not the self that speaks. However, onedoes the ego that says: “I spoke”. The Self does not have theattribute of speech, and neither does the pudgal (non-Selfcomplex). Words are a phase of the non-Self complex (pudgalparyaya). It is similar to the sound that is made by the frictionof the subatomic particles (parmanus) in a horn!The Gnani’s speech is also a ‘taped record’; it is notalive. But it emanates after touching the Self (chetan)! TheGnani’s speech is syadvaad, (that which accepts all viewpointsand never hurts anyone’s viewpoint) and does not disruptanyone’s standard normality whatsoever. It is spoken withabsolute awakened alertness, and it is only for the otherperson’s benefit. There is no worldly intent (bhaav) in it,whatsoever.By listening to the speech of the Gnani, repeatedly andjoyfully, one’s speech also becomes like that of the Gnani.When all karmas come to an end, when all the kashays(anger, pride, deceit, greed) have been eradicated; when thewhole science of the vitarag is present, that is when theexperience of the Self becomes distinctly clear.  And when therole of the ego has ended, and when the entire world is seen asfaultless (nirdosh); that is when the syadvaad speech will arisewith all its grandeur! In the meantime, it is just the talk of intellectand worldly interaction. And to preach on the path to moksha,is considered a dangerous liability.Where there is no discussion (vaad) or controversy(vivaad) but only syadvaad speech; only such a person cantalk about moksha. There is no discussion or argument when itcomes to understanding the Eternal (Sat).5556The intent: “What I am saying is true and, therefore,others should believe it,” is also a horrible disease! Right andcorrect speech will be accepted by the other person, withcertainty. And if he does not accept it, then you should let it go.Speech that is free of mistake only occurs when one doesnot have ‘ownership’ of its words. If the sense (or intent) of, “Ispoke so nicely,” is there, then there is definitely ‘ownership’ inthe speech.In religious discussion, one way to defend one’s own selfis through speech. Another way would be to remain in a statethat is free of anger, pride, deceit and greed (kashays) and then‘convince’ the listener. And if while trying to change the otherperson, you yourself become affected by the conversation, youtoo will change as a result, which would be yet another way.The Gnani, whose conduct is vitarag (absolutely free fromattachment and abhorrence) has syadvaad speech, which issweet and pleasant, and does not shock or evoke a reactionwithin the listener. Such speech, which is completely withoutinsistence, will touch the hearts of others; only then salvation forthe listener will occur. Such speech is unparalleled as it is repletewith the Gnani’s miraculous spiritual energy. We can attain it aswell, by praying with the intent, “Let my speech also be this way.” One is said to have energy and power in speech(vachanbud) when everyone hearing it, conduct themselves withenthusiasm, according to words! That which destroys the powerof one’s speech is: misuse of speech, threats, lying to protectoneself and undue insistence. The speech that hurts others’ heartswill result in one losing the ability to speak in one’s next life.“I do not want to give the slightest pain to anyone at all.I pray to attain such power and energy of speech.” The Gnanifulfills this for that he asks this. When a person remains silent(maun), where there is room for him to speak up, the energy ofpenance (tapobud) is attained from this silence. Silence alone isof no consequence, unless it accompanies the energy ofpenance. Gnanis possess the energy of penance of silence(maun tapobud), and this in itself can bring about salvation forthe whole world. When the expressions of pleasure ordispleasure are not evinced on a person’s face, one shouldknow that the person no longer has ownership of speech, andthat here, there is absolute liberation.Without the ego, speech cannot be spoken. Speech is theopen expression of the ego. Only the Gnani Purush’s syadvaadspeech is spoken without the ego. However, when he talks aboutother matters, the ego is there, but it is a ‘discharge’ ego. The attachment and ownership (parigraha) of speechwhere a person feels: ‘I spoke very well’ or ‘I am the one whois speaking’, will sow seeds of karma. This is the speech thatmakes one roam around in the cycles of life after life. Thevitarag speech, on the other hand, can bring an end to all that! How is the ‘taping’ (recording) of this ‘tape-record’done? A ‘codeword’ is first initiated by ego, and establishedwithin. Then from this ‘codeword’, a ‘shorthand’ is processed,and after this, it is played and the speech is heard, as it comesout in ‘full detail.’When no expression of like or dislike (bhaav-abhaav) isevident on someone’s face, one should know that the speechbeing ‘taped’, is according to one’s intention (bhaav). Inintention, if one simply has the intent to insult someone, then,when the circumstances come together, the abusive speech willemit for hours on its own. When the intention arises, it is instantlyimprinted as a ‘codeword’ and then transcribed into ‘shorthand’;thereafter, it is emitted in ‘full form’!After the parmanus (subatomic particles) are in closeproximity to the Self, the vibrations of likes and dislikes are created,5758The intent: “What I am saying is true and, therefore,others should believe it,” is also a horrible disease! Right andcorrect speech will be accepted by the other person, withcertainty. And if he does not accept it, then you should let it go.Speech that is free of mistake only occurs when one doesnot have ‘ownership’ of its words. If the sense (or intent) of, “Ispoke so nicely,” is there, then there is definitely ‘ownership’ inthe speech.In religious discussion, one way to defend one’s own selfis through speech. Another way would be to remain in a statethat is free of anger, pride, deceit and greed (kashays) and then‘convince’ the listener. And if while trying to change the otherperson, you yourself become affected by the conversation, youtoo will change as a result, which would be yet another way.The Gnani, whose conduct is vitarag (absolutely free fromattachment and abhorrence) has syadvaad speech, which issweet and pleasant, and does not shock or evoke a reactionwithin the listener. Such speech, which is completely withoutinsistence, will touch the hearts of others; only then salvation forthe listener will occur. Such speech is unparalleled as it is repletewith the Gnani’s miraculous spiritual energy. We can attain it aswell, by praying with the intent, “Let my speech also be this way.” One is said to have energy and power in speech(vachanbud) when everyone hearing it, conduct themselves withenthusiasm, according to words! That which destroys the powerof one’s speech is: misuse of speech, threats, lying to protectoneself and undue insistence. The speech that hurts others’ heartswill result in one losing the ability to speak in one’s next life.“I do not want to give the slightest pain to anyone at all.I pray to attain such power and energy of speech.” The Gnanifulfills this for that he asks this. When a person remains silent(maun), where there is room for him to speak up, the energy ofpenance (tapobud) is attained from this silence. Silence alone isof no consequence, unless it accompanies the energy ofpenance. Gnanis possess the energy of penance of silence(maun tapobud), and this in itself can bring about salvation forthe whole world. When the expressions of pleasure ordispleasure are not evinced on a person’s face, one shouldknow that the person no longer has ownership of speech, andthat here, there is absolute liberation.Without the ego, speech cannot be spoken. Speech is theopen expression of the ego. Only the Gnani Purush’s syadvaadspeech is spoken without the ego. However, when he talks aboutother matters, the ego is there, but it is a ‘discharge’ ego. The attachment and ownership (parigraha) of speechwhere a person feels: ‘I spoke very well’ or ‘I am the one whois speaking’, will sow seeds of karma. This is the speech thatmakes one roam around in the cycles of life after life. Thevitarag speech, on the other hand, can bring an end to all that! How is the ‘taping’ (recording) of this ‘tape-record’done? A ‘codeword’ is first initiated by ego, and establishedwithin. Then from this ‘codeword’, a ‘shorthand’ is processed,and after this, it is played and the speech is heard, as it comesout in ‘full detail.’When no expression of like or dislike (bhaav-abhaav) isevident on someone’s face, one should know that the speechbeing ‘taped’, is according to one’s intention (bhaav). Inintention, if one simply has the intent to insult someone, then,when the circumstances come together, the abusive speech willemit for hours on its own. When the intention arises, it is instantlyimprinted as a ‘codeword’ and then transcribed into ‘shorthand’;thereafter, it is emitted in ‘full form’!After the parmanus (subatomic particles) are in closeproximity to the Self, the vibrations of likes and dislikes are created,5758because of the presence of the Self, and as soon as the egobecomes involved in it, the vibrations are ‘typed’ up. When priorintents come into effect to give their results, the ‘taped’ speech, asa consequence, instantly comes out as speech.  The speech thatsubsequently issues forth is the exact ‘discharge’ of prior intents.When the slightest right or wrong is spoken about anyone,it gets ‘recorded’. The human mind and body, nonetheless, arethemselves also ‘taping’. Even when a negative word is said aboutsomeone who is asleep, that too gets caught up (recorded)! Here,it is Nature’s machinery! When ill words are spoken, in darknessor while alone, the person responsible for the utterance will findhimself in a circumstance where he himself will have to listen tovenomous words.  As soon as we experience such vibrationswithin us, we should dispel them with pratikraman.Not only what we speak is a ‘taped record’, but whatanother person speaks, is also a ‘taped record’. When oneunderstands this, no one will be afflicted by anyone’s words.“Gross circumstances, subtle circumstances and thecircumstances of speech are of the non-Self (par), and areunder the influence of the non-Self (paradhin).”~ Gnani Purush Dadashri What is the limitation of speech? In spite of having theunderstanding of the absolute Vision, one cannot clear more thanone ‘viewpoint’ “at a time”; whereas, the Vision can encompassall the degrees “at a time”!To attain the knowledge of all the secrets of the universe;to learn the subtlest knowledge, there is no other option, but togo to the ‘Atma Gnani Purush.’ For this reason, the scripturalscribes have referred to the ‘Gnani Purush’, as the embodimentof the absolute Self (dehadhari Parmatma). One attains theSelf, through his encounter!- Dr. Niruben AminCONTENTS(1) Awakened AwarenessMay One Be Aware of His Unchanging Nature1Wake Up from Bhaavnindra1Awareness of the Non-Self Complex:Awareness of the Self2Absolute Knowledge Means…2Awareness of the World: Cause of Suffering3Playing with Toys4Awareness Itself Will Result in Moksha4Knowledge Mediated Through the Sense Organs:Awareness6The Vision That Sees the Fault of the ‘self’8‘Topmost’ Awareness9Bhaav Jagruti: Swabhav Jagruti10The Beginning of the Awakened Awareness…10Yoga and Rituals Do Not Lead to Awareness of the Self11Awareness Only Through the Worship of the One withAwareness15Avoid Bhaavnindra15True Samadhi Through Awakened Awareness16 Knowing ‘Who Am I’ Blossoms the Awareness of the Self17Non-Doership Is Where Absolute Awareness Lies18What Is Upayog? What Is Jagruti ?19Awakened Awareness Through Akram Vignan20Insistence Is Bhaavnindra21Awareness Is to Know What Is Beneficial andHarmful to You21Where the Gnani Is Awake, the World Is Asleep23Restlessness Is the Cause of Misery235960because of the presence of the Self, and as soon as the egobecomes involved in it, the vibrations are ‘typed’ up. When priorintents come into effect to give their results, the ‘taped’ speech, asa consequence, instantly comes out as speech.  The speech thatsubsequently issues forth is the exact ‘discharge’ of prior intents.When the slightest right or wrong is spoken about anyone,it gets ‘recorded’. The human mind and body, nonetheless, arethemselves also ‘taping’. Even when a negative word is said aboutsomeone who is asleep, that too gets caught up (recorded)! Here,it is Nature’s machinery! When ill words are spoken, in darknessor while alone, the person responsible for the utterance will findhimself in a circumstance where he himself will have to listen tovenomous words.  As soon as we experience such vibrationswithin us, we should dispel them with pratikraman.Not only what we speak is a ‘taped record’, but whatanother person speaks, is also a ‘taped record’. When oneunderstands this, no one will be afflicted by anyone’s words.“Gross circumstances, subtle circumstances and thecircumstances of speech are of the non-Self (par), and areunder the influence of the non-Self (paradhin).”~ Gnani Purush Dadashri What is the limitation of speech? In spite of having theunderstanding of the absolute Vision, one cannot clear more thanone ‘viewpoint’ “at a time”; whereas, the Vision can encompassall the degrees “at a time”!To attain the knowledge of all the secrets of the universe;to learn the subtlest knowledge, there is no other option, but togo to the ‘Atma Gnani Purush.’ For this reason, the scripturalscribes have referred to the ‘Gnani Purush’, as the embodimentof the absolute Self (dehadhari Parmatma). One attains theSelf, through his encounter!- Dr. Niruben AminCONTENTS(1) Awakened AwarenessMay One Be Aware of His Unchanging Nature1Wake Up from Bhaavnindra1Awareness of the Non-Self Complex:Awareness of the Self2Absolute Knowledge Means…2Awareness of the World: Cause of Suffering3Playing with Toys4Awareness Itself Will Result in Moksha4Knowledge Mediated Through the Sense Organs:Awareness6The Vision That Sees the Fault of the ‘self’8‘Topmost’ Awareness9Bhaav Jagruti: Swabhav Jagruti10The Beginning of the Awakened Awareness…10Yoga and Rituals Do Not Lead to Awareness of the Self11Awareness Only Through the Worship of the One withAwareness15Avoid Bhaavnindra15True Samadhi Through Awakened Awareness16 Knowing ‘Who Am I’ Blossoms the Awareness of the Self17Non-Doership Is Where Absolute Awareness Lies18What Is Upayog? What Is Jagruti ?19Awakened Awareness Through Akram Vignan20Insistence Is Bhaavnindra21Awareness Is to Know What Is Beneficial andHarmful to You21Where the Gnani Is Awake, the World Is Asleep23Restlessness Is the Cause of Misery235960(2) Dhyan (Meditation)The Nature of Dhyan26Dhyan: Connection between Dhyeya and Dhyata27Ego – Not in Dhyan but in Actions29Results of Dhyan32Atmadhyan Is Samadhi33(3) Prarabdha – PurusharthWhat Is Purusharth?35How Much Purusharth in Digesting Food?37How Does A Living Being (Jiva) Evolve?39Then What Is True Purusharth?42Prarabdha and Sanchit Karma43Illusory Purusharth and Prarabdha Karma44What Purusharth Should One Do?45Purusharth Means Life with Upayog51The Exact Understanding of Vyavasthit52Which Is Greater, Destiny or Purusharth?57Kramic Path Is Dependent on Illusory Purusharth59How Does Prarabdha Unfold?62That Which Brings the Ultimate Result Is Purusharth64(4) Shraddha (Faith)Blind Faith – Ignorant Faith66Atma Shraddha – Prabhu Shraddha67Faith – Gnan67(5) OpinionThe Blindness of Opinion68Opinion and the Sense Organs69Opinions Lead to Obstruction69How to Rid Opinion?69Opinions Worth Welcoming!74The Nature of an Opinion74Opinions About Human Beings74(6) The Blindness of ‘Know-How’The Ego of ‘Know-How’ Prevents ‘Expertise’!76The Ledger of Analysis!78(7) ObstaclesHow Is an Obstacle Created?80Obstacles on the Path to Moksha83Causes of Gnanantaray and Darshanantaray84(8) Contempt – Dismiss with ScornYou Fear That What You Despise87How Harmful Is Dismissing with Contempt?88What Is the Solution for Tarchhod?89(9) The Aura of the Individual‘This’ Gnani Is Vitarag91The Phenomenal Vision of 1958 !92There Is No Method to Gnan94The Gnani Gives Proof of Moksha94The Great Importance of the Nimit97The Self and Punya99Dharmadhyan99Shukladhyan100The Mind and The Soul100Love and Worship100With Flawless Vision the World Is Flawless101A Seed of Karma Is Sown if You Become the Doer102Did You Receive the Knowledge of the Self orDid It Manifest?1036162(2) Dhyan (Meditation)The Nature of Dhyan26Dhyan: Connection between Dhyeya and Dhyata27Ego – Not in Dhyan but in Actions29Results of Dhyan32Atmadhyan Is Samadhi33(3) Prarabdha – PurusharthWhat Is Purusharth?35How Much Purusharth in Digesting Food?37How Does A Living Being (Jiva) Evolve?39Then What Is True Purusharth?42Prarabdha and Sanchit Karma43Illusory Purusharth and Prarabdha Karma44What Purusharth Should One Do?45Purusharth Means Life with Upayog51The Exact Understanding of Vyavasthit52Which Is Greater, Destiny or Purusharth?57Kramic Path Is Dependent on Illusory Purusharth59How Does Prarabdha Unfold?62That Which Brings the Ultimate Result Is Purusharth64(4) Shraddha (Faith)Blind Faith – Ignorant Faith66Atma Shraddha – Prabhu Shraddha67Faith – Gnan67(5) OpinionThe Blindness of Opinion68Opinion and the Sense Organs69Opinions Lead to Obstruction69How to Rid Opinion?69Opinions Worth Welcoming!74The Nature of an Opinion74Opinions About Human Beings74(6) The Blindness of ‘Know-How’The Ego of ‘Know-How’ Prevents ‘Expertise’!76The Ledger of Analysis!78(7) ObstaclesHow Is an Obstacle Created?80Obstacles on the Path to Moksha83Causes of Gnanantaray and Darshanantaray84(8) Contempt – Dismiss with ScornYou Fear That What You Despise87How Harmful Is Dismissing with Contempt?88What Is the Solution for Tarchhod?89(9) The Aura of the Individual‘This’ Gnani Is Vitarag91The Phenomenal Vision of 1958 !92There Is No Method to Gnan94The Gnani Gives Proof of Moksha94The Great Importance of the Nimit97The Self and Punya99Dharmadhyan99Shukladhyan100The Mind and The Soul100Love and Worship100With Flawless Vision the World Is Flawless101A Seed of Karma Is Sown if You Become the Doer102Did You Receive the Knowledge of the Self orDid It Manifest?1036162The Science of Speech Tells All!104… What Amazing Bliss!104The Gnani Cultivates The Self’s Energy105Can Gnani Be Compared with Anyone?105Recognizing a Gnani106Aptavani (Authentic or Trustworthy Speech) - How Functional !!106(10) Akram PathAttained Only Through the Grace of Gnani109Unprecedented and Non-contradictory110Worthiness in Akram Vignan!111Such an Amazing Gnan!112(11) The Atma and The EgoEternal Self115Nature115Who Controls Whom?115The Nature of Ego117Religion: Relative and Real118Only a Savior Can Save You119(12) Arrangement of Vyavasthit‘Vyavasthit Shakti’121The Time Cycle121 Total Surrender in the Service of Others122The Formation of Social Order123(13) Religion of the World: Religion of the SelfWhich Religion Should One Adopt for Happiness?125There Is Nothing but Bliss When the Self Is Attained126Bliss Only in Self-Realization127What Is the Fault of the Time Cycle?129Internal Happiness – External Happiness129Eternal Bliss When the Ego Melts131Misery Only Comes from the Mithya Darshan(Deluded Vision)131Suffering (Dukh) Becomes Beneficial132Physical Happiness: Borrowed Happiness133(14) The True Understanding of ReligionRole of Religion135Religion: For Renunciation or Indulgence?135Did Religion Help?136Before Birth and After Death…140Understanding Real Religion141The Path of Moksha Is…143To Be the Self Is the Religion of the Self145(15) Dharma in One’s ConductDharma and Conduct147The True Success of Human Life147Conflict – No Dharma There!147Akram Science – A Completely New Approach!!148Agna Itself Is the Religion150Changes Happen According to Knowledge150You Have to Ask for the Energies151Energy Attained Through Prayer152Prayer: Insistence on Truth!153(16) Relative Religion: Spiritual ScienceThe Development of Relative Religion155One Needs the Vitarag Dharma for Moksha156The Limitations of Relative Religion157The “Thermometer” of Real Religion1576364The Science of Speech Tells All!104… What Amazing Bliss!104The Gnani Cultivates The Self’s Energy105Can Gnani Be Compared with Anyone?105Recognizing a Gnani106Aptavani (Authentic or Trustworthy Speech) - How Functional !!106(10) Akram PathAttained Only Through the Grace of Gnani109Unprecedented and Non-contradictory110Worthiness in Akram Vignan!111Such an Amazing Gnan!112(11) The Atma and The EgoEternal Self115Nature115Who Controls Whom?115The Nature of Ego117Religion: Relative and Real118Only a Savior Can Save You119(12) Arrangement of Vyavasthit‘Vyavasthit Shakti’121The Time Cycle121 Total Surrender in the Service of Others122The Formation of Social Order123(13) Religion of the World: Religion of the SelfWhich Religion Should One Adopt for Happiness?125There Is Nothing but Bliss When the Self Is Attained126Bliss Only in Self-Realization127What Is the Fault of the Time Cycle?129Internal Happiness – External Happiness129Eternal Bliss When the Ego Melts131Misery Only Comes from the Mithya Darshan(Deluded Vision)131Suffering (Dukh) Becomes Beneficial132Physical Happiness: Borrowed Happiness133(14) The True Understanding of ReligionRole of Religion135Religion: For Renunciation or Indulgence?135Did Religion Help?136Before Birth and After Death…140Understanding Real Religion141The Path of Moksha Is…143To Be the Self Is the Religion of the Self145(15) Dharma in One’s ConductDharma and Conduct147The True Success of Human Life147Conflict – No Dharma There!147Akram Science – A Completely New Approach!!148Agna Itself Is the Religion150Changes Happen According to Knowledge150You Have to Ask for the Energies151Energy Attained Through Prayer152Prayer: Insistence on Truth!153(16) Relative Religion: Spiritual ScienceThe Development of Relative Religion155One Needs the Vitarag Dharma for Moksha156The Limitations of Relative Religion157The “Thermometer” of Real Religion1576364The Bhavna (Main Intent) for the Path ofMoksha (Liberation)158The Atma Through the Stages159Gnanghan Atma159The Vignanghan Atma161Sectarian Viewpoints Lie in Relative Religion161The Essence of Religion163What Is Religion? What Is Science?164(17) Knowing God Through the Vision of GnanIs ‘I Am a Part of God’ True?165Is God Omnipresent?166 The Life Given to Inanimate Objects by ‘My-ness’167(18) Understanding the KnowerAre You the Self? Do You Know the Self?168Is It the Mistake of the Soul?168Swadhyaya: Paradhyaya170Ultimately the Ego Will Have to be Dissolved170Gneya: Gnata171Freedom from the Non-Self Is Liberation173(19) The True Path of WorshipOnly Faith Will Be Fruitful174Can God Be Attained Through Worship?175Worship: Direct and Indirect177Worship: From the Gross to the Subtlest178Moksha: Through Gnan or Bhakti?180Direct Worship: Indirect Worship181(20) The Guru and The GnaniThe True Guru182Worldly Gurus183Relative Religion Is Like a Companion184There Must Not Be Any Business in Religion185What a Magnificent Principle of the Gnani Purush!188The Meaning of Religion190Even That Kind of Awareness Is a Great Awareness!190Recognizing The Guru190(21) The Purpose of PenancePenance, Renunciation and Fasting192Penance That Presents Naturally193Is There Renunciation and Acquisition for the Gnani?194The Awareness of the Pure Soul195Agiyaras According to Dada196Aayambil: A Scientific Process198Applied Awareness While Fasting199Dada’s Way of Fasting202Unodari for Awareness203Fasting, and Yet Kashays?203Is There Liberation Through Fasting?207‘Do It’ – But Only Your Faith Will Bring the Fruits208(22) Worldly ReligionsWhich Religion Is for Moksha?210Religion: Partial or Impartial211Business Tendencies Even in Religion212…Therefore a Return Ticket to a Lower Life-Form!213Only the Gnani Can Make One Realize the Atma214Worldly Religion Keeps You in Duality215That Which Produces Instant Result Is Religion216(23) The Goal Is to Attain MokshaWhat Is Moksha?2186566The Bhavna (Main Intent) for the Path ofMoksha (Liberation)158The Atma Through the Stages159Gnanghan Atma159The Vignanghan Atma161Sectarian Viewpoints Lie in Relative Religion161The Essence of Religion163What Is Religion? What Is Science?164(17) Knowing God Through the Vision of GnanIs ‘I Am a Part of God’ True?165Is God Omnipresent?166 The Life Given to Inanimate Objects by ‘My-ness’167(18) Understanding the KnowerAre You the Self? Do You Know the Self?168Is It the Mistake of the Soul?168Swadhyaya: Paradhyaya170Ultimately the Ego Will Have to be Dissolved170Gneya: Gnata171Freedom from the Non-Self Is Liberation173(19) The True Path of WorshipOnly Faith Will Be Fruitful174Can God Be Attained Through Worship?175Worship: Direct and Indirect177Worship: From the Gross to the Subtlest178Moksha: Through Gnan or Bhakti?180Direct Worship: Indirect Worship181(20) The Guru and The GnaniThe True Guru182Worldly Gurus183Relative Religion Is Like a Companion184There Must Not Be Any Business in Religion185What a Magnificent Principle of the Gnani Purush!188The Meaning of Religion190Even That Kind of Awareness Is a Great Awareness!190Recognizing The Guru190(21) The Purpose of PenancePenance, Renunciation and Fasting192Penance That Presents Naturally193Is There Renunciation and Acquisition for the Gnani?194The Awareness of the Pure Soul195Agiyaras According to Dada196Aayambil: A Scientific Process198Applied Awareness While Fasting199Dada’s Way of Fasting202Unodari for Awareness203Fasting, and Yet Kashays?203Is There Liberation Through Fasting?207‘Do It’ – But Only Your Faith Will Bring the Fruits208(22) Worldly ReligionsWhich Religion Is for Moksha?210Religion: Partial or Impartial211Business Tendencies Even in Religion212…Therefore a Return Ticket to a Lower Life-Form!213Only the Gnani Can Make One Realize the Atma214Worldly Religion Keeps You in Duality215That Which Produces Instant Result Is Religion216(23) The Goal Is to Attain MokshaWhat Is Moksha?2186566The Path of Attaining Moksha219Moksha Means Eternal Bliss220What Is the State as the Siddha?221The Nature of Moksha222No Liberation Even in Heaven223You Don’t Want the Temporary Thing223 When Does the World Yield?225Become Faultless!225The Resolve Only for Moksha226Moksha: A Location or a State?227Which Is More Difficult, Path of Moksha orPath of Worldly Life?228What Is a True Seeker?229In What Respect Is the Self Unbound?229Who Attains Moksha?229(24) Conviction On the Path to MokshaAttaining Moksha - Clear Vision for This231Moksha Is the ‘self’ Knowing the Self233(25) I and MyHow Can ‘I’ Become Separate?237Only Gnani Gives Original Solutions239(26) Memory Is Dependent on Raag-DweshWith Intense Memory Comes Intense Raag-Dwesh!241It Is Difficult to Remember, It Is Difficult to Forget!242The Gnani Is Beyond Use of Memory243Prashasta Raag Is a ‘Cause’ for Moksha244Memory Is a Huge Parigraha245(27) Open and StraightforwardNikhalasata Makes One Fearless!246(28) The Laughter of the Liberated OneFaultlessness Gives Rise to the Liberated Smile!249The Liberated Laughter of the Liberated Purush250(29) Worry: EquanimityWho Remembers the Past Now?252Taking Over Another’s Control Leads to Worries!253Entering into Thoughts Is the Obstruction254Is There Peace in Illusion?255Bliss in the Presence of the Gnani256No Attachment-Abhorrence Where There IsEquanimity257Sambhav: Samata – What Is the Difference?257The Tenacious Decision to Settle a File with Equanimity258Equanimity and the Knower-Seer State258Desire, Satisfaction, Contentment259(30) Saiyam ParinamWhat Is the Exact Definition of Saiyam?261The Energy of the Self Will Manifest Only with Saiyam262Take Advantage of the Opportunity of Saiyam263Saiyam Is Indeed the Purusharth263Saiyam Against Greed264(31) The Laws of Fulfilling DesiresHow Methodical Nature Is!266Desire Is Indeed the Obstacle268Pratyakhyan for Desires269(32) The Habit of Watching Television (TV)…What Is Important at That Time?271Passing Time or Wasting Your Life Away?2726768The Path of Attaining Moksha219Moksha Means Eternal Bliss220What Is the State as the Siddha?221The Nature of Moksha222No Liberation Even in Heaven223You Don’t Want the Temporary Thing223 When Does the World Yield?225Become Faultless!225The Resolve Only for Moksha226Moksha: A Location or a State?227Which Is More Difficult, Path of Moksha orPath of Worldly Life?228What Is a True Seeker?229In What Respect Is the Self Unbound?229Who Attains Moksha?229(24) Conviction On the Path to MokshaAttaining Moksha - Clear Vision for This231Moksha Is the ‘self’ Knowing the Self233(25) I and MyHow Can ‘I’ Become Separate?237Only Gnani Gives Original Solutions239(26) Memory Is Dependent on Raag-DweshWith Intense Memory Comes Intense Raag-Dwesh!241It Is Difficult to Remember, It Is Difficult to Forget!242The Gnani Is Beyond Use of Memory243Prashasta Raag Is a ‘Cause’ for Moksha244Memory Is a Huge Parigraha245(27) Open and StraightforwardNikhalasata Makes One Fearless!246(28) The Laughter of the Liberated OneFaultlessness Gives Rise to the Liberated Smile!249The Liberated Laughter of the Liberated Purush250(29) Worry: EquanimityWho Remembers the Past Now?252Taking Over Another’s Control Leads to Worries!253Entering into Thoughts Is the Obstruction254Is There Peace in Illusion?255Bliss in the Presence of the Gnani256No Attachment-Abhorrence Where There IsEquanimity257Sambhav: Samata – What Is the Difference?257The Tenacious Decision to Settle a File with Equanimity258Equanimity and the Knower-Seer State258Desire, Satisfaction, Contentment259(30) Saiyam ParinamWhat Is the Exact Definition of Saiyam?261The Energy of the Self Will Manifest Only with Saiyam262Take Advantage of the Opportunity of Saiyam263Saiyam Is Indeed the Purusharth263Saiyam Against Greed264(31) The Laws of Fulfilling DesiresHow Methodical Nature Is!266Desire Is Indeed the Obstacle268Pratyakhyan for Desires269(32) The Habit of Watching Television (TV)…What Is Important at That Time?271Passing Time or Wasting Your Life Away?2726768(33) GreedWhy Be Greedy When It Is Not in Your Hands?273Do You Gain or Lose with Greed?273Without Knowing the Self, Contentment Is Not Possible273A Greedy Person Looks for More, Despite Having It!274(34) Let Go of the ReinsThen the Practice of ‘Doership’ Will Go Away!275The Gnani’s Process276The Science of Charge and Discharge of Karma277As ‘Discharge’, Others as Faultless279In the ‘Dramatic’ There Is No Doership!279Saiyam of the Final State280(35) The Theory of KarmaWhat Is Karma and What Is Dharma in Vyavahar?282The World Only Knows the Theory of Doership282Who Is the ‘Doer’ of Karma?283Who Removes That Ego?285Continuous Binding of Karma WhereThere Is Ignorance286No Binding of Karma in the Presence of Gnan!286Lighter Karmas Are Bound Through Repentance287Karma Is Bound Only in the Human Form288Karma – A Balance of Many Lifetimes289How Is a Karmic Account Paid Off?290Aashrav, Bandh, Samvar and Nirjara291The Thermometer for Good or Bad Karma294Overt Karma: Subtle Karma295Liberation from Wrong Deeds302Karma of Paap-Punya303Defamation Binds Karma303The Supreme Power to Destroy Karma304Help by Remembering God305Karma Binds Even God!305The Divine Karma of the Gnani Purush305The Nature of Karma306Karma and Vyavasthit307Beware of the Seeds of Bhaav!307Conviction of Destruction of Karma308The Mirror of Life Is the Cause of Karma308The Solution to Become Free from ‘Sticky’ Karma309What Is ‘Sticky’ Karma?310How Can One Create Nishkaam Karma?311The Atma and Karma Are Always There313To Do, to Make Others Do, and to Incite Others to Do!313(36) Bhaav, Bhaavya and BhaavakOnly the Bhaavak Is the Doer of Bhaav316If You Enter into Bhaav, Then You Become Bhaavya316The Nature of the Bhaavak317Worldly Knowledge Is the Bhaavak’s Support!318The Bhaavak Forever Changing in the Samsaran Path320Liberation Is Yours if You Do Not BecomeOne with the Bhaav322Contained ‘self’ – Manifest Self324Prameya-Boundary: Pramaata-the Self325(37) The Energy of Action: The Energy of IntentThe Energy of Action Is Dependent upon the Non-Self326Fruit According to Bhaav!327The Difference between Bhaav and Ichchha327Bhaav Is the Root of All the Circumstances3286970(33) GreedWhy Be Greedy When It Is Not in Your Hands?273Do You Gain or Lose with Greed?273Without Knowing the Self, Contentment Is Not Possible273A Greedy Person Looks for More, Despite Having It!274(34) Let Go of the ReinsThen the Practice of ‘Doership’ Will Go Away!275The Gnani’s Process276The Science of Charge and Discharge of Karma277As ‘Discharge’, Others as Faultless279In the ‘Dramatic’ There Is No Doership!279Saiyam of the Final State280(35) The Theory of KarmaWhat Is Karma and What Is Dharma in Vyavahar?282The World Only Knows the Theory of Doership282Who Is the ‘Doer’ of Karma?283Who Removes That Ego?285Continuous Binding of Karma WhereThere Is Ignorance286No Binding of Karma in the Presence of Gnan!286Lighter Karmas Are Bound Through Repentance287Karma Is Bound Only in the Human Form288Karma – A Balance of Many Lifetimes289How Is a Karmic Account Paid Off?290Aashrav, Bandh, Samvar and Nirjara291The Thermometer for Good or Bad Karma294Overt Karma: Subtle Karma295Liberation from Wrong Deeds302Karma of Paap-Punya303Defamation Binds Karma303The Supreme Power to Destroy Karma304Help by Remembering God305Karma Binds Even God!305The Divine Karma of the Gnani Purush305The Nature of Karma306Karma and Vyavasthit307Beware of the Seeds of Bhaav!307Conviction of Destruction of Karma308The Mirror of Life Is the Cause of Karma308The Solution to Become Free from ‘Sticky’ Karma309What Is ‘Sticky’ Karma?310How Can One Create Nishkaam Karma?311The Atma and Karma Are Always There313To Do, to Make Others Do, and to Incite Others to Do!313(36) Bhaav, Bhaavya and BhaavakOnly the Bhaavak Is the Doer of Bhaav316If You Enter into Bhaav, Then You Become Bhaavya316The Nature of the Bhaavak317Worldly Knowledge Is the Bhaavak’s Support!318The Bhaavak Forever Changing in the Samsaran Path320Liberation Is Yours if You Do Not BecomeOne with the Bhaav322Contained ‘self’ – Manifest Self324Prameya-Boundary: Pramaata-the Self325(37) The Energy of Action: The Energy of IntentThe Energy of Action Is Dependent upon the Non-Self326Fruit According to Bhaav!327The Difference between Bhaav and Ichchha327Bhaav Is the Root of All the Circumstances3286970Special note to the reader(cid:79)  The word Self, with ‘S’, refers to the awakened Self orSoul,  which is separate from the worldly soul (non-awakened self), written with ‘s’. The term Shuddhatma(pure Soul) is used for the awakened Self, after the GnanVidhi given by the Gnani Purush.      Similarly, any word in the middle of a sentence, with aninitial capital or words in inverted commas, e.g. ‘You’,‘Your’, at the beginning of a sentence, refers to theawakened Self or Pragnya. This is an important distinctionfor the correct understanding of the difference betweenthe awakened Self or the Self and the non-awakened selfor the worldly self.(cid:79)  Wherever the name ‘Chandubhai’ is mentioned, thereader should substitute it with his or her name.(cid:79)    Dadashri uses the term ‘We’, ‘us’ or ‘our’ - meaning theGnani Purush.(cid:79)   We welcome your comments, suggestions, correctionsand any constructive criticism of this translation so futureeditions can be improved. Please e-mail them to:      engtranslation@dadabhagwan.org(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Bhaav Are Different and Thoughts Are Different329Only Bhaav Has Value!330Adverse Bhaav332The Nature of Bhaav334Bhaav Itself Is the Main Evidence335Dravya-Bhaav338Bhaav Mun: The Pratishthit Atma!340Pratibhaav343Swabhav – Swa-kshetra: Par-bhaav – Par-kshetra344(38) The Power of the Self Is Only in the Domain of the SelfAvastha Ma Asvastha – Uneasiness in Condition orPhases of Events346Avastha: Paryaya348(39) The Nature of Gnan: The Nature of TimeThe One Who Deserves Self-Realization inAkram Vignan351The Gnani Remains in the Present352The Eternal Element of Time355(40) The Nature of SpeechSpeech Is Not an Attribute of the Soul!356Syadvaad Speech357Who Has the Right to Preach?358Touched by Saraswati361 The Powerful Speech of the Gnani Purush361Power in the Penance of Silence362A Live Tape Recorder – What a Responsibility!365Speech Is the Embodiment of Ego372No Solution Without Vitarag Speech374The ‘Taping’ of Speech374The ‘Charging Point’ of Speech376Where the Lamp Is Lit, Your Work Gets Done!3777172Special note to the reader(cid:79)  The word Self, with ‘S’, refers to the awakened Self orSoul,  which is separate from the worldly soul (non-awakened self), written with ‘s’. The term Shuddhatma(pure Soul) is used for the awakened Self, after the GnanVidhi given by the Gnani Purush.      Similarly, any word in the middle of a sentence, with aninitial capital or words in inverted commas, e.g. ‘You’,‘Your’, at the beginning of a sentence, refers to theawakened Self or Pragnya. This is an important distinctionfor the correct understanding of the difference betweenthe awakened Self or the Self and the non-awakened selfor the worldly self.(cid:79)  Wherever the name ‘Chandubhai’ is mentioned, thereader should substitute it with his or her name.(cid:79)    Dadashri uses the term ‘We’, ‘us’ or ‘our’ - meaning theGnani Purush.(cid:79)   We welcome your comments, suggestions, correctionsand any constructive criticism of this translation so futureeditions can be improved. Please e-mail them to:      engtranslation@dadabhagwan.org(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Bhaav Are Different and Thoughts Are Different329Only Bhaav Has Value!330Adverse Bhaav332The Nature of Bhaav334Bhaav Itself Is the Main Evidence335Dravya-Bhaav338Bhaav Mun: The Pratishthit Atma!340Pratibhaav343Swabhav – Swa-kshetra: Par-bhaav – Par-kshetra344(38) The Power of the Self Is Only in the Domain of the SelfAvastha Ma Asvastha – Uneasiness in Condition orPhases of Events346Avastha: Paryaya348(39) The Nature of Gnan: The Nature of TimeThe One Who Deserves Self-Realization inAkram Vignan351The Gnani Remains in the Present352The Eternal Element of Time355(40) The Nature of SpeechSpeech Is Not an Attribute of the Soul!356Syadvaad Speech357Who Has the Right to Preach?358Touched by Saraswati361 The Powerful Speech of the Gnani Purush361Power in the Penance of Silence362A Live Tape Recorder – What a Responsibility!365Speech Is the Embodiment of Ego372No Solution Without Vitarag Speech374The ‘Taping’ of Speech374The ‘Charging Point’ of Speech376Where the Lamp Is Lit, Your Work Gets Done!3777172Aptavani-412Aptavani-4Aptavani - 4(1)Awakened AwarenessMay One Be Aware of His Unchanging NatureThe pratishthit atma arises when the ‘I am’ is instilled inthe non-Self; where there is no Self. The self here, is completelyvoid of the chetan (life energy). It is mechanical chetan (lifeenergy). It is not the real Self. It is just ‘machinery’ that will diewithout fuel. The entire machinery will stop even if you do notallow it to breathe. The mechanical chetan (non-Self complex)is by nature, unsteady and ever-changing. The real chetan, theSelf that is within, is constant and stable. It has never becomeunstable: it is as it is. It is itself God; the Lord of the three worlds(lokas). But only if one realizes this! If one were to realize one’sown Self, one could even be able to experience the same blissthat the Lord of the three worlds enjoys. However, people arein a state of unawareness (ajagruti). It is all a state ofunawareness.Wake Up from BhaavnindraThe entire world is in bhaavnindra. Bhaavnindra meansto be asleep and unaware of the Self. The other type of sleepis the physical sleep (dehanindra), where one sleeps and onealso does not have the awareness of the Self. In the latter, oneis asleep, both to the Self and the non-Self. During physicalsleep, a person is not aware of his body. He becomes aware ofhis body when he wakes up; however he is still unaware of theSelf (bhaavnindra). He continually harms himself while in thisstate of unawareness of the Self. Anger, pride, deceit and greedarise as a result of bhaavnindra. And it is bhaavnindra that isthe cause of slightest hurt to others. The entire world is inbhaavnindra. Wake up! I have come here to tell you only onething, and that is to wake up.Do you want to remain asleep or do you want to wakeup? How long are you going to remain asleep in this way?Questioner: I am awake, am I not?Dadashri: Who says you are awake? If you wereawake, you would not have any conflict with anyone, you wouldnot have ongoing clashes (kankaas) with anyone, you would nothave dissension because of differing opinions (matbhed) withanyone, and you would not have any worries (chinta).Awareness of the Non-Self Complex:Awareness of the SelfThere are two kinds of awareness: One is the awarenessof the pudgal (non-Self complex), and the other is theawareness of the Self. A person with the awareness of the non-Self complex (paudgalik jagruti) is engrossed in the pudgaland the person with the awareness of the Self is absorbed onlyin the Self (Atma jagruti). When a person’s awareness of thepudgal (non-Self complex) continues to increase; as hebecomes increasingly consumed with his ‘relative’ self and hisworldly interactions, he becomes tired and disillusioned. Now hehas the desire for the true bliss of the Self. At this point in time,all the circumstances, conducive to the awareness of the Self,convene to facilitate for him the attainment of this state. Once hiseyes open slightly to the awareness of the Self, they willgradually continue to do so until they are fully open.Absolute Knowledge Means…Absolute awakened awareness (jagruti) is the absoluteknowledge (Kevalgnan). There is nothing other than thisAptavani-412Aptavani-4Aptavani - 4(1)Awakened AwarenessMay One Be Aware of His Unchanging NatureThe pratishthit atma arises when the ‘I am’ is instilled inthe non-Self; where there is no Self. The self here, is completelyvoid of the chetan (life energy). It is mechanical chetan (lifeenergy). It is not the real Self. It is just ‘machinery’ that will diewithout fuel. The entire machinery will stop even if you do notallow it to breathe. The mechanical chetan (non-Self complex)is by nature, unsteady and ever-changing. The real chetan, theSelf that is within, is constant and stable. It has never becomeunstable: it is as it is. It is itself God; the Lord of the three worlds(lokas). But only if one realizes this! If one were to realize one’sown Self, one could even be able to experience the same blissthat the Lord of the three worlds enjoys. However, people arein a state of unawareness (ajagruti). It is all a state ofunawareness.Wake Up from BhaavnindraThe entire world is in bhaavnindra. Bhaavnindra meansto be asleep and unaware of the Self. The other type of sleepis the physical sleep (dehanindra), where one sleeps and onealso does not have the awareness of the Self. In the latter, oneis asleep, both to the Self and the non-Self. During physicalsleep, a person is not aware of his body. He becomes aware ofhis body when he wakes up; however he is still unaware of theSelf (bhaavnindra). He continually harms himself while in thisstate of unawareness of the Self. Anger, pride, deceit and greedarise as a result of bhaavnindra. And it is bhaavnindra that isthe cause of slightest hurt to others. The entire world is inbhaavnindra. Wake up! I have come here to tell you only onething, and that is to wake up.Do you want to remain asleep or do you want to wakeup? How long are you going to remain asleep in this way?Questioner: I am awake, am I not?Dadashri: Who says you are awake? If you wereawake, you would not have any conflict with anyone, you wouldnot have ongoing clashes (kankaas) with anyone, you would nothave dissension because of differing opinions (matbhed) withanyone, and you would not have any worries (chinta).Awareness of the Non-Self Complex:Awareness of the SelfThere are two kinds of awareness: One is the awarenessof the pudgal (non-Self complex), and the other is theawareness of the Self. A person with the awareness of the non-Self complex (paudgalik jagruti) is engrossed in the pudgaland the person with the awareness of the Self is absorbed onlyin the Self (Atma jagruti). When a person’s awareness of thepudgal (non-Self complex) continues to increase; as hebecomes increasingly consumed with his ‘relative’ self and hisworldly interactions, he becomes tired and disillusioned. Now hehas the desire for the true bliss of the Self. At this point in time,all the circumstances, conducive to the awareness of the Self,convene to facilitate for him the attainment of this state. Once hiseyes open slightly to the awareness of the Self, they willgradually continue to do so until they are fully open.Absolute Knowledge Means…Absolute awakened awareness (jagruti) is the absoluteknowledge (Kevalgnan). There is nothing other than thisAptavani-434Aptavani-4Kevalgnan, and yet it is nothing new. There is not a trace ofunawareness present. It is considered absolute awareness whenthere is not even the slightest ‘dozing’ (unawareness of and asthe Self). People in general have the worldly awareness;however, this awareness is not complete awareness.Awareness of the World: Cause of SufferingAs a person’s awareness of the worldly life (sansar)increases to its completion he will not like it all. He will find itpainful. He will see all the misery within it. It is after this, thathe makes an effort towards attaining the awareness of the Self.As his worldly awareness grows, his material pleasuresbecome painful and worldly luxuries are deemed as entrapment.The Emperor Bharat Chakravarti had thirteen hundred queens.Although he had his own empires, he constantly found them tobe painful and miserable. A person who has reached thepinnacle of worldly happiness, will also have increasedawareness of the worldly life. This very awareness will bepainful for him. He will then understand that he has to knowsomething new; something that will bring him permanenthappiness.Every living being is in search of happiness. As long asone does not have the real happiness, one will continue to obtainit from whatever awareness he has from the ‘relative’ pleasuresof the world. However, as worldly pleasure has duality, it willalways be followed by pain. The bliss of the Self, on the otherhand, is beyond duality. Real happiness is beyond duality; onceattained, this bliss never leaves. Real happiness will manifest asthe awareness of the Self increases. Such awareness arises afterone attains the knowledge of the Self (swaroop Gnan), uponwhich the awareness of the world will continue to grow. But theknowledge of the Self is the principle thing. When scientists talkabout awareness, they are primarily referring to the awarenessof the body complex (pudgal). They are clueless aboutspirituality, and the awareness of the Self. They are all in a stateof dormancy on this matter. The entire world is sleeping.Playing with ToysAwareness of the pudgal (non-Self complex) means to beabsorbed only in that which is temporary. Hence the entireworld is just ‘playing’ with “toys”.In this life, it is worth ‘sleeping’ with Your eyes open (withawareness as the Self). You will no longer play with toys, afteryou have attained the awareness of the Self. The eternalawareness is present when one ‘plays’ with that which ispermanent. Otherwise, ‘toys’ continue to break and make youcry; break and make you cry, over and over again. That is thenature of all that is temporary. How long do you have to playwith these toys? What happens when you give a child a toy, andit breaks? He will cry, will he not? Likewise, people play with‘toys’ (their children and relatives, etc.) and when these ‘toys’are broken, they too cry. Someone will cry, ‘My son has died!’Look here! It was just a ‘toy’ that broke! A child does not knowthat if his toy breaks, he can get another one. The worldly lifeis not painful, but unawareness (ajagruti) is.Questioner: Is moksha a ‘toy’ or not?Dadashri: No, no, it is not a toy. What is a toy? It issomething that is temporary; it breaks and gets destroyed. Thismoksha will never go away. Every living being wants happiness;he wants eternal happiness. Eternal happiness will never leave.It will not leave even if someone were to cut your ear off, orpick your pocket or do anything else to you. That is because theSelf has no liking for the ‘toy’. It has no relation with it.Awareness Itself Will Result in MokshaQuestioner: Are moksha and awakened awareness(jagruti) the same?Aptavani-434Aptavani-4Kevalgnan, and yet it is nothing new. There is not a trace ofunawareness present. It is considered absolute awareness whenthere is not even the slightest ‘dozing’ (unawareness of and asthe Self). People in general have the worldly awareness;however, this awareness is not complete awareness.Awareness of the World: Cause of SufferingAs a person’s awareness of the worldly life (sansar)increases to its completion he will not like it all. He will find itpainful. He will see all the misery within it. It is after this, thathe makes an effort towards attaining the awareness of the Self.As his worldly awareness grows, his material pleasuresbecome painful and worldly luxuries are deemed as entrapment.The Emperor Bharat Chakravarti had thirteen hundred queens.Although he had his own empires, he constantly found them tobe painful and miserable. A person who has reached thepinnacle of worldly happiness, will also have increasedawareness of the worldly life. This very awareness will bepainful for him. He will then understand that he has to knowsomething new; something that will bring him permanenthappiness.Every living being is in search of happiness. As long asone does not have the real happiness, one will continue to obtainit from whatever awareness he has from the ‘relative’ pleasuresof the world. However, as worldly pleasure has duality, it willalways be followed by pain. The bliss of the Self, on the otherhand, is beyond duality. Real happiness is beyond duality; onceattained, this bliss never leaves. Real happiness will manifest asthe awareness of the Self increases. Such awareness arises afterone attains the knowledge of the Self (swaroop Gnan), uponwhich the awareness of the world will continue to grow. But theknowledge of the Self is the principle thing. When scientists talkabout awareness, they are primarily referring to the awarenessof the body complex (pudgal). They are clueless aboutspirituality, and the awareness of the Self. They are all in a stateof dormancy on this matter. The entire world is sleeping.Playing with ToysAwareness of the pudgal (non-Self complex) means to beabsorbed only in that which is temporary. Hence the entireworld is just ‘playing’ with “toys”.In this life, it is worth ‘sleeping’ with Your eyes open (withawareness as the Self). You will no longer play with toys, afteryou have attained the awareness of the Self. The eternalawareness is present when one ‘plays’ with that which ispermanent. Otherwise, ‘toys’ continue to break and make youcry; break and make you cry, over and over again. That is thenature of all that is temporary. How long do you have to playwith these toys? What happens when you give a child a toy, andit breaks? He will cry, will he not? Likewise, people play with‘toys’ (their children and relatives, etc.) and when these ‘toys’are broken, they too cry. Someone will cry, ‘My son has died!’Look here! It was just a ‘toy’ that broke! A child does not knowthat if his toy breaks, he can get another one. The worldly lifeis not painful, but unawareness (ajagruti) is.Questioner: Is moksha a ‘toy’ or not?Dadashri: No, no, it is not a toy. What is a toy? It issomething that is temporary; it breaks and gets destroyed. Thismoksha will never go away. Every living being wants happiness;he wants eternal happiness. Eternal happiness will never leave.It will not leave even if someone were to cut your ear off, orpick your pocket or do anything else to you. That is because theSelf has no liking for the ‘toy’. It has no relation with it.Awareness Itself Will Result in MokshaQuestioner: Are moksha and awakened awareness(jagruti) the same?Aptavani-456Aptavani-4Dadashri: Moksha is only through awakened awareness.What does unawareness (ajagruti) mean? It is unawarenesswhen, as a result of differences in opinion with others(matbhed), you have dissension. A person is consideredawakened when he has the awareness of what is beneficial andwhat is harmful (for the Self); whereas, the person that does nothave this awareness, is in a state of bhaavnindra. Bhaavnindrais to sleep with one’s eyes open. And dravyanindra is whenone sleeps with one’s eyes closed. What is the reason formatbhed? It is bhaavnindra.Questioner: Does it mean that jagruti and moksha areone and the same?Dadashri: The awakened awareness of the Self isKevalgnan itself; it is itself liberation. There is no otherdifference. But awakened awareness is not the result ofmoksha. Moksha is the result of awakened awareness.‘Awakened awareness is the mother of moksha.’Some people say to me, “Dada, I do not want to go tomoksha.” When a person tells me something wrong like that, Isay to him, ‘You may not want moksha, but you do wantawareness, do you not?’, and he will answer, ‘Yes, I definitelywant awareness.’ So then I ask him, ‘Do you want to completethat awareness?’, and he will say, ‘Yes, I want to complete it.’This way, I give them a ‘ticket’ right away. They will not takea free ticket, but they will pay money for it! This is how peopleare; they do not understand what is beneficial to them, and whatis harmful.Absolute awareness is itself moksha. Absolute awarenessitself is Kevalgnan. If you have ninety-nine percent awareness,you add one percent to it, then at a hundred percent there iskevalgnan.Experience of the Self means that the experiences you hadbefore attaining the Gnan (Knowledge of the Self) and theexperience after Gnan is different. It is a new kind of experiencethat continues to grow gradually along with the awareness.Absolute awareness is absolute experience.Knowledge Mediated Through the SenseOrgans: AwarenessThere are two kinds of knowledge (gnan): Indriya-gnan(knowledge attained through the medium of the senses) andatindriya-gnan (knowledge beyond the senses). Indriya-gnanis limited and atindriya is unlimited. Even in indriya-gnan,people do not have complete awareness in the worldly life. Inindriya-gnan, a person that is fully aware, would be consideredan elevated sant purush (saint).Questioner: What is complete awareness of indriya-gnan?Dadashri: Five gnanendriya (Five senses; Sense organsof knowledge namely: hearing-ears, touch-skin, sight-eyes,taste-tongue, and smell-nose), five karmendriya (functionalorgans that facilitate action: the mouth, for eating and speech; theaction of the hands and feet; digestive and excretory organs);mind (mun), intellect (buddhi), chit, and the ego (ahamkar), allfall in the category of indriya-gnan.When a person has complete awareness in indriya-gnan,his ego will be such, that he will not have any dissension,because of a difference in opinion (matbhed) with anyone. Evenif someone tries to create matbhed, he will somehow escapenot creating it. If there is a possibility for conflict to occur, he willward off the differences. With the awareness of indriya-gnan,one will not have even the slightest of conflict with anyone. Hewill become “everywhere adjustable”; he will not interfere inworldly interactions.Even in indriya-gnan, there are two kinds of awareness:Aptavani-456Aptavani-4Dadashri: Moksha is only through awakened awareness.What does unawareness (ajagruti) mean? It is unawarenesswhen, as a result of differences in opinion with others(matbhed), you have dissension. A person is consideredawakened when he has the awareness of what is beneficial andwhat is harmful (for the Self); whereas, the person that does nothave this awareness, is in a state of bhaavnindra. Bhaavnindrais to sleep with one’s eyes open. And dravyanindra is whenone sleeps with one’s eyes closed. What is the reason formatbhed? It is bhaavnindra.Questioner: Does it mean that jagruti and moksha areone and the same?Dadashri: The awakened awareness of the Self isKevalgnan itself; it is itself liberation. There is no otherdifference. But awakened awareness is not the result ofmoksha. Moksha is the result of awakened awareness.‘Awakened awareness is the mother of moksha.’Some people say to me, “Dada, I do not want to go tomoksha.” When a person tells me something wrong like that, Isay to him, ‘You may not want moksha, but you do wantawareness, do you not?’, and he will answer, ‘Yes, I definitelywant awareness.’ So then I ask him, ‘Do you want to completethat awareness?’, and he will say, ‘Yes, I want to complete it.’This way, I give them a ‘ticket’ right away. They will not takea free ticket, but they will pay money for it! This is how peopleare; they do not understand what is beneficial to them, and whatis harmful.Absolute awareness is itself moksha. Absolute awarenessitself is Kevalgnan. If you have ninety-nine percent awareness,you add one percent to it, then at a hundred percent there iskevalgnan.Experience of the Self means that the experiences you hadbefore attaining the Gnan (Knowledge of the Self) and theexperience after Gnan is different. It is a new kind of experiencethat continues to grow gradually along with the awareness.Absolute awareness is absolute experience.Knowledge Mediated Through the SenseOrgans: AwarenessThere are two kinds of knowledge (gnan): Indriya-gnan(knowledge attained through the medium of the senses) andatindriya-gnan (knowledge beyond the senses). Indriya-gnanis limited and atindriya is unlimited. Even in indriya-gnan,people do not have complete awareness in the worldly life. Inindriya-gnan, a person that is fully aware, would be consideredan elevated sant purush (saint).Questioner: What is complete awareness of indriya-gnan?Dadashri: Five gnanendriya (Five senses; Sense organsof knowledge namely: hearing-ears, touch-skin, sight-eyes,taste-tongue, and smell-nose), five karmendriya (functionalorgans that facilitate action: the mouth, for eating and speech; theaction of the hands and feet; digestive and excretory organs);mind (mun), intellect (buddhi), chit, and the ego (ahamkar), allfall in the category of indriya-gnan.When a person has complete awareness in indriya-gnan,his ego will be such, that he will not have any dissension,because of a difference in opinion (matbhed) with anyone. Evenif someone tries to create matbhed, he will somehow escapenot creating it. If there is a possibility for conflict to occur, he willward off the differences. With the awareness of indriya-gnan,one will not have even the slightest of conflict with anyone. Hewill become “everywhere adjustable”; he will not interfere inworldly interactions.Even in indriya-gnan, there are two kinds of awareness:Aptavani-478Aptavani-4external and internal. Although one cannot attain the knowledgethat is beyond the senses (atindriya), the sensory (indriya)knowledge is still there, is it not? There are many scholars ofindriya-gnan, but there are no teachers or colleges for it.What is the cause of anger, pride, deceit and greed?What is the cause of matbhed? It is bhaavnindra. Whatcauses a person to become angry? It is bhaavnindra. What isthe cause behind someone’s greed? It is bhaavnindra.Bhaavnindra will not allow one to grasp the message ofliberation (updesha). When we become angry, we learn a lesson(updesha) from it: not to get angry over that incident again. Butdespite this, when anger does occur again, it is bhaavnindra.Getting angry, or becoming greedy is all unawareness(ajagruti). The anger, pride, deceit and greed will decrease, asthe unawareness (ajagruti) decreases, and the awakenedawareness (jagruti) increases. Unawareness means that there isno repentance after the anger occurs. A person who repentsafter he becomes angry has a little awareness, but moreunawareness. If someone realizes after becoming angry, that itwas wrong, and then ‘washes’ it off with pratikraman(apology), then that would be some degree of awareness. Butif one does not recognize one’s anger at all, it is a state ofunawareness. How can awareness be called awareness if itgives rise to the weakness of anger? Anger should not arise inany situation. Good awareness is one which pacifies anger. Realawareness (jagruti) however, is one that wards off anyimminent anger. People do not have such awareness at all.The one percent of awareness that remains in people atthis time, is only at the navel. There is only a state ofunawareness everywhere else. The open region at the navel(ruchak pradesh) constitutes the only level of awareness thathuman beings have. Otherwise, there is no awareness leftwhatsoever. Awareness is gone completely. Awareness thatincreases to 360º is called absolute enlightenment (Kevalgnan).Awareness at 359º is still considered an awakened awareness(jagruti).Anger (krodh), pride (maan), deceit (maya), and greed(lobh) are all unawareness. If someone asks me: “Explain to me,how is all that unawareness?” Then I will just ask him: “Do younot want to get rid of your anger, pride, deceit and greed?” Aslong as he says, “Yes, I do want to get rid of them,” he hasawareness. But to ‘feed’ anger, pride, deceit and greed isunawareness. The very things you want to get rid of, will stickaround if you keep feeding. If you stop fueling them for threeyears, they will not remain. Humans are unaware (ajagrut), andso are the animals. So they can both be considered equal, canthey not? Such a being does not benefit from the human life.The Vision That Sees the Fault of the ‘self’When a person can see his own faults, then know that hehas attained the awareness; otherwise, everyone walks in his‘sleep.’ There is no need to worry too much about whether ornot all the mistakes (dosh) are gone, but awareness is crucial.After attaining awareness, new mistakes will not arise and theold ones will continue to leave. ‘You’ (the Self) just simply ‘see’how those mistakes arise.Understand that you are ready for moksha, when you cansee your own mistakes. Without awareness, no one can see hisown faults. But if he needed to, he can easily see two to fivehundred or so faults in others. If your faults are causing harm toothers, You (the Self) should tell ‘Chandubhai’ (non-Self), “Dopratikraman.” No one has ever gone to moksha by hurtinganyone in the slightest degree. If you eat mangoes and friedbread (puris) every day, there is no problem, but it is notpossible for one to hurt anyone, and then go to moksha. Whatyou eat or drink here, are of no significance over there. Onlykashays (anger, pride, deceit, greed) are objectionable there;Aptavani-478Aptavani-4external and internal. Although one cannot attain the knowledgethat is beyond the senses (atindriya), the sensory (indriya)knowledge is still there, is it not? There are many scholars ofindriya-gnan, but there are no teachers or colleges for it.What is the cause of anger, pride, deceit and greed?What is the cause of matbhed? It is bhaavnindra. Whatcauses a person to become angry? It is bhaavnindra. What isthe cause behind someone’s greed? It is bhaavnindra.Bhaavnindra will not allow one to grasp the message ofliberation (updesha). When we become angry, we learn a lesson(updesha) from it: not to get angry over that incident again. Butdespite this, when anger does occur again, it is bhaavnindra.Getting angry, or becoming greedy is all unawareness(ajagruti). The anger, pride, deceit and greed will decrease, asthe unawareness (ajagruti) decreases, and the awakenedawareness (jagruti) increases. Unawareness means that there isno repentance after the anger occurs. A person who repentsafter he becomes angry has a little awareness, but moreunawareness. If someone realizes after becoming angry, that itwas wrong, and then ‘washes’ it off with pratikraman(apology), then that would be some degree of awareness. Butif one does not recognize one’s anger at all, it is a state ofunawareness. How can awareness be called awareness if itgives rise to the weakness of anger? Anger should not arise inany situation. Good awareness is one which pacifies anger. Realawareness (jagruti) however, is one that wards off anyimminent anger. People do not have such awareness at all.The one percent of awareness that remains in people atthis time, is only at the navel. There is only a state ofunawareness everywhere else. The open region at the navel(ruchak pradesh) constitutes the only level of awareness thathuman beings have. Otherwise, there is no awareness leftwhatsoever. Awareness is gone completely. Awareness thatincreases to 360º is called absolute enlightenment (Kevalgnan).Awareness at 359º is still considered an awakened awareness(jagruti).Anger (krodh), pride (maan), deceit (maya), and greed(lobh) are all unawareness. If someone asks me: “Explain to me,how is all that unawareness?” Then I will just ask him: “Do younot want to get rid of your anger, pride, deceit and greed?” Aslong as he says, “Yes, I do want to get rid of them,” he hasawareness. But to ‘feed’ anger, pride, deceit and greed isunawareness. The very things you want to get rid of, will stickaround if you keep feeding. If you stop fueling them for threeyears, they will not remain. Humans are unaware (ajagrut), andso are the animals. So they can both be considered equal, canthey not? Such a being does not benefit from the human life.The Vision That Sees the Fault of the ‘self’When a person can see his own faults, then know that hehas attained the awareness; otherwise, everyone walks in his‘sleep.’ There is no need to worry too much about whether ornot all the mistakes (dosh) are gone, but awareness is crucial.After attaining awareness, new mistakes will not arise and theold ones will continue to leave. ‘You’ (the Self) just simply ‘see’how those mistakes arise.Understand that you are ready for moksha, when you cansee your own mistakes. Without awareness, no one can see hisown faults. But if he needed to, he can easily see two to fivehundred or so faults in others. If your faults are causing harm toothers, You (the Self) should tell ‘Chandubhai’ (non-Self), “Dopratikraman.” No one has ever gone to moksha by hurtinganyone in the slightest degree. If you eat mangoes and friedbread (puris) every day, there is no problem, but it is notpossible for one to hurt anyone, and then go to moksha. Whatyou eat or drink here, are of no significance over there. Onlykashays (anger, pride, deceit, greed) are objectionable there;Aptavani-4910Aptavani-4moreover, there must be no unawareness. Why is the worldconsidered as ‘sleeping’? It is because people do not haveawareness of the Self and the non-Self (swa-par). There is noawareness of benefit or harm (hitta-ahita) left in the ‘relative’self. For moksha, kashay is objected to.‘Topmost’ Awareness‘Our’ (the Gnani Purush) awareness is the highest; youwould not even know about it. But when ‘we’ make a mistakewhile talking to you, ‘we’ would recognize it and ‘we’ wouldimmediately “wash” it off. There is a ‘tool’– in the form ofpratikraman – in place for that, which ‘washes’ it immediately.Subtler (sookshmatar) and subtlest (sookshmatam) mistakesstill remain for ‘us’, and they do not harm any living being evenin the slightest extent. I see the whole world as being faultless(nirdosh). ‘We—the Gnani Purush’ ourselves have becomeflawless, and ‘we’ only see the rest of the world as flawless. Theultimate awareness is to see everyone in the world as faultless.The absolute Gnan that prevails as Gnata-gneya (Gnatais the Knower and gneya is that which is to be known) isabsolute awareness, and that is ‘our’ state. Those who haveattained this Gnan from ‘us’, should have such awareness, thatduring any incident, all ‘our’ five sentences (the Five Agnas -Special directives given by the Gnani Purush that sustains theenlightened state after the Gnan Vidhi) should be present at thesame time, so that they will not experience any agitation fromwithin. You should constantly see the pure Soul within all livingbeings, whether it is a tree, a bird or anything else. When youhave such awareness (jagruti), it is considered awareness of thehighest kind. The awareness which is higher than this, is the onein which, when I talk to someone named Jayantbhai, there is theawareness within, that I am talking to Jayantbhai, and in realityhe is a pure Soul. That awareness constantly remains within meas I speak. Awareness is a very special thing.Bhaav Jagruti: Swabhav JagrutiQuestioner: What is bhaav jagruti?Dadashri: Bhaav jagruti (awareness of intent through,‘I am Chandubhai’) is applicable in the Kramic path (thetraditional step-by-step path to liberation). In the Akrampath, there is swabhav jagruti (awareness as the Self).Bhaav jagruti molds the prakruti (the relative self; the non-Self complex), and swabhav jagruti keeps the Self untaintedand untouched by the prakruti. My Five Agnas (specialdirectives given by the Gnani Purush that sustains theenlightened state after the Gnan Vidhi) keep You in theawareness of the Self (swabhav jagruti). I have removedyour bhaav jagruti. The whole world is trapped inbhaavnindra; unaware of the Self.Questioner: So does bhaav jagruti sow the seeds ofkarma?Dadashri: Yes, of course. If you make a charitabledonation with the bhaav of ‘I am Chandubhai,’ then you sow aseed of karma. But after you have attained the awareness of theSelf, when you say, “I want to make a donation,” you will notbe sowing any seed of karma, because now nirahamkari(without the ego). Not knowing one’s Self is called bhaavnindra. To knowthe Self is the vision of absolute independence (niralumbdarshan). It is the knowledge of absolute independence(niralumb Gnan).The Beginning of the Awakened Awareness…First, awareness should come in the self, the pudgal.After one attains Self-realization, being asleep to the pudgal,leads to an increasing awareness as the Self (Atma jagruti).Are children likely to make a fuss over spilled milk? No. WhyAptavani-4910Aptavani-4moreover, there must be no unawareness. Why is the worldconsidered as ‘sleeping’? It is because people do not haveawareness of the Self and the non-Self (swa-par). There is noawareness of benefit or harm (hitta-ahita) left in the ‘relative’self. For moksha, kashay is objected to.‘Topmost’ Awareness‘Our’ (the Gnani Purush) awareness is the highest; youwould not even know about it. But when ‘we’ make a mistakewhile talking to you, ‘we’ would recognize it and ‘we’ wouldimmediately “wash” it off. There is a ‘tool’– in the form ofpratikraman – in place for that, which ‘washes’ it immediately.Subtler (sookshmatar) and subtlest (sookshmatam) mistakesstill remain for ‘us’, and they do not harm any living being evenin the slightest extent. I see the whole world as being faultless(nirdosh). ‘We—the Gnani Purush’ ourselves have becomeflawless, and ‘we’ only see the rest of the world as flawless. Theultimate awareness is to see everyone in the world as faultless.The absolute Gnan that prevails as Gnata-gneya (Gnatais the Knower and gneya is that which is to be known) isabsolute awareness, and that is ‘our’ state. Those who haveattained this Gnan from ‘us’, should have such awareness, thatduring any incident, all ‘our’ five sentences (the Five Agnas -Special directives given by the Gnani Purush that sustains theenlightened state after the Gnan Vidhi) should be present at thesame time, so that they will not experience any agitation fromwithin. You should constantly see the pure Soul within all livingbeings, whether it is a tree, a bird or anything else. When youhave such awareness (jagruti), it is considered awareness of thehighest kind. The awareness which is higher than this, is the onein which, when I talk to someone named Jayantbhai, there is theawareness within, that I am talking to Jayantbhai, and in realityhe is a pure Soul. That awareness constantly remains within meas I speak. Awareness is a very special thing.Bhaav Jagruti: Swabhav JagrutiQuestioner: What is bhaav jagruti?Dadashri: Bhaav jagruti (awareness of intent through,‘I am Chandubhai’) is applicable in the Kramic path (thetraditional step-by-step path to liberation). In the Akrampath, there is swabhav jagruti (awareness as the Self).Bhaav jagruti molds the prakruti (the relative self; the non-Self complex), and swabhav jagruti keeps the Self untaintedand untouched by the prakruti. My Five Agnas (specialdirectives given by the Gnani Purush that sustains theenlightened state after the Gnan Vidhi) keep You in theawareness of the Self (swabhav jagruti). I have removedyour bhaav jagruti. The whole world is trapped inbhaavnindra; unaware of the Self.Questioner: So does bhaav jagruti sow the seeds ofkarma?Dadashri: Yes, of course. If you make a charitabledonation with the bhaav of ‘I am Chandubhai,’ then you sow aseed of karma. But after you have attained the awareness of theSelf, when you say, “I want to make a donation,” you will notbe sowing any seed of karma, because now nirahamkari(without the ego). Not knowing one’s Self is called bhaavnindra. To knowthe Self is the vision of absolute independence (niralumbdarshan). It is the knowledge of absolute independence(niralumb Gnan).The Beginning of the Awakened Awareness…First, awareness should come in the self, the pudgal.After one attains Self-realization, being asleep to the pudgal,leads to an increasing awareness as the Self (Atma jagruti).Are children likely to make a fuss over spilled milk? No. WhyAptavani-41112Aptavani-4is that? It is because of ignorance. As the child grows, hebecomes aware of the pudgal and then his conflicts begin.Thereafter, comes awareness of the Self. Children do not haveawareness in worldly life interactions (vyavahar jagruti).Nobody has such awareness. A person with the awareness ofworldly life interactions would not have any dissension onaccount of differences of opinion (matbhed) with anyone athome or outside. He would not clash with anyone.A person who has awareness of worldly life interaction(vyavahar jagruti), will not let any circumstances arise, thatwould create conflict in his home. The kashays of greed, deceitand illusory attachment (moha), play a very powerful role invyavahar jagruti. In the awareness of the Self (nischayjagruti), anger, pride, deceit and greed have come to an end.What does it mean when I talk about sleeping? What does beingawake mean? You will have to understand this, will you not? Theworld thinks that people with doctorates (PhD) must be truly‘aware’. A truly aware person is extraordinary. Jagruti is thatwhich prevails during every function of the four components ofthe antahkaran (the mind, the intellect, the chit and the ego).What is awakened awareness? Awareness begins when,under no circumstances, does one, enter into conflict with one’sown self (artadhyan). The second step is where one does notcreate conflict because of others (raudradhyan); such awarenessleads towards the natural and spontaneous bliss (sahaj samadhi).One should reap the benefits of one’s awareness. How can youcall it awareness when conflict arises? How can you say thatsomeone is aware (jagrut), when he remotely hurts others? Tocreate and attain a condition that is free of conflict, is consideredas having done a great purusharth (independent effort).Yoga and Rituals Do Not Lead to Awareness ofthe SelfQuestioner: Does doing puja (worship), japa (chants),tapa (penance), etc., help towards the awareness of theSelf?Dadashri: One will get the benefits of whichever goalhe carries out these activities for. If one wants to get married,but he cannot find a woman, he will find one if he doesworship, and penances, etc. He will receive whatever he doesall that for.Questioner: Will he not gain any benefit towards hisspiritual (adhyatmik) progress?Dadashri: He will gain spiritual benefit, if he does it witha spiritual goal. But no one does it for a spiritual goal. Everyonewants a cure for his ailment. People are all suffering from theinfernal pain and misery of this world. They are looking for acure for their suffering. In this worldly life, people are sufferingfrom all kinds of miseries. No one is doing anything for theawareness of the Self. Some have hunger for respect (maan),some have hunger for fame (kirti), and some have hunger fordisciples. They are hungry because of all this beggarly need(bheekh). In spirituality; however, there is no expectation forrespect, fame or anything else. Whereas here, people areabsorbed in all that is inauspicious (ashubha); some are lookingfor fame, and some for recognition. They are only engrossed inenjoying sensory pleasures. How many people can be on aspiritual path like this? Only a rare one. Most people havehunger for recognition and pride.If sleep were to stop for just a moment, then there wouldbe illumination everywhere. A person is considered as beingasleep, when he is engrossed only in his daily routine of living.I am saying this from the perspective of ultimate knowledge –that one remains completely engrossed in chanting mantras anddoing penance etc., that one carries out. If one were to awakenfor just a moment, it would be plenty. If a person can see hisown faults and give an impartial judgment, then he is consideredAptavani-41112Aptavani-4is that? It is because of ignorance. As the child grows, hebecomes aware of the pudgal and then his conflicts begin.Thereafter, comes awareness of the Self. Children do not haveawareness in worldly life interactions (vyavahar jagruti).Nobody has such awareness. A person with the awareness ofworldly life interactions would not have any dissension onaccount of differences of opinion (matbhed) with anyone athome or outside. He would not clash with anyone.A person who has awareness of worldly life interaction(vyavahar jagruti), will not let any circumstances arise, thatwould create conflict in his home. The kashays of greed, deceitand illusory attachment (moha), play a very powerful role invyavahar jagruti. In the awareness of the Self (nischayjagruti), anger, pride, deceit and greed have come to an end.What does it mean when I talk about sleeping? What does beingawake mean? You will have to understand this, will you not? Theworld thinks that people with doctorates (PhD) must be truly‘aware’. A truly aware person is extraordinary. Jagruti is thatwhich prevails during every function of the four components ofthe antahkaran (the mind, the intellect, the chit and the ego).What is awakened awareness? Awareness begins when,under no circumstances, does one, enter into conflict with one’sown self (artadhyan). The second step is where one does notcreate conflict because of others (raudradhyan); such awarenessleads towards the natural and spontaneous bliss (sahaj samadhi).One should reap the benefits of one’s awareness. How can youcall it awareness when conflict arises? How can you say thatsomeone is aware (jagrut), when he remotely hurts others? Tocreate and attain a condition that is free of conflict, is consideredas having done a great purusharth (independent effort).Yoga and Rituals Do Not Lead to Awareness ofthe SelfQuestioner: Does doing puja (worship), japa (chants),tapa (penance), etc., help towards the awareness of theSelf?Dadashri: One will get the benefits of whichever goalhe carries out these activities for. If one wants to get married,but he cannot find a woman, he will find one if he doesworship, and penances, etc. He will receive whatever he doesall that for.Questioner: Will he not gain any benefit towards hisspiritual (adhyatmik) progress?Dadashri: He will gain spiritual benefit, if he does it witha spiritual goal. But no one does it for a spiritual goal. Everyonewants a cure for his ailment. People are all suffering from theinfernal pain and misery of this world. They are looking for acure for their suffering. In this worldly life, people are sufferingfrom all kinds of miseries. No one is doing anything for theawareness of the Self. Some have hunger for respect (maan),some have hunger for fame (kirti), and some have hunger fordisciples. They are hungry because of all this beggarly need(bheekh). In spirituality; however, there is no expectation forrespect, fame or anything else. Whereas here, people areabsorbed in all that is inauspicious (ashubha); some are lookingfor fame, and some for recognition. They are only engrossed inenjoying sensory pleasures. How many people can be on aspiritual path like this? Only a rare one. Most people havehunger for recognition and pride.If sleep were to stop for just a moment, then there wouldbe illumination everywhere. A person is considered as beingasleep, when he is engrossed only in his daily routine of living.I am saying this from the perspective of ultimate knowledge –that one remains completely engrossed in chanting mantras anddoing penance etc., that one carries out. If one were to awakenfor just a moment, it would be plenty. If a person can see hisown faults and give an impartial judgment, then he is consideredAptavani-41314Aptavani-4to have awareness. A person, who is awakened to the Self,holds the realm of the Self in his hands. Only the one who hasabsolute awareness can awaken you to the awareness.Questioner: What is it when one awakens the kundalini(corporeal energy; yogic power)?Dadashri: It is mechanical awareness. It has no connectionwith the awareness of the Self. You cannot say that a person hasawareness of the Self, just because his kundalini has beenawakened, can you? That is one kind of intoxication of the ego(maadakata). With that, a person is able to maintainconcentration (ekagrata), and experience calmness within. Onewill need exact awareness of the Self (Gnan jagruti).Questioner: Everyone who does meditation says that itis very beneficial. What is it?Dadashri: Meditation is just intoxication of the ego(maadakata); a person feels a sense of peace with it. A persongets respite from his misery through meditation. Do youexperience the awareness of Shuddhatma (pure Soul) since youattained the Gnan?Questioner: Dada, that awareness is constantly present.Dadashri: That itself is the meditation (dhyan). Whatother dhyan does a person need to do? Meditation (dhyan)through pinching one’s nose is not considered meditation.Questioner: When we do your niddidhyasan (innervisualization) while at home, is that considered direct (pratyaksh)or indirect (paroksh)?Dadashri: That is direct (pratyaksh). As long as I ampresent, this photograph of mine is considered pratyaksh. Ifdhyan of “I am a pure Soul (Shuddhatma)” does not remain ina person’s consciousness, but only Dada does, then it is thesame thing because the Gnani Purush is your Atma itself.Questioner: Does meditation take one to the state ofshunyata (state of no mind/mindless state, no vibrations)?Dadashri: No. It increases vibrations (spandano). Itincreases egoism.Questioner: So is there no such thing as the chakras? (Achakra is believed to be a center of activity within the body thatreceives, assimilates and expresses life force energy.)Dadashri: There is. All those chakras are electricalinstallations and by focusing on them, concentration (ekagrata)arises, the mind improves, and one becomes steady; neverthelessit also increases the ego. Real Gnan is the only thing that doesnot require a “counterweight”. All other things require a“counterweight”. Whatever you take, you have to give somethingin return. Therefore, when you do concentration (ekagrata) orother such things, the ego will increase and you will incur a loss.This exact path of Gnan is the only one with a ‘safe-side’, thatwill not give rise to anything else.You should think about the benefits gained from suchmeditation. See if your conflicts (clash) have decreased. If theyhave, then you have attained relative religion, and if they arecompletely destroyed, then You have attained the real religion.What causes conflicts? It is ignorance of the Self. Whateverrelative religions there are in this world, they all keep you in theignorance of the Self.There are two kinds of dhyan that occur naturally:artadhyan (adverse internal meditation that hurts the self) andraudradhyan (adverse internal meditation that hurts the self andothers); whereas dharmadhyan (virtuous meditation) andshukladhyan (constant awareness as the Self) are consideredpurusharth (true independent effort). Atmadhyan (the meditationas the Self) is itself shukladhyan. Dhyan of “I am pure Soul(Shuddhatma)” is shukladhyan.Aptavani-41314Aptavani-4to have awareness. A person, who is awakened to the Self,holds the realm of the Self in his hands. Only the one who hasabsolute awareness can awaken you to the awareness.Questioner: What is it when one awakens the kundalini(corporeal energy; yogic power)?Dadashri: It is mechanical awareness. It has no connectionwith the awareness of the Self. You cannot say that a person hasawareness of the Self, just because his kundalini has beenawakened, can you? That is one kind of intoxication of the ego(maadakata). With that, a person is able to maintainconcentration (ekagrata), and experience calmness within. Onewill need exact awareness of the Self (Gnan jagruti).Questioner: Everyone who does meditation says that itis very beneficial. What is it?Dadashri: Meditation is just intoxication of the ego(maadakata); a person feels a sense of peace with it. A persongets respite from his misery through meditation. Do youexperience the awareness of Shuddhatma (pure Soul) since youattained the Gnan?Questioner: Dada, that awareness is constantly present.Dadashri: That itself is the meditation (dhyan). Whatother dhyan does a person need to do? Meditation (dhyan)through pinching one’s nose is not considered meditation.Questioner: When we do your niddidhyasan (innervisualization) while at home, is that considered direct (pratyaksh)or indirect (paroksh)?Dadashri: That is direct (pratyaksh). As long as I ampresent, this photograph of mine is considered pratyaksh. Ifdhyan of “I am a pure Soul (Shuddhatma)” does not remain ina person’s consciousness, but only Dada does, then it is thesame thing because the Gnani Purush is your Atma itself.Questioner: Does meditation take one to the state ofshunyata (state of no mind/mindless state, no vibrations)?Dadashri: No. It increases vibrations (spandano). Itincreases egoism.Questioner: So is there no such thing as the chakras? (Achakra is believed to be a center of activity within the body thatreceives, assimilates and expresses life force energy.)Dadashri: There is. All those chakras are electricalinstallations and by focusing on them, concentration (ekagrata)arises, the mind improves, and one becomes steady; neverthelessit also increases the ego. Real Gnan is the only thing that doesnot require a “counterweight”. All other things require a“counterweight”. Whatever you take, you have to give somethingin return. Therefore, when you do concentration (ekagrata) orother such things, the ego will increase and you will incur a loss.This exact path of Gnan is the only one with a ‘safe-side’, thatwill not give rise to anything else.You should think about the benefits gained from suchmeditation. See if your conflicts (clash) have decreased. If theyhave, then you have attained relative religion, and if they arecompletely destroyed, then You have attained the real religion.What causes conflicts? It is ignorance of the Self. Whateverrelative religions there are in this world, they all keep you in theignorance of the Self.There are two kinds of dhyan that occur naturally:artadhyan (adverse internal meditation that hurts the self) andraudradhyan (adverse internal meditation that hurts the self andothers); whereas dharmadhyan (virtuous meditation) andshukladhyan (constant awareness as the Self) are consideredpurusharth (true independent effort). Atmadhyan (the meditationas the Self) is itself shukladhyan. Dhyan of “I am pure Soul(Shuddhatma)” is shukladhyan.Aptavani-41516Aptavani-4Awareness Only Through the Worship of theOne with AwarenessQuestioner: You make us recite the Trimantra, singarati (The ritual of waving lamps in front of an idol or a deitywhile singing a hymn), etc., what are they? What is the need forthem?Dadashri: Whatever I make you recite; I make yourecite the names of those who are absolutely aware of the Self.I am teaching you the worship of those who have absoluteawareness. Your awareness will increase if you remember thosewho have this awareness. These obeisances (Namaskar Vidhi;The vidhi of salutations) are addressed to those who haveattained awareness and to those who at present have thisawareness. These obeisances pay a greater importance to thosewho currently prevail in awareness, than to those who are nolonger here. These obeisances please all who have attained theawareness. It shows humility and love towards them. It isscientific. If you do whatever others are doing here, it pleasesthe ‘Gnani Purush’. It will ruin everything if you try to be‘over-wise’ or too smart. Our world (Bharat Kshetra – planetEarth) is just one world, but the ‘Gnani Purush’ has aconnection with another world like ours (Mahavideh Kshetra –Mahavideh is the name of a location in this universe wherecurrently there are twenty Tirthankars, deeming it the mostsacred Kshetra; a special world from where souls can attain finalmoksha through the darshan of existing Tirthankars). ‘We’(Gnani Purush) make a connection for you with those worldswhere presently there live great beings with absolute awareness;‘we’ make a connection with the ones who have fractionally agreater awareness than me. You are introduced to Him throughsuch connection.Avoid BhaavnindraThat is why the Gnani Purush tells us that the entireworld is in bhaavnindra. A person conducts business and goesabout his daily routine, and his preoccupation with makingmoney. He has lost his ‘sleep’ (he has awareness) when it comesto making money, however for the rest of it, he is inbhaavnindra (he has no awareness of the Self). That is whyone has not attained even an iota of religion. True religion willnot allow bhaavnindra to occur, even for a moment; not evenin one’s sleep. The world is such that one has all kinds of bhaav(inner intent) that will arise within; however, in all that,bhaavnindra must not arise. Dehanindra (physical sleep) ispardonable; sleep is acceptable.Questioner: Bhaavnindra does arise, Dada.Dadashri: How can that be acceptable? You do not fallasleep when a train is approaching. The train will bring a deathof one lifetime; whereas bhaavnindra will bring the death ofinfinite lifetimes. This world is likely to bring about all kinds ofpeculiar intents, but You have to understand what is Yours in allthat. If you are in bhaavnindra, then this world will latch on toyou. Whenever bhaavnindra occurs, do pratikraman there.True Samadhi Through Awakened AwarenessEven writing the most profound religious sentences isbhaavnindra. Some experience calmness of the body (dehasamadhi), but then they will remain stuck in the layers of themind. However, true samadhi (perfect equanimity) is one wherethere is awareness of every kind; there is awareness ofeverything happening through the mind, body and speech.Questioner: Where is the bliss in the samadhi of themind?Dadashri: That is mental quiescence. However, truesamadhi is one with complete awareness. An absolutely awareperson’s conduct is of the highest quality in the world. As one’sjagruti (awakened awareness of the Self) increases, oneAptavani-41516Aptavani-4Awareness Only Through the Worship of theOne with AwarenessQuestioner: You make us recite the Trimantra, singarati (The ritual of waving lamps in front of an idol or a deitywhile singing a hymn), etc., what are they? What is the need forthem?Dadashri: Whatever I make you recite; I make yourecite the names of those who are absolutely aware of the Self.I am teaching you the worship of those who have absoluteawareness. Your awareness will increase if you remember thosewho have this awareness. These obeisances (Namaskar Vidhi;The vidhi of salutations) are addressed to those who haveattained awareness and to those who at present have thisawareness. These obeisances pay a greater importance to thosewho currently prevail in awareness, than to those who are nolonger here. These obeisances please all who have attained theawareness. It shows humility and love towards them. It isscientific. If you do whatever others are doing here, it pleasesthe ‘Gnani Purush’. It will ruin everything if you try to be‘over-wise’ or too smart. Our world (Bharat Kshetra – planetEarth) is just one world, but the ‘Gnani Purush’ has aconnection with another world like ours (Mahavideh Kshetra –Mahavideh is the name of a location in this universe wherecurrently there are twenty Tirthankars, deeming it the mostsacred Kshetra; a special world from where souls can attain finalmoksha through the darshan of existing Tirthankars). ‘We’(Gnani Purush) make a connection for you with those worldswhere presently there live great beings with absolute awareness;‘we’ make a connection with the ones who have fractionally agreater awareness than me. You are introduced to Him throughsuch connection.Avoid BhaavnindraThat is why the Gnani Purush tells us that the entireworld is in bhaavnindra. A person conducts business and goesabout his daily routine, and his preoccupation with makingmoney. He has lost his ‘sleep’ (he has awareness) when it comesto making money, however for the rest of it, he is inbhaavnindra (he has no awareness of the Self). That is whyone has not attained even an iota of religion. True religion willnot allow bhaavnindra to occur, even for a moment; not evenin one’s sleep. The world is such that one has all kinds of bhaav(inner intent) that will arise within; however, in all that,bhaavnindra must not arise. Dehanindra (physical sleep) ispardonable; sleep is acceptable.Questioner: Bhaavnindra does arise, Dada.Dadashri: How can that be acceptable? You do not fallasleep when a train is approaching. The train will bring a deathof one lifetime; whereas bhaavnindra will bring the death ofinfinite lifetimes. This world is likely to bring about all kinds ofpeculiar intents, but You have to understand what is Yours in allthat. If you are in bhaavnindra, then this world will latch on toyou. Whenever bhaavnindra occurs, do pratikraman there.True Samadhi Through Awakened AwarenessEven writing the most profound religious sentences isbhaavnindra. Some experience calmness of the body (dehasamadhi), but then they will remain stuck in the layers of themind. However, true samadhi (perfect equanimity) is one wherethere is awareness of every kind; there is awareness ofeverything happening through the mind, body and speech.Questioner: Where is the bliss in the samadhi of themind?Dadashri: That is mental quiescence. However, truesamadhi is one with complete awareness. An absolutely awareperson’s conduct is of the highest quality in the world. As one’sjagruti (awakened awareness of the Self) increases, oneAptavani-41718Aptavani-4becomes oblivious to the world. Still, such a person willaccomplish great work in the world. The greater the awareness,the greater will be your experience of bliss. The greater yourlevel of awareness, the greater your experience of liberation(moksha). Awakened awareness (jagruti) itself is moksha.This is the place where you can attain awareness of the Self. Iawaken you here.Just as a heartbroken person sinks into some deepercorner of his mind, a person with samadhi (mental samadhi)sinks deep into some corner of his mind and finds happinessthere. What is real samadhi? It is one where a person hascomplete external, as well as internal awareness. He is awareeverywhere. Real samadhi will not leave him even while he iseating, drinking or sitting around. If the samadhi remainsconstantly, even in situations of mental (aadhi), physical(vyadhi) or external (upadhi) problems, then it is real samadhi.That is called natural and spontaneous samadhi (sahaj samadhi);it is the blissful state of the Self (nirvikalp samadhi). Knowing ‘Who Am I’ Blossoms the Awarenessof the SelfQuestioner: Ordinarily, what is considered awareness?Dadashri: The whole day passes by in which one gets toeat and drink, according to his karmic account. Because of lackof awareness, he remains entangled in one thing or another. Whatyou understand as awareness, is when one is involved in anyworldly subject. That is called “awareness of a subject.” Peoplein the world have awareness only in sexuality and money matters;whereas exact awareness is everywhere; it is all encompassing.Every activity of the world is for attaining ekagrata(concentration through unity in mind, speech and body resultingin transient stillness). Any activity that gives rise to restlessness(vyagra), means that a wrong application has been undertaken.Japas (chants) and tapas (penance), etc., are for one’sconcentration (ekagrata). Those who cannot maintain ekagratashould do these, or do something similar. Bhaavnindra becomeslighter as one’s concentration (ekagrata) increases. Somepeople have thin bhaavnindra, while others have heavybhaavnindra. In the latter, even if you were to throw waterover the person’s face and shake him, he will not “awaken”; thisis the kind of thick and heavy bhaavnindra people are in. When‘we’ give the knowledge of the Self, one’s “eyes” open just alittle (partial awareness). That is when he “sees” that ‘I amseparate from all this.’ Then as he spends more time with ‘us’his “eyes” continue to open more (increasing awareness), andeventually he will attain absolute awareness. Therefore, one willhave to know the Self (Atma; the Soul). Without knowing theSelf, no one will attain moksha.Non-Doership Is Where Absolute Awareness LiesQuestioner: When can one say that he has attained theSelf? Is it when his belief of doership goes away?Dadashri: When the awareness of “I am doing,” isdestroyed, that is when the Self is known. Experience of the Self(Atmanubhav) shows the mistakes of the self all day long. Doyou not have the awareness, “I run this worldly life”?Questioner: That is happening by itself.Dadashri: When something good happens and someonegives compliments like, “Look, how well he did this,” one willtake credit and say “I did it,” and when something goes wrong,one will say, “The unfolding karma has overwhelmed me.” Thatis what the whole world says. The sense of ‘doership’ will nevergo away; you will become free from everything except yoursense of ‘doership’. Until a person’s ‘doership’ goes away, heis called egotistic, and ego means an illusion. Anyone in suchcomplete illusion is not allowed over “there” (moksha).Aptavani-41718Aptavani-4becomes oblivious to the world. Still, such a person willaccomplish great work in the world. The greater the awareness,the greater will be your experience of bliss. The greater yourlevel of awareness, the greater your experience of liberation(moksha). Awakened awareness (jagruti) itself is moksha.This is the place where you can attain awareness of the Self. Iawaken you here.Just as a heartbroken person sinks into some deepercorner of his mind, a person with samadhi (mental samadhi)sinks deep into some corner of his mind and finds happinessthere. What is real samadhi? It is one where a person hascomplete external, as well as internal awareness. He is awareeverywhere. Real samadhi will not leave him even while he iseating, drinking or sitting around. If the samadhi remainsconstantly, even in situations of mental (aadhi), physical(vyadhi) or external (upadhi) problems, then it is real samadhi.That is called natural and spontaneous samadhi (sahaj samadhi);it is the blissful state of the Self (nirvikalp samadhi). Knowing ‘Who Am I’ Blossoms the Awarenessof the SelfQuestioner: Ordinarily, what is considered awareness?Dadashri: The whole day passes by in which one gets toeat and drink, according to his karmic account. Because of lackof awareness, he remains entangled in one thing or another. Whatyou understand as awareness, is when one is involved in anyworldly subject. That is called “awareness of a subject.” Peoplein the world have awareness only in sexuality and money matters;whereas exact awareness is everywhere; it is all encompassing.Every activity of the world is for attaining ekagrata(concentration through unity in mind, speech and body resultingin transient stillness). Any activity that gives rise to restlessness(vyagra), means that a wrong application has been undertaken.Japas (chants) and tapas (penance), etc., are for one’sconcentration (ekagrata). Those who cannot maintain ekagratashould do these, or do something similar. Bhaavnindra becomeslighter as one’s concentration (ekagrata) increases. Somepeople have thin bhaavnindra, while others have heavybhaavnindra. In the latter, even if you were to throw waterover the person’s face and shake him, he will not “awaken”; thisis the kind of thick and heavy bhaavnindra people are in. When‘we’ give the knowledge of the Self, one’s “eyes” open just alittle (partial awareness). That is when he “sees” that ‘I amseparate from all this.’ Then as he spends more time with ‘us’his “eyes” continue to open more (increasing awareness), andeventually he will attain absolute awareness. Therefore, one willhave to know the Self (Atma; the Soul). Without knowing theSelf, no one will attain moksha.Non-Doership Is Where Absolute Awareness LiesQuestioner: When can one say that he has attained theSelf? Is it when his belief of doership goes away?Dadashri: When the awareness of “I am doing,” isdestroyed, that is when the Self is known. Experience of the Self(Atmanubhav) shows the mistakes of the self all day long. Doyou not have the awareness, “I run this worldly life”?Questioner: That is happening by itself.Dadashri: When something good happens and someonegives compliments like, “Look, how well he did this,” one willtake credit and say “I did it,” and when something goes wrong,one will say, “The unfolding karma has overwhelmed me.” Thatis what the whole world says. The sense of ‘doership’ will nevergo away; you will become free from everything except yoursense of ‘doership’. Until a person’s ‘doership’ goes away, heis called egotistic, and ego means an illusion. Anyone in suchcomplete illusion is not allowed over “there” (moksha).Aptavani-41920Aptavani-4Should the awareness of ‘doership’ not be destroyed?One may say, “I am a pure Soul,” but nothing is gained by that.It is only when one’s awareness of ‘doership’ is destroyed andwhen one attains the awareness of who the real ‘doer’ is, thatone can go forward. How can he otherwise? As long as‘doership’ exists, there can be no spiritual (adhyatmik) awareness.Nobody will allow you to enter the gates of moksha until youare free from ‘doership’.The illusion of ‘I am Chandubhai’ and the awareness of‘doership’ should be destroyed. Thereafter, the ‘doership’remains “dramatic” (acted out as in a play). What is a ‘dramatic’‘doership’? One will say, “I did that,” just as the character thatplays the role of King Bhartruhari in a drama says, “I am aKing.” But while he is acting out his role, all along he does notforget that he is really Laxmichand, and that he has to go homelater on and eat his dinner. Similarly, You do not forget that Youare pure Soul (Shuddhatma). And when you say, “I did this,”it is considered being “dramatic” (staged as in a play). Theawareness of ‘doership’ should be destroyed. People perpetuallyrecite that they are pure Soul, do they not? As it is so writtenin the scriptures; nevertheless, even if one were to sing aboutbeing a pure Soul all day long, one will not accomplish anything.Besides, people have sang like this throughout their infinite pastlifetimes.What Is Upayog? What Is Jagruti?Questioner: Please explain upayog and awakenedawareness (jagruti).Dadashri: To focus Your awakened awareness on aparticular place is considered upayog. To not let the awarenessslip away from what has been decided, into something else likeprofit and loss, and to focus the awareness in one place, iscalled upayog. Wherever the awareness remains, is upayog,but it can be upayog of the good or of the bad (shubhashubhaupayog). Shuddha (pure) upayog is that which is focusedsolely towards the pure Soul. When Your upayog remains in theAgnas of the Gnani Purush; when you walk around “seeing”the relative and the real, you should know that the final state hasarrived. But people go around poring over things, “Oh look!The Steel Trading Co.,” or some other company or, “Oh lookat this,” etc. This type of upayog is called ashubha (inauspicious)upayog. Upayog towards religion is good, and pure (shuddha)upayog is a completely different matter!Awakened Awareness Through Akram VignanWorldly awareness is considered paudgalik (of the non-Self) awareness. A man who has worldly awareness is veryintelligent; he is aware all day. Even if that awareness does notslack off, it is still considered worldly awareness, the fruit ofwhich will be a worldly life. And the fruit of “this” awareness (ofthe Self) will be kevalgnan. Do not become seduced byobserving the actions of this worldly life. All the actions of theworldly life will be spent only here in the world. They will yieldready fruit “cash” here, in this very life. That is why ‘we’ havenot made anyone renounce (tyaag) anything. This science ofAkram has made the discovery about ‘What this world is allabout. And what makes the world run’. This discovery of ‘our’from countless past lives, ‘we’ are disclosing to you here today.Besides, have you ever heard of anyone attaining moksha withinjust one hour? Something that cannot be attained even in millionsof years, ‘we’ are helping you attain that awareness of the Selfwithin an hour.This science is such that the whole world will come toaccept it: ‘What is this world? What is it not? What gives thekarmic fruit here in this life? And what gives the fruit there (inmoksha, the realm of the Self)? What part of the body complexhas chetan (the Self) and what part of it is achetan (void of theSelf). Who runs the world?’ These are all ‘our’ discoveries.Aptavani-41920Aptavani-4Should the awareness of ‘doership’ not be destroyed?One may say, “I am a pure Soul,” but nothing is gained by that.It is only when one’s awareness of ‘doership’ is destroyed andwhen one attains the awareness of who the real ‘doer’ is, thatone can go forward. How can he otherwise? As long as‘doership’ exists, there can be no spiritual (adhyatmik) awareness.Nobody will allow you to enter the gates of moksha until youare free from ‘doership’.The illusion of ‘I am Chandubhai’ and the awareness of‘doership’ should be destroyed. Thereafter, the ‘doership’remains “dramatic” (acted out as in a play). What is a ‘dramatic’‘doership’? One will say, “I did that,” just as the character thatplays the role of King Bhartruhari in a drama says, “I am aKing.” But while he is acting out his role, all along he does notforget that he is really Laxmichand, and that he has to go homelater on and eat his dinner. Similarly, You do not forget that Youare pure Soul (Shuddhatma). And when you say, “I did this,”it is considered being “dramatic” (staged as in a play). Theawareness of ‘doership’ should be destroyed. People perpetuallyrecite that they are pure Soul, do they not? As it is so writtenin the scriptures; nevertheless, even if one were to sing aboutbeing a pure Soul all day long, one will not accomplish anything.Besides, people have sang like this throughout their infinite pastlifetimes.What Is Upayog? What Is Jagruti?Questioner: Please explain upayog and awakenedawareness (jagruti).Dadashri: To focus Your awakened awareness on aparticular place is considered upayog. To not let the awarenessslip away from what has been decided, into something else likeprofit and loss, and to focus the awareness in one place, iscalled upayog. Wherever the awareness remains, is upayog,but it can be upayog of the good or of the bad (shubhashubhaupayog). Shuddha (pure) upayog is that which is focusedsolely towards the pure Soul. When Your upayog remains in theAgnas of the Gnani Purush; when you walk around “seeing”the relative and the real, you should know that the final state hasarrived. But people go around poring over things, “Oh look!The Steel Trading Co.,” or some other company or, “Oh lookat this,” etc. This type of upayog is called ashubha (inauspicious)upayog. Upayog towards religion is good, and pure (shuddha)upayog is a completely different matter!Awakened Awareness Through Akram VignanWorldly awareness is considered paudgalik (of the non-Self) awareness. A man who has worldly awareness is veryintelligent; he is aware all day. Even if that awareness does notslack off, it is still considered worldly awareness, the fruit ofwhich will be a worldly life. And the fruit of “this” awareness (ofthe Self) will be kevalgnan. Do not become seduced byobserving the actions of this worldly life. All the actions of theworldly life will be spent only here in the world. They will yieldready fruit “cash” here, in this very life. That is why ‘we’ havenot made anyone renounce (tyaag) anything. This science ofAkram has made the discovery about ‘What this world is allabout. And what makes the world run’. This discovery of ‘our’from countless past lives, ‘we’ are disclosing to you here today.Besides, have you ever heard of anyone attaining moksha withinjust one hour? Something that cannot be attained even in millionsof years, ‘we’ are helping you attain that awareness of the Selfwithin an hour.This science is such that the whole world will come toaccept it: ‘What is this world? What is it not? What gives thekarmic fruit here in this life? And what gives the fruit there (inmoksha, the realm of the Self)? What part of the body complexhas chetan (the Self) and what part of it is achetan (void of theSelf). Who runs the world?’ These are all ‘our’ discoveries.Aptavani-42122 Aptavani-4Insistence Is BhaavnindraAs long as a man has insistence (aagraha) of any kind,he is clearly in bhaavnindra. Insistence is wrong in the path ofmoksha. Awareness begins from the moment one understandsthis. At present, it is not just insistence that is prevalent inpeople, but they have also become pertinacious about theiropinion (matagrahi) and they insist that they are right evenwhen they are not (duragrahi—obstinate).Insistence about one’s status, sex, race and color insociety is called kadagraha (entrenched in one’s own viewpoint).Such kadagraha is not as harmful as the tenacious opinions,especially in religious matters (matagraha) like: “I am Jain…Iam Vaishnav (Lord Krishna’s follower)…I am Sthanakvasi …Iam Deravasi, I am Digambar”. (Jain denominations) It is ladenwith great liability.Awareness Is to Know What Is Beneficial andHarmful to YouThe path of the Vitarag says that if you tell anyone, ‘Youare wrong’, then you yourself are wrong. The other person’svision differs from yours, and that is why he sees it that way.How can he be at fault there? If a blind man bumps into a wall,could you scold him by saying, “Hey, can you not see where youare going?” For goodness sake! He bumped into the wallbecause he could not see! This is how the world ‘sleeps withopen eyes’. All the activities that take place are done in a stateof sleep (in ignorance). It is all happening in a ‘dream’ and theybelieve that they are doing all those things. But these activities inthe ‘dream’ will not help you. Your activities will have to comefrom the one who is awake (jagrut). People are asleep withtheir eyes open.Who is the one with the awareness (jagrut)? It is he whohas the awareness of what is beneficial and what is harmful toself. The whole world believes that they have awareness of whatis beneficial and what is harmful for them, but that is not calledthe true awareness. Those who are caught up, day and night, insearching for ways to make money, regardless of the means, aredoing so according to societal influence (loksangnya; Knowledgearising from association with the worldly people). They arecompletely preoccupied, day and night, with making money.Look, they have started businesses of working ‘under the table.’How can there be black-marketing in India? Any action carriedout in secrecy, will take one to a lower life-form. Anyone bornin India has already brought with him some worldly awareness.When we combine this worldly awareness with the current timecycle of Kaliyug (current era of the time cycle characterized bylack of unity in mind, speech and conduct), people cannotbecome free from pain and misery. If this were Satyug (era ofunity in mind, speech and acts) then people would become freefrom suffering.Young children have awareness only related with theirtoys. Similarly, people today have an awareness of the incometax and sales tax. Throughout their day they continue to have theawareness for money. Is this becoming for an Indian? If anIndian man were to attain complete awareness, he could makethe entire world dance on his finger. But unfortunately, theycovet money and sex. They covet that which is not rightfullytheirs. But they do not realize that when they die, Natureconfiscates the bank balances to their names. Confiscation byNature, means that you are not even entitled to any ‘refund’.The government would at least give you some refund, if it wereto confiscate your property. But this is Nature’s confiscation, soshould you not do something about it?You may not understand anything about the Self, but atleast do something for the next life (par-lok). Make sure thatyou do not do anything that will ruin the next life (par-lok). Thecurrent life is already ruined. There is nothing of any worth in it.Aptavani-42122 Aptavani-4Insistence Is BhaavnindraAs long as a man has insistence (aagraha) of any kind,he is clearly in bhaavnindra. Insistence is wrong in the path ofmoksha. Awareness begins from the moment one understandsthis. At present, it is not just insistence that is prevalent inpeople, but they have also become pertinacious about theiropinion (matagrahi) and they insist that they are right evenwhen they are not (duragrahi—obstinate).Insistence about one’s status, sex, race and color insociety is called kadagraha (entrenched in one’s own viewpoint).Such kadagraha is not as harmful as the tenacious opinions,especially in religious matters (matagraha) like: “I am Jain…Iam Vaishnav (Lord Krishna’s follower)…I am Sthanakvasi …Iam Deravasi, I am Digambar”. (Jain denominations) It is ladenwith great liability.Awareness Is to Know What Is Beneficial andHarmful to YouThe path of the Vitarag says that if you tell anyone, ‘Youare wrong’, then you yourself are wrong. The other person’svision differs from yours, and that is why he sees it that way.How can he be at fault there? If a blind man bumps into a wall,could you scold him by saying, “Hey, can you not see where youare going?” For goodness sake! He bumped into the wallbecause he could not see! This is how the world ‘sleeps withopen eyes’. All the activities that take place are done in a stateof sleep (in ignorance). It is all happening in a ‘dream’ and theybelieve that they are doing all those things. But these activities inthe ‘dream’ will not help you. Your activities will have to comefrom the one who is awake (jagrut). People are asleep withtheir eyes open.Who is the one with the awareness (jagrut)? It is he whohas the awareness of what is beneficial and what is harmful toself. The whole world believes that they have awareness of whatis beneficial and what is harmful for them, but that is not calledthe true awareness. Those who are caught up, day and night, insearching for ways to make money, regardless of the means, aredoing so according to societal influence (loksangnya; Knowledgearising from association with the worldly people). They arecompletely preoccupied, day and night, with making money.Look, they have started businesses of working ‘under the table.’How can there be black-marketing in India? Any action carriedout in secrecy, will take one to a lower life-form. Anyone bornin India has already brought with him some worldly awareness.When we combine this worldly awareness with the current timecycle of Kaliyug (current era of the time cycle characterized bylack of unity in mind, speech and conduct), people cannotbecome free from pain and misery. If this were Satyug (era ofunity in mind, speech and acts) then people would become freefrom suffering.Young children have awareness only related with theirtoys. Similarly, people today have an awareness of the incometax and sales tax. Throughout their day they continue to have theawareness for money. Is this becoming for an Indian? If anIndian man were to attain complete awareness, he could makethe entire world dance on his finger. But unfortunately, theycovet money and sex. They covet that which is not rightfullytheirs. But they do not realize that when they die, Natureconfiscates the bank balances to their names. Confiscation byNature, means that you are not even entitled to any ‘refund’.The government would at least give you some refund, if it wereto confiscate your property. But this is Nature’s confiscation, soshould you not do something about it?You may not understand anything about the Self, but atleast do something for the next life (par-lok). Make sure thatyou do not do anything that will ruin the next life (par-lok). Thecurrent life is already ruined. There is nothing of any worth in it.Aptavani-42324Aptavani-4If one were to even think about what is beneficial and what isnot, in what he has to take with him into his next life, it wouldbe more than enough.Where the Gnani Is Awake, the World Is AsleepQuestioner: Lord Krishna has said, ‘Where the world isawake; I sleep, and I am awake; where the world ‘sleeps’.’ Ido not understand that statement. Please explain that.Dadashri: The world is awake in worldly matters; that iswhere Krishna (the Self) ‘sleeps’, and where the world is‘asleep’ (in the matters of the Self), Krishna is awake.Eventually, one will have to come into this spiritual awareness(adhyatmik jagruti). Worldly awareness is the awarenessthrough ego (ahamkari jagruti): awareness without ego(nirahamkari jagruti) is moksha.Restlessness Is the Cause of MiseryHumans have two kinds of awareness: one is theawareness of stillness (sthirata), and the other is the awarenessof restlessness (chanchalata). Man has sunk deep into theawareness of restlessness, but he has not attained even onepercent of the awareness of stillness. Some have ten percent,some have fifteen percent, some have twenty percent, and somehave thirty percent awareness of restlessness. Awareness ofrestlessness leads one to an animal life-form; whereas theawareness of stillness will take one to moksha.Awareness that increases stillness, is real awareness. InAmerica, people have become very restless; they are suffocatingin terrible misery. Their pain (dukh) will not go away, eventhrough lamentation or suicide. Such are the pains one is givingrise to. They are caught in their own web. Before long, peoplewill start to complain. At the moment they are doing a lot ofegoism. As the restlessness increases, one’s entrapment increases.What can they do when the restlessness occurs? If there is nofacility for an emergency telephone on the highway at the sixty-seventh mile mark, they will complain that they want a phoneinstalled there. If you ask why, they will tell you that it is becausethere is already a phone on the first and the third furlong, butthere is none on the second furlong. Look how much agitationthey have. That is madness. There is so much to eat and drinkand yet the whole world is sunk in madness. People are innothing but misery and pain. They are permanently miserable!There is no happiness, not even for a moment. Until the energyof stillness arises within, how can a person be happy (sukh)?Questioner: Is it possible to find stillness between twothoughts?Dadashri: Such stillness is useless. It is the stillness of the“packing” (body; non-Self complex), which is of no use. That isnot considered stillness. Stillness should be unshakable. Stillnessshould not leave even if there is a looming threat over your headof an atom bomb about to fall. That is true stillness. People’sminds are restless (chanchal). Whereas my mind moves onsteadily. It is like where you have to shake hands with twothousand people. You shake hands with one person at a timeand you keep moving along as you shake hands with them. Thatis how it is for me; the thoughts of the mind ‘shake hands’ andmove on. No single thought will remain in one place, not evenfor a second. And for you, the thoughts get stuck for fifteenminutes to half an hour at a time. Do they do that or not?Questioner: Yes, they do.Dadashri: I too, have a mind. I would be considered‘absent minded’ if I did not. My mind is very solid and steady(prakhar). It will not be affected even if there is a threat of anatom bomb in the next hour. There is not the slightestrestlessness. It moves on at a steady pace. And your mind is likea fly hovering around a lump of sugar. It hovers aroundsomething it sees.Aptavani-42324Aptavani-4If one were to even think about what is beneficial and what isnot, in what he has to take with him into his next life, it wouldbe more than enough.Where the Gnani Is Awake, the World Is AsleepQuestioner: Lord Krishna has said, ‘Where the world isawake; I sleep, and I am awake; where the world ‘sleeps’.’ Ido not understand that statement. Please explain that.Dadashri: The world is awake in worldly matters; that iswhere Krishna (the Self) ‘sleeps’, and where the world is‘asleep’ (in the matters of the Self), Krishna is awake.Eventually, one will have to come into this spiritual awareness(adhyatmik jagruti). Worldly awareness is the awarenessthrough ego (ahamkari jagruti): awareness without ego(nirahamkari jagruti) is moksha.Restlessness Is the Cause of MiseryHumans have two kinds of awareness: one is theawareness of stillness (sthirata), and the other is the awarenessof restlessness (chanchalata). Man has sunk deep into theawareness of restlessness, but he has not attained even onepercent of the awareness of stillness. Some have ten percent,some have fifteen percent, some have twenty percent, and somehave thirty percent awareness of restlessness. Awareness ofrestlessness leads one to an animal life-form; whereas theawareness of stillness will take one to moksha.Awareness that increases stillness, is real awareness. InAmerica, people have become very restless; they are suffocatingin terrible misery. Their pain (dukh) will not go away, eventhrough lamentation or suicide. Such are the pains one is givingrise to. They are caught in their own web. Before long, peoplewill start to complain. At the moment they are doing a lot ofegoism. As the restlessness increases, one’s entrapment increases.What can they do when the restlessness occurs? If there is nofacility for an emergency telephone on the highway at the sixty-seventh mile mark, they will complain that they want a phoneinstalled there. If you ask why, they will tell you that it is becausethere is already a phone on the first and the third furlong, butthere is none on the second furlong. Look how much agitationthey have. That is madness. There is so much to eat and drinkand yet the whole world is sunk in madness. People are innothing but misery and pain. They are permanently miserable!There is no happiness, not even for a moment. Until the energyof stillness arises within, how can a person be happy (sukh)?Questioner: Is it possible to find stillness between twothoughts?Dadashri: Such stillness is useless. It is the stillness of the“packing” (body; non-Self complex), which is of no use. That isnot considered stillness. Stillness should be unshakable. Stillnessshould not leave even if there is a looming threat over your headof an atom bomb about to fall. That is true stillness. People’sminds are restless (chanchal). Whereas my mind moves onsteadily. It is like where you have to shake hands with twothousand people. You shake hands with one person at a timeand you keep moving along as you shake hands with them. Thatis how it is for me; the thoughts of the mind ‘shake hands’ andmove on. No single thought will remain in one place, not evenfor a second. And for you, the thoughts get stuck for fifteenminutes to half an hour at a time. Do they do that or not?Questioner: Yes, they do.Dadashri: I too, have a mind. I would be considered‘absent minded’ if I did not. My mind is very solid and steady(prakhar). It will not be affected even if there is a threat of anatom bomb in the next hour. There is not the slightestrestlessness. It moves on at a steady pace. And your mind is likea fly hovering around a lump of sugar. It hovers aroundsomething it sees.Aptavani-42526Aptavani-4Questioner: How can we get rid of such restlessness(chanchalata)?Dadashri: After attaining Gnan, there is no need for Youto get rid of restlessness, is there? You (the Self) just have to keep‘seeing.’ I have given you this Gnan, so You have to keep ‘seeing’what the restlessness does. However, others (without Gnan)become involved with the mind. They dance along with theirminds. Hey! Why don’t You just keep ‘seeing’ it as it dances? Butno, you dance along with it. You join in with its dance when youhave a pleasant thought, and when you have a bad thought, youfight with it by saying, “Why did you come?” When you have abad thought, You will know that the mind is bad, and that is whythe thoughts are also bad. When bad thoughts arise, thendepression occurs. And when good thoughts arise, there iselevation. I am trying to prepare You in such a way, that no onein the world can depress you. On the contrary, the one whocomes to depress you, will himself go back feeling depressed.Questioner: Is this stillness like the state of dreamlesssleep (shushupti)?Dadashri: There is nothing like stillness. Do we not stopthe engine to cool it down when it gets hot? That is how itremains non-active during deep sleep. The mind gets heated allday and then it stops. Sleep cools down all the ‘machinery’.Questioner: Is the desire to attain Gnan consideredawareness of the Self?Dadashri: That is called the coming together ofcircumstances for the awareness of the Self. First, the desire toattain the knowledge of the Self arises; that is one circumstancein itself, then comes the encounter with the Gnani Purush. Yourwork can only be done when the circumstance (saiyog) to attainthe knowledge of the Self arises, however, it is all dependentupon ‘scientific circumstantial evidences’.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(2)Dhyan (Meditation)The Nature of DhyanQuestioner: Why is meditation (dhyan) not mentioned inJainism?Dadashri: All four dhyans do appear in the Jain religion.They occur on their own. Dhyan is not something one has to do.Questioner: What is dhyan?Dadashri: Dhyan simultaneously occurs while one isdoing worldly activities. But to do the dhyan, wouldn’t you haveto sit in one place?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: That is called concentration (ekagrata).Dhyan constantly takes place in everyone. What is dhyan? Ifsomeone says to you, “You do not have any sense,” you willexperience raudradhyan. It will happen naturally. If someonewere to push you around, it will come about.Questioner: How does this dhyan occur? What is itsstage?Dadashri: If someone were to say to you, “You haveruined everything,” its internal effect on you, the anger that itincites, is raudradhyan.Whenever the mind says, “What will happen to me?” thatis called artadhyan. When you hear about the rationing of sugarand the mind says, “The sugar is being rationed. We did not buyAptavani-42526Aptavani-4Questioner: How can we get rid of such restlessness(chanchalata)?Dadashri: After attaining Gnan, there is no need for Youto get rid of restlessness, is there? You (the Self) just have to keep‘seeing.’ I have given you this Gnan, so You have to keep ‘seeing’what the restlessness does. However, others (without Gnan)become involved with the mind. They dance along with theirminds. Hey! Why don’t You just keep ‘seeing’ it as it dances? Butno, you dance along with it. You join in with its dance when youhave a pleasant thought, and when you have a bad thought, youfight with it by saying, “Why did you come?” When you have abad thought, You will know that the mind is bad, and that is whythe thoughts are also bad. When bad thoughts arise, thendepression occurs. And when good thoughts arise, there iselevation. I am trying to prepare You in such a way, that no onein the world can depress you. On the contrary, the one whocomes to depress you, will himself go back feeling depressed.Questioner: Is this stillness like the state of dreamlesssleep (shushupti)?Dadashri: There is nothing like stillness. Do we not stopthe engine to cool it down when it gets hot? That is how itremains non-active during deep sleep. The mind gets heated allday and then it stops. Sleep cools down all the ‘machinery’.Questioner: Is the desire to attain Gnan consideredawareness of the Self?Dadashri: That is called the coming together ofcircumstances for the awareness of the Self. First, the desire toattain the knowledge of the Self arises; that is one circumstancein itself, then comes the encounter with the Gnani Purush. Yourwork can only be done when the circumstance (saiyog) to attainthe knowledge of the Self arises, however, it is all dependentupon ‘scientific circumstantial evidences’.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(2)Dhyan (Meditation)The Nature of DhyanQuestioner: Why is meditation (dhyan) not mentioned inJainism?Dadashri: All four dhyans do appear in the Jain religion.They occur on their own. Dhyan is not something one has to do.Questioner: What is dhyan?Dadashri: Dhyan simultaneously occurs while one isdoing worldly activities. But to do the dhyan, wouldn’t you haveto sit in one place?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: That is called concentration (ekagrata).Dhyan constantly takes place in everyone. What is dhyan? Ifsomeone says to you, “You do not have any sense,” you willexperience raudradhyan. It will happen naturally. If someonewere to push you around, it will come about.Questioner: How does this dhyan occur? What is itsstage?Dadashri: If someone were to say to you, “You haveruined everything,” its internal effect on you, the anger that itincites, is raudradhyan.Whenever the mind says, “What will happen to me?” thatis called artadhyan. When you hear about the rationing of sugarand the mind says, “The sugar is being rationed. We did not buyAptavani-42728Aptavani-4any, so now what are we going to do?” is all artadhyan.Artadhyan and raudradhyan are perpetually occurring everyday. People have failed to understand dharmadhyan.Shukladhyan is the fourth type of dhyan, which is the directcause of moksha.Questioner: What is it when people do dhyan for theirpeace of mind?Dadashri: What kind of dhyan do they do?Questioner: They meditate, don’t they?Dadashri: That leads to intoxication of the ego(maadakata); one does not gain much from it.Questioner: Then how is it beneficial?Dadashri: That which is beneficial, is the knowledge ofthe Self: when you know and experience the answer to, ‘Whoam I?’, knowing this will give you permanent peace. Nothing willaffect You, whether someone picks your pocket or doesanything to you.Questioner: Can dhyan be done without sitting still inone place?Dadashri: Dhyan occurs on its own while you arecarrying out your ordinary daily mundane activities. People haveartadhyan and raudradhyan day and night. Even the dhyanthat takes one to Devgati (life as a celestial being) and thedhyan that leads to moksha, can be performed while carryingout one’s daily activities.Dhyan: Connection between Dhyeya and DhyataDhyan – meditation.Dhyeya – the goal for which the meditation is being done.Dhyata – the one who “meditates” – can be relative or real.Questioner: What is the origin of dhyan?Dadashri: Dhyan is that first one determines one’s goal(dhyeya), so the connection with the goal is dhyan. Dhyanwill remain as long as that connection is maintained. If youdecide to go to Mumbai, when you buy a ticket, your dhyanfor Mumbai will remain naturally, while you are sitting in thetrain.In dhyan (meditation), the dhyata (one who meditates onthe goal) has to be determined, and the goal (dhyeya) has to bedecided. You are the dhyata, and that which has been decided;is the goal (dhyeya). Maintaining the connection between thetwo is called dhyan. When dhyeya and dhyata becomeabsorbed (tanmayakar) with each other, then it is called dhyan.You are evidently the dhyata so what do you have as your goal(dhyeya)?Questioner: The ‘concentration’ that I have to do, it hasto be done on the ‘Swa’ (the Self), right?Dadashri: Yes, you have to focus your concentration(meditate) only on the ‘Swa’ (the Self). But unless youunderstand what ‘Swa’ really is, how will you do it? Won’t youhave to understand what it is first? The ‘Swa’ is not found inbooks, neither has it been written in scripture. It may have beenwritten in word form, but the Self is not in the form of a word.So then how can you determine the Self as your goal?Questioner: Can’t we just use supposition to decide it?Dadashri: When you want to go to Ahmedabad, andthrough just supposition, you head South instead of North, howwill that work through supposition? Supposition should have itslimits. Supposition should stay within its boundary, and notoutside of it.Meditation (dhyan) can only occur when a personacknowledges the goal (dhyeya), and he himself becomes theAptavani-42728Aptavani-4any, so now what are we going to do?” is all artadhyan.Artadhyan and raudradhyan are perpetually occurring everyday. People have failed to understand dharmadhyan.Shukladhyan is the fourth type of dhyan, which is the directcause of moksha.Questioner: What is it when people do dhyan for theirpeace of mind?Dadashri: What kind of dhyan do they do?Questioner: They meditate, don’t they?Dadashri: That leads to intoxication of the ego(maadakata); one does not gain much from it.Questioner: Then how is it beneficial?Dadashri: That which is beneficial, is the knowledge ofthe Self: when you know and experience the answer to, ‘Whoam I?’, knowing this will give you permanent peace. Nothing willaffect You, whether someone picks your pocket or doesanything to you.Questioner: Can dhyan be done without sitting still inone place?Dadashri: Dhyan occurs on its own while you arecarrying out your ordinary daily mundane activities. People haveartadhyan and raudradhyan day and night. Even the dhyanthat takes one to Devgati (life as a celestial being) and thedhyan that leads to moksha, can be performed while carryingout one’s daily activities.Dhyan: Connection between Dhyeya and DhyataDhyan – meditation.Dhyeya – the goal for which the meditation is being done.Dhyata – the one who “meditates” – can be relative or real.Questioner: What is the origin of dhyan?Dadashri: Dhyan is that first one determines one’s goal(dhyeya), so the connection with the goal is dhyan. Dhyanwill remain as long as that connection is maintained. If youdecide to go to Mumbai, when you buy a ticket, your dhyanfor Mumbai will remain naturally, while you are sitting in thetrain.In dhyan (meditation), the dhyata (one who meditates onthe goal) has to be determined, and the goal (dhyeya) has to bedecided. You are the dhyata, and that which has been decided;is the goal (dhyeya). Maintaining the connection between thetwo is called dhyan. When dhyeya and dhyata becomeabsorbed (tanmayakar) with each other, then it is called dhyan.You are evidently the dhyata so what do you have as your goal(dhyeya)?Questioner: The ‘concentration’ that I have to do, it hasto be done on the ‘Swa’ (the Self), right?Dadashri: Yes, you have to focus your concentration(meditate) only on the ‘Swa’ (the Self). But unless youunderstand what ‘Swa’ really is, how will you do it? Won’t youhave to understand what it is first? The ‘Swa’ is not found inbooks, neither has it been written in scripture. It may have beenwritten in word form, but the Self is not in the form of a word.So then how can you determine the Self as your goal?Questioner: Can’t we just use supposition to decide it?Dadashri: When you want to go to Ahmedabad, andthrough just supposition, you head South instead of North, howwill that work through supposition? Supposition should have itslimits. Supposition should stay within its boundary, and notoutside of it.Meditation (dhyan) can only occur when a personacknowledges the goal (dhyeya), and he himself becomes theAptavani-42930Aptavani-4dhyata (one who meditates). You have to become the one whomeditates and knows the aim of your meditation.You become the dhyata as, ‘I am Chandubhai,’ do you not?‘Chandubhai’ is your name. How can you become a dhyata?Questioner: By the way of ‘I am Shuddhatma (I ampure Soul)’.Dadashri: Shuddhatma, but who is that? Have yourealized that?Questioner: No.Dadashri: Then it is all wrong if you say so withoutrealizing the Self. You have to realize the Self. You should at leasthave that pratiti (conviction). Even if you have not realized theSelf, that conviction (pratiti) must be there, and the pratitishould be such that it should never falter. From the moment youbecome aware that ‘I am Shuddhatma,’ that dhyan willautomatically remain; You do not have to do anything. Whereveryou have to do anything, it is all dependent upon circumstances.It will happen if the circumstances are right; otherwise it will not.And once You attain the awareness of being the pure Soul(Shuddhatma), the dhyan will arise on its own.If you have a diamond and you store it at a special place,and you are the only one who knows its whereabouts, then youare aware of where it is. So that is where your dhyan (focus;meditation) will be at. Your dhyan will be there, even if you aresitting at your in-law’s home. It is still there in the form of aconviction (pratiti), even when you forget about it. Otherwise,it is definitely there in your awareness (khyal), at the back ofyour mind. Awareness (khyal; laksha) is the “brother” ofdhyan.Ego – Not in Dhyan but in ActionsQuestioner: How should I do dhyan? I want to learnbecause I don’t do it right.Dadashri: Are you the one that does the dhyan or doessomeone else do it?Questioner: I do it.Dadashri: Does it ever happen, that you can’t do it?Questioner: Yes, it does.Dadashri: There is a reason for it. As long as you are‘Chandubhai,’ no work gets done correctly. How true is it, thatyou are ‘Chandubhai’?Questioner: A hundred percent.Dadashri: As long as you have this wrong belief of, ‘Iam ‘Chandubhai’, for that length of time the egoism of, “I didthis much, I did this,” will be there. Wherever you “do”something, it gives rise to the egoism of ‘doership’ there. Andas this egoism increases, it will drive the Lord (the Self) furtheraway. If you want to know (experience) the state of theabsolute Self (Parmatma), it will only happen if the egoismgoes away.Dhyan is something which no one knows how to do.Anything that has to be “done”, is done through ego andtherefore, it is not dhyan. It is ekagrata (concentration). Dhyanis where the ego is absent. It cannot be done through the ego.Dhyan is something that has to be understood, it is notsomething that has to be “done”. There is a great deal ofdifference between dhyan and ekagrata. You need ego forekagrata. Dhyan is untouched by the ego. If the ego increasesor decreases, does that not remain in your dhyan?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: To be aware of whether the ego increased ordecreased is called dhyan. Even in artadhyan and raudradhyan,the ego is not used.Aptavani-42930Aptavani-4dhyata (one who meditates). You have to become the one whomeditates and knows the aim of your meditation.You become the dhyata as, ‘I am Chandubhai,’ do you not?‘Chandubhai’ is your name. How can you become a dhyata?Questioner: By the way of ‘I am Shuddhatma (I ampure Soul)’.Dadashri: Shuddhatma, but who is that? Have yourealized that?Questioner: No.Dadashri: Then it is all wrong if you say so withoutrealizing the Self. You have to realize the Self. You should at leasthave that pratiti (conviction). Even if you have not realized theSelf, that conviction (pratiti) must be there, and the pratitishould be such that it should never falter. From the moment youbecome aware that ‘I am Shuddhatma,’ that dhyan willautomatically remain; You do not have to do anything. Whereveryou have to do anything, it is all dependent upon circumstances.It will happen if the circumstances are right; otherwise it will not.And once You attain the awareness of being the pure Soul(Shuddhatma), the dhyan will arise on its own.If you have a diamond and you store it at a special place,and you are the only one who knows its whereabouts, then youare aware of where it is. So that is where your dhyan (focus;meditation) will be at. Your dhyan will be there, even if you aresitting at your in-law’s home. It is still there in the form of aconviction (pratiti), even when you forget about it. Otherwise,it is definitely there in your awareness (khyal), at the back ofyour mind. Awareness (khyal; laksha) is the “brother” ofdhyan.Ego – Not in Dhyan but in ActionsQuestioner: How should I do dhyan? I want to learnbecause I don’t do it right.Dadashri: Are you the one that does the dhyan or doessomeone else do it?Questioner: I do it.Dadashri: Does it ever happen, that you can’t do it?Questioner: Yes, it does.Dadashri: There is a reason for it. As long as you are‘Chandubhai,’ no work gets done correctly. How true is it, thatyou are ‘Chandubhai’?Questioner: A hundred percent.Dadashri: As long as you have this wrong belief of, ‘Iam ‘Chandubhai’, for that length of time the egoism of, “I didthis much, I did this,” will be there. Wherever you “do”something, it gives rise to the egoism of ‘doership’ there. Andas this egoism increases, it will drive the Lord (the Self) furtheraway. If you want to know (experience) the state of theabsolute Self (Parmatma), it will only happen if the egoismgoes away.Dhyan is something which no one knows how to do.Anything that has to be “done”, is done through ego andtherefore, it is not dhyan. It is ekagrata (concentration). Dhyanis where the ego is absent. It cannot be done through the ego.Dhyan is something that has to be understood, it is notsomething that has to be “done”. There is a great deal ofdifference between dhyan and ekagrata. You need ego forekagrata. Dhyan is untouched by the ego. If the ego increasesor decreases, does that not remain in your dhyan?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: To be aware of whether the ego increased ordecreased is called dhyan. Even in artadhyan and raudradhyan,the ego is not used.Aptavani-43132Aptavani-4Questioner: There is ego in dharmadhyan (absence ofartadhyan or raudradhyan), is there not?Dadashri: There is no ego in that either. There is no egoin dhyan. But there is ego in kriya (action).Questioner: Is the ego not a nimit (instrumental evidence)in artadhyan and raudradhyan?Dadashri: Not just a nimit, but actions also belong tothe ego. Action is not dhyan. But the result that arises from theaction, is dhyan. And the dhyan resulting from that has no ego.When artadhyan occurs there is no, “I am doing artadhyan”in it, and that is why there is no ego in such a dhyan.When the ego is used in other places, (in mundanematters, away from the Self), it gives rise to dhyan.Questioner: There is no ego in dhyan, and there is no‘doership’ in it, so then how does it bind us?Dadashri: After artadhyan occurs, when one’s belief is:“I did artadhyan,” one then becomes the ‘doer’ there, andconsequently binds karma.Questioner: You said that dhyan arises when the goal(dhyeya) is decided and one becomes a dhyata. The ego is notneeded in that, is it?Dadashri: The ego may or may not be involved. If thedhyata (one who meditates is egoless), then shukladhyan(meditation as the Self) itself will arise. Otherwise, dharmadhyan,artadhyan or raudradhyan will occur.Questioner: The state of dhyata can be egotistic or non-egotistic, but there is no ego in the dhyan that occurs as aconsequence of it.Dadashri: Yes and there will be moksha when it resultsin shukladhyan.Questioner: Does the ego play a part in deciding thegoal (dhyeya)?Dadashri: It is the ego that decides the goal (dhyeya).Once you have the goal (dhyeya) of moksha, and a dhyata thatis egoless, then that is shukladhyan.Questioner: Is there a subtle presence of the ego in thedhyeya of dharmadhyan?Dadashri: Yes, there is. Dharmadhyan cannot occurwithout the ego’s presence.Questioner: Would you say that artadhyan,raudradhyan and dharmadhyan, are states of the pudgal(non-Self complex)?Dadashri: Yes, those are states of the pudgal, andshukladhyan is a state of the Self.Questioner: So could you say that shukladhyan is theresult of the Self?Dadashri: Yes.Questioner: Is it true that karmas that arise inshukladhyan will be good, and those that occur in dharmadhyanwill be slightly inferior?Dadashri: If one has shukladhyan, in the Kramic path,then there will not be any charging of karma. This is the Akrampath, and the karma here, have no ‘doership’. They occur in theform of ‘discharge’. You have attained this Gnan without evenhaving to discharge your karma first!Results of DhyanDhyan yields its fruit (consequences). What are the fruitsof raudradhyan? It gives rise to an evil disposition within aperson.Aptavani-43132Aptavani-4Questioner: There is ego in dharmadhyan (absence ofartadhyan or raudradhyan), is there not?Dadashri: There is no ego in that either. There is no egoin dhyan. But there is ego in kriya (action).Questioner: Is the ego not a nimit (instrumental evidence)in artadhyan and raudradhyan?Dadashri: Not just a nimit, but actions also belong tothe ego. Action is not dhyan. But the result that arises from theaction, is dhyan. And the dhyan resulting from that has no ego.When artadhyan occurs there is no, “I am doing artadhyan”in it, and that is why there is no ego in such a dhyan.When the ego is used in other places, (in mundanematters, away from the Self), it gives rise to dhyan.Questioner: There is no ego in dhyan, and there is no‘doership’ in it, so then how does it bind us?Dadashri: After artadhyan occurs, when one’s belief is:“I did artadhyan,” one then becomes the ‘doer’ there, andconsequently binds karma.Questioner: You said that dhyan arises when the goal(dhyeya) is decided and one becomes a dhyata. The ego is notneeded in that, is it?Dadashri: The ego may or may not be involved. If thedhyata (one who meditates is egoless), then shukladhyan(meditation as the Self) itself will arise. Otherwise, dharmadhyan,artadhyan or raudradhyan will occur.Questioner: The state of dhyata can be egotistic or non-egotistic, but there is no ego in the dhyan that occurs as aconsequence of it.Dadashri: Yes and there will be moksha when it resultsin shukladhyan.Questioner: Does the ego play a part in deciding thegoal (dhyeya)?Dadashri: It is the ego that decides the goal (dhyeya).Once you have the goal (dhyeya) of moksha, and a dhyata thatis egoless, then that is shukladhyan.Questioner: Is there a subtle presence of the ego in thedhyeya of dharmadhyan?Dadashri: Yes, there is. Dharmadhyan cannot occurwithout the ego’s presence.Questioner: Would you say that artadhyan,raudradhyan and dharmadhyan, are states of the pudgal(non-Self complex)?Dadashri: Yes, those are states of the pudgal, andshukladhyan is a state of the Self.Questioner: So could you say that shukladhyan is theresult of the Self?Dadashri: Yes.Questioner: Is it true that karmas that arise inshukladhyan will be good, and those that occur in dharmadhyanwill be slightly inferior?Dadashri: If one has shukladhyan, in the Kramic path,then there will not be any charging of karma. This is the Akrampath, and the karma here, have no ‘doership’. They occur in theform of ‘discharge’. You have attained this Gnan without evenhaving to discharge your karma first!Results of DhyanDhyan yields its fruit (consequences). What are the fruitsof raudradhyan? It gives rise to an evil disposition within aperson.Aptavani-43334Aptavani-4Questioner: Does karma occur according to one’stendencies (vruttis)?Dadashri: That is true. But where do the tendencies firstarise? They arise from dhyan. Artadhyan and raudradhyanare dhyans that will transport one to an animal life-form, or alife-form in hell. Then one has to experience the effects of thosekarmas over there.Questioner: Is the “shoot-on-sight” pratikraman(pratikraman done the instant a fault is “seen”) a way to turna dhyan around?Dadashri: Yes, that is turning the dhyan itself.Questioner: To “shoot” means that one destroys thepudgal. It means that one is interfering with that whichvyavasthit (scientific circumstantial evidence) had in store. Sowhat will the next life be like?Dadashri: Even that will be exactly the same. Whateverthe ‘link’ is, it will be the same (i.e., the discharge of karma isaccording to the charge).Questioner: If a person turns things around through“shooting”, does the lifespan of the tendencies (vruttis) remainthe same or is it reduced?Dadashri: That lifespan was meant to end here; therefore,all the circumstantial evidences come together, and it ends. The“top” (the relative self) spins in the opposite direction.Atmadhyan Is SamadhiMeditation on the Self (Atmadhyan): that is the truedhyan. There is no telling where all the other forms of dhyanthat people practice, will lead them. That is concentration(ekagrata). What did the Lord say? He has said that oneshould keep dhyan on one’s khichadee (i.e. food), and dhyanon one’s husband; if not, then keep the dhyan of the Self. Asidefrom these dhyans, all other forms of dhyan have nosignificance. Besides, why would you want to go overboard withall the others? For this samadhi of the Self, why would youwant to do all the other dhyans? If you come into the Self, youwill have constant samadhi.They tell you to do meditation (dhyan), where you haveto sit in one spot, and focus on the inhaling and exhaling ofbreathing. Now would you be able to do that meditation if youwere running a fever? Dhyan is not overt and visible; words oractions are.Should you have to do dhyan to decrease your attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh)? To reduce the attachment-abhorrence(raag-dwesh), you have to know the Science of the Vitarag.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-43334Aptavani-4Questioner: Does karma occur according to one’stendencies (vruttis)?Dadashri: That is true. But where do the tendencies firstarise? They arise from dhyan. Artadhyan and raudradhyanare dhyans that will transport one to an animal life-form, or alife-form in hell. Then one has to experience the effects of thosekarmas over there.Questioner: Is the “shoot-on-sight” pratikraman(pratikraman done the instant a fault is “seen”) a way to turna dhyan around?Dadashri: Yes, that is turning the dhyan itself.Questioner: To “shoot” means that one destroys thepudgal. It means that one is interfering with that whichvyavasthit (scientific circumstantial evidence) had in store. Sowhat will the next life be like?Dadashri: Even that will be exactly the same. Whateverthe ‘link’ is, it will be the same (i.e., the discharge of karma isaccording to the charge).Questioner: If a person turns things around through“shooting”, does the lifespan of the tendencies (vruttis) remainthe same or is it reduced?Dadashri: That lifespan was meant to end here; therefore,all the circumstantial evidences come together, and it ends. The“top” (the relative self) spins in the opposite direction.Atmadhyan Is SamadhiMeditation on the Self (Atmadhyan): that is the truedhyan. There is no telling where all the other forms of dhyanthat people practice, will lead them. That is concentration(ekagrata). What did the Lord say? He has said that oneshould keep dhyan on one’s khichadee (i.e. food), and dhyanon one’s husband; if not, then keep the dhyan of the Self. Asidefrom these dhyans, all other forms of dhyan have nosignificance. Besides, why would you want to go overboard withall the others? For this samadhi of the Self, why would youwant to do all the other dhyans? If you come into the Self, youwill have constant samadhi.They tell you to do meditation (dhyan), where you haveto sit in one spot, and focus on the inhaling and exhaling ofbreathing. Now would you be able to do that meditation if youwere running a fever? Dhyan is not overt and visible; words oractions are.Should you have to do dhyan to decrease your attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh)? To reduce the attachment-abhorrence(raag-dwesh), you have to know the Science of the Vitarag.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-43536Aptavani-4(3)Prarabdha – PurusharthWhat Is Purusharth?Dadashri: What purusharth (independent effort; freewill effort) do you do?Questioner: Of business.Dadashri: That is not considered purusharth. If aperson were truly doing purusharth, he would bring in onlyprofits, but do you also not incur losses? You cannot call thatpurusharth. That is just a ‘wound rope’ (karma from past life)which is unwinding (discharging). How can you call that apurusharth? If you are doing the purusharth, then why do youincur a loss?Questioner: That does happen too. And sometimes it iseven damaging.Dadashri: No, the one doing the purusharth will neverincur a loss. Who is the one saying, “I am doing purusharth”?All the people in the world are “tops” (spinning tops). Aperson’s prakruti (non-Self complex of mind, speech andbody) is making him ‘dance’, and yet he will say that he is“dancing”. If you gave him a powerful electrical shock, his bonesand entrails would explode. Even reading books and scripturesis not purusharth. It is all evidential effort (naimitik purusharth;his current purusharth is one of the evidences of his karmadischarge).No one has understood what real purusharth is. “I am,I am”, you say, but you do not even have the independentpower to go to vacate your bowels at will. You are a“bhammardo” (A spinning top. Dadashri uses this analogy todescribe the charging and discharging of karma: the winding ofthe string is the ‘causal’ karma – charged in the past life, andthe unwinding string is the ‘effect’ karma – discharged in thepresent life)! It is because of your nose that you are able tobreathe. You do not even have control over your own breathing.This “top” does not even have the independent power andenergy to breathe in and out. You say, “I am breathing,” so whodoes the breathing while you are asleep?You know what happens when you pinch your nose for awhile, don’t you? This machinery is so arranged that it draws itsbreath from within. And it is the very same machinery thatthrows the breath out. Nevertheless, people still say, “I amtaking a deep breath”, and “I am taking a shallow breath.” Youdo not even have the awareness of who you are. The string ismerely being wound (charging of karma) around the top(bhammardo) here, and as the top spins, the string unwinds(discharging of karma); but you say, “I am spinning.” No onein this world has the power to vacate his own bowels at will.Even I don’t. You keep saying, “Purusharth, purusharth”. Areyou talking about the purusharth of the one who is living, or theone who is dead? How can one do purusharth without firstbecoming a Purush (the Self)? That which you believe to be theSoul (Self) is actually the energized or charged non-Self(nischetan chetan). Who does the purusharth?Questioner: I am the one doing it, am I not?Dadashri: But who is this ‘I’? This ‘I’ (that you know)is the ‘top’ itself. So how is this ‘top’ supposed to do anypurusharth? If you could do purusharth, you would never letyourself die, but who is to say when this ‘top’ will topple overonto its side. This ‘top’ says to the doctor, “Sir (Saheb), pleaseAptavani-43536Aptavani-4(3)Prarabdha – PurusharthWhat Is Purusharth?Dadashri: What purusharth (independent effort; freewill effort) do you do?Questioner: Of business.Dadashri: That is not considered purusharth. If aperson were truly doing purusharth, he would bring in onlyprofits, but do you also not incur losses? You cannot call thatpurusharth. That is just a ‘wound rope’ (karma from past life)which is unwinding (discharging). How can you call that apurusharth? If you are doing the purusharth, then why do youincur a loss?Questioner: That does happen too. And sometimes it iseven damaging.Dadashri: No, the one doing the purusharth will neverincur a loss. Who is the one saying, “I am doing purusharth”?All the people in the world are “tops” (spinning tops). Aperson’s prakruti (non-Self complex of mind, speech andbody) is making him ‘dance’, and yet he will say that he is“dancing”. If you gave him a powerful electrical shock, his bonesand entrails would explode. Even reading books and scripturesis not purusharth. It is all evidential effort (naimitik purusharth;his current purusharth is one of the evidences of his karmadischarge).No one has understood what real purusharth is. “I am,I am”, you say, but you do not even have the independentpower to go to vacate your bowels at will. You are a“bhammardo” (A spinning top. Dadashri uses this analogy todescribe the charging and discharging of karma: the winding ofthe string is the ‘causal’ karma – charged in the past life, andthe unwinding string is the ‘effect’ karma – discharged in thepresent life)! It is because of your nose that you are able tobreathe. You do not even have control over your own breathing.This “top” does not even have the independent power andenergy to breathe in and out. You say, “I am breathing,” so whodoes the breathing while you are asleep?You know what happens when you pinch your nose for awhile, don’t you? This machinery is so arranged that it draws itsbreath from within. And it is the very same machinery thatthrows the breath out. Nevertheless, people still say, “I amtaking a deep breath”, and “I am taking a shallow breath.” Youdo not even have the awareness of who you are. The string ismerely being wound (charging of karma) around the top(bhammardo) here, and as the top spins, the string unwinds(discharging of karma); but you say, “I am spinning.” No onein this world has the power to vacate his own bowels at will.Even I don’t. You keep saying, “Purusharth, purusharth”. Areyou talking about the purusharth of the one who is living, or theone who is dead? How can one do purusharth without firstbecoming a Purush (the Self)? That which you believe to be theSoul (Self) is actually the energized or charged non-Self(nischetan chetan). Who does the purusharth?Questioner: I am the one doing it, am I not?Dadashri: But who is this ‘I’? This ‘I’ (that you know)is the ‘top’ itself. So how is this ‘top’ supposed to do anypurusharth? If you could do purusharth, you would never letyourself die, but who is to say when this ‘top’ will topple overonto its side. This ‘top’ says to the doctor, “Sir (Saheb), pleaseAptavani-43738 Aptavani-4save me.” You fool, the doctor’s mother is dead, his father isdead; he could not even save them, so how is he going to saveyou? If the doctor’s father has phlegm stuck in his throat, youwould say to him, “You have done so many surgeries onpeople’s stomachs to remove tumors, so why don’t you justremove this phlegm clot?” And he would reply, “No, if I did that,it will kill him.” They make idle claims such as, “I saved thatpatient…” You louts! You have every right to say that, if you arenever going to die! First, put an end to your funeral pyre(nanami)! Therefore, understand all this.How Much Purusharth in Digesting Food?Take this snack for instance that is in front of us. Tell mehow much purusharth is needed to eat it? If you needpurusharth for eating, then that purusharth and the worldlypurusharth (routine activities) are the same. Do you have to doany purusharth when you eat?Questioner: No.Dadashri: The fact is that, for eating you have to donaimitik purusharth (evidence-based effort); you have tomove your hands and your mouth. The teeth will chew thefood nicely and the tongue will also do its job, as long as youdo not interfere. But you interfere in it by saying, “I am doingthe purusharth of eating.” Now if the tongue tried to do thepurusharth of eating, it would get crushed many a time,between the thirty-two teeth. But the tongue does not interfere,and it does not say, “I am doing the purusharth.” Duringmeals, provided that one does not attempt to do purusharthin the ‘mill’ (chewing complex), the activity of eating canhappen naturally and nicely. All you have to do is to “know”and “see”. Everything will happen naturally. In the evening,don’t you go to sleep after you have eaten some savorycake(handvo)? So in order to digest it, what purusharth doyou do?Questioner: To digest my food, I have to move about,and walk around.Dadashri: Those actions are simply instrumental (nimit)for digestion. And when you are asleep, your breathingcontinues well, so that you wake up feeling refreshed. Althoughyou are sleeping, the right amounts of digestive juices, bile, etc.,are being released for digestion. Who goes in there to regulatethem? Just as everything runs automatically within the body,everything on the outside also runs automatically. All you have todo is to make a naimitik (instrumental; as one of the evidences)effort. As it is, everything is arranged according to scientificcircumstantial evidence (vyavasthit).From birth, one brings all of one’s suffering, accoladesand insults, repute, ill-repute, etc., but it is the ego that is theproblem. A person believes himself to be the ‘doer’ of anyactivity that is being done. Is there anything in all of this that hasto be done? One only has to know the Atma (the Self) in allthis. When you eat something, the internal activities take placenaturally. In the same way, that which occurs externally, alsohappens naturally. How much food, how many steps, how towalk, how much to walk, all happens by itself. When a persondoes the egoism; he is simply being too smart when he believesthat he is doing the purusharth. Without first becoming thePurush (the Self), the purusharth cannot be done. The GnaniPurush must first instill in you, the awareness of the alakh (theunknowable; imperceptible): the Self.In Mumbai, people’s purusharth is their determination todo this and to do that! Mumbai is still the same. So manybusinessmen have died there as a result of their arrogance. Aslong as Mumbai prospers, no one can do anything. No one hasthe power to stop Mumbai’s prosperity; nor to prevent itsdestruction. While you people have set out to do the purusharth!!You are nothing but a small fish in a big pond.Aptavani-43738 Aptavani-4save me.” You fool, the doctor’s mother is dead, his father isdead; he could not even save them, so how is he going to saveyou? If the doctor’s father has phlegm stuck in his throat, youwould say to him, “You have done so many surgeries onpeople’s stomachs to remove tumors, so why don’t you justremove this phlegm clot?” And he would reply, “No, if I did that,it will kill him.” They make idle claims such as, “I saved thatpatient…” You louts! You have every right to say that, if you arenever going to die! First, put an end to your funeral pyre(nanami)! Therefore, understand all this.How Much Purusharth in Digesting Food?Take this snack for instance that is in front of us. Tell mehow much purusharth is needed to eat it? If you needpurusharth for eating, then that purusharth and the worldlypurusharth (routine activities) are the same. Do you have to doany purusharth when you eat?Questioner: No.Dadashri: The fact is that, for eating you have to donaimitik purusharth (evidence-based effort); you have tomove your hands and your mouth. The teeth will chew thefood nicely and the tongue will also do its job, as long as youdo not interfere. But you interfere in it by saying, “I am doingthe purusharth of eating.” Now if the tongue tried to do thepurusharth of eating, it would get crushed many a time,between the thirty-two teeth. But the tongue does not interfere,and it does not say, “I am doing the purusharth.” Duringmeals, provided that one does not attempt to do purusharthin the ‘mill’ (chewing complex), the activity of eating canhappen naturally and nicely. All you have to do is to “know”and “see”. Everything will happen naturally. In the evening,don’t you go to sleep after you have eaten some savorycake(handvo)? So in order to digest it, what purusharth doyou do?Questioner: To digest my food, I have to move about,and walk around.Dadashri: Those actions are simply instrumental (nimit)for digestion. And when you are asleep, your breathingcontinues well, so that you wake up feeling refreshed. Althoughyou are sleeping, the right amounts of digestive juices, bile, etc.,are being released for digestion. Who goes in there to regulatethem? Just as everything runs automatically within the body,everything on the outside also runs automatically. All you have todo is to make a naimitik (instrumental; as one of the evidences)effort. As it is, everything is arranged according to scientificcircumstantial evidence (vyavasthit).From birth, one brings all of one’s suffering, accoladesand insults, repute, ill-repute, etc., but it is the ego that is theproblem. A person believes himself to be the ‘doer’ of anyactivity that is being done. Is there anything in all of this that hasto be done? One only has to know the Atma (the Self) in allthis. When you eat something, the internal activities take placenaturally. In the same way, that which occurs externally, alsohappens naturally. How much food, how many steps, how towalk, how much to walk, all happens by itself. When a persondoes the egoism; he is simply being too smart when he believesthat he is doing the purusharth. Without first becoming thePurush (the Self), the purusharth cannot be done. The GnaniPurush must first instill in you, the awareness of the alakh (theunknowable; imperceptible): the Self.In Mumbai, people’s purusharth is their determination todo this and to do that! Mumbai is still the same. So manybusinessmen have died there as a result of their arrogance. Aslong as Mumbai prospers, no one can do anything. No one hasthe power to stop Mumbai’s prosperity; nor to prevent itsdestruction. While you people have set out to do the purusharth!!You are nothing but a small fish in a big pond.Aptavani-43940Aptavani-4The word “purusharth” is a word that comes from thelanguage of illusion. It is not a word that is found in thelanguage of truth. It is just like saying, “I am his brother-in-law”. It is not a real word. In that respect, the language isdifferent altogether.How Does A Living Being (Jiva) Evolve?Questioner: Through what purusharth has the jiva (aliving being) evolved?Dadashri: I will explain that to you. Our Narmada Riverflows over its mud and rocks. Where there are rocks andboulders, its current is particularly strong, that the water’s forcebreaks off the fragments from the rocks’ edges. These fragmentsof rock end up as large stones and small pebbles cast out to sea.When these rocks and stones first start out, their edges are sosharp and jagged that they could easily cut you and make youbleed. This is because freshly-cut, broken stones that fall in theriver are sharp. I will explain to you what the purusharth ofthese living beings (jivas) is. As the river flows in its course, itdrags and pulls these stones along with it. These stonesconstantly collide and abrade with each other. And after aboutten or fifteen miles, they are smooth and shiny. They look as ifthey have been polished and made to look like marble. Eventhen however, they still have their edges and corners. And by thetime they pass through the Bhadbhooja area, they become sorounded that when people go on to a pilgrimage, they are askedto, ‘Bring home a “shaligram” for worship’. (Shaligrams aresymbolic round stones that represent the lingam in the worshipof Lord Shiva). So people worship these rounded stones. Andthis is how all the living beings perpetually collide with oneanother. Nature continually makes them collide, and at the sametime, they are also becoming rounder (they are evolving;become well rounded).Questioner: So one does not have to do anything?Dadashri: You do not have to do anything. What can a“top” do? What can one do when he does not even have controlover his own bowel movement? The stones that become round,from colliding around over and over, people now say areshaligrams, and place them in temples! Those that becameshaligrams end up as idols for worship, while the rest end upin the sea. A person having taken birth in India is himself a‘stone’ that has become round. If such people meet a GnaniPurush and attain the Self, they themselves become the idols ofworship, while the others are cast into the sea! Withoutbecoming Self-realized, there is no purusharth. Until a personattains samkit (realization of the Self), he will be discharging hiskarma, while simultaneously binding new karma (akaamnirjara).The purusharth that people commonly refer to, is thepurusharth of illusion. Illusory purusharth means that one hasto take another birth. The purusharth of illusion implies anotherbirth for a being.I have drawn an analogy for you of how the stonesoriginate, their journey, and where they end up. It is very muchlike the process of the human life in this world. There is nobeginning for the avyavahar jivas (unnamed embodied souls):only infinity. But the origin of the process of human worldly lifebegins from here, just like the moment the stone falls into theriver. Avyavahar rashi means that the embodied soul has notbeen given a name yet (embodied souls in an unnamed state).From the moment it attains a name, such as ‘rose’ or ‘jasmine’,or ‘ant’ etc., the embodied soul is said to have come intovyavahar rashi (an identified embodied soul). (From this pointin time the living entity derives its name and becomes incorporatedinto the flow of the worldly life.) They naturally get pushed andshoved forward. There is a natural arrangement all the way untilit becomes a ‘kernel’ (the end).Aptavani-43940Aptavani-4The word “purusharth” is a word that comes from thelanguage of illusion. It is not a word that is found in thelanguage of truth. It is just like saying, “I am his brother-in-law”. It is not a real word. In that respect, the language isdifferent altogether.How Does A Living Being (Jiva) Evolve?Questioner: Through what purusharth has the jiva (aliving being) evolved?Dadashri: I will explain that to you. Our Narmada Riverflows over its mud and rocks. Where there are rocks andboulders, its current is particularly strong, that the water’s forcebreaks off the fragments from the rocks’ edges. These fragmentsof rock end up as large stones and small pebbles cast out to sea.When these rocks and stones first start out, their edges are sosharp and jagged that they could easily cut you and make youbleed. This is because freshly-cut, broken stones that fall in theriver are sharp. I will explain to you what the purusharth ofthese living beings (jivas) is. As the river flows in its course, itdrags and pulls these stones along with it. These stonesconstantly collide and abrade with each other. And after aboutten or fifteen miles, they are smooth and shiny. They look as ifthey have been polished and made to look like marble. Eventhen however, they still have their edges and corners. And by thetime they pass through the Bhadbhooja area, they become sorounded that when people go on to a pilgrimage, they are askedto, ‘Bring home a “shaligram” for worship’. (Shaligrams aresymbolic round stones that represent the lingam in the worshipof Lord Shiva). So people worship these rounded stones. Andthis is how all the living beings perpetually collide with oneanother. Nature continually makes them collide, and at the sametime, they are also becoming rounder (they are evolving;become well rounded).Questioner: So one does not have to do anything?Dadashri: You do not have to do anything. What can a“top” do? What can one do when he does not even have controlover his own bowel movement? The stones that become round,from colliding around over and over, people now say areshaligrams, and place them in temples! Those that becameshaligrams end up as idols for worship, while the rest end upin the sea. A person having taken birth in India is himself a‘stone’ that has become round. If such people meet a GnaniPurush and attain the Self, they themselves become the idols ofworship, while the others are cast into the sea! Withoutbecoming Self-realized, there is no purusharth. Until a personattains samkit (realization of the Self), he will be discharging hiskarma, while simultaneously binding new karma (akaamnirjara).The purusharth that people commonly refer to, is thepurusharth of illusion. Illusory purusharth means that one hasto take another birth. The purusharth of illusion implies anotherbirth for a being.I have drawn an analogy for you of how the stonesoriginate, their journey, and where they end up. It is very muchlike the process of the human life in this world. There is nobeginning for the avyavahar jivas (unnamed embodied souls):only infinity. But the origin of the process of human worldly lifebegins from here, just like the moment the stone falls into theriver. Avyavahar rashi means that the embodied soul has notbeen given a name yet (embodied souls in an unnamed state).From the moment it attains a name, such as ‘rose’ or ‘jasmine’,or ‘ant’ etc., the embodied soul is said to have come intovyavahar rashi (an identified embodied soul). (From this pointin time the living entity derives its name and becomes incorporatedinto the flow of the worldly life.) They naturally get pushed andshoved forward. There is a natural arrangement all the way untilit becomes a ‘kernel’ (the end).Aptavani-44142Aptavani-4Questioner: Is there a reason as to why one stone goesinto the ocean and another becomes a shaligram?Dadashri: There is no reason behind it. It depends oneach one’s circumstance. Don’t you see that because youencountered the circumstance (saiyog) to meet ‘Dada’, you arenow able to stay in the absolute bliss (parmanand)? It is simplybecause of the circumstance you encountered. Have you had todo anything else, afterward? Did you have to spin a wheel oranything like that? Otherwise, when will this process of worldlylife come to an end?These stones, small or large, are the same when they fallinto the river, but who separates them out to be smoother? It isscientific circumstantial evidence that does this. Today, thestones may be here and next year they may be on the other side.They do not even have to walk or do anything else, and yet theybecome shaligrams! That is exactly the state of these embodiedsouls (jivas). These are all like stones; when the Atma is takenaway, they are just stones!Questioner: Is there any purusharth in circumstances?Dadashri: Only the one who has himself become aPurush (the Self), can do purusharth. Lord Krishna has said,‘Odhavaji, what can the weak achieve?’ What does the greatestJain spiritual master (acharya) Anandghanji say? He says, ‘HeyAjitnath! You have become a Purush. It is because you haveconquered your anger, pride, deceit and greed, which is whyyou are called unconquered (ajit; invincible), whilst I am weakas they have conquered me.’ When such a great acharyaconsiders himself to be weak, then there is nothing to be said forthe rest of us, is there?All these activities continue on ‘mechanically’: the wheatwill grow, the wheat will come into the market, it will be groundinto flour, and then it will be made into a loaf of bread. It allcontinues to happen mechanically. The ‘mechanical’ ‘evidences’are full of cycles of creation and destruction.Then What Is True Purusharth?The truth is that the real purusharth is needed. Not theprakruti’s (non-Self complex), but the purusharth of thePurush (of the Self). The purusharth that takes place in theworld is that of the prakruti. All the samayik one does,pratikraman one does, dhyan (meditation) one does, kirtan(sing religious songs), is all the purusharth of the pudgal (non-Self complex)! Real purusharth, however, comes after onebecomes a Purush (the Self). Only then will it reach its precisegoal.This ‘Dada’ has seen both Gnan (knowledge of the Self)and agnan (relative knowledge) as being separate, and that isexactly what he is showing you. Thereafter, the Purush (theSelf) will come into the domain of the Self, at which point, thepragnyashakti (the liberating energy of the Self) takes over andbecomes the guide; maintaining one’s alertness. Until then, oneremains in the religion and realm of the prakruti.Questioner: Can a true inner intent (bhaav) be consideredas purusharth?Dadashri: Like-dislike (bhaav-abhaav) is all karma.And to come into the Self (swabhav-bhaav) is the realpurusharth. Swabhav-bhaav means You; the Self, who is notthe ‘doer’ of anything. There is no bhaav in it. In that state, Youremain the ‘Knower-Seer’ (Gnata-Drashta), and in eternalbliss (parmanand).Everyone comes into swabhav-bhaav (the Self) afterattaining the Self. Chetan (the Self) purusharth (spiritual effort)arises after You become a Purush; also called swabhavikpurusharth. And when one comes into absolute Parmatmapurusharth, one oneself becomes the absolute Self (Parmatma).Aptavani-44142Aptavani-4Questioner: Is there a reason as to why one stone goesinto the ocean and another becomes a shaligram?Dadashri: There is no reason behind it. It depends oneach one’s circumstance. Don’t you see that because youencountered the circumstance (saiyog) to meet ‘Dada’, you arenow able to stay in the absolute bliss (parmanand)? It is simplybecause of the circumstance you encountered. Have you had todo anything else, afterward? Did you have to spin a wheel oranything like that? Otherwise, when will this process of worldlylife come to an end?These stones, small or large, are the same when they fallinto the river, but who separates them out to be smoother? It isscientific circumstantial evidence that does this. Today, thestones may be here and next year they may be on the other side.They do not even have to walk or do anything else, and yet theybecome shaligrams! That is exactly the state of these embodiedsouls (jivas). These are all like stones; when the Atma is takenaway, they are just stones!Questioner: Is there any purusharth in circumstances?Dadashri: Only the one who has himself become aPurush (the Self), can do purusharth. Lord Krishna has said,‘Odhavaji, what can the weak achieve?’ What does the greatestJain spiritual master (acharya) Anandghanji say? He says, ‘HeyAjitnath! You have become a Purush. It is because you haveconquered your anger, pride, deceit and greed, which is whyyou are called unconquered (ajit; invincible), whilst I am weakas they have conquered me.’ When such a great acharyaconsiders himself to be weak, then there is nothing to be said forthe rest of us, is there?All these activities continue on ‘mechanically’: the wheatwill grow, the wheat will come into the market, it will be groundinto flour, and then it will be made into a loaf of bread. It allcontinues to happen mechanically. The ‘mechanical’ ‘evidences’are full of cycles of creation and destruction.Then What Is True Purusharth?The truth is that the real purusharth is needed. Not theprakruti’s (non-Self complex), but the purusharth of thePurush (of the Self). The purusharth that takes place in theworld is that of the prakruti. All the samayik one does,pratikraman one does, dhyan (meditation) one does, kirtan(sing religious songs), is all the purusharth of the pudgal (non-Self complex)! Real purusharth, however, comes after onebecomes a Purush (the Self). Only then will it reach its precisegoal.This ‘Dada’ has seen both Gnan (knowledge of the Self)and agnan (relative knowledge) as being separate, and that isexactly what he is showing you. Thereafter, the Purush (theSelf) will come into the domain of the Self, at which point, thepragnyashakti (the liberating energy of the Self) takes over andbecomes the guide; maintaining one’s alertness. Until then, oneremains in the religion and realm of the prakruti.Questioner: Can a true inner intent (bhaav) be consideredas purusharth?Dadashri: Like-dislike (bhaav-abhaav) is all karma.And to come into the Self (swabhav-bhaav) is the realpurusharth. Swabhav-bhaav means You; the Self, who is notthe ‘doer’ of anything. There is no bhaav in it. In that state, Youremain the ‘Knower-Seer’ (Gnata-Drashta), and in eternalbliss (parmanand).Everyone comes into swabhav-bhaav (the Self) afterattaining the Self. Chetan (the Self) purusharth (spiritual effort)arises after You become a Purush; also called swabhavikpurusharth. And when one comes into absolute Parmatmapurusharth, one oneself becomes the absolute Self (Parmatma).Aptavani-44344Aptavani-4All relative work is accomplished only when all thecircumstances come together. That is vyavasthit. The Gnanisays that until now you were in bhrant (illusory) purusharth,and now that you have attained the knowledge of the Self, getbusy with the ‘real’ purusharth where circumstances are notneeded. Nothing is needed in real purusharth; whereas in therelative purusharth, you will need all the circumstances: you willneed the mind, the body and the speech. What is thepurusharth of the Self? It is where no raag-dwesh occurs inthe state of pudgal (non-Self complex); even if someone wereto kill you.Prarabdha and Sanchit KarmaQuestioner: What is the difference between destiny(naseeb) and vyavasthit?Dadashri: ‘Destiny’ (naseeb), fortune-misfortune, fate ordecision (takdir-tadbir), and prarabdha-purusharth, are allterms which pertain to an illusory language; these words comefrom a ‘lower’ language. That is the language of the kindergartenlevel. It is not on the level of Gnan. ‘Vyavasthit’ is found on theGnan level. Do people not say, “It will happen if it is in theprarabdha (ordained)”? However, some may argue, “How canit be achieved without purusharth (independent effort)?” Soknowledge should be such that no one can raise any objectionto it. People use these words erroneously, without evenunderstanding what prarabdha is or what purusharth is.Falling sick is not prarabdha karma. What does theLord consider to be prarabdha karma? It is that when youeat junk food, you are eating it because of your prarabdhakarma, and the result of it will be dysentery (this is essentiallyan effect of an effect). That which makes you eat, even whenyou do not want to, is your prarabdha karma and thedysentery you get from it, is the fruit of that karma (effect ofeffect).Questioner: How can we stop ourselves from eatingjunk food? During that time, is it the prarabdha karma orsanchit karma (accumulated karma to be worked out infuture) that is in effect?Dadashri: Sanchit karmas come from your past life asprarabdha karma in this life, and that is why one ‘feels likeeating this and eating that’, and so one continues to eat tangyand spicy things. This puts stress on one’s power of ‘vitality’ sothat one is unable to digest the food properly. Therefore, thetoxins keep collecting in one place. There are certain parts of thebody where the ‘vitality power’ throws these toxins. Doctorscan destroy them through ‘Rays’ (radiation) or dissolving themwith chemicals.Illusory Purusharth and Prarabdha KarmaIn the worldly life, that which people believe is purusharth,is not purusharth at all. If such a huge mistake such as this,goes on in India and everywhere else, what will happen to thepeople? You will have to understand the difference betweenprarabdha and purusharth from a Gnani Purush.What do people consider purusharth? They considergetting up early in the morning is purusharth. A person will say,“Yesterday I got up late, but I got up early today. Then I hadtea, went to the toilet, had a shower, and then immediately wentto my work, where I stayed the entire day.” He calls thispurusharth. But that is destiny (prarabdha; ordained). Activities,such as running around, meeting people, going to the bank, etc.,are all prarabdha. Now tell me, what do you think peopleunderstand is prarabdha? That which is prarabdha, they callpurusharth. So then tell me when does purusharth happen? Isthis not worth understanding? If you understand the differencebetween prarabdha and purusharth from the Gnani Purush,then your problems will be solved.Aptavani-44344Aptavani-4All relative work is accomplished only when all thecircumstances come together. That is vyavasthit. The Gnanisays that until now you were in bhrant (illusory) purusharth,and now that you have attained the knowledge of the Self, getbusy with the ‘real’ purusharth where circumstances are notneeded. Nothing is needed in real purusharth; whereas in therelative purusharth, you will need all the circumstances: you willneed the mind, the body and the speech. What is thepurusharth of the Self? It is where no raag-dwesh occurs inthe state of pudgal (non-Self complex); even if someone wereto kill you.Prarabdha and Sanchit KarmaQuestioner: What is the difference between destiny(naseeb) and vyavasthit?Dadashri: ‘Destiny’ (naseeb), fortune-misfortune, fate ordecision (takdir-tadbir), and prarabdha-purusharth, are allterms which pertain to an illusory language; these words comefrom a ‘lower’ language. That is the language of the kindergartenlevel. It is not on the level of Gnan. ‘Vyavasthit’ is found on theGnan level. Do people not say, “It will happen if it is in theprarabdha (ordained)”? However, some may argue, “How canit be achieved without purusharth (independent effort)?” Soknowledge should be such that no one can raise any objectionto it. People use these words erroneously, without evenunderstanding what prarabdha is or what purusharth is.Falling sick is not prarabdha karma. What does theLord consider to be prarabdha karma? It is that when youeat junk food, you are eating it because of your prarabdhakarma, and the result of it will be dysentery (this is essentiallyan effect of an effect). That which makes you eat, even whenyou do not want to, is your prarabdha karma and thedysentery you get from it, is the fruit of that karma (effect ofeffect).Questioner: How can we stop ourselves from eatingjunk food? During that time, is it the prarabdha karma orsanchit karma (accumulated karma to be worked out infuture) that is in effect?Dadashri: Sanchit karmas come from your past life asprarabdha karma in this life, and that is why one ‘feels likeeating this and eating that’, and so one continues to eat tangyand spicy things. This puts stress on one’s power of ‘vitality’ sothat one is unable to digest the food properly. Therefore, thetoxins keep collecting in one place. There are certain parts of thebody where the ‘vitality power’ throws these toxins. Doctorscan destroy them through ‘Rays’ (radiation) or dissolving themwith chemicals.Illusory Purusharth and Prarabdha KarmaIn the worldly life, that which people believe is purusharth,is not purusharth at all. If such a huge mistake such as this,goes on in India and everywhere else, what will happen to thepeople? You will have to understand the difference betweenprarabdha and purusharth from a Gnani Purush.What do people consider purusharth? They considergetting up early in the morning is purusharth. A person will say,“Yesterday I got up late, but I got up early today. Then I hadtea, went to the toilet, had a shower, and then immediately wentto my work, where I stayed the entire day.” He calls thispurusharth. But that is destiny (prarabdha; ordained). Activities,such as running around, meeting people, going to the bank, etc.,are all prarabdha. Now tell me, what do you think peopleunderstand is prarabdha? That which is prarabdha, they callpurusharth. So then tell me when does purusharth happen? Isthis not worth understanding? If you understand the differencebetween prarabdha and purusharth from the Gnani Purush,then your problems will be solved.Aptavani-44546Aptavani-4After attaining this Gnan, You do not have prarabdha orpurusharth. You have become the Self and so for You,everything is vyavasthit. For the rest of the world, the world isnot vyavasthit. It is because they themselves are in a state ofillusion (bhranti), that they cannot help doing dakho (interfering).If you are offered tea and there is no sugar in it, you willunderstand that it is vyavasthit and deal with it with equanimity,but you will not interfere. Whereas what do othersdo?Questioner: They will kick up a fuss.Dadashri: It is because You have become ‘Purush’ thatYou have purusharth. However, for others in the world, withoutpurusharth there is no place, is there? For them it is illusorypurusharth; nevertheless, it is still a purusharth. But shouldn’tthat have to be known as well? In the Kramic path, one has toprogress towards moksha, by way of illusory purusharth. Nowwhat do people say in general? ‘I expanded this shop. I didgreat business. I studied. I came first’ – they consider all this astheir purusharth; however, it is really all destiny (prarabdha).Should such a mistake not be rectified?Questioner: It should be.Dadashri: It is fine if You do not correct it, since Youalready have vyavasthit in Your hands, is that not so? But whenwill others understand?What Purusharth Should One Do?If everything is prarabdha, then what is purusharth? Doyou ever wonder about this?Questioner: I have not thought about it.Dadashri: If you had decided the night before that youwanted to wake up early the next morning, but you oversleep,you should not say to the others, “Why did you not wake meup when you knew I had to catch a train?” You do not need tomake such a fuss. They would have forgotten even if you hadasked them to wake you. Is there a need for you to make a fuss,when your waking up late is prarabdha itself? Now what is thepurusharth that you need to do? Your decision that you mustget up early is the purusharth. And if in case, your tea comeswithout any sugar, decide to yourself that it is because of yourprarabdha that you got sugarless tea. No one should beblamed. So request for some sugar or else decide to yourselfthat you do not want to ask for it at all. Do one of the two.The bhaav (inner intent) that you do is the purusharth;however, it is considered a relative purusharth. What can onecall ‘real’ purusharth? It is the paarinamic bhaav (intent as orof the Self) that arises, that is called ‘real’ purusharth. All daylong, these people go around doing their samayik, pratikraman,japa, tapa, dhyan, and rituals, etc., and yet it is all done in theirsleep (in the state of ignorance of the Self). You cannot call thatpurusharth. Should the one doing purusharth be awake orasleep?Questioner: Awake.Dadashri: The world considers prarabdha as purusharth.There are probably just a few people who are awake. They arethe ones who know and understand that, ‘It must be this way.’The remainder, however, have no clue about the differencebetween prarabdha and purusharth.Questioner: Is this all not a mistake?Dadashri: Actually, it is not a mistake. And why not?That is what I am going to explain to you. The differentiationbetween prarabdha and purusharth that people have formerlymade, is correct up to the point, where there is unity of mind,speech and body. And that is that they would speak what wason their minds and they would act that way too. But in this eraof the current time cycle, that unity of the mind, body andAptavani-44546Aptavani-4After attaining this Gnan, You do not have prarabdha orpurusharth. You have become the Self and so for You,everything is vyavasthit. For the rest of the world, the world isnot vyavasthit. It is because they themselves are in a state ofillusion (bhranti), that they cannot help doing dakho (interfering).If you are offered tea and there is no sugar in it, you willunderstand that it is vyavasthit and deal with it with equanimity,but you will not interfere. Whereas what do othersdo?Questioner: They will kick up a fuss.Dadashri: It is because You have become ‘Purush’ thatYou have purusharth. However, for others in the world, withoutpurusharth there is no place, is there? For them it is illusorypurusharth; nevertheless, it is still a purusharth. But shouldn’tthat have to be known as well? In the Kramic path, one has toprogress towards moksha, by way of illusory purusharth. Nowwhat do people say in general? ‘I expanded this shop. I didgreat business. I studied. I came first’ – they consider all this astheir purusharth; however, it is really all destiny (prarabdha).Should such a mistake not be rectified?Questioner: It should be.Dadashri: It is fine if You do not correct it, since Youalready have vyavasthit in Your hands, is that not so? But whenwill others understand?What Purusharth Should One Do?If everything is prarabdha, then what is purusharth? Doyou ever wonder about this?Questioner: I have not thought about it.Dadashri: If you had decided the night before that youwanted to wake up early the next morning, but you oversleep,you should not say to the others, “Why did you not wake meup when you knew I had to catch a train?” You do not need tomake such a fuss. They would have forgotten even if you hadasked them to wake you. Is there a need for you to make a fuss,when your waking up late is prarabdha itself? Now what is thepurusharth that you need to do? Your decision that you mustget up early is the purusharth. And if in case, your tea comeswithout any sugar, decide to yourself that it is because of yourprarabdha that you got sugarless tea. No one should beblamed. So request for some sugar or else decide to yourselfthat you do not want to ask for it at all. Do one of the two.The bhaav (inner intent) that you do is the purusharth;however, it is considered a relative purusharth. What can onecall ‘real’ purusharth? It is the paarinamic bhaav (intent as orof the Self) that arises, that is called ‘real’ purusharth. All daylong, these people go around doing their samayik, pratikraman,japa, tapa, dhyan, and rituals, etc., and yet it is all done in theirsleep (in the state of ignorance of the Self). You cannot call thatpurusharth. Should the one doing purusharth be awake orasleep?Questioner: Awake.Dadashri: The world considers prarabdha as purusharth.There are probably just a few people who are awake. They arethe ones who know and understand that, ‘It must be this way.’The remainder, however, have no clue about the differencebetween prarabdha and purusharth.Questioner: Is this all not a mistake?Dadashri: Actually, it is not a mistake. And why not?That is what I am going to explain to you. The differentiationbetween prarabdha and purusharth that people have formerlymade, is correct up to the point, where there is unity of mind,speech and body. And that is that they would speak what wason their minds and they would act that way too. But in this eraof the current time cycle, that unity of the mind, body andAptavani-44748Aptavani-4speech is broken, and that is why the differences betweenpurusharth and prarabdha prove wrong. It is not completelywrong, but it is ‘relative’ truth.Questioner: I understand prarabdha, but I still do notunderstand purusharth properly.Dadashri: Circumstances coming together is prarabdha,and to maintain equanimity when that circumstance is negative orpainful, is called purusharth. Whatever circumstance arises, isall prarabdha. When you pass with a ‘first class’ grade, it isprarabdha. And when another person fails to get a ‘first class’,it is also prarabdha. From these words, recognize that anycircumstance that you encounter is all prarabdha. Waking up inthe morning is also a circumstance. If you wake up at seventhirty, then it is considered a circumstance of seven thirty. Thatis called prarabdha.Questioner: If a man speaks negatively about me, rightin front of me and I make an effort (purusharth) to maintainequanimity towards him is that really prarabdha or not?Dadashri: What happens is that when a person encountersa negative circumstance, like an insult, he does not dopurusharth there, but he instead returns the insults and displaysexpressions of disgust and all that. If someone insults you, andyou perceive it as being the fruit of your own karma; the otherperson is just an instrument (nimit) and that he is faultless, thenit can be considered the purusharth that follows the Lord’sagna (special directive). Maintaining equanimity at that time ispurusharth.Questioner: For those that do not have the right vision ofthe Self (samyak darshan), is this the only purusharth for them?Dadashri: Yes. For the people at large, that is purusharth.And what kind of purusharth is it? It is a ‘relative’ purusharth.Because, in their worldly life (sansar) they have ‘relative’ gnan.Some of it comes from what they hear. Some of it comes fromreading books. All that is ‘relative’ gnan. When there isinfluence of ‘relative’ knowledge it is considered ‘relative’purusharth. Here, if it is influenced by real Gnan, then it isconsidered ‘real’ purusharth; nevertheless, people do makesome purusharth in the world. It has not become utterlyfruitless!You can at least find maybe two or three out of athousand who do such a purusharth! But they cannotunderstand completely whether they should call it prarabdha orpurusharth! For them, the purusharth occurs by itself. Onehas no concept about the ‘grade’ of that, and what ‘grade’ ‘this’is. All that people know of prarabdha and purusharth is: “‘Ihave to go at eleven o’clock’. ‘How did I get late?’ ‘Why didyou spill the soup?’ And ‘he did this’ and ‘he did that’.” Alas,the spilling of the soup is considered a circumstance. From this,there are only two separate things that occur in the worldly life:saiyog (the coming together of circumstances) and viyog (thedissipation of the circumstances). However many circumstancesthere are, that many will definitely dissipate. And whatever thesaiyog, to maintain equanimity in it, is the purusharth. It is notconsidered purusharth when someone showers you withflowers, and your ego inflates. Whatever happens naturally isprarabdha. Have you ever done a purusharth whereby youmaintained your orderly composure, even after you had beenshowered with flowers?Questioner: No, I was not aware that it is calledpurusharth.Dadashri: That is why I say, understand prarabdha andpurusharth. One is not aware of the purusharth that does takeplace; it happens naturally, even during sleep.Questioner: Does prarabdha come according to whatwas charged in the past life?Aptavani-44748Aptavani-4speech is broken, and that is why the differences betweenpurusharth and prarabdha prove wrong. It is not completelywrong, but it is ‘relative’ truth.Questioner: I understand prarabdha, but I still do notunderstand purusharth properly.Dadashri: Circumstances coming together is prarabdha,and to maintain equanimity when that circumstance is negative orpainful, is called purusharth. Whatever circumstance arises, isall prarabdha. When you pass with a ‘first class’ grade, it isprarabdha. And when another person fails to get a ‘first class’,it is also prarabdha. From these words, recognize that anycircumstance that you encounter is all prarabdha. Waking up inthe morning is also a circumstance. If you wake up at seventhirty, then it is considered a circumstance of seven thirty. Thatis called prarabdha.Questioner: If a man speaks negatively about me, rightin front of me and I make an effort (purusharth) to maintainequanimity towards him is that really prarabdha or not?Dadashri: What happens is that when a person encountersa negative circumstance, like an insult, he does not dopurusharth there, but he instead returns the insults and displaysexpressions of disgust and all that. If someone insults you, andyou perceive it as being the fruit of your own karma; the otherperson is just an instrument (nimit) and that he is faultless, thenit can be considered the purusharth that follows the Lord’sagna (special directive). Maintaining equanimity at that time ispurusharth.Questioner: For those that do not have the right vision ofthe Self (samyak darshan), is this the only purusharth for them?Dadashri: Yes. For the people at large, that is purusharth.And what kind of purusharth is it? It is a ‘relative’ purusharth.Because, in their worldly life (sansar) they have ‘relative’ gnan.Some of it comes from what they hear. Some of it comes fromreading books. All that is ‘relative’ gnan. When there isinfluence of ‘relative’ knowledge it is considered ‘relative’purusharth. Here, if it is influenced by real Gnan, then it isconsidered ‘real’ purusharth; nevertheless, people do makesome purusharth in the world. It has not become utterlyfruitless!You can at least find maybe two or three out of athousand who do such a purusharth! But they cannotunderstand completely whether they should call it prarabdha orpurusharth! For them, the purusharth occurs by itself. Onehas no concept about the ‘grade’ of that, and what ‘grade’ ‘this’is. All that people know of prarabdha and purusharth is: “‘Ihave to go at eleven o’clock’. ‘How did I get late?’ ‘Why didyou spill the soup?’ And ‘he did this’ and ‘he did that’.” Alas,the spilling of the soup is considered a circumstance. From this,there are only two separate things that occur in the worldly life:saiyog (the coming together of circumstances) and viyog (thedissipation of the circumstances). However many circumstancesthere are, that many will definitely dissipate. And whatever thesaiyog, to maintain equanimity in it, is the purusharth. It is notconsidered purusharth when someone showers you withflowers, and your ego inflates. Whatever happens naturally isprarabdha. Have you ever done a purusharth whereby youmaintained your orderly composure, even after you had beenshowered with flowers?Questioner: No, I was not aware that it is calledpurusharth.Dadashri: That is why I say, understand prarabdha andpurusharth. One is not aware of the purusharth that does takeplace; it happens naturally, even during sleep.Questioner: Does prarabdha come according to whatwas charged in the past life?Aptavani-44950Aptavani-4Dadashri: Whatever was charged in the past life, it isdischarging now in the form of circumstances. And should anegative circumstance occur, to turn it around into a positivewould be the purusharth. It is easy to slip down, anyone cando that. Would you call that purusharth? To stop yourself fromslipping is the purusharth. People are just walking aroundblindly colliding with each other, thinking something of themselves!Will you not have to understand all this? When somethingcompletely false has been taken to be true, where will it all end?Can something that cannot be resolved, ever come to an end?And this knowledge of ‘vyavasthit’ is not meant foreverybody, because the ego is still with them. Now, the egocomes under the control of ‘vyavasthit’, but when it claims the‘doership’, it interferes (does dakho) in vyavasthit. Moreover,one ruins one’s happiness by interfering in vyavasthit. It wouldbe very beneficial for one to not interfere through the ego anddo the purusharth with equanimity. Even then one who is notSelf-realized cannot believe in vyavasthit. Vyavasthit is onlythere after one becomes the pure Self (shuddha); oneunderstands it after Self-realization! The world is vyavasthitindeed, there are no two ways about it, but when the ego saysthat it is vyavasthit, then interfering occurs. When people haveso grossly misinterpreted prarabdha, how can we even begin totalk about all the other crutches people use?Questioner: Can prarabdha be changed through thegrace of the Gnani Purush?Dadashri: Yes, he can, but in what way? The bitternessof the suffering can be lessened, but the suffering itself cannot beeliminated altogether.When you do not have Self-realization, if you becomeangry with someone or someone gets angry with you, you willfeel bad or feel depressed or even aggravated with that person.If you change your inner approach at such a time, then it isconsidered your purusharth. You can say that such a person isawake. You can only do purusharth when you have theawareness, right? It is because one is ‘asleep’ that one is unableto do purusharth. That is what is called bhaavnindra.This is all prarabdha. It is the prakruti that forces you todance. It makes the actively restless one, dance faster and thelazy one, dance slower. The active one says, ‘This prarabdhavadi(lazy) is lazy and I am purusharthvadi (industrious).’ Reallyspeaking, you have bound energetic prarabdha; whereas, theother person has bound lazy prarabdha. They are bothdependent on circumstance. If a person’s business is runningwell, he is considered purusharthi (industrious), and if it is not,people will say he is prarabdhavadi (lazy)! In fact, it is not likethat. Prarabdha (effect) means that it is “free of cost”.Purusharth (cause) means that it is something that takes youfurther; it is something that is earned.So, not only did he lose saiyam (self-control overpassions like anger, pride, deceit and greed), but you lost yoursas well. Therefore, you will both go on to a lower life-form(adhogati). Now if you maintain self-control (saiyam), you willnot acquire a lower life-form, as here you will not slip up. Theother person may have slipped, but where is your purusharthwhen you slip along with him?It is very important to understand this prarabdha-purusharth. How can you call it purusharth, if today you arein the same rut as you were in yesterday? Still it is not as if thatthere is no purusharth at all. At the most, perhaps just two tofive people in a thousand may have purusharth. It is a very lowpercentage and they too do not even know that it is purusharth.They just believe that the one hurrying around is the only onedoing the purusharth. People think of purusharth as runningaround from place to place, working frantically, and not sittingidle. They will say things like, ‘He is a very purusharthi (hardAptavani-44950Aptavani-4Dadashri: Whatever was charged in the past life, it isdischarging now in the form of circumstances. And should anegative circumstance occur, to turn it around into a positivewould be the purusharth. It is easy to slip down, anyone cando that. Would you call that purusharth? To stop yourself fromslipping is the purusharth. People are just walking aroundblindly colliding with each other, thinking something of themselves!Will you not have to understand all this? When somethingcompletely false has been taken to be true, where will it all end?Can something that cannot be resolved, ever come to an end?And this knowledge of ‘vyavasthit’ is not meant foreverybody, because the ego is still with them. Now, the egocomes under the control of ‘vyavasthit’, but when it claims the‘doership’, it interferes (does dakho) in vyavasthit. Moreover,one ruins one’s happiness by interfering in vyavasthit. It wouldbe very beneficial for one to not interfere through the ego anddo the purusharth with equanimity. Even then one who is notSelf-realized cannot believe in vyavasthit. Vyavasthit is onlythere after one becomes the pure Self (shuddha); oneunderstands it after Self-realization! The world is vyavasthitindeed, there are no two ways about it, but when the ego saysthat it is vyavasthit, then interfering occurs. When people haveso grossly misinterpreted prarabdha, how can we even begin totalk about all the other crutches people use?Questioner: Can prarabdha be changed through thegrace of the Gnani Purush?Dadashri: Yes, he can, but in what way? The bitternessof the suffering can be lessened, but the suffering itself cannot beeliminated altogether.When you do not have Self-realization, if you becomeangry with someone or someone gets angry with you, you willfeel bad or feel depressed or even aggravated with that person.If you change your inner approach at such a time, then it isconsidered your purusharth. You can say that such a person isawake. You can only do purusharth when you have theawareness, right? It is because one is ‘asleep’ that one is unableto do purusharth. That is what is called bhaavnindra.This is all prarabdha. It is the prakruti that forces you todance. It makes the actively restless one, dance faster and thelazy one, dance slower. The active one says, ‘This prarabdhavadi(lazy) is lazy and I am purusharthvadi (industrious).’ Reallyspeaking, you have bound energetic prarabdha; whereas, theother person has bound lazy prarabdha. They are bothdependent on circumstance. If a person’s business is runningwell, he is considered purusharthi (industrious), and if it is not,people will say he is prarabdhavadi (lazy)! In fact, it is not likethat. Prarabdha (effect) means that it is “free of cost”.Purusharth (cause) means that it is something that takes youfurther; it is something that is earned.So, not only did he lose saiyam (self-control overpassions like anger, pride, deceit and greed), but you lost yoursas well. Therefore, you will both go on to a lower life-form(adhogati). Now if you maintain self-control (saiyam), you willnot acquire a lower life-form, as here you will not slip up. Theother person may have slipped, but where is your purusharthwhen you slip along with him?It is very important to understand this prarabdha-purusharth. How can you call it purusharth, if today you arein the same rut as you were in yesterday? Still it is not as if thatthere is no purusharth at all. At the most, perhaps just two tofive people in a thousand may have purusharth. It is a very lowpercentage and they too do not even know that it is purusharth.They just believe that the one hurrying around is the only onedoing the purusharth. People think of purusharth as runningaround from place to place, working frantically, and not sittingidle. They will say things like, ‘He is a very purusharthi (hardAptavani-45152Aptavani-4working) person. He is a very purusharthi person.’ Hey! These‘tops’ were born to run around all day! How can you call thatpurusharth?Purusharth Means Life with UpayogPurusharth means a life with applied awakened awareness(upayog). Here (amongst the Self-realized) we have pureapplied awareness as the Self (shuddha upayog); whileeverywhere else, there is auspicious awareness (shubha upayog).That which has become inauspicious (ashubha) is turned intoauspicious (shubha) through their applied awareness (upayog).So that whatever self-control (saiyam) you might perceive inpeople, is all natural. They do not realize that they are doingpurusharth. That is the nature of their prakruti. That whichoccurs naturally, cannot be called purusharth. You know thatthis is purusharth and the rest is prarabdha. Real purusharthstarts after one becomes a Purush (Self-realized). You wouldcall this ‘real’ purusharth, and the other is ‘relative’ purusharth.Questioner: What is the difference between samata(equanimity; without attachment or abhorrence) and saiyam(self-control)?Dadashri: Self-control (saiyam) is purusharth andequanimity (samata) is an attribute attained through Gnan. Yam(following rules and regulations) is considered purusharth, niyam(following principles) is considered purusharth, and saiyam(discipline; self-control) is also considered purusharth. We arenot talking about the visible saiyam. Purusharth is never visible.Questioner: What is the difference between saiyam(discipline; self-control) and penance (tapa)?Dadashri: They are indeed different. In saiyam there isno suffering involved. In penance however, there is suffering.Someone may tell you that in your eating, you have no self-control. However, when you start to eat normal amounts, thatsaiyam will return. In penance, you have to ‘heat’ your mind up.You have to make it ‘burn’ in the fire of penance. But ‘ours’(Akram science) is a different kind of penance. The penancethat we have is the penance of ‘Gnan (knowledge of the Self),darshan (vision of the Self), charitra (conduct as the Self) andtapa (penance as the Self)’. Our penance is ‘done’ during thetimes when the body experiences pain (ashata). This is becauseas long there is charged karma in past life (puran; ‘causes’),you will have to do penance until its discharge (galan) iscompletely done. Will you gain anything by complaining andfussing? The tapa (penance) has to continue even when yourheart wrenches in agony, to the point where it makes youscream out loud. What does penance mean? What is theultimate penance? To not allow the ‘home department’ (the Self)and the ‘foreign department’ (the non-Self) to become one, iswhat the Lord regards as the ultimate penance.If the wrong type of purusharth is done, it may evenbecome undone. You yourself are “wholly and solely” responsiblefor what you do. If you want to do the right thing, then do theright thing. And if you want to do the wrong thing, then do thewrong thing. This Gnan is such that you will not experience anyworries. Worries can kill a person. A man was telling me thatunless he had worries, he could not get his work done, so toleave his worries alone. So I said to him, “Very well, do not takemy Gnan then. Just come to satsang (a gathering of Self-realized beings) as you are.” He was thinking that he would onlybe able to work if he had worries, and that without them, hecould not work. He did not know whether he was doing it orsomeone else. According to his understanding, he was the onedoing. He just believed that he did it all.The Exact Understanding of VyavasthitQuestioner: What is the relationship between prarabdhaand vyavasthit?Aptavani-45152Aptavani-4working) person. He is a very purusharthi person.’ Hey! These‘tops’ were born to run around all day! How can you call thatpurusharth?Purusharth Means Life with UpayogPurusharth means a life with applied awakened awareness(upayog). Here (amongst the Self-realized) we have pureapplied awareness as the Self (shuddha upayog); whileeverywhere else, there is auspicious awareness (shubha upayog).That which has become inauspicious (ashubha) is turned intoauspicious (shubha) through their applied awareness (upayog).So that whatever self-control (saiyam) you might perceive inpeople, is all natural. They do not realize that they are doingpurusharth. That is the nature of their prakruti. That whichoccurs naturally, cannot be called purusharth. You know thatthis is purusharth and the rest is prarabdha. Real purusharthstarts after one becomes a Purush (Self-realized). You wouldcall this ‘real’ purusharth, and the other is ‘relative’ purusharth.Questioner: What is the difference between samata(equanimity; without attachment or abhorrence) and saiyam(self-control)?Dadashri: Self-control (saiyam) is purusharth andequanimity (samata) is an attribute attained through Gnan. Yam(following rules and regulations) is considered purusharth, niyam(following principles) is considered purusharth, and saiyam(discipline; self-control) is also considered purusharth. We arenot talking about the visible saiyam. Purusharth is never visible.Questioner: What is the difference between saiyam(discipline; self-control) and penance (tapa)?Dadashri: They are indeed different. In saiyam there isno suffering involved. In penance however, there is suffering.Someone may tell you that in your eating, you have no self-control. However, when you start to eat normal amounts, thatsaiyam will return. In penance, you have to ‘heat’ your mind up.You have to make it ‘burn’ in the fire of penance. But ‘ours’(Akram science) is a different kind of penance. The penancethat we have is the penance of ‘Gnan (knowledge of the Self),darshan (vision of the Self), charitra (conduct as the Self) andtapa (penance as the Self)’. Our penance is ‘done’ during thetimes when the body experiences pain (ashata). This is becauseas long there is charged karma in past life (puran; ‘causes’),you will have to do penance until its discharge (galan) iscompletely done. Will you gain anything by complaining andfussing? The tapa (penance) has to continue even when yourheart wrenches in agony, to the point where it makes youscream out loud. What does penance mean? What is theultimate penance? To not allow the ‘home department’ (the Self)and the ‘foreign department’ (the non-Self) to become one, iswhat the Lord regards as the ultimate penance.If the wrong type of purusharth is done, it may evenbecome undone. You yourself are “wholly and solely” responsiblefor what you do. If you want to do the right thing, then do theright thing. And if you want to do the wrong thing, then do thewrong thing. This Gnan is such that you will not experience anyworries. Worries can kill a person. A man was telling me thatunless he had worries, he could not get his work done, so toleave his worries alone. So I said to him, “Very well, do not takemy Gnan then. Just come to satsang (a gathering of Self-realized beings) as you are.” He was thinking that he would onlybe able to work if he had worries, and that without them, hecould not work. He did not know whether he was doing it orsomeone else. According to his understanding, he was the onedoing. He just believed that he did it all.The Exact Understanding of VyavasthitQuestioner: What is the relationship between prarabdhaand vyavasthit?Aptavani-45354Aptavani-4Dadashri: There is no difference if you look at it. Butsince people have applied a wrong meaning to prarabdha, Iexplained it to you in a different way. But vyavasthit is muchhigher than prarabdha. What vyavasthit says is that youcontinue doing what you do and leave the rest, including itsfruit, to ‘me’. On the other hand, prarabdha does not tell youthis; therefore, vyavasthit is a complete thing. If you lean onthis fact throughout your life, you will not encounter difficulties.Prarabdha used to be accurate, but it has become the wrongkind of support for people, so can anyone do anything aboutthat?Questioner: I think that the word prarabdha refers to anindividual and vyavasthit is in reference to entirety. Is that right?Dadashri: No, it is not like that. Prarabdha is inreference to an individual, but vyavasthit goes beyond that.Prarabdha happens first and then there is vyavasthit. Vyavasthitgives you a detailed explanation of the individual as well as theentirety.I have given a detailed explanation on the knowledge ofvyavasthit. What is the world like? How does it run? I haveexposed everything. I have exposed it all, for your benefit, sothat you feel at peace and do not have any sankalp (‘My-ness’)or vikalp (‘I am Chandubhai’). Vyavasthit cannot be understoodin the Kramic path. The entire Kramic path is based on theego; therefore one cannot say “vyavasthit”. When a personbecomes the ‘doer’ himself, he will never accept vyavasthit asbeing the ‘doer’. He only believes, ‘It is I who does everything.’If you asked him, ‘If you were the one doing it, then why didyou make such a loss?’ And he will answer, ‘Sir, it all dependson prarabdha.’ People will call it both, prarabdha andpurusharth.How many years has it been since you received Gnan?Questioner: Three years.Dadashri: So have you seen anything wrong withvyavasthit in the last three years?Questioner: No, nothing at all.Dadashri: One can have doubts and uncertainties aboutHari (God) as to, “Why did He do it this way?” There is no oneby the name of “Hari” out there. It is just a crutch. Saints andsages have come up with the word, because people need somekind of assurance, don’t they? Ours is Akram Vignan;therefore, I have exposed everything ‘as it is’, and revealed thepart that runs on its own. Therefore, there is no need for you toworry about anything. Just look at how the hair grows on itsown! The mustache grows by itself! You can have a French cutwhenever you want to. Just in case someone lops off yourmustache, do not get anxious! And do not get upset with theperpetrator either. The mustache will grow back within a month.So it is not something you need to get aggravated about. If yourchild dies, you should not worry, as this is vyavasthit. If yousuffer a loss, you should not worry. And even if you make aprofit, you should not become over elated. All of it is done byvyavasthit.You are not the doer. Just as the night and day; sunriseand sunset and everything else, is so exact and regulated, so isthe mind; under the control of vyavasthit. I have disclosed allof this. Just to disclose this very thing; what it actually is, hasbeen the search of my countless past lives. If I say it is destiny(effect, prarabdha), then I will be able to sleep easily. But whenyou say that it is purusharth (effort, free will), then should youdo the purusharth to wake up early or stay in bed late? I didnot approve of this uncertainty. Then what are the facts? So Isaid, “Vyavasthit!” And so, that was all right!After giving this knowledge of vyavasthit, it is possibleAptavani-45354Aptavani-4Dadashri: There is no difference if you look at it. Butsince people have applied a wrong meaning to prarabdha, Iexplained it to you in a different way. But vyavasthit is muchhigher than prarabdha. What vyavasthit says is that youcontinue doing what you do and leave the rest, including itsfruit, to ‘me’. On the other hand, prarabdha does not tell youthis; therefore, vyavasthit is a complete thing. If you lean onthis fact throughout your life, you will not encounter difficulties.Prarabdha used to be accurate, but it has become the wrongkind of support for people, so can anyone do anything aboutthat?Questioner: I think that the word prarabdha refers to anindividual and vyavasthit is in reference to entirety. Is that right?Dadashri: No, it is not like that. Prarabdha is inreference to an individual, but vyavasthit goes beyond that.Prarabdha happens first and then there is vyavasthit. Vyavasthitgives you a detailed explanation of the individual as well as theentirety.I have given a detailed explanation on the knowledge ofvyavasthit. What is the world like? How does it run? I haveexposed everything. I have exposed it all, for your benefit, sothat you feel at peace and do not have any sankalp (‘My-ness’)or vikalp (‘I am Chandubhai’). Vyavasthit cannot be understoodin the Kramic path. The entire Kramic path is based on theego; therefore one cannot say “vyavasthit”. When a personbecomes the ‘doer’ himself, he will never accept vyavasthit asbeing the ‘doer’. He only believes, ‘It is I who does everything.’If you asked him, ‘If you were the one doing it, then why didyou make such a loss?’ And he will answer, ‘Sir, it all dependson prarabdha.’ People will call it both, prarabdha andpurusharth.How many years has it been since you received Gnan?Questioner: Three years.Dadashri: So have you seen anything wrong withvyavasthit in the last three years?Questioner: No, nothing at all.Dadashri: One can have doubts and uncertainties aboutHari (God) as to, “Why did He do it this way?” There is no oneby the name of “Hari” out there. It is just a crutch. Saints andsages have come up with the word, because people need somekind of assurance, don’t they? Ours is Akram Vignan;therefore, I have exposed everything ‘as it is’, and revealed thepart that runs on its own. Therefore, there is no need for you toworry about anything. Just look at how the hair grows on itsown! The mustache grows by itself! You can have a French cutwhenever you want to. Just in case someone lops off yourmustache, do not get anxious! And do not get upset with theperpetrator either. The mustache will grow back within a month.So it is not something you need to get aggravated about. If yourchild dies, you should not worry, as this is vyavasthit. If yousuffer a loss, you should not worry. And even if you make aprofit, you should not become over elated. All of it is done byvyavasthit.You are not the doer. Just as the night and day; sunriseand sunset and everything else, is so exact and regulated, so isthe mind; under the control of vyavasthit. I have disclosed allof this. Just to disclose this very thing; what it actually is, hasbeen the search of my countless past lives. If I say it is destiny(effect, prarabdha), then I will be able to sleep easily. But whenyou say that it is purusharth (effort, free will), then should youdo the purusharth to wake up early or stay in bed late? I didnot approve of this uncertainty. Then what are the facts? So Isaid, “Vyavasthit!” And so, that was all right!After giving this knowledge of vyavasthit, it is possibleAptavani-45556Aptavani-4for one to live completely as a Gnani, one’s vikalp (‘I amChandubhai’) and sankalp (‘My-ness’) will not arise. When youget a letter regarding your income tax, saying that you have topay a penalty, you will immediately understand that it isvyavasthit. If it is in your vyavasthit, then of course you willbe fined. Otherwise, what else is he going to do, since he doesnot even have the independent control to empty his own bowelsat will? No one is able to do anything in this world. And if it ismeant to be so in your vyavasthit, then nothing is going to letyou off, so why should you be afraid?Whatever is in your karmic account, it will never let goof you. What can your poor boss do there? He is merely aninstrument (a nimit). You will create animosity and vengeance(veyr) for the boss, blaming him for everything, and complainingthat he is the only one who is like that; always after you. Alas,it is not the boss that is after you; it is your karma. By notunderstanding this, people are just creating vengeance.As long as one becomes the ‘doer’, he will neverunderstand ‘who the doer (karta) is’. If one understands whothe ‘doer’ is, then one will not remain as the ‘doer’. See, Youdo not have to do anything, do You?Questioner: No.Dadashri: The Kramic path means that the ego is there,and with it, there is also the will of God. How can the two existtogether? That is why Lord Mahavir (last Tirthankar) proclaimed,that one is the ‘doer’ in vyavahar (life’s interactions). As longas you have the ego (‘I am Chandubhai’), then you are indeedthe ‘doer’, and if You do not have the ego, then vyavasthit isthe ‘doer’.Questioner: Dada, if one believes that God is the ‘doer’(karta), then can’t he just live his life with the understanding thathe is the ‘non-doer’ (akarta)?Dadashri: No, how can you ever become a ‘non-doer’?If you become a non-doer, then how can it be possible for youto renounce (tyaag) anything? ‘God’s will’ is just there toappease your own mind. If you drop a cup, you will say that itwas ‘God’s will.’ But how can it be ‘God’s will’ when there isnobody out there, who goes by the name of God? Does anyonehave the right to interfere in your affairs? Why would God needto do anything in my work? Is he my superior? But just look atall this fallacy that has carried on until now.The Gnani Purush never uses anything as a crutch.Many say that it is the fruit of their karma. ‘We’ have givenYou this beautiful “vyavasthit” so that you will not experienceany difficulties. ‘We’ have examined this vyavasthit beforegiving it to you. It is all one hundred percent vyavasthit!Otherwise, you will get on the wrong path. ‘We’ are sayingthat it is vyavasthit as far as it relates to worldly matters.What ‘we’ have given You, will run things for you from nowon. You have to remain in the purusharth dharma (religion ofthe Self). You may ask whether this will work for you or not.‘We’ tell you that it is vyavasthit, so do not even pay anyattention to it there. This mind, body and speech are under thecontrol of vyavasthit. All you have to do is simply ‘see’ whatthe body does. Keep ‘seeing’ what ‘Chandubhai’ does. AndYou just have to keep following ‘our’ Five Agnas (specialdirectives). Now tell me, hasn’t this been given to you sosimply and directly?Questioner: Is remaining in the Five Agnas consideredpurusharth?Dadashri: Yes, to remain in the Agnas is itself purusharth;it is the religion (dharma; duty) and it is also the penance(tapa). The Agnas contain everything. Therefore, You do nothave to do anything. Once you meet a Gnani Purush, You onlyhave to remain in his Agnas.Aptavani-45556Aptavani-4for one to live completely as a Gnani, one’s vikalp (‘I amChandubhai’) and sankalp (‘My-ness’) will not arise. When youget a letter regarding your income tax, saying that you have topay a penalty, you will immediately understand that it isvyavasthit. If it is in your vyavasthit, then of course you willbe fined. Otherwise, what else is he going to do, since he doesnot even have the independent control to empty his own bowelsat will? No one is able to do anything in this world. And if it ismeant to be so in your vyavasthit, then nothing is going to letyou off, so why should you be afraid?Whatever is in your karmic account, it will never let goof you. What can your poor boss do there? He is merely aninstrument (a nimit). You will create animosity and vengeance(veyr) for the boss, blaming him for everything, and complainingthat he is the only one who is like that; always after you. Alas,it is not the boss that is after you; it is your karma. By notunderstanding this, people are just creating vengeance.As long as one becomes the ‘doer’, he will neverunderstand ‘who the doer (karta) is’. If one understands whothe ‘doer’ is, then one will not remain as the ‘doer’. See, Youdo not have to do anything, do You?Questioner: No.Dadashri: The Kramic path means that the ego is there,and with it, there is also the will of God. How can the two existtogether? That is why Lord Mahavir (last Tirthankar) proclaimed,that one is the ‘doer’ in vyavahar (life’s interactions). As longas you have the ego (‘I am Chandubhai’), then you are indeedthe ‘doer’, and if You do not have the ego, then vyavasthit isthe ‘doer’.Questioner: Dada, if one believes that God is the ‘doer’(karta), then can’t he just live his life with the understanding thathe is the ‘non-doer’ (akarta)?Dadashri: No, how can you ever become a ‘non-doer’?If you become a non-doer, then how can it be possible for youto renounce (tyaag) anything? ‘God’s will’ is just there toappease your own mind. If you drop a cup, you will say that itwas ‘God’s will.’ But how can it be ‘God’s will’ when there isnobody out there, who goes by the name of God? Does anyonehave the right to interfere in your affairs? Why would God needto do anything in my work? Is he my superior? But just look atall this fallacy that has carried on until now.The Gnani Purush never uses anything as a crutch.Many say that it is the fruit of their karma. ‘We’ have givenYou this beautiful “vyavasthit” so that you will not experienceany difficulties. ‘We’ have examined this vyavasthit beforegiving it to you. It is all one hundred percent vyavasthit!Otherwise, you will get on the wrong path. ‘We’ are sayingthat it is vyavasthit as far as it relates to worldly matters.What ‘we’ have given You, will run things for you from nowon. You have to remain in the purusharth dharma (religion ofthe Self). You may ask whether this will work for you or not.‘We’ tell you that it is vyavasthit, so do not even pay anyattention to it there. This mind, body and speech are under thecontrol of vyavasthit. All you have to do is simply ‘see’ whatthe body does. Keep ‘seeing’ what ‘Chandubhai’ does. AndYou just have to keep following ‘our’ Five Agnas (specialdirectives). Now tell me, hasn’t this been given to you sosimply and directly?Questioner: Is remaining in the Five Agnas consideredpurusharth?Dadashri: Yes, to remain in the Agnas is itself purusharth;it is the religion (dharma; duty) and it is also the penance(tapa). The Agnas contain everything. Therefore, You do nothave to do anything. Once you meet a Gnani Purush, You onlyhave to remain in his Agnas.Aptavani-45758 Aptavani-4Which Is Greater, Destiny or Purusharth?Questioner: Which is the greater of the two, destiny(bhagya) or effort (purusharth)?Dadashri: He that understands destiny and purusharth,is greater. People do not know this. What do you considerpurusharth to be? Have you experienced destiny (bhagya)?Questioner: I believe that everything happens throughdestiny (bhagya).Dadashri: Where have you seen free will (purusharth)?Questioner: What happens routinely is purusharth(free-will effort).Dadashri: What is destiny (prarabdha)?Questioner: A miracle, like getting to do your darshan,I consider destiny (a bhagya).Dadashri: Would you call your coming here, apurusharth?Questioner: Yes, that would be called a purusharth.Dadashri: This is it. People do not realize the differencebetween free will (purusharth) and destiny (prarabdha).They speak this way because of illusion (bhranti). Illusion is atype of vision, is it not? Which is why, they see that this isprarabdha and that is purusharth through the illusion.Purusharth, in fact, is not visible. Whatever you see, is allprarabdha. Purusharth continues to occur, but you areunaware of it. If purusharth were visible, everyone would turnthings around for the better.Questioner: How does purusharth occur?Dadashri: Purusharth occurs from within, which isknown as bhaav purusharth (it creates a cause). Now, peopleuse the word bhaav, but they do not understand it. Dravya(everything visible; karmic effect) is prarabdha. And innerintent (bhaav) is purusharth.Questioner: Do the karmas we do, happen because ofdestiny (bhagya) or is destiny created by karma?Dadashri: Karma happens because of destiny (effect;prarabdha), however, when the karma occurs, you are notaware of the inner intent (bhaav) that arises at the time, whichis the purusharth that continues within in a subtle way. Those(bhaav) are the ‘causes’ and these are all the ‘effects’. ‘Effects’are all prarabdha (destiny). Your coming here is prarabdha,your asking questions is prarabdha, your listening here isprarabdha, whereas, the purusharth is what goes on withinyou. Everything from birth until death, is mandatory (farajiyat).And that which is mandatory, is destiny (prarabdha). You haveno choice about marriage, becoming widowed, being educated,having a job or a business, etc. One man’s business will notsucceed even when it is an honest business and another man’sbusiness will be very successful in spite of ongoing dishonesty.That is all prarabdha. The gross (sthool) or visible part, is allprarabdha and the subtle (sookshma) part is all purusharth.Questioner: Does destiny continue to change or does itremain the same? If you have good karma, is it possible foryour destiny to change?Dadashri: Whatever changes you perceive to be onaccount of good karma, that makes you think that it was whatyou did that saved you, it was really something that was destinedto happen. Or else it would not have happened. Therefore, it isall prarabdha and it cannot be changed.Questioner: Although people have bound good karma,they still have to suffer the pain (dukh) that comes their way,don’t they?Aptavani-45758 Aptavani-4Which Is Greater, Destiny or Purusharth?Questioner: Which is the greater of the two, destiny(bhagya) or effort (purusharth)?Dadashri: He that understands destiny and purusharth,is greater. People do not know this. What do you considerpurusharth to be? Have you experienced destiny (bhagya)?Questioner: I believe that everything happens throughdestiny (bhagya).Dadashri: Where have you seen free will (purusharth)?Questioner: What happens routinely is purusharth(free-will effort).Dadashri: What is destiny (prarabdha)?Questioner: A miracle, like getting to do your darshan,I consider destiny (a bhagya).Dadashri: Would you call your coming here, apurusharth?Questioner: Yes, that would be called a purusharth.Dadashri: This is it. People do not realize the differencebetween free will (purusharth) and destiny (prarabdha).They speak this way because of illusion (bhranti). Illusion is atype of vision, is it not? Which is why, they see that this isprarabdha and that is purusharth through the illusion.Purusharth, in fact, is not visible. Whatever you see, is allprarabdha. Purusharth continues to occur, but you areunaware of it. If purusharth were visible, everyone would turnthings around for the better.Questioner: How does purusharth occur?Dadashri: Purusharth occurs from within, which isknown as bhaav purusharth (it creates a cause). Now, peopleuse the word bhaav, but they do not understand it. Dravya(everything visible; karmic effect) is prarabdha. And innerintent (bhaav) is purusharth.Questioner: Do the karmas we do, happen because ofdestiny (bhagya) or is destiny created by karma?Dadashri: Karma happens because of destiny (effect;prarabdha), however, when the karma occurs, you are notaware of the inner intent (bhaav) that arises at the time, whichis the purusharth that continues within in a subtle way. Those(bhaav) are the ‘causes’ and these are all the ‘effects’. ‘Effects’are all prarabdha (destiny). Your coming here is prarabdha,your asking questions is prarabdha, your listening here isprarabdha, whereas, the purusharth is what goes on withinyou. Everything from birth until death, is mandatory (farajiyat).And that which is mandatory, is destiny (prarabdha). You haveno choice about marriage, becoming widowed, being educated,having a job or a business, etc. One man’s business will notsucceed even when it is an honest business and another man’sbusiness will be very successful in spite of ongoing dishonesty.That is all prarabdha. The gross (sthool) or visible part, is allprarabdha and the subtle (sookshma) part is all purusharth.Questioner: Does destiny continue to change or does itremain the same? If you have good karma, is it possible foryour destiny to change?Dadashri: Whatever changes you perceive to be onaccount of good karma, that makes you think that it was whatyou did that saved you, it was really something that was destinedto happen. Or else it would not have happened. Therefore, it isall prarabdha and it cannot be changed.Questioner: Although people have bound good karma,they still have to suffer the pain (dukh) that comes their way,don’t they?Aptavani-45960Aptavani-4Dadashri: If they did not have to suffer the pain in spiteof their good karma, where would they go? Everyone has tosuffer his or her pain. The experience can be pleasant (shata)or it can be unpleasant (ashata). When one’s daughter getsmarried, one has experience of pleasure (shata-vedaniya), butafter the marriage, when the son-in-law comes to ask for money,it gives rise to unpleasant experience (ashata-vedaniya). All theexternal experiences of pleasure or pain are in the control ofvyavasthit, and the inner happiness that prevails is thepurusharth.Kramic Path Is Dependent on IllusoryPurusharthWhat is prarabdha? It is not in our hands (satta). It isunder the control of another, and yet if we believe that it is in ourcontrol, that is our purusharth. “I did this, I did that”. Althoughyou are not the one doing it, you claim that you are. This is yourmisconception which is a purusharth. It is called an illusoryeffort (bhrant purusharth). And from the moment the awarenessthat, ‘I am not the doer’ arises, the illusory effort (bhrantpurusharth) stops and the purusharth towards mokshabegins.Questioner: Will the feeling of “I am not the ‘doer’”occur only if it is in the destiny?Dadashri: It will only occur if it is in the destiny.However, it will not work just by saying that it is all in thedestiny. After attaining the Atma (the Self), the real purusharthbegins. If not, there is always the illusory effort! There is theillusory effort of the illusion (that ‘I am Chandubhai’), and thereis the real purusharth of Gnan (that ‘I am pure Soul’). Bothcontinue to occur. The purusharth of Gnan will take You tomoksha, and the purusharth of the illusion will make youwander around interminably in the worldly life.Questioner: Prayatna (effort), prarabdha andpurusharth – are all three the same?Dadashri: Prarabdha and prayatna are the same thing.They are both ‘children’ of the same ‘parents’. And what isconsidered real purusharth? It is that which is not mixed. It isintegral. It does not need anything else. In real purusharth, Youare not dependent on anything. It can be done whenever Youwant to do it; whereas, for the so-called purusharth of thisworldly life, you can only get to the station if your legs are in goodshape (healthy). You can only function properly, providing you donot have a headache. So you can say that everything is dependenton other factors. It is with expectations (sapeksha). Whereas,real purusharth is independent and without expectation. You willfind solutions to everything, if you come into real purusharth.Questioner: I was on the Kramic path, and today myfocus (dhyan) has turned towards the Akram path. So shouldI consider that as my purusharth or the effect of my destiny?Dadashri: That is considered fruition of your meritkarma (punya). Your destiny (bhagya- unfolding of karma)brought you here. Then ‘we’ gave you Gnan. Which made youa Purush, and now having become a Purush, Your purusharthhas begun. As long as there is the belief of ‘I am doing’, itcannot be considered purusharth. After you attained theknowledge of the Self, You have learnt how to ‘See and Know’.After You know that You are the Knower (Gnata) andChandubhai is gneya (the object to be known), the realpurusharth begins.There is only the Self (Atma) and the non-Self (prakruti).The prakruti is dependent on karmic effect (prarabdha).Because of kriya (actions of the prakruti) the inner intent(bhaav) naturally arises. This inner intent (bhaav) is thepurusharth for the next life. But people do not know that it isAptavani-45960Aptavani-4Dadashri: If they did not have to suffer the pain in spiteof their good karma, where would they go? Everyone has tosuffer his or her pain. The experience can be pleasant (shata)or it can be unpleasant (ashata). When one’s daughter getsmarried, one has experience of pleasure (shata-vedaniya), butafter the marriage, when the son-in-law comes to ask for money,it gives rise to unpleasant experience (ashata-vedaniya). All theexternal experiences of pleasure or pain are in the control ofvyavasthit, and the inner happiness that prevails is thepurusharth.Kramic Path Is Dependent on IllusoryPurusharthWhat is prarabdha? It is not in our hands (satta). It isunder the control of another, and yet if we believe that it is in ourcontrol, that is our purusharth. “I did this, I did that”. Althoughyou are not the one doing it, you claim that you are. This is yourmisconception which is a purusharth. It is called an illusoryeffort (bhrant purusharth). And from the moment the awarenessthat, ‘I am not the doer’ arises, the illusory effort (bhrantpurusharth) stops and the purusharth towards mokshabegins.Questioner: Will the feeling of “I am not the ‘doer’”occur only if it is in the destiny?Dadashri: It will only occur if it is in the destiny.However, it will not work just by saying that it is all in thedestiny. After attaining the Atma (the Self), the real purusharthbegins. If not, there is always the illusory effort! There is theillusory effort of the illusion (that ‘I am Chandubhai’), and thereis the real purusharth of Gnan (that ‘I am pure Soul’). Bothcontinue to occur. The purusharth of Gnan will take You tomoksha, and the purusharth of the illusion will make youwander around interminably in the worldly life.Questioner: Prayatna (effort), prarabdha andpurusharth – are all three the same?Dadashri: Prarabdha and prayatna are the same thing.They are both ‘children’ of the same ‘parents’. And what isconsidered real purusharth? It is that which is not mixed. It isintegral. It does not need anything else. In real purusharth, Youare not dependent on anything. It can be done whenever Youwant to do it; whereas, for the so-called purusharth of thisworldly life, you can only get to the station if your legs are in goodshape (healthy). You can only function properly, providing you donot have a headache. So you can say that everything is dependenton other factors. It is with expectations (sapeksha). Whereas,real purusharth is independent and without expectation. You willfind solutions to everything, if you come into real purusharth.Questioner: I was on the Kramic path, and today myfocus (dhyan) has turned towards the Akram path. So shouldI consider that as my purusharth or the effect of my destiny?Dadashri: That is considered fruition of your meritkarma (punya). Your destiny (bhagya- unfolding of karma)brought you here. Then ‘we’ gave you Gnan. Which made youa Purush, and now having become a Purush, Your purusharthhas begun. As long as there is the belief of ‘I am doing’, itcannot be considered purusharth. After you attained theknowledge of the Self, You have learnt how to ‘See and Know’.After You know that You are the Knower (Gnata) andChandubhai is gneya (the object to be known), the realpurusharth begins.There is only the Self (Atma) and the non-Self (prakruti).The prakruti is dependent on karmic effect (prarabdha).Because of kriya (actions of the prakruti) the inner intent(bhaav) naturally arises. This inner intent (bhaav) is thepurusharth for the next life. But people do not know that it isAptavani-46162Aptavani-4illusory effort (bhrant purusharth)! That which charges karmafor the next life is illusory effort (bhrant purusharth) and all therest is prarabdha (effect of karma in this life). Of course, innerintent (bhaav) is bound to arise, is it not?Wouldn’t you have to make the bhaav to get married? Itis because of the bhaav from your previous life, that you havesuch desires now. Because you charged such a bhaav, this iswhat has come about. This is why inner intent (bhaav) is saidto be purusharth and dravya (what comes into effect) isconsidered prarabdha. But people take this in their ownlanguage (interpret) by calling effect (dravya), a purusharth;while having no understanding whatsoever, of the bhaav(‘charge’) purusharth.Here in the path of Akram, both effect (dravya) andcause (bhaav) have been classed as ‘discharge’. The Kramicpath is dependent on cause (bhaav). In the Akram path wehave entered into our swabhav (the Self), which means that theothers are in par-bhaav (nature of the non-Self). We have putcause (bhaav) aside, so that all that remains for You now, is tosettle all effects (dravya) with equanimity.Questioner: So one cannot consider it a purusharthuntil he knows the Self?Dadashri: You cannot say that you are doing realpurusharth. However, you can still do the illusory (bhrant)purusharth. If you have unity of mind, speech and body, thenthrough the illusory purusharth a karmic seed will be sown.That is considered vyavahar (worldly) purusharth. A personsays exactly what is on his mind, and acts according to what hismind and speech dictate. If he becomes involved in activitywhich is shubha (auspicious), he will benefit from his worldlypurusharth. If he proceeds in this way, he will eventually meetwith the right circumstances to allow him to attain the Self. Thatis why shubha has been praised. This illusory purusharth isconsidered one kind of purusharth. I will explain to you whythis is called an illusory purusharth.The Kramic path is such that if you tell someone to sitdown and do chanting (japa), he would sit down to do japa.The chanting (japa) happens because of prarabdha, but it is thebhaav (subtlest inner intent) that occurs at the time, that sowsthe karmic seed for the next life, which is called purusharth.Therefore, while experiencing the prarabdha, it gives rise topurusharth. While enjoying his prarabdha, the seed ofpurusharth is sown within. This is because he believes, ‘I amthe doer’. Otherwise, you would not be sowing the seeds whilegoing through prarabdha and you would still attain moksha.But you still have the bhaav of doership which is why there isa great deal of emphasis placed on prarabdha and on kriya(rituals and actions). It is because behind that, the purusharthis occurring automatically.The Kramic path today is fractured. If a person sits downto do religious chanting (japa), and while he is chanting, at thesame time he is, creating bhaav in his mind, thinking: ‘My fatheris useless, my father is useless... he bothers me; he provokesme.’ So he has something different on his mind, he sayssomething different and his actions are different. What wasKramic path like until now? It was to do purusharth whilegoing through the prarabdha. And what is the Akram path?Straight, direct purusharth! Through the grace of the GnaniPurush, You become Purush (the Self) and then the realpurusharth arises. You attain complete awareness as the Self;and absolute light. Thereafter, You will never forget the Self,even for a second.How Does Prarabdha Unfold?Questioner: But does prarabdha only occur if one doespurusharth?Dadashri: That is not purusharth. Those are all naimitikAptavani-46162Aptavani-4illusory effort (bhrant purusharth)! That which charges karmafor the next life is illusory effort (bhrant purusharth) and all therest is prarabdha (effect of karma in this life). Of course, innerintent (bhaav) is bound to arise, is it not?Wouldn’t you have to make the bhaav to get married? Itis because of the bhaav from your previous life, that you havesuch desires now. Because you charged such a bhaav, this iswhat has come about. This is why inner intent (bhaav) is saidto be purusharth and dravya (what comes into effect) isconsidered prarabdha. But people take this in their ownlanguage (interpret) by calling effect (dravya), a purusharth;while having no understanding whatsoever, of the bhaav(‘charge’) purusharth.Here in the path of Akram, both effect (dravya) andcause (bhaav) have been classed as ‘discharge’. The Kramicpath is dependent on cause (bhaav). In the Akram path wehave entered into our swabhav (the Self), which means that theothers are in par-bhaav (nature of the non-Self). We have putcause (bhaav) aside, so that all that remains for You now, is tosettle all effects (dravya) with equanimity.Questioner: So one cannot consider it a purusharthuntil he knows the Self?Dadashri: You cannot say that you are doing realpurusharth. However, you can still do the illusory (bhrant)purusharth. If you have unity of mind, speech and body, thenthrough the illusory purusharth a karmic seed will be sown.That is considered vyavahar (worldly) purusharth. A personsays exactly what is on his mind, and acts according to what hismind and speech dictate. If he becomes involved in activitywhich is shubha (auspicious), he will benefit from his worldlypurusharth. If he proceeds in this way, he will eventually meetwith the right circumstances to allow him to attain the Self. Thatis why shubha has been praised. This illusory purusharth isconsidered one kind of purusharth. I will explain to you whythis is called an illusory purusharth.The Kramic path is such that if you tell someone to sitdown and do chanting (japa), he would sit down to do japa.The chanting (japa) happens because of prarabdha, but it is thebhaav (subtlest inner intent) that occurs at the time, that sowsthe karmic seed for the next life, which is called purusharth.Therefore, while experiencing the prarabdha, it gives rise topurusharth. While enjoying his prarabdha, the seed ofpurusharth is sown within. This is because he believes, ‘I amthe doer’. Otherwise, you would not be sowing the seeds whilegoing through prarabdha and you would still attain moksha.But you still have the bhaav of doership which is why there isa great deal of emphasis placed on prarabdha and on kriya(rituals and actions). It is because behind that, the purusharthis occurring automatically.The Kramic path today is fractured. If a person sits downto do religious chanting (japa), and while he is chanting, at thesame time he is, creating bhaav in his mind, thinking: ‘My fatheris useless, my father is useless... he bothers me; he provokesme.’ So he has something different on his mind, he sayssomething different and his actions are different. What wasKramic path like until now? It was to do purusharth whilegoing through the prarabdha. And what is the Akram path?Straight, direct purusharth! Through the grace of the GnaniPurush, You become Purush (the Self) and then the realpurusharth arises. You attain complete awareness as the Self;and absolute light. Thereafter, You will never forget the Self,even for a second.How Does Prarabdha Unfold?Questioner: But does prarabdha only occur if one doespurusharth?Dadashri: That is not purusharth. Those are all naimitikAptavani-46364Aptavani-4(apparent doer; instrumental) efforts. You simply continuemaking those efforts.Questioner: Is this just the naimitik karma of prarabdha(effect)?Dadashri: It happens because of prarabdha. It onlyhappens through the inspiration of prarabdha.Questioner: What is prarabdha?Dadashri: Prarabdha (effect of karma) means thebhaavkarma (‘cause’) was created in the past life. That cause(bhaavkarma) gets fed into this ‘computer’ and it is issued intothe universe where it encounters Nature. Then, along with all theother natural causes that come together, we receive it here as avisible effect of that. It is ‘Vyavasthit shakti’ that brings the‘effect’ here. Then you have to get up when it makes you get up,and walk the way it makes you walk. Even the good and badthoughts arise as a consequence of this very process. This is avery subtle phenomenon.Questioner: Is the current prarabdha, the fruit of the‘cause’ (bhaav) from our previous life?Dadashri: Yes. It is the fruit of the ‘cause’ (bhaav) fromthe previous life. And the new ‘causes’ (bhaavs) that occurtoday, are the ‘causes’ for the next life.Questioner: Do these new intents (bhaavs) that arisetoday not give fruit here in this very lifetime?Dadashri: No, they will not give fruition here. Newbhaavs are ‘causes’, the effects of which will be experienced inthe next life. And so, the cycle of cause and effect, effect andcause, continues for endless lifetimes. Unless the Gnani Purushstops the ‘causes’, and puts an end to one’s ‘doership’ of thecause karma (bhaavkarma), this cycle of cause and effect willgo on and on...That Which Brings the Ultimate Result IsPurusharthQuestioner: Can prarabdha be changed through astrong purusharth?Dadashri: If it is only the purusharth, then it can bechanged. But you have to know what purusharth is, don’t you?Without knowing that, what good is it? If out of this money, oneof the bills is genuine and the other is fake; however you cannotdistinguish the one that is genuine, so you take the fake bill withyou. Who will cash it for you? What do you call a purusharth?Questioner: Whatever we do for religion and moksha ispurusharth!Dadashri: That is not called purusharth. That is justsomething you do that is beneficial (hitkari). And anything youdo other than that, is detrimental (ahitkari). Hence, all that iseither beneficial or detrimental, but what is purusharth?Whatever you succeed in doing (safada) is purusharth.Questioner: Some say that you can attain prarabdhaonly if you work for it, and some say that you get an opportunityto work, only if it is in your prarabdha. What is the truth in this?Dadashri: Whatever you see through your eyes, hearthrough your ears, smell through your nose, taste through yourtongue, feel through your skin; whatever you can experiencethrough the five senses, is all prarabdha. Now tell me, how cananyone understand this?Questioner: Then there is a need for purusharth, isn’tthere?Dadashri: Actually, all this is nothing but prarabdha.People did not understand real purusharth and so they createdbhrant (illusory) purusharth. Such purusharth is like an‘illusion’. It is not easy to find something like purusharth. If itAptavani-46364Aptavani-4(apparent doer; instrumental) efforts. You simply continuemaking those efforts.Questioner: Is this just the naimitik karma of prarabdha(effect)?Dadashri: It happens because of prarabdha. It onlyhappens through the inspiration of prarabdha.Questioner: What is prarabdha?Dadashri: Prarabdha (effect of karma) means thebhaavkarma (‘cause’) was created in the past life. That cause(bhaavkarma) gets fed into this ‘computer’ and it is issued intothe universe where it encounters Nature. Then, along with all theother natural causes that come together, we receive it here as avisible effect of that. It is ‘Vyavasthit shakti’ that brings the‘effect’ here. Then you have to get up when it makes you get up,and walk the way it makes you walk. Even the good and badthoughts arise as a consequence of this very process. This is avery subtle phenomenon.Questioner: Is the current prarabdha, the fruit of the‘cause’ (bhaav) from our previous life?Dadashri: Yes. It is the fruit of the ‘cause’ (bhaav) fromthe previous life. And the new ‘causes’ (bhaavs) that occurtoday, are the ‘causes’ for the next life.Questioner: Do these new intents (bhaavs) that arisetoday not give fruit here in this very lifetime?Dadashri: No, they will not give fruition here. Newbhaavs are ‘causes’, the effects of which will be experienced inthe next life. And so, the cycle of cause and effect, effect andcause, continues for endless lifetimes. Unless the Gnani Purushstops the ‘causes’, and puts an end to one’s ‘doership’ of thecause karma (bhaavkarma), this cycle of cause and effect willgo on and on...That Which Brings the Ultimate Result IsPurusharthQuestioner: Can prarabdha be changed through astrong purusharth?Dadashri: If it is only the purusharth, then it can bechanged. But you have to know what purusharth is, don’t you?Without knowing that, what good is it? If out of this money, oneof the bills is genuine and the other is fake; however you cannotdistinguish the one that is genuine, so you take the fake bill withyou. Who will cash it for you? What do you call a purusharth?Questioner: Whatever we do for religion and moksha ispurusharth!Dadashri: That is not called purusharth. That is justsomething you do that is beneficial (hitkari). And anything youdo other than that, is detrimental (ahitkari). Hence, all that iseither beneficial or detrimental, but what is purusharth?Whatever you succeed in doing (safada) is purusharth.Questioner: Some say that you can attain prarabdhaonly if you work for it, and some say that you get an opportunityto work, only if it is in your prarabdha. What is the truth in this?Dadashri: Whatever you see through your eyes, hearthrough your ears, smell through your nose, taste through yourtongue, feel through your skin; whatever you can experiencethrough the five senses, is all prarabdha. Now tell me, how cananyone understand this?Questioner: Then there is a need for purusharth, isn’tthere?Dadashri: Actually, all this is nothing but prarabdha.People did not understand real purusharth and so they createdbhrant (illusory) purusharth. Such purusharth is like an‘illusion’. It is not easy to find something like purusharth. If itAptavani-46566Aptavani-4were easy to find purusharth, everyone would do purusharthand go to moksha tomorrow! But all they do is keep trying tochange prarabdha and, therefore, all their efforts are wasted.But I show them the real purusharth in no time, and that is whytheir efforts are rewarded. Purusharth is that which accomplishesthe goal; otherwise one can make all the efforts one wants overcountless lifetimes, and still not attain anything. They are the toilsof agnanis (those who are not Self-realized)! Agnanis cannever get rid of their agnan (ignorance of the Self).(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(4)Shraddha (Faith)Blind Faith – Ignorant FaithA superintendent of a large farm once told me that he didnot believe in blind faith (andha-shraddha). I made a mental noteof what he said. Then while we were strolling in his farm, we cameacross a patch of land that was fifty feet wide, and covered withtall grass. As we crossed the patch, he leaped along with four-foot long strides. I asked him, “You had no idea that there mightbe snakes or scorpions in the grass, so how come you put yourfeet in it?” What tremendous blind faith thatis!Without blind faith you cannot even eat, board a ship orsit in a taxi! With what sort of faith (shraddha) do you sit in ataxi? You do not have faith in the fact that there will not be anaccident. When you drink water at home, do you ever check tosee whether any lizards or insects have fallen into your tank orwhether your neighbors have dumped germicides in it? Therefore,it is not possible to do anything without blind faith (andha-shraddha).What you understand or call blind faith, is not really blindfaith. It is ignorant faith (agnya-shraddha). The entire world liesin ignorant faith. When children play with dolls and toys, it iswith ignorant faith; likewise, there is ignorant faith in religion.Gnani Purush alone is without blind faith. His physical bodyhowever, is in blind faith. Shortly, even ‘we’ will go home anddrink water without checking it, but ‘we’ do not have theownership of this body.Aptavani-46566Aptavani-4were easy to find purusharth, everyone would do purusharthand go to moksha tomorrow! But all they do is keep trying tochange prarabdha and, therefore, all their efforts are wasted.But I show them the real purusharth in no time, and that is whytheir efforts are rewarded. Purusharth is that which accomplishesthe goal; otherwise one can make all the efforts one wants overcountless lifetimes, and still not attain anything. They are the toilsof agnanis (those who are not Self-realized)! Agnanis cannever get rid of their agnan (ignorance of the Self).(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(4)Shraddha (Faith)Blind Faith – Ignorant FaithA superintendent of a large farm once told me that he didnot believe in blind faith (andha-shraddha). I made a mental noteof what he said. Then while we were strolling in his farm, we cameacross a patch of land that was fifty feet wide, and covered withtall grass. As we crossed the patch, he leaped along with four-foot long strides. I asked him, “You had no idea that there mightbe snakes or scorpions in the grass, so how come you put yourfeet in it?” What tremendous blind faith thatis!Without blind faith you cannot even eat, board a ship orsit in a taxi! With what sort of faith (shraddha) do you sit in ataxi? You do not have faith in the fact that there will not be anaccident. When you drink water at home, do you ever check tosee whether any lizards or insects have fallen into your tank orwhether your neighbors have dumped germicides in it? Therefore,it is not possible to do anything without blind faith (andha-shraddha).What you understand or call blind faith, is not really blindfaith. It is ignorant faith (agnya-shraddha). The entire world liesin ignorant faith. When children play with dolls and toys, it iswith ignorant faith; likewise, there is ignorant faith in religion.Gnani Purush alone is without blind faith. His physical bodyhowever, is in blind faith. Shortly, even ‘we’ will go home anddrink water without checking it, but ‘we’ do not have theownership of this body.Aptavani-46768Aptavani-4Atma Shraddha – Prabhu ShraddhaQuestioner: What is the difference between faith in theSelf (Atma shraddha) and faith in God (prabhu shraddha)?Dadashri: In prabhu shraddha, there is a belief that,‘the Lord is separate and I am separate.’ And in Atmashraddha, one becomes the Self, and then worships the Self.This is direct (pratyaksh) worship and the other is consideredindirect (paroksh) worship. The one who has not attained theSelf, does not realize that the Lord he refers to, is his own Soul.That is why he worships in the name of Lord, but it reaches hisown Soul indirectly.Faith – GnanQuestioner: Can one attain Gnan without faith (shraddha)or not?Dadashri: Even ignorance cannot be attained withoutfaith. Faith is a ‘cause’ and Gnan is the ‘result’.After attaining the knowledge of the Self, what should Youbecome? You should become the embodiment of faith! Peoplewill have faith in you at the mere sight of you. It is indeed veryrare to find such a model of faith!(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(5)OpinionThe Blindness of OpinionIf a poker player came here, you may have an opinionabout him that, ‘here is a poker player sitting’, which will makeyou feel uneasy. While others will not have a problem with it.Why is that?Questioner: It is because others are not aware that he isa poker player.Dadashri: Others know of that, but they do not form anopinion (abhipraya) about him; whereas you do, which is whyit bothers you. You should let go of those opinions. You are theone who formed this opinion; therefore, it is your own fault, andthat is why it bothers you. The other person does not tell youto form opinions about him. If it bothers you, then it is indeedthe result of your own fault.Questioner: Is it considered prejudice (purvagraha) toform an opinion about something without knowing the facts? Dadashri: No, it is not like that. This man is alwaysdonating money, and to believe that he will donate money todayas well, is ‘prejudice’. If a man comes to upset you every day,but today he has come to invite you for dinner; the very momentyou see him, you will think to yourself that he has come to upsetyou, that is ‘prejudice’.This worldly life (sansar) is founded on prejudice. Let goof the prior judgments, as they will keep changing. Even if a thiefAptavani-46768Aptavani-4Atma Shraddha – Prabhu ShraddhaQuestioner: What is the difference between faith in theSelf (Atma shraddha) and faith in God (prabhu shraddha)?Dadashri: In prabhu shraddha, there is a belief that,‘the Lord is separate and I am separate.’ And in Atmashraddha, one becomes the Self, and then worships the Self.This is direct (pratyaksh) worship and the other is consideredindirect (paroksh) worship. The one who has not attained theSelf, does not realize that the Lord he refers to, is his own Soul.That is why he worships in the name of Lord, but it reaches hisown Soul indirectly.Faith – GnanQuestioner: Can one attain Gnan without faith (shraddha)or not?Dadashri: Even ignorance cannot be attained withoutfaith. Faith is a ‘cause’ and Gnan is the ‘result’.After attaining the knowledge of the Self, what should Youbecome? You should become the embodiment of faith! Peoplewill have faith in you at the mere sight of you. It is indeed veryrare to find such a model of faith!(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(5)OpinionThe Blindness of OpinionIf a poker player came here, you may have an opinionabout him that, ‘here is a poker player sitting’, which will makeyou feel uneasy. While others will not have a problem with it.Why is that?Questioner: It is because others are not aware that he isa poker player.Dadashri: Others know of that, but they do not form anopinion (abhipraya) about him; whereas you do, which is whyit bothers you. You should let go of those opinions. You are theone who formed this opinion; therefore, it is your own fault, andthat is why it bothers you. The other person does not tell youto form opinions about him. If it bothers you, then it is indeedthe result of your own fault.Questioner: Is it considered prejudice (purvagraha) toform an opinion about something without knowing the facts? Dadashri: No, it is not like that. This man is alwaysdonating money, and to believe that he will donate money todayas well, is ‘prejudice’. If a man comes to upset you every day,but today he has come to invite you for dinner; the very momentyou see him, you will think to yourself that he has come to upsetyou, that is ‘prejudice’.This worldly life (sansar) is founded on prejudice. Let goof the prior judgments, as they will keep changing. Even if a thiefAptavani-46970Aptavani-4steals in front of your eyes, do not have prejudice towards him.For you never know that tomorrow he may even become anhonest man. I do not have any prejudice, not even foramoment.Opinion and the Sense OrgansThe senses (indriya) will definitely accept (like) a mangoif it is very tasty. You will immediately grab it and start eating itwhen it comes in front of you. But why is it that you rememberthe mango even after you have eaten it? That is because you hadformed an opinion that, ‘the mango is very tasty’. It is not thesenses that make you think about it; the poor senses will eatanything you put in front of them. It is your opinion that createsattachment (raag) and abhorrence (dwesh). You becomespontaneous and natural (sahaj) when you become free ofopinions.Attachment and abhorrence happen the moment you forman opinion. Where there is no opinion, there is no attachment orabhorrence.Opinions Lead to ObstructionQuestioner: What should we do if we cannot get rid ofpreviously formed opinions?Dadashri: When you form a very strong opinion aboutsomething, it becomes a major obstruction (atkan) for you. It iseasy to get rid of those opinions that are spread about, but it isvery difficult to get rid of those opinions that create anobstruction for you. It is a serious ailment. It is not the vishays(pleasures of the senses) themselves, that have attachment orabhorrence, but the underlying belief in opinion, that is indeedattachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh).How to Rid Opinion?Questioner: How do we get rid of an entrenchedopinion?Dadashri: It will begin to leave, the moment you make adecision to get rid of it. If it is an entrenched opinion, it will cometo an end if you “dig” into it for two hours every day. Afterattaining the Self, You have attained purusharth dharma (thereligion of the Self), and purusharth dharma can go all the wayup to super effort (parakram), which is capable of eradicatingand destroying any kind of obstacle (atkan). But You have toknow what caused the opinion in the first place, and then youmust do pratikraman for it.How heavenly your home would become, if everyone init got rid of their opinions about each other!Questioner: What if we have an opinion about someone’sprakruti, and we believe that if we did not say anything to him,he would not change?Dadashri: As long as you have the opinion that,‘Nothing can be achieved without getting angry with him,’ thenshould he get into trouble with you, you will not refrain yourselffrom rebuking him, because the previous ‘reactions’ are boundto occur. Although you may have decided to rid yourself ofyour opinion about him, those reactions from the past will stilllinger on for a while. They will remain for you and for him aswell.Questioner: Opinions annoy me over and over again.Dadashri: You should try to not have an opinion evenabout that opinion.Questioner: Who makes opinions?Dadashri: When a mango comes in front of you,according to your own prakruti, your senses (indriya) may likeit. It is not the nature of the sense organs to form a good or abad opinion about anything. Worldly influence (loksangnya)plays a huge role in this. A person forms opinions of, “This isAptavani-46970Aptavani-4steals in front of your eyes, do not have prejudice towards him.For you never know that tomorrow he may even become anhonest man. I do not have any prejudice, not even foramoment.Opinion and the Sense OrgansThe senses (indriya) will definitely accept (like) a mangoif it is very tasty. You will immediately grab it and start eating itwhen it comes in front of you. But why is it that you rememberthe mango even after you have eaten it? That is because you hadformed an opinion that, ‘the mango is very tasty’. It is not thesenses that make you think about it; the poor senses will eatanything you put in front of them. It is your opinion that createsattachment (raag) and abhorrence (dwesh). You becomespontaneous and natural (sahaj) when you become free ofopinions.Attachment and abhorrence happen the moment you forman opinion. Where there is no opinion, there is no attachment orabhorrence.Opinions Lead to ObstructionQuestioner: What should we do if we cannot get rid ofpreviously formed opinions?Dadashri: When you form a very strong opinion aboutsomething, it becomes a major obstruction (atkan) for you. It iseasy to get rid of those opinions that are spread about, but it isvery difficult to get rid of those opinions that create anobstruction for you. It is a serious ailment. It is not the vishays(pleasures of the senses) themselves, that have attachment orabhorrence, but the underlying belief in opinion, that is indeedattachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh).How to Rid Opinion?Questioner: How do we get rid of an entrenchedopinion?Dadashri: It will begin to leave, the moment you make adecision to get rid of it. If it is an entrenched opinion, it will cometo an end if you “dig” into it for two hours every day. Afterattaining the Self, You have attained purusharth dharma (thereligion of the Self), and purusharth dharma can go all the wayup to super effort (parakram), which is capable of eradicatingand destroying any kind of obstacle (atkan). But You have toknow what caused the opinion in the first place, and then youmust do pratikraman for it.How heavenly your home would become, if everyone init got rid of their opinions about each other!Questioner: What if we have an opinion about someone’sprakruti, and we believe that if we did not say anything to him,he would not change?Dadashri: As long as you have the opinion that,‘Nothing can be achieved without getting angry with him,’ thenshould he get into trouble with you, you will not refrain yourselffrom rebuking him, because the previous ‘reactions’ are boundto occur. Although you may have decided to rid yourself ofyour opinion about him, those reactions from the past will stilllinger on for a while. They will remain for you and for him aswell.Questioner: Opinions annoy me over and over again.Dadashri: You should try to not have an opinion evenabout that opinion.Questioner: Who makes opinions?Dadashri: When a mango comes in front of you,according to your own prakruti, your senses (indriya) may likeit. It is not the nature of the sense organs to form a good or abad opinion about anything. Worldly influence (loksangnya)plays a huge role in this. A person forms opinions of, “This isAptavani-47172Aptavani-4good and that is bad,” based on what other people say. Thenthe intellect (buddhi) makes a decision and it starts working.Through Gnani’s influence (Gnani’s sangnya), worldly influence(loksangnya) is eliminated and you are liberated from thoseopinions.If you have even the slightest positive or negative thoughtabout someone, you should erase it immediately. If that thoughtlingers on for even a moment, it will reach the other person, andthen it will proliferate. The thought will grow inside the otherperson, within four hours, twelve hours or even after two days.Therefore, these vibrations should not drift in that direction.Questioner: What can we do about that?Dadashri: You should erase it immediately throughpratikraman. If you cannot do pratikraman, then remember‘Dada’ or whomever your God may be and briefly say, “Thesethoughts that I am having are not right; they are not mythoughts.”When your opinion about the other person breaks, youwill be able to happily talk to him and that will also make himhappy. But when you perceive him through your opinion, yousee his faults, then your mind casts its shadow on his mind. Sowhen he approaches you or comes to your house, you do notlike it and that picture instantly gets imprinted within him.What does one have to do to change one’s opinion? If aperson is a thief, in your mind you should keep saying, “He isan honest man, he is an honest man.” Say to yourself, ‘he is agood man, he is a pure Soul (Shuddhatma), and I have a wrongopinion about him’. This is how you should turn it around fromwithin.Spoken words are ruined because of opinions, and that iswhy they are harsh. When you express harsh words, the otherperson will also use harsh words towards you.You should not have suspicion (shanka) towards anyone.Suspicion is the result of opinions that have been formed.Why do boys wear their hair long these days? In theiropinion they look good with long hair. And what if you ask thisyoung man to grow his hair long? He will think that it looks badon him. This is just a collection of opinions. Opinions aredependent on the intellect’s whims. Opinions are the result ofwhere the intellect (buddhi) believes happiness lies. Theydepend upon what the person has brought forth in the receptacleof intellect (buddhi no ashaya) from his past life.If someone has deceived you, you should not keeprecalling it. Just look at what that person is doing today;otherwise, it would be considered prejudice. To remember thepast, is very detrimental.Questioner: But shouldn’t we keep it in mind (dhyan)?Dadashri: That will happen anyway. If you keep it inawareness (dhyan), then it becomes a prejudice. The prejudiceswill ruin your worldly life (sansar) once again. You shouldremain vitarag (free from attachment). You will naturally beaware of the past; nevertheless, it is not a helpful thing. It wasbecause of the way your karma was unfolding, that hebehaved the way he did towards you. If your karma is good,he will behave well towards you. Therefore, do not haveprejudice. How are you to know, if the person who cheatedyou before, has come today to bring you a profit? It is up toyou if you want to deal with him or not, but you should nothave any prejudice! However, when the time comes, whereyou have to deal with him, do not have any prejudice againsthim.Questioner: Does having opinion destroy vitaragata(state of absolute detachment)?Dadashri: Yes, you should not have opinions. OpinionAptavani-47172Aptavani-4good and that is bad,” based on what other people say. Thenthe intellect (buddhi) makes a decision and it starts working.Through Gnani’s influence (Gnani’s sangnya), worldly influence(loksangnya) is eliminated and you are liberated from thoseopinions.If you have even the slightest positive or negative thoughtabout someone, you should erase it immediately. If that thoughtlingers on for even a moment, it will reach the other person, andthen it will proliferate. The thought will grow inside the otherperson, within four hours, twelve hours or even after two days.Therefore, these vibrations should not drift in that direction.Questioner: What can we do about that?Dadashri: You should erase it immediately throughpratikraman. If you cannot do pratikraman, then remember‘Dada’ or whomever your God may be and briefly say, “Thesethoughts that I am having are not right; they are not mythoughts.”When your opinion about the other person breaks, youwill be able to happily talk to him and that will also make himhappy. But when you perceive him through your opinion, yousee his faults, then your mind casts its shadow on his mind. Sowhen he approaches you or comes to your house, you do notlike it and that picture instantly gets imprinted within him.What does one have to do to change one’s opinion? If aperson is a thief, in your mind you should keep saying, “He isan honest man, he is an honest man.” Say to yourself, ‘he is agood man, he is a pure Soul (Shuddhatma), and I have a wrongopinion about him’. This is how you should turn it around fromwithin.Spoken words are ruined because of opinions, and that iswhy they are harsh. When you express harsh words, the otherperson will also use harsh words towards you.You should not have suspicion (shanka) towards anyone.Suspicion is the result of opinions that have been formed.Why do boys wear their hair long these days? In theiropinion they look good with long hair. And what if you ask thisyoung man to grow his hair long? He will think that it looks badon him. This is just a collection of opinions. Opinions aredependent on the intellect’s whims. Opinions are the result ofwhere the intellect (buddhi) believes happiness lies. Theydepend upon what the person has brought forth in the receptacleof intellect (buddhi no ashaya) from his past life.If someone has deceived you, you should not keeprecalling it. Just look at what that person is doing today;otherwise, it would be considered prejudice. To remember thepast, is very detrimental.Questioner: But shouldn’t we keep it in mind (dhyan)?Dadashri: That will happen anyway. If you keep it inawareness (dhyan), then it becomes a prejudice. The prejudiceswill ruin your worldly life (sansar) once again. You shouldremain vitarag (free from attachment). You will naturally beaware of the past; nevertheless, it is not a helpful thing. It wasbecause of the way your karma was unfolding, that hebehaved the way he did towards you. If your karma is good,he will behave well towards you. Therefore, do not haveprejudice. How are you to know, if the person who cheatedyou before, has come today to bring you a profit? It is up toyou if you want to deal with him or not, but you should nothave any prejudice! However, when the time comes, whereyou have to deal with him, do not have any prejudice againsthim.Questioner: Does having opinion destroy vitaragata(state of absolute detachment)?Dadashri: Yes, you should not have opinions. OpinionAptavani-47374Aptavani-4belongs to the non-Self and You have to ‘know’ that it is wrong,and that it is harmful. You bind opinion through your own fault,your own mistake and your own viewpoint. What right do youhave to form an opinion?Questioner: If we form an opinion that we cannot eraseit, do we bind karma?Dadashri: If you have attained this Akram Vignan andyou have the knowledge of separation between the Self and thenon-Self, then You will not bind karma. And yes, if you do notdo pratikraman for the opinion, it will continue to have aneffect on the other person, and he will not have a good feelingabout you. You will not bind karma if you live with a clear innerintent (bhaav; conscience) and with pratikraman, even itseffect will disappear. Purusharth is to ‘divide’ by seven if it was‘multiplied’ by seven.Everything, from birth to death, is in the hands of‘scientific circumstantial evidence’ (vyavasthit) so what is thepoint in having opinions? Having attained the knowledge of theSelf, and after attaining the Gnata-gneya connection (whereyou remain the Knower of all that is to be known), riddingyourself of the few remaining opinions, you pass ‘with honors’!You cannot see things as they are because of opinions,and you cannot experience the bliss of liberation, becauseopinion shrouds it. When you have no opinion left, you canbecome faultless (nirdosh). Once you attain the knowledge ofthe Self, You are considered free (mukta), even if you do haveopinions, but you are not yet supremely free (maha-mukta).Your experience of infinite bliss is halted because of opinions.The ‘causes’ that you had of the past life, come into effectin this life. But to give opinion about the ‘effect’ that ‘this is good’or ‘this is bad’ causes attachment and abhorrence (raag-dwesh).Causes are not bound by actions; they are bound by opinions.Opinions Worth Welcoming!There is nothing wrong with enjoying something, but youshould not form an opinion about it. You should not even havean opinion like, ‘I do not have a problem now’. Even if youhappen to lie, there is no problem with that, but your opinionshould be to tell only the truth.There is no problem with abrahmacharya (sexuality), butyou should not have an opinion about it. The opinion should onlybe for brahmacharya (absolutely free from any sexual impulsesof the mind, speech and body). The opinion to have is, “thisbody is a betrayal (dago).” Any kind of opinion increases theburden. Whatever the opinion, with it comes a burden!If you have an opinion about someone, he will have oneabout you. If you get rid of your opinion, then his opinion willalso go away on its own.The Nature of an OpinionQuestioner: Is opinion the pratishthit ahamkar (instilledego)?Dadashri: Yes. Opinion is made up of subatomicparticles (parmanus) of the ego. Opinions show individuality.One’s vision completely changes through opinion.There is no problem with opinions that are ‘lifeless’ andwhen they do not tug, as these can be dealt with quickly. Butopinions backed by insistence, create a shroud of ignoranceover one’s knowledge.Opinions About Human BeingsThere is not much harm in forming an opinion about non-living things (jada); you will not have much difficulty in getting ridof it. But I caution you about forming opinions aboutmishrachetan (power chetan; human beings).Aptavani-47374Aptavani-4belongs to the non-Self and You have to ‘know’ that it is wrong,and that it is harmful. You bind opinion through your own fault,your own mistake and your own viewpoint. What right do youhave to form an opinion?Questioner: If we form an opinion that we cannot eraseit, do we bind karma?Dadashri: If you have attained this Akram Vignan andyou have the knowledge of separation between the Self and thenon-Self, then You will not bind karma. And yes, if you do notdo pratikraman for the opinion, it will continue to have aneffect on the other person, and he will not have a good feelingabout you. You will not bind karma if you live with a clear innerintent (bhaav; conscience) and with pratikraman, even itseffect will disappear. Purusharth is to ‘divide’ by seven if it was‘multiplied’ by seven.Everything, from birth to death, is in the hands of‘scientific circumstantial evidence’ (vyavasthit) so what is thepoint in having opinions? Having attained the knowledge of theSelf, and after attaining the Gnata-gneya connection (whereyou remain the Knower of all that is to be known), riddingyourself of the few remaining opinions, you pass ‘with honors’!You cannot see things as they are because of opinions,and you cannot experience the bliss of liberation, becauseopinion shrouds it. When you have no opinion left, you canbecome faultless (nirdosh). Once you attain the knowledge ofthe Self, You are considered free (mukta), even if you do haveopinions, but you are not yet supremely free (maha-mukta).Your experience of infinite bliss is halted because of opinions.The ‘causes’ that you had of the past life, come into effectin this life. But to give opinion about the ‘effect’ that ‘this is good’or ‘this is bad’ causes attachment and abhorrence (raag-dwesh).Causes are not bound by actions; they are bound by opinions.Opinions Worth Welcoming!There is nothing wrong with enjoying something, but youshould not form an opinion about it. You should not even havean opinion like, ‘I do not have a problem now’. Even if youhappen to lie, there is no problem with that, but your opinionshould be to tell only the truth.There is no problem with abrahmacharya (sexuality), butyou should not have an opinion about it. The opinion should onlybe for brahmacharya (absolutely free from any sexual impulsesof the mind, speech and body). The opinion to have is, “thisbody is a betrayal (dago).” Any kind of opinion increases theburden. Whatever the opinion, with it comes a burden!If you have an opinion about someone, he will have oneabout you. If you get rid of your opinion, then his opinion willalso go away on its own.The Nature of an OpinionQuestioner: Is opinion the pratishthit ahamkar (instilledego)?Dadashri: Yes. Opinion is made up of subatomicparticles (parmanus) of the ego. Opinions show individuality.One’s vision completely changes through opinion.There is no problem with opinions that are ‘lifeless’ andwhen they do not tug, as these can be dealt with quickly. Butopinions backed by insistence, create a shroud of ignoranceover one’s knowledge.Opinions About Human BeingsThere is not much harm in forming an opinion about non-living things (jada); you will not have much difficulty in getting ridof it. But I caution you about forming opinions aboutmishrachetan (power chetan; human beings).76Aptavani-4Aptavani-475Every man has formed an opinion about his wife, and thiscauses conflicts.‘I am Chandulal’ is an opinion, is it not? You believeyourself to be who you are not and not what you really are.You have formed strong opinions about everyone in yourfamily. For that reason, you must not form opinions aboutanyone; about ‘mishrachetan’ who appears to sulk one minuteand smile the next. Opinion itself is the obstacle (antaray).Demerit karma (paap) can be destroyed, but the obstaclescreated by opinions are detrimental only to yourself. They createentanglements with the very things you want to be free of.Your own actions may seem bitter to you, but they are theactions of the pudgal (non-Self). You have piled up your stockof opinions through your own free will. Each of us has his ownreactions based on his own opinions.The pure Soul (Shuddhatma) is certainly there, but it isthe opinion that is created by the pratishthit atma (self chargedin the past life) that operates the “machinery” (the non-Self).Except for the Shuddhatma, the rest is all ‘machinery’.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(6)The Blindness of ‘Know-How’The Ego of ‘Know-How’ Prevents ‘Expertise’!I do not know how to write. I do not even know how tohold a pen. I do not know how to do anything. When one doesnot know how to do anything related to sansar (the mundane),one is called a Gnani. I am considered abuddha (one whodoes not use intellect).Questioner: You call yourself abuddha (without intellect),but to me you seem extremely intelligent (prabuddha).Dadashri: But I am telling you everything from my ownexperience. I am seventy years old, but I still do not know howto shave. People think they know how to shave, but that isnothing but egoism. There must be just a few people who knowhow to shave. Even I realize that I myself have no idea abouthow properly to hold the razor or angle the blade. I have notbecome expert at that. As long as you are not an expert, youcan only say, you do not know how to do it.Questioner: You have not seen any benefit in becomingan expert, have you?Dadashri: It is not a question of benefit, but I am tellingyou ‘just as it is’, and that is that I do not know how to shave.You may wonder how that is possible. To say that you knowhow, is wrong. It is just egoism. Many do not even know howto use a blade; they cannot even tell whether or not the bladehas become dull. Everything continues on with such laxity andignorance.76Aptavani-4Aptavani-475Every man has formed an opinion about his wife, and thiscauses conflicts.‘I am Chandulal’ is an opinion, is it not? You believeyourself to be who you are not and not what you really are.You have formed strong opinions about everyone in yourfamily. For that reason, you must not form opinions aboutanyone; about ‘mishrachetan’ who appears to sulk one minuteand smile the next. Opinion itself is the obstacle (antaray).Demerit karma (paap) can be destroyed, but the obstaclescreated by opinions are detrimental only to yourself. They createentanglements with the very things you want to be free of.Your own actions may seem bitter to you, but they are theactions of the pudgal (non-Self). You have piled up your stockof opinions through your own free will. Each of us has his ownreactions based on his own opinions.The pure Soul (Shuddhatma) is certainly there, but it isthe opinion that is created by the pratishthit atma (self chargedin the past life) that operates the “machinery” (the non-Self).Except for the Shuddhatma, the rest is all ‘machinery’.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(6)The Blindness of ‘Know-How’The Ego of ‘Know-How’ Prevents ‘Expertise’!I do not know how to write. I do not even know how tohold a pen. I do not know how to do anything. When one doesnot know how to do anything related to sansar (the mundane),one is called a Gnani. I am considered abuddha (one whodoes not use intellect).Questioner: You call yourself abuddha (without intellect),but to me you seem extremely intelligent (prabuddha).Dadashri: But I am telling you everything from my ownexperience. I am seventy years old, but I still do not know howto shave. People think they know how to shave, but that isnothing but egoism. There must be just a few people who knowhow to shave. Even I realize that I myself have no idea abouthow properly to hold the razor or angle the blade. I have notbecome expert at that. As long as you are not an expert, youcan only say, you do not know how to do it.Questioner: You have not seen any benefit in becomingan expert, have you?Dadashri: It is not a question of benefit, but I am tellingyou ‘just as it is’, and that is that I do not know how to shave.You may wonder how that is possible. To say that you knowhow, is wrong. It is just egoism. Many do not even know howto use a blade; they cannot even tell whether or not the bladehas become dull. Everything continues on with such laxity andignorance.Aptavani-47778Aptavani-4Questioner: What do you mean by expert?Dadashri: Man cannot become an expert. To be anexpert is a natural gift. In this Atmavignan (Science of theSoul), I have become an expert, and even that is a natural gift.Otherwise, how can a man become a Gnani? That is why I say,“This is but natural.”As a matter of fact, I do not even know how to walk.People may say, ‘Dada walks very nicely’! But since I amlooking through the perspective of Gnan (Gnan drashti), I amaware that I do not know how to walk.Questioner: But everything about you appears idealtous.Dadashri: It may seem that way, but I see it throughGnan, I see through ultimate ‘glasses’ (spectacles). And withthat ultimate light, all this appears imperfect.Many people tell me that they have learned to eatproperly after sitting with me. However, I know that I myself donot know how to eat. I have in my awareness, a picture of howI am eating and how my conduct (charitra) should be while Ieat. But who has such ability? It is the one that has thenaturalgift.It is not possible for one to have an ego and become anexpert at the same time. The ego stops from becoming anexpert.That is why when ‘we’ tell you that ‘we’ are abuddha,‘we’ are saying that from experience, and not arbitrarily.Nevertheless, if it appears prabuddha (extremely intelligent) toyou, then it is your own perception (drashti; vision). Where ismy vision? Did you understand this? ‘Our’ vision is the ultimatevision.I used to consider myself an expert in my business. AfterGnan, I saw the people doing business through an unprejudiced,impartial vision. That is when I realized that I did not knowanything. This is nothing but egoism. Just because five peoplebelieve it and accept it, does that make you an expert?Questioner: Your statement of “I am abuddha” is finethrough your vision, but what about through the worldly vision?Dadashri: “I am intelligent” and this Gnan of the Selfcannot co-exist. ‘We’ have the full light of Gnan; therefore,there is no need at all for the intellect, is there? ‘The intellect(buddhi) makes you emotional and Gnan keeps you in motion’.I have become oblivious to worldly life (sansar). I do noteven know how to sign my own name. I have not writtenanything in the last fifteen or twenty years, and so I haveforgotten how to write. It is possible to automatically forget thisworldly life. You do not need to try all these differentexperiments. It will be forgotten when you break free from itsfamiliarity (parichaya). Therefore, you should get rid of itsfamiliarity. Routine, worldly life interaction (vyavahar) is not aproblem; the problem lies in its familiarity.The Ledger of Analysis!What have you brought along with you from yourprevious life? You have brought everything that is necessary for‘Chandubhai’ (the ‘relative’ self): all that is necessary for themind, all that is necessary for the chit, for the intellect, and allthat is necessary for the ego. Now Nature supplies all thosethings to you, and yet you claim that you yourself are doing it.When everything is already ready, what can you say that youhave done? To do something for which nothing is ready, isconsidered a purusharth (self effort).You have already come prepared with: this shop, thisoffice, wife, and the children from your past life. This is thekarmic account. The Atma (Self) has no father, nor son. It isAptavani-47778Aptavani-4Questioner: What do you mean by expert?Dadashri: Man cannot become an expert. To be anexpert is a natural gift. In this Atmavignan (Science of theSoul), I have become an expert, and even that is a natural gift.Otherwise, how can a man become a Gnani? That is why I say,“This is but natural.”As a matter of fact, I do not even know how to walk.People may say, ‘Dada walks very nicely’! But since I amlooking through the perspective of Gnan (Gnan drashti), I amaware that I do not know how to walk.Questioner: But everything about you appears idealtous.Dadashri: It may seem that way, but I see it throughGnan, I see through ultimate ‘glasses’ (spectacles). And withthat ultimate light, all this appears imperfect.Many people tell me that they have learned to eatproperly after sitting with me. However, I know that I myself donot know how to eat. I have in my awareness, a picture of howI am eating and how my conduct (charitra) should be while Ieat. But who has such ability? It is the one that has thenaturalgift.It is not possible for one to have an ego and become anexpert at the same time. The ego stops from becoming anexpert.That is why when ‘we’ tell you that ‘we’ are abuddha,‘we’ are saying that from experience, and not arbitrarily.Nevertheless, if it appears prabuddha (extremely intelligent) toyou, then it is your own perception (drashti; vision). Where ismy vision? Did you understand this? ‘Our’ vision is the ultimatevision.I used to consider myself an expert in my business. AfterGnan, I saw the people doing business through an unprejudiced,impartial vision. That is when I realized that I did not knowanything. This is nothing but egoism. Just because five peoplebelieve it and accept it, does that make you an expert?Questioner: Your statement of “I am abuddha” is finethrough your vision, but what about through the worldly vision?Dadashri: “I am intelligent” and this Gnan of the Selfcannot co-exist. ‘We’ have the full light of Gnan; therefore,there is no need at all for the intellect, is there? ‘The intellect(buddhi) makes you emotional and Gnan keeps you in motion’.I have become oblivious to worldly life (sansar). I do noteven know how to sign my own name. I have not writtenanything in the last fifteen or twenty years, and so I haveforgotten how to write. It is possible to automatically forget thisworldly life. You do not need to try all these differentexperiments. It will be forgotten when you break free from itsfamiliarity (parichaya). Therefore, you should get rid of itsfamiliarity. Routine, worldly life interaction (vyavahar) is not aproblem; the problem lies in its familiarity.The Ledger of Analysis!What have you brought along with you from yourprevious life? You have brought everything that is necessary for‘Chandubhai’ (the ‘relative’ self): all that is necessary for themind, all that is necessary for the chit, for the intellect, and allthat is necessary for the ego. Now Nature supplies all thosethings to you, and yet you claim that you yourself are doing it.When everything is already ready, what can you say that youhave done? To do something for which nothing is ready, isconsidered a purusharth (self effort).You have already come prepared with: this shop, thisoffice, wife, and the children from your past life. This is thekarmic account. The Atma (Self) has no father, nor son. It isAptavani-47980Aptavani-4because of the result of accounts of ‘give and take’ (karma) thatthey have all come together. Because they do not know how tomove forward, they just till and delve along. I am telling you thatit has already been ‘tilled’ and it is ready. You don’t need to paytoo much attention to it. Just keep your chit natural (sahaj) inall this, and do everything else. You have brought with you, fromyour past life, all the ‘mandatory stations’ from birth until death.When it is to your liking, you claim that it is your own wish andfree will (marajiyat), and when it is not, you say it is mandatory(farajiyat).In fact, everything is mandatory. Will you not have toknow all this? How long can you let this fallacy continue? Shouldyou not find some kind of analysis? You need to keep the‘ledger’ of your analysis with you.If you went out to buy vegetables, for you it would bemandatory (farajiyat). However, if along the way you comeacross someone who greets you with respect, your egobecomes inflated! Will you not incur a loss here? Therefore, youwill not need to look at a ‘ledger’ and figure out where you areincurring a loss.When you attend a wedding and someone says, “Welcomesir” it will inflate your ego and the ‘Seer’ (jonaaro) willunderstand that this ‘sir’ has incurred a loss. The other personis obliged to greet you with a “welcome,” but you should notbecome weak at that moment. You should become so smart thatyou do not incur a loss anywhere. You may have lost once, youmay have lost twice, or you may have lost twenty times;nevertheless you will eventually have to decide whether they aregreeting you or the You within. God is sitting within. And He isthe pure Soul (Shuddhatma).(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(7)ObstaclesHow Is an Obstacle Created?Questioner: The worldly life is such that there is nothingbut obstacles (antaray) in it.Dadashri: You are a Parmatma (the absolute Self), butyou do not reap the full benefit of your position. That is becausethere are nothing but obstacles. An obstacle is created themoment you say, ‘I am Chandubhai.’ This is because God (theSelf within) says, “Are you calling me Chandu?” Although youmay have said it in ignorance, even then an obstacle is created.If you were to unknowingly put your hand into a fire, would yoube spared the effects?The Parmatma is sitting within you. There is infiniteenergy within at your disposal. But however many obstacles youcreate, that much energy gets concealed.Whenever you desire something, an obstacle arises. Anobstacle arises towards whatever you desire. Do you have adesire for air? That is why obstacle for air does not arise. Butthere is some desire for water which is why obstacles ariseforit.The Gnani Purush does not have a desire for anythingand that is why he is in an obstacle-free (nirantaray) state.Everything comes spontaneously and naturally to him. TheGnani does not lack nor desire anything. You are Parmatma ifyour beggarly desires go away. Through beggary comesbondage.Aptavani-47980Aptavani-4because of the result of accounts of ‘give and take’ (karma) thatthey have all come together. Because they do not know how tomove forward, they just till and delve along. I am telling you thatit has already been ‘tilled’ and it is ready. You don’t need to paytoo much attention to it. Just keep your chit natural (sahaj) inall this, and do everything else. You have brought with you, fromyour past life, all the ‘mandatory stations’ from birth until death.When it is to your liking, you claim that it is your own wish andfree will (marajiyat), and when it is not, you say it is mandatory(farajiyat).In fact, everything is mandatory. Will you not have toknow all this? How long can you let this fallacy continue? Shouldyou not find some kind of analysis? You need to keep the‘ledger’ of your analysis with you.If you went out to buy vegetables, for you it would bemandatory (farajiyat). However, if along the way you comeacross someone who greets you with respect, your egobecomes inflated! Will you not incur a loss here? Therefore, youwill not need to look at a ‘ledger’ and figure out where you areincurring a loss.When you attend a wedding and someone says, “Welcomesir” it will inflate your ego and the ‘Seer’ (jonaaro) willunderstand that this ‘sir’ has incurred a loss. The other personis obliged to greet you with a “welcome,” but you should notbecome weak at that moment. You should become so smart thatyou do not incur a loss anywhere. You may have lost once, youmay have lost twice, or you may have lost twenty times;nevertheless you will eventually have to decide whether they aregreeting you or the You within. God is sitting within. And He isthe pure Soul (Shuddhatma).(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(7)ObstaclesHow Is an Obstacle Created?Questioner: The worldly life is such that there is nothingbut obstacles (antaray) in it.Dadashri: You are a Parmatma (the absolute Self), butyou do not reap the full benefit of your position. That is becausethere are nothing but obstacles. An obstacle is created themoment you say, ‘I am Chandubhai.’ This is because God (theSelf within) says, “Are you calling me Chandu?” Although youmay have said it in ignorance, even then an obstacle is created.If you were to unknowingly put your hand into a fire, would yoube spared the effects?The Parmatma is sitting within you. There is infiniteenergy within at your disposal. But however many obstacles youcreate, that much energy gets concealed.Whenever you desire something, an obstacle arises. Anobstacle arises towards whatever you desire. Do you have adesire for air? That is why obstacle for air does not arise. Butthere is some desire for water which is why obstacles ariseforit.The Gnani Purush does not have a desire for anythingand that is why he is in an obstacle-free (nirantaray) state.Everything comes spontaneously and naturally to him. TheGnani does not lack nor desire anything. You are Parmatma ifyour beggarly desires go away. Through beggary comesbondage.Aptavani-48182Aptavani-4You create obstacles for everything by yourself. Whateveryou have brought with you in your ‘receptacle of intellect’(buddhi no ashaya), you will receive even without desiring it,provided there are no obstacles against it.There is everything in this world, but why do these thingsnot come to you? It is because your obstacles are hindering you.Questioner: How do these obstacles happen?Dadashri: If this man is giving out some snacks tosomeone and you say, “Why don’t you leave it, it will only goto waste,” you can say that an obstacle has been created. Whensomeone is donating some money and you say to him, “Why areyou giving him money? He is likely to squander it away,” and soyou create an obstacle towards charity. Then, regardless ofwhether or not that person gives the money, you still created anobstacle. Then, when you encounter difficult times, there will beno one there to help you.Questioner: What if the obstacles were not createdthrough speech, but through the mind?Dadashri: The effectof spoken words is realized in thislife, and those drawn by the mind will come into effect in thenext life.So all these obstacles have been created by one’s ownself; otherwise, is there anything that the Self does not have?Everything in the world is ready, and waiting for it. “Can wecome, can we come?” they are asking. However, it is theobstacles that tell them, “No, you cannot come.” So theobstacles do not allow them to come to you.Questioner: So we should stay vigilant (jagruti) that nonegative thoughts arise.Dadashri: That cannot be possible. Negative thoughtswill not stop coming. You have to erase them, that is your job.You have the thought, ‘he should not be giving it to him,’ but theGnan springs up to remind you that you are creating obstacles.So you must quickly erase it. If one did not have Gnan, whatwould one do? If you ask him, ‘Why were you thinking thatway?’ and he will say, “What do you know? I have to think thatway,” moreover, he doubles the damage. What can a crazy egonot do? He is shooting himself in the foot. We however, canerase all this. When you repent (do prashchyataap) in yourmind, ask for forgiveness (pratikraman), and vow never tospeak that way again (pratyakhyan), you can erase it. You canmake changes to a letter before you mail it. And if you startthinking that it is good to give donations, then the previous(negative thought) one gets erased.Questioner: What if we encourage and support gooddeeds?Dadashri: Then it benefits the giver as well as you. If youdo not give encouragement then you will not find anyone toencourage you. However, as far as the Gnanis are concerned,all this is worth discarding. It is all for augmenting worldly life(sansar). Nevertheless, for those who do not have Self-realization (Atmagnan), it is a tool for a wonderful worldly life.I will explain to you how obstacles are created in thisworldly life. At work if you call your assistant ‘stupid,’ then youwould create an obstacle towards your own intelligence! Now,the entire world is entrapped in such obstacles and one’s ownexistence in it is being wasted away. You do not have the ‘right’to call anyone stupid. When you utter such things, the otherperson will tell you the same thing as well, and so he would bebinding an obstacle for himself too! Now tell me, how can theworld stop creating such obstacles? By calling others ‘worthless’,you create an obstacle towards your own worth. If you dopratikraman immediately for it, then it is erased before theobstacle is created.Aptavani-48182Aptavani-4You create obstacles for everything by yourself. Whateveryou have brought with you in your ‘receptacle of intellect’(buddhi no ashaya), you will receive even without desiring it,provided there are no obstacles against it.There is everything in this world, but why do these thingsnot come to you? It is because your obstacles are hindering you.Questioner: How do these obstacles happen?Dadashri: If this man is giving out some snacks tosomeone and you say, “Why don’t you leave it, it will only goto waste,” you can say that an obstacle has been created. Whensomeone is donating some money and you say to him, “Why areyou giving him money? He is likely to squander it away,” and soyou create an obstacle towards charity. Then, regardless ofwhether or not that person gives the money, you still created anobstacle. Then, when you encounter difficult times, there will beno one there to help you.Questioner: What if the obstacles were not createdthrough speech, but through the mind?Dadashri: The effectof spoken words is realized in thislife, and those drawn by the mind will come into effect in thenext life.So all these obstacles have been created by one’s ownself; otherwise, is there anything that the Self does not have?Everything in the world is ready, and waiting for it. “Can wecome, can we come?” they are asking. However, it is theobstacles that tell them, “No, you cannot come.” So theobstacles do not allow them to come to you.Questioner: So we should stay vigilant (jagruti) that nonegative thoughts arise.Dadashri: That cannot be possible. Negative thoughtswill not stop coming. You have to erase them, that is your job.You have the thought, ‘he should not be giving it to him,’ but theGnan springs up to remind you that you are creating obstacles.So you must quickly erase it. If one did not have Gnan, whatwould one do? If you ask him, ‘Why were you thinking thatway?’ and he will say, “What do you know? I have to think thatway,” moreover, he doubles the damage. What can a crazy egonot do? He is shooting himself in the foot. We however, canerase all this. When you repent (do prashchyataap) in yourmind, ask for forgiveness (pratikraman), and vow never tospeak that way again (pratyakhyan), you can erase it. You canmake changes to a letter before you mail it. And if you startthinking that it is good to give donations, then the previous(negative thought) one gets erased.Questioner: What if we encourage and support gooddeeds?Dadashri: Then it benefits the giver as well as you. If youdo not give encouragement then you will not find anyone toencourage you. However, as far as the Gnanis are concerned,all this is worth discarding. It is all for augmenting worldly life(sansar). Nevertheless, for those who do not have Self-realization (Atmagnan), it is a tool for a wonderful worldly life.I will explain to you how obstacles are created in thisworldly life. At work if you call your assistant ‘stupid,’ then youwould create an obstacle towards your own intelligence! Now,the entire world is entrapped in such obstacles and one’s ownexistence in it is being wasted away. You do not have the ‘right’to call anyone stupid. When you utter such things, the otherperson will tell you the same thing as well, and so he would bebinding an obstacle for himself too! Now tell me, how can theworld stop creating such obstacles? By calling others ‘worthless’,you create an obstacle towards your own worth. If you dopratikraman immediately for it, then it is erased before theobstacle is created.Aptavani-48384Aptavani-4Cardamom is expensive, cloves are expensive, betel nut isexpensive and that is why people do not eat them. They do notget to eat these, because they had created obstacles towardsthem. Seven members in a household, are eating shrikhand(yogurt pudding), while one of them has to eat rustic bread andbuttermilk because the doctor has warned him that he may dieif he ate shrikhand. Why do such obstacles happen? It isbecause he had previously scornfully rejected that food when itwas served to him.Obstacles on the Path to MokshaWhen you encounter obstacles on the path to moksha,your energy manifests even more. Therefore, even when youencounter an obstacle, maintain your firm decision (nischay)that, “Nobody has the power to stop me”; have such an innerintent. You do not have to utter it because to speak it is ego.Your lack of firm decision (nischay) is itself the obstacle.This obstacle can be destroyed through a firm decision. Don’t allobstacles get destroyed with the nischay for the Self (Atma)?There is not much of a problem with obstacles created bythe intellect (buddhi) in worldly matters, but when it comes tothe intellect in religious matters, it creates great obstacles. Suchobstacles make you wander endlessly from one birth to another.In ‘relative’ religious matters, the obstacles for many of the maleascetics (sadhus), female ascetics (sadhvis), spiritual masters(acharyas) have been destroyed; however they still have manyobstacles that pertain to ‘real’ religion; the religion of the Self(Atma-dharma).How are obstacles in religion created? “I know something,”is the greatest obstacle. In religion, when can you say that youknow something? It is when you never stumble; when you neverhave any artadhyan (adverse internal meditation that hurts theself) or raudradhyan (adverse internal meditation that hurts theself and others). And not even a hint of raudradhyan shouldrise, nor even the potential for it to arise; is called “Knowing.”Hence the Lord says, that as long as artadhyan and raudradhyanoccur one should say, “I do not know anything; the GnaniPurush knows.” Until then, do not take on any responsibility. Itis a grave responsibility and you will end up getting off at thewrong “station”. God calls this (to say “I know”) the greatestGnanantaray (obstacle against knowledge of the Self) of all.Obstacles against money and donations can be destroyed, butit is not easy to destroy obstacles against knowledge of the Self.Causes of Gnanantaray and DarshanantarayQuestioner: What causes Gnanantaray (obstacle againstknowledge of the Self) and darshanantaray (obstacle againstvision of the Self)?Dadashri: In religion, when you say anything negative like,“You do not understand anything at all, I understand everything,”you create Gnanantaray and darshanantaray. Or, if someone isattaining Atmagnan (knowledge of the Self) and you create anobstacle against it, then you create a Gnanantaray. If someonetells you, “A Gnani has come, come along if you want to,” andyou say, “I have seen many so-called Gnani Purush”, you createan obstacle. Now, being a human, one cannot refrain from sayingsuch things, can one?! If however, you are unable to go, but youfeel, “the Gnani Purush has come, but I cannot go to him”, thenthe obstacle is destroyed. It is because one lacks understanding,that one is not aware that he is creating obstacles.Every spoken word carries danger, so if you do not knowhow to speak, it is best to stay quiet! Especially where itconcerns religion, it is very risky. The perils of worldly life(sansar) can be easily removed.Why does a person not know how to sing a spiritual song(pad)? It is because he created an obstacle by saying, “I willAptavani-48384Aptavani-4Cardamom is expensive, cloves are expensive, betel nut isexpensive and that is why people do not eat them. They do notget to eat these, because they had created obstacles towardsthem. Seven members in a household, are eating shrikhand(yogurt pudding), while one of them has to eat rustic bread andbuttermilk because the doctor has warned him that he may dieif he ate shrikhand. Why do such obstacles happen? It isbecause he had previously scornfully rejected that food when itwas served to him.Obstacles on the Path to MokshaWhen you encounter obstacles on the path to moksha,your energy manifests even more. Therefore, even when youencounter an obstacle, maintain your firm decision (nischay)that, “Nobody has the power to stop me”; have such an innerintent. You do not have to utter it because to speak it is ego.Your lack of firm decision (nischay) is itself the obstacle.This obstacle can be destroyed through a firm decision. Don’t allobstacles get destroyed with the nischay for the Self (Atma)?There is not much of a problem with obstacles created bythe intellect (buddhi) in worldly matters, but when it comes tothe intellect in religious matters, it creates great obstacles. Suchobstacles make you wander endlessly from one birth to another.In ‘relative’ religious matters, the obstacles for many of the maleascetics (sadhus), female ascetics (sadhvis), spiritual masters(acharyas) have been destroyed; however they still have manyobstacles that pertain to ‘real’ religion; the religion of the Self(Atma-dharma).How are obstacles in religion created? “I know something,”is the greatest obstacle. In religion, when can you say that youknow something? It is when you never stumble; when you neverhave any artadhyan (adverse internal meditation that hurts theself) or raudradhyan (adverse internal meditation that hurts theself and others). And not even a hint of raudradhyan shouldrise, nor even the potential for it to arise; is called “Knowing.”Hence the Lord says, that as long as artadhyan and raudradhyanoccur one should say, “I do not know anything; the GnaniPurush knows.” Until then, do not take on any responsibility. Itis a grave responsibility and you will end up getting off at thewrong “station”. God calls this (to say “I know”) the greatestGnanantaray (obstacle against knowledge of the Self) of all.Obstacles against money and donations can be destroyed, butit is not easy to destroy obstacles against knowledge of the Self.Causes of Gnanantaray and DarshanantarayQuestioner: What causes Gnanantaray (obstacle againstknowledge of the Self) and darshanantaray (obstacle againstvision of the Self)?Dadashri: In religion, when you say anything negative like,“You do not understand anything at all, I understand everything,”you create Gnanantaray and darshanantaray. Or, if someone isattaining Atmagnan (knowledge of the Self) and you create anobstacle against it, then you create a Gnanantaray. If someonetells you, “A Gnani has come, come along if you want to,” andyou say, “I have seen many so-called Gnani Purush”, you createan obstacle. Now, being a human, one cannot refrain from sayingsuch things, can one?! If however, you are unable to go, but youfeel, “the Gnani Purush has come, but I cannot go to him”, thenthe obstacle is destroyed. It is because one lacks understanding,that one is not aware that he is creating obstacles.Every spoken word carries danger, so if you do not knowhow to speak, it is best to stay quiet! Especially where itconcerns religion, it is very risky. The perils of worldly life(sansar) can be easily removed.Why does a person not know how to sing a spiritual song(pad)? It is because he created an obstacle by saying, “I willAptavani-48586Aptavani-4never know how to sing.” You create an obstacle for yourself bysimply saying that. And if you say, “Sure, I know how to sing!”then the obstacle will disappear. You do not have to goanywhereto learn things; you have come here already knowing them.Questioner: Would one know how to sing if he says, “Iknow how to sing”?Dadashri: No. Not “I know how to sing,” but in yourmind, you should have a strong conviction, “Why not, whyshould I not know how to sing?”So many people say, “How can there be such a thing asAkram Gnan? How is it possible to attain moksha in just anhour?” The moment you say that, you create obstacles. You cannever tell what is possible in this world, so it is not worth usingyour intellect (buddhi) to assess it, because it has clearlyhappened and that is (ability to attain Gnan within one hour) afact. These obstacles prevail particularly for Atmavignan(science of the Self; spiritual science): the very last ‘station’.Those who have managed to remove their obstacles forthe paroksh (indirect), they have the obstacles for the pratyaksh(direct). Which is why they only come across the paroksh.Generally, obstacles for the pratyaksh are immense, however, ifthey are destroyed, the reward is an end to the wandering of lifeafter life.Questioner: How can one destroy Gnanantaray anddarshanantaray?Dadashri: The Gnani Purush can destroy them for you.He can destroy ignorance of the Self, as well as remove theobstacles for you. But there are certain obstacles that evenGnani cannot remove.Questioner: What are those obstacles?Dadashri: Wherever there is a violation of humility(vinaya). Humility is foremost a thing for the path of moksha.There should not be even a single negative thought about theGnani Purush.Questioner: What should I do when I have the innerintent (bhaav) to come here, but the pudgal maya (illusoryattachment to the worldly things) prevents me?Dadashri: That itself is obstructing karma (antaraykarma). If your inner intent (bhaav) is strong, then one day itwill come to an end. Antaray karma is achetan (lifeless) andyour inner intent (bhaav) is now joined with the chetan(animate; alive), so as a result, the obstacles can be destroyed.And during the vidhis (special energizing blessings of the GnaniPurush) if you keep asking the Gnani Purush to destroy yourobstacles, he will. The power and energy of the Gnani Purush’swords (vachanbud) will destroy your obstacles. If you feel adeep regret for not being able to attend satsang (assembly ofSelf-realized persons), then your obstacles will be destroyed.Questioner: Can obstacles break on their own accord,or do you need purusharth (Self-effort) to destroy them?Dadashri: They are destroyed through your inner intent(bhaav). When the time comes for the obstacles to bedestroyed, that is when the inner intent will arise within.Once you receive ‘this’ Gnan, all your obstacles aredestroyed. This is because obstacles are created through theego that says, “I am something.” When the antaray karma isbroken, it does not take long at all. How far apart are the Atmaand moksha? Not at all. The obstacles that lie between the two,is the distance between them.After attaining the Self, the obstacle is in the form of acircumstance (saiyog), and circumstances by nature dissociate(viyog); whereas ‘You’, Shuddhatma (the pure Soul) are not acircumstance (asaiyogi); You are eternal (aviyogi; no dissipation).(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-48586Aptavani-4never know how to sing.” You create an obstacle for yourself bysimply saying that. And if you say, “Sure, I know how to sing!”then the obstacle will disappear. You do not have to goanywhereto learn things; you have come here already knowing them.Questioner: Would one know how to sing if he says, “Iknow how to sing”?Dadashri: No. Not “I know how to sing,” but in yourmind, you should have a strong conviction, “Why not, whyshould I not know how to sing?”So many people say, “How can there be such a thing asAkram Gnan? How is it possible to attain moksha in just anhour?” The moment you say that, you create obstacles. You cannever tell what is possible in this world, so it is not worth usingyour intellect (buddhi) to assess it, because it has clearlyhappened and that is (ability to attain Gnan within one hour) afact. These obstacles prevail particularly for Atmavignan(science of the Self; spiritual science): the very last ‘station’.Those who have managed to remove their obstacles forthe paroksh (indirect), they have the obstacles for the pratyaksh(direct). Which is why they only come across the paroksh.Generally, obstacles for the pratyaksh are immense, however, ifthey are destroyed, the reward is an end to the wandering of lifeafter life.Questioner: How can one destroy Gnanantaray anddarshanantaray?Dadashri: The Gnani Purush can destroy them for you.He can destroy ignorance of the Self, as well as remove theobstacles for you. But there are certain obstacles that evenGnani cannot remove.Questioner: What are those obstacles?Dadashri: Wherever there is a violation of humility(vinaya). Humility is foremost a thing for the path of moksha.There should not be even a single negative thought about theGnani Purush.Questioner: What should I do when I have the innerintent (bhaav) to come here, but the pudgal maya (illusoryattachment to the worldly things) prevents me?Dadashri: That itself is obstructing karma (antaraykarma). If your inner intent (bhaav) is strong, then one day itwill come to an end. Antaray karma is achetan (lifeless) andyour inner intent (bhaav) is now joined with the chetan(animate; alive), so as a result, the obstacles can be destroyed.And during the vidhis (special energizing blessings of the GnaniPurush) if you keep asking the Gnani Purush to destroy yourobstacles, he will. The power and energy of the Gnani Purush’swords (vachanbud) will destroy your obstacles. If you feel adeep regret for not being able to attend satsang (assembly ofSelf-realized persons), then your obstacles will be destroyed.Questioner: Can obstacles break on their own accord,or do you need purusharth (Self-effort) to destroy them?Dadashri: They are destroyed through your inner intent(bhaav). When the time comes for the obstacles to bedestroyed, that is when the inner intent will arise within.Once you receive ‘this’ Gnan, all your obstacles aredestroyed. This is because obstacles are created through theego that says, “I am something.” When the antaray karma isbroken, it does not take long at all. How far apart are the Atmaand moksha? Not at all. The obstacles that lie between the two,is the distance between them.After attaining the Self, the obstacle is in the form of acircumstance (saiyog), and circumstances by nature dissociate(viyog); whereas ‘You’, Shuddhatma (the pure Soul) are not acircumstance (asaiyogi); You are eternal (aviyogi; no dissipation).(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-48788Aptavani-4(8)Contempt – Dismiss with ScornYou Fear That What You DespiseYou will fear anyone or anything that you have contemptfor. Why do you fear the policeman? It is because you havescorn for him. Whatever you disdain, will cause you fear. Ifyou have scorn for mosquitoes, they will not leave you aloneat night.If you have contempt for courts or lawyers, you will havea fear of entering the courthouse.Why do you not fear someone you know? It is becauseyou do not feel any scorn for him.Questioner: Does contempt come first, or does fearcome first?Dadashri: First there is contempt. It is not fear thatcomes first. How is that? Somewhere, you may have heard thatpolicemen are really bad. So you have a prior knowledgebecause of which you develop contempt for them. That scorngives rise to fear which increases gradually over time. Thenwhen you see a policeman, you become nervous, even if heapproaches to ask you for an address.Questioner: If scorn (tiraskar) gives rise to fear thenwhat does attachment (raag) lead to?Dadashri: Infatuation (murchha; illusory attachment) andunconsciousness occur. When both of these go away, youbecome vitarag.How Harmful Is Dismissing with Contempt?Questioner: What is the difference between scorn(tiraskar) and tarchhod (dismissing with contempt)?Dadashri: At times, one may not even be aware of scorn(tiraskar). Scorn is a completely mild thing, whereas tarchhod(dismissing with contempt) is fierce and it can instantly cause aperson to ‘bleed’. This bleeding is not of the physical body. Itis the mind that bleeds.Questioner: What are the consequences of tarchhodand tiraskar?Dadashri: You may not even discern the consequence oftiraskar, but that of tarchhod is huge. Tarchhod causes allkinds of obstacles. So it will not allow you to attain things, andit will create all sorts of misery. What can tarchhod not do? Ithas given rise to the entire world. That is why I tell you onething, and that is, “Let go of your enmity and vengeance (veyr)and beware that you are not contemptuous towards anyone”.My chit is very attentive when it comes to tarchhod(dismissing with contempt). If I have to walk home late at night,I am very careful about not disturbing any sleeping dog, with thenoise of my shoes. Isn’t there a soul within them as well? Iwould not even be scornful with the person who lovingly gaveme ‘poison’.On the path of the vitarag, you should not oppose or dotarchhod (dismissing with contempt) towards anyone. A vitaragwill never oppose anyone, whether it be a thief, a villain, ascoundrel or anyone else. If you tell someone, “You are in thewrong business,” then he will feel the tarchhod. And when youdo that, you will not be able to see God within him. God tellsyou to see the person through elemental vision (tattva drashti).If you see him through the situational vision (avastha drashti),you will only spoil things for yourself. What if you throw a stoneAptavani-48788Aptavani-4(8)Contempt – Dismiss with ScornYou Fear That What You DespiseYou will fear anyone or anything that you have contemptfor. Why do you fear the policeman? It is because you havescorn for him. Whatever you disdain, will cause you fear. Ifyou have scorn for mosquitoes, they will not leave you aloneat night.If you have contempt for courts or lawyers, you will havea fear of entering the courthouse.Why do you not fear someone you know? It is becauseyou do not feel any scorn for him.Questioner: Does contempt come first, or does fearcome first?Dadashri: First there is contempt. It is not fear thatcomes first. How is that? Somewhere, you may have heard thatpolicemen are really bad. So you have a prior knowledgebecause of which you develop contempt for them. That scorngives rise to fear which increases gradually over time. Thenwhen you see a policeman, you become nervous, even if heapproaches to ask you for an address.Questioner: If scorn (tiraskar) gives rise to fear thenwhat does attachment (raag) lead to?Dadashri: Infatuation (murchha; illusory attachment) andunconsciousness occur. When both of these go away, youbecome vitarag.How Harmful Is Dismissing with Contempt?Questioner: What is the difference between scorn(tiraskar) and tarchhod (dismissing with contempt)?Dadashri: At times, one may not even be aware of scorn(tiraskar). Scorn is a completely mild thing, whereas tarchhod(dismissing with contempt) is fierce and it can instantly cause aperson to ‘bleed’. This bleeding is not of the physical body. Itis the mind that bleeds.Questioner: What are the consequences of tarchhodand tiraskar?Dadashri: You may not even discern the consequence oftiraskar, but that of tarchhod is huge. Tarchhod causes allkinds of obstacles. So it will not allow you to attain things, andit will create all sorts of misery. What can tarchhod not do? Ithas given rise to the entire world. That is why I tell you onething, and that is, “Let go of your enmity and vengeance (veyr)and beware that you are not contemptuous towards anyone”.My chit is very attentive when it comes to tarchhod(dismissing with contempt). If I have to walk home late at night,I am very careful about not disturbing any sleeping dog, with thenoise of my shoes. Isn’t there a soul within them as well? Iwould not even be scornful with the person who lovingly gaveme ‘poison’.On the path of the vitarag, you should not oppose or dotarchhod (dismissing with contempt) towards anyone. A vitaragwill never oppose anyone, whether it be a thief, a villain, ascoundrel or anyone else. If you tell someone, “You are in thewrong business,” then he will feel the tarchhod. And when youdo that, you will not be able to see God within him. God tellsyou to see the person through elemental vision (tattva drashti).If you see him through the situational vision (avastha drashti),you will only spoil things for yourself. What if you throw a stoneAptavani-48990Aptavani-4in the mud? Is it going to mess up the mud? The mud is alreadysoiled, but you will get splattered. Hence the Vitarags werevery clever indeed; they would move around without contemptfor any living being.Tarchhod closes all the doors. The person you dismisswith contempt (tarchhod) will never again open his door to you.Questioner: We experience both, tarchhod and tiraskar,in each and every moment, of our worldly life.Dadashri: Yes, isn’t everyone experiencing the samething? They are responsible for the world’s misery. A person’sspeech may be so vile and negative that he will even say thingslike, “Let there be famine”!Questioner: Nowadays there are ‘kings’ of such negativespeech.Dadashri: From what ‘we’ have seen of the past lives,‘we’ are incredulous about the amount of damage that tarchhodcan do! That is why we should behave in a way that shows noscorn, even for the simple laborer. Ultimately, to take revengefor the contempt, one may even bite you as a snake. Tarchhodwill take its revenge at any cost!Physical scars may heal, but the scars caused by speechdo not heal throughout a person’s entire lifetime. Many scars willnot heal even after a hundred lifetimes.What Is the Solution for Tarchhod?Questioner: What should we do to make sure that wedo not have to suffer the consequences of tarchhod (dismissingwith contempt)?Dadashri: There is no solution for that other than to keepdoing pratikraman. You have to do that until the other person’smind comes around. And should you come face to face withhim, then ask for his forgiveness nicely, “My friend, I am sorrythat I was wrong. I am such a fool. I have no sense.” And sohis scars will begin to heal. A person likes it, when you criticizeyourself, and that will heal his scars.If you want to be happy in life, then don’t do tarchhod(to spurn with contempt) towards anyone! Who are you doingtarchhod to? To God Himself! As God resides in every being.The insult does not reach the person: the insult reaches God!God takes the results of everything in the world. Therefore, dothings that He can accept, and that do not make you look badin His eyes. It is not possible for anyone to attain moksha byspurning even a single living being with contempt (tarchhod).(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-48990Aptavani-4in the mud? Is it going to mess up the mud? The mud is alreadysoiled, but you will get splattered. Hence the Vitarags werevery clever indeed; they would move around without contemptfor any living being.Tarchhod closes all the doors. The person you dismisswith contempt (tarchhod) will never again open his door to you.Questioner: We experience both, tarchhod and tiraskar,in each and every moment, of our worldly life.Dadashri: Yes, isn’t everyone experiencing the samething? They are responsible for the world’s misery. A person’sspeech may be so vile and negative that he will even say thingslike, “Let there be famine”!Questioner: Nowadays there are ‘kings’ of such negativespeech.Dadashri: From what ‘we’ have seen of the past lives,‘we’ are incredulous about the amount of damage that tarchhodcan do! That is why we should behave in a way that shows noscorn, even for the simple laborer. Ultimately, to take revengefor the contempt, one may even bite you as a snake. Tarchhodwill take its revenge at any cost!Physical scars may heal, but the scars caused by speechdo not heal throughout a person’s entire lifetime. Many scars willnot heal even after a hundred lifetimes.What Is the Solution for Tarchhod?Questioner: What should we do to make sure that wedo not have to suffer the consequences of tarchhod (dismissingwith contempt)?Dadashri: There is no solution for that other than to keepdoing pratikraman. You have to do that until the other person’smind comes around. And should you come face to face withhim, then ask for his forgiveness nicely, “My friend, I am sorrythat I was wrong. I am such a fool. I have no sense.” And sohis scars will begin to heal. A person likes it, when you criticizeyourself, and that will heal his scars.If you want to be happy in life, then don’t do tarchhod(to spurn with contempt) towards anyone! Who are you doingtarchhod to? To God Himself! As God resides in every being.The insult does not reach the person: the insult reaches God!God takes the results of everything in the world. Therefore, dothings that He can accept, and that do not make you look badin His eyes. It is not possible for anyone to attain moksha byspurning even a single living being with contempt (tarchhod).(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-49192Aptavani-4 (9)The Aura of the Individual‘This’ Gnani Is VitaragQuestioner: What do you love the most?Dadashri: I do not love anything except the Atma (Soul;Self).Questioner: Tell us about your spiritual thoughts andexperiences.Dadashri: I remain completely separate from the mind,body and speech. Nevertheless, I have not attained absoluteknowledge (kevalgnan). Owing to the effects of the prevailingtime cycle, I am still four degrees short of attaining it (the full 360degrees).Questioner: How do you manage to live in such adetached state, from this worldly life (sansar)?Dadashri: With complete vitaragata (state of absolutedetachment). I do business; I pay income tax, sales tax and allthat. Even with all the ‘swords’ of the worldly life hanging overmy head, I remain vitarag. This vitaragata would remain, evenif someone were to cut off my hand.Questioner: Despite having all this, do you feel theimportance of business?Dadashri: Nothing is important to me, but I still have todo it. It is like being taken away by the policeman and made todo something against your will.Questioner: What happens when you make a profit inyour business?Dadashri: I do not have those sorts of tendencies. I havenever had thoughts about making a profit; everything happensspontaneously and naturally. I do not have any kinds of desireseither. I have attained a state that is desire-free.Questioner: Since when have you attained such a state?Dadashri: All my life, I had virtually spent in dharmadhyan(virtuous meditation), but in 1958, the Gnan manifested withinme!Questioner: How much spiritual pursuit (sadhana) wasthere behind the manifestation of the Gnan?Dadashri: ‘This’ (Gnan) is the fruit of the sadhana(spiritual seeking) from countless past lives; however, it is stillthere even in this life. And besides this, I also had acquired highmoral and spiritual values from my mother.Questioner: Did you ever practice rules or rituals, fast ortake any vows?Dadashri: I have never fasted even for the sake of it.Granted, throughout my life I have observed the penance ofunodari (eating less than what one’s hunger demands). I strictlyfollowed the practices of chovihaar (eating before dark); I onlydrank boiled water, and I avoided kandamood (root vegetables,specifically onions, garlic and potatoes).The Phenomenal Vision of 1958!Questioner: The vision (darshan) you had at Suratstation in 1958, what was it like?Dadashri: I felt as though I had become completelydetached from this body.Questioner: How did that separation feel?Aptavani-49192Aptavani-4 (9)The Aura of the Individual‘This’ Gnani Is VitaragQuestioner: What do you love the most?Dadashri: I do not love anything except the Atma (Soul;Self).Questioner: Tell us about your spiritual thoughts andexperiences.Dadashri: I remain completely separate from the mind,body and speech. Nevertheless, I have not attained absoluteknowledge (kevalgnan). Owing to the effects of the prevailingtime cycle, I am still four degrees short of attaining it (the full 360degrees).Questioner: How do you manage to live in such adetached state, from this worldly life (sansar)?Dadashri: With complete vitaragata (state of absolutedetachment). I do business; I pay income tax, sales tax and allthat. Even with all the ‘swords’ of the worldly life hanging overmy head, I remain vitarag. This vitaragata would remain, evenif someone were to cut off my hand.Questioner: Despite having all this, do you feel theimportance of business?Dadashri: Nothing is important to me, but I still have todo it. It is like being taken away by the policeman and made todo something against your will.Questioner: What happens when you make a profit inyour business?Dadashri: I do not have those sorts of tendencies. I havenever had thoughts about making a profit; everything happensspontaneously and naturally. I do not have any kinds of desireseither. I have attained a state that is desire-free.Questioner: Since when have you attained such a state?Dadashri: All my life, I had virtually spent in dharmadhyan(virtuous meditation), but in 1958, the Gnan manifested withinme!Questioner: How much spiritual pursuit (sadhana) wasthere behind the manifestation of the Gnan?Dadashri: ‘This’ (Gnan) is the fruit of the sadhana(spiritual seeking) from countless past lives; however, it is stillthere even in this life. And besides this, I also had acquired highmoral and spiritual values from my mother.Questioner: Did you ever practice rules or rituals, fast ortake any vows?Dadashri: I have never fasted even for the sake of it.Granted, throughout my life I have observed the penance ofunodari (eating less than what one’s hunger demands). I strictlyfollowed the practices of chovihaar (eating before dark); I onlydrank boiled water, and I avoided kandamood (root vegetables,specifically onions, garlic and potatoes).The Phenomenal Vision of 1958!Questioner: The vision (darshan) you had at Suratstation in 1958, what was it like?Dadashri: I felt as though I had become completelydetached from this body.Questioner: How did that separation feel?Aptavani-49394Aptavani-4Dadashri: Absolute separation; it is a completely differentstate altogether! It is not possible to describe it!!Questioner: Did you feel that something was going tohappen prior to that moment?Dadashri: I was experiencing a lot of peace. But it wasthe kind of peace associated with the ego; that is of no use. Thatkind of peace, even people who are not Self-realized, canexperience.Questioner: During that time on the station, had you everfelt such a bliss before?Dadashri: With the attributes of Gnata (Knower),Drashta (Seer) and Parmanand (Supremely blissful), I hadbecome separate. I was not in my body, I was not in my speech,nor was I in my mind. That was how detached I had become.That is indeed the attainment of Gnan (the Self-knowledge).Gnan is the Atma (the Soul; the Self) itself.Questioner: Does the light of Gnan- after itsmanifestation- stay the same for you, or does it keep increasing?Dadashri: ‘Ours’ is the ‘experienced Gnan’ in whichthere cannot be two kinds of light. There is only one kind ofconstant light. ‘We’ have complete, precise and clear experience(spashta anubhav) of the Self. Until you have the clearexperience of the Self (spashta anubhav), the Gnan willcontinue to increase. Once you have that clear exact experience(spashta anubhav), the Gnan is complete.Questioner: How can someone who studies spirituality,know that he has reached the absolute state?Dadashri: Such a person’s speech will be vitarag(detached and without abhorrence towards anything), hisexpression will be vitarag, and conduct will be vitarag.Everything about him is vitarag. He has no attachment for, norabhorrence towards anything; whether you insult him orshower him with flowers. His speech is syadvaad, whichmeans that it does not hurt anyone’s religion or anyone’sviewpoint at all.There Is No Method to GnanQuestioner: You move around in a liberated state, buthow did you acquire the special powers (siddhi)?Dadashri: Just like you, many people ask me the samequestion, and I have to say to them, “Do you want to imitateme? You will just waste your efforts, if you try to imitate me.”‘This is but natural.’ Even the Gnan that manifested within mehappened on the bench where I sat, amidst the terrible hustleand bustle of the Surat station.Questioner: You say that Gnan that manifested was “butnatural”. Can you explain what you mean by that?Dadashri: “But natural” Gnan happens to only fewpeople. If someone says, “I did it myself,” then that Gnanremains incomplete. This Gnan happened ‘naturally’ on its own.If one did it himself, then the vikalp (the ego of ‘I amChandubhai’), would decrease by 80 percent, but 20 percentwould still remain. But this is the Science of the Vitarag, whichmeans that it is a 100 percent nirvikalp (ego-less state).The Gnani Gives Proof of MokshaQuestioner: What do you do on a daily basis?Dadashri: I constantly live in my moksha; even at thispresent moment I am in my moksha. The speech that is emitting,comes from a ‘recorded tape’. I am not its owner. I just seewhether that speech comes out ‘right or wrong’.Questioner: When your ‘tape’ within is not sayinganything, does it mean that it is just gone ‘blank’?Aptavani-49394Aptavani-4Dadashri: Absolute separation; it is a completely differentstate altogether! It is not possible to describe it!!Questioner: Did you feel that something was going tohappen prior to that moment?Dadashri: I was experiencing a lot of peace. But it wasthe kind of peace associated with the ego; that is of no use. Thatkind of peace, even people who are not Self-realized, canexperience.Questioner: During that time on the station, had you everfelt such a bliss before?Dadashri: With the attributes of Gnata (Knower),Drashta (Seer) and Parmanand (Supremely blissful), I hadbecome separate. I was not in my body, I was not in my speech,nor was I in my mind. That was how detached I had become.That is indeed the attainment of Gnan (the Self-knowledge).Gnan is the Atma (the Soul; the Self) itself.Questioner: Does the light of Gnan- after itsmanifestation- stay the same for you, or does it keep increasing?Dadashri: ‘Ours’ is the ‘experienced Gnan’ in whichthere cannot be two kinds of light. There is only one kind ofconstant light. ‘We’ have complete, precise and clear experience(spashta anubhav) of the Self. Until you have the clearexperience of the Self (spashta anubhav), the Gnan willcontinue to increase. Once you have that clear exact experience(spashta anubhav), the Gnan is complete.Questioner: How can someone who studies spirituality,know that he has reached the absolute state?Dadashri: Such a person’s speech will be vitarag(detached and without abhorrence towards anything), hisexpression will be vitarag, and conduct will be vitarag.Everything about him is vitarag. He has no attachment for, norabhorrence towards anything; whether you insult him orshower him with flowers. His speech is syadvaad, whichmeans that it does not hurt anyone’s religion or anyone’sviewpoint at all.There Is No Method to GnanQuestioner: You move around in a liberated state, buthow did you acquire the special powers (siddhi)?Dadashri: Just like you, many people ask me the samequestion, and I have to say to them, “Do you want to imitateme? You will just waste your efforts, if you try to imitate me.”‘This is but natural.’ Even the Gnan that manifested within mehappened on the bench where I sat, amidst the terrible hustleand bustle of the Surat station.Questioner: You say that Gnan that manifested was “butnatural”. Can you explain what you mean by that?Dadashri: “But natural” Gnan happens to only fewpeople. If someone says, “I did it myself,” then that Gnanremains incomplete. This Gnan happened ‘naturally’ on its own.If one did it himself, then the vikalp (the ego of ‘I amChandubhai’), would decrease by 80 percent, but 20 percentwould still remain. But this is the Science of the Vitarag, whichmeans that it is a 100 percent nirvikalp (ego-less state).The Gnani Gives Proof of MokshaQuestioner: What do you do on a daily basis?Dadashri: I constantly live in my moksha; even at thispresent moment I am in my moksha. The speech that is emitting,comes from a ‘recorded tape’. I am not its owner. I just seewhether that speech comes out ‘right or wrong’.Questioner: When your ‘tape’ within is not sayinganything, does it mean that it is just gone ‘blank’?Aptavani-49596Aptavani-4Dadashri: The audible ‘tape’ keeps on playing, andsimultaneously the ‘tape’ of subtle (inaudible) speech is alsoplaying.Questioner: Can the Gnani Purush change one’sparmanus (subatomic particles)? Or do they change because ofhis presence?Dadashri: After you have put yogurt in the milk, theGnani cannot do anything. If you had asked before you put inthe yogurt (i.e. charging karma), it would have been possible;however, nothing can be done about it after the fact The Gnanican annihilate all karma – that is all he is capable of. The Gnanican change some aspects of things. And that I can do for you.Questioner: What do you mean when you say, ‘puttingyogurt in milk’?Dadashri: You have no choice but suffer the effects ofkarmas that have become solidified like ice. The Gnani candestroy karmas that are in the form of water and vapor.Nevertheless, his inner intent is always just naimitik (instrumental),and therefore he remains as the non-doer (akarta).Questioner: What is moksha?Dadashri: Moksha is liberation from all types of pain(dukh), and the attainment of eternal bliss. Moksha is the feelingof liberation.Questioner: What causes bondage?Dadashri: Ignorance of the Self.Questioner: Is moksha a location or a state?Dadashri: It is a state, but not this state that you arefamiliar with: it is a natural state.Questioner: Does moksha mean independence?Dadashri: Yes, real independence – where there is nosuperior and no “underhand” (subordinate).Questioner: Is it possible to attain such an independentstate in the worldly life (sansar)?Dadashri: Why not? I have attained it. I am living proofthat it is possible to attain such a state, even while living in theworldly life (sansar). You will get some ‘encouragement’ fromseeing me, that it is attainable even while living in the worldly life(sansar).Questioner: What is the difference between darshan(vision as the Self) and Gnan?Dadashri: Darshan is the main vehicle for moksha.Gnan is the extension (vishesha) of darshan. When Gnan anddarshan come together, it gives rise to conduct (charitra).What is Gnan? It is that which has been known and understoodthrough darshan (understanding through the vision as the Self).When that understanding “fits” within, and when one is able tomake others understand; when such a state arises, it is calledGnan. The real work is done by darshan.Questioner: Is there a relationship between Gnan andShuddhatma?Dadashri: Shuddhatma is really the Gnanswaroop (theGnan; the state of the Self). Absolute Gnanswaroop isParmatma swaroop (The absolute state of the Self).Questioner: Who binds the karma if the Atma (the Self)does not do anything?Dadashri: The ego that says, “I did this,” is itself the onethat binds karma.Questioner: What is the difference between the Knower(gnayak) and an inquisitive person (jignyasu)?Aptavani-49596Aptavani-4Dadashri: The audible ‘tape’ keeps on playing, andsimultaneously the ‘tape’ of subtle (inaudible) speech is alsoplaying.Questioner: Can the Gnani Purush change one’sparmanus (subatomic particles)? Or do they change because ofhis presence?Dadashri: After you have put yogurt in the milk, theGnani cannot do anything. If you had asked before you put inthe yogurt (i.e. charging karma), it would have been possible;however, nothing can be done about it after the fact The Gnanican annihilate all karma – that is all he is capable of. The Gnanican change some aspects of things. And that I can do for you.Questioner: What do you mean when you say, ‘puttingyogurt in milk’?Dadashri: You have no choice but suffer the effects ofkarmas that have become solidified like ice. The Gnani candestroy karmas that are in the form of water and vapor.Nevertheless, his inner intent is always just naimitik (instrumental),and therefore he remains as the non-doer (akarta).Questioner: What is moksha?Dadashri: Moksha is liberation from all types of pain(dukh), and the attainment of eternal bliss. Moksha is the feelingof liberation.Questioner: What causes bondage?Dadashri: Ignorance of the Self.Questioner: Is moksha a location or a state?Dadashri: It is a state, but not this state that you arefamiliar with: it is a natural state.Questioner: Does moksha mean independence?Dadashri: Yes, real independence – where there is nosuperior and no “underhand” (subordinate).Questioner: Is it possible to attain such an independentstate in the worldly life (sansar)?Dadashri: Why not? I have attained it. I am living proofthat it is possible to attain such a state, even while living in theworldly life (sansar). You will get some ‘encouragement’ fromseeing me, that it is attainable even while living in the worldly life(sansar).Questioner: What is the difference between darshan(vision as the Self) and Gnan?Dadashri: Darshan is the main vehicle for moksha.Gnan is the extension (vishesha) of darshan. When Gnan anddarshan come together, it gives rise to conduct (charitra).What is Gnan? It is that which has been known and understoodthrough darshan (understanding through the vision as the Self).When that understanding “fits” within, and when one is able tomake others understand; when such a state arises, it is calledGnan. The real work is done by darshan.Questioner: Is there a relationship between Gnan andShuddhatma?Dadashri: Shuddhatma is really the Gnanswaroop (theGnan; the state of the Self). Absolute Gnanswaroop isParmatma swaroop (The absolute state of the Self).Questioner: Who binds the karma if the Atma (the Self)does not do anything?Dadashri: The ego that says, “I did this,” is itself the onethat binds karma.Questioner: What is the difference between the Knower(gnayak) and an inquisitive person (jignyasu)?Aptavani-49798Aptavani-4Dadashri: There is a tremendous difference. You cannotmake a connection between the two. Gnayak is one’s Self thathas become Parmatma (absolute Self); whereas jignyasu hasto make a guru, and he has to keep searching. Inquisitivenesshas arisen within and, therefore, he becomes a purusharthi (onemaking the effort), but the gnayak is verily the God.Questioner: What is the difference between mumukshuand jignyasu?Dadashri: Mumukshu is one who only desires mokshaand jignyasu means that one still has a desire for happiness andso one gets it from wherever one can.Questioner: What does it mean to see within theuniverse and outside the universe?Dadashri: One is said to be inside the universe, whenone is tanmayakar (to become one) with the gneyas (thatwhich is to be known). And when one is outside of the universe,it means that one just sees the gneyas as gneyas.Questioner: What is ‘absolute’ science?Dadashri: Science that is nirlep (absolutely detached)from agnan (ignorance of the Self) is ‘absolute’ science.Questioner: Has the word “Atma” been in existencefrom time immemorial?Dadashri: Yes, since time immemorial. Gnan and itsways have been the same since time immemorial.The Great Importance of the NimitQuestioner: Do we need a nimit (a person who isinstrumental) in order to realize the Self?Dadashri: Nothing can happen without a nimit. Only asan exception, can it happen without a nimit to someone rare.And when it does, they are called swayam-buddha (spontaneousSelf-realization). Even those who are swayam-buddha, wouldhad to have met a Gnani in their past life. Nothing can happenwithout a nimit. One must have upadaan (spiritual readiness) aswell as a nimit.‘Upadaan nu naam lai ae je tajey nimit;‘One who abandons the nimit, emphasizing one’s ownreadiness exclusively;Paame nahi siddhattva ne, rahe bhrantima sthita.’Does not attain liberation and remains established inillusion.’~ Shrimad RajchandraTherefore, you need a nimit first. Even if one’s upadaanis not awakened, Gnan will awaken it. But without a nimit,nothing can be done.Questioner: What if you have a hundred percentconviction that the experience of the Self does not ever happenthrough a nimit (another person)?Dadashri: Then you will never experience the Self. Youmay have tremendous upadaan, but if you cannot find a nimit,then you will never experience the Self. The nimit is vital!Questioner: So, we have to accept that that experienceof the Self can only happen through a nimit?Dadashri: Here is how it is. Everyone must keep hisupadaan awakened, and many do. But what can they dowithout a nimit? There is no other way.Questioner: Does one meet a nimit through his meritkarma (punya) or through his purusharth (effort)?Dadashri: Through his merit karma (punya). Otherwise,even if he does purusharth of running from one upashraya(place where monks stay for a short time) to another for infiniteAptavani-49798Aptavani-4Dadashri: There is a tremendous difference. You cannotmake a connection between the two. Gnayak is one’s Self thathas become Parmatma (absolute Self); whereas jignyasu hasto make a guru, and he has to keep searching. Inquisitivenesshas arisen within and, therefore, he becomes a purusharthi (onemaking the effort), but the gnayak is verily the God.Questioner: What is the difference between mumukshuand jignyasu?Dadashri: Mumukshu is one who only desires mokshaand jignyasu means that one still has a desire for happiness andso one gets it from wherever one can.Questioner: What does it mean to see within theuniverse and outside the universe?Dadashri: One is said to be inside the universe, whenone is tanmayakar (to become one) with the gneyas (thatwhich is to be known). And when one is outside of the universe,it means that one just sees the gneyas as gneyas.Questioner: What is ‘absolute’ science?Dadashri: Science that is nirlep (absolutely detached)from agnan (ignorance of the Self) is ‘absolute’ science.Questioner: Has the word “Atma” been in existencefrom time immemorial?Dadashri: Yes, since time immemorial. Gnan and itsways have been the same since time immemorial.The Great Importance of the NimitQuestioner: Do we need a nimit (a person who isinstrumental) in order to realize the Self?Dadashri: Nothing can happen without a nimit. Only asan exception, can it happen without a nimit to someone rare.And when it does, they are called swayam-buddha (spontaneousSelf-realization). Even those who are swayam-buddha, wouldhad to have met a Gnani in their past life. Nothing can happenwithout a nimit. One must have upadaan (spiritual readiness) aswell as a nimit.‘Upadaan nu naam lai ae je tajey nimit;‘One who abandons the nimit, emphasizing one’s ownreadiness exclusively;Paame nahi siddhattva ne, rahe bhrantima sthita.’Does not attain liberation and remains established inillusion.’~ Shrimad RajchandraTherefore, you need a nimit first. Even if one’s upadaanis not awakened, Gnan will awaken it. But without a nimit,nothing can be done.Questioner: What if you have a hundred percentconviction that the experience of the Self does not ever happenthrough a nimit (another person)?Dadashri: Then you will never experience the Self. Youmay have tremendous upadaan, but if you cannot find a nimit,then you will never experience the Self. The nimit is vital!Questioner: So, we have to accept that that experienceof the Self can only happen through a nimit?Dadashri: Here is how it is. Everyone must keep hisupadaan awakened, and many do. But what can they dowithout a nimit? There is no other way.Questioner: Does one meet a nimit through his meritkarma (punya) or through his purusharth (effort)?Dadashri: Through his merit karma (punya). Otherwise,even if he does purusharth of running from one upashraya(place where monks stay for a short time) to another for infiniteAptavani-499100Aptavani-4lives, he will still not find a nimit. Whereas with merit karma;he may meet him (the nimit) on the street. There one needspunya-anubandhi-punya (merit karma that binds more newmerit karma, these are the highest kind of merit karma).The Self and PunyaQuestioner: Does the Atma (Self) have a connectionwith merit karmas (punya)?Dadashri: There is no connection. However, as long asone believes, ‘I am doing this,’ there is a connection. When the‘right belief’, “I am not the ‘doer’,” is established, then there isno longer a connection between the Atma (the Self) and punya(merit karma).Questioner: What should one do in order to increaseone’s merit karma (punya)?Dadashri: You must be obliging towards others all daylong. Using your mind, body and speech with unity, for the sakeof others is called merit karma (punya).Questioner: What if, while doing good for others, weruin things for ourselves.Dadashri: You will not spoil anything for yourself; I‘guarantee’ you that.Questioner: The current times are such that no matterwhat you do, whether you do the prayer beads, or you dochanting of mantra (japa), you do penance (tapa), or worship,etc., there is still no peace – what is that?Dadashri: That only means that you have not found theright path yet; therefore, change the path.DharmadhyanQuestioner: What is considered dharmadhyan?Dadashri: When someone insults you, and you becomeangry, that is raudradhyan. Now if someone insults you and atthat moment your Gnan tells you that he is just a nimit and,‘This is simply the fruit of my own unfolding karma, so no oneis at fault here’; you realize this and you do not get angry, thenthat is dharmadhyan. To turn artadhyan (adverse internalmeditation that hurts the self) and raudradhyan (adverseinternal meditation that hurts the self and others) around isdharmadhyan.ShukladhyanQuestioner: What is shukladhyan?Dadashri: Shukladhyan means to have constantawareness of, “I am Shuddhatma.” It should not be piecemealawareness; it should be continuous. Shukladhyan means themeditation (dhyan) of the eternal element (Soul) anddharmadhyan is the meditation of situation (avastha); of thatwhich is not eternal.The Mind and The SoulQuestioner: What is the difference between the mindand the Atma (the Self)?Dadashri: The mind is made up of tubers (gaanth),formed from the vibrations created as a consequence ofignorance of the Self. It (tuber) erupts in the form of a thought.The mind is gross, it is nischetan chetan (mechanical; non-Self;lifeless life) and the Self is chaitanya Parmatma (absolute Self;Life energy).Love and WorshipQuestioner: Of the two, which is higher, love (prem) orworship (bhakti)?Dadashri: You are talking about the love for God and notAptavani-499100Aptavani-4lives, he will still not find a nimit. Whereas with merit karma;he may meet him (the nimit) on the street. There one needspunya-anubandhi-punya (merit karma that binds more newmerit karma, these are the highest kind of merit karma).The Self and PunyaQuestioner: Does the Atma (Self) have a connectionwith merit karmas (punya)?Dadashri: There is no connection. However, as long asone believes, ‘I am doing this,’ there is a connection. When the‘right belief’, “I am not the ‘doer’,” is established, then there isno longer a connection between the Atma (the Self) and punya(merit karma).Questioner: What should one do in order to increaseone’s merit karma (punya)?Dadashri: You must be obliging towards others all daylong. Using your mind, body and speech with unity, for the sakeof others is called merit karma (punya).Questioner: What if, while doing good for others, weruin things for ourselves.Dadashri: You will not spoil anything for yourself; I‘guarantee’ you that.Questioner: The current times are such that no matterwhat you do, whether you do the prayer beads, or you dochanting of mantra (japa), you do penance (tapa), or worship,etc., there is still no peace – what is that?Dadashri: That only means that you have not found theright path yet; therefore, change the path.DharmadhyanQuestioner: What is considered dharmadhyan?Dadashri: When someone insults you, and you becomeangry, that is raudradhyan. Now if someone insults you and atthat moment your Gnan tells you that he is just a nimit and,‘This is simply the fruit of my own unfolding karma, so no oneis at fault here’; you realize this and you do not get angry, thenthat is dharmadhyan. To turn artadhyan (adverse internalmeditation that hurts the self) and raudradhyan (adverseinternal meditation that hurts the self and others) around isdharmadhyan.ShukladhyanQuestioner: What is shukladhyan?Dadashri: Shukladhyan means to have constantawareness of, “I am Shuddhatma.” It should not be piecemealawareness; it should be continuous. Shukladhyan means themeditation (dhyan) of the eternal element (Soul) anddharmadhyan is the meditation of situation (avastha); of thatwhich is not eternal.The Mind and The SoulQuestioner: What is the difference between the mindand the Atma (the Self)?Dadashri: The mind is made up of tubers (gaanth),formed from the vibrations created as a consequence ofignorance of the Self. It (tuber) erupts in the form of a thought.The mind is gross, it is nischetan chetan (mechanical; non-Self;lifeless life) and the Self is chaitanya Parmatma (absolute Self;Life energy).Love and WorshipQuestioner: Of the two, which is higher, love (prem) orworship (bhakti)?Dadashri: You are talking about the love for God and notAptavani-4101102Aptavani-4the worldly love, right? Worship can only come about if there islove for God, and not otherwise. Worship without love is notconsidered worship.Questioner: What is considered premlakshana bhakti(worship with love of God)?Dadashri: True premlakshana bhakti is the love ofGod. It is where you will not forget God the whole day long.Even while you are counting money, you have God on yourmind; that is love for God. At the moment there is still more lovefor money. To forget God at the time your daughter is gettingmarried is illusory attachment (moha); it is infatuation (murchha).Premlakshana bhakti is very high worship; God Himself makesHis presence there.With Flawless Vision the World Is FlawlessQuestioner: How can we attain faultlessness(nirdoshata)?Dadashri: When you ‘see’ the entire world as beingfaultless (nirdosh). I have become faultless (nirdosh) throughseeing the entire world as faultless. The one who does good andthe one who does bad, in my eyes, are both faultless.Questioner: In the ‘relative’ perspective, when you dosomething wrong, isn’t it apparent who is at fault (doshit)?Dadashri: When is one considered to be at fault(doshit)? It is when his Shuddhatma (the pure Soul) ‘is doing’something wrong. But the Shuddhatma is the ‘non-doer’. It isnot possible for the Shuddhatma ‘to do’ anything. This isdischarge of karma and you see him at fault (doshit) in it. Youshould do pratikraman for any faults that you see in others. Aslong as you see fault in any living being in this world, know thatyou have not yet attained inner purification (shuddhikaran).Until then, it is sensory knowledge (indriya-gnan).Questioner: Is bitterness a kind of ego?Dadashri: Bitterness and sweetness are both the fruit ofkarma, and they will be there only as long as the ego is there.The fruit of the ego that does good, will be sweet, and the fruitof the ego that does bad, will be bitter.Questioner: Who creates all the confusion in this world?Dadashri: Ignorance of the Self.Questioner: Who is the greater; the one asking forforgiveness, or the one who forgives?Dadashri: Even the horse and cart carriage drivers, taxidrivers, or potters come to ask for forgiveness. However, theyhave not given forgiveness themselves. So the one who forgives,has greater value. It is very difficult to forgive. ‘Ours’ (Dada’s)is natural and spontaneous (sahaj) forgiveness (kshama). Youare automatically forgiven for any mistakes you make, whetheryou ask for forgiveness or not.A Seed of Karma Is Sown if You Become theDoerQuestioner: What is the difference between a man whothinks about killing someone and a man who actually killssomeone?Dadashri: The one who thinks about it, is guilty in theeyes of Nature, and the one who actually kills someone, is guiltyin the eyes of the world. A man who kills someone in this lifewas already guilty (of having bhaav and planting a seed ofkilling) from his previous life. His punishment will be in this life,in the form of a jail sentence, or harassment and humiliation byother people. That karma will come to end, provided he doesnot sow any new seeds.Questioner: Is there a method to planting these ‘seeds’Aptavani-4101102Aptavani-4the worldly love, right? Worship can only come about if there islove for God, and not otherwise. Worship without love is notconsidered worship.Questioner: What is considered premlakshana bhakti(worship with love of God)?Dadashri: True premlakshana bhakti is the love ofGod. It is where you will not forget God the whole day long.Even while you are counting money, you have God on yourmind; that is love for God. At the moment there is still more lovefor money. To forget God at the time your daughter is gettingmarried is illusory attachment (moha); it is infatuation (murchha).Premlakshana bhakti is very high worship; God Himself makesHis presence there.With Flawless Vision the World Is FlawlessQuestioner: How can we attain faultlessness(nirdoshata)?Dadashri: When you ‘see’ the entire world as beingfaultless (nirdosh). I have become faultless (nirdosh) throughseeing the entire world as faultless. The one who does good andthe one who does bad, in my eyes, are both faultless.Questioner: In the ‘relative’ perspective, when you dosomething wrong, isn’t it apparent who is at fault (doshit)?Dadashri: When is one considered to be at fault(doshit)? It is when his Shuddhatma (the pure Soul) ‘is doing’something wrong. But the Shuddhatma is the ‘non-doer’. It isnot possible for the Shuddhatma ‘to do’ anything. This isdischarge of karma and you see him at fault (doshit) in it. Youshould do pratikraman for any faults that you see in others. Aslong as you see fault in any living being in this world, know thatyou have not yet attained inner purification (shuddhikaran).Until then, it is sensory knowledge (indriya-gnan).Questioner: Is bitterness a kind of ego?Dadashri: Bitterness and sweetness are both the fruit ofkarma, and they will be there only as long as the ego is there.The fruit of the ego that does good, will be sweet, and the fruitof the ego that does bad, will be bitter.Questioner: Who creates all the confusion in this world?Dadashri: Ignorance of the Self.Questioner: Who is the greater; the one asking forforgiveness, or the one who forgives?Dadashri: Even the horse and cart carriage drivers, taxidrivers, or potters come to ask for forgiveness. However, theyhave not given forgiveness themselves. So the one who forgives,has greater value. It is very difficult to forgive. ‘Ours’ (Dada’s)is natural and spontaneous (sahaj) forgiveness (kshama). Youare automatically forgiven for any mistakes you make, whetheryou ask for forgiveness or not.A Seed of Karma Is Sown if You Become theDoerQuestioner: What is the difference between a man whothinks about killing someone and a man who actually killssomeone?Dadashri: The one who thinks about it, is guilty in theeyes of Nature, and the one who actually kills someone, is guiltyin the eyes of the world. A man who kills someone in this lifewas already guilty (of having bhaav and planting a seed ofkilling) from his previous life. His punishment will be in this life,in the form of a jail sentence, or harassment and humiliation byother people. That karma will come to end, provided he doesnot sow any new seeds.Questioner: Is there a method to planting these ‘seeds’Aptavani-4103104Aptavani-4(cause of karma)? Is there a way of knowing which seed willbe sown and which seed will not?Dadashri: Yes. When you say things like, “This was agreat snack” and “I ate it”, then a seed is sown. There is nothingwrong in saying, “I ate,” but you should ‘know’ who the ‘eater’is. You should know, “I (the Self) am not eating, the eater (thenon-Self) is eating.” Hence, you sow the seeds when youbecome ‘the doer’.Did You Receive the Knowledge of the Self orDid It Manifest?Questioner: What is the difference between ‘attaining thestate that you are in’ and ‘attaining moksha’?Dadashri: There is no difference. I have indeed attainedmoksha. If you attained the state I am in, even you would attainmoksha. You do not have to look for it outside, for it is insideyou.Questioner: You tell us that we should realize who weare, so how can we do that?Dadashri: You have to come to me. You have to say thatyou want to know who You are, so that I can help you do that.Questioner: Is the Gnan that we have received from youthe Atmagnan (knowledge of the Self) itself?Dadashri: What you have received is not the Atmagnan.It is that which has manifested within you is the Atmagnan.When you repeat what I ask you to repeat, it destroys all yourdemerit karma (paap) and the Gnan begins to emanate withinyou. Has it not manifested within you?Questioner (Mahatma): Yes, it has.Questioner: What should one do to attain the grace(krupa) of the Gnani Purush?Dadashri: The Gnani himself knows when you arefollowing his Agnas. The Gnani wants nothing else. He will bepleased if you abide by the ‘laws’ (Agnas; special directives) ofthe place that you want to go to, nothing else.The Science of Speech Tells All!Questioner: For how long has your link of spiritual effort(sadhana) been going on?Dadashri: Innumerable people throughout the ages havehad this common link. These are all just links. That day in 1958,this Gnan came about. And then it had to come forth. In orderfor it to emerge, it will always find a link (nimit). I have attained356 degrees of Gnan, but it has not come out yet. Only theGnan of the lower degrees has come out. It will be quite aphenomenon for this era, the day this Gnan emerges in its full356 degrees.Questioner: To extract the 356 degree Gnan, will wenot need people who are more apt; qualified people?Dadashri: Yes, you need such people for this. Ifsomeone like that comes along, then the Gnan will come outreally fast. As such people come along, higher Gnan willemerge. To bring it out, is not in my hands. This (Dada’s speech)is just a “record.” The ‘record’ will play, as more apt peoplecome along!… What Amazing Bliss!Questioner: Did you realize that you had attained Gnanwhen it happened?Dadashri: Did I indeed?! At the time, I felt as though Iwas sitting in Siddha Gati (abode of the Absolute liberatedSouls, located at the crest of the universe), experiencing infinitebliss, so how would I not realize it? Although I was sitting on abench, I was still experiencing the bliss of the Siddha Gati. TheAptavani-4103104Aptavani-4(cause of karma)? Is there a way of knowing which seed willbe sown and which seed will not?Dadashri: Yes. When you say things like, “This was agreat snack” and “I ate it”, then a seed is sown. There is nothingwrong in saying, “I ate,” but you should ‘know’ who the ‘eater’is. You should know, “I (the Self) am not eating, the eater (thenon-Self) is eating.” Hence, you sow the seeds when youbecome ‘the doer’.Did You Receive the Knowledge of the Self orDid It Manifest?Questioner: What is the difference between ‘attaining thestate that you are in’ and ‘attaining moksha’?Dadashri: There is no difference. I have indeed attainedmoksha. If you attained the state I am in, even you would attainmoksha. You do not have to look for it outside, for it is insideyou.Questioner: You tell us that we should realize who weare, so how can we do that?Dadashri: You have to come to me. You have to say thatyou want to know who You are, so that I can help you do that.Questioner: Is the Gnan that we have received from youthe Atmagnan (knowledge of the Self) itself?Dadashri: What you have received is not the Atmagnan.It is that which has manifested within you is the Atmagnan.When you repeat what I ask you to repeat, it destroys all yourdemerit karma (paap) and the Gnan begins to emanate withinyou. Has it not manifested within you?Questioner (Mahatma): Yes, it has.Questioner: What should one do to attain the grace(krupa) of the Gnani Purush?Dadashri: The Gnani himself knows when you arefollowing his Agnas. The Gnani wants nothing else. He will bepleased if you abide by the ‘laws’ (Agnas; special directives) ofthe place that you want to go to, nothing else.The Science of Speech Tells All!Questioner: For how long has your link of spiritual effort(sadhana) been going on?Dadashri: Innumerable people throughout the ages havehad this common link. These are all just links. That day in 1958,this Gnan came about. And then it had to come forth. In orderfor it to emerge, it will always find a link (nimit). I have attained356 degrees of Gnan, but it has not come out yet. Only theGnan of the lower degrees has come out. It will be quite aphenomenon for this era, the day this Gnan emerges in its full356 degrees.Questioner: To extract the 356 degree Gnan, will wenot need people who are more apt; qualified people?Dadashri: Yes, you need such people for this. Ifsomeone like that comes along, then the Gnan will come outreally fast. As such people come along, higher Gnan willemerge. To bring it out, is not in my hands. This (Dada’s speech)is just a “record.” The ‘record’ will play, as more apt peoplecome along!… What Amazing Bliss!Questioner: Did you realize that you had attained Gnanwhen it happened?Dadashri: Did I indeed?! At the time, I felt as though Iwas sitting in Siddha Gati (abode of the Absolute liberatedSouls, located at the crest of the universe), experiencing infinitebliss, so how would I not realize it? Although I was sitting on abench, I was still experiencing the bliss of the Siddha Gati. TheAptavani-4105106Aptavani-4gentleman who was my attendant, who sat beside me at thetime, also attained moksha. This Akram Vignan that hasmanifested is something quite amazing!The Gnani Cultivates The Self’s EnergyQuestioner: When we do Charan Vidhi (the specialinner blessings received by direct touching of the feet of theGnani with the forehead) at Your feet, what does it really mean?Dadashri: The Charan Vidhi separates the Self from thenon-Self within, thus bliss expresses within. All weaknesses(kashays) go away. There is tremendous energy (shakti) at thefeet of the Gnani.Can Gnani Be Compared with Anyone?Questioner: Is there no comparison to a Gnani?Dadashri: There is no comparison to a Gnani. Who isa Gnani? Not everyone is considered a Gnani. One is a Gnaniif he does not have the slightest ownership of the mind, of thespeech or of the body; he who constantly remains as the Selfand he who does not have even a trace of ego.Questioner: Does the Gnani have the highest humility(namrata)?Dadashri: Even an ordinary person has humility, but theGnani does not have an ego at all. There is no ego, even whensomeone insults him.Questioner: Does the Gnani have no interest (nispruha)?Dadashri: The Gnani is not nispruha. There are manypeople who are nispruhi. There are many who say, “I do notneed anything,” but that is an ego of not having interest. TheGnani Purush is saspruha-nispruha, which means that he isuninterested in material pleasure and interested only in the Self(saspruha).Questioner: Does spruha mean desire?Dadashri: Spruha does not mean only one kind ofdesire, but many kinds of desires. When one has countlessdesires for the enjoyment of all kinds of temporary pleasures, itis called spruha.Questioner: Can you predict the future?Dadashri: I would not say that, but if you have anytroubles, I can make you completely free of worry.Recognizing a GnaniQuestioner: How can one recognize a Gnani?Dadashri: If you provoke him and he does not strikeback, then you should know that he is indeed a real Gnani.Wouldn’t you have to test him? If you see any anger, pride,deceit and greed in him, you should immediately move to adifferent ‘shop’ (spiritual guide).Questioner: If I put a Gnani to the test it would bedisrespectful and he would feel insulted. And say he is a realGnani, then wouldn’t I be held accountable for that error (dosh)?Dadashri: If you did meet a true Gnani, he would onlykeep giving you his blessings, regardless of anything unbecomingthat you may do. But if he gets angry and strikes back, then youshould ask him to forgive you and go buy him a cheap pair ofspectacles as a conciliatory gift. If that does not pacify him, tell him,‘Your Holiness, my mind is little crazy. Just before I came here, mywife and I had a fight at home.’ This will make him happy. So thenhe will be happy. How long will you waste your time there?Aptavani (Authentic or Trustworthy Speech) -How Functional !!Questioner: When we read your Aptavani, its effect isso wonderful that we want to keep reading it.Aptavani-4105106Aptavani-4gentleman who was my attendant, who sat beside me at thetime, also attained moksha. This Akram Vignan that hasmanifested is something quite amazing!The Gnani Cultivates The Self’s EnergyQuestioner: When we do Charan Vidhi (the specialinner blessings received by direct touching of the feet of theGnani with the forehead) at Your feet, what does it really mean?Dadashri: The Charan Vidhi separates the Self from thenon-Self within, thus bliss expresses within. All weaknesses(kashays) go away. There is tremendous energy (shakti) at thefeet of the Gnani.Can Gnani Be Compared with Anyone?Questioner: Is there no comparison to a Gnani?Dadashri: There is no comparison to a Gnani. Who isa Gnani? Not everyone is considered a Gnani. One is a Gnaniif he does not have the slightest ownership of the mind, of thespeech or of the body; he who constantly remains as the Selfand he who does not have even a trace of ego.Questioner: Does the Gnani have the highest humility(namrata)?Dadashri: Even an ordinary person has humility, but theGnani does not have an ego at all. There is no ego, even whensomeone insults him.Questioner: Does the Gnani have no interest (nispruha)?Dadashri: The Gnani is not nispruha. There are manypeople who are nispruhi. There are many who say, “I do notneed anything,” but that is an ego of not having interest. TheGnani Purush is saspruha-nispruha, which means that he isuninterested in material pleasure and interested only in the Self(saspruha).Questioner: Does spruha mean desire?Dadashri: Spruha does not mean only one kind ofdesire, but many kinds of desires. When one has countlessdesires for the enjoyment of all kinds of temporary pleasures, itis called spruha.Questioner: Can you predict the future?Dadashri: I would not say that, but if you have anytroubles, I can make you completely free of worry.Recognizing a GnaniQuestioner: How can one recognize a Gnani?Dadashri: If you provoke him and he does not strikeback, then you should know that he is indeed a real Gnani.Wouldn’t you have to test him? If you see any anger, pride,deceit and greed in him, you should immediately move to adifferent ‘shop’ (spiritual guide).Questioner: If I put a Gnani to the test it would bedisrespectful and he would feel insulted. And say he is a realGnani, then wouldn’t I be held accountable for that error (dosh)?Dadashri: If you did meet a true Gnani, he would onlykeep giving you his blessings, regardless of anything unbecomingthat you may do. But if he gets angry and strikes back, then youshould ask him to forgive you and go buy him a cheap pair ofspectacles as a conciliatory gift. If that does not pacify him, tell him,‘Your Holiness, my mind is little crazy. Just before I came here, mywife and I had a fight at home.’ This will make him happy. So thenhe will be happy. How long will you waste your time there?Aptavani (Authentic or Trustworthy Speech) -How Functional !!Questioner: When we read your Aptavani, its effect isso wonderful that we want to keep reading it.Aptavani-4107108Aptavani-4Dadashri: These words are of the Gnani Purush andthey are fresh. Its phases (paryaya) are current and therefore allyour phases change as you read it, and bliss (anand) continuesto express. Some can even attain samkit (the right vision) in thisway. This is because this speech is the speech of the Vitarag.Speech is only worthy if it is without attachment or abhorrence,and not otherwise. The speech of the Lord was withoutattachment and abhorrence, and its effect is still going on after2500 years. Therefore, even the speech of the Gnani Purushis effective; it will be for at least two to four generations for sure. For liberation, there is no solution without the speech ofa Vitarag.Questioner: I have read both parts of the Aptavani.Nowhere, throughout the entire book, is there any criticism, norany mention of destroying any person.Dadashri: Self-realized persons do not criticize anyone.It is not in them to destroy or construct anything. Why wouldyou want to destroy and create? Why would you opposeanything? Opposition is a kind of ego. It is considered a ‘mad’ego!Religion is something that has no discordance. Such areligion is like nectar. Discord is poison.Questioner: While I am reading the Aptavani, I can seeDada!Dadashri: Yes… You will see ‘Dada’. You will see the‘exact’ Dada. Whenever you wish, you can see ‘Dada’ and it ispossible to reap the benefit. The one you see in front of you isnot ‘Dada.’ He is a Patel from the town of Bhadran. Even theone who speaks is not ‘Dada’, but a ‘recorded tape’ that isspeaking. ‘Dada’ is ‘Dada’: within whom sits the Vitarag; theLord of the fourteen worlds!! He is the one who has manifestedwithin me and whom even I worship. The one who is manifestwithin me is ‘Dada.’ He has manifested within. So many peoplewill be forever blessed. Even when he places his hands on you,you will be eternally blessed (kalyan). This is Akram Vignan.At the present time, it is not likely that the Kramic path willwork.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4107108Aptavani-4Dadashri: These words are of the Gnani Purush andthey are fresh. Its phases (paryaya) are current and therefore allyour phases change as you read it, and bliss (anand) continuesto express. Some can even attain samkit (the right vision) in thisway. This is because this speech is the speech of the Vitarag.Speech is only worthy if it is without attachment or abhorrence,and not otherwise. The speech of the Lord was withoutattachment and abhorrence, and its effect is still going on after2500 years. Therefore, even the speech of the Gnani Purushis effective; it will be for at least two to four generations for sure. For liberation, there is no solution without the speech ofa Vitarag.Questioner: I have read both parts of the Aptavani.Nowhere, throughout the entire book, is there any criticism, norany mention of destroying any person.Dadashri: Self-realized persons do not criticize anyone.It is not in them to destroy or construct anything. Why wouldyou want to destroy and create? Why would you opposeanything? Opposition is a kind of ego. It is considered a ‘mad’ego!Religion is something that has no discordance. Such areligion is like nectar. Discord is poison.Questioner: While I am reading the Aptavani, I can seeDada!Dadashri: Yes… You will see ‘Dada’. You will see the‘exact’ Dada. Whenever you wish, you can see ‘Dada’ and it ispossible to reap the benefit. The one you see in front of you isnot ‘Dada.’ He is a Patel from the town of Bhadran. Even theone who speaks is not ‘Dada’, but a ‘recorded tape’ that isspeaking. ‘Dada’ is ‘Dada’: within whom sits the Vitarag; theLord of the fourteen worlds!! He is the one who has manifestedwithin me and whom even I worship. The one who is manifestwithin me is ‘Dada.’ He has manifested within. So many peoplewill be forever blessed. Even when he places his hands on you,you will be eternally blessed (kalyan). This is Akram Vignan.At the present time, it is not likely that the Kramic path willwork.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4109110Aptavani-4(10)Akram PathAttained Only Through the Grace of GnaniQuestioner: The Akram marg that you speak of, maybe fine and easy for a Gnani like you. But for us ordinarypeople, who have to live and work in the worldly life (sansar),it is a bit difficult. How can we deal with that?Dadashri: When God; the Lord of the fourteen worlds,is Himself manifested within the Gnani Purush, what could youpossibly not accomplish from meeting such a Gnani Purush?You do not have to do anything with your own energy (shakti).It will all happen through his grace. Grace accomplisheseverything. Therefore, whatever you ask for here, you will get.All you have to do is to remain in the Gnani’s Agnas.Questioner: But don’t we have to bring about thesalvation of our own Atma (Self) through our own atma (non-realized self)?Dadashri: That is true, but that is a discussion thatbelongs to the Kramic path. This is Akram Vignan. Therefore,you have to extract your work directly from a living God, andit will remain every moment, not just for one or two hours.Questioner: So, if we hand everything over to him, doesthat mean that he will take care of everything for us?Dadashri: He does everything; you do not have to doanything. ‘Doing’ binds karma. All you have to do is to get onthe “lift” (the elevator) and abide by the Five Agnas. And afteryou get on the lift, you must not jump around or stick yourhand out. That is all you have to do. Rarely does such a pathcome along and it is only meant for the punyashadis (thosewith tremendous merit karma). This is an exceptional path.Only once every million years does such an exceptional pathcome about! It is considered the eleventh wonder of theworld! When one acquires a ticket for this phenomenal path,his work is done.Unprecedented and Non-contradictoryQuestioner: Did you initiate this concept of attainingmoksha through Akram Vignan or was it in existence before?Dadashri: It comes every million years. It is notabsolutely new, but it seems new, because it has not appearedin any books in the last million years, which is why it has beencalled unprecedented. It has never been read, heard or knownbefore that is how unprecedented it is.Questioner: Please talk about any scientific basis if thereis behind the Gnan that you give.Dadashri: This is all science (vignan), non-contradictoryscience. What is the foundation of science? It destroys all yourdemerit karma (paap). Without that, you cannot have the exactexperience of the Self (sakshatkar), without which there is nomoksha. That exact experience of the Self should remainconstantly. It will not change even for a moment. It will remainautomatically, without You having to remember it.Putting aside the notion of knowing the Self, people havemade tremendous endeavors to even establish faith (shraddha)in the Self; just to have conviction of, ‘I am Atma (the Soul)’.But it is difficult to attain such faith in this strange era of thecurrent time cycle. Now, to attain the experience of the Selffrom a Gnani Purush, in such times, is itself the inherentspecial energies (siddhis) of Akram Gnan. All this is possibleAptavani-4109110Aptavani-4(10)Akram PathAttained Only Through the Grace of GnaniQuestioner: The Akram marg that you speak of, maybe fine and easy for a Gnani like you. But for us ordinarypeople, who have to live and work in the worldly life (sansar),it is a bit difficult. How can we deal with that?Dadashri: When God; the Lord of the fourteen worlds,is Himself manifested within the Gnani Purush, what could youpossibly not accomplish from meeting such a Gnani Purush?You do not have to do anything with your own energy (shakti).It will all happen through his grace. Grace accomplisheseverything. Therefore, whatever you ask for here, you will get.All you have to do is to remain in the Gnani’s Agnas.Questioner: But don’t we have to bring about thesalvation of our own Atma (Self) through our own atma (non-realized self)?Dadashri: That is true, but that is a discussion thatbelongs to the Kramic path. This is Akram Vignan. Therefore,you have to extract your work directly from a living God, andit will remain every moment, not just for one or two hours.Questioner: So, if we hand everything over to him, doesthat mean that he will take care of everything for us?Dadashri: He does everything; you do not have to doanything. ‘Doing’ binds karma. All you have to do is to get onthe “lift” (the elevator) and abide by the Five Agnas. And afteryou get on the lift, you must not jump around or stick yourhand out. That is all you have to do. Rarely does such a pathcome along and it is only meant for the punyashadis (thosewith tremendous merit karma). This is an exceptional path.Only once every million years does such an exceptional pathcome about! It is considered the eleventh wonder of theworld! When one acquires a ticket for this phenomenal path,his work is done.Unprecedented and Non-contradictoryQuestioner: Did you initiate this concept of attainingmoksha through Akram Vignan or was it in existence before?Dadashri: It comes every million years. It is notabsolutely new, but it seems new, because it has not appearedin any books in the last million years, which is why it has beencalled unprecedented. It has never been read, heard or knownbefore that is how unprecedented it is.Questioner: Please talk about any scientific basis if thereis behind the Gnan that you give.Dadashri: This is all science (vignan), non-contradictoryscience. What is the foundation of science? It destroys all yourdemerit karma (paap). Without that, you cannot have the exactexperience of the Self (sakshatkar), without which there is nomoksha. That exact experience of the Self should remainconstantly. It will not change even for a moment. It will remainautomatically, without You having to remember it.Putting aside the notion of knowing the Self, people havemade tremendous endeavors to even establish faith (shraddha)in the Self; just to have conviction of, ‘I am Atma (the Soul)’.But it is difficult to attain such faith in this strange era of thecurrent time cycle. Now, to attain the experience of the Selffrom a Gnani Purush, in such times, is itself the inherentspecial energies (siddhis) of Akram Gnan. All this is possibleAptavani-4111112Aptavani-4because the Gnani Purush receives the grace from all thecelestial beings and the entire universe, who are well pleasedwith him.Worthiness in Akram Vignan!Questioner: Can a nimit oblige a seeker who does nothave the spiritual readiness or qualification (upadaan)?  If so,then to what extent and in what way?Dadashri: In the kramic path, the nimit cannot obligeyou without your readiness or qualification (upadaan). ThisAkram Gnani can help anyone. One’s eligibility is one’sencounter with him- Gnani Purush. This is Akram Vignan. Itis one that can give you liberation within one hour. That whichwas not possible in a million lifetimes, you can attain within justone hour! It gives you immediate results. Kramic means thatyou climb “step-by-step”, one step at a time, and as you climbupwards, you have to let go of your acquisitions (parigraha)along your way.Questioner: For whatever wrong we do through ourown deeds, can a sadguru (ultimate guru) destroy them throughthe Akram Path?Dadashri: Yes, he can destroy everything.Questioner: One’s own atma (the self) cannot destroythe fault, but a sadguru can do that?Dadashri: The Gnani Purush can do everything. Whatcan he not do? He can do everything because he is not the‘doer’. The one who is the ‘doer’ cannot do anything. TheGnani Purush is not a ‘doer’ at all; He is simply an instrumental(nimit).Questioner: Can one’s own atma not do it?Dadashri: If your own atma could do it, then you wouldnot have been wandering around until now, would you have?Without a nimit, nothing will ever take place. One’s atmacannot do anything. How can the one who is bound, free himselfon his own?Questioner: Of all those who became gnanis in the past,did any of them show such an Akram path?Dadashri: Yes, it was shown. Lord Rushabhdev hadrevealed it to King Bharat. The king lived a worldly life with histhirteen hundred queens, and despite this, attained moksha. Andto the other ninety-nine sons He gave the Kramic path.Questioner: That must have been because of KingBharat’s worthiness. How can we be as worthy for that?Dadashri: In this Akram Vignan, one’s worthiness is noteven an issue. All you have to do is meet me. And if you askme to grace you, then that is all you need.Such an Amazing Gnan!This is my natural gift. This was my intense search, butnow it is “scientific circumstantial evidence.” The light hasoccurred naturally, so come and light up your lamp too.Questioner: In this Akram path, once a person reachesthe seventh floor, can he drop down to the fourth or the fifthfloor?Dadashri: No, he cannot come down. But if a personwants to deliberately ruin everything and fall, then who can stophim? Otherwise, no one can take him down against his wishes.Moksha should be attained here only. We do not wantdeferred moksha, on “credit”. Moksha means the feeling ofliberation. You do not have any worries, nothing affects you, andthere is no one superior over you; this is what you willexperience. This will come into your experience. Without theAptavani-4111112Aptavani-4because the Gnani Purush receives the grace from all thecelestial beings and the entire universe, who are well pleasedwith him.Worthiness in Akram Vignan!Questioner: Can a nimit oblige a seeker who does nothave the spiritual readiness or qualification (upadaan)?  If so,then to what extent and in what way?Dadashri: In the kramic path, the nimit cannot obligeyou without your readiness or qualification (upadaan). ThisAkram Gnani can help anyone. One’s eligibility is one’sencounter with him- Gnani Purush. This is Akram Vignan. Itis one that can give you liberation within one hour. That whichwas not possible in a million lifetimes, you can attain within justone hour! It gives you immediate results. Kramic means thatyou climb “step-by-step”, one step at a time, and as you climbupwards, you have to let go of your acquisitions (parigraha)along your way.Questioner: For whatever wrong we do through ourown deeds, can a sadguru (ultimate guru) destroy them throughthe Akram Path?Dadashri: Yes, he can destroy everything.Questioner: One’s own atma (the self) cannot destroythe fault, but a sadguru can do that?Dadashri: The Gnani Purush can do everything. Whatcan he not do? He can do everything because he is not the‘doer’. The one who is the ‘doer’ cannot do anything. TheGnani Purush is not a ‘doer’ at all; He is simply an instrumental(nimit).Questioner: Can one’s own atma not do it?Dadashri: If your own atma could do it, then you wouldnot have been wandering around until now, would you have?Without a nimit, nothing will ever take place. One’s atmacannot do anything. How can the one who is bound, free himselfon his own?Questioner: Of all those who became gnanis in the past,did any of them show such an Akram path?Dadashri: Yes, it was shown. Lord Rushabhdev hadrevealed it to King Bharat. The king lived a worldly life with histhirteen hundred queens, and despite this, attained moksha. Andto the other ninety-nine sons He gave the Kramic path.Questioner: That must have been because of KingBharat’s worthiness. How can we be as worthy for that?Dadashri: In this Akram Vignan, one’s worthiness is noteven an issue. All you have to do is meet me. And if you askme to grace you, then that is all you need.Such an Amazing Gnan!This is my natural gift. This was my intense search, butnow it is “scientific circumstantial evidence.” The light hasoccurred naturally, so come and light up your lamp too.Questioner: In this Akram path, once a person reachesthe seventh floor, can he drop down to the fourth or the fifthfloor?Dadashri: No, he cannot come down. But if a personwants to deliberately ruin everything and fall, then who can stophim? Otherwise, no one can take him down against his wishes.Moksha should be attained here only. We do not wantdeferred moksha, on “credit”. Moksha means the feeling ofliberation. You do not have any worries, nothing affects you, andthere is no one superior over you; this is what you willexperience. This will come into your experience. Without theAptavani-4113114Aptavani-4experience, it is futile. Anything without the experience will bemuddled. You need “cash”. So “this is the cash bank of divinesolution”.Questioner: Life is short of years and the road tomoksha is long. But since finding this Akram, I feel so muchjoy.Dadashri: This is something that never happens, butnow that it has, just get your “work” done. Of course, therewill be great joy. Even I felt such great joy from the wonderfulGnan that manifested in me. It gave rise to tremendoussiddhis (special energies)! This is because there is nothing inthis world that I have a beggarly desire for (bheekh). I did nothave any bheekh for respect (maan), for money, for fame, forsex, nor did I have any beggarly desire for disciples or ofbuilding temples. I did not have beggarly desire of any kind, inthis world. This is why I attained this state! Still, it is ‘scientificcircumstantial evidence’. Now, it is on account of this state thatI am in, that you are able to attain the very same state. Youbecome like the one whose niddidhyasan (envisioning) youdo.Questioner: Is it because of a connection from the pastlife that one attains Akram?Dadashri: This is the only way through which you areable to meet me. This meeting with the Gnani Purush happensas a result of the unfolding of your merit karma (punyas) ofinfinite past lives.All others are considered Kramic paths. The Kramicpath is the ‘relative’ path. ‘Relative’ means that it yields worldlyfruit, and takes you ‘step by step’ towards moksha. Throughrenunciation and penance one has to eventually purify the ego;thereupon you will arrive at the gate of moksha. When you havecleansed the ego of all its anger, pride, deceit, greed, sexualityand all worldly desires, the gate of moksha will open to you.The Kramic path is a very difficult path indeed! And here, onthe Akram path, the Gnani Purush purifies your ego for you.He takes away your ego and your mamata (‘My-ness’), sothen what else remains? Then you experience your Self. Yourwork is done, only when You have the experience of the Self.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4113114Aptavani-4experience, it is futile. Anything without the experience will bemuddled. You need “cash”. So “this is the cash bank of divinesolution”.Questioner: Life is short of years and the road tomoksha is long. But since finding this Akram, I feel so muchjoy.Dadashri: This is something that never happens, butnow that it has, just get your “work” done. Of course, therewill be great joy. Even I felt such great joy from the wonderfulGnan that manifested in me. It gave rise to tremendoussiddhis (special energies)! This is because there is nothing inthis world that I have a beggarly desire for (bheekh). I did nothave any bheekh for respect (maan), for money, for fame, forsex, nor did I have any beggarly desire for disciples or ofbuilding temples. I did not have beggarly desire of any kind, inthis world. This is why I attained this state! Still, it is ‘scientificcircumstantial evidence’. Now, it is on account of this state thatI am in, that you are able to attain the very same state. Youbecome like the one whose niddidhyasan (envisioning) youdo.Questioner: Is it because of a connection from the pastlife that one attains Akram?Dadashri: This is the only way through which you areable to meet me. This meeting with the Gnani Purush happensas a result of the unfolding of your merit karma (punyas) ofinfinite past lives.All others are considered Kramic paths. The Kramicpath is the ‘relative’ path. ‘Relative’ means that it yields worldlyfruit, and takes you ‘step by step’ towards moksha. Throughrenunciation and penance one has to eventually purify the ego;thereupon you will arrive at the gate of moksha. When you havecleansed the ego of all its anger, pride, deceit, greed, sexualityand all worldly desires, the gate of moksha will open to you.The Kramic path is a very difficult path indeed! And here, onthe Akram path, the Gnani Purush purifies your ego for you.He takes away your ego and your mamata (‘My-ness’), sothen what else remains? Then you experience your Self. Yourwork is done, only when You have the experience of the Self.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4115116Aptavani-4(11)The Atma and The EgoEternal SelfQuestioner: Where did the Self (chetan) come from?Where does it originate?Dadashri: It has no origin, neither does it have an end.These are just the phases and stages (avastha) of a living being(jiva). The phases (avastha) will keep changing, but the Self(vastu) remains the same.NatureQuestioner: What is nature?Dadashri: Nature means “scientific circumstantialevidences”.Questioner: All these scientific circumstantial evidencesthat come together, isn’t there some sort of energy (shakti)behind it?Dadashri: It is not a living energy; it is an inanimateenergy. It is an energy that is a mixture of jada (inanimatematter; non-Self) and chetan (life-energy; the Self) in whichjada happens to be in vishesha bhaav (extra-expression ofintent). In all this, the Self has remained the same from timeimmemorial.Who Controls Whom?Questioner: Does the embodied soul (jiva) exert controlover the body, or does the body exert control over the jiva?Dadashri: That is the question! At the moment, theembodied soul (jiva) has absolutely no control over the body.Why is that? It is because it has the wrong belief of ‘I amChandubhai’ and that is the greatest wrong belief of all.Questioner: One has to believe that for the sake ofworldly interactions.Dadashri: There is nothing wrong in believing that for thesake of worldly interactions (vyavahar). But if someone insultsyou, do you not accept it right away? Does it affect you or not?Questioner: It does.Dadashri: Then you are not ‘Chandubhai’ just for thesake of worldly interactions, but you really are ‘Chandubhai’.That is how the wrong belief has set in. Just because people callyou ‘Chandubhai,’ you too believe yourself to be that. Then youbelieve, ‘I am her husband, I am this boy’s father, I am likethis…I am a collector, etc.’ How many such beliefs do youhave?Questioner: Many.Dadashri: It is because of this wrong belief that the bodyexerts ‘control’ over the embodied soul (jiva; self). If thesewrong beliefs go away, then the body has absolutely no ‘control’over the jiva. The Atma (the Self) itself has infinite energy, butit is trapped because of these wrong beliefs. How can you getrid of these wrong beliefs? They will go away when the GnaniPurush gives you the ‘right belief’; otherwise referred to assamyak darshan (right vision of the Self) in our scriptures.Nothing will be attained by believing, ‘I am Chandubhai.’In reality you are not ‘Chandubhai.’ You are ‘Chandubhai’‘by the relative viewpoint’. You should enquire who you are, ‘bythe real viewpoint’, should you not? So at the present momentit is your body that has control over you. Not just the body, butAptavani-4115116Aptavani-4(11)The Atma and The EgoEternal SelfQuestioner: Where did the Self (chetan) come from?Where does it originate?Dadashri: It has no origin, neither does it have an end.These are just the phases and stages (avastha) of a living being(jiva). The phases (avastha) will keep changing, but the Self(vastu) remains the same.NatureQuestioner: What is nature?Dadashri: Nature means “scientific circumstantialevidences”.Questioner: All these scientific circumstantial evidencesthat come together, isn’t there some sort of energy (shakti)behind it?Dadashri: It is not a living energy; it is an inanimateenergy. It is an energy that is a mixture of jada (inanimatematter; non-Self) and chetan (life-energy; the Self) in whichjada happens to be in vishesha bhaav (extra-expression ofintent). In all this, the Self has remained the same from timeimmemorial.Who Controls Whom?Questioner: Does the embodied soul (jiva) exert controlover the body, or does the body exert control over the jiva?Dadashri: That is the question! At the moment, theembodied soul (jiva) has absolutely no control over the body.Why is that? It is because it has the wrong belief of ‘I amChandubhai’ and that is the greatest wrong belief of all.Questioner: One has to believe that for the sake ofworldly interactions.Dadashri: There is nothing wrong in believing that for thesake of worldly interactions (vyavahar). But if someone insultsyou, do you not accept it right away? Does it affect you or not?Questioner: It does.Dadashri: Then you are not ‘Chandubhai’ just for thesake of worldly interactions, but you really are ‘Chandubhai’.That is how the wrong belief has set in. Just because people callyou ‘Chandubhai,’ you too believe yourself to be that. Then youbelieve, ‘I am her husband, I am this boy’s father, I am likethis…I am a collector, etc.’ How many such beliefs do youhave?Questioner: Many.Dadashri: It is because of this wrong belief that the bodyexerts ‘control’ over the embodied soul (jiva; self). If thesewrong beliefs go away, then the body has absolutely no ‘control’over the jiva. The Atma (the Self) itself has infinite energy, butit is trapped because of these wrong beliefs. How can you getrid of these wrong beliefs? They will go away when the GnaniPurush gives you the ‘right belief’; otherwise referred to assamyak darshan (right vision of the Self) in our scriptures.Nothing will be attained by believing, ‘I am Chandubhai.’In reality you are not ‘Chandubhai.’ You are ‘Chandubhai’‘by the relative viewpoint’. You should enquire who you are, ‘bythe real viewpoint’, should you not? So at the present momentit is your body that has control over you. Not just the body, butAptavani-4117118Aptavani-4the mind as well. The mind is completely physical. All these havecontrol over you at this time. Oh, forget the body having controlover the embodied soul (jiva), what about a pimple that breaksout on the body and starts to throb! Even that controls the jiva.The Nature of EgoQuestioner: Which one goes through birth and death(the coming and going; avagaman), the Soul or the body?Dadashri: Neither the body, nor the Soul, undergoesbirth and death (avagaman). Only the ego does. This bodycomes with all its necessities, but it is mainly the ego that comesand goes. The cycles of birth and death come to an end, for theone whose ego has ended.Questioner: What is a true definition of ego?Dadashri: The world has not understood the real meaningof the ego. It is not how they understand it. Each understands itaccording to his own language (bhasha; interpretation). Isn’teveryone’s ‘language’ different? But it will not do, as far as thelanguage of God goes. You will be put to the test, because ‘there’(in matters of liberation), it will not work.Ego means that although one does not do anything, oneasserts, ‘I am the doer’ (ahamkar). That is the false assertion(aropit bhaav; false imposition). It is called ego. The primarything is the ego, and from it arises all kinds of words like: maan(pride), abhimaan (excessive pride due to material possessions),garva (ego of doership), ghemaraji (pompous display withoutany substance), etc. What kind of a thing is abhimaan? In it thearopit bhaav (false assertion) which is the ego, is there, butwhen someone shows off by saying, “I have four bungalows andI have two cars,” it is called abhimaan.To claim to do something when one is not the doer iscalled egoism (ahamkar).Questioner: The Gita (The Bhagavad Gita, The sacredtext of knowledge given by Lord Krishna to Arjun at Mahabharatawar) mentions that the ego is the principle thing; therefore, itmust have existed before the origin of everything, right?Dadashri: It is a thing before the utpatti (origin,beginning). What the Gita says is right. The ego does not comeafter utpatti. Primarily it is the ego that comes first and thencomes the origination. You will realize the fruit of whateverkarma you have done with ego in this life, in the next life. Intruth, it is someone else that is the ‘doer’, but it is through yourillusion (bhranti), that you believe you have ‘done’ it. If youyourself were the doer, then you would not allow yourself to die(nanami). No one has the independent power and energy(shakti) to evacuate his bowels. Nevertheless, he does haveother powers, but they have not yet manifested. And he whosays, ‘I am doing’, is outside of his ‘own’ (the Self’s) power(shakti). Don’t people say, “I ate, I drank, or I am hungry”? Ifyou are hungry, then why don’t you put out that hunger? And hewould say, ‘No, I cannot satisfy my hunger without putting somefood in my stomach.’The ego arises first, and then the body is formed;thereafter, all the other external results (parinam) eventuate.Karma is created by the ego and this is the consequence of that.This mind, body and speech are the fruits (consequences). Theego is the ‘cause’ and the mind, body and speech are the‘effect’. ‘Cause and effect’, ‘effect and cause’: this is howeverything continues. The Gnani Purush can stop the causes,so only the effect is left. And so there will never again be anothereffective body.Religion: Relative and RealThere are two kinds of religions (dharma) in the world:One is to know the Atma (the Self) and the Parmatma(absolute Self) as one (abheda). And the other is to know theAptavani-4117118Aptavani-4the mind as well. The mind is completely physical. All these havecontrol over you at this time. Oh, forget the body having controlover the embodied soul (jiva), what about a pimple that breaksout on the body and starts to throb! Even that controls the jiva.The Nature of EgoQuestioner: Which one goes through birth and death(the coming and going; avagaman), the Soul or the body?Dadashri: Neither the body, nor the Soul, undergoesbirth and death (avagaman). Only the ego does. This bodycomes with all its necessities, but it is mainly the ego that comesand goes. The cycles of birth and death come to an end, for theone whose ego has ended.Questioner: What is a true definition of ego?Dadashri: The world has not understood the real meaningof the ego. It is not how they understand it. Each understands itaccording to his own language (bhasha; interpretation). Isn’teveryone’s ‘language’ different? But it will not do, as far as thelanguage of God goes. You will be put to the test, because ‘there’(in matters of liberation), it will not work.Ego means that although one does not do anything, oneasserts, ‘I am the doer’ (ahamkar). That is the false assertion(aropit bhaav; false imposition). It is called ego. The primarything is the ego, and from it arises all kinds of words like: maan(pride), abhimaan (excessive pride due to material possessions),garva (ego of doership), ghemaraji (pompous display withoutany substance), etc. What kind of a thing is abhimaan? In it thearopit bhaav (false assertion) which is the ego, is there, butwhen someone shows off by saying, “I have four bungalows andI have two cars,” it is called abhimaan.To claim to do something when one is not the doer iscalled egoism (ahamkar).Questioner: The Gita (The Bhagavad Gita, The sacredtext of knowledge given by Lord Krishna to Arjun at Mahabharatawar) mentions that the ego is the principle thing; therefore, itmust have existed before the origin of everything, right?Dadashri: It is a thing before the utpatti (origin,beginning). What the Gita says is right. The ego does not comeafter utpatti. Primarily it is the ego that comes first and thencomes the origination. You will realize the fruit of whateverkarma you have done with ego in this life, in the next life. Intruth, it is someone else that is the ‘doer’, but it is through yourillusion (bhranti), that you believe you have ‘done’ it. If youyourself were the doer, then you would not allow yourself to die(nanami). No one has the independent power and energy(shakti) to evacuate his bowels. Nevertheless, he does haveother powers, but they have not yet manifested. And he whosays, ‘I am doing’, is outside of his ‘own’ (the Self’s) power(shakti). Don’t people say, “I ate, I drank, or I am hungry”? Ifyou are hungry, then why don’t you put out that hunger? And hewould say, ‘No, I cannot satisfy my hunger without putting somefood in my stomach.’The ego arises first, and then the body is formed;thereafter, all the other external results (parinam) eventuate.Karma is created by the ego and this is the consequence of that.This mind, body and speech are the fruits (consequences). Theego is the ‘cause’ and the mind, body and speech are the‘effect’. ‘Cause and effect’, ‘effect and cause’: this is howeverything continues. The Gnani Purush can stop the causes,so only the effect is left. And so there will never again be anothereffective body.Religion: Relative and RealThere are two kinds of religions (dharma) in the world:One is to know the Atma (the Self) and the Parmatma(absolute Self) as one (abheda). And the other is to know theAptavani-4119120Aptavani-4Atma and the Parmatma as separate, that is to say, ‘I andBhagwan (God) are separate.’In the first kind of religion, the awareness is that the Atma(the Self) is itself the Parmatma (absolute Self). This is the‘real’ religion, after which one attains liberation. When you haveexperience of the Atma being the Parmatma, you attainliberation.And as long as there is the awareness (bhaan) that theAtma and the Parmatma are separate, one binds merit (punya)and demerit (paap) karma. And that is why a ‘causal’ body(karan sharira) continues to be formed, and one wandersaround for infinite lives. It is an illusory belief to go on saying thatGod is separate and ‘I’ am separate. In truth, you and God areone, but you do not understand this. You cannot seem to findsomeone who can make you understand that You and theParmatma (absolute Self) are one and the same. When youfind such a person, he will give You the awareness of thatoneness. It is your weakness that makes you see God as beingseparate from you, which is why you are in the form of a livingbeing (jiva). Because there is no weakness in God, yourweaknesses will go away, and thereafter You will have theperpetual, exact experience that You yourself are the God.It is when people continue to call him ‘Chandu, Chandu,’and that affects him and he believes, ‘I am Chandu.’ The effectof illusion (bhranti) does not budge. Otherwise, the Self isindeed the absolute Self.Only a Savior Can Save YouQuestioner: What should one do to attain the state of theabsolute Self (Parmatma)?Dadashri: For that, you must attain the Gnani Purush’sgrace, and if you want to get to that stage gradually, you haveto obtain the Agna (directive) from the Gnani Purush. And ifhe does grant you his grace, then you can attain that state withinan hour.Otherwise, attain it gradually. Those people that are in nohurry; those who still have worldly desires to experience thepleasures of the senses, they can attain it slowly. And those whoexperience pain even in worldly pleasures, and who cannot evenendure happiness, qualify for liberation. The Gnani Purush thenliberates them. This is because the Gnani Purush has himselfbecome a savior (tarantaaran). He has crossed the ocean ofthe worldly life and he can help others across as well.Questioner: If we have such guru’s grace (guru-krupa),then we would not have to work so hard.Dadashri: All the effort you are making right now is allgoing to go to waste. It is not a complete waste, but a task thatwould generally take an hour, will waste a whole year. And ifyou have a guru above you, he will take you only as far as hehas reached; whereas a Gnani Purush has been all the way,and so he will take you all the way as well.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4119120Aptavani-4Atma and the Parmatma as separate, that is to say, ‘I andBhagwan (God) are separate.’In the first kind of religion, the awareness is that the Atma(the Self) is itself the Parmatma (absolute Self). This is the‘real’ religion, after which one attains liberation. When you haveexperience of the Atma being the Parmatma, you attainliberation.And as long as there is the awareness (bhaan) that theAtma and the Parmatma are separate, one binds merit (punya)and demerit (paap) karma. And that is why a ‘causal’ body(karan sharira) continues to be formed, and one wandersaround for infinite lives. It is an illusory belief to go on saying thatGod is separate and ‘I’ am separate. In truth, you and God areone, but you do not understand this. You cannot seem to findsomeone who can make you understand that You and theParmatma (absolute Self) are one and the same. When youfind such a person, he will give You the awareness of thatoneness. It is your weakness that makes you see God as beingseparate from you, which is why you are in the form of a livingbeing (jiva). Because there is no weakness in God, yourweaknesses will go away, and thereafter You will have theperpetual, exact experience that You yourself are the God.It is when people continue to call him ‘Chandu, Chandu,’and that affects him and he believes, ‘I am Chandu.’ The effectof illusion (bhranti) does not budge. Otherwise, the Self isindeed the absolute Self.Only a Savior Can Save YouQuestioner: What should one do to attain the state of theabsolute Self (Parmatma)?Dadashri: For that, you must attain the Gnani Purush’sgrace, and if you want to get to that stage gradually, you haveto obtain the Agna (directive) from the Gnani Purush. And ifhe does grant you his grace, then you can attain that state withinan hour.Otherwise, attain it gradually. Those people that are in nohurry; those who still have worldly desires to experience thepleasures of the senses, they can attain it slowly. And those whoexperience pain even in worldly pleasures, and who cannot evenendure happiness, qualify for liberation. The Gnani Purush thenliberates them. This is because the Gnani Purush has himselfbecome a savior (tarantaaran). He has crossed the ocean ofthe worldly life and he can help others across as well.Questioner: If we have such guru’s grace (guru-krupa),then we would not have to work so hard.Dadashri: All the effort you are making right now is allgoing to go to waste. It is not a complete waste, but a task thatwould generally take an hour, will waste a whole year. And ifyou have a guru above you, he will take you only as far as hehas reached; whereas a Gnani Purush has been all the way,and so he will take you all the way as well.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4121122Aptavani-4(12)Arrangement of Vyavasthit‘Vyavasthit Shakti’Questioner: There is some energy regulating the world.Is it the vyavasthit shakti?Dadashri: That is the vyavasthit shakti. How is itsregulation (niyantran)? If you want to elevate water (say into awater tank) you have to use a pump (requires effort). And what ifyou want to empty the tank? You do not have to do anything.Someone may ask why? It is because it is the nature of watertoflow downwards. This regulation occurs naturally, in the same way.Questioner: Does vyavasthit control all the eternalelements that exist in the world?Dadashri: Nothing has any control over anything else.This is an ‘uncontrolled’ group; each one is independent of theother. Vyavasthit is something for you to know and understand.They themselves are not concerned about anything. Vyavasthitis Your ticket to reach the ‘station’ of moksha. With this ticketyou can move forward. No one is under the control of another;they are all independent. In all of this, the Atma (Soul) isParmatma (supreme Soul); it is chetan (life-force). Nevertheless,the other elements (five eternal elements) do not pay heed to it.All the other elements say: “You may be Parmatma, but whatis it got to do with us? You are separate and so are we!”The Time CycleQuestioner: How did the ages of Satyug (period of unityin mind, speech and body) and Kaliyug (current era of the timecycle characterized by lack of unity in mind, speech andconduct) come about?Dadashri: This is a time cycle. Just like this rotating wheel.As it is on a downward turn, that is where we are at in our timecycle. Therefore this is an age of descending part of the cycle.And after this, there will come the ascending part of the cycle.Questioner: So then where is the fault of the one whodoes demerit karma (paap) and the one who does merit karma(punya)?Dadashri: There is no fault at all. Really, no one is at fault(doshit), but it is you that says, “I did this,” whether it is rightor wrong. You yourself have to suffer on account of theassertion. You don’t do it of your own accord. Although youmay not want to do it, Nature coerces you to. It all happensthrough naimitik (instrumental) jolt. What is the age of Satyugand all the other ages like? If you went out to buy somechickpeas during the daytime, you might be able to get a bag ortwo, but what if you went out at two-thirty at night, how manychickpeas will you come across then? That is how this is.Everything happens according to the time. Total Surrender in the Service of OthersQuestioner: So isn’t there anything left for us to do forthis world?Dadashri: There has never been anything for you to do;it is just the ego that has arisen. Only humans have the ego of‘doership’.Questioner: This lady is a doctor. When a poor patientcomes to her, she feels compassion (empathy; anukampa)towards him and treats him. So then, according to what you aresaying, there is no question about compassion, is there?Aptavani-4121122Aptavani-4(12)Arrangement of Vyavasthit‘Vyavasthit Shakti’Questioner: There is some energy regulating the world.Is it the vyavasthit shakti?Dadashri: That is the vyavasthit shakti. How is itsregulation (niyantran)? If you want to elevate water (say into awater tank) you have to use a pump (requires effort). And what ifyou want to empty the tank? You do not have to do anything.Someone may ask why? It is because it is the nature of watertoflow downwards. This regulation occurs naturally, in the same way.Questioner: Does vyavasthit control all the eternalelements that exist in the world?Dadashri: Nothing has any control over anything else.This is an ‘uncontrolled’ group; each one is independent of theother. Vyavasthit is something for you to know and understand.They themselves are not concerned about anything. Vyavasthitis Your ticket to reach the ‘station’ of moksha. With this ticketyou can move forward. No one is under the control of another;they are all independent. In all of this, the Atma (Soul) isParmatma (supreme Soul); it is chetan (life-force). Nevertheless,the other elements (five eternal elements) do not pay heed to it.All the other elements say: “You may be Parmatma, but whatis it got to do with us? You are separate and so are we!”The Time CycleQuestioner: How did the ages of Satyug (period of unityin mind, speech and body) and Kaliyug (current era of the timecycle characterized by lack of unity in mind, speech andconduct) come about?Dadashri: This is a time cycle. Just like this rotating wheel.As it is on a downward turn, that is where we are at in our timecycle. Therefore this is an age of descending part of the cycle.And after this, there will come the ascending part of the cycle.Questioner: So then where is the fault of the one whodoes demerit karma (paap) and the one who does merit karma(punya)?Dadashri: There is no fault at all. Really, no one is at fault(doshit), but it is you that says, “I did this,” whether it is rightor wrong. You yourself have to suffer on account of theassertion. You don’t do it of your own accord. Although youmay not want to do it, Nature coerces you to. It all happensthrough naimitik (instrumental) jolt. What is the age of Satyugand all the other ages like? If you went out to buy somechickpeas during the daytime, you might be able to get a bag ortwo, but what if you went out at two-thirty at night, how manychickpeas will you come across then? That is how this is.Everything happens according to the time. Total Surrender in the Service of OthersQuestioner: So isn’t there anything left for us to do forthis world?Dadashri: There has never been anything for you to do;it is just the ego that has arisen. Only humans have the ego of‘doership’.Questioner: This lady is a doctor. When a poor patientcomes to her, she feels compassion (empathy; anukampa)towards him and treats him. So then, according to what you aresaying, there is no question about compassion, is there?Aptavani-4123124Aptavani-4Dadashri: Even that compassion is natural, but then in it,one has the ego of, ‘How compassionate I am!’ There is noproblem as long as you do not have such an ego, but you cannotstop doing such egoism, can you?Questioner: In serving the world, is it not our duty toemploy the intent (bhaav) that we are serving the Lord(Parmatma)?Dadashri: Yes. For that, your fruit will be merit karma(punya), but not moksha.Questioner: Can we not get moksha even if we handedover our fruit directly to the Parmatma?Dadashri: No one can hand over the fruit (punya) likethat.Questioner: What if we mentally surrender them?Dadashri: If you surrender like that, no one will acceptthe fruit or give it. The surrendering is just for namesake. Onlyyou are the one who receives the fruit. The justice that prevailsin Nature’s domain says, ‘The fault is of the sufferer.’Questioner: What if one no longer has the belief, “I amthe doer”?Dadashri: If the ‘doership’ goes away and he attainsknowledge of the Self, then he will not bind any karma.The Formation of Social OrderQuestioner: In this world, so many people go aroundhurting and killing others, and in the process, they are creatinga new kind of social order. What happens then?Dadashri: In the oceans we have, have you witnessed allthe attacks that occur in them? Have you seen enormous fishweighing hundreds of tons fight in the ocean?Questioner: So is the fighting just going to carry on likethat?Dadashri: Yes. That is Nature’s doing. No one else doesanything in all this, the poor things! It is vyavasthit that makesthem do it. All these wars and battles are natural. If you do notlike the worldly life (sansar), then become a ‘non-doer’ and doaccording to what the Gnani Purush tells you, and Yourproblem will be solved. No one in the world has any control inall this; not even the control to go to the toilet. Things will onlyhappen when the circumstances in Nature are right.Questioner: This world continues to become ‘luxurious’.It is becoming jada (inhumane).Dadashri: When was it ever not luxurious? Only as faras one had not seen anything. That means, that until they had notseen anything they were nirmohi (free from illusory attachment).In these villages, nothing of the sort had ever been seen before,right?Questioner: Is it like becoming celibate just because youcannot find a wife?Dadashri: The moha (illusory attachment) that you seearound you, is the moha of ‘looking’, and from this moha arisesgnan (knowledge). One is exhausted after relentless stumblingand defeat in the worldly life. And hence, out of that moha(illusory attachment), vairagya (a state of dispassion towardsthe worldly life) is borne.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4123124Aptavani-4Dadashri: Even that compassion is natural, but then in it,one has the ego of, ‘How compassionate I am!’ There is noproblem as long as you do not have such an ego, but you cannotstop doing such egoism, can you?Questioner: In serving the world, is it not our duty toemploy the intent (bhaav) that we are serving the Lord(Parmatma)?Dadashri: Yes. For that, your fruit will be merit karma(punya), but not moksha.Questioner: Can we not get moksha even if we handedover our fruit directly to the Parmatma?Dadashri: No one can hand over the fruit (punya) likethat.Questioner: What if we mentally surrender them?Dadashri: If you surrender like that, no one will acceptthe fruit or give it. The surrendering is just for namesake. Onlyyou are the one who receives the fruit. The justice that prevailsin Nature’s domain says, ‘The fault is of the sufferer.’Questioner: What if one no longer has the belief, “I amthe doer”?Dadashri: If the ‘doership’ goes away and he attainsknowledge of the Self, then he will not bind any karma.The Formation of Social OrderQuestioner: In this world, so many people go aroundhurting and killing others, and in the process, they are creatinga new kind of social order. What happens then?Dadashri: In the oceans we have, have you witnessed allthe attacks that occur in them? Have you seen enormous fishweighing hundreds of tons fight in the ocean?Questioner: So is the fighting just going to carry on likethat?Dadashri: Yes. That is Nature’s doing. No one else doesanything in all this, the poor things! It is vyavasthit that makesthem do it. All these wars and battles are natural. If you do notlike the worldly life (sansar), then become a ‘non-doer’ and doaccording to what the Gnani Purush tells you, and Yourproblem will be solved. No one in the world has any control inall this; not even the control to go to the toilet. Things will onlyhappen when the circumstances in Nature are right.Questioner: This world continues to become ‘luxurious’.It is becoming jada (inhumane).Dadashri: When was it ever not luxurious? Only as faras one had not seen anything. That means, that until they had notseen anything they were nirmohi (free from illusory attachment).In these villages, nothing of the sort had ever been seen before,right?Questioner: Is it like becoming celibate just because youcannot find a wife?Dadashri: The moha (illusory attachment) that you seearound you, is the moha of ‘looking’, and from this moha arisesgnan (knowledge). One is exhausted after relentless stumblingand defeat in the worldly life. And hence, out of that moha(illusory attachment), vairagya (a state of dispassion towardsthe worldly life) is borne.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4125126Aptavani-4(13) Religion of the World: Religion of the SelfWhich Religion Should One Adopt forHappiness?Questioner: What is religion (dharma)? Who has topractice religion? What is the purpose of practicing religion?Dadashri: All the religions that are out there, are allworldly (vyavaharik; secular) religions. Vyavaharik means thatthey are for carrying out the worldly life. The Vaishnav religion,the Jain religion, the Shiva religion, etc., are all religions thatpertain to the worldly interaction (vyavahar).Now isn’t there a code of conduct for the vehicle driverson the road? Their ‘dharma’ (code of conduct) says that anycollision with another vehicle will be fatal. It says that you are atgrave risk if you collide; therefore, do not collide with anyone.Do not cause any harm or trouble (traas) to anyone. That is thelaw governing (dharma of) the vehicles and traffic. Thevyavahar dharma also says the same: not to give suffering toothers. If you want happiness, then you should give happiness toothers. If that person does not give you any happiness, thenthere will be others who will. And if you hurt others, thendefinitely anyone will hurt you. This is called vyavaharik(worldly) dharma.The real religion is the nature of one’s own Self. That isthe religion of the Self (Atma-dharma); it is the religion ofyour natural state, wherein there is supreme bliss. The realreligion begins to work on its own, from the moment theGnani Purush gives You the Self-realization; whereas in theworldly religion (vyavahar dharma) one has to practice thereligion and learnit.There Is Nothing but Bliss When the Self IsAttainedQuestioner: What is that thing that applies to bothreligion and the worldly life, and gives happiness?Dadashri: If a person comes to me (Dada) and attainsGnan (knowledge of the Self), he will experience happiness ineverything. And if a person has obstacles (antaray) and doesnot want to take Gnan from me, he will still experiencehappiness if he asks me everything and understands how theworldly life (sansar) runs, and what it is all about.In true religion (dharma) there is always resolution(samadhan). In relative religion, there is some degree ofresolution and some degree of unsolved issues, it is the first step.Then one enters the real religion, where there must be resolution(samadhan) in every circumstance. Only if you have resolution(samadhan), can you have peace, right?What do all the living beings (jivas) search for? They arelooking for happiness, but the happiness is short-lived. Peoplego out to weddings and to the theater for entertainment, but theirmisery returns to them again. When unhappiness followshappiness, how can you call it happiness? It is the happiness ofmurchha (unconscious infatuation). Happiness should bepermanent. This is nothing but temporary happiness; an imaginaryhappiness. What is every soul (atma) searching for? It is lookingfor happiness; happiness that is eternal. People believe, ‘It(happiness) will come from this or it will come from that. I willbuy this. I will do that, I will build a bungalow, then I will behappy, I will buy a car, then I will be happy.’ They keep ondoing this but no happiness comes their way. On the contrary,Aptavani-4125126Aptavani-4(13) Religion of the World: Religion of the SelfWhich Religion Should One Adopt forHappiness?Questioner: What is religion (dharma)? Who has topractice religion? What is the purpose of practicing religion?Dadashri: All the religions that are out there, are allworldly (vyavaharik; secular) religions. Vyavaharik means thatthey are for carrying out the worldly life. The Vaishnav religion,the Jain religion, the Shiva religion, etc., are all religions thatpertain to the worldly interaction (vyavahar).Now isn’t there a code of conduct for the vehicle driverson the road? Their ‘dharma’ (code of conduct) says that anycollision with another vehicle will be fatal. It says that you are atgrave risk if you collide; therefore, do not collide with anyone.Do not cause any harm or trouble (traas) to anyone. That is thelaw governing (dharma of) the vehicles and traffic. Thevyavahar dharma also says the same: not to give suffering toothers. If you want happiness, then you should give happiness toothers. If that person does not give you any happiness, thenthere will be others who will. And if you hurt others, thendefinitely anyone will hurt you. This is called vyavaharik(worldly) dharma.The real religion is the nature of one’s own Self. That isthe religion of the Self (Atma-dharma); it is the religion ofyour natural state, wherein there is supreme bliss. The realreligion begins to work on its own, from the moment theGnani Purush gives You the Self-realization; whereas in theworldly religion (vyavahar dharma) one has to practice thereligion and learnit.There Is Nothing but Bliss When the Self IsAttainedQuestioner: What is that thing that applies to bothreligion and the worldly life, and gives happiness?Dadashri: If a person comes to me (Dada) and attainsGnan (knowledge of the Self), he will experience happiness ineverything. And if a person has obstacles (antaray) and doesnot want to take Gnan from me, he will still experiencehappiness if he asks me everything and understands how theworldly life (sansar) runs, and what it is all about.In true religion (dharma) there is always resolution(samadhan). In relative religion, there is some degree ofresolution and some degree of unsolved issues, it is the first step.Then one enters the real religion, where there must be resolution(samadhan) in every circumstance. Only if you have resolution(samadhan), can you have peace, right?What do all the living beings (jivas) search for? They arelooking for happiness, but the happiness is short-lived. Peoplego out to weddings and to the theater for entertainment, but theirmisery returns to them again. When unhappiness followshappiness, how can you call it happiness? It is the happiness ofmurchha (unconscious infatuation). Happiness should bepermanent. This is nothing but temporary happiness; an imaginaryhappiness. What is every soul (atma) searching for? It is lookingfor happiness; happiness that is eternal. People believe, ‘It(happiness) will come from this or it will come from that. I willbuy this. I will do that, I will build a bungalow, then I will behappy, I will buy a car, then I will be happy.’ They keep ondoing this but no happiness comes their way. On the contrary,Aptavani-4127128Aptavani-4they sink deeper and deeper into the mire of confusion.Happiness lies within. It lies in the Self itself. Therefore, if youattain the Self, you attain the happiness.It is ten-thirty at night and you are going to sleep, but allof a sudden you remember, ‘The promissory note of the twohundred rupees that you had loaned was due today. Now whatis going to happen?’ Would you be able to fall asleep after that?At such a time, will you not need something to ease your mind?Without solutions, a man can go insane or increase his bloodpressure and develop heart problems. If he can find a solution,he can be at peace.Bliss Only in Self-RealizationQuestioner: You have spoken about temporary happiness(anand) and permanent happiness (anand). But how can we tellthe difference between them if we have not yet experienced thathappiness?Dadashri: You will not know the difference at all. Untilyou attain permanent happiness, you will consider this ashappiness.If you put an ant, that typically lives in cow dung, into aflower, it will die. This is because it is used to its happiness: livingin dung. Its prakruti (inherent nature) is only familiar with that.On the other hand, if you put an ant that lives in a flower, intocow dung, it will not like it.People will say that happiness lies in money, but there aresome ascetics (sadhus) who will not accept money even if youoffered it to them. Even if you come to give me all the gold inthe world, I would not take it, because I do not find anyhappiness in money or wealth at all. Therefore, happiness doesnot lie in money. If there was happiness in money, then everyonewould derive the same experience from it. Whereas the Atma’s(of the Self) happiness can be experienced by everyone. This isbecause it is real happiness, and it is eternal happiness. Youcannot even imagine the magnitude of such happiness!Where there is no other talk except of the Atma and theParmatma (Supreme Soul), there lies the true happiness. Thisis where there is not even the slightest discussion related to theworldly life (sansar), such as how one can gain and profit in life,or how one can attain even good qualities. People seek tocultivate good qualities. These qualities, both good and bad,belong to the part which is the non-Self, and they are temporary.Nonetheless, people need them. Everyone needs somethingdifferent depending upon his expectations. However, a personwho wants the state of absolute vitaragata (state of absolutedetachment), will have to go beyond all the good and badqualities and know ‘who the Self is’. After knowing that, all hisconcerns should be directed towards the Atma (Self) andParmatma (absolute Self). And this will give rise to a state ofcomplete vitaragata.Questioner: Time passes us by and we still cannot findreal happiness.Dadashri: To get real happiness, you must first becomereal (the Self) yourself. And if you want ‘worldly’ (sansari)happiness, then you should become ‘worldly’ (sansari). Thenature of worldly happiness is that it is puran-galan (input-output). It comes and goes. It has duality (pleasure and pain).Permanent happiness is experienced once you attain theunderstanding and the realization of “Who am I?”Questioner: When will we find happiness in the worldlylife?Dadashri: There can never be any happiness in theworldly life. But if you adopt good measures, then you willexperience some happiness, and if you adopt measures basedon Gnan, you will have permanent bliss.Aptavani-4127128Aptavani-4they sink deeper and deeper into the mire of confusion.Happiness lies within. It lies in the Self itself. Therefore, if youattain the Self, you attain the happiness.It is ten-thirty at night and you are going to sleep, but allof a sudden you remember, ‘The promissory note of the twohundred rupees that you had loaned was due today. Now whatis going to happen?’ Would you be able to fall asleep after that?At such a time, will you not need something to ease your mind?Without solutions, a man can go insane or increase his bloodpressure and develop heart problems. If he can find a solution,he can be at peace.Bliss Only in Self-RealizationQuestioner: You have spoken about temporary happiness(anand) and permanent happiness (anand). But how can we tellthe difference between them if we have not yet experienced thathappiness?Dadashri: You will not know the difference at all. Untilyou attain permanent happiness, you will consider this ashappiness.If you put an ant, that typically lives in cow dung, into aflower, it will die. This is because it is used to its happiness: livingin dung. Its prakruti (inherent nature) is only familiar with that.On the other hand, if you put an ant that lives in a flower, intocow dung, it will not like it.People will say that happiness lies in money, but there aresome ascetics (sadhus) who will not accept money even if youoffered it to them. Even if you come to give me all the gold inthe world, I would not take it, because I do not find anyhappiness in money or wealth at all. Therefore, happiness doesnot lie in money. If there was happiness in money, then everyonewould derive the same experience from it. Whereas the Atma’s(of the Self) happiness can be experienced by everyone. This isbecause it is real happiness, and it is eternal happiness. Youcannot even imagine the magnitude of such happiness!Where there is no other talk except of the Atma and theParmatma (Supreme Soul), there lies the true happiness. Thisis where there is not even the slightest discussion related to theworldly life (sansar), such as how one can gain and profit in life,or how one can attain even good qualities. People seek tocultivate good qualities. These qualities, both good and bad,belong to the part which is the non-Self, and they are temporary.Nonetheless, people need them. Everyone needs somethingdifferent depending upon his expectations. However, a personwho wants the state of absolute vitaragata (state of absolutedetachment), will have to go beyond all the good and badqualities and know ‘who the Self is’. After knowing that, all hisconcerns should be directed towards the Atma (Self) andParmatma (absolute Self). And this will give rise to a state ofcomplete vitaragata.Questioner: Time passes us by and we still cannot findreal happiness.Dadashri: To get real happiness, you must first becomereal (the Self) yourself. And if you want ‘worldly’ (sansari)happiness, then you should become ‘worldly’ (sansari). Thenature of worldly happiness is that it is puran-galan (input-output). It comes and goes. It has duality (pleasure and pain).Permanent happiness is experienced once you attain theunderstanding and the realization of “Who am I?”Questioner: When will we find happiness in the worldlylife?Dadashri: There can never be any happiness in theworldly life. But if you adopt good measures, then you willexperience some happiness, and if you adopt measures basedon Gnan, you will have permanent bliss.Aptavani-4129130Aptavani-4At present, there is ninety-nine percent pains and misery(dukh) and only one percent happiness (sukh). In Satyug (eraof unity in mind, speech and body) there was only happiness.What Is the Fault of the Time Cycle?Questioner: Do happiness and misery occur because oftime?Dadashri: This is a samsaran marg (a path of evolution forevery living entity). All these living beings (jivas) are flowing alongin this stream. They are progressing. How can you measureprogress? When visible matter (dravya; effect of karma), location(kshetra), time (kaad) and intent (bhaav) come together, theaction becomes visible. Time is evident and therefore, people givemore credence to time. How much of our own ‘doership’ can weattribute to our coming into this Kaliyug (the current era of the timecycle characterized by lack of unity in mind, speech and body);dushamkaal (current time cycle characterized as a time of lack ofunity in people’s thought, speech and action; An era of moral andspiritual decline)? What part did we play in all that?The entire world is experiencing relentless, unlimited innerturmoil and suffering. When someone says, “Chandubhai has nosense at all,” it affects you inside. And you feel the inner burning(antardaah). What is this inner burning (antardaah)? This iswhen the parmanus (the subatomic particles) ignite and burn, andwhen one parmanu is about to burn out, it ignites a second one,which then ignites a third one, and so on... This carries onconstantly. They burn just like the electricity, and you have tosuffer it as pain. When excessive parmanus ignite, people willsay, “My jiva keeps burning (I am tormented).” How can youbear all that? When one’s inner burning (antardaah) goes away,the drum beat of liberation will sound.Internal Happiness – External HappinessToday’s worldly science has become ‘out of balance’. Ithas exceeded normal limits and turned into ‘poison’. In this dayand age, it is on account of this worldly science (bhautikvignan) that we have unlimited external happiness. While on theother hand, the inner happiness has dried up! There should bea balance in external and internal happiness. If there are slightups and downs, it is acceptable, but they should be within limit.If your worldly happiness decreases, you can make do with it,but today the inner happiness has completely disappeared. InAmerica, it has completely gone. People over there, take up totwenty sleeping pills to get to sleep! America has attainedlimitless external happiness, but at the same time they havesacrificed their inner happiness. What kind of science would youcall that?!!People run around on the outside in search for innerpeace, but how can they find it that way? You will only findpeace on the outside, if you have peace within. Therefore, youmust believe that there is happiness within. Only then can youattain inner peace.God (Bhagwan) has asked you to keep an eye on thegauge which measures the inner and the outer happiness. If innerhappiness goes down and your external happiness goes up, thenknow that you are doomed. A little fluctuation up and down, isacceptable, but what will become of you if your inner happinessgoes completely down? People have increased their externalhappiness so much. A man will buy apartments that are worthmillions, have copious amounts to eat and drink, crates uponcrates of fruit; wherefore he ends up with high blood pressureand heart attacks, and his wife with diabetes. Doctors have put‘muzzles over their mouths’ (placed dietary restrictions). So whois going to eat all this? The rats, his servants and his cook willeat and drink and get plump! When you enter his expensiveapartment, you feel as if you have entered a morgue (cemetery).And even when you converse with him, he talks with sheer ego.He serves you expensive tea, but in the absence of real innerAptavani-4129130Aptavani-4At present, there is ninety-nine percent pains and misery(dukh) and only one percent happiness (sukh). In Satyug (eraof unity in mind, speech and body) there was only happiness.What Is the Fault of the Time Cycle?Questioner: Do happiness and misery occur because oftime?Dadashri: This is a samsaran marg (a path of evolution forevery living entity). All these living beings (jivas) are flowing alongin this stream. They are progressing. How can you measureprogress? When visible matter (dravya; effect of karma), location(kshetra), time (kaad) and intent (bhaav) come together, theaction becomes visible. Time is evident and therefore, people givemore credence to time. How much of our own ‘doership’ can weattribute to our coming into this Kaliyug (the current era of the timecycle characterized by lack of unity in mind, speech and body);dushamkaal (current time cycle characterized as a time of lack ofunity in people’s thought, speech and action; An era of moral andspiritual decline)? What part did we play in all that?The entire world is experiencing relentless, unlimited innerturmoil and suffering. When someone says, “Chandubhai has nosense at all,” it affects you inside. And you feel the inner burning(antardaah). What is this inner burning (antardaah)? This iswhen the parmanus (the subatomic particles) ignite and burn, andwhen one parmanu is about to burn out, it ignites a second one,which then ignites a third one, and so on... This carries onconstantly. They burn just like the electricity, and you have tosuffer it as pain. When excessive parmanus ignite, people willsay, “My jiva keeps burning (I am tormented).” How can youbear all that? When one’s inner burning (antardaah) goes away,the drum beat of liberation will sound.Internal Happiness – External HappinessToday’s worldly science has become ‘out of balance’. Ithas exceeded normal limits and turned into ‘poison’. In this dayand age, it is on account of this worldly science (bhautikvignan) that we have unlimited external happiness. While on theother hand, the inner happiness has dried up! There should bea balance in external and internal happiness. If there are slightups and downs, it is acceptable, but they should be within limit.If your worldly happiness decreases, you can make do with it,but today the inner happiness has completely disappeared. InAmerica, it has completely gone. People over there, take up totwenty sleeping pills to get to sleep! America has attainedlimitless external happiness, but at the same time they havesacrificed their inner happiness. What kind of science would youcall that?!!People run around on the outside in search for innerpeace, but how can they find it that way? You will only findpeace on the outside, if you have peace within. Therefore, youmust believe that there is happiness within. Only then can youattain inner peace.God (Bhagwan) has asked you to keep an eye on thegauge which measures the inner and the outer happiness. If innerhappiness goes down and your external happiness goes up, thenknow that you are doomed. A little fluctuation up and down, isacceptable, but what will become of you if your inner happinessgoes completely down? People have increased their externalhappiness so much. A man will buy apartments that are worthmillions, have copious amounts to eat and drink, crates uponcrates of fruit; wherefore he ends up with high blood pressureand heart attacks, and his wife with diabetes. Doctors have put‘muzzles over their mouths’ (placed dietary restrictions). So whois going to eat all this? The rats, his servants and his cook willeat and drink and get plump! When you enter his expensiveapartment, you feel as if you have entered a morgue (cemetery).And even when you converse with him, he talks with sheer ego.He serves you expensive tea, but in the absence of real innerAptavani-4131132Aptavani-4intent (bhaav), even gold, no matter how good it is, loses itsworth. And from the look on his face, he appears as if he hasforgotten how to smile. What kind of gift of external happinessis this?Inner happiness brings forth contentment (trupti) andexternal happiness increases one’s greed. Inner peace cannotremain where one’s intellect (buddhi) is self-serving.Eternal Bliss When the Ego MeltsHowever far one has walked in the wrong direction, theego increases by that much. And by however much the egodecreases, that much happiness prevails. My ego is completelygone and that is why I experience eternal happiness. Truehappiness is that which prevails even amidst suffering. Evenwhen someone insults you, you still experience that happiness,and think to yourself, ‘Wow, what happiness!’There is nothing but supreme bliss in the Atma (Self), butbecause of passion-laden intent (kalushit bhaav), this blissbecomes covered. Where does this bliss come from? Does itcome from vishays (objects of sensual pleasures)? Does itcome from fame (respect; maan)? Does it come from anger(krodh)? Does it come from greed (lobh)? When it does notcome from any of these, then you should realize that it is samkit(the right understanding).The Atma (Self) exists where there is no pain or sorrow.Misery Only Comes from the Mithya Darshan(Deluded Vision)Misery (dukh) exists in the worldly life (sansar) onlybecause one creates the misery (dukh); otherwise, there is nosuch thing as misery.There is everything in this world, but why do we havemiseries? It is because of wrong vision. Right understanding(samyak samjan) is to look for happiness even in the midst ofpain and misery.Any suffering (dukh; unhappiness) that you do not fear,you will not have to face. Neither a robber nor even God willcome to you.The Lord says that if you want moksha, you should go toa Gnani Purush, and if you want happiness in your worldly life(sansar), then you should serve your parents and your guru. Itis possible to receive lasting happiness through caring for one’sparents.It is loksangnya (societal influence and association) tobelieve that happiness is where other people believe that it is.And to believe that happiness lies only in the Atma (the Self) isconsidered Gnani’s sangnya (association with the Gnani).A man prays to God every day, ‘Oh Lord! Make mehappy, make me happy.’ And another man, when he prays hesays, ‘Oh Lord! Let everyone in my family be happy.’ When hesays “my family,” that also includes him. The second man will bethe happier of the two, while the first man’s plea goes to waste.You have the inner intent (bhaav) for the world’s salvation, andtherefore you are also included in that salvation.Suffering (Dukh) Becomes BeneficialQuestioner: Kunta (mother of the five Pandavas in theMahabharata) asked for pain (dukh) and not for happiness, sothat she could be reminded of God. What is the significance ofthis?Dadashri: Say we keep the door to the home closed atall times. No sooner do you close the door after one personleaves, someone else knocks on the door. And when that personleaves, and you close the door after him, a third person comesknocking. This goes on the whole day. It would be worthAptavani-4131132Aptavani-4intent (bhaav), even gold, no matter how good it is, loses itsworth. And from the look on his face, he appears as if he hasforgotten how to smile. What kind of gift of external happinessis this?Inner happiness brings forth contentment (trupti) andexternal happiness increases one’s greed. Inner peace cannotremain where one’s intellect (buddhi) is self-serving.Eternal Bliss When the Ego MeltsHowever far one has walked in the wrong direction, theego increases by that much. And by however much the egodecreases, that much happiness prevails. My ego is completelygone and that is why I experience eternal happiness. Truehappiness is that which prevails even amidst suffering. Evenwhen someone insults you, you still experience that happiness,and think to yourself, ‘Wow, what happiness!’There is nothing but supreme bliss in the Atma (Self), butbecause of passion-laden intent (kalushit bhaav), this blissbecomes covered. Where does this bliss come from? Does itcome from vishays (objects of sensual pleasures)? Does itcome from fame (respect; maan)? Does it come from anger(krodh)? Does it come from greed (lobh)? When it does notcome from any of these, then you should realize that it is samkit(the right understanding).The Atma (Self) exists where there is no pain or sorrow.Misery Only Comes from the Mithya Darshan(Deluded Vision)Misery (dukh) exists in the worldly life (sansar) onlybecause one creates the misery (dukh); otherwise, there is nosuch thing as misery.There is everything in this world, but why do we havemiseries? It is because of wrong vision. Right understanding(samyak samjan) is to look for happiness even in the midst ofpain and misery.Any suffering (dukh; unhappiness) that you do not fear,you will not have to face. Neither a robber nor even God willcome to you.The Lord says that if you want moksha, you should go toa Gnani Purush, and if you want happiness in your worldly life(sansar), then you should serve your parents and your guru. Itis possible to receive lasting happiness through caring for one’sparents.It is loksangnya (societal influence and association) tobelieve that happiness is where other people believe that it is.And to believe that happiness lies only in the Atma (the Self) isconsidered Gnani’s sangnya (association with the Gnani).A man prays to God every day, ‘Oh Lord! Make mehappy, make me happy.’ And another man, when he prays hesays, ‘Oh Lord! Let everyone in my family be happy.’ When hesays “my family,” that also includes him. The second man will bethe happier of the two, while the first man’s plea goes to waste.You have the inner intent (bhaav) for the world’s salvation, andtherefore you are also included in that salvation.Suffering (Dukh) Becomes BeneficialQuestioner: Kunta (mother of the five Pandavas in theMahabharata) asked for pain (dukh) and not for happiness, sothat she could be reminded of God. What is the significance ofthis?Dadashri: Say we keep the door to the home closed atall times. No sooner do you close the door after one personleaves, someone else knocks on the door. And when that personleaves, and you close the door after him, a third person comesknocking. This goes on the whole day. It would be worthAptavani-4133134Aptavani-4keeping it shut, if no one were to knock for three or more hours.Then why not just leave it open! In the same way, if you haveone misery after another, just ‘say’ to the misery: “The door isopen, so you can come and go as you please.”What did all those who became saints’ experience? Theyused to experience misery! Happiness and unhappiness arevikalp (wrong belief of the ‘relative’). So ‘change’ the vikalparound. Call happiness unhappiness; and unhappiness happiness.Leave your door open for whichever one that wants to come in.Physical Happiness: Borrowed HappinessLet go of your expectations of pudgal sukh (pleasures ofthe non-Self complex- mind, speech and body); it is justborrowed happiness. Pudgal happiness is not ‘free of cost’: itcomes at a price. It will have to be repaid. How long can youstay happy on borrowed happiness? When can you borrowmoney? When you face shame and disgrace. But one hasborrowed happiness from wherever he can, and so now he hasto pay it back in the form of unhappiness (dukh). Whether it isthrough physical, mental or verbal suffering.When your son calls out to you, “Daddy, daddy,” itshould sound bitter to you. If it sounds sweet, and makes youfeel good, it means that you have borrowed happiness which willhave to be repaid in the form of unhappiness. When your songrows up he will say to you, “You have no sense.” That is whenyou will wonder ‘what happened?’ It is only because youborrowed it that you now have to repay. He is collecting onwhat (happiness) he gave you in the past. So, you should watchout from the very start! I had stopped the practice of borrowinghappiness. Oh ho! There is infinite bliss in the Self, so whyshould you fall into that putrid garbage?You cannot bear it when people at home, or outside, sayanything unpleasant to you, which is why I tell you that, speechis a ‘record’. In this time cycle (kaad), records will play badly.Regardless of however long or how much the other person’s‘record’ plays, but if you consider it a ‘record’ and continue tolisten, and the other person gets tired, then realize that you haveindeed digested the real Gnan. Kashays (anger, pride, deceitand greed) can never be conquered through kashays. They canonly be conquered through equanimity (samata).There should be no desire (bhavna) towards eating oranything else. Hey! Not even for pudgalik sukh (body’spleasures). That would be borrowed happiness that you cannotafford. And when collection time comes around, you will not beable to pay it back. The pudgal itself is vitarag. The momentyou bring it, the borrowing of happiness begins.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4133134Aptavani-4keeping it shut, if no one were to knock for three or more hours.Then why not just leave it open! In the same way, if you haveone misery after another, just ‘say’ to the misery: “The door isopen, so you can come and go as you please.”What did all those who became saints’ experience? Theyused to experience misery! Happiness and unhappiness arevikalp (wrong belief of the ‘relative’). So ‘change’ the vikalparound. Call happiness unhappiness; and unhappiness happiness.Leave your door open for whichever one that wants to come in.Physical Happiness: Borrowed HappinessLet go of your expectations of pudgal sukh (pleasures ofthe non-Self complex- mind, speech and body); it is justborrowed happiness. Pudgal happiness is not ‘free of cost’: itcomes at a price. It will have to be repaid. How long can youstay happy on borrowed happiness? When can you borrowmoney? When you face shame and disgrace. But one hasborrowed happiness from wherever he can, and so now he hasto pay it back in the form of unhappiness (dukh). Whether it isthrough physical, mental or verbal suffering.When your son calls out to you, “Daddy, daddy,” itshould sound bitter to you. If it sounds sweet, and makes youfeel good, it means that you have borrowed happiness which willhave to be repaid in the form of unhappiness. When your songrows up he will say to you, “You have no sense.” That is whenyou will wonder ‘what happened?’ It is only because youborrowed it that you now have to repay. He is collecting onwhat (happiness) he gave you in the past. So, you should watchout from the very start! I had stopped the practice of borrowinghappiness. Oh ho! There is infinite bliss in the Self, so whyshould you fall into that putrid garbage?You cannot bear it when people at home, or outside, sayanything unpleasant to you, which is why I tell you that, speechis a ‘record’. In this time cycle (kaad), records will play badly.Regardless of however long or how much the other person’s‘record’ plays, but if you consider it a ‘record’ and continue tolisten, and the other person gets tired, then realize that you haveindeed digested the real Gnan. Kashays (anger, pride, deceitand greed) can never be conquered through kashays. They canonly be conquered through equanimity (samata).There should be no desire (bhavna) towards eating oranything else. Hey! Not even for pudgalik sukh (body’spleasures). That would be borrowed happiness that you cannotafford. And when collection time comes around, you will not beable to pay it back. The pudgal itself is vitarag. The momentyou bring it, the borrowing of happiness begins.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4135136Aptavani-4(14)The True Understanding of ReligionRole of ReligionQuestioner: Where is religion?Dadashri: There are two kinds of religions. One islaukik (worldly), and the other is alaukik (religion beyond theworld; of the Self). Laukik (worldly) religion gives rise toworldly happiness. Any deeds that are carried out withmithyatva (illusion; wrong belief of ‘I am Chandubhai’) areconsidered worldly religions, the fruit of which is the worldly life(sansar). You are rewarded with worldly happiness, but you willnot get moksha. And when you come into the alaukik religion,and the mithyatva (illusion) breaks, you can say that you havefound the path to moksha!How can the mithya drashti (illusory vision) be destroyed?The Gnani Purush explains to you in the Gnan, that all theseare wrong beliefs, and he ‘fractures’ those wrong beliefs, andinstills within your understanding the lasting right belief ofsamyak darshan (right vision of the Self). When the Gnani’sgrace (krupa) befalls you, and you attain samyak darshan(vision of the Self), after which you will attain samyak Gnan(knowledge of the Self) which will continue to manifest intosamyak charitra (conduct of the Self).Religion: For Renunciation or Indulgence?Questioner: Is there religion in tyaag (renunciation) orbhoga (pleasures)?Dadashri: Religion can neither be in renunciation nor inpleasure. They are both wrong beliefs. The one who renounces(tyaag) anything, will take it up (grahan) again. Isn’t there thesaying, ‘Tyaage so aage’ (Whatever you renounce will return toyou a hundred-fold)? Therefore, whatever you renounce, it willcome back to you in plentitude. And then when you acquire itagain (grahan) you will experience difficulties, which will leadyou again to desire renunciation. This is because when youacquire too much, you get tired of it.Questioner: So, should one do renunciation (tyaag), orshould one not do tyaag?Dadashri: How much should you renounce? Howevermuch of a burden you can carry on your head, is the amount thatyou should keep, and then you can renounce the rest of it.Despite this, people still continue augmenting their burden.Anything that causes artadhyan (adverse internal meditationthat hurts the self) and raudradhyan (adverse internal meditationthat hurts the self and others) is the excess amount, which youshould renounce. True renunciation is when it does not causeyou any artadhyan or raudradhyan.Did Religion Help?If you were pick-pocketed and lost five thousand rupees,you would become very stressed. When you report it to apoliceman, you will say, “Just look officer, he cut it (the pocket)from here and here.” This is because you believe, ‘I amChandubhai and my pocket was picked’. Whereas this man sittinghere (Dada referring to a mahatma, Pravinbhai; one who hasattained the Self), will go straight home without saying a thing toanyone. This is because ‘he’ (the Self) is not ‘Pravinbhai’ (amahatma), and the pocket is not ‘his’. So why would he haveany upadhi (externally induced stress)? That is called liberation(mukti). When the worldly life (sansar) does not touch You, thatis liberation. But stress affects you, does it not?Aptavani-4135136Aptavani-4(14)The True Understanding of ReligionRole of ReligionQuestioner: Where is religion?Dadashri: There are two kinds of religions. One islaukik (worldly), and the other is alaukik (religion beyond theworld; of the Self). Laukik (worldly) religion gives rise toworldly happiness. Any deeds that are carried out withmithyatva (illusion; wrong belief of ‘I am Chandubhai’) areconsidered worldly religions, the fruit of which is the worldly life(sansar). You are rewarded with worldly happiness, but you willnot get moksha. And when you come into the alaukik religion,and the mithyatva (illusion) breaks, you can say that you havefound the path to moksha!How can the mithya drashti (illusory vision) be destroyed?The Gnani Purush explains to you in the Gnan, that all theseare wrong beliefs, and he ‘fractures’ those wrong beliefs, andinstills within your understanding the lasting right belief ofsamyak darshan (right vision of the Self). When the Gnani’sgrace (krupa) befalls you, and you attain samyak darshan(vision of the Self), after which you will attain samyak Gnan(knowledge of the Self) which will continue to manifest intosamyak charitra (conduct of the Self).Religion: For Renunciation or Indulgence?Questioner: Is there religion in tyaag (renunciation) orbhoga (pleasures)?Dadashri: Religion can neither be in renunciation nor inpleasure. They are both wrong beliefs. The one who renounces(tyaag) anything, will take it up (grahan) again. Isn’t there thesaying, ‘Tyaage so aage’ (Whatever you renounce will return toyou a hundred-fold)? Therefore, whatever you renounce, it willcome back to you in plentitude. And then when you acquire itagain (grahan) you will experience difficulties, which will leadyou again to desire renunciation. This is because when youacquire too much, you get tired of it.Questioner: So, should one do renunciation (tyaag), orshould one not do tyaag?Dadashri: How much should you renounce? Howevermuch of a burden you can carry on your head, is the amount thatyou should keep, and then you can renounce the rest of it.Despite this, people still continue augmenting their burden.Anything that causes artadhyan (adverse internal meditationthat hurts the self) and raudradhyan (adverse internal meditationthat hurts the self and others) is the excess amount, which youshould renounce. True renunciation is when it does not causeyou any artadhyan or raudradhyan.Did Religion Help?If you were pick-pocketed and lost five thousand rupees,you would become very stressed. When you report it to apoliceman, you will say, “Just look officer, he cut it (the pocket)from here and here.” This is because you believe, ‘I amChandubhai and my pocket was picked’. Whereas this man sittinghere (Dada referring to a mahatma, Pravinbhai; one who hasattained the Self), will go straight home without saying a thing toanyone. This is because ‘he’ (the Self) is not ‘Pravinbhai’ (amahatma), and the pocket is not ‘his’. So why would he haveany upadhi (externally induced stress)? That is called liberation(mukti). When the worldly life (sansar) does not touch You, thatis liberation. But stress affects you, does it not?Aptavani-4137138Aptavani-4Questioner: Absolutely, from all sides.Dadashri: All your life you have practiced religion. Hey!You have practiced it throughout your countless past lives, butit never became your relative (sago; someone helpful to you).Religion that abandons you, even before ‘your pocket ispicked’, cannot be called religion. That which stays with you ateach and every minute is called religion. Religion gives youprotection, it gives you peace and it gives you samadhi(unaffected in mental, physical or externally induced problems).It will not make you worry. If you have worries, then it is notcalled religion.What do you worry about? Do you worry about yourdaughter growing up? Your daughter has matured, because ofher own body, so why are you making such a big deal over it?Do girls not mature? Even these plants grow with age! In thiscase, your anxiety increases as your daughter is growing up.One man, whose daughter had not grown at all, complained thatshe was too short! This is what he was worried about. Theseare how worried people become. Now how do you deal withsuch people? They have nothing but anxieties! If a girl is reallysmart, they will say that she is ‘over-wise’, and if she is not thatsmart, they will call her dumb. You cannot please them in anyway!Does your religion abandon you when someone insultsyou?Questioner: Yes, it does.Dadashri: Although you worship God every day, theinstant someone insults you even the slightest bit, it abandonsyou?Questioner: While I am in the act of worship and doingmy prayer beads, if someone were to insult me, it wouldcertainly leave, Sir.Dadashri: It can only be called religion if it gives youinner stillness. It comes to aid you in situations like whensomeone insults you. All this is nothing but unnecessary runningand rushing around. People have worn down the steps oftemples and derasars (Jain temples), and even the marblestones have been worn away. But nothing has been accomplished.If religion does not help you, then you cannot call it religion. IfI did you a favor five times, you would stand by me when I needyou, whereas here, you practice religion every day and it doesnot stand by you, but leaves quickly, even before the time youmost need it. How can you call that religion?One reads religious books every day, he reads so manyof them that his mind becomes like a book. The mind itself turnsinto a book! What has the Lord said? He said that one shouldknow the Atma. Instead, all people keep knowing, is books!What good is that? You do so much in your life, but artadhyan(adverse internal meditation that hurts the self) and raudradhyan(adverse internal meditation that hurts the self and others) stillcontinue! Now what will you do? You have indeed been greatlycheated. All your life, you have been cheated by anger, pride,deceit and greed, and now you are left with nothing. What willyou do in times of hardship?One practices religion for innumerable lifetimes, but it hasbeen a fruitless endeavor, and one’s adharma (irreligion;inauspicious and hurtful actions) increases. At the slightestprovocation like, “Chandubhai has no sense,” he explodes. Evenwhile doing samayik (meditative introspection), or turningprayer beads, he blows up at the slightest provocation. Doesthat happen or not?Questioner: Yes, it happens.Dadashri: Why would that happen, Sir? Isn’t itbecause your equanimity (samata) is not there? Otherwise,when you can maintain equanimity amidst upadhi (externallyAptavani-4137138Aptavani-4Questioner: Absolutely, from all sides.Dadashri: All your life you have practiced religion. Hey!You have practiced it throughout your countless past lives, butit never became your relative (sago; someone helpful to you).Religion that abandons you, even before ‘your pocket ispicked’, cannot be called religion. That which stays with you ateach and every minute is called religion. Religion gives youprotection, it gives you peace and it gives you samadhi(unaffected in mental, physical or externally induced problems).It will not make you worry. If you have worries, then it is notcalled religion.What do you worry about? Do you worry about yourdaughter growing up? Your daughter has matured, because ofher own body, so why are you making such a big deal over it?Do girls not mature? Even these plants grow with age! In thiscase, your anxiety increases as your daughter is growing up.One man, whose daughter had not grown at all, complained thatshe was too short! This is what he was worried about. Theseare how worried people become. Now how do you deal withsuch people? They have nothing but anxieties! If a girl is reallysmart, they will say that she is ‘over-wise’, and if she is not thatsmart, they will call her dumb. You cannot please them in anyway!Does your religion abandon you when someone insultsyou?Questioner: Yes, it does.Dadashri: Although you worship God every day, theinstant someone insults you even the slightest bit, it abandonsyou?Questioner: While I am in the act of worship and doingmy prayer beads, if someone were to insult me, it wouldcertainly leave, Sir.Dadashri: It can only be called religion if it gives youinner stillness. It comes to aid you in situations like whensomeone insults you. All this is nothing but unnecessary runningand rushing around. People have worn down the steps oftemples and derasars (Jain temples), and even the marblestones have been worn away. But nothing has been accomplished.If religion does not help you, then you cannot call it religion. IfI did you a favor five times, you would stand by me when I needyou, whereas here, you practice religion every day and it doesnot stand by you, but leaves quickly, even before the time youmost need it. How can you call that religion?One reads religious books every day, he reads so manyof them that his mind becomes like a book. The mind itself turnsinto a book! What has the Lord said? He said that one shouldknow the Atma. Instead, all people keep knowing, is books!What good is that? You do so much in your life, but artadhyan(adverse internal meditation that hurts the self) and raudradhyan(adverse internal meditation that hurts the self and others) stillcontinue! Now what will you do? You have indeed been greatlycheated. All your life, you have been cheated by anger, pride,deceit and greed, and now you are left with nothing. What willyou do in times of hardship?One practices religion for innumerable lifetimes, but it hasbeen a fruitless endeavor, and one’s adharma (irreligion;inauspicious and hurtful actions) increases. At the slightestprovocation like, “Chandubhai has no sense,” he explodes. Evenwhile doing samayik (meditative introspection), or turningprayer beads, he blows up at the slightest provocation. Doesthat happen or not?Questioner: Yes, it happens.Dadashri: Why would that happen, Sir? Isn’t itbecause your equanimity (samata) is not there? Otherwise,when you can maintain equanimity amidst upadhi (externallyAptavani-4139140Aptavani-4induced problems), you will hear the resounding trumpets ofmoksha.Questioner: How can we maintain equanimity?Dadashri: What do you mean how can it be maintained?Just look at this man (mahatma), does he have equanimity(samata) or not? Why don’t you just ask him? There has to beequanimity during times of upadhi (externally induced misery);otherwise how can you call it a religion? What you havepracticed so far cannot be called true religion. You can say it isindeed real religion when it is present even when someone insultsyou or picks your pocket. Religion does not help you, does it?Questioner: No, it does not.Dadashri: That means that you have not been sincere toreligion. In this Kaliyug (the current era of the time cyclecharacterized by lack of unity in mind, speech and body) no oneis sincere to religion. When a person cannot stay sincere to hisbrother or his wife, how is he to remain sincere to his religion?People go to worship every day with their little silver boxes. SoI asked God, “Lord! So many come to worship you every dayand yet why are you not pleased with them?” And the Lordsays, “They all come and do darshan (devotional viewing) ofme, but at the same time they are thinking about the slippers theyhave left outside the temple, that someone might come and steal,and alas, they are even preoccupied with thoughts about theirshops and businesses. So tell me, am I at fault here? How canI be pleased with them?”So then, people ask me, ‘How should we do darshan(worship)?’ Then I explain it to them: ‘When you go for yourworship, say to your shoes, “I am telling you, as per DadaBhagwan’s agna (directive) that you can leave if you want to,or you can stay if you like”.’ Do this, and then you can do yourdarshan. And when you return and discover that your shoes aregone, just think as if they have eloped. And if they are still there,put them on. Do not spoil both situations! Just for the sake offifty or a hundred rupees, why spoil your relationship with God?!Questioner: But isn’t this an everyday occurrence?Dadashri: They do not disappear every day. It is just afear one has.Questioner: They are likely to go!Dadashri: It is only the one who thinks too much aboutthem, that loses them. His shoes are more likely to disappear.For someone like me, who never thinks about his shoes, theystay in place, where I left them. They would never go anywhere.That is a law. Religion protects!Questioner: If we have faith in religion, will it protect us?Dadashri: How can you keep faith? When your intention(daanat) is wrong, how can you maintain faith? Your intentionhas to be clean, just like the Kshatriya (the warrior class).Wasn’t Bhagwan (Lord Mahavir) also a Kshatriya? A personwith clean intention would tell his shoes, “Go if you want to, Iam off to worship God.” You, on the other hand, want this, andwant that too!Before Birth and After Death…‘Janma pahela chaalto ne mooa pachhi chaalsheAtke na koi di vyavahar reSapeksha sansar re…’‘The worldly life went on before birth and it will continueafter deathWorldly dealings will never stopRelative is the worldly life…’~ NavneetAptavani-4139140Aptavani-4induced problems), you will hear the resounding trumpets ofmoksha.Questioner: How can we maintain equanimity?Dadashri: What do you mean how can it be maintained?Just look at this man (mahatma), does he have equanimity(samata) or not? Why don’t you just ask him? There has to beequanimity during times of upadhi (externally induced misery);otherwise how can you call it a religion? What you havepracticed so far cannot be called true religion. You can say it isindeed real religion when it is present even when someone insultsyou or picks your pocket. Religion does not help you, does it?Questioner: No, it does not.Dadashri: That means that you have not been sincere toreligion. In this Kaliyug (the current era of the time cyclecharacterized by lack of unity in mind, speech and body) no oneis sincere to religion. When a person cannot stay sincere to hisbrother or his wife, how is he to remain sincere to his religion?People go to worship every day with their little silver boxes. SoI asked God, “Lord! So many come to worship you every dayand yet why are you not pleased with them?” And the Lordsays, “They all come and do darshan (devotional viewing) ofme, but at the same time they are thinking about the slippers theyhave left outside the temple, that someone might come and steal,and alas, they are even preoccupied with thoughts about theirshops and businesses. So tell me, am I at fault here? How canI be pleased with them?”So then, people ask me, ‘How should we do darshan(worship)?’ Then I explain it to them: ‘When you go for yourworship, say to your shoes, “I am telling you, as per DadaBhagwan’s agna (directive) that you can leave if you want to,or you can stay if you like”.’ Do this, and then you can do yourdarshan. And when you return and discover that your shoes aregone, just think as if they have eloped. And if they are still there,put them on. Do not spoil both situations! Just for the sake offifty or a hundred rupees, why spoil your relationship with God?!Questioner: But isn’t this an everyday occurrence?Dadashri: They do not disappear every day. It is just afear one has.Questioner: They are likely to go!Dadashri: It is only the one who thinks too much aboutthem, that loses them. His shoes are more likely to disappear.For someone like me, who never thinks about his shoes, theystay in place, where I left them. They would never go anywhere.That is a law. Religion protects!Questioner: If we have faith in religion, will it protect us?Dadashri: How can you keep faith? When your intention(daanat) is wrong, how can you maintain faith? Your intentionhas to be clean, just like the Kshatriya (the warrior class).Wasn’t Bhagwan (Lord Mahavir) also a Kshatriya? A personwith clean intention would tell his shoes, “Go if you want to, Iam off to worship God.” You, on the other hand, want this, andwant that too!Before Birth and After Death…‘Janma pahela chaalto ne mooa pachhi chaalsheAtke na koi di vyavahar reSapeksha sansar re…’‘The worldly life went on before birth and it will continueafter deathWorldly dealings will never stopRelative is the worldly life…’~ NavneetAptavani-4141142Aptavani-4What is there left for you to do? Worldly interaction wasgoing on before your birth and it will go on even after you areno more. You are needlessly stuck in the belief that you arerunning everything! The world runs and it will continue to run.You just eat, drink and go to sleep. Relax and go take a strollon the Juhu beach! Why must you be so restless? You arerelentlessly spending your entire day just running around workingin restlessness, as though you are never going to ‘end up onpyre’ (die)! Of course, if you were to live for yet another fivehundred or a thousand years more, you could understand whysomeone would say, ‘Let him be restless, the poor man still hasanother thousand years to get through!’ But there is no tellingwhen you will ‘go on the pyre’ or when you will drop off aftera heart failure. One may have passed all one’s exams at school,but one fails here!Understanding Real ReligionA person practices his religion every day, but all day longhe runs around in turmoil and restlessness. The Lord tells us thatit can be called religion if it brings results. If all devotees justthought about this much, they would start wondering about whytheir religion has not yielded anything for them. No matter howmuch soap they use, the clothing still stays the same. So is it thesoap’s fault, or the one that uses it, or the clothing itself?! Ifartadhyan (adverse internal meditation that hurts the self) andraudradhyan (adverse internal meditation that hurts the self andothers) continue to occur with the same intensity, wouldn’t yourealize that there is a mistake somewhere?Do you understand what artadhyan and raudradhyanmean?Questioner: No, would you please explain?Dadashri: If five people came to your home as guests, ateleven o’clock at night, would it affect you at all?Questioner: It depends on who the guests are. If I likedmy guests, it would not bother me, but if I did not like the guest,I would think, ‘Why has he come so late at night?’Dadashri: The pleasure you experience when you seethe guests that you like, is also artadhyan. And when the guestthat you dislike shows up and you think to yourself, ‘What is hedoing here?’, is also artadhyan. Although you are annoyed tosee the guests, you still say to them, ‘Come in, come on in.’ Youonly say this because you want to save face and protect yourreputation (aabaru). All for the sake of protecting theirreputation, these so-called ‘respectable’ people, are spoilingtheir lives to come!Why not instead just ask them up front, ‘So what are youdoing here?’ This way, you will not spoil the rest of this life andthe next. Nevertheless, you invite them in, ‘Do come in please.’Then you quietly go and ask the wife, “When did they say theywere leaving? They have come with big suitcases!” ‘How wouldI know’ she will reply, ‘they are your friends anyway. Nothingto do with me.’ Hey! They have just got here, and already youare thinking, ‘When are they leaving? When will they leave?’What is wrong with just letting them stay a few days or even afortnight?When will this suffering (dukh) ever end? How canreligion ever produce any results? Even if there are elevenvisitors, religion would gently say, “Welcome, come in,” withoutany other hassle and without resentment. If you have anyresentment in your mind, your guests will surely recognize it fromyour face. This is what you would call artadhyan. The fruit ofartadhyan is Tiryancha gati (birth in animal life-form).What is raudradhyan? You initially turn red whensomeone insults you. If someone says, “Chandubhai has nosense,” you are instantly offended, and the intellect will arise.That is called raudradhyan. When you feel aggravated, thenAptavani-4141142Aptavani-4What is there left for you to do? Worldly interaction wasgoing on before your birth and it will go on even after you areno more. You are needlessly stuck in the belief that you arerunning everything! The world runs and it will continue to run.You just eat, drink and go to sleep. Relax and go take a strollon the Juhu beach! Why must you be so restless? You arerelentlessly spending your entire day just running around workingin restlessness, as though you are never going to ‘end up onpyre’ (die)! Of course, if you were to live for yet another fivehundred or a thousand years more, you could understand whysomeone would say, ‘Let him be restless, the poor man still hasanother thousand years to get through!’ But there is no tellingwhen you will ‘go on the pyre’ or when you will drop off aftera heart failure. One may have passed all one’s exams at school,but one fails here!Understanding Real ReligionA person practices his religion every day, but all day longhe runs around in turmoil and restlessness. The Lord tells us thatit can be called religion if it brings results. If all devotees justthought about this much, they would start wondering about whytheir religion has not yielded anything for them. No matter howmuch soap they use, the clothing still stays the same. So is it thesoap’s fault, or the one that uses it, or the clothing itself?! Ifartadhyan (adverse internal meditation that hurts the self) andraudradhyan (adverse internal meditation that hurts the self andothers) continue to occur with the same intensity, wouldn’t yourealize that there is a mistake somewhere?Do you understand what artadhyan and raudradhyanmean?Questioner: No, would you please explain?Dadashri: If five people came to your home as guests, ateleven o’clock at night, would it affect you at all?Questioner: It depends on who the guests are. If I likedmy guests, it would not bother me, but if I did not like the guest,I would think, ‘Why has he come so late at night?’Dadashri: The pleasure you experience when you seethe guests that you like, is also artadhyan. And when the guestthat you dislike shows up and you think to yourself, ‘What is hedoing here?’, is also artadhyan. Although you are annoyed tosee the guests, you still say to them, ‘Come in, come on in.’ Youonly say this because you want to save face and protect yourreputation (aabaru). All for the sake of protecting theirreputation, these so-called ‘respectable’ people, are spoilingtheir lives to come!Why not instead just ask them up front, ‘So what are youdoing here?’ This way, you will not spoil the rest of this life andthe next. Nevertheless, you invite them in, ‘Do come in please.’Then you quietly go and ask the wife, “When did they say theywere leaving? They have come with big suitcases!” ‘How wouldI know’ she will reply, ‘they are your friends anyway. Nothingto do with me.’ Hey! They have just got here, and already youare thinking, ‘When are they leaving? When will they leave?’What is wrong with just letting them stay a few days or even afortnight?When will this suffering (dukh) ever end? How canreligion ever produce any results? Even if there are elevenvisitors, religion would gently say, “Welcome, come in,” withoutany other hassle and without resentment. If you have anyresentment in your mind, your guests will surely recognize it fromyour face. This is what you would call artadhyan. The fruit ofartadhyan is Tiryancha gati (birth in animal life-form).What is raudradhyan? You initially turn red whensomeone insults you. If someone says, “Chandubhai has nosense,” you are instantly offended, and the intellect will arise.That is called raudradhyan. When you feel aggravated, thenAptavani-4143144Aptavani-4that is called raudradhyan. And the fruit of raudradhyan willbe Narak gati (a life in hell). Now tell me, would the Lord havespoken justly or unjustly? The Lord would not have spokenunjustly, now would he? The vitarag Lord would never beunjust.Now, why can a person not tolerate insult or hurt? It isbecause, ‘he has not known religion, has not listened to religion,nor has had faith in religion.’ He has not heard real religion yet.If he listens to the religion (dharma) and establishes faith in it,then the religion would help him. However, religion does notwait, does it now? You are not the only one who has thisproblem. Real religion is that which frees you from all kinds ofsuffering (dukh). How can you call it a religion when it increasesone’s suffering?The Path of Moksha Is…There is only one path to moksha (ultimate liberation),and not two. When you look, you will see that there is only onepath that leads to moksha. Gnan (knowledge of the Self),darshan (vision of the Self), charitra (conduct) and tapa(internal penance) are the four pillars of moksha. And when youlook, you will notice that they are always the same four pillars.Then the roads that lead to them may be different. Some areKramic paths, in which one does chanting and penance (japa-tapa) for one’s progress; climbing up cumbersomely one step ata time.Another one is the Akram marg, which does not requireyou to climb any steps, but simply puts you on an elevator (lift)!Go for whichever path that suits you. Do you want to take thelift, or would you rather climb?Questioner: Wouldn’t it be easier and straightforward totake the lift?Dadashri: Then come to me, and within an hour you willhave it in your hands. Thereafter, You will have no worries(chinta), upadhi (suffering from outside) and the samadhi (thestate in which no situation in the relative world affects the innerbliss) will prevail at all times. That is when you will realize thatyou are ready for moksha. There is nothing to worry about, soget your daughters married and your sons married. It is all good.There will be no problem. All you have to do is remain in myAgnas (directives). Will you be able to stay in my Agnas?Questioner: Why not? This is all I need. The otherhappiness is just temporary.Dadashri: For infinite lifetimes you have only enjoyed thetransitory happiness. For millions of lifetimes you have been likethis, and you are still like this today. In fact, you are even worse.As long as you have artadhyan and raudradhyan, you cannotcall yourself a true devotee of God. These devotees may appearwise and passive, but if you irritate them even slightly, they willstrike back! You would not call them true devotees. They mayhave done darshan (see or visit with devotion) of God’s murti(stone effigy of idol), but they have failed to recognize the Godthat sits within the idol. Haven’t they been doing darshan ofidols over innumerable lifetimes? They have not recognized God,have they? When it comes to God, people do His darshan verysuperficially, but when they eat, they chew their food slowly anddeliberately to see if there is any cardamom or nutmeg in it.Moreover, this has gotten worse! Now sir, when do you plan ongoing to moksha?Questioner: Now will you show us what the solution is?Dadashri: The solution is for you to ask the GnaniPurush, ‘Sir, give me liberation.’ But you do not even say athing, do you? You do not even have the desire for liberation!Shouldn’t you have to ask for it? If you went into a jewelry shopand just browsed around without asking anything, how wouldthe jeweler know what you want? So, for moksha, divine visionAptavani-4143144Aptavani-4that is called raudradhyan. And the fruit of raudradhyan willbe Narak gati (a life in hell). Now tell me, would the Lord havespoken justly or unjustly? The Lord would not have spokenunjustly, now would he? The vitarag Lord would never beunjust.Now, why can a person not tolerate insult or hurt? It isbecause, ‘he has not known religion, has not listened to religion,nor has had faith in religion.’ He has not heard real religion yet.If he listens to the religion (dharma) and establishes faith in it,then the religion would help him. However, religion does notwait, does it now? You are not the only one who has thisproblem. Real religion is that which frees you from all kinds ofsuffering (dukh). How can you call it a religion when it increasesone’s suffering?The Path of Moksha Is…There is only one path to moksha (ultimate liberation),and not two. When you look, you will see that there is only onepath that leads to moksha. Gnan (knowledge of the Self),darshan (vision of the Self), charitra (conduct) and tapa(internal penance) are the four pillars of moksha. And when youlook, you will notice that they are always the same four pillars.Then the roads that lead to them may be different. Some areKramic paths, in which one does chanting and penance (japa-tapa) for one’s progress; climbing up cumbersomely one step ata time.Another one is the Akram marg, which does not requireyou to climb any steps, but simply puts you on an elevator (lift)!Go for whichever path that suits you. Do you want to take thelift, or would you rather climb?Questioner: Wouldn’t it be easier and straightforward totake the lift?Dadashri: Then come to me, and within an hour you willhave it in your hands. Thereafter, You will have no worries(chinta), upadhi (suffering from outside) and the samadhi (thestate in which no situation in the relative world affects the innerbliss) will prevail at all times. That is when you will realize thatyou are ready for moksha. There is nothing to worry about, soget your daughters married and your sons married. It is all good.There will be no problem. All you have to do is remain in myAgnas (directives). Will you be able to stay in my Agnas?Questioner: Why not? This is all I need. The otherhappiness is just temporary.Dadashri: For infinite lifetimes you have only enjoyed thetransitory happiness. For millions of lifetimes you have been likethis, and you are still like this today. In fact, you are even worse.As long as you have artadhyan and raudradhyan, you cannotcall yourself a true devotee of God. These devotees may appearwise and passive, but if you irritate them even slightly, they willstrike back! You would not call them true devotees. They mayhave done darshan (see or visit with devotion) of God’s murti(stone effigy of idol), but they have failed to recognize the Godthat sits within the idol. Haven’t they been doing darshan ofidols over innumerable lifetimes? They have not recognized God,have they? When it comes to God, people do His darshan verysuperficially, but when they eat, they chew their food slowly anddeliberately to see if there is any cardamom or nutmeg in it.Moreover, this has gotten worse! Now sir, when do you plan ongoing to moksha?Questioner: Now will you show us what the solution is?Dadashri: The solution is for you to ask the GnaniPurush, ‘Sir, give me liberation.’ But you do not even say athing, do you? You do not even have the desire for liberation!Shouldn’t you have to ask for it? If you went into a jewelry shopand just browsed around without asking anything, how wouldthe jeweler know what you want? So, for moksha, divine visionAptavani-4145146Aptavani-4or whatever else you may want, just fill out a tender (order; list).‘We’ will give you everything in just one hour.To Be the Self Is the Religion of the SelfQuestioner: What is religion (dharma)? That is what Iwant to understand.Dadashri: That which holds you up, and never lets youfall, is religion. At the moment you are not even aware that youare falling. All people of this Kaliyug (the current era of the timecycle characterized by lack of unity in mind, speech and body)are slipping; they are gradually heading towards a lower life-form.Dharma (religion) does not just have one meaning. Howmany kinds of religion are there? There are all kinds of religion,ranging from a single degree all the way up to three hundredsixty degrees. For each and every person’s viewpoint, there isa religion, which is why there is matbhed (difference of opinion).What is the religion (dharma) that is going on in our country?It is one that stops one from doing bad deeds and encouragesgood deeds.Questioner: So is that called religion (dharma)?Dadashri: No. It cannot be called real religion. What isthe dharma of this gold? Does it ever rust? So it means thatdharma is when one maintains one’s swabhav (inherentproperties). Therefore, You are the Atma (Self), and when youremain as the Atma, only then it is called dharma. This is justdehadhyas (‘I am the body’): Stopping wrong deeds andmaking one do good deeds. All of it is illusion (bhranti). Gooddeeds are illusion (bhranti), and bad deeds are illusion(bhranti) also; however, I am not asking you to stop your gooddeeds. They can be turned from bad to the good. It is all welland good, but still the illusion does not go away. Only after theillusion goes away, does the real religion begin!Dharma is that which brings you into your own nature(the nature of the Self). Therefore, you are the Atma (the Self).What is your nature (swabhav)? It is parmanand (eternalbliss). If You remain within this state of infinite bliss, nothing fromthe outside can affect you. That is called dharma; it will helpYou reach moksha and give you liberation.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4145146Aptavani-4or whatever else you may want, just fill out a tender (order; list).‘We’ will give you everything in just one hour.To Be the Self Is the Religion of the SelfQuestioner: What is religion (dharma)? That is what Iwant to understand.Dadashri: That which holds you up, and never lets youfall, is religion. At the moment you are not even aware that youare falling. All people of this Kaliyug (the current era of the timecycle characterized by lack of unity in mind, speech and body)are slipping; they are gradually heading towards a lower life-form.Dharma (religion) does not just have one meaning. Howmany kinds of religion are there? There are all kinds of religion,ranging from a single degree all the way up to three hundredsixty degrees. For each and every person’s viewpoint, there isa religion, which is why there is matbhed (difference of opinion).What is the religion (dharma) that is going on in our country?It is one that stops one from doing bad deeds and encouragesgood deeds.Questioner: So is that called religion (dharma)?Dadashri: No. It cannot be called real religion. What isthe dharma of this gold? Does it ever rust? So it means thatdharma is when one maintains one’s swabhav (inherentproperties). Therefore, You are the Atma (Self), and when youremain as the Atma, only then it is called dharma. This is justdehadhyas (‘I am the body’): Stopping wrong deeds andmaking one do good deeds. All of it is illusion (bhranti). Gooddeeds are illusion (bhranti), and bad deeds are illusion(bhranti) also; however, I am not asking you to stop your gooddeeds. They can be turned from bad to the good. It is all welland good, but still the illusion does not go away. Only after theillusion goes away, does the real religion begin!Dharma is that which brings you into your own nature(the nature of the Self). Therefore, you are the Atma (the Self).What is your nature (swabhav)? It is parmanand (eternalbliss). If You remain within this state of infinite bliss, nothing fromthe outside can affect you. That is called dharma; it will helpYou reach moksha and give you liberation.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4147148Aptavani-4(15)Dharma in One’s ConductDharma and ConductQuestioner: I cannot put religion into practice (aacharan),Dada.Dadashri: God does not place value on conduct; hevalues intent (hetu; goal). That which manifests as conduct, theLord has called nokarma (neutral karma). These are very mildkarmas. A conduct coupled with intent is a completely differentthing altogether! If you only give a penny, but you give it with atrue heart, then it would be called dharma (religion). Anythingthat instills stillness is dharma. The Gnani Purush has stillnessso whoever comes to him and ties his ‘boat’ to the Gnani; Hewill also become still.The True Success of Human LifeQuestioner: What should one do so that this human lifedoes not go to waste?Dadashri: If throughout your day, you contemplate, ‘Thishuman life should not go to waste,’ then you will succeed.Instead of worrying about this human birth, people worry aboutmoney. Making any effort is not in your hands, but inner intent(bhaav) is. Effort is under the control of something else. Youreceive fruits for your inner intent (bhaav). In fact, even innerintent (bhaav) is controlled by some other energy, but when youdo inner intent, you will receive its fruits.Conflict – No Dharma There!Conflict (klesha) is a terrible disease of the worldly life(sansar). That which does not give rise to conflict is calleddharma. In sansar, there is nothing wrong with eating anddrinking, but the conflict that occurs should not be there. Godsays that it is fine if you do not go to moksha, but it would bebetter to live in the worldly life (sansar), provided it is free ofconflict. Conflict is a dangerous disease, it is even worse thantuberculosis. If conflict does not go away, then you don’t knowwhat religion is. That is what the Lord had said. Conflicts willtake you to a life in the animal kingdom.Therefore, you need to know two things: Live yourworldly life as long as you have no conflict; otherwise, findyourself a path to moksha. Where there is even the slightestconflict, there is no dharma (religion), and where there isreligion, there is no conflict at all. Conflict is a disease of themind which will ruin your life to come. If the body is ailing, it willnot spoil the next life; we see to that when we treat it withremedies. Then shouldn’t we look for remedies to treat thedisease of conflict? You must quickly look into that and see whatcaused the conflict!Akram Science – A Completely New Approach!!The entire worldly life (sansar) is the result ofmisunderstanding. If I tell people to, ‘Have compassion, keeppeace, and tell the truth’, they will say, ‘Only You can havecompassion, we cannot.’ For thousands of years, the scriptureshave sung the same tune: ‘Tell the truth, have compassion, bepeaceful, and do not get angry.’ To this, people say: We wantnothing more than to speak the truth, but we just cannot. Wenever want to get angry, but it happens anyway. So yourscriptures are worthless to us. And so they have just put awaytheir ‘scriptural textbooks’ on the top shelf!I intend to give the world a completely new ‘science’. Tohave compassion, to speak the truth, to be at peace, are all‘effects’. People have the knowledge of ‘effects’, but no oneAptavani-4147148Aptavani-4(15)Dharma in One’s ConductDharma and ConductQuestioner: I cannot put religion into practice (aacharan),Dada.Dadashri: God does not place value on conduct; hevalues intent (hetu; goal). That which manifests as conduct, theLord has called nokarma (neutral karma). These are very mildkarmas. A conduct coupled with intent is a completely differentthing altogether! If you only give a penny, but you give it with atrue heart, then it would be called dharma (religion). Anythingthat instills stillness is dharma. The Gnani Purush has stillnessso whoever comes to him and ties his ‘boat’ to the Gnani; Hewill also become still.The True Success of Human LifeQuestioner: What should one do so that this human lifedoes not go to waste?Dadashri: If throughout your day, you contemplate, ‘Thishuman life should not go to waste,’ then you will succeed.Instead of worrying about this human birth, people worry aboutmoney. Making any effort is not in your hands, but inner intent(bhaav) is. Effort is under the control of something else. Youreceive fruits for your inner intent (bhaav). In fact, even innerintent (bhaav) is controlled by some other energy, but when youdo inner intent, you will receive its fruits.Conflict – No Dharma There!Conflict (klesha) is a terrible disease of the worldly life(sansar). That which does not give rise to conflict is calleddharma. In sansar, there is nothing wrong with eating anddrinking, but the conflict that occurs should not be there. Godsays that it is fine if you do not go to moksha, but it would bebetter to live in the worldly life (sansar), provided it is free ofconflict. Conflict is a dangerous disease, it is even worse thantuberculosis. If conflict does not go away, then you don’t knowwhat religion is. That is what the Lord had said. Conflicts willtake you to a life in the animal kingdom.Therefore, you need to know two things: Live yourworldly life as long as you have no conflict; otherwise, findyourself a path to moksha. Where there is even the slightestconflict, there is no dharma (religion), and where there isreligion, there is no conflict at all. Conflict is a disease of themind which will ruin your life to come. If the body is ailing, it willnot spoil the next life; we see to that when we treat it withremedies. Then shouldn’t we look for remedies to treat thedisease of conflict? You must quickly look into that and see whatcaused the conflict!Akram Science – A Completely New Approach!!The entire worldly life (sansar) is the result ofmisunderstanding. If I tell people to, ‘Have compassion, keeppeace, and tell the truth’, they will say, ‘Only You can havecompassion, we cannot.’ For thousands of years, the scriptureshave sung the same tune: ‘Tell the truth, have compassion, bepeaceful, and do not get angry.’ To this, people say: We wantnothing more than to speak the truth, but we just cannot. Wenever want to get angry, but it happens anyway. So yourscriptures are worthless to us. And so they have just put awaytheir ‘scriptural textbooks’ on the top shelf!I intend to give the world a completely new ‘science’. Tohave compassion, to speak the truth, to be at peace, are all‘effects’. People have the knowledge of ‘effects’, but no oneAptavani-4149150Aptavani-4has the knowledge about ‘causes’. That is ignorance. I wouldlike to give you some clarification about ‘causes’. Anything thatmakes things ‘open to sky’ is called Gnan. Gnan shouldproduce results (kriyakari; effective). And for it to be effective,the Gnan has to come from knowledge that comes fromexperience. Scriptural knowledge just leads to aimless wandering.Any ‘relative’ religion should be one that procures results.There is going to be a natural change in all the religions,and this Akram path will find such a simple path, that everyonewill find this dharma very easy to follow and reap instantbenefits. What is dharma? It is that which produces results. Justas rice pudding satisfies hunger, when ‘we’ give you knowledgeof the Self, it will give such an inner happiness that has neverbefore been attained in any lifetime, or in any time cycle. Theremay be external ashata (pain experience; turmoil; uneasiness),but the shata (comfortable and pleasant) within, will remain allthe time. In the world people always have external shata(comfortable and pleasant), but no one has internal shata.Our science says that we do not have problems with youstealing, or telling a lie, but do the pratikraman (apology) forit, in this way. I would not tell a thief that he should not steal.I would tell him that he should understand the consequences ofhis act of stealing, and be mindful. All this stealing, telling lies andgetting angry is done because it is mandatory (farajiyat) –ithappens. On the contrary, if you admonish someone, not to dosomething again, he will do it even more. In his mind, the thiefwill decide, ‘I will definitely steal. Who are you to tell me whatto do!’ Therefore, explain things to him with love. All ‘diseases’can be abolished through love. You will find it from the GnaniPurush or from His ‘followers’ (mahatmas). You will need forgiveness (kshama) towards anger(krodh), natural frankness (rujuta) towards deceit (kapat), andtenderness (maardavata) towards pride (maan). Let angeroccur if it comes. If pride and greed happen, let them happen,but do pratikraman for it and turn it around. When you do that,you are doing the highest dharmadhyan (virtuous meditation).Don’t be afraid if you have thoughts of kucharitra (unpleasantand unacceptable conduct), there is nothing wrong with thesethoughts. But make sure that you do pratikraman. This is a ‘lift’marg (a speedy path to liberation). You can move faster ahead.From the moment you come into dharmadhyan (virtuousmeditation), your interactions with the world will begin to appearimmaculate. If you experience thoughts that are of kucharitra(negative or harmful conduct) you should say to them, “Come in.Have some tea. You are here, but from now on I will do whatthe Gnani Purush shows me.” This is called the forth pillar ofdharmadhyan.Agna Itself Is the ReligionSo now, what religion do we follow? What does it meanto follow the Agnas of the Gnani Purush, and what is religion?It means to remain as the Self. The religion of the world is toabide by the Agnas of the Lord.There is no greater religion in the world than to keep theGnani Purush happy. And it is entirely in your hands to pleasehim (rajipo). As You rise higher through my Agnas, my rajipofor You will increase. The Lord has said that if you please theGnani and learn to fulfill his wishes, there is moksha for you!If you follow just one of my Agnas, that Agna will take You allthe way to moksha.Changes Happen According to KnowledgeA tailor was convinced in his gnan (knowledge) that it isbeneficial for him to catch mice in a cage and then release themto the crows, who will feed on them, and in doing that at leastanother will reap some benefit from it. Now because of suchknowledge, for his part, he will end up killing mice. I changedAptavani-4149150Aptavani-4has the knowledge about ‘causes’. That is ignorance. I wouldlike to give you some clarification about ‘causes’. Anything thatmakes things ‘open to sky’ is called Gnan. Gnan shouldproduce results (kriyakari; effective). And for it to be effective,the Gnan has to come from knowledge that comes fromexperience. Scriptural knowledge just leads to aimless wandering.Any ‘relative’ religion should be one that procures results.There is going to be a natural change in all the religions,and this Akram path will find such a simple path, that everyonewill find this dharma very easy to follow and reap instantbenefits. What is dharma? It is that which produces results. Justas rice pudding satisfies hunger, when ‘we’ give you knowledgeof the Self, it will give such an inner happiness that has neverbefore been attained in any lifetime, or in any time cycle. Theremay be external ashata (pain experience; turmoil; uneasiness),but the shata (comfortable and pleasant) within, will remain allthe time. In the world people always have external shata(comfortable and pleasant), but no one has internal shata.Our science says that we do not have problems with youstealing, or telling a lie, but do the pratikraman (apology) forit, in this way. I would not tell a thief that he should not steal.I would tell him that he should understand the consequences ofhis act of stealing, and be mindful. All this stealing, telling lies andgetting angry is done because it is mandatory (farajiyat) –ithappens. On the contrary, if you admonish someone, not to dosomething again, he will do it even more. In his mind, the thiefwill decide, ‘I will definitely steal. Who are you to tell me whatto do!’ Therefore, explain things to him with love. All ‘diseases’can be abolished through love. You will find it from the GnaniPurush or from His ‘followers’ (mahatmas). You will need forgiveness (kshama) towards anger(krodh), natural frankness (rujuta) towards deceit (kapat), andtenderness (maardavata) towards pride (maan). Let angeroccur if it comes. If pride and greed happen, let them happen,but do pratikraman for it and turn it around. When you do that,you are doing the highest dharmadhyan (virtuous meditation).Don’t be afraid if you have thoughts of kucharitra (unpleasantand unacceptable conduct), there is nothing wrong with thesethoughts. But make sure that you do pratikraman. This is a ‘lift’marg (a speedy path to liberation). You can move faster ahead.From the moment you come into dharmadhyan (virtuousmeditation), your interactions with the world will begin to appearimmaculate. If you experience thoughts that are of kucharitra(negative or harmful conduct) you should say to them, “Come in.Have some tea. You are here, but from now on I will do whatthe Gnani Purush shows me.” This is called the forth pillar ofdharmadhyan.Agna Itself Is the ReligionSo now, what religion do we follow? What does it meanto follow the Agnas of the Gnani Purush, and what is religion?It means to remain as the Self. The religion of the world is toabide by the Agnas of the Lord.There is no greater religion in the world than to keep theGnani Purush happy. And it is entirely in your hands to pleasehim (rajipo). As You rise higher through my Agnas, my rajipofor You will increase. The Lord has said that if you please theGnani and learn to fulfill his wishes, there is moksha for you!If you follow just one of my Agnas, that Agna will take You allthe way to moksha.Changes Happen According to KnowledgeA tailor was convinced in his gnan (knowledge) that it isbeneficial for him to catch mice in a cage and then release themto the crows, who will feed on them, and in doing that at leastanother will reap some benefit from it. Now because of suchknowledge, for his part, he will end up killing mice. I changedAptavani-4151152Aptavani-4that knowledge for him, and faithfully he began to believe thatkilling mice is indeed harmful, thereafter that gnan will start toappear in his actions. Faith should change through gnan(knowledge), it should change through understanding. One doesnot have to pay attention to conduct (charitra). Conduct willnot change as long as there is an ‘effect’ (of ‘cause’ from pastlife) behind it. Now when he goes to kill a mouse, he will feelthat it is wrong to kill. And although he may end up killing itbecause of the ‘effect’ (left from the previous ‘cause’), he willnow continue to feel that it is wrong.This gnan (relative knowledge) pertains to the shubha-ashubha (auspicious-inauspicious). There is no such thing inshuddha (pure) Gnan. It (gnan) may or may not manifest inone’s actions, but should never slip away. Gnan should remainintact – ‘exactly’ as it is – through one’s conviction and faith.One only needs to know the real Gnan, thereafter the faithtowards that Gnan should never waver. And whatever theensuing conduct may be, is of no significance.Questioner: Do things happen ‘exactly’ throughvachanbud (energy and power of words)?Dadashri: You can change one’s actions throughvachanbud. With vachanbud you can prevent someone fromdoing something wrong.You Have to Ask for the EnergiesIf you have faith in the relative knowledge (agnan), thenthe action (kriya) will last a very long time; however, if there isless faith in the relative knowledge, that action (kriya) will begone in no time. And if the agnan itself is slight, then the kriyawill go even sooner. In order to know agnan, (worldly orrelative knowledge) one expends the pudgal shakti (theenergies of the non-Self complex of mind, speech and body).And in order to know the Gnan (knowledge of the Self), onehas to pray and ask for the strength (shakti; energy). Thepudgal automatically gives you the energy for the knowledge ofagnan, just like that, but for Gnan, you do not receive that kindof energy.You continuously and spontaneously receive pudgalshakti (energy from the non-Self complex) for things such as,asatya (untruth), chori (stealing), abrahmacharya (sexuality),etc. Against that, on the other hand, for the satya (truth),brahmacharya (celibacy) one has to ask for the energy. Afteryou know through Gnan-darshan (knowledge-vision), if youask for energy with faith and conviction, you will receive it. It isagnan (ignorance) that will take you down, and for that thebody’s energies will always keep flowing. Gnan is what willraise you up, and carry you higher. Gnan opposes the pudgal’stendencies (to bring you down) and therefore you have to askfor the energy so that you can go higher.Energy Attained Through PrayerQuestioner: In order to rise, how do we ask for energyand whom do we ask?Dadashri: From your own Shuddhatma (pure Soul); orthe Gnani Purush you can ask for energy (shakti), and if youhave not attained Self-realization, then you can ask your guru,the idol of your deity, or whomever you believe in, to grant youthe energy. You should make a list of all the faults that you seein yourself and then ask for energy. Through gnan (knowledge)and faith (shraddha) you have to decide that something iswrong, and that it is indeed a wrong thing. Do pratikraman forit and ask the Gnani Purush for the energy to never do it again,and it (the wrong) will go away.The larger ‘knots’ (of karma) can be dissolved throughsamayik (meditative introspection as the Self ‘seeing’ the self)and smaller faults can be removed through prayers. AnythingAptavani-4151152Aptavani-4that knowledge for him, and faithfully he began to believe thatkilling mice is indeed harmful, thereafter that gnan will start toappear in his actions. Faith should change through gnan(knowledge), it should change through understanding. One doesnot have to pay attention to conduct (charitra). Conduct willnot change as long as there is an ‘effect’ (of ‘cause’ from pastlife) behind it. Now when he goes to kill a mouse, he will feelthat it is wrong to kill. And although he may end up killing itbecause of the ‘effect’ (left from the previous ‘cause’), he willnow continue to feel that it is wrong.This gnan (relative knowledge) pertains to the shubha-ashubha (auspicious-inauspicious). There is no such thing inshuddha (pure) Gnan. It (gnan) may or may not manifest inone’s actions, but should never slip away. Gnan should remainintact – ‘exactly’ as it is – through one’s conviction and faith.One only needs to know the real Gnan, thereafter the faithtowards that Gnan should never waver. And whatever theensuing conduct may be, is of no significance.Questioner: Do things happen ‘exactly’ throughvachanbud (energy and power of words)?Dadashri: You can change one’s actions throughvachanbud. With vachanbud you can prevent someone fromdoing something wrong.You Have to Ask for the EnergiesIf you have faith in the relative knowledge (agnan), thenthe action (kriya) will last a very long time; however, if there isless faith in the relative knowledge, that action (kriya) will begone in no time. And if the agnan itself is slight, then the kriyawill go even sooner. In order to know agnan, (worldly orrelative knowledge) one expends the pudgal shakti (theenergies of the non-Self complex of mind, speech and body).And in order to know the Gnan (knowledge of the Self), onehas to pray and ask for the strength (shakti; energy). Thepudgal automatically gives you the energy for the knowledge ofagnan, just like that, but for Gnan, you do not receive that kindof energy.You continuously and spontaneously receive pudgalshakti (energy from the non-Self complex) for things such as,asatya (untruth), chori (stealing), abrahmacharya (sexuality),etc. Against that, on the other hand, for the satya (truth),brahmacharya (celibacy) one has to ask for the energy. Afteryou know through Gnan-darshan (knowledge-vision), if youask for energy with faith and conviction, you will receive it. It isagnan (ignorance) that will take you down, and for that thebody’s energies will always keep flowing. Gnan is what willraise you up, and carry you higher. Gnan opposes the pudgal’stendencies (to bring you down) and therefore you have to askfor the energy so that you can go higher.Energy Attained Through PrayerQuestioner: In order to rise, how do we ask for energyand whom do we ask?Dadashri: From your own Shuddhatma (pure Soul); orthe Gnani Purush you can ask for energy (shakti), and if youhave not attained Self-realization, then you can ask your guru,the idol of your deity, or whomever you believe in, to grant youthe energy. You should make a list of all the faults that you seein yourself and then ask for energy. Through gnan (knowledge)and faith (shraddha) you have to decide that something iswrong, and that it is indeed a wrong thing. Do pratikraman forit and ask the Gnani Purush for the energy to never do it again,and it (the wrong) will go away.The larger ‘knots’ (of karma) can be dissolved throughsamayik (meditative introspection as the Self ‘seeing’ the self)and smaller faults can be removed through prayers. AnythingAptavani-4153154Aptavani-4that has occurred in the absence of prayer can be eliminatedthrough prayer. All this has arisen out of agnan (ignorance of theSelf). Paudgalik (of the non-Self complex) energies can beremoved with prayer. It is easy to slip, and it is difficult to climbup. This is because, slipping involves paudgalik energies.Questioner: What is prayer (prarthana)?Dadashri: Pra + arthana = prarthana. Pra meansextra. It means to ask God for a greater meaning.Questioner: Are the prayers of the world fruitful?Dadashri: A prayer should be a true prayer, and aperson who makes such a prayer is very rare indeed.Questioner: Can there be one out of a hundred?Dadashri: Yes, there can be, if the one who is praying ispure at heart; his prayer would be a true prayer. However, at thetime of praying, if his chit (inner component of gnan –knowledge and darshan – vision) is absent then his prayercannot be considered a true prayer.Questioner: Who should we pray for and how shouldwe pray?Dadashri: Prayer means that one is searching for one’sown self. God resides within the person himself, and because hedoes not realize this, he goes to temples and derasars toworship (bhakti) Him. Such worship is indirect devotion(paroksh bhakti).Prayer: Insistence on Truth!Questioner: If one person strictly follows a path ofsteadfast truth, while another does prayers, which one of thetwo is right? Which one will find God first?Dadashri: The one who prays.Questioner: Is it not said that, ‘Truth is itself God’(Satya ej Ishwar chhe)?Dadashri: This truth is not God. This truth can bealtered. Isn’t the belief that, ‘I am Chandubhai,’ also false? Thistruth is temporary; it is not the real truth. Real truth is that whichis permanent; which is indeed the only truth. It is itself in the formof sat chit anand – that verily is the only “truth” and that is inthe form of eternal-awareness-bliss (sat-chit-anand; theawareness of the eternal is bliss).What is the world’s truth like? You may say, ‘I lent thisman some money, he is cunning, and he will not pay me back.’And someone else might say to you, ‘why do you keep whining?Why don’t you go home, eat something and relax or go tosleep? Why are you squabbling?’ And if you tell him, ‘I have todo that, because I am right,’ then you are the one who is moreat fault. What should truth be like? It should be ordinary (oraverage). It should be an honest truth, and it should not deceiveor cheat anyone. It should not involve stealing. It only requiresmorality and nothing else. All those have stubbornly raised theirtails and insisted on their own truth have only ended up in thesea!To insist on the truth is poisonous, and it is also poisonousto insist on the non-truth.Questioner: When you give distinctions about truth, canyou also do the same about prayer? Is there such a thing asdeceitful prayer?Dadashri: Prayer should be completely true, it must notbe careless. When a parrot says, “Aayarama-gayarama,Rama-Rama” (the Lord’s name), does it say it with understandingor without understanding? In the same way, prayer should bedone thoughtfully and with understanding; it should be heartfelt.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4153154Aptavani-4that has occurred in the absence of prayer can be eliminatedthrough prayer. All this has arisen out of agnan (ignorance of theSelf). Paudgalik (of the non-Self complex) energies can beremoved with prayer. It is easy to slip, and it is difficult to climbup. This is because, slipping involves paudgalik energies.Questioner: What is prayer (prarthana)?Dadashri: Pra + arthana = prarthana. Pra meansextra. It means to ask God for a greater meaning.Questioner: Are the prayers of the world fruitful?Dadashri: A prayer should be a true prayer, and aperson who makes such a prayer is very rare indeed.Questioner: Can there be one out of a hundred?Dadashri: Yes, there can be, if the one who is praying ispure at heart; his prayer would be a true prayer. However, at thetime of praying, if his chit (inner component of gnan –knowledge and darshan – vision) is absent then his prayercannot be considered a true prayer.Questioner: Who should we pray for and how shouldwe pray?Dadashri: Prayer means that one is searching for one’sown self. God resides within the person himself, and because hedoes not realize this, he goes to temples and derasars toworship (bhakti) Him. Such worship is indirect devotion(paroksh bhakti).Prayer: Insistence on Truth!Questioner: If one person strictly follows a path ofsteadfast truth, while another does prayers, which one of thetwo is right? Which one will find God first?Dadashri: The one who prays.Questioner: Is it not said that, ‘Truth is itself God’(Satya ej Ishwar chhe)?Dadashri: This truth is not God. This truth can bealtered. Isn’t the belief that, ‘I am Chandubhai,’ also false? Thistruth is temporary; it is not the real truth. Real truth is that whichis permanent; which is indeed the only truth. It is itself in the formof sat chit anand – that verily is the only “truth” and that is inthe form of eternal-awareness-bliss (sat-chit-anand; theawareness of the eternal is bliss).What is the world’s truth like? You may say, ‘I lent thisman some money, he is cunning, and he will not pay me back.’And someone else might say to you, ‘why do you keep whining?Why don’t you go home, eat something and relax or go tosleep? Why are you squabbling?’ And if you tell him, ‘I have todo that, because I am right,’ then you are the one who is moreat fault. What should truth be like? It should be ordinary (oraverage). It should be an honest truth, and it should not deceiveor cheat anyone. It should not involve stealing. It only requiresmorality and nothing else. All those have stubbornly raised theirtails and insisted on their own truth have only ended up in thesea!To insist on the truth is poisonous, and it is also poisonousto insist on the non-truth.Questioner: When you give distinctions about truth, canyou also do the same about prayer? Is there such a thing asdeceitful prayer?Dadashri: Prayer should be completely true, it must notbe careless. When a parrot says, “Aayarama-gayarama,Rama-Rama” (the Lord’s name), does it say it with understandingor without understanding? In the same way, prayer should bedone thoughtfully and with understanding; it should be heartfelt.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4155156Aptavani-4(16)Relative Religion: Spiritual ScienceThe Development of Relative ReligionRelative religion is not a natural (swabhavik) religion;whereas real religion is natural (swabhavik) and it gives naturalhappiness. When one knows the answer to, ‘Who am I?’ and‘Who runs all this?’ his moha (illusory attachment) will dissipate.Otherwise, it is just moha: ‘This is my sister, this is my aunt...’Even one’s moha for one’s aunt does not go away! If you getburnt, people just ask about you, but there is not any real feelinginvolved.All the relative religions in the world are contradictory. Arelative religion is like trying to wash a garment (dhoti) clean. Toclean it, you have to use soap, but then the soap leaves its ownresidue behind. And to get rid of the soap scum, you have toadd Tinopal (whitening agent), but then the Tinopal leaves itsown residue. Likewise, the gurus of this world remove your dirt,but leave theirs behind on you. All the relative religions do isremove ‘dirt’ with ‘dirt’.One has not heard, known or had faith in the knowledgeof the Vitarags (the absolutely enlightened beings who are freefrom all attachment). If this would have happened, one’s workwould have been accomplished. Vitarag Gnan cannot beattained without a vitaragi Purush (Self-realized being, who isfree from all the worldly attachments). Indirect (paroksh;through ignorance of the Self) worship gives rise to the worldlylife (sansar); whereby you bind merit karma. Hence, theworldly life will appear sweet so that one sinks deeper into it.It would be better if it were bitter instead.Relative religions tell you to do good deeds. Even if youdo the deed with ego, it is still considered good, because thefruit of it will be merit karma (punya). You reap what you sow.If you sow wheat; you will get wheat, and if you sow millet, youwill get millet. Therefore, only sow what is suitable for you. Youmust get rid of your bad thoughts. But what people do insteadis they sow good seeds (deeds) and they also sow seeds fromthe jujube bush (bad deeds)! So now the jujube bushes aresprouting everywhere. The ‘relative’ is a ‘mixture’, and the realis independent. Changes occur in the relative. Anything that hasbeen altered or adulterated in any way is ‘relative’; whereas the‘real’ is pure. Whichever way you ‘slice’ the ‘relative’, wouldyou be able to find any ‘slice’ of real in it? The Vitarags havesaid that there is much more beyond what you are doing.Nevertheless, these are paths and people will gradually progressin this way. Everyone believes that his religion is the ultimatereligion; nonetheless, his belief that his religion is right for him, iswhat will make him ‘develop’ further.One Needs the Vitarag Dharma for MokshaGnan is endless. However, there is no other Gnan(knowledge) beyond that which the Vitarags have conquered.The Vitarag never loses. Perhaps at times the body loses, themind loses or the speech loses; but never the Vitarag. TheVitarags are so wise! The religion of the Vitarag is based onsiddhant (irrefutable principles of Self-realization) which is whyit yields immediate results (‘cash’ fruit). It gives you the ‘cash’fruit of moksha!The Lord, who is the giver of moksha, is impartial(nishpakshapati). The Vitarag Bhagwan within you is impartial.A Vitarag religion is a religion that is 360 degrees, which meansthat it is a complete religion. It is a true religion, it has substance,Aptavani-4155156Aptavani-4(16)Relative Religion: Spiritual ScienceThe Development of Relative ReligionRelative religion is not a natural (swabhavik) religion;whereas real religion is natural (swabhavik) and it gives naturalhappiness. When one knows the answer to, ‘Who am I?’ and‘Who runs all this?’ his moha (illusory attachment) will dissipate.Otherwise, it is just moha: ‘This is my sister, this is my aunt...’Even one’s moha for one’s aunt does not go away! If you getburnt, people just ask about you, but there is not any real feelinginvolved.All the relative religions in the world are contradictory. Arelative religion is like trying to wash a garment (dhoti) clean. Toclean it, you have to use soap, but then the soap leaves its ownresidue behind. And to get rid of the soap scum, you have toadd Tinopal (whitening agent), but then the Tinopal leaves itsown residue. Likewise, the gurus of this world remove your dirt,but leave theirs behind on you. All the relative religions do isremove ‘dirt’ with ‘dirt’.One has not heard, known or had faith in the knowledgeof the Vitarags (the absolutely enlightened beings who are freefrom all attachment). If this would have happened, one’s workwould have been accomplished. Vitarag Gnan cannot beattained without a vitaragi Purush (Self-realized being, who isfree from all the worldly attachments). Indirect (paroksh;through ignorance of the Self) worship gives rise to the worldlylife (sansar); whereby you bind merit karma. Hence, theworldly life will appear sweet so that one sinks deeper into it.It would be better if it were bitter instead.Relative religions tell you to do good deeds. Even if youdo the deed with ego, it is still considered good, because thefruit of it will be merit karma (punya). You reap what you sow.If you sow wheat; you will get wheat, and if you sow millet, youwill get millet. Therefore, only sow what is suitable for you. Youmust get rid of your bad thoughts. But what people do insteadis they sow good seeds (deeds) and they also sow seeds fromthe jujube bush (bad deeds)! So now the jujube bushes aresprouting everywhere. The ‘relative’ is a ‘mixture’, and the realis independent. Changes occur in the relative. Anything that hasbeen altered or adulterated in any way is ‘relative’; whereas the‘real’ is pure. Whichever way you ‘slice’ the ‘relative’, wouldyou be able to find any ‘slice’ of real in it? The Vitarags havesaid that there is much more beyond what you are doing.Nevertheless, these are paths and people will gradually progressin this way. Everyone believes that his religion is the ultimatereligion; nonetheless, his belief that his religion is right for him, iswhat will make him ‘develop’ further.One Needs the Vitarag Dharma for MokshaGnan is endless. However, there is no other Gnan(knowledge) beyond that which the Vitarags have conquered.The Vitarag never loses. Perhaps at times the body loses, themind loses or the speech loses; but never the Vitarag. TheVitarags are so wise! The religion of the Vitarag is based onsiddhant (irrefutable principles of Self-realization) which is whyit yields immediate results (‘cash’ fruit). It gives you the ‘cash’fruit of moksha!The Lord, who is the giver of moksha, is impartial(nishpakshapati). The Vitarag Bhagwan within you is impartial.A Vitarag religion is a religion that is 360 degrees, which meansthat it is a complete religion. It is a true religion, it has substance,Aptavani-4157158 Aptavani-4and it is impartial. There is nothing wrong in partiality, becauseit will keep you in a ‘standard’. Whereas impartiality is ‘out ofstandard’. ‘This’ (Akram Vignan) is a science; it is not areligion. The Hindu religion, the Jain religion, and Christianity,are all religions. There is only one science, but there are manyreligions.The Limitations of Relative ReligionThe religions of the world are ‘relative’ religions, whichhelp in ‘relative’ matters. They help direct you towards the‘real’.Questioner: Dada, what are the limitations of the relativereligion that you speak of?Dadashri: Whatever you experience through your fivesenses is within the prescribed limits of the ‘relative’.Questioner: Does the ‘relative’ have any connection withthe ‘real’?Dadashri: Of course it does! It is because of the ‘real’that the relative came about. It is because of its affiliation to the‘real’ that the ‘relative’ has arisen. This has created a phase. Andthe phase that has come about is temporary.Questioner: As long as one has not attained the ‘real’, isthere a need for the ‘relative’?Dadashri: Until one attains the ‘real’, everything is‘relative’. Only after one attains the ‘real’, does the ‘relative’become separated.The “Thermometer” of Real ReligionDadashri: What do you do nowadays?Questioner: I am reading the books of ShrimadRajchandra (also known as Krupadudev, Gnani Purush of theKramic path who became enlightened) and studying religion.Dadashri: Just reading books will not do anything. Wherethat is concerned, you must be free of all kashays (anger, pride,deceit, greed). If you heard someone say, ‘Chandubhai has nosense’, would you feel hurt? Would it affect you?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: So those words have hurt you. Understandthat as long as words hurt you, you have not attained religion atall. It is fine if you are hurt from being struck by a rock; you caneasily treat the wound. However, feeling hurt from words is notthe fruit of real religion. The fruit of religion is when words donot hurt you. Shouldn’t you have something that indicates howmuch your fever has gone up or down?The Bhavna (Main Intent) for the Path ofMoksha (Liberation)There are three things required for the path of moksha:1.An intense desire to attain the Atma (Self).2.An intense desire to meet a Gnani Purush.3.If one has not yet encountered a Gnani Purush,then one should have a strong inner intent (bhavna) for theencounter to take place.Firstly, you must have the inner intent (bhavna) for theGnani Purush, and once you find him, you will attain thebenefits. This is the main path. The rest is all vyavahar dharma(religion of worldly interactions). If there is any real religion(nischay) in the relative religion, then it is only these threeprecepts above. Understanding just this, will give you solutions.‘With utmost reverence and devotion, I bow to the ‘realSelf’ in all living beings of this universe. The real Self within allliving beings is divine and, therefore, I see the divine Self in allliving beings.’Aptavani-4157158 Aptavani-4and it is impartial. There is nothing wrong in partiality, becauseit will keep you in a ‘standard’. Whereas impartiality is ‘out ofstandard’. ‘This’ (Akram Vignan) is a science; it is not areligion. The Hindu religion, the Jain religion, and Christianity,are all religions. There is only one science, but there are manyreligions.The Limitations of Relative ReligionThe religions of the world are ‘relative’ religions, whichhelp in ‘relative’ matters. They help direct you towards the‘real’.Questioner: Dada, what are the limitations of the relativereligion that you speak of?Dadashri: Whatever you experience through your fivesenses is within the prescribed limits of the ‘relative’.Questioner: Does the ‘relative’ have any connection withthe ‘real’?Dadashri: Of course it does! It is because of the ‘real’that the relative came about. It is because of its affiliation to the‘real’ that the ‘relative’ has arisen. This has created a phase. Andthe phase that has come about is temporary.Questioner: As long as one has not attained the ‘real’, isthere a need for the ‘relative’?Dadashri: Until one attains the ‘real’, everything is‘relative’. Only after one attains the ‘real’, does the ‘relative’become separated.The “Thermometer” of Real ReligionDadashri: What do you do nowadays?Questioner: I am reading the books of ShrimadRajchandra (also known as Krupadudev, Gnani Purush of theKramic path who became enlightened) and studying religion.Dadashri: Just reading books will not do anything. Wherethat is concerned, you must be free of all kashays (anger, pride,deceit, greed). If you heard someone say, ‘Chandubhai has nosense’, would you feel hurt? Would it affect you?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: So those words have hurt you. Understandthat as long as words hurt you, you have not attained religion atall. It is fine if you are hurt from being struck by a rock; you caneasily treat the wound. However, feeling hurt from words is notthe fruit of real religion. The fruit of religion is when words donot hurt you. Shouldn’t you have something that indicates howmuch your fever has gone up or down?The Bhavna (Main Intent) for the Path ofMoksha (Liberation)There are three things required for the path of moksha:1.An intense desire to attain the Atma (Self).2.An intense desire to meet a Gnani Purush.3.If one has not yet encountered a Gnani Purush,then one should have a strong inner intent (bhavna) for theencounter to take place.Firstly, you must have the inner intent (bhavna) for theGnani Purush, and once you find him, you will attain thebenefits. This is the main path. The rest is all vyavahar dharma(religion of worldly interactions). If there is any real religion(nischay) in the relative religion, then it is only these threeprecepts above. Understanding just this, will give you solutions.‘With utmost reverence and devotion, I bow to the ‘realSelf’ in all living beings of this universe. The real Self within allliving beings is divine and, therefore, I see the divine Self in allliving beings.’Aptavani-4159160Aptavani-4If one understands only this statement, then it can be saidthat one has indeed attained religion.All these religions are relative ‘religions’. ‘Relative’religions mean that they remove worldly pain, and bring worldlyhappiness. They do not give you moksha (liberation). ‘Relative’means a viewpoint. Each viewpoint encompasses millions ofpeople.The Atma Through the StagesThat which keeps pushing adharma (irreligion) away isdharma (religion). It is called dharmadharma. Wherever thereis adharma, there is always dharma. This is precisely whydharma exists: to get rid of adharma. The Soul has three states:1. Dharmadharma atma (mudhatma) – One whobelieves this relative world as real. The one who is asleep(without any awakened awareness, ajagrut) in this world.2. Gnanghan Atma (antaratma) – The one who has justawakened to the Self (jagrut), interim state of the Self, ‘I ampure Soul.’3. Vignanghan Atma (Parmatma) – The absolute Self,continuously and constantly aware.Gnanghan AtmaWhen can it be called a siddhant (irrefutable principletoward the attainment of Truth, the Self)? When a personprogresses from the state of dharmadharma (in duality ofrelative religion) and attains the grace of the Gnani Purush, hearrives at the state of a Gnanghan Atma (the Self). The Atmais Gnanghan (only knowledge), and it is eternal. Gnanghanmeans the knowledge of the distinction between ‘what is real’(the Self) and ‘what is relative’ (the non-Self)! This means thatas one begins to recognize the difference between the permanentand temporary, he comes into the ‘theory of reality’ and attainsmoksha. The person, then attains the awareness of Shuddhatma(the pure Soul) and alakh niranjan (the rare state of attainmentof the Atma), his work is done.This worldly life (sansar) is ‘relative’, and You (the Self)are ‘real’. So stay on the side of the ‘real’ and do nikal (settlewith equanimity) with the ‘relative’. Will you not have toexorcize the ‘demons’ (kashay) that have taken ‘possession’ inyou for so long? This is a science. And in science there cannotbe matbhed. Matbhed exists in dharmadharma (i.e. in‘relative’ religions). All the religions out there have matbhed andvikalp (false belief). For how long are they considered vikalp?For as long as there is dharmadharma atma (mudhatma;deluded soul ‘I am Chandubhai’). That which keeps pushingaway adharma is dharma. Hey! If you do not get along withadharma, then live without attachment and abhorrence (raag-dwesh)!But can one live that way? One lives with abhorrence foradharma and attachment towards dharma! The dharmadharmasoul is a state of delusion; a state of wrong belief. ‘Relative’religions are considered dharmadharma. It is good to practice‘relative’ religion, one’s life ahead will be better; one will eat betterand things will run well. But all these are just temporary comforts.Going to moksha does not mean that you have to pushaside adharma or anything else. In order to go to moksha, youhave to settle both dharma and adharma with equanimity.Dharmadharma is the nature of the body, mind, intellect andthe prakruti (‘relative’ inherent nature); whereas the Atma’snature is vitarag. If you want to maintain the nature of vitarag,then do not fall in love with dharma and do not bicker withadharma.“All these ‘relatives’ (non-Self) are ‘temporary’, and the‘real’ (the Self) is permanent.”The Gnani Purush can give you Gnanghan Atma (pureAptavani-4159160Aptavani-4If one understands only this statement, then it can be saidthat one has indeed attained religion.All these religions are relative ‘religions’. ‘Relative’religions mean that they remove worldly pain, and bring worldlyhappiness. They do not give you moksha (liberation). ‘Relative’means a viewpoint. Each viewpoint encompasses millions ofpeople.The Atma Through the StagesThat which keeps pushing adharma (irreligion) away isdharma (religion). It is called dharmadharma. Wherever thereis adharma, there is always dharma. This is precisely whydharma exists: to get rid of adharma. The Soul has three states:1. Dharmadharma atma (mudhatma) – One whobelieves this relative world as real. The one who is asleep(without any awakened awareness, ajagrut) in this world.2. Gnanghan Atma (antaratma) – The one who has justawakened to the Self (jagrut), interim state of the Self, ‘I ampure Soul.’3. Vignanghan Atma (Parmatma) – The absolute Self,continuously and constantly aware.Gnanghan AtmaWhen can it be called a siddhant (irrefutable principletoward the attainment of Truth, the Self)? When a personprogresses from the state of dharmadharma (in duality ofrelative religion) and attains the grace of the Gnani Purush, hearrives at the state of a Gnanghan Atma (the Self). The Atmais Gnanghan (only knowledge), and it is eternal. Gnanghanmeans the knowledge of the distinction between ‘what is real’(the Self) and ‘what is relative’ (the non-Self)! This means thatas one begins to recognize the difference between the permanentand temporary, he comes into the ‘theory of reality’ and attainsmoksha. The person, then attains the awareness of Shuddhatma(the pure Soul) and alakh niranjan (the rare state of attainmentof the Atma), his work is done.This worldly life (sansar) is ‘relative’, and You (the Self)are ‘real’. So stay on the side of the ‘real’ and do nikal (settlewith equanimity) with the ‘relative’. Will you not have toexorcize the ‘demons’ (kashay) that have taken ‘possession’ inyou for so long? This is a science. And in science there cannotbe matbhed. Matbhed exists in dharmadharma (i.e. in‘relative’ religions). All the religions out there have matbhed andvikalp (false belief). For how long are they considered vikalp?For as long as there is dharmadharma atma (mudhatma;deluded soul ‘I am Chandubhai’). That which keeps pushingaway adharma is dharma. Hey! If you do not get along withadharma, then live without attachment and abhorrence (raag-dwesh)!But can one live that way? One lives with abhorrence foradharma and attachment towards dharma! The dharmadharmasoul is a state of delusion; a state of wrong belief. ‘Relative’religions are considered dharmadharma. It is good to practice‘relative’ religion, one’s life ahead will be better; one will eat betterand things will run well. But all these are just temporary comforts.Going to moksha does not mean that you have to pushaside adharma or anything else. In order to go to moksha, youhave to settle both dharma and adharma with equanimity.Dharmadharma is the nature of the body, mind, intellect andthe prakruti (‘relative’ inherent nature); whereas the Atma’snature is vitarag. If you want to maintain the nature of vitarag,then do not fall in love with dharma and do not bicker withadharma.“All these ‘relatives’ (non-Self) are ‘temporary’, and the‘real’ (the Self) is permanent.”The Gnani Purush can give you Gnanghan Atma (pureAptavani-4161162Aptavani-4Soul), which lifts you out of the state of dharmadharma(relative religion). As long as there is dharmadharma atma,there will be aimless wandering life after life. The fruit of dharmais worldly happiness (sukh) and the fruit of adharma is worldlymisery (dukh). Through dharma, one attains more of theworldly life (sansar). And when You come into “theory ofreality,” You attain the Gnanghan Atma. What lies beyond that?The “Theory of Absolutism”! That is Vignanghan Atma (theabsolute Self).The Vignanghan AtmaGnan means Atma (the Self), and Vignan meansParmatma (The absolute Self). This is a science. The scienceof Atma-Parmatma is a siddhant (incontrovertible principlethat verily leads to the ultimate, the absolute Self). The siddhantis immaculate; not the slightest of change can be made to it, andit can take you right through on to the other side – ultimatemoksha. After having attained Gnanghan Atma, and afterattaining the eternal state, You have to then know the VignanghanAtma. Vignanghan means, that one sees the ‘I Am’ in all thatlives. When you “see” that, it is Vignanghan Atma – althoughone is bound, one remains free! The Gnani Purush isVignanghan Atma! He is not just in the ‘Theory of Absolutism,’but he is in the “Theorem of Absolutism.” It is because of the‘awakening’ of the entire world’s merit karma (punya) that this‘Akram Vignan’ has come about, and the Vignanghan Atmahas been illuminated.The entire world exists in the form of science, but becauseit has not known this, it is in the pursuit of religion. If only peoplewould understand the science that this is all it is, and how itworks, they would be set free. It is this very incomprehensionthat is extremely puzzling!Sectarian Viewpoints Lie in Relative ReligionJainism, Hinduism, Islam, Zoroastrianism and Christianity,are all ‘relative’ religions. Those religions and ‘this’ (religion ofthe Self) have nothing to do with each other. This is the ‘real’thing. A relative religion means that it leads you forward ‘step bystep’. Even then, it is still a ‘relative’ religion (dharma); it is not‘real’. Where there are sects and viewpoints; not a singlereligion can be real. Where there is sectarianism (gachha) orviewpoint (mata), there is no passage to moksha. Partiality(paksha) and moksha are contradictory to one another. Thereis an even greater karmic bondage with viewpoint among sects(gachha-mata), than for someone living in the worldly life!Moksha (liberation) is attained through the Vitaragdharma (religion of Vitarags). Religious sect (sampradaya) isconsidered as ekantik (adhering to a single viewpoint). TheVitarag religion is not ekantik; it is anekantik (accepting of allviewpoints). The Vitarag exists on the outside of all sects. TheVitarag dharma is void of matbhed (difference of opinions).‘Ours’ (Akram Vignan) is anekantik path (accepts allviewpoints). Here there are Parsis, Jains, Muslims and Hindus.The discussions here are acceptable to all. The speech here issyadvaad (embraced by all). In a religion where there is justone single viewpoint, just one kind of people will flock to it. Andthey will all share the same common views; no one else will gothere. The Vitarag’s speech can put an end to all misery. Aslong as there is disagreement and sectarianism; not withstandingthe path of moksha, one has not even attained religion. One hasunderstood nothing.Questioner: When can it be said that one has understood?Dadashri: When conflicts and worries are gone, then youcan say that you have understood. If conflicts or worries do notarise within a person, whether someone insults him, or slaps him,or even if as soon as he gets into a car, he is told to get out ofit, then he is said to have understood. Otherwise, how can youconsider him as having any understanding?Aptavani-4161162Aptavani-4Soul), which lifts you out of the state of dharmadharma(relative religion). As long as there is dharmadharma atma,there will be aimless wandering life after life. The fruit of dharmais worldly happiness (sukh) and the fruit of adharma is worldlymisery (dukh). Through dharma, one attains more of theworldly life (sansar). And when You come into “theory ofreality,” You attain the Gnanghan Atma. What lies beyond that?The “Theory of Absolutism”! That is Vignanghan Atma (theabsolute Self).The Vignanghan AtmaGnan means Atma (the Self), and Vignan meansParmatma (The absolute Self). This is a science. The scienceof Atma-Parmatma is a siddhant (incontrovertible principlethat verily leads to the ultimate, the absolute Self). The siddhantis immaculate; not the slightest of change can be made to it, andit can take you right through on to the other side – ultimatemoksha. After having attained Gnanghan Atma, and afterattaining the eternal state, You have to then know the VignanghanAtma. Vignanghan means, that one sees the ‘I Am’ in all thatlives. When you “see” that, it is Vignanghan Atma – althoughone is bound, one remains free! The Gnani Purush isVignanghan Atma! He is not just in the ‘Theory of Absolutism,’but he is in the “Theorem of Absolutism.” It is because of the‘awakening’ of the entire world’s merit karma (punya) that this‘Akram Vignan’ has come about, and the Vignanghan Atmahas been illuminated.The entire world exists in the form of science, but becauseit has not known this, it is in the pursuit of religion. If only peoplewould understand the science that this is all it is, and how itworks, they would be set free. It is this very incomprehensionthat is extremely puzzling!Sectarian Viewpoints Lie in Relative ReligionJainism, Hinduism, Islam, Zoroastrianism and Christianity,are all ‘relative’ religions. Those religions and ‘this’ (religion ofthe Self) have nothing to do with each other. This is the ‘real’thing. A relative religion means that it leads you forward ‘step bystep’. Even then, it is still a ‘relative’ religion (dharma); it is not‘real’. Where there are sects and viewpoints; not a singlereligion can be real. Where there is sectarianism (gachha) orviewpoint (mata), there is no passage to moksha. Partiality(paksha) and moksha are contradictory to one another. Thereis an even greater karmic bondage with viewpoint among sects(gachha-mata), than for someone living in the worldly life!Moksha (liberation) is attained through the Vitaragdharma (religion of Vitarags). Religious sect (sampradaya) isconsidered as ekantik (adhering to a single viewpoint). TheVitarag religion is not ekantik; it is anekantik (accepting of allviewpoints). The Vitarag exists on the outside of all sects. TheVitarag dharma is void of matbhed (difference of opinions).‘Ours’ (Akram Vignan) is anekantik path (accepts allviewpoints). Here there are Parsis, Jains, Muslims and Hindus.The discussions here are acceptable to all. The speech here issyadvaad (embraced by all). In a religion where there is justone single viewpoint, just one kind of people will flock to it. Andthey will all share the same common views; no one else will gothere. The Vitarag’s speech can put an end to all misery. Aslong as there is disagreement and sectarianism; not withstandingthe path of moksha, one has not even attained religion. One hasunderstood nothing.Questioner: When can it be said that one has understood?Dadashri: When conflicts and worries are gone, then youcan say that you have understood. If conflicts or worries do notarise within a person, whether someone insults him, or slaps him,or even if as soon as he gets into a car, he is told to get out ofit, then he is said to have understood. Otherwise, how can youconsider him as having any understanding?Aptavani-4163164Aptavani-4The Essence of ReligionThere are two kinds of saar (essence; substance) in theworld. Dharmasaar (essence of religion) and samaysaar(essence of the smallest fraction of time; the Self).What do we call religion (dharma)? If one attains theessence of religion (dharmasaar), then one is said to haveattained religion. What is the essence of religion (dharmasaar)?It is when one does not have any artadhyan (adverse internalmeditation that hurts the self) or raudradhyan (adverse internalmeditation that hurts the self and others). A person can eat,drink, go out, make money or do anything else, but as long ashe has no artadhyan or raudradhyan, it is considereddharmasaar, and marmasaar (essence of the meaning ofreligion), would be liberation. The essence (saar) derived fromthe meaning of religion (dharma): which is marmasaar, is calledliberation (mukti).What is the essence of all the religions? It is to seewhether or not artadhyan and raudradhyan are dispelled. Ifthey have not gone, then one is not in religion. Have theydecreased? To which a person would respond ‘yes’. If theyhave decreased, then maybe we can say that he is in religion(dharma). However, if they have not decreased, but occurmore and more, it would not be right to say that he is inreligion.What is the essence of religion (dharmasaar)? It is whenif you are provoked, you do not see fault in the other person.What is the essence of the world (jagatsaar)? Pleasures of thesenses (vishay sukh). What is the essence of religion(dharmasaar)? It is where artadhyan and raudradhyan donot occur. Dharmasaar is the principal essence of the world.Any religion where you do not attain dharmasaar is wrong.Then regardless of whichever faith you follow, be it Jain orHindu, it is all wrong.When swa-parinati (the natural state of the Self) arises,it means samaysaar (essence of time) has arisen.What Is Religion? What Is Science?There is a difference between religion and science.Science has siddhant (irrefutable principles) and religions are all‘relative’; their fruits are ‘relative’ and even their actions are‘relative’. Anything that you do with the underlying belief of, ‘Iam Chandubhai’ is religion. But to know something precisely, ‘asit is’, is called science. When you have become nihshank (freefrom doubt), and after having realized your own Self, and seeingthings ‘as they are’, it would be called science (vignan).Science is always non-contradictory. It will show everything ‘asit is’, as it will only show the facts.Questioner: Can you explain that in detail?Dadashri: It is like this: Say, ‘You are Chandubhai’. Ifyou insult someone, then it would be adharma (irreligion), andif you gave someone something good to eat and drink and puthis mind at ease, then it would be called religion (dharma). Andif you hurt someone, or make someone feel bad or uneasy, itwould be called adharma. ‘Relative’ (non-Self) things give riseto the ‘relative’ and the ‘real’ (the Self) never gives rise to the‘relative’. The ‘real’ only arises from the ‘real’. The only thingthat remains is the realization of the ‘real’ (the Self). At themoment, you have the illusory beliefs that: ‘All things runbecause of my power (shakti), God did this, my horoscope(stars) is not in my favor...’ When in fact, the real ‘doer’ is someother entity.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4163164Aptavani-4The Essence of ReligionThere are two kinds of saar (essence; substance) in theworld. Dharmasaar (essence of religion) and samaysaar(essence of the smallest fraction of time; the Self).What do we call religion (dharma)? If one attains theessence of religion (dharmasaar), then one is said to haveattained religion. What is the essence of religion (dharmasaar)?It is when one does not have any artadhyan (adverse internalmeditation that hurts the self) or raudradhyan (adverse internalmeditation that hurts the self and others). A person can eat,drink, go out, make money or do anything else, but as long ashe has no artadhyan or raudradhyan, it is considereddharmasaar, and marmasaar (essence of the meaning ofreligion), would be liberation. The essence (saar) derived fromthe meaning of religion (dharma): which is marmasaar, is calledliberation (mukti).What is the essence of all the religions? It is to seewhether or not artadhyan and raudradhyan are dispelled. Ifthey have not gone, then one is not in religion. Have theydecreased? To which a person would respond ‘yes’. If theyhave decreased, then maybe we can say that he is in religion(dharma). However, if they have not decreased, but occurmore and more, it would not be right to say that he is inreligion.What is the essence of religion (dharmasaar)? It is whenif you are provoked, you do not see fault in the other person.What is the essence of the world (jagatsaar)? Pleasures of thesenses (vishay sukh). What is the essence of religion(dharmasaar)? It is where artadhyan and raudradhyan donot occur. Dharmasaar is the principal essence of the world.Any religion where you do not attain dharmasaar is wrong.Then regardless of whichever faith you follow, be it Jain orHindu, it is all wrong.When swa-parinati (the natural state of the Self) arises,it means samaysaar (essence of time) has arisen.What Is Religion? What Is Science?There is a difference between religion and science.Science has siddhant (irrefutable principles) and religions are all‘relative’; their fruits are ‘relative’ and even their actions are‘relative’. Anything that you do with the underlying belief of, ‘Iam Chandubhai’ is religion. But to know something precisely, ‘asit is’, is called science. When you have become nihshank (freefrom doubt), and after having realized your own Self, and seeingthings ‘as they are’, it would be called science (vignan).Science is always non-contradictory. It will show everything ‘asit is’, as it will only show the facts.Questioner: Can you explain that in detail?Dadashri: It is like this: Say, ‘You are Chandubhai’. Ifyou insult someone, then it would be adharma (irreligion), andif you gave someone something good to eat and drink and puthis mind at ease, then it would be called religion (dharma). Andif you hurt someone, or make someone feel bad or uneasy, itwould be called adharma. ‘Relative’ (non-Self) things give riseto the ‘relative’ and the ‘real’ (the Self) never gives rise to the‘relative’. The ‘real’ only arises from the ‘real’. The only thingthat remains is the realization of the ‘real’ (the Self). At themoment, you have the illusory beliefs that: ‘All things runbecause of my power (shakti), God did this, my horoscope(stars) is not in my favor...’ When in fact, the real ‘doer’ is someother entity.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4165166Aptavani-4(17)Knowing God Through the Vision of GnanIs ‘I Am a Part of God’ True?Dadashri: Who are you?Questioner: I am a part of God (Ishwar).Dadashri: People have been lead astray with thesediscussions about one being a part or fraction of God. How canone be a fraction of God? How can you divide God into pieces?The Atma (Soul; Self) is asaiyogi – it has no connections withany circumstance. You can cut something that is saiyog, intopieces. The Atma is a natural (swabhavik) thing; you cannotdivide the innate nature (swabhav) into pieces. You (the Self)are verily whole, but you are shrouded by veils of ignorance.When one says, “I am a fraction of God,” what one is reallytrying to say, is that a fraction of gnan (knowledge) hasmanifested within him, and that a fraction of ignorance has beenunveiled.The sun is full, but the amount of light you get from itdepends upon how much of it gets covered by clouds.Likewise, You (the Self) are ‘full’ and complete, but you havebeen covered up. In the beginning, there is the one-sensedorganism (ekendriya jiva) which has a fraction of the total veiluncovered. If you hit it hard or cut it, it would feel pain, butif you swore at it or gave it some tea, it would not feelanything. Then the two-sensed organisms (beindriya) likecrustaceans (shells and oysters), also fall into this category.Then there are the three-sensed organisms (tranindriya) likemoths. Then they become organism with four senses(charindriya). And those with the five-sensed living beings(panchindriya) have exposed the five senses, as that much ofthe covering has been unveiled. Nevertheless, the God (Atma;Self) within each and every single one is in a fully completeform, except that the coverings are still there. When the Selfbecomes completely unveiled, then you yourself are theParmatma (absolute Self). Anything that is divisible hasfragments. The Atma is indivisible. Its infinite locations(pradesh) are indivisible in form.Without being awakened (jagruti), one cannot becomeaware of one’s Self. When a person becomes fully awakened,he becomes aware of the Self (Shuddhatma), and through thatawareness comes the realization that he himself is God (Ishwar;Parmatma), in every sense of the word. He will begin toexperience this and in all his actions that follow thereafter, therewill be no pain (dukh) whatsoever.Is God Omnipresent?Dadashri: Where does God live?Questioner: God is omnipresent. He is in every grain.Dadashri: Then there is no need to go looking for him,is there? So if God is everywhere, then where would you go tothe toilet? If God is everywhere, then there is no such distinctionbetween animate (chetan) and inanimate (jada), is there? So itis not like that. There is animate and there is inanimate. If allthere are just grains of wheat, then what is there left to winnow(separate)? If you can tell what the wheat is, then you will beable to pick out the pieces of grit from it. And you will evenmanage the winnowing if you can recognize what the pieces ofgrit are. In the same way, if you know the Self; you will knowthe non-Self. And even if you recognize the non-Self, then youwill know the Self. But when people keep saying that God iseverywhere, then why bother to seek him?Aptavani-4165166Aptavani-4(17)Knowing God Through the Vision of GnanIs ‘I Am a Part of God’ True?Dadashri: Who are you?Questioner: I am a part of God (Ishwar).Dadashri: People have been lead astray with thesediscussions about one being a part or fraction of God. How canone be a fraction of God? How can you divide God into pieces?The Atma (Soul; Self) is asaiyogi – it has no connections withany circumstance. You can cut something that is saiyog, intopieces. The Atma is a natural (swabhavik) thing; you cannotdivide the innate nature (swabhav) into pieces. You (the Self)are verily whole, but you are shrouded by veils of ignorance.When one says, “I am a fraction of God,” what one is reallytrying to say, is that a fraction of gnan (knowledge) hasmanifested within him, and that a fraction of ignorance has beenunveiled.The sun is full, but the amount of light you get from itdepends upon how much of it gets covered by clouds.Likewise, You (the Self) are ‘full’ and complete, but you havebeen covered up. In the beginning, there is the one-sensedorganism (ekendriya jiva) which has a fraction of the total veiluncovered. If you hit it hard or cut it, it would feel pain, butif you swore at it or gave it some tea, it would not feelanything. Then the two-sensed organisms (beindriya) likecrustaceans (shells and oysters), also fall into this category.Then there are the three-sensed organisms (tranindriya) likemoths. Then they become organism with four senses(charindriya). And those with the five-sensed living beings(panchindriya) have exposed the five senses, as that much ofthe covering has been unveiled. Nevertheless, the God (Atma;Self) within each and every single one is in a fully completeform, except that the coverings are still there. When the Selfbecomes completely unveiled, then you yourself are theParmatma (absolute Self). Anything that is divisible hasfragments. The Atma is indivisible. Its infinite locations(pradesh) are indivisible in form.Without being awakened (jagruti), one cannot becomeaware of one’s Self. When a person becomes fully awakened,he becomes aware of the Self (Shuddhatma), and through thatawareness comes the realization that he himself is God (Ishwar;Parmatma), in every sense of the word. He will begin toexperience this and in all his actions that follow thereafter, therewill be no pain (dukh) whatsoever.Is God Omnipresent?Dadashri: Where does God live?Questioner: God is omnipresent. He is in every grain.Dadashri: Then there is no need to go looking for him,is there? So if God is everywhere, then where would you go tothe toilet? If God is everywhere, then there is no such distinctionbetween animate (chetan) and inanimate (jada), is there? So itis not like that. There is animate and there is inanimate. If allthere are just grains of wheat, then what is there left to winnow(separate)? If you can tell what the wheat is, then you will beable to pick out the pieces of grit from it. And you will evenmanage the winnowing if you can recognize what the pieces ofgrit are. In the same way, if you know the Self; you will knowthe non-Self. And even if you recognize the non-Self, then youwill know the Self. But when people keep saying that God iseverywhere, then why bother to seek him?Aptavani-4167168Aptavani-4 The Life Given to Inanimate Objects by ‘My-ness’People say that there is God in every grain, in this and inthat. Isn’t there a difference between what the person is tryingto say and the way the listener understands the message?Questioner: Of course, there has to be!Dadashri: I will explain to you what the expectation(apeksha) behind a message is. There are two divisions in thisworld: The Atma (Self) and the anatma (the non-Self). Thistable here has no chetan (life) in it. But because this tablebelongs to ‘Chandubhai’, it means that it has become vestedwith the chetan bhaav (living intent). That is sankalpi chetan,or the extension of life through ‘My-ness’; it is given life becauseof Chandubhai’s belief that he is its owner. If you took the tableaway from him, without asking, then to such an extent, youwould be at fault. However, if you paid him for it first and thensmashed it and destroyed it, then in that case, you would not beat fault. The chetan tattva (element of chetan; the Self) is thatin which there is knowledge (Gnan) and vision (darshan).(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(18)Understanding the KnowerAre You the Self? Do You Know the Self?Dadashri: What is your name?Questioner: Chandubhai.Dadashri: Are you really ‘Chandubhai’ or do youdoubtit?Questioner: It is a name given to this body.Dadashri: Then who are you?Questioner: Atma.Dadashri: What is Atma? What do you mean by Atma?Are you referring to this body, these bangles or the brain, whenyou say Atma? What can we call Atma? Will you not have torealize what the Atma is? You will have to know the Atma (Self;Soul), will you not? You will have to attain knowledge about theSelf, will you not?Questioner: The antaratma (the one within).Dadashri: Yes. The antaratma is fine, but don’t you alsohave to know about its attributes and nature (gunadharma)?Whether it eats and drinks, or not? Or would it burn if someonewere to set it on fire?Is It the Mistake of the Soul?What are the attributes of the Soul? Is worrying one of itsAptavani-4167168Aptavani-4 The Life Given to Inanimate Objects by ‘My-ness’People say that there is God in every grain, in this and inthat. Isn’t there a difference between what the person is tryingto say and the way the listener understands the message?Questioner: Of course, there has to be!Dadashri: I will explain to you what the expectation(apeksha) behind a message is. There are two divisions in thisworld: The Atma (Self) and the anatma (the non-Self). Thistable here has no chetan (life) in it. But because this tablebelongs to ‘Chandubhai’, it means that it has become vestedwith the chetan bhaav (living intent). That is sankalpi chetan,or the extension of life through ‘My-ness’; it is given life becauseof Chandubhai’s belief that he is its owner. If you took the tableaway from him, without asking, then to such an extent, youwould be at fault. However, if you paid him for it first and thensmashed it and destroyed it, then in that case, you would not beat fault. The chetan tattva (element of chetan; the Self) is thatin which there is knowledge (Gnan) and vision (darshan).(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(18)Understanding the KnowerAre You the Self? Do You Know the Self?Dadashri: What is your name?Questioner: Chandubhai.Dadashri: Are you really ‘Chandubhai’ or do youdoubtit?Questioner: It is a name given to this body.Dadashri: Then who are you?Questioner: Atma.Dadashri: What is Atma? What do you mean by Atma?Are you referring to this body, these bangles or the brain, whenyou say Atma? What can we call Atma? Will you not have torealize what the Atma is? You will have to know the Atma (Self;Soul), will you not? You will have to attain knowledge about theSelf, will you not?Questioner: The antaratma (the one within).Dadashri: Yes. The antaratma is fine, but don’t you alsohave to know about its attributes and nature (gunadharma)?Whether it eats and drinks, or not? Or would it burn if someonewere to set it on fire?Is It the Mistake of the Soul?What are the attributes of the Soul? Is worrying one of itsAptavani-4169170Aptavani-4attributes? Or is doing kashay (anger, pride, deceit or greed),one of its attributes?Questioner: That is not the Atma’s attribute. It doeskashays only by mistake.Dadashri: If the Atma (Soul) makes mistakes, how canyou even call it Atma? The Atma (the Self) itself is Parmatma(the Absolute Self). How can it ever make a mistake? Wouldn’tthat make us superior to the Atma, if we pointed out itsmistakes? The statement that “the soul makes a mistake” in itselfmeans that the Soul makes mistakes and you are pure, withoutany mistake. The Soul itself is the absolute Soul; it is vitarag(absolutely free from all attachment and abhorrence). It isbecause you have not been awakened to your own swaroop(the Self) that you believe, ‘I am Chandubhai.’ I am Chandubhai- is an aropit bhaav (falsely projected belief); it is an imagining(kalpit); it is a ‘relative’ bhaav.So in reality, who would You be? Then who are Youreally? This ‘Chandubhai’ is ‘relative’. In the ‘relative’, there areall sorts of wrong beliefs (vikalp): ‘I am his daughter, I am hermasi (aunt; mother’s sister), and I am her kaki (aunt; paternaluncle’s wife) etc...’ There are many such ‘wrong beliefs’.Whereas in the ‘real’ there is no vikalp. If You come to ‘realizethe real’, then You will know that you have become aware ofYour own swaroop (the Self) and You are ready for liberation(moksha). You have never attained the awareness of the ‘real’(Self). To attain the awareness of the Self (Atma) is consideredas having right belief (samkit) or right vision (samyak darshan).You have never attained right belief (samkit), because if youhad, you would not still be sitting here! Without samkit, youwould not have even a moment of inner peace and you wouldremain in illusion all the time. When you are getting married, youbecome infatuated (murchhit), but then afterward, the noveltywears off. This is mohanindra (sleep of illusory attachment).Swadhyaya: ParadhyayaDadashri: What do you read?Questioner: Jain swadhyaya (study of the Self), sutras,and I give lectures etc. I do all that.Dadashri: The one doing the swadhyaya is really doingparadhyaya (study of the non-Self). If you did swadhyaya(study of the Self), just once, then from there on, you wouldfind a solution to everything. Everything that is taking place inthe world is paravalumban (dependent upon the non-Self)and this dependency may be correct. With swavalumban(dependency on the Self) there is liberation, and paravalumban(dependency on the non-Self) will lead to relentless wanderinglife after life.Ultimately the Ego Will Have to be DissolvedHuman nature considers that adopting a path which isshubha-ashubha (auspicious-inauspicious) is religion (dharma).Every religion talks about doing good and avoiding the bad. TheJain religion relegates such discussions of shubha-ashubha to alower level; there is no discussion about it whatsoever. In theirspiritual readings and discussions, they refer to the works andhear the discourses of elevated individuals such as those whohave gone on to become the highest Gnanis, the absolutelyenlightened beings and superlative men. And from this, arisesone’s intent (bhaav), to become just like these great men. Thisis the essence of the Jain religion, but people have insteadentered into shubha-ashubha (doing good and avoiding thebad)!Jainism comprises four Anuyogas (paths that lead to theSelf): Kathanuyoga (stories of the great human beings whohave attained the Self), Charananuyoga (the path of surrenderand devotion), Karananuyoga (the path of understanding thelaw of cause and effect, the description of the universe) andAptavani-4169170Aptavani-4attributes? Or is doing kashay (anger, pride, deceit or greed),one of its attributes?Questioner: That is not the Atma’s attribute. It doeskashays only by mistake.Dadashri: If the Atma (Soul) makes mistakes, how canyou even call it Atma? The Atma (the Self) itself is Parmatma(the Absolute Self). How can it ever make a mistake? Wouldn’tthat make us superior to the Atma, if we pointed out itsmistakes? The statement that “the soul makes a mistake” in itselfmeans that the Soul makes mistakes and you are pure, withoutany mistake. The Soul itself is the absolute Soul; it is vitarag(absolutely free from all attachment and abhorrence). It isbecause you have not been awakened to your own swaroop(the Self) that you believe, ‘I am Chandubhai.’ I am Chandubhai- is an aropit bhaav (falsely projected belief); it is an imagining(kalpit); it is a ‘relative’ bhaav.So in reality, who would You be? Then who are Youreally? This ‘Chandubhai’ is ‘relative’. In the ‘relative’, there areall sorts of wrong beliefs (vikalp): ‘I am his daughter, I am hermasi (aunt; mother’s sister), and I am her kaki (aunt; paternaluncle’s wife) etc...’ There are many such ‘wrong beliefs’.Whereas in the ‘real’ there is no vikalp. If You come to ‘realizethe real’, then You will know that you have become aware ofYour own swaroop (the Self) and You are ready for liberation(moksha). You have never attained the awareness of the ‘real’(Self). To attain the awareness of the Self (Atma) is consideredas having right belief (samkit) or right vision (samyak darshan).You have never attained right belief (samkit), because if youhad, you would not still be sitting here! Without samkit, youwould not have even a moment of inner peace and you wouldremain in illusion all the time. When you are getting married, youbecome infatuated (murchhit), but then afterward, the noveltywears off. This is mohanindra (sleep of illusory attachment).Swadhyaya: ParadhyayaDadashri: What do you read?Questioner: Jain swadhyaya (study of the Self), sutras,and I give lectures etc. I do all that.Dadashri: The one doing the swadhyaya is really doingparadhyaya (study of the non-Self). If you did swadhyaya(study of the Self), just once, then from there on, you wouldfind a solution to everything. Everything that is taking place inthe world is paravalumban (dependent upon the non-Self)and this dependency may be correct. With swavalumban(dependency on the Self) there is liberation, and paravalumban(dependency on the non-Self) will lead to relentless wanderinglife after life.Ultimately the Ego Will Have to be DissolvedHuman nature considers that adopting a path which isshubha-ashubha (auspicious-inauspicious) is religion (dharma).Every religion talks about doing good and avoiding the bad. TheJain religion relegates such discussions of shubha-ashubha to alower level; there is no discussion about it whatsoever. In theirspiritual readings and discussions, they refer to the works andhear the discourses of elevated individuals such as those whohave gone on to become the highest Gnanis, the absolutelyenlightened beings and superlative men. And from this, arisesone’s intent (bhaav), to become just like these great men. Thisis the essence of the Jain religion, but people have insteadentered into shubha-ashubha (doing good and avoiding thebad)!Jainism comprises four Anuyogas (paths that lead to theSelf): Kathanuyoga (stories of the great human beings whohave attained the Self), Charananuyoga (the path of surrenderand devotion), Karananuyoga (the path of understanding thelaw of cause and effect, the description of the universe) andAptavani-4171172Aptavani-4Dravyanuyoga (the philosophy of the essence of life andliberation through scriptures).Vedanta (philosophy taught by the Vedas, the mostancient scriptures of India) also has four yoga (paths that leadto the Self): Bhaktiyoga (cultivation of a devotional relationshipwith God through prayer), Karmayoga (The path to Godthrough selfless service to others), Rajyoga (attuning the mind toGod and truth through concentration and meditation), Gnanyoga(approach to God through discrimination and reason).The Lord had said that if you are a Jain, you should readthese four anuyogas, and the followers of Vedanta, should readthe four yogas. In so doing, you will find the Atma (the Self).In the shubhashubha (doing good deeds and avoiding baddeeds), the ego increases. And through kathanuyoga (listeningto narrations of stories about great beings that have attained theSelf) the ego does not increase. And by hearing stories of greataccomplishments of people like Vastupal-Tejpal (two brothersin the thirteenth century, who built a temple dedicated to the 22ndTirthankar Lord Neminath), one is inspired by the likes of suchpeople and wants to emulate their ways. These days, only theegos have increased. How much ego should a Jain have? Onlyas much as would be required to run his household andbusiness. Instead, they have started nothing but chaos!Gneya: Gnata“Anaadithi ‘gneya’ ney ja ‘gnata’ samaji vartey lok.”‘Since time immemorial, people have believed gneya asthe Gnata. And that is how they pass the life.’~ NavneetOver infinite past lives, what has people’s religion been?They have practiced religion through the notion that the gneya(that which is to be known, the non-Self) is the Gnata(Knower). The spiritual teacher (acharya) is the gneya and theSelf is the Gnata. But because of illusion (bhranti) he perceiveshimself as the gneya. He believes that he is indeed the acharya:‘I gave that discourse, I read the scripture, I did the penanceand the renunciation of my worldly goods.’ However, the ‘doer’(the non-Self) is not the Knower (the Self) and the Knower isnot the ‘doer’. The ‘doer’ (karta) and the Knower (jaananaar)have never become one; they are not one and they never will beone. And yet he claims, ‘I am the acharya and I gave thediscourse.’ Whereupon I know what ‘station’ he was stuck at!You are sitting at Matunga station (Mumbai railway) andyou say that the next station is Kolkata, when in fact; it is Mahim(suburb station on the way to Kolkata). You can wander aroundfor countless lives and still you will not arrive at Kolkata.The Knower (Gnata) is the Self, and the object to beknown (gneya) is the non-Self. ‘Chandubhai’ is the object to beknown (gneya). ‘I am his brother’ is gneya, ‘he is owner of thisbusiness’ is gneya, ‘he is the owner of this house’ is gneya andYou are Gnata.If You remain the Knower of all that is to be known, thenYou will experience samadhi (blissful state; the state of the Self).What is ‘your’ dharma (religion; function)? It is to remain theKnower of all that is happening, and to remain as the Knower-Seer, and in absolute bliss (parmanandi)! What is dharma (truenature of a thing)? If gold is in its own dharma, it means that itstays within the properties of its nature. It would not be gold’sdharma if it displayed the attributes of brass. That would becalled par-dharma (the nature of the other). You have becomeChandubhai, believing that the body’s dharma is your owndharma, and dharma of the antahkaran (the inner complex ofthe self comprised of mind, intellect, chit and ego) is yourdharma. That is par-dharma (the nature of the non-Self).One can never attain moksha (liberation) through par-dharma. Moksha is attained through swa-dharma (being theAptavani-4171172Aptavani-4Dravyanuyoga (the philosophy of the essence of life andliberation through scriptures).Vedanta (philosophy taught by the Vedas, the mostancient scriptures of India) also has four yoga (paths that leadto the Self): Bhaktiyoga (cultivation of a devotional relationshipwith God through prayer), Karmayoga (The path to Godthrough selfless service to others), Rajyoga (attuning the mind toGod and truth through concentration and meditation), Gnanyoga(approach to God through discrimination and reason).The Lord had said that if you are a Jain, you should readthese four anuyogas, and the followers of Vedanta, should readthe four yogas. In so doing, you will find the Atma (the Self).In the shubhashubha (doing good deeds and avoiding baddeeds), the ego increases. And through kathanuyoga (listeningto narrations of stories about great beings that have attained theSelf) the ego does not increase. And by hearing stories of greataccomplishments of people like Vastupal-Tejpal (two brothersin the thirteenth century, who built a temple dedicated to the 22ndTirthankar Lord Neminath), one is inspired by the likes of suchpeople and wants to emulate their ways. These days, only theegos have increased. How much ego should a Jain have? Onlyas much as would be required to run his household andbusiness. Instead, they have started nothing but chaos!Gneya: Gnata“Anaadithi ‘gneya’ ney ja ‘gnata’ samaji vartey lok.”‘Since time immemorial, people have believed gneya asthe Gnata. And that is how they pass the life.’~ NavneetOver infinite past lives, what has people’s religion been?They have practiced religion through the notion that the gneya(that which is to be known, the non-Self) is the Gnata(Knower). The spiritual teacher (acharya) is the gneya and theSelf is the Gnata. But because of illusion (bhranti) he perceiveshimself as the gneya. He believes that he is indeed the acharya:‘I gave that discourse, I read the scripture, I did the penanceand the renunciation of my worldly goods.’ However, the ‘doer’(the non-Self) is not the Knower (the Self) and the Knower isnot the ‘doer’. The ‘doer’ (karta) and the Knower (jaananaar)have never become one; they are not one and they never will beone. And yet he claims, ‘I am the acharya and I gave thediscourse.’ Whereupon I know what ‘station’ he was stuck at!You are sitting at Matunga station (Mumbai railway) andyou say that the next station is Kolkata, when in fact; it is Mahim(suburb station on the way to Kolkata). You can wander aroundfor countless lives and still you will not arrive at Kolkata.The Knower (Gnata) is the Self, and the object to beknown (gneya) is the non-Self. ‘Chandubhai’ is the object to beknown (gneya). ‘I am his brother’ is gneya, ‘he is owner of thisbusiness’ is gneya, ‘he is the owner of this house’ is gneya andYou are Gnata.If You remain the Knower of all that is to be known, thenYou will experience samadhi (blissful state; the state of the Self).What is ‘your’ dharma (religion; function)? It is to remain theKnower of all that is happening, and to remain as the Knower-Seer, and in absolute bliss (parmanandi)! What is dharma (truenature of a thing)? If gold is in its own dharma, it means that itstays within the properties of its nature. It would not be gold’sdharma if it displayed the attributes of brass. That would becalled par-dharma (the nature of the other). You have becomeChandubhai, believing that the body’s dharma is your owndharma, and dharma of the antahkaran (the inner complex ofthe self comprised of mind, intellect, chit and ego) is yourdharma. That is par-dharma (the nature of the non-Self).One can never attain moksha (liberation) through par-dharma. Moksha is attained through swa-dharma (being theAptavani-4173174Aptavani-4Self). At any given time, gold will always remain in its owndharma. The wrong belief that ‘I am Chandubhai’ is an Illusion,and moreover, when you say that you are: ‘his father-in-law, hisson, his father, his lawyer when in court, and when you are in yourshop, you are the boss’ – is all illusion (bhranti). You are indeedyourself Shuddhatma (pure Soul), but it is this false imputation(aropit bhaav), that does not allow you to understand this.Freedom from the Non-Self Is LiberationMoksha dharma (the true nature of liberation) is tobecome free from ignorance. In this path of liberation, I makeeveryone free from ignorance, so that one becomes engaged inthe Gnan. When ignorance ceases; science (vignan) manifests.But without a Gnani, that cannot be possible; one’s dehadhyas(belief of ‘I am this body’), would never leave. Freedom fromdehadhyas is liberation itself. One needs only a fraction ofcontact with Gnan to attain the complete Gnan. If just afraction of ‘science’ is discerned, then it will become complete.This is because Gnan (Knowledge) is a ‘science’, andignorance is not a science. When can a fraction of the ‘science’(vignan) arise? It is when you ask the One that has traveled thepath and knows it well, so that you find your way. And so if youask the Gnani Purush that knows ‘this’, you will attain the path.This is not a religion; it is a science. This is the ‘real’ religion.This (path) is not always around. Here, the Lord of the fourteenworlds has manifested within me. This body is like a bubble; onecan never tell when it will burst. While you have your body, Youmust get your work done! I have the same light within me thatthe Vitarags had. It is possible to find complete solutionsthrough this Gnani Purush, so get Your work done. I will saythis much, and I am free, my work is done. I am vitarag, so Iwill not write letters to invite you to come.Dharma (religion) is that which liberates you from allbondage. That which gives you true liberation is called dharma.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(19)The True Path of WorshipOnly Faith Will Be FruitfulDev (the deity; God) is according to your belief. Howwould it benefit you to do darshan (see or visit with devotion)of an idol (murti), if you did not have any belief in it? If your‘belief’ was constant, then you would remember God day andnight. Therefore, place your faith (shraddha) in the idol. Theidol is not God; your faith itself is God. Nevertheless, when youdo the Lord’s darshan, you should do it with bhaav (devotionalfeelings). If you make the effort to do darshan, but your heartis not in it, then your efforts will be in vain. If you wish to dothe true darshan of the Lord, in a temple or a derasar, then Iwill teach you the right way to do that. Tell me, does anyonewish to do that?Questioner: Yes, we do. Teach us, Dada. From tomorrow,we will start doing it that way!Dadashri: When you go to the derasar say, “DearVitarag Lord, You reside within me! However, as yet, I havenot experienced that. This is why I am doing your darshan here.This is the way the Gnani Purush, Dada Bhagwan, has taughtme to do your darshan and that is why I am doing Yourdarshan in this way. So bless me so that I may realize my ownSelf.” And do darshan in this way wherever you go. These arejust the different names that are given. ‘Relatively’, they aredifferent, but ‘really’ they are one.Although the shop is far away, you are sitting here thinkingAptavani-4173174Aptavani-4Self). At any given time, gold will always remain in its owndharma. The wrong belief that ‘I am Chandubhai’ is an Illusion,and moreover, when you say that you are: ‘his father-in-law, hisson, his father, his lawyer when in court, and when you are in yourshop, you are the boss’ – is all illusion (bhranti). You are indeedyourself Shuddhatma (pure Soul), but it is this false imputation(aropit bhaav), that does not allow you to understand this.Freedom from the Non-Self Is LiberationMoksha dharma (the true nature of liberation) is tobecome free from ignorance. In this path of liberation, I makeeveryone free from ignorance, so that one becomes engaged inthe Gnan. When ignorance ceases; science (vignan) manifests.But without a Gnani, that cannot be possible; one’s dehadhyas(belief of ‘I am this body’), would never leave. Freedom fromdehadhyas is liberation itself. One needs only a fraction ofcontact with Gnan to attain the complete Gnan. If just afraction of ‘science’ is discerned, then it will become complete.This is because Gnan (Knowledge) is a ‘science’, andignorance is not a science. When can a fraction of the ‘science’(vignan) arise? It is when you ask the One that has traveled thepath and knows it well, so that you find your way. And so if youask the Gnani Purush that knows ‘this’, you will attain the path.This is not a religion; it is a science. This is the ‘real’ religion.This (path) is not always around. Here, the Lord of the fourteenworlds has manifested within me. This body is like a bubble; onecan never tell when it will burst. While you have your body, Youmust get your work done! I have the same light within me thatthe Vitarags had. It is possible to find complete solutionsthrough this Gnani Purush, so get Your work done. I will saythis much, and I am free, my work is done. I am vitarag, so Iwill not write letters to invite you to come.Dharma (religion) is that which liberates you from allbondage. That which gives you true liberation is called dharma.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(19)The True Path of WorshipOnly Faith Will Be FruitfulDev (the deity; God) is according to your belief. Howwould it benefit you to do darshan (see or visit with devotion)of an idol (murti), if you did not have any belief in it? If your‘belief’ was constant, then you would remember God day andnight. Therefore, place your faith (shraddha) in the idol. Theidol is not God; your faith itself is God. Nevertheless, when youdo the Lord’s darshan, you should do it with bhaav (devotionalfeelings). If you make the effort to do darshan, but your heartis not in it, then your efforts will be in vain. If you wish to dothe true darshan of the Lord, in a temple or a derasar, then Iwill teach you the right way to do that. Tell me, does anyonewish to do that?Questioner: Yes, we do. Teach us, Dada. From tomorrow,we will start doing it that way!Dadashri: When you go to the derasar say, “DearVitarag Lord, You reside within me! However, as yet, I havenot experienced that. This is why I am doing your darshan here.This is the way the Gnani Purush, Dada Bhagwan, has taughtme to do your darshan and that is why I am doing Yourdarshan in this way. So bless me so that I may realize my ownSelf.” And do darshan in this way wherever you go. These arejust the different names that are given. ‘Relatively’, they aredifferent, but ‘really’ they are one.Although the shop is far away, you are sitting here thinkingAptavani-4175176Aptavani-4about it! Hey! Why don’t you just think about where you aresitting? You will go on thinking about your shop even while youare walking along. And when they set out to go to the temple,no one is thinking about religion. They think about their shopsinstead. So many people just have a habit of going to the templeevery day. Alas! Is it just out of habit that you go to do theLord’s darshan? Every day the darshan of the Lord should feelnew. And at the time of going to do darshan, your fervor andjoy of going there should be as fresh, each time. This going tothe temple for darshan every day, has just become a sort ofhabit.How can you practice dharma? Should one do karma ordharma the whole day? Only those, whose merit karma(punya) allows them to do just a couple of hours of work a day,which they get done in no time, can do dharma and attain it.Can God Be Attained Through Worship?Questioner: Can anyone attain God by doing devotionalworship (bhakti)?Dadashri: You cannot do anything to attain God (Ishwar)through your five senses. That would be indirect devotion(paroksh bhakti).Questioner: Wouldn’t that be kalpanik (of theimagination) bhakti?Dadashri: That is all just kalpanik bhakti. And when thebhakti (worship) becomes nirvikalp (without ego) then yourwork gets done. Vikalp worship is done through the mind.Questioner: I like bhakti (devotional worship) ineverything.Dadashri: Bhakti is your tuber (granthi; knot). Thoughtsof bhakti, thoughts of darshan, are granthi (tuber). Sooner orlater you will have to become nirgranth (free from tubers;without knots). If you hear that you will be visiting Dakor (placeof pilgrimage to do darshan of Lord Krishna) in two days, agranthi for going there will keep ‘sprouting’. Mind you, there isnothing wrong in that. It is better than having bad thoughts. Whatis bhakti? If you become immersed in bhakti, then it will keepall the world’s ‘diseases’ at bay.Questioner: When I read about bhakti marg (the pathof devotional worship), I feel like it is worth doing. And whenI read about yoga, about karma, about the path of Gnan, thenI feel that too is worth doing. What is that?Dadashri: The whole world suffers from a ‘disease’called ‘swachhand’ (to understand and do according to one’sown intellect), so one measures everything according to his ownintellect.Questioner: You give Gnan, but shouldn’t there be somequalification (support- foundation; paayo) on our part?Dadashri: All these people (mahatmas) lacked such afoundation. No one has ever had a foundation. If you stumbleor trip over something you know, wouldn’t that be considereddarkness? You will not stumble or trip in the light. If you canmaintain equanimity in adversity, then it is Gnan. Anyone canmaintain equanimity in a state of equanimity. To say, ‘I did this,I did that, I worshiped,’ is all egoism. Gnan is without egoism.Ranchhodji (Lord Krishna) is not wrong: it is yourworship that is wrong. Nevertheless, your worship is indirectworship (paroksh bhakti); it is a ‘secondary’ bhakti (worship).The fruit of paroksh (indirect worship) is apara-bhakti (indirectworship of the Self), and the fruit of aparoksh bhakti (directworship), is para-bhakti (direct worship of the Self). Para-bhakti leads to moksha.All these devotees become intoxicated by the rhythm(taal) and beat of the drums. Rarely would you find someone,Aptavani-4175176Aptavani-4about it! Hey! Why don’t you just think about where you aresitting? You will go on thinking about your shop even while youare walking along. And when they set out to go to the temple,no one is thinking about religion. They think about their shopsinstead. So many people just have a habit of going to the templeevery day. Alas! Is it just out of habit that you go to do theLord’s darshan? Every day the darshan of the Lord should feelnew. And at the time of going to do darshan, your fervor andjoy of going there should be as fresh, each time. This going tothe temple for darshan every day, has just become a sort ofhabit.How can you practice dharma? Should one do karma ordharma the whole day? Only those, whose merit karma(punya) allows them to do just a couple of hours of work a day,which they get done in no time, can do dharma and attain it.Can God Be Attained Through Worship?Questioner: Can anyone attain God by doing devotionalworship (bhakti)?Dadashri: You cannot do anything to attain God (Ishwar)through your five senses. That would be indirect devotion(paroksh bhakti).Questioner: Wouldn’t that be kalpanik (of theimagination) bhakti?Dadashri: That is all just kalpanik bhakti. And when thebhakti (worship) becomes nirvikalp (without ego) then yourwork gets done. Vikalp worship is done through the mind.Questioner: I like bhakti (devotional worship) ineverything.Dadashri: Bhakti is your tuber (granthi; knot). Thoughtsof bhakti, thoughts of darshan, are granthi (tuber). Sooner orlater you will have to become nirgranth (free from tubers;without knots). If you hear that you will be visiting Dakor (placeof pilgrimage to do darshan of Lord Krishna) in two days, agranthi for going there will keep ‘sprouting’. Mind you, there isnothing wrong in that. It is better than having bad thoughts. Whatis bhakti? If you become immersed in bhakti, then it will keepall the world’s ‘diseases’ at bay.Questioner: When I read about bhakti marg (the pathof devotional worship), I feel like it is worth doing. And whenI read about yoga, about karma, about the path of Gnan, thenI feel that too is worth doing. What is that?Dadashri: The whole world suffers from a ‘disease’called ‘swachhand’ (to understand and do according to one’sown intellect), so one measures everything according to his ownintellect.Questioner: You give Gnan, but shouldn’t there be somequalification (support- foundation; paayo) on our part?Dadashri: All these people (mahatmas) lacked such afoundation. No one has ever had a foundation. If you stumbleor trip over something you know, wouldn’t that be considereddarkness? You will not stumble or trip in the light. If you canmaintain equanimity in adversity, then it is Gnan. Anyone canmaintain equanimity in a state of equanimity. To say, ‘I did this,I did that, I worshiped,’ is all egoism. Gnan is without egoism.Ranchhodji (Lord Krishna) is not wrong: it is yourworship that is wrong. Nevertheless, your worship is indirectworship (paroksh bhakti); it is a ‘secondary’ bhakti (worship).The fruit of paroksh (indirect worship) is apara-bhakti (indirectworship of the Self), and the fruit of aparoksh bhakti (directworship), is para-bhakti (direct worship of the Self). Para-bhakti leads to moksha.All these devotees become intoxicated by the rhythm(taal) and beat of the drums. Rarely would you find someone,Aptavani-4177178Aptavani-4who is lost in the rhythm of the Lord. Just doing this in theLord’s name accomplishes so much!Worship: Direct and IndirectQuestioner: In the path of devotion (bhakti), do theworldly difficulties create a barrier?Dadashri: There are two kinds of bhakti marg (paths ofdevotion). One is indirect (paroksh) worship, which yieldsworldly fruit while it gradually elevates you spiritually. Thesecond is direct (pratyaksh) worship, which is directed towardsthe One in whom God has manifested. And it is here that yourwork will get done. There are many obstacles in indirectdevotion (paroksh bhakti). One’s own thoughts becomeobstacles. The path of bhakti (devotional worship) is good, butit may disappear according to the changes in one’s circumstances;whereas Gnan always remains with You.Questioner: Who bears the responsibility in the path ofdevotion? Is it God?Dadashri: Yes.Even Narsinh Mehta (a great poet and devotee of LordKrishna) used to say, ‘Dear Lord, liberate me!’ All devoteesexperience inner suffering (artata). He expressed his inner painto the Lord saying, ‘Dear Lord, liberate me from this suffering.’Even so, such a devotion is still good; his devotion wasexclusively to the Lord. Whose devotion is the highest? The truedevotee’s. He is not worshiping the real God, but he isworshiping the indirect God. Nevertheless, it is still a trueworship, because it will lead to the direct (pratyaksh) God (theSelf within). But when can one be called a true devotee? Whensankalp-vikalp (worries and doubts) do not seize him, he isconsidered a true devotee. He leaves everything to God, sayingthat God will do the sankalp-vikalp. Whereas here, when aman gets his son married, he takes all the credit for it and whenthe child is born, he distributes sweets to everyone. But whenthe child dies, he blames God. A true devotee will leaveeverything to the God. He will say to God, “Lord, why shouldI worry? It is Your reputation that is at stake here.” Suchdevotion is very rare to find.One ‘realizes’ the ‘relative’ and another ‘realizes’ the‘real’. What happens when devotees claim to have had thedirect experience of the Lord? They ‘see’ within them the imageof the flute-playing Lord Krishna. They have brought with themfrom their past life, such spiritual energies (siddhis).If he came to me, I would tell him, “What you see is theimage (drashya), and you are the Seer (Drashta). The Krishnayou see playing the flute, is not the real Krishna. That is theimage (drashya) and the one who sees the image is the realKrishna, which is You yourself. This is just the vision (drashti)that has fallen on the image (drashya). When the vision(drashti) falls on the Seer (Drashta), then the goal can beaccomplished.”Even the devotees have not attained this goal. They tooyearn for this. Once there is a goal (dhyeya), only then can onebecome dhyata (the Self), but to understand the nature of thegoal, one needs a guru.What did Narsinh Mehta sing?‘Jaha lagi Atma tattva chinhyo nahi; tyahaa lagisadhana sarva joothi.’‘Until one attains the Atma (Self); the entire search isin vain.’Worship: From the Gross to the SubtlestQuestioner: Scriptures of every religion place greatimportance on name (naam), and the chanting of names. Whyis that significant?Aptavani-4177178Aptavani-4who is lost in the rhythm of the Lord. Just doing this in theLord’s name accomplishes so much!Worship: Direct and IndirectQuestioner: In the path of devotion (bhakti), do theworldly difficulties create a barrier?Dadashri: There are two kinds of bhakti marg (paths ofdevotion). One is indirect (paroksh) worship, which yieldsworldly fruit while it gradually elevates you spiritually. Thesecond is direct (pratyaksh) worship, which is directed towardsthe One in whom God has manifested. And it is here that yourwork will get done. There are many obstacles in indirectdevotion (paroksh bhakti). One’s own thoughts becomeobstacles. The path of bhakti (devotional worship) is good, butit may disappear according to the changes in one’s circumstances;whereas Gnan always remains with You.Questioner: Who bears the responsibility in the path ofdevotion? Is it God?Dadashri: Yes.Even Narsinh Mehta (a great poet and devotee of LordKrishna) used to say, ‘Dear Lord, liberate me!’ All devoteesexperience inner suffering (artata). He expressed his inner painto the Lord saying, ‘Dear Lord, liberate me from this suffering.’Even so, such a devotion is still good; his devotion wasexclusively to the Lord. Whose devotion is the highest? The truedevotee’s. He is not worshiping the real God, but he isworshiping the indirect God. Nevertheless, it is still a trueworship, because it will lead to the direct (pratyaksh) God (theSelf within). But when can one be called a true devotee? Whensankalp-vikalp (worries and doubts) do not seize him, he isconsidered a true devotee. He leaves everything to God, sayingthat God will do the sankalp-vikalp. Whereas here, when aman gets his son married, he takes all the credit for it and whenthe child is born, he distributes sweets to everyone. But whenthe child dies, he blames God. A true devotee will leaveeverything to the God. He will say to God, “Lord, why shouldI worry? It is Your reputation that is at stake here.” Suchdevotion is very rare to find.One ‘realizes’ the ‘relative’ and another ‘realizes’ the‘real’. What happens when devotees claim to have had thedirect experience of the Lord? They ‘see’ within them the imageof the flute-playing Lord Krishna. They have brought with themfrom their past life, such spiritual energies (siddhis).If he came to me, I would tell him, “What you see is theimage (drashya), and you are the Seer (Drashta). The Krishnayou see playing the flute, is not the real Krishna. That is theimage (drashya) and the one who sees the image is the realKrishna, which is You yourself. This is just the vision (drashti)that has fallen on the image (drashya). When the vision(drashti) falls on the Seer (Drashta), then the goal can beaccomplished.”Even the devotees have not attained this goal. They tooyearn for this. Once there is a goal (dhyeya), only then can onebecome dhyata (the Self), but to understand the nature of thegoal, one needs a guru.What did Narsinh Mehta sing?‘Jaha lagi Atma tattva chinhyo nahi; tyahaa lagisadhana sarva joothi.’‘Until one attains the Atma (Self); the entire search isin vain.’Worship: From the Gross to the SubtlestQuestioner: Scriptures of every religion place greatimportance on name (naam), and the chanting of names. Whyis that significant?Aptavani-4179180 Aptavani-4Dadashri: It is all done for the sake of concentration(ekagrata). ‘Name’ is something sthool (gross-concrete);therefore it is bhakti at a gross level. Then instillation of an idol(sthapana) is subtle worship (sookshma bhakti). Dravya(actual presence) constitutes subtler worship (sookshmatarbhakti). And lastly, bhaav (intent; here it means vision as theSelf) which is subtlest worship (sookshmatam bhakti). Thereare these four types of worship (bhakti). Even reciting LordMahavir’s name is sthool worship. When one does sthapana,i.e., placing a picture of Lord Mahavir and then reciting,“Mahavir…Mahavir,” it is considered subtle worship (sookshmabhakti).Instead of doing bhakti in front of my picture, if you doit in my presence, it is considered subtler worship (sookshmatarbhakti). Moreover, if you just abide by my Agnas, it issookshmatam bhakti (the subtlest kind of worship). What I amsaying is that when my Agnas become established in Yourbhaav (vision and understanding), it is considered bhaavbhakti. This will give you immediate results. The other threekinds of worship (naam, sthapana and dravya) give youworldly benefits. But only ‘this’ one will give you the real ‘cash’(the fruits are realized immediately), which is why I say, “This isthe cash bank in the world.” The reason it is called a cash bankis because it is ‘here’ (in the presence of the Gnani Purush),that the final and the ultimate bhaav worship happens.Naam bhakti is not entirely wrong. There is no rule aboutnames. As far as names go, it is fine to utter Rama, and it is alsoacceptable for someone to keep saying ‘limdo, limdo (Neemtree)’. All that is needed, is a name for it to be uttered. It allowsyou to maintain focused concentration (upayog) in whatever youare saying, so that your attention is not diverted somewhere else.The atma (self) must never be allowed to stay idle at any givenmoment, which is why you need something to preoccupy it, andthat is why recitation of a name (naam-smaran) is not entirelywrong. There is nothing that is wrong in this world. Howevernaam, sthapana and dravya are all vyavahar (interactionsrelated to the world); whereas bhaav is nischay (related to theSelf). In vyavahar, they have been doing the same thing overand over, throughout infinite past lives; they have roamed androamed and roamed and roamed! Throughout the ages, peoplehave become acharyas, sadhus, sadhvis (spiritual leaders andmonks), and this is how they have wandered around, but theystill have not found the right path.Moksha: Through Gnan or Bhakti?Questioner: Is moksha attained through the path ofdevotion (bhakti marg), or through the path of knowledge(Gnan marg)?Dadashri: What do you understand by the path ofdevotion? Bhakti follows after the path of Gnan (knowledge ofthe Self) begins. Will you not follow the directions that you havebeen given to go to the station? To follow the directions of thepath, from the knowledge (gnan) given to you, is consideredbhakti.What is the real meaning of the word bhakti? This wordbhakti incorporates aashraya (the intent and the goal). All thesepeople, to whom I have given Gnan, are also on the path ofbhakti. You have to do bhakti (worship) of whomever thatshelters you.Questioner: So is there also a bhakti marg in theAkram path?Dadashri: ‘This’ is para-bhakti (direct worship of theSelf). In the Akram path, the bhakti that one does afterattaining the Self is the bhakti of one’s own Self. The one, whois making a garland, is doing the bhakti of her own Self, evenif she puts the garland on me. Doing the bhakti of a GnaniPurush is essentially the same as doing one’s own (of the Self)Aptavani-4179180 Aptavani-4Dadashri: It is all done for the sake of concentration(ekagrata). ‘Name’ is something sthool (gross-concrete);therefore it is bhakti at a gross level. Then instillation of an idol(sthapana) is subtle worship (sookshma bhakti). Dravya(actual presence) constitutes subtler worship (sookshmatarbhakti). And lastly, bhaav (intent; here it means vision as theSelf) which is subtlest worship (sookshmatam bhakti). Thereare these four types of worship (bhakti). Even reciting LordMahavir’s name is sthool worship. When one does sthapana,i.e., placing a picture of Lord Mahavir and then reciting,“Mahavir…Mahavir,” it is considered subtle worship (sookshmabhakti).Instead of doing bhakti in front of my picture, if you doit in my presence, it is considered subtler worship (sookshmatarbhakti). Moreover, if you just abide by my Agnas, it issookshmatam bhakti (the subtlest kind of worship). What I amsaying is that when my Agnas become established in Yourbhaav (vision and understanding), it is considered bhaavbhakti. This will give you immediate results. The other threekinds of worship (naam, sthapana and dravya) give youworldly benefits. But only ‘this’ one will give you the real ‘cash’(the fruits are realized immediately), which is why I say, “This isthe cash bank in the world.” The reason it is called a cash bankis because it is ‘here’ (in the presence of the Gnani Purush),that the final and the ultimate bhaav worship happens.Naam bhakti is not entirely wrong. There is no rule aboutnames. As far as names go, it is fine to utter Rama, and it is alsoacceptable for someone to keep saying ‘limdo, limdo (Neemtree)’. All that is needed, is a name for it to be uttered. It allowsyou to maintain focused concentration (upayog) in whatever youare saying, so that your attention is not diverted somewhere else.The atma (self) must never be allowed to stay idle at any givenmoment, which is why you need something to preoccupy it, andthat is why recitation of a name (naam-smaran) is not entirelywrong. There is nothing that is wrong in this world. Howevernaam, sthapana and dravya are all vyavahar (interactionsrelated to the world); whereas bhaav is nischay (related to theSelf). In vyavahar, they have been doing the same thing overand over, throughout infinite past lives; they have roamed androamed and roamed and roamed! Throughout the ages, peoplehave become acharyas, sadhus, sadhvis (spiritual leaders andmonks), and this is how they have wandered around, but theystill have not found the right path.Moksha: Through Gnan or Bhakti?Questioner: Is moksha attained through the path ofdevotion (bhakti marg), or through the path of knowledge(Gnan marg)?Dadashri: What do you understand by the path ofdevotion? Bhakti follows after the path of Gnan (knowledge ofthe Self) begins. Will you not follow the directions that you havebeen given to go to the station? To follow the directions of thepath, from the knowledge (gnan) given to you, is consideredbhakti.What is the real meaning of the word bhakti? This wordbhakti incorporates aashraya (the intent and the goal). All thesepeople, to whom I have given Gnan, are also on the path ofbhakti. You have to do bhakti (worship) of whomever thatshelters you.Questioner: So is there also a bhakti marg in theAkram path?Dadashri: ‘This’ is para-bhakti (direct worship of theSelf). In the Akram path, the bhakti that one does afterattaining the Self is the bhakti of one’s own Self. The one, whois making a garland, is doing the bhakti of her own Self, evenif she puts the garland on me. Doing the bhakti of a GnaniPurush is essentially the same as doing one’s own (of the Self)Aptavani-4181182Aptavani-4bhakti. Until your own Atma has not fully been expressed, theGnani Purush is your Atma (Self). The Gnani Purush has noshalya (internal torment). He has a chit that is pleasing to others(prasanna) so that it brings great joy for those who come to dohis darshan. Mere darshan of the Gnani destroys the sins ofmany lifetimes.Direct Worship: Indirect WorshipThe worship (bhakti) that the whole world is in search ofis apara-bhakti (worship through the non-Self; through intellectand ego). Any bhakti (worship) in which the intellect (buddhi)does not enter at all, is called the bhakti of moksha (liberation).Bhakti should be for moksha. And when the intellect enters intoit, it becomes apara-bhakti (of the non-Self). When the intellectcomes out of it, it then becomes para-bhakti (the worship ofthe Self). The bhakti that goes on ‘here’ (in Dada’s satsang) allthroughout the day is para-bhakti and the fruit (reward) of thatis moksha (liberation). Ours is a path of moksha. Where thereis no path to moksha, there is the path of the worldly life(sansar). When the intellect enters into bhakti, it renders aperson emotional, and makes him aware of his ‘relative’ self, ‘Iam Chandubhai, I am the chief blacksmith.’ The intellect will notallow para-bhakti to occur. Whereas here, after you attain theGnan, it is all para-bhakti. Para-bhakti would be that whichis done for the Atma (Self); for the Shuddhatma (pure Soul),and anything else that is done for the sake of the Atma. If oneremains awake (aware) for the Self, one is ‘sleeping’ with regardto the world. Eating for the benefit of the Atma (Self) is fasting,and doing bhakti for the Atma is para-bhakti.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(20)The Guru and The GnaniThe True GuruQuestioner: I already have a guru from before, so can Imake you my guru now?Dadashri: You need two gurus. The worldly (sansari)guru teaches you about the shubha-ashubha (what is beneficialand what is harmful in life); whilst here I free you from theshackles of shubha-ashubha. In truth, this is not a gurupad(position or a state of guru). You will not find anythingdetrimental (badhak; obstructive or harmful) here; there are onlysadhak (conducive to attaining moksha) things here.Nevertheless, you do need a guru in the worldly life (sansar).If you have his blessings, they will be useful to you for yourhappiness in the world (bhautik sukh). However, ‘this’ (Gnan)goes beyond the material things of this world. Those others areconsidered worldly (laukik) gurus.Questioner: What is a worldly (laukik) guru?Dadashri: Someone who teaches you good things is aworldly guru. What can improve your current worldly life? It allhappens based on the planning that was done in our past life.Therefore, you receive good parents and good grounding inyour upbringing. You come prepared with everything from yourpast life. The Gnani’s grace is silent. He would never sayoutright things like, ‘May you be wealthy’ or ‘May you have ason’. Through the Gnani’s grace, you attain moksha!Questioner: If everyone is going to moksha anyway,then why would we need a Gnani?Aptavani-4181182Aptavani-4bhakti. Until your own Atma has not fully been expressed, theGnani Purush is your Atma (Self). The Gnani Purush has noshalya (internal torment). He has a chit that is pleasing to others(prasanna) so that it brings great joy for those who come to dohis darshan. Mere darshan of the Gnani destroys the sins ofmany lifetimes.Direct Worship: Indirect WorshipThe worship (bhakti) that the whole world is in search ofis apara-bhakti (worship through the non-Self; through intellectand ego). Any bhakti (worship) in which the intellect (buddhi)does not enter at all, is called the bhakti of moksha (liberation).Bhakti should be for moksha. And when the intellect enters intoit, it becomes apara-bhakti (of the non-Self). When the intellectcomes out of it, it then becomes para-bhakti (the worship ofthe Self). The bhakti that goes on ‘here’ (in Dada’s satsang) allthroughout the day is para-bhakti and the fruit (reward) of thatis moksha (liberation). Ours is a path of moksha. Where thereis no path to moksha, there is the path of the worldly life(sansar). When the intellect enters into bhakti, it renders aperson emotional, and makes him aware of his ‘relative’ self, ‘Iam Chandubhai, I am the chief blacksmith.’ The intellect will notallow para-bhakti to occur. Whereas here, after you attain theGnan, it is all para-bhakti. Para-bhakti would be that whichis done for the Atma (Self); for the Shuddhatma (pure Soul),and anything else that is done for the sake of the Atma. If oneremains awake (aware) for the Self, one is ‘sleeping’ with regardto the world. Eating for the benefit of the Atma (Self) is fasting,and doing bhakti for the Atma is para-bhakti.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(20)The Guru and The GnaniThe True GuruQuestioner: I already have a guru from before, so can Imake you my guru now?Dadashri: You need two gurus. The worldly (sansari)guru teaches you about the shubha-ashubha (what is beneficialand what is harmful in life); whilst here I free you from theshackles of shubha-ashubha. In truth, this is not a gurupad(position or a state of guru). You will not find anythingdetrimental (badhak; obstructive or harmful) here; there are onlysadhak (conducive to attaining moksha) things here.Nevertheless, you do need a guru in the worldly life (sansar).If you have his blessings, they will be useful to you for yourhappiness in the world (bhautik sukh). However, ‘this’ (Gnan)goes beyond the material things of this world. Those others areconsidered worldly (laukik) gurus.Questioner: What is a worldly (laukik) guru?Dadashri: Someone who teaches you good things is aworldly guru. What can improve your current worldly life? It allhappens based on the planning that was done in our past life.Therefore, you receive good parents and good grounding inyour upbringing. You come prepared with everything from yourpast life. The Gnani’s grace is silent. He would never sayoutright things like, ‘May you be wealthy’ or ‘May you have ason’. Through the Gnani’s grace, you attain moksha!Questioner: If everyone is going to moksha anyway,then why would we need a Gnani?Aptavani-4183184Aptavani-4Dadashri: First, you must arrive at the Central Station(the Self), only then can you make such a statement. Every livingbeing (jiva) has been around from time immemorial, but it isonly when one meets the Gnani Purush that one arrives at thebeginning of the end.Questioner: So, is there a need for a guru on the pathof moksha?Dadashri: Yes, so many people say that there is no need!That would be like snuffing out a light. The guru is a light, butwouldn’t you have to recognize the guru? When you believe thatdarkness is light, how can you attain anything?All these acharyas-maharajs (religious teachers andheads) are considered gurus. Who is a sadguru? It is someonewho has attained the Self (Sat). If he has attained such a state,he will not become irritated with you, if you do somethingwrong. And the Gnani Purush is one who has swa-purusharth(constant awareness and conduct as the Self). The GnaniPurush is considered the wonder of the world.Questioner: How can we recognize a Gnani?Dadashri: Say to the (so called) ‘gnani’, “Sir, help mesolve my problem,” and if he says to you, “Go and do thismuch,” then you should tell him, “Sir, I have been doing that forsuch a long time, but it has not got me anywhere.” If you try toget a small child to run errands for you, is he likely to do it? Onlyadults have to do that. In the same way, if you meet a GnaniPurush, ask him directly what you want. A real guru is the onewho gives you liberation from the worldly life (sansar). Thereare many other kinds of gurus, but what are they good for? Youwould even need a guru who knows the directions, if youwanted to go from here to the station.Worldly GurusThese worldly gurus may not be Gnanis, but do youknow ‘who they are’? They are like the railway ‘point-men’.If there is a train going to Delhi, a point-man will set it on theright track. But these days, the trains to Delhi have beendiverted to Surat which has caused head on collisions. Hey!You are being paid to do your job as a ‘point-man’ so whycan you not even do that? Simply by winning debates andarguments, they have set themselves up as the gurus of theworld! Are they gurus by attribute, or just by name? Wouldyou not have to judge that for yourself? If he is a guru byattribute, it will raise further questions. There is no problem ifhe is by name.The Lord had said, ‘I am the disciple of the entire world.’No one can become a guru of the whole world. Nowadays theyhave become just commercial enterprises; no devotion toreligion remains anywhere. Their preoccupation is with eating,drinking and ensuring their status and fame. Do you think I likeusing such stern words? Nevertheless, I have to do that, so thatyou can stay mindful. Only the one who does not need anythingwill speak the truth. There are however, some true and sincerepersons, but they are very few and far between, perhaps two orfive percent. Who can make you walk a straight line? Only thosewho walk the straight line, one hundred percent themselves canmake you do the same. How can they teach others if there issomething wrong in them? I can teach you only that in which Imyself am a hundred percent correct. Only then will my wordsbe effective (vachanbud).Relative Religion Is Like a CompanionThe ‘relative’ religion is like a companion. If the personthat is accompanying you is good and strong, then your path willbe smooth, but if he is a rogue, then he will rob you. Companymeans that which has a ‘beginning’ and an ‘end’. What good iscompany that has no beginning and no end? Company means anatural coming together of like-minded people. Ours is aAptavani-4183184Aptavani-4Dadashri: First, you must arrive at the Central Station(the Self), only then can you make such a statement. Every livingbeing (jiva) has been around from time immemorial, but it isonly when one meets the Gnani Purush that one arrives at thebeginning of the end.Questioner: So, is there a need for a guru on the pathof moksha?Dadashri: Yes, so many people say that there is no need!That would be like snuffing out a light. The guru is a light, butwouldn’t you have to recognize the guru? When you believe thatdarkness is light, how can you attain anything?All these acharyas-maharajs (religious teachers andheads) are considered gurus. Who is a sadguru? It is someonewho has attained the Self (Sat). If he has attained such a state,he will not become irritated with you, if you do somethingwrong. And the Gnani Purush is one who has swa-purusharth(constant awareness and conduct as the Self). The GnaniPurush is considered the wonder of the world.Questioner: How can we recognize a Gnani?Dadashri: Say to the (so called) ‘gnani’, “Sir, help mesolve my problem,” and if he says to you, “Go and do thismuch,” then you should tell him, “Sir, I have been doing that forsuch a long time, but it has not got me anywhere.” If you try toget a small child to run errands for you, is he likely to do it? Onlyadults have to do that. In the same way, if you meet a GnaniPurush, ask him directly what you want. A real guru is the onewho gives you liberation from the worldly life (sansar). Thereare many other kinds of gurus, but what are they good for? Youwould even need a guru who knows the directions, if youwanted to go from here to the station.Worldly GurusThese worldly gurus may not be Gnanis, but do youknow ‘who they are’? They are like the railway ‘point-men’.If there is a train going to Delhi, a point-man will set it on theright track. But these days, the trains to Delhi have beendiverted to Surat which has caused head on collisions. Hey!You are being paid to do your job as a ‘point-man’ so whycan you not even do that? Simply by winning debates andarguments, they have set themselves up as the gurus of theworld! Are they gurus by attribute, or just by name? Wouldyou not have to judge that for yourself? If he is a guru byattribute, it will raise further questions. There is no problem ifhe is by name.The Lord had said, ‘I am the disciple of the entire world.’No one can become a guru of the whole world. Nowadays theyhave become just commercial enterprises; no devotion toreligion remains anywhere. Their preoccupation is with eating,drinking and ensuring their status and fame. Do you think I likeusing such stern words? Nevertheless, I have to do that, so thatyou can stay mindful. Only the one who does not need anythingwill speak the truth. There are however, some true and sincerepersons, but they are very few and far between, perhaps two orfive percent. Who can make you walk a straight line? Only thosewho walk the straight line, one hundred percent themselves canmake you do the same. How can they teach others if there issomething wrong in them? I can teach you only that in which Imyself am a hundred percent correct. Only then will my wordsbe effective (vachanbud).Relative Religion Is Like a CompanionThe ‘relative’ religion is like a companion. If the personthat is accompanying you is good and strong, then your path willbe smooth, but if he is a rogue, then he will rob you. Companymeans that which has a ‘beginning’ and an ‘end’. What good iscompany that has no beginning and no end? Company means anatural coming together of like-minded people. Ours is aAptavani-4185186Aptavani-4‘science’, from zero to one hundred. It takes you all the way, inrelation to the past and the future.Religion is something that carries you from one end to theother. But that never happens now, does it? And if it does, thenyour work is certainly done. But if you do not find anything, thenit is better to have the companionship of ‘relative’ religion.There Must Not Be Any Business in ReligionThe one who becomes a disciple of the whole world isworthy of being a guru. If you do not have awareness, even fora moment of, ‘He is my disciple,’ then you can make disciples.I have given Gnan to five thousand people, but I have never feltfor even a moment, that they are my disciples.The Lord has said that it is fine if you do everything elsewrong, but when you choose a guru, make sure that he isstraightforward. For infinite lifetimes you have been wandering,because you have come across the wrong gurus. People in Indiahave made a business out of religion and that is wrong. Thereshould be religion in business. But you cannot have business inreligion. Even if the guru is not a Gnani, if you feel at peace justby seeing him, then you should stay there. But do not stay withsomeone that makes a business out of religion. If you cannot findhonest men, then it is worth following Bhima’s example. WhenBhima (character from the epic Mahabharata) could not find anyhonest person to make his guru, he took a pot, painted it andwrote on it ‘Namo Neminathaya’ (I bow down to LordNeminath) and there he did his worship. It really is nobody’sfault. This current time cycle is very peculiar and what we findtoday is typical of this time cycle. What can that poor man (theguru) do? He is trapped in it too.Questioner: If we go and bow down to an ascetic(sadhu), does that mean that we have made him our guru?Dadashri: No, you have to talk to him; you have tomake a bargain with him. This is all for a ‘business’ that youhave to draw up a ‘contract’ with him by telling him, “Fromtoday onwards I embrace you in my heart as my guru.” Onceyou have established him as your guru, you are considered tohave laid the foundation, and once that is done, it is a sin todestroy it. Do not lay a foundation otherwise. In the Lordswords, do not lay a foundation, and if you do, then you must notdestroy it.If there is anyone that knows how to make a guru, it is theKhojas (ethnic group of Shia Muslims). If your guru were to getmarried, not even married, but if he interfered with someone,you would all gang up on him and keep beating him. Whereaswhen the Aga Khan (hereditary title of Imam -high priest- offollowers of the Shia faith) married a European lady, they allcelebrated his marriage. That is called a true disciple. You shouldnot see faults in your guru. You can look at other people’s faults,but do not see faults in your guru; otherwise do not make himyour guru. Where religion is concerned, the one who eradicatesmistakes is considered God. You must not find faults in anyone;it is a grave liability to do so.Do you know what Sahajanand Swami (The Godhead ofthe Swaminarayan religion in the Swaminarayan sect of Hinduism)discovered? ‘The guru is the fifth doom.’ If you see even theslightest fault in your guru, then you are doomed! And shouldyou happen to see anything negative about him, you should tellyourself, ‘No, that is not so’ and then close your eyes.Otherwise, all the living beings (jiva) will fall (out of grace).Only the followers of Aga Khan have remained protected. Justlook! Has anyone amongst them ever complained? And if ourpeople were his disciples, they would judge him in so manyways.I am not asking you to worship (aradhana) a guru, butdo not speak negatively (viradhana) about him. However, ifAptavani-4185186Aptavani-4‘science’, from zero to one hundred. It takes you all the way, inrelation to the past and the future.Religion is something that carries you from one end to theother. But that never happens now, does it? And if it does, thenyour work is certainly done. But if you do not find anything, thenit is better to have the companionship of ‘relative’ religion.There Must Not Be Any Business in ReligionThe one who becomes a disciple of the whole world isworthy of being a guru. If you do not have awareness, even fora moment of, ‘He is my disciple,’ then you can make disciples.I have given Gnan to five thousand people, but I have never feltfor even a moment, that they are my disciples.The Lord has said that it is fine if you do everything elsewrong, but when you choose a guru, make sure that he isstraightforward. For infinite lifetimes you have been wandering,because you have come across the wrong gurus. People in Indiahave made a business out of religion and that is wrong. Thereshould be religion in business. But you cannot have business inreligion. Even if the guru is not a Gnani, if you feel at peace justby seeing him, then you should stay there. But do not stay withsomeone that makes a business out of religion. If you cannot findhonest men, then it is worth following Bhima’s example. WhenBhima (character from the epic Mahabharata) could not find anyhonest person to make his guru, he took a pot, painted it andwrote on it ‘Namo Neminathaya’ (I bow down to LordNeminath) and there he did his worship. It really is nobody’sfault. This current time cycle is very peculiar and what we findtoday is typical of this time cycle. What can that poor man (theguru) do? He is trapped in it too.Questioner: If we go and bow down to an ascetic(sadhu), does that mean that we have made him our guru?Dadashri: No, you have to talk to him; you have tomake a bargain with him. This is all for a ‘business’ that youhave to draw up a ‘contract’ with him by telling him, “Fromtoday onwards I embrace you in my heart as my guru.” Onceyou have established him as your guru, you are considered tohave laid the foundation, and once that is done, it is a sin todestroy it. Do not lay a foundation otherwise. In the Lordswords, do not lay a foundation, and if you do, then you must notdestroy it.If there is anyone that knows how to make a guru, it is theKhojas (ethnic group of Shia Muslims). If your guru were to getmarried, not even married, but if he interfered with someone,you would all gang up on him and keep beating him. Whereaswhen the Aga Khan (hereditary title of Imam -high priest- offollowers of the Shia faith) married a European lady, they allcelebrated his marriage. That is called a true disciple. You shouldnot see faults in your guru. You can look at other people’s faults,but do not see faults in your guru; otherwise do not make himyour guru. Where religion is concerned, the one who eradicatesmistakes is considered God. You must not find faults in anyone;it is a grave liability to do so.Do you know what Sahajanand Swami (The Godhead ofthe Swaminarayan religion in the Swaminarayan sect of Hinduism)discovered? ‘The guru is the fifth doom.’ If you see even theslightest fault in your guru, then you are doomed! And shouldyou happen to see anything negative about him, you should tellyourself, ‘No, that is not so’ and then close your eyes.Otherwise, all the living beings (jiva) will fall (out of grace).Only the followers of Aga Khan have remained protected. Justlook! Has anyone amongst them ever complained? And if ourpeople were his disciples, they would judge him in so manyways.I am not asking you to worship (aradhana) a guru, butdo not speak negatively (viradhana) about him. However, ifAptavani-4187188Aptavani-4one does aradhana, then he will surely be blessed, but he doesnot possess the strength or energy for that. What I am saying isthat even if you have to have a really crazed guru, then go aheadand have one, but as long as you make sure that you remaincompletely sincere to him your whole life, you will be trulyblessed. If you remain completely sincere to a guru that isabsolutely crazy, all your kashays (inner enemies of anger, pride,deceit and greed) will come to an end! But you would need tounderstand at least this much! The least you can do is reach thislevel of understanding that is precisely why the deity is depictedin stone for you, because given people’s mentality, they cannotdemean it or find fault in a stone effigy. Oh, but no! They evenfind fault with the stone, by criticizing the adornments, ‘thataangi (The silver-plating over the idols of God) is not quiteright’ on the statue. These people are so nitpicking! They are soanalytical, to the extent that they find fault in their guru. Forgetabout looking at their own faults, but they even pick faults in theguru. That is how much ‘alertness’ they have! I guarantee you that if you were to make any crazed guruyour guru, and you remained sincere to him throughout yourwhole life, then it is possible for you to attain moksha withinthree lifetimes. Mind you, the guru must be living. People couldnot afford to do that, which is why these stone idols have beenestablished instead.Questioner: And whatever agna (special directive) theguru gives us, we have to follow it, don’t we?Dadashri: Yes, even if that agna is outrageous, you stillhave to stick with it. If you want to go to moksha, then if youmake a guru, you have to remain sincere to him throughout yourlife. A true disciple is one who finds his own happiness in thehappiness of his guru. He looks for what pleases his guru. Andif he does this his whole life, then all his kashays will end. Acrazed guru is a vehicle for you to get rid of all your ownkashays, or else a Gnani Purush can wash away yourkashays. Any others, that come in between will only make youwander around unnecessarily. To remain under the Agna of theOne who is liberated is true religion.Once you establish someone as your guru and youworship him, you should not criticize him, no matter how crazedhe is. If the guru’s weaknesses are exposed, you should notcriticize him, at all. If the guru does something wrong, it isentirely his responsibility and no one else’s. These Khojas donot criticize their guru. They are so wise! One should adopt thatkind of wisdom. Even the vitarags used to say that one shouldadopt any attribute of wisdom one sees in others. Being as‘developed’ as they are, the Hindus are quick to criticize things,‘how can this be?’ They have even become the guru’s judges!They begin to interfere. Cast your intellect aside! I call suchpeople purva viradhak (the one who has opposed andcriticized in the past life) because all the garbage that was leftover came over into this time cycle. The beings of the fourth timecycle are the leftover ‘rubbish material’ from the Satyug,Dwapar and Treta (previous time cycles); therefore they allpossess nothing but viradhana (criticism and opposition). Theytalk negatively about those who feed them, they speak ill of thegurus who teach them, and they even speak negatively about themothers and fathers who feed them. They complain to neighbors,“My dad fights with my mom, he is a worthless.” So theneighbors will then incite the son. He divulges all the familysecrets to the outside world! Alas, there is no sincerity left at allthese days.What a Magnificent Principle of the GnaniPurush!Once you venerate someone, then no matter whatwrong he does, you do not change the way you view him. Myprinciple has always been that if a plant that I watered andAptavani-4187188Aptavani-4one does aradhana, then he will surely be blessed, but he doesnot possess the strength or energy for that. What I am saying isthat even if you have to have a really crazed guru, then go aheadand have one, but as long as you make sure that you remaincompletely sincere to him your whole life, you will be trulyblessed. If you remain completely sincere to a guru that isabsolutely crazy, all your kashays (inner enemies of anger, pride,deceit and greed) will come to an end! But you would need tounderstand at least this much! The least you can do is reach thislevel of understanding that is precisely why the deity is depictedin stone for you, because given people’s mentality, they cannotdemean it or find fault in a stone effigy. Oh, but no! They evenfind fault with the stone, by criticizing the adornments, ‘thataangi (The silver-plating over the idols of God) is not quiteright’ on the statue. These people are so nitpicking! They are soanalytical, to the extent that they find fault in their guru. Forgetabout looking at their own faults, but they even pick faults in theguru. That is how much ‘alertness’ they have! I guarantee you that if you were to make any crazed guruyour guru, and you remained sincere to him throughout yourwhole life, then it is possible for you to attain moksha withinthree lifetimes. Mind you, the guru must be living. People couldnot afford to do that, which is why these stone idols have beenestablished instead.Questioner: And whatever agna (special directive) theguru gives us, we have to follow it, don’t we?Dadashri: Yes, even if that agna is outrageous, you stillhave to stick with it. If you want to go to moksha, then if youmake a guru, you have to remain sincere to him throughout yourlife. A true disciple is one who finds his own happiness in thehappiness of his guru. He looks for what pleases his guru. Andif he does this his whole life, then all his kashays will end. Acrazed guru is a vehicle for you to get rid of all your ownkashays, or else a Gnani Purush can wash away yourkashays. Any others, that come in between will only make youwander around unnecessarily. To remain under the Agna of theOne who is liberated is true religion.Once you establish someone as your guru and youworship him, you should not criticize him, no matter how crazedhe is. If the guru’s weaknesses are exposed, you should notcriticize him, at all. If the guru does something wrong, it isentirely his responsibility and no one else’s. These Khojas donot criticize their guru. They are so wise! One should adopt thatkind of wisdom. Even the vitarags used to say that one shouldadopt any attribute of wisdom one sees in others. Being as‘developed’ as they are, the Hindus are quick to criticize things,‘how can this be?’ They have even become the guru’s judges!They begin to interfere. Cast your intellect aside! I call suchpeople purva viradhak (the one who has opposed andcriticized in the past life) because all the garbage that was leftover came over into this time cycle. The beings of the fourth timecycle are the leftover ‘rubbish material’ from the Satyug,Dwapar and Treta (previous time cycles); therefore they allpossess nothing but viradhana (criticism and opposition). Theytalk negatively about those who feed them, they speak ill of thegurus who teach them, and they even speak negatively about themothers and fathers who feed them. They complain to neighbors,“My dad fights with my mom, he is a worthless.” So theneighbors will then incite the son. He divulges all the familysecrets to the outside world! Alas, there is no sincerity left at allthese days.What a Magnificent Principle of the GnaniPurush!Once you venerate someone, then no matter whatwrong he does, you do not change the way you view him. Myprinciple has always been that if a plant that I watered andAptavani-4189190Aptavani-4nurtured is in the way of my plans to run a railway line, I wouldtake the track around it, but I would never uproot the plant!There has to be a principle (siddhant) in place. Once youhave built something, you must never destroy it. Not justspeaking about destroying, but the impression I have of youfrom the first time we meet, will always remain the same. It willnot ever change; not even for a moment. Today, if I havedecided that this gentleman is honest, and he takes moneyfrom my pocket, then even if someone came and told me thathe had himself witnessed the man taking the money; I will stillmaintain that he is not a thief. That is because my understandingis different. I have seen what he has been like all along, so Iwould not make a mental note of his actions and dismiss hisactions that are driven by circumstances. The whole worldmakes a mental note (nondha) about actions that arepropelled by circumstances. The purva viradhak (those whohave opposed and criticized in previous lifetimes) beings areprone to thoughts of viradhana (criticism and contempt);therefore, I do not regard them as being at fault. What I amsaying is that it is not unusual to have such wayward thoughts,but You do not get caught up in it, and become that.You will be able to go to moksha, if you have destroyedyour every mistake. But without destroying your mistakes, youcannot go to moksha.When you remain tranquil, under whatsoever circumstance,and your commitment to your goal does not change, then youcan indeed say that you have attained religion. People “remain”good in order to appear good in the eyes of others or theyremain good because adverse circumstances do not arise forthem. Our goal is just Shuddhatma and moksha, and sonothing else affects us at all. Circumstances of the non-Self donot affect me (the Self). Presently your entire day is spent in astate of the non-Self, and you are looking for moksha?! Youonly need that single goal for moksha.The Meaning of ReligionReligion (dharma) exists even outside. Religion exists inplaces of worship; in temples and monasteries, and everywherepeople go. But there is no meaning left in it. You cannot findmeaning (marma) there any longer. If you have a nice bigmango, but when you slice it, all you find is just the stone andthe skin around it, so what meaning (marma; substance) is thereto it? It is just like the religions of today; without substance!Religion means to look for the real thing (Self), but with a wrongbelief. ‘This’ (Akram) here, is a science. Religion should besomething that helps you gather the tools (sadhan) to guide youfor spirituality.Even That Kind of Awareness Is a GreatAwareness!Viradhana of the guru is to oppose, criticize and offendthe very person from whom one has attained something; it is todestroy the foundation that one has created through one’s guru.Such a person is called purva viradhak jiva (did viradhana inhis previous life). In this era, there are purva viradhak souls, ofwhich I myself too was one once. I became aware that I toowas one of them and it was after this realization that the Gnanmanifested in me.Recognizing The GuruQuestioner: If I make someone my guru, without muchthought, and later I realize that it was a mistake and I picked thewrong person, what should I do?Dadashri: You do not have to recognize the guru; youjust develop a liking for him that leads you to make him yourguru. No one knows how to recognize a guru. Where is the artof recognizing precious jewelry? These people are likely topresent you with glass instead of diamonds. We have ways totest authenticity of diamonds, but where are you going to findAptavani-4189190Aptavani-4nurtured is in the way of my plans to run a railway line, I wouldtake the track around it, but I would never uproot the plant!There has to be a principle (siddhant) in place. Once youhave built something, you must never destroy it. Not justspeaking about destroying, but the impression I have of youfrom the first time we meet, will always remain the same. It willnot ever change; not even for a moment. Today, if I havedecided that this gentleman is honest, and he takes moneyfrom my pocket, then even if someone came and told me thathe had himself witnessed the man taking the money; I will stillmaintain that he is not a thief. That is because my understandingis different. I have seen what he has been like all along, so Iwould not make a mental note of his actions and dismiss hisactions that are driven by circumstances. The whole worldmakes a mental note (nondha) about actions that arepropelled by circumstances. The purva viradhak (those whohave opposed and criticized in previous lifetimes) beings areprone to thoughts of viradhana (criticism and contempt);therefore, I do not regard them as being at fault. What I amsaying is that it is not unusual to have such wayward thoughts,but You do not get caught up in it, and become that.You will be able to go to moksha, if you have destroyedyour every mistake. But without destroying your mistakes, youcannot go to moksha.When you remain tranquil, under whatsoever circumstance,and your commitment to your goal does not change, then youcan indeed say that you have attained religion. People “remain”good in order to appear good in the eyes of others or theyremain good because adverse circumstances do not arise forthem. Our goal is just Shuddhatma and moksha, and sonothing else affects us at all. Circumstances of the non-Self donot affect me (the Self). Presently your entire day is spent in astate of the non-Self, and you are looking for moksha?! Youonly need that single goal for moksha.The Meaning of ReligionReligion (dharma) exists even outside. Religion exists inplaces of worship; in temples and monasteries, and everywherepeople go. But there is no meaning left in it. You cannot findmeaning (marma) there any longer. If you have a nice bigmango, but when you slice it, all you find is just the stone andthe skin around it, so what meaning (marma; substance) is thereto it? It is just like the religions of today; without substance!Religion means to look for the real thing (Self), but with a wrongbelief. ‘This’ (Akram) here, is a science. Religion should besomething that helps you gather the tools (sadhan) to guide youfor spirituality.Even That Kind of Awareness Is a GreatAwareness!Viradhana of the guru is to oppose, criticize and offendthe very person from whom one has attained something; it is todestroy the foundation that one has created through one’s guru.Such a person is called purva viradhak jiva (did viradhana inhis previous life). In this era, there are purva viradhak souls, ofwhich I myself too was one once. I became aware that I toowas one of them and it was after this realization that the Gnanmanifested in me.Recognizing The GuruQuestioner: If I make someone my guru, without muchthought, and later I realize that it was a mistake and I picked thewrong person, what should I do?Dadashri: You do not have to recognize the guru; youjust develop a liking for him that leads you to make him yourguru. No one knows how to recognize a guru. Where is the artof recognizing precious jewelry? These people are likely topresent you with glass instead of diamonds. We have ways totest authenticity of diamonds, but where are you going to findAptavani-4191192Aptavani-4ways to test humans to see if one is a genuine guru. Whathappens is that you become overwhelmed by the person andyou make him your guru on the spur of the moment: ‘As oftomorrow sir, you are my guru.’Questioner: Yes, so do I have to stick to him once Imake him my guru?Dadashri: After you make him your guru, if he happensto go insane as a result of the effect of his karma, do youassume that his position as guru goes away? His madness isdisplayed because of his unfolding karma, and for someone tohangs on to his position of guru, the Lord considers as aradhakpad (the state of being worshipped), which means that you mustnever have contempt for the person once you have worshippedhim.Questioner: It is also said that without a guru, you willnot attain gnan.Dadashri: The guru shows you the way, and he guidesyou on the path and the Gnani Purush gives you Gnan. TheGnani Purush is the one for whom there is nothing left to know.He remains only as the Self. The Gnani Purush can give youeverything, while the guru guides you in your worldly life(sansar), and if you do what he tells you to, you will be happy.Nevertheless, with the guru your suffering (dukh); externalsuffering (upadhi) do not go away, do they? External problemswill be there all the time. At the most, when people worship aguru, they may find some worldly (sansarik) happiness, but theirexternal problems will still be there. The one who gives you bliss(samadhi); amidst mental suffering (aadhi), physical suffering(vyadhi) and externally-induced suffering (upadhi) is the GnaniPurush.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(21)The Purpose of PenancePenance, Renunciation and FastingQuestioner: Are penance (tapa), vows (vrat) anddisciplined rituals (niyam) necessary or are they unnecessary?Dadashri: All the medicines that are available in apharmacy are all necessary, but they are necessary for otherpeople, and you only have to take the medicine that you need.In the same way, penance, fasting, renunciation, vows, etc., areall necessary. There is nothing false or wrong in this world.Stealing is not wrong and neither is levying income tax. Whenyour pocket is picked, it is the Nature’s tax! The one’s imposingthe tax are the thieves themselves! There is nothing wrong in thateither. There is nothing wrong with fasting, penance or chanting.Everything is correct according to each individual’s viewpointand expectation.Questioner: So is it necessary to do japa-tapa (chantingor penance)?Dadashri: No. Is it necessary for you to take all themedicines that are in a drugstore? You take the medicineaccording to the illness that you have, and you will only need acouple of bottles of it. If you took all the bottles, it would killyou! If you are fond of japa-tapa, then you should do it.Questioner: Is it possible to be fond of japa-tapa?Dadashri: Would anyone do it without being fond of it?This is how it goes: fondness for women, for alcohol or forAptavani-4191192Aptavani-4ways to test humans to see if one is a genuine guru. Whathappens is that you become overwhelmed by the person andyou make him your guru on the spur of the moment: ‘As oftomorrow sir, you are my guru.’Questioner: Yes, so do I have to stick to him once Imake him my guru?Dadashri: After you make him your guru, if he happensto go insane as a result of the effect of his karma, do youassume that his position as guru goes away? His madness isdisplayed because of his unfolding karma, and for someone tohangs on to his position of guru, the Lord considers as aradhakpad (the state of being worshipped), which means that you mustnever have contempt for the person once you have worshippedhim.Questioner: It is also said that without a guru, you willnot attain gnan.Dadashri: The guru shows you the way, and he guidesyou on the path and the Gnani Purush gives you Gnan. TheGnani Purush is the one for whom there is nothing left to know.He remains only as the Self. The Gnani Purush can give youeverything, while the guru guides you in your worldly life(sansar), and if you do what he tells you to, you will be happy.Nevertheless, with the guru your suffering (dukh); externalsuffering (upadhi) do not go away, do they? External problemswill be there all the time. At the most, when people worship aguru, they may find some worldly (sansarik) happiness, but theirexternal problems will still be there. The one who gives you bliss(samadhi); amidst mental suffering (aadhi), physical suffering(vyadhi) and externally-induced suffering (upadhi) is the GnaniPurush.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(21)The Purpose of PenancePenance, Renunciation and FastingQuestioner: Are penance (tapa), vows (vrat) anddisciplined rituals (niyam) necessary or are they unnecessary?Dadashri: All the medicines that are available in apharmacy are all necessary, but they are necessary for otherpeople, and you only have to take the medicine that you need.In the same way, penance, fasting, renunciation, vows, etc., areall necessary. There is nothing false or wrong in this world.Stealing is not wrong and neither is levying income tax. Whenyour pocket is picked, it is the Nature’s tax! The one’s imposingthe tax are the thieves themselves! There is nothing wrong in thateither. There is nothing wrong with fasting, penance or chanting.Everything is correct according to each individual’s viewpointand expectation.Questioner: So is it necessary to do japa-tapa (chantingor penance)?Dadashri: No. Is it necessary for you to take all themedicines that are in a drugstore? You take the medicineaccording to the illness that you have, and you will only need acouple of bottles of it. If you took all the bottles, it would killyou! If you are fond of japa-tapa, then you should do it.Questioner: Is it possible to be fond of japa-tapa?Dadashri: Would anyone do it without being fond of it?This is how it goes: fondness for women, for alcohol or forAptavani-4193194Aptavani-4cigarettes, etc., are considered ashubha (inauspicious) fondness;whereas this japa-tapa is considered shubha (auspicious).Everything that one has to do day in and day out, is consideredfondness.Questioner: Does one bind karma doing japa-tapa?Dadashri: Of course, you bind karma in it! You bindkarma in everything. Even when you sleep at night, you bindkarma. And with chanting (japa) and penance (tapa) however,there is considerable binding of karma. But that will be karmaof merit (punya), which in the next life, will bring one happinessand material wealth.This entire path of the vitarag is a path of labhalabha(gain and loss). Do not expend even five cents on religion, if youcan help it. A person fasts, and then goes around bragging abouthow many days he fasted, but when his son comes along, hestarts quarreling with him: ‘Why were you not at the shop thismorning?!’ For goodness sakes, why bring the shop into this?Why don’t you just get on with your fasting! When the sonreplies, ‘I could not go to the shop today’, he has a row withhim. While in the other room sits the mother, who has also beenfasting, and when she hears the sound of breaking glass, sheyells, ‘What happened? What just broke?’ Dear old lady, it isyour soul that just broke! Just one glass breaks and her chit isout there! They are all suffering nothing but loss.Penance That Presents NaturallyIn this day and age people do not need to go out in searchof penance (tapa). People have been told to do penance thatpresents itself naturally. This is because, in this Kaliyug (currentera of the time cycle characterized by lack of unity in mind,speech and conduct), people are already suffering, be it athome, in the bedroom or at the temple; they are already intorment. What is the point of making someone do penance(tapa) when he is already suffering (natural penance)? It is likeputting a turban over your combed hair. There is no point to it.Do penance if a glass smashes. If your son does not go to work,you do penance. When the prakruti (the relative self) startsacting up during adverse circumstances, it creates a lot of innerturmoil, and that is when you have to do penance (tapa). In thisage, you need to do the penances that just present themselvesto you on their own. In Satyug throughout his entire life, the manof the house never had to worry about where the family’s ricecame from, or how much it cost! Things came naturally. Today,however, everyone in the family would know that he had goneout to buy the ration and he will return with some rice and sugar.Just look at these punyashadi (lucky people) here! They haveconstructed the tallest of buildings, but they have fallen short ofmerit karma (punya)!Is There Renunciation and Acquisition for theGnani?A man who follows the path of the Vitarag must spendhis life with applied awareness (upayog). He uses this awarenessto turn inauspicious (ashubha) situations around into auspicious(shubha) ones.Questioner: ‘The Gnani does not have to renounce, nordoes he have to acquire anything’. Would you please explain thissentence?Dadashri: It means that if the Gnani is served a plate offood and if the soup (kadhee) is salty, the Gnani will settle forit (with equanimity). And if the soup (kadhee) is very tasty, hewill settle for that too. He will not say, ‘I have renounced this’.When you say tyaag it is considered scorn (tiraskar). Andatyaag (acquisition; grahan) is attachment (raag). The Gnanidoes not have attachment (raag) or abhorrence (dwesh);therefore, tyaagatyaag (renunciation and acquisition) is neveran issue for him. He accepts whatever comes before him withAptavani-4193194Aptavani-4cigarettes, etc., are considered ashubha (inauspicious) fondness;whereas this japa-tapa is considered shubha (auspicious).Everything that one has to do day in and day out, is consideredfondness.Questioner: Does one bind karma doing japa-tapa?Dadashri: Of course, you bind karma in it! You bindkarma in everything. Even when you sleep at night, you bindkarma. And with chanting (japa) and penance (tapa) however,there is considerable binding of karma. But that will be karmaof merit (punya), which in the next life, will bring one happinessand material wealth.This entire path of the vitarag is a path of labhalabha(gain and loss). Do not expend even five cents on religion, if youcan help it. A person fasts, and then goes around bragging abouthow many days he fasted, but when his son comes along, hestarts quarreling with him: ‘Why were you not at the shop thismorning?!’ For goodness sakes, why bring the shop into this?Why don’t you just get on with your fasting! When the sonreplies, ‘I could not go to the shop today’, he has a row withhim. While in the other room sits the mother, who has also beenfasting, and when she hears the sound of breaking glass, sheyells, ‘What happened? What just broke?’ Dear old lady, it isyour soul that just broke! Just one glass breaks and her chit isout there! They are all suffering nothing but loss.Penance That Presents NaturallyIn this day and age people do not need to go out in searchof penance (tapa). People have been told to do penance thatpresents itself naturally. This is because, in this Kaliyug (currentera of the time cycle characterized by lack of unity in mind,speech and conduct), people are already suffering, be it athome, in the bedroom or at the temple; they are already intorment. What is the point of making someone do penance(tapa) when he is already suffering (natural penance)? It is likeputting a turban over your combed hair. There is no point to it.Do penance if a glass smashes. If your son does not go to work,you do penance. When the prakruti (the relative self) startsacting up during adverse circumstances, it creates a lot of innerturmoil, and that is when you have to do penance (tapa). In thisage, you need to do the penances that just present themselvesto you on their own. In Satyug throughout his entire life, the manof the house never had to worry about where the family’s ricecame from, or how much it cost! Things came naturally. Today,however, everyone in the family would know that he had goneout to buy the ration and he will return with some rice and sugar.Just look at these punyashadi (lucky people) here! They haveconstructed the tallest of buildings, but they have fallen short ofmerit karma (punya)!Is There Renunciation and Acquisition for theGnani?A man who follows the path of the Vitarag must spendhis life with applied awareness (upayog). He uses this awarenessto turn inauspicious (ashubha) situations around into auspicious(shubha) ones.Questioner: ‘The Gnani does not have to renounce, nordoes he have to acquire anything’. Would you please explain thissentence?Dadashri: It means that if the Gnani is served a plate offood and if the soup (kadhee) is salty, the Gnani will settle forit (with equanimity). And if the soup (kadhee) is very tasty, hewill settle for that too. He will not say, ‘I have renounced this’.When you say tyaag it is considered scorn (tiraskar). Andatyaag (acquisition; grahan) is attachment (raag). The Gnanidoes not have attachment (raag) or abhorrence (dwesh);therefore, tyaagatyaag (renunciation and acquisition) is neveran issue for him. He accepts whatever comes before him withAptavani-4195196Aptavani-4vitarag bhaav (complete non-attachment from within), and hedeals with it.The Lord does not consider, what people in generalconsider, as renunciation (tyaag). True renunciation in theLord’s eyes, is the renunciation of murchha (infatuation due toattachment) incited by material things. This ‘Dada’ has all thethings. He has wealth, he has a business in his name, and he haschecks in his name. Dada has not renounced a thing. Andbecause he has no murchha, it means that he has renouncedeverything. A sadhu maharaj should never say that he was bornin such and such a town, because despite having renouncedeverything, he still carries it all inside and so that murchha andmoha (attachment for illusory things) do not go away. Whereas,in whatever I am telling you, there is no cause for any sort ofrenunciation. What is there that does not warrant renunciationanyways? Things do not have to be renounced, but what doesneed to be renounced, is the murchha for them. What ismurchha? It is mohaniya karma (karma that does not let onesee ‘as it is’; karma of illusory attraction). People haverenounced many things; however all those things still stand,because their murchha over them has not left. After attaining theknowledge of the Self, you no longer have murchha. This isbecause You are now Shuddhatma (pure Soul). Upon becomingShuddhatma, all the murchha vanishes. Your mohaniya karmais completely destroyed; otherwise the awareness of theShuddhatma could never be established. As long as there iseven a drop of mohaniya karma left, the awareness (laksha)of Shuddhatma can never be established.The Awareness of the Pure SoulQuestioner: Dada, is one considered to have attainedtheawareness (laksha) of the Self, when he experiences the Self?Dadashri: When you wake up at night, what is the firstthing that comes into your awareness (laksha)?Questioner: I am Shuddhatma.Dadashri: Just know, that if ‘I am Shuddhatma’happens by itself, the awareness (laksha) has been established.You do not have to make the effort to remember it. And if youtried to remember, you might not be able to if your memory wasnot all that good. Laksha is awakened awareness (jagruti).And You also have the anubhav. Experience (anubhav),awareness (laksha) and conviction (pratiti) – You have all thesethree. Only after you experience the Self (Atma), can youperform your actions with equanimity and make progress(towards absolute Self-realization).Agiyaras According to DadaDoing agiyaras (fasting on the eleventh day of the lunarfortnight) is also ‘scientific’. If a person does Dada’s agiyarasjust once in his life, he can attain salvation. Just once, in Dada’sname, it should be done.Questioner: How should I do Dada’s agiyaras?Dadashri: Do not give any nourishment to the fivegnanendriya (sense organs of knowledge), five karmendriya(organs of action) and the mind, which makes up the eleventhcomponent. The eyes (see), ears (hear), mouth (taste), nose(smell) and touch are sense organs of knowledge (gnanendriya);the karmendriya are the hands, feet, excretory, etc., and theeleventh is the mind. Just for one day, You deprive them of their‘food’. Of course, the ears will hear, but You should not listenout. You will see with your eyes, but do not get up to look. Youshould not do anything the whole day; just starve the mind.Questioner: Can we move about?Dadashri: No. You cannot do anything.Questioner: Can we go to sleep?Dadashri: You can lie down.Aptavani-4195196Aptavani-4vitarag bhaav (complete non-attachment from within), and hedeals with it.The Lord does not consider, what people in generalconsider, as renunciation (tyaag). True renunciation in theLord’s eyes, is the renunciation of murchha (infatuation due toattachment) incited by material things. This ‘Dada’ has all thethings. He has wealth, he has a business in his name, and he haschecks in his name. Dada has not renounced a thing. Andbecause he has no murchha, it means that he has renouncedeverything. A sadhu maharaj should never say that he was bornin such and such a town, because despite having renouncedeverything, he still carries it all inside and so that murchha andmoha (attachment for illusory things) do not go away. Whereas,in whatever I am telling you, there is no cause for any sort ofrenunciation. What is there that does not warrant renunciationanyways? Things do not have to be renounced, but what doesneed to be renounced, is the murchha for them. What ismurchha? It is mohaniya karma (karma that does not let onesee ‘as it is’; karma of illusory attraction). People haverenounced many things; however all those things still stand,because their murchha over them has not left. After attaining theknowledge of the Self, you no longer have murchha. This isbecause You are now Shuddhatma (pure Soul). Upon becomingShuddhatma, all the murchha vanishes. Your mohaniya karmais completely destroyed; otherwise the awareness of theShuddhatma could never be established. As long as there iseven a drop of mohaniya karma left, the awareness (laksha)of Shuddhatma can never be established.The Awareness of the Pure SoulQuestioner: Dada, is one considered to have attainedtheawareness (laksha) of the Self, when he experiences the Self?Dadashri: When you wake up at night, what is the firstthing that comes into your awareness (laksha)?Questioner: I am Shuddhatma.Dadashri: Just know, that if ‘I am Shuddhatma’happens by itself, the awareness (laksha) has been established.You do not have to make the effort to remember it. And if youtried to remember, you might not be able to if your memory wasnot all that good. Laksha is awakened awareness (jagruti).And You also have the anubhav. Experience (anubhav),awareness (laksha) and conviction (pratiti) – You have all thesethree. Only after you experience the Self (Atma), can youperform your actions with equanimity and make progress(towards absolute Self-realization).Agiyaras According to DadaDoing agiyaras (fasting on the eleventh day of the lunarfortnight) is also ‘scientific’. If a person does Dada’s agiyarasjust once in his life, he can attain salvation. Just once, in Dada’sname, it should be done.Questioner: How should I do Dada’s agiyaras?Dadashri: Do not give any nourishment to the fivegnanendriya (sense organs of knowledge), five karmendriya(organs of action) and the mind, which makes up the eleventhcomponent. The eyes (see), ears (hear), mouth (taste), nose(smell) and touch are sense organs of knowledge (gnanendriya);the karmendriya are the hands, feet, excretory, etc., and theeleventh is the mind. Just for one day, You deprive them of their‘food’. Of course, the ears will hear, but You should not listenout. You will see with your eyes, but do not get up to look. Youshould not do anything the whole day; just starve the mind.Questioner: Can we move about?Dadashri: No. You cannot do anything.Questioner: Can we go to sleep?Dadashri: You can lie down.Aptavani-4197198Aptavani-4Questioner: What if we feel sleepy?Dadashri: Then you should sit up again. You have tospend the entire twenty-four hours in constant awareness. TheAtma will be completely separated if you did just one agiyaraslike this.Questioner: This is difficult to do.Dadashri: If you make a firm decision (nischay), you willbe able to do it. If your decision (nischay) is there, along withmy power and energy of words (vachanbud) you will definitelybe able to do it.Questioner: If we want to fast, do we need your agna(permission) for it?Dadashri: I do not give people such agna (permission)to fast. But if you want to fast, then you should make a firmdecision (nischay), then come to me for my agna and then goahead and do it. Through the agna and with my vachanbud(power of the Gnani’s words), your work will be done.Questioner: If you are not here in Mumbai and I wantto do a fast, should I take the agna from your picture?Dadashri: Yes, there is not a problem in you taking theagna first before you do it. I will be present if you call for me,but you do not know how to call me!Questioner: I understand about the karmendriya (fiveorgans of action) and the gnanendriya (the five senses ofknowledge), but what about the mind, Dada? Doesn’t it justwander around?Dadashri: Let it wander around. Just do not give it anyfood; starve it. Even if it jumps around or settles down, just donot feed it. Do not give your hands any ‘food’. Do not give foodto your eyes. On that day, you should just sit and not ‘feed’ yourlegs. Do not sit with a book, keep saying “Dada,” but not outloud; just in your head. In your mind, keep reciting Dada’sname. Just doing one of these agiyaras, will benefit youcompletely. However, on the contrary, when these people doagiyaras they stuff themselves even more on that day, withmoriyo (special grain), laddu, puri fried in ghee, kadhee anda variety of vegetables (shaak).Questioner: What does one get out of doing penance,fasting and aayambil (Jain practice of eating bland food justonce a day)?Dadashri: It purifies the body and the mind. At times, itcan improve the speech or sometimes even ruin it. If you askedsomeone to speak after he had dined well, on a full stomach hemay not even be able to. And on the other hand, if his stomachwas empty, he would show signs of anguish!Aayambil: A Scientific ProcessQuestioner: How old is the practice of aayambil? Doesit date back to the time of Lord Mahavir?Dadashri: Aayambil is a science. It goes back to thetime of Lord Rushabhdev. It is not for the purpose of attainingthe Atma (Self), but for the body’s benefit. It serves to keep thebody healthy. Anyone whose body has toxicity or who does notkeep well, should do aayambil. It should be done systematically.You should only eat one staple food, which is one staple grain,and nothing else. Aayambil is considered very practical andcorrect. ‘This’ is the only ‘chamber’ from the Lord Tirthankar’spalace that is still standing today. Everything else has collapsedinto ruins.Questioner: In the aayambil, the rituals they perform,theprayer beads they do and all that, is all of that considered right?Dadashri: There is no connection with aayambil andAptavani-4197198Aptavani-4Questioner: What if we feel sleepy?Dadashri: Then you should sit up again. You have tospend the entire twenty-four hours in constant awareness. TheAtma will be completely separated if you did just one agiyaraslike this.Questioner: This is difficult to do.Dadashri: If you make a firm decision (nischay), you willbe able to do it. If your decision (nischay) is there, along withmy power and energy of words (vachanbud) you will definitelybe able to do it.Questioner: If we want to fast, do we need your agna(permission) for it?Dadashri: I do not give people such agna (permission)to fast. But if you want to fast, then you should make a firmdecision (nischay), then come to me for my agna and then goahead and do it. Through the agna and with my vachanbud(power of the Gnani’s words), your work will be done.Questioner: If you are not here in Mumbai and I wantto do a fast, should I take the agna from your picture?Dadashri: Yes, there is not a problem in you taking theagna first before you do it. I will be present if you call for me,but you do not know how to call me!Questioner: I understand about the karmendriya (fiveorgans of action) and the gnanendriya (the five senses ofknowledge), but what about the mind, Dada? Doesn’t it justwander around?Dadashri: Let it wander around. Just do not give it anyfood; starve it. Even if it jumps around or settles down, just donot feed it. Do not give your hands any ‘food’. Do not give foodto your eyes. On that day, you should just sit and not ‘feed’ yourlegs. Do not sit with a book, keep saying “Dada,” but not outloud; just in your head. In your mind, keep reciting Dada’sname. Just doing one of these agiyaras, will benefit youcompletely. However, on the contrary, when these people doagiyaras they stuff themselves even more on that day, withmoriyo (special grain), laddu, puri fried in ghee, kadhee anda variety of vegetables (shaak).Questioner: What does one get out of doing penance,fasting and aayambil (Jain practice of eating bland food justonce a day)?Dadashri: It purifies the body and the mind. At times, itcan improve the speech or sometimes even ruin it. If you askedsomeone to speak after he had dined well, on a full stomach hemay not even be able to. And on the other hand, if his stomachwas empty, he would show signs of anguish!Aayambil: A Scientific ProcessQuestioner: How old is the practice of aayambil? Doesit date back to the time of Lord Mahavir?Dadashri: Aayambil is a science. It goes back to thetime of Lord Rushabhdev. It is not for the purpose of attainingthe Atma (Self), but for the body’s benefit. It serves to keep thebody healthy. Anyone whose body has toxicity or who does notkeep well, should do aayambil. It should be done systematically.You should only eat one staple food, which is one staple grain,and nothing else. Aayambil is considered very practical andcorrect. ‘This’ is the only ‘chamber’ from the Lord Tirthankar’spalace that is still standing today. Everything else has collapsedinto ruins.Questioner: In the aayambil, the rituals they perform,theprayer beads they do and all that, is all of that considered right?Dadashri: There is no connection with aayambil andAptavani-4199200Aptavani-4those rituals. That is something completely different. Aayambilonly means that you should eat just one type of grain, only justonce a day, and keep reciting the Lord’s mantras that is all.You can still say that you have practiced aayambil if you justeat one type of grain just once a day, even if you do not chantthe Lord’s name. Even Muslims can do that. Just to sustainyourself with eating just one kind of grain, is an enormousphysical penance (tapa). It is the best way to rid the body ofall kinds of toxins. It was the Tirthankar Lords who made thisscientific discovery. That is why I tell all those who are Jain,that they are so fortunate to have retained this science. Eventoday people eat just one kind of grain and stay healthy. Manyskin diseases are cured with aayambil. It is beneficial forvitiligo as well.Questioner: Many people have been doing aayambil foryears and years. What is the benefit in that?Dadashri: Aayambil is only beneficial if it is practiced fora certain period of time. It is detrimental if it is prolonged overan extensive period of time. It will create deficiencies in vitaminsand other nutrients that the body requires. Everything needs tobe within normality.Applied Awareness While FastingQuestioner: What is it when people fast for three days,nine days, one month, three months?Dadashri: Fasting is a good thing, but it is for thosewho have eaten too much. Why should those unfortunate ones,whose food is rationed, have to fast? The Lord has not saidanything wrong when he said to fast. He said, ‘You may fast,but if at the end of your fasting you do not find the Atma, thenthe fasting was done in vain.’ If at the end of your fastingperiod, you do not have the awareness of the Self (Atma),then you will reap some benefits in the worldly life (sansar)and you will bind karma of merit. These people have beenfasting through countless lifetimes. The Lord has called itfasting without understanding. This is because all the fasts thatyou have done without the right awareness, have been done invain!! You are more likely to succeed in doing penance if yousit with someone who does penance. The Self never eats; it isonly the body that eats. You will only understand this after yourealize what the Self is, and unless you do, you will neverunderstand this.The Lord said, that if you do just one single fast with pureapplied awareness (upayog), you will accomplish your work.Since You have attained the knowledge of the Self, You will beable to fast with upayog (applied awareness) of the pure Selfand therefore, your fast will be done with pure appliedawareness (shuddha upayog). You have the ‘main’ thing (theSelf) in Your hands; the kite’s string is in Your hands. To stop ittaking a dive, is in Your hands. If you can manage a single fast,then try it and see for yourself. Experience the ‘taste’ of ityourself! On a Sunday. When you do not have to go anywhere,you can do it then. On that day, you should not sleep. Youcannot maintain awareness during sleep, now can you? This fastshould be done with pure applied awareness (shuddha upayog).During this time, if you read or sing spiritual songs (pado)throughout the day, there will be inner and outer purity. Or else,use Dada’s Five Agnas for support.If you spend the entire day in shuddha upayog in thisway, you will not even feel that you have fasted the whole day.You will only feel hungry, if you happen to slip away fromupayog (awareness of the Self). You will be aware of thehunger, but You will not suffer its pangs. If you suffer the hunger,it means that you have lost the upayog. But ‘to know’ thehunger, is upayog. Many people feel very good on the day oftheir fast. They feel comfortable experience (shata vedaniya).Therefore, everything depends upon the belief.Aptavani-4199200Aptavani-4those rituals. That is something completely different. Aayambilonly means that you should eat just one type of grain, only justonce a day, and keep reciting the Lord’s mantras that is all.You can still say that you have practiced aayambil if you justeat one type of grain just once a day, even if you do not chantthe Lord’s name. Even Muslims can do that. Just to sustainyourself with eating just one kind of grain, is an enormousphysical penance (tapa). It is the best way to rid the body ofall kinds of toxins. It was the Tirthankar Lords who made thisscientific discovery. That is why I tell all those who are Jain,that they are so fortunate to have retained this science. Eventoday people eat just one kind of grain and stay healthy. Manyskin diseases are cured with aayambil. It is beneficial forvitiligo as well.Questioner: Many people have been doing aayambil foryears and years. What is the benefit in that?Dadashri: Aayambil is only beneficial if it is practiced fora certain period of time. It is detrimental if it is prolonged overan extensive period of time. It will create deficiencies in vitaminsand other nutrients that the body requires. Everything needs tobe within normality.Applied Awareness While FastingQuestioner: What is it when people fast for three days,nine days, one month, three months?Dadashri: Fasting is a good thing, but it is for thosewho have eaten too much. Why should those unfortunate ones,whose food is rationed, have to fast? The Lord has not saidanything wrong when he said to fast. He said, ‘You may fast,but if at the end of your fasting you do not find the Atma, thenthe fasting was done in vain.’ If at the end of your fastingperiod, you do not have the awareness of the Self (Atma),then you will reap some benefits in the worldly life (sansar)and you will bind karma of merit. These people have beenfasting through countless lifetimes. The Lord has called itfasting without understanding. This is because all the fasts thatyou have done without the right awareness, have been done invain!! You are more likely to succeed in doing penance if yousit with someone who does penance. The Self never eats; it isonly the body that eats. You will only understand this after yourealize what the Self is, and unless you do, you will neverunderstand this.The Lord said, that if you do just one single fast with pureapplied awareness (upayog), you will accomplish your work.Since You have attained the knowledge of the Self, You will beable to fast with upayog (applied awareness) of the pure Selfand therefore, your fast will be done with pure appliedawareness (shuddha upayog). You have the ‘main’ thing (theSelf) in Your hands; the kite’s string is in Your hands. To stop ittaking a dive, is in Your hands. If you can manage a single fast,then try it and see for yourself. Experience the ‘taste’ of ityourself! On a Sunday. When you do not have to go anywhere,you can do it then. On that day, you should not sleep. Youcannot maintain awareness during sleep, now can you? This fastshould be done with pure applied awareness (shuddha upayog).During this time, if you read or sing spiritual songs (pado)throughout the day, there will be inner and outer purity. Or else,use Dada’s Five Agnas for support.If you spend the entire day in shuddha upayog in thisway, you will not even feel that you have fasted the whole day.You will only feel hungry, if you happen to slip away fromupayog (awareness of the Self). You will be aware of thehunger, but You will not suffer its pangs. If you suffer the hunger,it means that you have lost the upayog. But ‘to know’ thehunger, is upayog. Many people feel very good on the day oftheir fast. They feel comfortable experience (shata vedaniya).Therefore, everything depends upon the belief.Aptavani-4201202Aptavani-4Questioner: Dada, there is no upayog anywhere, so noone talks about it.Dadashri: There is no upayog left anywhere. That is whyno one is talking about upayog. People have failed to useupayog and that is why it has been set aside. Otherwise, is it noteasy to understand upayog when it is explained to you?Questioner: It is easy when someone explains it.Dadashri: The Lord has said that if you turn somethingthat is inauspicious (ashubha), into something auspicious(shubha), do it with applied awareness (upayog). And onceyou enter shuddha (pure), then it is shuddha upayog (pureapplied awakened awareness), which means that You are nowParmatma (the Absolute Self). That is why You have been toldto maintain upayog. Really, you can do just about everything,but it does not mean anything. Nevertheless, you will benefit insome way, your efforts will not go to waste. Not even for aminute have I ever forsaken shuddha upayog (pure appliedawakened awareness) any given day. I am constantly in pureawareness. I have no use for shubha upayog. ‘Shuddha upayogi ne samatadhari, gnan dhyan manohari,Karma kalank ko dur nivari, jiva vare shivnari’‘The one with shuddha upayog is poised in the SelfHis knowledge and meditation captivates the mindAloof he remains from the binding of karma,Becomes he the absolute (Shiva)’Questioner: What if our mahatmas who have attainedSelf-realization practice fasting?Dadashri: It will help them a lot. A single fast will givethem a whole year’s benefit, but they must maintain a lot ofawakened awareness (jagruti).The Lord has said that if a person fasted for just one daywith shuddha upayog (pure applied awareness) it will generatean entire year’s worth of shuddha upayog for him. For fasting,you have to ‘lock up’ (no eating or drinking) on the night before.Before going to bed, you have to make a firm decision that youare going to fast with pure awareness the following day. Aftergiving you my agna (special directive), you will maintain theawareness of, ‘I am pure Soul’ and you will also be able toremain in the Five Agnas. In this way, if you can, put a lock onyour mouth for thirty-six hours, you will attain awareness for awhole year. And the Lord has also said that if you have notattained Gnan and you fast, you will reap the benefit of stayinghungry; if you have a fever, you will feel better. So many peoplefast, just to get on a procession carriage (celebrating the effortand courage of those who have fasted).For crying out loud! Why are you bothering to fast whenall your ribs are showing? It is only good for someone who isfat. The fasting that the Lord spoke of is not wrong. In fact, itis very beautiful, but who was it meant for? If you fast with theawareness as the Self that I have given You, You will indeedreap the benefits that the Lord has spoken of.Fasting was recommended for the bygone people whoenjoyed pure fresh milk in the morning and pure ghee (clarifiedbutter) at mealtimes. Their grain was not rationed, their ghee wasample and everything they ate was unadulterated, unlike today’sfood. The wretched mortals today are already starving, so whywould they want to fast? Is there even any strength in them? Youcan even see their ribs! It is okay to do two or three fasts.Dada’s Way of FastingQuestioner: How many times did you fast in order tobecome a Gnani?Dadashri: To tell the truth, I have not fasted even once.I am always doing unodari tapa (the penance of eating less thanAptavani-4201202Aptavani-4Questioner: Dada, there is no upayog anywhere, so noone talks about it.Dadashri: There is no upayog left anywhere. That is whyno one is talking about upayog. People have failed to useupayog and that is why it has been set aside. Otherwise, is it noteasy to understand upayog when it is explained to you?Questioner: It is easy when someone explains it.Dadashri: The Lord has said that if you turn somethingthat is inauspicious (ashubha), into something auspicious(shubha), do it with applied awareness (upayog). And onceyou enter shuddha (pure), then it is shuddha upayog (pureapplied awakened awareness), which means that You are nowParmatma (the Absolute Self). That is why You have been toldto maintain upayog. Really, you can do just about everything,but it does not mean anything. Nevertheless, you will benefit insome way, your efforts will not go to waste. Not even for aminute have I ever forsaken shuddha upayog (pure appliedawakened awareness) any given day. I am constantly in pureawareness. I have no use for shubha upayog. ‘Shuddha upayogi ne samatadhari, gnan dhyan manohari,Karma kalank ko dur nivari, jiva vare shivnari’‘The one with shuddha upayog is poised in the SelfHis knowledge and meditation captivates the mindAloof he remains from the binding of karma,Becomes he the absolute (Shiva)’Questioner: What if our mahatmas who have attainedSelf-realization practice fasting?Dadashri: It will help them a lot. A single fast will givethem a whole year’s benefit, but they must maintain a lot ofawakened awareness (jagruti).The Lord has said that if a person fasted for just one daywith shuddha upayog (pure applied awareness) it will generatean entire year’s worth of shuddha upayog for him. For fasting,you have to ‘lock up’ (no eating or drinking) on the night before.Before going to bed, you have to make a firm decision that youare going to fast with pure awareness the following day. Aftergiving you my agna (special directive), you will maintain theawareness of, ‘I am pure Soul’ and you will also be able toremain in the Five Agnas. In this way, if you can, put a lock onyour mouth for thirty-six hours, you will attain awareness for awhole year. And the Lord has also said that if you have notattained Gnan and you fast, you will reap the benefit of stayinghungry; if you have a fever, you will feel better. So many peoplefast, just to get on a procession carriage (celebrating the effortand courage of those who have fasted).For crying out loud! Why are you bothering to fast whenall your ribs are showing? It is only good for someone who isfat. The fasting that the Lord spoke of is not wrong. In fact, itis very beautiful, but who was it meant for? If you fast with theawareness as the Self that I have given You, You will indeedreap the benefits that the Lord has spoken of.Fasting was recommended for the bygone people whoenjoyed pure fresh milk in the morning and pure ghee (clarifiedbutter) at mealtimes. Their grain was not rationed, their ghee wasample and everything they ate was unadulterated, unlike today’sfood. The wretched mortals today are already starving, so whywould they want to fast? Is there even any strength in them? Youcan even see their ribs! It is okay to do two or three fasts.Dada’s Way of FastingQuestioner: How many times did you fast in order tobecome a Gnani?Dadashri: To tell the truth, I have not fasted even once.I am always doing unodari tapa (the penance of eating less thanAptavani-4203204Aptavani-4full satisfaction). This is something I have discovered. Constantunodari is like fasting all the time. If you went about trying topractice all the twelve tapa, when would it all ever end?Unodari for AwarenessQuestioner: What if I cannot fast in order to makeprogress on the path of moksha? Is there anything else I cando?Dadashri: Do unodari (consuming less than what thestomach demands).Questioner: What does unodari mean?Dadashri: If you eat four rotlis (flat unleavened wheatbread), then first you start with eating three, and then two. Thatis called unodari. This ‘pot’ (stomach) is not meant to be filledto the brim!Questioner: If we do not eat enough, then how are wesupposed to make an effort to practice religion?Dadashri: Unodari means that, if you are hungry, thenyou should eat, you are not asked to practice religion on anempty stomach. With unodari, you are less likely to doze off.Unodari is one of the best things you can do. Divide your mealinto four parts. Allow one part for rotli and vegetables, one partfor water and keep one part vacant for air to move around in.If you do not, then you will lose your awareness (jagruti) forsure. Real unodari is where awareness (jagruti) never fails you.You should fast if you have overeaten or you feel sickly.However fasting is not mandatory.Fasting, and Yet Kashays?Questioner: On the day I fast, the moment I wake up,I feel it would be good if someone were to do my work for me.Dadashri: It would be better if you did not do penance(tapa) than to have such beggarly thoughts. Lord does not tellyou to become dependent instead of independent.Questioner: On the day I am fasting, if I start feeling likeeating something, I have to remind myself that it is my fast day,but I still make sure to set aside some of my favorite food sothat I can eat it the following day. Is that wrong to do?Dadashri: The person who eats will be better off thanthat. This is because the person who fasts is bound, by hiswrong deed (dosh). Whereas the person who does not fast;does not get bound. He eats and forgets about it. On the otherhand, someone who despite not eating, is fixating, ‘I will eattomorrow’, and so he becomes bound. When this deceptioneventually comes into fruition, he will find himself in the primalform of a four-legged beast! Isn’t that the whole lunacy ofreligion? My goodness! This is a mighty responsibility that youhave taken on. ‘I will eat it tomorrow’ you will think to yourselfat night, as you think about your pantry, and your focus (dhyan)will be, ‘It is in the pantry so I will get to eat it tomorrow.’ Nowis there anything that this dhyan is not capable of? It can maketwo legs into four legs (take one from human to animal life-form). If you keep falling over with two legs, then you will havefour; at least you will not keep tripping over then!Here they are all fasting, and yet along with it they dokashay (anger, pride, deceit and greed). If you want to dokashay, then do not fast, and if you want to fast then do not dokashay. Your fast should be void of artadhyan (adverse internalmeditation that hurts the self) or raudradhyan (adverse internalmeditation that hurts the self and others). However, on dayswhere a person is not fasting, if he does not get to eat until twoin the afternoon, he creates havoc. The ‘top’ (Dada’s analogyfor people- bhammardo—Dadashri uses this analogy: the stringwound around it represents causes or charging of karma in pastlife. And the spinning, as the string unwinds, represents the effectAptavani-4203204Aptavani-4full satisfaction). This is something I have discovered. Constantunodari is like fasting all the time. If you went about trying topractice all the twelve tapa, when would it all ever end?Unodari for AwarenessQuestioner: What if I cannot fast in order to makeprogress on the path of moksha? Is there anything else I cando?Dadashri: Do unodari (consuming less than what thestomach demands).Questioner: What does unodari mean?Dadashri: If you eat four rotlis (flat unleavened wheatbread), then first you start with eating three, and then two. Thatis called unodari. This ‘pot’ (stomach) is not meant to be filledto the brim!Questioner: If we do not eat enough, then how are wesupposed to make an effort to practice religion?Dadashri: Unodari means that, if you are hungry, thenyou should eat, you are not asked to practice religion on anempty stomach. With unodari, you are less likely to doze off.Unodari is one of the best things you can do. Divide your mealinto four parts. Allow one part for rotli and vegetables, one partfor water and keep one part vacant for air to move around in.If you do not, then you will lose your awareness (jagruti) forsure. Real unodari is where awareness (jagruti) never fails you.You should fast if you have overeaten or you feel sickly.However fasting is not mandatory.Fasting, and Yet Kashays?Questioner: On the day I fast, the moment I wake up,I feel it would be good if someone were to do my work for me.Dadashri: It would be better if you did not do penance(tapa) than to have such beggarly thoughts. Lord does not tellyou to become dependent instead of independent.Questioner: On the day I am fasting, if I start feeling likeeating something, I have to remind myself that it is my fast day,but I still make sure to set aside some of my favorite food sothat I can eat it the following day. Is that wrong to do?Dadashri: The person who eats will be better off thanthat. This is because the person who fasts is bound, by hiswrong deed (dosh). Whereas the person who does not fast;does not get bound. He eats and forgets about it. On the otherhand, someone who despite not eating, is fixating, ‘I will eattomorrow’, and so he becomes bound. When this deceptioneventually comes into fruition, he will find himself in the primalform of a four-legged beast! Isn’t that the whole lunacy ofreligion? My goodness! This is a mighty responsibility that youhave taken on. ‘I will eat it tomorrow’ you will think to yourselfat night, as you think about your pantry, and your focus (dhyan)will be, ‘It is in the pantry so I will get to eat it tomorrow.’ Nowis there anything that this dhyan is not capable of? It can maketwo legs into four legs (take one from human to animal life-form). If you keep falling over with two legs, then you will havefour; at least you will not keep tripping over then!Here they are all fasting, and yet along with it they dokashay (anger, pride, deceit and greed). If you want to dokashay, then do not fast, and if you want to fast then do not dokashay. Your fast should be void of artadhyan (adverse internalmeditation that hurts the self) or raudradhyan (adverse internalmeditation that hurts the self and others). However, on dayswhere a person is not fasting, if he does not get to eat until twoin the afternoon, he creates havoc. The ‘top’ (Dada’s analogyfor people- bhammardo—Dadashri uses this analogy: the stringwound around it represents causes or charging of karma in pastlife. And the spinning, as the string unwinds, represents the effectAptavani-4205206Aptavani-4or the discharge of those karmas in the present life) would gohaywire. ‘What sort of town is this, where there are norestaurants?!’ he would yell.This presents the right occasion for him to exercisecaution. For goodness sakes! Just do the fast the vitarags havetold you to do, so that your mind does not go bouncing aroundand bothering you. And when it comes to a wedding feast,where there are all kinds of good food to eat, a person will say,“I am fasting today”. He just says that and stands around! Thatis what has become of them all!! People have no clue aboutwhen they should fast. When you do not have anything to eat,or you do not get what you like to eat, then do penance (tapa).Food will present itself to you naturally, when the time is right.And when you do not get any food, you should simply acceptthe fact that it might not be possible on that day, and that wouldmean that it is a day to fast. A hungry businessman, on the otherhand, would go into a ‘Laxmi Lodge’ (wayside cafe), climbupstairs and comment, ‘This place is filthy and they all lookdirty.’ He comes back down and does kashay.Everything is all there and waiting for you. All the differentfoods and spices; such an abundance and array that peoplecould easily tire of. And yet why is it that you do not haveaccess to it and it does not appear in front of you? It is becauseyou have brought so many obstacles (antaray) with you. It ispossible for one to get a meal that consists of thirty-two differentdishes, but people have brought so many obstacles with themthat they cannot even get khichadee (staple rice and lentilmixture) with pure ghee.The Lord tells us that we should not to do any kashay.It would be better not to do any penance at all rather than doingit with kashay. Kashays carry a greater value. The lossesincurred from kashay far outweigh the benefits of doing penance(tapa). The religion (dharma) of the Vitarag places emphasison benefit over loss (labha-alabha). This means that if out ofa hundred percent profit, you have a loss of ninety-eight percent,you should conduct your business with the understanding thatyou have the net gain of two percent. With kashays, everythingis destroyed. Kashay devours everything. How does it devourit? It is like a blind man who weaves a rope while on the otherend, a calf chews on it. The blind man thinks that the rope isgetting longer, but all along the calf is chewing it up. All this isthe fruit of deeds done in ignorance.It is possible to move ahead once you have understoodthis. You have been doing the same thing over and overthroughout countless lifetimes. People have done chanting (japa)and penance (tapa), except that it was done without permission(agna). They did it with their own viewpoint (mata), and withswachhand (self-guided). If you have a guru who is Self-realized; with the right vision, then you should do it according tohis agna. The guru must be samkiti (Self-realized; with rightvision); a mithyatvi (with deluded vision) guru will not do. Aguru with a deluded vision will not be able to rid you of yourdeluded vision; nevertheless, you can still offer him your services(seva) if required. But to get ahead, you do need a guru that hasrealized the Self (Atma). If you make a guru of someone whohas realized the Atma, you will succeed in getting your workdone. Otherwise, if you begin a relationship with a mithyatviguru, not only will it prevent your progress, but it will lead youastray and you never know where you might end up stranded.Questioner: What is a ‘fast done with awareness’?Dadashri: If your fasting is done with the guidance ofsomeone who has awareness (Self-realized; jagrut), then itwould mean that it is done with awareness. At this moment, I amthe person with full awareness, and if you fast according to mywords, then it would be regarded as a fast with awareness.Questioner: Didn’t Christ and Buddha also fast to attainenlightenment?Aptavani-4205206Aptavani-4or the discharge of those karmas in the present life) would gohaywire. ‘What sort of town is this, where there are norestaurants?!’ he would yell.This presents the right occasion for him to exercisecaution. For goodness sakes! Just do the fast the vitarags havetold you to do, so that your mind does not go bouncing aroundand bothering you. And when it comes to a wedding feast,where there are all kinds of good food to eat, a person will say,“I am fasting today”. He just says that and stands around! Thatis what has become of them all!! People have no clue aboutwhen they should fast. When you do not have anything to eat,or you do not get what you like to eat, then do penance (tapa).Food will present itself to you naturally, when the time is right.And when you do not get any food, you should simply acceptthe fact that it might not be possible on that day, and that wouldmean that it is a day to fast. A hungry businessman, on the otherhand, would go into a ‘Laxmi Lodge’ (wayside cafe), climbupstairs and comment, ‘This place is filthy and they all lookdirty.’ He comes back down and does kashay.Everything is all there and waiting for you. All the differentfoods and spices; such an abundance and array that peoplecould easily tire of. And yet why is it that you do not haveaccess to it and it does not appear in front of you? It is becauseyou have brought so many obstacles (antaray) with you. It ispossible for one to get a meal that consists of thirty-two differentdishes, but people have brought so many obstacles with themthat they cannot even get khichadee (staple rice and lentilmixture) with pure ghee.The Lord tells us that we should not to do any kashay.It would be better not to do any penance at all rather than doingit with kashay. Kashays carry a greater value. The lossesincurred from kashay far outweigh the benefits of doing penance(tapa). The religion (dharma) of the Vitarag places emphasison benefit over loss (labha-alabha). This means that if out ofa hundred percent profit, you have a loss of ninety-eight percent,you should conduct your business with the understanding thatyou have the net gain of two percent. With kashays, everythingis destroyed. Kashay devours everything. How does it devourit? It is like a blind man who weaves a rope while on the otherend, a calf chews on it. The blind man thinks that the rope isgetting longer, but all along the calf is chewing it up. All this isthe fruit of deeds done in ignorance.It is possible to move ahead once you have understoodthis. You have been doing the same thing over and overthroughout countless lifetimes. People have done chanting (japa)and penance (tapa), except that it was done without permission(agna). They did it with their own viewpoint (mata), and withswachhand (self-guided). If you have a guru who is Self-realized; with the right vision, then you should do it according tohis agna. The guru must be samkiti (Self-realized; with rightvision); a mithyatvi (with deluded vision) guru will not do. Aguru with a deluded vision will not be able to rid you of yourdeluded vision; nevertheless, you can still offer him your services(seva) if required. But to get ahead, you do need a guru that hasrealized the Self (Atma). If you make a guru of someone whohas realized the Atma, you will succeed in getting your workdone. Otherwise, if you begin a relationship with a mithyatviguru, not only will it prevent your progress, but it will lead youastray and you never know where you might end up stranded.Questioner: What is a ‘fast done with awareness’?Dadashri: If your fasting is done with the guidance ofsomeone who has awareness (Self-realized; jagrut), then itwould mean that it is done with awareness. At this moment, I amthe person with full awareness, and if you fast according to mywords, then it would be regarded as a fast with awareness.Questioner: Didn’t Christ and Buddha also fast to attainenlightenment?Aptavani-4207208Aptavani-4Dadashri: It was not just fasting. They did so many otherthings.Food in itself is an intoxicant. Regardless of the kind offood it is, it is intoxicating and people take pleasure in itsintoxication. Through fasting, the intoxication is reduced. But iffasting does not support one’s awareness, then it would be futile.All it does is keep the body healthy, and perhaps clears the minda little, and that is about it. But later on, the person may not beable to stay awake so he falls asleep. Sooner or later he willhave to eat, will he not? However, once you are fully aware(jagrut) it does not matter whether you eat and drink. Once his‘eyes are opened’ eating and drinking will not get in the way.You have to take in whatever food that suits you. If the ‘food’of penance appeals to you, then you should take it, and if it doesnot appeal to you, then don’t. Even penance (tapa) is food.Nevertheless, if you have indigestion, then you should fast.There is no connection between God and food. Why would theAtma (Self) need to fast? People fast and say that they aredoing it for their Atma. And the Atma says, how are youobliging me by doing this? So if you feel like undertaking thepenance, then you should go ahead with it.Is There Liberation Through Fasting?Every day you keep feeding this body, so if you did notgive it anything to eat for just a day, it would stay clean, yourmind would stay well and all in all, everything would be healthy;therefore, fasting is not detrimental. But all this is really notnecessary for those who wish to go to moksha. Fasting doesplay a helpful role, but one should not become too obsessedwith it. If you want to attain moksha, then all you need to knowis: ‘Am I bound or not?’, ‘How was this bondage created?’,and ‘How can I break free from this bondage?’ You shouldknow the answers to these.The way to break the bondage is to ask someone whohimself is free (mukta): ‘Sir, if you have become free then I willsit with you; otherwise why would I want to waste my time if Ido not get anything out of it?’ I am in bondage and if you aretoo, then how can we see eye to eye? Haven’t you foundanyone who has told you that he has become free?Questioner: Haven’t I found your satsang?Dadashri: Very well then, ‘we’ are telling you that ‘we’have become free. So if you want liberation, then come here.There is no fee or anything else, and besides, this is the Lord’spath where there is no such thing as fees. The Gnani Purushhas no beggarly desire for money, for fame, for disciples, forsexuality or anything in this world. Hence! He attains the stateof Gnani Purush.‘Do It’ – But Only Your Faith Will Bring the FruitsQuestioner: The astrologer tells me that the planets Rahuand Ketu are creating obstacles for me, and for that I need tofast on Wednesdays.Dadashri: Then fast on Wednesday. Is there any harm init? If you go to an astrologer, then you have to fast on aWednesday, or else do not go there. Because you went toconsult the astrologer, it created a doubt in your mind, right? Sothen you should fast on Wednesdays. Besides, it will do yourhealth some good.Questioner: It is a tradition in our house to fast onMondays.Dadashri: Then do it. Do you have faith in it or not?Questioner: Of course, I have faith in it.Dadashri: Whatever you do, do it with faith, but if yourfaith falters, then do not carry on with it. Say you got on a train,if you have a niggling feeling like: ‘Yesterday the train wasAptavani-4207208Aptavani-4Dadashri: It was not just fasting. They did so many otherthings.Food in itself is an intoxicant. Regardless of the kind offood it is, it is intoxicating and people take pleasure in itsintoxication. Through fasting, the intoxication is reduced. But iffasting does not support one’s awareness, then it would be futile.All it does is keep the body healthy, and perhaps clears the minda little, and that is about it. But later on, the person may not beable to stay awake so he falls asleep. Sooner or later he willhave to eat, will he not? However, once you are fully aware(jagrut) it does not matter whether you eat and drink. Once his‘eyes are opened’ eating and drinking will not get in the way.You have to take in whatever food that suits you. If the ‘food’of penance appeals to you, then you should take it, and if it doesnot appeal to you, then don’t. Even penance (tapa) is food.Nevertheless, if you have indigestion, then you should fast.There is no connection between God and food. Why would theAtma (Self) need to fast? People fast and say that they aredoing it for their Atma. And the Atma says, how are youobliging me by doing this? So if you feel like undertaking thepenance, then you should go ahead with it.Is There Liberation Through Fasting?Every day you keep feeding this body, so if you did notgive it anything to eat for just a day, it would stay clean, yourmind would stay well and all in all, everything would be healthy;therefore, fasting is not detrimental. But all this is really notnecessary for those who wish to go to moksha. Fasting doesplay a helpful role, but one should not become too obsessedwith it. If you want to attain moksha, then all you need to knowis: ‘Am I bound or not?’, ‘How was this bondage created?’,and ‘How can I break free from this bondage?’ You shouldknow the answers to these.The way to break the bondage is to ask someone whohimself is free (mukta): ‘Sir, if you have become free then I willsit with you; otherwise why would I want to waste my time if Ido not get anything out of it?’ I am in bondage and if you aretoo, then how can we see eye to eye? Haven’t you foundanyone who has told you that he has become free?Questioner: Haven’t I found your satsang?Dadashri: Very well then, ‘we’ are telling you that ‘we’have become free. So if you want liberation, then come here.There is no fee or anything else, and besides, this is the Lord’spath where there is no such thing as fees. The Gnani Purushhas no beggarly desire for money, for fame, for disciples, forsexuality or anything in this world. Hence! He attains the stateof Gnani Purush.‘Do It’ – But Only Your Faith Will Bring the FruitsQuestioner: The astrologer tells me that the planets Rahuand Ketu are creating obstacles for me, and for that I need tofast on Wednesdays.Dadashri: Then fast on Wednesday. Is there any harm init? If you go to an astrologer, then you have to fast on aWednesday, or else do not go there. Because you went toconsult the astrologer, it created a doubt in your mind, right? Sothen you should fast on Wednesdays. Besides, it will do yourhealth some good.Questioner: It is a tradition in our house to fast onMondays.Dadashri: Then do it. Do you have faith in it or not?Questioner: Of course, I have faith in it.Dadashri: Whatever you do, do it with faith, but if yourfaith falters, then do not carry on with it. Say you got on a train,if you have a niggling feeling like: ‘Yesterday the train wasAptavani-4209210Aptavani-4derailed, what if it happens again today?’ At that very moment,you should get off. What good is it if you have no faith? Doanything, as long as you have faith in it, and if you do not havefaith, then stop doing it.Faith should be such that, even if you are beaten orinsulted, it will not be shaken, no matter what. This is howsteadfast your faith should be.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(22)Worldly ReligionsWhich Religion Is for Moksha?Questioner: Can any seeker reach moksha if hepractices religion properly?Dadashri: A seeker is partial (pakshapati), and who doyou think God is partial to? Surely He must be impartial(nishpakshapati), now wouldn’t He be?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Those involved in partiality (paksha) willnever attain liberation (moksha). Yes, they may receive worldlyhappiness. There is no moksha for those who are in the‘standard’ (relative worldly religions). If you come ‘out ofstandard’ then you can attain moksha. Here, we are ‘out ofstandard’. Everyone comes here. Muslims, Jains and Vaishnavs,they all come here.All these different religions – the Jain religion, Vaishnavreligion, Shiva religion, Muslim religion – are all ‘relative’religions. Not one of them is a ‘real’ religion. A ‘relative’ religionmeans it will help you develop. However, it will not help you‘develop fully’. And moksha is only for those who are ‘fullydeveloped’ (known the Self). One can attain moksha when,despite having a body, the Atma (Self) within remains separate.The Vitarag speech and nothing else, is the only solutionfor moksha. Any other speech contains attachment (raag; my-speech). Vitarag speech means the speech that does not hurtAptavani-4209210Aptavani-4derailed, what if it happens again today?’ At that very moment,you should get off. What good is it if you have no faith? Doanything, as long as you have faith in it, and if you do not havefaith, then stop doing it.Faith should be such that, even if you are beaten orinsulted, it will not be shaken, no matter what. This is howsteadfast your faith should be.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(22)Worldly ReligionsWhich Religion Is for Moksha?Questioner: Can any seeker reach moksha if hepractices religion properly?Dadashri: A seeker is partial (pakshapati), and who doyou think God is partial to? Surely He must be impartial(nishpakshapati), now wouldn’t He be?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Those involved in partiality (paksha) willnever attain liberation (moksha). Yes, they may receive worldlyhappiness. There is no moksha for those who are in the‘standard’ (relative worldly religions). If you come ‘out ofstandard’ then you can attain moksha. Here, we are ‘out ofstandard’. Everyone comes here. Muslims, Jains and Vaishnavs,they all come here.All these different religions – the Jain religion, Vaishnavreligion, Shiva religion, Muslim religion – are all ‘relative’religions. Not one of them is a ‘real’ religion. A ‘relative’ religionmeans it will help you develop. However, it will not help you‘develop fully’. And moksha is only for those who are ‘fullydeveloped’ (known the Self). One can attain moksha when,despite having a body, the Atma (Self) within remains separate.The Vitarag speech and nothing else, is the only solutionfor moksha. Any other speech contains attachment (raag; my-speech). Vitarag speech means the speech that does not hurtAptavani-4211212Aptavani-4anyone’s viewpoint (syadvaad). It does not violate the foundationof any living being. Even if a butcher came along; he would bein his own dharma (carrying out his duty as a butcher). In theVitarag’s eyes, no one ever steps out of the bounds of hisdharma (role in life), not even for a moment. No one can liveeven for a moment without dharma, but despite this, adharma(kashay) creeps in. An atheist may not believe in God, he maynot believe in religion, but he believes in ethics, and ethics is thegreatest dharma. Without ethics, there is no religion (dharma).Ethics is the foundation of a religion. Even though one does notbelieve in God, he is in religion (dharma) if he is being ethical.No one is without religion. There is Atma (Self), and so therehas to be religion. Every person has a religion! Yes, and alongwith it there is also irreligion (adharma).Religion: Partial or ImpartialEach religious sect asserts its own matagraha (obstinacyof viewpoint) and it is deep in kadagraha (entrenched in itsviewpoint). They all believe that they can attain moksha throughtheir own faith. However, they are all uncompromising andopinionated. Those who are insistent (aagrahi) will never attainmoksha. Only the non-insistent (niragrahi) will attain moksha.People immersed in sects will not attain anything from readingthe scriptures of that sect. When one extracts the essence ofevery sect, reads every scripture of every religion; then one isconsidered to have attained religion. What is religion (dharma)?You will not understand that until you have grasped the essenceof religion. Otherwise, all who are trapped within any sect aresheep, and whoever comes out of it, are lions. The Lord saysthat my opinion is vitarag (absolutely devoid of attachment andabhorrence) and yours is full of attachment (raag) andabhorrence (dwesh).All the twenty-four Tirthankars had vitarag opinion.Those who are involved in partiality (sects) do not have vitaragopinion. After the Lord had left, partiality crept in and thesesects and divisions began to emerge. Not only did the path tomoksha not remain true, but relative religion did not remain trueeither. True religion is to practice and remain within the Lord’sAgnas. Practice whatever Agna you can, even two, but thereshould not be any falseness in it. Here you have people whokeep glancing at their watches while they do introspectivemeditation (samayik)! The Lord says do samayik if you can,do a few if you cannot do many, but all the same, do it right andproperly. The Lord’s Agna will never get old no matter if youpractice it a million times. But because a person does notunderstand it, he fails to follow it properly. It is not his fault. Youcan only practice dharmadhyan (virtuous meditation) of theVitarag Lord provided that you do not get caught up with anykind of sectarianism. Dharmadhyan disappears when onebecomes involved in any kind of partiality. To be partial meansto adhere to a particular viewpoint. There will be no differencesof opinions (matbhed) if You stay in the center, and that is whenYou will attain moksha. If You put yourself at any ‘degree’,there will always be ‘ours’ and ‘yours’, and as long as you staythere, you cannot attain moksha.Business Tendencies Even in ReligionAll religions that exist in the worldly life (sansar), aretermed as business, because they carry some sort of subtledesire. You will not attain the Self, if there is a trace of subtledesire. If one himself is drowning, how can he save you fromdrowning too? Without Gnan, those desires will not leave.Desire itself is a burning flame. When it arises, it ignites itself, sothen it has to be extinguished. Today’s people are trying to putit out with ‘petrol’! If you leave home after a nice and satisfyingmeal, are you likely to look at anyone’s shop for food?Questioner: No.Dadashri: In the same way, the Gnani Purush gives youAptavani-4211212Aptavani-4anyone’s viewpoint (syadvaad). It does not violate the foundationof any living being. Even if a butcher came along; he would bein his own dharma (carrying out his duty as a butcher). In theVitarag’s eyes, no one ever steps out of the bounds of hisdharma (role in life), not even for a moment. No one can liveeven for a moment without dharma, but despite this, adharma(kashay) creeps in. An atheist may not believe in God, he maynot believe in religion, but he believes in ethics, and ethics is thegreatest dharma. Without ethics, there is no religion (dharma).Ethics is the foundation of a religion. Even though one does notbelieve in God, he is in religion (dharma) if he is being ethical.No one is without religion. There is Atma (Self), and so therehas to be religion. Every person has a religion! Yes, and alongwith it there is also irreligion (adharma).Religion: Partial or ImpartialEach religious sect asserts its own matagraha (obstinacyof viewpoint) and it is deep in kadagraha (entrenched in itsviewpoint). They all believe that they can attain moksha throughtheir own faith. However, they are all uncompromising andopinionated. Those who are insistent (aagrahi) will never attainmoksha. Only the non-insistent (niragrahi) will attain moksha.People immersed in sects will not attain anything from readingthe scriptures of that sect. When one extracts the essence ofevery sect, reads every scripture of every religion; then one isconsidered to have attained religion. What is religion (dharma)?You will not understand that until you have grasped the essenceof religion. Otherwise, all who are trapped within any sect aresheep, and whoever comes out of it, are lions. The Lord saysthat my opinion is vitarag (absolutely devoid of attachment andabhorrence) and yours is full of attachment (raag) andabhorrence (dwesh).All the twenty-four Tirthankars had vitarag opinion.Those who are involved in partiality (sects) do not have vitaragopinion. After the Lord had left, partiality crept in and thesesects and divisions began to emerge. Not only did the path tomoksha not remain true, but relative religion did not remain trueeither. True religion is to practice and remain within the Lord’sAgnas. Practice whatever Agna you can, even two, but thereshould not be any falseness in it. Here you have people whokeep glancing at their watches while they do introspectivemeditation (samayik)! The Lord says do samayik if you can,do a few if you cannot do many, but all the same, do it right andproperly. The Lord’s Agna will never get old no matter if youpractice it a million times. But because a person does notunderstand it, he fails to follow it properly. It is not his fault. Youcan only practice dharmadhyan (virtuous meditation) of theVitarag Lord provided that you do not get caught up with anykind of sectarianism. Dharmadhyan disappears when onebecomes involved in any kind of partiality. To be partial meansto adhere to a particular viewpoint. There will be no differencesof opinions (matbhed) if You stay in the center, and that is whenYou will attain moksha. If You put yourself at any ‘degree’,there will always be ‘ours’ and ‘yours’, and as long as you staythere, you cannot attain moksha.Business Tendencies Even in ReligionAll religions that exist in the worldly life (sansar), aretermed as business, because they carry some sort of subtledesire. You will not attain the Self, if there is a trace of subtledesire. If one himself is drowning, how can he save you fromdrowning too? Without Gnan, those desires will not leave.Desire itself is a burning flame. When it arises, it ignites itself, sothen it has to be extinguished. Today’s people are trying to putit out with ‘petrol’! If you leave home after a nice and satisfyingmeal, are you likely to look at anyone’s shop for food?Questioner: No.Dadashri: In the same way, the Gnani Purush gives youAptavani-4213214Aptavani-4absolute contentment (trupti) from within, so that you do notexperience external desires.Questioner: What will become of those who go aroundpillaging?Dadashri: Those who are being robbed are reallymaking an ‘earning’. Being robbed in the ‘relative’ would beconsidered as an earning in the ‘real’.Questioner: What is maha-mohaniya (greatly deluding)karma?Dadashri: Any misuse in matters of religion is maha-mohaniya karma, and such a karma will bind terrible lifetimesto come. Any money-related business in religion, is notconsidered so bad, but if there is immorality, then one will bindhorrendous karma. Misuse in worldly matters is called deluding(mohaniya) karma, and misuse in matters of religion is calledmaha-mohaniya (greatly deluding) karma.…Therefore a Return Ticket to a Lower Life-Form!In the worldly religion, if you say to the guru, ‘Sir, do thisfor me,’ he will be well pleased. That is perfectly fine. Becausehow can one live without the ego? But money and sexualityshould never enter into religion. If I accepted money, then itwould mean that people are beggars and so am I. Then whatwould be the difference between a Gnani Purush and otherpeople? Therefore, the Gnani Purush does not have anybeggarly desire for anything. He desires nothing. I do not haveany desire for respect, any desire for money, any desire for sex,any desire for fame or any desire for disciples – No desire ofany kind. Wherever there is even a trace of desire, Bhagwan(God) and bhakta (devotee) remain separate. And in theabsence of desire, it means that Bhagwan and devotee(bhakta) have become one. Not everyone quarrels in religion;however, the ones that do, are the ones who hold a ‘returnticket’ (to lower life-form). To quarrel in the worldly life, is notof great consequence, but quarreling in the religion is the workof those who possess a ‘return ticket’.Questioner: What do you mean by ‘return ticket’?Dadashri: It means that one has come into the humanform from the animal life-form with a ‘return ticket’, so that iswhere one will be going back to. In religion (dharma) thereshould not be any dispute such as our religion is Islam and oursis Hindu. No one should interfere with religion. Only he that hascome with a return ticket will interfere. Having contempt for anyreligion is to have disputes with every religion. Straightforwardpeople would not do such a thing. There are very few peoplewho are that way inclined; with civility.Only the Gnani Can Make One Realize theAtmaWould the Vitarag’s speech ever be wrong? Does itsound like a mother-in-law’s and daughter-in-law’s speech?One has developed a bad habit for bathing and that is why onerubs mud on oneself. Unless his bad habit goes away, he will notstop rubbing the mud. Instead, know God; know the Atma(Self). He who has known the Self, knows everything. And theone who has not known the Self, should just go to a jungle andlet out a loud cry so that he gets to cry to his heart’s content.No one here gets to cry to his heart’s content. In the path of theVitarag, each and every word is completely replete with bliss(sukh). Has Dada made anyone renounce anything here? Hehas not given any pacchakhaan (pratyakhyan; vow not torepeat mistakes) nor has he made anyone renounce anything.Just look at how everyone is experiencing such happinesswithout having to do anything! And it is the kind that You willnever run short of. You have been given light that will never godown. Infinite light!Aptavani-4213214Aptavani-4absolute contentment (trupti) from within, so that you do notexperience external desires.Questioner: What will become of those who go aroundpillaging?Dadashri: Those who are being robbed are reallymaking an ‘earning’. Being robbed in the ‘relative’ would beconsidered as an earning in the ‘real’.Questioner: What is maha-mohaniya (greatly deluding)karma?Dadashri: Any misuse in matters of religion is maha-mohaniya karma, and such a karma will bind terrible lifetimesto come. Any money-related business in religion, is notconsidered so bad, but if there is immorality, then one will bindhorrendous karma. Misuse in worldly matters is called deluding(mohaniya) karma, and misuse in matters of religion is calledmaha-mohaniya (greatly deluding) karma.…Therefore a Return Ticket to a Lower Life-Form!In the worldly religion, if you say to the guru, ‘Sir, do thisfor me,’ he will be well pleased. That is perfectly fine. Becausehow can one live without the ego? But money and sexualityshould never enter into religion. If I accepted money, then itwould mean that people are beggars and so am I. Then whatwould be the difference between a Gnani Purush and otherpeople? Therefore, the Gnani Purush does not have anybeggarly desire for anything. He desires nothing. I do not haveany desire for respect, any desire for money, any desire for sex,any desire for fame or any desire for disciples – No desire ofany kind. Wherever there is even a trace of desire, Bhagwan(God) and bhakta (devotee) remain separate. And in theabsence of desire, it means that Bhagwan and devotee(bhakta) have become one. Not everyone quarrels in religion;however, the ones that do, are the ones who hold a ‘returnticket’ (to lower life-form). To quarrel in the worldly life, is notof great consequence, but quarreling in the religion is the workof those who possess a ‘return ticket’.Questioner: What do you mean by ‘return ticket’?Dadashri: It means that one has come into the humanform from the animal life-form with a ‘return ticket’, so that iswhere one will be going back to. In religion (dharma) thereshould not be any dispute such as our religion is Islam and oursis Hindu. No one should interfere with religion. Only he that hascome with a return ticket will interfere. Having contempt for anyreligion is to have disputes with every religion. Straightforwardpeople would not do such a thing. There are very few peoplewho are that way inclined; with civility.Only the Gnani Can Make One Realize theAtmaWould the Vitarag’s speech ever be wrong? Does itsound like a mother-in-law’s and daughter-in-law’s speech?One has developed a bad habit for bathing and that is why onerubs mud on oneself. Unless his bad habit goes away, he will notstop rubbing the mud. Instead, know God; know the Atma(Self). He who has known the Self, knows everything. And theone who has not known the Self, should just go to a jungle andlet out a loud cry so that he gets to cry to his heart’s content.No one here gets to cry to his heart’s content. In the path of theVitarag, each and every word is completely replete with bliss(sukh). Has Dada made anyone renounce anything here? Hehas not given any pacchakhaan (pratyakhyan; vow not torepeat mistakes) nor has he made anyone renounce anything.Just look at how everyone is experiencing such happinesswithout having to do anything! And it is the kind that You willnever run short of. You have been given light that will never godown. Infinite light!Aptavani-4215216Aptavani-4Worldly Religion Keeps You in Duality‘Relative’ religions create dualities, but ‘this’ (Akram),however is the ‘real’ path. This here, takes you beyond allduality. If there was such a thing as a true ‘shop’ for religion,then it would be well and good, but these just lead you astray,so what good are they? They say, ‘Realize the Self.’ So you say,‘Even my father told me to do the same, and that is why I havecome to you so that you can help me realize it.’ But whereveryou go they bathe you with cold water on a cold winter’s day.Without ever having learned a single word about Atmagnan(knowledge of the Self), here sits one who has become a gnani.How can you call someone a Gnani when his anger, pride,deceit and greed are alive and kicking? You would call someonea Gnani if he has no pravrutti (worldly activity). He does notpossess anger, pride, deceit and greed. The one who hasbecome vitarag is considered a Gnani. This intellect thatcreates division (bhed buddhi) has arisen because of thephysical eyes! It even creates differences of ‘you and I’ betweentwo brothers. It will create differences even between a husbandand a wife, so that when they quarrel, it is ‘you’ and ‘I’! Thisis how the ‘relative’ life is; it will not end until it crushes youcompletely and brings you (your ego) to zero. ‘Relative’ religioncauses division (bhed); whereas ‘real’ religion carries you all theway, without creating any division. It stays abheda (as one). All ‘relative’ religions are considered worldly religions(laukik). They do not take you to moksha. They will always tellyou to do things, ‘do this or this, or to do that’. They make youdo things. You are not the ‘doer’. Nevertheless, they will keepyou in ‘doership’; whilst ‘we’ do not tell you to do anything, andthat is why this is called an alaukik (beyond the world) religion.Anyone that comes here, will surely attain moksha. That is why‘we’ first ask him, “Do you want moksha? Do you want to getrid of your ‘disease’?” And then if he wants to, ‘we’ will performthe ‘operation’ (separation of the Self and the non-Self). If hedoes not desire moksha, but wants worldly happiness, then‘we’ will even help him make that ‘adjustment’ too. If he hasproblems at home, ‘we’ will help him solve them and help himadjust at home. ‘Adjustment’ is the main dharma (religion). Ifsomeone owes you money and refuses to repay you, if there isa breakdown of your ‘adjustment’, then it signifies failure in yourreligion (dharma)!    That Which Produces Instant Result Is ReligionWhat is considered religion (true nature of a thing;dharma)? It is that which produces instant result. It is onlyreligion if it yields immediate results; otherwise it is non-religion(adharma). Doesn’t anger give instant results? Just as non-religion (adharma) gives instant result, so should religion(dharma) give you an instant result too. Even if a person whois not Self-realized, practices true religion, he will still have ahome that is free from conflict. Where there is kashay (anger,pride, deceit and greed), there is no religion. It is a wonder thatpeople are looking for religion where there is kashay. Peopleare not capable of assessing. After attaining enlightened view(samyak darshan) one will not like the worldly life (sansar).And that is why samyak darshan says, ‘After you attain me,you will have to go to moksha! So think before you worshipme.’ This is why Kavi sings:‘Jeni re Santo, koti janmo ni punya jaage re,Tene re Santo, Dada na darshan thaaye re,Ghatma eney khatkaro khat khat vaage re’‘Oh Saints! The one whose merit karma of infinite lives hasawakened-They, Oh Saints! Will have the darshan of DadaAnd they will have the clock-like warning from within.’Reminder (khatkaro) means that once you have metDada, you will want to keep doing His darshan. That is whyAptavani-4215216Aptavani-4Worldly Religion Keeps You in Duality‘Relative’ religions create dualities, but ‘this’ (Akram),however is the ‘real’ path. This here, takes you beyond allduality. If there was such a thing as a true ‘shop’ for religion,then it would be well and good, but these just lead you astray,so what good are they? They say, ‘Realize the Self.’ So you say,‘Even my father told me to do the same, and that is why I havecome to you so that you can help me realize it.’ But whereveryou go they bathe you with cold water on a cold winter’s day.Without ever having learned a single word about Atmagnan(knowledge of the Self), here sits one who has become a gnani.How can you call someone a Gnani when his anger, pride,deceit and greed are alive and kicking? You would call someonea Gnani if he has no pravrutti (worldly activity). He does notpossess anger, pride, deceit and greed. The one who hasbecome vitarag is considered a Gnani. This intellect thatcreates division (bhed buddhi) has arisen because of thephysical eyes! It even creates differences of ‘you and I’ betweentwo brothers. It will create differences even between a husbandand a wife, so that when they quarrel, it is ‘you’ and ‘I’! Thisis how the ‘relative’ life is; it will not end until it crushes youcompletely and brings you (your ego) to zero. ‘Relative’ religioncauses division (bhed); whereas ‘real’ religion carries you all theway, without creating any division. It stays abheda (as one). All ‘relative’ religions are considered worldly religions(laukik). They do not take you to moksha. They will always tellyou to do things, ‘do this or this, or to do that’. They make youdo things. You are not the ‘doer’. Nevertheless, they will keepyou in ‘doership’; whilst ‘we’ do not tell you to do anything, andthat is why this is called an alaukik (beyond the world) religion.Anyone that comes here, will surely attain moksha. That is why‘we’ first ask him, “Do you want moksha? Do you want to getrid of your ‘disease’?” And then if he wants to, ‘we’ will performthe ‘operation’ (separation of the Self and the non-Self). If hedoes not desire moksha, but wants worldly happiness, then‘we’ will even help him make that ‘adjustment’ too. If he hasproblems at home, ‘we’ will help him solve them and help himadjust at home. ‘Adjustment’ is the main dharma (religion). Ifsomeone owes you money and refuses to repay you, if there isa breakdown of your ‘adjustment’, then it signifies failure in yourreligion (dharma)!    That Which Produces Instant Result Is ReligionWhat is considered religion (true nature of a thing;dharma)? It is that which produces instant result. It is onlyreligion if it yields immediate results; otherwise it is non-religion(adharma). Doesn’t anger give instant results? Just as non-religion (adharma) gives instant result, so should religion(dharma) give you an instant result too. Even if a person whois not Self-realized, practices true religion, he will still have ahome that is free from conflict. Where there is kashay (anger,pride, deceit and greed), there is no religion. It is a wonder thatpeople are looking for religion where there is kashay. Peopleare not capable of assessing. After attaining enlightened view(samyak darshan) one will not like the worldly life (sansar).And that is why samyak darshan says, ‘After you attain me,you will have to go to moksha! So think before you worshipme.’ This is why Kavi sings:‘Jeni re Santo, koti janmo ni punya jaage re,Tene re Santo, Dada na darshan thaaye re,Ghatma eney khatkaro khat khat vaage re’‘Oh Saints! The one whose merit karma of infinite lives hasawakened-They, Oh Saints! Will have the darshan of DadaAnd they will have the clock-like warning from within.’Reminder (khatkaro) means that once you have metDada, you will want to keep doing His darshan. That is whyAptavani-4217218Aptavani-4‘we’ say, ‘If you want to go back (to sansar) then do not gettogether with me, but if you do meet me, then you will have togo to moksha! And if you want to roam around in the four life-forms (gatis), I can also make that possible. If you get thestamp (of approval) for moksha here, then you will have to goto moksha.’ ‘We’ tell you not to get stuck here, because onceyou do get trapped, you will not be able to get out.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(23)The Goal Is to Attain MokshaWhat Is Moksha?Questioner: What is the final liberation (moksha) andwhat is freedom (mukti)?Dadashri: Both the words are closely related. They are‘sons’ of the same ‘mother’.If you want liberation (mukti) from all karma and youwant full moksha, then you must first become free fromignorance (of the Self). This means that you are bound only bythe ignorance. Once the ignorance has left, you will find thatthings will be simpler and straightforward; there will be peaceand day by day, you will experience more and more bliss andYou will find freedom from karma.Moksha means to attain the awareness of being free.Even while living, the awareness of ‘I am free’ should always bethere. Moksha is no good to you after you die. That would belike a deception. Moksha should be instant ‘cash’, it is notacceptable if it is ‘on credit’ (pending collection; has yet to beexperienced). These times are such, that if you ask someone tobuy you vegetables, he is likely to charge you a commission forit! So then can you even accept moksha on credit in this dayand age? If someone offers you such a moksha, you should sayto him, ‘moksha in the next life’; tell him you do not want thatkind of moksha if it is ‘on credit’. At times like this, you shouldnot be doing business on credit. Adulteration even exists inreligion. Gone are the days of adulterating real ghee (clarifiedAptavani-4217218Aptavani-4‘we’ say, ‘If you want to go back (to sansar) then do not gettogether with me, but if you do meet me, then you will have togo to moksha! And if you want to roam around in the four life-forms (gatis), I can also make that possible. If you get thestamp (of approval) for moksha here, then you will have to goto moksha.’ ‘We’ tell you not to get stuck here, because onceyou do get trapped, you will not be able to get out.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(23)The Goal Is to Attain MokshaWhat Is Moksha?Questioner: What is the final liberation (moksha) andwhat is freedom (mukti)?Dadashri: Both the words are closely related. They are‘sons’ of the same ‘mother’.If you want liberation (mukti) from all karma and youwant full moksha, then you must first become free fromignorance (of the Self). This means that you are bound only bythe ignorance. Once the ignorance has left, you will find thatthings will be simpler and straightforward; there will be peaceand day by day, you will experience more and more bliss andYou will find freedom from karma.Moksha means to attain the awareness of being free.Even while living, the awareness of ‘I am free’ should always bethere. Moksha is no good to you after you die. That would belike a deception. Moksha should be instant ‘cash’, it is notacceptable if it is ‘on credit’ (pending collection; has yet to beexperienced). These times are such, that if you ask someone tobuy you vegetables, he is likely to charge you a commission forit! So then can you even accept moksha on credit in this dayand age? If someone offers you such a moksha, you should sayto him, ‘moksha in the next life’; tell him you do not want thatkind of moksha if it is ‘on credit’. At times like this, you shouldnot be doing business on credit. Adulteration even exists inreligion. Gone are the days of adulterating real ghee (clarifiedAptavani-4219220Aptavani-4butter), by adding vegetable ghee (margarine) to it. Now theyresort to adulterating even the vegetable ghee! If someone says,‘get rid of your anger, pride, deceit and greed’, you should sayto him, ‘Sir, even I know that, but just tell me something that willhelp get rid of my anger, pride, deceit and greed (krodh, maan,maya, lobh).’ What is the point of carrying on like this? Go tosomeone that has vachanbud (power and energy behindwords), and whose conduct carries so much energy(charitrabud) that anger, pride, deceit and greed will be forcedto leave. If a weak person can remove his weaknesses byhimself, then why would he need a strong person?When people go to listen to religious discourse, they callit shrutagnan (scriptural knowledge through listening); however,real shrutagnan is something that, upon hearing, one’s ‘disease’(of kashay) begins to subside on its own.The Path of Attaining MokshaQuestioner: How can one attain moksha?Dadashri: There is no method for it. Moksha happenswhen artadhyan and raudradhyan go away.Questioner: Even so, how does one attain moksha?From whom do we attain moksha?Dadashri: You can attain moksha only from the GnaniPurush. The One who is himself free, can give you freedom.How can a man free others, when he himself is shackled? Soyou are free to go to whichever ‘shop’ you want to. But youhave to ask there, ‘Sir, will you give me moksha?’ If he says,‘No, I am not ready to give moksha’, then you have to go toa second one, and then to a third one. You have to keep lookinguntil you find one that will give you what you want. Whathappens if you just stay in one shop? You will just end up takinga beating. The reason that you have wandered around forcountless lifetimes is because you have been sitting in just oneshop, not bothering to investigate: ‘By sitting here, am Iexperiencing freedom (mukti) or not? Have my anger, pride,deceit and greed decreased?’ You never even looked at that.When you want to get married, you inquire about thefamily and its background. You ‘realize’ (investigate) everythingelse, but you never ‘realize’ this. What a huge ‘blunder’ this is!Questioner: What is the first step for attaining the stateof the Vitarag (The one who is free from all attachments)?Dadashri: The real thing is to go to moksha.Questioner: Isn’t moksha attained later?Dadashri: At this time, there is no moksha for the body,but there is always the Atma’s moksha, isn’t there? Because ofthe current time cycle, moksha for the body has been preventedfrom this world (kshetra); however, the Atma’s moksha is stillpossible, isn’t it?Questioner: Yes, it is.Dadashri: That in itself is more than enough.Questioner: What should I do to attain the moksha?You show me how.Dadashri: I can show you how, but you will not be ableto do it. You will forget when you get home. In this time cycle,you will find that people do not have that kind of stillness andsteadiness. Instead, just come to ‘us’, and within an hour ‘we’will give you instant moksha. You will not have to do anythingafter that. You will only have to abide by ‘our’ Agnas.Moksha Means Eternal BlissQuestioner: Man has not experienced anything aboutmoksha, and yet he attempts to attain it.Dadashri: In this world, the experience of happiness-Aptavani-4219220Aptavani-4butter), by adding vegetable ghee (margarine) to it. Now theyresort to adulterating even the vegetable ghee! If someone says,‘get rid of your anger, pride, deceit and greed’, you should sayto him, ‘Sir, even I know that, but just tell me something that willhelp get rid of my anger, pride, deceit and greed (krodh, maan,maya, lobh).’ What is the point of carrying on like this? Go tosomeone that has vachanbud (power and energy behindwords), and whose conduct carries so much energy(charitrabud) that anger, pride, deceit and greed will be forcedto leave. If a weak person can remove his weaknesses byhimself, then why would he need a strong person?When people go to listen to religious discourse, they callit shrutagnan (scriptural knowledge through listening); however,real shrutagnan is something that, upon hearing, one’s ‘disease’(of kashay) begins to subside on its own.The Path of Attaining MokshaQuestioner: How can one attain moksha?Dadashri: There is no method for it. Moksha happenswhen artadhyan and raudradhyan go away.Questioner: Even so, how does one attain moksha?From whom do we attain moksha?Dadashri: You can attain moksha only from the GnaniPurush. The One who is himself free, can give you freedom.How can a man free others, when he himself is shackled? Soyou are free to go to whichever ‘shop’ you want to. But youhave to ask there, ‘Sir, will you give me moksha?’ If he says,‘No, I am not ready to give moksha’, then you have to go toa second one, and then to a third one. You have to keep lookinguntil you find one that will give you what you want. Whathappens if you just stay in one shop? You will just end up takinga beating. The reason that you have wandered around forcountless lifetimes is because you have been sitting in just oneshop, not bothering to investigate: ‘By sitting here, am Iexperiencing freedom (mukti) or not? Have my anger, pride,deceit and greed decreased?’ You never even looked at that.When you want to get married, you inquire about thefamily and its background. You ‘realize’ (investigate) everythingelse, but you never ‘realize’ this. What a huge ‘blunder’ this is!Questioner: What is the first step for attaining the stateof the Vitarag (The one who is free from all attachments)?Dadashri: The real thing is to go to moksha.Questioner: Isn’t moksha attained later?Dadashri: At this time, there is no moksha for the body,but there is always the Atma’s moksha, isn’t there? Because ofthe current time cycle, moksha for the body has been preventedfrom this world (kshetra); however, the Atma’s moksha is stillpossible, isn’t it?Questioner: Yes, it is.Dadashri: That in itself is more than enough.Questioner: What should I do to attain the moksha?You show me how.Dadashri: I can show you how, but you will not be ableto do it. You will forget when you get home. In this time cycle,you will find that people do not have that kind of stillness andsteadiness. Instead, just come to ‘us’, and within an hour ‘we’will give you instant moksha. You will not have to do anythingafter that. You will only have to abide by ‘our’ Agnas.Moksha Means Eternal BlissQuestioner: Man has not experienced anything aboutmoksha, and yet he attempts to attain it.Dadashri: In this world, the experience of happiness-Aptavani-4221222Aptavani-4unhappiness (sukh-dukh) is essentially just unhappiness (dukh).Whatever happiness one experiences is only through one’simagination. Something that you find appealing may makesomeone else unhappy when you give it to him. Doesn’t thathappen? True happiness is that which makes everyone happy.Everyone shares the same opinion about real happiness.Every living being searches for happiness and avoidsunhappiness. No one likes unhappiness. Now this happiness is‘temporary’, and they do not like it because it is followed byunhappiness. What kind of happiness (sukh) do people like?They like permanent happiness (sanatan sukh), which onceattained, will never allow unhappiness (dukh) to enter. What ispermanent happiness (sanatan sukh)? It is moksha; it isliberation (mukti)! Only if there is moksha, can eternalhappiness (sanatan sukh) arise. In bondage, there is unhappiness.Indifference towards worldly pain (dukh) is the firstexperience of moksha. You will experience that, the day after‘we’ give you Gnan. Next you will experience the weight andburden of your physical body and karma to lift. Thereafter, youwill experience so much bliss that is indescribable.What Is the State as the Siddha?Questioner: After we attain moksha, what state will webe in?Dadashri: In the state of Parmatma (absolute Self).Questioner: Does one have to do anything after that?Dadashri: There is nothing to be done there. Even now,your Atma (Self) does not do anything. Whatever is being done,is done through agnan bhaav (the intent of the non-Self, ‘I amChandubhai’), a ‘mechanical’ bhaav (intent). The Atma (Self)does not have the ability to carry out any actions. It is simply the‘Knower’ (gnayak), by nature. In Siddha gati (location at thecrest of the universe where all liberated souls ascend and resideeternally), they exist in the state of Knower (Gnata), Seer(Drashta) and in absolute bliss (parmanandi). There, in Siddhagati, there is so much bliss, that should just a minute’s worth ofthat bliss falls to earth it would create such an abundance of joyin this world, that would last every single day of an entire year!The Nature of MokshaQuestioner: So after attaining moksha, one never takesbirth again?Dadashri: Who would want to come back to this chaoticmess? This is something that gives great misery. Don’t you seehow much dependency there is in the world? It is like believingyourself to be happy when you are intoxicated with alcohol. Thisworldly life (sansar) is like some sort of possession. You arepossessed by the ‘ghosts’ of the mind, speech and body! Youwill realize it when you have a toothache. When a king has atoothache, what does he love, his kingdom or his queen?Questioner: Neither.Dadashri: This is a horrendous difficulty. Whereas inmoksha, there prevails natural bliss.Questioner: In spite of living in the worldly life (sansar),can a person experience moksha?Dadashri: If you tie a blind man to a pole, winding a lotof rope around him and then, without touching him, from behindhim you slowly cut one round of the rope with a blade, wouldhe not know?Questioner: Yes, he would.Dadashri: He would know that the bondage is brokenfrom that side. That is how one experiences moksha.Moksha means a sense of liberation, and you do not feelAptavani-4221222Aptavani-4unhappiness (sukh-dukh) is essentially just unhappiness (dukh).Whatever happiness one experiences is only through one’simagination. Something that you find appealing may makesomeone else unhappy when you give it to him. Doesn’t thathappen? True happiness is that which makes everyone happy.Everyone shares the same opinion about real happiness.Every living being searches for happiness and avoidsunhappiness. No one likes unhappiness. Now this happiness is‘temporary’, and they do not like it because it is followed byunhappiness. What kind of happiness (sukh) do people like?They like permanent happiness (sanatan sukh), which onceattained, will never allow unhappiness (dukh) to enter. What ispermanent happiness (sanatan sukh)? It is moksha; it isliberation (mukti)! Only if there is moksha, can eternalhappiness (sanatan sukh) arise. In bondage, there is unhappiness.Indifference towards worldly pain (dukh) is the firstexperience of moksha. You will experience that, the day after‘we’ give you Gnan. Next you will experience the weight andburden of your physical body and karma to lift. Thereafter, youwill experience so much bliss that is indescribable.What Is the State as the Siddha?Questioner: After we attain moksha, what state will webe in?Dadashri: In the state of Parmatma (absolute Self).Questioner: Does one have to do anything after that?Dadashri: There is nothing to be done there. Even now,your Atma (Self) does not do anything. Whatever is being done,is done through agnan bhaav (the intent of the non-Self, ‘I amChandubhai’), a ‘mechanical’ bhaav (intent). The Atma (Self)does not have the ability to carry out any actions. It is simply the‘Knower’ (gnayak), by nature. In Siddha gati (location at thecrest of the universe where all liberated souls ascend and resideeternally), they exist in the state of Knower (Gnata), Seer(Drashta) and in absolute bliss (parmanandi). There, in Siddhagati, there is so much bliss, that should just a minute’s worth ofthat bliss falls to earth it would create such an abundance of joyin this world, that would last every single day of an entire year!The Nature of MokshaQuestioner: So after attaining moksha, one never takesbirth again?Dadashri: Who would want to come back to this chaoticmess? This is something that gives great misery. Don’t you seehow much dependency there is in the world? It is like believingyourself to be happy when you are intoxicated with alcohol. Thisworldly life (sansar) is like some sort of possession. You arepossessed by the ‘ghosts’ of the mind, speech and body! Youwill realize it when you have a toothache. When a king has atoothache, what does he love, his kingdom or his queen?Questioner: Neither.Dadashri: This is a horrendous difficulty. Whereas inmoksha, there prevails natural bliss.Questioner: In spite of living in the worldly life (sansar),can a person experience moksha?Dadashri: If you tie a blind man to a pole, winding a lotof rope around him and then, without touching him, from behindhim you slowly cut one round of the rope with a blade, wouldhe not know?Questioner: Yes, he would.Dadashri: He would know that the bondage is brokenfrom that side. That is how one experiences moksha.Moksha means a sense of liberation, and you do not feelAptavani-4223224 Aptavani-4bound. Even if you are arrested by the police, you will not feelbound.No Liberation Even in HeavenQuestioner: What do they mean when they say thatmoksha is like attaining heaven, and to attain vaikunth (God’sabode), is to merge with God?Dadashri: There is no heaven, or any such place there.Heaven means a place where you enjoy worldly happiness, andhell is where you suffer worldly miseries. And in this middleworld (madhyalok; our galaxy) there is a ‘mixture’ of bothworldly happiness and suffering. Even in heaven there isbondage. You will have to stay there even if you do not like it.If you cannot get along with your spouse over there, you will stillhave to live with them. It is because over there, lifespan cannotbe reduced.For hundreds of thousands of past lifetimes the desire forfreedom has always been there in everyone’s vessel of intellect(buddhi no ashaya), but they still cannot escape and they havemade vain efforts. No matter how hard you struggle, you are notlikely to find it. Even when a man tries to live without a wife andchildren (tyaagi-renouncing the worldly life), he still getsnowhere, so then in his next life, he becomes worldly (sansari).He has tried all kinds of ways to find happiness. Whatever onedoes in order to attain the nirvikalp (the state of the Self), it isall vikalp (wrong belief) of vikalp (ego). These entanglementsare not easy to get rid of. If one’s entanglement of the marriedlife goes away, then entanglements of renouncing possess him;there is worldly life there too, is it not?You Don’t Want the Temporary ThingWhat should one do for liberation (mukti)?You should have the inner intent (bhaav) that You wantnothing else except a Gnani Purush. ‘I do not desire anythingthat is temporary in this world.’ You should say this five timesevery morning upon waking up. The one who remains sincere tothis will not bind any karma. But who is the ‘I’? You shoulddecide this before saying it. You should decide that, ‘I am the pureSoul (Shuddhatma), and it is the body that has needs. It is‘Chandubhai’ who wants. That is not excessive, is it? Whateverthere is in vyavasthit is well and good, and if there is not, thenso be it, but nevertheless, ‘I do not want anything’. This is theinner intent that you should have. And if you remain sincere to it,then interference (dakho) is not likely to happen. You will onlyreceive what vyavasthit has in store for you, nothing can makea difference to that. You will however acquire benefits like fewerworries and less frustration. Both these dravyas (the Self and thenon-Self) are separate. You just have to experience each of themseparately. You do not have to do anything else. Even when theintellect (buddhi) interferes by entering your thoughts and creatingconfusion, You are still not the ‘doer’. ‘You’ (the Self) just keepYour part separate. When ‘You’ (the Self) and ‘Chandubhai’ (thenon-Self) live as neighbors, then nothing touches you! If Youremain sincere to ‘Yourself’, then this is a science of a kind thatwill keep You untouched (nirlep).You work in the warehouse. When you are at work, areyou ‘sincere’ or not?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: It is difficult to stay sincere in such situations,but it is not so difficult here. If a person feels that he still wantsto relish the worldly life, but that his sincerity cannot bemaintained, he should let me know so that I can help him finda way out. But if he is confused and bewildered by doubts aboutwhether or not he will bind karma, then he will not getanywhere. The theory of binding of karma is altogether adifferent thing. That, You have to understand from me.Aptavani-4223224 Aptavani-4bound. Even if you are arrested by the police, you will not feelbound.No Liberation Even in HeavenQuestioner: What do they mean when they say thatmoksha is like attaining heaven, and to attain vaikunth (God’sabode), is to merge with God?Dadashri: There is no heaven, or any such place there.Heaven means a place where you enjoy worldly happiness, andhell is where you suffer worldly miseries. And in this middleworld (madhyalok; our galaxy) there is a ‘mixture’ of bothworldly happiness and suffering. Even in heaven there isbondage. You will have to stay there even if you do not like it.If you cannot get along with your spouse over there, you will stillhave to live with them. It is because over there, lifespan cannotbe reduced.For hundreds of thousands of past lifetimes the desire forfreedom has always been there in everyone’s vessel of intellect(buddhi no ashaya), but they still cannot escape and they havemade vain efforts. No matter how hard you struggle, you are notlikely to find it. Even when a man tries to live without a wife andchildren (tyaagi-renouncing the worldly life), he still getsnowhere, so then in his next life, he becomes worldly (sansari).He has tried all kinds of ways to find happiness. Whatever onedoes in order to attain the nirvikalp (the state of the Self), it isall vikalp (wrong belief) of vikalp (ego). These entanglementsare not easy to get rid of. If one’s entanglement of the marriedlife goes away, then entanglements of renouncing possess him;there is worldly life there too, is it not?You Don’t Want the Temporary ThingWhat should one do for liberation (mukti)?You should have the inner intent (bhaav) that You wantnothing else except a Gnani Purush. ‘I do not desire anythingthat is temporary in this world.’ You should say this five timesevery morning upon waking up. The one who remains sincere tothis will not bind any karma. But who is the ‘I’? You shoulddecide this before saying it. You should decide that, ‘I am the pureSoul (Shuddhatma), and it is the body that has needs. It is‘Chandubhai’ who wants. That is not excessive, is it? Whateverthere is in vyavasthit is well and good, and if there is not, thenso be it, but nevertheless, ‘I do not want anything’. This is theinner intent that you should have. And if you remain sincere to it,then interference (dakho) is not likely to happen. You will onlyreceive what vyavasthit has in store for you, nothing can makea difference to that. You will however acquire benefits like fewerworries and less frustration. Both these dravyas (the Self and thenon-Self) are separate. You just have to experience each of themseparately. You do not have to do anything else. Even when theintellect (buddhi) interferes by entering your thoughts and creatingconfusion, You are still not the ‘doer’. ‘You’ (the Self) just keepYour part separate. When ‘You’ (the Self) and ‘Chandubhai’ (thenon-Self) live as neighbors, then nothing touches you! If Youremain sincere to ‘Yourself’, then this is a science of a kind thatwill keep You untouched (nirlep).You work in the warehouse. When you are at work, areyou ‘sincere’ or not?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: It is difficult to stay sincere in such situations,but it is not so difficult here. If a person feels that he still wantsto relish the worldly life, but that his sincerity cannot bemaintained, he should let me know so that I can help him finda way out. But if he is confused and bewildered by doubts aboutwhether or not he will bind karma, then he will not getanywhere. The theory of binding of karma is altogether adifferent thing. That, You have to understand from me.Aptavani-4225226Aptavani-4 When Does the World Yield?He whose every beggarly desire (bheekh) has diminished,is given all the world’s scripture in his hands (to speak aboutthem).How many kinds of beggarly desires (bheekh) must therebe? There is the bheekh for respect (maan), the bheekh formoney (lobh), the bheekh for carnal pleasure (vishay), thebheekh for disciples, the bheekh to build temples. All sorts ofbheekh, nothing but beggarly desires. How will such penury becleared away? Amidst such rampant beggary, how can oneattain liberation?The entire world’s realm (satta) falls into the hands of, hethat is free from any kind of beggarly desire (bheekh). At themoment, it is in my hands. And this is because my every bheekhhas departed. Until you meet the One who is free of all passions,you will not attain true religion (dharma). It is extremely rare tomeet such a person in this world. You will accomplish the workfor moksha if you meet one. If you do not find such a person,for how long can you let it go like that? If it is just respect(maan) that you are hungry for, then you can deal with that. Butfor those who covet money, carnal pleasure (vishay), and fame,it is inexcusable.Become Faultless!Atmabuddhi in the Atma (to be in the Self) is moksha.And atmabuddhi in the deha (to be in the non-Self) is theworldly life (sansar).This vision (drashti) continues to fall on images (drashya;object to be seen), but it never falls on the Seer (Drashta).Questioner: But doesn’t one only see what the physicaleyes allow one to see?Dadashri: Drashti can never fall on the Drashta throughthe physical eyes. Only when divyachakshu (the vision of theSelf) arises does the vision fall upon the Drashta (Seer).To know the Atma (Self) you simply have to understandthe facts. There is nothing for you to do. Someone asked theLord, ‘When will I attain moksha?’ and the Lord replied, ‘Youwill attain moksha when your understanding (vision; darshan)becomes free of mistakes.’ Now tell me, what is wrong in whatthe Lord said?Questioner: He is right.Dadashri: Then he asked the Lord again, ‘What aboutthe chanting (japa) and penance (tapa) one has to do?’ So theLord said to him, ‘On the day you have indigestion, you canfast. I do not expect you to do japa-tapa. All I want from youis that you make your gnan and understanding mistake free.’How many mistakes do you have at the present time? ‘I amChandubhai, I am this woman’s husband, I am this boy’s father.’Just look at all these mistakes... an endless chain of mistakes. Ifthe mistake is at the root, what can you do? One thing istemporary and one thing is permanent. If you try to ‘multiply’ thetwo, by that time, the temporary will have disappeared. So youwill never be able to ‘multiply’ and you will not see a result.‘Friday never ends and Saturday never comes.’ “Every day isFriday,” and it will remain “Friday”, meaning everything remainsas status quo. People have ended up in a crooked alley.Mistakes will not improve even the worldly life, so how do youexpect to attain moksha? In reality, your own nature is mokshaitself. You yourself are the Parmatma; therefore, all You needis the awareness of Gnan (knowledge) that is faultless andunderstanding (vision; darshan) that is faultless. You are indeedShuddhatma (pure Soul), but you need to become aware ofthat.The Resolve Only for MokshaQuestioner: Give me that understanding. I have a strongAptavani-4225226Aptavani-4 When Does the World Yield?He whose every beggarly desire (bheekh) has diminished,is given all the world’s scripture in his hands (to speak aboutthem).How many kinds of beggarly desires (bheekh) must therebe? There is the bheekh for respect (maan), the bheekh formoney (lobh), the bheekh for carnal pleasure (vishay), thebheekh for disciples, the bheekh to build temples. All sorts ofbheekh, nothing but beggarly desires. How will such penury becleared away? Amidst such rampant beggary, how can oneattain liberation?The entire world’s realm (satta) falls into the hands of, hethat is free from any kind of beggarly desire (bheekh). At themoment, it is in my hands. And this is because my every bheekhhas departed. Until you meet the One who is free of all passions,you will not attain true religion (dharma). It is extremely rare tomeet such a person in this world. You will accomplish the workfor moksha if you meet one. If you do not find such a person,for how long can you let it go like that? If it is just respect(maan) that you are hungry for, then you can deal with that. Butfor those who covet money, carnal pleasure (vishay), and fame,it is inexcusable.Become Faultless!Atmabuddhi in the Atma (to be in the Self) is moksha.And atmabuddhi in the deha (to be in the non-Self) is theworldly life (sansar).This vision (drashti) continues to fall on images (drashya;object to be seen), but it never falls on the Seer (Drashta).Questioner: But doesn’t one only see what the physicaleyes allow one to see?Dadashri: Drashti can never fall on the Drashta throughthe physical eyes. Only when divyachakshu (the vision of theSelf) arises does the vision fall upon the Drashta (Seer).To know the Atma (Self) you simply have to understandthe facts. There is nothing for you to do. Someone asked theLord, ‘When will I attain moksha?’ and the Lord replied, ‘Youwill attain moksha when your understanding (vision; darshan)becomes free of mistakes.’ Now tell me, what is wrong in whatthe Lord said?Questioner: He is right.Dadashri: Then he asked the Lord again, ‘What aboutthe chanting (japa) and penance (tapa) one has to do?’ So theLord said to him, ‘On the day you have indigestion, you canfast. I do not expect you to do japa-tapa. All I want from youis that you make your gnan and understanding mistake free.’How many mistakes do you have at the present time? ‘I amChandubhai, I am this woman’s husband, I am this boy’s father.’Just look at all these mistakes... an endless chain of mistakes. Ifthe mistake is at the root, what can you do? One thing istemporary and one thing is permanent. If you try to ‘multiply’ thetwo, by that time, the temporary will have disappeared. So youwill never be able to ‘multiply’ and you will not see a result.‘Friday never ends and Saturday never comes.’ “Every day isFriday,” and it will remain “Friday”, meaning everything remainsas status quo. People have ended up in a crooked alley.Mistakes will not improve even the worldly life, so how do youexpect to attain moksha? In reality, your own nature is mokshaitself. You yourself are the Parmatma; therefore, all You needis the awareness of Gnan (knowledge) that is faultless andunderstanding (vision; darshan) that is faultless. You are indeedShuddhatma (pure Soul), but you need to become aware ofthat.The Resolve Only for MokshaQuestioner: Give me that understanding. I have a strongAptavani-4227228Aptavani-4desire to attain that awareness, and that is why I have comehere.Dadashri: Life after life, people have desired that Gnan(knowledge), but they have not made a firm niyanu (strongresolution) to attain it. If one had made a true resolution(niyanu) then all his merit karma (punya) would have beenspent on just that, and he would indeed have attained what hedesired. The nature of niyanu is that all your merit karmas(punya) are expended only on the resolution itself. So much ofyour merit karma (punya) has been spent on your extravaganthouses and your body. It has been spent on cars and homes andkeeping your wife and children happy. As for myself, I onlybrought with me the niyanu for moksha, which is why thingshave run smoothly. I never have any problems. The meaning ofniyanu is that one should have a single goal: I want only this,and nothing else! It is only worth doing the niyanu for moksha.The goal should just be for Shuddhatma and niyanu for onlymoksha (final liberation). That is all, and nothing else. Now allYou have to do is embrace it with firm determination (nischay)and focus all Your energies on that niyanu. If You have just thisone niyanu, You will no longer prolong your lifetimes. You willbe liberated in a couple of lifetimes. This worldly life is nothingbut a pit of entanglements.Moksha: A Location or a State?Questioner: But what I wanted to know was whethermoksha is a place where we go to, or is it something we haveto acquire or is it some kind of a state?Dadashri: Moksha is your own nature (swabhav).Your own nature (swabhav) is moksha itself. But in order foryou to realize your nature, would you not have to dosomething? Your nature is moksha, but because you are notaware of this state, you are not experiencing the bliss from it.You do not have to go to any place for moksha. Freedomfrom all pain (unhappiness; dukh) is the first stage of moksha,and the second stage of moksha is liberation from the worldlylife (sansar)! Once you attain the first moksha, you will seethe second moksha right in front of you, it will come to youon its own. The first liberation (mukti), is in the form of‘causes’, and the second is in the form of ‘effect’. Afterfreedom from ‘causes’, you can carry on with your worldlyduties of marrying off your children and all that. There is intentof freedom (mukta bhaav) even in that and right now, ‘effect’moksha is not possible. I myself remain in the ‘causes’moksha and all other work carries on.By whichever body (deha) one attains the awareness offreedom, one only has one or more lifetimes (deha).Which Is More Difficult, Path of Moksha or Pathof Worldly Life?The moksha marg cannot be difficult, but sansar marg(the path of the worldly life) is. How many things do you needto boil water in a large tank? And how much effort is requiredto boil that water? And then what do you have to do to cool thewater? Thereupon a person will be baffled by, ‘how to cool itdown?’ You being gnani (knowledgeable) would say to him,‘Just put out the fire and get some sleep’. He would bewondering, how after taking so long to heat, the water wouldmanage to cool down so quickly. But the inherent nature ofwater is to be cold, so naturally it will cool by itself. To heatwater is the same as bringing it into the nature of the worldly life(sansar). To come into the nature of the Self (swabhav) iscalled moksha, and to go out of it (vibhav-attribute that is notof the Self; ‘I am Chandulal’) is the worldly life (sansar). Foryou to attain such a Bhed Gnan (the knowledge that separatesthe Self from the non-Self), you must meet a Gnani, only thenYour work is done; otherwise you will never find any stability formillions of lifetimes.Aptavani-4227228Aptavani-4desire to attain that awareness, and that is why I have comehere.Dadashri: Life after life, people have desired that Gnan(knowledge), but they have not made a firm niyanu (strongresolution) to attain it. If one had made a true resolution(niyanu) then all his merit karma (punya) would have beenspent on just that, and he would indeed have attained what hedesired. The nature of niyanu is that all your merit karmas(punya) are expended only on the resolution itself. So much ofyour merit karma (punya) has been spent on your extravaganthouses and your body. It has been spent on cars and homes andkeeping your wife and children happy. As for myself, I onlybrought with me the niyanu for moksha, which is why thingshave run smoothly. I never have any problems. The meaning ofniyanu is that one should have a single goal: I want only this,and nothing else! It is only worth doing the niyanu for moksha.The goal should just be for Shuddhatma and niyanu for onlymoksha (final liberation). That is all, and nothing else. Now allYou have to do is embrace it with firm determination (nischay)and focus all Your energies on that niyanu. If You have just thisone niyanu, You will no longer prolong your lifetimes. You willbe liberated in a couple of lifetimes. This worldly life is nothingbut a pit of entanglements.Moksha: A Location or a State?Questioner: But what I wanted to know was whethermoksha is a place where we go to, or is it something we haveto acquire or is it some kind of a state?Dadashri: Moksha is your own nature (swabhav).Your own nature (swabhav) is moksha itself. But in order foryou to realize your nature, would you not have to dosomething? Your nature is moksha, but because you are notaware of this state, you are not experiencing the bliss from it.You do not have to go to any place for moksha. Freedomfrom all pain (unhappiness; dukh) is the first stage of moksha,and the second stage of moksha is liberation from the worldlylife (sansar)! Once you attain the first moksha, you will seethe second moksha right in front of you, it will come to youon its own. The first liberation (mukti), is in the form of‘causes’, and the second is in the form of ‘effect’. Afterfreedom from ‘causes’, you can carry on with your worldlyduties of marrying off your children and all that. There is intentof freedom (mukta bhaav) even in that and right now, ‘effect’moksha is not possible. I myself remain in the ‘causes’moksha and all other work carries on.By whichever body (deha) one attains the awareness offreedom, one only has one or more lifetimes (deha).Which Is More Difficult, Path of Moksha or Pathof Worldly Life?The moksha marg cannot be difficult, but sansar marg(the path of the worldly life) is. How many things do you needto boil water in a large tank? And how much effort is requiredto boil that water? And then what do you have to do to cool thewater? Thereupon a person will be baffled by, ‘how to cool itdown?’ You being gnani (knowledgeable) would say to him,‘Just put out the fire and get some sleep’. He would bewondering, how after taking so long to heat, the water wouldmanage to cool down so quickly. But the inherent nature ofwater is to be cold, so naturally it will cool by itself. To heatwater is the same as bringing it into the nature of the worldly life(sansar). To come into the nature of the Self (swabhav) iscalled moksha, and to go out of it (vibhav-attribute that is notof the Self; ‘I am Chandulal’) is the worldly life (sansar). Foryou to attain such a Bhed Gnan (the knowledge that separatesthe Self from the non-Self), you must meet a Gnani, only thenYour work is done; otherwise you will never find any stability formillions of lifetimes.Aptavani-4229230Aptavani-4What Is a True Seeker?It is stated very clearly in the scriptures, that truemumukshu (seeker of moksha) is one who can immediatelyrecognize a Gnani. He whose only desire is moksha, will bequick to recognize the Gnani Purush as the one who bestowsit. But those who have other desires; respect, fame, disciples,will not be able to recognize a Gnani Purush. This is becausethere is a veil of ignorance covering them. The Gnani Purushis so simple and straightforward; he is so easily recognizable.But if upon seeing him your impression is, ‘Why is he dressedlike that?’ Then you are going to head the wrong way!In What Respect Is the Self Unbound?Questioner: They say that the Atma (Soul; Self) isunbound (abandha), then who is it that attains moksha?Dadashri: When it comes to the Atma, if you understandthe language of the Gnani, then you will find the answers.Abandha (unbound) is different according to the commonlanguage of the world, and in the language of the Gnani, it isalso different. If you understand abandha in the language of theSarvagnya (the Gnani, the Knower of all elements), then it ispossible for you to attain such a state; the unbound state. In theGnani’s language, the Atma is unbound (abandha), for it is ina constant state of moksha. Never has it ever become bound.This is the language of the Sarvagnya; it is ‘as it is’; ‘it is a fact’.If a person has even a momentary doubt about whether or nothe is bound, then he will bind karma. Beyond any doubt, theSelf is unbound.Who Attains Moksha?Questioner: How can we differentiate between death,mukti and moksha?Dadashri: If you are really Chandubhai, then you willsurely face death (mrutyu), and if You are Shiva (the Self), thenYou have mukti (first stage of moksha) and the fruit of thatmukti is moksha (second stage). Mukti should happen here. Ihave attained mukti.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4229230Aptavani-4What Is a True Seeker?It is stated very clearly in the scriptures, that truemumukshu (seeker of moksha) is one who can immediatelyrecognize a Gnani. He whose only desire is moksha, will bequick to recognize the Gnani Purush as the one who bestowsit. But those who have other desires; respect, fame, disciples,will not be able to recognize a Gnani Purush. This is becausethere is a veil of ignorance covering them. The Gnani Purushis so simple and straightforward; he is so easily recognizable.But if upon seeing him your impression is, ‘Why is he dressedlike that?’ Then you are going to head the wrong way!In What Respect Is the Self Unbound?Questioner: They say that the Atma (Soul; Self) isunbound (abandha), then who is it that attains moksha?Dadashri: When it comes to the Atma, if you understandthe language of the Gnani, then you will find the answers.Abandha (unbound) is different according to the commonlanguage of the world, and in the language of the Gnani, it isalso different. If you understand abandha in the language of theSarvagnya (the Gnani, the Knower of all elements), then it ispossible for you to attain such a state; the unbound state. In theGnani’s language, the Atma is unbound (abandha), for it is ina constant state of moksha. Never has it ever become bound.This is the language of the Sarvagnya; it is ‘as it is’; ‘it is a fact’.If a person has even a momentary doubt about whether or nothe is bound, then he will bind karma. Beyond any doubt, theSelf is unbound.Who Attains Moksha?Questioner: How can we differentiate between death,mukti and moksha?Dadashri: If you are really Chandubhai, then you willsurely face death (mrutyu), and if You are Shiva (the Self), thenYou have mukti (first stage of moksha) and the fruit of thatmukti is moksha (second stage). Mukti should happen here. Ihave attained mukti.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4231232 Aptavani-4(24)Conviction On the Path to MokshaAttaining Moksha - Clear Vision for ThisQuestioner: For someone who seeks moksha, whatreligion would he need?Dadashri: He needs Atma-dharma (religion of the Self).Questioner: In what attire does one attain moksha?Dadashri: Attire and moksha do not have anything to dowith each other. Whether one runs around naked or clothed, itdoes not matter. Moksha can be attained in any attire.Questioner: At what spiritual level can one attainmoksha?Dadashri: Moksha is attained through the vitaragdharma (religion). You attain moksha at the level of theVitarag.Questioner: In what state does one attain moksha?Dadashri: In the vitarag state.Questioner: In which sect or division is true religionfound? What is a sect? Is there any need for them?Dadashri: All sects are incomplete religions; ‘relative’religion. Where there is any kind of partiality or bias, there is nomoksha. ‘Real’ religion is absent. True religion (dharma) doesnot exist in sects, because they are all ekantik (individualizedperspective; narrow-minded).Questioner: How can we recognize a sadguru?Dadashri: A Sadguru is someone who has the constantawareness of the Atma (Self) all day and night. You will havenever come across his speech in any of the scriptures, nor everhave heard speech like his, and yet you experience it.Questioner: How can we say that this is indeed thesadguru?Dadashri: If you feel tranquility in his presence, then heis the sadguru.Questioner: What are the qualities of a sadguru?Dadashri: He is free of all kashays (anger, pride, deceitand greed).Questioner: Where can sadgurus be found in this timecycle?Dadashri: He is sitting in front of you.Questioner: What do we have to do to attain thesadguru’s grace?Dadashri: Absolute humility (param vinaya).Questioner: Samyaktva (right understanding), beej-Gnan (seed of Gnan) or bodha-beej (beginning of Gnan) areconsidered main components of religion, so how can one attainthem?Dadashri: From a sadguru who is free of kashay.Questioner: How does religion originate or how can weattain religion?Dadashri: Through a sadguru who has no kashay.Questioner: By what ritual (kriya; deed) or doing what,do we acquire religion?Aptavani-4231232 Aptavani-4(24)Conviction On the Path to MokshaAttaining Moksha - Clear Vision for ThisQuestioner: For someone who seeks moksha, whatreligion would he need?Dadashri: He needs Atma-dharma (religion of the Self).Questioner: In what attire does one attain moksha?Dadashri: Attire and moksha do not have anything to dowith each other. Whether one runs around naked or clothed, itdoes not matter. Moksha can be attained in any attire.Questioner: At what spiritual level can one attainmoksha?Dadashri: Moksha is attained through the vitaragdharma (religion). You attain moksha at the level of theVitarag.Questioner: In what state does one attain moksha?Dadashri: In the vitarag state.Questioner: In which sect or division is true religionfound? What is a sect? Is there any need for them?Dadashri: All sects are incomplete religions; ‘relative’religion. Where there is any kind of partiality or bias, there is nomoksha. ‘Real’ religion is absent. True religion (dharma) doesnot exist in sects, because they are all ekantik (individualizedperspective; narrow-minded).Questioner: How can we recognize a sadguru?Dadashri: A Sadguru is someone who has the constantawareness of the Atma (Self) all day and night. You will havenever come across his speech in any of the scriptures, nor everhave heard speech like his, and yet you experience it.Questioner: How can we say that this is indeed thesadguru?Dadashri: If you feel tranquility in his presence, then heis the sadguru.Questioner: What are the qualities of a sadguru?Dadashri: He is free of all kashays (anger, pride, deceitand greed).Questioner: Where can sadgurus be found in this timecycle?Dadashri: He is sitting in front of you.Questioner: What do we have to do to attain thesadguru’s grace?Dadashri: Absolute humility (param vinaya).Questioner: Samyaktva (right understanding), beej-Gnan (seed of Gnan) or bodha-beej (beginning of Gnan) areconsidered main components of religion, so how can one attainthem?Dadashri: From a sadguru who is free of kashay.Questioner: How does religion originate or how can weattain religion?Dadashri: Through a sadguru who has no kashay.Questioner: By what ritual (kriya; deed) or doing what,do we acquire religion?Aptavani-4233234Aptavani-4Dadashri: Religion is attained through Gnan kriya(knowledge; it means to Know and remain as the Self) anddarshan kriya (vision; it means to See and remain as the Self).Questioner: By what means do we attain religion(dharma)? What is considered religion (dharma)?Dadashri: In order to attain religion your spiritualreadiness (upadaan) should be there. What is consideredreligion? When kashays decrease, then You will know thatreligion has arisen. Know that You have attained religion, whenyour kashays have gone.Questioner: How can we become still in religion (dharma)?Dadashri: By awakening upadaan (spiritual readiness),You can find stillness.Questioner: What is the simple and straightforwardsolution to moksha?Dadashri: The path of moksha becomes easy throughserving the Gnani Purush who is free from all kashays.Questioner: What sort of tools do we need to attainmoksha?Dadashri: One attains moksha through Gnan (knowledgeof the Self). Moksha can be attained with sadgnan (rightknowledge) and Atmagnan (knowledge of the Self).Moksha Is the ‘self’ Knowing the SelfQuestioner: How does it benefit the self (worldly self),unless the conviction of the Atma (Self) arises from within? TheAtma has understood that it is completely separate from themind, speech and body, and all other substances, but until itbecomes free from the states of ‘doership’ and the states ofsuffering and pleasure in the worldly life (sansar); until thathappens, how is one to progress in religion?Dadashri: Once you have the conviction (pratiti), aboutthe Gnani, it is inevitable that you will have the conviction(pratiti) of the Self. After You attain the conviction (pratiti) ofthe Self, and after You attain the awareness (laksha) of the Self,You cease to be doer-sufferer (karta-bhokta) in the worldly life(sansar). The worldly activities continue on their own.Questioner: Under the present circumstances, I do notfeel that it is possible to live a worldly life and at the same timebe on the path of moksha.Dadashri: It is not just a possibility, but it is somethingthat you can experience. You will understand it when Youexperience it. You may not think it possible, but it is somethingthat you can experience. This is because the two things areseparate, and it is possible to experience each one separately.People believe that the Atma (Soul) is same as ‘I am’. To callthat Soul (Atma), is wrong. At the moment, it is the ‘mechanical’atma (self) that they are referring to when they say, ‘I am’. Theoriginal (dar assal) Atma (Soul) is separate from that. Whenyou attain the awareness of the ‘original Soul’, you will becomeaware of the Atma (the Soul). It is then that ‘I’ will ‘fit’ into theoriginal Self (Soul). The Self (the Soul) has its astitva(existence), its vastutva (elemental substance; the Self) and itspurnatva (the state of being complete; absolute state). Allpeople are aware of their existence (astitva), but not theirvastutva (real nature or what they truly are), so when ‘we’ givethem the awareness of vastutva (Self-realization), one ‘fits’ into‘ones’ own Self; moving towards purnatva (absoluteness).Thereafter, You (the Self) remain in your own nature, the pudgal(the non-Self complex; prakruti) stays in its nature. They areboth separate and therefore, they function separately.The Gnani Purush has all kinds of special spiritualenergies (siddhis) that is why this is possible. He has many kindsof special spiritual energies (siddhis) and of great wonder. ThatAptavani-4233234Aptavani-4Dadashri: Religion is attained through Gnan kriya(knowledge; it means to Know and remain as the Self) anddarshan kriya (vision; it means to See and remain as the Self).Questioner: By what means do we attain religion(dharma)? What is considered religion (dharma)?Dadashri: In order to attain religion your spiritualreadiness (upadaan) should be there. What is consideredreligion? When kashays decrease, then You will know thatreligion has arisen. Know that You have attained religion, whenyour kashays have gone.Questioner: How can we become still in religion (dharma)?Dadashri: By awakening upadaan (spiritual readiness),You can find stillness.Questioner: What is the simple and straightforwardsolution to moksha?Dadashri: The path of moksha becomes easy throughserving the Gnani Purush who is free from all kashays.Questioner: What sort of tools do we need to attainmoksha?Dadashri: One attains moksha through Gnan (knowledgeof the Self). Moksha can be attained with sadgnan (rightknowledge) and Atmagnan (knowledge of the Self).Moksha Is the ‘self’ Knowing the SelfQuestioner: How does it benefit the self (worldly self),unless the conviction of the Atma (Self) arises from within? TheAtma has understood that it is completely separate from themind, speech and body, and all other substances, but until itbecomes free from the states of ‘doership’ and the states ofsuffering and pleasure in the worldly life (sansar); until thathappens, how is one to progress in religion?Dadashri: Once you have the conviction (pratiti), aboutthe Gnani, it is inevitable that you will have the conviction(pratiti) of the Self. After You attain the conviction (pratiti) ofthe Self, and after You attain the awareness (laksha) of the Self,You cease to be doer-sufferer (karta-bhokta) in the worldly life(sansar). The worldly activities continue on their own.Questioner: Under the present circumstances, I do notfeel that it is possible to live a worldly life and at the same timebe on the path of moksha.Dadashri: It is not just a possibility, but it is somethingthat you can experience. You will understand it when Youexperience it. You may not think it possible, but it is somethingthat you can experience. This is because the two things areseparate, and it is possible to experience each one separately.People believe that the Atma (Soul) is same as ‘I am’. To callthat Soul (Atma), is wrong. At the moment, it is the ‘mechanical’atma (self) that they are referring to when they say, ‘I am’. Theoriginal (dar assal) Atma (Soul) is separate from that. Whenyou attain the awareness of the ‘original Soul’, you will becomeaware of the Atma (the Soul). It is then that ‘I’ will ‘fit’ into theoriginal Self (Soul). The Self (the Soul) has its astitva(existence), its vastutva (elemental substance; the Self) and itspurnatva (the state of being complete; absolute state). Allpeople are aware of their existence (astitva), but not theirvastutva (real nature or what they truly are), so when ‘we’ givethem the awareness of vastutva (Self-realization), one ‘fits’ into‘ones’ own Self; moving towards purnatva (absoluteness).Thereafter, You (the Self) remain in your own nature, the pudgal(the non-Self complex; prakruti) stays in its nature. They areboth separate and therefore, they function separately.The Gnani Purush has all kinds of special spiritualenergies (siddhis) that is why this is possible. He has many kindsof special spiritual energies (siddhis) and of great wonder. ThatAptavani-4235236Aptavani-4is because, He has no expectations of any kind; therefore he hasall kinds of siddhis.Questioner: Wouldn’t the worldly life present an obstacleon the path to moksha?Dadashri: Essentially what I am trying to say, is that if theworldly life was indeed an obstacle, then it would mean that allthese sadhus, sanyasis and acharyas who have renounced theirworldly lives, will have had their problem solved; that is what itmeans. But that does not happen. As a matter of fact, theworldly life does not hinder moksha at all. For moksha, it is notthe worldly life that gets in the way; it is ignorance of the Self.The Gnani Purush gives you such a precise and unfailingGnan, that it immediately comes into your vartan (conduct asthe Self; experience). The Gnan that gives results is Gnan.Anything else is not Gnan.Questioner: The path of moksha is a path of liberation(mukti); therefore it should be free of expectations. Then whydo we have to please the Shaashan (guardian) celestial deities(devas and devis), that protect the path?Dadashri: You have to keep pleasing the guardiancelestial deities, because humans in this time cycle, are purva-viradhak. Purva-viradhak means that they are here because intheir past life, they have harmed others in one way or another.And that is why until now, they have wandered aimlessly fromone life to another. The reason for revering the celestial deitiesis so that they will not hold any ‘claim’ against us, nor presentobstacles on our path, allowing us a safe passage to moksha,and giving us their ‘help’. If you have an old dispute with thepeople of this village, if you maintain an inner intent (bhaav) ofreverence towards them, it will end the dispute and moreover,it will make things even better for you.However, even if you are reverent towards the rest of theworld, and not just with the guardian deva-devi, you will farewell. The Shaashan deva-devis will come to your aid,whenever you are confronted by obstacles in their reign or inany religion. With this particular path of moksha, it is notpossible to go directly to moksha from here. In this path, youwill still have one or two more lifetimes before you can attain thefinal moksha (liberation). This time cycle (kaad) is so peculiar,that a person brings with him, karma which is ‘compressed’, sothat no matter if he flies around in a plane all day long, he nevergets his work done. Therefore, one or two lifetimes worth ofkarma remain pending.So wouldn’t you call this moksha? You can experiencemoksha here and now. You will experience the awareness ofseparation; ‘I have become separated’.Questioner: In your opinion, which is the right day (tithi)for Jains to observe, chotha (fourth day of lunar fortnight) orpancham (fifth day)?Dadashri: Whatever is convenient for you, is right.Anything which allows you to do dharma (religion), is right, andanything that causes adharma (harm) is wrong.Questioner: Whom can you call a Jain?Dadashri: Jina means Atmagnani (the Knower of theSelf) and Jineshwar means Tirthankar (The Absolute Savior;Absolutely enlightened One). Someone who listens to a Jina orJineshwar is considered Jain. Someone who has heard it, hasfaith in it and has observed it to an extent, is referred to as ashravak, and someone who observes it fully is a sadhu.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4235236Aptavani-4is because, He has no expectations of any kind; therefore he hasall kinds of siddhis.Questioner: Wouldn’t the worldly life present an obstacleon the path to moksha?Dadashri: Essentially what I am trying to say, is that if theworldly life was indeed an obstacle, then it would mean that allthese sadhus, sanyasis and acharyas who have renounced theirworldly lives, will have had their problem solved; that is what itmeans. But that does not happen. As a matter of fact, theworldly life does not hinder moksha at all. For moksha, it is notthe worldly life that gets in the way; it is ignorance of the Self.The Gnani Purush gives you such a precise and unfailingGnan, that it immediately comes into your vartan (conduct asthe Self; experience). The Gnan that gives results is Gnan.Anything else is not Gnan.Questioner: The path of moksha is a path of liberation(mukti); therefore it should be free of expectations. Then whydo we have to please the Shaashan (guardian) celestial deities(devas and devis), that protect the path?Dadashri: You have to keep pleasing the guardiancelestial deities, because humans in this time cycle, are purva-viradhak. Purva-viradhak means that they are here because intheir past life, they have harmed others in one way or another.And that is why until now, they have wandered aimlessly fromone life to another. The reason for revering the celestial deitiesis so that they will not hold any ‘claim’ against us, nor presentobstacles on our path, allowing us a safe passage to moksha,and giving us their ‘help’. If you have an old dispute with thepeople of this village, if you maintain an inner intent (bhaav) ofreverence towards them, it will end the dispute and moreover,it will make things even better for you.However, even if you are reverent towards the rest of theworld, and not just with the guardian deva-devi, you will farewell. The Shaashan deva-devis will come to your aid,whenever you are confronted by obstacles in their reign or inany religion. With this particular path of moksha, it is notpossible to go directly to moksha from here. In this path, youwill still have one or two more lifetimes before you can attain thefinal moksha (liberation). This time cycle (kaad) is so peculiar,that a person brings with him, karma which is ‘compressed’, sothat no matter if he flies around in a plane all day long, he nevergets his work done. Therefore, one or two lifetimes worth ofkarma remain pending.So wouldn’t you call this moksha? You can experiencemoksha here and now. You will experience the awareness ofseparation; ‘I have become separated’.Questioner: In your opinion, which is the right day (tithi)for Jains to observe, chotha (fourth day of lunar fortnight) orpancham (fifth day)?Dadashri: Whatever is convenient for you, is right.Anything which allows you to do dharma (religion), is right, andanything that causes adharma (harm) is wrong.Questioner: Whom can you call a Jain?Dadashri: Jina means Atmagnani (the Knower of theSelf) and Jineshwar means Tirthankar (The Absolute Savior;Absolutely enlightened One). Someone who listens to a Jina orJineshwar is considered Jain. Someone who has heard it, hasfaith in it and has observed it to an extent, is referred to as ashravak, and someone who observes it fully is a sadhu.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4237238Aptavani-4(25)I and MyHow Can ‘I’ Become Separate?I came across a German couple when I went to Lonavala.What were their names?Questioner: Susan and Lloyd.Dadashri: I asked them, “Would you like to beimmersed in ‘I’ or ‘My’? There are ponds of this ‘I’ and ‘My’.Those who have been immersed in the pond of ‘I’ have neverdied, while those who are immersed in the pond of ‘My’ havenever lived.” So they said, “We want it to be such, that we willnever have to die again.” So I explained, “There is no worry in‘I’. Don’t worry for ‘My’. ‘I’ is immortal, ‘My’ is mortal.”Therefore, separate ‘I’ and ‘My’!Within just half an hour they understood this and theywere delighted.Questioner: But how do I understand ‘I’ as separate?Dadashri: What is your name?Questioner: Chandubhai.Dadashri: Who are you?Questioner: Chandubhai.Dadashri: Don’t you recognize the contradiction between‘I am Chandubhai’, and ‘My name is Chandubhai’? When yousay, “I am definitely Chandubhai,” do you mean you are also thehand?Questioner: No, the hand is mine.Dadashri: Look, first take away the name from what youbelieve to be ‘I.’ Then take away all the things that are clearlyvisible on the outside. Do you experience that this name isseparate from you? Anything that comes under ‘My’ is worthdeducting. Both ‘I’ and ‘My’ are always separate; they neverbecome one. After you take away the name, do the same for therest: This is my hand, This is my body, My eyes, My ears…keep subtracting all these organs. After you have subtracted allthe physical tangible things, then take away: My mind, Myintellect, My chit, My egoism. Subtract all that. Once you havededucted all the things that come under My-My, whatever thatremains, is chetan (the Self). Nothing else should remainbesides that chetan (the Self). Everything in ‘My’ is all pudgal(the non-Self complex); it is of the non-Self (parbharyu). ‘I’and ‘My’ are completely separate. ‘My’ is a temporaryadjustment and ‘I’ is the permanent adjustment.Questioner: What should one do to get rid of ‘My’?Dadashri: I can show you the way, but you will not beable to do it. It is complex and this time cycle (kaad) isaltogether strange. That is why you will need my help. You willnot be able to subtract all the ‘My’ from the ‘I’. You will be ableto take away the drashti-gamya (that which is visible). Then,you will be able to separate the two through buddhi-gamya (theintellectual). But you will not be able to subtract whatever liesbeyond buddhi-gamya. Only the Gnani can do that. You willnot be able to get rid of the final the subtlest (sookshmatam)ego. For that, you will need the Gnani Purush. I will separateeverything for you. Thereafter, You will continue to experience ‘Iam pure Soul (Shuddhatma).’ You should be able to experiencethat. Besides that, I will also give you the divine vision(divyachakshu) with which You will see the Atma (Soul) inevery living being (atmavat sarva bhuteshu).Aptavani-4237238Aptavani-4(25)I and MyHow Can ‘I’ Become Separate?I came across a German couple when I went to Lonavala.What were their names?Questioner: Susan and Lloyd.Dadashri: I asked them, “Would you like to beimmersed in ‘I’ or ‘My’? There are ponds of this ‘I’ and ‘My’.Those who have been immersed in the pond of ‘I’ have neverdied, while those who are immersed in the pond of ‘My’ havenever lived.” So they said, “We want it to be such, that we willnever have to die again.” So I explained, “There is no worry in‘I’. Don’t worry for ‘My’. ‘I’ is immortal, ‘My’ is mortal.”Therefore, separate ‘I’ and ‘My’!Within just half an hour they understood this and theywere delighted.Questioner: But how do I understand ‘I’ as separate?Dadashri: What is your name?Questioner: Chandubhai.Dadashri: Who are you?Questioner: Chandubhai.Dadashri: Don’t you recognize the contradiction between‘I am Chandubhai’, and ‘My name is Chandubhai’? When yousay, “I am definitely Chandubhai,” do you mean you are also thehand?Questioner: No, the hand is mine.Dadashri: Look, first take away the name from what youbelieve to be ‘I.’ Then take away all the things that are clearlyvisible on the outside. Do you experience that this name isseparate from you? Anything that comes under ‘My’ is worthdeducting. Both ‘I’ and ‘My’ are always separate; they neverbecome one. After you take away the name, do the same for therest: This is my hand, This is my body, My eyes, My ears…keep subtracting all these organs. After you have subtracted allthe physical tangible things, then take away: My mind, Myintellect, My chit, My egoism. Subtract all that. Once you havededucted all the things that come under My-My, whatever thatremains, is chetan (the Self). Nothing else should remainbesides that chetan (the Self). Everything in ‘My’ is all pudgal(the non-Self complex); it is of the non-Self (parbharyu). ‘I’and ‘My’ are completely separate. ‘My’ is a temporaryadjustment and ‘I’ is the permanent adjustment.Questioner: What should one do to get rid of ‘My’?Dadashri: I can show you the way, but you will not beable to do it. It is complex and this time cycle (kaad) isaltogether strange. That is why you will need my help. You willnot be able to subtract all the ‘My’ from the ‘I’. You will be ableto take away the drashti-gamya (that which is visible). Then,you will be able to separate the two through buddhi-gamya (theintellectual). But you will not be able to subtract whatever liesbeyond buddhi-gamya. Only the Gnani can do that. You willnot be able to get rid of the final the subtlest (sookshmatam)ego. For that, you will need the Gnani Purush. I will separateeverything for you. Thereafter, You will continue to experience ‘Iam pure Soul (Shuddhatma).’ You should be able to experiencethat. Besides that, I will also give you the divine vision(divyachakshu) with which You will see the Atma (Soul) inevery living being (atmavat sarva bhuteshu).Aptavani-4239240Aptavani-4Only Gnani Gives Original SolutionsShouldn’t we put a ‘Demarcation line’ between the ‘I’ and‘My’? One being a ‘Spiritual Adjustment’ and the other,‘Mechanical Adjustment’; the two need to be separated. Or elsehow would you tell which one is India and which one isPakistan? Because a ‘line of demarcation’ (between I and my)has not been placed, there are conflicts every day. ‘My’ is completely mechanical. ‘I’ is not mechanical. ‘I’is Absolute.Nature helps ‘My’ in every way. Therefore, do not stickyour hands into ‘My’. All You have to do is just ‘see’ (keepwatching). This ‘machine’ (the non-Self complex) will continueto receive its fuel, water and air. And even that will be more‘tasteful’ and you will get it ‘free of cost’!In the worldly life (sansar), the ‘My’ eats up all the weightof the ‘I’, so that now the ‘I’ is five pounds and the ‘My’ is ahundred thousand pounds. If the weight of ‘My’ went down, theweight of ‘I’ would increase.The ‘I’ is God (the Self) and the ‘My’ is illusoryattachment (maya). ‘My’ is Relative to ‘I’. ‘I’ is Real. TheAtma’s attributes, if projected on to the ‘I’, will result in greatincrease in ‘your’ energies. Without the Gnani, you will neverbe able to know the main Atma; however, the ‘I’ and ‘My’ are“Complete separate”. If everyone, including foreigners,understood just this much, most of their problems would lessenconsiderably. Foreign scientists are quick to grasp thisdiscussion. This is a science. This is a fundamentally uniquespiritual research of Akram Vignan. ‘I’ and ‘My’ areabsolutely separate. ‘I’ is the natural state of the Self, whereas‘My’ is a sense of ownership.The foreigners keep trying to research into reincarnation.To them I say, instead, why they do not figure out whether the‘I’ and ‘My’ are indeed Separate? Do they not say, “My birth”and “My death”?You may use the word ‘My’ in your worldly interactions(vyavahar), but it should be purely “dramatic” (play-acting).You can use it after separating the ‘I’ from it. ‘My’ is forbhogavavoo (suffering; pleasure) but not meant to ‘Reinvite’(create new karma). ‘Complete Happiness’ belongs to ‘I’without ‘My’.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4239240Aptavani-4Only Gnani Gives Original SolutionsShouldn’t we put a ‘Demarcation line’ between the ‘I’ and‘My’? One being a ‘Spiritual Adjustment’ and the other,‘Mechanical Adjustment’; the two need to be separated. Or elsehow would you tell which one is India and which one isPakistan? Because a ‘line of demarcation’ (between I and my)has not been placed, there are conflicts every day. ‘My’ is completely mechanical. ‘I’ is not mechanical. ‘I’is Absolute.Nature helps ‘My’ in every way. Therefore, do not stickyour hands into ‘My’. All You have to do is just ‘see’ (keepwatching). This ‘machine’ (the non-Self complex) will continueto receive its fuel, water and air. And even that will be more‘tasteful’ and you will get it ‘free of cost’!In the worldly life (sansar), the ‘My’ eats up all the weightof the ‘I’, so that now the ‘I’ is five pounds and the ‘My’ is ahundred thousand pounds. If the weight of ‘My’ went down, theweight of ‘I’ would increase.The ‘I’ is God (the Self) and the ‘My’ is illusoryattachment (maya). ‘My’ is Relative to ‘I’. ‘I’ is Real. TheAtma’s attributes, if projected on to the ‘I’, will result in greatincrease in ‘your’ energies. Without the Gnani, you will neverbe able to know the main Atma; however, the ‘I’ and ‘My’ are“Complete separate”. If everyone, including foreigners,understood just this much, most of their problems would lessenconsiderably. Foreign scientists are quick to grasp thisdiscussion. This is a science. This is a fundamentally uniquespiritual research of Akram Vignan. ‘I’ and ‘My’ areabsolutely separate. ‘I’ is the natural state of the Self, whereas‘My’ is a sense of ownership.The foreigners keep trying to research into reincarnation.To them I say, instead, why they do not figure out whether the‘I’ and ‘My’ are indeed Separate? Do they not say, “My birth”and “My death”?You may use the word ‘My’ in your worldly interactions(vyavahar), but it should be purely “dramatic” (play-acting).You can use it after separating the ‘I’ from it. ‘My’ is forbhogavavoo (suffering; pleasure) but not meant to ‘Reinvite’(create new karma). ‘Complete Happiness’ belongs to ‘I’without ‘My’.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4241242Aptavani-4(26)Memory Is Dependent on Raag-DweshWith Intense Memory Comes Intense Raag-Dwesh!I do not even remember what day it will be tomorrow,and yet this world still carries on. If I ask, there will be threepeople ready to say it is Sunday. There are many people toremember that.Whom can you consider to have become a Vitarag? It ishe who does not remember anything except for the Atma (Self),and all the tools that help him attain the Self.The more the memory goes, the more vitarag youbecome. The Vitarag has no memory (smruti) of any kind. Notremembering the worldly life (vismruti) itself is moksha.People try very hard to increase the power of theirmemory (smaran shakti). But there is no such thing as memorypower. Memory power is a result of attachment-abhorrence(raag-dwesh). I do not have any attachment-abhorrence andtherefore, I have no memory power. You can tell from yourmemory where you have attachment and where you haveabhorrence. That is why people have tried to look for ways toforget the world.Questioner: Would that mean, that if someone passes hisexams with first class, he has a lot of attachment-abhorrence?Dadashri: He will get higher marks in where his ‘interest’lies. If he likes (has raag for) History, he will attain higher marksin that. There are some children who cannot remember anythingin their studies. We realize that they do not have any interest intheir studies; whereas in the things that interest them, theydisplay a good memory. You become an ‘expert’ in things thatyou have attachment (raag) for. I had attachment (raag)towards spirituality, and that is why I became an ‘expert’ in it.Many people have a tremendous attachment for scriptures,which is why they have such an intense memory for them. Whenthe attachment (raag) for the Atma (Self) develops, worldly life(sansar) and everywhere else, is cast into oblivion.It Is Difficult to Remember, It Is Difficult toForget!Questioner: Today, I remembered something that I hadnot thought about for the past fifteen years. What would you callthat? What kind of attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh) is that?Dadashri: That is dependent on the attachment-abhorrence(raag-dwesh). There are certain things that come into yourmemory frequently, and there are certain things that only comewhen the time for it has matured to yield its result.Questioner: Why is it easy to remember things, butdifficult to forget them?Dadashri: It is not easy to remember and it is also noteasy to forget; they are both difficult. Those who cannotremember, find it very difficult to remember. Then wouldn’t it bequite easy for them to forget? And those who can remember alot, find it very difficult to forget.Questioner: I have a question. How can we be free fromthe memories of this world? How can we forget?Dadashri: It is impossible to forget the world even for anhour. Even if you were to spend thousands of rupees, trying toforget just an hour’s worth of this world, it would not beAptavani-4241242Aptavani-4(26)Memory Is Dependent on Raag-DweshWith Intense Memory Comes Intense Raag-Dwesh!I do not even remember what day it will be tomorrow,and yet this world still carries on. If I ask, there will be threepeople ready to say it is Sunday. There are many people toremember that.Whom can you consider to have become a Vitarag? It ishe who does not remember anything except for the Atma (Self),and all the tools that help him attain the Self.The more the memory goes, the more vitarag youbecome. The Vitarag has no memory (smruti) of any kind. Notremembering the worldly life (vismruti) itself is moksha.People try very hard to increase the power of theirmemory (smaran shakti). But there is no such thing as memorypower. Memory power is a result of attachment-abhorrence(raag-dwesh). I do not have any attachment-abhorrence andtherefore, I have no memory power. You can tell from yourmemory where you have attachment and where you haveabhorrence. That is why people have tried to look for ways toforget the world.Questioner: Would that mean, that if someone passes hisexams with first class, he has a lot of attachment-abhorrence?Dadashri: He will get higher marks in where his ‘interest’lies. If he likes (has raag for) History, he will attain higher marksin that. There are some children who cannot remember anythingin their studies. We realize that they do not have any interest intheir studies; whereas in the things that interest them, theydisplay a good memory. You become an ‘expert’ in things thatyou have attachment (raag) for. I had attachment (raag)towards spirituality, and that is why I became an ‘expert’ in it.Many people have a tremendous attachment for scriptures,which is why they have such an intense memory for them. Whenthe attachment (raag) for the Atma (Self) develops, worldly life(sansar) and everywhere else, is cast into oblivion.It Is Difficult to Remember, It Is Difficult toForget!Questioner: Today, I remembered something that I hadnot thought about for the past fifteen years. What would you callthat? What kind of attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh) is that?Dadashri: That is dependent on the attachment-abhorrence(raag-dwesh). There are certain things that come into yourmemory frequently, and there are certain things that only comewhen the time for it has matured to yield its result.Questioner: Why is it easy to remember things, butdifficult to forget them?Dadashri: It is not easy to remember and it is also noteasy to forget; they are both difficult. Those who cannotremember, find it very difficult to remember. Then wouldn’t it bequite easy for them to forget? And those who can remember alot, find it very difficult to forget.Questioner: I have a question. How can we be free fromthe memories of this world? How can we forget?Dadashri: It is impossible to forget the world even for anhour. Even if you were to spend thousands of rupees, trying toforget just an hour’s worth of this world, it would not beAptavani-4243244Aptavani-4possible to do so. You will remember all sorts of things. Whileyou are eating you will only remember your sick relatives! Nowwhy would you be reminded about a sick person during yourmealtime? So it is primarily memory, that harasses people.Questioner: But then I question how I would deal withpaying sales tax and income tax, if I forget about the world. Willthat not get me into trouble?Dadashri: It is not like that. It is possible for the worldto remain out of your mind, and your work in the world to goon as well. On the contrary, it will occur spontaneously andnaturally.The Gnani Is Beyond Use of MemoryIt is memory that gives rise to misery (dukh). I hadtremendous memory prior to this Gnan, and it caused me lot ofmisery. It would keep me up at night. From that, I was able todeduce where misery (dukh) lies. Looking at it this way, I washappy in every way, but there was endless dukh because of thismemory. I would remember many things at a time. But memoryis a paudgalik (of the non-Self) matter; it is not chetan (of theSelf). Then after Gnan I began to ‘see’. It was not a ‘vision’from memory, but it was a direct and exact ‘vision’. Questioner: You say that you do not have any memory,but today when you give examples of incidents that took placeten years ago, you describe it exactly just as it happened. Itseems to come out in a systematic manner, in the same ‘link’,word for word, just like a recording. What would you say thatis? What kind of power (shakti; energy) is that?Dadashri: ‘Memory’ is dependent on attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh), and that is why it is never exact. Thatwhich comes out of me is based on the vision (darshan);therefore, it is exact. I can see everything, from the time I was fouryears old, until now. I do not have to think about it or recallanything. If I look back to the age of fourteen, I can seeeverything or if I look back on age twenty, then I can see that too.When someone comes to ask me questions, I have to firstassess his ‘file’ and then give my answers accordingly. Myanswers will be in ‘connection’ with what I had told him earlierand what the present situation is now. Everyone’s ‘file’ isdifferent and therefore, the answers are all different. The answerdepends on the ‘file’. Now someone may ask, “Dada, whydon’t you have the same answer for everyone?” That cannot beso. Everyone’s ‘files’ are different, everyone’s ailment isdifferent, and that is why I have different ‘bottles’ and different‘medicines’. Everyone’s ups and downs are different. In mysiddhantik (involving principle) discussions there can be nochanges. No one can ever put a cross over it in any time period– past, present or future. These solutions to the worldlyquestions depend upon the questioner (nimit; the instrumentalsource).Whatever you make me remember, I can envision it all.Even if Kanubhai (Dadashri’s business partner’s son), were totell me something about our business, I can see everything. I cansee the bridge and all its supporting beams, I can see what iswhere, and where it is not; I can see all that. When you remindme, I place the upayog (applied awareness) and I can seeeverything in its proper order.Questioner: So you see it through upayog (appliedawareness), right?Dadashri: As soon as someone reminds me, the upayoggoes straight there. If the upayog did not go there, there wouldbe a breakdown in the worldly interaction (vyavahar).Prashasta Raag Is a ‘Cause’ for MokshaWhen the time comes, ‘we’ remember everything. ‘We’still have attachment (raag) for satsang. That is why when it isAptavani-4243244Aptavani-4possible to do so. You will remember all sorts of things. Whileyou are eating you will only remember your sick relatives! Nowwhy would you be reminded about a sick person during yourmealtime? So it is primarily memory, that harasses people.Questioner: But then I question how I would deal withpaying sales tax and income tax, if I forget about the world. Willthat not get me into trouble?Dadashri: It is not like that. It is possible for the worldto remain out of your mind, and your work in the world to goon as well. On the contrary, it will occur spontaneously andnaturally.The Gnani Is Beyond Use of MemoryIt is memory that gives rise to misery (dukh). I hadtremendous memory prior to this Gnan, and it caused me lot ofmisery. It would keep me up at night. From that, I was able todeduce where misery (dukh) lies. Looking at it this way, I washappy in every way, but there was endless dukh because of thismemory. I would remember many things at a time. But memoryis a paudgalik (of the non-Self) matter; it is not chetan (of theSelf). Then after Gnan I began to ‘see’. It was not a ‘vision’from memory, but it was a direct and exact ‘vision’. Questioner: You say that you do not have any memory,but today when you give examples of incidents that took placeten years ago, you describe it exactly just as it happened. Itseems to come out in a systematic manner, in the same ‘link’,word for word, just like a recording. What would you say thatis? What kind of power (shakti; energy) is that?Dadashri: ‘Memory’ is dependent on attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh), and that is why it is never exact. Thatwhich comes out of me is based on the vision (darshan);therefore, it is exact. I can see everything, from the time I was fouryears old, until now. I do not have to think about it or recallanything. If I look back to the age of fourteen, I can seeeverything or if I look back on age twenty, then I can see that too.When someone comes to ask me questions, I have to firstassess his ‘file’ and then give my answers accordingly. Myanswers will be in ‘connection’ with what I had told him earlierand what the present situation is now. Everyone’s ‘file’ isdifferent and therefore, the answers are all different. The answerdepends on the ‘file’. Now someone may ask, “Dada, whydon’t you have the same answer for everyone?” That cannot beso. Everyone’s ‘files’ are different, everyone’s ailment isdifferent, and that is why I have different ‘bottles’ and different‘medicines’. Everyone’s ups and downs are different. In mysiddhantik (involving principle) discussions there can be nochanges. No one can ever put a cross over it in any time period– past, present or future. These solutions to the worldlyquestions depend upon the questioner (nimit; the instrumentalsource).Whatever you make me remember, I can envision it all.Even if Kanubhai (Dadashri’s business partner’s son), were totell me something about our business, I can see everything. I cansee the bridge and all its supporting beams, I can see what iswhere, and where it is not; I can see all that. When you remindme, I place the upayog (applied awareness) and I can seeeverything in its proper order.Questioner: So you see it through upayog (appliedawareness), right?Dadashri: As soon as someone reminds me, the upayoggoes straight there. If the upayog did not go there, there wouldbe a breakdown in the worldly interaction (vyavahar).Prashasta Raag Is a ‘Cause’ for MokshaWhen the time comes, ‘we’ remember everything. ‘We’still have attachment (raag) for satsang. That is why when it isAptavani-4245246Aptavani-4time for satsang, ‘we’ remember about going to satsang. ‘We’also have attachment (raag) for mahatmas. This form ofattachment is considered prashasta raag (attachment of thehighest kind – it leads to the Self). It does not bind karma, butit does create an account with Mahavideh Kshetra. Everyone hasto go to the Lord Simandhar Swami in Mahavideh Kshetra. Thatis why you should understand about Him and become familiarwith Him. That is why I keep making you sing in praise of Him.Questioner: And what if we keep remembering ‘Dada’?Dadashri: That is prashasta raag. Prashasta raagmakes you vitarag. Such attachment is worth having! One hasto remove attachment from everywhere else and place it in this.There is an enormous difference between the attachment for allthat leads to the Atma (the Self) and the attachment for thebody. The attachment (mamata) for the goal that leads to theAtma (Self), is the attachment for the Atma, which willultimately give you your liberation.So many people are like jada (lacking sensitivity;impervious or without care). Even these people do not have theability to remember. Lack of memory without Self-realization, isthe same as being inanimate (jada). When you eat a lot, sleepa lot and become slothful, it will make the mind ‘dull’. It will takeyou to a lower life-form.Memory Is a Huge ParigrahaWhat is acquisitiveness (parigraha)? It is something thatyou keep remembering. ‘Is the ring still on my finger? Has itfallen off?’ If you are not reminded of this, then you are freefrom acquisitiveness (aparigrahi). You cannot become freefrom acquisitiveness (aparigrahi) through renunciation. On thecontrary, the more you try to renounce something, the more youwill remember it.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(27)Open and StraightforwardNikhalasata Makes One Fearless!I have no problem with you not reading books or notknowing anything. But become open and straightforward(nikhalas). Truly nikhalas. Thereafter, knowledge that makesthe one who is open and straightforward (nikhalas) shine, willmanifest automatically.Questioner: Being nikhalas (candid and guileless) in theworldly interactions (vyavahar) can cause problems.Dadashri: But no one can be nikhalas. Only afterattaining the knowledge of the Self (Atmagnan) can onebecome nikhalas.Questioner: We would be considered fools if webecame nikhalas in our worldly life.Dadashri: Fools can never be nikhalas (open andstraightforward). People consider them as honest (nikhalas).Someone who is nikhalas is different altogether. He would befrank and honest (nikhalas) in everything he does, not just oneor two things.Questioner: Please explain nikhalas more clearly.Dadashri: A nikhalas person is a very ‘pure’ person. Heis not just a human; he is a superhuman. Only then can hebecome nikhalas. A nikhalas person is very pure andtransparent. He does not have a single impure thought. NowAptavani-4245246Aptavani-4time for satsang, ‘we’ remember about going to satsang. ‘We’also have attachment (raag) for mahatmas. This form ofattachment is considered prashasta raag (attachment of thehighest kind – it leads to the Self). It does not bind karma, butit does create an account with Mahavideh Kshetra. Everyone hasto go to the Lord Simandhar Swami in Mahavideh Kshetra. Thatis why you should understand about Him and become familiarwith Him. That is why I keep making you sing in praise of Him.Questioner: And what if we keep remembering ‘Dada’?Dadashri: That is prashasta raag. Prashasta raagmakes you vitarag. Such attachment is worth having! One hasto remove attachment from everywhere else and place it in this.There is an enormous difference between the attachment for allthat leads to the Atma (the Self) and the attachment for thebody. The attachment (mamata) for the goal that leads to theAtma (Self), is the attachment for the Atma, which willultimately give you your liberation.So many people are like jada (lacking sensitivity;impervious or without care). Even these people do not have theability to remember. Lack of memory without Self-realization, isthe same as being inanimate (jada). When you eat a lot, sleepa lot and become slothful, it will make the mind ‘dull’. It will takeyou to a lower life-form.Memory Is a Huge ParigrahaWhat is acquisitiveness (parigraha)? It is something thatyou keep remembering. ‘Is the ring still on my finger? Has itfallen off?’ If you are not reminded of this, then you are freefrom acquisitiveness (aparigrahi). You cannot become freefrom acquisitiveness (aparigrahi) through renunciation. On thecontrary, the more you try to renounce something, the more youwill remember it.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(27)Open and StraightforwardNikhalasata Makes One Fearless!I have no problem with you not reading books or notknowing anything. But become open and straightforward(nikhalas). Truly nikhalas. Thereafter, knowledge that makesthe one who is open and straightforward (nikhalas) shine, willmanifest automatically.Questioner: Being nikhalas (candid and guileless) in theworldly interactions (vyavahar) can cause problems.Dadashri: But no one can be nikhalas. Only afterattaining the knowledge of the Self (Atmagnan) can onebecome nikhalas.Questioner: We would be considered fools if webecame nikhalas in our worldly life.Dadashri: Fools can never be nikhalas (open andstraightforward). People consider them as honest (nikhalas).Someone who is nikhalas is different altogether. He would befrank and honest (nikhalas) in everything he does, not just oneor two things.Questioner: Please explain nikhalas more clearly.Dadashri: A nikhalas person is a very ‘pure’ person. Heis not just a human; he is a superhuman. Only then can hebecome nikhalas. A nikhalas person is very pure andtransparent. He does not have a single impure thought. NowAptavani-4247248Aptavani-4does that ever come about? After attaining the knowledge of theSelf one gradually becomes like that.Questioner: Don’t people take advantage of people whoare nikhalas?Dadashri: No. The person who comes to take advantagewould not even be able to come within a hundred feet of him.He will lose courage.Questioner: Does nikhalas mean to stay in one’s ownswaroop (the Self)?Dadashri: When I give you Gnan (knowledge of theSelf), even You remain as the Self. But you would not call thatnikhalasata. A nikhalas person does not have a single thoughtabout worldly life (sansar); his heart is absolutely pure. Youhowever, still have those thoughts and you become engrossed(tanmayakar) in them. You will not become transparent, as longas you have thoughts about your home, your business, sex andany other kinds of thoughts.Questioner: What does a nikhalas person think about?Dadashri: He has no thoughts at all. His mind isconstantly moving at every moment; it becomes samayvarti(prevailing in the alertness of the smallest fraction of time; i.e. itdoes not get stuck on any particular thing; it is always in thepresent moment).A nikhalas person has infinite special energies (siddhis).But, he does not use them. Ultimately, even You will have tobecome like that, will You not?Write an ‘essay’ about what one has to live life for andbring it to me! Write about all the positive sides and the allnegative sides of it. Won’t you have to make some kind ofprogress? How long will you remain as an ordinary man? At theage of thirteen, I had thoughts about becoming an extraordinaryman. To me, ‘ordinary’ meant being like some sort of vegetable.An extraordinary person is not faced with the difficulties that anordinary human faces. An ordinary man cannot help anyone;whereas an extraordinary human exists only to help others. Thatis why the world accepts him.Questioner: How do we define an extraordinary man?Dadashri: Extraordinary means that one becomes helpfulto everyone; to every living being of this world. When onebecomes independent (free), when one transcends the prakruti(the non-Self complex), one becomes extraordinary. An ordinaryhuman will experience helplessness. He will be helpless if youkeep him hungry for three days. So, become extraordinary andthen there will be no end to the bliss within. When you see an important person, it will develop aninferiority complex within you. You are bedazzled by him. Whyare you bedazzled when he is just an ordinary person himself?There is no need for anyone to be afraid of anything in theworld if he becomes nikhalas. Such a person will be‘automatically’ protected. No one can destroy such a person.After attaining the knowledge of the Self there will arise anabsolute state, and no one will be able to hurt or destroy You;no one will even bother You.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4247248Aptavani-4does that ever come about? After attaining the knowledge of theSelf one gradually becomes like that.Questioner: Don’t people take advantage of people whoare nikhalas?Dadashri: No. The person who comes to take advantagewould not even be able to come within a hundred feet of him.He will lose courage.Questioner: Does nikhalas mean to stay in one’s ownswaroop (the Self)?Dadashri: When I give you Gnan (knowledge of theSelf), even You remain as the Self. But you would not call thatnikhalasata. A nikhalas person does not have a single thoughtabout worldly life (sansar); his heart is absolutely pure. Youhowever, still have those thoughts and you become engrossed(tanmayakar) in them. You will not become transparent, as longas you have thoughts about your home, your business, sex andany other kinds of thoughts.Questioner: What does a nikhalas person think about?Dadashri: He has no thoughts at all. His mind isconstantly moving at every moment; it becomes samayvarti(prevailing in the alertness of the smallest fraction of time; i.e. itdoes not get stuck on any particular thing; it is always in thepresent moment).A nikhalas person has infinite special energies (siddhis).But, he does not use them. Ultimately, even You will have tobecome like that, will You not?Write an ‘essay’ about what one has to live life for andbring it to me! Write about all the positive sides and the allnegative sides of it. Won’t you have to make some kind ofprogress? How long will you remain as an ordinary man? At theage of thirteen, I had thoughts about becoming an extraordinaryman. To me, ‘ordinary’ meant being like some sort of vegetable.An extraordinary person is not faced with the difficulties that anordinary human faces. An ordinary man cannot help anyone;whereas an extraordinary human exists only to help others. Thatis why the world accepts him.Questioner: How do we define an extraordinary man?Dadashri: Extraordinary means that one becomes helpfulto everyone; to every living being of this world. When onebecomes independent (free), when one transcends the prakruti(the non-Self complex), one becomes extraordinary. An ordinaryhuman will experience helplessness. He will be helpless if youkeep him hungry for three days. So, become extraordinary andthen there will be no end to the bliss within. When you see an important person, it will develop aninferiority complex within you. You are bedazzled by him. Whyare you bedazzled when he is just an ordinary person himself?There is no need for anyone to be afraid of anything in theworld if he becomes nikhalas. Such a person will be‘automatically’ protected. No one can destroy such a person.After attaining the knowledge of the Self there will arise anabsolute state, and no one will be able to hurt or destroy You;no one will even bother You.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4249250Aptavani-4(28)The Laughter of the Liberated OneFaultlessness Gives Rise to the Liberated Smile!Dadashri: How old are you?Questioner: Seventy.Dadashri: Just look at how even at this age, he looks atme and chuckles like a child! That is called simplicity andstraightforwardness (saradata). Has people’s laughter beensnatched away from them? Why can’t they laugh? One wouldsay it is because of inflexibility and unnaturalness (asaradata).So what I tell them to do, is sit here in satsang, all day long.In doing so, their inflexibility and unnaturalness (asaradata) willgo away and their laughter will open up. I make you do arati(the ritual of waving lamps in front of an idol or a deity whilesinging a hymn), because it opens up your laughter. Laughtershould arise from the naval (unrestricted). Why do you laugh justfrom the throat? It is because you have got impurity in yourmouth. And when you do arati, all that impurity falls out.Questioner: What do you consider a mukta hasya (thesmile and the laughter of the liberated One)?Dadashri: Have you seen such mukta hasya?Questioner: We have seen yours, Dada!Dadashri: Does it seem free and unrestricted to you?Questioner: Yes, it is absolutely the laughter (hasya) ofthe Vitarag (unattached; free).Dadashri: That is called mukta hasya.Questioner: We have encountered circumstances toattain mukta hasya, so how come it has been obstructed?Dadashri: It has not happened, because there are allkinds of ‘ghosts’ within you. No one other than a liberated mancan remove them for you. The liberated One (mukta Purush)can create within you such a mukta hasya through his ownmukta hasya. A person has all kinds of insistence (khench) thatlie within him, and that is why he does not cry at the time ofcrying and laugh at the time of laughing.What creates laughter? Why does this elderly gentlemanlaugh so much? It is because of his innocence (nirdoshata;faultlessness) and because he is sarad (flexible; straightforward).Sarad means flexible. It means that he will bend (adjust) inwhatever direction you want him to, just like gold (malleable).You can mold him anyway you want to, within an hour.Questioner: So does that mean that as faultlessnessincreases, so will mukta hasya?Dadashri: Yes, it is the attribute of faultlessness(nirdoshata). Today, when people with etiquette, laugh at thedinner table, it is considered a polished laugh. It is a new kindof thing altogether, sort of weird and artificial. It is better to bequiet than to have a fake laughter. It is better to speak less, thanto speak artificially.Since this man has been here, he has been experiencing anew sort of bliss that he has not felt before. Only he and I knowthis. That is because he is flexible (sarad) and he experiencesbliss just from my darshan.The Liberated Laughter of the Liberated PurushThe Gnani Purush is in a constant state of liberation, andbecause of that, others become free from within. ‘Our’ mindAptavani-4249250Aptavani-4(28)The Laughter of the Liberated OneFaultlessness Gives Rise to the Liberated Smile!Dadashri: How old are you?Questioner: Seventy.Dadashri: Just look at how even at this age, he looks atme and chuckles like a child! That is called simplicity andstraightforwardness (saradata). Has people’s laughter beensnatched away from them? Why can’t they laugh? One wouldsay it is because of inflexibility and unnaturalness (asaradata).So what I tell them to do, is sit here in satsang, all day long.In doing so, their inflexibility and unnaturalness (asaradata) willgo away and their laughter will open up. I make you do arati(the ritual of waving lamps in front of an idol or a deity whilesinging a hymn), because it opens up your laughter. Laughtershould arise from the naval (unrestricted). Why do you laugh justfrom the throat? It is because you have got impurity in yourmouth. And when you do arati, all that impurity falls out.Questioner: What do you consider a mukta hasya (thesmile and the laughter of the liberated One)?Dadashri: Have you seen such mukta hasya?Questioner: We have seen yours, Dada!Dadashri: Does it seem free and unrestricted to you?Questioner: Yes, it is absolutely the laughter (hasya) ofthe Vitarag (unattached; free).Dadashri: That is called mukta hasya.Questioner: We have encountered circumstances toattain mukta hasya, so how come it has been obstructed?Dadashri: It has not happened, because there are allkinds of ‘ghosts’ within you. No one other than a liberated mancan remove them for you. The liberated One (mukta Purush)can create within you such a mukta hasya through his ownmukta hasya. A person has all kinds of insistence (khench) thatlie within him, and that is why he does not cry at the time ofcrying and laugh at the time of laughing.What creates laughter? Why does this elderly gentlemanlaugh so much? It is because of his innocence (nirdoshata;faultlessness) and because he is sarad (flexible; straightforward).Sarad means flexible. It means that he will bend (adjust) inwhatever direction you want him to, just like gold (malleable).You can mold him anyway you want to, within an hour.Questioner: So does that mean that as faultlessnessincreases, so will mukta hasya?Dadashri: Yes, it is the attribute of faultlessness(nirdoshata). Today, when people with etiquette, laugh at thedinner table, it is considered a polished laugh. It is a new kindof thing altogether, sort of weird and artificial. It is better to bequiet than to have a fake laughter. It is better to speak less, thanto speak artificially.Since this man has been here, he has been experiencing anew sort of bliss that he has not felt before. Only he and I knowthis. That is because he is flexible (sarad) and he experiencesbliss just from my darshan.The Liberated Laughter of the Liberated PurushThe Gnani Purush is in a constant state of liberation, andbecause of that, others become free from within. ‘Our’ mindAptavani-4251252Aptavani-4remains free; it does not get bound even for a moment by anycircumstance. Everyone becomes cheerful just doing darshan ofthe Gnani Purush and by doing so, many karmas aredissipated.Except for the completely vitarag Lord’s, there is noother laughter that is karma-free laughter. Such laughter hasmanifested at such a time (the current time cycle) in the GnaniPurush of the Science of Akram. And it can destroy all thekarma. No matter when you look at the Gnani Purush, evenif you see him at two in the morning, he will still have the samemukta hasya, while other people’s laughter (hasya) is filled withkashays.Questioner: Does mukta hasya stop with vairagya(dispassion towards the worldly life)?Dadashri: In vairagya there is indifference (udaseenta).Udaseenta is incomplete (with reference to liberation); muktahasya is complete.Questioner: While talking to you, sometimes we toolaugh freely. Is that considered mukta hasya?Dadashri: Yes, it is unrestrained at that time. That is howYou get practice. Otherwise, why would we need to recite,‘Dada Bhagwan na aseem jai jaikar ho’? During that time allthe inner garbage comes out and You become free.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(29)Worry: EquanimityWho Remembers the Past Now?Questioner: How can we afford not to worry abouttomorrow?Dadashri: There is never a tomorrow. No one in theworld has seen tomorrow. Whenever you look, it is alwaystoday. Tomorrow is the reason of difficulty. Yesterday means thetime that has passed. Yesterday means the past. So there is noneed at all to worry about tomorrow.Questioner: So then why do you buy tickets in advance?Dadashri: That is an ‘evidence’. Sometimes, it may noteven come true. Don’t you make plans, for example, that youwant to go to Mumbai on the 25th and to Vadodara on the28th? You have that in your vision. You do not see very clearlythrough that vision. You see it through a “blurry” vision. In theexact vision, You can remain still and “see” clearly. The rule isthat you will have a clear vision up to a certain ‘boundary’, andif you go beyond that, then for the time being you will stumble.Do not look at what you do not need to. If you keep lookingat the clock, you are bound to trip over. Therefore, throughthis vision, look only at a certain distance ahead of you as youwalk.When there is no such thing as tomorrow, then what is thepoint? The present time is the now, and the time gone by isyesterday, which is the past. Not even a fool would go lookingfor the past, and tomorrow is in the hands of scientificAptavani-4251252Aptavani-4remains free; it does not get bound even for a moment by anycircumstance. Everyone becomes cheerful just doing darshan ofthe Gnani Purush and by doing so, many karmas aredissipated.Except for the completely vitarag Lord’s, there is noother laughter that is karma-free laughter. Such laughter hasmanifested at such a time (the current time cycle) in the GnaniPurush of the Science of Akram. And it can destroy all thekarma. No matter when you look at the Gnani Purush, evenif you see him at two in the morning, he will still have the samemukta hasya, while other people’s laughter (hasya) is filled withkashays.Questioner: Does mukta hasya stop with vairagya(dispassion towards the worldly life)?Dadashri: In vairagya there is indifference (udaseenta).Udaseenta is incomplete (with reference to liberation); muktahasya is complete.Questioner: While talking to you, sometimes we toolaugh freely. Is that considered mukta hasya?Dadashri: Yes, it is unrestrained at that time. That is howYou get practice. Otherwise, why would we need to recite,‘Dada Bhagwan na aseem jai jaikar ho’? During that time allthe inner garbage comes out and You become free.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(29)Worry: EquanimityWho Remembers the Past Now?Questioner: How can we afford not to worry abouttomorrow?Dadashri: There is never a tomorrow. No one in theworld has seen tomorrow. Whenever you look, it is alwaystoday. Tomorrow is the reason of difficulty. Yesterday means thetime that has passed. Yesterday means the past. So there is noneed at all to worry about tomorrow.Questioner: So then why do you buy tickets in advance?Dadashri: That is an ‘evidence’. Sometimes, it may noteven come true. Don’t you make plans, for example, that youwant to go to Mumbai on the 25th and to Vadodara on the28th? You have that in your vision. You do not see very clearlythrough that vision. You see it through a “blurry” vision. In theexact vision, You can remain still and “see” clearly. The rule isthat you will have a clear vision up to a certain ‘boundary’, andif you go beyond that, then for the time being you will stumble.Do not look at what you do not need to. If you keep lookingat the clock, you are bound to trip over. Therefore, throughthis vision, look only at a certain distance ahead of you as youwalk.When there is no such thing as tomorrow, then what is thepoint? The present time is the now, and the time gone by isyesterday, which is the past. Not even a fool would go lookingfor the past, and tomorrow is in the hands of scientificAptavani-4253254Aptavani-4circumstantial evidence (vyavasthit). Therefore, remain only inthe present; just stay in the present time which is now.Taking Over Another’s Control Leads toWorries!All kinds of difficulties come to a home that has worries!Worrying is an ego. Do you have any control over running allthis? If you take away the control from the one who has thecontrol, then he will not stick his hand in it again. Leave thecontrol in the hands of the controller.Questioner: What should we do so that we do not haveany worries?Dadashri: Turn around. Or else, get rid of your ‘egoism’.If there is a Gnani Purush and if he gives you Gnan, then youwill not have any worries. What is the consequence of worrying?Questioner: I do not know.Dadashri: The consequence, is a birth in the animal life-form. Worrying is an ‘above-normal egoism’.Questioner: I worry a lot.Dadashri: You have relatively fewer worries, which iswhy you have the chance to even come here. These wealthybusinessmen (sheths) do not even have the time to use the toilet.That is how many worries they have. They have two businessesand they want to start a third one! Greed, greed and greed.How much have you decided to earn? One million rupees?!Questioner: The more, the better.Dadashri: Haven’t you had enough yet? Even when yourblack hair has turned grey, you are still not done? That is whyit is a betrayal (dago). Now just let go of all this hassle and livein contentment; have your tea and snacks in peace, eat yourmeals peacefully and get on with your work.Entering into Thoughts Is the ObstructionWorrying will delay all your work. Is the morning likely tocome any earlier if you spend the whole night, sitting outside,worrying about how soon it will come? On the contrary, it willcome even later. Why don’t you just get under the covers andgo to sleep? Worrying will delay your work. If you worry aboutwhether or not you will find any vegetables, then you will notfind them either.Why worry about something that you have no solutionfor? There is no remedy for death, so does anyone worry aboutdying?What do you do when you worry?Questioner: Recite the Lord’s name.Dadashri: Do you have a friend with whom you are notacquainted?Questioner: No, how can one have a friend withoutbeing acquainted to him?Dadashri: Then how can you recite the Lord’s namewithout being acquainted with Him?When you start worrying, you should know that the workat hand will be ruined, and if you do not have worries, then beassured that it is going to turn out good. Worry is an obstructionto any work. It will ruin the business.Questioner: What causes this worry?Dadashri: You have the aropit bhaav (a wrong belief):‘I am Chandubhai’. It is because you do not know your ‘real’self. When does one worry? Worrying occurs when youbecome one with (tanmayakar) the thoughts that arise in themind. Thoughts are inanimate (jada) while you are chetan(living). Worrying occurs because of a mixture of jada andAptavani-4253254Aptavani-4circumstantial evidence (vyavasthit). Therefore, remain only inthe present; just stay in the present time which is now.Taking Over Another’s Control Leads toWorries!All kinds of difficulties come to a home that has worries!Worrying is an ego. Do you have any control over running allthis? If you take away the control from the one who has thecontrol, then he will not stick his hand in it again. Leave thecontrol in the hands of the controller.Questioner: What should we do so that we do not haveany worries?Dadashri: Turn around. Or else, get rid of your ‘egoism’.If there is a Gnani Purush and if he gives you Gnan, then youwill not have any worries. What is the consequence of worrying?Questioner: I do not know.Dadashri: The consequence, is a birth in the animal life-form. Worrying is an ‘above-normal egoism’.Questioner: I worry a lot.Dadashri: You have relatively fewer worries, which iswhy you have the chance to even come here. These wealthybusinessmen (sheths) do not even have the time to use the toilet.That is how many worries they have. They have two businessesand they want to start a third one! Greed, greed and greed.How much have you decided to earn? One million rupees?!Questioner: The more, the better.Dadashri: Haven’t you had enough yet? Even when yourblack hair has turned grey, you are still not done? That is whyit is a betrayal (dago). Now just let go of all this hassle and livein contentment; have your tea and snacks in peace, eat yourmeals peacefully and get on with your work.Entering into Thoughts Is the ObstructionWorrying will delay all your work. Is the morning likely tocome any earlier if you spend the whole night, sitting outside,worrying about how soon it will come? On the contrary, it willcome even later. Why don’t you just get under the covers andgo to sleep? Worrying will delay your work. If you worry aboutwhether or not you will find any vegetables, then you will notfind them either.Why worry about something that you have no solutionfor? There is no remedy for death, so does anyone worry aboutdying?What do you do when you worry?Questioner: Recite the Lord’s name.Dadashri: Do you have a friend with whom you are notacquainted?Questioner: No, how can one have a friend withoutbeing acquainted to him?Dadashri: Then how can you recite the Lord’s namewithout being acquainted with Him?When you start worrying, you should know that the workat hand will be ruined, and if you do not have worries, then beassured that it is going to turn out good. Worry is an obstructionto any work. It will ruin the business.Questioner: What causes this worry?Dadashri: You have the aropit bhaav (a wrong belief):‘I am Chandubhai’. It is because you do not know your ‘real’self. When does one worry? Worrying occurs when youbecome one with (tanmayakar) the thoughts that arise in themind. Thoughts are inanimate (jada) while you are chetan(living). Worrying occurs because of a mixture of jada andAptavani-4255256Aptavani-4chetan. Worrying is an internally induced suffering of the mind(parishah). It gives rise to suffering of pain. In order to avoidworrying, you must realize that thoughts of the mind are subtlecircumstances; they are ‘gneyas’ (the objects to be known) andYou are the Gnata (the ‘Knower’ of the gneyas). Thoughts willcome, but you have to do pratikraman for them, or else theyhave to be made insignificant. Thoughts that come to You arereally inanimate. You create obstacles the moment you startworrying. Why stick your hand in the energy that is not Yourown?With the Akram Gnan that ‘we’ give you, if you still haveworries, then you can hire an attorney and sue ‘us’ if you want.‘We’ are giving you this much of a guarantee. When yourworldly worries go away, that is the first moksha. The secondmoksha occurs when the account of karma is settled. Thesecond moksha is the Absolute State (purnahuti).Is There Peace in Illusion?How can one attain peace in this world? It would nothappen, even if you had millions of rupees. How can there bepeace (shanti) where there is illusion (bhranti)?Questioner: Why isn’t there peace all the time in spite ofour practicing so much religion?Dadashri: It is because you are constantly in the state ofthe non-Self (achetan). If you remain in the Self (chetan), youwill experience constant peace.Questioner: What efforts should I make to acquirepeace?Dadashri: You can never find peace if you have to put inan effort for it. It is all ghadbhanj (an activity of constructionand destruction).There are all kinds of peace in this world, but they are allillusory (murchhit) peace; whereas Atma shanti (peace of theSelf), is one without any kind of illusion. There is absolutecontentment (trupti) in the peace of the Self, and in the othersthere is no contentment.When a state of bliss replaces a state of restlessness(ashanti), realize that the binding of karma has ceased and onlythen will come the solution (liberation).Bliss in the Presence of the GnaniWe had gone to visit Lake Vihar. There, a gentleman bythe name of Shayada Saheb brought a Muslim friend, who wasa senior government officer, to do my darshan. He brought hiswife and children along with him. He was a thinker and a verydevout man. As he started to sit down on the dirt someone saidto him, “The ants will bite you there, sit next to Dada.” So heanswered, “How can ants bite me in the presence of Dada?”Then I made him sit by me. After ten minutes or so, he tells me,“I have visited so many religious places, but I have neverexperienced the kind of peace that I have experienced here inthe last ten minutes, since I have come here. What is the reasonbehind this?” And I told him, “There is no other reason. You aresitting very close to Allah. Would you not experience happinessand peace if you were in close vicinity with Allah? Allah is sittingright next to ‘me’ – almost touching me – and you are sitting nextto me. So then you have come very close to Him, have you not?So what kind of peace are you likely to experience?”The Gnani Purush has a “cash department.” ‘This is acash bank of divine solution.’ Anyone whose merit karmas(punya) have matured, will meet me and his work will be done.Questioner: What is bliss (anand), what is peace(shanti)?Dadashri: Peace is ‘relative’ and eternal bliss(parmanand) is absolute. Parmanand means absoluteAptavani-4255256Aptavani-4chetan. Worrying is an internally induced suffering of the mind(parishah). It gives rise to suffering of pain. In order to avoidworrying, you must realize that thoughts of the mind are subtlecircumstances; they are ‘gneyas’ (the objects to be known) andYou are the Gnata (the ‘Knower’ of the gneyas). Thoughts willcome, but you have to do pratikraman for them, or else theyhave to be made insignificant. Thoughts that come to You arereally inanimate. You create obstacles the moment you startworrying. Why stick your hand in the energy that is not Yourown?With the Akram Gnan that ‘we’ give you, if you still haveworries, then you can hire an attorney and sue ‘us’ if you want.‘We’ are giving you this much of a guarantee. When yourworldly worries go away, that is the first moksha. The secondmoksha occurs when the account of karma is settled. Thesecond moksha is the Absolute State (purnahuti).Is There Peace in Illusion?How can one attain peace in this world? It would nothappen, even if you had millions of rupees. How can there bepeace (shanti) where there is illusion (bhranti)?Questioner: Why isn’t there peace all the time in spite ofour practicing so much religion?Dadashri: It is because you are constantly in the state ofthe non-Self (achetan). If you remain in the Self (chetan), youwill experience constant peace.Questioner: What efforts should I make to acquirepeace?Dadashri: You can never find peace if you have to put inan effort for it. It is all ghadbhanj (an activity of constructionand destruction).There are all kinds of peace in this world, but they are allillusory (murchhit) peace; whereas Atma shanti (peace of theSelf), is one without any kind of illusion. There is absolutecontentment (trupti) in the peace of the Self, and in the othersthere is no contentment.When a state of bliss replaces a state of restlessness(ashanti), realize that the binding of karma has ceased and onlythen will come the solution (liberation).Bliss in the Presence of the GnaniWe had gone to visit Lake Vihar. There, a gentleman bythe name of Shayada Saheb brought a Muslim friend, who wasa senior government officer, to do my darshan. He brought hiswife and children along with him. He was a thinker and a verydevout man. As he started to sit down on the dirt someone saidto him, “The ants will bite you there, sit next to Dada.” So heanswered, “How can ants bite me in the presence of Dada?”Then I made him sit by me. After ten minutes or so, he tells me,“I have visited so many religious places, but I have neverexperienced the kind of peace that I have experienced here inthe last ten minutes, since I have come here. What is the reasonbehind this?” And I told him, “There is no other reason. You aresitting very close to Allah. Would you not experience happinessand peace if you were in close vicinity with Allah? Allah is sittingright next to ‘me’ – almost touching me – and you are sitting nextto me. So then you have come very close to Him, have you not?So what kind of peace are you likely to experience?”The Gnani Purush has a “cash department.” ‘This is acash bank of divine solution.’ Anyone whose merit karmas(punya) have matured, will meet me and his work will be done.Questioner: What is bliss (anand), what is peace(shanti)?Dadashri: Peace is ‘relative’ and eternal bliss(parmanand) is absolute. Parmanand means absoluteAptavani-4257258Aptavani-4contentment (param trupti). When all the karmic accounts ofthis body are settled, You will experience contentment andeternal bliss. As long as the burden of the body is there, therewill be no contentment.No Attachment-Abhorrence Where There IsEquanimityEquanimity (samata) is very important. If a man’s wifesays something hurtful to him and he just listens and takes it in,people call it equanimity (samata), but that is not equanimity(samata). How can you call it equanimity when there is internalturmoil and restlessness (ajampo)?Equanimity (samata) is when there is no attachment(raag) towards a person who garlands you with flowers, andthere is no abhorrence (dwesh) towards the one who insultsyou. Both the good (shubha) or the bad (ashubha), areconsidered as equal. When there is no attachment-abhorrence ingood and bad, it is called equanimity. You can only consider thevitarags (absolutely enlightened beings) as having this quality.Sambhav: Samata – What Is the Difference?Questioner: What is the difference between samata andsambhav?Dadashri: There is a big difference. What is sambhav(intent of equanimity)? Say we have a weighing scale that istipped on one side. We will put a counterweight on the otherside to balance it out, however, if we were to use a frog as thecounterweight, how long would the scale remain balanced?Nevertheless, sambhav is considered the highest intent. You areat least trying to maintain a balance, are you not? Samatahowever, means that there is no attachment (raag) towards theperson who showers you with flowers and no abhorrence(dwesh) towards the person who throws rocks at you;moreover, you would even bless him!The Tenacious Decision to Settle a File withEquanimityThis dictum of Akram, ‘Settle all files with equanimity,’ isan amazing thing. If You decide to follow my Agna, that youwant to ‘settle all your files with equanimity’, then it will be therefor You. You just need the firm and resolute determination(nischay) that you want to settle matters in this way. Thesewords themselves are in the form of Gnan. The rest thathappens on the outside, is in the hands of vyavasthit. Howeverit requires a strong inner intent of determination to follow thisAgna.To settle with equanimity (sambhave nikal) means tosettle in accordance with the circumstances, without attachmentor abhorrence. That is not the case in samata (absolutesameness; equanimity).When someone you do not like, appears before you, themind, body, chit and ego will all ‘jump around’ restlessly. It isat this time, that You have to say, “I have to settle withequanimity,” then everything will calm down. The very momentYou make the decision about settling matters with equanimity, ithas an effect on the other person and it will calm him down.However, sometimes, the karmic account with him may be so‘sticky’ that it may not appease him! That is not Your lookout.All You have to do is hold a strong decision (nischay) that Youwant to settle the matter with equanimity. Sooner or later he isbound to cool down. Everything happens only according tovyavasthit.Equanimity and the Knower-Seer StateQuestioner: What is the difference between samata andthe Gnata-Drashta (Knower-Seer) state?Dadashri: In the ‘state’ of samata you can ‘nod off tosleep’ (lose absolute awareness) and you have to be wokenAptavani-4257258Aptavani-4contentment (param trupti). When all the karmic accounts ofthis body are settled, You will experience contentment andeternal bliss. As long as the burden of the body is there, therewill be no contentment.No Attachment-Abhorrence Where There IsEquanimityEquanimity (samata) is very important. If a man’s wifesays something hurtful to him and he just listens and takes it in,people call it equanimity (samata), but that is not equanimity(samata). How can you call it equanimity when there is internalturmoil and restlessness (ajampo)?Equanimity (samata) is when there is no attachment(raag) towards a person who garlands you with flowers, andthere is no abhorrence (dwesh) towards the one who insultsyou. Both the good (shubha) or the bad (ashubha), areconsidered as equal. When there is no attachment-abhorrence ingood and bad, it is called equanimity. You can only consider thevitarags (absolutely enlightened beings) as having this quality.Sambhav: Samata – What Is the Difference?Questioner: What is the difference between samata andsambhav?Dadashri: There is a big difference. What is sambhav(intent of equanimity)? Say we have a weighing scale that istipped on one side. We will put a counterweight on the otherside to balance it out, however, if we were to use a frog as thecounterweight, how long would the scale remain balanced?Nevertheless, sambhav is considered the highest intent. You areat least trying to maintain a balance, are you not? Samatahowever, means that there is no attachment (raag) towards theperson who showers you with flowers and no abhorrence(dwesh) towards the person who throws rocks at you;moreover, you would even bless him!The Tenacious Decision to Settle a File withEquanimityThis dictum of Akram, ‘Settle all files with equanimity,’ isan amazing thing. If You decide to follow my Agna, that youwant to ‘settle all your files with equanimity’, then it will be therefor You. You just need the firm and resolute determination(nischay) that you want to settle matters in this way. Thesewords themselves are in the form of Gnan. The rest thathappens on the outside, is in the hands of vyavasthit. Howeverit requires a strong inner intent of determination to follow thisAgna.To settle with equanimity (sambhave nikal) means tosettle in accordance with the circumstances, without attachmentor abhorrence. That is not the case in samata (absolutesameness; equanimity).When someone you do not like, appears before you, themind, body, chit and ego will all ‘jump around’ restlessly. It isat this time, that You have to say, “I have to settle withequanimity,” then everything will calm down. The very momentYou make the decision about settling matters with equanimity, ithas an effect on the other person and it will calm him down.However, sometimes, the karmic account with him may be so‘sticky’ that it may not appease him! That is not Your lookout.All You have to do is hold a strong decision (nischay) that Youwant to settle the matter with equanimity. Sooner or later he isbound to cool down. Everything happens only according tovyavasthit.Equanimity and the Knower-Seer StateQuestioner: What is the difference between samata andthe Gnata-Drashta (Knower-Seer) state?Dadashri: In the ‘state’ of samata you can ‘nod off tosleep’ (lose absolute awareness) and you have to be wokenAptavani-4259260Aptavani-4back up with a small tap. Whereas Gnata-Drashta is alwaysawake (jagrut).Questioner: Is samata a state of the mind?Dadashri: It is a state of the mind, but when can the stateof the mind remain like that? It only remains if there is awarenessand Gnan within. Otherwise, the mind always leans towardsone side or another. When does samata remain? It is when oneattains the Atma (the Self).As long as you are ‘Chandubhai’ vishamta (raag-dwesh,attachment-abhorrence) is bound to occur, and when theawareness of “I am Shuddhatma” occurs, Your work is done.Desire, Satisfaction, Contentment You get satisfaction (santosh) from eating, drinking andenjoying worldly things, but you do not get contentment (trupti)from that. With satisfaction, new seeds of karma are sown.However, when contentment (trupti) arises, desire (trushna)will not remain. Desire leaves. There is a great differencebetween contentment (trupti) and satisfaction (santosh).Everyone experiences satisfaction, but only few experiencecontentment. With satisfaction, come further thoughts. If you atecheesecake, you will have satisfaction, but a desire for it willremain. That is called satisfaction (santosh). With contentment(trupti), however, there is no desire again and you will not eventhink about it again. A person who has contentment (trupti), willnot have a single thought about sex again. No matter how muchunderstanding people may have, they have become ensnared bysexual pleasures, because they do not have contentment! Thescience of the Vitarag brings You contentment (trupti).People say, “I am eating.” Hey! Aren’t you merely puttingout the fire of the hunger? The thirst for water is fine, but thethirst for money is very dangerous. No kind of “water” canquench such a ‘thirst’.Desires will never come to an end. Satisfaction willhappen, but there will be no contentment. Satisfaction (santosh)is a ‘psychological’ result; it will not last.To believe that there is contentment in the non-Self things(sadhan), living and non living, is psychology, and contentmentin the Self (sadhya) is the science of the Atma (Self).(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4259260Aptavani-4back up with a small tap. Whereas Gnata-Drashta is alwaysawake (jagrut).Questioner: Is samata a state of the mind?Dadashri: It is a state of the mind, but when can the stateof the mind remain like that? It only remains if there is awarenessand Gnan within. Otherwise, the mind always leans towardsone side or another. When does samata remain? It is when oneattains the Atma (the Self).As long as you are ‘Chandubhai’ vishamta (raag-dwesh,attachment-abhorrence) is bound to occur, and when theawareness of “I am Shuddhatma” occurs, Your work is done.Desire, Satisfaction, Contentment You get satisfaction (santosh) from eating, drinking andenjoying worldly things, but you do not get contentment (trupti)from that. With satisfaction, new seeds of karma are sown.However, when contentment (trupti) arises, desire (trushna)will not remain. Desire leaves. There is a great differencebetween contentment (trupti) and satisfaction (santosh).Everyone experiences satisfaction, but only few experiencecontentment. With satisfaction, come further thoughts. If you atecheesecake, you will have satisfaction, but a desire for it willremain. That is called satisfaction (santosh). With contentment(trupti), however, there is no desire again and you will not eventhink about it again. A person who has contentment (trupti), willnot have a single thought about sex again. No matter how muchunderstanding people may have, they have become ensnared bysexual pleasures, because they do not have contentment! Thescience of the Vitarag brings You contentment (trupti).People say, “I am eating.” Hey! Aren’t you merely puttingout the fire of the hunger? The thirst for water is fine, but thethirst for money is very dangerous. No kind of “water” canquench such a ‘thirst’.Desires will never come to an end. Satisfaction willhappen, but there will be no contentment. Satisfaction (santosh)is a ‘psychological’ result; it will not last.To believe that there is contentment in the non-Self things(sadhan), living and non living, is psychology, and contentmentin the Self (sadhya) is the science of the Atma (Self).(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4261262Aptavani-4(30)Saiyam ParinamWhat Is the Exact Definition of Saiyam?There are two types of saiyam (self-discipline); externaland internal.The Lord does not consider external (visible throughmind, speech and body) saiyam as saiyam. That saiyam isdependent upon the unfolding of karma. To say, “I maintainedsaiyam”, when saiyam is dependent on unfolding karma, is anillusion (bhranti).Questioner: What is saiyam parinam in the true sense?Dadashri: Sampurna saiyam (complete discipline) iswhen par-parinati (state of the non-Self) does not arise at all.This begins when all the tendencies (vruttis) return home to theSelf. The beginning of the ‘fractional change’ is called saiyam.The state of saiyam parinam happens after one attains Self-realization.Saiyam of sense pleasures (vishay) is not consideredsaiyam. Absence of anger, pride, deceit and greed is calledsaiyam parinam. Otherwise, the renunciation people do is justof worldly things; they renounce money, they renounce sex, andwe are not negating it, but that is called tyaag (renunciation). Itis not the saiyam the Lord has spoken of. The saiyam of thephysical body is not called saiyam, as that saiyam is dependentupon circumstances; it is an effect of previously chargedkarmas. Whereas, the saiyamit mun (the disciplined mind), themind that does not react to ‘evidences’ of anger, pride, deceitand greed, is dependent on purusharth.Saiyam (absence of kashay: anger-pride-deceit-greed)should prevail amidst intense adverse situations.One lady tells me, “Dada, my husband slapped me lastnight.” I asked her, “Then what did you tell him?” She replied,“I turned the other cheek for him.” I asked, “What was yourinner state at that time?” She told me, “Completely peaceful. Idid not have even a single negative thought. Your Gnan waspresent.”This is called saiyam. Everyone in the world suffers painand adversity with tears, and the Gnani suffers it with a smile.You will have to suffer (bhogavavoo) it, will you not?The Energy of the Self Will Manifest Only withSaiyamIf one remains in such a saiyam (absence of kashay) justonce, it will give rise to enough energy within to practice saiyamtwice. Then the power of two will generate four times, and fourwill generate sixteen times the energy. It is a rule of multiplication.In all that, the Self has infinite energy. That energy starts tomanifest as one comes into saiyam.What is swanubhav (experience of the Self) state? Afterattaining the Atma (Self), as much as one remains in saiyam,that much is the state of the experience of the Self (swanubhav).The one who has a fraction of that will attain the complete state.Even the Lord has praised the one with saiyam. Such aone is worthy of darshan, he has conquered death.Questioner: How has he conquered death?Dadashri: When one does not have the fear of dying,one is considered to have conquered death.Aptavani-4261262Aptavani-4(30)Saiyam ParinamWhat Is the Exact Definition of Saiyam?There are two types of saiyam (self-discipline); externaland internal.The Lord does not consider external (visible throughmind, speech and body) saiyam as saiyam. That saiyam isdependent upon the unfolding of karma. To say, “I maintainedsaiyam”, when saiyam is dependent on unfolding karma, is anillusion (bhranti).Questioner: What is saiyam parinam in the true sense?Dadashri: Sampurna saiyam (complete discipline) iswhen par-parinati (state of the non-Self) does not arise at all.This begins when all the tendencies (vruttis) return home to theSelf. The beginning of the ‘fractional change’ is called saiyam.The state of saiyam parinam happens after one attains Self-realization.Saiyam of sense pleasures (vishay) is not consideredsaiyam. Absence of anger, pride, deceit and greed is calledsaiyam parinam. Otherwise, the renunciation people do is justof worldly things; they renounce money, they renounce sex, andwe are not negating it, but that is called tyaag (renunciation). Itis not the saiyam the Lord has spoken of. The saiyam of thephysical body is not called saiyam, as that saiyam is dependentupon circumstances; it is an effect of previously chargedkarmas. Whereas, the saiyamit mun (the disciplined mind), themind that does not react to ‘evidences’ of anger, pride, deceitand greed, is dependent on purusharth.Saiyam (absence of kashay: anger-pride-deceit-greed)should prevail amidst intense adverse situations.One lady tells me, “Dada, my husband slapped me lastnight.” I asked her, “Then what did you tell him?” She replied,“I turned the other cheek for him.” I asked, “What was yourinner state at that time?” She told me, “Completely peaceful. Idid not have even a single negative thought. Your Gnan waspresent.”This is called saiyam. Everyone in the world suffers painand adversity with tears, and the Gnani suffers it with a smile.You will have to suffer (bhogavavoo) it, will you not?The Energy of the Self Will Manifest Only withSaiyamIf one remains in such a saiyam (absence of kashay) justonce, it will give rise to enough energy within to practice saiyamtwice. Then the power of two will generate four times, and fourwill generate sixteen times the energy. It is a rule of multiplication.In all that, the Self has infinite energy. That energy starts tomanifest as one comes into saiyam.What is swanubhav (experience of the Self) state? Afterattaining the Atma (Self), as much as one remains in saiyam,that much is the state of the experience of the Self (swanubhav).The one who has a fraction of that will attain the complete state.Even the Lord has praised the one with saiyam. Such aone is worthy of darshan, he has conquered death.Questioner: How has he conquered death?Dadashri: When one does not have the fear of dying,one is considered to have conquered death.Aptavani-4263264Aptavani-4Take Advantage of the Opportunity of SaiyamWhen someone says, “Chandubhai has ruined everything,”the inner results within will change as a reaction. However, toknow that “what is happening within is wrong” is half the saiyam(ardha-saiyam). And if such results do not arise at all, then it isconsidered complete saiyam.Questioner: When someone scolds me, or insults me, Ijust shut the window on that side. I will not listen to that. Theycan just carry on talking.Dadashri: You had the ‘scope’ to practice saiyam in thatsituation, but you did not take advantage of it. If you were to sayto someone, “Tell me off so I can try and practice saiyam(equanimity, absence of kashay),” that will not work, will it?This opportunity for saiyam happens naturally and rarely, andwhen it happens, people turn a deaf ear to it and shun it, “Ohgo away! He will say that, he has a bad habit of doing that!”How much do you benefit in doing that? If there is a foul stenchand you pinch your nose, what saiyam did you exercise?At one time, I even put out a reward of five hundredrupees, stating that anyone in need of money, should come hereand slap me and collect the five hundred rupees. Would anyonebe ready to slap me for free? Goodness! No, no one came toslap me despite the reward. People told me, ‘Dada, wherewould we go if we slap you?’ That is how it is. Therefore, donot miss the opportunity when it comes around.My energy has increased through the multiplication ofsaiyam. After attaining the Gnan, a state of endless saiyamresulted in me. So whatever I received, was beneficial. Duringexternal adversity, the saiyam of the Self that prevails istremendous.Saiyam Is Indeed the PurusharthReal saiyam (kashay-free state) arises in the presence ofthe Self. From the moment conviction (pratiti) of the Self isestablished, true saiyam begins. Thereafter, one begins to seeone’s own faults and does pratikraman (apology coupled withrepentance) for them. That is a true saiyam. Saiyam itself ispurusharth. Only after one becomes a Purush (the Self), afterknowing the Self, can one do purusharth. Saiyam applies onlyto the Purush (the Self), and not to the prakruti (the non-Self).The Prakruti is dependent on the unfolding of karma; how canthere be saiyam there? One is considered to have come intoreal saiyam only after the Self manifests. Otherwise, this worldlysaiyam is like the ‘practice’ to improve the worldly interactions.Only the one with saiyam has the awareness of the Self.Such people will not allow one mistake to give rise to another.If someone drops a hot charcoal on you, you have alreadyincurred one loss, but then you create another big loss by gettingagitated within (ajampo) and expressing it (kadhapo; visibleanger; outburst that hurts other). This is how one becomes‘bankrupt’. Endless loss is created from just one loss. TheGnan will shake it off and the bliss of saiyam that arises fromit defies all words!When is worldly interaction (vyavahar) considered good?From the time saiyam (self-discipline, absence of kashay)begins. The worldly interaction (vyavahar) of the personwithout saiyam is not considered complete. The Gnani’sspeech, conduct, everything about him has saiyam, and thisstate will win over the minds of others.Saiyam Against GreedQuestioner: Please explain the saiyam (equanimityagainst kashay) of pride (maan) and the saiyam of greed(lobh).Dadashri: Some people have already attained a fractionof saiyam against pride. If someone were to insult them, theywould be able to maintain ardha-saiyam (partial freedom fromAptavani-4263264Aptavani-4Take Advantage of the Opportunity of SaiyamWhen someone says, “Chandubhai has ruined everything,”the inner results within will change as a reaction. However, toknow that “what is happening within is wrong” is half the saiyam(ardha-saiyam). And if such results do not arise at all, then it isconsidered complete saiyam.Questioner: When someone scolds me, or insults me, Ijust shut the window on that side. I will not listen to that. Theycan just carry on talking.Dadashri: You had the ‘scope’ to practice saiyam in thatsituation, but you did not take advantage of it. If you were to sayto someone, “Tell me off so I can try and practice saiyam(equanimity, absence of kashay),” that will not work, will it?This opportunity for saiyam happens naturally and rarely, andwhen it happens, people turn a deaf ear to it and shun it, “Ohgo away! He will say that, he has a bad habit of doing that!”How much do you benefit in doing that? If there is a foul stenchand you pinch your nose, what saiyam did you exercise?At one time, I even put out a reward of five hundredrupees, stating that anyone in need of money, should come hereand slap me and collect the five hundred rupees. Would anyonebe ready to slap me for free? Goodness! No, no one came toslap me despite the reward. People told me, ‘Dada, wherewould we go if we slap you?’ That is how it is. Therefore, donot miss the opportunity when it comes around.My energy has increased through the multiplication ofsaiyam. After attaining the Gnan, a state of endless saiyamresulted in me. So whatever I received, was beneficial. Duringexternal adversity, the saiyam of the Self that prevails istremendous.Saiyam Is Indeed the PurusharthReal saiyam (kashay-free state) arises in the presence ofthe Self. From the moment conviction (pratiti) of the Self isestablished, true saiyam begins. Thereafter, one begins to seeone’s own faults and does pratikraman (apology coupled withrepentance) for them. That is a true saiyam. Saiyam itself ispurusharth. Only after one becomes a Purush (the Self), afterknowing the Self, can one do purusharth. Saiyam applies onlyto the Purush (the Self), and not to the prakruti (the non-Self).The Prakruti is dependent on the unfolding of karma; how canthere be saiyam there? One is considered to have come intoreal saiyam only after the Self manifests. Otherwise, this worldlysaiyam is like the ‘practice’ to improve the worldly interactions.Only the one with saiyam has the awareness of the Self.Such people will not allow one mistake to give rise to another.If someone drops a hot charcoal on you, you have alreadyincurred one loss, but then you create another big loss by gettingagitated within (ajampo) and expressing it (kadhapo; visibleanger; outburst that hurts other). This is how one becomes‘bankrupt’. Endless loss is created from just one loss. TheGnan will shake it off and the bliss of saiyam that arises fromit defies all words!When is worldly interaction (vyavahar) considered good?From the time saiyam (self-discipline, absence of kashay)begins. The worldly interaction (vyavahar) of the personwithout saiyam is not considered complete. The Gnani’sspeech, conduct, everything about him has saiyam, and thisstate will win over the minds of others.Saiyam Against GreedQuestioner: Please explain the saiyam (equanimityagainst kashay) of pride (maan) and the saiyam of greed(lobh).Dadashri: Some people have already attained a fractionof saiyam against pride. If someone were to insult them, theywould be able to maintain ardha-saiyam (partial freedom fromAptavani-4265266Aptavani-4reaction to kashay). In the case of greed however, one losescomplete self-control and awareness. And in this situation thereis more asaiyam (expression of kashay; discomposure). Thenlater, when the awareness comes, one fourth of the saiyam willarise. The Vaniks (business class) have a large tuber (granthi;knot) of avarice, and Kshatriyas (the warrior class) have a largetuber (granthi) of pride. One is not able to maintain saiyam inthe kashay in which one has a large tuber (granthi). In thatcase, one has to come into purusharth dharma (be the Selfthrough the Five Agnas), and in the state of parakram(extraordinary effort as the Self).When confronted with situations that create internalsuffering (parishah) and external suffering (upsarga) one doesnot let it affect him, and if the suffering does arise, to ‘know’that, it is saiyam. To ‘know’ the suffering is saiyam. LordMahavir just ‘knew’ of His suffering; He did not suffer. Hesuffered only “dramatically” (with the prevailing exact knowledgeof the Self and the non-Self).(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(31)The Laws of Fulfilling DesiresHow Methodical Nature Is!The things in the world are limited, but the desires ofhuman beings are endless, are infinite. If you make a note of allthe desires the human beings of the world possess, and a noteof all the wealth in this world, will you be able to match them?Questioner: What should I do to fulfill my desires?Dadashri: The nature of mind is such that it will alwayslook for something new. It will look for a new sofa for the home,it will look for a new apartment, etc. A person starts talking abouta new flat when he is healthy, if his health is not good, he will say,‘I do not want the flat anymore.’ Then for his health to improve,he will make some kind of religious pledge. The mind will jumparound like a monkey and that too without a tail! Nature says,“Accept what I give you and consider it vyavasthit. I will slowlyfulfill all your desires at my convenience before you die.”When your desire for something dies, the object of yourdesire will come to you of its own accord. One man had adesire to get married right up until the age of fifty-five. He wouldtell people to find him a bride. And then, when he turned fifty-eight, someone came to him and said, “I have a daughter if youwant to get married.” So now the man says “No, my desire isnow dead.”What is the point of buying diamond earrings for aseventy-year-old lady?Aptavani-4265266Aptavani-4reaction to kashay). In the case of greed however, one losescomplete self-control and awareness. And in this situation thereis more asaiyam (expression of kashay; discomposure). Thenlater, when the awareness comes, one fourth of the saiyam willarise. The Vaniks (business class) have a large tuber (granthi;knot) of avarice, and Kshatriyas (the warrior class) have a largetuber (granthi) of pride. One is not able to maintain saiyam inthe kashay in which one has a large tuber (granthi). In thatcase, one has to come into purusharth dharma (be the Selfthrough the Five Agnas), and in the state of parakram(extraordinary effort as the Self).When confronted with situations that create internalsuffering (parishah) and external suffering (upsarga) one doesnot let it affect him, and if the suffering does arise, to ‘know’that, it is saiyam. To ‘know’ the suffering is saiyam. LordMahavir just ‘knew’ of His suffering; He did not suffer. Hesuffered only “dramatically” (with the prevailing exact knowledgeof the Self and the non-Self).(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(31)The Laws of Fulfilling DesiresHow Methodical Nature Is!The things in the world are limited, but the desires ofhuman beings are endless, are infinite. If you make a note of allthe desires the human beings of the world possess, and a noteof all the wealth in this world, will you be able to match them?Questioner: What should I do to fulfill my desires?Dadashri: The nature of mind is such that it will alwayslook for something new. It will look for a new sofa for the home,it will look for a new apartment, etc. A person starts talking abouta new flat when he is healthy, if his health is not good, he will say,‘I do not want the flat anymore.’ Then for his health to improve,he will make some kind of religious pledge. The mind will jumparound like a monkey and that too without a tail! Nature says,“Accept what I give you and consider it vyavasthit. I will slowlyfulfill all your desires at my convenience before you die.”When your desire for something dies, the object of yourdesire will come to you of its own accord. One man had adesire to get married right up until the age of fifty-five. He wouldtell people to find him a bride. And then, when he turned fifty-eight, someone came to him and said, “I have a daughter if youwant to get married.” So now the man says “No, my desire isnow dead.”What is the point of buying diamond earrings for aseventy-year-old lady?Aptavani-4267268Aptavani-4But the laws of nature are different. The laws that carryone into a higher life-form are different from the laws that dragone down to a lower life-form. Nevertheless, everyone’s desireswill be fulfilled for sure.The law of nature is such that if one desires something andthe desire is immediately fulfilled, one is slipping down into alower life-form. And if you have a desire for something and youdo not get it, but when you do get it, you no longer desire it, itwill transport you to a higher life-form. That is a good thing.Questioner: Some people’s desires are fulfilled the verymoment the desires occur. What would you call that?Dadashri: When a person’s desires are fulfilledimmediately, he becomes so full of himself (intoxicated with ego)that he cloys himself to the point of death and heads for a lowerlife-form. Because the nature of the mind is such that once itfinds a place to jump around in, it will keep on jumping.This is Kaliyug (the current era of the time cyclecharacterized by lack of unity in mind, speech and body), andso the fulfillment of desire increases a person’s ego, and the‘wagon’ goes the wrong way (crazed ego). Therefore, it isbetter to stumble and fall in this time cycle. Desires are fulfilledbecause of merit karmas (punya). Because people’s desires getfulfilled, they create all kinds of tumult. They squander their meritkarma (punya), and that gives rise to all these entanglements.Isn’t that all because of the mad ego? Therefore, in this age, thistripping and stumbling to acquire the higher state, is morebeneficial to you.How wonderful Nature’s arrangement is! For those whoare to go to a higher life-form, Nature arranges everything forthem according to their desires, but only after their desires die.And those who are to go to a lower life-form, Nature arrangesit so that their desires are immediately fulfilled. Therefore,understand this fact about Nature.Desire Is Indeed the ObstacleQuestioner: Where does desire (ichchha) originate?Dadashri: Desire arises from the pressure ofcircumstances. Right now, no one has a desire to cover himselfup with a blanket, but if it suddenly turns very cold, everyonewill have the desire to cover themselves. Circumstances makethem do that.Questioner: Desire is dependency, so why should onedesire anything?Dadashri: Even though you may not want to desire, it isnot something you can be free of, is it?Questioner: In parabrahma (the Self), there is no desireand no mind, is there?Dadashri: The Self (Parabrahma) never has anydesires. Desire is a state of dependency. If there is a desire-free(nirichchhak) man in the world, it is only the Gnani Purush. Adesire-free person does not have any kind of desire. Even if yougave him all the gold in the world, he would have no use for it.Such a being does not have even a single thought about sex(vishay). He is absolutely indifferent to respect (maan) or insult(upmaan). He has no beggarly desire for fame (kirti), disciples,or building temples. He has become free from ownership of thebody (swamitwa). Such a Gnani Purush makes us free ofdesire.When can one remain in applied awareness of the Self(upayog)? It is when all desires become weak. Won’t they haveto be weakened sooner or later? The slightest of desire is abeggary. It is because I have become completely free of desirethat I have attained the state of a Gnani.No obstacles remain for the one whose desires come toan end. Obstacles arise when desires arise.Aptavani-4267268Aptavani-4But the laws of nature are different. The laws that carryone into a higher life-form are different from the laws that dragone down to a lower life-form. Nevertheless, everyone’s desireswill be fulfilled for sure.The law of nature is such that if one desires something andthe desire is immediately fulfilled, one is slipping down into alower life-form. And if you have a desire for something and youdo not get it, but when you do get it, you no longer desire it, itwill transport you to a higher life-form. That is a good thing.Questioner: Some people’s desires are fulfilled the verymoment the desires occur. What would you call that?Dadashri: When a person’s desires are fulfilledimmediately, he becomes so full of himself (intoxicated with ego)that he cloys himself to the point of death and heads for a lowerlife-form. Because the nature of the mind is such that once itfinds a place to jump around in, it will keep on jumping.This is Kaliyug (the current era of the time cyclecharacterized by lack of unity in mind, speech and body), andso the fulfillment of desire increases a person’s ego, and the‘wagon’ goes the wrong way (crazed ego). Therefore, it isbetter to stumble and fall in this time cycle. Desires are fulfilledbecause of merit karmas (punya). Because people’s desires getfulfilled, they create all kinds of tumult. They squander their meritkarma (punya), and that gives rise to all these entanglements.Isn’t that all because of the mad ego? Therefore, in this age, thistripping and stumbling to acquire the higher state, is morebeneficial to you.How wonderful Nature’s arrangement is! For those whoare to go to a higher life-form, Nature arranges everything forthem according to their desires, but only after their desires die.And those who are to go to a lower life-form, Nature arrangesit so that their desires are immediately fulfilled. Therefore,understand this fact about Nature.Desire Is Indeed the ObstacleQuestioner: Where does desire (ichchha) originate?Dadashri: Desire arises from the pressure ofcircumstances. Right now, no one has a desire to cover himselfup with a blanket, but if it suddenly turns very cold, everyonewill have the desire to cover themselves. Circumstances makethem do that.Questioner: Desire is dependency, so why should onedesire anything?Dadashri: Even though you may not want to desire, it isnot something you can be free of, is it?Questioner: In parabrahma (the Self), there is no desireand no mind, is there?Dadashri: The Self (Parabrahma) never has anydesires. Desire is a state of dependency. If there is a desire-free(nirichchhak) man in the world, it is only the Gnani Purush. Adesire-free person does not have any kind of desire. Even if yougave him all the gold in the world, he would have no use for it.Such a being does not have even a single thought about sex(vishay). He is absolutely indifferent to respect (maan) or insult(upmaan). He has no beggarly desire for fame (kirti), disciples,or building temples. He has become free from ownership of thebody (swamitwa). Such a Gnani Purush makes us free ofdesire.When can one remain in applied awareness of the Self(upayog)? It is when all desires become weak. Won’t they haveto be weakened sooner or later? The slightest of desire is abeggary. It is because I have become completely free of desirethat I have attained the state of a Gnani.No obstacles remain for the one whose desires come toan end. Obstacles arise when desires arise.Aptavani-4269270Aptavani-4He that desires, cannot see, because the veil of desireshrouds him.Questioner: How do you fulfill an intense desire?Dadashri: Whatever you have an intense desire for, isbound to come your way. It will come to you in two years, fiveyears, but it will eventually come to you. Intense desire itselfsays that it will be fulfilled for sure. The desires for those whoare heading towards moksha have to be fulfilled. Only then canthey go to moksha.Pratyakhyan for DesiresYou should all search within you to see which desires stillremain. First ask, “Is there a desire to go to the movies?” If theanswer is no, then ask about a second thing, and a third thing,etc., and you will get the answers from within. The moment youget up in the morning, say five times with a sincere heart, “I donot want any temporary thing in this world.” Say this much andgo about your day. After that, if desire arises, then immediatelydo pratyakhyan (firm determination to never commit themistake again, and asking for the energies for this). Should adesire arise, where you did not desire it, you should ‘minus’ that‘plus’ desire with pratyakhyan. Then there is no liability.Questioner: Why do we have hopes and then despair?Dadashri: Hope, despair and desire is the role (dharma)of the deha (non-Self body complex). It continues to play itsrole. Does the Self have any desires? If it did, then it would becalled a beggar. All the desires that occur after attaining the Selfare ‘discharging’ (effect) desires. ‘Charge’ desires cause bondage.Questioner: When can we say that desire is ‘charged’?Dadashri: Are you sure that ‘you are Chandubhai’?Questioner: No.Dadashri: Then how can you bind karma without youbeing a ‘doer’? ‘I am Chandubhai’ is ignorance (agnan), andthe ‘doership’ is through this ignorance. The ‘doership’ is gonewhen this ignorance goes away. Then there is no more‘charging’. All that remains is the ‘discharging’.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4269270Aptavani-4He that desires, cannot see, because the veil of desireshrouds him.Questioner: How do you fulfill an intense desire?Dadashri: Whatever you have an intense desire for, isbound to come your way. It will come to you in two years, fiveyears, but it will eventually come to you. Intense desire itselfsays that it will be fulfilled for sure. The desires for those whoare heading towards moksha have to be fulfilled. Only then canthey go to moksha.Pratyakhyan for DesiresYou should all search within you to see which desires stillremain. First ask, “Is there a desire to go to the movies?” If theanswer is no, then ask about a second thing, and a third thing,etc., and you will get the answers from within. The moment youget up in the morning, say five times with a sincere heart, “I donot want any temporary thing in this world.” Say this much andgo about your day. After that, if desire arises, then immediatelydo pratyakhyan (firm determination to never commit themistake again, and asking for the energies for this). Should adesire arise, where you did not desire it, you should ‘minus’ that‘plus’ desire with pratyakhyan. Then there is no liability.Questioner: Why do we have hopes and then despair?Dadashri: Hope, despair and desire is the role (dharma)of the deha (non-Self body complex). It continues to play itsrole. Does the Self have any desires? If it did, then it would becalled a beggar. All the desires that occur after attaining the Selfare ‘discharging’ (effect) desires. ‘Charge’ desires cause bondage.Questioner: When can we say that desire is ‘charged’?Dadashri: Are you sure that ‘you are Chandubhai’?Questioner: No.Dadashri: Then how can you bind karma without youbeing a ‘doer’? ‘I am Chandubhai’ is ignorance (agnan), andthe ‘doership’ is through this ignorance. The ‘doership’ is gonewhen this ignorance goes away. Then there is no more‘charging’. All that remains is the ‘discharging’.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4271272Aptavani-4(32)The Habit of Watching Television (TV)…What Is Important at That Time?Dadashri: There is satsang every Sunday, close towhere you live. Why don’t you attend?Questioner: On Sundays, I have to watch TV Dada!Dadashri: What connection do you have with TV? Youhave bifocals now, and you are still watching TV? In ourcountry, you do not even need to watch TV or see plays,because it is all happening on the streets outside your door.Don’t you see it?Questioner: It will all end when we get there, will it not?Dadashri: Lord Krishna has said the same thing in theGita, that humans are wasting away their precious timemeaninglessly. Going to work to feed the family is notmeaningless. Alas, until one attains the other vision (of the Self),this vision (worldly vision) is not likely to leave, is it?When would a person rub stinking mud over his body? Itis when he feels a lot of burning sensation. Similarly, the TV, themovies, etc., are like the stinking mud. You do not gain anythingwith substance from them. I do not have a problem withtelevision; you are free to look at anything you want to. But sayyou had a choice between five to ten minutes of TV or five toten minutes of satsang, which would you prefer? If you have anexam at eleven, and you have to eat at eleven, what would youdo? That is the kind of understanding you should have!Passing Time or Wasting Your Life Away?There are people in India who would waste eight hourslooking for the fifty cents they lost. People’s time is spentaccording to their understanding. One has attained this humanlife with very great difficulty. This body is invaluable, but it isused according to one’s understanding. Would it not be usedaccording to a person’s own understanding? I am not saying thatwhat you are doing is wrong. There is no such thing as “wrong”in this world. But wouldn’t you be wasting your time in it? It isa ‘waste of time’. Just because of such a lack of understandingone forfeits this rare human life-form, only to end up with fourlegs, six legs, eight legs. You wander around while all precioustime turns to dust.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4271272Aptavani-4(32)The Habit of Watching Television (TV)…What Is Important at That Time?Dadashri: There is satsang every Sunday, close towhere you live. Why don’t you attend?Questioner: On Sundays, I have to watch TV Dada!Dadashri: What connection do you have with TV? Youhave bifocals now, and you are still watching TV? In ourcountry, you do not even need to watch TV or see plays,because it is all happening on the streets outside your door.Don’t you see it?Questioner: It will all end when we get there, will it not?Dadashri: Lord Krishna has said the same thing in theGita, that humans are wasting away their precious timemeaninglessly. Going to work to feed the family is notmeaningless. Alas, until one attains the other vision (of the Self),this vision (worldly vision) is not likely to leave, is it?When would a person rub stinking mud over his body? Itis when he feels a lot of burning sensation. Similarly, the TV, themovies, etc., are like the stinking mud. You do not gain anythingwith substance from them. I do not have a problem withtelevision; you are free to look at anything you want to. But sayyou had a choice between five to ten minutes of TV or five toten minutes of satsang, which would you prefer? If you have anexam at eleven, and you have to eat at eleven, what would youdo? That is the kind of understanding you should have!Passing Time or Wasting Your Life Away?There are people in India who would waste eight hourslooking for the fifty cents they lost. People’s time is spentaccording to their understanding. One has attained this humanlife with very great difficulty. This body is invaluable, but it isused according to one’s understanding. Would it not be usedaccording to a person’s own understanding? I am not saying thatwhat you are doing is wrong. There is no such thing as “wrong”in this world. But wouldn’t you be wasting your time in it? It isa ‘waste of time’. Just because of such a lack of understandingone forfeits this rare human life-form, only to end up with fourlegs, six legs, eight legs. You wander around while all precioustime turns to dust.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4273274Aptavani-4(33)GreedWhy Be Greedy When It Is Not in Your Hands?Questioner: I have a ‘knot’ of greed, what can I doabout it?Dadashri: You should say, “Whatever it is to be invyavasthit, let it be. And whatever is not in vyavasthit, so be it”.Do You Gain or Lose with Greed?Questioner: When does the ‘knot’ of greed explode?Dadashri: When you have accumulated ‘99’. (One isconstantly striving to turn that sum into 100 and so one becomesgreedy in the process). A person may be a millionaire, but howis it possible for him not to have any greed (lobh)? A greedyperson is obsessed with just one thing. He is not too botheredabout pride. It will trouble a proud man to be insulted; whereasa greedy man will say, “I made two hundred rupees today, sowhat if he insulted me?” As long as there is pride and anger ina person, he is not considered greedy. Greed is a bad habit thathas formed through life after life. A greedy man may make aprofit for the first five to ten years, but in the end he will incura loss without fail. An honest man will not lose anything. Butwhen Nature changes its results, no one is spared. What is forcertain is that an honest man will have less to fear.Without Knowing the Self, Contentment Is NotPossibleThe antonym of greed (lobh) is satisfaction (santosh). Aperson receives satisfaction for something good that he did in hisprevious life. He may also find a degree of satisfaction inunderstanding the world. But where there is knowledge of the Self(Atmagnan), he will experience nothing but contentment (trupti).If he has enjoyed something for countless lifetimes, he may notwant anything, because he is already experiencing satisfaction. Theperson who has not had that experience, on the other hand, willperpetually feel, “I want to enjoy this, I want to enjoy that.” If youhave enjoyed royalty in your past life, you will not like it if youwere offered the same in this life, because you will get tired of it.Questioner: There are some people who want whatothers have. If they see others with a car, then they want it too.Dadashri: When does loksangnya (loksangnya – to bedictated by what the world does; societal influence) arise? Itarises when one is not satisfied from within. Even to this day, Ihave not found a single person who could give me happiness.Even when I was young I never felt the need to have a radio.Aren’t all these just living, walking ‘radios’?A Greedy Person Looks for More, DespiteHaving It!Questioner: Isn’t a greedy person (lobhio), also miserly(kanjoos)?Dadashri: No, misers are different. A person becomes amiser because he does not have money; whereas a greedy manmay have twenty-five thousand rupees at home and yet his chitwill be stuck on where he can find the cheaper ghee (clarifiedbutter). His chit is constantly in greed. Even when he goes to themarket, he looks for a heap of cheap vegetables.The one who has awareness in every facet of greed isconsidered a greedy man. A man who goes to the neighbor andgets something from him, because he has run out at home, is notgreedy. The one who has everything and yet keeps looking forit elsewhere is considered greedy.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4273274Aptavani-4(33)GreedWhy Be Greedy When It Is Not in Your Hands?Questioner: I have a ‘knot’ of greed, what can I doabout it?Dadashri: You should say, “Whatever it is to be invyavasthit, let it be. And whatever is not in vyavasthit, so be it”.Do You Gain or Lose with Greed?Questioner: When does the ‘knot’ of greed explode?Dadashri: When you have accumulated ‘99’. (One isconstantly striving to turn that sum into 100 and so one becomesgreedy in the process). A person may be a millionaire, but howis it possible for him not to have any greed (lobh)? A greedyperson is obsessed with just one thing. He is not too botheredabout pride. It will trouble a proud man to be insulted; whereasa greedy man will say, “I made two hundred rupees today, sowhat if he insulted me?” As long as there is pride and anger ina person, he is not considered greedy. Greed is a bad habit thathas formed through life after life. A greedy man may make aprofit for the first five to ten years, but in the end he will incura loss without fail. An honest man will not lose anything. Butwhen Nature changes its results, no one is spared. What is forcertain is that an honest man will have less to fear.Without Knowing the Self, Contentment Is NotPossibleThe antonym of greed (lobh) is satisfaction (santosh). Aperson receives satisfaction for something good that he did in hisprevious life. He may also find a degree of satisfaction inunderstanding the world. But where there is knowledge of the Self(Atmagnan), he will experience nothing but contentment (trupti).If he has enjoyed something for countless lifetimes, he may notwant anything, because he is already experiencing satisfaction. Theperson who has not had that experience, on the other hand, willperpetually feel, “I want to enjoy this, I want to enjoy that.” If youhave enjoyed royalty in your past life, you will not like it if youwere offered the same in this life, because you will get tired of it.Questioner: There are some people who want whatothers have. If they see others with a car, then they want it too.Dadashri: When does loksangnya (loksangnya – to bedictated by what the world does; societal influence) arise? Itarises when one is not satisfied from within. Even to this day, Ihave not found a single person who could give me happiness.Even when I was young I never felt the need to have a radio.Aren’t all these just living, walking ‘radios’?A Greedy Person Looks for More, DespiteHaving It!Questioner: Isn’t a greedy person (lobhio), also miserly(kanjoos)?Dadashri: No, misers are different. A person becomes amiser because he does not have money; whereas a greedy manmay have twenty-five thousand rupees at home and yet his chitwill be stuck on where he can find the cheaper ghee (clarifiedbutter). His chit is constantly in greed. Even when he goes to themarket, he looks for a heap of cheap vegetables.The one who has awareness in every facet of greed isconsidered a greedy man. A man who goes to the neighbor andgets something from him, because he has run out at home, is notgreedy. The one who has everything and yet keeps looking forit elsewhere is considered greedy.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4275276Aptavani-4(34)Let Go of the ReinsThen the Practice of ‘Doership’ Will Go Away!Here, in Akram, we do not have worldly samayik,dhyan, or any other rituals. All that, you find on the outside.Worldly samayik or dhyan means that you decide on anexternal boundary for yourself and then you do not allowanything to enter into it. You continue to push out anything thattries to come into it. But things will come in even if you try tokeep them out. Whereas in our samayik, You simply have to“see” what enters, and what happens within. You just have to goon ‘seeing’ all the thoughts that come along, whether they aregood thoughts or bad thoughts. When you watch a movie andyou see the actors fighting and creating havoc, you do not getemotional, do you? Just as it is in a cinema, so it is a ‘cinema’within you. This samayik is like watching a movie within you. Itis indeed beneficial, especially if you do it for forty-eight minutes.Just try this experiment, of letting go of the reins, justone day of the week. On Sunday, let go of your reins early inthe morning and say, “Dada, I am handing this rope over toyou.” Hand over to Dada the reins of all the five “horses” (thesenses), and then just see how they all run. I will not let this“chariot” fall into a ditch or do anything else. You do not knowhow to handle the reins which is why you let go of them on adownward slope and keep pulling hard while going uphill andso the poor “horses” get exhausted and bleed from theirmouths. That is why Lord Krishna told Arjun to sit and let himguide the chariot. Arjun’s chariot began to run straight whenLord Krishna took over the reins. I ask you to let go of thereins only once a week. However, if mistakes still occur, thensay, “Dada, I apologize for taking over the reins again. I willnot do that again,” then let go of them again. Initially, you willmake mistakes. It takes time for it to come into practice. Youwill get it right after two or three times. Then for furtherprogress You have to continue ‘seeing’ what ‘Chandubhai’ issaying, and whether it is correct or not.The Gnani’s ProcessIn our Gnani’s program, I see each and every kriya(action through mind, speech and body). That is why I call “this”speech a record. I keep “seeing” what this record is playing andwhat it is not; whereas people become engrossed (tanmayakar;become one with) with their speech. To remain completely nir-tanmayakar (one does not become one) is considered absoluteknowledge (Kevalgnan).The way the world sees things is also the way the agnanisees things. But what they ‘see’ will be of no use to them. Thisis because their ‘basement’ is ego (ahamkar). ‘I am Chandubhai’is their ‘basement’ (foundation), and our (mahatmas’) basementis ‘I am Shuddhatma.’ Therefore, whatever I see countstowards a fraction of kevalgnan. For whatever fraction You‘see’; however much of a fraction you ‘see’ yourself as beingseparate; your speech as being separate and you ‘see’ what this‘Chandubhai’ (the non-Self) is doing, all gives rise to acorresponding fraction of kevalgnan. When someone insultsme, it is in my Gnan and when this ‘record’ speaks, it is alsoin my Gnan. It is in my Gnan when this ‘record’ says anythingwrong. For me there is complete awareness (jagruti) all thetime. And complete awareness is kevalgnan. In the worldly life,people have worldly awareness, but that awareness is based onego. Whereas “this” awareness, is the awareness that comesafter You become Shuddhatma (pure Soul). This is a fraction ofAptavani-4275276Aptavani-4(34)Let Go of the ReinsThen the Practice of ‘Doership’ Will Go Away!Here, in Akram, we do not have worldly samayik,dhyan, or any other rituals. All that, you find on the outside.Worldly samayik or dhyan means that you decide on anexternal boundary for yourself and then you do not allowanything to enter into it. You continue to push out anything thattries to come into it. But things will come in even if you try tokeep them out. Whereas in our samayik, You simply have to“see” what enters, and what happens within. You just have to goon ‘seeing’ all the thoughts that come along, whether they aregood thoughts or bad thoughts. When you watch a movie andyou see the actors fighting and creating havoc, you do not getemotional, do you? Just as it is in a cinema, so it is a ‘cinema’within you. This samayik is like watching a movie within you. Itis indeed beneficial, especially if you do it for forty-eight minutes.Just try this experiment, of letting go of the reins, justone day of the week. On Sunday, let go of your reins early inthe morning and say, “Dada, I am handing this rope over toyou.” Hand over to Dada the reins of all the five “horses” (thesenses), and then just see how they all run. I will not let this“chariot” fall into a ditch or do anything else. You do not knowhow to handle the reins which is why you let go of them on adownward slope and keep pulling hard while going uphill andso the poor “horses” get exhausted and bleed from theirmouths. That is why Lord Krishna told Arjun to sit and let himguide the chariot. Arjun’s chariot began to run straight whenLord Krishna took over the reins. I ask you to let go of thereins only once a week. However, if mistakes still occur, thensay, “Dada, I apologize for taking over the reins again. I willnot do that again,” then let go of them again. Initially, you willmake mistakes. It takes time for it to come into practice. Youwill get it right after two or three times. Then for furtherprogress You have to continue ‘seeing’ what ‘Chandubhai’ issaying, and whether it is correct or not.The Gnani’s ProcessIn our Gnani’s program, I see each and every kriya(action through mind, speech and body). That is why I call “this”speech a record. I keep “seeing” what this record is playing andwhat it is not; whereas people become engrossed (tanmayakar;become one with) with their speech. To remain completely nir-tanmayakar (one does not become one) is considered absoluteknowledge (Kevalgnan).The way the world sees things is also the way the agnanisees things. But what they ‘see’ will be of no use to them. Thisis because their ‘basement’ is ego (ahamkar). ‘I am Chandubhai’is their ‘basement’ (foundation), and our (mahatmas’) basementis ‘I am Shuddhatma.’ Therefore, whatever I see countstowards a fraction of kevalgnan. For whatever fraction You‘see’; however much of a fraction you ‘see’ yourself as beingseparate; your speech as being separate and you ‘see’ what this‘Chandubhai’ (the non-Self) is doing, all gives rise to acorresponding fraction of kevalgnan. When someone insultsme, it is in my Gnan and when this ‘record’ speaks, it is alsoin my Gnan. It is in my Gnan when this ‘record’ says anythingwrong. For me there is complete awareness (jagruti) all thetime. And complete awareness is kevalgnan. In the worldly life,people have worldly awareness, but that awareness is based onego. Whereas “this” awareness, is the awareness that comesafter You become Shuddhatma (pure Soul). This is a fraction ofAptavani-4277278Aptavani-4the awareness of kevalgnan and from that point onwards, itbecomes kalyankari (ultimate benefit towards salvation).Do not allow the inner machinery to slack off. You haveto keep an eye on where the wear and tear occurs and whathappens to it; with whom you used harsh words? There isnothing wrong with saying them, but you have to keep ‘seeing’:‘Wow! ‘Chandubhai’ spoke harshly!’Questioner: But wouldn’t it be better to stay quiet asmuch as possible?Dadashri: It is no longer in Your hands, whether to speakor not. You are a general manager, so you will immediatelyunderstand when I explain things to you.The Science of Charge and Discharge of KarmaWhat is considered a ‘discharge’? Say there is a motor,which runs when you wind it up. The winding is equivalent to‘charging’. Then when you leave it to ‘discharge’, would it beunder your control?Questioner: No.Dadashri: It is not under our control after that. It willunwind only as much as you wound it. If you wound it only halfway it will go only half the way, if it is wound a quarter of theway, it will only go quarter of the way, and if you gave it a fullturn, it will unwind fully. You will not be able to stop it. That iscalled ‘discharge’. The speech is being discharged in the sameway. Three ‘batteries’ are being discharged; the batteries of thespeech, the conduct and the mind. Even thoughts, whether youwish them too or not, continue to ‘discharge’. They go ondischarging whether they are good thoughts or bad. As thesethree ‘batteries’ discharge on one end, simultaneously three newones are being ‘charged’ at the other end: a new mind isforming, and new speech is being ‘recorded’. As long as aperson does not have awareness of the Self, there is no such‘basement’; these new ‘batteries’ will continue to be charged.They will carry on discharging as well. So they are just‘batteries’. All three, run down and all three are getting charged.As long as the imposition of the wrong belief (aropit bhaav) of‘I am Chandubhai’ is there, the batteries just carry on charging,because of the ignorance of the Self. And when You have theawareness of, ‘I am Shuddhatma,’ you no longer ‘charge’ anynew ‘batteries’. The old ones of course, will continue to‘discharge’ for everyone; the Self-realized and the non-Self-realized alike, as well as for the animals – they all will havebatteries that ‘discharge’.No effort is needed in this ‘discharge’. Their nature is todischarge; therefore, they will continue to discharge on theirown. Your hand will move on its own even if you decide you donot want to move it. That is because all this ‘machinery’ is‘discharging’. People however, try to alter the ‘discharge’, nowhow can that be possible? At the very least, they can change the‘charge’ in the ‘charging’ process. When the ‘discharge’ occursaccording to a person’s wishes, his ego will increase, because hefeels that everything is going his way. But when it goes againstwhat he wants, he will say, “God did this to me. My karmas arenot good.” They utter all kinds of nonsense. It is ‘discharge’when it happens according to one’s desires and it is also‘discharge’ when it happens contrary to one’s desires. It showsits nature ‘discharge’. Two kinds of things happen here – eitheryou like it or you don’t. For the world, this gives rise toattachment (raag) and abhorrence (dwesh) towards things.Attachment towards things one likes, and abhorrence towardswhat one dislikes. So the world persists through attachment,abhorrence and the ignorance (agnan) of ‘I am Chandubhai’.Jainism calls it raag (attachment), dwesh (abhorrence) andagnan (ignorance of the Self) and Vedanta (Hindu scriptures)calls it mudd (impurities), vikshep (obstructed view; falseprojection) and agnan (ignorance of the Self).Aptavani-4277278Aptavani-4the awareness of kevalgnan and from that point onwards, itbecomes kalyankari (ultimate benefit towards salvation).Do not allow the inner machinery to slack off. You haveto keep an eye on where the wear and tear occurs and whathappens to it; with whom you used harsh words? There isnothing wrong with saying them, but you have to keep ‘seeing’:‘Wow! ‘Chandubhai’ spoke harshly!’Questioner: But wouldn’t it be better to stay quiet asmuch as possible?Dadashri: It is no longer in Your hands, whether to speakor not. You are a general manager, so you will immediatelyunderstand when I explain things to you.The Science of Charge and Discharge of KarmaWhat is considered a ‘discharge’? Say there is a motor,which runs when you wind it up. The winding is equivalent to‘charging’. Then when you leave it to ‘discharge’, would it beunder your control?Questioner: No.Dadashri: It is not under our control after that. It willunwind only as much as you wound it. If you wound it only halfway it will go only half the way, if it is wound a quarter of theway, it will only go quarter of the way, and if you gave it a fullturn, it will unwind fully. You will not be able to stop it. That iscalled ‘discharge’. The speech is being discharged in the sameway. Three ‘batteries’ are being discharged; the batteries of thespeech, the conduct and the mind. Even thoughts, whether youwish them too or not, continue to ‘discharge’. They go ondischarging whether they are good thoughts or bad. As thesethree ‘batteries’ discharge on one end, simultaneously three newones are being ‘charged’ at the other end: a new mind isforming, and new speech is being ‘recorded’. As long as aperson does not have awareness of the Self, there is no such‘basement’; these new ‘batteries’ will continue to be charged.They will carry on discharging as well. So they are just‘batteries’. All three, run down and all three are getting charged.As long as the imposition of the wrong belief (aropit bhaav) of‘I am Chandubhai’ is there, the batteries just carry on charging,because of the ignorance of the Self. And when You have theawareness of, ‘I am Shuddhatma,’ you no longer ‘charge’ anynew ‘batteries’. The old ones of course, will continue to‘discharge’ for everyone; the Self-realized and the non-Self-realized alike, as well as for the animals – they all will havebatteries that ‘discharge’.No effort is needed in this ‘discharge’. Their nature is todischarge; therefore, they will continue to discharge on theirown. Your hand will move on its own even if you decide you donot want to move it. That is because all this ‘machinery’ is‘discharging’. People however, try to alter the ‘discharge’, nowhow can that be possible? At the very least, they can change the‘charge’ in the ‘charging’ process. When the ‘discharge’ occursaccording to a person’s wishes, his ego will increase, because hefeels that everything is going his way. But when it goes againstwhat he wants, he will say, “God did this to me. My karmas arenot good.” They utter all kinds of nonsense. It is ‘discharge’when it happens according to one’s desires and it is also‘discharge’ when it happens contrary to one’s desires. It showsits nature ‘discharge’. Two kinds of things happen here – eitheryou like it or you don’t. For the world, this gives rise toattachment (raag) and abhorrence (dwesh) towards things.Attachment towards things one likes, and abhorrence towardswhat one dislikes. So the world persists through attachment,abhorrence and the ignorance (agnan) of ‘I am Chandubhai’.Jainism calls it raag (attachment), dwesh (abhorrence) andagnan (ignorance of the Self) and Vedanta (Hindu scriptures)calls it mudd (impurities), vikshep (obstructed view; falseprojection) and agnan (ignorance of the Self).Aptavani-4279280Aptavani-4As ‘Discharge’, Others as FaultlessIt is a different matter to look at everything from theoutside but when You continue to ‘see’ within, You will be in therealm of kevalgnan. But that would be a fraction of kevalgnan,not the absolute kevalgnan. If you have bad thoughts, youshould just ‘see’ them and if you have good ones, you shouldjust ‘see’ them as well. Have no attachment (raag) towards thegood and no abhorrence (dwesh) towards the bad. You do notneed to look at what is good and what is bad, because you haveno control over it. So what do Gnanis look at? They see thewhole world as faultless (nirdosh). They see that all this isnothing but ‘discharge’, so how can all the poor things beblamed? It is a ‘discharge’ when someone insults or curses you,and it is a discharge when the boss confuses you. The boss isan instrumental (nimit). No one is at fault in this world. The faultyou see in others is your own fault (effect of the cause in the pastlife), and that is the very ‘blunder’ which gives rise to the worldlylife. Enmity is created through seeing faults or negativity inothers.In the ‘Dramatic’ There Is No Doership!If you do not have the ‘real’ vision (vision as the Self), youwill see everything the way people of the world see it with theirworldly vision of, “This is my brother-in-law, this is my uncle…”.By saying “my,” attachment (raag) arises. However, after youattain the knowledge of the Self, when You say “my”, it nowbecomes ‘dramatic’. The ‘my’ carries a ‘dramatic’ intent(bhaav). ‘Dramatic’ (characteristic of drama; fictitious, acting:There is a clear separation in the vision of the Self and the non-Self). It is a short and simple thing. You only have to understandit.The mind, speech and conduct are continually discharging,and now all You have to do is keep ‘seeing’ them. The‘discharge’ is not in your hands. It is no use trying to meddle init. You (the Self) have to just ‘see’ what ‘Chandubhai’ (the non-Self) is doing. This is the only thing that Lord Mahavir wasdoing. He was only ‘seeing’ what was going on in his pudgal(non-Self complex) and nothing else. How wise He was! Justtalking about Him gives me so much joy!Questioner: But even by being ‘dramatic’ in the worldlylife, doesn’t one still have to do things?Dadashri: Nothing needs to be done in the ‘dramatic’; itall happens on its own. Besides, there is nothing worth doing, ithappens by itself. You fall asleep when it is time to sleep and youwake up when it is time to wake up. Everything just goes onhappening. You cannot say, ‘It is got to be done, it is worthdoing’ or you cannot say, ‘It is not to be done or it is not worthdoing’ either, because ‘doership’ is not in Your hands. The Atma(the Self) is not the ‘doer’.Saiyam of the Final StateQuestioner: But whatever karma one has to do in theworldly interactions (vyavahar), are bound to come, aren’tthey?Dadashri: All that happens on its own. You (the Self)have to say to ‘Chandubhai’ (the non-Self), “Chandubhai, it istime for you to go to work, why are you not going?” That is all.You have to alert him to this much. It all happens. ‘Discharge’means that it continues to happen. If you say something hurtfulto someone, there is nothing wrong in telling ‘Chandubhai’ thatit would be better if he would not say hurtful things to others.Despite this, if something hurtful does get said, then You shouldtell ‘Chandubhai’, “Why did you do atikraman (aggressionthrough thoughts, speech or action)? You said things that hurtthis young man, so do pratikraman for it.” Then You make himdo the pratikraman in the young man’s name. This is all Youhave to understand.Aptavani-4279280Aptavani-4As ‘Discharge’, Others as FaultlessIt is a different matter to look at everything from theoutside but when You continue to ‘see’ within, You will be in therealm of kevalgnan. But that would be a fraction of kevalgnan,not the absolute kevalgnan. If you have bad thoughts, youshould just ‘see’ them and if you have good ones, you shouldjust ‘see’ them as well. Have no attachment (raag) towards thegood and no abhorrence (dwesh) towards the bad. You do notneed to look at what is good and what is bad, because you haveno control over it. So what do Gnanis look at? They see thewhole world as faultless (nirdosh). They see that all this isnothing but ‘discharge’, so how can all the poor things beblamed? It is a ‘discharge’ when someone insults or curses you,and it is a discharge when the boss confuses you. The boss isan instrumental (nimit). No one is at fault in this world. The faultyou see in others is your own fault (effect of the cause in the pastlife), and that is the very ‘blunder’ which gives rise to the worldlylife. Enmity is created through seeing faults or negativity inothers.In the ‘Dramatic’ There Is No Doership!If you do not have the ‘real’ vision (vision as the Self), youwill see everything the way people of the world see it with theirworldly vision of, “This is my brother-in-law, this is my uncle…”.By saying “my,” attachment (raag) arises. However, after youattain the knowledge of the Self, when You say “my”, it nowbecomes ‘dramatic’. The ‘my’ carries a ‘dramatic’ intent(bhaav). ‘Dramatic’ (characteristic of drama; fictitious, acting:There is a clear separation in the vision of the Self and the non-Self). It is a short and simple thing. You only have to understandit.The mind, speech and conduct are continually discharging,and now all You have to do is keep ‘seeing’ them. The‘discharge’ is not in your hands. It is no use trying to meddle init. You (the Self) have to just ‘see’ what ‘Chandubhai’ (the non-Self) is doing. This is the only thing that Lord Mahavir wasdoing. He was only ‘seeing’ what was going on in his pudgal(non-Self complex) and nothing else. How wise He was! Justtalking about Him gives me so much joy!Questioner: But even by being ‘dramatic’ in the worldlylife, doesn’t one still have to do things?Dadashri: Nothing needs to be done in the ‘dramatic’; itall happens on its own. Besides, there is nothing worth doing, ithappens by itself. You fall asleep when it is time to sleep and youwake up when it is time to wake up. Everything just goes onhappening. You cannot say, ‘It is got to be done, it is worthdoing’ or you cannot say, ‘It is not to be done or it is not worthdoing’ either, because ‘doership’ is not in Your hands. The Atma(the Self) is not the ‘doer’.Saiyam of the Final StateQuestioner: But whatever karma one has to do in theworldly interactions (vyavahar), are bound to come, aren’tthey?Dadashri: All that happens on its own. You (the Self)have to say to ‘Chandubhai’ (the non-Self), “Chandubhai, it istime for you to go to work, why are you not going?” That is all.You have to alert him to this much. It all happens. ‘Discharge’means that it continues to happen. If you say something hurtfulto someone, there is nothing wrong in telling ‘Chandubhai’ thatit would be better if he would not say hurtful things to others.Despite this, if something hurtful does get said, then You shouldtell ‘Chandubhai’, “Why did you do atikraman (aggressionthrough thoughts, speech or action)? You said things that hurtthis young man, so do pratikraman for it.” Then You make himdo the pratikraman in the young man’s name. This is all Youhave to understand.Aptavani-4281282Aptavani-4To miss ‘seeing’ ‘what is happening’ is consideredasaiyam, and to continuously ‘see’ ‘what is happening’ issaiyam.This is the final saiyam; it is the saiyam of the Gnanis.People generally consider saiyam as referring to the control ofthe body’s functions. But all that is talk at the gross level, while‘this’ is the ultimate discussion about saiyam. With ‘this’saiyam, the rule is that the pudgal (body complex) of the onewho attains it, will gradually become saiyamit (natural andwithout kashays). Alas! This ultimate saiyam is the only thingworth coming into.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(35)The Theory of KarmaWhat Is Karma and What Is Dharma in Vyavahar?When two people interact and resolve their pendingaccounts of karma with each other, it is called dharma.Not to resolve a pending account amicably with anyone,is karma (binding new karma).If the vegetable dish is too salty, to eat it is dharma, andto say, “Why did you make it so salty?” is karma.The World Only Knows the Theory of DoershipQuestioner: The theory of karma is not in Jainism, butit is in the Gita, why is that?Dadashri: The theory of karma has been accepted inJainism, as well as in other religions. Those who believe in ‘lifeafter death’, believe in the theory of karma.Understand the theory of karma. All people look at, isthe ‘theory of doership’ of atma (worldly self). They have seenthe theory of “He insulted me; he is the ‘doer’”, but they havenot come across the theory which states that the other person’saction is the result of the unfolding karma of the one beinginsulted. Many people say, “My karmas are obstructing me”,but they have not seen that theory. If they understood whatkarma is, then there would be no grounds for accusing the otherperson by saying, “Why did he do that to me?”Because of karma, all living beings (jivas) are experiencingAptavani-4281282Aptavani-4To miss ‘seeing’ ‘what is happening’ is consideredasaiyam, and to continuously ‘see’ ‘what is happening’ issaiyam.This is the final saiyam; it is the saiyam of the Gnanis.People generally consider saiyam as referring to the control ofthe body’s functions. But all that is talk at the gross level, while‘this’ is the ultimate discussion about saiyam. With ‘this’saiyam, the rule is that the pudgal (body complex) of the onewho attains it, will gradually become saiyamit (natural andwithout kashays). Alas! This ultimate saiyam is the only thingworth coming into.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(35)The Theory of KarmaWhat Is Karma and What Is Dharma in Vyavahar?When two people interact and resolve their pendingaccounts of karma with each other, it is called dharma.Not to resolve a pending account amicably with anyone,is karma (binding new karma).If the vegetable dish is too salty, to eat it is dharma, andto say, “Why did you make it so salty?” is karma.The World Only Knows the Theory of DoershipQuestioner: The theory of karma is not in Jainism, butit is in the Gita, why is that?Dadashri: The theory of karma has been accepted inJainism, as well as in other religions. Those who believe in ‘lifeafter death’, believe in the theory of karma.Understand the theory of karma. All people look at, isthe ‘theory of doership’ of atma (worldly self). They have seenthe theory of “He insulted me; he is the ‘doer’”, but they havenot come across the theory which states that the other person’saction is the result of the unfolding karma of the one beinginsulted. Many people say, “My karmas are obstructing me”,but they have not seen that theory. If they understood whatkarma is, then there would be no grounds for accusing the otherperson by saying, “Why did he do that to me?”Because of karma, all living beings (jivas) are experiencingAptavani-4283284Aptavani-4terrible suffering. Moreover, at the same time, they go aroundaccusing others, “He did this to me and he did that to me.” Andin this way, the karmas only double. If they would justunderstand the root cause behind why things happen to them,and that the reason why their loved ones bother them so much,is because of their own karmic accounts from the past life, andthat the fault is of the sufferer; then their suffering will abate.Questioner: Does the worldly life run according to thetheory of karma?Dadashri: No, there is no theory of karma in it.Questioner: What is karma? There is no resolution if oneeven depends on the theory of karma. If one considers God asthe ‘doer’, even then it does not fit into the equation. Then therehas to be something else that regulates all this. What is that?Dadashri: It is all run by scientific circumstantial evidences.The whole world is run by this energy. These words are not easyto understand unless you think about them very closely.Who Is the ‘Doer’ of Karma?Questioner: What is karma? What is the root of it?How is karma bound?Dadashri: Karma is bound through ‘doership’ (karta-bhaav). “I am doing it” is ‘doership’. Someone else does it andone claims, “I did it.” He passes his college examinations on thebasis of some other energy, and yet he claims that he passed theexams. That is a wrong belief and this is what binds karma. ‘Iam Chandubhai’ is itself karma.Questioner: Then who does the karma? Does karmaaffect the Atma (the Self) or the pudgal (the non-Selfcomplex)?Dadashri: If you are a Gnani (Self-realized), then thekarmas do not belong to you, but if you are agnani (ignorantof the Self), then they are yours.It is wrong to believe that the Atma (the Self) is the‘doer’ of karma. In fact, the Atma is not the ‘doer’ ofkarma. If it was the ‘doer’ of karma, it would never attainliberation. Even the absolutely liberated ones, the Siddhas whohave gone to moksha, would continue binding karma, if theSelf was a ‘doer’ of anything. There is no superior entity thatbinds karma or releases one from karma. What there is, isonly you.Questioner: If the Self is pure (shuddha) then who getssmeared and tainted by karma?Dadashri: The ‘doer’.Questioner: If the pudgal (non-Self complex) is the‘doer’, doesn’t it remain here (after death)?Dadashri: Neither the pudgal (non-Self complex) northe Self create, or bind karma. It is in the presence of the Selfthat ego arises. And it is that very ego that is the doer of karma.This is the ego that says, “I did this, I am happy, I am unhappy,I attained Gnan, I slipped into ignorance (agnan).” The egodoes all this. Once the ego leaves, one becomes the Self. Justso that the world could comprehend this, the vitarags have saidthat the self from the perspective of the vyavahar (worldlyinteraction) is the ‘doer’; however, from the perspective ofnischay (of the Self), it is a ‘non-doer’. ‘By relative viewpoint’,the self is a ‘doer’ of karma. However, it is not the ‘doer’ ofthese visible karmas (those evident through mind, speech andbody), it is the ‘doer’ of bhaavkarma (‘I am Chandubhai’), andthis charges karma. The ‘doer’ of the visible karma is Nature;it is vyavasthit.“By ‘real’ viewpoint” the Self is the ‘doer’ of swabhavkarma (its natural state of Knowing and Seeing).Aptavani-4283284Aptavani-4terrible suffering. Moreover, at the same time, they go aroundaccusing others, “He did this to me and he did that to me.” Andin this way, the karmas only double. If they would justunderstand the root cause behind why things happen to them,and that the reason why their loved ones bother them so much,is because of their own karmic accounts from the past life, andthat the fault is of the sufferer; then their suffering will abate.Questioner: Does the worldly life run according to thetheory of karma?Dadashri: No, there is no theory of karma in it.Questioner: What is karma? There is no resolution if oneeven depends on the theory of karma. If one considers God asthe ‘doer’, even then it does not fit into the equation. Then therehas to be something else that regulates all this. What is that?Dadashri: It is all run by scientific circumstantial evidences.The whole world is run by this energy. These words are not easyto understand unless you think about them very closely.Who Is the ‘Doer’ of Karma?Questioner: What is karma? What is the root of it?How is karma bound?Dadashri: Karma is bound through ‘doership’ (karta-bhaav). “I am doing it” is ‘doership’. Someone else does it andone claims, “I did it.” He passes his college examinations on thebasis of some other energy, and yet he claims that he passed theexams. That is a wrong belief and this is what binds karma. ‘Iam Chandubhai’ is itself karma.Questioner: Then who does the karma? Does karmaaffect the Atma (the Self) or the pudgal (the non-Selfcomplex)?Dadashri: If you are a Gnani (Self-realized), then thekarmas do not belong to you, but if you are agnani (ignorantof the Self), then they are yours.It is wrong to believe that the Atma (the Self) is the‘doer’ of karma. In fact, the Atma is not the ‘doer’ ofkarma. If it was the ‘doer’ of karma, it would never attainliberation. Even the absolutely liberated ones, the Siddhas whohave gone to moksha, would continue binding karma, if theSelf was a ‘doer’ of anything. There is no superior entity thatbinds karma or releases one from karma. What there is, isonly you.Questioner: If the Self is pure (shuddha) then who getssmeared and tainted by karma?Dadashri: The ‘doer’.Questioner: If the pudgal (non-Self complex) is the‘doer’, doesn’t it remain here (after death)?Dadashri: Neither the pudgal (non-Self complex) northe Self create, or bind karma. It is in the presence of the Selfthat ego arises. And it is that very ego that is the doer of karma.This is the ego that says, “I did this, I am happy, I am unhappy,I attained Gnan, I slipped into ignorance (agnan).” The egodoes all this. Once the ego leaves, one becomes the Self. Justso that the world could comprehend this, the vitarags have saidthat the self from the perspective of the vyavahar (worldlyinteraction) is the ‘doer’; however, from the perspective ofnischay (of the Self), it is a ‘non-doer’. ‘By relative viewpoint’,the self is a ‘doer’ of karma. However, it is not the ‘doer’ ofthese visible karmas (those evident through mind, speech andbody), it is the ‘doer’ of bhaavkarma (‘I am Chandubhai’), andthis charges karma. The ‘doer’ of the visible karma is Nature;it is vyavasthit.“By ‘real’ viewpoint” the Self is the ‘doer’ of swabhavkarma (its natural state of Knowing and Seeing).Aptavani-4285286Aptavani-4One’s own wrong belief of ‘I am Chandubhai’ arises!With this wrong belief karma is created. The pudgal (non-Selfcomplex) alone cannot create karma. It requires the Atma’spresence. The ego that arises because of the presence of theAtma (Self) is doing the work. All this ends when the ego is‘fractured’. The ego binds karma, and Nature frees you fromkarma. Nature frees you from karma when the timing is right,and when all the other ‘evidences’ come together. When you arebeing freed from that karma, the ego suffers (bhogavey) it andbinds a new karma.Who Removes That Ego?Questioner: Do you mean to say that the Atma (Self)binds (‘charges’) and ‘discharges’ karma through the bodycomplex (pudgal)?Dadashri: No, it is not like that. The Self has absolutelyno involvement in this. In fact, the Self is free. It is independent.It is the ego, which has been created through a false imposition(of ‘I am Chandubhai’) that binds karma, and it is the ego thatexperiences the fruits of karma. You are Shuddhatma (the pureSoul), and yet you claim ‘I am Chandubhai’. To claim to bewhat you are not, is called the ego. This is the false impositionof the ego. Egoism is to usurp someone else’s space and call ityour own. When this ego departs, You can return to Your ownplace.Questioner: Can we get rid of our ego through our ownefforts, or does it happen naturally?Dadashri: You cannot get rid of it completely, however,you can up to a certain extent. When you wash clothes withsoap, the soap will leave its residue behind on the clothes. ThenTinopal (stain-remover) will leave its residue behind if you try toremove the soap residue with it; the final residue will not comeout on its own. You need a Gnani Purush to remove the final“dirt,” but until that happens the ego breaks down through aseries of natural beatings.Continuous Binding of Karma Where There IsIgnoranceQuestioner: Aren’t we binding karma at each momentright now?Dadashri: Not just every moment, but even at night whileyou sleep. During the day, you are aware that you are bindingkarma, but you are also binding karma during the night. Thatis because even while you are sleeping, you do not forget, ‘I amChandubhai.’No Binding of Karma in the Presence of Gnan!Questioner: How do we stop binding karma?Dadashri: It is when You have the awareness of yourown Atma. After the Gnani Purush gives You the awareness ofthe Self, You will no longer bind any karma. After that, you willnot bind any new karma, and the old ones will continue to‘discharge’.Questioner: How can one become free from the karmasthat are being bound through the bodily functions of eating anddrinking?Dadashri: After Self-realization, you do not bind anykarma whatsoever. From then on, in eating, drinking,wandering about or wearing spectacles, you do not bind anykarma.Questioner: But doesn’t eating and drinking kill a lot ofliving beings (jivas, embodied souls)?Dadashri: As long as one is violent (himsak), there willalways be violence (himsa) in one’s every action. ‘I amChandubhai’ is a wrong belief, and that in itself is a violent intentAptavani-4285286Aptavani-4One’s own wrong belief of ‘I am Chandubhai’ arises!With this wrong belief karma is created. The pudgal (non-Selfcomplex) alone cannot create karma. It requires the Atma’spresence. The ego that arises because of the presence of theAtma (Self) is doing the work. All this ends when the ego is‘fractured’. The ego binds karma, and Nature frees you fromkarma. Nature frees you from karma when the timing is right,and when all the other ‘evidences’ come together. When you arebeing freed from that karma, the ego suffers (bhogavey) it andbinds a new karma.Who Removes That Ego?Questioner: Do you mean to say that the Atma (Self)binds (‘charges’) and ‘discharges’ karma through the bodycomplex (pudgal)?Dadashri: No, it is not like that. The Self has absolutelyno involvement in this. In fact, the Self is free. It is independent.It is the ego, which has been created through a false imposition(of ‘I am Chandubhai’) that binds karma, and it is the ego thatexperiences the fruits of karma. You are Shuddhatma (the pureSoul), and yet you claim ‘I am Chandubhai’. To claim to bewhat you are not, is called the ego. This is the false impositionof the ego. Egoism is to usurp someone else’s space and call ityour own. When this ego departs, You can return to Your ownplace.Questioner: Can we get rid of our ego through our ownefforts, or does it happen naturally?Dadashri: You cannot get rid of it completely, however,you can up to a certain extent. When you wash clothes withsoap, the soap will leave its residue behind on the clothes. ThenTinopal (stain-remover) will leave its residue behind if you try toremove the soap residue with it; the final residue will not comeout on its own. You need a Gnani Purush to remove the final“dirt,” but until that happens the ego breaks down through aseries of natural beatings.Continuous Binding of Karma Where There IsIgnoranceQuestioner: Aren’t we binding karma at each momentright now?Dadashri: Not just every moment, but even at night whileyou sleep. During the day, you are aware that you are bindingkarma, but you are also binding karma during the night. Thatis because even while you are sleeping, you do not forget, ‘I amChandubhai.’No Binding of Karma in the Presence of Gnan!Questioner: How do we stop binding karma?Dadashri: It is when You have the awareness of yourown Atma. After the Gnani Purush gives You the awareness ofthe Self, You will no longer bind any karma. After that, you willnot bind any new karma, and the old ones will continue to‘discharge’.Questioner: How can one become free from the karmasthat are being bound through the bodily functions of eating anddrinking?Dadashri: After Self-realization, you do not bind anykarma whatsoever. From then on, in eating, drinking,wandering about or wearing spectacles, you do not bind anykarma.Questioner: But doesn’t eating and drinking kill a lot ofliving beings (jivas, embodied souls)?Dadashri: As long as one is violent (himsak), there willalways be violence (himsa) in one’s every action. ‘I amChandubhai’ is a wrong belief, and that in itself is a violent intentAptavani-4287288Aptavani-4(himsak bhaav). And where you yourself become the Self, itmeans that you have become a non-violent (ahimsak), and thefault (dosh) of violence (himsa) does not fall on You. Butbecause there is no awareness of the Self, only violence prevailseverywhere. Only the vision (drashti) needs to change.Lighter Karmas Are Bound ThroughRepentanceQuestioner: Are you saying that I do not bind anykarma if I have non-violent intention in my heart, while carryingout worldly obligations with my body?Dadashri: No. You will still bind karma. As long as youhave the belief of, ‘I am Chandubhai’, the violence (himsa) doesoccur, even though in your mind, your inner intent (bhaav) is, “Ido not want to do any violence.” Despite that, if it does happen,you will still have to confront the consequences of your karma,and what would that be like? You will probably get hit by a smallstone and your karma will be paid off. Whereas another personwith the inner intent of, “I want to do himsa” will be hit by alarge rock. The violence (himsa) is the same for both, butbecause of the differences in the inner intent, the fruits of thekarma are different.Questioner: Do I have to repent for carrying out thebody’s functions (dharma)?Dadashri: Of course! Until you attain the awareness of,‘I am the Atma’, you will bind even stronger karma if you donot repent. The ‘knots’ of karma become lighter as you repent.Otherwise, the consequence of that demerit karma (paap) willbe very grave. You will even lose the coming life as a humanbeing. And should you happen to be born as a human again, youwill encounter many difficulties. You will never come across anyfood, drink, or respect; only unrelenting disrespect and insult.That is precisely why repentance and all these other actions areso necessary. This is called indirect (paroksh) worship (bhakti).Until you attain Atmagnan (knowledge of the Soul) you have todo this kind of indirect worship.Karma Is Bound Only in the Human FormQuestioner: If I do not repent for my daily actions, dothey accumulate in the long run?Dadashri: No, they do not accumulate. Karmas willshed once they are bound. For example, if one binds karmasthat lead to the animal life, then one takes birth in an animal life-form and dissipates karmas there, before returning back to thehuman form. Karmas do not accumulate from one life toanother. One lifetime’s earning of karma (causes in human life),he will spend them in five to seven lifetimes in the animal life-form, before returning.Questioner: Does one bind karma in the animal life-form?Dadashri: No, karmas are not bound there. Onlyhumans bind karma. Even the celestial beings (devas, devis) donot bind karma. Everyone goes into other life-forms, only todissipate their karma (discharge).Questioner: The living beings (jivas) of the Tiryanchagati (lower life-forms) are violent (himsak) too. Even they havekashays, so don’t they bind karma?Dadashri: No. No animal binds karma, except forhumans.Questioner: Will the karma, bound in the human form,have to be suffered in a lower life-form?Dadashri: Yes, if you have taken or enjoyed anything thatis not rightfully yours, it is a ‘bestial’ karma which will have tobe suffered by going into the animal life-form.Aptavani-4287288Aptavani-4(himsak bhaav). And where you yourself become the Self, itmeans that you have become a non-violent (ahimsak), and thefault (dosh) of violence (himsa) does not fall on You. Butbecause there is no awareness of the Self, only violence prevailseverywhere. Only the vision (drashti) needs to change.Lighter Karmas Are Bound ThroughRepentanceQuestioner: Are you saying that I do not bind anykarma if I have non-violent intention in my heart, while carryingout worldly obligations with my body?Dadashri: No. You will still bind karma. As long as youhave the belief of, ‘I am Chandubhai’, the violence (himsa) doesoccur, even though in your mind, your inner intent (bhaav) is, “Ido not want to do any violence.” Despite that, if it does happen,you will still have to confront the consequences of your karma,and what would that be like? You will probably get hit by a smallstone and your karma will be paid off. Whereas another personwith the inner intent of, “I want to do himsa” will be hit by alarge rock. The violence (himsa) is the same for both, butbecause of the differences in the inner intent, the fruits of thekarma are different.Questioner: Do I have to repent for carrying out thebody’s functions (dharma)?Dadashri: Of course! Until you attain the awareness of,‘I am the Atma’, you will bind even stronger karma if you donot repent. The ‘knots’ of karma become lighter as you repent.Otherwise, the consequence of that demerit karma (paap) willbe very grave. You will even lose the coming life as a humanbeing. And should you happen to be born as a human again, youwill encounter many difficulties. You will never come across anyfood, drink, or respect; only unrelenting disrespect and insult.That is precisely why repentance and all these other actions areso necessary. This is called indirect (paroksh) worship (bhakti).Until you attain Atmagnan (knowledge of the Soul) you have todo this kind of indirect worship.Karma Is Bound Only in the Human FormQuestioner: If I do not repent for my daily actions, dothey accumulate in the long run?Dadashri: No, they do not accumulate. Karmas willshed once they are bound. For example, if one binds karmasthat lead to the animal life, then one takes birth in an animal life-form and dissipates karmas there, before returning back to thehuman form. Karmas do not accumulate from one life toanother. One lifetime’s earning of karma (causes in human life),he will spend them in five to seven lifetimes in the animal life-form, before returning.Questioner: Does one bind karma in the animal life-form?Dadashri: No, karmas are not bound there. Onlyhumans bind karma. Even the celestial beings (devas, devis) donot bind karma. Everyone goes into other life-forms, only todissipate their karma (discharge).Questioner: The living beings (jivas) of the Tiryanchagati (lower life-forms) are violent (himsak) too. Even they havekashays, so don’t they bind karma?Dadashri: No. No animal binds karma, except forhumans.Questioner: Will the karma, bound in the human form,have to be suffered in a lower life-form?Dadashri: Yes, if you have taken or enjoyed anything thatis not rightfully yours, it is a ‘bestial’ karma which will have tobe suffered by going into the animal life-form.Aptavani-4289290Aptavani-4Questioner: And after suffering there, does he return tothe human life-form?Dadashri: Yes, he returns to the human life-form. Evenif he goes into the celestial life he has to return to the humanlife. One only has the right to venture into the realms of otherlife-forms from the human life-form. In the human life-form,there is both ‘charging’ and ‘discharging’ of karma, whilst inother life-forms, there is only ‘discharge’ of karma. Onlyhuman life is a “test examination”. Those who fail, will go to alower life-form or to some infernal realm. Those who pass, willremain as humans, and if they have an ‘exceptional grade’,they will go on to life as a celestial being. The fifth gati (realmor life-form) is moksha which is only attained by way of thehuman life-form.Questioner: Does one have to make a stop in the humanlife-form, on the way from one lower life-form to another lowerlife-form?Dadashri: No, from one lower life-form to another lowerlife-form, is eight lifetimes at the most and no more. One thenreturns to the human life-form.Questioner: You also find the same sort of humanunderstanding in the animal life-form, so why do animals notbind karma?Dadashri: Animals have ‘limited’ understanding andhumans have ‘unlimited’ understanding. Animals even havelimited ‘minds’. Therefore, they are unable to bind karma.Karma – A Balance of Many LifetimesQuestioner: Are my present karmas, from my countlesspast lives?Dadashri: Each life is in the form of a ‘balance sheet’ ofendless previous lives. It is not the sum of all previous lives,because the rule is that upon maturation, the karma has to bearits fruit, or else so many karmas will stay pending!How Is a Karmic Account Paid Off?Questioner: If we have created enmity (veyr) towardssomeone, then do we have to face him in another life to settleit?Dadashri: No, it is not like that. A score is not settled inthat way. When enmity is created, attachment-abhorrence(raag-dwesh) is involved. If you had created enmity with yourson in the past life, wouldn’t you wonder about which lifetime itwould be settled? How will you come together again like this?Your son may even come as a cat in this life. If you offer it milk,it will scratch you on your face. That is how it all is! This is howyour enmity gets settled. The rule of the maturation time forkarma, is that the karmic account (hisaab) is paid off quickly.When I ask you, have you done anything for moksha inyour countless past lives? It means, what is the balance sheet ofall your past lives? Isn’t it that artadhyan and raudradhyanhave continued to carry on?Whatever you have to experience and suffer, is itself thefruits of your past karma, and nothing else. You cannot seekarma. You can see the ‘fruit’ (effect) of karma. Whensomeone slaps you or you have a stomachache or headache orparalysis, etc., is all referred to as karma, but it is not that atall. Some attribute these afflictions to this body (pudgal) and itsactions. But in truth, it is not that. The body (deha) is notkusangi (a negative influence; wrong company). If theunderstanding veered in this direction, it would help them alongtheir way to moksha. This is just a glitch in one’s understanding.The belief that ‘I am Chandubhai’ and everything doneunder this belief, is the cause of the worldly life (sansar).Questioner: Often, when people burn themselves or fall,Aptavani-4289290Aptavani-4Questioner: And after suffering there, does he return tothe human life-form?Dadashri: Yes, he returns to the human life-form. Evenif he goes into the celestial life he has to return to the humanlife. One only has the right to venture into the realms of otherlife-forms from the human life-form. In the human life-form,there is both ‘charging’ and ‘discharging’ of karma, whilst inother life-forms, there is only ‘discharge’ of karma. Onlyhuman life is a “test examination”. Those who fail, will go to alower life-form or to some infernal realm. Those who pass, willremain as humans, and if they have an ‘exceptional grade’,they will go on to life as a celestial being. The fifth gati (realmor life-form) is moksha which is only attained by way of thehuman life-form.Questioner: Does one have to make a stop in the humanlife-form, on the way from one lower life-form to another lowerlife-form?Dadashri: No, from one lower life-form to another lowerlife-form, is eight lifetimes at the most and no more. One thenreturns to the human life-form.Questioner: You also find the same sort of humanunderstanding in the animal life-form, so why do animals notbind karma?Dadashri: Animals have ‘limited’ understanding andhumans have ‘unlimited’ understanding. Animals even havelimited ‘minds’. Therefore, they are unable to bind karma.Karma – A Balance of Many LifetimesQuestioner: Are my present karmas, from my countlesspast lives?Dadashri: Each life is in the form of a ‘balance sheet’ ofendless previous lives. It is not the sum of all previous lives,because the rule is that upon maturation, the karma has to bearits fruit, or else so many karmas will stay pending!How Is a Karmic Account Paid Off?Questioner: If we have created enmity (veyr) towardssomeone, then do we have to face him in another life to settleit?Dadashri: No, it is not like that. A score is not settled inthat way. When enmity is created, attachment-abhorrence(raag-dwesh) is involved. If you had created enmity with yourson in the past life, wouldn’t you wonder about which lifetime itwould be settled? How will you come together again like this?Your son may even come as a cat in this life. If you offer it milk,it will scratch you on your face. That is how it all is! This is howyour enmity gets settled. The rule of the maturation time forkarma, is that the karmic account (hisaab) is paid off quickly.When I ask you, have you done anything for moksha inyour countless past lives? It means, what is the balance sheet ofall your past lives? Isn’t it that artadhyan and raudradhyanhave continued to carry on?Whatever you have to experience and suffer, is itself thefruits of your past karma, and nothing else. You cannot seekarma. You can see the ‘fruit’ (effect) of karma. Whensomeone slaps you or you have a stomachache or headache orparalysis, etc., is all referred to as karma, but it is not that atall. Some attribute these afflictions to this body (pudgal) and itsactions. But in truth, it is not that. The body (deha) is notkusangi (a negative influence; wrong company). If theunderstanding veered in this direction, it would help them alongtheir way to moksha. This is just a glitch in one’s understanding.The belief that ‘I am Chandubhai’ and everything doneunder this belief, is the cause of the worldly life (sansar).Questioner: Often, when people burn themselves or fall,Aptavani-4291292Aptavani-4in the absence of a nimit (instrumental person), what karma hascaused that?Dadashri: You get hurt because in your past life, youmade an inner intent (bhaav) to hurt another. And if you had notmade such an inner intent, then nothing will harm you.When everyone around is being robbed, but if there is ashonest man in their midst, he will never be robbed. The thievesthemselves will not be able to rob such a man. That is the kindof “safe-side” there is in this world.Aashrav, Bandh, Samvar and NirjaraQuestioner: How should I understand the term‘discharging of karma’?Dadashri: What is the root cause of karma? Attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh). In Jainism it is said, ‘If you want togo to moksha, then you have to get rid of attachment (raag),abhorrence (dwesh) and agnan (ignorance of the Self).’ And inVedanta it says, ‘You attain moksha when mudd (impurity),vikshep (obstructed view; false projection) and agnan (ignoranceof the Self) go away.’ Agnan (ignorance) is common to both.Agnan is the basis for attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh).Karma will begin to fall off when ignorance of the Self (agnan)goes away. How can you get rid of ignorance (agnan)? WithGnan (Knowledge of the Self). Liberation is halted because ofthe ignorance of the Self.Who do you think is the ‘doer’ of karma?Questioner: The Atma (Soul).Dadashri: How can the Atma be kriya-vadi (‘doer’ ofanything)? This is very important to understand. No one is ableto shed even a single karma. Karma is shed when samvar(stoppage of karmic matter) occurs. With all this continuingaashrav (influx of karmic matter), how can the karma beshed? To discharge (shed) karma and at the same time aashrav(influx) to continue, is contradictory. If you want to shed karma,you must have samvar (stoppage of the influx). But first, unlessyou make the distinction between jiva-ajiva (living-nonliving;the Self and the non-Self), you will not get anywhere. Essentiallyall you will be doing is enduring the inauspicious (ashubha)karma and binding auspicious (shubha) karma. Otherwise, thekarma will continue being bound.Questioner: How does aashrav (influx of karmicmatter) occur?Dadashri: When you have bad thoughts in your mind, itis called udaya-bhaav (intent that arises due to the unfolding ofpast karma). If the atma (relative self) becomes involved(tanmayakar) with the thought, it is called aashrav (influx ofkarmic matter). Now for that atikraman (negative bhaav), ifyou immediately do pratikraman, it will get erased. If youcannot do pratikraman, then the karma will bind.Just one lifetime going to waste is not of great consequence,but what is crucial, is that one will bind karma for anotherhundred more lifetimes.Questioner: What is samvar?Dadashri: Samvar means the stoppage of ‘charging’. Aslong as there is this awareness of ‘I am Chandubhai’, both influx(aashrav) and bondage (bandh) will continue. And if theawareness of ‘I am Shuddhatma’ is present, there will besamvar (stoppage of charging new karma). How long does theawareness of ‘I am Shuddhatma’ remain with you?Questioner: It stays with me the whole time since yougave me the Gnan.Dadashri: Therefore, there is no binding of karma(bandh) for You from now on. You have samvar (blockage),Aptavani-4291292Aptavani-4in the absence of a nimit (instrumental person), what karma hascaused that?Dadashri: You get hurt because in your past life, youmade an inner intent (bhaav) to hurt another. And if you had notmade such an inner intent, then nothing will harm you.When everyone around is being robbed, but if there is ashonest man in their midst, he will never be robbed. The thievesthemselves will not be able to rob such a man. That is the kindof “safe-side” there is in this world.Aashrav, Bandh, Samvar and NirjaraQuestioner: How should I understand the term‘discharging of karma’?Dadashri: What is the root cause of karma? Attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh). In Jainism it is said, ‘If you want togo to moksha, then you have to get rid of attachment (raag),abhorrence (dwesh) and agnan (ignorance of the Self).’ And inVedanta it says, ‘You attain moksha when mudd (impurity),vikshep (obstructed view; false projection) and agnan (ignoranceof the Self) go away.’ Agnan (ignorance) is common to both.Agnan is the basis for attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh).Karma will begin to fall off when ignorance of the Self (agnan)goes away. How can you get rid of ignorance (agnan)? WithGnan (Knowledge of the Self). Liberation is halted because ofthe ignorance of the Self.Who do you think is the ‘doer’ of karma?Questioner: The Atma (Soul).Dadashri: How can the Atma be kriya-vadi (‘doer’ ofanything)? This is very important to understand. No one is ableto shed even a single karma. Karma is shed when samvar(stoppage of karmic matter) occurs. With all this continuingaashrav (influx of karmic matter), how can the karma beshed? To discharge (shed) karma and at the same time aashrav(influx) to continue, is contradictory. If you want to shed karma,you must have samvar (stoppage of the influx). But first, unlessyou make the distinction between jiva-ajiva (living-nonliving;the Self and the non-Self), you will not get anywhere. Essentiallyall you will be doing is enduring the inauspicious (ashubha)karma and binding auspicious (shubha) karma. Otherwise, thekarma will continue being bound.Questioner: How does aashrav (influx of karmicmatter) occur?Dadashri: When you have bad thoughts in your mind, itis called udaya-bhaav (intent that arises due to the unfolding ofpast karma). If the atma (relative self) becomes involved(tanmayakar) with the thought, it is called aashrav (influx ofkarmic matter). Now for that atikraman (negative bhaav), ifyou immediately do pratikraman, it will get erased. If youcannot do pratikraman, then the karma will bind.Just one lifetime going to waste is not of great consequence,but what is crucial, is that one will bind karma for anotherhundred more lifetimes.Questioner: What is samvar?Dadashri: Samvar means the stoppage of ‘charging’. Aslong as there is this awareness of ‘I am Chandubhai’, both influx(aashrav) and bondage (bandh) will continue. And if theawareness of ‘I am Shuddhatma’ is present, there will besamvar (stoppage of charging new karma). How long does theawareness of ‘I am Shuddhatma’ remain with you?Questioner: It stays with me the whole time since yougave me the Gnan.Dadashri: Therefore, there is no binding of karma(bandh) for You from now on. You have samvar (blockage),Aptavani-4293294Aptavani-4and the aashrav (influx) from before, will continue to discharge(nirjara). Now no more new karma is bound. There isdischarging (nirjara) of karma for every living being. When youdo not have the knowledge of the Self, your past karma willcontinue to discharge (nirjara), but at the same time, you willcontinue to bind new ones.After swaroop Gnan (knowledge of the Self), there isonly discharge of karma (nirjara). In other words, the chargingof karma ends, leaving only those that need to be ‘discharged’.With whatever inner intent (bhaav) the karma was ‘charged’,it will be ‘discharged’ with the same inner intent. Except, in thiscase, You have no new charging (samvar) while the karma isbeing discharged; you do not charge any karma, whilst othersdo.Those who have pure awareness of the Self (shuddhaupayogi) do not bind a single karma.Questioner: Can bondage be destroyed in the smallestfraction of time (samaya)?Dadashri: Yes, it can. On account of pure appliedawareness (shuddha upayog) it is possible. Through AkramVignan, it is possible for one to remain in shuddha upayog.Questioner: What is true penance? What is the discharge(nirjara) of karma that Lord Mahavir has shown us?Dadashri: As long as there is no ‘charging’ of newkarma (samvar), sakaam (moksha hetu bhoot – for thepurpose of attaining liberation) discharge will not occur. Sakaamdischarge occurs only when there is no new charging (samvar).Even cows and buffaloes have akaam (without ultimatepurpose) discharge.Questioner: Please explain what is bandh and anubandh?Dadashri: With anubandh, your karma is unfolding andcoming into effect. Your meeting with Kaviraj is because ofanubandh (effect). At that moment you again bind karma(bandh). So you have to understand where the responsibilitylies.Questioner: What causes bandh (binding of karma) andanubandh (discharge of karma)?Dadashri: It is because of the belief of ‘I am Chandubhai,I am the ‘doer’ of this.’Questioner: Does that lead to bandh (binding of karma)or anubandh (discharge of karma)?Dadashri: Anubandh.Questioner: Then how does bandh occur?Dadashri: After anubandh, the same old processcontinues. As long as the ‘doership’ stays, bandh (binding ofkarma) continues. But if You have the realization at that timethat, ‘I am Shuddhatma and vyavasthit is the doer’, then the‘charging’ will not occur. In spite of anubandh (discharge ofkarma), there will be no bandh (charging).The Thermometer for Good or Bad KarmaQuestioner: What is the “thermometer” (gauge) torecognize shubha (auspicious) karma and ashubha (inauspicious)karma?Dadashri: When a shubha karma unfolds, you feel itssweetness, you feel peaceful and you have a sense of comfortand tranquility around you, but when a bad karma (ashubha)is unfolding you feel a bitterness and your mind feels uneasy andrestless. A bad karma causes you internal suffering, while agood karma lets you experience pleasure.Questioner: There are times when we feel we arebinding bad (ashubha) karma, even though externally the eventunfolding is one of good karma.Aptavani-4293294Aptavani-4and the aashrav (influx) from before, will continue to discharge(nirjara). Now no more new karma is bound. There isdischarging (nirjara) of karma for every living being. When youdo not have the knowledge of the Self, your past karma willcontinue to discharge (nirjara), but at the same time, you willcontinue to bind new ones.After swaroop Gnan (knowledge of the Self), there isonly discharge of karma (nirjara). In other words, the chargingof karma ends, leaving only those that need to be ‘discharged’.With whatever inner intent (bhaav) the karma was ‘charged’,it will be ‘discharged’ with the same inner intent. Except, in thiscase, You have no new charging (samvar) while the karma isbeing discharged; you do not charge any karma, whilst othersdo.Those who have pure awareness of the Self (shuddhaupayogi) do not bind a single karma.Questioner: Can bondage be destroyed in the smallestfraction of time (samaya)?Dadashri: Yes, it can. On account of pure appliedawareness (shuddha upayog) it is possible. Through AkramVignan, it is possible for one to remain in shuddha upayog.Questioner: What is true penance? What is the discharge(nirjara) of karma that Lord Mahavir has shown us?Dadashri: As long as there is no ‘charging’ of newkarma (samvar), sakaam (moksha hetu bhoot – for thepurpose of attaining liberation) discharge will not occur. Sakaamdischarge occurs only when there is no new charging (samvar).Even cows and buffaloes have akaam (without ultimatepurpose) discharge.Questioner: Please explain what is bandh and anubandh?Dadashri: With anubandh, your karma is unfolding andcoming into effect. Your meeting with Kaviraj is because ofanubandh (effect). At that moment you again bind karma(bandh). So you have to understand where the responsibilitylies.Questioner: What causes bandh (binding of karma) andanubandh (discharge of karma)?Dadashri: It is because of the belief of ‘I am Chandubhai,I am the ‘doer’ of this.’Questioner: Does that lead to bandh (binding of karma)or anubandh (discharge of karma)?Dadashri: Anubandh.Questioner: Then how does bandh occur?Dadashri: After anubandh, the same old processcontinues. As long as the ‘doership’ stays, bandh (binding ofkarma) continues. But if You have the realization at that timethat, ‘I am Shuddhatma and vyavasthit is the doer’, then the‘charging’ will not occur. In spite of anubandh (discharge ofkarma), there will be no bandh (charging).The Thermometer for Good or Bad KarmaQuestioner: What is the “thermometer” (gauge) torecognize shubha (auspicious) karma and ashubha (inauspicious)karma?Dadashri: When a shubha karma unfolds, you feel itssweetness, you feel peaceful and you have a sense of comfortand tranquility around you, but when a bad karma (ashubha)is unfolding you feel a bitterness and your mind feels uneasy andrestless. A bad karma causes you internal suffering, while agood karma lets you experience pleasure.Questioner: There are times when we feel we arebinding bad (ashubha) karma, even though externally the eventunfolding is one of good karma.Aptavani-4295296Aptavani-4Dadashri: Yes. That happens. Right now the event maybe of shubha (good) karma, but one may be binding badkarma from within.Overt Karma: Subtle KarmaQuestioner: How can we tell whether a karma is old(discharging, effect) or new (charging, cause)?Dadashri: Nobody can see whether a karma has beencreated (charged) or not. Only the Lord, the One with absoluteknowledge (kevalgnan), can know this. There is not theslightest trace of new karma in what you see in the world today.As long as you stay as the Knower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta) ofthe unfolding karma, you will not create a new karma. But ifyou become tanmayakar (‘I am Chandubhai, I am doing this’),then you will bind new karma. It is only after You becomeAtmagnani (knower of the Atma), that you stop bindingkarma.All the upchar (remedies-spiritual/religious) and medicinesthat are around in this Kaliyug (the current era of the time cyclecharacterized by lack of unity in mind, speech and body) arewrong. If a man does charitable work, is pious in his religion,donates money to temples, he does all that throughout his day,he is regarded by people as a ‘religious’ man. But within him, theman conceals intentions like, ‘How do I amass more?’ And‘How can I find gratification?’ His real desire is to take fromothers, what is not rightfully his. In this Kaliyug (the current eraof the time cycle), people generally desire to take things that arenot rightfully theirs. They are always ready to enjoy somethingthey have no right to. He may, on the outside, be displaying hisgenerosity by acting charitably and flaunting his ‘religious’ naturewith visible austerities, but internally he is harboring thoughts ofillicit money and sex. The Lord does not grant such a man asingle penny’s worth of credit. Why is that? It is because theseare all sthool (perceptible; overt) karma. All of which you seeon the outside; what you see in a person’s behavior, is overt(sthool) karma. The person will realize the fruit of his sthoolkarma, here and now. People think of these sthool karmas askarma for the life to come, but the fruits of these karmas willbe realized here in this very life. Whereas the fruits of subtle(sookshma) karma that are being bound internally, that are notperceptible to others, will be realized in the next life. If a person were to steal today, the stealing is overt(sthool) karma. And he will receive the fruit of that karma inthis very life. In one way or another he will be disgraced; withpunishment from the police perhaps – but in any case he willreceive the fruit of his overt (sthool) karma in the presentlifetime. When someone gives a generous donation, people willgive him considerable praise and importance. ‘Oh, what a greatphilanthropist he is!’ they will say. While all along, the man ishaving negative thoughts about his donation! This is the subtle(sookshma) karma that he is binding from within. This overt(sthool) karma and overt (sthool) conduct that is overtlyvisible, will be of no help to you ‘over there’ (in the next life)!Over there, only ‘What is subtle (sookshma) thought?’ willcarry weight. And ‘what is subtle (sookshma) karma?’ is allthat will be helpful to you over there. Now the whole world has“adjusted” (become accustomed) to the overt (sthool) karma.The practice of meditation and penance by the monks andascetics is all overt (sthool; effect) karma. Where is the subtle(sookshma) karma in all that? There is no subtle (sookshma)karma in it for their next life. For their overt (sthool) karma,they will receive praise in this life. The acharyas do theirpratikraman, samayik, give lectures and discourses, etc., butthat is their conduct; their overt karma. But you have to lookat what is going on inside. It is what is being ‘charged’ inside thatis going to help you over there. Their conduct today is a‘discharge’. Their entire external conduct is in the form of‘discharge’. They all say, “I did samayik, I did dhyan, IAptavani-4295296Aptavani-4Dadashri: Yes. That happens. Right now the event maybe of shubha (good) karma, but one may be binding badkarma from within.Overt Karma: Subtle KarmaQuestioner: How can we tell whether a karma is old(discharging, effect) or new (charging, cause)?Dadashri: Nobody can see whether a karma has beencreated (charged) or not. Only the Lord, the One with absoluteknowledge (kevalgnan), can know this. There is not theslightest trace of new karma in what you see in the world today.As long as you stay as the Knower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta) ofthe unfolding karma, you will not create a new karma. But ifyou become tanmayakar (‘I am Chandubhai, I am doing this’),then you will bind new karma. It is only after You becomeAtmagnani (knower of the Atma), that you stop bindingkarma.All the upchar (remedies-spiritual/religious) and medicinesthat are around in this Kaliyug (the current era of the time cyclecharacterized by lack of unity in mind, speech and body) arewrong. If a man does charitable work, is pious in his religion,donates money to temples, he does all that throughout his day,he is regarded by people as a ‘religious’ man. But within him, theman conceals intentions like, ‘How do I amass more?’ And‘How can I find gratification?’ His real desire is to take fromothers, what is not rightfully his. In this Kaliyug (the current eraof the time cycle), people generally desire to take things that arenot rightfully theirs. They are always ready to enjoy somethingthey have no right to. He may, on the outside, be displaying hisgenerosity by acting charitably and flaunting his ‘religious’ naturewith visible austerities, but internally he is harboring thoughts ofillicit money and sex. The Lord does not grant such a man asingle penny’s worth of credit. Why is that? It is because theseare all sthool (perceptible; overt) karma. All of which you seeon the outside; what you see in a person’s behavior, is overt(sthool) karma. The person will realize the fruit of his sthoolkarma, here and now. People think of these sthool karmas askarma for the life to come, but the fruits of these karmas willbe realized here in this very life. Whereas the fruits of subtle(sookshma) karma that are being bound internally, that are notperceptible to others, will be realized in the next life. If a person were to steal today, the stealing is overt(sthool) karma. And he will receive the fruit of that karma inthis very life. In one way or another he will be disgraced; withpunishment from the police perhaps – but in any case he willreceive the fruit of his overt (sthool) karma in the presentlifetime. When someone gives a generous donation, people willgive him considerable praise and importance. ‘Oh, what a greatphilanthropist he is!’ they will say. While all along, the man ishaving negative thoughts about his donation! This is the subtle(sookshma) karma that he is binding from within. This overt(sthool) karma and overt (sthool) conduct that is overtlyvisible, will be of no help to you ‘over there’ (in the next life)!Over there, only ‘What is subtle (sookshma) thought?’ willcarry weight. And ‘what is subtle (sookshma) karma?’ is allthat will be helpful to you over there. Now the whole world has“adjusted” (become accustomed) to the overt (sthool) karma.The practice of meditation and penance by the monks andascetics is all overt (sthool; effect) karma. Where is the subtle(sookshma) karma in all that? There is no subtle (sookshma)karma in it for their next life. For their overt (sthool) karma,they will receive praise in this life. The acharyas do theirpratikraman, samayik, give lectures and discourses, etc., butthat is their conduct; their overt karma. But you have to lookat what is going on inside. It is what is being ‘charged’ inside thatis going to help you over there. Their conduct today is a‘discharge’. Their entire external conduct is in the form of‘discharge’. They all say, “I did samayik, I did dhyan, IAptavani-4297298Aptavani-4donated.” One will be rewarded for all that, here. For all that,they will be rewarded here (in this life), but what does that haveto do with the next life? The Lord is no fool that He will acceptsuch falsehood from you. They may be doing samayik on theoutside, but who knows what is going on inside.One man was doing introspective meditation (samayik)when someone knocked on his door. His wife opened the door.A man had come looking for him. “Where is the sheth (theboss)?” he asked, and the wife replied, “He has gone to agarbage dump (a bad part of town, renowned for illicitactivities)!” The sheth, upon hearing his wife’s reply, lookedwithin and realized that indeed, that is where his mind was!Although on the outside he was doing a samayik, he kepthaving bad thoughts within. God does not allow such falsehoodto carry on. If samayik prevails internally, although it may not bethe case on the outside, it will still be acceptable ‘there’(moksha). But this external ostentation will not work over there.I will explain to you what overt (sthool) karma is. Sayyou become very angry. Even though you do not want to getangry, the anger still comes. Doesn’t that happen?Questioner: It does happen.Dadashri: When that anger happens, you reap theconsequences right here and now. People will say, ‘Let him be,he has got a ferocious temper anyway.’ Someone may even slapyou. Therefore, either through disgrace or by some other way,you will receive the fruit of your karma. So, to become angryis your overt (sthool) karma. But if your inner intent (bhaav)of today is one of, ‘It is necessary to get angry’, then it wouldbe, that you are creating another account of anger. But if todayyou have decided in your mind that you do not want to get angryat all, but despite that if you still do, then there will be no binding(karma of anger) in the next life. In this overt (sthool) karma,because you displayed your anger, you will have to suffer itsconsequences in this lifetime. Even then, you will not bind anykarma for the life to come. This is because, you have firmresolve (nischay) in the subtle (sookshma) karma, to notbecome angry.Now if a man does not get angry with anyone, but thinksto himself, ‘These people will only shape up if someone gotangry with them’, then in his next life he will become an angeredindividual. So whatever anger one displays on the outside, isovert (sthool) karma, and whatever internal intent he has at thetime, is subtle (sookshma) karma.If you understand just this much, there is no binding inovert (sthool) karma whatsoever. That is why I have putforward this science in a different light. Until now, people havebeen brainwashed into believing that bondage of karma occursthrough the overt (sthool) karma, and that is why people arevery frightened.You have a wife at home. You want to go to moksha andyou are married. You may think to yourself, ‘I am married, howcan I go to moksha now?’ Look here, it is not your wife whois getting in the way, she is not an impediment, but your subtle(sookshma) karma is. Your overt (sthool) karmas are not anobstacle. That is why I ‘open’ this science to you. If I do not‘open’ this science to you, you would feel constant fear andnothing but confusion and anxiety. Those ascetics proclaim thatthey will attain moksha (liberation). How on earth are you goingto manage that? You do not even know what you are going torenounce in the first place. You have only renounced the thingsthat are overt (sthool; perceptible). You have renounced whatyou see with your eyes and what you hear with your ears. Thefruit of that will be rewarded to you in this very life. This,however, is a new kind of science! It is Akram Vignan. Thisscience ‘facilitates’ people in every way; it has made it very easyfor people to attain liberation. How can you leave your wife andAptavani-4297298Aptavani-4donated.” One will be rewarded for all that, here. For all that,they will be rewarded here (in this life), but what does that haveto do with the next life? The Lord is no fool that He will acceptsuch falsehood from you. They may be doing samayik on theoutside, but who knows what is going on inside.One man was doing introspective meditation (samayik)when someone knocked on his door. His wife opened the door.A man had come looking for him. “Where is the sheth (theboss)?” he asked, and the wife replied, “He has gone to agarbage dump (a bad part of town, renowned for illicitactivities)!” The sheth, upon hearing his wife’s reply, lookedwithin and realized that indeed, that is where his mind was!Although on the outside he was doing a samayik, he kepthaving bad thoughts within. God does not allow such falsehoodto carry on. If samayik prevails internally, although it may not bethe case on the outside, it will still be acceptable ‘there’(moksha). But this external ostentation will not work over there.I will explain to you what overt (sthool) karma is. Sayyou become very angry. Even though you do not want to getangry, the anger still comes. Doesn’t that happen?Questioner: It does happen.Dadashri: When that anger happens, you reap theconsequences right here and now. People will say, ‘Let him be,he has got a ferocious temper anyway.’ Someone may even slapyou. Therefore, either through disgrace or by some other way,you will receive the fruit of your karma. So, to become angryis your overt (sthool) karma. But if your inner intent (bhaav)of today is one of, ‘It is necessary to get angry’, then it wouldbe, that you are creating another account of anger. But if todayyou have decided in your mind that you do not want to get angryat all, but despite that if you still do, then there will be no binding(karma of anger) in the next life. In this overt (sthool) karma,because you displayed your anger, you will have to suffer itsconsequences in this lifetime. Even then, you will not bind anykarma for the life to come. This is because, you have firmresolve (nischay) in the subtle (sookshma) karma, to notbecome angry.Now if a man does not get angry with anyone, but thinksto himself, ‘These people will only shape up if someone gotangry with them’, then in his next life he will become an angeredindividual. So whatever anger one displays on the outside, isovert (sthool) karma, and whatever internal intent he has at thetime, is subtle (sookshma) karma.If you understand just this much, there is no binding inovert (sthool) karma whatsoever. That is why I have putforward this science in a different light. Until now, people havebeen brainwashed into believing that bondage of karma occursthrough the overt (sthool) karma, and that is why people arevery frightened.You have a wife at home. You want to go to moksha andyou are married. You may think to yourself, ‘I am married, howcan I go to moksha now?’ Look here, it is not your wife whois getting in the way, she is not an impediment, but your subtle(sookshma) karma is. Your overt (sthool) karmas are not anobstacle. That is why I ‘open’ this science to you. If I do not‘open’ this science to you, you would feel constant fear andnothing but confusion and anxiety. Those ascetics proclaim thatthey will attain moksha (liberation). How on earth are you goingto manage that? You do not even know what you are going torenounce in the first place. You have only renounced the thingsthat are overt (sthool; perceptible). You have renounced whatyou see with your eyes and what you hear with your ears. Thefruit of that will be rewarded to you in this very life. This,however, is a new kind of science! It is Akram Vignan. Thisscience ‘facilitates’ people in every way; it has made it very easyfor people to attain liberation. How can you leave your wife andAptavani-4299300Aptavani-4run away to moksha? And is it possible for one to attainmoksha after having abandoned one’s wife? Is it possible toattain moksha after hurting someone? So take care of all yourobligations and responsibilities towards your wife and children.So calmly eat what your wife serves you, and know that it is allyour overt (sthool; effect) karma! But make sure that theopinion you have behind the overt (sthool) karma is not onethat will lead you to ‘charge’ subtle (sookshma) karma for thenext life. For that very reason I have given you these ‘Fivestatements’ (Agnas). Within you, You should not have theopinion that, ‘This is correct, what I am doing, and what everI am enjoying is correct.’ You should not have such an opinion.If you change your opinion, just this much, then that is all thatis needed.Parents become furious when their teenager has badtendencies, and they go around saying, ‘My son is like this; heis a thief, he is worthless’. Good heavens! Just drop it, whydon’t you. What is done is done! For the present time, changehis inner intent (bhaav). Change his internal opinions. Theparents do not know how to change their child’s intents. This isbecause they are not ‘certified’ parents. They do not have a‘certificate’ and they have become parents? If the boy picks upa habit of stealing, his parents will keep scolding and punishinghim. They will keep telling him, “You have no sense, you do thisand you do that.” This is how the parents go ‘overboard’ (talkexcessively). Needless to say, such extreme reactions on thepart of parents do not help. So what does the child do?Mentally he decides, “Let them say what they want to, I amgoing to do it anyway.” The parents are turning this boy, moreand more into a thief. People have started to use the tools thatwere employed in the ages of Dwapar, Treta and Satyug intoday’s Kaliyug (the current era of the time cycle characterizedby lack of unity in mind, speech and body).Nowadays, the way to turn children around is different.You have to change their inner intent (bhaav). Talk to your childaffectionately. Embrace him and tell him, “Come here son, letyour mom yell. She may yell, but how would you feel if someonetook money out of your pocket, the way you stole fromsomeone else? Imagine how bad you would feel at the time. Inthe same way, wouldn’t he too feel bad?” You have to explainthis whole ‘theory’ to your son. You just need to impress uponhim once, for him to realize that his actions are wrong. If youkeep punishing over and over, he is likely to get more agitatedand defiant. You just need to change the way you deal with yourchildren.In this case, the father is like a policeman. At home, hiswife and son cannot laugh or open their mouths in his presence.That is how tight a control he has of them. Should there be suchcontrol and fear? Are you some kind of an animal, like a lion ora tiger? You should not exercise such fearful authority on others.One eye should be stern, while the other should show affection.The reason for your strictness should be so that they do not goawry and venture on a wrong path. Don’t they have emergencyalarm chains on the trains, in case something falls out? But saya pack of cigarettes fell out and you pulled the chain, wouldn’tthat be considered a violation?The world has only understood overt (sthool) karma. Ithas failed to understand subtle (sookshma) karma altogether.And if it had understood subtle (sookshma) karma, it wouldnot be in the state that it is in!A wealthy businessman donated fifty thousand rupees toa charity. So his friend asked him, “Why did you give away somuch money?” and the businessman tells him, “I am not the sortthat would give even a penny, but I got pressured into it by thelord mayor.” Now what consequences will arise from this? Thefifty-thousand rupee donation he made was overt (sthool;visible) karma, and the businessman will glean its reward in theAptavani-4299300Aptavani-4run away to moksha? And is it possible for one to attainmoksha after having abandoned one’s wife? Is it possible toattain moksha after hurting someone? So take care of all yourobligations and responsibilities towards your wife and children.So calmly eat what your wife serves you, and know that it is allyour overt (sthool; effect) karma! But make sure that theopinion you have behind the overt (sthool) karma is not onethat will lead you to ‘charge’ subtle (sookshma) karma for thenext life. For that very reason I have given you these ‘Fivestatements’ (Agnas). Within you, You should not have theopinion that, ‘This is correct, what I am doing, and what everI am enjoying is correct.’ You should not have such an opinion.If you change your opinion, just this much, then that is all thatis needed.Parents become furious when their teenager has badtendencies, and they go around saying, ‘My son is like this; heis a thief, he is worthless’. Good heavens! Just drop it, whydon’t you. What is done is done! For the present time, changehis inner intent (bhaav). Change his internal opinions. Theparents do not know how to change their child’s intents. This isbecause they are not ‘certified’ parents. They do not have a‘certificate’ and they have become parents? If the boy picks upa habit of stealing, his parents will keep scolding and punishinghim. They will keep telling him, “You have no sense, you do thisand you do that.” This is how the parents go ‘overboard’ (talkexcessively). Needless to say, such extreme reactions on thepart of parents do not help. So what does the child do?Mentally he decides, “Let them say what they want to, I amgoing to do it anyway.” The parents are turning this boy, moreand more into a thief. People have started to use the tools thatwere employed in the ages of Dwapar, Treta and Satyug intoday’s Kaliyug (the current era of the time cycle characterizedby lack of unity in mind, speech and body).Nowadays, the way to turn children around is different.You have to change their inner intent (bhaav). Talk to your childaffectionately. Embrace him and tell him, “Come here son, letyour mom yell. She may yell, but how would you feel if someonetook money out of your pocket, the way you stole fromsomeone else? Imagine how bad you would feel at the time. Inthe same way, wouldn’t he too feel bad?” You have to explainthis whole ‘theory’ to your son. You just need to impress uponhim once, for him to realize that his actions are wrong. If youkeep punishing over and over, he is likely to get more agitatedand defiant. You just need to change the way you deal with yourchildren.In this case, the father is like a policeman. At home, hiswife and son cannot laugh or open their mouths in his presence.That is how tight a control he has of them. Should there be suchcontrol and fear? Are you some kind of an animal, like a lion ora tiger? You should not exercise such fearful authority on others.One eye should be stern, while the other should show affection.The reason for your strictness should be so that they do not goawry and venture on a wrong path. Don’t they have emergencyalarm chains on the trains, in case something falls out? But saya pack of cigarettes fell out and you pulled the chain, wouldn’tthat be considered a violation?The world has only understood overt (sthool) karma. Ithas failed to understand subtle (sookshma) karma altogether.And if it had understood subtle (sookshma) karma, it wouldnot be in the state that it is in!A wealthy businessman donated fifty thousand rupees toa charity. So his friend asked him, “Why did you give away somuch money?” and the businessman tells him, “I am not the sortthat would give even a penny, but I got pressured into it by thelord mayor.” Now what consequences will arise from this? Thefifty-thousand rupee donation he made was overt (sthool;visible) karma, and the businessman will glean its reward in theAptavani-4301302Aptavani-4here and now. People will sing his praise and he will attain fame,but what sort of subtle (sookshma) karma must he havebound? It would be, ‘I am not the sort that would give anymoney’. And the fruit of that, will come for him in his next life.This means that in his next life, he will not be able to give a singlepenny towards a donation. Now who could understand such asubtle thing?Questioner: Dada, is the ‘doer’ of sookshma (cause)karma and sthool (effect) karma different?Dadashri: Yes, the ‘doers’ are different in both cases.These sthool (effect) karmas are ‘discharge’ karmas. Just likea battery, once charged, wouldn’t it just go on discharging?Even though you do not want it to, wouldn’t it continuedischarging?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: That is how the overt (sthool; effect) karmasare ‘discharge’ karmas, and the new ones, that are beingcharged internally, are subtle (sookshma; cause), which will‘discharge’ in the next life. And in this lifetime, charged‘batteries’ of the previous lifetime are continually discharging.The battery of the mind, the battery of the speech and thebattery of the body are all discharging, while simultaneously newones are being charged from within.When I speak, you believe that, ‘I (Dada) am speaking’,but that is not the case. This is a ‘record’ that is playing! It is thespeech’s ‘battery’ that is discharging. I am not the one speaking.Whereas all people say, “Just look at how well I spoke!” That isall a wrong belief. They are merely doing ‘egoism’. Is thereanything else left once the ‘egoism’ leaves? This egoism alone isignorance and it is itself the illusion of the Self (Bhagwan nimaya). This is because the ‘doer’ is someone else, and yet your‘adjustment’ is your belief that ‘I am the doer’.The subtle (sookshma) karmas that are charging within,all go into a “computer”. One computer is vyashti (individual)and the other computer is samashti (universal). The subtle(sookshma; cause) karmas first go into the vyashti (individual),then they go into the samashti (universal) ‘computer’. Fromthere, the samashti takes over and does all the work. All therest, are subtle karmas that are being charged, so there is noreal worry. But to really say and believe that, ‘I am Chandubhai’,is the very way that a karma is bound. “Who am I?” If you justrealized this much, then from that point on you will become freeof all the karma.Therefore, ‘this’ science is presented in a simple andstraightforward way. Otherwise not even millions of efforts canmake you the absolute Self. ‘This’ is the exact “theorem ofAbsolutism”!Liberation from Wrong DeedsQuestioner: I do wrong things, but I do not have thecourage to extricate myself from them.Dadashri: You will not have the courage. How can youfind courage, when at such a time, the burden of wrong deedshas increased so much? So, for once you just have to declare‘bankruptcy’. Then you can begin to pay off your debts. Youwill have to pay off your debts (suffer the effect), will you not?I will find a way for you.Questioner: When people know that after they die, thereis another life to come, why do they keep doing bad deeds?How does one do good deeds?Dadashri: It is against one’s wishes that one does wrong.From the moment you wake up in the morning, nothing is underyour control; it is all beyond your control. That other control isin the hands of another energy which I call ‘vyavasthit’. Whatdoes this vyavasthit shakti (energy) do? When your meritAptavani-4301302Aptavani-4here and now. People will sing his praise and he will attain fame,but what sort of subtle (sookshma) karma must he havebound? It would be, ‘I am not the sort that would give anymoney’. And the fruit of that, will come for him in his next life.This means that in his next life, he will not be able to give a singlepenny towards a donation. Now who could understand such asubtle thing?Questioner: Dada, is the ‘doer’ of sookshma (cause)karma and sthool (effect) karma different?Dadashri: Yes, the ‘doers’ are different in both cases.These sthool (effect) karmas are ‘discharge’ karmas. Just likea battery, once charged, wouldn’t it just go on discharging?Even though you do not want it to, wouldn’t it continuedischarging?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: That is how the overt (sthool; effect) karmasare ‘discharge’ karmas, and the new ones, that are beingcharged internally, are subtle (sookshma; cause), which will‘discharge’ in the next life. And in this lifetime, charged‘batteries’ of the previous lifetime are continually discharging.The battery of the mind, the battery of the speech and thebattery of the body are all discharging, while simultaneously newones are being charged from within.When I speak, you believe that, ‘I (Dada) am speaking’,but that is not the case. This is a ‘record’ that is playing! It is thespeech’s ‘battery’ that is discharging. I am not the one speaking.Whereas all people say, “Just look at how well I spoke!” That isall a wrong belief. They are merely doing ‘egoism’. Is thereanything else left once the ‘egoism’ leaves? This egoism alone isignorance and it is itself the illusion of the Self (Bhagwan nimaya). This is because the ‘doer’ is someone else, and yet your‘adjustment’ is your belief that ‘I am the doer’.The subtle (sookshma) karmas that are charging within,all go into a “computer”. One computer is vyashti (individual)and the other computer is samashti (universal). The subtle(sookshma; cause) karmas first go into the vyashti (individual),then they go into the samashti (universal) ‘computer’. Fromthere, the samashti takes over and does all the work. All therest, are subtle karmas that are being charged, so there is noreal worry. But to really say and believe that, ‘I am Chandubhai’,is the very way that a karma is bound. “Who am I?” If you justrealized this much, then from that point on you will become freeof all the karma.Therefore, ‘this’ science is presented in a simple andstraightforward way. Otherwise not even millions of efforts canmake you the absolute Self. ‘This’ is the exact “theorem ofAbsolutism”!Liberation from Wrong DeedsQuestioner: I do wrong things, but I do not have thecourage to extricate myself from them.Dadashri: You will not have the courage. How can youfind courage, when at such a time, the burden of wrong deedshas increased so much? So, for once you just have to declare‘bankruptcy’. Then you can begin to pay off your debts. Youwill have to pay off your debts (suffer the effect), will you not?I will find a way for you.Questioner: When people know that after they die, thereis another life to come, why do they keep doing bad deeds?How does one do good deeds?Dadashri: It is against one’s wishes that one does wrong.From the moment you wake up in the morning, nothing is underyour control; it is all beyond your control. That other control isin the hands of another energy which I call ‘vyavasthit’. Whatdoes this vyavasthit shakti (energy) do? When your meritAptavani-4303304Aptavani-4karma (punya) comes into fruition, it brings togethercircumstances that are agreeable. And when your demeritkarma (paap; sinful) comes into play, it dismisses thoseagreeable circumstances. Therefore, everything, whether it isgood karma or bad karma, is in the hands of this externalenergy! Every living being (jiva) is under this external controluntil it attains ultimate vision of the Self (parmartha samkit).Karma of Paap-PunyaQuestioner: Are demerit karma (paap) and karma thesame thing, or are they different?Dadashri: Paap and punya are both karma. But thekarma of punya (merit) will not bother you, whereas the karmaof paap (demerit) will not allow things to go the way you wantthem to and it will create problems for you.Questioner: What sort of karma would people havedone to merit worldly happiness?Dadashri: If you give happiness to someone who isunhappy, you will bind punya, and as a consequence, you willreceive the same happiness in return. If you give unhappiness tosomeone; you will get unhappiness. Therefore, give to otherswhat you would like for them to give to you.There are two kinds of merit karma (punya). With onekind of merit karma (punya) you receive worldly happiness andthe other kind of merit karma (punya) will procure realliberation for you.Defamation Binds KarmaYou should not do anyone’s ninda (criticize or slander aperson in their absence). Hey, you should not even talk aboutthem even a bit. From that you will acquire great fault (dosh).Particularly in this satsang; in this gathering of enlightenedbeings, you must not utter a single word about anyone. Just aninkling of negativity will bring a tremendous covering ofignorance over your Gnan. So can you imagine how dense thecover will be if you criticize or speak negatively about amahatma in his absence? In satsang, you should blend withothers just like sugar dissolves in milk. It is the intellect thatinterferes in all this. I know everything about everyone, but Inever say a word about it to anyone. Even a single negativeword will bring a huge veil of ignorance over your Gnan.You bind tremendous karma when you say, “He cheatedme”. Instead if you slapped him a couple of times you wouldbind lesser karma. You are cheated only when your karma forgetting cheated unfolds. How is it the other person’s fault? Onthe contrary, he did help you shed your karma. He is a nimit(instrumental).The Supreme Power to Destroy KarmaQuestioner: We have to suffer the effects of our karma,don’t we?Dadashri: Yes. That is the law of karma.Questioner: Can the Gnani free us from that?Dadashri: The Gnani Purush destroys your karma.But there are two kinds of karmas involved. Some havebecome frozen solid like ice, while others are like water andvapor. The Gnani eliminates the karmas that are like waterand vapor, but you have no choice but to suffer the effects ofthose that have solidified like ice! However, after attainingknowledge of the Self, there is a difference in the way thesekarmas are suffered. The cut from the jab of a dry thorn willfeel like a small pin prick. The suffering will seem a lot lessintense. The Gnani Purush can destroy those karmas thatremain in the ‘causal’ form, but those karmas that are in the‘effect’ form, those that have become solid like ice, willdefinitely have to be suffered.Aptavani-4303304Aptavani-4karma (punya) comes into fruition, it brings togethercircumstances that are agreeable. And when your demeritkarma (paap; sinful) comes into play, it dismisses thoseagreeable circumstances. Therefore, everything, whether it isgood karma or bad karma, is in the hands of this externalenergy! Every living being (jiva) is under this external controluntil it attains ultimate vision of the Self (parmartha samkit).Karma of Paap-PunyaQuestioner: Are demerit karma (paap) and karma thesame thing, or are they different?Dadashri: Paap and punya are both karma. But thekarma of punya (merit) will not bother you, whereas the karmaof paap (demerit) will not allow things to go the way you wantthem to and it will create problems for you.Questioner: What sort of karma would people havedone to merit worldly happiness?Dadashri: If you give happiness to someone who isunhappy, you will bind punya, and as a consequence, you willreceive the same happiness in return. If you give unhappiness tosomeone; you will get unhappiness. Therefore, give to otherswhat you would like for them to give to you.There are two kinds of merit karma (punya). With onekind of merit karma (punya) you receive worldly happiness andthe other kind of merit karma (punya) will procure realliberation for you.Defamation Binds KarmaYou should not do anyone’s ninda (criticize or slander aperson in their absence). Hey, you should not even talk aboutthem even a bit. From that you will acquire great fault (dosh).Particularly in this satsang; in this gathering of enlightenedbeings, you must not utter a single word about anyone. Just aninkling of negativity will bring a tremendous covering ofignorance over your Gnan. So can you imagine how dense thecover will be if you criticize or speak negatively about amahatma in his absence? In satsang, you should blend withothers just like sugar dissolves in milk. It is the intellect thatinterferes in all this. I know everything about everyone, but Inever say a word about it to anyone. Even a single negativeword will bring a huge veil of ignorance over your Gnan.You bind tremendous karma when you say, “He cheatedme”. Instead if you slapped him a couple of times you wouldbind lesser karma. You are cheated only when your karma forgetting cheated unfolds. How is it the other person’s fault? Onthe contrary, he did help you shed your karma. He is a nimit(instrumental).The Supreme Power to Destroy KarmaQuestioner: We have to suffer the effects of our karma,don’t we?Dadashri: Yes. That is the law of karma.Questioner: Can the Gnani free us from that?Dadashri: The Gnani Purush destroys your karma.But there are two kinds of karmas involved. Some havebecome frozen solid like ice, while others are like water andvapor. The Gnani eliminates the karmas that are like waterand vapor, but you have no choice but to suffer the effects ofthose that have solidified like ice! However, after attainingknowledge of the Self, there is a difference in the way thesekarmas are suffered. The cut from the jab of a dry thorn willfeel like a small pin prick. The suffering will seem a lot lessintense. The Gnani Purush can destroy those karmas thatremain in the ‘causal’ form, but those karmas that are in the‘effect’ form, those that have become solid like ice, willdefinitely have to be suffered.Aptavani-4305306Aptavani-4Help by Remembering GodQuestioner: Our karma either sinks us or it keeps usafloat. Why should we think about God and pray to Him(prabhu smaran) during that time?Dadashri: God is light, it is absolute Light. If you do notthink about Him, you will not receive the light; that is the onlyproblem. Otherwise, He does not interfere in anything else. Ifyou want help in sinking or in swimming, then you shouldremember God (prabhu smaran). You are bound to receive Hislight if you remember Him. Your karma will improve through thelight. But your remembrance of Him (prabhu smaran) shouldbe done with a true heart. You should not have the wrong belief,like ‘He is up there!’ There is no one up there. He that sits insideyou is God Himself!Karma Binds Even God!Questioner: All those who became God on this planetlike Lord Rushabhdev, Lord Mahavir and Lord Neminath,weren’t they also subject to the bondage of karma?Dadashri: Everyone had come under the bondage ofkarma, which is why they were born from a mother’s womb.There is not a single God who has not taken birth from themother. Those who became a God, had attained knowledge ofthe Atma (Self) in their two or three previous lives, and lastlythey became God. It is possible for those who have attainedawareness of the Atma, to become a God in two to four morelives. If you want to go directly to moksha, it is possible, andif you want to work on the salvation for the world, then it ispossible for you to become God. You can do one or the other.The Divine Karma of the Gnani PurushThe scriptures say that the Gnani’s every karma is divine(divya) karma. This is because he is completely egoless, and heresides in a state that is completely void of ‘doership’. That iswhy he is called vitarag. You cannot find an absolute Vitaragin this present age. I am vitarag, but I am not completevitarag.I am vitarag with every single one of the countless livingbeings (jivas) in this world, with the one exception being, thatI still have attachment (raag) for the salvation of the world(jagat kalyan). There is still a little bit of attachment (raag) leftin me, to interfere for the salvation of the world, but only asmuch as to ‘discharge’ my karmas. I in general, am always ina perpetual state of moksha. The Gnani remains untouched bytime, karma and illusion (maya). He who moves aboutunrestricted by physical matter (dravya), place (kshetra), time(kaad), inner intent (bhaav) and life (bhav) is a Gnani.The Nature of KarmaPeople say that karmas take a hold of them. But karmais neither female nor male. It has no gender. And You the Selfare Parmatma (absolute Self).Karma is neither non-living (jada; inanimate) nor living(chetan; animate), but it is nischetan chetan (lifeless life;mechanical). One receives the fruit of karma because of thepresence of the Self. Karma is charged because the nischetanchetan (mechanical self) comes into contact with the purechetan (Self). Once you attain the knowledge of the Self, youwill cease to bind karma.Questioner: What kind of relationship does the Atma(Self) have with karma?Dadashri: It is a ‘relative’ relationship.Questioner: Does the karma entrap the Self, or doesthe Self bind the karma?Dadashri: The karma entraps the Self. The pudgalAptavani-4305306Aptavani-4Help by Remembering GodQuestioner: Our karma either sinks us or it keeps usafloat. Why should we think about God and pray to Him(prabhu smaran) during that time?Dadashri: God is light, it is absolute Light. If you do notthink about Him, you will not receive the light; that is the onlyproblem. Otherwise, He does not interfere in anything else. Ifyou want help in sinking or in swimming, then you shouldremember God (prabhu smaran). You are bound to receive Hislight if you remember Him. Your karma will improve through thelight. But your remembrance of Him (prabhu smaran) shouldbe done with a true heart. You should not have the wrong belief,like ‘He is up there!’ There is no one up there. He that sits insideyou is God Himself!Karma Binds Even God!Questioner: All those who became God on this planetlike Lord Rushabhdev, Lord Mahavir and Lord Neminath,weren’t they also subject to the bondage of karma?Dadashri: Everyone had come under the bondage ofkarma, which is why they were born from a mother’s womb.There is not a single God who has not taken birth from themother. Those who became a God, had attained knowledge ofthe Atma (Self) in their two or three previous lives, and lastlythey became God. It is possible for those who have attainedawareness of the Atma, to become a God in two to four morelives. If you want to go directly to moksha, it is possible, andif you want to work on the salvation for the world, then it ispossible for you to become God. You can do one or the other.The Divine Karma of the Gnani PurushThe scriptures say that the Gnani’s every karma is divine(divya) karma. This is because he is completely egoless, and heresides in a state that is completely void of ‘doership’. That iswhy he is called vitarag. You cannot find an absolute Vitaragin this present age. I am vitarag, but I am not completevitarag.I am vitarag with every single one of the countless livingbeings (jivas) in this world, with the one exception being, thatI still have attachment (raag) for the salvation of the world(jagat kalyan). There is still a little bit of attachment (raag) leftin me, to interfere for the salvation of the world, but only asmuch as to ‘discharge’ my karmas. I in general, am always ina perpetual state of moksha. The Gnani remains untouched bytime, karma and illusion (maya). He who moves aboutunrestricted by physical matter (dravya), place (kshetra), time(kaad), inner intent (bhaav) and life (bhav) is a Gnani.The Nature of KarmaPeople say that karmas take a hold of them. But karmais neither female nor male. It has no gender. And You the Selfare Parmatma (absolute Self).Karma is neither non-living (jada; inanimate) nor living(chetan; animate), but it is nischetan chetan (lifeless life;mechanical). One receives the fruit of karma because of thepresence of the Self. Karma is charged because the nischetanchetan (mechanical self) comes into contact with the purechetan (Self). Once you attain the knowledge of the Self, youwill cease to bind karma.Questioner: What kind of relationship does the Atma(Self) have with karma?Dadashri: It is a ‘relative’ relationship.Questioner: Does the karma entrap the Self, or doesthe Self bind the karma?Dadashri: The karma entraps the Self. The pudgalAptavani-4307308Aptavani-4(non-Self complex) has so much energy; just look how it hasentrapped the Parmatma (absolute Self)!Questioner: Can the atma (worldly self) shed thekarma if it wanted to?Dadashri: How can one become free when one oneselfis bound? Karma can only be shed if you attain the state of theSelf. Once you attain this state of the Self, you will be able toshed any kind of karma. Behold how the Gnani Purushdestroys all the karmas within just an hour! That is preciselywhy You maintain the constant awareness of the Self, that youwould not manage otherwise.Karmas are in the nature of the pudgal (influx-output;non-Self), and they will continue to display the par-parinam(results of the non-Self). You, Shuddhatma (the pure Soul), areswa-parinam (result of the Self). Par-parinam (results of thenon-Self) is in the form of gneya (that which is to be known),and ‘You’ (the Atma) are in the form of the Knower (Gnata).Karma and VyavasthitQuestioner: Is the vyavasthit that you talk about,according to karma?Dadashri: Karmas do not run this world. The world isrun by vyavasthit shakti. Who brought you here? Karma? No.Vyavasthit brought you here. The karma was already lyingthere within. So why didn’t it bring you here yesterday, why didit bring you here today? Vyavasthit brings the time, the placeand all the other circumstances together, and so you come here.Karma is just one part of vyavasthit.Beware of the Seeds of Bhaav!The Lord has said, ‘You are Parmatma (the SupremeSoul). You are separate from the effect (dravya-bhaav;discharge intent ready for the next life; past life cause ready atthe time of effect in this life). You are separate from each andevery circumstance. But people cling to circumstances more.Isn’t there a difference between the seed that is in yourhand and another that has fallen on the ground?That is why the Lord tells us to gently put away the seedthat is in your hand aside. But keep a lookout for the seed thatfell on the ground, because if it comes across other ‘scientificcircumstantial evidences’, it will sprout. Once the seed falls onthe ground, it will meet up with other ‘evidences’, so be careful.If there is the slightest sign of growth, you should uproot it anddiscard it or else it will grow into a tree.All the negative intent (bhaav) that come to you rightnow, are ‘seeds’ that have already fallen. Although you do notwant to kill an insect, it still gets crushed under your feet, so youshould know that it was a seed that had already fallen. In sucha case, you should be mindful and do pratikraman.Past karmas continue to burn (being discharged) in theworld’s ‘sacrificial fire’, while new karmas continue beingbound.Conviction of Destruction of KarmaQuestioner: How can we tell if the effect of a karma hasbeen wiped out?Dadashri: Whatever the circumstance your karma isrelated to, if you do not experience any attachment (raag) orabhorrence (dwesh) in it, then you can be assured that theparticular karma has been destroyed. If it gives rise to like anddislike, then you should understand that the karma is still atlarge.The Mirror of Life Is the Cause of KarmaQuestioner: What is the link between the subatomicAptavani-4307308Aptavani-4(non-Self complex) has so much energy; just look how it hasentrapped the Parmatma (absolute Self)!Questioner: Can the atma (worldly self) shed thekarma if it wanted to?Dadashri: How can one become free when one oneselfis bound? Karma can only be shed if you attain the state of theSelf. Once you attain this state of the Self, you will be able toshed any kind of karma. Behold how the Gnani Purushdestroys all the karmas within just an hour! That is preciselywhy You maintain the constant awareness of the Self, that youwould not manage otherwise.Karmas are in the nature of the pudgal (influx-output;non-Self), and they will continue to display the par-parinam(results of the non-Self). You, Shuddhatma (the pure Soul), areswa-parinam (result of the Self). Par-parinam (results of thenon-Self) is in the form of gneya (that which is to be known),and ‘You’ (the Atma) are in the form of the Knower (Gnata).Karma and VyavasthitQuestioner: Is the vyavasthit that you talk about,according to karma?Dadashri: Karmas do not run this world. The world isrun by vyavasthit shakti. Who brought you here? Karma? No.Vyavasthit brought you here. The karma was already lyingthere within. So why didn’t it bring you here yesterday, why didit bring you here today? Vyavasthit brings the time, the placeand all the other circumstances together, and so you come here.Karma is just one part of vyavasthit.Beware of the Seeds of Bhaav!The Lord has said, ‘You are Parmatma (the SupremeSoul). You are separate from the effect (dravya-bhaav;discharge intent ready for the next life; past life cause ready atthe time of effect in this life). You are separate from each andevery circumstance. But people cling to circumstances more.Isn’t there a difference between the seed that is in yourhand and another that has fallen on the ground?That is why the Lord tells us to gently put away the seedthat is in your hand aside. But keep a lookout for the seed thatfell on the ground, because if it comes across other ‘scientificcircumstantial evidences’, it will sprout. Once the seed falls onthe ground, it will meet up with other ‘evidences’, so be careful.If there is the slightest sign of growth, you should uproot it anddiscard it or else it will grow into a tree.All the negative intent (bhaav) that come to you rightnow, are ‘seeds’ that have already fallen. Although you do notwant to kill an insect, it still gets crushed under your feet, so youshould know that it was a seed that had already fallen. In sucha case, you should be mindful and do pratikraman.Past karmas continue to burn (being discharged) in theworld’s ‘sacrificial fire’, while new karmas continue beingbound.Conviction of Destruction of KarmaQuestioner: How can we tell if the effect of a karma hasbeen wiped out?Dadashri: Whatever the circumstance your karma isrelated to, if you do not experience any attachment (raag) orabhorrence (dwesh) in it, then you can be assured that theparticular karma has been destroyed. If it gives rise to like anddislike, then you should understand that the karma is still atlarge.The Mirror of Life Is the Cause of KarmaQuestioner: What is the link between the subatomicAptavani-4309310Aptavani-4particles (parmanus) and the binding of karma? How is karmabound?Dadashri: The energy of the Self (chetan shakti) is suchthat with ‘wrong belief’ it creates the vikalp of: ‘I am this, I amthis’, which is itself the bondage of karma. Just as when lookingin the mirror, you capture an instant image, because theparmanus (indivisible particles of an atom) are active, whatevervikalp arises, the corresponding parmanus (subatomic particles)immediately arise accordingly. The fundamental parmanus are inan elemental (tattva) form, but when they come together theybecome the situation (avastha). These are all miracles ofsakriya (nature of action). It is this pudgal (non-Self matter)which confuses the Atma. It is its action that brings aboutconfusion. The activity of the pudgal is such, that even thoughit is inanimate by nature, it creates the illusion of being animate.It is just like a little bird that pecks at the image of itself in thereflection on the mirror; perceiving it to be another bird.The Solution to Become Free from ‘Sticky’KarmaQuestioner: Is it because karmas are very ‘sticky’ thatwe have to suffer pain (dukh; unhappiness)?Dadashri: The karmas were created by you, so it isyour own fault. No one else in the world is at fault. Others arejust instrumental (nimit). The pain (dukh) is yours, and it isbrought to you in the hands of the nimit. If you receive a letternotifying you of the death of your father-in-law, how can youfind fault with the postman who brings the letter to you?Questioner: What do you mean by ‘sticky karma’?Dadashri: When you do anything with absolute unity ofyour mind, speech and body where no other contradictory innerintent (bhaav) is present, you bind terrible ‘sticky’ karma. Thekarma you create with such intensity for the purpose of attainingthe Self will liberate you in two or three lifetimes. But the ‘sticky’karma created for the worldly life (sansar) will take significantlylonger to maturate. This is why the worldly life is still thriving.If a straightforward man were to pick someone’s pocketfor the first time, he will get caught. This is because his karmawill mature immediately, and he is freed from this karma. Andthe experienced pickpocket, on the other hand, will never getcaught. People would normally perceive the one getting caughtin the act, as the guilty one. Nature, however, is in his ‘favor’.Nature will give the gentler person his ‘reward’ and take him toa higher life-form; whereas the experienced one, already showssigns of heading for a lower life-form, in the simple fact that hecannot be caught.What Is ‘Sticky’ Karma?So many karmas simply fall away on their own. Manykarmas can be shed through repentance. The ‘sticky’ karmasare those that, even after much repentance, still cannot be shed,but have to be endured. The Jain refers to them as sticky(nikachit; heavy and ‘sticky’ karma that one has no choice butto suffer its effect) karma. If someone spits on you, and youthrow some water on it, it will immediately wash off. Some mayspit on you, but no matter how hard you try to wash it off withsoap and water, you still will not manage to remove it. Nowthose are extremely sticky.Questioner: Why is it that although I have made a strongdecision (nischay) to settle matters with equanimity (sambhavenikal), I still come across dispute?Dadashri: In how many places does that happen? Ahundred?Questioner: It only happens in one place.Dadashri: Then that is sticky (nikachit) karma. HowAptavani-4309310Aptavani-4particles (parmanus) and the binding of karma? How is karmabound?Dadashri: The energy of the Self (chetan shakti) is suchthat with ‘wrong belief’ it creates the vikalp of: ‘I am this, I amthis’, which is itself the bondage of karma. Just as when lookingin the mirror, you capture an instant image, because theparmanus (indivisible particles of an atom) are active, whatevervikalp arises, the corresponding parmanus (subatomic particles)immediately arise accordingly. The fundamental parmanus are inan elemental (tattva) form, but when they come together theybecome the situation (avastha). These are all miracles ofsakriya (nature of action). It is this pudgal (non-Self matter)which confuses the Atma. It is its action that brings aboutconfusion. The activity of the pudgal is such, that even thoughit is inanimate by nature, it creates the illusion of being animate.It is just like a little bird that pecks at the image of itself in thereflection on the mirror; perceiving it to be another bird.The Solution to Become Free from ‘Sticky’KarmaQuestioner: Is it because karmas are very ‘sticky’ thatwe have to suffer pain (dukh; unhappiness)?Dadashri: The karmas were created by you, so it isyour own fault. No one else in the world is at fault. Others arejust instrumental (nimit). The pain (dukh) is yours, and it isbrought to you in the hands of the nimit. If you receive a letternotifying you of the death of your father-in-law, how can youfind fault with the postman who brings the letter to you?Questioner: What do you mean by ‘sticky karma’?Dadashri: When you do anything with absolute unity ofyour mind, speech and body where no other contradictory innerintent (bhaav) is present, you bind terrible ‘sticky’ karma. Thekarma you create with such intensity for the purpose of attainingthe Self will liberate you in two or three lifetimes. But the ‘sticky’karma created for the worldly life (sansar) will take significantlylonger to maturate. This is why the worldly life is still thriving.If a straightforward man were to pick someone’s pocketfor the first time, he will get caught. This is because his karmawill mature immediately, and he is freed from this karma. Andthe experienced pickpocket, on the other hand, will never getcaught. People would normally perceive the one getting caughtin the act, as the guilty one. Nature, however, is in his ‘favor’.Nature will give the gentler person his ‘reward’ and take him toa higher life-form; whereas the experienced one, already showssigns of heading for a lower life-form, in the simple fact that hecannot be caught.What Is ‘Sticky’ Karma?So many karmas simply fall away on their own. Manykarmas can be shed through repentance. The ‘sticky’ karmasare those that, even after much repentance, still cannot be shed,but have to be endured. The Jain refers to them as sticky(nikachit; heavy and ‘sticky’ karma that one has no choice butto suffer its effect) karma. If someone spits on you, and youthrow some water on it, it will immediately wash off. Some mayspit on you, but no matter how hard you try to wash it off withsoap and water, you still will not manage to remove it. Nowthose are extremely sticky.Questioner: Why is it that although I have made a strongdecision (nischay) to settle matters with equanimity (sambhavenikal), I still come across dispute?Dadashri: In how many places does that happen? Ahundred?Questioner: It only happens in one place.Dadashri: Then that is sticky (nikachit) karma. HowAptavani-4311312Aptavani-4can you wash away such sticky (nikachit) karma? Throughalochana (recall transgression; confession), pratikraman (petitionfor forgiveness) and pratyakhyan (avowal never to repeattransgression). The karma will lighten as a result of this.Thereafter, you will be able to stay Knower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta). You have to continuously do pratikraman for that.As much ‘force’ it took for that karma to become sticky(nikachit), you will need just as much ‘force’ in yourpratikraman in order to wash it off.Questioner: What kind of effort (purusharth) shouldone do towards sticky (nikachit) karma?Dadashri: You have to maintain tremendous awarenessthere. When you come across a slippery patch, notice howcautious you are? When you see wolves and tigers in the jungle,how cautious are you? So if you can keep similar awareness inthis as well, you can be free.How Can One Create Nishkaam Karma?Questioner: Does rebirth (punarjanma) happen becauseof attachment (aasakti) or as a result of karma?Dadashri: Attachment (aasakti) exists as a result ofkarma, and it is because of attachment (aasakti) that rebirthoccurs. Attachment (aasakti) is a ‘stepping’.Questioner: Is there rebirth even for someone who doesnishkaam (without expectation of reward) karma?Dadashri: Even if you do nishkaam karma, it is notpossible to prevent another life. It can be stopped only after oneattains the knowledge of the Self.Questioner: How does nishkaam karma bind karma?Dadashri: When a person does nishkaam karma withthe belief of ‘I am Chandubhai,’ he binds karma without adoubt. By doing nishkaam karma, the worldly life (sansar) willrun smoothly. In truth, without first ascertaining, ‘Who am I?’,nishkaam karma is not possible. How can nishkaam karmabe done as long as there is the presence of anger, pride, deceitand greed?One believes he is doing nishkaam karma when the doeris someone else. Whatever activity he does, is all discharge. Tobelieve ‘I am doing nishkaam karma’ is itself bondage. As longas there is a doer of nishkaam karma, there is bondage.Lord Krishna showed people a different way by which toattain worldly happiness! What is considered nishkaam karma?You have your own income. You receive income from your landand some from the printing press you have started. In twelvemonths you receive an average of 20-25 thousand from yourassets. But if you base your expectation on this amount, and youmake five thousand, you feel the loss of 20 thousand. And whatif you had not made any expectations at all? Nishkaam karmameans to do everything without expecting anything in return.Lord Krishna has given people a very wonderful thing, but is itpossible for anyone to achieve this? People are not capable ofthis. It is very difficult to understand nishkaam karma precisely.That is why Lord Krishna said, that there might be just one ortwo persons who would understand the subtlest meaning of theGita.Questioner: If we do something without any intent ofexpectation (nishkaam bhaav), then we will not bind anykarma, will we?Dadashri: Do it with nishkaam bhaav (the intent ofnishkaam). However, as long as you have the belief of, ‘I amChandubhai,’ and you do nishkaam karma, then you will bindmerit karma (punya). No matter what, the binding of karmawill occur. If you become the ‘doer’ then the bondage of karmais inevitable.Aptavani-4311312Aptavani-4can you wash away such sticky (nikachit) karma? Throughalochana (recall transgression; confession), pratikraman (petitionfor forgiveness) and pratyakhyan (avowal never to repeattransgression). The karma will lighten as a result of this.Thereafter, you will be able to stay Knower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta). You have to continuously do pratikraman for that.As much ‘force’ it took for that karma to become sticky(nikachit), you will need just as much ‘force’ in yourpratikraman in order to wash it off.Questioner: What kind of effort (purusharth) shouldone do towards sticky (nikachit) karma?Dadashri: You have to maintain tremendous awarenessthere. When you come across a slippery patch, notice howcautious you are? When you see wolves and tigers in the jungle,how cautious are you? So if you can keep similar awareness inthis as well, you can be free.How Can One Create Nishkaam Karma?Questioner: Does rebirth (punarjanma) happen becauseof attachment (aasakti) or as a result of karma?Dadashri: Attachment (aasakti) exists as a result ofkarma, and it is because of attachment (aasakti) that rebirthoccurs. Attachment (aasakti) is a ‘stepping’.Questioner: Is there rebirth even for someone who doesnishkaam (without expectation of reward) karma?Dadashri: Even if you do nishkaam karma, it is notpossible to prevent another life. It can be stopped only after oneattains the knowledge of the Self.Questioner: How does nishkaam karma bind karma?Dadashri: When a person does nishkaam karma withthe belief of ‘I am Chandubhai,’ he binds karma without adoubt. By doing nishkaam karma, the worldly life (sansar) willrun smoothly. In truth, without first ascertaining, ‘Who am I?’,nishkaam karma is not possible. How can nishkaam karmabe done as long as there is the presence of anger, pride, deceitand greed?One believes he is doing nishkaam karma when the doeris someone else. Whatever activity he does, is all discharge. Tobelieve ‘I am doing nishkaam karma’ is itself bondage. As longas there is a doer of nishkaam karma, there is bondage.Lord Krishna showed people a different way by which toattain worldly happiness! What is considered nishkaam karma?You have your own income. You receive income from your landand some from the printing press you have started. In twelvemonths you receive an average of 20-25 thousand from yourassets. But if you base your expectation on this amount, and youmake five thousand, you feel the loss of 20 thousand. And whatif you had not made any expectations at all? Nishkaam karmameans to do everything without expecting anything in return.Lord Krishna has given people a very wonderful thing, but is itpossible for anyone to achieve this? People are not capable ofthis. It is very difficult to understand nishkaam karma precisely.That is why Lord Krishna said, that there might be just one ortwo persons who would understand the subtlest meaning of theGita.Questioner: If we do something without any intent ofexpectation (nishkaam bhaav), then we will not bind anykarma, will we?Dadashri: Do it with nishkaam bhaav (the intent ofnishkaam). However, as long as you have the belief of, ‘I amChandubhai,’ and you do nishkaam karma, then you will bindmerit karma (punya). No matter what, the binding of karmawill occur. If you become the ‘doer’ then the bondage of karmais inevitable.Aptavani-4313314Aptavani-4Questioner: How can one become nishkaami (doingwithout expectation)?Dadashri: Do your work without thinking about theresults. Continue working without worrying, whether or not yourboss will reprimand you or get upset with you. If you decide totake an exam, then do it without worrying or thinking aboutwhether you will pass or not.They have not understood a single word of what LordKrishna was saying to them and they go around accusing Himof indulgence in worldly pleasures. Heavens! Who do you thinkwas indulging in pleasures? Was it Krishna or is it you? Krishnawas Vasudev, from human He became God!The Atma and Karma Are Always ThereThe Vitarag have said that karma and the Atma havebeen in existence since time immemorial. Neither of them havea beginning (aadi). Therefore, it is karma that gives rise to innerintent (bhaav), and inner intent (bhaav) that gives rise tokarma. And this is how it continually carries on. The Atmaremains exactly where it is.To Do, to Make Others Do, and to Incite Othersto Do!Questioner: What is the difference between doingsomething yourself (karavu), making others do it (karavavu),and encouraging and instigating others into doing it (anumodana)?Dadashri: The greatest fault (dosh) falls on those who doanumodana (instigating and encouraging others into doingsomething). The secondary and lesser fault, befalls on the onewho makes others do something (karavavu). The one whodoes (karavu) it himself, is guilty of a lesser fault. The butcherwho chops up goats and sells the meat, commits a lesser fault(dosh) than those people who say, “We should eat meat,because there will be a shortage of grain if we do not.” Thosethat preach in this way, commit a greater fault (dosh). The poorbutchers are just doing it to ‘feed their bellies’ (provide for theirfamily). And what about the ‘goats’(!) these zealots of thereligion of ahimsa (non-violence) kill? What are they killing for?Questioner: I did not understand that.Dadashri: These butchers who kill goats are better! Theykill the animal with a single clean (halaal) cut, but they do nottorture it. Whereas these people inflict a slow torture. If theylend you five hundred rupees, in twelve months, four hundred ofit alone will be the interest! And again, they kill you with theirintellect (buddhi); they do not need a handgun. If a customerventures into a fabric shop, he will be enticed by, “This is a highquality fabric, just newly imported from Allahabad.”, so – beingas naive and gullible as he is – he ends up buying it. Theshopkeepers recognize that the customer is not very astute, sothey take advantage of him. So they shoot him with their ‘bullet’of intellect (buddhi). This is considered tremendousraudradhyan (adverse internal meditation that hurts the self andothers).What is going to become of them? These businessmen(sheths) use such far out tactics that all the farmers in the districtbring their money home to them. They charge interest uponinterest upon interest, so the poor farmers who are laboring sohard to pay off, the exorbitant interest, are reduced to corpses;whereas the sheths, strut around with their corpulent 150kgbodies! But when the time changes, that very body will bereduced to chutney (crushed condiments)! Krupadudev ShrimadRajchandra said that, those who eat to increase their body fleshare all flesh eaters. Food is meant for survival. But instead, itbloats up here and plumps up there, until it is a fat tub!Questioner: So the one who encourages and instigates(anumodana) others is at greater fault?Aptavani-4313314Aptavani-4Questioner: How can one become nishkaami (doingwithout expectation)?Dadashri: Do your work without thinking about theresults. Continue working without worrying, whether or not yourboss will reprimand you or get upset with you. If you decide totake an exam, then do it without worrying or thinking aboutwhether you will pass or not.They have not understood a single word of what LordKrishna was saying to them and they go around accusing Himof indulgence in worldly pleasures. Heavens! Who do you thinkwas indulging in pleasures? Was it Krishna or is it you? Krishnawas Vasudev, from human He became God!The Atma and Karma Are Always ThereThe Vitarag have said that karma and the Atma havebeen in existence since time immemorial. Neither of them havea beginning (aadi). Therefore, it is karma that gives rise to innerintent (bhaav), and inner intent (bhaav) that gives rise tokarma. And this is how it continually carries on. The Atmaremains exactly where it is.To Do, to Make Others Do, and to Incite Othersto Do!Questioner: What is the difference between doingsomething yourself (karavu), making others do it (karavavu),and encouraging and instigating others into doing it (anumodana)?Dadashri: The greatest fault (dosh) falls on those who doanumodana (instigating and encouraging others into doingsomething). The secondary and lesser fault, befalls on the onewho makes others do something (karavavu). The one whodoes (karavu) it himself, is guilty of a lesser fault. The butcherwho chops up goats and sells the meat, commits a lesser fault(dosh) than those people who say, “We should eat meat,because there will be a shortage of grain if we do not.” Thosethat preach in this way, commit a greater fault (dosh). The poorbutchers are just doing it to ‘feed their bellies’ (provide for theirfamily). And what about the ‘goats’(!) these zealots of thereligion of ahimsa (non-violence) kill? What are they killing for?Questioner: I did not understand that.Dadashri: These butchers who kill goats are better! Theykill the animal with a single clean (halaal) cut, but they do nottorture it. Whereas these people inflict a slow torture. If theylend you five hundred rupees, in twelve months, four hundred ofit alone will be the interest! And again, they kill you with theirintellect (buddhi); they do not need a handgun. If a customerventures into a fabric shop, he will be enticed by, “This is a highquality fabric, just newly imported from Allahabad.”, so – beingas naive and gullible as he is – he ends up buying it. Theshopkeepers recognize that the customer is not very astute, sothey take advantage of him. So they shoot him with their ‘bullet’of intellect (buddhi). This is considered tremendousraudradhyan (adverse internal meditation that hurts the self andothers).What is going to become of them? These businessmen(sheths) use such far out tactics that all the farmers in the districtbring their money home to them. They charge interest uponinterest upon interest, so the poor farmers who are laboring sohard to pay off, the exorbitant interest, are reduced to corpses;whereas the sheths, strut around with their corpulent 150kgbodies! But when the time changes, that very body will bereduced to chutney (crushed condiments)! Krupadudev ShrimadRajchandra said that, those who eat to increase their body fleshare all flesh eaters. Food is meant for survival. But instead, itbloats up here and plumps up there, until it is a fat tub!Questioner: So the one who encourages and instigates(anumodana) others is at greater fault?Aptavani-4315316Aptavani-4Dadashri: There are two kinds of anumodana(instigation). One anumodana is where all the activities aresolely based on the person instigating them. The otheranumodana is where one says ‘yes’ to everything, “Yes sir, yessir” (agreeing to what is being done). There is not much of a fault(dosh) here. If others are doing something and you say, “Yes, Ilike this, it is very good,” it is not really very significant. Whetheryou said it or not, they were still going to do it. You commit agreater fault, if an action, which would otherwise not take place,is carried out solely because of your own anumodana(instigation). Which anumodana that carries the greatest weight?It is the one that runs the world.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(36)Bhaav, Bhaavya and BhaavakOnly the Bhaavak Is the Doer of BhaavQuestioner: Who is the ‘doer’ of inner intent (bhaav)?Is it the Self?Dadashri: The ‘bhaavako’ within, is the one whichmakes you do the bhaav. The Self does not do bhaav. Peoplebelieve that it is the bhaavkarma (causal karma) that takespossession of them. But in fact, those that make you do innerintent (bhaav), are sitting within you. The Self never doesbhaav.Questioner: Who is this bhaavako?Dadashri: It is not the only bhaavak. There is thekrodhak, which makes you do krodh (anger). There is thelobhak that makes you do lobh (greed). There is the nindak,which even though you may not want to, will make you doninda (gossip). The Self does not participate in any of this. Nowif the Self were to do the bhaav, what state would it be in? Itwould be finished. There are others too that make you dobhaav. They are called bhaavak. The bhaavako make you dobhaav. At that moment in time, the ‘self’ becomes bhaavya(tainted with bhaav). ‘It’ likes that. Because one does not haveawareness of the Self, this effect comes about.If You Enter into Bhaav, Then You BecomeBhaavya‘Mahila bhaavak bhaavya bhadey to,Aptavani-4315316Aptavani-4Dadashri: There are two kinds of anumodana(instigation). One anumodana is where all the activities aresolely based on the person instigating them. The otheranumodana is where one says ‘yes’ to everything, “Yes sir, yessir” (agreeing to what is being done). There is not much of a fault(dosh) here. If others are doing something and you say, “Yes, Ilike this, it is very good,” it is not really very significant. Whetheryou said it or not, they were still going to do it. You commit agreater fault, if an action, which would otherwise not take place,is carried out solely because of your own anumodana(instigation). Which anumodana that carries the greatest weight?It is the one that runs the world.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(36)Bhaav, Bhaavya and BhaavakOnly the Bhaavak Is the Doer of BhaavQuestioner: Who is the ‘doer’ of inner intent (bhaav)?Is it the Self?Dadashri: The ‘bhaavako’ within, is the one whichmakes you do the bhaav. The Self does not do bhaav. Peoplebelieve that it is the bhaavkarma (causal karma) that takespossession of them. But in fact, those that make you do innerintent (bhaav), are sitting within you. The Self never doesbhaav.Questioner: Who is this bhaavako?Dadashri: It is not the only bhaavak. There is thekrodhak, which makes you do krodh (anger). There is thelobhak that makes you do lobh (greed). There is the nindak,which even though you may not want to, will make you doninda (gossip). The Self does not participate in any of this. Nowif the Self were to do the bhaav, what state would it be in? Itwould be finished. There are others too that make you dobhaav. They are called bhaavak. The bhaavako make you dobhaav. At that moment in time, the ‘self’ becomes bhaavya(tainted with bhaav). ‘It’ likes that. Because one does not haveawareness of the Self, this effect comes about.If You Enter into Bhaav, Then You BecomeBhaavya‘Mahila bhaavak bhaavya bhadey to,Aptavani-4317318Aptavani-4Chitraman navu thaaya ja chhe sto.’                          ~ Navneet‘When one mixes with the one with the inner intent,It creates a new cause for sure.’                           ~ NavneetWhen a bhaav arises within, the bhaavya (the self)becomes one with the intent (bhaav). This paints a new ‘scenario’for the next life (binds new karma). The self (worldly self) isbhaavya and from within, the bhaavako (of kashay: anger,pride, deceit and greed) makes one do bhaav (inner intent). Whatis wrong in having the bhaav? If the bhaavya (self) does notbecome one with the bhaav (inner intent), but just continues tosee: “Wow! The bhaavako are even making one do these kindsof bhaav!” Let the bhaavako make you do whatever bhaav theylike, all You have to do is just keep ‘seeing’, and You will not bindkarma. This is the ultimate science.The Nature of the BhaavakQuestioner: How does one know that the bhaavakmade one do the bhaav? Can you explain this in detail?Dadashri: You have lived in the busy city of Mumbai andsuddenly you have to leave and you find yourself in a desert.There are no trees and no shade. This is when you have bhaavlike: ‘Where shall we sit? Where can we find coolness? Wheredo we take shelter?’ It is the inner bhaavako that makes youhave such bhaav. They are all sitting inside you. The wholeworld is on this natural path to moksha. This is all a natural flow,and all the living beings (jivas; embodied souls) are naturallyflowing along in the current. Along the way, all sorts ofbhaavako (what makes one do bhaav) arise on this path.Questioner: Does it mean that shata-ashata vedaniya(karma of pleasant and unpleasant experience) has occurred?Dadashri: No, no. Not shata-ashata vedaniya.Vedaniya (suffering) can only be called vedaniya (suffering).Whereas this is bhaavako. They make you do all kinds ofbhaav. You may not want to be afraid of anything; you may befree from fear, but the moment you see a snake, it willimmediately make you do a bhaav of fear. Would it make youdo that or not?Questioner: It will. Is that called vikalp?Dadashri: No. It is not even called vikalp. As you seethe snake pass, you become involved (tanmayakar) with thebhaav of fear prompted by the bhaavako of fear. It is thebhaavak of fear.Worldly Knowledge Is the Bhaavak’s Support!This worldly knowledge is such that it makes one becomebhaavak. If You have the main Gnan, then it would not darebother You. Gnan means ‘I am Shuddhatma’. Once you havethis awareness of ‘I am Shuddhatma’, the bhaavak no longerhas any influence. But until then the bhaavak will continue topush and manipulate you. It will push you from here and fromthere, making you collide, just like a football.Questioner: In which part of the antahkaran (the mind,intellect, chit and ego) is the bhaavako located? Is it in the mind?Dadashri: No. The bhaavako is even separate from theantahkaran! It is not a part of the antahkaran. Theantahkaran will do what the bhaavako makes it do. Thebhaavako makes the atma (self) murchhit (immersed inillusion), and so the atma (self) becomes the bhaavya. This thenstarts up the antahkaran. And if You have the awareness of, ‘Iam Shuddhatma (pure Soul)’, then even if thousands of suchbhaavako were to come along, you would not have anyproblem. The bhaavak (which makes one do bhaav) inside isnot alone. There is a krodhak (which makes one do anger), aAptavani-4317318Aptavani-4Chitraman navu thaaya ja chhe sto.’                          ~ Navneet‘When one mixes with the one with the inner intent,It creates a new cause for sure.’                           ~ NavneetWhen a bhaav arises within, the bhaavya (the self)becomes one with the intent (bhaav). This paints a new ‘scenario’for the next life (binds new karma). The self (worldly self) isbhaavya and from within, the bhaavako (of kashay: anger,pride, deceit and greed) makes one do bhaav (inner intent). Whatis wrong in having the bhaav? If the bhaavya (self) does notbecome one with the bhaav (inner intent), but just continues tosee: “Wow! The bhaavako are even making one do these kindsof bhaav!” Let the bhaavako make you do whatever bhaav theylike, all You have to do is just keep ‘seeing’, and You will not bindkarma. This is the ultimate science.The Nature of the BhaavakQuestioner: How does one know that the bhaavakmade one do the bhaav? Can you explain this in detail?Dadashri: You have lived in the busy city of Mumbai andsuddenly you have to leave and you find yourself in a desert.There are no trees and no shade. This is when you have bhaavlike: ‘Where shall we sit? Where can we find coolness? Wheredo we take shelter?’ It is the inner bhaavako that makes youhave such bhaav. They are all sitting inside you. The wholeworld is on this natural path to moksha. This is all a natural flow,and all the living beings (jivas; embodied souls) are naturallyflowing along in the current. Along the way, all sorts ofbhaavako (what makes one do bhaav) arise on this path.Questioner: Does it mean that shata-ashata vedaniya(karma of pleasant and unpleasant experience) has occurred?Dadashri: No, no. Not shata-ashata vedaniya.Vedaniya (suffering) can only be called vedaniya (suffering).Whereas this is bhaavako. They make you do all kinds ofbhaav. You may not want to be afraid of anything; you may befree from fear, but the moment you see a snake, it willimmediately make you do a bhaav of fear. Would it make youdo that or not?Questioner: It will. Is that called vikalp?Dadashri: No. It is not even called vikalp. As you seethe snake pass, you become involved (tanmayakar) with thebhaav of fear prompted by the bhaavako of fear. It is thebhaavak of fear.Worldly Knowledge Is the Bhaavak’s Support!This worldly knowledge is such that it makes one becomebhaavak. If You have the main Gnan, then it would not darebother You. Gnan means ‘I am Shuddhatma’. Once you havethis awareness of ‘I am Shuddhatma’, the bhaavak no longerhas any influence. But until then the bhaavak will continue topush and manipulate you. It will push you from here and fromthere, making you collide, just like a football.Questioner: In which part of the antahkaran (the mind,intellect, chit and ego) is the bhaavako located? Is it in the mind?Dadashri: No. The bhaavako is even separate from theantahkaran! It is not a part of the antahkaran. Theantahkaran will do what the bhaavako makes it do. Thebhaavako makes the atma (self) murchhit (immersed inillusion), and so the atma (self) becomes the bhaavya. This thenstarts up the antahkaran. And if You have the awareness of, ‘Iam Shuddhatma (pure Soul)’, then even if thousands of suchbhaavako were to come along, you would not have anyproblem. The bhaavak (which makes one do bhaav) inside isnot alone. There is a krodhak (which makes one do anger), aAptavani-4319320Aptavani-4lobhak (which makes one do greed), a nindak (which makesone do malicious gossip), a chetak (which makes one becomecautious), and many such ‘k’s inside. ‘K’ means karavnaar(that which makes you do things). There is an entire universewithin!Questioner: So does the bhaavako give rise to suchbhaav that make the atma murchhit (deluded)?Dadashri: No, it is not like that. The bhaavako givesrise to such a state within, that the atma (self) becomesimmediately deluded (murchhit). Murchhit means that onecompletely loses one’s own awareness. Wouldn’t everyone bemade unconscious if there were a gas explosion? That is howthe bhaavako makes the atma (self) do the bhaav, whichcauses the effect. Who is not affected? The one who has theawareness of the Self, is not affected. If not, this ‘worldlyknowledge’ does not guard the self from its effect. There is somuch pressure from the circumstances that it does not allow itto stay free from effects. When one knows, ‘I am Shuddhatma,’the bhaavako will not exert its influence. The commonunderstanding is that the Self does the bhaav and that is whytime, bhaav and karma are bound. But if the Self were to dobhaav, we would be done for, it would be the end. That wouldmean that the Self is beggarly and needy.The bhaavako makes one do the bhaav, and it isbhaavako that makes the self (atma) bhaavya (one with thebhaav).Questioner: Is this bhaavako in the form of subatomicparticle (parmanu) or in the form of a solid knot (gaanth)?Dadashri: They are parmanu. They are in the form ofpudgal parmanu.Questioner: Does it mean that the self becomes absorbedin (tanmayakar; one with) with whatever it likes?Dadashri: Yes, and it does not become absorbed(tanmayakar) with anything that it does not like. This meansthat as long as the self does not become bhaavya, nothing willhappen.Questioner: So does it mean that as long as one doesnot become absorbed in (tanmayakar), the ‘picture is notdrawn’ yet?Dadashri: It is fine if you do not become absorbed(tanmayakar), but ‘it’ (self) will not be able to manage that.Only if the self has the awareness of the Self, then it will notbecome absorbed (tanmayakar).The Bhaavak Forever Changing in theSamsaran PathThe bhaavako will also continue to change. The bhaavakoon the tenth mile, are different from the ones on the eleventh mileand the ones on the twelfth mile will be even more different. Thatis because all living beings are all on a course of progression(samsaran path). So in reality, there is no real ‘doer’. Neitherthe Atma, nor the pudgal (the non-Self complex) is the ‘doer’in this world. If the pudgal were the ‘doer’, then it would haveto suffer, and if the Self were the ‘doer’, it would have to suffer.But neither the Atma suffers anything, nor does the pudgalsuffer anything. It is just the ego that suffers.Questioner: Everything that has arisen, has come aboutbecause we have brought it with us in our intents (ashaya), isthat not so?Dadashri: No, no intents (ashaya) or anything of thesort. People have just become trapped. If it did happen becauseof your intention (ashaya), then you would be considered theguilty one; you would be the ‘doer’.Questioner: All that has arisen prior to one attainingAptavani-4319320Aptavani-4lobhak (which makes one do greed), a nindak (which makesone do malicious gossip), a chetak (which makes one becomecautious), and many such ‘k’s inside. ‘K’ means karavnaar(that which makes you do things). There is an entire universewithin!Questioner: So does the bhaavako give rise to suchbhaav that make the atma murchhit (deluded)?Dadashri: No, it is not like that. The bhaavako givesrise to such a state within, that the atma (self) becomesimmediately deluded (murchhit). Murchhit means that onecompletely loses one’s own awareness. Wouldn’t everyone bemade unconscious if there were a gas explosion? That is howthe bhaavako makes the atma (self) do the bhaav, whichcauses the effect. Who is not affected? The one who has theawareness of the Self, is not affected. If not, this ‘worldlyknowledge’ does not guard the self from its effect. There is somuch pressure from the circumstances that it does not allow itto stay free from effects. When one knows, ‘I am Shuddhatma,’the bhaavako will not exert its influence. The commonunderstanding is that the Self does the bhaav and that is whytime, bhaav and karma are bound. But if the Self were to dobhaav, we would be done for, it would be the end. That wouldmean that the Self is beggarly and needy.The bhaavako makes one do the bhaav, and it isbhaavako that makes the self (atma) bhaavya (one with thebhaav).Questioner: Is this bhaavako in the form of subatomicparticle (parmanu) or in the form of a solid knot (gaanth)?Dadashri: They are parmanu. They are in the form ofpudgal parmanu.Questioner: Does it mean that the self becomes absorbedin (tanmayakar; one with) with whatever it likes?Dadashri: Yes, and it does not become absorbed(tanmayakar) with anything that it does not like. This meansthat as long as the self does not become bhaavya, nothing willhappen.Questioner: So does it mean that as long as one doesnot become absorbed in (tanmayakar), the ‘picture is notdrawn’ yet?Dadashri: It is fine if you do not become absorbed(tanmayakar), but ‘it’ (self) will not be able to manage that.Only if the self has the awareness of the Self, then it will notbecome absorbed (tanmayakar).The Bhaavak Forever Changing in theSamsaran PathThe bhaavako will also continue to change. The bhaavakoon the tenth mile, are different from the ones on the eleventh mileand the ones on the twelfth mile will be even more different. Thatis because all living beings are all on a course of progression(samsaran path). So in reality, there is no real ‘doer’. Neitherthe Atma, nor the pudgal (the non-Self complex) is the ‘doer’in this world. If the pudgal were the ‘doer’, then it would haveto suffer, and if the Self were the ‘doer’, it would have to suffer.But neither the Atma suffers anything, nor does the pudgalsuffer anything. It is just the ego that suffers.Questioner: Everything that has arisen, has come aboutbecause we have brought it with us in our intents (ashaya), isthat not so?Dadashri: No, no intents (ashaya) or anything of thesort. People have just become trapped. If it did happen becauseof your intention (ashaya), then you would be considered theguilty one; you would be the ‘doer’.Questioner: All that has arisen prior to one attainingAptavani-4321322Aptavani-4Atmagnan (knowledge of the Self) is because of the ashaya(intent of the past life), isn’t it?Dadashri: From the ashaya, it will seem to you that aresult may be created by a particular ashaya, however, theashaya is not the ‘doer’. You may feel that these are yourashayas and that is why all this has come to you. Whatever yourashaya, that is what you will get. The rule is that if you havebought this kind of a ticket, then you will get to Calcutta.Ashaya is like buying a ticket.It is through ego, that one says, this happened because ofmy ashaya. The worldly life (sansar) continuously moves along.A man asked the Lord, ‘What do I have to do, to speed up mymoksha?’ And the Lord said, ‘Your state of development(bhavsthiti) is not yet ready. Moksha is a long way off for you.’If moksha is at the eighteenth mile, how can you go there if youare at the eleventh mile? Even if you spent all your time with theGnani Purush, you still will not get there. However, when youreach a certain ‘boundary’, and you encounter a Gnani Purush,your liberation will be at hand.It is the bhaavako within that makes one do the bhaav.This is a very elevated science. If we are in a ‘Zaveri Bazzar’(shopping district for jewelry in Mumbai) we have a differentinner intent (bhaav). If we are at ‘darukhana’ (a bar or liquorstore), our inner intent (bhaav) would be different, and if wewere at the ‘chor bazaar’ (black-market) we would have adifferent inner intent (bhaav).Questioner: That happens because the inner intent(bhaav) changes every second.Dadashri: That which changes is not the Self, but it is thebhaavako. If you go around as Shuddhatma (the pure Soul),you will not be affected by ‘Dongri’, nor will you be affected byliquor stores and bars, or even when you are at a jeweler’s. Ifyour support comes from ‘relative’ knowledge, then as yourlocation changes, so too will your inner intent (bhaav). This isknowledge mediated through the senses (indriya-gnan) and it isbecause of it, that the inner intent (bhaav) changes. Once theknowledge of the Self is attained, the bhaavako will no longerhave the control.Therefore, all this is an effect of subatomic particles(parmanus). Just as the miles (on spiritual path) change, so dothe parmanus. So one gradually moves forward on the path tomoksha.Questioner: So in the end, there are no more bhaavakparmanus left? Does the Gnani have these ‘k’s?Dadashri: In the state that ‘we’ are in, there are noparmanus of bhaavak left at all. When You arrive at where‘we’ (the Gnanis) are sitting, even your bhaavak will notremain. There will not be anything shouting inside you. WhenYou have clear and distinct experience (spashta vedan) of thepure Self (Shuddhatma), none of the ‘k’ s will remain. All youhave to do is understand this ‘science’. This Gnan works by‘itself’ (swayam kriyakari). If you understand this subtle fact,only then you will attain moksha.Liberation Is Yours if You Do Not Become Onewith the BhaavWhat does the Lord deem as penance (tapa)? The Lorddoes not consider the penance that people do, penance. This ispeople’s penance, which is deemed as worldly penance. Thepenance for moksha is beyond worldly penance. When theinner bhaavako makes you do all the inner intent (bhaav), atthat time You would maintain such a penance that You do not letgo of what is ‘Yours’ (maintain separation between the Self andthe non-Self). Lord Mahavir practiced the very same penance.Until the very end He unrelentingly endured the penance, andAptavani-4321322Aptavani-4Atmagnan (knowledge of the Self) is because of the ashaya(intent of the past life), isn’t it?Dadashri: From the ashaya, it will seem to you that aresult may be created by a particular ashaya, however, theashaya is not the ‘doer’. You may feel that these are yourashayas and that is why all this has come to you. Whatever yourashaya, that is what you will get. The rule is that if you havebought this kind of a ticket, then you will get to Calcutta.Ashaya is like buying a ticket.It is through ego, that one says, this happened because ofmy ashaya. The worldly life (sansar) continuously moves along.A man asked the Lord, ‘What do I have to do, to speed up mymoksha?’ And the Lord said, ‘Your state of development(bhavsthiti) is not yet ready. Moksha is a long way off for you.’If moksha is at the eighteenth mile, how can you go there if youare at the eleventh mile? Even if you spent all your time with theGnani Purush, you still will not get there. However, when youreach a certain ‘boundary’, and you encounter a Gnani Purush,your liberation will be at hand.It is the bhaavako within that makes one do the bhaav.This is a very elevated science. If we are in a ‘Zaveri Bazzar’(shopping district for jewelry in Mumbai) we have a differentinner intent (bhaav). If we are at ‘darukhana’ (a bar or liquorstore), our inner intent (bhaav) would be different, and if wewere at the ‘chor bazaar’ (black-market) we would have adifferent inner intent (bhaav).Questioner: That happens because the inner intent(bhaav) changes every second.Dadashri: That which changes is not the Self, but it is thebhaavako. If you go around as Shuddhatma (the pure Soul),you will not be affected by ‘Dongri’, nor will you be affected byliquor stores and bars, or even when you are at a jeweler’s. Ifyour support comes from ‘relative’ knowledge, then as yourlocation changes, so too will your inner intent (bhaav). This isknowledge mediated through the senses (indriya-gnan) and it isbecause of it, that the inner intent (bhaav) changes. Once theknowledge of the Self is attained, the bhaavako will no longerhave the control.Therefore, all this is an effect of subatomic particles(parmanus). Just as the miles (on spiritual path) change, so dothe parmanus. So one gradually moves forward on the path tomoksha.Questioner: So in the end, there are no more bhaavakparmanus left? Does the Gnani have these ‘k’s?Dadashri: In the state that ‘we’ are in, there are noparmanus of bhaavak left at all. When You arrive at where‘we’ (the Gnanis) are sitting, even your bhaavak will notremain. There will not be anything shouting inside you. WhenYou have clear and distinct experience (spashta vedan) of thepure Self (Shuddhatma), none of the ‘k’ s will remain. All youhave to do is understand this ‘science’. This Gnan works by‘itself’ (swayam kriyakari). If you understand this subtle fact,only then you will attain moksha.Liberation Is Yours if You Do Not Become Onewith the BhaavWhat does the Lord deem as penance (tapa)? The Lorddoes not consider the penance that people do, penance. This ispeople’s penance, which is deemed as worldly penance. Thepenance for moksha is beyond worldly penance. When theinner bhaavako makes you do all the inner intent (bhaav), atthat time You would maintain such a penance that You do not letgo of what is ‘Yours’ (maintain separation between the Self andthe non-Self). Lord Mahavir practiced the very same penance.Until the very end He unrelentingly endured the penance, andAptavani-4323324Aptavani-4went on seeing through the Gnan, and He remained untouchedfrom all effects.Questioner: How can one remain unaffected?Dadashri: All the bhaavako are inside you. When youyourself (self) become bhaavya, you will have bhaav, and soyou become trapped. You are Parmatma (Supreme Soul). So‘know’ the inner intent. And if You remain the Knower-Seer(Gnata-Drashta) of the inner intent (bhaav), You will not gettrapped. If there were no bhaavak, then you are truly theParmatma. Who is this bhaavak? It is the mistakes from thepast life that are the bhaavak, and the seeds are sown becauseof them. When the bhaavak and bhaavya become one, theseed drops into the yoni (a seed gets planted). And from that,the worldly life (sansar) emerges. If the bhaavak and bhaavyado not become one, if You remain ‘strong’; You do not becomebhaavya, then although the ‘discharge’ karmas come intofruition, they will dissipate (discharge) without creating any newbondage.When I give you this Gnan, I place a ‘chetak’ (vigilantone who alerts) within you. All you have to do is to make ‘him’strong. “There is joy in sex.” – This is where you will need helpfrom the chetak. Surrendering to sexuality (vishay) should belike something is being forced upon you by threats from apoliceman. That is how strong this chetak should become. Onlythen he will stand up to that bhaavako. Otherwise the chetakwill become weak. This ‘k’ (of sexuality) is very strong andoppressive.Chetak will caution You against the obstacles in theworldly life (sansar). After attaining the knowledge of the Self,new “stations” of alochana, pratikraman and chetak, etc., areestablished and the generations of the families of the ‘k’s willautomatically begin to leave.Contained ‘self’ – Manifest SelfQuestioner: Please explain:‘Vyaapak ne vyavasthit khode chhe,Divyachakshu eni lhaani maane chhe.’~ Navneet‘The vyavasthit is seeking the one who wants to pervadeThe divine vision of the Self enjoys the bliss of ‘this’.’~ NavneetDadashri: What Kaviraj, in the spiritual song (pada), issaying is that ‘vyavasthit’ is searching for vyaapak (the onewho wants to pervade)! The entire world is run by vyavasthit,which continually keeps it vyavasthit (in order). No one canchange that. And vyavasthit never makes it avyavasthit(disorderly).Here, a large ‘number’ (strong karma) is being dividedby a large number (will have strong effect). You may wonder,‘Why does my own son misbehave and cause so muchdamage?’ Hey, you! Won’t you need as heavy a ‘number’(karma) to divide with, in order to cancel out your heavy‘number’ (karma cause)? The heavier the number (cause ofkarma), the heavier the ‘divider’ (effect), and the lighter thenumber (karma), the lighter the ‘divider’. But the division doestake place.Questioner: Does vyaapak mean Ishwar (God)?Dadashri: Here, in the spiritual song (pada) the wordvyaapak means something else. The word sarva-vyaapak (all-pervading; omnipresent) is different and this word is different.Just like bhaavak, chetak, there is vyaapak. The Atma (Soul)is vyaapya (has the property of being all-pervasive) and theinside is filled with vyaapako. These vyaapako make the Atmavyaapya (all pervasive). There are all kinds of vyaapako sittingAptavani-4323324Aptavani-4went on seeing through the Gnan, and He remained untouchedfrom all effects.Questioner: How can one remain unaffected?Dadashri: All the bhaavako are inside you. When youyourself (self) become bhaavya, you will have bhaav, and soyou become trapped. You are Parmatma (Supreme Soul). So‘know’ the inner intent. And if You remain the Knower-Seer(Gnata-Drashta) of the inner intent (bhaav), You will not gettrapped. If there were no bhaavak, then you are truly theParmatma. Who is this bhaavak? It is the mistakes from thepast life that are the bhaavak, and the seeds are sown becauseof them. When the bhaavak and bhaavya become one, theseed drops into the yoni (a seed gets planted). And from that,the worldly life (sansar) emerges. If the bhaavak and bhaavyado not become one, if You remain ‘strong’; You do not becomebhaavya, then although the ‘discharge’ karmas come intofruition, they will dissipate (discharge) without creating any newbondage.When I give you this Gnan, I place a ‘chetak’ (vigilantone who alerts) within you. All you have to do is to make ‘him’strong. “There is joy in sex.” – This is where you will need helpfrom the chetak. Surrendering to sexuality (vishay) should belike something is being forced upon you by threats from apoliceman. That is how strong this chetak should become. Onlythen he will stand up to that bhaavako. Otherwise the chetakwill become weak. This ‘k’ (of sexuality) is very strong andoppressive.Chetak will caution You against the obstacles in theworldly life (sansar). After attaining the knowledge of the Self,new “stations” of alochana, pratikraman and chetak, etc., areestablished and the generations of the families of the ‘k’s willautomatically begin to leave.Contained ‘self’ – Manifest SelfQuestioner: Please explain:‘Vyaapak ne vyavasthit khode chhe,Divyachakshu eni lhaani maane chhe.’~ Navneet‘The vyavasthit is seeking the one who wants to pervadeThe divine vision of the Self enjoys the bliss of ‘this’.’~ NavneetDadashri: What Kaviraj, in the spiritual song (pada), issaying is that ‘vyavasthit’ is searching for vyaapak (the onewho wants to pervade)! The entire world is run by vyavasthit,which continually keeps it vyavasthit (in order). No one canchange that. And vyavasthit never makes it avyavasthit(disorderly).Here, a large ‘number’ (strong karma) is being dividedby a large number (will have strong effect). You may wonder,‘Why does my own son misbehave and cause so muchdamage?’ Hey, you! Won’t you need as heavy a ‘number’(karma) to divide with, in order to cancel out your heavy‘number’ (karma cause)? The heavier the number (cause ofkarma), the heavier the ‘divider’ (effect), and the lighter thenumber (karma), the lighter the ‘divider’. But the division doestake place.Questioner: Does vyaapak mean Ishwar (God)?Dadashri: Here, in the spiritual song (pada) the wordvyaapak means something else. The word sarva-vyaapak (all-pervading; omnipresent) is different and this word is different.Just like bhaavak, chetak, there is vyaapak. The Atma (Soul)is vyaapya (has the property of being all-pervasive) and theinside is filled with vyaapako. These vyaapako make the Atmavyaapya (all pervasive). There are all kinds of vyaapako sittingAptavani-4325326Aptavani-4within. Vyaapak means those that bring about the state ofpervasiveness, and vyaapya means, for example, the light in thisvessel, when it is taken out of the vessel and diffuses, it becomesvyaapya. As many places it can, it spreads to. It should receivethe ‘scope’, or chance to spread. And what does vyaapakmean? It remains as vyaapak in every living being. It is spreadthroughout the body. After the Self has expressed, after attainingknowledge of the Self, it remains vyaapya (omnipresent). Inreality, the Self is vyaapya (pervasive; omnipresent), but as faras devotees are concerned, only saying ‘vyaapak’ will benefitthem.Prameya-Boundary: Pramaata-the SelfThe Atma (Soul) is pramaata. Whereas, what doesprameya mean? What is the prameya (limit) for these laborers?You would say that it is as far as their ‘maintenance’ and theeducation of their children. So some towards education andsome towards the worldly life. This is their prameya (limit) andtheir atma (self) is confined within those bounds. ‘Prameyapramaney pramaata thai.’ (The self spreads according to theprescribed boundaries). It spreads as the prameya (boundary)enlarges. As the businessman’s wealth expands to ten bungalows,factories, cars, money, etc., and his worldly intent (sansar-bhaav) increases, the prameya (boundary) will also increaseaccordingly, and with it, the pramaata (self) will increase. Butultimately, who is regarded as the pramaata (the Self)? It isconsidered the true pramaata when its light pervades the entireuniverse! The whole universe is prameya. How much of it isprameya? Only the part that is within the universe (lok), and notthe part which is outside the universe (alok). The Atma (Soul)only reaches the limits of the prescribed space (pramaata),which is the universe; it does not venture beyond it.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(37)The Energy of Action: The Energy of IntentThe Energy of Action Is Dependent upon theNon-SelfDadashri: Do you want to live through yet anotherhundred lifetimes, or do you want to go to moksha early? Thenthe Gnani Purush can write you a note accordingly. He can dowhatever he chooses. That is because he is not the ‘doers’ ofanything. The Gnani Purush is considered the “giver” ofmoksha.Questioner: He can point us in the right direction, butthen isn’t it up to us to do the rest?Dadashri: The kriya-shakti (energy to do) is not in yourhands. The only thing that is in your hands, is energy of intent(bhaav-shakti). At best, You can do the bhaav that You wantto follow Dada’s Agnas. You can do that kind of inner intent(bhaav). You cannot do anything else. You are only free to usebhaav-shakti. You may say, “I went to Surat and came back.”Well now, did the train go to Surat or did you go? Then you say,“I am tired.” Now if you say, “The train went to Surat andarrived at Surat where I got off,” you will not feel tired. ‘I amdoing’, is illusion (bhranti). The state of ‘doership’ is the stateof illusion. Have you ever understood this before?Questioner: No, I have never understood this.Dadashri: The entire state of ‘doership’ is a state ofillusion. If the state of ‘doership’ were indeed a real state, thena man would do whatever he feels like, with his beard andAptavani-4325326Aptavani-4within. Vyaapak means those that bring about the state ofpervasiveness, and vyaapya means, for example, the light in thisvessel, when it is taken out of the vessel and diffuses, it becomesvyaapya. As many places it can, it spreads to. It should receivethe ‘scope’, or chance to spread. And what does vyaapakmean? It remains as vyaapak in every living being. It is spreadthroughout the body. After the Self has expressed, after attainingknowledge of the Self, it remains vyaapya (omnipresent). Inreality, the Self is vyaapya (pervasive; omnipresent), but as faras devotees are concerned, only saying ‘vyaapak’ will benefitthem.Prameya-Boundary: Pramaata-the SelfThe Atma (Soul) is pramaata. Whereas, what doesprameya mean? What is the prameya (limit) for these laborers?You would say that it is as far as their ‘maintenance’ and theeducation of their children. So some towards education andsome towards the worldly life. This is their prameya (limit) andtheir atma (self) is confined within those bounds. ‘Prameyapramaney pramaata thai.’ (The self spreads according to theprescribed boundaries). It spreads as the prameya (boundary)enlarges. As the businessman’s wealth expands to ten bungalows,factories, cars, money, etc., and his worldly intent (sansar-bhaav) increases, the prameya (boundary) will also increaseaccordingly, and with it, the pramaata (self) will increase. Butultimately, who is regarded as the pramaata (the Self)? It isconsidered the true pramaata when its light pervades the entireuniverse! The whole universe is prameya. How much of it isprameya? Only the part that is within the universe (lok), and notthe part which is outside the universe (alok). The Atma (Soul)only reaches the limits of the prescribed space (pramaata),which is the universe; it does not venture beyond it.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(37)The Energy of Action: The Energy of IntentThe Energy of Action Is Dependent upon theNon-SelfDadashri: Do you want to live through yet anotherhundred lifetimes, or do you want to go to moksha early? Thenthe Gnani Purush can write you a note accordingly. He can dowhatever he chooses. That is because he is not the ‘doers’ ofanything. The Gnani Purush is considered the “giver” ofmoksha.Questioner: He can point us in the right direction, butthen isn’t it up to us to do the rest?Dadashri: The kriya-shakti (energy to do) is not in yourhands. The only thing that is in your hands, is energy of intent(bhaav-shakti). At best, You can do the bhaav that You wantto follow Dada’s Agnas. You can do that kind of inner intent(bhaav). You cannot do anything else. You are only free to usebhaav-shakti. You may say, “I went to Surat and came back.”Well now, did the train go to Surat or did you go? Then you say,“I am tired.” Now if you say, “The train went to Surat andarrived at Surat where I got off,” you will not feel tired. ‘I amdoing’, is illusion (bhranti). The state of ‘doership’ is the stateof illusion. Have you ever understood this before?Questioner: No, I have never understood this.Dadashri: The entire state of ‘doership’ is a state ofillusion. If the state of ‘doership’ were indeed a real state, thena man would do whatever he feels like, with his beard andAptavani-4327328Aptavani-4everything else. Alas, would he have allowed himself to go bald?He would rather have a jungle of hair on his head, than a drypatch of ‘desert’! But here, some have become deserts and inmany other places they have become jungles! You do not haveany control (satta) in your hands. A single tiny toothache makesyou cry out loud!Fruit According to Bhaav!Aside from doing inner intent (bhaav), we do not havethe power to do anything else. Even your inner intent (bhaav)should not be expressed. When you do inner intent, the ego isalways behind it. Except for the attainment of moksha, it is notworth having any other kind of ego. It is not even worth havingthe ego to do jagat kalyan (salvation of the world). Everyoneis a nimit (instrumental). No one is a ‘doer’. Why are theycalled nimit? How does someone become a nimit? If someonemakes the inner intent, ‘I want to sort these people out,’ hisinner intent (bhaav) gets ‘deposited’ by Nature and becomes‘noted’. And when the time comes for Nature to ‘sort them out’,it draws all the necessary circumstances towards the nimit whohad made the bhaav. So for the person who made the innerintent (bhaav), the event that he made the bhaav for, occurs.The world continues to do bhaav and abhaav. Bhaav-abhaav (relative positive and negative intent) is in itselfattachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh). When ‘we’ give You theknowledge of the Self, from that time onwards, You stop makingbhaav, as ‘we’ put a halt to both the positive and the negativebhaav for you. But when a prior bhaav comes forth to fruition,you wonder why you have such a bhaav. Actually, it is not abhaav, but a desire (ichchha; a wish).The Difference between Bhaav and IchchhaQuestioner: What is considered bhaav?Dadashri: What is considered a real bhaav? It is notwhat you see, but the plans that are being carried out. In thenext life, they will come into effect. The planning is conductedthrough these bhaavs, but you will not be aware of this.Questioner: What is desire (ichchha)? Why does onehave desires?Dadashri: It is like a corncob. This only happens if aseed has already been sown. Whatever bhaav you have, itsdesire will arise. The desire is a result (karmic effect) andbhaav is the ‘cause’. Desire is all ‘effect’. You should decidethat you do not want any worldly thing, and this will become‘sealed’ (ratified) within. After attaining knowledge of the Self,all the desires that you have, are an ‘effect’. And you have tosuffer all the ‘effects’.Bhaav Is the Root of All the CircumstancesQuestioner: What is the difference between a circumstance(saiyog) and an inner intent (bhaav)?Dadashri: There is a big difference. A circumstance is asthool (a tangible and overt) thing and bhaav is a very subtle(sookshma) thing. Actually, even bhaav can be considered acircumstance (saiyog). That is why Lord Mahavir said:‘Shesha mei baheera bhaava savve sanjog lakhana.’‘The rest are all my external intents, all circumstanceshave recognizable attributes.’The rest are the external intents (baheera bhaava). Sohow can one recognize them as such? The answer is that youcan tell from the circumstances you encounter, what kind ofbhaav you had created in the past life.What kind of external bhaavs did you make in order forus to meet?Questioner: Of satsang.Aptavani-4327328Aptavani-4everything else. Alas, would he have allowed himself to go bald?He would rather have a jungle of hair on his head, than a drypatch of ‘desert’! But here, some have become deserts and inmany other places they have become jungles! You do not haveany control (satta) in your hands. A single tiny toothache makesyou cry out loud!Fruit According to Bhaav!Aside from doing inner intent (bhaav), we do not havethe power to do anything else. Even your inner intent (bhaav)should not be expressed. When you do inner intent, the ego isalways behind it. Except for the attainment of moksha, it is notworth having any other kind of ego. It is not even worth havingthe ego to do jagat kalyan (salvation of the world). Everyoneis a nimit (instrumental). No one is a ‘doer’. Why are theycalled nimit? How does someone become a nimit? If someonemakes the inner intent, ‘I want to sort these people out,’ hisinner intent (bhaav) gets ‘deposited’ by Nature and becomes‘noted’. And when the time comes for Nature to ‘sort them out’,it draws all the necessary circumstances towards the nimit whohad made the bhaav. So for the person who made the innerintent (bhaav), the event that he made the bhaav for, occurs.The world continues to do bhaav and abhaav. Bhaav-abhaav (relative positive and negative intent) is in itselfattachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh). When ‘we’ give You theknowledge of the Self, from that time onwards, You stop makingbhaav, as ‘we’ put a halt to both the positive and the negativebhaav for you. But when a prior bhaav comes forth to fruition,you wonder why you have such a bhaav. Actually, it is not abhaav, but a desire (ichchha; a wish).The Difference between Bhaav and IchchhaQuestioner: What is considered bhaav?Dadashri: What is considered a real bhaav? It is notwhat you see, but the plans that are being carried out. In thenext life, they will come into effect. The planning is conductedthrough these bhaavs, but you will not be aware of this.Questioner: What is desire (ichchha)? Why does onehave desires?Dadashri: It is like a corncob. This only happens if aseed has already been sown. Whatever bhaav you have, itsdesire will arise. The desire is a result (karmic effect) andbhaav is the ‘cause’. Desire is all ‘effect’. You should decidethat you do not want any worldly thing, and this will become‘sealed’ (ratified) within. After attaining knowledge of the Self,all the desires that you have, are an ‘effect’. And you have tosuffer all the ‘effects’.Bhaav Is the Root of All the CircumstancesQuestioner: What is the difference between a circumstance(saiyog) and an inner intent (bhaav)?Dadashri: There is a big difference. A circumstance is asthool (a tangible and overt) thing and bhaav is a very subtle(sookshma) thing. Actually, even bhaav can be considered acircumstance (saiyog). That is why Lord Mahavir said:‘Shesha mei baheera bhaava savve sanjog lakhana.’‘The rest are all my external intents, all circumstanceshave recognizable attributes.’The rest are the external intents (baheera bhaava). Sohow can one recognize them as such? The answer is that youcan tell from the circumstances you encounter, what kind ofbhaav you had created in the past life.What kind of external bhaavs did you make in order forus to meet?Questioner: Of satsang.Aptavani-4329330Aptavani-4Dadashri: That is why this circumstance of this satsangcame about, and what if you had made the bhaav to drinkalcohol?Therefore, you encounter circumstances according toyour bhaav. You can infer what your bhaav must have beenfor such a circumstance to occur, and destroy it by its root.The Gnanis discover the root cause from the bhaav anddestroy it.Bhaav Are Different and Thoughts Are DifferentQuestioner: To have bhaav and to have thoughts, whatis the difference between the two?Dadashri: Bhaav is not what people understand it to be.“I have a great bhaav for jalebi (Indian sweet),” – the wordbhaav used here, is random and used very loosely, in all kindsof situations. The fact is that bhaav is not something that youcan perceive with your eyes. What people refer to as a bhaavis actually a desire.Thoughts and bhaav have nothing to do with one another.Questioner: Thought arises and bhaav occurs. There isno ‘demarcation’ between the two.Dadashri: Whatever thought arises, is in the form of‘discharge’ and bhaav is ‘charge’. No matter how manythoughts you have, there is nothing wrong with them as long as‘You’ remain in Gnan.Questioner: Does one reap the fruit in this very life ofbhaav done in this life?Dadashri: No. So many things have to come togetherbefore the bhaav comes into effect (dravya). It takes a longtime for the bhaav to manifest into an effect. It is only when thekarma matures, that it comes into fruition.Just because you bring some milk, does not mean that ithas become doodhpaak (milk delicacy). You need to light thestove, put the milk in a pan, keep stirring it, and then thedoodhpaak will be made.Only Bhaav Has Value!In the worldly life (sansar), worldly things do not presentan obstacle, but your bhaav is an obstacle. The Lord said thatif the dravya is there, the bhaav will occur. This is what it waslike during the good eras of the past time cycles. When a personmade a donation, he would be so elated, that he would wonderwhen such an occasion would arise again. Whereas in this age,the effect (dravya) is different and so is the inner intent (bhaav).Nowadays, while giving the donation a person’s inner intent(bhaav) will be, ‘I would never give it, if it was not for themayor who pressured me into it.’ Therefore, the mind isdifferent, the speech is different and the conduct is different.That is how they bind causes for a lower life-form. Because theyare deceitful.When a person goes to worship God, along with that, healso has to worship his shoes and his business! (his mind is onhis shop and his shoes he left outside). The dravya (effect) istowards God, and the bhaav is towards his shoes and his shop.So what God says is that your bhaav is not according to yourdravya; therefore, you have not practiced your religion (dharma)at all, and to believe ‘I practice religion’, would mean that youare being deceitful. For that reason you will definitely go into alower life-form. On the path of the Vitarags, even this much ofinsincerity cannot be afforded by anyone.Bhaav is of value. Today, nothing happens according tobhaav, does it? You may have made bhajiya (fritters), but if youhave made them with bhaav, then they are worth even more.People do not know how to recognize bhaav. Even when theyare offered delectable food with abhaav (absence of bhaav;Aptavani-4329330Aptavani-4Dadashri: That is why this circumstance of this satsangcame about, and what if you had made the bhaav to drinkalcohol?Therefore, you encounter circumstances according toyour bhaav. You can infer what your bhaav must have beenfor such a circumstance to occur, and destroy it by its root.The Gnanis discover the root cause from the bhaav anddestroy it.Bhaav Are Different and Thoughts Are DifferentQuestioner: To have bhaav and to have thoughts, whatis the difference between the two?Dadashri: Bhaav is not what people understand it to be.“I have a great bhaav for jalebi (Indian sweet),” – the wordbhaav used here, is random and used very loosely, in all kindsof situations. The fact is that bhaav is not something that youcan perceive with your eyes. What people refer to as a bhaavis actually a desire.Thoughts and bhaav have nothing to do with one another.Questioner: Thought arises and bhaav occurs. There isno ‘demarcation’ between the two.Dadashri: Whatever thought arises, is in the form of‘discharge’ and bhaav is ‘charge’. No matter how manythoughts you have, there is nothing wrong with them as long as‘You’ remain in Gnan.Questioner: Does one reap the fruit in this very life ofbhaav done in this life?Dadashri: No. So many things have to come togetherbefore the bhaav comes into effect (dravya). It takes a longtime for the bhaav to manifest into an effect. It is only when thekarma matures, that it comes into fruition.Just because you bring some milk, does not mean that ithas become doodhpaak (milk delicacy). You need to light thestove, put the milk in a pan, keep stirring it, and then thedoodhpaak will be made.Only Bhaav Has Value!In the worldly life (sansar), worldly things do not presentan obstacle, but your bhaav is an obstacle. The Lord said thatif the dravya is there, the bhaav will occur. This is what it waslike during the good eras of the past time cycles. When a personmade a donation, he would be so elated, that he would wonderwhen such an occasion would arise again. Whereas in this age,the effect (dravya) is different and so is the inner intent (bhaav).Nowadays, while giving the donation a person’s inner intent(bhaav) will be, ‘I would never give it, if it was not for themayor who pressured me into it.’ Therefore, the mind isdifferent, the speech is different and the conduct is different.That is how they bind causes for a lower life-form. Because theyare deceitful.When a person goes to worship God, along with that, healso has to worship his shoes and his business! (his mind is onhis shop and his shoes he left outside). The dravya (effect) istowards God, and the bhaav is towards his shoes and his shop.So what God says is that your bhaav is not according to yourdravya; therefore, you have not practiced your religion (dharma)at all, and to believe ‘I practice religion’, would mean that youare being deceitful. For that reason you will definitely go into alower life-form. On the path of the Vitarags, even this much ofinsincerity cannot be afforded by anyone.Bhaav is of value. Today, nothing happens according tobhaav, does it? You may have made bhajiya (fritters), but if youhave made them with bhaav, then they are worth even more.People do not know how to recognize bhaav. Even when theyare offered delectable food with abhaav (absence of bhaav;Aptavani-4331332Aptavani-4negative intent), they will eat it with relish. But when they areserved a simple rotlo (dense, rustic unleavened millet flat-bread)with bhaav, they will pull a face. Really, if the rotlo is made withbhaav, you should just eat it with some water. I would evenswallow poison, if it were served with bhaav. The value is in thebhaav. If people were to conduct their interactions with bhaav(good intention) then this too could be Satyug (Era of unity inmind, speech and acts). Wouldn’t it be beautiful if employersand employees interacted with each other with bhaav (goodintent)! Today, there is no bhaav at all. Alas, even if chantingmantras was done with bhaav, you would not have anyworries. The kriya (action) of bhaav is a living kriya, even if itdoes belong to the relative self (nischetan chetan; mechanicalself). And the kriya (action) of abhaav (negative intent) islifeless.When you give food to someone, when you offer to Jainsadhus (monks), you should do it with bhaav. So many peopledo not even present offerings to their maharaj (high rankingascetic) with bhaav. The maharaj is the seat of the VitaragLord. They should be looked after! There is Atma (Soul) withinhim. It immediately recognizes whether you are giving withbhaav, and whether or not it is given with humility. If you do nothave the facility at home or you cannot afford much, then youcan feed your guests basic rotlo and vegetables, but do not spoilyour bhaav. Shouldn’t there be nobility in your vyavahar(worldly interaction)? In the Kramic path, only bhaav isconsidered most valuable.‘Let no one be hurt in the slightest through this mind,speech and body of mine.’ If you understand this one statement,it is more than enough.Questioner: As long as we have this body, to live withouthurting any living being (jiva) is very difficult.Dadashri: Just because it is difficult, you cannot say thatyou want to live your life by hurting others. Even then you shouldhave the inner intent (bhavna) that you do not want to hurtanyone. You are only responsible for your bhavna. You are notresponsible for your actions.Adverse BhaavThe whole world is binding karma through adverse intent(pratipakshi bhaav). A Self-realized person does not haveadverse intent (pratipakshi bhaav). There is an effect, but hedoes not bind karma. And when his highest spiritual effort(parakram) occurs, he will not be affected at all. Now whathappens in a state where he is affected? In such a state, ifsomeone curses or insults him, he will feel, ‘Why did they evensay that to me?’ That is how he will feel. Whereas parakramwould say, “It must be your own fault, for him to say such thingsto you. And the reason you have lost out, is because you do notknow how to do business.” When You talk to yourself in thisway, you will get to know yourself, you will experience yourown Self, you will undergo the experience of sitting in Your ownseat; the seat of Shuddhatma (the pure Soul). But you quicklyjump out of your seat here. This is because of the familiarity(parichaya; habit) of infinite past lives, and also because of thesuffering that still remains pending!!Your own mistake, awakens the demerit karma (paap)and sets the ceiling fan in motion which then falls on you. Theaccount of karma (hisaab) is indeed your own!What do we mean by spoiling the mind? It is not only themind that gets spoiled. The entire antahkaran (the innercomplex of the self comprised of mind, intellect, chit and ego)becomes spoiled. After the entire ‘parliament’ (the fourcomponents of the antahkaran) makes a decision, the adverseintent (pratipakshi bhaav) will arise. ‘I am going to do this tohim or that to him,’ is what you will feel. It is not only the mindthat does this. The mind is gneya (to be known) and it isAptavani-4331332Aptavani-4negative intent), they will eat it with relish. But when they areserved a simple rotlo (dense, rustic unleavened millet flat-bread)with bhaav, they will pull a face. Really, if the rotlo is made withbhaav, you should just eat it with some water. I would evenswallow poison, if it were served with bhaav. The value is in thebhaav. If people were to conduct their interactions with bhaav(good intention) then this too could be Satyug (Era of unity inmind, speech and acts). Wouldn’t it be beautiful if employersand employees interacted with each other with bhaav (goodintent)! Today, there is no bhaav at all. Alas, even if chantingmantras was done with bhaav, you would not have anyworries. The kriya (action) of bhaav is a living kriya, even if itdoes belong to the relative self (nischetan chetan; mechanicalself). And the kriya (action) of abhaav (negative intent) islifeless.When you give food to someone, when you offer to Jainsadhus (monks), you should do it with bhaav. So many peopledo not even present offerings to their maharaj (high rankingascetic) with bhaav. The maharaj is the seat of the VitaragLord. They should be looked after! There is Atma (Soul) withinhim. It immediately recognizes whether you are giving withbhaav, and whether or not it is given with humility. If you do nothave the facility at home or you cannot afford much, then youcan feed your guests basic rotlo and vegetables, but do not spoilyour bhaav. Shouldn’t there be nobility in your vyavahar(worldly interaction)? In the Kramic path, only bhaav isconsidered most valuable.‘Let no one be hurt in the slightest through this mind,speech and body of mine.’ If you understand this one statement,it is more than enough.Questioner: As long as we have this body, to live withouthurting any living being (jiva) is very difficult.Dadashri: Just because it is difficult, you cannot say thatyou want to live your life by hurting others. Even then you shouldhave the inner intent (bhavna) that you do not want to hurtanyone. You are only responsible for your bhavna. You are notresponsible for your actions.Adverse BhaavThe whole world is binding karma through adverse intent(pratipakshi bhaav). A Self-realized person does not haveadverse intent (pratipakshi bhaav). There is an effect, but hedoes not bind karma. And when his highest spiritual effort(parakram) occurs, he will not be affected at all. Now whathappens in a state where he is affected? In such a state, ifsomeone curses or insults him, he will feel, ‘Why did they evensay that to me?’ That is how he will feel. Whereas parakramwould say, “It must be your own fault, for him to say such thingsto you. And the reason you have lost out, is because you do notknow how to do business.” When You talk to yourself in thisway, you will get to know yourself, you will experience yourown Self, you will undergo the experience of sitting in Your ownseat; the seat of Shuddhatma (the pure Soul). But you quicklyjump out of your seat here. This is because of the familiarity(parichaya; habit) of infinite past lives, and also because of thesuffering that still remains pending!!Your own mistake, awakens the demerit karma (paap)and sets the ceiling fan in motion which then falls on you. Theaccount of karma (hisaab) is indeed your own!What do we mean by spoiling the mind? It is not only themind that gets spoiled. The entire antahkaran (the innercomplex of the self comprised of mind, intellect, chit and ego)becomes spoiled. After the entire ‘parliament’ (the fourcomponents of the antahkaran) makes a decision, the adverseintent (pratipakshi bhaav) will arise. ‘I am going to do this tohim or that to him,’ is what you will feel. It is not only the mindthat does this. The mind is gneya (to be known) and it isAptavani-4333334Aptavani-4vitarag (detached; non-attachment) by nature. If the mindbecomes spoiled, then do pratikraman. The decision undertakenby the ‘parliament’ of the antahkaran, and the ‘spoiling’ of themind, are two different things.If you go into an office to ask for a permit, but the manin charge refuses to give it to you. You will think to yourself,‘That man is useless, he is like this and like that.’ Now you haveno idea about the consequences of this intent (bhaav). That iswhy you have to change your bhaav and do pratikraman. Wecall this awareness (jagruti).If you utter anything negative about any living being itundoubtedly becomes ‘recorded’. The slightest provocation isbound to start the ‘record’ of adverse intent (pratipakshibhaav) playing.Questioner: But it should not even enter the bhaav,should it?Dadashri: If you provoke someone, attacking intent(pratipakshi bhaav) will not refrain from arising within him. Ifhe is strong, he may not say anything, but will he not feel it inhis mind? If you stop talking, the other person’s intent (bhaav)will also come to an end.I never, regardless of the circumstance, have adverseintent (pratipakshi bhaav). Sooner or later, you are bound toarrive at such a stage.In ‘our’ eyes, you will not see any other bhaav, which iswhy people do ‘our’ darshan. One should not be able to readany kind of negative bhaav in these eyes. That is when one willfeel samadhi (state of the Self which is free from any effects ofmental, physical or externally induced pain), just by looking intothose eyes. You will not feel such an attraction towards someonewho is after something, such as: respect, fame, anger, greed orattachment.The Nature of BhaavYour bhaav should be present. Then all the otherevidences will come together. Because you are not ready withyour bhaav, many of these evidences go to waste.If you want to get married, keep the bhaav to getmarried, ready. And if you do not want to get married, thenkeep the bhaav of not marrying, ready. The appropriatecircumstances will come together according to the bhaav youkeep present. Because one of the ‘evidences’, is indeed thepresence of bhaav.So what is this like? If a lazy farmer does not bother goingout to his field to sow seeds, then what can rain do? The rainwill fall anyway, but the farmer will not gain anything from it.While another farmer has already sown seeds, so everything willsprout as soon as the rain falls.Questioner: If a person has only one bhaav, which doesnot change, will that bhaav go away if the rest of evidences donot come together?Dadashri: Yes. Even that can happen! That only happensrarely. Such a bhaav is considered a weak bhaav from theprevious life, you would call a wavering bhaav. Otherwise thatwill not happen. Just like nothing would grow from a rottenseed, a weak bhaav does not produce anything. You willrecognize it. It will waver. ‘Should I sow the seeds or should Inot?’ ‘Should I sow the seeds or should I not?’ That onlyhappens sometimes.And ‘we’ are telling you the fundamental thing, and that iswhen you offer up your bhaav, everything will come togetheraccordingly. If you want to start a business, then you have tomake a decision beforehand that you want to start a business.Then, if not today, but six months down the road, thecircumstances will come together. But you have to be ready,Aptavani-4333334Aptavani-4vitarag (detached; non-attachment) by nature. If the mindbecomes spoiled, then do pratikraman. The decision undertakenby the ‘parliament’ of the antahkaran, and the ‘spoiling’ of themind, are two different things.If you go into an office to ask for a permit, but the manin charge refuses to give it to you. You will think to yourself,‘That man is useless, he is like this and like that.’ Now you haveno idea about the consequences of this intent (bhaav). That iswhy you have to change your bhaav and do pratikraman. Wecall this awareness (jagruti).If you utter anything negative about any living being itundoubtedly becomes ‘recorded’. The slightest provocation isbound to start the ‘record’ of adverse intent (pratipakshibhaav) playing.Questioner: But it should not even enter the bhaav,should it?Dadashri: If you provoke someone, attacking intent(pratipakshi bhaav) will not refrain from arising within him. Ifhe is strong, he may not say anything, but will he not feel it inhis mind? If you stop talking, the other person’s intent (bhaav)will also come to an end.I never, regardless of the circumstance, have adverseintent (pratipakshi bhaav). Sooner or later, you are bound toarrive at such a stage.In ‘our’ eyes, you will not see any other bhaav, which iswhy people do ‘our’ darshan. One should not be able to readany kind of negative bhaav in these eyes. That is when one willfeel samadhi (state of the Self which is free from any effects ofmental, physical or externally induced pain), just by looking intothose eyes. You will not feel such an attraction towards someonewho is after something, such as: respect, fame, anger, greed orattachment.The Nature of BhaavYour bhaav should be present. Then all the otherevidences will come together. Because you are not ready withyour bhaav, many of these evidences go to waste.If you want to get married, keep the bhaav to getmarried, ready. And if you do not want to get married, thenkeep the bhaav of not marrying, ready. The appropriatecircumstances will come together according to the bhaav youkeep present. Because one of the ‘evidences’, is indeed thepresence of bhaav.So what is this like? If a lazy farmer does not bother goingout to his field to sow seeds, then what can rain do? The rainwill fall anyway, but the farmer will not gain anything from it.While another farmer has already sown seeds, so everything willsprout as soon as the rain falls.Questioner: If a person has only one bhaav, which doesnot change, will that bhaav go away if the rest of evidences donot come together?Dadashri: Yes. Even that can happen! That only happensrarely. Such a bhaav is considered a weak bhaav from theprevious life, you would call a wavering bhaav. Otherwise thatwill not happen. Just like nothing would grow from a rottenseed, a weak bhaav does not produce anything. You willrecognize it. It will waver. ‘Should I sow the seeds or should Inot?’ ‘Should I sow the seeds or should I not?’ That onlyhappens sometimes.And ‘we’ are telling you the fundamental thing, and that iswhen you offer up your bhaav, everything will come togetheraccordingly. If you want to start a business, then you have tomake a decision beforehand that you want to start a business.Then, if not today, but six months down the road, thecircumstances will come together. But you have to be ready,Aptavani-4335336Aptavani-4keep your bhaav ready. And the rest is in the hands ofvyavasthit.You should not allow any new bhaav to arise. The Atma(the Self) does not have any! Since you attained the Self, Yourbhaavkarma (charging karma) ceases. These are your previousbhaav, those which we call past (bhoot) bhaav. When theunfolding of karma from the past (bhoot bhaav) occurs, thedeed gets done, and that is what we deal with. We do not dobhaav for the future (bhaavi bhaav). The present bhaav is ourswabhav (I am pure Soul)! Indriya-gnan (knowledge mediatedthrough the senses) gives rise to bhavnas and Gnan beyond thesenses does not give rise to any bhavnas; the Shuddhatmadoes not give rise to bhavna.Bhaav Itself Is the Main EvidenceIn the state of ignorance, the self is in the form of bhaav;it is bhaav-atma. And in the state of Gnan it is a Gnan-Atma.The bhaav-atma only has the control over bhaav, and that isall it uses. It does nothing else. All the bhaavs that are done gointo Nature. Then Nature, mixing with the pudgal (body-complex), yields its results. This is a very subtle science. If youhave one bad thought, the external parmanus (subatomicparticles), instantly create an account and join with the internalparmanus, and settle in. Once that karmic account (hisaab) isestablished, it will issue its fruit and depart. They will not goaway just like that. The Atma does not do anything in all this.And there is no God out there to come and bring you the fruit.It is vyavasthit shakti (scientific circumstantial evidences) thatlooks after things for you. In all this, the Self (Atma) does notdo anything. It does not eat, it does not drink, it does not evenexperience pleasure of any kind; it only is the ‘doer’ of bhaav.There is no problem if the self becomes the ‘doer’ of the ‘natureof the Self’ (swabhav). But because it has become the ‘doer’of that which is beyond its realm (vibhav-attribute that is not ofthe Self; ‘I am Chandulal’; extra intent) it has given rise to thisworldly life (sansar). Through the doer of the nature of the Self(swabhav), there is moksha.Even if a man has a hundred queens, if he starts having abhaav of wanting to attain brahmacharya (absolute freedomfrom any sexual impulses through mind, speech and body), andthe bhaav that he should not indulge in sexual activities, thenthrough such recurring thoughts he will become bhaav-swaroop(absolute intent-filled state of brahmacharya). And what awonderful state of brahmacharya he will experience in his nextlife! To practice perfect celibacy through mind, speech and bodyis not in one’s hands. It will come as an effect of the bhaav thatwas done in the past life.The Tirthankars, after attaining Gnan, have a final bhaavof the salvation of the world (jagat kalyan). Their own salvationhas already happened. Now, they have the bhaav of, how canothers attain salvation? According to their bhaav, the bhaav-atma takes its form. First, there is a bhaav-atma (causal; onecreates causes for becoming a Tirthankar; vyavahar atma)Tirthankar, and then the dravya-atma (effect; dischargepratishthit soul; one behaves as a Tirthankar in the next life)Tirthankar. Even that is not the result of nirvikalp (the Self),but the result of vikalp (non-Self), it is the result of bhaav.Questioner: Are yogi purush, such as yourself, able tosee the subtle actions of the parmanus (subatomic particles)?Dadashri: Yes, they can, which is why it is the only waythis puzzle can be solved. Otherwise, there is no other way thatthis puzzle can be solved.People may say that a person died because someonegave him poison. That is not the correct way to look at it. Firstly,the antahkaran (mind, intellect, chit and ego complex) ispoisoned. This is a subtle (sookshma) form of poisoning, whileAptavani-4335336Aptavani-4keep your bhaav ready. And the rest is in the hands ofvyavasthit.You should not allow any new bhaav to arise. The Atma(the Self) does not have any! Since you attained the Self, Yourbhaavkarma (charging karma) ceases. These are your previousbhaav, those which we call past (bhoot) bhaav. When theunfolding of karma from the past (bhoot bhaav) occurs, thedeed gets done, and that is what we deal with. We do not dobhaav for the future (bhaavi bhaav). The present bhaav is ourswabhav (I am pure Soul)! Indriya-gnan (knowledge mediatedthrough the senses) gives rise to bhavnas and Gnan beyond thesenses does not give rise to any bhavnas; the Shuddhatmadoes not give rise to bhavna.Bhaav Itself Is the Main EvidenceIn the state of ignorance, the self is in the form of bhaav;it is bhaav-atma. And in the state of Gnan it is a Gnan-Atma.The bhaav-atma only has the control over bhaav, and that isall it uses. It does nothing else. All the bhaavs that are done gointo Nature. Then Nature, mixing with the pudgal (body-complex), yields its results. This is a very subtle science. If youhave one bad thought, the external parmanus (subatomicparticles), instantly create an account and join with the internalparmanus, and settle in. Once that karmic account (hisaab) isestablished, it will issue its fruit and depart. They will not goaway just like that. The Atma does not do anything in all this.And there is no God out there to come and bring you the fruit.It is vyavasthit shakti (scientific circumstantial evidences) thatlooks after things for you. In all this, the Self (Atma) does notdo anything. It does not eat, it does not drink, it does not evenexperience pleasure of any kind; it only is the ‘doer’ of bhaav.There is no problem if the self becomes the ‘doer’ of the ‘natureof the Self’ (swabhav). But because it has become the ‘doer’of that which is beyond its realm (vibhav-attribute that is not ofthe Self; ‘I am Chandulal’; extra intent) it has given rise to thisworldly life (sansar). Through the doer of the nature of the Self(swabhav), there is moksha.Even if a man has a hundred queens, if he starts having abhaav of wanting to attain brahmacharya (absolute freedomfrom any sexual impulses through mind, speech and body), andthe bhaav that he should not indulge in sexual activities, thenthrough such recurring thoughts he will become bhaav-swaroop(absolute intent-filled state of brahmacharya). And what awonderful state of brahmacharya he will experience in his nextlife! To practice perfect celibacy through mind, speech and bodyis not in one’s hands. It will come as an effect of the bhaav thatwas done in the past life.The Tirthankars, after attaining Gnan, have a final bhaavof the salvation of the world (jagat kalyan). Their own salvationhas already happened. Now, they have the bhaav of, how canothers attain salvation? According to their bhaav, the bhaav-atma takes its form. First, there is a bhaav-atma (causal; onecreates causes for becoming a Tirthankar; vyavahar atma)Tirthankar, and then the dravya-atma (effect; dischargepratishthit soul; one behaves as a Tirthankar in the next life)Tirthankar. Even that is not the result of nirvikalp (the Self),but the result of vikalp (non-Self), it is the result of bhaav.Questioner: Are yogi purush, such as yourself, able tosee the subtle actions of the parmanus (subatomic particles)?Dadashri: Yes, they can, which is why it is the only waythis puzzle can be solved. Otherwise, there is no other way thatthis puzzle can be solved.People may say that a person died because someonegave him poison. That is not the correct way to look at it. Firstly,the antahkaran (mind, intellect, chit and ego complex) ispoisoned. This is a subtle (sookshma) form of poisoning, while338Aptavani-4Aptavani-4337the other is an overt (sthool; tangible) form of poisoning. Theaction initially takes place internally, before it happens externally.The food that we eat daily, we do not ask everyday thatsomething specific should be made for us. And even if we didask, it would not be made the way we wanted it. Whatever theparmanus (subatomic particles) within you are asking for,vyavasthit shakti (scientific circumstantial evidence) furnishestheir demands on the outside. Everything is arranged accordingto vyavasthit. When inside you, you need to taste somethingbitter, you will come across bitter-gourd curry (karela nushaak). The fools however, make such a ruckus: “Why did youmake bitter-gourd curry (karela nu shaak) today?” Even this isa science.I have said: “Mind is effective, speech is effective, bodyis effective.” Now you should have many thoughts about theway in which they are ‘effective’.When you feel hurt, it is the effect of subatomic particles(parmanus) of the mind and here, no one is at fault. It is onlyan effect. No one on the outside hurts you. All those that are onthe outside, are just nimit (instrumental in the process). First ithappens internally, and only then does it happen on the outside.Therefore, I am able to tell from what goes on internally, whatis about to take place shortly. That is how I see things.At least you understand that poison can kill a person, youdo not need God’s help there, do you? God does not have tocome over and do the killing. It is the parmanus that do thekilling. The real killers are within you. The world would notoperate if you could not physically (sthool) see things! Thisentire illusion (bhranti) is there because of the sthool (tangible;visible). Any good doctor will make you vomit out the sthoolpoison, but whatever there is in the subtle (sookshma),regardless of how much vomiting you do, will kill you anyway.This is a science that is worth knowing.Questioner: So whatever we encounter has been residinginside us all along in a subtle form, and that is why we comeacross it on the outside?Dadashri: Then who else is going to bring it together? Ifyou have been served this much vegetable curry (shaak), don’tyou sometimes leave a couple of pieces of it behind on yourplate? Why is that? Hey! Don’t you even leave behind a singlegrain? You will be able to eat only what the account is within(what is coming to you as a karmic effect); everything else thatremains is not yours.Your good bhaav will yield good fruit and your badbhaav will yield bad fruit. And when you do neither good norbad bhaav and become Shuddhatma (the pure Soul), youcease to be the ‘doer’. Then the old bhaav will come and giveits result and leave, and another new one does not come along.This is a science, not religion (dharma).Religion is there to pave the way for the science.Otherwise, science is a science. It will lead you all the way toliberation.Dravya-BhaavQuestioner: Which is higher, dravya (effect) or bhaav(cause; inner intent)?Dadashri: Bhaav is the greatest, according to the Lord.Dravya (effect) can also be wrong. You do not have to see that,you just have to look at the bhaav.It is very difficult to understand dravya-bhaav. When thistop spins and its string unwinds, that is effect (dravya) and whenit gets wound up again, that is cause (bhaav; intent).The pure Soul does not have any kind of bhaav. Thebhaav of pratishthit atma (relative soul) is considered bhaav.Both Gnanis (those who are Self-realized) and agnanis (those338Aptavani-4Aptavani-4337the other is an overt (sthool; tangible) form of poisoning. Theaction initially takes place internally, before it happens externally.The food that we eat daily, we do not ask everyday thatsomething specific should be made for us. And even if we didask, it would not be made the way we wanted it. Whatever theparmanus (subatomic particles) within you are asking for,vyavasthit shakti (scientific circumstantial evidence) furnishestheir demands on the outside. Everything is arranged accordingto vyavasthit. When inside you, you need to taste somethingbitter, you will come across bitter-gourd curry (karela nushaak). The fools however, make such a ruckus: “Why did youmake bitter-gourd curry (karela nu shaak) today?” Even this isa science.I have said: “Mind is effective, speech is effective, bodyis effective.” Now you should have many thoughts about theway in which they are ‘effective’.When you feel hurt, it is the effect of subatomic particles(parmanus) of the mind and here, no one is at fault. It is onlyan effect. No one on the outside hurts you. All those that are onthe outside, are just nimit (instrumental in the process). First ithappens internally, and only then does it happen on the outside.Therefore, I am able to tell from what goes on internally, whatis about to take place shortly. That is how I see things.At least you understand that poison can kill a person, youdo not need God’s help there, do you? God does not have tocome over and do the killing. It is the parmanus that do thekilling. The real killers are within you. The world would notoperate if you could not physically (sthool) see things! Thisentire illusion (bhranti) is there because of the sthool (tangible;visible). Any good doctor will make you vomit out the sthoolpoison, but whatever there is in the subtle (sookshma),regardless of how much vomiting you do, will kill you anyway.This is a science that is worth knowing.Questioner: So whatever we encounter has been residinginside us all along in a subtle form, and that is why we comeacross it on the outside?Dadashri: Then who else is going to bring it together? Ifyou have been served this much vegetable curry (shaak), don’tyou sometimes leave a couple of pieces of it behind on yourplate? Why is that? Hey! Don’t you even leave behind a singlegrain? You will be able to eat only what the account is within(what is coming to you as a karmic effect); everything else thatremains is not yours.Your good bhaav will yield good fruit and your badbhaav will yield bad fruit. And when you do neither good norbad bhaav and become Shuddhatma (the pure Soul), youcease to be the ‘doer’. Then the old bhaav will come and giveits result and leave, and another new one does not come along.This is a science, not religion (dharma).Religion is there to pave the way for the science.Otherwise, science is a science. It will lead you all the way toliberation.Dravya-BhaavQuestioner: Which is higher, dravya (effect) or bhaav(cause; inner intent)?Dadashri: Bhaav is the greatest, according to the Lord.Dravya (effect) can also be wrong. You do not have to see that,you just have to look at the bhaav.It is very difficult to understand dravya-bhaav. When thistop spins and its string unwinds, that is effect (dravya) and whenit gets wound up again, that is cause (bhaav; intent).The pure Soul does not have any kind of bhaav. Thebhaav of pratishthit atma (relative soul) is considered bhaav.Both Gnanis (those who are Self-realized) and agnanis (thoseAptavani-4339340Aptavani-4who are not Self-realized) alike, have a pratishthit atma. Theone who has not realized the Self may make a strong decisionof, “I really want to do pratikraman”. When he makes such astrong bhaav, then effect (dravya) will arise, and from thateffect (dravya), a bhaav will arise.Questioner: What is bhaav-mun and dravya-mun?(mun is mind)Dadashri: When you create a pratishthit atma, that isthe beginning of bhaav-mun which manifests into dravya-mun.The bhaav-abhaav (like-dislike; good intent and bad intent),that people do, belong to the pratishthit atma (relative self).Shuddhatma (the pure Soul) does not have bhaav. Whateveryou can see is ‘discharge’. You cannot see ‘charge’ and youwould not even be aware of it. Bhaav is not easy to find. Veryfew can understand bhaav. Nevertheless, because they believethat bhaav comes from pure Soul (Shuddhatma), they createmuch confusion.Without Gnan, it is impossible to grasp what bhaav is.Bhaav is very deep, deep, deep – even if you said ‘deep’ amillion times, you would not reach the end of its unfathomabledepths.A person may say, “In order to do this work, I have donea lot of bhaav.” What does the Lord say to that? That it is astrong decision of the mind. You do not call that bhaav.Questioner: What is dravya-bhaav?Dadashri: You sow the seeds of whatever dharma(religion; duty; action) you do. That is why the ganadhars (chiefdisciples of the Tirthankars) said that people should dodravya-bhaav. But in this age (current time cycle) the effect(dravya) is different and the cause (bhaav) is different.Listening to a spiritual discourse, is as a result of the effect(dravya) of considerable merit. But while sitting there you mayhave all kinds of bhaavs, on ways of how to make profit insome way. In previous ages, the dravya-bhaav was true;whatever the dravya, so was the bhaav (because of unity inmind, speech and body). If a person was tying a bandage onsomeone, he would be completely absorbed in his act. Thatwould mean that he has instilled his dravya-bhaav. Peopletoday however, may be tying bandages, but in the back of theirminds, they will be wondering how they got lumbered with it. Ifa person’s conduct is in accordance with his dravya-bhaav,then that is sowing a true seed.Dravyakarma is the fruit (effect of your past karma) thatyou receive. Bhaavkarma (charge karma) is the seed that yousow (causes for new karma in your next life). Bhaav fromdravya and dravya from bhaav (cause from effect and effectfrom cause), and so it continues in this way.If, while in the act of stealing, you maintain a positivebhaav you will receive fruits of merit karma (punya). If yourbhaav, at the time of stealing, is that you wish you did not haveto resort to stealing, then you would bind merit karma(punya).If while doing samayik (introspective meditation), youkeep looking at the clock, you are sowing the seeds of bhaavin the wrong way.The dravya-kriya (visible physical actions) that you do, iswhat vyavasthit shakti makes you do, so what is your part init? The Lord says that He does not look at dravya-kriya(visible physical action). In this era of time, dravya (effect) isunpredictable, so make the right kinds of bhaav, so that you canmove ahead.Bhaav Mun: The Pratishthit Atma!Questioner: Does charging mind (bhaav-mun; causalmind) mean the atma?Aptavani-4339340Aptavani-4who are not Self-realized) alike, have a pratishthit atma. Theone who has not realized the Self may make a strong decisionof, “I really want to do pratikraman”. When he makes such astrong bhaav, then effect (dravya) will arise, and from thateffect (dravya), a bhaav will arise.Questioner: What is bhaav-mun and dravya-mun?(mun is mind)Dadashri: When you create a pratishthit atma, that isthe beginning of bhaav-mun which manifests into dravya-mun.The bhaav-abhaav (like-dislike; good intent and bad intent),that people do, belong to the pratishthit atma (relative self).Shuddhatma (the pure Soul) does not have bhaav. Whateveryou can see is ‘discharge’. You cannot see ‘charge’ and youwould not even be aware of it. Bhaav is not easy to find. Veryfew can understand bhaav. Nevertheless, because they believethat bhaav comes from pure Soul (Shuddhatma), they createmuch confusion.Without Gnan, it is impossible to grasp what bhaav is.Bhaav is very deep, deep, deep – even if you said ‘deep’ amillion times, you would not reach the end of its unfathomabledepths.A person may say, “In order to do this work, I have donea lot of bhaav.” What does the Lord say to that? That it is astrong decision of the mind. You do not call that bhaav.Questioner: What is dravya-bhaav?Dadashri: You sow the seeds of whatever dharma(religion; duty; action) you do. That is why the ganadhars (chiefdisciples of the Tirthankars) said that people should dodravya-bhaav. But in this age (current time cycle) the effect(dravya) is different and the cause (bhaav) is different.Listening to a spiritual discourse, is as a result of the effect(dravya) of considerable merit. But while sitting there you mayhave all kinds of bhaavs, on ways of how to make profit insome way. In previous ages, the dravya-bhaav was true;whatever the dravya, so was the bhaav (because of unity inmind, speech and body). If a person was tying a bandage onsomeone, he would be completely absorbed in his act. Thatwould mean that he has instilled his dravya-bhaav. Peopletoday however, may be tying bandages, but in the back of theirminds, they will be wondering how they got lumbered with it. Ifa person’s conduct is in accordance with his dravya-bhaav,then that is sowing a true seed.Dravyakarma is the fruit (effect of your past karma) thatyou receive. Bhaavkarma (charge karma) is the seed that yousow (causes for new karma in your next life). Bhaav fromdravya and dravya from bhaav (cause from effect and effectfrom cause), and so it continues in this way.If, while in the act of stealing, you maintain a positivebhaav you will receive fruits of merit karma (punya). If yourbhaav, at the time of stealing, is that you wish you did not haveto resort to stealing, then you would bind merit karma(punya).If while doing samayik (introspective meditation), youkeep looking at the clock, you are sowing the seeds of bhaavin the wrong way.The dravya-kriya (visible physical actions) that you do, iswhat vyavasthit shakti makes you do, so what is your part init? The Lord says that He does not look at dravya-kriya(visible physical action). In this era of time, dravya (effect) isunpredictable, so make the right kinds of bhaav, so that you canmove ahead.Bhaav Mun: The Pratishthit Atma!Questioner: Does charging mind (bhaav-mun; causalmind) mean the atma?Aptavani-4341342Aptavani-4Dadashri: If you go on calling charging mind (bhaav-mun), atma, then it is not a wonder that you go wanderingaround life after life! In the Kramic path, the charging mind(bhaav-mun) itself is referred to as the Atma, whereas inAkram, I have eliminated both the charging mind (bhaav-mun)and the discharging mind (dravya-mun).Questioner: Is charging mind (bhaav-mun) the same aspratishthit atma (relative self, ‘I am Chandubhai’)?Dadashri: Charging mind (Bhaav-mun) is not pratishthitatma. The charging mind (bhaav-mun) gives rise to a newpratishthit atma. The discharging mind (dravya-mun) isactually the pratishthit atma. The dravya-mun is the ‘discharge’mind and the bhaav-mun is the ‘charge’ mind.The world is constantly trying to destroy effect (dravya);attempting to change external actions. In our Akram Vignan,we have put aside, both the effect (dravya) and the cause(bhaav). No more stepwise arduous climb; just straight ‘direct’attainment of the Self within an hour. Otherwise, never in amillion lifetimes would you manage to attain such samkit (Self-enlightenment).Questioner: But one can experience the result of this,can’t he?Dadashri: If you cannot experience it, then it is no goodto you. When you put sugar in your mouth, you should be ableto experience its sweetness. If you kept reading, “Sugar issweet” you still will not experience it. If you just kept reciting,“I am Atma…I am Atma”, you would get nowhere. If Youcould experience the Atma every second, then it is of worth.Questioner: Is it necessary for us to go on reciting it,once we have already gained the experience?Dadashri: There is no need to recite or do anythingelse. You need to understand Akram Vignan. If you understandit just once, You will always have freedom (mukti). Thisscience is such that you will no longer ‘charge’ any newkarma.The discharging mind (dravya-mun) is entirely physical,and the charging mind (bhaav-mun) arises out of illusion(bhranti). As long as there is illusion (bhranti), there is chargemind (bhaav-mun). The vision of dravyakarma (subtledischarging karma) brings forth the vision of eight karmas (fourghati and four aghati karma) from one’s past life, and basedon that vision, one does bhaav. The subatomic particles(parmanus) latch onto this bhaav (cause), and as a result, theeffect (dravya) takes place. This is all a science.Questioner: Does one’s bhaav (subtle intent) in the finalhour of one’s life formulate the pudgal (non-Self complex)?Dadashri: It will attach immediately. The bhaav that isdone is the illusory intent (bhranti bhaav); intent of the non-Self. It is not the bhaav of the swabhav (of the Self).As an illusion occurs in the mind, pure parmanus on theoutside, known as vishrasa, begin to flow inwardly in a streamof prayogsha (new charging of parmanus) and when theyproduce results (in the next life through a pudgal), they are asmishrasa (mixed; awaiting to give effect) which yield bitter orsweet results, before eventually departing. This body, at themoment, is made up of mishrasa parmanus. They produceresults and leave. New seeds are not sown when You attainawareness of the Self.No one is spared from the unfolding of his karma. Oncecaught in the net of vyavasthit, you will be pinned in from allsides. The ‘pegs’ of circumstances will be clamped down fromall directions. Whatever pleases the mind, it will pursue. Youmay not like it, but the mind does, doesn’t it? That is why youAptavani-4341342Aptavani-4Dadashri: If you go on calling charging mind (bhaav-mun), atma, then it is not a wonder that you go wanderingaround life after life! In the Kramic path, the charging mind(bhaav-mun) itself is referred to as the Atma, whereas inAkram, I have eliminated both the charging mind (bhaav-mun)and the discharging mind (dravya-mun).Questioner: Is charging mind (bhaav-mun) the same aspratishthit atma (relative self, ‘I am Chandubhai’)?Dadashri: Charging mind (Bhaav-mun) is not pratishthitatma. The charging mind (bhaav-mun) gives rise to a newpratishthit atma. The discharging mind (dravya-mun) isactually the pratishthit atma. The dravya-mun is the ‘discharge’mind and the bhaav-mun is the ‘charge’ mind.The world is constantly trying to destroy effect (dravya);attempting to change external actions. In our Akram Vignan,we have put aside, both the effect (dravya) and the cause(bhaav). No more stepwise arduous climb; just straight ‘direct’attainment of the Self within an hour. Otherwise, never in amillion lifetimes would you manage to attain such samkit (Self-enlightenment).Questioner: But one can experience the result of this,can’t he?Dadashri: If you cannot experience it, then it is no goodto you. When you put sugar in your mouth, you should be ableto experience its sweetness. If you kept reading, “Sugar issweet” you still will not experience it. If you just kept reciting,“I am Atma…I am Atma”, you would get nowhere. If Youcould experience the Atma every second, then it is of worth.Questioner: Is it necessary for us to go on reciting it,once we have already gained the experience?Dadashri: There is no need to recite or do anythingelse. You need to understand Akram Vignan. If you understandit just once, You will always have freedom (mukti). Thisscience is such that you will no longer ‘charge’ any newkarma.The discharging mind (dravya-mun) is entirely physical,and the charging mind (bhaav-mun) arises out of illusion(bhranti). As long as there is illusion (bhranti), there is chargemind (bhaav-mun). The vision of dravyakarma (subtledischarging karma) brings forth the vision of eight karmas (fourghati and four aghati karma) from one’s past life, and basedon that vision, one does bhaav. The subatomic particles(parmanus) latch onto this bhaav (cause), and as a result, theeffect (dravya) takes place. This is all a science.Questioner: Does one’s bhaav (subtle intent) in the finalhour of one’s life formulate the pudgal (non-Self complex)?Dadashri: It will attach immediately. The bhaav that isdone is the illusory intent (bhranti bhaav); intent of the non-Self. It is not the bhaav of the swabhav (of the Self).As an illusion occurs in the mind, pure parmanus on theoutside, known as vishrasa, begin to flow inwardly in a streamof prayogsha (new charging of parmanus) and when theyproduce results (in the next life through a pudgal), they are asmishrasa (mixed; awaiting to give effect) which yield bitter orsweet results, before eventually departing. This body, at themoment, is made up of mishrasa parmanus. They produceresults and leave. New seeds are not sown when You attainawareness of the Self.No one is spared from the unfolding of his karma. Oncecaught in the net of vyavasthit, you will be pinned in from allsides. The ‘pegs’ of circumstances will be clamped down fromall directions. Whatever pleases the mind, it will pursue. Youmay not like it, but the mind does, doesn’t it? That is why youAptavani-4343344Aptavani-4become engrossed (tanmayakar) in it. The nature of the mindis such, that as long as it does not get what it likes, as long asit does not have its way, it is not going to be satisfied. It is notworth entering the ‘exhibition’ of the worldly life (sansar).PratibhaavQuestioner: What is a pratibhaav?Dadashri: When you say something wrong, and fromwithin you feel, ‘That was wrong, I should not have said that’,that is called pratibhaav (sense of opposition; remorse). Forthe very thing that you say, you have the bhaav that you shouldnot have said it, is considered pratibhaav.Questioner: Therefore, awareness (jagruti) is pratibhaavitself?Dadashri: Pratibhaav occurs if there is awarenesswithin. Once you “fire the bullet” (harsh words), if in your mindyou feel, “I should not have fired it,” that is pratibhaav. Thispratibhaav is considered your purusharth (spiritual effort).Questioner: What kind of pratibhaav does the Gnanihave?Dadashri: We do not have pratibhaav.Questioner: In the event of ‘firing a bullet’ what state isthe Gnani in?Dadashri: The ‘bullet’ naturally does not fire from within,so then is there a need for the bhaav? And when tiny ‘bullets’go off, I just keep ‘seeing’ them, “Wow! The fireworks aregoing off!” That is not what you would consider a bhaav. Insidethe body, there are many such ‘bullets’ that continually go off,and that is not considered bhaav.Questioner: When we become engrossed (tanmayakar)with the ‘discharge’, are more bhaav not being created?Dadashri: Yes, of course everything is a liability! Whenyou do pratikraman, it is cleared. Even doing pratikraman isa par-bhaav (of the non-Self). With that, you bind merit karma(punya), it is not swabhav (of the Self). The binding of meritkarma (punya) and the binding of demerit karma (paap)belongs to the non-Self. When you settle them with equanimity(sambhave-nikal), they are reduced.Therefore, pratibhaav does not occur to those who areignorant of the Self (agnani). They do not have any awareness(jagruti) to make them realize that what is happening is wrong.Even the Gnani does not have pratibhaav. That is because nobhaav whatsoever arises within him, so how can he havepratibhaav? That is the sign of absolute awareness. And thosewho have attained samyak darshan (the vision of the Self),such mahatmas (those who have attained Self-realizationthrough Gnan Vidhi) with awareness, have pratibhaav, so thatwhenever they have a negative bhaav, the awareness (jagruti)will instantly alert them and then pratibhaav will arise withinthem.Swabhav – Swa-kshetra: Par-bhaav – Par-kshetraQuestioner: Whenever I see you, you always look thesame. There is never any change. Why is that?Dadashri: Is this a flower that it would wither? This is theParmatma (Supreme Self), that has manifested and is sittingwithin! Otherwise, I would appear withered. What does onesuch as he, whose par-bhaav (state of the non-Self) has ended,whose constant awareness (jagruti) is maintained in theswabhav (in the Self), who has not the slightest interest in thenon-Self (par-bhaav), need?With the demise of par-bhaav (state of the non-Self), thebliss experienced is indeed something special! You should fixAptavani-4343344Aptavani-4become engrossed (tanmayakar) in it. The nature of the mindis such, that as long as it does not get what it likes, as long asit does not have its way, it is not going to be satisfied. It is notworth entering the ‘exhibition’ of the worldly life (sansar).PratibhaavQuestioner: What is a pratibhaav?Dadashri: When you say something wrong, and fromwithin you feel, ‘That was wrong, I should not have said that’,that is called pratibhaav (sense of opposition; remorse). Forthe very thing that you say, you have the bhaav that you shouldnot have said it, is considered pratibhaav.Questioner: Therefore, awareness (jagruti) is pratibhaavitself?Dadashri: Pratibhaav occurs if there is awarenesswithin. Once you “fire the bullet” (harsh words), if in your mindyou feel, “I should not have fired it,” that is pratibhaav. Thispratibhaav is considered your purusharth (spiritual effort).Questioner: What kind of pratibhaav does the Gnanihave?Dadashri: We do not have pratibhaav.Questioner: In the event of ‘firing a bullet’ what state isthe Gnani in?Dadashri: The ‘bullet’ naturally does not fire from within,so then is there a need for the bhaav? And when tiny ‘bullets’go off, I just keep ‘seeing’ them, “Wow! The fireworks aregoing off!” That is not what you would consider a bhaav. Insidethe body, there are many such ‘bullets’ that continually go off,and that is not considered bhaav.Questioner: When we become engrossed (tanmayakar)with the ‘discharge’, are more bhaav not being created?Dadashri: Yes, of course everything is a liability! Whenyou do pratikraman, it is cleared. Even doing pratikraman isa par-bhaav (of the non-Self). With that, you bind merit karma(punya), it is not swabhav (of the Self). The binding of meritkarma (punya) and the binding of demerit karma (paap)belongs to the non-Self. When you settle them with equanimity(sambhave-nikal), they are reduced.Therefore, pratibhaav does not occur to those who areignorant of the Self (agnani). They do not have any awareness(jagruti) to make them realize that what is happening is wrong.Even the Gnani does not have pratibhaav. That is because nobhaav whatsoever arises within him, so how can he havepratibhaav? That is the sign of absolute awareness. And thosewho have attained samyak darshan (the vision of the Self),such mahatmas (those who have attained Self-realizationthrough Gnan Vidhi) with awareness, have pratibhaav, so thatwhenever they have a negative bhaav, the awareness (jagruti)will instantly alert them and then pratibhaav will arise withinthem.Swabhav – Swa-kshetra: Par-bhaav – Par-kshetraQuestioner: Whenever I see you, you always look thesame. There is never any change. Why is that?Dadashri: Is this a flower that it would wither? This is theParmatma (Supreme Self), that has manifested and is sittingwithin! Otherwise, I would appear withered. What does onesuch as he, whose par-bhaav (state of the non-Self) has ended,whose constant awareness (jagruti) is maintained in theswabhav (in the Self), who has not the slightest interest in thenon-Self (par-bhaav), need?With the demise of par-bhaav (state of the non-Self), thebliss experienced is indeed something special! You should fixAptavani-4345346Aptavani-4your sight on that demise. The more the par-bhaav dies, themore stable You will become in the Self. This is all You need tounderstand. Nothing else is worth doing. As long as there is par-bhaav, there is a par-kshetra (the non-Self location). Oncepar-bhaav has gone, for a length of time, you remain asParmatma (the absolute Self) before You go on to Siddhakshetra (location at the crest of the universe where all liberatedSouls ascend and reside eternally). Being the Self is the entranceto the Siddha kshetra.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(38)The Power of the Self Is Only in the Domain ofthe SelfAvastha Ma Asvastha – Uneasiness inCondition or Phases of EventsQuestioner: What is the definition of mithyatva?Dadashri: Mithyatva means to become engrossed(tanmayakar) in any situation (avastha). What is the result ofthat? Uneasiness and restlessness (asvastha). And what is thedefinition of samyak darshan (right vision, samyaktva)? Tranquility(svastha). The one who dwells in the Self does not dwell insituations. Such a person would consider all situations as‘discharge’ and he would dwell in the stillness (nirakudata) of theSelf. Nirakudata is the natural state of the Siddha Lords (theabsolutely liberated Ones). This science of ours is so beautiful thatyou will not have to think about a thing. The moment You saysettle (nikal; dispense with), you become free from it.The entire world dwells in situations (avastha;circumstances). It cannot come out of avastha. Those thatdwell in avastha, are in a state of disquiet and restlessness(asvastha) all day and all night. If he does not find a seat on thetrain, it will constantly bother him. Goodness! Why do you letit bother you? Just tell yourself, “Such is the effect of mykarma”. He keeps looking around at the other passengers,anticipating someone to leave their seat!What kind of understanding does a mithyatvi (with thewrong vision of ‘I am Chandubhai’) have? He is alwaysAptavani-4345346Aptavani-4your sight on that demise. The more the par-bhaav dies, themore stable You will become in the Self. This is all You need tounderstand. Nothing else is worth doing. As long as there is par-bhaav, there is a par-kshetra (the non-Self location). Oncepar-bhaav has gone, for a length of time, you remain asParmatma (the absolute Self) before You go on to Siddhakshetra (location at the crest of the universe where all liberatedSouls ascend and reside eternally). Being the Self is the entranceto the Siddha kshetra.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(38)The Power of the Self Is Only in the Domain ofthe SelfAvastha Ma Asvastha – Uneasiness inCondition or Phases of EventsQuestioner: What is the definition of mithyatva?Dadashri: Mithyatva means to become engrossed(tanmayakar) in any situation (avastha). What is the result ofthat? Uneasiness and restlessness (asvastha). And what is thedefinition of samyak darshan (right vision, samyaktva)? Tranquility(svastha). The one who dwells in the Self does not dwell insituations. Such a person would consider all situations as‘discharge’ and he would dwell in the stillness (nirakudata) of theSelf. Nirakudata is the natural state of the Siddha Lords (theabsolutely liberated Ones). This science of ours is so beautiful thatyou will not have to think about a thing. The moment You saysettle (nikal; dispense with), you become free from it.The entire world dwells in situations (avastha;circumstances). It cannot come out of avastha. Those thatdwell in avastha, are in a state of disquiet and restlessness(asvastha) all day and all night. If he does not find a seat on thetrain, it will constantly bother him. Goodness! Why do you letit bother you? Just tell yourself, “Such is the effect of mykarma”. He keeps looking around at the other passengers,anticipating someone to leave their seat!What kind of understanding does a mithyatvi (with thewrong vision of ‘I am Chandubhai’) have? He is alwaysAptavani-4347348Aptavani-4absorbed in the situation (avastha) at hand. If the situation(avastha) is poverty, he will become tanmayakar (one with) bypoverty, and if he becomes wealthy, he gets absorbed(tanmayakar) in his wealth, baring an inflated chest, with apompous gait! When he has a fever, he becomes absorbed(tanmayakar) with it, saying he cannot walk. Someone like mewould say, “Set a tiger running after him.” Then will he run ornot? People needlessly make themselves feeble from saying, “Icannot walk, I cannot walk...”You become whatever you say you are. That is because,the nature of the Atma is such that one becomes whatever onesays he is. Then the legs will know, that they do not have tomove, since there is no one to tell them off. We have to tellthem, “How dare you not walk, I am not finished with you yet.”If you scold them a bit like this, they will automatically walk.How come they can run when a tiger is after them? You feed thisbody, you give it drink, nice spice tea (masala chai), and stillthey will not walk?Whatever situation (avastha) a person falls into, he willpreserve and protect. He can be free his whole life, but if he hasto spend the last six months in jail, he yells, “I am a prisoner!”When a woman gets married, she enjoys the happiness of amarriage, and when she becomes a widow, she suffers awidow’s grief. “I am a widow.” She will say. In her last life shewas widowed, but even then, didn’t she become married again?What else is there in this world besides “rundapo” (to end) and“mundapo” (to begin)?All situations (avastha) change. The Atma, stays the same;its form never changes. Changes never take place in the Atma.Eternal element (vastu) never gets destroyed. Situations (avastha)die from second to second. The entire world exists only insituation (avastha). “I am Chandu, this is my son, this is my wife”– in this situation they dwell. Moreover, they will say, “I havegrown old!” How could the Atma ever get old? All these are notthe Atma’s situations (avastha). They are the situations of thenon-Self (prakrut avastha). How did they come about? Throughthe pressure of saiyog (circumstance). Just by coming in touchingwith the Atma, the causes arise. They become ‘charged’ (askarma), and then eventually they ‘discharge’.What happened to your children from your past life? Dothey still remember you? Have you written to them? In his finalhour, a man will say, “My little girl still remains unmarried!” Hedeserted his children in the previous life and now in this life hesays, “My children, my children!” and stays absorbed(tanmayakar; consumed) in it. One is constantly forgetting thesituations of the past, while remaining absorbed (tanmayakar)in new situations (avastha)! To remain absorbed (tanmayakar)in the situation (avastha) is called the worldly life (sansar),which is what sows the seeds of the worldly life, and to remainabsorbed in the Self is called moksha.What is it like in this worldly life (sansar)? It is wherepeople forget whatever pain (dukh; sorrow) they have suffered,and whatever happiness (sukh) they have had; they even forgetthe vengeance (veyr) they bind in their childhood. They will thensit together to have tea and forget about everything. Theyendorse and sign whatever situation (avastha) that happens toarise at the time. Once signed, the ‘signatures’ cannot be erased.The problem is with the signing. People tend to sign on justabout everything. They unnecessarily oppress others and ‘signaway’ on that as well. In fact, even if someone abducted yourdaughter, you still cannot “sign” on that. People just go ondrafting everything in all the situations (avastha). They evendraw up a picture about killing.Avastha: ParyayaDadashri: How many avasthas (situations) do humanbeings have?Aptavani-4347348Aptavani-4absorbed in the situation (avastha) at hand. If the situation(avastha) is poverty, he will become tanmayakar (one with) bypoverty, and if he becomes wealthy, he gets absorbed(tanmayakar) in his wealth, baring an inflated chest, with apompous gait! When he has a fever, he becomes absorbed(tanmayakar) with it, saying he cannot walk. Someone like mewould say, “Set a tiger running after him.” Then will he run ornot? People needlessly make themselves feeble from saying, “Icannot walk, I cannot walk...”You become whatever you say you are. That is because,the nature of the Atma is such that one becomes whatever onesays he is. Then the legs will know, that they do not have tomove, since there is no one to tell them off. We have to tellthem, “How dare you not walk, I am not finished with you yet.”If you scold them a bit like this, they will automatically walk.How come they can run when a tiger is after them? You feed thisbody, you give it drink, nice spice tea (masala chai), and stillthey will not walk?Whatever situation (avastha) a person falls into, he willpreserve and protect. He can be free his whole life, but if he hasto spend the last six months in jail, he yells, “I am a prisoner!”When a woman gets married, she enjoys the happiness of amarriage, and when she becomes a widow, she suffers awidow’s grief. “I am a widow.” She will say. In her last life shewas widowed, but even then, didn’t she become married again?What else is there in this world besides “rundapo” (to end) and“mundapo” (to begin)?All situations (avastha) change. The Atma, stays the same;its form never changes. Changes never take place in the Atma.Eternal element (vastu) never gets destroyed. Situations (avastha)die from second to second. The entire world exists only insituation (avastha). “I am Chandu, this is my son, this is my wife”– in this situation they dwell. Moreover, they will say, “I havegrown old!” How could the Atma ever get old? All these are notthe Atma’s situations (avastha). They are the situations of thenon-Self (prakrut avastha). How did they come about? Throughthe pressure of saiyog (circumstance). Just by coming in touchingwith the Atma, the causes arise. They become ‘charged’ (askarma), and then eventually they ‘discharge’.What happened to your children from your past life? Dothey still remember you? Have you written to them? In his finalhour, a man will say, “My little girl still remains unmarried!” Hedeserted his children in the previous life and now in this life hesays, “My children, my children!” and stays absorbed(tanmayakar; consumed) in it. One is constantly forgetting thesituations of the past, while remaining absorbed (tanmayakar)in new situations (avastha)! To remain absorbed (tanmayakar)in the situation (avastha) is called the worldly life (sansar),which is what sows the seeds of the worldly life, and to remainabsorbed in the Self is called moksha.What is it like in this worldly life (sansar)? It is wherepeople forget whatever pain (dukh; sorrow) they have suffered,and whatever happiness (sukh) they have had; they even forgetthe vengeance (veyr) they bind in their childhood. They will thensit together to have tea and forget about everything. Theyendorse and sign whatever situation (avastha) that happens toarise at the time. Once signed, the ‘signatures’ cannot be erased.The problem is with the signing. People tend to sign on justabout everything. They unnecessarily oppress others and ‘signaway’ on that as well. In fact, even if someone abducted yourdaughter, you still cannot “sign” on that. People just go ondrafting everything in all the situations (avastha). They evendraw up a picture about killing.Avastha: ParyayaDadashri: How many avasthas (situations) do humanbeings have?Aptavani-4349350Aptavani-4Questioner: Baal-avastha (childhood), youva-avastha(adolescence), praooddha-avastha (maturity) and vruddha-avastha (old age).Dadashri: Are there only the four avasthas? Isn’t deathalso an avastha?Questioner: That is a full stop (a period).Dadashri: Even death is considered a situation (avastha).When a living being (jiva) enters the womb (garbha), it is astate in the womb (garbha avastha). Prior to this there was theavastha of death (maran avastha). So the wheel of avasthakeeps moving. You think that there are only four avasthas,don’t you? But all this changes every five minutes. One moment,you will be thinking about your home, and the thought may lastfor two or three minutes, then you will think about somethingelse. All these avastha keep changing. You have given me thenames of all the major situations (avastha) in one’s life. But onecontinues to dwell only in avasthas. “All these are temporaryadjustments.”Questioner: Right now we are certainly in an avastha.Dadashri: Those situations are not the kind that will bringpeace and closure. Gnan is something which allows you toremain nihshank (doubt-free) in every situation (avastha). OurGnan is such that in every avastha (situation) it will give younihshank samadhan (doubtless inner satisfaction). Whereashere, you have people who get ‘depressed’ when their pocketsget picked, and so ‘tight’ (conceited) when they are given anaccolade.Questioner: What is avastha (situation) and paryaya(phase)?Dadashri: Relative knowledge is all the knowledge ofavastha. Paryaya is a very profound and subtle thing. Andavastha is a very gross and tangible thing. Anything that can beexperienced through the five senses is avastha, and paryaya issomething that can be understood through Gnan.All things have avastha (situations). Take this fan forexample. By nature (swabhav) it is a fan, and at the moment itsavastha is to turn, then will come its avastha, to stop. Avasthais temporary, and the fundamental form (swaroop) is anelemental form (tattva swaroop), which is eternal.Every situation (avastha) only comes forth to free you.Whatever the situation; good or bad, painful (ashata vedaniya)or pleasant (shata vedaniya), it comes to liberate you. Whatdoes the situation (avastha) tell you? “Free yourself!” If Youmaintain Your awakened applied awareness (upayog) in thatsituation (avastha), then You will clearly be free. When thatstain comes along, won’t it be you who has to wash it off?(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4349350Aptavani-4Questioner: Baal-avastha (childhood), youva-avastha(adolescence), praooddha-avastha (maturity) and vruddha-avastha (old age).Dadashri: Are there only the four avasthas? Isn’t deathalso an avastha?Questioner: That is a full stop (a period).Dadashri: Even death is considered a situation (avastha).When a living being (jiva) enters the womb (garbha), it is astate in the womb (garbha avastha). Prior to this there was theavastha of death (maran avastha). So the wheel of avasthakeeps moving. You think that there are only four avasthas,don’t you? But all this changes every five minutes. One moment,you will be thinking about your home, and the thought may lastfor two or three minutes, then you will think about somethingelse. All these avastha keep changing. You have given me thenames of all the major situations (avastha) in one’s life. But onecontinues to dwell only in avasthas. “All these are temporaryadjustments.”Questioner: Right now we are certainly in an avastha.Dadashri: Those situations are not the kind that will bringpeace and closure. Gnan is something which allows you toremain nihshank (doubt-free) in every situation (avastha). OurGnan is such that in every avastha (situation) it will give younihshank samadhan (doubtless inner satisfaction). Whereashere, you have people who get ‘depressed’ when their pocketsget picked, and so ‘tight’ (conceited) when they are given anaccolade.Questioner: What is avastha (situation) and paryaya(phase)?Dadashri: Relative knowledge is all the knowledge ofavastha. Paryaya is a very profound and subtle thing. Andavastha is a very gross and tangible thing. Anything that can beexperienced through the five senses is avastha, and paryaya issomething that can be understood through Gnan.All things have avastha (situations). Take this fan forexample. By nature (swabhav) it is a fan, and at the moment itsavastha is to turn, then will come its avastha, to stop. Avasthais temporary, and the fundamental form (swaroop) is anelemental form (tattva swaroop), which is eternal.Every situation (avastha) only comes forth to free you.Whatever the situation; good or bad, painful (ashata vedaniya)or pleasant (shata vedaniya), it comes to liberate you. Whatdoes the situation (avastha) tell you? “Free yourself!” If Youmaintain Your awakened applied awareness (upayog) in thatsituation (avastha), then You will clearly be free. When thatstain comes along, won’t it be you who has to wash it off?(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-4351352Aptavani-4(39)The Nature of Gnan: The Nature of TimeThe One Who Deserves Self-Realization inAkram VignanQuestioner: Does a man bound by the noose ofprarabdha (effect in this life of causes laid in past life) have aright to attain Gnan?Dadashri: Even Lord Mahavir was bound by Hisprarabdha, and He was entitled to absolute knowledge(kevalgnan), so why would you not be entitled to Atmagnan?Every human is bound by prarabdha, which is why there isanother life (reincarnation; avatar). Even the final life is boundby prarabdha, and that is why it takes place.Questioner: Does the prarabdha then let go?Dadashri: Then one does not bind anymore prarabdha(effect for next life). After I give you Gnan, You will no longerbind any prarabdha. This means that your past karma will‘discharge’, and you will not be ‘charging’ any new ones. Thatis how this science is.Questioner: Can a married man be entitled to Gnan?Dadashri: In the current era we live in, it is not worthlooking at someone’s eligibility. In this present age, no one hasany kind of eligibility. That is why I have made this Gnanavailable for anyone who comes along. Do you know what timeperiod this is? In Jainism it is referred to as Dushamkaal andin Vedanta it is called Kaliyug. What is Kaliyug? That there isno respite from pain, stress and worries. The torment of ‘Whatwill happen tomorrow? What will happen tomorrow?’, nevergoes away. And what is Dushamkaal? In spite of intensesuffering, there is no equanimity. Now in this sort of age, if youwent out in search of eligibility, who would qualify? No onewould be eligible!!Questioner: Would you call the Gnan that you give, aform of grace (krupa)?Dadashri: Only through grace (krupa) will the work getdone. The grace of the ‘Dada Bhagwan’ that has manifestedwithin me, passes directly into You. You have to get Your workdone through this grace. Each person receives grace accordingto his receptiveness, and the more humility (vinaya) he has, themore grace he will receive. The highest quality one can have inthe world is the quality of humility (vinaya).Questioner: Isn’t there a saying, that one can attainmoksha quicker in Kaliyug?Dadashri: That is true. There is a reason for that.Because people would not pass in this Kaliyug, the “professors”decided to lower the standards more. Otherwise, how wouldanyone be able to pass? In Kaliyug, the standard by whichone’s humanness is ascertained, has become so ‘low’, that iswhy you have become worthy, no? Otherwise who would letpeople of the current era of this time cycle enter moksha?Someone has to be allowed to pass the examinations; otherwiseyou will have to shut down the ‘college’. That is why the ‘level’has been lowered.The Gnani Remains in the PresentQuestioner: In the definition of time cycles, was thereever a Kaliyug before?Dadashri: There is a Kaliyug in every time cycle.Aptavani-4351352Aptavani-4(39)The Nature of Gnan: The Nature of TimeThe One Who Deserves Self-Realization inAkram VignanQuestioner: Does a man bound by the noose ofprarabdha (effect in this life of causes laid in past life) have aright to attain Gnan?Dadashri: Even Lord Mahavir was bound by Hisprarabdha, and He was entitled to absolute knowledge(kevalgnan), so why would you not be entitled to Atmagnan?Every human is bound by prarabdha, which is why there isanother life (reincarnation; avatar). Even the final life is boundby prarabdha, and that is why it takes place.Questioner: Does the prarabdha then let go?Dadashri: Then one does not bind anymore prarabdha(effect for next life). After I give you Gnan, You will no longerbind any prarabdha. This means that your past karma will‘discharge’, and you will not be ‘charging’ any new ones. Thatis how this science is.Questioner: Can a married man be entitled to Gnan?Dadashri: In the current era we live in, it is not worthlooking at someone’s eligibility. In this present age, no one hasany kind of eligibility. That is why I have made this Gnanavailable for anyone who comes along. Do you know what timeperiod this is? In Jainism it is referred to as Dushamkaal andin Vedanta it is called Kaliyug. What is Kaliyug? That there isno respite from pain, stress and worries. The torment of ‘Whatwill happen tomorrow? What will happen tomorrow?’, nevergoes away. And what is Dushamkaal? In spite of intensesuffering, there is no equanimity. Now in this sort of age, if youwent out in search of eligibility, who would qualify? No onewould be eligible!!Questioner: Would you call the Gnan that you give, aform of grace (krupa)?Dadashri: Only through grace (krupa) will the work getdone. The grace of the ‘Dada Bhagwan’ that has manifestedwithin me, passes directly into You. You have to get Your workdone through this grace. Each person receives grace accordingto his receptiveness, and the more humility (vinaya) he has, themore grace he will receive. The highest quality one can have inthe world is the quality of humility (vinaya).Questioner: Isn’t there a saying, that one can attainmoksha quicker in Kaliyug?Dadashri: That is true. There is a reason for that.Because people would not pass in this Kaliyug, the “professors”decided to lower the standards more. Otherwise, how wouldanyone be able to pass? In Kaliyug, the standard by whichone’s humanness is ascertained, has become so ‘low’, that iswhy you have become worthy, no? Otherwise who would letpeople of the current era of this time cycle enter moksha?Someone has to be allowed to pass the examinations; otherwiseyou will have to shut down the ‘college’. That is why the ‘level’has been lowered.The Gnani Remains in the PresentQuestioner: In the definition of time cycles, was thereever a Kaliyug before?Dadashri: There is a Kaliyug in every time cycle.Aptavani-4353354Aptavani-4Kaliyug is like the night that follows the day. Does it not? Thatis how Kaliyug is. It is because of Kaliyug, that Satyug (Ageof unity in mind, speech and action) is called Satyug. If therewere no Kaliyug, Satyug would have no value.Questioner: Is man subject to yug (age of time cycle) oris yug subject to man?Dadashri: Man is presently subject to time. But themuda samaya (time as an eternal element) has arisen becauseof you (because of the belief I am this non-Self). ‘You’ (the Self)yourself are the king, and all this has come about in the king’swake.Questioner: Is samaya (time) God, and is samaya(time) Parmeshwar (absolute God)?Dadashri: Time cannot be Parmeshwar. Otherwise,people would go around chanting, “Time, Time...” (Instead ofGod). You yourself are Parmeshwar, and you need to knowthat Time is just a nimit (instrumental) in the middle.How much difference is there between ‘Us-the GnaniPurush’ and You? ‘We’ have conquered time. People areconsumed by time. ‘You’ still have to conquer time. How canyou conquer time? The past is forgotten. The future is in thehands of scientific circumstantial evidences (vyavasthit); therefore,You need to remain in the present. So then time can beconquered. As You go on to do our ‘Akram’ samayik, You willlearn how to hold onto the present. It does not come straight toyou. When You do samayik (being the Self and ‘seeing’ the self)for an hour, You are in the present (vartaman).What does it mean, to stay in the present (vartaman)?When you are writing down your financial accounts, don’t youstay fully focused on your accounts? If you (your mind) driftoff into the future, you will make errors in your accounting. Ifyou remain in the present, it is possible not to make a singleerror. What I am telling You, is that You should experience thepresent that is before You. The past is gone. Even intellectualswould not stir up the past. And to think about the future is toworry.Therefore, remain in the present. While the satsang isgoing on now, listen to it with concentration (ekagra) of chit.When you are balancing your books, do it with suchconcentration (ekagra) of chit. And when you are swearing atsomeone, do it with the same concentration (ekagra) of chit.He who perpetually remains in the present, is a Gnani. Peoplecannot enjoy the present, because they worry about the futureand the past. They even make errors in their accounting. TheGnani Purush will never ruin the present.Questioner: Do we have to forget about the past and thefuture?Dadashri: No, you do not have to forget, you just haveto remain in the present. Forgetting is a burden. You cannotforget even if you want to, and besides, the more you try toforget something, the more you will remember it. One man wastelling me, “When I sit down to do a samayik (meditativeintrospection) I think to myself, ‘Today I am not going to bereminded about the shop’. And on that very day, the first thingI see in my samayik is the shop!” Why does that happen? It isbecause, when he said he did not want to be reminded of it,essentially he showed contempt towards it! You should not becontemptuous of anything.There is only one thing, and that is to remain in thepresent. You have nothing whatsoever to do with the past or thefuture. Remaining in the present is immortal state (amarpad).‘We’ remain exactly as ‘we’ are in the present. If you wake ‘us’up at night ‘we’ will be the same, and if you wake ‘us’ up in theday, ‘we’ will be the same. Whenever you see ‘us’ ‘we’ will bejust the same as ‘we’ are now.Aptavani-4353354Aptavani-4Kaliyug is like the night that follows the day. Does it not? Thatis how Kaliyug is. It is because of Kaliyug, that Satyug (Ageof unity in mind, speech and action) is called Satyug. If therewere no Kaliyug, Satyug would have no value.Questioner: Is man subject to yug (age of time cycle) oris yug subject to man?Dadashri: Man is presently subject to time. But themuda samaya (time as an eternal element) has arisen becauseof you (because of the belief I am this non-Self). ‘You’ (the Self)yourself are the king, and all this has come about in the king’swake.Questioner: Is samaya (time) God, and is samaya(time) Parmeshwar (absolute God)?Dadashri: Time cannot be Parmeshwar. Otherwise,people would go around chanting, “Time, Time...” (Instead ofGod). You yourself are Parmeshwar, and you need to knowthat Time is just a nimit (instrumental) in the middle.How much difference is there between ‘Us-the GnaniPurush’ and You? ‘We’ have conquered time. People areconsumed by time. ‘You’ still have to conquer time. How canyou conquer time? The past is forgotten. The future is in thehands of scientific circumstantial evidences (vyavasthit); therefore,You need to remain in the present. So then time can beconquered. As You go on to do our ‘Akram’ samayik, You willlearn how to hold onto the present. It does not come straight toyou. When You do samayik (being the Self and ‘seeing’ the self)for an hour, You are in the present (vartaman).What does it mean, to stay in the present (vartaman)?When you are writing down your financial accounts, don’t youstay fully focused on your accounts? If you (your mind) driftoff into the future, you will make errors in your accounting. Ifyou remain in the present, it is possible not to make a singleerror. What I am telling You, is that You should experience thepresent that is before You. The past is gone. Even intellectualswould not stir up the past. And to think about the future is toworry.Therefore, remain in the present. While the satsang isgoing on now, listen to it with concentration (ekagra) of chit.When you are balancing your books, do it with suchconcentration (ekagra) of chit. And when you are swearing atsomeone, do it with the same concentration (ekagra) of chit.He who perpetually remains in the present, is a Gnani. Peoplecannot enjoy the present, because they worry about the futureand the past. They even make errors in their accounting. TheGnani Purush will never ruin the present.Questioner: Do we have to forget about the past and thefuture?Dadashri: No, you do not have to forget, you just haveto remain in the present. Forgetting is a burden. You cannotforget even if you want to, and besides, the more you try toforget something, the more you will remember it. One man wastelling me, “When I sit down to do a samayik (meditativeintrospection) I think to myself, ‘Today I am not going to bereminded about the shop’. And on that very day, the first thingI see in my samayik is the shop!” Why does that happen? It isbecause, when he said he did not want to be reminded of it,essentially he showed contempt towards it! You should not becontemptuous of anything.There is only one thing, and that is to remain in thepresent. You have nothing whatsoever to do with the past or thefuture. Remaining in the present is immortal state (amarpad).‘We’ remain exactly as ‘we’ are in the present. If you wake ‘us’up at night ‘we’ will be the same, and if you wake ‘us’ up in theday, ‘we’ will be the same. Whenever you see ‘us’ ‘we’ will bejust the same as ‘we’ are now.Aptavani-4355356Aptavani-4The Eternal Element of TimeQuestioner: How does the dravya (element) calledkaad (time) function?Dadashri: Time is only naimitik (instrumental; evidence).The time it takes for one parmanu (subatomic particle) to leaveits space and move into another space is called ‘samaya’ (thesmallest division of time). This worldly life (sansar) is constantlyevolving (samsaran). It is constantly flowing. It cannot be madestill at all. A single second (pala) is comprised of many samaya(smallest division of time).The moment I tell you something and you understand itimmediately, that is considered a higher development. The lesstime it takes; the higher the development, and the more time ittakes; the lesser the development. Kaad (time) is subtle(sookshma). Samaya is the subtlest. For ‘us’ (Gnanis), time iscloser to samaya, and the Tirthankars have samaya. If youcould reach samaya today, then you would attain moksha. Thepeculiarity of this age is that one cannot reach samaya.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(40)The Nature of SpeechSpeech Is Not an Attribute of the Soul!Dadashri: Who is the one doing this talking?Questioner: You, Dada Bhagwan, are speaking.Dadashri: I myself am not speaking. I do not have theenergy (shakti) to speak at all. This is the ‘original tape-record’that is ‘speaking’. If you wanted to, from this one, you couldrecord another ‘tape-record’, a third and fourth... and don’t youbelieve, ‘I am talking’, when you speak? It is because youspeak yourself that you are in this ‘puzzle’, while I am sittinghere, after having ‘solved’ the ‘puzzle’. When you speak, youhave the ego of, ‘I am speaking’. Yours too is a ‘tape-record’that is ‘speaking’.The Atma cannot speak. The Atma does not have theattribute of speech. Words are not one of the Atma’s attributes,and neither are they attributes of the pudgal (non-Self complex).If it were an attribute of either of them, then it would last forever.But ‘this’ (the body) dies. In fact, the word is actually one of theparyaya (phases) of pudgal (non-Self complex). It is a situation(avastha) of the pudgal. When two parmanus (subatomicparticles) collide, they produce a sound. What happens whenyou beep a car horn? Speech (vani; sound) comes out.Questioner: If you have to press it for the speech (vani;sound) to come out, then it would be termed as mechanicalspeech (vani). But the Gnani’s speech is not mechanical, is it?Aptavani-4355356Aptavani-4The Eternal Element of TimeQuestioner: How does the dravya (element) calledkaad (time) function?Dadashri: Time is only naimitik (instrumental; evidence).The time it takes for one parmanu (subatomic particle) to leaveits space and move into another space is called ‘samaya’ (thesmallest division of time). This worldly life (sansar) is constantlyevolving (samsaran). It is constantly flowing. It cannot be madestill at all. A single second (pala) is comprised of many samaya(smallest division of time).The moment I tell you something and you understand itimmediately, that is considered a higher development. The lesstime it takes; the higher the development, and the more time ittakes; the lesser the development. Kaad (time) is subtle(sookshma). Samaya is the subtlest. For ‘us’ (Gnanis), time iscloser to samaya, and the Tirthankars have samaya. If youcould reach samaya today, then you would attain moksha. Thepeculiarity of this age is that one cannot reach samaya.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(40)The Nature of SpeechSpeech Is Not an Attribute of the Soul!Dadashri: Who is the one doing this talking?Questioner: You, Dada Bhagwan, are speaking.Dadashri: I myself am not speaking. I do not have theenergy (shakti) to speak at all. This is the ‘original tape-record’that is ‘speaking’. If you wanted to, from this one, you couldrecord another ‘tape-record’, a third and fourth... and don’t youbelieve, ‘I am talking’, when you speak? It is because youspeak yourself that you are in this ‘puzzle’, while I am sittinghere, after having ‘solved’ the ‘puzzle’. When you speak, youhave the ego of, ‘I am speaking’. Yours too is a ‘tape-record’that is ‘speaking’.The Atma cannot speak. The Atma does not have theattribute of speech. Words are not one of the Atma’s attributes,and neither are they attributes of the pudgal (non-Self complex).If it were an attribute of either of them, then it would last forever.But ‘this’ (the body) dies. In fact, the word is actually one of theparyaya (phases) of pudgal (non-Self complex). It is a situation(avastha) of the pudgal. When two parmanus (subatomicparticles) collide, they produce a sound. What happens whenyou beep a car horn? Speech (vani; sound) comes out.Questioner: If you have to press it for the speech (vani;sound) to come out, then it would be termed as mechanicalspeech (vani). But the Gnani’s speech is not mechanical, is it?Aptavani-4357358 Aptavani-4Dadashri: Our (Gnani’s) speech is a ‘taped-record’,and so is yours. Except the Gnani’s speech is syadvaad(speech that does not hurt anyone).Questioner: Is syadvaad speech that is chetan (living)?Dadashri: Speech can never have life; whether it is yoursor ‘ours’. Yes, ‘our’ speech (vani) emanates, after havingtouched the absolute pure Self, and so it appears to be alive.Questioner: Can one say ‘speech (vani) is lifeless(jada)’?Dadashri: It is okay to say, ‘speech is lifeless’, but youcan never say speech has life. When you press on a car horn,doesn’t it produce a honking sound? When you press it like that,the parmanus (subatomic particles) that are in it, becomeagitated and collide with one another, to create all this noise. Justlisten to the sound coming out of the horn! That is how it allcomes out of the ‘horn’, after continuously colliding. All this is‘mechanical’. The Atma is itself Parmatma (the absolute Soul).Syadvaad SpeechQuestioner: Your speech, the speech of the Gnani, whatis it like?Dadashri: It is syadvaad (speech that does not hurtanyone); it is considered anekant (impartial; perspective ofuniversal acceptance).Questioner: What does syadvaad mean?Dadashri: It is speech that will not hurt the foundation ofany religion. Such speech is embraced by Vaishnavs, Jains,Swetambars, Digambars, Sthanakvasi, Parsis, Muslims. Theywill all ‘accept’ it. It is not ekantik (partial; polemic; individualizedperspective) towards any single viewpoint. It is anekantik(impartial; accepting of all viewpoints and accepted by all).Questioner: Is it free from insistence (niragrahi)?Dadashri: Yes, you can say that. There is no kind ofinsistence in it.Questioner: For speech that is non-insistent (niragrahi),do we have to think before we speak?Dadashri: No. If you think before you speak, yourspeech will never be niragrahi. This directly comes out aftertouching the chetan (the Self). The Gnani’s speech comes outwith awareness (jagruti). It is only for the benefit (hitta; good)of others. The awareness (jagruti) remains to the extent that noone’s benefit (hitta) is compromised.When you keep listening with zeal, to the Gnani Purush’sspeech, even your speech becomes like that. Just imitating it willnot work.Questioner: When does one’s speech become syadvaad?Dadashri: When all the karmas are destroyed; whenanger, pride, deceit, greed (krodh, maan, maya, lobh) aredestroyed, then the speech that emits will be syadvaad (hurts noone) speech. The entire science of the Vitarag Lords must bepresent. It will only occur if one has clear and distinct experience(spashta anubhav) of the Atma. Until then, it is all talk relatedto the intellect, and is considered as talk pertaining to theworldly life (vyavahar). Unless your speech is syadvaad, youtake on a big risk when you preach about the path of moksha.Who Has the Right to Preach?Who can give spiritual discourse (updesha)? Onlysomeone who does not raise the listener’s objection. However,in our path, there is no discussion. How do you go aboutunderstanding our books? No two people will have the samecomprehension. One may have the right understanding, while theother person’s understanding will be incomplete. So if the oneAptavani-4357358 Aptavani-4Dadashri: Our (Gnani’s) speech is a ‘taped-record’,and so is yours. Except the Gnani’s speech is syadvaad(speech that does not hurt anyone).Questioner: Is syadvaad speech that is chetan (living)?Dadashri: Speech can never have life; whether it is yoursor ‘ours’. Yes, ‘our’ speech (vani) emanates, after havingtouched the absolute pure Self, and so it appears to be alive.Questioner: Can one say ‘speech (vani) is lifeless(jada)’?Dadashri: It is okay to say, ‘speech is lifeless’, but youcan never say speech has life. When you press on a car horn,doesn’t it produce a honking sound? When you press it like that,the parmanus (subatomic particles) that are in it, becomeagitated and collide with one another, to create all this noise. Justlisten to the sound coming out of the horn! That is how it allcomes out of the ‘horn’, after continuously colliding. All this is‘mechanical’. The Atma is itself Parmatma (the absolute Soul).Syadvaad SpeechQuestioner: Your speech, the speech of the Gnani, whatis it like?Dadashri: It is syadvaad (speech that does not hurtanyone); it is considered anekant (impartial; perspective ofuniversal acceptance).Questioner: What does syadvaad mean?Dadashri: It is speech that will not hurt the foundation ofany religion. Such speech is embraced by Vaishnavs, Jains,Swetambars, Digambars, Sthanakvasi, Parsis, Muslims. Theywill all ‘accept’ it. It is not ekantik (partial; polemic; individualizedperspective) towards any single viewpoint. It is anekantik(impartial; accepting of all viewpoints and accepted by all).Questioner: Is it free from insistence (niragrahi)?Dadashri: Yes, you can say that. There is no kind ofinsistence in it.Questioner: For speech that is non-insistent (niragrahi),do we have to think before we speak?Dadashri: No. If you think before you speak, yourspeech will never be niragrahi. This directly comes out aftertouching the chetan (the Self). The Gnani’s speech comes outwith awareness (jagruti). It is only for the benefit (hitta; good)of others. The awareness (jagruti) remains to the extent that noone’s benefit (hitta) is compromised.When you keep listening with zeal, to the Gnani Purush’sspeech, even your speech becomes like that. Just imitating it willnot work.Questioner: When does one’s speech become syadvaad?Dadashri: When all the karmas are destroyed; whenanger, pride, deceit, greed (krodh, maan, maya, lobh) aredestroyed, then the speech that emits will be syadvaad (hurts noone) speech. The entire science of the Vitarag Lords must bepresent. It will only occur if one has clear and distinct experience(spashta anubhav) of the Atma. Until then, it is all talk relatedto the intellect, and is considered as talk pertaining to theworldly life (vyavahar). Unless your speech is syadvaad, youtake on a big risk when you preach about the path of moksha.Who Has the Right to Preach?Who can give spiritual discourse (updesha)? Onlysomeone who does not raise the listener’s objection. However,in our path, there is no discussion. How do you go aboutunderstanding our books? No two people will have the samecomprehension. One may have the right understanding, while theother person’s understanding will be incomplete. So if the oneAptavani-4359360Aptavani-4with the incomplete understanding insists: ‘I am the one who isright’, then you should just say, “Yes, you are correct,” andmove on. In understanding the Truth (Sat; eternal), there shouldbe no controversy.You must not have the belief: ‘Mine is right’. If youcontinue to believe, ‘It is mine, so it is right.’ you could say thatyou are afflicted with a disease. If indeed you are right, the otherperson would accept what you say without fail. And if he doesnot do that, then you should just let it go. When I say something,the other person’s Atma will most certainly agree to it. When hedoes not agree, it is because of his obstinacy. Mistake cannotoccur because this speech does not belong to me. Where thereis, ‘This is my speech’, mistakes will occur.If someone went out to give spiritual discourse (updesha)in this day and age, he is likely to get himself bound. To giveupdesha (preach) in the presence of kashays (anger, pride,deceit and greed) is a sign of going to hell. At best, it can betolerated from a person whose kashays are relatively mild.Otherwise, however, this carries a very heavy liability.What does kashay-free speech mean? It is where onedoes not have the ‘ownership’ of his speech. If one is the ownerof speech, one will say, “I spoke so well! Did you like it?” Sohe ‘cashes’ in his check. ‘We’ are not the owner of the speech,or of the mind, or even of the body.When does syadvaad (that which does not hurt) speecharise? When the role of the ego comes to an end. When you seethe whole world as faultless (nirdosh), and not a single being isseen at fault at all! I do not even see a thief as being at fault.People say stealing is a crime. But the way a thief looks at it,is that he is merely carrying out his duty (dharma; role). Ifsomeone brought him to me, I would put my arm on his shoulderand ask him in private, “Son, do you like this business? Does itplease you?” Then he would open up to me. He would not feelintimidated with me. A man will lie, because of fear. I would thenmake him understand: “Do you have any idea about theresponsibility you carry, and the consequences of your actions?”And ‘You are stealing’, does not even exist in my mind.And if it were in my mind, it would cast an effect on his mind.Each and every person is in his own nature (dharma).Syadvaad speech is to not hurt the praman (measure; worth)of any dharma. Speech that is syadvaad, is complete.Everyone’s prakruti (non-Self complex) is different, even so,syadvaad speech does not disregard anyone’s prakruti.The Gnani Purush can show you every remedy. He willfind the cause of the ‘disease’ and he will even show you theremedies. All you have to do is ask him what the truth is, andtell him how you have understood it, so that he can immediatelyshow you which ‘button’ to press, to get things started!There are many different ways in which religion is beingdiscussed, in order to give a person the right understanding.1. Using speech to defend and protect oneself. That isone way.2. To ‘convince’ the other person. Is another way. Nomatter what religion the other person practices, his belief willchange. But you should know how to speak this way, shouldn’tyou? Surely you should have that much power and energy(shakti), shouldn’t you? The amount of Gnan you understand,determines the energy that arises within you. And while trying to‘convince’ the other person, there should not be the slightest,anger, pride, deceit or greed (kashay). Or else, the other personwill not be convinced at all. When kashay arises, it is aweakness.3. Some people are weak, because when they attempt toconvince others, they themselves become influenced by themand change their minds. The other person will ask questions thatAptavani-4359360Aptavani-4with the incomplete understanding insists: ‘I am the one who isright’, then you should just say, “Yes, you are correct,” andmove on. In understanding the Truth (Sat; eternal), there shouldbe no controversy.You must not have the belief: ‘Mine is right’. If youcontinue to believe, ‘It is mine, so it is right.’ you could say thatyou are afflicted with a disease. If indeed you are right, the otherperson would accept what you say without fail. And if he doesnot do that, then you should just let it go. When I say something,the other person’s Atma will most certainly agree to it. When hedoes not agree, it is because of his obstinacy. Mistake cannotoccur because this speech does not belong to me. Where thereis, ‘This is my speech’, mistakes will occur.If someone went out to give spiritual discourse (updesha)in this day and age, he is likely to get himself bound. To giveupdesha (preach) in the presence of kashays (anger, pride,deceit and greed) is a sign of going to hell. At best, it can betolerated from a person whose kashays are relatively mild.Otherwise, however, this carries a very heavy liability.What does kashay-free speech mean? It is where onedoes not have the ‘ownership’ of his speech. If one is the ownerof speech, one will say, “I spoke so well! Did you like it?” Sohe ‘cashes’ in his check. ‘We’ are not the owner of the speech,or of the mind, or even of the body.When does syadvaad (that which does not hurt) speecharise? When the role of the ego comes to an end. When you seethe whole world as faultless (nirdosh), and not a single being isseen at fault at all! I do not even see a thief as being at fault.People say stealing is a crime. But the way a thief looks at it,is that he is merely carrying out his duty (dharma; role). Ifsomeone brought him to me, I would put my arm on his shoulderand ask him in private, “Son, do you like this business? Does itplease you?” Then he would open up to me. He would not feelintimidated with me. A man will lie, because of fear. I would thenmake him understand: “Do you have any idea about theresponsibility you carry, and the consequences of your actions?”And ‘You are stealing’, does not even exist in my mind.And if it were in my mind, it would cast an effect on his mind.Each and every person is in his own nature (dharma).Syadvaad speech is to not hurt the praman (measure; worth)of any dharma. Speech that is syadvaad, is complete.Everyone’s prakruti (non-Self complex) is different, even so,syadvaad speech does not disregard anyone’s prakruti.The Gnani Purush can show you every remedy. He willfind the cause of the ‘disease’ and he will even show you theremedies. All you have to do is ask him what the truth is, andtell him how you have understood it, so that he can immediatelyshow you which ‘button’ to press, to get things started!There are many different ways in which religion is beingdiscussed, in order to give a person the right understanding.1. Using speech to defend and protect oneself. That isone way.2. To ‘convince’ the other person. Is another way. Nomatter what religion the other person practices, his belief willchange. But you should know how to speak this way, shouldn’tyou? Surely you should have that much power and energy(shakti), shouldn’t you? The amount of Gnan you understand,determines the energy that arises within you. And while trying to‘convince’ the other person, there should not be the slightest,anger, pride, deceit or greed (kashay). Or else, the other personwill not be convinced at all. When kashay arises, it is aweakness.3. Some people are weak, because when they attempt toconvince others, they themselves become influenced by themand change their minds. The other person will ask questions thatAptavani-4361362Aptavani-4will confuse him. He will end up feeling discouraged and thinkthat he has no Gnan (knowledge) whatsoever.Touched by SaraswatiThe Gnani Purush’s speech is sweet and pleasant; itdoes not shock or alarm (aaghaat) anyone, and it does notcreate pratyaghaat (reaction to shock) in anyone who listens toit. When the words that come forth do not hurt anyone to theslightest extent, it is charitra (conduct as the Self). You canrecognize the strength of a person’s character by his speech.There is really no other way you can tell a person’s strength ofconduct (charitrabud). If the intellect is syadvaad, then it maycreate an impression of being syadvaad, but it is incomplete.Whereas with Gnan-syadvaad (speech that flows in the state ofGnan), the conduct (charitra) of the speaker is vitarag(without attachment or abhorrence). People of every religionuphold Gnan-syadvaad as the standard. In such speech, thereis no insistence (pressure).This is a science (vignan). When speech assumes theform of Saraswati (the Goddess of Knowledge), it touchespeople’s hearts, and that is when people are blessed. In thisworld, it is difficult to come across speech that touches hearts.My speech touches your heart and if only you fully digest justone word of it, it will take you all the way to moksha.Questioner: If one wants to make his speech like that,what should he do?Dadashri: Everyday, with a prayerful and sincere intent(bhaav), you must ask, ‘Let me not hurt anyone through myspeech. Let my speech give happiness to others.’ If you nurturethis ‘cause’, you will attain such speech. The Powerful Speech of the Gnani PurushThere is tremendous power of speech (vachanbud) in theGnani Purush’s each and every word. Power of speech(vachanbud) is something that when I tell them to, everyonestands up. When people act according to what they are told, itis called vachanbud. With vachanbud, speech continues tobecome siddha; it accomplishes the intent. There is not anyvachanbud left these days, is there? When a father says to hisson, “Go to bed.” his son will say, “No, I am off to see amovie.” It is called vachanbud, when everyone at home doeswhat you tell them to do.Questioner: How can we attain power of speech(vachanbud)?Dadashri: How have you lost vachanbud? It is becauseyou have misused speech. You have lied, you have beratedothers, you have scared dogs, and you have been deceitful,which is why your vachanbud has broken down. Vachanbud isalso destroyed when you protect yourself by lying, when youinsist on your own truth or when you negate truth.You scold your boy, “Sit up straight stupid”. So in frontof your son, you lose your vachanbud. If you use speech, thatdeeply hurts someone, in your next life, your speech will becompletely snatched away from you, so that you will remainmute for ten-fifteen years.Speak as truthfully as you are able to understand. It isokay not to speak when you do not understand. Yourvachanbud will increase all the more. “I do not want to sayanything that will hurt anyone”, is what you need to decide, andyou should constantly ask Dada for strength (shakti) and withthat, you will attain it. It requires my vachanbud and a strongdesire on your part. My vachanbud will remove all yourobstacles. You will be tested, but you will come through.Power in the Penance of SilenceQuestioner: What do they mean when they say, thatAptavani-4361362Aptavani-4will confuse him. He will end up feeling discouraged and thinkthat he has no Gnan (knowledge) whatsoever.Touched by SaraswatiThe Gnani Purush’s speech is sweet and pleasant; itdoes not shock or alarm (aaghaat) anyone, and it does notcreate pratyaghaat (reaction to shock) in anyone who listens toit. When the words that come forth do not hurt anyone to theslightest extent, it is charitra (conduct as the Self). You canrecognize the strength of a person’s character by his speech.There is really no other way you can tell a person’s strength ofconduct (charitrabud). If the intellect is syadvaad, then it maycreate an impression of being syadvaad, but it is incomplete.Whereas with Gnan-syadvaad (speech that flows in the state ofGnan), the conduct (charitra) of the speaker is vitarag(without attachment or abhorrence). People of every religionuphold Gnan-syadvaad as the standard. In such speech, thereis no insistence (pressure).This is a science (vignan). When speech assumes theform of Saraswati (the Goddess of Knowledge), it touchespeople’s hearts, and that is when people are blessed. In thisworld, it is difficult to come across speech that touches hearts.My speech touches your heart and if only you fully digest justone word of it, it will take you all the way to moksha.Questioner: If one wants to make his speech like that,what should he do?Dadashri: Everyday, with a prayerful and sincere intent(bhaav), you must ask, ‘Let me not hurt anyone through myspeech. Let my speech give happiness to others.’ If you nurturethis ‘cause’, you will attain such speech. The Powerful Speech of the Gnani PurushThere is tremendous power of speech (vachanbud) in theGnani Purush’s each and every word. Power of speech(vachanbud) is something that when I tell them to, everyonestands up. When people act according to what they are told, itis called vachanbud. With vachanbud, speech continues tobecome siddha; it accomplishes the intent. There is not anyvachanbud left these days, is there? When a father says to hisson, “Go to bed.” his son will say, “No, I am off to see amovie.” It is called vachanbud, when everyone at home doeswhat you tell them to do.Questioner: How can we attain power of speech(vachanbud)?Dadashri: How have you lost vachanbud? It is becauseyou have misused speech. You have lied, you have beratedothers, you have scared dogs, and you have been deceitful,which is why your vachanbud has broken down. Vachanbud isalso destroyed when you protect yourself by lying, when youinsist on your own truth or when you negate truth.You scold your boy, “Sit up straight stupid”. So in frontof your son, you lose your vachanbud. If you use speech, thatdeeply hurts someone, in your next life, your speech will becompletely snatched away from you, so that you will remainmute for ten-fifteen years.Speak as truthfully as you are able to understand. It isokay not to speak when you do not understand. Yourvachanbud will increase all the more. “I do not want to sayanything that will hurt anyone”, is what you need to decide, andyou should constantly ask Dada for strength (shakti) and withthat, you will attain it. It requires my vachanbud and a strongdesire on your part. My vachanbud will remove all yourobstacles. You will be tested, but you will come through.Power in the Penance of SilenceQuestioner: What do they mean when they say, thatAptavani-4363364Aptavani-4staying silent (maun) is considered power of penance(tapobud)?Dadashri: A penance of silence would be where aperson, who stays silence (maun) in situations where he wouldnot normally stay silent, so then the maun (his silence), goes intotapobud (power of penance). If his servant breaks a cup andhe does not utter a thing, it is rendered a penance (tapa). Thereis nothing as powerful as silence in this world. This power isdissipated the instant you utter something. Silence is the highestpenance. If you are having a dispute with your father, if you staysilent (maun), you are doing a penance. Everything ‘melts’ inthat penance and from that, science comes about. Nowadayspeople stay silent for a day and then the next day they vent theirbottled up boiling anger! The penance of silence can do muchgood. It can bring salvation to the entire world.That is why Kavi wrote:‘Sat purush nu maun tapobud,nischay aakhha jaga ne taarey’‘The penance of silence of the realized Soul,will definitely liberate the entire world.’ ~Kavi NavneetYou are free to say anything in the presence of Dada;nevertheless, maintaining your silence is power of penance(tapobud).Questioner: What is considered maun (remaining silent)?Dadashri: Whatever you say, that is related to the Atma,is considered maun (here it means anything said for the salvationof others).Questioner: If we stop speaking overtly (sthool), andwe remain silent, will it benefit us?Dadashri: Overt silence (sthool maun) will really upsetthe overt ego (sthool ahamkar). Words have created all theworld’s entanglements. And through silence, power (shakti) cangrow immensely. Overt speech can hurt others; it can hurt likea rock. Can you imagine how much you accomplish on the dayyou observe silence? Maun brings saiyam (control over kashay– anger, pride, deceit, greed). Even overt maun brings aboutsaiyam. That is considered silence of the ego. And if theawareness, ‘I am Shuddhatma’ is present, then it is consideredthe silence of the pure Soul.Questioner: Then how should maun be?Dadashri: Maun is where there is no nokashay(neutral kashay): no laughter, grief, fear, disgust, or anythingelse. There is no subtle inner speech either. During times ofmaun, you obviously would not speak, but writing is speechas well. So even writing does not constitute maun. Maun(silence) puts an end to all the agitation. When there is anabsence of written or suggestive communication, it is calledtrue silence.Questioner: If we feel angry inside, but we are silent onthe outside, what can we do?Dadashri: That is why I say, that no matter what you sayand how crazily you behave, ultimately you should stick to theLord’s side (with the intention not to hurt at all). All this mayhave transpired when you were on the side of evil, but youshould keep your mind on the Lord’s side. If you give way toevil, you will be doomed.Questioner: Isn’t it the mind that is at work in all thesematters?Dadashri: It is because of the mind that this worldly life(sansar) has come about. With one mind the worldly life(sansar) sets, and with other mind it arises.Aptavani-4363364Aptavani-4staying silent (maun) is considered power of penance(tapobud)?Dadashri: A penance of silence would be where aperson, who stays silence (maun) in situations where he wouldnot normally stay silent, so then the maun (his silence), goes intotapobud (power of penance). If his servant breaks a cup andhe does not utter a thing, it is rendered a penance (tapa). Thereis nothing as powerful as silence in this world. This power isdissipated the instant you utter something. Silence is the highestpenance. If you are having a dispute with your father, if you staysilent (maun), you are doing a penance. Everything ‘melts’ inthat penance and from that, science comes about. Nowadayspeople stay silent for a day and then the next day they vent theirbottled up boiling anger! The penance of silence can do muchgood. It can bring salvation to the entire world.That is why Kavi wrote:‘Sat purush nu maun tapobud,nischay aakhha jaga ne taarey’‘The penance of silence of the realized Soul,will definitely liberate the entire world.’ ~Kavi NavneetYou are free to say anything in the presence of Dada;nevertheless, maintaining your silence is power of penance(tapobud).Questioner: What is considered maun (remaining silent)?Dadashri: Whatever you say, that is related to the Atma,is considered maun (here it means anything said for the salvationof others).Questioner: If we stop speaking overtly (sthool), andwe remain silent, will it benefit us?Dadashri: Overt silence (sthool maun) will really upsetthe overt ego (sthool ahamkar). Words have created all theworld’s entanglements. And through silence, power (shakti) cangrow immensely. Overt speech can hurt others; it can hurt likea rock. Can you imagine how much you accomplish on the dayyou observe silence? Maun brings saiyam (control over kashay– anger, pride, deceit, greed). Even overt maun brings aboutsaiyam. That is considered silence of the ego. And if theawareness, ‘I am Shuddhatma’ is present, then it is consideredthe silence of the pure Soul.Questioner: Then how should maun be?Dadashri: Maun is where there is no nokashay(neutral kashay): no laughter, grief, fear, disgust, or anythingelse. There is no subtle inner speech either. During times ofmaun, you obviously would not speak, but writing is speechas well. So even writing does not constitute maun. Maun(silence) puts an end to all the agitation. When there is anabsence of written or suggestive communication, it is calledtrue silence.Questioner: If we feel angry inside, but we are silent onthe outside, what can we do?Dadashri: That is why I say, that no matter what you sayand how crazily you behave, ultimately you should stick to theLord’s side (with the intention not to hurt at all). All this mayhave transpired when you were on the side of evil, but youshould keep your mind on the Lord’s side. If you give way toevil, you will be doomed.Questioner: Isn’t it the mind that is at work in all thesematters?Dadashri: It is because of the mind that this worldly life(sansar) has come about. With one mind the worldly life(sansar) sets, and with other mind it arises.Aptavani-4365366Aptavani-4Questioner: If we cannot understand the other person’sviewpoint, what should we do?Dadashri: Stay silent (maun). It was because of maunthat stupid people are considered wise. If someone says to you,“you have no sense in you.” then just remain silent. And if at thetime, you retaliate, he will remember it and think, ‘This one reallyis an idiot.’In this Dushamkaal (present age), speech alone causesbondage (bandhan). In Sushamkaal (the previous age), it wasthe mind that created bondage. If it was not for words, mokshacould be easily attained. Therefore, you must not utter a wordabout anyone. To say something bad about someone, is thesame as throwing dirt on your own self. To utter a single wordis very risky. When you speak wrongly, you are throwing dirtover yourself and even when you have wrong thoughts, you arethrowing dirt on yourself. For these wrongs, you must dopratikraman (repent), so that you can free yourself from itseffects.A Live Tape Recorder – What a Responsibility!There are all kinds of devices such as tape recorders,transmitters, that exist today. Prominent people live in fear ofsomeone recording their conversations. These devices are onlymeant to record words. The human mind and body, however,will record everything. Nevertheless, people are not afraid ofthis at all. When the other person is asleep, and you say, “Heis worthless”, inside him, it gets ‘taped’! At a later time, it willproduce a result. So you must not say anything even about asleeping person. Not even a single word. This machinery is such,that it will record everything. If you must speak, then saysomething good like, “You are really a great man.” If you upholdgood inner intent (bhaav), you will be rewarded with happiness.But if you say something even slightly negative, whether you sayit in the dark, or even when you are alone, the consequences ofit will be as bitter as poison. It will all be recorded anyway. Somake sure you record only the good things.Questioner: I do not want anything that is at all bitter.Dadashri: If you want the bitter, then say bitter things, orelse do not say them at all. Even if someone hits you, you shouldnot say a thing to him. Just say to him, “I am much obliged to you.”The Lord has said that in these times, if someone insultsyou, you should invite him for dinner. Even if he has a ‘wild’temperament, you should still forgive him. If you tried to get‘revenge’, you will be pulled back into the worldly life (sansar)again. You must not take ‘revenge’ in this age. There is nothingbut ‘wildness’ in this Dushamkaal (the present era). You cannever tell what kind of thoughts you will have. You will evenhave thoughts about the end of the world! In this age, so manyjiva (living beings) are going to collide with each other. And ifyou create enmity with such people, you too will have to collide.That is why we say, “I salute you sir!” In this time cycle, it is bestthat you instantly forgive someone, or else you will have tosuffer. And this world is founded on vengeance (veyr).In this age, it is impossible for you to go and reason withsomeone. And if you are capable of making others understand,then you can explain to them using good words, so that even ifit does get ‘recorded’, you are not held accountable. So stay‘positive’. In this world, only the ‘positive’ will give youhappiness; the ‘negative’ will give you nothing but a great dealof grief (dukh). Can you imagine the magnitude of liability!Those who go about looking for justice and injustice will insultand give abuse to so many people. It is not worth looking forjustice and injustice. Justice and injustice is a “thermometer”(gauge) for the world, to assess whose “fever” has come downby how much, and by how much has it gone up? The world willnever become just, nor will it ever become unjust. The samecorrupted mess will continue on.Aptavani-4365366Aptavani-4Questioner: If we cannot understand the other person’sviewpoint, what should we do?Dadashri: Stay silent (maun). It was because of maunthat stupid people are considered wise. If someone says to you,“you have no sense in you.” then just remain silent. And if at thetime, you retaliate, he will remember it and think, ‘This one reallyis an idiot.’In this Dushamkaal (present age), speech alone causesbondage (bandhan). In Sushamkaal (the previous age), it wasthe mind that created bondage. If it was not for words, mokshacould be easily attained. Therefore, you must not utter a wordabout anyone. To say something bad about someone, is thesame as throwing dirt on your own self. To utter a single wordis very risky. When you speak wrongly, you are throwing dirtover yourself and even when you have wrong thoughts, you arethrowing dirt on yourself. For these wrongs, you must dopratikraman (repent), so that you can free yourself from itseffects.A Live Tape Recorder – What a Responsibility!There are all kinds of devices such as tape recorders,transmitters, that exist today. Prominent people live in fear ofsomeone recording their conversations. These devices are onlymeant to record words. The human mind and body, however,will record everything. Nevertheless, people are not afraid ofthis at all. When the other person is asleep, and you say, “Heis worthless”, inside him, it gets ‘taped’! At a later time, it willproduce a result. So you must not say anything even about asleeping person. Not even a single word. This machinery is such,that it will record everything. If you must speak, then saysomething good like, “You are really a great man.” If you upholdgood inner intent (bhaav), you will be rewarded with happiness.But if you say something even slightly negative, whether you sayit in the dark, or even when you are alone, the consequences ofit will be as bitter as poison. It will all be recorded anyway. Somake sure you record only the good things.Questioner: I do not want anything that is at all bitter.Dadashri: If you want the bitter, then say bitter things, orelse do not say them at all. Even if someone hits you, you shouldnot say a thing to him. Just say to him, “I am much obliged to you.”The Lord has said that in these times, if someone insultsyou, you should invite him for dinner. Even if he has a ‘wild’temperament, you should still forgive him. If you tried to get‘revenge’, you will be pulled back into the worldly life (sansar)again. You must not take ‘revenge’ in this age. There is nothingbut ‘wildness’ in this Dushamkaal (the present era). You cannever tell what kind of thoughts you will have. You will evenhave thoughts about the end of the world! In this age, so manyjiva (living beings) are going to collide with each other. And ifyou create enmity with such people, you too will have to collide.That is why we say, “I salute you sir!” In this time cycle, it is bestthat you instantly forgive someone, or else you will have tosuffer. And this world is founded on vengeance (veyr).In this age, it is impossible for you to go and reason withsomeone. And if you are capable of making others understand,then you can explain to them using good words, so that even ifit does get ‘recorded’, you are not held accountable. So stay‘positive’. In this world, only the ‘positive’ will give youhappiness; the ‘negative’ will give you nothing but a great dealof grief (dukh). Can you imagine the magnitude of liability!Those who go about looking for justice and injustice will insultand give abuse to so many people. It is not worth looking forjustice and injustice. Justice and injustice is a “thermometer”(gauge) for the world, to assess whose “fever” has come downby how much, and by how much has it gone up? The world willnever become just, nor will it ever become unjust. The samecorrupted mess will continue on.Aptavani-4367368Aptavani-4The world has been like this ever since it began. InSatyug (Time cycle of unity in mind, speech and actions) theenvironment was not so spoilt, but today, its effect is worse.Don’t you think, that in the days of Lord Rama, when therewere kidnappers who abducted Sita (His wife), that they wouldnot be around today? This is never-ending. This ‘machinery’ hasbeen like this from the very beginning. One has no insight, onehas no idea about his responsibility, so do not say anythingirresponsible. Do not act irresponsibly or do anythingirresponsible. Take everything positively. If you want to dosomething good for someone, then go and do it. But do not dothings that are bad, and do not have bad thoughts. Do not listento anything bad about someone. It is very risky. Otherwise, inthis huge and vast world, moksha lies right there within you, andyet you cannot find it!!! And besides, you have been wanderingfor countless births!!!In ordinary worldly interaction (vyavahar), speaking isnot a problem. But when you say anything negative about ahuman being, it gets ‘recorded’ inside him! If you want to recorda ‘tape’ of those in sansar (people), how long does it take? Ifyou provoke someone even slightly, it will create the provocationand a hostile intent (pratipakshi bhaav) will continue to be‘taped’ (recorded). ‘You have so much weakness in you, thateven before provocation, you will start speaking.’Questioner: Let alone not saying anything negative, weshould not even have a negative inner intent (bhaav), right?Dadashri: You should not have that kind of bhaav, thatis true. Whatever enters your bhaav, will inevitably come out inyour speech. Therefore, to stop speaking, will also stop thebhaav. This bhaav is an echo behind the speech. There is noway to prevent a bhaav of hostility (pratipakshi bhaav) fromsurfacing now, is there! I do not have such bhaav. You have toalso reach that state. That weakness of yours needs to go, sothat the hostile bhaavs do not arise. And should they arise attimes, you have the weapon of pratikraman, with which youwill be able to erase them. If water seeps into your factory, aslong as it does not freeze over, it is fine. If it does freeze, thenit is out of your hands.If in a letter, you wrote something wrongly aboutsomeone, as long as you have not mailed the letter yet, you stillhave a chance to add a footnote to say, ‘ I have written somehurtful things about you in the above letter, and it isbecause I was out of my mind at the time, so please forgiveme.’ If you write that, all will be forgiven. But at that time, aperson would not let go his pride. So he will not write it. Rarelydoes a person do that, because it would hurt his pride.Just look at all these ‘scraps of prestige’! It takes so muchclothing, to hang on to one’s pride. And even then, if they tear,you have to mend them. If a man’s clothes get dirty, he starts arow, “You have not even washed my white cap. The boat-shaped one I used to wear? Why haven’t you done anyironing?” Now he starts quarreling about the ironing. Why doeshe guard his reputation so much? You should look for the kindof reputation where people would worship you, even if you wentaround naked.You have infinite energies (shakti) within you. You can turnthese energies any way you want to. You just need to know how.The only type of speech this ‘tape recorder’ can handle,is the kind that expresses love in every ‘dealing’ with others. Forthat, you will receive great appreciation.The scriptures tell you that you should not say anythingbad, or think anything bad. You may ask yourself why they keepsaying the same old thing over and over. This ‘machinery’ is justthat way, so it records everything. So when all the evidencescome together, there is havoc.Aptavani-4367368Aptavani-4The world has been like this ever since it began. InSatyug (Time cycle of unity in mind, speech and actions) theenvironment was not so spoilt, but today, its effect is worse.Don’t you think, that in the days of Lord Rama, when therewere kidnappers who abducted Sita (His wife), that they wouldnot be around today? This is never-ending. This ‘machinery’ hasbeen like this from the very beginning. One has no insight, onehas no idea about his responsibility, so do not say anythingirresponsible. Do not act irresponsibly or do anythingirresponsible. Take everything positively. If you want to dosomething good for someone, then go and do it. But do not dothings that are bad, and do not have bad thoughts. Do not listento anything bad about someone. It is very risky. Otherwise, inthis huge and vast world, moksha lies right there within you, andyet you cannot find it!!! And besides, you have been wanderingfor countless births!!!In ordinary worldly interaction (vyavahar), speaking isnot a problem. But when you say anything negative about ahuman being, it gets ‘recorded’ inside him! If you want to recorda ‘tape’ of those in sansar (people), how long does it take? Ifyou provoke someone even slightly, it will create the provocationand a hostile intent (pratipakshi bhaav) will continue to be‘taped’ (recorded). ‘You have so much weakness in you, thateven before provocation, you will start speaking.’Questioner: Let alone not saying anything negative, weshould not even have a negative inner intent (bhaav), right?Dadashri: You should not have that kind of bhaav, thatis true. Whatever enters your bhaav, will inevitably come out inyour speech. Therefore, to stop speaking, will also stop thebhaav. This bhaav is an echo behind the speech. There is noway to prevent a bhaav of hostility (pratipakshi bhaav) fromsurfacing now, is there! I do not have such bhaav. You have toalso reach that state. That weakness of yours needs to go, sothat the hostile bhaavs do not arise. And should they arise attimes, you have the weapon of pratikraman, with which youwill be able to erase them. If water seeps into your factory, aslong as it does not freeze over, it is fine. If it does freeze, thenit is out of your hands.If in a letter, you wrote something wrongly aboutsomeone, as long as you have not mailed the letter yet, you stillhave a chance to add a footnote to say, ‘ I have written somehurtful things about you in the above letter, and it isbecause I was out of my mind at the time, so please forgiveme.’ If you write that, all will be forgiven. But at that time, aperson would not let go his pride. So he will not write it. Rarelydoes a person do that, because it would hurt his pride.Just look at all these ‘scraps of prestige’! It takes so muchclothing, to hang on to one’s pride. And even then, if they tear,you have to mend them. If a man’s clothes get dirty, he starts arow, “You have not even washed my white cap. The boat-shaped one I used to wear? Why haven’t you done anyironing?” Now he starts quarreling about the ironing. Why doeshe guard his reputation so much? You should look for the kindof reputation where people would worship you, even if you wentaround naked.You have infinite energies (shakti) within you. You can turnthese energies any way you want to. You just need to know how.The only type of speech this ‘tape recorder’ can handle,is the kind that expresses love in every ‘dealing’ with others. Forthat, you will receive great appreciation.The scriptures tell you that you should not say anythingbad, or think anything bad. You may ask yourself why they keepsaying the same old thing over and over. This ‘machinery’ is justthat way, so it records everything. So when all the evidencescome together, there is havoc.Aptavani-4369370Aptavani-4Questioner: Do the evidences (puraava) presentthemselves as circumstances (saiyog)?Dadashri: Yes. When circumstances come together, theymanifest externally. There are some evidences that remain withinand torment you. Even that happens when the circumstancescome together. They are considered internal circumstances. Thatis scientific circumstantial evidence.If while at home, a man scolds his wife, he will think, ‘Noone has heard anything, this is normal!’ In the presence of theiryoung children, the couple says whatever they like to each other.According to them, what is a child going to understand? Heyyou! What about the ‘taping’ that is going on inside him? It willall come out when the child grows up!Questioner: If we do not want to ‘tape’ (record)anything, then what is the answer to that?Dadashri: Do not give out any vibrations. Just keep‘seeing’ everything. But that is not going to happen! Even this isa ‘machine’ and moreover, it is dependent on other entity. Thisis why I am showing you another way, so that if it does get‘taped’, you can immediately erase it, and it will be alright. Thispratikraman is the tool for erasing. With that, a change willhappen within a couple of lifetimes, and hurtful speech will cometo an end.Questioner: After I have attained the awareness of thepure Soul, the pratikraman is always going on.Dadashri: Then you are no longer responsible.I hear Kaviraj’s spiritual songs (pados) in the same‘exact’ voice and in the same tune and melody continually fortwo to three hours. What must that be? This is a machine. Eventhis is the greatest science. The other kind of machine is man-made and this is not man-made (that which is happeningeffortless; anupcharik). Man cannot create such a machine.This does not require an electric current or batteries. It will runin the daytime, in the nighttime, in the rain, in the heat, and evenwhen it snows, it stays on.If you saw someone fifteen years ago and you met himagain today, you would still recall him. That is how this machineworks.Each and every parmanu (subatomic particle) has theenergy (shakti; power) to ‘tape’ (record). The eyes have theenergy (shakti; energy) to film. Inside, you have infinite energies.From this single internal machinery, countless others are created.Therefore, this is extremely powerful machinery.As long as you have need of this world’s interaction(vyavahar), you should speak in a pleasing manner, that will winover the minds of others (manohar). He whose speech,conduct and humility have become manohar (win over theminds of others), becomes prematma (the embodiment of love).But how can you learn this? People use such speech, that aperson who is about to offer them a cup of tea will change hismind.If you go to an unfamiliar village, and you keep saying,“These petty vendors are so...” and you go on complaining, thenare you going to find anything to eat there in the evening?Instead if you just say, “You people are so kind.” If you say this,people will actually come up to you and ask, “Have you eatenyet or not?”In this era of the time cycle, you should not even, ridiculesomeone. You should not say a single word. If a man is fat, youshould not call him “fat”. If a man is tall, you should not call him“tall”. People have turned into ‘plastic’ (insensitive). Our peoplewill criticize anyone. Not just humans, but they even criticize thisfruit. “This will give me gas”, they will say. “This will produce tooAptavani-4369370Aptavani-4Questioner: Do the evidences (puraava) presentthemselves as circumstances (saiyog)?Dadashri: Yes. When circumstances come together, theymanifest externally. There are some evidences that remain withinand torment you. Even that happens when the circumstancescome together. They are considered internal circumstances. Thatis scientific circumstantial evidence.If while at home, a man scolds his wife, he will think, ‘Noone has heard anything, this is normal!’ In the presence of theiryoung children, the couple says whatever they like to each other.According to them, what is a child going to understand? Heyyou! What about the ‘taping’ that is going on inside him? It willall come out when the child grows up!Questioner: If we do not want to ‘tape’ (record)anything, then what is the answer to that?Dadashri: Do not give out any vibrations. Just keep‘seeing’ everything. But that is not going to happen! Even this isa ‘machine’ and moreover, it is dependent on other entity. Thisis why I am showing you another way, so that if it does get‘taped’, you can immediately erase it, and it will be alright. Thispratikraman is the tool for erasing. With that, a change willhappen within a couple of lifetimes, and hurtful speech will cometo an end.Questioner: After I have attained the awareness of thepure Soul, the pratikraman is always going on.Dadashri: Then you are no longer responsible.I hear Kaviraj’s spiritual songs (pados) in the same‘exact’ voice and in the same tune and melody continually fortwo to three hours. What must that be? This is a machine. Eventhis is the greatest science. The other kind of machine is man-made and this is not man-made (that which is happeningeffortless; anupcharik). Man cannot create such a machine.This does not require an electric current or batteries. It will runin the daytime, in the nighttime, in the rain, in the heat, and evenwhen it snows, it stays on.If you saw someone fifteen years ago and you met himagain today, you would still recall him. That is how this machineworks.Each and every parmanu (subatomic particle) has theenergy (shakti; power) to ‘tape’ (record). The eyes have theenergy (shakti; energy) to film. Inside, you have infinite energies.From this single internal machinery, countless others are created.Therefore, this is extremely powerful machinery.As long as you have need of this world’s interaction(vyavahar), you should speak in a pleasing manner, that will winover the minds of others (manohar). He whose speech,conduct and humility have become manohar (win over theminds of others), becomes prematma (the embodiment of love).But how can you learn this? People use such speech, that aperson who is about to offer them a cup of tea will change hismind.If you go to an unfamiliar village, and you keep saying,“These petty vendors are so...” and you go on complaining, thenare you going to find anything to eat there in the evening?Instead if you just say, “You people are so kind.” If you say this,people will actually come up to you and ask, “Have you eatenyet or not?”In this era of the time cycle, you should not even, ridiculesomeone. You should not say a single word. If a man is fat, youshould not call him “fat”. If a man is tall, you should not call him“tall”. People have turned into ‘plastic’ (insensitive). Our peoplewill criticize anyone. Not just humans, but they even criticize thisfruit. “This will give me gas”, they will say. “This will produce tooAptavani-4371372Aptavani-4much heat in my intestines”. Hey now! You may get gas from it,but others will not. Their whole language is awkward, so whatcan you do?This world has arisen through speech, and it will endthrough speech.In these ‘developed’ households, of cultured people, it isnot their careless behavior, but their careless speech, that causesunhappiness (dukh; grief). Do you think that these people throwstones at each other at home? No! They shoot arrows of words.Is it better to throw a stone or is it better to strike with harshspeech?Questioner: A stone is better.Dadashri: Our people prefer stones over something thatdoes not physically hurt them. If something causes bleeding orburning when it hits you, you can get a doctor to treat you. Butwhen words cause a wound, it will never heal. Even after fifteenyears or so, that wound will go on hurting! Why is that so? Itis because you believe that the words came from the personhimself. I guarantee you that, every living being’s speech is a‘record’. Even mine is a ‘record’! If this ‘record’ is playing,“Chandubhai is not a good man, Chandubhai is not a goodman...” would you be become defensive?Questioner: But that is a machine, isn’t it?Dadashri: Even when human beings speak, they are all‘records’. If you consider your own words, as a ‘record’ andthe other person’s words as a ‘record’ you will find a solution.There is no other way to win over the world. As soon as youutter, “record”, the other person has become faultless (nirdosh)!When in a state of ignorance, as long as a person feels,‘He keeps going on and on... How can I take any more ofit?!’, sickness will not leave. You do not have to suffer ortolerate anything. You just have to understand that it is a‘record’. If you do not believe that speech is in the form of a‘record’, then even your speech will come out like that.Therefore, the cycle of effect and cause, cause and effect willjust perpetuate.Speech is entirely a ‘thermometer’.This science is such that it will bring about a solution. Ifsomeone tells you off, or if he laughs at you, then you shouldlaugh along with him. You know that this is how the record isplaying. How can the other person be saying anything? Hehimself is a ‘top’ (spinning toy) there. This poor man onlydeserves sympathy!Questioner: At the time, I do not have this kind ofawareness.Dadashri: First, you have to decide that, “Speech is arecord.” Speech is a record, is a record, is a record… “Overt(sthool) circumstances, subtle (sookshma) circumstances, andcircumstances of speech (vani) are of the non-Self (par) andthey are dependent on the non-Self (paradhin).” Speech isneither in the hands of the speaker, nor is it in the hands of thelistener. Circumstances of speech are of the non-Self and theyare dependent on the non-Self. Who would stick out his handwhen these firework rockets go off?Bhagwan (God) moves away from any discussion thatgoes beyond two minutes. When the conversation turnsreckless, Bhagwan leaves. It is okay to discuss something, aslong as there is no insistence in it. With insistence, one increasesthe burden.Speech Is the Embodiment of EgoSpeech is just an open ego. What is being said, and howmuch is being said, is all an open ego. Except, when the GnaniAptavani-4371372Aptavani-4much heat in my intestines”. Hey now! You may get gas from it,but others will not. Their whole language is awkward, so whatcan you do?This world has arisen through speech, and it will endthrough speech.In these ‘developed’ households, of cultured people, it isnot their careless behavior, but their careless speech, that causesunhappiness (dukh; grief). Do you think that these people throwstones at each other at home? No! They shoot arrows of words.Is it better to throw a stone or is it better to strike with harshspeech?Questioner: A stone is better.Dadashri: Our people prefer stones over something thatdoes not physically hurt them. If something causes bleeding orburning when it hits you, you can get a doctor to treat you. Butwhen words cause a wound, it will never heal. Even after fifteenyears or so, that wound will go on hurting! Why is that so? Itis because you believe that the words came from the personhimself. I guarantee you that, every living being’s speech is a‘record’. Even mine is a ‘record’! If this ‘record’ is playing,“Chandubhai is not a good man, Chandubhai is not a goodman...” would you be become defensive?Questioner: But that is a machine, isn’t it?Dadashri: Even when human beings speak, they are all‘records’. If you consider your own words, as a ‘record’ andthe other person’s words as a ‘record’ you will find a solution.There is no other way to win over the world. As soon as youutter, “record”, the other person has become faultless (nirdosh)!When in a state of ignorance, as long as a person feels,‘He keeps going on and on... How can I take any more ofit?!’, sickness will not leave. You do not have to suffer ortolerate anything. You just have to understand that it is a‘record’. If you do not believe that speech is in the form of a‘record’, then even your speech will come out like that.Therefore, the cycle of effect and cause, cause and effect willjust perpetuate.Speech is entirely a ‘thermometer’.This science is such that it will bring about a solution. Ifsomeone tells you off, or if he laughs at you, then you shouldlaugh along with him. You know that this is how the record isplaying. How can the other person be saying anything? Hehimself is a ‘top’ (spinning toy) there. This poor man onlydeserves sympathy!Questioner: At the time, I do not have this kind ofawareness.Dadashri: First, you have to decide that, “Speech is arecord.” Speech is a record, is a record, is a record… “Overt(sthool) circumstances, subtle (sookshma) circumstances, andcircumstances of speech (vani) are of the non-Self (par) andthey are dependent on the non-Self (paradhin).” Speech isneither in the hands of the speaker, nor is it in the hands of thelistener. Circumstances of speech are of the non-Self and theyare dependent on the non-Self. Who would stick out his handwhen these firework rockets go off?Bhagwan (God) moves away from any discussion thatgoes beyond two minutes. When the conversation turnsreckless, Bhagwan leaves. It is okay to discuss something, aslong as there is no insistence in it. With insistence, one increasesthe burden.Speech Is the Embodiment of EgoSpeech is just an open ego. What is being said, and howmuch is being said, is all an open ego. Except, when the GnaniAptavani-4373374Aptavani-4speaks syadvaad (that speech which does not hurt any livingbeing), there is no ego in it. However, when he says anythingelse, it is only his ego that is coming out. That ego is one thatis leaving. It is called a ‘discharge’ ego.Questioner: So, it is speech without ego that comes out?Dadashri: It is called a ‘lifeless’ (nirjiva) ego. If thespeech has a ‘living’ (sajiva) ego, then it will hurt others. ‘Our’speech is without ‘My-ness’ (nirmamatva), and is egoless(nirahamkari), which is why people experience joy.Just by listening to someone speak, you can tell the kindof ego, and to what extent it has been ‘charged’. Speech thatis without syadvaad is all ego. Ego is not as apparent in one’sconduct. Only on occasion you might see a person’s chestinflated with ego, perhaps when you go to a wedding.‘How well I spoke!’ is a parigraha of speech. ‘I amtalking’ is the awareness by which a new seed of karma issown.Questioner: What is spontaneous and natural (sahajik)speech?Dadashri: One that does not have the slightest bit of egoin it. Not even for a second do I become the owner of thisspeech, so therefore my speech is spontaneous and natural(sahajik).The worldly self (atma) is sacharachar (mixture of thestill, the Self and the changing, the non-Self). There are three‘char’ in ‘sachar’: aachar (conduct), vichaar (thoughts) anduchchar (speech). If these three remain within the bounds of‘normality’ there is no problem. When they are in normality, ahuman’s ‘fragrance’ can indeed be perceived. What is thegreatest test for a person? Do not test him by his conduct, donot test him by his thoughts, but do test him by his speech.No Solution Without Vitarag SpeechSomeone asked the Lord, “By what means do we attainmoksha?” And the Lord replied, “Without vitarag speech,there is no other way.” Such speech is that which accomplishesthe ultimate (siddha speech); it grows on the listener.Questioner: What is the definition and level (praman) ofvitarag speech?Dadashri: Vitarag speech means that it is acceptable toevery soul and every religion. Only an obstinate person will notaccept it. Vitarag speech is pleasing to the Atma, while otherspeeches are pleasing to the mind. From the moment you hearthe vitarag speech, it will appear new to you, it will seem,unprecedented (apurva) to you. Apurva means that it has neverbeen heard before and you will not have read it anywherebefore. You can say that it is the speech of a Vitarag, becauseeveryone will embrace it; believers and non-believers alike.Even non-believers will say, “We accept what you say, but it isreally not for us”.The ‘Taping’ of SpeechQuestioner: You say that you are not speaking, but thatit is a ‘tape-record’ playing. Please explain how that is so?Dadashri: You can tell by its attributes (gunadharma).There are no attributes (gunadharma) of the Atma in it. Thereare not any gunadharma of the pudgal (non-Self) in it either.It is a stage (avastha; state) of the pudgal. Speech is ‘taped’(recorded), prompted by the ego (ahamkar). The ego(ahamkar) does not ‘tape’ on its own. It only prompts the‘taping’. From within, the ego does the prompting: ‘When I amin court, I want to say it like this...or I want to say that’, and thatis how the ‘tape’ comes out.Questioner: When would your speech have been‘taped’?Aptavani-4373374Aptavani-4speaks syadvaad (that speech which does not hurt any livingbeing), there is no ego in it. However, when he says anythingelse, it is only his ego that is coming out. That ego is one thatis leaving. It is called a ‘discharge’ ego.Questioner: So, it is speech without ego that comes out?Dadashri: It is called a ‘lifeless’ (nirjiva) ego. If thespeech has a ‘living’ (sajiva) ego, then it will hurt others. ‘Our’speech is without ‘My-ness’ (nirmamatva), and is egoless(nirahamkari), which is why people experience joy.Just by listening to someone speak, you can tell the kindof ego, and to what extent it has been ‘charged’. Speech thatis without syadvaad is all ego. Ego is not as apparent in one’sconduct. Only on occasion you might see a person’s chestinflated with ego, perhaps when you go to a wedding.‘How well I spoke!’ is a parigraha of speech. ‘I amtalking’ is the awareness by which a new seed of karma issown.Questioner: What is spontaneous and natural (sahajik)speech?Dadashri: One that does not have the slightest bit of egoin it. Not even for a second do I become the owner of thisspeech, so therefore my speech is spontaneous and natural(sahajik).The worldly self (atma) is sacharachar (mixture of thestill, the Self and the changing, the non-Self). There are three‘char’ in ‘sachar’: aachar (conduct), vichaar (thoughts) anduchchar (speech). If these three remain within the bounds of‘normality’ there is no problem. When they are in normality, ahuman’s ‘fragrance’ can indeed be perceived. What is thegreatest test for a person? Do not test him by his conduct, donot test him by his thoughts, but do test him by his speech.No Solution Without Vitarag SpeechSomeone asked the Lord, “By what means do we attainmoksha?” And the Lord replied, “Without vitarag speech,there is no other way.” Such speech is that which accomplishesthe ultimate (siddha speech); it grows on the listener.Questioner: What is the definition and level (praman) ofvitarag speech?Dadashri: Vitarag speech means that it is acceptable toevery soul and every religion. Only an obstinate person will notaccept it. Vitarag speech is pleasing to the Atma, while otherspeeches are pleasing to the mind. From the moment you hearthe vitarag speech, it will appear new to you, it will seem,unprecedented (apurva) to you. Apurva means that it has neverbeen heard before and you will not have read it anywherebefore. You can say that it is the speech of a Vitarag, becauseeveryone will embrace it; believers and non-believers alike.Even non-believers will say, “We accept what you say, but it isreally not for us”.The ‘Taping’ of SpeechQuestioner: You say that you are not speaking, but thatit is a ‘tape-record’ playing. Please explain how that is so?Dadashri: You can tell by its attributes (gunadharma).There are no attributes (gunadharma) of the Atma in it. Thereare not any gunadharma of the pudgal (non-Self) in it either.It is a stage (avastha; state) of the pudgal. Speech is ‘taped’(recorded), prompted by the ego (ahamkar). The ego(ahamkar) does not ‘tape’ on its own. It only prompts the‘taping’. From within, the ego does the prompting: ‘When I amin court, I want to say it like this...or I want to say that’, and thatis how the ‘tape’ comes out.Questioner: When would your speech have been‘taped’?Aptavani-4375376Aptavani-4Dadashri: It was taped in the past life and now it is beingplayed in this life.Questioner: Is speech the sthool (tangible; overt) resultof sookshma (subtle)?Dadashri: Yes, the subtle turned into the overt.Questioner: Where did the subtle (sookshma) originatein the first place?Dadashri: Before that, the subtle (sookshma) againarises from the overt (sthool). When it is sthool, on account ofattachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh), once again a new subtle(sookshma) one arises. If for just one lifetime, you manage toremain vitarag (absence of attachment and abhorrence), thewhole process would end. But people just go on sowing thoseseeds (through attachment-abhorrence).Questioner: Wouldn’t you call the language that you arespeaking, a samadhi bhasha (language that gives inner stillnessand peace)?Dadashri: If you want to call it a samadhi bhasha, thenyou can call it a samadhi bhasha. If you want to call itsyadvaad, then it is syadvaad. ‘Our’ speech will never giveunhappiness to others; it renders happiness to all. ‘We’ do not‘own’ this speech. Once the ego is completely gone, the‘record’ is clean. My record (speech) became clear after Gnanmanifested in me.Questioner: When can one say that his speech is arecord?Dadashri: When you do not notice any like or dislike(bhaav-abhaav) on the person’s face, ownership of the speechhas indeed been lost, and that is where your ‘end’ (liberation)comes.The ‘Charging Point’ of SpeechQuestioner: If this is a ‘discharging tape’, then how dowe create a new ‘tape’?Dadashri: While you are speaking right now, a new‘tape’ is simultaneously being recorded. That ‘tape’ is createdthrough your bhaav (inner intent). It is ‘taped’ according to yourbhaav. What is my bhaav when I am talking? If it is: ‘I wantto insult you’, then that is how it will be ‘taped’. If it is: ‘I wantto respect you and act lovingly towards you’, then it is ‘taped’in that way. So it gets ‘taped’ according to the inner intent(bhaav).Questioner: Is it created anew when bhaav occurs?Dadashri: Of course. When the bhaav occurs, a newtape is created. And you will not be able to change it, even ifyou try. This speech is not the property (dharma) of the pudgal(the non-Self complex). It is something aupcharik (not real).Therefore, the inner intents (bhaav) from the previous life; thosethat have passed, come into effect in the present, and that is howthey are immediately ‘taped’ and released as words. It all getsdone ‘speedily’. It is astonishing! The speech that comes outtoday, is not the muda-bhaav (charge), but the old bhaav.Gata-bhaav (past bhaav) is a ‘discharge’ bhaav, and it isbecause of this that the speech comes out. Therefore, speech isthe ‘discharge’ of the ‘discharge’. And the mind is a “pure”‘discharge’. ‘Discharge’ bhaav means ‘lifeless’ (nirjiva) bhaav.Questioner: How did speech get ‘taped’ in the firstplace?Dadashri: The Atma encounters circumstances ofsubatomic particles (parmanus), and that is where ‘charging’occurs. The Atma’s presence, gives rise to vibrations of like-dislike (bhaav-abhaav), and if ego enters into it, then thosevibrations get ‘taped’.Aptavani-4375376Aptavani-4Dadashri: It was taped in the past life and now it is beingplayed in this life.Questioner: Is speech the sthool (tangible; overt) resultof sookshma (subtle)?Dadashri: Yes, the subtle turned into the overt.Questioner: Where did the subtle (sookshma) originatein the first place?Dadashri: Before that, the subtle (sookshma) againarises from the overt (sthool). When it is sthool, on account ofattachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh), once again a new subtle(sookshma) one arises. If for just one lifetime, you manage toremain vitarag (absence of attachment and abhorrence), thewhole process would end. But people just go on sowing thoseseeds (through attachment-abhorrence).Questioner: Wouldn’t you call the language that you arespeaking, a samadhi bhasha (language that gives inner stillnessand peace)?Dadashri: If you want to call it a samadhi bhasha, thenyou can call it a samadhi bhasha. If you want to call itsyadvaad, then it is syadvaad. ‘Our’ speech will never giveunhappiness to others; it renders happiness to all. ‘We’ do not‘own’ this speech. Once the ego is completely gone, the‘record’ is clean. My record (speech) became clear after Gnanmanifested in me.Questioner: When can one say that his speech is arecord?Dadashri: When you do not notice any like or dislike(bhaav-abhaav) on the person’s face, ownership of the speechhas indeed been lost, and that is where your ‘end’ (liberation)comes.The ‘Charging Point’ of SpeechQuestioner: If this is a ‘discharging tape’, then how dowe create a new ‘tape’?Dadashri: While you are speaking right now, a new‘tape’ is simultaneously being recorded. That ‘tape’ is createdthrough your bhaav (inner intent). It is ‘taped’ according to yourbhaav. What is my bhaav when I am talking? If it is: ‘I wantto insult you’, then that is how it will be ‘taped’. If it is: ‘I wantto respect you and act lovingly towards you’, then it is ‘taped’in that way. So it gets ‘taped’ according to the inner intent(bhaav).Questioner: Is it created anew when bhaav occurs?Dadashri: Of course. When the bhaav occurs, a newtape is created. And you will not be able to change it, even ifyou try. This speech is not the property (dharma) of the pudgal(the non-Self complex). It is something aupcharik (not real).Therefore, the inner intents (bhaav) from the previous life; thosethat have passed, come into effect in the present, and that is howthey are immediately ‘taped’ and released as words. It all getsdone ‘speedily’. It is astonishing! The speech that comes outtoday, is not the muda-bhaav (charge), but the old bhaav.Gata-bhaav (past bhaav) is a ‘discharge’ bhaav, and it isbecause of this that the speech comes out. Therefore, speech isthe ‘discharge’ of the ‘discharge’. And the mind is a “pure”‘discharge’. ‘Discharge’ bhaav means ‘lifeless’ (nirjiva) bhaav.Questioner: How did speech get ‘taped’ in the firstplace?Dadashri: The Atma encounters circumstances ofsubatomic particles (parmanus), and that is where ‘charging’occurs. The Atma’s presence, gives rise to vibrations of like-dislike (bhaav-abhaav), and if ego enters into it, then thosevibrations get ‘taped’.Aptavani-4377378Aptavani-4Speech is such that it cannot show two viewpoints ‘at atime’. This means, that in order to express something, you haveto say it again in another sentence. In your inner vision(darshan) you can see it in all its entirety, but no man canexpress it ‘at a time’ (spontaneously). That is why speech iscalled syadvaad.Reciting mantras is the overt (sthool) thing. There is abenefit in the sthool, however you must take it to the subtle(sookshma) level. After saying, “I bow down to DadaBhagwan,” you should be able to visualize ‘Dada,’ even withouthis photograph. Then you have to go on to the subtlest(sookshmatam), and at the subtlest (sookshmatam) level youwill reap instant benefits!Where the Lamp Is Lit, Your Work Gets Done!Because the Atma has not become known, this entireworld is in shambles. People believe that all the movement andaction they see, would not occur without there being an Atmawithin. But what they refer to as chetan (life), is not chetan atall. We call it nischetan chetan (mechanical self; energized non-Self complex). It is not real chetan, it is a ‘discharge’ chetan,which has been mechanically wound up. The real chetan (Self),lies within. It is always constant (sthir) and always still (achar);whereas the other is constantly changing (sachar; in movement).That is why these worldly beings are called sacharachar. Thatwhich will perish is changing (sachar), and that which is eternalis achar (immovable and unchanging).That is why it is written in every scripture: ‘KnowAtmagnan (knowledge of the Self)’ but it is not so easy to do.If you have been pursuing it for innumerable past lifetimes, thenit is possible for it to manifest. Or else, it can be attained froma Gnani Purush! Otherwise Atmagnan is not something that iseasy to come by. A person may know all the scriptures, but hewill not find the Atma through them. He can memorize all theexcerpts in all the scriptures, but even then he will not knowabout the Atma. And even if he did know something, it wouldonly be in terms of words. So what would that be like? He willbe able to describe what it is like, ‘The Atma is like this, likethis...’ You sorry chap! Just say, “I am like this, I am like this”!Then he’d say, “No, how can I say that?” That is why, only hewho becomes ‘That’ (the Self) can say, “I am full of infiniteknowledge, I am full of infinite vision, I am full of infinite energy.”Do you say that or not?Questioner: Yes, I do.Dadashri: That is because you have become ‘That’ (theSelf).Questioner: But, Dada, only He who knows the Self canhelp others know the Self; no one else can, can he?Dadashri: That is why it has been said, “Know theAtmagnani as the Parmatma (the absolute Self) in a humanphysical form.” Previous Gnanis have all said that the GnaniPurush has, in the human form, become Parmatma, so weshould get our work done. The absolute Self has manifestedinside the Gnani Purush, and that Self is worth knowing. If youwant to know the Atma, then go to the Gnani Purush. Anyother ‘Atma’ of scriptures and books, will not do. If there is apicture of a candle in a book, you can see what a candle lookslike, but there will not be any light coming out from it. You willnot get anything out of it. To know the Atma you have to meetwith the Gnani Purush personally, and only then you canaccomplish your goal.Jai Sat Chit AnandAptavani-4377378Aptavani-4Speech is such that it cannot show two viewpoints ‘at atime’. This means, that in order to express something, you haveto say it again in another sentence. In your inner vision(darshan) you can see it in all its entirety, but no man canexpress it ‘at a time’ (spontaneously). That is why speech iscalled syadvaad.Reciting mantras is the overt (sthool) thing. There is abenefit in the sthool, however you must take it to the subtle(sookshma) level. After saying, “I bow down to DadaBhagwan,” you should be able to visualize ‘Dada,’ even withouthis photograph. Then you have to go on to the subtlest(sookshmatam), and at the subtlest (sookshmatam) level youwill reap instant benefits!Where the Lamp Is Lit, Your Work Gets Done!Because the Atma has not become known, this entireworld is in shambles. People believe that all the movement andaction they see, would not occur without there being an Atmawithin. But what they refer to as chetan (life), is not chetan atall. We call it nischetan chetan (mechanical self; energized non-Self complex). It is not real chetan, it is a ‘discharge’ chetan,which has been mechanically wound up. The real chetan (Self),lies within. It is always constant (sthir) and always still (achar);whereas the other is constantly changing (sachar; in movement).That is why these worldly beings are called sacharachar. Thatwhich will perish is changing (sachar), and that which is eternalis achar (immovable and unchanging).That is why it is written in every scripture: ‘KnowAtmagnan (knowledge of the Self)’ but it is not so easy to do.If you have been pursuing it for innumerable past lifetimes, thenit is possible for it to manifest. Or else, it can be attained froma Gnani Purush! Otherwise Atmagnan is not something that iseasy to come by. A person may know all the scriptures, but hewill not find the Atma through them. He can memorize all theexcerpts in all the scriptures, but even then he will not knowabout the Atma. And even if he did know something, it wouldonly be in terms of words. So what would that be like? He willbe able to describe what it is like, ‘The Atma is like this, likethis...’ You sorry chap! Just say, “I am like this, I am like this”!Then he’d say, “No, how can I say that?” That is why, only hewho becomes ‘That’ (the Self) can say, “I am full of infiniteknowledge, I am full of infinite vision, I am full of infinite energy.”Do you say that or not?Questioner: Yes, I do.Dadashri: That is because you have become ‘That’ (theSelf).Questioner: But, Dada, only He who knows the Self canhelp others know the Self; no one else can, can he?Dadashri: That is why it has been said, “Know theAtmagnani as the Parmatma (the absolute Self) in a humanphysical form.” Previous Gnanis have all said that the GnaniPurush has, in the human form, become Parmatma, so weshould get our work done. The absolute Self has manifestedinside the Gnani Purush, and that Self is worth knowing. If youwant to know the Atma, then go to the Gnani Purush. Anyother ‘Atma’ of scriptures and books, will not do. If there is apicture of a candle in a book, you can see what a candle lookslike, but there will not be any light coming out from it. You willnot get anything out of it. To know the Atma you have to meetwith the Gnani Purush personally, and only then you canaccomplish your goal.Jai Sat Chit AnandAabaruReputationAacharan   Conduct; Put into practiceAadhiMental sufferingAaghaatShockAagrahaInsistenceAasaktiAttachmentAashravInflux of karmic matterAayambilEating food made from only one varietyof grain; Jain practice of eating blandfood and only once a dayAbandhaUnboundAbhedaAs oneAbhimaanExcessive pride due to materialpossessionsAbhiprayaOpinionAbrahmacharyaSexualityAbuddhaOne who does not use intellectAcharStill; Immovable and unchangingAcharyaSpiritual masterAchetanVoid of the Self; Lifeless; The non-SelfAdharmaAny hurt caused to others; Non- religion;Irreligion;  Inauspicious and hurtfulactions; (kashay)AdhyatmikSpiritualAdhyatmik jagrutiSpiritual awarenessAgiyarasObservance of fasting done on theeleventh day of the lunar cycle; Fastingon the eleventh day of the lunar fortnightAgnaSpecial directives given by the GnaniPurush that sustains the enlightened stateafter the Gnan Vidhi; Special directiveAgnanIgnorance of the Self; Worldly or relativeknowledgeAgnan bhaavThe intent of the non-Self, ‘I amChandulal’Agnani   One who is not Self-realized; Ignorantof the SelfAgnya-shraddhaIgnorant faithAhamkarEgo; I am the “doer”Ahamkari jagrutiAwareness through egoAhimsakNon-violentAjagrutUnaware; Without awakened awarenessAjagrutiUnawarenessAjampoInternal turmoil and restlessnessAkartaNon-doerAkhandContinualAkram margThe step-less path to LiberationAkram VignanThe spiritual science of the step-lesspath to Self-realization; Step-less,direct path to Self-realizationAkram VignaniThe scientist of the direct path toliberationAlakh   The unknowable; ImperceptibleAlaukikBeyond the world; The RealAlochanaRecall transgression; Confession;Acknowledgment of mistakeAlokThe part which is outside the universeAmarpadImmortal stateAmurtaFormlessAnaadiSince time immemorialAnandBlissAnant shaktiInfinite energyAnatmaThe non-SelfAndha-shraddhaBlind faithAnekantPerspective of universal acceptanceAnekantikAccepting of all viewpoints and acceptedby allGLOSSARYAabaruReputationAacharan   Conduct; Put into practiceAadhiMental sufferingAaghaatShockAagrahaInsistenceAasaktiAttachmentAashravInflux of karmic matterAayambilEating food made from only one varietyof grain; Jain practice of eating blandfood and only once a dayAbandhaUnboundAbhedaAs oneAbhimaanExcessive pride due to materialpossessionsAbhiprayaOpinionAbrahmacharyaSexualityAbuddhaOne who does not use intellectAcharStill; Immovable and unchangingAcharyaSpiritual masterAchetanVoid of the Self; Lifeless; The non-SelfAdharmaAny hurt caused to others; Non- religion;Irreligion;  Inauspicious and hurtfulactions; (kashay)AdhyatmikSpiritualAdhyatmik jagrutiSpiritual awarenessAgiyarasObservance of fasting done on theeleventh day of the lunar cycle; Fastingon the eleventh day of the lunar fortnightAgnaSpecial directives given by the GnaniPurush that sustains the enlightened stateafter the Gnan Vidhi; Special directiveAgnanIgnorance of the Self; Worldly or relativeknowledgeAgnan bhaavThe intent of the non-Self, ‘I amChandulal’Agnani   One who is not Self-realized; Ignorantof the SelfAgnya-shraddhaIgnorant faithAhamkarEgo; I am the “doer”Ahamkari jagrutiAwareness through egoAhimsakNon-violentAjagrutUnaware; Without awakened awarenessAjagrutiUnawarenessAjampoInternal turmoil and restlessnessAkartaNon-doerAkhandContinualAkram margThe step-less path to LiberationAkram VignanThe spiritual science of the step-lesspath to Self-realization; Step-less,direct path to Self-realizationAkram VignaniThe scientist of the direct path toliberationAlakh   The unknowable; ImperceptibleAlaukikBeyond the world; The RealAlochanaRecall transgression; Confession;Acknowledgment of mistakeAlokThe part which is outside the universeAmarpadImmortal stateAmurtaFormlessAnaadiSince time immemorialAnandBlissAnant shaktiInfinite energyAnatmaThe non-SelfAndha-shraddhaBlind faithAnekantPerspective of universal acceptanceAnekantikAccepting of all viewpoints and acceptedby allGLOSSARYAntahkaranThe inner complex of the self comprisedof mind, intellect, chit and egoAntaratmaThe interim soul that is awakened to theSelf; Interim state of the Self, ‘I am pureSoul’AntarayObstacleAntaray karmaObstructing karmaAntardaahInner burningAnubandhDischarge of karma; EffectAnukampaCompassion; EmpathyAnumodanaInstigation; Instigating and encouragingothers into doing somethingAnupcharikThat which is happening effortlessAnuyogaPaths that lead to the SelfApara-bhaktiIndirect worship of the SelfAparigrahiFree from acquisitivenessAptavaniAuthentic speech of the Gnani PurushAradhak padThe state of being worshippedAradhanaTo worshipAratiThe ritual of waving lamps in front of anidol or a deity while singing a hymnArdha-saiyamPartial freedom from reaction to kashayAropit bhaavFalse assertion; Imposition of the wrongbelief of ‘I am Chandubhai’ArtadhyanAdverse internal meditation that hurtsthe selfArtataInner sufferingAsaiyamExpression of kashayAsaiyogiNo connection with any circumstanceAsaradataInflexibility and unnaturalnessAsatyaUntruthAshantiA state of restlessnessAshataPainful; UnpleasantAshata vedaniyaUnpleasant experience; Painful situationAshaya   IntentionAshubhaInauspiciousAshubha upayogInauspicious applied awarenessAstitvaExistenceAsvasthaUneasiness and restlessnessAtikramanAggression through thoughts, speech oractionAtindriyaBeyond the sensesAtindriya-gnanKnowledge beyond the sensesAtkanMajor obstructionAtmaThe Self; SoulAtma-charyaTo dwell in the SelfAtma-dharmaReligion of the SelfAtmadhyanThe meditation as the Self; Meditationof the SelfAtmagnanKnowledge of the SelfAtmagnaniThe Self-realized One; The Knower ofthe SelfAtma jagrutiAwareness of the pure Soul (Selfawareness)AtmanubhavExperience of the SelfAtma-parinatiState of the SelfAtma-ramanataBliss of the SelfAtma shantiPeace of the SelfAtma shraddha   Faith in the SelfAtmavignanScience of the SoulAtyaagAcquisitionAvagamanComing and goingAvasthaSituationsAvastha drashtiSituational visionAntahkaranThe inner complex of the self comprisedof mind, intellect, chit and egoAntaratmaThe interim soul that is awakened to theSelf; Interim state of the Self, ‘I am pureSoul’AntarayObstacleAntaray karmaObstructing karmaAntardaahInner burningAnubandhDischarge of karma; EffectAnukampaCompassion; EmpathyAnumodanaInstigation; Instigating and encouragingothers into doing somethingAnupcharikThat which is happening effortlessAnuyogaPaths that lead to the SelfApara-bhaktiIndirect worship of the SelfAparigrahiFree from acquisitivenessAptavaniAuthentic speech of the Gnani PurushAradhak padThe state of being worshippedAradhanaTo worshipAratiThe ritual of waving lamps in front of anidol or a deity while singing a hymnArdha-saiyamPartial freedom from reaction to kashayAropit bhaavFalse assertion; Imposition of the wrongbelief of ‘I am Chandubhai’ArtadhyanAdverse internal meditation that hurtsthe selfArtataInner sufferingAsaiyamExpression of kashayAsaiyogiNo connection with any circumstanceAsaradataInflexibility and unnaturalnessAsatyaUntruthAshantiA state of restlessnessAshataPainful; UnpleasantAshata vedaniyaUnpleasant experience; Painful situationAshaya   IntentionAshubhaInauspiciousAshubha upayogInauspicious applied awarenessAstitvaExistenceAsvasthaUneasiness and restlessnessAtikramanAggression through thoughts, speech oractionAtindriyaBeyond the sensesAtindriya-gnanKnowledge beyond the sensesAtkanMajor obstructionAtmaThe Self; SoulAtma-charyaTo dwell in the SelfAtma-dharmaReligion of the SelfAtmadhyanThe meditation as the Self; Meditationof the SelfAtmagnanKnowledge of the SelfAtmagnaniThe Self-realized One; The Knower ofthe SelfAtma jagrutiAwareness of the pure Soul (Selfawareness)AtmanubhavExperience of the SelfAtma-parinatiState of the SelfAtma-ramanataBliss of the SelfAtma shantiPeace of the SelfAtma shraddha   Faith in the SelfAtmavignanScience of the SoulAtyaagAcquisitionAvagamanComing and goingAvasthaSituationsAvastha drashtiSituational visionAvirataUnendingAviyogiNo dissipation; EternalAvyavahar jivasUnnamed embodied soulsAvyavahar rashiEmbodies souls in an unnamed stateBandhBinding of karmaBeej GnanSeed of GnanBhaavInner intentBhaav-abhaavLike-dislike; Intent – non-intent; Positiveand negative; Good intent and bad intentBhaavakIt is the one that makes you do theintentionsBhaavatma‘I am Chandulal’; Relative selfBhaav jagrutiAwareness of intent through, ‘I amChandubhai’BhaavkarmaCause karma; Charge karmaBhaav-munThe causal mind; Charging mindBhaavnindraAsleep to the Self; Unaware of the SelfBhaav purusharthIntent-based self-effortBhaav-shaktiEnergy of intentionBhaav-swaroopAbsolute intent filled stateBhaavyaOne doing the intentBhagwanGodBhagwat swaroopGodly formBhagyaDestinyBhaktaDevoteeBhaktiWorship; DevotionBhaktiyogaCultivation of a devotional relationshipwith God through prayerBhammardoA spinning topBharat KshetraPlanet earthBhasha   LanguageBhavLifeBhavnaDesireBhavsthitiState of developmentBhedDivisionBhed buddhiIntellect that creates divisionBhed GnanKnowledge that separates the Self fromthe non-SelfBheekhBeggarly desireBhogaPleasureBhrantiIllusionBhrant jagrutiIllusory awarenessBhrant purusharthIllusory effortBodha beejBeginning of GnanBrahmacharyaCelibacy; Absolutely free from any sexualimpulses of the mind, speech and bodyBuddhiIntellectBuddhi-gamyaIntellectualBuddhi no ashayaReceptacle of intellectChaitanya ParmatmaAbsolute Self, Life energyChakraA chakra is believed to be a center ofactivity within the body that receives,assimilates and expresses life forceenergyChakshuVisionChanchalRestlessChanchalataRestlessnessCharananuyogaThe path of surrender and devotionCharitraConductCharitrabudStrength of conductChetakMakes one become cautiousChetanThe Self; Animate; Life energyChetan shaktiEnergy of the SelfChetan tattvaElement of the SelfAvirataUnendingAviyogiNo dissipation; EternalAvyavahar jivasUnnamed embodied soulsAvyavahar rashiEmbodies souls in an unnamed stateBandhBinding of karmaBeej GnanSeed of GnanBhaavInner intentBhaav-abhaavLike-dislike; Intent – non-intent; Positiveand negative; Good intent and bad intentBhaavakIt is the one that makes you do theintentionsBhaavatma‘I am Chandulal’; Relative selfBhaav jagrutiAwareness of intent through, ‘I amChandubhai’BhaavkarmaCause karma; Charge karmaBhaav-munThe causal mind; Charging mindBhaavnindraAsleep to the Self; Unaware of the SelfBhaav purusharthIntent-based self-effortBhaav-shaktiEnergy of intentionBhaav-swaroopAbsolute intent filled stateBhaavyaOne doing the intentBhagwanGodBhagwat swaroopGodly formBhagyaDestinyBhaktaDevoteeBhaktiWorship; DevotionBhaktiyogaCultivation of a devotional relationshipwith God through prayerBhammardoA spinning topBharat KshetraPlanet earthBhasha   LanguageBhavLifeBhavnaDesireBhavsthitiState of developmentBhedDivisionBhed buddhiIntellect that creates divisionBhed GnanKnowledge that separates the Self fromthe non-SelfBheekhBeggarly desireBhogaPleasureBhrantiIllusionBhrant jagrutiIllusory awarenessBhrant purusharthIllusory effortBodha beejBeginning of GnanBrahmacharyaCelibacy; Absolutely free from any sexualimpulses of the mind, speech and bodyBuddhiIntellectBuddhi-gamyaIntellectualBuddhi no ashayaReceptacle of intellectChaitanya ParmatmaAbsolute Self, Life energyChakraA chakra is believed to be a center ofactivity within the body that receives,assimilates and expresses life forceenergyChakshuVisionChanchalRestlessChanchalataRestlessnessCharananuyogaThe path of surrender and devotionCharitraConductCharitrabudStrength of conductChetakMakes one become cautiousChetanThe Self; Animate; Life energyChetan shaktiEnergy of the SelfChetan tattvaElement of the SelfChintaWorriesChitInner component of knowledge andvisionChoriStealingChovihaarPractice of eating food before sundownDaanatIntentionDagoBetrayal; DeceptionDakhoInterferenceDarshanVision; Devotional viewing; In AkramVignan it is vision as the SelfDarshanantarayObstacles to vision as the SelfDarshan kriyaVision; To See and remain as the SelfDayaKindnessDeha-buddhiTo be in the non-SelfDehadhariParmatma The embodiment of the absolute SelfDehadhyasBelief ‘I am the body’Deha SamadhiCalmness of the bodyDerasarJain templeDevas and DevisCelestial deitiesDevgatiLife as a celestial beingDharmaReligion; Duty; True nature of a thingDharmadharmaRelative religionDharmadharma atmaDeluded soul; One who believes thisrelative world as real; The one who isasleep (without any awakenedawareness) in this worldDharmadhyanVirtuous meditationDharmasaarEssence of religionDhyanMeditation; Focus; AwarenessDhyataOne who meditates on the goalDhyeyaGoalDivyaDivineDivyachakshuVision of the Self ; Divine visionDoshFault; Error; MistakeDoshitAt faultDrashtaSeerDrashtiVisionDrashti-gamyaThat which is visibleDrashyaImage; Object to be seenDravyaPhysical matter/element; Effect of karmaDravya-atmaDischarge pratishthit soul; One behavesas a Tirthankar in the next lifeDravya-bhaavPast life cause ready at the time of effectin this life; Discharge intent ready fornext lifeDravyakarmaEffect karma; Subtle discharging karmaDravya kriyaVisible physical actionDravya munDischarging mind; Effect mindDravyanuyogaIn Jainism, the philosophy of the essenceof life and liberation through scripturesDukhPain; Misery; UnhappinessDuragrahiObstinateDushamkaal(Same as Kaliyug), current time cyclecharacterized as a time of lack of unityin people’s thought, speech and action;An era of moral and spiritual declineEkagrataConcentrationEkantikIndividualized perspective; Narrow-minded; Partial; Adhering to a singleviewpointEkendriya jivaOne-sensed organismFarajiyatMandatoryGaanthKnot; TuberGachhaSectGalanDischarge; OutputGanadharsChief disciples of TirthankarsChintaWorriesChitInner component of knowledge andvisionChoriStealingChovihaarPractice of eating food before sundownDaanatIntentionDagoBetrayal; DeceptionDakhoInterferenceDarshanVision; Devotional viewing; In AkramVignan it is vision as the SelfDarshanantarayObstacles to vision as the SelfDarshan kriyaVision; To See and remain as the SelfDayaKindnessDeha-buddhiTo be in the non-SelfDehadhariParmatma The embodiment of the absolute SelfDehadhyasBelief ‘I am the body’Deha SamadhiCalmness of the bodyDerasarJain templeDevas and DevisCelestial deitiesDevgatiLife as a celestial beingDharmaReligion; Duty; True nature of a thingDharmadharmaRelative religionDharmadharma atmaDeluded soul; One who believes thisrelative world as real; The one who isasleep (without any awakenedawareness) in this worldDharmadhyanVirtuous meditationDharmasaarEssence of religionDhyanMeditation; Focus; AwarenessDhyataOne who meditates on the goalDhyeyaGoalDivyaDivineDivyachakshuVision of the Self ; Divine visionDoshFault; Error; MistakeDoshitAt faultDrashtaSeerDrashtiVisionDrashti-gamyaThat which is visibleDrashyaImage; Object to be seenDravyaPhysical matter/element; Effect of karmaDravya-atmaDischarge pratishthit soul; One behavesas a Tirthankar in the next lifeDravya-bhaavPast life cause ready at the time of effectin this life; Discharge intent ready fornext lifeDravyakarmaEffect karma; Subtle discharging karmaDravya kriyaVisible physical actionDravya munDischarging mind; Effect mindDravyanuyogaIn Jainism, the philosophy of the essenceof life and liberation through scripturesDukhPain; Misery; UnhappinessDuragrahiObstinateDushamkaal(Same as Kaliyug), current time cyclecharacterized as a time of lack of unityin people’s thought, speech and action;An era of moral and spiritual declineEkagrataConcentrationEkantikIndividualized perspective; Narrow-minded; Partial; Adhering to a singleviewpointEkendriya jivaOne-sensed organismFarajiyatMandatoryGaanthKnot; TuberGachhaSectGalanDischarge; OutputGanadharsChief disciples of TirthankarsGarbha avasthaState in the wombGarvaEgo of doershipGhadbhanjAn activity of construction anddestructionGhatiDestroyerGhemarajiPompous display without any substanceGnanKnowledge of the SelfGnanantarayObstacles against Knowledge of theSelfGnanatmaInterim state of the Self, ‘I am pureSoul’Gnan-DarshanKnowledge-VisionGnanendriyaFive senses; Sense organs of knowledgenamely: hearing-ears, touch-skin, sight-eyes, taste-tongue, and smell-noseGnanghan AtmaThe Self with Knowledge; The interimstate of the soul, ‘I am pure Soul’Gnani PurushThe Enlightened One, and is able toenlighten othersGnanisThose who are Self-realizedGnani-sangnyaKnowledge of the GnaniGnan jagrutiAwareness of the SelfGnan kriyaTo know and remain as the SelfGnanswaroopThe state of the SelfGnan-syadvaadSpeech that flows in the state of GnanGnataThe KnowerGnayakThe KnowerGneyaThe object to be knownGrahanAcquisitionGranthiTuber; KnotGunadharmaAttributes and natureGurukilliGuru-keyGuru krupaGuru’s graceHariGodHasyaLaughterHetuIntention; Motive; PurposeHimsaViolenceHimsakViolentHimsak bhaavViolent intentHitta-ahitaBenefit-harmIchchhaDesireIndriyaSense organIndriya-gnanKnowledge attained through the mediumof the sensesIshwarGodJadaLifeless; Inanimate matter; Non-living;Also mean lacking sensitivity; Impervious;InhumaneJagat kalyanSalvation of the worldJagatsaarEssence of the worldJagrutAwake and alertJagrutiAwakened awareness; Awakenedawareness of the SelfJalebiIndian sweetJapaChanting of God’s name or mantraJignyasuInquisitive personJivanmuktaOne with freedom from wandering lifeafter life; Freedom while livingJivasEmbodied souls; Living beingsKaadTimeKadagrahaEntrenched in one’s own viewpointKadhapoOutburst that hurts others; Visible angerKadheeSoupGarbha avasthaState in the wombGarvaEgo of doershipGhadbhanjAn activity of construction anddestructionGhatiDestroyerGhemarajiPompous display without any substanceGnanKnowledge of the SelfGnanantarayObstacles against Knowledge of theSelfGnanatmaInterim state of the Self, ‘I am pureSoul’Gnan-DarshanKnowledge-VisionGnanendriyaFive senses; Sense organs of knowledgenamely: hearing-ears, touch-skin, sight-eyes, taste-tongue, and smell-noseGnanghan AtmaThe Self with Knowledge; The interimstate of the soul, ‘I am pure Soul’Gnani PurushThe Enlightened One, and is able toenlighten othersGnanisThose who are Self-realizedGnani-sangnyaKnowledge of the GnaniGnan jagrutiAwareness of the SelfGnan kriyaTo know and remain as the SelfGnanswaroopThe state of the SelfGnan-syadvaadSpeech that flows in the state of GnanGnataThe KnowerGnayakThe KnowerGneyaThe object to be knownGrahanAcquisitionGranthiTuber; KnotGunadharmaAttributes and natureGurukilliGuru-keyGuru krupaGuru’s graceHariGodHasyaLaughterHetuIntention; Motive; PurposeHimsaViolenceHimsakViolentHimsak bhaavViolent intentHitta-ahitaBenefit-harmIchchhaDesireIndriyaSense organIndriya-gnanKnowledge attained through the mediumof the sensesIshwarGodJadaLifeless; Inanimate matter; Non-living;Also mean lacking sensitivity; Impervious;InhumaneJagat kalyanSalvation of the worldJagatsaarEssence of the worldJagrutAwake and alertJagrutiAwakened awareness; Awakenedawareness of the SelfJalebiIndian sweetJapaChanting of God’s name or mantraJignyasuInquisitive personJivanmuktaOne with freedom from wandering lifeafter life; Freedom while livingJivasEmbodied souls; Living beingsKaadTimeKadagrahaEntrenched in one’s own viewpointKadhapoOutburst that hurts others; Visible angerKadheeSoupKaliyugCurrent era of the time cyclecharacterized by lack of unity in mind,speech and conductKalyanBlessed eternallyKalyankariBeneficialKandamoodRoot vegetablesKanjoosMiserlyKankaasOngoing clashKapatDeceitKaran shariraCausal bodyKarmendriyaFive organs of actionKarnanuyogaIn Jainism, the path of understanding thelaw of cause and effect, the descriptionof the universeKartaThe doerKarta bhaavA sense of doershipKashaysAnger, pride, deceit and greedKathanuyogaIn Jainism, stories of the great humanbeings who have attained the SelfKevalgnanAbsolute knowledgeKhatkaroReminderKhenchInsistencesKhichadeeStaple rice and lentil mixtureKhyalAwarenessKirtanSing religious songsKirtiFameKleshaConflictKramic pathTraditional step-by-step path to Self-realizationKriyaActions and rituals through mind, speechand bodyKriya-shaktiThe energy to doKriya-vadiThe doer of somethingKrodhAngerKrodhakThat which makes one do angerKrupaGraceKshamaForgivenessKshatriyaThe warrior classKshetraPlace; LocationKucharitraUnpleasant and unacceptable conductKundaliniCorporeal energy; Yogic powerKuntaMother of the five Pandavas in theMahabharataKusangiWrong company; A negative influenceLabhalabhaGain and lossLakshaAwarenessLaukikWorldlyLobhGreedLobhioA greedy personLokThe universeLokasRegions of the universeLoksangnyaSocietal influence; Worldly peer pressureMaadakataIntoxication of the egoMaanPride; RespectMaardavataTendernessMadhyalokMiddle worldMaha-mohaniyaGreatly deluding karmakarmaMaha-muktaSupremely freeMaharajHigh ranking asceticMahatmasThose who have attained Self-realizationthrough Gnan VidhiMahavideh KshetraMahavideh is the name of a location inthis universe where currently there aretwenty Tirthankars, deeming it the mostKaliyugCurrent era of the time cyclecharacterized by lack of unity in mind,speech and conductKalyanBlessed eternallyKalyankariBeneficialKandamoodRoot vegetablesKanjoosMiserlyKankaasOngoing clashKapatDeceitKaran shariraCausal bodyKarmendriyaFive organs of actionKarnanuyogaIn Jainism, the path of understanding thelaw of cause and effect, the descriptionof the universeKartaThe doerKarta bhaavA sense of doershipKashaysAnger, pride, deceit and greedKathanuyogaIn Jainism, stories of the great humanbeings who have attained the SelfKevalgnanAbsolute knowledgeKhatkaroReminderKhenchInsistencesKhichadeeStaple rice and lentil mixtureKhyalAwarenessKirtanSing religious songsKirtiFameKleshaConflictKramic pathTraditional step-by-step path to Self-realizationKriyaActions and rituals through mind, speechand bodyKriya-shaktiThe energy to doKriya-vadiThe doer of somethingKrodhAngerKrodhakThat which makes one do angerKrupaGraceKshamaForgivenessKshatriyaThe warrior classKshetraPlace; LocationKucharitraUnpleasant and unacceptable conductKundaliniCorporeal energy; Yogic powerKuntaMother of the five Pandavas in theMahabharataKusangiWrong company; A negative influenceLabhalabhaGain and lossLakshaAwarenessLaukikWorldlyLobhGreedLobhioA greedy personLokThe universeLokasRegions of the universeLoksangnyaSocietal influence; Worldly peer pressureMaadakataIntoxication of the egoMaanPride; RespectMaardavataTendernessMadhyalokMiddle worldMaha-mohaniyaGreatly deluding karmakarmaMaha-muktaSupremely freeMaharajHigh ranking asceticMahatmasThose who have attained Self-realizationthrough Gnan VidhiMahavideh KshetraMahavideh is the name of a location inthis universe where currently there aretwenty Tirthankars, deeming it the mostsacred kshetra; a special world fromwhere souls can attain final mokshathrough darshan of existing TirthankarsMamataMy-ness; AttachmentManoharWin over the minds of othersMarajiyatFree willMarmaMeaningMarmasaarEssence of the meaning of religionMataViewpoint; OpinionMatagrahaObstinacy of viewpointMatagrahiPertinacious about one’s own opinionMatbhedDissension because of differing opinionsMaunMaintaining silenceMayaDeceit; Illusory attachmentMishrachetanPower chetan; The relative selfMishrasaMixed parmanus waiting to give effectMithya darshanDeluded visionMithya drashtiIllusory visionMithyatvaIgnorance of the Self; Wrong belief of ‘Iam Chandubhai’MithyatviOne with the wrong vision of ‘I amChandubhai’; One with deluded visionMohaIllusory attachmentMohanindraSleep of illusory attachmentMohaniyaDeludingMohaniya karmaKarma of illusory attachmentMokshaLiberationMoksha dharmaThe true nature of liberationMoriyoSpecial grainMuda samayaTime as an eternal elementMudhatmaDeluded soul (‘I am Chandubhai’); Thestate of the Soul in ignorance of the SelfMuktaFreeMukta hasyaLiberated smile (the permanent radianceon the face of the completely liberatedOne—Purush); The smile and thelaughter of the liberated OneMuktiLiberation; FreedomMumukshuDesirous for only moksha; Seeker ofmokshaMunMindMundapoTo beginMurchhaIntense attraction; Infatuation; Infatuationdue to attachmentMurchhitIllusory state; Deluded; UnawarespirituallyMurtaForm; The physical; Tangible formNaamNameNaam jaapChanting of a nameNaam-smaranRecitation of a name of GodNaimitikInstrumental; As one of the evidences;Apparent doerNaimitik purusharthEvidence-based effort; Evidential effortNamaskar VidhiThe vidhi of salutations; Obeisance to allthe GodsNamrataHumilityNanamiFuneral pyreNarak gatiA life in hellNaseebDestinyNiddidhyasanInner visualization; EnvisioningNihshankFree from doubtNikachitStickyNikachit karmaHeavy and ‘sticky’ karma that one hasno choice but suffer its effectNikalTo settleNikhalasOpen and straightforward; Candid andguileless; Frank and honestsacred kshetra; a special world fromwhere souls can attain final mokshathrough darshan of existing TirthankarsMamataMy-ness; AttachmentManoharWin over the minds of othersMarajiyatFree willMarmaMeaningMarmasaarEssence of the meaning of religionMataViewpoint; OpinionMatagrahaObstinacy of viewpointMatagrahiPertinacious about one’s own opinionMatbhedDissension because of differing opinionsMaunMaintaining silenceMayaDeceit; Illusory attachmentMishrachetanPower chetan; The relative selfMishrasaMixed parmanus waiting to give effectMithya darshanDeluded visionMithya drashtiIllusory visionMithyatvaIgnorance of the Self; Wrong belief of ‘Iam Chandubhai’MithyatviOne with the wrong vision of ‘I amChandubhai’; One with deluded visionMohaIllusory attachmentMohanindraSleep of illusory attachmentMohaniyaDeludingMohaniya karmaKarma of illusory attachmentMokshaLiberationMoksha dharmaThe true nature of liberationMoriyoSpecial grainMuda samayaTime as an eternal elementMudhatmaDeluded soul (‘I am Chandubhai’); Thestate of the Soul in ignorance of the SelfMuktaFreeMukta hasyaLiberated smile (the permanent radianceon the face of the completely liberatedOne—Purush); The smile and thelaughter of the liberated OneMuktiLiberation; FreedomMumukshuDesirous for only moksha; Seeker ofmokshaMunMindMundapoTo beginMurchhaIntense attraction; Infatuation; Infatuationdue to attachmentMurchhitIllusory state; Deluded; UnawarespirituallyMurtaForm; The physical; Tangible formNaamNameNaam jaapChanting of a nameNaam-smaranRecitation of a name of GodNaimitikInstrumental; As one of the evidences;Apparent doerNaimitik purusharthEvidence-based effort; Evidential effortNamaskar VidhiThe vidhi of salutations; Obeisance to allthe GodsNamrataHumilityNanamiFuneral pyreNarak gatiA life in hellNaseebDestinyNiddidhyasanInner visualization; EnvisioningNihshankFree from doubtNikachitStickyNikachit karmaHeavy and ‘sticky’ karma that one hasno choice but suffer its effectNikalTo settleNikhalasOpen and straightforward; Candid andguileless; Frank and honestNikhalasataStraightforwardness; PurityNimitA person who is instrumental; Instrument;EvidenceNindaCriticize or slander a person in theirabsence; Do gossipNindakThat which makes one ‘do’ hurtfulgossipNiragrahiNon-insistent; Free from insistenceNirahamkariWithout ego; EgolessNirakudataDwelling in the stillness of the Self,which is the natural state of the SiddhaLords (the absolutely liberated Ones)NiralumbNon-dependentNiralumb darshanThe vision of absolute independenceNiralumb GnanThe knowledge of absolute independenceNirantarayObstacle-freeNirantaray padAn obstacle-free stateNirdoshFaultlessNirdoshataFaultlessnessNirdosh drashtiFaultless visionNirgranthFree from tubers; Without knotsNirichchhakDesire-free stateNirjaraDischarging of karmaNirlepAbsolutely detached; UntouchedNirmohiOne who is free from illusory attachmentNirvikalpEgoless state; The state of the SelfNirvikalp SamadhiThe blissful state of the SelfNischayRelated to the Self; The Self; Realviewpoint; Also meaning Strongdetermination; Firm decisionNischay jagrutiAwareness of the SelfNischetan chetanMechanical self; Lifeless life; Energizedor charged non-Self complex;MechanicalNishkaamWithout desiresNishkaamiOne doing without expectationNishkaam karmaKarma done without expectation ofrewardsNishpakshapatiImpartialNispruhaWithout interestNiyamDisciplinesNiyantranRegulationNiyanuStrong resolutionNokarmaNeutral karmaNokashayNeutral kashaysNondhaMental notePaapSin; Demerit karmaPaarinamic bhaavIntent as or of the SelfPacchakhaanMaking a firm decision not to eat certainfoodPadSpiritual songPakshaPartialityPakshapatiPartialPalaA second, which is made up of manysamaya—smallest division of timeParOf the non-SelfPara-bhaktiDirect worship of the SelfParabrahmaThe SelfParadhinUnder the influence of the non-SelfParadhyayaStudy of the non-SelfParakramExtraordinary effort as the SelfParakram bhaavExtraordinary spiritual understanding andinner visionParam truptiAbsolute contentmentParam vinayaAbsolute humilityParavalumbanDependency on the non-SelfPar-bhaavThe state of the non-SelfNikhalasataStraightforwardness; PurityNimitA person who is instrumental; Instrument;EvidenceNindaCriticize or slander a person in theirabsence; Do gossipNindakThat which makes one ‘do’ hurtfulgossipNiragrahiNon-insistent; Free from insistenceNirahamkariWithout ego; EgolessNirakudataDwelling in the stillness of the Self,which is the natural state of the SiddhaLords (the absolutely liberated Ones)NiralumbNon-dependentNiralumb darshanThe vision of absolute independenceNiralumb GnanThe knowledge of absolute independenceNirantarayObstacle-freeNirantaray padAn obstacle-free stateNirdoshFaultlessNirdoshataFaultlessnessNirdosh drashtiFaultless visionNirgranthFree from tubers; Without knotsNirichchhakDesire-free stateNirjaraDischarging of karmaNirlepAbsolutely detached; UntouchedNirmohiOne who is free from illusory attachmentNirvikalpEgoless state; The state of the SelfNirvikalp SamadhiThe blissful state of the SelfNischayRelated to the Self; The Self; Realviewpoint; Also meaning Strongdetermination; Firm decisionNischay jagrutiAwareness of the SelfNischetan chetanMechanical self; Lifeless life; Energizedor charged non-Self complex;MechanicalNishkaamWithout desiresNishkaamiOne doing without expectationNishkaam karmaKarma done without expectation ofrewardsNishpakshapatiImpartialNispruhaWithout interestNiyamDisciplinesNiyantranRegulationNiyanuStrong resolutionNokarmaNeutral karmaNokashayNeutral kashaysNondhaMental notePaapSin; Demerit karmaPaarinamic bhaavIntent as or of the SelfPacchakhaanMaking a firm decision not to eat certainfoodPadSpiritual songPakshaPartialityPakshapatiPartialPalaA second, which is made up of manysamaya—smallest division of timeParOf the non-SelfPara-bhaktiDirect worship of the SelfParabrahmaThe SelfParadhinUnder the influence of the non-SelfParadhyayaStudy of the non-SelfParakramExtraordinary effort as the SelfParakram bhaavExtraordinary spiritual understanding andinner visionParam truptiAbsolute contentmentParam vinayaAbsolute humilityParavalumbanDependency on the non-SelfPar-bhaavThe state of the non-SelfParbharyuBelongs to the non-SelfPar-dharmaThe nature of the non-Self, The natureof the otherParichayaFamiliarityParigrahaAcquisitiveness; Attachment andownershipParishahInternal suffering of the mind; InternalsufferingPar-kshetraThe non-Self locationPar-lokThe next lifeParmanandEternal bliss; Absolute blissParmanandiIn absolute bliss; Supremely blissfulParmanusSubatomic particlesParmartha samkitUltimate vision of the SelfParmatmaSupreme Soul; Absolute SelfParmatma PurusharthStaying continuously as the Self,“Knowing” and “Seeing”Parmatma swaroop The absolute state of the SelfParmeshwarAbsolute GodParokshIndirectPar-parinamResults of the non-SelfParyayaPhasePaudgalikOf the non-Self complexPaudgalik jagrutiAwareness of the non-Self complexPrabhu shraddhaFaith in GodPrabhu smaranRemembrance of GodPrabuddhaExtremely intelligentPradeshLocations; RegionPragnyashaktiThe liberating energy of the SelfPrakharSolid and steadyPrakrut avasthaSituations of the non-SelfPrakrutiThe relative self; The non-Self complex;Also means inherent naturePramaataThe Knower (Gnata)PramanLevelPrameyaThe object to be known (Gneya);Projection or boundaryPrarabdhaDestiny; Ordained; EffectPrarabdhavadiLazyPrarthanaPrayerPrasannaThat which pleases othersPrashasta raagAttachment of the highest kind – it leadsto the SelfPrashchyataapRepentancePratibhaavIntent of opposition; Sense of opposition;RemorsePratikramanRepentance and asking for forgivenessfor the error; Repentance and apologyPratipakshi bhaavAdverse intent; Attacking intent;Opposing intentPratishthit atmaThe charged self; The relative selfPratitiConvictionPratyaghaatReaction to shockPratyakhyanRemorse and avowal to not repeat themistakePratyakshDirectPratyaksh bhaktiDirect worshipPravruttiWorldly activityPrayatnaEffortPrayogshaNew charging of parmanusPremLovePremlakshana bhaktiWorship with love of GodPudgalThe non-Self complex of mind, speechand bodyParbharyuBelongs to the non-SelfPar-dharmaThe nature of the non-Self, The natureof the otherParichayaFamiliarityParigrahaAcquisitiveness; Attachment andownershipParishahInternal suffering of the mind; InternalsufferingPar-kshetraThe non-Self locationPar-lokThe next lifeParmanandEternal bliss; Absolute blissParmanandiIn absolute bliss; Supremely blissfulParmanusSubatomic particlesParmartha samkitUltimate vision of the SelfParmatmaSupreme Soul; Absolute SelfParmatma PurusharthStaying continuously as the Self,“Knowing” and “Seeing”Parmatma swaroop The absolute state of the SelfParmeshwarAbsolute GodParokshIndirectPar-parinamResults of the non-SelfParyayaPhasePaudgalikOf the non-Self complexPaudgalik jagrutiAwareness of the non-Self complexPrabhu shraddhaFaith in GodPrabhu smaranRemembrance of GodPrabuddhaExtremely intelligentPradeshLocations; RegionPragnyashaktiThe liberating energy of the SelfPrakharSolid and steadyPrakrut avasthaSituations of the non-SelfPrakrutiThe relative self; The non-Self complex;Also means inherent naturePramaataThe Knower (Gnata)PramanLevelPrameyaThe object to be known (Gneya);Projection or boundaryPrarabdhaDestiny; Ordained; EffectPrarabdhavadiLazyPrarthanaPrayerPrasannaThat which pleases othersPrashasta raagAttachment of the highest kind – it leadsto the SelfPrashchyataapRepentancePratibhaavIntent of opposition; Sense of opposition;RemorsePratikramanRepentance and asking for forgivenessfor the error; Repentance and apologyPratipakshi bhaavAdverse intent; Attacking intent;Opposing intentPratishthit atmaThe charged self; The relative selfPratitiConvictionPratyaghaatReaction to shockPratyakhyanRemorse and avowal to not repeat themistakePratyakshDirectPratyaksh bhaktiDirect worshipPravruttiWorldly activityPrayatnaEffortPrayogshaNew charging of parmanusPremLovePremlakshana bhaktiWorship with love of GodPudgalThe non-Self complex of mind, speechand bodyPudgal mayaIllusory attachment to the worldly thingsPudgal paryayaPhase of the non-Self complexPudgal shaktiEnergies of the non-Self complexPudgal sukhPleasures of the non-Self complexPujaWorshipPunarjanmaRebirthPunyaMerit karmaPunya-Merit karma that binds more new merit-anubandhi-punyakarmaPunyashadisThose with tremendous merit karmaPuraavaEvidencesPuranCharged in past life; Causes; InputPuran-galanInput-outputPurisKind of fried breadPurnatvaThe state of being complete; Absolutestate; AbsolutenessPurushThe Self; The Self-realized OnePurusharthIndependent effort; Free willPurusharth dharmaBe the Self through the Five Agnas;Religion of the SelfPurusharthiIndustrious; One making the effort; HardworkingPurusharthvadiIndustriousPurvagrahaPrejudicePurva viradhak jivaThe one has opposed and criticized inthe past lifeRaagAttachmentRaag-dweshAttachment-abhorrenceRajipoTo pleaseRanchhodjiLord KrishnaRaudradhyanAdverse internal meditation that hurtsthe self and othersRotliFlat unleavened wheat breadRotloDense, rustic unleavened millet flat-breadRuchak PradeshAppropriate regionsRujutaNatural franknessRundapoTo endSaarEssence; SubstanceSacharChangingSacharacharSachar is that which is going to perish(temporary) and moves, and that whichis eternal is immovable and unchangingis called acharSadhanToolSadhanaSpiritual endeavor; Undergoing self-discipline for spiritual development;Spiritual practiceSadhyaThe ultimate goal; The SelfSadgnanRight knowledgeSadguruUltimate guruSadhusMale asceticsSadhvisFemale asceticsSafadaSucceed in doingSahajSpontaneous and naturalSahajanand SwamiThe Godhead of the Swaminarayanreligion in the Swaminarayan sect ofHinduismSahaj samadhiNatural and spontaneous blissSaiyamControl over passions like anger, pride,deceit and greed; Absence of kashay(anger-pride-deceit-greed); Kashay freestate; Also means self-control; self-disciplineSaiyamitNatural and without kashaysPudgal mayaIllusory attachment to the worldly thingsPudgal paryayaPhase of the non-Self complexPudgal shaktiEnergies of the non-Self complexPudgal sukhPleasures of the non-Self complexPujaWorshipPunarjanmaRebirthPunyaMerit karmaPunya-Merit karma that binds more new merit-anubandhi-punyakarmaPunyashadisThose with tremendous merit karmaPuraavaEvidencesPuranCharged in past life; Causes; InputPuran-galanInput-outputPurisKind of fried breadPurnatvaThe state of being complete; Absolutestate; AbsolutenessPurushThe Self; The Self-realized OnePurusharthIndependent effort; Free willPurusharth dharmaBe the Self through the Five Agnas;Religion of the SelfPurusharthiIndustrious; One making the effort; HardworkingPurusharthvadiIndustriousPurvagrahaPrejudicePurva viradhak jivaThe one has opposed and criticized inthe past lifeRaagAttachmentRaag-dweshAttachment-abhorrenceRajipoTo pleaseRanchhodjiLord KrishnaRaudradhyanAdverse internal meditation that hurtsthe self and othersRotliFlat unleavened wheat breadRotloDense, rustic unleavened millet flat-breadRuchak PradeshAppropriate regionsRujutaNatural franknessRundapoTo endSaarEssence; SubstanceSacharChangingSacharacharSachar is that which is going to perish(temporary) and moves, and that whichis eternal is immovable and unchangingis called acharSadhanToolSadhanaSpiritual endeavor; Undergoing self-discipline for spiritual development;Spiritual practiceSadhyaThe ultimate goal; The SelfSadgnanRight knowledgeSadguruUltimate guruSadhusMale asceticsSadhvisFemale asceticsSafadaSucceed in doingSahajSpontaneous and naturalSahajanand SwamiThe Godhead of the Swaminarayanreligion in the Swaminarayan sect ofHinduismSahaj samadhiNatural and spontaneous blissSaiyamControl over passions like anger, pride,deceit and greed; Absence of kashay(anger-pride-deceit-greed); Kashay freestate; Also means self-control; self-disciplineSaiyamitNatural and without kashaysSaiyamit munDisciplined mindSaiyam parinamAbsence of kashay reactionSaiyogCircumstancesSakaamFor the purpose of attaining liberationSakriyaActiveSakriyataActivitySakshatkarExact experience of the SelfSamadhanClosure; ResolutionSamashtiUniversalSamataEquanimity; No attachment-abhorrence;Absolute samenessSamata bhaavIntention to remain in equanimitySamayaThe smallest fraction of time; The smallestdivision of time; The time it takes forone subatomic particle to leave its spaceand to move into another space is called‘samaya’SamayikMeditative introspection; Being the Selfand ‘seeing’ the selfSamaysaarEssence of the smallest fraction of time;The SelfSambhavIntent of equanimitySambhave nikalTo settle with equanimitySamkitRight vision; Right beliefSamkitiSelf-realizedSampradayaReligious sectSampurna saiyamComplete disciplineSamsaranConstantly evolvingSamsaran margPath of natural and spiritual evolution; Apath of evolution for every living entitySamvaadDiscourseSamvarBlockage; Stoppage of charging newkarmaSamyak charitraConduct of the SelfSamyak darshanRight vision; Enlightened view; Vision ofthe SelfSamyak GnanKnowledge of the SelfSamyak samjanRight understandingSamyaktvaRight understanding; Right visionSanchit karmaAccumulated karmaSankalpMy-nessSankalpi-chetanThe extension of life in a non-living thingthrough ‘My-ness’Sankalp-vikalpWorries and doubtsSansarThe worldly lifeSansar-bhaavWorldly intentSansariWorldlySantoSaintsSantoshSatisfactionSapekshaDepends on context: With expectations;RelativeSaradFlexible; StraightforwardSaradataStraightforwardnessSarvagnyaKnower of all elementsSarva-vyaapakAll-pervading; OmnipresentSaspruhaWith interestSatThe Eternal; The SelfSat-chit-anandThe awareness of the eternal is blissSatsangGathering of Self-realized beingsSattaRealmSatyaTruthSatyugEra of unity in mind, speech and actsSevaServiceShaktiEnergy; Strength; PowerShaligramA rock turns into the shape of an idol;Saiyamit munDisciplined mindSaiyam parinamAbsence of kashay reactionSaiyogCircumstancesSakaamFor the purpose of attaining liberationSakriyaActiveSakriyataActivitySakshatkarExact experience of the SelfSamadhanClosure; ResolutionSamashtiUniversalSamataEquanimity; No attachment-abhorrence;Absolute samenessSamata bhaavIntention to remain in equanimitySamayaThe smallest fraction of time; The smallestdivision of time; The time it takes forone subatomic particle to leave its spaceand to move into another space is called‘samaya’SamayikMeditative introspection; Being the Selfand ‘seeing’ the selfSamaysaarEssence of the smallest fraction of time;The SelfSambhavIntent of equanimitySambhave nikalTo settle with equanimitySamkitRight vision; Right beliefSamkitiSelf-realizedSampradayaReligious sectSampurna saiyamComplete disciplineSamsaranConstantly evolvingSamsaran margPath of natural and spiritual evolution; Apath of evolution for every living entitySamvaadDiscourseSamvarBlockage; Stoppage of charging newkarmaSamyak charitraConduct of the SelfSamyak darshanRight vision; Enlightened view; Vision ofthe SelfSamyak GnanKnowledge of the SelfSamyak samjanRight understandingSamyaktvaRight understanding; Right visionSanchit karmaAccumulated karmaSankalpMy-nessSankalpi-chetanThe extension of life in a non-living thingthrough ‘My-ness’Sankalp-vikalpWorries and doubtsSansarThe worldly lifeSansar-bhaavWorldly intentSansariWorldlySantoSaintsSantoshSatisfactionSapekshaDepends on context: With expectations;RelativeSaradFlexible; StraightforwardSaradataStraightforwardnessSarvagnyaKnower of all elementsSarva-vyaapakAll-pervading; OmnipresentSaspruhaWith interestSatThe Eternal; The SelfSat-chit-anandThe awareness of the eternal is blissSatsangGathering of Self-realized beingsSattaRealmSatyaTruthSatyugEra of unity in mind, speech and actsSevaServiceShaktiEnergy; Strength; PowerShaligramA rock turns into the shape of an idol;Shaligrams are symbolic round stonesthat represent the lingam in the worshipof Lord ShivaShalyaInternal tormentShankaSuspicionShantiPeaceSharanuProtectionShataPleasantShata vedaniyaExperience of pleasureShethWealthy businessmanShivaThe Self; The absoluteShraddhaFaithShree SimandharCurrent living TirthankarSwamiShrikhandYogurt puddingShrimad Rajchandra Also known as Krupadudev, GnaniPurush of the Kramic path who becameenlightenedShrutagnanScriptural knowledge through listeningShubhaAuspiciousShuddhaPureShuddhatmaPure SoulShuddha upayogPure applied awareness as the SelfShuddhikaranInner purificationShukladhyanMeditation as the SelfShunyataState of no mind/mindless state,no vibrationsShushuptiDreamless sleepSiddhaAbsolutely liberated One;‘siddha’ alsomeans: To accomplishSiddha gatiLocation of the Siddhas; Abode of theabsolute liberated SoulsSiddha kshetraLocation at the crest of the universewhere all liberated Souls ascend andreside eternallySiddhantikInvolving principleSiddhantsIrrefutable principles that accomplish theultimateSiddhisSpecial spiritual energiesSmaran shaktiMemory powerSmrutiMemorySookshmaSubtleSookshmatamSubtlestSookshmatarSubtlerSpandanoVibrationsSpashta vedanClear and distinct experienceSpruhaDesiresSthapanaInstillation of an idolSthirataStillnessSthoolGross; OvertSthool karmaKarma experienced with the five sensesSthool maunOvert silenceSukhHappinessSwaThe SelfSwabhavInnate nature; Also nature of the SelfSwabhav-bhaavThe SelfSwabhavikNaturalSwabhavik purusharth‘Effort’to remain as the Self, “Knowing”and “Seeing”Swabhav jagrutiAwareness as the SelfSwabhav karmaNatural state of “Knowing” and “Seeing”SwachhandTo understand and do according toone’s own intellectSwa-dharmaBeing the SelfShaligrams are symbolic round stonesthat represent the lingam in the worshipof Lord ShivaShalyaInternal tormentShankaSuspicionShantiPeaceSharanuProtectionShataPleasantShata vedaniyaExperience of pleasureShethWealthy businessmanShivaThe Self; The absoluteShraddhaFaithShree SimandharCurrent living TirthankarSwamiShrikhandYogurt puddingShrimad Rajchandra Also known as Krupadudev, GnaniPurush of the Kramic path who becameenlightenedShrutagnanScriptural knowledge through listeningShubhaAuspiciousShuddhaPureShuddhatmaPure SoulShuddha upayogPure applied awareness as the SelfShuddhikaranInner purificationShukladhyanMeditation as the SelfShunyataState of no mind/mindless state,no vibrationsShushuptiDreamless sleepSiddhaAbsolutely liberated One;‘siddha’ alsomeans: To accomplishSiddha gatiLocation of the Siddhas; Abode of theabsolute liberated SoulsSiddha kshetraLocation at the crest of the universewhere all liberated Souls ascend andreside eternallySiddhantikInvolving principleSiddhantsIrrefutable principles that accomplish theultimateSiddhisSpecial spiritual energiesSmaran shaktiMemory powerSmrutiMemorySookshmaSubtleSookshmatamSubtlestSookshmatarSubtlerSpandanoVibrationsSpashta vedanClear and distinct experienceSpruhaDesiresSthapanaInstillation of an idolSthirataStillnessSthoolGross; OvertSthool karmaKarma experienced with the five sensesSthool maunOvert silenceSukhHappinessSwaThe SelfSwabhavInnate nature; Also nature of the SelfSwabhav-bhaavThe SelfSwabhavikNaturalSwabhavik purusharth‘Effort’to remain as the Self, “Knowing”and “Seeing”Swabhav jagrutiAwareness as the SelfSwabhav karmaNatural state of “Knowing” and “Seeing”SwachhandTo understand and do according toone’s own intellectSwa-dharmaBeing the SelfSwadhyayaStudy of the SelfSwavalumbanDependency on the SelfSwanubhavExperience of the SelfSwa-parinatiThe natural state of the SelfSwa-purusharthConstant awareness and conduct as theSelfSwaroopThe SelfSwaroop GnanKnowledge of the SelfSwayam-buddhaSpontaneous Self-realizationSwayam kriyakariWorks by itselfSyadvaadSpeech that is accepted by all and hurtsnone; Speech which accepts allviewpoints and never hurts anyone’sviewpointTaalBeats and rhythm of the drumsTanmayakarTo become absorbed; To becomeengrossedTantili vaniSpeech associated with lingering effect;Speech with the link of continual hurtTapaPenanceTapobudEnergy of penanceTarantaaranA Savior; He has crossed the ocean ofthe worldly life and he can help othersacross as wellTarchhodContempt; Dismissing with contempt;Contemptuous rejectionTattvaEternal elementTattva drashtiElemental visionTattva swaroopForm of eternal elementTiraskarScornTirthankarAbsolutely enlightened One; TheAbsolute SaviorTiryancha gatiLower life-forms; Animal life-formTruptiContentmentTrushnaDesireTyaagRenunciationTyaagiRenouncing the worldly lifeUdaseen bhaavDevoid of worldly attachmentUdaseentaIndifferenceUdaya-bhaavIntent that arises due to the unfolding ofpast karmaUnodariEating less food than what one hasappetite forUpadhiExternally induced problemsUpadaanSpiritual readinessUpashrayaA short-term monastic domicile; JainMonasteryUpayogApplied awareness; FocusedconcentrationUpdeshaSpiritual discourse; PreachUpmaanInsultVaadDebateVachanbudThe energy and power of wordsVaikunthGod’s abodeVairagyaDispassion towards the worldly lifeVaniSpeechVaniksBusiness classVartanConductVastuEternal element; The SelfVastupal-TejpalTwo brothers in the thirteenth century,who built a temple dedicated to the 22ndTirthankar Lord NeminathVastutvaElemental substance; The Self; Self-realizationVedantaPhilosophy taught by the Vedas, themost ancient scriptures of IndiaSwadhyayaStudy of the SelfSwavalumbanDependency on the SelfSwanubhavExperience of the SelfSwa-parinatiThe natural state of the SelfSwa-purusharthConstant awareness and conduct as theSelfSwaroopThe SelfSwaroop GnanKnowledge of the SelfSwayam-buddhaSpontaneous Self-realizationSwayam kriyakariWorks by itselfSyadvaadSpeech that is accepted by all and hurtsnone; Speech which accepts allviewpoints and never hurts anyone’sviewpointTaalBeats and rhythm of the drumsTanmayakarTo become absorbed; To becomeengrossedTantili vaniSpeech associated with lingering effect;Speech with the link of continual hurtTapaPenanceTapobudEnergy of penanceTarantaaranA Savior; He has crossed the ocean ofthe worldly life and he can help othersacross as wellTarchhodContempt; Dismissing with contempt;Contemptuous rejectionTattvaEternal elementTattva drashtiElemental visionTattva swaroopForm of eternal elementTiraskarScornTirthankarAbsolutely enlightened One; TheAbsolute SaviorTiryancha gatiLower life-forms; Animal life-formTruptiContentmentTrushnaDesireTyaagRenunciationTyaagiRenouncing the worldly lifeUdaseen bhaavDevoid of worldly attachmentUdaseentaIndifferenceUdaya-bhaavIntent that arises due to the unfolding ofpast karmaUnodariEating less food than what one hasappetite forUpadhiExternally induced problemsUpadaanSpiritual readinessUpashrayaA short-term monastic domicile; JainMonasteryUpayogApplied awareness; FocusedconcentrationUpdeshaSpiritual discourse; PreachUpmaanInsultVaadDebateVachanbudThe energy and power of wordsVaikunthGod’s abodeVairagyaDispassion towards the worldly lifeVaniSpeechVaniksBusiness classVartanConductVastuEternal element; The SelfVastupal-TejpalTwo brothers in the thirteenth century,who built a temple dedicated to the 22ndTirthankar Lord NeminathVastutvaElemental substance; The Self; Self-realizationVedantaPhilosophy taught by the Vedas, themost ancient scriptures of IndiaVeyrEnmity; VengeanceVibhavAttribute that is not of the Self; ‘I amChandulal’; Extra intentVidhiSpecial energizing blessings of the GnaniPurush; The prayers which are given inCharan VidhiVignanScienceVignanghan AtmaThe Absolute SoulVikalpThe belief of ‘I am Chandulal’VinayaHumilityVinaya dharmaReligion of humilityViparit darshanWrong visionViradhanaNegative talk; Criticism and oppositionVishamtaAttachment-abhorrenceVishaySense pleasuresVishay sukhPleasures of the sensesVisheshaExtraVishesha bhaavExtra-expression of intentVishesha parinamExtra resultVishrasaPure parmanusVismrutiNot rememberingVitaragThe fully enlightened beings who haveno attachment or abhorrenceVitaragataVoid of any attachmentVitarag bhaavComplete non-attachment from withinVitaragi PurushSelf-realized being, who is free from allthe worldly attachmentsVitarag vaniSpeech that is free of attachment orabhorrenceVivaadDispute; ControversyViyogDissipation of the circumstancesVratVowsVruttisTendenciesVyaapakWhich makes one bring aboutpervasivenessVyaapyaThe property of being all pervasiveVyadhiPhysical sufferingVyagraRestlessnessVyashtiIndividualVyavaharWorldly interactions; Also means fromrelative viewpoint; Worldly perspectiveVyavahar dharmaWorldly religionVyavahar jagrutiAwareness of worldly life interactionsVyavasthitScientific circumstantial evidenceVyavasthit shaktiThe energy of scientific circumstantialevidenceYamaself-controlYogi PurushOne who has attained the final unionwith the SelfYugEra(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)VeyrEnmity; VengeanceVibhavAttribute that is not of the Self; ‘I amChandulal’; Extra intentVidhiSpecial energizing blessings of the GnaniPurush; The prayers which are given inCharan VidhiVignanScienceVignanghan AtmaThe Absolute SoulVikalpThe belief of ‘I am Chandulal’VinayaHumilityVinaya dharmaReligion of humilityViparit darshanWrong visionViradhanaNegative talk; Criticism and oppositionVishamtaAttachment-abhorrenceVishaySense pleasuresVishay sukhPleasures of the sensesVisheshaExtraVishesha bhaavExtra-expression of intentVishesha parinamExtra resultVishrasaPure parmanusVismrutiNot rememberingVitaragThe fully enlightened beings who haveno attachment or abhorrenceVitaragataVoid of any attachmentVitarag bhaavComplete non-attachment from withinVitaragi PurushSelf-realized being, who is free from allthe worldly attachmentsVitarag vaniSpeech that is free of attachment orabhorrenceVivaadDispute; ControversyViyogDissipation of the circumstancesVratVowsVruttisTendenciesVyaapakWhich makes one bring aboutpervasivenessVyaapyaThe property of being all pervasiveVyadhiPhysical sufferingVyagraRestlessnessVyashtiIndividualVyavaharWorldly interactions; Also means fromrelative viewpoint; Worldly perspectiveVyavahar dharmaWorldly religionVyavahar jagrutiAwareness of worldly life interactionsVyavasthitScientific circumstantial evidenceVyavasthit shaktiThe energy of scientific circumstantialevidenceYamaself-controlYogi PurushOne who has attained the final unionwith the SelfYugEra(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Books of Akram Vignan of Dada Bhagwan1.Adjust Everywhere2.Ahimsa : Non-Violence3.Anger4.Aptavani - 15.Aptavani - 26.Aptavani - 47.Aptavani - 58.Aptavani - 69.Aptavani - 910.Autobiography of Gnani Purush A.M.Patel11.Avoid Clashes12.Brahmacharya : Celibacy Attained With Understanding13.Death : Before, During & After...14.Flawless Vision15.Generation Gap16.Harmony In Marriage17.Life Without Conflict18.Money19.Noble Use of Money20.Pratikraman : The master key that resolves all conflicts( Abridge & Big Volume)21.Pure Love22.Right Understanding to Help Others23.Science of Karma24.Science of Speech25.Shree Simandhar Swami : The Living God26.The Essence Of All Religion27.The Fault Is Of the Sufferer28.The Guru and The Disciple29.Tri Mantra : The mantra that removes all worldly obstacles30.Whatever Happened is Justice31.Who Am I ?32.Worries'Dadavani' Magazine is published Every monthWebsite : www.dadabhagwan.orgKenya:+254  722 722 063Australia:+61 421127947UAE: +971  557316937Singapore: +65  81129229New Zealand: +64 21 0376434Germany: +49 700 32327474Persons to ContactDada Bhagwan ParivarAdalaj:Trimandir, Simandhar City,Ahmedabad-Kalol Highway, Adalaj,Dist.: Gandhinagar - 382421, Gujarat, India.Tel : (079) 39830100, Email : info@dadabhagwan.orgAhmedabad:"Dada Darshan", 5, Mamtapark Society,Behind Navgujarat College, Usmanpura,Ahmedabad- 380 014. Tel. : (079) 27540408Rajkot:Trimandir, Ahmedabad-Rajkot Highway, Nr. TarghadiyaChokdi, Maliyasan Village, Rajkot. Tel.: 9274111393Vadodara:"Dada Mandir", 17, Mama ni pol (Street), Opp. Raopura Police Station, Salatvada, Vadodara.Tel. : (0265) 2414142Bhuj:"Trimandir",  B/h Hill Garden, Airport Road,Near Sahyog Nagar, Bhuj (Kutch). Tel. : (02832) 290123Godhra:"Trimandir", Village-Bhamaiya, Opp. FCI Godown,Godhra, Dist - Pachmahal. Tel. : (02672) 262300Mumbai:Mobile : 9323528901Kolkata:Mobile : 9330133885Bangalore :Mobile : 9590979099U.S.A. :Dada Bhagwan Vignan Institute :100, SW Redbud Lane, Topeka, Kansas 66606Tel. : +1 877-505-DADA (3232) ,Email : info@us.dadabhagwan.orgU.K.:Satsang Activity Centre,College House, 15 CollegeRoad, Harrow, HA1 1BA, Tel. :+44 330-111-DADA (3232)Email : info@uk.dadabhagwan.orgBooks of Akram Vignan of Dada Bhagwan1.Adjust Everywhere2.Ahimsa : Non-Violence3.Anger4.Aptavani - 15.Aptavani - 26.Aptavani - 47.Aptavani - 58.Aptavani - 69.Aptavani - 910.Autobiography of Gnani Purush A.M.Patel11.Avoid Clashes12.Brahmacharya : Celibacy Attained With Understanding13.Death : Before, During & After...14.Flawless Vision15.Generation Gap16.Harmony In Marriage17.Life Without Conflict18.Money19.Noble Use of Money20.Pratikraman : The master key that resolves all conflicts( Abridge & Big Volume)21.Pure Love22.Right Understanding to Help Others23.Science of Karma24.Science of Speech25.Shree Simandhar Swami : The Living God26.The Essence Of All Religion27.The Fault Is Of the Sufferer28.The Guru and The Disciple29.Tri Mantra : The mantra that removes all worldly obstacles30.Whatever Happened is Justice31.Who Am I ?32.Worries'Dadavani' Magazine is published Every monthWebsite : www.dadabhagwan.orgKenya:+254  722 722 063Australia:+61 421127947UAE: +971  557316937Singapore: +65  81129229New Zealand: +64 21 0376434Germany: +49 700 32327474Persons to ContactDada Bhagwan ParivarAdalaj:Trimandir, Simandhar City,Ahmedabad-Kalol Highway, Adalaj,Dist.: Gandhinagar - 382421, Gujarat, India.Tel : (079) 39830100, Email : info@dadabhagwan.orgAhmedabad:"Dada Darshan", 5, Mamtapark Society,Behind Navgujarat College, Usmanpura,Ahmedabad- 380 014. Tel. : (079) 27540408Rajkot:Trimandir, Ahmedabad-Rajkot Highway, Nr. TarghadiyaChokdi, Maliyasan Village, Rajkot. Tel.: 9274111393Vadodara:"Dada Mandir", 17, Mama ni pol (Street), Opp. Raopura Police Station, Salatvada, Vadodara.Tel. : (0265) 2414142Bhuj:"Trimandir",  B/h Hill Garden, Airport Road,Near Sahyog Nagar, Bhuj (Kutch). Tel. : (02832) 290123Godhra:"Trimandir", Village-Bhamaiya, Opp. FCI Godown,Godhra, Dist - Pachmahal. Tel. : (02672) 262300Mumbai:Mobile : 9323528901Kolkata:Mobile : 9330133885Bangalore :Mobile : 9590979099U.S.A. :Dada Bhagwan Vignan Institute :100, SW Redbud Lane, Topeka, Kansas 66606Tel. : +1 877-505-DADA (3232) ,Email : info@us.dadabhagwan.orgU.K.:Satsang Activity Centre,College House, 15 CollegeRoad, Harrow, HA1 1BA, Tel. :+44 330-111-DADA (3232)Email : info@uk.dadabhagwan.org