A 

B

As Expounded by Dada Bhagwan

Aptavani  –  14
Part  –  2

Originally  Compiled  in  Gujarati  by:
Dr.  Niruben  Amin

C 

D

Publisher 

:  Mr. Ajit C. Patel 
   Dada Bhagwan Vignan Foundation 
   1, Varun Apartment, 37, Shrimali Society, 
   Opp. Navrangpura Police Station, 
   Navrangpura, Ahmedabad: 380009.
   Gujarat, India.
    Tel. : +91 79 35002100, +91 9328661166-77

©

 Dada Bhagwan Foundation
   5, Mamta Park Society, B\h. Navgujarat College,
   Usmanpura, Ahmedabad - 380014, Gujarat, India.
    Email: info@dadabhagwan.org  Tel.: +91 9328661166-77
    All Rights Reserved. No part of this publication may be 
    shared, copied, translated or reproduced in any form
    (including electronic storage or audio recording) without 
    written permission from the holder of the copyright.
    This publication is licensed for your personal use only.

Web Version :  December 2022  

Price 

:  Ultimate humility and the intent that
    'I do not know anything'!

Printer 

:   Amba Multiprint   
   B - 99, Electronics GIDC, K-6 Road,
   Sector - 25, Gandhinagar-382044. 
   Gujarat, India.
   Tel. : +91 79 35002142, +91 9328660055

ISBN/eISBN :  978-93-91375-30-0

Printed in India

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
Dedication

The mysteries of the universe, the Gnani reveals here;

Vishwana rahasyo, Gnani khole ahi;

Never was before, never will be, such a Gnani anywhere!

Na bhooto na bhavishye, aavaa Gnani ‘kahi’!

Containing an original in depth elucidation on the six 
eternal elements;

Chha tattvona guhya maulik fod;

Matchless is this fourteenth Aptavani!

Aptavani chaudmi aa ajod!

The partnership of the six eternal elements since time 
immemorial;

Chha tattvoni anaadini bhaagidaari;

None of them can claim, ‘My share is more than yours’!

Na koi kahi shake vadhu, maari ke taari!

The eternal elements of motion and inertia support 
movement from one place to another;

Gati, sthiti sahaye, heraferi;

The eternal element of Space claims, ‘I’m responsible for 
providing the space!’

Aakash kahe bhaagma, jagaa ‘mari’!

The eternal element of Time is responsible for 
management; 

The eternal element of inanimate matter provides the 
material;

Kaalno vahivat, jadno maal;

The eternal element of the Self is the Observer, however 
it caused a commotion!

Chetan nirikshak, pan kari dhamaal!

3

By becoming the owner, the limits were crossed;

Bani betho maalik, tuti paad;

The Gnani sets things right, that itself is a miracle!

Gnani laave thekane, e ja kamaal!

Pure parmanu, charged parmanu, eﬀ ective parmanu;

Vishrasa, prayogsa, mishrasa;

The state of parmanu, explained so easily!

Samajavi sahajma, parmanu dasha!

The energy to do activity, belongs only to the non-Self 
complex of input and output;

Kriyavarti shakti, matra pudgal tani;

The Self envisions, so the non-Self complex gets 
sketched!

Kalpe Chetan, pudgali chitaramani!

The Science of the Tirthankar Lords, manifested through 
Dada;

Tirthankari Vignan, pragatyu Dada thaki;

The fourteenth Aptavani, oﬀ ered with humility to the 
world!

Chaudami Aptavani, jag charane muki!

- Dr. Niruben Amin

4

Trimantra

The Three Mantras That Destroy All Obstacles in Life
Namo Vitaraagaya
I bow to the Ones who are absolutely free from all attachment and 
abhorrence
Namo Arihantanam
I bow to the living Ones who have annihilated all internal enemies 
of anger, pride, deceit and greed
Namo Siddhanam
I bow to the Ones who have attained the state of total and ﬁ nal 
liberation
Namo Aayariyanam
I bow to the Self-realized masters who impart the Knowledge of 
the Self to others
Namo Uvazzayanam
I bow to the Ones who have received the Knowledge of the Self 
and are helping others attain the same
Namo Loye Savva Sahunam
I bow to the Ones, wherever they may be, who have received the 
Knowledge of the Self
Eso Pancha Namukkaro
These ﬁ ve salutations
Savva Pavappanasano
Destroy all demerit karma
Mangalanam Cha Savvesim
Of all that is auspicious
Padhamam Havai Mangalam
This is the highest
Om Namo Bhagavate Vasudevaya
ǁ2ǁ
I bow to the Ones who have attained the absolute Self in human form
Om Namah Shivaya
ǁ3ǁ
I bow to all human beings who have become instruments for the 
salvation of the world
Jai Sat Chit Anand
Awareness of the Eternal is Bliss

ǁ1ǁ

5

Who  Is  Dada  Bhagwan?

In June 1958, around 6 o’clock one evening, amidst the 
hustle  and  bustle  of  the  Surat  railway  station  while  seated 
on a bench, ‘Dada Bhagwan’ manifested completely within 
the  sacred  bodily  form  of Ambalal  Muljibhai  Patel.  Nature 
revealed  a  remarkable  phenomenon  of  spirituality!  In  the 
span  of  an  hour,  the  vision  of  the  universe  was  unveiled  to 
him!  Complete  clarity  for  all  spiritual  questions  such  as, 
‘Who  are  we? Who  is  God? Who  runs  the  world? What  is 
karma? What  is  liberation?’  etc.  was  attained.

What He attained that evening, He imparted to others 
through  his  original  Scientiﬁ c  experiment  (Gnan  Vidhi)  in 
just two hours! This has been referred to as the Akram path. 
Kram  means  to  climb  up  sequentially,  step-by-step  while 
Akram  means  step-less,  a  shortcut,  the  elevator  path!

He,  himself,  would  explain  to  others  who  Dada 
Bhagwan  is  by  saying,  “The  one  visible  before  you  is  not 
Dada  Bhagwan.  I  am  the  Gnani  Purush  and  the  One  who 
has  manifested  within  is  Dada  Bhagwan  who  is  the  Lord 
of  the  fourteen  worlds.  He  is  also  within  you,  and  within 
everyone else too. He resides unmanifest within you, whereas 
here  [within  A.  M.  Patel],  He  has  manifested  completely! 
I,  myself,  am  not  God  (Bhagwan);  I  also  bow  down  to  the 
Dada  Bhagwan  who  has  manifest  within  me.”



6

The  Current  Link  to Attain  Self-Realization

After  attaining  the  Knowledge  of  the  Self  in  1958, 
absolutely  revered  Dada  Bhagwan  (Dadashri)  traveled 
nationally  and  internationally  to  impart  spiritual  discourse 
and  Self-realization  to  spiritual  seekers. 

During  his  lifetime  itself,  Dadashri  had  given  the 
spiritual  power  to  Pujya  Dr.  Niruben  Amin  (Niruma)  to 
bestow  Self-realization  to  others.  In  the  same  way,  after 
Dadashri  left  his  mortal  body,  Pujya  Niruma  conducted 
spiritual discourses (satsang) and imparted Self-realization to 
spiritual seekers, as an instrumental doer. Dadashri had also 
given Pujya Deepakbhai Desai the spiritual power to conduct 
satsang.  At  present,  with  the  blessings  of  Pujya  Niruma, 
Pujya  Deepakbhai  travels  nationally  and  internationally  to 
impart  Self-realization  as  an  instrumental  doer.

After  Self-realization,  thousands  of  spiritual  seekers 
prevail  in  a  state  free  from  bondage  and  dwell  in  the 
experience of the Self, whilst carrying out all their worldly 
responsibilities. 



7

Note About This Translation

The  Gnani  Purush,  Ambalal  M.  Patel,  also  commonly 
known  as  ‘Dadashri’  or  ‘Dada’,  gave  spiritual  discourses  that 
were  in  the  form  of  answers  to  questions  asked  by  spiritual 
aspirants.  These  discourses  were  recorded  and  compiled  into 
books  by  Pujya  Dr.  Niruben Amin  in  the  Gujarati  language.

Dadashri had said that it would be impossible to translate 
His  satsangs  and  the  Knowledge  about  the  Science  of  Self-
realization word for word into other languages, because some 
of the meaning would be lost in the process. Therefore, in order 
to understand precisely the Akram Science of Self-realization, 
He  stressed  the  importance  of  learning  Gujarati.

However,  Dadashri  did  grant  His  blessings  to  translate 
His words into other languages so that spiritual seekers could 
beneﬁ t to a certain degree and later progress through their own 
eﬀ orts. This book is not a literal translation, but great care has 
been  taken  to  preserve  the  essence  of  His  original  message.

Spiritual  discourses  have  been  and  continue  to  be 
translated  from  Gujarati.  For  certain  Gujarati  words,  several 
translated  words  or  even  sentences  are  needed  to  convey  the 
meaning, hence many Gujarati words have been retained within 
the translated text for better understanding. Where the Gujarati 
word  is  used  for  the  ﬁ rst  time,  it  is  italicized,  followed  by  a 
translation explaining its meaning in parenthesis. Subsequently, 
only  the  Gujarati  word  is  used  in  the  text  that  follows.  This 
serves a two-fold beneﬁ t; ﬁ rstly, ease of translation and reading, 
and secondly, make the reader more familiar with the Gujarati 
words,  which  is  critical  for  a  deeper  understanding  of  this 
spiritual  Science.  The  content  in  square  brackets  provides 
further  clarity  regarding  the  matter,  which  is  not  present  in 
the  original  Gujarati  content.

This  is  a  humble  attempt  to  present  to  the  world,  the 
essence  of  His  Knowledge.  While  reading  this  translation,  if 
there is any contradiction or discrepancy, then it is the mistake 
of  the  translators  and  the  understanding  of  the  matter  should 
be  clariﬁ ed  with  the  living  Gnani  to  avoid  misinterpretation.



8

Special Note to the Reader

The  Self  is  the  Soul  (Atma)  within  all  living  beings. 

The  term  pure  Soul  is  used  by  the  Gnani  Purush  for 
the  awakened  Self,  after  the  Gnan  vidhi.  The  word  Self, 
with an uppercase ‘S’, refers to the awakened Self which is 
separate  from  the  worldly-interacting  self,  which  is  written 
with  a  lowercase  ‘s’. 

Wherever Dadashri uses the term ‘we’, ‘us’, or ‘our’, 

He  is  referring  to  Himself,  the  Gnani  Purush. 

Similarly,  the  use  of  You  or  Your  in  the  middle  of  a 
sentence,  with  an  uppercase  ﬁ rst  letter,  or  ‘You’,  ‘Your’  in 
single quotes at the beginning of the sentence, refers to the 
state of the awakened Self or Pragnya. This is an important 
distinction  for  the  correct  understanding  of  the  diﬀ erence 
between the awakened Self and the worldly-interacting self.

Wherever  the  name  ‘Chandubhai’  is  used,  the  reader 
should  substitute  his  or  her  name  and  read  the  matter 
accordingly.

The masculine third person pronoun ‘he’ and likewise 
the  object  pronoun  ‘him’  have  been  used  for  the  most  part 
throughout  the  translation.  Needless  to  say,  ‘he’  includes 
‘she’  and  ‘him’  includes  ‘her’. 

At  the  time  of  charging,  the  dravya  is  the  worldly-
interacting  self  (vyavahaar  atma;  bhrant  chetan),  kshetra 
is  the  location  on  the  track  of  niyati,  kaal  is  the  time,  and 
bhaav  is  the  charging  intent  (charging  bhaav).

At the time of discharging, the dravya is the discharging 
pratishthit  atma  or  the  physical  evidences  (e.g.  the  people, 
the  objects,  etc.),  kshetra  is  the  physical  location,  kaal  is 
the time during which all the evidences come together, and 
bhaav  is  the  discharging  intent  (discharging  bhaav).

Time  with  uppercase  ‘T’  or  Kaal  refers  to  Real Time 

9

or the eternal element of Time and  time with lowercase ‘t’ 
or  kaal  refers  to  relative  time  or  time  used  in  the  relative.

Space  with  uppercase  ‘S’  or  Kshetra-  refers  to  the 
eternal  element  of  Space  or  aakash  tattva  space  with 
lowercase  ‘s’  or  kshetra  -  refers  to  the  place  occupied,  or 
the  physical  location,  or  the  ‘mile’  or  location  on  the  track 
of  niyati.

For  reference,  a  glossary  of  all  the  Gujarati  words 
is  either  provided  at  the  back  of  this  book  or  available  on 
our  website  at: 

http://www.dadabhagwan.org/books-media/glossary/



10

 
The Aptavanis,  Filled  to  the  Brim  With 
Complete  Knowledge About  Practical  Worldly 
Interactions  as  well  as  Spirituality!

The Gnani Purush (the One who has realized the Self 
and  is  able  to  do  the  same  for  others)  is  One  for  whom 
nothing  remains  to  be  Known  in  this  world.  The  Gnani  is 
considered  the  world’s  observatory.

Questioner: But can You not disclose everything You 

Know?

Dadashri: ‘We’ certainly are disclosing it here, aren’t 
‘we’! These Aptavanis (series of fourteen volumes compiled 
from Dadashri’s speech) will be written for the very reason 
that  these  people  are  not  able  to  understand  a  single  word 
of these technical terms from the past. Therefore, over here, 
the  explanation  about  ‘What  is  dharma?’  and  ‘What  is  the 
Self?’  has  been  given  to  everyone  in  our  language,  in  the 
colloquial  language,  the  one  that  everyone  understands.

Questioner:  ‘You’  are  at  three  hundred  and  sixty 
degrees, so You should give the Knowledge of that degree, 
shouldn’t You?

Dadashri:  Yes.  So  just  as  there  is  this  Aptavani, 
fourteen such Aptavanis will be released. When the fourteen 
Aptavanis  are  complete,  when  the  collective  Knowledge 
within all of them is put together, the complete Knowledge 
will  be  encompassed.  Hence,  the  ‘beads’  [each  and  every 
established principle which joins together to form a ‘garland’] 
should  be  completed,  shouldn’t  they?

This  is  absolute  Knowledge  that  is  deﬁ cient  by  just 
four  degrees.  Therefore,  these  [Aptavanis]  are  indeed 
considered scriptures. People cannot even comprehend those 
other  scriptures.

Questioner: Just as there are those six Darshan [schools 

11

of philosophy based on the Vedas; the Nyaya, the Vaiseshika, 
the  Sankhya,  the  Yoga,  the  Mimamsa,  and  the  Vedanta], 
similarly  can  these  Aptavanis  not  be  considered  as  one 
Darshan?

Dadashri:  No,  the Aptavanis  are  the  collective  form 
of the six Darshan. Each of the six Darshan represent their 
own diﬀ erent viewpoint. One says, “This is ours, this is ours, 
this  is  ours.”  [Whereas]  This  is  the  Darshan  put  together. 
This  is  all-encompassing  and  accepting  of  all  viewpoints 
(anekant), it does not adhere to a single viewpoint (ekantik). 
Therefore, it encompasses the six Darshan. If the proponents 
of  the  six  Darshan  were  sitting  here,  then  none  of  them 
would get up and leave. Each one of them would feel as if 
it is his own Darshan. Therefore, there is no partiality here, 
it  is  impartial! A  follower  of  Jainism  is  able  to  sit  here,  a 
follower  of  the  Vedanta  is  able  to  sit  here,  there  are  even 
Parsis  here;  followers  of  all  religions  are  found  here.

Questioner:  If  one  maintains  faith  (shraddha)  in 
Dada’s  speech,  if  one  maintains  faith  in  the Aptavani,  then 
would  one  attain  samkit  (the  right  belief  that  ‘I  am  pure 
Soul’)  or  not?

Dadashri:  How  did  the  faith  set  in  for  you?

Questioner: The faith set in simply upon reading the 

Aptavani.

Dadashri:  That  is  known  as  samkit.  When  Your 
perspective  (drashti)  ‘fits’  with  this  perspective  [the 
perspective that is explained in Aptavani], that is known as 
Atmadrashti  (the  right  belief  that  ‘I  am  pure  Soul’;  Vision 
as  the  Self).  When  Your  perspective  ‘ﬁ ts’  completely  with 
this perspective, then it is considered Atmadrashti. The other 
perspective  is  that  of,  ‘This  is  not  it,  this  is  not  it,  neither 
are  any  of  these  it,  nor  this  one.’  In  this  way,  we  are  able 
to  understand  that  there  are  two  diﬀ erent  perspectives.  But 
12

thereafter, a solution can only be found if one does not read 
other  books.

All  of  these  Aptavanis  are  helpful.  People  of  future 
generations  will  need  them,  won’t  they?  These  will  be 
helpful  to  them.  These Aptavanis  are  something  incredibly 
marvelous.  And  through  the  Aptavanis,  all  the  diﬃ  culties 
arising  in  worldly  life  interactions  will  also  depart.

Many people tell ‘us’, “I come across a lot of diﬃ  culties, 
and  when  I  pick  up  an  Aptavani  and  randomly  look  at  it, 
then a page turns up and it takes away my diﬃ  culties.” The 
person  ﬁ nds  it,  he  gets  the  link.

Questioner:  The  compilation  has  been  put  together 
very beautifully. Each and every subject has been compiled 
very  wonderfully.

Dadashri:  Yes.  That  is  ‘our’  desire,  that  it  should 
beneﬁ t [all]. Therefore, set aside some time and keep reading 
them  a  little.

Questioner:  Dada,  that  is  why  we  say  that  we  are 

greatly  obliged  to  the Aptavani.

Dadashri: The Aptavani is actually One’s own living, 

awakened  form,  of  a  kind,  isn’t  it!

Therefore,  if  one  were  to  read  this  speech,  then  one 

would  attain  samkit  spontaneously!



13

Editorial

The  current  volume,  Aptavani  14  (Part  2),  contains 
the  description  of  the  eternal  elements.  In  the  ﬁ rst  section 
of  the  book,  Dadashri  has  explained  the  extremely  deep 
and  subtlest  concepts  about  the  six  eternal  elements,  using 
simple and straightforward, colloquial language which even 
the average person can understand. That, too, by giving the 
analogy  of  the  partnership  of  the  six  eternal  elements,  He 
has  completely  simpliﬁ ed  the  most  mysterious  knowledge 
about  the  formation  of  the  universe!

The goods belong to the eternal element of inanimate 
matter  (jada  tattva),  the  work  of  the  eternal  element  that 
supports  motion  (gatisahayak  tattva)  is  to  transport  them, 
the eternal element that supports inertia (sthitisahayak tattva) 
arranges  the  goods,  it  stores  them.  The  eternal  element 
of  Time  (kaal  tattva)  does  the  work  of  management  by 
transforming the new to the old and vice versa. The eternal 
element  of  Space  (aakash  tattva)  provides  the  space  to 
keep  the  goods,  in  order  to  run  the  business. And  the  role 
of  the  eternal  element  of  the  Self  (Chetan  tattva)  is  that 
of  a  supervisor.  Instead,  it  ended  up  becoming  the  owner, 
and  issues  arose  within  the  partnership,  and  lawsuits  were 
ﬁ led. If the Self becomes the Observer [Knower-Seer] once 
again, then resolution will come about for this conﬂ ict that 
has  been  around  since  time  immemorial.

The  jada  Pudgal  Parmanu  (the  smallest,  most 
indivisible,  indestructible  particles  of  the  eternal  element 
of inanimate matter), as well as mysteries about the pudgal 
(the non-Self complex that undergoes inﬂ ux and outﬂ ux), are 
revealed in the second section of this Aptavani. In that too, 
using simple examples, vishrasa, prayogsa, and mishrasa (the 
various  phases  of  parmanu)  have  been  explained  in  a  way 
that is easy to understand. The miraculous play (karamat) of 
the pudgal and its inherent nature to become multiple from 
14

one  (prasavdharmi  swabhaav),  the  entire  world  is  nothing 
but  input  and  output;  simply  upon  reading  this,  it  ﬁ ts  in 
one’s  mind.  Upon  understanding  the  mystery  behind  the 
energy  of  the  pudgal  to  do  activity  (kriyavarti  shakti),  the 
wrong belief about being the ‘doer’, right from the worldly 
perspective all the way to the elemental level, gets dissolved.

The  eﬀ ects  of  the  parmanu  extending  all  the  way  to 
gross  worldly  interactions  are  disclosed  here.  Through  the 
perspective  of  the  Gnani  (the  enlightened  One  who  can 
enlighten  others),  the  eﬀ ects  of  the  parmanu  of  food,  are 
also  revealed  here.

Before  reading  this  particular  volume,  the  spiritual 
aspirant  should  certainly  read  the  introduction,  only  then 
will  the  inner  intention  of  the  Gnani  become  clear  and  the 
link  become  evident.

After  attaining  the  Knowledge  of  the  Self  (Atma 
Gnan),  Dadashri’s  speech  has  come  forth  bit-by-bit  over 
twenty  years,  on  account  of  various  diﬀ erent  individuals 
who were instrumental [in the unfolding of discourses]. The 
entire  principle  cannot  possibly  be  disclosed  at  a  go,  with 
just one person over so many years, can it? Therefore, very 
many spiritual discourses (satsang) have been collected and 
compiled  to  present  the  established  principle  (siddhant).  If 
the spiritual aspirant completes [the reading of] one chapter 
in  one  sitting,  only  then  will  the  link  be  maintained  and 
become set in one’s understanding. By reading [the chapter] 
intermittently,  there  may  be  the  possibility  of  a  break  in 
the  link  and  subsequent  diﬃ  culty  in  setting  it  in  ones’ 
understanding.

The Knowledge-laden speech of the Gnani Purush has 
come forth after having ‘touched’ the original Self and it is 
like  an  invaluable  jewel.  Various  diﬀ erent  jewels  combine 
to form a ‘garland’ of each and every established principle. 
We  will  go  on  reading  with  the  intention  that  we  want  to 
15

understand  every  point,  such  that  we  can  exactly  visualize 
what  Dadashri  saw  in  His  Darshan  (Vision  as  the  Self), 
and  keep  collecting  the  jewels  carefully,  then  eventually  a 
‘garland’  of  the  established  principle  will  be  formed.  That 
established principle will forever become assimilated in the 
heart  and  come  into  experience. 

The  fourteenth  Aptavani  is  at  a  Ph.D.  level  and  it 
explains  the  Knowledge  of  the  eternal  elements  (tattva 
Gnan)  in  subtlety!  Hence,  the  basic  material  will  not  be 
available  in  detail  here,  or  even  may  not  be  found  here  at 
all. The spiritual aspirant will only be able to understand the 
fourteenth Aptavani, if the aspirant reads it after having done 
a  full  study  of  the  thirteen Aptavanis  and  all  of  Dadashri’s 
other  great  volumes.  And  it  is  a  humble  request  that  you 
study  the  fourteenth  Aptavani  only  after  everything  else 
[from the other volumes] becomes set in Your understanding.

The content under each new heading is to be understood 
as  a  discourse  with  a  new  person.  Therefore,  it  may  seem 
as  if  the  questioner  is  asking  the  question  repeatedly,  but 
because  deep  insights  can  be  gained,  it  has  been  included 
in  the  compilation.

The  human  anatomy  is  described  in  grade  ten,  grade 
twelve, and in medical college. The very same basic topics 
are covered in depth as one moves forward, but that is not to 
say that the very same material is to be studied at all levels.

The speech of the Gnani is the essence of all scriptures 
and  once  it  is  compiled,  then  that  speech  itself  becomes  a 
scripture.  Likewise,  for  one  on  the  path  to  liberation,  this 
Aptavani  is  a  scripture  of  the  speech  narrated  by  One  with 
the  experience  of  the  Self,  which,  for  those  who  are  only 
concerned  with  the  attainment  of  liberation,  will  be  useful 
as  a  milestone  for  the  condition  of  the  inner  state  on  the 
path  to  liberation. 

16

In  the  scriptures,  0.36  grams  of  ‘gold’  is  woven  into 
2000 kilograms of ‘cotton thread’, which the spiritual aspirant 
has to ﬁ nd and attain himself. In the Aptavani, the manifest 
Gnani  has  given  one  hundred  percent  of  pure  ‘gold’  only.

In this compilation, the diﬀ erent examples that ﬂ owed 
through the speech of absolutely revered Dadashri to explain 
the  most  profound  eternal  element  [the  Self],  have  been 
presented. In order to understand the indestructible (avinashi) 
eternal element [the Self] which is experiential, examples of 
the destructible (vinashi) [temporary, relative] are always at a 
limitation. Nevertheless, in order to explain it from diﬀ erent 
angles  and  in  order  to  understand  the  diﬀ erent  properties, 
the diﬀ erent examples are such that they can be very useful. 
At some points, it may appear that there is a contradiction, 
but  that  is  based  on  the  relative  context;  therefore  [really 
speaking],  there  is  no  contradiction.  It  is  never  such  that  it 
cancels  out  the  established  principle. 

Most  revered  Dadashri’s  discourses  range  from 
ignorance  of  the  Self  (agnan)  all  the  way  to  absolute 
Knowledge  (keval  Gnan).  There  may  be  shortcomings  of 
the  editor,  in  the  editorial  or  the  introduction.  Moreover, 
what  has  been  conveyed  today  is  based  on  the  clarity  of 
today’s  understanding,  however,  through  the  grace  of  the 
Gnani, going forward if exceptional clarity of understanding 
develops  then  the  very  same  points  will  seem  diﬀ erent. 
But,  actually  those  would  be  subtle  details  of  an  advanced 
level.  The  exact  understanding  of  the  Knowledge  [of  the 
Self] can only be experienced by Those who have absolute 
Knowledge! Therefore, we request your forgiveness should 
you  feel  like  there  is  a  mistake.  By  repeatedly  reading  the 
Knowledge-laden speech of the Gnani Purush, let the original 
material  be  understood  on  its  own  [naturally].  The  speech 
of  the  Gnani  Purush  is  itself  ‘eﬀ ective’;  it  will  deﬁ nitely 
bring  results  of  its  own  accord.
17

It  is  not  worth  putting  a  ‘full  stop’  [assuming  full 
understanding] on our own [current] understanding. Always 
strive  to  move  forward  by  putting  a  ‘comma’  [on  our 
current  understanding].  If  the  speech  of  the  Gnani  Purush 
is  devoutly  studied  every  day,  then  unprecedented  new 
clarity  of  understanding  will  develop.  That  understanding 
will  advance,  and  in  order  to  ascend  the  progressive  states 
of  experience  as  the  Self,  the  spiritual  Science  will  clearly 
come  into  experience.

While  reading  very  subtle  material,  such  as  that  of 
vibhaav  or  paryay,  if  the  spiritual  aspirant  ﬁ nds  himself 
confused,  there  is  no  need  to  be  puzzled.  If  this  is  not 
understood, then does that mean that liberation (moksha) will 
be  halted  [for  You]?  Not  at  all.  Moksha  is  easily  attained, 
simply by remaining in the Gnani’s Agnas (the ﬁ ve special 
directives  or  principles  given  by  the  Gnani  Purush  that 
sustain the enlightened state after Gnan Vidhi), not by logical 
reasoning or by the application of the intellectual approach 
of  scholars.  If  One  remains  in  the  Agnas,  then  the  Gnani’s 
grace will itself free One from all shortcomings. Therefore, 
in order to attain moksha, which is the essence of all eternal 
elements,  remaining  in  the  Agnas  of  the  Gnani  is  indeed 
the  essence  [bottom  line].

-  Dr.  Niruben Amin

18

Introduction
[Section  1]

The  Six  Eternal  Elements

[1]  The  Universe  Has  Come  Into  Existence 
Through  the  Six  Eternal  Elements

The world has no beginning and no end (anaadi anant). 
The coming together of circumstances (saiyog) are prone to 
dissipation (viyog) by their inherent nature. Everything arises 
through the coming together of circumstances, and disperses 
through  dissipation.  There  is  no  ‘doer’  of  this.

The  world  is  the  puzzle  itself.  No  one  has  created  it. 
Even God is not its creator. Nor is nature its creator. It has 
happened  naturally.

No  [individual]  person  has  created  this  world,  and  it 
has  not  formed  without  it  being  created.  This  means  that 
everyone  is  a  doer  as  an  evidentiary  doer,  not  in  reality.

There are six eternal elements in the world; the world 
has  arisen  through  the  coming  together  of  these  eternal 
elements.  This  is  not  something  that  can  be  understood 
through  the  intellect.  This  is  because  One  can  speak  about 
the  eternal  only  if  One  becomes  eternal  Himself.  When 
scientists go beyond the theory of relativity, the [theory of] 
Reality  begins. And  the  third  is  the  theory  of  absolutism. 

The  six  elements  are  permanent.  They  can  be  Seen 
only through absolute Knowledge. Even the saints and ardent 
devotees  cannot  see  them.

No one has control over these eternal elements. All six 
of them are independent. There is no owner of the universe, 
yet  there  is  niyati  (the  level  of  spiritual  development  of  a 
soul  as  it  progresses  naturally  on  the  track  of  evolution). 
The  manager  is  vyavasthit  shakti  (the  natural  energy  that 
19

brings together the scientiﬁ c circumstantial evidences to give 
result)  moreover,  it  is  an  inanimate  energy  (jada  shakti).

Those  who  tried  to  ﬁ gure  out  which  eternal  element 
of the six came ﬁ rst, have wound up wandering for inﬁ nite 
lifetimes! All  of  this  is  actually  a  Science.

Of  the  six  eternal  elements,  the  Self  is  akriya  (not 
connected with any activity; a non-doer; the Knower-Seer). 
Each  eternal  element  has  its  own  special  property  (guna). 
All the six eternal elements are interconnected (avinabhaavi) 
[in the sense that they cannot be or exist without the other].

Dada is considered such a Gnani that He is the world’s 
observatory.  He  is  considered  the  authority  over  the  four 
Vedas  [the  oldest  scriptures  of  Hinduism].

The  One  who  Knows  the  Self  alone  is  referred  to  as 
a  Tattvagnani,  whereas  the  One  who  Knows  all  the  eternal 
elements  is  a  Sarvagnya!

The  result  of  Knowing  the  Self  is  inﬁ nite  liberation 

even  amidst  endless  suﬀ ering!

All  the  eternal  elements  in  this  universe  are  sthir 
(still;  steady)  by  their  inherent  nature.  A  single  Parmanu 
(the  smallest,  most  indivisible  and  indestructible  particle  of 
inanimate matter) is also steady, but it is because of the coming 
together of all the eternal elements and vibhaav (a third identity 
with completely new properties that arises due to the coming 
together of the Self and inanimate matter) arising, that it has 
become chanchal (active; unsteady; moving). Jada Parmanu 
(the  smallest,  most  indivisible,  indestructible  particles  of  the 
eternal element of inanimate matter) are themselves chanchal, 
whereas  the  Self  is  steady  by  Its  inherent  nature.

All  six  eternal  elements  are  constantly  undergoing 
change  (parivartansheel)  by  their  inherent  nature.  The 
Parmanu keep revolving in the space in this world (aakash 
kshetra).

20

Each eternal element has its elemental matter (dravya), 
properties  (guna),  and  phases  (paryay).  That  from  which 
properties  and  phases  arise  is  the  dravya;  that  itself  has 
been  referred  to  as  vastu  (eternal  element).

Vishesh  parinaam  (a  completely  new  eﬀ ect)  arises 
through the mixing of the Self and inanimate matter (jada). 
So  entirely  new  properties  arise,  which  are  referred  to  as 
vyatirek  guna. 

What  is  the  difference  between  vinashi  and 
parivartansheel?  Vinashi  means  destructible,  whereas  the 
original element is avinashi (permanent; indestructible). The 
properties of the Self are indestructible and parivartansheel 
(constantly undergoing change). The phases are destructible 
and  constantly  changing.

Based  on  the  time  it  takes  for  one  Parmanu  to  cross 
another,  the  evidence  (nimit)  of  Time  was  deduced.  That 
amount of time is referred to as a samay (the smallest, most 
indivisible  unit  of  Time).

What  is  constantly  undergoing  change  in  the  Self? 
No  change  happens  in  the  elemental  matter  (dravya)  of 
the original Self (mool Chetan). ‘Its’ properties are inﬁ nite 
Knowledge, inﬁ nite Vision, inﬁ nite bliss…Any object to be 
Known  (gneya)  cannot  be  Known  through  Its  Knowledge 
(Gnan),  but  through  Its  phase  (paryay).  The  properties 
remain  constantly  with  the  Self,  the  phases  alter.  As  the 
object  to  be  Known  changes,  the  phase  of  Knowledge 
changes. Nevertheless, the Knowledge undoubtedly remains 
pure;  completely  and  totally  pure.

What  is  the  difference  between  a  change  in 
form  (roopantar)  and  to  constantly  undergo  change 
(parivartansheel)?  A  change  in  form  only  applies  to  the 
non-Self  complex  of  input  and  output  (pudgal),  which  has 
form.  A  change  in  form  applies  to  the  external  part.  That 
change  in  form  is  at  the  gross  level.  The  original  Pudgal 
21

Parmanu  (smallest,  indivisible  particles  of  the  element  of 
inanimate matter) are not changing in form either. They are 
simply constantly revolving or undergoing change; moreover, 
they  are  certainly  pure  within.

In terms of the elemental matter, property, and phase of 
the Self, the elemental matter (vastu; dravya) is comparable 
to an electric bulb. Its energy to give illumination (prakash) 
is  considered  its  property,  and  to  See  and  Know  all  the 
objects in that illumination is known as its phase. The bulb 
remains  exactly  where  it  is.

Here, everything related to the Self is being analyzed 
in  depth.  That  which  is  related  to  worldly  life,  that  which 
is  related  to  anger,  pride,  deceit,  and  greed,  is  analyzed  in 
depth everywhere else, however, that which is related to the 
Self  is  analyzed  in  depth  only  over  here. 

All  six  eternal  elements  keep  revolving  [around  each 
other];  in  this,  not  one  harasses  the  other,  not  one  helps 
the other. Nor do they become one with [each other]. They 
are all certainly pure. They simply keep revolving; they are 
constantly  undergoing  change. 

These  Parmanu  keep  revolving  in  the  universe,  and 
the Self also keeps revolving. With the engrossment arising 
out  of  the  two  coming  together  in  close  proximity,  a  veil 
of ignorance arises, and upon separating, they become free.

The revolving of the six eternal [elements] is referred 

to  as  the  world.

These  are  the  six  eternal  elements  of  the  universe:

1.  Atma

2.  Jada

The original Self (mool 
Chetan)
Inanimate matter 
(Parmanu)

Without form (aroopi)

The only eternal 
element with a visible 
form (roopi)

22

3.  Dharmastikaya 
(also known as 
gatisahayak)
4.  Adharmastikaya 
(also known as 
sthitisahayak)
5.  Aakash
6.  Kaal

That which supports 
motion

Without form 

That which makes 
objects still; that which 
supports inertia
That which gives space
Has atoms of Time 
(kaalanu); brings about 
change 

Without form 

Without form 
Without form 

The  ﬁ ve  eternal  elements  are  referred  to  as  astikaya 
(that  which  can  have  more  than  one  pradesh).  The  eternal 
element  of  Time  cannot  be  referred  to  as  astikaya.

These are all discoveries of the Tirthankar Lords (living 
fully  enlightened  being  whose  presence  turns  every  place 
They go, into a place of pilgrimage and whose darshan grants 
ﬁ nal liberation to the One who has attained Self-realization), 
through  absolute  Knowledge  (keval  Gnan)!

The  six  eternal  elements  are  always  Sat.  Sat  means 

indestructible,  and  asat  means  destructible. 

The  Self  does  not  occupy  real  space.  The  embodied 

one,  the  embodied  self  occupies  space.

When an embodied soul (jeev) came from avyavahaar 
rashi  (a  state  of  uncategorized  souls  that  have  not  yet 
entered worldly interactions) into vyavahaar rashi (worldly 
nomenclature), which eternal element latched on to it ﬁ rst? 
It  entered  into  this  [worldly  nomenclature]  on  the  basis 
of  Time.  In  any  current  that  is  ﬂ owing,  would  it  have  its 
turn  [to  join  the  sea]  or  not?  Niyati  (the  level  of  spiritual 
development of a soul as it progresses naturally on the track 
of evolution) is responsible for this. Neither niyati nor Time 
is  independent.  Neither  are  superior.

Nevertheless,  if  we  were  to  consider  who  plays  the 
major  role  in  this,  then  it  would  be  that  of  the  Pudgal 
23

(eternal element of inanimate matter). Therefore, the primary 
scuﬄ  e is between inanimate matter and the Self. The others 
are  silent.  However,  the  Self  has  become  entrapped  in  all 
of  these  ﬁ ve  eternal  elements,  despite  being  the  owner  of 
inﬁ nite  energies!  When  the  [developing]  self  attains  the 
experiential  awareness  of  Its  own  Self  (bhaan)  and  that  of 
the  eternal  element  of  inanimate  matter,  that  is  when  the 
Self  will  become  separate  from  all  of  them. 

It  has  never  been  the  case  that  the  Self  has  existed 
without  the  other  five  eternal  elements.  They  have  all 
certainly  been  together  since  time  immemorial. All  the  six 
eternal  elements  exist  in  the  form  of  a  mixture,  not  in  the 
form  of  a  compound.  If  they  were  to  become  a  compound, 
then the original gunadharma (properties that have a speciﬁ c 
function)  themselves  would  change.

The  Self  is  undoubtedly  pure;  it  is  simply  the  belief 

that  has  become  wrong.

The  vikalp  (the  wrong  belief  that  ‘I  am  Chandubhai’ 
and  all  the  relative  ‘I-ness’  that  stems  from  it)  are  limited, 
whereas the properties of the Self are unlimited. Only then 
would liberation (moksha) be attainable. And the reason it has 
been said that there are inﬁ nite properties is because one is 
in a state of gross unawareness of the Self (bebhaan). There 
is no need to say anything to the One who has experiential 
awareness  as  the  Self,  is  there!

The Self is an eternal element. Therefore, Its existence 
is  also  eternal.  There  cannot  be  a  reason  for  the  existence 
of  an  eternal  element.

The Self is Itself without form, the other four [eternal 
elements  are  also]  without  form.  Only  the  eternal  element 
of  inanimate  matter  has  form. The  eternal  element  that  has 
form is such that the moment it is interfered with, it becomes 
disturbed, and worldly life comes into being. The developing 
self  is  formless,  and  upon  seeing  that  which  has  form,  by 
24

interfering  with  it,  the  eternal  element  of  inanimate  matter 
takes  on  the  corresponding  form  in  the  same  manner.

The  One  who  has  Knowledge  beyond  the  Vedas  is 
known as a bhed Vignani (the One who separates the Self and 
all  the  other  ﬁ ve  eternal  elements);  He  is  the  only  One  who 
can separate all these eternal elements. The scriptures do not 
work  here. The  direct  illumination  of  the  Gnani  is  required. 
Dada, in whom the completely unveiled Self has manifested, 
is such a Gnani of the current era of the time cycle, that He 
can  separate  everything  within  a  span  of  just  two  hours!

[2]  The  Self,  the  Indestructible  Element

The  Self  (Atma)  is  an  absolute  eternal  element  such 
that  It  has  inﬁ nite  energies.  ‘It’  alone  has  Chetanta  (the 
property  to  Know  and  See;  life  sustaining  energy),  It  has 
Knowledge,  It  has  bliss.  No  other  eternal  element  (tattva) 
has  these.  There  are  inﬁ nite  such  Atma,  and  each  Atma  is 
without  a  beginning  or  an  end  (anaadi  anant).

The Self is in the form of solid, unbroken Knowledge 
and Vision (chaitanyaghan swaroopi). Ignorance never ﬂ ows 
forth  from  It.

The  Self  is  indeed  pure  across  the  three  time  periods 
[the past, the present, and the future]. However, the prakruti 
(non-Self  complex)  that  arose  as  a  part  of  the  vishesh 
parinaam (completely new result that arises when two eternal 
elements come together) is mishrachetan (the I with wrong 
belief that arises as when the eternal elements of the Self and 
inanimate matter come into close proximity with each other). 
The Real Self (Nishchay Atma) is certainly the absolute Self 
(Parmatma). The worldly-interacting self (vyavahaar atma) 
is  relative.  Chetan  (the  Self)  is  Itself  God,  It  is  absolutely 
free  of  dependency  on  anything  relative  (niralamb).

What  is  the  diﬀ erence  between  the  embodied  soul  or 

the  relative  self  (jeev)  and  the  Self  (Atma)? 

25

That which believes that it lives and dies is jeev. The 

Self  is  ageless  and  immortal  (ajar  amar).

The  original  eternal  element  (mool  tattva)  is  referred 
to  as  the  Self,  whereas  its  temporary  state  (avastha)  has 
been  referred  to  as  jeev.

The  Self  has  the  property  of  Knowing.  Whereas  the 
worldly-interacting  self  displays  feelings  (laagni). The  Self 
(Chetan)  is  without  activity  (akriya),  It  is  steady  (adol). 

If  we  worship  the  Self  as  being  formless  (aroopi) 
only, then besides the Pudgal (eternal element of inanimate 
matter), the other four eternal elements are also formless, so 
it  reaches  them  [too].  Like  the  Self,  the  other  four  [eternal 
elements]  are  invisible  (amurt),  they  never  increase  or 
decrease  (aguru-laghu),  they  are  nirlep  (nothing  can  touch 
or smear onto them), they are immiscible (tankotkirna), they 
are  steady  (avichal).

The  Self  is  something  to  be  experienced.  ‘Its’ 
Knowledge,  Vision,  and  the  experience  of  bliss  of  a  state 
that  is  free  of  uneasiness  and  agitation  (niraakul  anand)  is 
unique  to  It.

The Self Itself has never become impure. It simply has 
the  wrong  belief  (bhranti)  of  becoming  impure.  In  Reality, 
One  (pote;  the  developing  ‘I’)  is  certainly  the  pure  Soul. 
One  believes  ‘I  am  Chandubhai’  in  the  relative. 

In the Gita, it has been said, “That which is temporary 
(asat)  is  destructible,  whereas  Sat  (the  Self;  the  eternal 
element)  is  indestructible  over  all  three  time  periods  [the 
past,  the  present,  and  the  future].  The  Self  is  permanent 
(nitya),  indestructible  (avinashi),  unconﬁ ned  illumination 
(aprameya),  and  the  bodies  of  this  one  who  possesses  a 
body, they are destructible. In the Lord’s language, the Self 
does  not  die  nor  does  It  get  born.

Lord Krishna has said, “Liberation (moksha) is within 

26

You. So, let go of everything else and worship Me, worship 
the  One  within.”  The  Gita  indeed  refers  to  the  Self  as  the 
real  Krishna,  worship  It.  Wherever  the  word  ‘I’  is  used  in 
the  Gita,  it  is  referring  to  the  Self.  Whereas  people  have 
misunderstood  it  to  mean  that  it  refers  to  the  individual. 
Ultimately,  the  Self  Itself  is  the  absolute  Self!

[3]  The  Element  That  Supports  Motion  –  The 
Element  That  Supports  Inertia

Neither inanimate matter nor the Self have the energy 
to  move  themselves  independently.  The  eternal  element 
that  supports  motion  (gatisahayak  tattva;  also  known  as 
dharmastikaya)  assists  them  with  motion. 

When  an  intention  arises  within,  when  the  desire 
arises  to  go  somewhere,  the  moment  there  is  realization  of 
a  subtle  sign  of  this  type,  the  eternal  element  that  supports 
motion  assists  it. 

It is mentioned in the Upanishad [ancient Sanskrit texts 
of  spiritual  teaching  and  ideas  of  Hinduism]  that  the  self 
is  in  motion  and  the  Self  is  not  in  motion.  In  the  Real,  the 
Self is not in motion, but when the worldly-interacting self 
(vyavahaar atma) does an intent (bhaav), then it moves with 
the  assistance  of  the  eternal  element  that  supports  motion.

The  eternal  element  of  the  Self  is  the  only  One  that 
can  prevail  in  the  inherent  nature  as  the  Self  (Swabhaav) 
and it can also assume identiﬁ cation with that which is not 
the  Self  (visheshbhaav). Through  visheshbhaav,  as  soon  as 
it does the bhaav to move, the eternal element that supports 
motion immediately helps in moving it along. Just as water 
helps a ﬁ sh to move forward! If there is no water, then the 
ﬁ sh  cannot  move  along.

Now, if the eternal element that supports motion were 
to  be  the  only  one,  then  everyone  would  be  constantly 
scurrying about hither and thither, within the home, outside, 
27

everywhere! There  would  be  no  need  to  invest  in  a  sofa,  a 
bed,  or  chairs.  However,  there  is  another  eternal  element, 
which  is  referred  to  as  sthitisahayak  (also  known  as 
adharmastikaya;  the  eternal  element  that  supports  inertia); 
it  makes  everything  still.

When a log is thrown into a river, it seems as though the 
water is the one that pulls it along; however, it is actually the 
eternal element that supports motion alone that pulls it along. 

The  eternal  elements  that  support  motion  and  inertia 
have  pradesh  (regions;  spatial  units),  they  do  not  have 
atoms.  Even  the  Self  has  inﬁ nite  pradesh  (smallest  amount 
of  space  that  a  single  parmanu  occupies  on  the  Self). This 
point  is  beyond  the  intellect.  It  can  only  be  Seen  through 
absolute  Knowledge  (keval  Gnan).

When the inﬂ uence of the eternal element that supports 
motion is over, then the eternal element that supports inertia 
starts functioning. At the time of death, do people not say, “I 
have lost the courage to get up and even walk.” This means 
that  the  eternal  element  that  supports  motion  has  depleted.

Fundamentally,  it  is  not  the  eternal  element  of  the  Self 
that has a request to move about. It is actually as a result of the 
visheshbhaav (a third identity with completely new properties) 
that arises due to the coming together of the Self and inanimate 
matter.  This  in  turn  gives  rise  to  the  I  (hu).  That  unnatural 
I  (vibhaavik  hu)  has  the  property  to  do  bhaav.  The  bhaav  is 
of  the  vyatirek  guna  (completely  new  properties  of  a  third 
component  that  arises  when  the  eternal  elements  of  the  Self 
and  inanimate  matter  come  together).  It  does  the  bhaav  and 
the eternal element that supports motion assists it in moving. 

Who  is  the  one  that  does  the  bhaav?  Is  it  inanimate 

matter  or  the  Self?

It  is  the  assumed  self  that  does  the  bhaav!  Meaning, 
the  worldly-interacting  self  (vyavahaar  atma).  It  is  only  if 
28

the  bhaav  is  made  that  the  eternal  elements  that  support 
motion and inertia assist, otherwise they do not. In worldly 
interaction  (vyavahaar;  the  relative),  there  is  help  from 
everyone.  In  the  Real  (Nishchay),  there  is  no  need  for 
that  at  all,  is  there!  If  one  wants  to  remain  in  the  relative 
(vyavahaar),  then  space  is  needed,  time  is  needed. All  six 
eternal  elements  are  within  us.

A  lizard’s  dismembered  tail  keeps  ﬂ ailing  for  a  long 
time!  Why  is  that?  The  jeev  (life  force)  has  actually  left 
with the lizard that darted away, so which other jeev entered 
the tail? Can the Self be cut into two pieces? No. The Self 
actually  moves  away  from  the  tail  at  the  very  instant  the 
tail  is  being  cut;  It  contracts  and  enters  completely  in  the 
lizard.  Then  the  tail  keeps  ﬂ ailing  around  because  of  the 
eternal  element  that  supports  motion.  Then  immediately 
upon  ﬁ nishing  its  work,  the  eternal  element  that  supports 
motion  leaves  and  the  eternal  element  that  supports  inertia 
assists  it  in  remaining  still.

The  eternal  element  that  supports  inertia  is  there  to  a 
greater extent in trees, and there is very little of the eternal 
element  that  supports  motion.  The  eternal  elements  that 
support  motion  and  inertia  exist  as  far  as  the  lokaakash 
(region  of  space  in  the  universe  in  which  all  six  eternal 
elements exist) extends. It is one, it is undivided, it is eternal.

It  is  a  popular  notion  that  at  the  time  of  death,  a 
mythological  ﬂ ying  vehicle  (vimaan)  comes  and  takes  the 
jeev  away.  In  reality,  it  is  not  a  vimaan,  but  the  eternal 
element that supports motion that takes it away. It is because 
people do not understand this eternal element that it has been 
referred  to  as  a  vimaan  in  a  childlike  language.

As  a  result  of  doing  the  bhaav  of  wanting  to  go  to 
moksha, the eternal element that supports motion automatically 
takes  It  [the  Self]  to  moksha. The  Self  does  not  need  to  do 
anything at all in this. The Self certainly remains a non-doer 
29

all  the  way  to  the  very  end.  The  moment  the  Self  becomes 
free of karma, as Its inherent nature is to ascend, so the eternal 
element that supports motion goes all the way to see It oﬀ  to 
Siddha Kshetra (the permanent abode of absolutely liberated 
Souls),  and  the  eternal  element  that  supports  inertia  makes 
It still there. In this way, they ﬁ nish oﬀ  their pending work, 
and ultimately, those two eternal elements also become free!

That  is  certainly  why  Shrimad  Rajchandra  has  said:

“As per the previously planned causes, the Self ascends 
and  remains  as  the  Self  in  the  abode  of  the  absolutely 
liberated  Souls!”

“Purva  prayogaadi  kaaranaa  yogthi,  urdhvagaman 

Siddhalay  prapt  susthit  jo!”

The  previous  planning  brings  us  here  and  makes 
us  move  around.  Whereas  the  previous  planning  of  those 
going to moksha takes them to Siddhashila (crescent shaped 
location at the crest of the universe which is the permanent 
abode  of  the  absolutely  liberated  Souls  who  have  attained 
ultimate  liberation).

Ultimately, even the Self does not need to do anything 
to go to moksha. The Self has certainly remained as the Self, 
throughout the course of worldly life, without any diﬃ  culty!

[4]  The  Element  of  Time

The  fact  that  everything  in  this  world  is  constantly 
changing from new to old is dependent on Time. The eternal 
element  of  Time  (kaal  tattva)  itself  is  not  making  the  new 
old,  but  Time  is  instrumental  (nimit)  in  that  process.

How  is  it  possible  to  measure  how  long  a  temporary 
state will last? It is through the eternal element of Time. The 
fact  that  we  are  able  to  recognize  input  and  output  (puran-
galan), the coming together and dissolution of circumstances, 
is  also  indeed  because  of  the  eternal  element  of  Time.

30

‘Time’ even causes the extinction of the lineage of the 

Gnanis.  Nothing  else  has  that  kind  of  strength.

The amount of time it takes for one Parmanu to cross 

over  another  Parmanu  has  been  referred  to  as  samay.

‘Time’  is  in  the  form  of  kaalanu  (atoms  of  Time). 
They are inﬁ nite, but they are formless, they are not visible. 
They  are  non-living  (nishchetan).

What Lord Krishna had said in the Gita; if there were 
to  be  any  accomplished  practitioner  of  the  eternal  element 
of  Time,  then  he  would  be  able  to  recall  the  atoms  of  that 
Time  even  today  and  have  us  all  listen  [to  the  speech  of 
Lord  Krishna]!  The  atoms  of  Time  remain  somewhere  in 
the  universe  for  the  duration  of  one  kalp  (one  complete 
revolution  of  the  time  cycle  comprising  12  time  periods, 
6  of  the  ascending  cycle  and  6  of  the  descending  cycle), 
meaning  that  they  last  for  one  Avsarpini  (ascending  half-
cycle  of  time)  and  one  Utsarpini  (descending  half-cycle  of 
time).  However,  that  art  [of  recalling  the  atoms  of  Time] 
does  not  exist  in  the  current  times,  it  has  vanished.  Dada 
says,  “Even  ‘we’  do  not  have  that  art.  It  is  Those  who  are 
at  360  degrees  who  Know  this  art.”

Time  is  of  two  types:  1.  vyavahaar  kaal  (time  used 
in  the  relative  sense;  relative  time),  2. Nishchay  kaal  (Real 
Time;  the  eternal  element  of  Time).

A pal (a measure of time equal to 24 seconds), a vipal 
(one  sixteenth  of  a  second),  a  second,  a  minute,  an  hour,  a 
day, a week, a month, a year…this is considered vyavahaar 
kaal. And a samay is considered Nishchay kaal. A samay is 
the  smallest,  most  indivisible  unit  of  Time.

The  Tirthankar  Lords  had  reached  the  level  of 
awareness of one samay, through absolute Knowledge (keval 
Gnan)! Dadashri says, “I have not even reached ﬁ ve hundred 
samay!” The One with absolute Knowledge (a keval Gnani) 
has  revolutions  that  span  a  samay!

31

When  it  comes  to  [absolute]  Vision  (Darshan),  time 
is  not  applicable.  Time  applies  to  the  objects  to  be  seen 
(drashya),  not  to  the  Seer  (Drashta).

‘Time’  is  not  an  illusion,  it  is  a  reality.

Every  circumstance  indeed  comes  with  its  time.  It  is 
verily the time of the circumstance (sanjog kaal) that brings 
the  various  circumstances  together.

It  is  always  in  the  awareness  of  time  as  to  what  will 
happen, for example, at twenty past ten. When the dravya (the 
relative self or the physical evidences), the place (kshetra), 
the time (kaal), the intent (bhaav), and a lifetime (bhav) all 
come  together,  that  is  when  an  action  takes  place. 

Moreover,  every  circumstance  is  prone  to  dissipation 

by  its  inherent  nature.

The  circumstance  of  having  guests  visit  you  is  prone 
to  dissipation  by  its  inherent  nature,  so  then  why  fret  over 
when  they  will  leave?  The  circumstances  of  pleasure  and 
pain  are  prone  to  dissipation  by  their  inherent  nature;  it 
happens  automatically.

The circumstances come together based on the intents 
(bhaav).  One  himself  (the  developing  I;  pote)  is  the  ‘king’ 
of  the  intents.

Nothing at all aﬀ ects that which is Real (nirpeksh). It 

aﬀ ects  only  that  which  is  relative  (sapeksh).

Time,  karma,  and  maya  (illusion  induced  by  worldly 
life) do not aﬀ ect Dada’s mahatmas (those who have received 
Self-realization through Gnan vidhi), provided They remain 
in  the  ﬁ ve  Agnas. 

Time  is  actually  ticking  by  continuously.  How  can 

anyone  form  a  relationship  with  it  at  all?

Dadashri says, “‘We’ are beyond everything; the dravya, 

32

the place, the time, the intent, a lifetime, the body. ‘We’ are 
not  bound  by  any  of  them.”

In  [the  phrase]  Akram  Vignan,  [the  words]  ‘kram’ 
(stepwise) and ‘Akram’ (step-less) are adjectives, they keep 
on changing. However, [the word] ‘Vignan’ (Science) is not 
an adjective; it is permanent. An adjective is something that 
applies  for  a  given  amount  of  time.  Once  the  time  limit  is 
up,  the  adjective  no  longer  applies.

‘It is predetermined to happen’ is correct and ‘it is not 
predetermined’  is  also  correct.  Therefore,  the  exact  thing 
is  actually  ‘vyavasthit’  (a  result  of  scientiﬁ c  circumstantial 
evidences). 

One goes to moksha when the time is right. However, 
time  is  not  the  only  thing  that  is  required;  one  can  go  to 
moksha only if one meets a Gnani, if one attains the proper 
means. When the time is right, everything [all the evidences] 
will  certainly  be  attained. 

If  a  Tirthankar  is  around,  and  if  a  person,  upon 
completely  surrendering  to  the  Lord,  is  ready  to  follow 
whatever self-restraints (saiyam) the Lord tells him to follow, 
then can that person go to moksha in that very lifetime? The 
Lord would respond, “No.” Why is that? The answer is, his 
bhavsthiti (predetermined number of lives and lifespan until 
the  attainment  of  moksha  based  on  one’s  stock  of  karma; 
spiritual development) is not yet ‘ripened’ [ready to unfold]. 
The  bhavsthiti  can  be  made  to  unfold  earlier  than  its  time 
through  certain  means;  however,  it  can  be  made  to  unfold 
earlier  through  certain  means  only  if  it  is  meant  to  unfold 
earlier,  otherwise  it  will  not. 

So  then  where  does  Purusharth  (real  spiritual  eﬀ ort 

to  progress  as  the  Self)  come  into  this?

Where  is  there  any  Purusharth  when  one  has  the 
wrong  belief  (bhranti)  anyway?  Purusharth  can  happen 
33

after  becoming  the  Purush  (the  Self).  On  the  Kramik  path 
(traditional step-by-step path of spiritual progress), purusharth 
(relative eﬀ ort) is done through the ego. Later on, even that 
ego  will  have  to  be  dissolved.

 Time is not doing the Purusharth, the Purush is doing 

the  Purusharth.

Why are there only twenty-four Tirthankar Lords? Why 
are  there  sixty-three  Shalaka  Purush  (human  beings  with 
extraordinary, super-human energies and accomplishments)?

That is all natural. It is always this very same number. 
Two H plus O equals water. Why is it always this particular 
measurement?  This  is  all  scientiﬁ c.  How  beautiful  is  this 
natural  arrangement!

Dadashri  says,  “During  childhood,  I  used  to  have 
many  thoughts,  such  as,  ‘Who  came  up  with  the  concept 
of  a  year? Why  do  we  have  months?’” Then  gradually,  He 
understood that mangoes grow on the mango tree only once 
every  twelve  months;  many  ﬂ owers  and  fruits  grow  only 
once  every  twelve  months.

Therefore, the essence of this world is [the concept of] 
twelve months. Moreover, within a month, there are ﬁ fteen 
days  in  which  the  moon  is  visible,  and  ﬁ fteen  days  during 
which  it  is  not  visible.  It  is  all  exact. All  of  this  is  natural. 
It  is  not  a  ﬁ gment  of  the  imagination  of  human  beings. 
The  intellect  cannot  be  used  here  at  all.  Time  is  entirely 
mathematical.  What  is  the  only  place  in  which  there  are 
changes in the natural order? The nature of human beings is 
to have entrenched deluded beliefs acquired through societal 
inﬂ uence (gruhit mithyatva). It is certainly because of these 
entrenched  deluded  beliefs  that  moksha  has  been  impeded 
in  the  current  era  of  the  time  cycle!

Karma is subject to time, and time is itself subject to 
other factors. No one is actually completely independent. Just 
34

look  at  that,  even  God  [the  Self]  has  become  entrapped  in 
this ﬁ asco! It is only the bestower of liberation (mokshadata), 
the  One  who  has  become  liberated  and  can  liberate  others 
(tarantaaranhaar), a Gnani Purush (the One who has realized 
the Self and is able to do the same for others) who can set 
one  free  from  this!

[5]  The  Eternal  Element  of  Space

[5.1]  Space  Is  an  Indestructible  Eternal  Element

The  eternal  element  of  the  Self  has  been  said  to  be 
like  the  eternal  element  of  Space  (aakash),  so  what  is  the 
diﬀ erence  between  the  two?

Space

The Self

- Non-living (nishchetan)

- Does not have feelings (laagni)
- Formless (aroopi)
- Eternal element
- Does not have Knowledge

- Nothing in the world can disturb 
it.
- Subtle (sookshma)
- A third parmanu cannot pass 
through the space occupied by 
two parmanu 
- The pudgal occupies space.

- Chetan (the property of 
Knowing and Seeing)
- Has feelings 
- Formless 
- Eternal element
- Is the Real form as Knowledge 
(Gnan Swaroop)
- Nothing in the world can disturb 
It.
- Subtle 
- The Self can pass through 
anything.

- The Self does not occupy space 
(anavgaahak).

‘Space’  is  so  vast,  yet  it  is  indivisible,  it  is  a  single 
entity,  it  is  continuous.  The  role  of  providing  space  is  that 
of  the  eternal  element  of  Space.  The  eternal  element  of 
Space  provides  space  to  the  self  that  has  deviated  from  its 
inherent nature (vibhaavik atma). The Self in Its natural state 
(Swabhaavik  Atma)  does  not  need  space  at  all.

‘Space’ is independent, it is just as independent as the 

35

Self. It cannot be divided into pieces; it can have aggregates. 
There might be more of it collected together in some places 
and less in others, but the entity as a whole does not break. 

‘Space’ alone is perceivable; that too, only the tangible 

aspect  of  Space  is  perceivable.

The color of the sky that is visible is the part that has 
a lot of hollow space. And there too, the reﬂ ection that the 
ocean  gives  oﬀ ,  falls  on  that.  The  light  of  the  sun  falls  on 
the  ocean  and  its  reﬂ ection  is  given  oﬀ   above.  Otherwise, 
the  sky  means  space,  an  open  space.  Water  itself  is  also 
colorless.

The  eternal  element  of  Space  is  present  in  everyone. 
A diamond contains the least amount of space. That is why 
it  does  not  break  easily.

‘Space’  is  everywhere.  The  Self  does  not  occupy 
space  in  Siddha  Kshetra.  That  is  why  It  has  been  referred 
to  as  anavgaahak.  The  absolutely  liberated  Lords  (Siddha 
Bhagwant) reside in Siddha Kshetra. Despite being formless 
(niraakaar), They have form (aakaar). ‘Their’ form is two-
thirds the size of the body in which They became liberated.

The  dravya,  kshetra  (location),  time  (kaal),  intent 
(bhaav),  and  a  lifetime  (bhav);  all  of  these  keep  changing. 
A  lifetime  (bhav)  can  last  for  a  longer  time,  whereas  the 
dravya,  place,  time,  and  intent  keep  changing  constantly.

One  indeed  remains  as  the  Self  through  these  four 
intents:  Swadravya  (the  elemental  matter  as  the  Self), 
Swakshetra (the realm as the Self), Swabhaav (the inherent 
nature  as  the  Self),  and  Swakaal  (time  as  it  relates  to  the 
Real).  That  verily  is  the  pure  Soul.

Swakshetra  refers  to  the  state  of  the  Self  having 
inﬁ nite spatial units (pradesh). In reality, that is not kshetra 
but  it  has  been  used  for  Swakshetra  so  as  to  explain  the 
36

concept  of  parkshetra  (realm  of  the  non-Self).  The  Self 
only  has  Swabhaav,  It  does  not  have  anything  else.  To  be 
the  Knower-Seer  and  in  permanent  bliss,  that  verily  is  Its 
Swabhaav;  everything  besides  that  is  parbhaav  (the  state 
as the non-Self). The parbhaav is dependent on parkshetra.

The Self is kshetragnya (the Knower-Seer of the relative 
self).  The  Knower  of  the  [par]  kshetra  (relative  self)  has 
become kshetrakaar (to become one with the relative self).

[5.2]  The  Unique  Eﬀ ects  of  Space!

Besides  the  Self,  everything  occupies  space.  The 
inherent  nature  of  Pudgal  is  to  occupy  space.  Even  pure 
Parmanu  occupy  space.

If  I  want  to  become  a  doctor,  how  does  space  play  a 
role in that? When timing, space, and all other causes come 
together,  that  is  when  the  thoughts  of  becoming  a  doctor 
arise.  One  does  not  bind  karma  of  his  own  accord.  Space 
is  the  main  factor  in  this.

What  came  ﬁ rst,  the  inherent  nature  (swabhaav)  or 

space?

It is on account of the inherent nature that one comes 
across  the  space,  and  it  is  on  account  of  the  space  that 
the  inherent  nature  is  attained.  So  this  happens  based  on 
evidences  instrumental  in  the  process  (nimit-naimittik).

Karma  is  also  based  on  space.  Karma  is  not  the 

fundamental  factor;  karma  is  based  on  space.

However,  it  is  on  the  basis  of  time  that  the  intent 

arose  in  that  space.

When the dravya (the worldly-interacting self) comes 
into the kshetra (location), then based on that, the time comes 
together, and after time, the intent arises, and thereafter the 
karma  gets  charged.

37

The  dravya  comes  into  a  kshetra  →  time  →  intent  = 

charging  of  karma.

Dravya  refers  to  the  worldly-interacting  self  (bhrant 
chetan).  The  Chetan  that  is  without  illusion  would  indeed 
never  occupy  space!  Therefore,  fundamentally,  the  kshetra 
comes  ﬁ rst,  then  everything  moves  ahead.

And  based  on  what  does  one  acquire  the  space?  It 
is  based  on  its  law.  In  school,  everyone  may  be  listening 
together, yet the space is diﬀ erent for everyone, so the intent 
is  deﬁ nitely  diﬀ erent  for  everyone. 

As  the  space  is  diﬀ erent,  everyone’s  ego  is  diﬀ erent, 
and  based  on  the  ego,  the  space  is  diﬀ erent;  they  are 
reciprocatory.

‘Knowledge’  (Gnan)  does  not  occupy  space,  karma 
occupies  space.  Even  bhakti  (devotional  acts)  occupies 
space.  Karma  and  Knowledge  can  coexist.  This  is  because 
Knowledge does not occupy space, does it! Karma and bhakti 
cannot  coexist.  This  is  because  they  both  occupy  space.

The place [the space] and the time can aﬀ ect thoughts, 
they cannot aﬀ ect the Self. Besides the Self, there is nothing 
in this world that is free from eﬀ ects. The pudgal (the non-
Self  complex  that  undergoes  inﬂ ux  and  outﬂ ux)  itself  is 
‘eﬀ ective’  [prone  to  change  based  on  the  eﬀ ects].

Just  as  people  have  vibrations,  locations  also  have 
vibrations.  In  Kurukshetra  (the  land  on  which  the  war  of 
the  Mahabharat  was  fought),  only  thoughts  of  ﬁ ghting 
arise.  People  even  end  up  ﬁ ghting  there!  Devotional  acts 
or  knowledge,  only  work  in  full  swing  in  certain  places.

The  connection  with  a  location  is  a  karmic  account. 
When there is merit karma, the connection [with the location] 
seems pleasant, it seems pacifying. Conversely, upon seeing 
a  dog  or  a  lizard,  if  revulsion  arises,  then  it  would  be 
considered as that type of karmic account having unfolded.
38

We are the ones who have to become wise. If we are 
not  straightforward,  then  we  will  come  across  a  place  that 
is perverse. Amidst that, if the intent were to improve, then 
the kshetra, the dravya, the time, everything would deﬁ nitely 
improve. It is the intent that is to be changed. Every person 
has to become prepared to such an extent that no matter what 
the circumstance, no place should seem burdensome to him.

If an atheist goes to a place of pilgrimage (tirth), then 
even he will start believing in God! Wherever the Tirthankar 
Lords  go,  that  place  becomes  a  place  of  pilgrimage!  Dada 
says  that  this  does  not  happen  to  such  an  extent  with  Him.

For  mahatmas,  all  the  intents  are  now  discharging 
intents. Intents can only be done as long as there is the belief 
that,  ‘I  am  Chandubhai,’  otherwise  they  cannot  be  done.

When  can  the  location  change? 

It  is  when  one’s  inherent  nature  (swabhaav)  changes.

Only  those  with  dusham  swabhaav  (nature  of  the 
relative  self  that  is  characterized  by  anger,  pride,  deceit, 
greed  and  a  lack  of  unity  in  thought,  speech,  and  action) 
come to this place [Bharat Kshetra; one of the three locations 
in  the  universe  where  human  beings  reside,  the  other  two 
are  Mahavideh  Kshetra  and  Airavat  Kshetra]  at  this  time. 
Dada  says,  “‘We’  too  have  come  here!”  After  Gnan,  once 
One’s swabhaav changes, then there will be a change in the 
location, and One will be able to go to Mahavideh Kshetra 
(one  of  the  three  locations  in  the  universe  where  human 
beings reside, the other two are Bharat Kshetra and Airavat 
Kshetra)  after  one  or  so  lifetimes.

Everyone certainly remains within the boundary. And 
for  the  One  who  goes  beyond  the  boundary,  for  the  One 
who  comes  out  of  the  boundary,  His  work  is  complete. 
And  only  the  One  who  has  become  boundaryless  can  take 
others  outside  the  boundary.  [The  intellect  is  limited.  The 
Gnan  is  unlimited.]

39

[5.3]  The  Mystery  Behind  Diﬀ erent  Faces!

Why  is  the  face  diﬀ erent  for  each  individual?

If  God  had  created  them,  then  how  would  He  have 

sculpted  them  all  diﬀ erently?

God must have had to create so many molds, mustn’t 
He?  If  the  faces  were  the  same,  then  it  would  be  diﬃ  cult 
to  recognize  one’s  son-in-law!  One’s  husband  would  get 
switched! “This person is not the one I had applied vermillion 
on!” Whereas the husband may have come after washing oﬀ  
the vermillion! Can you imagine the ﬁ asco it would create?

The  face  is  based  on  the  space.  The  reason  behind 
the  variation  in  faces  is  that  every  living  being  occupies  a 
diﬀ erent  space!

When  one  person  speaks,  there  may  be  one  hundred 
people listening to him. The timing may be the same for them 
all, but as their space diﬀ ers, there is variation in everything. 
Dadashri  has  referred  to  the  change  in  the  bhaav  (belief; 
intent)  as  vyavasthit  (a  result  of  scientiﬁ c  circumstantial 
evidences). God has Knowledge, but no intellect. The intellect 
alone  can  give  rise  to  all  of  this,  not  Knowledge!

Hundreds of thousands of bubbles form near a waterfall. 
They  may  be  small  or  large,  but  are  there  any  that  are 
identical  in  size?  No,  because  the  space  is  diﬀ erent.  When 
one  evidence  changes,  other  things  also  change.  Each  and 
every grain in khichdee (an Indian dish made from rice and 
lentils)  is  diﬀ erent.  Each  and  every  leaf  of  a  tamarind  tree 
is diﬀ erent from all the others! This is on account of space. 
This  Science  is  worth  understanding.

The ﬁ ngerprint of every human being is diﬀ erent! The 
courts  and  immigration  oﬃ  ces  function  on  its  basis!  Not 
even  two  hairs  from  the  same  head  are  identical.

A certain number of people become soldiers, carpenters, 

40

women, men; all of these karmic accounts are based on the 
variation  in  space.

The  taste  of  each  mango  on  the  same  mango  tree  is 
diﬀ erent!  The  taste  of  the  ﬁ rst  rotli  (ﬂ atbread)  is  diﬀ erent, 
the taste of the second, third…and the last is diﬀ erent! Some 
people  become  famous  for  their  fritters,  for  their  mathiya 
(crispy, savory snack); why is that? It is because the space, 
the  time,  and  the  intent  are  all  diﬀ erent.

No living being can reside within another living being, 
and if it were to do so, then it would be so in a subtle form. 
Even then, it would not be residing within the living being, 
but outside of it, meaning that it would be within the cavity 
of the body. This is because the space is diﬀ erent for every 
living  being.

As  the  space  is  diﬀ erent,  the  intents  are  diﬀ erent,  so 
the  vyavasthit  is  diﬀ erent.  Is  it  niyati  (the  level  of  spiritual 
development of a soul as it progresses naturally on the track 
of  evolution)  that  is  at  work  behind  all  of  this?

When does niyati apply? When the space is the same. 
Then  everything  would  be  identical  for  everyone.  What  is 
niyati? It is a ﬂ ow. Just as when water is ﬂ owing, it is never 
the same water [in that space]. It changes from one moment 
to the next. That is why the space is diﬀ erent for everyone. 
Two  Parmanu  or  two  living  beings  cannot  reside  in  the 
same  space.  So,  the  fact  that  everyone  acquires  a  diﬀ erent 
space  is  on  the  basis  of  niyati,  but  niyati  alone  cannot  do 
anything. As the space is diﬀ erent, the ego is diﬀ erent, and 
the  ego  does  everything.

Niyati is actually the same for everyone. Niyati helps in 
the same way, be it for bondage or for liberation. Whatever 
is the basis for bondage, is the very same basis for liberation. 
Niyati  simply  helps  everyone.

Every  living  being  has  the  exact  same  experience  as 

41

each  living  being  that  passes  through  that  particular  space. 
Whatever  comes  at  the  sixteenth  mile,  everyone  has  the 
exact  same  experience  of  that.  Niyati  is  not  destiny,  but 
a  ﬂ ow.  It  is  one  of  the  evidences.  [More  detail  on  niyati 
can  be  found  in  Aptavani  11  Purvardh  Gujarati  book  page 
numbers  270  to  330.]

Forty-eight  minutes  before  the  time  of  death,  the 
decision forms as to which realm of existence will be attained 
in  the  next  life.  Therefore,  if  the  ﬁ nal  forty-eight  minutes 
are  taken  care  of  [spent  in  awareness  as  the  Self,]  then 
the  person’s  spiritual  work  will  have  been  accomplished! 
A  balance  sheet  of  one’s  entire  life  gets  tallied  in  the  ﬁ nal 
forty-eight  minutes.

The  Self  is  identical  within  everyone.  The  dharma 
(religion) of the Self is also the same, so then why are there 
so  many  diﬀ erent  religions  out  there?

As  the  space  is  diﬀ erent,  everyone’s  thoughts  are 
diﬀ erent; the face, the mind, everything is diﬀ erent. Hence, 
the  religions  are  also  diﬀ erent!

Now,  if  you  take  a  closer  look,  space  is  not  the 
fundamental  factor  by  100%.  As  the  space  changes,  the 
bhaav  (belief;  intent)  changes,  the  ego  changes,  everything 
changes.  In  this,  space  represents  50%  of  the  causal  factor 
and  the  others  represent  the  remaining  50%  of  the  causal 
factor.  But  as  space  is  the  greater  contributing  factor,  it  is 
considered  the  fundamental  factor.

If there is a heap of jewelry lying around in a secluded 
spot,  and  we  happen  to  come  across  it,  then  the  intent  of 
stealing arises in our mind; through that, the seed has been 
sown.  On  what  basis  do  these  intents  arise?  It  is  on  the 
basis  of  worldly  knowledge,  and  as  diﬀ erent  intents  arise, 
so  diﬀ erent  parmanu  get  drawn  in.

It  is  one’s  own  projection,  based  on  one’s  own 

42

knowledge.  Otherwise,  everything  would  be  pre-ordained. 
However,  it  is  not  like  that.  As  the  space  is  diﬀ erent,  the 
intent,  the  time,  everything  is  diﬀ erent. 

‘Space’ is an independent eternal element. It does not 
need  any  support.  However,  the  space  that  a  living  being 
attains  is  on  the  basis  of  niyati. 

The  space  of  a  mother  and  the  fetus  in  her  womb  is 
the same. That is why the intents of both are the same at that 
time. Whatever space one receives, is based on his past karmic 
accounts. In order to acquire a good space, one should have 
good  intents  right  now,  one  should  turn  his  intents  around.

When can these subtle points be understood? It is when 
expertise  has  been  developed  [regarding  the  Knowledge  of 
the  Self;  regarding  spirituality]. And  because  of  the  space, 
this  expertise  varies!

[6]  Worldly  Life  Means  a  Business  Partnership 
of  the  Six  Eternal  Elements

There  are  six  eternal  elements  inside  each  body.  Six 
partners  have  come  together  to  run  this  worldly  life;  a 
limited  company  has  been  set  up.  The  six  partners  are:  1) 
inanimate matter (Parmanu; jada), 2) the Self, 3) Space, 4) 
motion,  5)  inertia,  6)  Time.

When the business started up, the place was provided 
by  the  eternal  element  of  Space.  So  it  became  a  one-sixth 
partner.  It  provided  as  much  place  as  was  needed.

The eternal element of inanimate matter provided the 
goods. It became the supplier. Whatever goods are required 
can be sought from the Parmanu. This eternal element which 
has  form  is  just  the  supplier.

The  eternal  element  that  supports  motion  does  the 
‘carting’  [transportation].  Its  function  is  to  transport  the 
goods  back  and  forth.

43

The fourth partner is the eternal element that supports 
inertia.  Who  stores  the  stock?  The  eternal  element  that 
supports inertia unloads the stock and stores it in one place. 

The  eternal  element  of  Time  says  that  the  [function 
of] management is mine. ‘Time’ turns the new into old. The 
atoms  of  Time  bring  the  circumstantial  evidences  together. 
[The atoms of Time reside in each and every spatial unit in 
the region of space in the universe where all the six eternal 
elements  exist.]

And  the  eternal  element  of  the  Self  watches  over  all 
of these partners. ‘It’ functions as the supervisor. All It has 
to  do  is  supervision,  It  is  not  supposed  to  talk  to  or  scold 
anyone or do anything like that. All It has to do is observe 
all of this, It is to oversee everything. ‘It’ does not need to 
get  involved  in  anything  else.

Now, all the Self had to do was to oversee everything, 
but  instead  it  ended  up  taking  ownership  of  the  entire 
business! It ended up believing, ‘I am indeed the one doing 
all of this,’ and so all the other partners became enraged. The 
self [that has deviated from its inherent nature] believes, ‘As 
far  as  the  goods  are  concerned,  I  am  the  owner,  and  these 
are indeed mine, the ‘carting’ is mine, I also do the storing, 
even the management is mine, the place is also mine.’ So, it 
blew  oﬀ   all  the  other  partners  and  claimed  whole  and  sole 
ownership! And  so  the  other  partners  ﬁ led  a  lawsuit.  That 
is  why  the  self  now  ﬁ nds  it  unbearable.

Now, when Gnan is attained, all of this ﬁ ghting ceases. 
The  self  who  had  ended  up  claiming  ownership,  who  had 
become  the  doer,  let’s  go  of  that,  and  remains  only  as  the 
Knower-Seer. And  so  the  ﬁ ghting  ceases.

No  one  in  this  world  can  claim,  “I  am  doing  this.” 
Not  even  God  [the  Self]  can  claim,  “I  created  the  world.” 
Even  God  has  an  equal  partnership  in  this.  God  is  also  a 
one-sixth  partner.

44

How  do  ﬁ ghts  ensue  within  the  body?

After welcoming someone into your home, the thought 
arises in your very own mind, ‘Why did I invite him in?’ So, 
divisiveness due to diﬀ erence of opinion carries on in your 
very  own  body.  This  happens  everywhere.  After  attaining 
Gnan, the divisiveness due to diﬀ erence of opinions arising 
within  decreases!

Upon  believing  or  saying,  “I  did  this,”  the  quarrels 
start up with the other partners within. They start exclaiming, 
“Why are you taking this on for yourself? We also have an 
equal  partnership  in  running  this  business!”

If one partner were to not be present, then the other ﬁ ve 
would  break  down,  the  business  would  not  function  at  all.

The ‘shop’ called ‘Chandubhai’ has opened up; it has 
six partners. Moreover, he gets married, so six more partners 
associated  with  the  ‘shop’  called  ‘Chandraben’  are  added; 
hence  it  turns  into  a  corporation  of  twelve  partners.  In 
addition, upon having a son and a daughter, the corporation 
keeps on increasing. It is only when one meets a Gnani that 
one  becomes  released  from  this  belief  of  ‘I  am  this  body’ 
(dehadhyaas), this belief which has been around since inﬁ nite 
lifetimes.  Otherwise,  how  would  it  leave?

The Self simply has to keep Seeing everything. Dada 

says,  “All  ‘we’  are  doing  is  simply  observing.” 

Fundamentally, all the six eternal elements are indeed 
free from attachment and abhorrence. This drama has arisen 
within the partnership of the six! In the process of carrying 
out the drama, the aham (the ‘I’) arose [for the Self]. From 
that point onwards, the ﬁ ghting with each other began, “Hey, 
is  all  of  this  yours  alone?  We  will  get  back  at  you!”  This 
ﬁ ght  has  been  going  on  since  time  immemorial.

By  giving  this  metaphor  of  the  partnership  of  the 

45

six  eternal  elements,  Dadashri  has  explained  in  such 
a  straightforward  manner,  the  concept  of  the  mystery 
surrounding  the  existence  of  the  entire  universe!  Whilst 
feeding  a  small  child  some  chocolate  and  whilst  playing 
with him, He has taught him the entire alphabet! The Gnani 
always completely simpliﬁ es the most complicated concepts. 
Whereas ignorant gurus greatly complicate even the simplest 
of things! This Dadashri, who has never been around before 
and  never  will  be  in  the  future,  has  manifested  in  this  era 
of  the  time  cycle;  that  can  only  happen  when  the  merit 
karma  of  the  entire  world  comes  to  unfold.  And  now,  all 
You  have  to  do  is  to  take  full  advantage  of  it!  Get  Your 
[spiritual] work done! Get Your [spiritual] work done!! Get 
Your  [spiritual]  work  done!

The Knowledge of the six eternal elements is actually 
a Science! It is for Knowing; it is not for worshipping. What 
is  to  be  worshipped?  That  which  brings  about  closure  and 
inner satisfaction in your mind at every moment, Dadashri’s 
ﬁ ve Agnas; these are to be worshipped. There is no need to 
delve  too  deeply  into  the  subtle  matters.

[Section  2]

Parmanu,  an  Indestructible  Eternal  Element

[1]  The  Real  Form  of  Parmanu

The  world  is  ﬁ lled  entirely  with  Parmanu.

Parmanu is an eternal element with form. It is visible 
through  the  ﬁ ve  sense  organs.  The  Self  is  formless.  ‘It’ 
cannot  be  seen  through  the  eyes,  It  can  be  Seen  through 
the  divine  eyes  (divya  chakshu).

The  discovery  of  Parmanu  is  that  of  the  Tirthankar 
Lords  (living  fully  enlightened  being  whose  presence  turns 
every place They go, into a place of pilgrimage and whose 
darshan grants ﬁ nal liberation to the One who has attained 
46

Self-realization),  and  it  has  come  into  the  understanding 
of  the  Gnanis.  The  Tirthankar  Lords  are  able  to  See  them 
through absolute Knowledge. Dada cannot See them through 
absolute Knowledge, but He can understand what they are!

The  Parmanu  are  indivisible. The  pudgal  arises  from 

the  Parmanu.

There  are  inﬁ nite  Parmanu.  Each  and  every  one  of 
them  can  be  separated.  One  Parmanu  does  not  give  rise 
to  inﬁ nite  Parmanu.  When  a  certain  number  of  Parmanu 
come together, it is referred to as an atom. That can be seen 
through  a  scientiﬁ c  instrument.

There  are  inﬁ nite  Parmanu  and  inﬁ nite  Souls.  The 
eternal  element  of  Space,  the  eternal  elements  that  support 
motion  and  inertia,  they  are  all  just  one  each!

When  two  or  more  than  two  Parmanu  unite,  it  is 
referred  to  as  a  skandha.  Skandha  means  that  they  have 
gelled together. There is not just one Parmanu in the body, 
there  are  aggregates  of  skandha.

The  scientists  have  reached  the  level  of  subatomic 
particles. They believe that these can still be divided further. 
However,  it  does  not  seem  likely  that  they  will  be  able  to 
reach the level of Parmanu. The keval Gnanis (the Ones with 
absolute  Knowledge),  those  who  have  become  completely 
absolute,  are  able  to  See  the  Parmanu.  Even  the  Gnanis 
cannot  See  them.

The  mind,  speech,  and  body  cannot  be  considered 
Parmanu;  they  are  considered  pudgal.  The  pudgal  is  not 
in  the  form  as  the  original  Parmanu,  it  is  in  the  form  as  a 
temporary  state.

That which is indivisible, that is Parmanu, that is the 
original  eternal  element.  Whereas  the  pudgal  is  that  which 
has become vibhaavik (deviated from its inherent nature). So 
47

there are two types of pudgal; one is the original swabhaavik 
Pudgal (Parmanu is in its pure natural form), and the second 
is  the  pudgal  that  has  acquired  visheshbhaav  (taken  on  a 
form that is not one’s own). Only the body that every living 
being has acquired can be referred to as pudgal, nothing else 
can be referred to as pudgal. Parmanu alone, or a skandha 
alone,  cannot  be  referred  to  as  pudgal.  Pudgal  means  that 
it  should  be  living.

Swabhaavik Pudgal 
(Parmanu in its pure natural form)

Indivisible
Does not exist in the body
Is alone; is referred to as 
Parmanu or skandha
Is not unnatural
Does not increase or decrease 
(aguru-laghu)
Permanent
Is in the form as Parmanu
Is pure

The Self is absent
The keval Gnani (the Ones with 
absolute Knowledge) can See it

Vibhaavik pudgal 
(pudgal  parmanu  that  have 
deviated from their inherent nature)
Divisible
Exists in the body
Exists only in that which is living

Is unnatural (vikrut)
Increases and decreases (guru-
laghu)
Temporary
Exists as an aggregate
Is ‘colored’ as per the bhaav of 
the prakruti
The Self is present
The Gnani can see it

There  is  a  great  deal  of  a  diﬀ erence  between  the 
energy of the Self and the energy of the pudgal. The energy 
of  the  pudgal  is  actually  power  that  has  been  ﬁ lled  in  the 
presence  of  the  Self,  it  is  power  chetan  (pudgal  that  has 
been powered with life energy in the presence of the Self). 
The power has been ﬁ lled in the three batteries of the mind, 
speech, and body, that is why it functions just as if it were 
living.  There  is  anger,  pride,  deceit,  and  greed;  everything 
is  present  in  it.  Whereas  the  original  Self  does  not  ‘do’ 
anything  at  all.  ‘It’  simply  illuminates  every  living  being. 
48

It  is  just  the  power  chetan  that  is  doing  everything.  The 
pudgal  has  boundless  energy.

There  is  tremendous  energy  even  in  the  original 
Parmanu. The energy that has arisen [in the pudgal] through 
knowledge  and  vision  and  the  worldly-interacting  self  is 
unnatural  energy.

Under certain circumstances, when inanimate matter is 
split, tremendous energy is released. Not just one Parmanu, 
but  when  a  large  number  of  Parmanu  come  together,  an 
atom is formed. That atom can be split. Atomic energy gets 
released  through  that.  Electrons,  protons,  and  neutrons  are 
all  inanimate. 

It is the inherent nature of Parmanu to come together, 
to  dissipate,  to  undergo  input  and  output  (puran-galan). 
Energy  does  not  get  released  with  the  coming  together  of 
Parmanu.  The  atom  that  forms  as  a  result  of  the  Parmanu 
coming  together,  when  that  atom  is  split,  the  energy  is 
released. This  is  because  it  is  going  against  nature,  it  is  an 
unnatural  process.

[2]  The  Properties  of  Pudgal  Parmanu

The Pudgal has a visible form (roopi). The other ﬁ ve 

eternal  elements  are  formless. 

Swabhaavik Pudgal 
(Parmanu in its pure natural 
form)
Non-living

Has form

The Self

Living

Formless

Form, taste, smell, tactility
Visible

Knowledge, Vision, bliss
Invisible

There  is  not  even  a  single  common  property  in  the 
prakruti and the Self. The swabhaavik Pudgal (Parmanu in 
its pure natural form) has four major properties: form, taste, 
49

smell  and  tactility.  In  this,  the  form  keeps  on  changing. 
One  may  bring  home  a  beautiful  wife,  but  as  she  ages,  the 
beautiful  form  continues  to  fade!

  The  pure  natural  form  is  not  visible  to  the  eyes;  the 

unnatural  form  is  visible  to  the  eyes. 

When a living being comes into worldly nomenclature, 

that  is  when  it  is  given  a  name. 

The Self is separate from the name and the form. The 
forms of the pudgal have arisen due to wrong belief (bhranti). 
The original Real form of the Self is undoubtedly separate.

There are endless varieties of form, but they are all of 
the pudgal, and they keep on changing. The eye is primarily 
made  up  of  luminous  parmanu.

Besides inanimate matter, the other ﬁ ve eternal elements 
are all formless too. That too, the Self has Its own distinctive 
properties  with  a  speciﬁ c  function,  of  which  the  primary 
ones  are  inﬁ nite  Knowledge,  inﬁ nite  Vision,  inﬁ nite  bliss, 
and  inﬁ nite  energy.  The  other  properties,  such  as  being 
invisible (amurt), free from association (asang), immiscible 
(tankotkirna),  and  indestructible  (avinashi),  apply  to  the 
other four eternal elements as well. So, when one worships 
these properties, it reaches them too, that is why one would 
not be able to attain the original Self [through worshipping 
them  alone].

Taste is a second property of the swabhaavik Pudgal.

There  are  six  types  of  taste:  bitter,  sweet,  pungent, 

salty,  astringent,  and  sour.

For  a  mango  to  taste  sour  or  sweet  is  a  property  of 
inanimate  matter.  However,  in  such  a  case,  if  one  feels, 
‘Why is it so sour? Why is it sweet?’ then the bhaav (inner 
intent)  of  the  worldly-interacting  self  becomes  involved  in 
that. The belief of ‘I like this’ and ‘I do not like this’ (bhaav-
50

abhaav)  is  of  the  worldly-interacting  self.  To  become  free 
from these beliefs of like and dislike, One should maintain 
the awareness of, ‘The eater eats, and I, the ‘non-eater’, am 
the  Knower  of  this.’

Inanimate  matter  also  has  the  property  of  tactility. 

Cold, warm, smooth, rough; these properties of tactility 

keep  on  changing.

The parmanu colored with the intent done in the past 
life come into eﬀ ect today. If the parmanu were coated with 
the  intent  of  anger  (ugra),  when  the  developing  I  becomes 
engrossed  in  them,  it  is  referred  to  as  krodh  (anger  with 
violent  intent).  And  if  One  does  not  become  engrossed  in 
them, then it is not referred to as krodh, it is referred to as 
ugrata (discharging anger). There is a krodhak within, which 
causes  one  to  become  angry.  Attachment  and  abhorrence, 
pleasure and pain, charge karma, subtle discharge karma, and 
gross  discharge  karma;  these  are  all  eﬀ ects  of  the  pudgal. 
And  the  phases  of  the  Pudgal  Parmanu  refers  to  all  the 
colors: red, yellow, green, the smoothness; all of that which 
keeps  on  changing.

What is the law regarding the tactility of the Pudgal?

It  is,  in  fact,  the  Gnani  alone  who  understands  that 

in  exactness.

Someone  may  ﬁ re  a  bullet  at  us,  but  who  knows  the 
law of whether it will hit us or not? Does anyone have that 
authority?  The  authority  is  actually  of  vyavasthit.

Smell is a property of the swabhaavik Pudgal, whereas 
a  pleasant  odor  or  an  unpleasant  odor  is  not  its  property, 
but  its  phase.  The  Self  has  nothing  to  do  with  it.  If  one’s 
attention goes towards a pleasant odor, then it will inevitably 
go  towards  an  unpleasant  odor.  Therefore,  maintain  the 
applied awareness towards the Self. Pleasant and unpleasant 
51

speech,  pleasant  and  unpleasant  tastes,  objects  that  are 
visually  pleasing  or  unpleasing;  those  are  all  properties  of 
the  pudgal.

Words  are  not  a  property  of  the  Pudgal.  It  is  only 
when the Parmanu collide with one another that words are 
produced.  This  is  not  a  permanent  property  of  the  Pudgal.

When we squeeze the rubber ball of a horn, it produces 
a sound. By squeezing the rubber ball, when the Parmanu are 
forced out, friction arises, due to which sound is produced.

Not a single property of the Self can be imitated. The 
properties  of  the  pudgal  can  be  imitated.  Many  copies  can 
be  made  of  the  taped  record  of  speech.

Temporary states are destructible. The original eternal 
elements  are  indestructible.  Therefore,  the  world  is  also 
indestructible. Not a single Parmanu increases or decreases. 
The  temporary  states  keep  on  changing;  just  as  buttermilk 
and  milky  rice  pudding  can  be  made  from  the  very  same 
milk!  It  is  the  temporary  states  that  are  changing.

[To  hear]  Words  –  a  function  of  the  ear

To  taste  –  a  function  of  the  tongue

To  see  the  form   –  a  function  of  the  eye

To  feel  the  texture  –  a  function  of  the  skin

To  smell  –  a  function  of  the  nose

These  are  all  attributes  of  the  pudgal.

The  mind,  intellect,  chit  (subtle  component  of  vision 
and  knowledge  in  the  inner  functioning  instrument  called 
antahkaran),  and  ego  are  all  of  the  pudgal.

Anger,  pride,  deceit,  and  greed  are  properties  of  the 
pudgal.  They  can  only  arise  in  the  presence  of  the  Self, 
otherwise  they  would  not  arise.  They  are  considered  the 
52

attributes  of  the  prakruti.  Yet  they  are  destructible.  The 
properties  of  the  Self  are  permanent.

To be honest, forgiving, generous, merciful, or having 
an  obliging  nature;  these  are  all  attributes  of  the  prakruti, 
they  are  destructible.  When  delirium  arises,  it  makes  the 
best  of  men  act  crazy.

Who  ﬁ lls  the  water  in  these  coconuts?  It  happens 
by  its  inherent  nature.  God  or  no  one  else  is  the  doer  of 
it.  However  many  types  of  things  there  are,  there  are  that 
many  types  of  inherent  natures. 

What  does  inﬁ nite  phases  (paryay)  mean?  It  is  the 
eﬀ ect  of  the  inherent  nature  (swabhaav).  The  rising  and 
falling of the inherent nature, the inherent nature becoming 
less  intense  or  more  intense,  the  changes  that  happen  in 
the  inherent  nature,  those  are  all  considered  phases.  The 
inherent nature [of a living object] would not arise without 
the  presence  of  the  Self.

This  saltiness,  sourness  and  so  on  are  fundamentally 
properties of the Pudgal Parmanu only. They exist without 
the presence of the Self. Whereas the pudgal arises through 
the  presence  of  the  Self.  The  parmanu  that  have  deviated 
from  their  inherent  nature  (vikaari  parmanu)  are  referred 
to  as  pudgal.

Are  all  the  parmanu  in  the  world  ones  that  have 
deviated  from  their  inherent  nature?  Are  there  really  any 
Parmanu in the pure form? Yes, for the most part, they are 
pure. Not all of them have deviated from their inherent nature.

In  the  original  pure  Parmanu,  all  the  fundamental 
properties  are  there.  Form,  taste,  smell,  and  tactility,  all 
are  there.  These  original  properties  are  there  even  in  the 
absence of the Self. In deviating from their inherent nature, 
the  presence  of  the  Self  is  merely  in  the  form  as  an  active 
evidence  (nimit),  It  is  deﬁ nitely  not  in  the  form  as  a  doer. 
53

The  Self  does  not  do  anything  at  all,  It  is  nothing  but  the 
illuminator.  In  fact,  it  is  the  ego  in  the  middle  who  simply 
takes  it  upon  itself,  claiming,  “I  am  this,  and  I  am  the 
doer.” And the ego falls on the side of the parmanu, not on 
the  side  of  illumination.  How  does  the  ego  work?  It  does 
not  do  anything  else,  it  simply  does  the  bhaav.  It  has  the 
authority  of  bhaav;  it  does  not  have  any  other  authority.  If 
one  encounters  a  Gnani,  then  that  very  same  ego  becomes 
‘I am pure Soul’; it dissolves. Then the parmanu that have 
deviated  from  their  inherent  nature  start  reverting  back  to 
the  pure  phase  parmanu  (vishrasa)  automatically. 

Once the vikalp (the wrong belief that ‘I am Chandubhai’ 
and  all  the  relative  ‘I-ness’  that  stems  from  it)  have  been 
uprooted,  they  do  not  appear  again. 

Someone  may  say  that  you  are  dark-complexioned, 
but  if  you  have  cleared  oﬀ   that  vikalp  (wrong  belief),  then 
You  will  not  get  aﬀ ected.  As  long  as  you  get  aﬀ ected,  or 
as  long  as  you  call  other  people  dark-complexioned,  you 
have  placed  a  value  for  that  vikalp.  If You  devalue  it,  then 
You  will  not  get  aﬀ ected.  That  is  Your  real  spiritual  eﬀ ort 
to  progress  as  the  Self  (Purusharth);  to  be  dark  and  light-
complexioned,  these  are  all  properties  of  inanimate  matter.

Ultimately, all of this is actually the ‘hand’ [synonymous 
to  the  playing  cards  held  by  a  player  in  a  game  of  cards] 
of  the  Pudgal. 

There  is  inﬁ nite  energy  in  the  Self,  but  because  of 
the veil arising out of the parmanu that have come together 
[with  the  body],  there  is  pitch  darkness.

[3]  Kriyavati  Shakti

Of  the  six  eternal  elements,  it  is  the  Pudgal  alone 
that  has  kriyavati  shakti  (the  unique  energy  or  property  to 
be  inherently  active).  When  snow  falls  suddenly,  a  form 
54

of  Lord  Buddha  or  a  form  of  an  animal  may  take  shape, 
isn’t  it?  Its  inherent  nature  is  such  that  it  undergoes  puran 
(charging;  inﬂ ux)  and  the  very  same  then  undergoes  galan 
(discharging;  outﬂ ux);  therefore,  the  Pudgal  is  such  that  it 
brings  about  results  on  its  own  (swayam  kriyakaari).

The  swabhaavik  Pudgal  (Parmanu  in  its  pure  natural 
form)  as  well  as  the  vibhaavik  pudgal  (the  pudgal  formed 
from  the  parmanu  that  have  deviated  from  their  inherent 
nature;  same  as  vikrut  pudgal,  vibhaavik  parmanu,  vikaari 
pudgal and vikaari parmanu) are kriyavaan (inherently active; 
‘eﬀ ective’ such that they take on the eﬀ ect and give result).

The instant a bhaav arises in the self, vibrations arise 
in  the  Pudgal,  and  everything  becomes  kriyavaan.  So,  the 
Pudgal is kriyavaan in both senses. There are two types of 
Pudgal  Parmanu:  those  which  have  not  come  into  contact 
with the Self, the pure swabhaavik Pudgal Parmanu and those 
which  have  come  into  contact  with  the  Self,  the  vibhaavik 
pudgal parmanu. By coming into contact with the Self, there 
is  no  activity  of  the  Self  in  that,  it  is  simply  Its  presence 
only. Therefore, the Pudgal is the doer with respect to both, 
the  natural  state  and  the  unnatural  state. 

Of the six eternal elements, it is the Pudgal alone that 
can  be  perceived  by  the  sense  organs  (indriyagamya),  the 
other  ﬁ ve  cannot.

If wood, bones, ﬂ esh, etc., are lying around, then they 
will  start  to  decay  of  their  own  accord.  Therefore,  within 
each entity, their independent activities are constantly taking 
place.  In  this,  the  Pudgal  is  sakriya  (continuously  in  some 
kind  of  activity)  and  the  Self  is  akriya  (prevailing  in  the 
state  as  the  Knower-Seer;  prevailing  in  the  state  as  a  non-
doer; devoid of activity). Due to illusion, people believe the 
Self  to  be  sakriya  and  the  Pudgal  to  be  akriya! 

The eternal element of the Pudgal is the only one that 

55

is sakriya, and it is due to its state of being sakriya that the 
eternal  element  of  Time  came  to  be  identiﬁ ed.

The  strength  of  the  Self  is  to  prevail  as  the  Knower 

and  Seer  of  the  entire  universe. 

It  is  due  to  the  presence  of  the  Self  that  the  pudgal 
becomes sakriya. The Self does not get aﬀ ected at all by that. 

All the six eternal elements have the energy to undergo 
change, they have their elemental matter, property and phases 
(dravya, guna, paryay), but apart from the Pudgal Parmanu, 
none of the other ﬁ ve eternal elements have a state of being 
sakriya.  There  is  a  huge  diﬀ erence  between  the  energy  to 
undergo  change,  the  elemental  matter,  property  and  phases 
and  the  Real  state  of  being  sakriya. The  original  Pudgal  is 
sakriya  in  the  Real  sense,  without  a  ‘push’  [any  inﬂ uence] 
from  anybody.  To  be  in  a  sakriya  state  is  a  permanent 
property  of  the  Pudgal,  whereas  the  vibhaavik  pudgal  has 
arisen  due  to  a  ‘push’  from  another  thing.  So,  that  cannot 
be  considered  as  the  exact,  the  Real  sakriya  state.

The pudgal that this body is made up of is the vikrut 
pudgal  (parmanu  that  have  deviated  from  their  inherent 
nature; same as vikaari pudgal, vikaari parmanu, vibhaavik 
parmanu  and  vibhaavik  pudgal).

To  be  in  a  sakriya  state  is  the  inherent  nature  of  the 
Pudgal, therefore the Pudgal takes on a form in accordance 
with  the  bhaav  that  the  self  does.  The  bhaav  of  the  self  is 
neither  the  paryay  of  the  Self,  nor  is  it  the  natural  bhaav 
of  the  Self.  It  is  its  vibhaavik  bhaav  (the  wrong  belief  of 
‘I  am  Chandubhai’),  it  is  its  visheshbhaav.

The arising of the vikrut bhaav of the self [the wrong 
belief  of  ‘I  am  Chandubhai]  and  the  vikrut  bhaav  of  the 
pudgal  [the  parmanu  in  a  charged  state],  that  verily  is  the 
vishesh parinaam (completely new eﬀ ect). No one is at fault 
in this. It is also not as if it is happening due to something 
56

in particular. It is simply due to the coming together of the 
two eternal elements that completely new properties (vishesh 
guna)  tend  to  arise.  If  it  were  happening  due  to  someone, 
then  that  person  would  be  considered  at  fault,  whereas  the 
Self  is  Itself  considered  nirlep  (unaﬀ ected).

In  this,  there  is  nothing  at  all  as  per  the  desire  of  the 
Self.  The  visheshbhaav  is  arising  simply  because  the  two 
eternal  elements  have  come  together  in  close  proximity. 
Thereafter,  the  eternal  element  which  is  ‘eﬀ ective’  takes 
on  the  eﬀ ect,  and  the  eternal  element  that  is  ineﬀ ective, 
does not take on the eﬀ ect, yet, the visheshbhaav deﬁ nitely 
arises. As the inanimate Parmanu are in a sakriya state, they 
immediately take on the eﬀ ect. In Siddha Kshetra, there are 
no Pudgal Parmanu, therefore there is nothing that can take 
on  the  eﬀ ect  there. 

The  Pudgal  has  its  own  independent  energy  which 
brings  about  a  change.  That  [energy]  is  independent  and 
natural.

Both,  the  jeev  (living  being)  and  the  pudgal,  are 
sakriya  (continuously  in  some  kind  of  activity).  Here,  the 
jeev  refers  to  the  bavo,  the  one  in  whom  the  power  of  the 
self  has  been  ﬁ lled  in,  and  the  pudgal  is  Mangaldas  (the 
physical  body  complex).  They  are  simply  a  discharge  and 
they  are  also  sakriya. The  activities  keep  happening  on  the 
basis  of  time.

So  the  important  gunadharma  (intrinsic  properties 
that  have  a  speciﬁ c  function)  of  the  Pudgal  are  that  it  has 
a  visible  form  (roopi)  and  it  is  swayam  kriyakaari  (such 
that it procures results on its own). Whether you call it the 
imagination, the bhaav or the desire of the developing I, the 
Pudgal,  of  its  own  accord,  takes  on  a  corresponding  form. 
That is verily the illusion that has arisen for the developing 
I that, ‘Who besides me would do this?’ All the desires that 
one  does,  they  are  limited.  Even  the  illusory  attachment 
57

(moha)  is  limited;  that  is  why  the  body  has  no  more  than 
2  legs  and  2  hands,  it  does  not  have  4  legs  and  6  hands.

What  causes  the  Pudgal  to  be  drawn  in?  Does  it  get 
charged upon coming into contact with the Self? That is not 
how it is. The moment the vibhaav arises, the Parmanu get 
drawn in, and then when the time is right, they get charged 
of  their  own  accord,  they  take  on  a  visible  form  on  their 
own,  automatically.  The  body  is  then  formed  from  it.  This 
is  all  a  function  of  the  Pudgal  itself,  the  Self  has  nothing 
to  do  with  this.

This  wrong  belief  too  is  on  the  basis  of  the  law  of 
nature, it is not outside the law of nature. If it were outside 
the  law  of  nature,  then  it  would  never  be  possible  to  turn 
the  wrong  belief  into  the  right  belief.

In this, the Knowledge is of the Self, and the karamat 
(craftsmanship)  is  of  the  Pudgal.  Due  to  the  energy  or 
property  of  envisioning  (kalpshakti)  of  the  Self,  the  vikalp 
(the wrong belief that ‘I am Chandubhai’ and all the relative 
‘I-ness’  that  stems  from  it)  have  arisen. And  it  is  from  this 
context  that  the  self  is  considered  at  fault.  The  body  and 
everything else has indeed formed due to the [wrong] belief. 
The [wrong] belief causes the Parmanu to be drawn in and 
they  naturally  become  ‘eﬀ ective’. 

All  of  this  is  the  craftsmanship  of  the  Pudgal  alone. 
The  noose  used  for  hanging  is  a  pudgal  and  the  one 
responsible  for  hanging  is  also  a  pudgal.  When  Lalchand 
punches  Fulchand,  that  is  also  the  craftsmanship  of  the 
Pudgal  and  when  Fulchand  punches  Lalchand,  that  too  is 
the  craftsmanship  of  the  Pudgal.  The  Gnani  would  remain 
separate  in  this,  whereas  the  one  who  does  not  have  Self-
realization  would  become  engrossed. 

Lord  Krishna  has  said  that  there  are  two  energies 
in  this  world:  one  is  the  energy  of  the  non-Self  (anatma 
shakti) and the other is the energy of the Self (Atma shakti). 
58

The  energy  of  inanimate  matter  is  so  powerful  that  it  has 
restrained,  it  has  bound  the  Lord  of  the  fourteen  worlds! 
The Self has indeed been entrapped in karma, hasn’t It! As 
long  as  the  self  does  not  come  into  Its  inherent  nature  as 
the  Self,  it  cannot  shed  oﬀ   the  karma.

There  is  tremendous  energy  in  the  pure  Pudgal 
Parmanu  and  there  is  a  similar  energy  in  the  vibhaavik 
pudgal  too.  There  is  simply  the  bhaav  of  the  self  in  this, 
due  to  which  the  power  gets  ﬁ lled  in  the  Pudgal.  Due  to  a 
change in the belief (darshan), the knowledge changes, thus 
there is a change in the conduct too. Dadashri’s Knowledge 
is  such  that  it  reverts  the  belief  (darshan)  back  to  what  it 
should  be,  and  gradually  the  rest  change  too.

For  many  the  question  arises  that,  ‘If  the  Self  has 
inﬁ nite  energy  then  why  does  it  not  annihilate  the  veils  of 
the pudgal and set Itself free?’ But, the energy of the pudgal 
is  no  ordinary  energy,  is  it!  There  is  tremendous  energy  in 
the  atom!

The  very  reason  for  the  Self  to  become  entrapped  by 
inanimate matter is illusion (bhranti; wrong belief). The Self 
and inanimate matter are in close proximity with each other, 
due  to  which  a  vishesh  parinaam  (completely  new  eﬀ ect) 
arises, and in this vishesh parinaam, the ego develops. It is 
the  very  one  who  becomes  the  ringleader.

It  is  only  the  Gnanis  and  the  Tirthankars  who  can 
understand in exactness that all of this is the craftsmanship 
(karamat)  of  the  Pudgal  alone.

One  will  be  able  to  become  God  when  one  will 
understand  that  the  Pudgal  is  sakriya  (to  be  continuously 
in some kind of activity) and the Self is akriya (in the state 
as  a  non-doer;  in  the  state  as  the  Knower-Seer).

What is the activity at the gross level dependent upon?

It  is  dependent  upon  the  ego. 

59

What  is  the  ego  dependent  upon?

It  is  dependent  on  the  ignorance  of  the  Self.

Therefore,  the  root  cause  is  ignorance  of  the  Self. 

Shrimad Rajchandra has referred to the Self as akriya-
sakriya, but that is with reference to context, it is not without 
reference to context. As long as the ego exists, it is sakriya, 
and the moment the ego leaves, It is akriya. If the policeman 
were  to  catch  us,  then  ‘we’  cannot  say,  “I  am  the  Self,”  or 
“I am a Gnani.” From the relative viewpoint we would have 
to  accept  responsibility  for  the  fault  committed.

The  one  doing  the  activity  is  the  pudgal  and  the  one 
doing the meditation is also the pudgal. The Self is completely 
separate  from  that,  It  is  nirlep  (unaﬀ ected). 

The  pudgal  that  does  the  meditation  is  the  doer  of 
the  meditation,  and  it  becomes  the  suﬀ erer  (bhokta)  of  the 
meditation  only. 

The self is the doer from the relative viewpoint, and It 
is a non-doer from the Real viewpoint. Whereas the Pudgal 
is  the  doer  from  both,  the  relative  viewpoint  and  the  Real 
viewpoint.

The  Pudgal  is  sakriya-akriya. As  long  as  it  is  just  a 
single  Parmanu,  it  is  akriya;  thereafter  it  becomes  sakriya.

The  mind,  speech  and  body  are  ‘eﬀ ective’  by  their 
inherent nature and the Self continues to See and Know by Its 
inherent nature. Besides the activity of Knowing (Gnankriya), 
there  is  nothing  else  for  the  Self.  It  is  just  that  veils  have 
come  over  the  Knowledge  of  the  Self,  and  the  veil  is  that 
of  the  intellect.  As  One  becomes  free  of  the  ego  and  free 
of the I that prevails in the relative (hupanu), One becomes 
free of doing and making others do, and consequently inﬁ nite 
Knowledge  and  inﬁ nite  Vision  start  to  manifest.

60

Since time immemorial, the stains of karma have been 
adhering  onto  the  pradesh  (smallest  amount  of  space  that 
a  single  parmanu  occupies  on  the  Self)  of  the  Self.  That 
is  why,  Its  energies  have  been  obstructed.  Humans  do  not 
have  any  control  in  their  hands.  Humans  do  not  have  the 
energy  to  allow  even  one  strand  of  hair  from  growing  or 
to  prevent  it  from  growing.

Without having the Knowledge of the Self, no one can 
prevail in an akriya state (in the state as a non-doer; in the 
state  as  the  Knower-Seer).  It  is  only  through  the  Gnani’s 
Agnas,  through  Dada’s  Agnas  that  One  can  prevail  in  an 
akriya  state.

Akriya  means  to  prevail  as  the  Knower  and  Seer.  To 
be the Knower and Seer is not any type of activity; it is just 
for  the  purpose  of  explaining  that  the  words  ‘Gnan  kriya’ 
(the activity of Knowing) and ‘Darshan kriya’ (the activity 
of Seeing) are used; however, in Reality, there is no worldly 
activity  taking  place  when  One  is  Seeing  and  Knowing. 

Shrimad Rajchandra has said that every eternal element 
is  endowed  with  its  inherent  activity.  The  purport  of  Him 
saying  this  is  that  fundamentally,  each  eternal  element  is 
not  sakriya  (continuously  in  some  kind  of  activity),  but  it 
is  constantly  undergoing  change.  Each  eternal  element  is 
constantly  undergoing  change  (parivartansheel).

Shrimad  Rajchandra  has  said  regarding  the  sense  of 
doership (kartapanu) of the Self that as the Self is endowed 
with  activity,  It  is  also  the  doer.  Elaborating  on  the  sense 
of  doership,  it  has  been  said  that  from  the  context  of  the 
absolute Self, in the absolute state as the Self, It is the doer 
of Its inherent nature as the Self. From the context of worldly 
interactions that do not require planning or eﬀ ort (anupcharit 
vyavahaar), the self is the doer of the subtle discharge karma 
(dravyakarma) and from the context of worldly interactions 
that require planning and eﬀ ort (upchaarthi), it is considered 
61

the  doer  [builder]  of  houses,  cities  etc.  In  the  Real  sense, 
fundamentally,  It  is  the  doer  of  Its  own  inherent  nature  as 
the  Self;  that  is  what  Krupaludev  is  trying  to  convey.

On the Akram path, ‘we’ have actually given the line 
of  demarcation  between  the  original  Self  and  the  worldly-
interacting self. Otherwise, on the Kramik path, the worldly-
interacting  self  is  believed  to  be  the  original  Self,  and  that 
is indeed why they believe that it is endowed with activity. 
So,  all  these  rituals  that  are  being  done,  the  committees 
that  are  being  formed,  they  are  all  actually  referring  to  the 
worldly-interacting  self  as  doing  them.

And  in  keval  Gnan  (absolute  Knowledge),  it  is  said 
that  ‘You’  observe  the  original  Self  and  make  the  worldly-
interacting  self  like  That.  ‘You’  have  to  set  the  discipline 
of  Seeing,  that  is  what  Akram  Vignan  teaches.

On the Akram path, no activity needs to be done. Just 
by  observing  the  Knowledge  of  the  Self,  One  can  attain 
liberation.  This  is  because,  in  the  Gnan  vidhi  (Scientiﬁ c 
experiment  to  impart  Self-realization,  exclusive  to  Akram 
Vignan. This is a scientiﬁ c process of 48 minutes wherein the 
Gnani  graces  the  seeker  and  imparts  the  Knowledge  of  the 
Self) You have been made the pure Soul, meaning that You 
have  been  made  the  ‘model’  Itself.

On  the  Kramik  path,  the  indriya  atma  (the  physical 
body;  Mangaldas)  is  not  believed  to  be  the  Self,  they  refer 
to it as the body [kayotsarg; standing in an upright position 
and  meditating  on  the  properties  of  the  pure  Soul  after 
renouncing the mind, speech and body]. They renounce the 
mind, speech and body by setting the understanding that ‘I 
am separate from them.’ Secondly, they consider the kashay 
atma (the self with anger, pride, deceit and greed; the bavo) 
to  be  the  actual  Self,  and  they  are  trying  to  make  that  self 
steady.  And  the  third  one,  the  original  Self  (the  akashayi 
Atma;  the  Self  without  kashay)  is  much  further  away.

62

 If the awareness prevails constantly that, ‘All of this 
is  the  craftsmanship  (karamat)  of  the  Pudgal,’  then  it  is 
keval Darshan (absolute Vision). And if the skillful activities 
of  the  Pudgal  are  Known,  then  it  is  keval  Gnan  (absolute 
Knowledge)! And if it comes into One’s absolute experience 
as the Self [to continuously Know and See as separate] that 
‘this  is  the  craftsmanship  of  the  Pudgal’,  then  it  is  keval 
Charitra  (absolute  Conduct  as  the  Self)!

[4]  The  Pudgal  Is  Prasavdharmi

What  does  ‘ekodaham  bahusyam’  mean?

As the Self, the ‘I’ is only one, whereas with tadaakaar 
bhaav (by taking on the form as the pudgal whilst remaining 
totally separate from it) in the world, the I takes on endless 
forms. The  pudgal  is  such  that  it  can  take  on  many  forms, 
that is why one becomes someone’s child, someone’s uncle, 
someone’s  father-in-law. The  energy  of  inanimate  matter  is 
at  work  over  here.  Inanimate  matter  is  such  that  it  has  a 
visible form and that is why it can take on many forms. The 
pudgal is prasavdharmi (has the inherent nature to give rise 
to many visible forms from one). It can show many visible 
forms  from  one.

So  many  food  items  can  be  made  from  wheat!  This 
world is ﬁ lled with parmanu that have the potential to give 
rise  to  endless  other  visible  forms  from  one  (prasavta).

If  you  are  just  one,  but  there  are  a  hundred  thousand 
mirrors  placed  around  you,  then  a  hundred  thousand 
reﬂ ections  of  you  will  be  seen.  This  is  the  inherent  nature 
of the pudgal, to give rise to many visible forms from one.

Something may be spoken on just one television, but it 
can be heard throughout the world! That is the prasavdharma 
of  the  pudgal!

In  the  ocean,  only  one  moon  can  be  seen,  and  in  a 

63

hundred thousand water pots, a hundred thousand reﬂ ections 
of  the  moon  will  be  seen!  Like  that,  from  one,  there  are 
endless,  limitless  possibilities!

Fundamentally,  the  Knowledge  of  the  Self  (Gnan)  is 
not prasavdharmi, It is in fact deﬁ nitely nirlep (unaﬀ ected).

[5]  Prayogsa  -  Mishrasa  -  Vishrasa 

The  three  temporary  states  of  Parmanu,  ‘prayogsa’, 
‘mishrasa’,  and  ‘vishrasa’,  are  an  exclusive  and  amazing 
discovery  of  the  Tirthankar  Lords. 

The  entire  world  is  ﬁ lled  with  Pudgal  Parmanu. The 
pure  Parmanu,  the  ones  which  can  only  be  experienced 
through  the  Knowledge  of  the  Self  (Gnangamya),  the  ones 
which cannot be seen through the eyes, have been referred to 
as vishrasa Parmanu. The vishrasa Parmanu come together 
one  by  one,  and  if  more  than  two  come  together,  [then  a 
skandha (an aggregate) forms] and then they dissipate once 
again.  This  is  known  as  swabhaavik  puran-galan  (natural 
inﬂ ux and outﬂ ux, wherein the Parmanu come together and 
dissipate).  There  is  a  big  diﬀ erence  between  swabhaavik 
puran-galan and vibhaavik puran-galan. When air is inhaled 
and  exhaled,  that  is  known  as  vibhaavik  puran-galan.  The 
formation  of  bones,  ﬂ esh  and  the  decaying  of  the  same  is 
also  vibhaavik  puran-galan. 

The  pure  Parmanu  which  are  on  the  outside,  the 
vishrasa,  are  all  the  same,  but  when  anger,  pride,  deceit, 
greed  arises,  the  vishrasa  Parmanu  get  drawn  in  from  the 
outside.  And  based  on  the  electrical  body  within,  they  all 
get  charged. They  do  not  get  charged  on  the  outside.  Now, 
when one gets angry, these Parmanu get drawn in through the 
nose, the ears, the eyes, they get pulled in from everywhere, 
even  through  the  hair  that  stands  up! 

Once  the  parmanu  have  become  prayogsa,  they 
automatically turn into mishrasa in the next life. The moment 
64

they  turn  into  mishrasa,  the  body  forms  of  its  own  accord. 
The  mishrasa  parmanu  verily  make  up  the  pudgal.  The 
prayogsa  parmanu  cannot  be  considered  as  pudgal.  The 
Parmanu  in  vishrasa  and  prayogsa  form  are  the  only  that 
can  be  referred  to  as  Parmanu. 

The aham (the ‘I’) that arises is pudgal. The mind, the 
intellect,  the  chit  and  the  ego,  all  of  those  are  considered 
pudgal. The aham is referred to as mishrachetan (the I with 
wrong belief that arises as when the eternal elements of the 
Self  and  inanimate  matter  come  into  close  proximity  with 
each  other).  The  entire  pudgal  is  considered  mishrachetan. 
The  prayogsa  parmanu  are  considered  prayog  chetan 
(parmanu  charged  in  accordance  with  the  bhaav  of  the 
developing  I). 

What  is  the  mishrachetan? 

There are vishrasa Parmanu in the universe, which are 
pure. The moment a simple thought like ‘I want to punch him 
twice’  arises  within,  the  Parmanu  get  drawn  in  and  through 
the electrical body, a prayog (process of charging; experiment) 
takes  place  on  them. The  parmanu  which  have  undergone  a 
prayog are known as prayogsa. The bhaavak parmanu (those 
that  cause  the  bhaav  to  arise)  refers  to  the  mishrachetan. 

The  prayogsa  parmanu  are  at  the  subtle  level  and 
in  the  next  life  they  transform  into  a  physical  form  and 
dissipate after giving oﬀ  the eﬀ ect. The prayogsa transform 
into  mishrasa  in  the  next  life. The  prayogsa  are  the  causal 
parmanu,  which  give  rise  to  the  eﬀ ective  body  once  it  [a 
living  being]  enters  the  womb.  On  the  Akram  path,  the 
causal  parmanu  (prayogsa)  no  longer  arise. 

The  moment  one  says,  “I  did  it,”  karma  are  bound 
at  the  subtle  level.  The  doer  is  actually  vyavasthit  whereas 
one  believes,  ‘I  am  the  doer,’  due  to  that  the  parmanu  get 
drawn  in  and  a  new  body  gets  sculpted. 

65

The  prayogsa  parmanu  are  then  subject  to  vyavasthit 
shakti  (the  energy  that  brings  together  the  scientific 
circumstantial  evidences  to  give  result)  and  the  ones  that 
then give an exact eﬀ ect at the physical level are mishrasa. 

If  at  the  subtle  level,  one  has  the  desire  for  sexual 
pleasures  (vishay),  then  not  only  will  he  get  a  wife,  but 
he  will  also  get  a  father-in-law,  a  mother-in-law,  a  paternal 
uncle-in-law, a maternal uncle-in-law… imagine the number 
of other worldly entanglements that ensue! All of that is the 
work  of  vyavasthit. At  the  prayogsa  level,  nothing  has  yet 
solidiﬁ ed. The fact is that the parmanu that accumulate within 
and  a  prayog  happens  on  them,  where  a  color  gets  plated 
onto  them,  those  parmanu  are  verily  referred  to  as  karma. 

The  pure  Parmanu  are  diﬀ erent  and  the  parmanu 
which  carry  the  karma  are  diﬀ erent.  The  subtlest  Parmanu 
[vishrasa] are present in the open space, when they become 
prayogsa  and  get  pulled  in,  those  are  the  subtler  parmanu. 
Then those that transform to the subtle level within are the 
mishrasa.  And  based  on  the  subtle  parmanu  within,  the 
gross  parmanu  get  pulled  in  from  the  outside,  which  then 
give  eﬀ ect  and  dissipate.  At  the  time  of  giving  the  eﬀ ect, 
the gross parmanu are pulled in from the outside, and then 
the  eﬀ ect  unfolds,  meaning  that  at  the  time  of  charging, 
only  the  subtle  ones  get  bound,  and  at  the  time  of  giving 
the  eﬀ ect,  the  gross  ones  get  pulled  in  from  the  outside. 
The  eﬀ ect  is  governed  by  vyavasthit  shakti. 

The physical body, the subtle body and the causal body, 
all  three  are  pudgal.  The  main  culprit  is  the  subtle  body, 
due to which the causal body forms, once the parmanu get 
drawn  in.  The  physical  body  burns,  the  subtle  body  does 
not  burn. 

The cycle of converting from the physical to the subtle 
form,  and  from  the  subtle  to  the  physical  form  continues 
on  and  on. 

66

A living being is present in the womb right from when 
the pregnancy starts, however, it is in an unconscious stage. 
Gradually,  it  develops.  It  cannot  be  deemed  a  pregnancy  if 
there  is  no  living  being  in  the  womb. 

The parmanu of the causal body are spread within the 
entire physical body; it is from these that the eﬀ ective body 
forms. In this life, the parmanu are in the subtle form, and 
in  the  next  life,  the  parmanu  manifest  in  physical  form  as 
the  eﬀ ective  body. 

Sanchit karma refers to the stock of karma accumulated 
within. They are subtle, whereas the prarabdha and kriyaman 
karma are at the gross level. That which is visible when one 
is  doing  an  activity,  that  is  the  kriyaman  karma. 

The  stock  of  sanchit  karma  are  in  the  form  of  subtle 
parmanu  which  reside  in  the  heart  part.  In  the  true  sense, 
they are not karma. Once the bitter or sweet eﬀ ects they give 
oﬀ  have been suﬀ ered, they return outside after transforming 
into  vishrasa. 

The moment you say, “I want to beat this person up,” 
the process of charging happens and the parmanu get plated 
with  demerit.  At  the  time  of  discharging,  they  give  oﬀ   a 
bitter eﬀ ect. And if one says, “I want to make a donation,” 
then  the  parmanu  get  plated  with  merit,  which  then  give 
oﬀ   a  sweet  eﬀ ect  [in  the  next  life]. 

The  parmanu  get  colored  in  accordance  with  the 
kashaybhaav  (an  intent  laden  with  anger,  pride,  deceit  or 
greed); they get plated [with the bhaav], and then they give 
oﬀ   an  eﬀ ect  in  accordance  with  the  bhaav.

As  long  as  one  has  the  awareness  that  ‘I  am 
Chandubhai’,  the  parmanu  get  drawn  in.  After  One  gets 
the  awareness  of  ‘I  am  pure  Soul’,  the  parmanu  no  longer 
get  drawn  in. 

The kaarman sharir (causal body) leaves as prayogsa 

67

parmanu at the time of death. It is nothing besides prayogsa 
parmanu. 

When  the  mishrasa  are  giving  effect,  if  one  has 
attachment and abhorrence, then new prayogsa form at that 
time.  Those  which  have  become  prayogsa  transform  into 
mishrasa  and  dissipate  after  giving  oﬀ   the  eﬀ ect. 

Prayogsa  refers  to  those  that  are  avasthit  (charged) 
whereas mishrasa are those which are subject to vyavasthit. 
Once the parmanu have been charged, their temporary state 
from the moment they accumulate within [after being subject 
to  vyavasthit]  until  they  give  eﬀ ect  is  known  as  mishrasa. 
Once they dissipate after giving the eﬀ ect, they become pure 
and  transform  back  into  vishrasa! 

The  prayogsa  can  be  changed  after  Gnan,  but  the 
mishrasa cannot be changed whatsoever. One has no choice 
but  to  go  through  the  solidiﬁ ed  karma  that  unfolds!

When the prayogsa parmanu from the past life become 
mishrasa  in  this  life,  they  become  visible  in  the  form  of  a 
body. And  once  they  dissipate  after  giving  the  eﬀ ect,  they 
become  vishrasa. 

The  moment  pure  Conduct  as  the  Self  arises  in  the 

heart,  pure  vishrasa  will  come  about. 

After attaining Gnan, new parmanu do not get drawn 
within. The reason for this is that the ignorance of the Self, 
the  belief  of  ‘I  am  Chandubhai’,  has  been  fractured  at  the 
fundamental level. Thereafter, One just has to prevail in the 
bliss  of  the  Self.  Then  the  parmanu  will  no  longer  give  a 
bitter  or  sweet  eﬀ ect.

The mishrasa are there from the time one is born until 
the time one dies. At the time of suﬀ ering the mishrasa, new 
prayogsa  are  formed  [for  those  who  are  not  Self-realized]. 
After attaining Gnan, if someone curses at you, if You See 
the  pure  Soul  within  that  person,  and  clear  that  ﬁ le  with 
68

equanimity, then the vishrasa remain as vishrasa only. And 
as You See the pure Soul, the parmanu [within] will become 
pure  and  dissipate. 

After attaining Gnan, karma do not get charged at all. 
Even  if  you  were  to  get  irritated,  it  is  Chandubhai  who  is 
getting  irritated.  ‘You’  are  the  pure  Soul,  therefore You  do 
not  get  irritated.

In  the  state  of  ignorance  of  the  Self,  new  parmanu 
were  getting  pulled  in. After  attaining  Gnan,  the  very  one 
pulling  the  parmanu  has  gone.  If  One  lapses  in  remaining 
as the Knower-Seer of that, then they will come back again. 
If  at  that  time  You  remain  as  the  Knower-Seer,  then  the 
parmanu  will  dissipate  permanently. 

When  the  vishrasa  turn  into  prayogsa,  a  prayog 
happens on them meaning that they get plated with the bhaav 
of  the  pratishthit  atma  (charging  relative  self). 

As long as the awareness of ‘I am the doer’ prevails, 

the  cycle  will  keep  going  on. 

On the Akram path, after attaining Gnan, it is considered 
discharge  whether  one  is  increasing  the  parigrah  (worldly 
possessions),  reducing  the  parigrah  or  even  remaining 
aparigrahi (one who is in a state free from worldly attachment 
or acquisitiveness). The bhaav that was done in the past life 
of  either  increasing  the  parigrah  or  to  become  aparigrahi, 
that bhaav is discharging in this life. All You have to do is 
clear that [with equanimity], there is nothing to be acquired.

After  attaining  Gnan,  what  are  the  parmanu  saying 
to  the  pure  Soul?  “‘You’  have  actually  become  pure,  now 
all  that  remains  for You  is  to  make  us  pure. We  were  pure 
indeed,  you  have  made  us  impure. Therefore,  you  are  held 
liable.”  How  can  they  be  puriﬁ ed?  If  One  follows  Dada’s 
Agnas, then the Agnas are such that the parmanu will become 
pure  of  their  own  accord  only.
69

The  karmic  account  with  each  and  every  parmanu 
will  have  to  be  cleared  oﬀ   [with  equanimity].  Then,  once 
there  are  no  more  stains  left,  the  steady  form  as  the  Self 
will  be  attained. 

The  puriﬁ cation  that  happens  when  One  prevails  in 
samata  (the  equanimity  that  prevails  for  One  who  is  in 
experience  of  the  Self)  is  second  to  none.  If  One  cannot 
prevail in samata, then it is good if pratikraman (three-step 
process of reversal from aggression through thought, speech, 
or  action.  It  consists  of:  alochana  -  confessing  the  mistake 
to  the  Lord  within,  pratikraman  -  asking  for  forgiveness 
for that mistake, and pratyakhyan - making the ﬁ rm resolve 
to  never  repeat  the  mistake,  and  asking  for  the  energy  for 
the  same)  is  done.  However,  the  bhaav  should  deﬁ nitely 
be  maintained  that  You  want  to  prevail  in  the  Agnas  one 
hundred  percent. 

The parmanu cannot be puriﬁ ed through pratikraman. 
If  the  other  person  has  been  hurt  by  us,  then  by  doing 
pratikraman, the hurt felt by the other person eases or else 
the  hurtful  feeling  will  not  remain  at  all.  And  one’s  own 
negative  opinion  gets  fractured.  However,  the  puriﬁ cation 
of the parmanu happens only by prevailing as the Knower-
Seer,  which  is  what  happens  during  samayik  (introspection 
process for a speciﬁ c time in which One remains as the Self 
and  Sees  the  faults  of  the  non-Self).  In  samayik,  the  Self 
is  directly  at  work.  Pratikraman  is  the  work  of  Pragnya. 
That is why, everything can be puriﬁ ed completely through 
samayik. 

In  the  general  sense,  we  can  say  that  the  parmanu 
become  puriﬁ ed  through  pratikraman,  however,  in  Reality, 
they  become  puriﬁ ed  only  through  samayik.

For  mahatmas,  the  atikraman  (aggression  towards 
other living beings through mind, body, or speech) is being 
done by the pratishthit atma (discharging relative self) and 
70

the pratikraman is also being done by the pratishthit atma. 
The  faults  are  at  the  discharge  level,  and  the  pratikraman 
is  also  at  the  discharge  level. 

If the pudgal parmanu are chanchal (restless) by their 
inherent nature, then how can they be made steady (sthir)?

They  become  steady  gradually,  as  they  come  closer 

to  their  original  inherent  nature.

The  Pudgal  Parmanu  in  their  original  state  as  the 
Parmanu are steady indeed. They do not become kampayman 
(unsteady;  emotional)  at  all,  but  it  is  because  of  the 
visheshbhaav arising, that the parmanu have become vikrut. 

What  can  be  referred  to  as  gross,  subtle,  subtler  and 

subtlest  parmanu? 

Subtlest  -  vishrasa

Subtler  -  prayogsa  which  is  verily  the  causal  body

Subtle - mishrasa which is verily the pratishthit atma 

(discharging  relative  self) 

Gross - those which the doctors can see, those which 

can  be  seen  with  high-resolution  microscopes. 

The  vitaraag  Lords  have  Seen  inﬁ nite  gneya  (objects 
to  be  Known)  within  just  one  gneya.  Dada  too  has  Seen 
the  very  same,  and  that  is  in  the  form  as  vishrasa.  When 
all the impurity goes away from the mishrasa, they become 
vishrasa.

When all the external things and people are Known and 
experienced as paraya (not being of the Self), that is when 
You  will  be  able  to  prevail  in  the  experiential  awareness 
that  the  parmanu  that  make  up  this  body  of  yours  also  do 
not belong to the Self. In doing so, You will come into the 
prevalence  that  each  and  every  Parmanu  does  not  belong 
to  the  Self. 

71

What  an  extraordinary  discovery  of  the  Tirthankar 

Lords!

These  words  ‘tankotkirna’,  ‘vishrasa’,  ‘prayogsa’, 
‘mishrasa’  have  created  a  stir  in  the  spiritual  world! These 
words which people [the general public] do not even know 
how  to  write,  those  very  words  have  been  understood  in 
their  entirety  by  Them;  how  [extraordinary]  must  those 
Tirthankar  Lords  be!!

[6]  The  Link  Between  Bhaav  and  Parmanu…

What  is  the  link  between  parmanu  and  bhaav  (inner 

intent)? 

The  parmanu  become  arranged  in  accordance  with 
the bhaav. If ten people have the bhaav to donate, then the 
parmanu  become  arranged  accordingly,  but  the  parmanu 
for  each  are  diﬀ erent.  The  parmanu  become  charged  and 
arranged  according  to  the  type  of  bhaav  one  has  and  the 
purpose  behind  it.  In  this,  the  bhaav  is  the  main  basis.  In 
fact, these [bodies] are just ‘toys’ made up of parmanu, they 
have arisen in the midst of them. In other words, the parmanu 
become  arranged  according  to  the  bhaav  and  subsequently 
through  them,  the  body  is  formed.

The  [pure]  Parmanu  are  subtle  and  so  is  the  bhaav. 
The  parmanu  which  get  drawn  in  through  the  bhaav  are 
also  considered  subtle.  Then  the  parmanu  become  visible 
at  the  gross  level  and  the  entire  body  is  seen.  The  subtle 
parmanu  all  come  together  and  they  then  become  visible 
at  the  gross  level.  The  murti  (visible  representation;  the 
body)  automatically  forms  in  accordance  with  the  bhaav! 
After death, when the body is burnt, the parmanu dissipate; 
however,  there  is  no  increase  or  decrease  in  them.

When  the  parmanu  get  drawn  in  through  a  bhaav  of 
attachment, those parmanu become colored with attachment. In 
the same way, the parmanu become colored with abhorrence. 
72

After death, these parmanu that were colored with attachment 
and abhorrence go with the Self in the subtle form and they 
then ‘ripen’ in the body attained in the next life and give eﬀ ect. 
The  parmanu  colored  with  attachment  give  oﬀ   the  eﬀ ect  of 
pleasure and those with abhorrence give oﬀ  the eﬀ ect of pain 
and subsequently, they become pure; the coloring comes oﬀ . 
The  old  coloring  comes  oﬀ   and  a  new  one  comes  on.

The  moment  a  single  bad  thought  arises,  the  [pure] 
Parmanu that are on the outside immediately become colored 
and get drawn in. They enter within and based on the bhaav, 
a  karmic  account  is  bound;  then  after  giving  oﬀ   an  exact 
eﬀ ect  [in  the  next  life],  they  become  pure.  They  cannot 
leave  just  like  that,  without  giving  oﬀ   the  eﬀ ect.  So  this 
is  the  profound  Science  of  the  parmanu. They  are  swayam 
kriyakaari  (once  arranged,  they  are  such  that  they  give  an 
exact  result  on  their  own).  There  is  no  God  that  gives  the 
result.  There  are  no  celestial  beings  or  planets  (grah)  that 
do  anything  in  this.  This  is  not  a  religion,  but  a  [spiritual] 
Science. As long as one has not attained this Science, religion 
is  there  to  develop  his  eligibility.  Otherwise,  if  we  were  to 
feed  someone  poison,  who  would  come  to  kill  him?  God? 
Yamaraj (the mythological god of death) or the poison? The 
energy  of  [the  eternal  element  of]  inanimate  matter  (jada) 
is  also  extraordinary!  Just  look,  it  seems  to  have  increased 
beyond  that  of  the  [developing]  self! The  [developing]  self 
has  become  trapped  in  them,  hasn’t  it!

The inherent nature of the [worldly-interacting] self is 
such that it becomes whatever it envisions. So, the moment 
one has a bhaav, the parmanu get colored. ‘I am pure Soul’ 
is the nirvikalp state (the state free from the wrong belief ‘I 
am  Chandubhai’  and  all  the  relative  ‘I-ness’  and  ‘my-ness’ 
that  stem  from  it).  In  this  state,  the  parmanu  do  not  get 
drawn  in.  In  the  state  of  vikalp  (the  wrong  belief  of  ‘I  am 
Chandubhai’  and  the  relative  ‘I-ness’  that  stems  from  it), 
the  parmanu  get  drawn  in. 

73

The  Science  Behind  the  Formation  of  the  Body!

The  causal  body  (kaaran  deha)  is  formed  from  the 
charged  parmanu.  This  is  what  goes  along  with  the  Self. 
The  causal  body  (kaaran  sharir),  the  electrical  body  (tejas 
sharir) and the Self; these three enter the womb together. As 
soon as the causal body enters the womb, the new eﬀ ective 
body  begins  to  develop.  The  effective  body  continues 
developing until the time of birth. The body may be small in 
the womb, but the entire life’s eﬀ ects are contained within. 
As  the  circumstances  unfold,  the  eﬀ ects  are  given  oﬀ ,  e.g. 
the  parmanu  of  sexuality  for  the  entire  life  may  be  within, 
however  they  sprout  after  the  age  of  fourteen  or  ﬁ fteen, 
when the time is right. Otherwise, the entire karmic stock is 
actually there, right from the beginning! It is just like how an 
entire banyan tree is contained within the seed! Everything is 
contained within, from the time one enters the womb, until 
the  time  of  death. Where  one  will  be  born,  where  one  will 
marry, how many times one will marry, where one will die; 
all of that is within. In the ignorant state, both, the charging 
and  the  discharging  of  parmanu  takes  place. 

The parmanu get charged in this life. Those parmanu 
then  enter  the  womb  in  the  next  life  and  then  one  can 
experience  them  through  the  ﬁ ve  sense  organs.  Those  are 
all  eﬀ ects  given  oﬀ   at  the  gross  level.  The  three  types  of 
parmanu  and  how  they  scientiﬁ cally  work  in  the  three 
divisions  is  being  revealed  here.

In  short,  one  needs  to  understand  the  entire  process 

as  follows:

(1)  The  causal  body  is  charged  in  the  previous  life. 
The causal body goes with the embodied soul (jeev) to 
the  next  life  and  enters  the  new  womb. That  is  when 
the  eﬀ ective  body  is  formed  from  it. 

(2) Once the eﬀ ective body is formed, all the parmanu 

74

of the causal body are used up and the eﬀ ective body 
continues giving oﬀ  eﬀ ects throughout the entire life. 
The  parmanu  of  the  previous  life’s  causal  body  are 
not  required  for  this. 

(3) The parmanu of the eﬀ ective body are the subtlest. 
When  they  give  eﬀ ect,  other,  new  parmanu  at  the 
gross level from the outside get attracted and one ends 
up  eating  bitter  gourd  curry  from  his  plate!  The  old 
parmanu on the inside are attracting the new parmanu 
on the outside. This is a very subtle and scientiﬁ c point.

The First Stage - 

Charge parmanu

Causal Body 
(Kaaran Sharir)

Formed in the previous 
life

The Second Stage - 
Eﬀ ective parmanu

The Third Stage - 
The  gross  parmanu 
on the outside





In the womb 
-  the  effective  body 
is  formed  from  new 
parmanu 
-  the  parmanu  of  the 
c a u s a l   b o d y   d o   n o t 
remain at all.

Bitter  gourd  curry... 
served on a plate, - in this 
case, the gross parmanu 
are  attracted,  through 
the property of attraction 
of  the  subtlest  parmanu 
within the eﬀ ective body.

How  does  this  entire  Science  work?

The  parmanu  of  the  eﬀ ective  body  become  ready 
within.  If  one  is  meant  to  eat  only  two  mustard  seeds, 
many things may come together on the outside, but he will 
only  be  able  to  eat  two  mustard  seeds,  not  three. When  all 
the  circumstances  come  together  in  the  form  of  an  eﬀ ect, 
what  does  the  ego  (ahamkaar)  do?  It  claims,  “I  ate  it.”  In 
reality, one will only be able to eat according to the internal 
design.  Not  even  a  deviation  of  a  single  mustard  seed  can 
take  place  in  that. 

75

This is a very subtle discussion by absolutely revered 

Dadashri!

Are the kashay (anger, pride, deceit and greed) of this 

life  or  of  the  previous  life?

All  the  anger,  pride,  deceit  and  greed  of  this  life 
dissolve  by  the  time  of  death  and  one  binds  new  ones  for 
the next life, which he takes along with him in the form of 
a  balance  of  the  entire  life.  The  karmic  account  of  kashay 
is  bound  in  this  way. 

Then  why  have  they  been  referred  to  as  karma  of 

many  lifetimes? 

Really  speaking,  it  is  not  that  they  have  been 
accumulated  over  many  lifetimes.  The  seeds  from  the 
previous  life  dissolve  and  he  once  again  sows  similar  new 
seeds. 

Whatever  parmanu  become  ready  as  the  causal  body 
in  this  life,  they  are  parmanu  in  an  adulterated  form. They 
are not precise parmanu of anger, pride, deceit or greed. In 
the next life, when the eﬀ ect unfolds, that is when they are 
referred to as anger, pride, deceit and greed. Until then, they 
are  in  the  form  as  parmanu.  That  is  why  Dadashri  clearly 
states, “Whatever [discharge] parmanu are yours after Gnan, 
they  are  not  of  this  life. All  the  [charged]  parmanu  of  this 
life have been burnt and cleared up. After Gnan, the karmic 
account  of  this  life  and  one’s  own  nature,  all  of  that  will 
dissolve.  In  the  next  life,  your  nature  will  not  be  like  what 
it  is  currently.  It  will  be  something  completely  new  and 
diﬀ erent  at  that  time!” 

[7]  The  Science  of  the  Eﬀ ects  of  Parmanu

The  coming  together  of  each  parmanu  is  not  outside 
the law of vyavasthit. The coming together of two completely 
auspicious  (chokhkha)  parmanu  is  subject  to  the  law  of 
76

vyavasthit,  so  what  is  there  to  say  about  inauspicious 
(kadroopa)  parmanu?  If  we  receive  one  insult,  then  just 
imagine  how  many  parmanu  are  involved  in  that!  All  of 
that  is  deﬁ nitely  subject  to  vyavasthit.

Here, throughout the chapter, you should understand the 
parmanu to be vibhaavik pudgal parmanu (parmanu that have 
deviated from their inherent nature). Here, the discussion is 
not about the pure Parmanu. The auspicious parmanu or the 
inauspicious parmanu are diﬀ erent from the pure Parmanu. 
Vyavasthit  applies  to  the  vibhaavik  parmanu  alone.

Suppose  one  person  curses  at  another,  as  the  speaker 
and the listener are both ignorant of the Self, however much 
the  listener  gets  aﬀ ected  by  the  verbal  abuse,  those  many 
parmanu  enter  within  him.  The  eﬀ ect  does  not  reach  the 
absolutely  liberated  Souls. 

Depending  on  how  much  you  quarrel,  those  many 
[eﬀ ects of the] parmanu of the other person will enter within 
you  and  things  will  spoil  for  both  of  you. 

If you made a comment to someone that, “This judge 
isn’t  good,”  then  the  eﬀ ect  of  speaking  thus  will  deﬁ nitely 
reach the judge, and later, the moment he sees you, a negative 
eﬀ ect  will  arise  in  him.  And  upon  saying,  “This  judge  is 
good,”  a  positive  eﬀ ect  will  arise  in  him.  Therefore,  it  is 
only  worth  thinking  positively  of  others. 

If  everyone  were  to  collectively  have  the  same  intent 
that  ‘May  it  rain  in  India’,  then  there  would  be  a  good 
amount  of  rainfall.  But  if  the  person  who  washes  clothes 
yells,  “Don’t  rain!”  Then  what  can  the  poor  rain  do? 

There  is  a  diﬀ erence  in  the  karmic  account  of  every 
parmanu. The parmanu of courage of mind are diﬀ erent in 
each person. One person may eat his meal peacefully, even 
when  robbers  have  come,  whereas  another  would  tremble 
in  fear!

77

The  body  of  a  man  and  a  woman  are  made  up  of 
parmanu.  In  a  man,  there  are  more  parmanu  of  anger  and 
pride.  Whereas  in  a  woman,  there  are  more  parmanu  of 
maya,  meaning  deceit,  and  greed.  One  gets  a  body  in  the 
next life based on the parmanu he accumulates [in this life]. 

  Men  have  hyper  parmanu;  that  is  why  they  do  not 
have  steadiness.  They  keep  moving  back  and  forth  all  day 
long.  These  parmanu  of  women  are  full  of  moha  (illusory 
attachment). 

 Everything besides the Self is considered ling (gender). 
There are three types of ling: purush-ling (masculine), stri-
ling  (feminine)  and  napunsak-ling  (neuter).

When  anger,  pride,  deceit,  and  greed  arise  and  if  a 
tanto  (lingering  link)  remains,  then  it  is  considered  wrong. 
If  a  lingering  link  does  not  remain  for  any  matter,  if  it 
immediately  prevails  for You  that  ‘Nothing  has  happened,’ 
then  all  that  remains  is  simply  attraction  (aakarshan)  and 
repulsion  (vikarshan),  a  property  of  the  parmanu. 

After attaining Gnan, instead of the parmanu of anger 
[charge parmanu], the parmanu of ugrata (discharge parmanu 
colored  with  the  intent  of  anger)  remain  and  instead  of 
the  parmanu  of  greed  [charge  parmanu],  the  parmanu  of 
attraction  [discharge  parmanu]  remain. 

There  are  two  kinds  of  parmanu  when  it  comes  to 
attraction  and  repulsion.  In  abhorrence  there  are  parmanu 
of anger and in attachment there are parmanu of greed. The 
attraction between parmanu occurs when positively [charged] 
and  negatively  [charged]  parmanu  come  together. 

There  is  no  such  thing  as  a  blood  relationship  in  this 

world.

This is simply the attraction and repulsion of parmanu. 
People  with  similar  parmanu  are  born  close  to  each  other 
in  the  next  life.

78

Attraction  and  repulsion  are  not  to  be  removed.  It  is 
simply the bhaav (inner intent) of attachment and abhorrence 
that  has  to  be  removed. 

Where there is aasakti (discharge attachment that arises 
due  to  attraction),  there  will  be  enmity.  Aasakti  is  akin  to 
poison  itself.  Where  there  is  attachment,  abhorrence  will 
inevitably  arise.  Attachment  arises  from  abhorrence  and 
abhorrence  arises  from  attachment;  this  cycle  continues. 
Remove  abhorrence  from  its  roots. 

When  people  with  mutually  opposing  parmanu  come 
together,  the  awakened  awareness  increases.  Or  else,  they 
would  deﬁ nitely  be  densely  veiled  by  ignorance. 

When can Your vitaraagata (a state absolutely free of 
attachment  and  abhorrence)  be  considered  as  tested?  It  is 
not when you are just sitting amongst a few resting snakes. 
Check to see whether agitation or steadiness prevails within 
after  the  snakes  have  been  instigated. 

The properties named attachment or abhorrence are not 
in  the  Self.  There  is  an  electrical  body  within  this  physical 
body.  When  matching  parmanu  are  encountered,  the  entire 
body  gets  attracted  like  a  magnet.  This  is  similar  to  what 
happens between a magnet and iron ﬁ lings. All You have to 
do  is  Know  that  attraction  occurred.  Instead,  one  believes, 
‘I  got  attracted.  I  have  feelings  of  attachment.’ 

After  attaining  Gnan,  the  kashay  leave.  Thereafter, 
only  the  attraction  and  repulsion  of  the  pudgal  [parmanu] 
remains.  The  aggregate  of  parmanu  magnetized  with 
attraction  or  repulsion  within  the  non-Self  are  the  ones 
getting  attracted,  even  if  there  is  no  desire  for  that!  Well, 
it  is  simply  the  pudgal  attracting  the  pudgal.  It  can  be 
considered attachment only if the [worldly-interacting] self 
becomes  engrossed  in  that.

Who decides which body the living being will go into 

79

after death? No one is doing this. It is the law of nature. In 
fact,  with  whomever  one  has  a  karmic  account,  wherever 
those parmanu are, that is where the living being gets drawn. 
As  per  the  law  of  attraction,  the  living  being  gets  drawn 
there  based  on  the  parmanu  of  the  causal  body.  The  Self 
remains  completely  untainted  (nirlep)  in  this.  In  the  long 
run, the attraction turns into repulsion. [On what basis? The 
inherent  nature  of  the  parmanu  is  indeed  like  that.] 

One’s  next  birth  is  in  accordance  with  his  karma. 
How  does  that  work?  Who  does  that?  On  what  basis  does 
your  headache  go  away  even  though  you  have  just  taken 
the medicine orally? How does the medicine know it has to 
go  to  the  head?  The  [natural]  law  is  such  that  the  ailment 
attracts  the  medicine.  Similarly,  based  on  the  attraction  [of 
the  parmanu],  one  takes  birth  as  a  buﬀ alo  or  as  a  human 
being. The  entire  world  is  functioning  based  solely  on  [the 
law of] attraction. There is no need for anyone in between. 
All  of  it  [the  causes]  is  within  us  only. 

 Those  who  have  attraction  for  each  other,  cry  at  the 
time  of  separation  and  those  who  have  repulsion  for  each 
other, feel joy at the time of separation. All of that is simply 
an  eﬀ ect  of  the  parmanu. 

Let  people  cry  when  their  loved  ones  pass  away. 
The  parmanu  of  illusory  attachment  (moha)  and  ‘my-ness’ 
(mamata)  are  coming  out;  you  should  let  them  come  out. 

By shaking hands with any odd type of person, those 

types  of  parmanu  enter  within. 

Having  loving  or  disagreeable  feelings  for  someone 

is  on  account  of  the  parmanu  within. 

If  you  remember  someone  over  and  again,  their 

parmanu  will  enter  within  you. 

Similar  parmanu  get  attracted  to  each  other 
automatically,  by  their  inherent  nature.  A  drunk  person 
80

will  deﬁ nitely  come  across  another  drunkard.  It  can  only 
be  considered  as  attraction  and  repulsion  after  attaining 
Gnan.  The  reason  being,  the  developing  ‘I’  prevails  as 
nothing else but the Knower. Whereas in the ignorant state, 
the developing I becomes the doer, because he believes, ‘I 
got  attracted.’

Here,  in  the  presence  of  the  Gnani,  when  you  clap 
your hands during bhakti (singing of devotional songs), you 
experience  joy.  At  that  time,  the  impure  parmanu  empty 
out  and  puriﬁ cation  starts  happening. The  ignorance  of  the 
Self (mithyatva) dissolves and the right belief of ‘I am pure 
Soul’  (samkit)  starts  to  set  in. 

Attachment  and  abhorrence  are  properties  of  the  ego 
whereas attraction and repulsion are properties of the pudgal 
[parmanu]. After the ego leaves, the attraction of one pudgal 
for  another  remains,  but  attraction  no  longer  remains  for 
You  [the  Self].

There  is  an  electrical  body  inside  this  physical  body. 
That is why the entire physical body is magnetized. Attraction 
and  repulsion  occurs  due  to  that. All  of  this  is  nothing  but 
Science. 

After  attaining  Gnan,  the  developing  ‘I’  goes  from 
siding with the pudgal (the non-Self complex that undergoes 
inﬂ ux and outﬂ ux) to siding with the Self. But the attraction 
of the pudgal which has been there for inﬁ nite lives, does not 
leave. If there is any attraction that causes harm [spiritually], 
it  is  the  attraction  between  a  man  and  a  woman.  A  great 
amount  of  awareness  is  needed  there. 

One marries due to attraction and when the parmanu of 
attraction empty out, he renounces [the wife]. At that time, 
he  believes,  ‘I  renounced.’  That  is  simply  egoism. 

Wherever  attraction  and  repulsion  occur,  there,  it  is 

necessary  to  do  pratikraman. 
81

A  solution  has  to  be  found  for  everything;  for  that 

which  you  like  as  well  as  for  that  which  you  dislike. 

Even  attachment  will  have  to  be  cleared  [with 
equanimity].  You  have  to  return  [to  the  world]  whatever 
parmanu  you  had  accumulated  [from  it]  and  become  free.

The  Self  is  pure,  and  the  Knowledge  regarding  the 
parmanu  is  pure.  The  Knowledge  regarding  the  eternal 
elements  is  always  pure. 

When  the  parmanu  of  the  mind  and  the  parmanu  of 
the  body  come  together,  one  experiences  a  terrible  attack 
of  restlessness.  It  may  even  cause  him  to  commit  suicide. 

The  causal  mind  (bhaav  mun)  is  equivalent  to  the 
[worldly-interacting]  self’s  state  of  engrossment  in  the 
explosive  parmanu  (ranjaymaanpanu).  When  the  time 
comes  for  the  [charged]  parmanu  to  unfold  [in  the  next 
life],  they  give  their  eﬀ ect.  When  the  tubers  made  up  of 
explosive  parmanu  burst,  that  is  the  [eﬀ ective;  discharge] 
mind. 

In  the  state  of  ignorance,  when  one  has  thoughts 
of  taking  that  which  is  not  rightfully  his  own,  he  attracts 
parmanu  which  will  take  him  to  the  animal  life-form. 

The  parmanu  of  a  Self-realized  person  are  light-
weighted  whereas  the  parmanu  of  an  ignorant  person  are 
heavy-weighted. The  parmanu  of  a  mental  person  are  very 
heavy-weighted.

Dada has given a promise to mahatmas, “In your ﬁ nal 
moments,  Dada  will  be  readily  present!”  And  a  samadhi 
maran (a blissful death during which One is in the awareness 
of  the  Self)  will  deﬁ nitely  take  place! 

Those  who  have  met  Dadashri  have  parmanu  that 
match  His  to  some  extent.  Only  then  would  they  be  able 
to  meet  each  other. 

82

Who  controls  the  parmanu?  On  what  basis  do  they 

get  their  shape  or  their  space?

The  parmanu  are  moving  about  or  functioning 
automatically,  as  per  their  own  inherent  nature  indeed. The 
world is constantly undergoing change. Even vyavasthit is not 
governing it. Vyavasthit is simply bringing the circumstances 
together. 

Where  parmanu  that  are  very  distinctly  compatible 
come  together,  there,  viraho  (the  pain  of  separation  from  a 
loved one) arises. When you remember Dada Bhagwan, the 
parmanu  within  Him  get  drawn  inside  you. Therefore,  you 
should  remember  highly  spiritually  elevated  people,  recall 
the  Tirthankars. 

Dada’s  parmanu  are  of  a  very  high  level.  Just  by 
touching Him, you experience ‘coolness’. In fact, by touching 
His  feet,  you  acquire  tremendous  parmanu. 

The  highest  of  all  parmanu  in  the  entire  universe  are 
those  of  a  Tirthankar;  Their  body  is  considered  charam 
sharir  (the  ﬁ nal  body  before  attaining  liberation). 

The Tirthankar Lords have an extraordinarily attractive 
body!  No  famine  arises  within  four  thousand  miles  [500 
yojan]  of  Their  vicinity!

When only the single-most intention for world salvation 
prevails, one acquires the parmanu of becoming a Tirthankar! 
‘His’  attractiveness  is  to  such  an  extent  that  everyone  feels 
drawn to Him. The Tirthankar Lord’s body, blood, bones and 
ﬂ esh, all of those are completely unique and extraordinary! 
‘His’  speech  is  syadvaad  (accepts  all  viewpoints  and  never 
hurts  anyone’s  viewpoint).

  The  [eﬀ ects  of  the]  parmanu  of  the  current  living 
Tirthankar Lord permeate all around. One can beneﬁ t greatly 
from  a  current  living  Tirthankar.

83

[8]  The  Eﬀ ect  of  the  Parmanu  of  Food

Eating  is  the  first  galan  (discharging;  outflux; 
emptying  out)  and  going  to  the  bathroom  is  the  second 
galan.  Puran  and  galan  (charging  and  discharging;  inﬂ ux 
and  outﬂ ux;  ﬁ lling  in  and  emptying  out)  are  subject  to 
another authority (parsatta). Puran is still somewhat under 
One’s [the Self’s] own authority, but not completely. When 
one attains Gnan, then it comes under One’s own authority. 
On the Kramik path, once one attains matiGnan (Knowledge 
of the Self that has been digested and that is in experience) 
and  shrutGnan  (Knowledge  of  the  Self  obtained  through 
listening  or  reading  the  words  of  an  enlightened  One), 
then  it  also  comes  somewhat  under  One’s  own  authority. 
Earning  money  is  also  galan  (discharge),  it  is  [subject  to] 
vyavasthit. 

Puran (charging) requires eﬀ ort and galan (discharge) 

happens  on  its  own.

With regard to food, based on whatever you had charged 
through  bhaav  (intent;  belief)  in  the  past  life,  you  are  able 
to  eat  in  this  life.  That  is  called  the  ﬁ rst  galan.

Whatever you are able to eat, what is the basis for that?

The  eater  does  not  know  what  food  will  be  served 
today.  The  person  making  the  food  does  not  know  what 
they  will  make  tomorrow.  Moreover,  how  much  of  that 
will  you  be  able  to  eat  and  how  much  will  you  not  be 
able  to  eat,  all  the  parmanu  for  that  are  already  arranged. 
One  is  able  to  eat  only  what  the  parmanu  within  like. 
Everything  comes  together  based  on  the  very  demand  of 
the  parmanu  within.

If you keep oﬀ ering a one-year-old baby diﬀ erent food 
items, it won’t eat any of them, but it will immediately eat 
one  particular  item!  It  doesn’t  understand  what  the  food 
84

items  are,  but  the  parmanu  within  pull  it  [that  particular 
food  item]  and  that  is  what  the  baby  eats.

What  is  the  reason  why  certain  food  items  are  not 
liked?  The  parmanu  within  are  not  pulling  [those  items]. 
And the ones that are being pulled greatly are the ones you 
like  a  lot.  The  subtle  parmanu  within  pull  the  gross  ones 
[in  the  form  of  food  items]. 

Tea  is  grown  in  Ceylon  and  a  business  merchant  in 

Mumbai  drinks  it!

If  you  like  tea,  it  means  that  the  parmanu  within  are 
pulling  it,  and  if  you  have  an  ardent  desire  (shok)  for  it, 
then  you,  in  fact,  are  the  doer  of  that!

The electrical body (tejas sharir) is common in each 
body. The digestion of food, the circulation of blood, these 
are  all  functions  of  the  tejas  sharir.  Its  machinery  is  set 
up  in  the  spinal  cord  and  its  ‘wires’  reach  everywhere. 
That  is  how  [the  digesting  of]  food  and  everything  else 
functions. 

The one who eats non-vegetarian food, his tendencies 

are  violent. 

The  parmanu  are  vitaraag  (absolutely  free  from 
attachment  and  abhorrence)  indeed.  The  eater  is  the  one 
with  attachment  and  abhorrence;  which  is  why  whatever 
happiness  he  derives  from  food  or  anything  else,  he  does 
so at his own expense. The results of which will not refrain 
from  coming!

What is the science behind the illness of TB from the 

Gnani’s  perspective? 

Based on the thoughts you have, the parmanu related 
to  them  get  pulled  and  accumulate  within.  The  moment 
thoughts  about  burning  a  beehive  arise,  the  parmanu  of 
TB  get  pulled  in.  Not  just  bees,  but  if  you  kill  any  living 
85

being, it will deﬁ nitely take revenge and disease will arise. 
The law of nature is such that they [the parmanu] will also 
bring about the healing of wounds of the body. [Amidst that,] 
One is simply doing the egoism of ‘I did it.’ The energy of 
these atoms is so tremendous, that even God’s energy does 
not  compare  to  it. 

Nature, in fact, takes the good or bad intents done by 
humans, even further [by bringing those intents into eﬀ ect].

Pudgal means ethvado (food left over in a plate after 
eating;  refuse).  What  is  there  to  be  delighted  or  sorrowful 
about  with  regard  to  puran-galan?  All  humans  are  eating 
the  ‘ladoos’  (ball-shaped  Indian  dessert)  made  from  the 
crematorium  ashes. 

Dadashri says, “‘We’ do not even like to eat. Would one 
like to go through all this hassle of chewing, etc.? However, 
as  ‘we’  remain  separate,  there  is  no  problem.”  Would  you 
ﬁ nd  anyone  other  than  Dada  who  doesn’t  even  like  to  eat? 

[9]  The  Pudgal  Constantly  Undergoes  Pu-
ran-Galan

Whatever  puran  (inﬂ ux;  charging)  has  occurred  will 
undergo galan (outﬂ ux; discharging), the circumstances [that 
come  together,]  dissipate. 

Keep  Seeing  the  credit  (jash)  that  you  get  and  also 
keep  Seeing  the  discredit  (apjash)  that  you  get.  The 
reason  being,  credit  and  discredit  are  both  pudgal;  they 
both  undergo  puran-galan.  You  did  not  know  what  to 
‘purchase’  at  the  time  of  the  ﬁ rst  puran,  which  is  why, 
you have now, during the galan, taken this beating in the 
form  of  discredit!

Pudgal  =  Pur  +  Gal.  The  ‘r’  has  become  a  ‘d’  here. 
In  the  combined  form,  it  is  purgal,  it  undergoes  puran  and 
galan.

86

There  are  ﬁ ve  things  in  this  world. 

There  are  three  in  this  body;  puran,  galan  and  pure 

Soul. 

There  are  two  on  the  outside;  bhojanalay  and 

shaochalay. 

Bhojanalay is something worth enjoying and shaochalay 

is  something  worth  letting  go  of. 

Moreover, all this can be encompassed in two words: 
the  pure  Soul  and  circumstances  (saiyogo).  There  are  only 
these  two  things  in  the  world.

The parmanu all become like how one speaks [charged 
with that intent], and they get drawn in. When the parmanu 
get drawn in, it is called ‘pur’. Then, when those parmanu 
give  eﬀ ect  and  undergo  galan,  it  is  known  as  ‘gal’. 

At the time when karma is bound, the parmanu undergo 
puran; that is what they call the bandh (charging) of karma. 
And when karma are released, galan [of parmanu] happens; 
that  is  what  they  call  the  nirjara  (discharging)  of  karma. 
Hence,  it  is  called  pur  +  gal.

However  it  [the  karmic  stock]  has  been  ﬁ lled  in,  that 
is  indeed  how  it  will  come  out  at  the  time  of  galan.  No 
matter how much a neem tree is watered with sweet water, 
will  it  become  sweet? 

Puran  and  galan  both  happen  naturally.  In  the  state 
of  ignorance  of  the  Self,  puran  occurs  due  to  the  pressure 
of circumstances and galan happens through circumstances.

After receiving Gnan, only galan remains, new puran 
does  not  happen. A  spinning  top  only  displays  the  process 
of  galan.  The  process  of  puran  is  done  by  humans  when 
they  wind  the  string  of  the  spinning  top,  and  the  process 
of  galan  is  done  by  the  spinning  top  itself.  Similarly,  in 
87

the  case  of  humans,  the  representative  of  the  Self,  the 
[developing] I, does the puran and the body does the galan. 
The  [developing]  I  is  the  ego  and  it  has  become  the  doer 
and  it  doesn’t  even  listen  to  the  original  Self. This  puran-
galan  is  of  the  pudgal,  yet,  the  [developing]  I  believes,  ‘I 
am  indeed  the  one  doing  it.’  The  entire  pudgal  is  [subject 
to]  vyavasthit.

After  Gnan,  the  [developing]  ‘I’  becomes  the  pure 
Soul, due to which the ego is destroyed. The living part gets 
pulled  out  from  it  and  the  non-living  part  remains,  which 
then  continues  to  undergo  galan  of  its  own  accord. 

The  Self  is  permanent  and  everything  else  is  [subject 
to;  undergoes]  puran-galan.  During  that  [puran-galan],  the 
[developing] I, due to ignorance of the Self, upon believing 
there  to  be  proﬁ t  and  loss,  has  attachment  and  abhorrence, 
and  thus,  continues  to  bind  worldly  life.

How  can  one  stop  puran  from  occurring?

Without  the  Knowledge  of  the  Self,  one  cannot  stop 
puran  from  occurring,  but  a  change  can  be  made  in  it.  For 
example,  while  doing  a  bad  deed,  if  he  keeps  feeling  that, 
‘This  should  not  be  so,’  that  is  puran.  And  while  doing  a 
good  deed,  if  he  feels  that,  ‘This  should  be  done,’  that  too 
is  puran.  On  that  basis,  the  galan  will  happen  anew. After 
puran  takes  place,  galan  happens  on  its  own.  Making  a 
change  in  the  puran  is  only  partially  in  your  hands.  The 
reason  being,  it  is  only  if  the  circumstances  are  favorable 
that  you  will  have  thoughts  of  doing  something  good.  In 
fact,  no  one  has  the  complete  independent  authority  in  any 
place  whatsoever. 

After receiving Gnan, if you become engrossed in a bad 
or  good  thought  about  someone,  even  then  it  is  considered 
galan. Dada’s vitaraag Vignan (the Science that leads to the 
absolute  state)  is  wonderful!

88

‘Attaining  the  natural  and  spontaneous  state,  the 
vitaraag  (absolutely  detached)  Lord  has  referred  to  that  as 
liberation’;  that  is  indeed  what  is  prevailing  for  mahatmas. 
‘You’ don’t have to look at the good and bad of the pudgal, 
You simply need to Know that. Even if a mahatma acts crazy, 
Know  that  whatever  puran  was  done  is  now  undergoing 
galan!  Have  compassion  for  him.

The  anger,  pride,  deceit  and  greed  that  are  unfolding 

are  also  the  galan  of  the  puran  that  was  done.

The  law  is  such  that  puran  happens  slowly,  while 

galan  happens  all  of  a  sudden.

After Self-realization, if You remain as the Knower-Seer 
of  all  the  kriya  (activities  of  the  mind-speech-body),  then 
all  the  activities  are  in  the  form  of  galan  alone,  regardless 
of  them  being  good  habits  or  bad  habits! 

The One who has Known all the types of puran-galan, 

that  very  Self  is  the  Parmatma  (absolute  Self).

‘You’  are  Gnanakaar  (the  Knower),  Atmakaar  (the 
Self),  so  why  are  you  becoming  kshetrakaar  (one  with  the 
body)?  [By  believing,]  ‘I  am  like  this,  I  am  like  that,’  you 
become  kshetrakaar.

Indriya  sukh  (pleasures  derived  from  worldly  or 
material  things  as  perceived  by  the  ﬁ ve  sense  organs) 
are  subject  to  puran-galan,  they  are  imaginary,  they  are 
temporary.  Atindriya  sukh  is  the  bliss  of  the  Self  that  is 
experienced  without  the  help  of  any  external  things. 

During  puran,  if  You  do  not  indulge  in  subtle  pride 
(garva) and during galan, if You do not become disappointed, 
that  is  a  sign  that You  have  attained  Gnan.

Tantric techniques and rituals are all an illusion caused 

by  the  pudgal.  The  Gnani  does  not  get  involved  in  it.

89

“Be it a particle of dust or the prosperity of a Vaimanik 
dev, ‘See’ it all as pudgal, of the same inherent nature.”

“Rajkan  ke  riddhi  vaimanik  devni,
Sarve  manya  pudgal  ek  swabhaav  jo.”

  -  Shrimad  Rajchandra.

‘He’  [Shrimad  Rajchandra]  Saw  all  the  pudgal  to  be 
of the same inherent nature. What must He have Seen! ‘He’ 
Saw  everything  as  puran-galan,  puran-galan... 

At the end, the Kramik and Akram paths become one. 
As  long  as  the  [living]  kashay  (anger,  pride,  deceit,  greed) 
are there, the charging continues. In the liberated part, there 
is  Akram. 

Even on the Kramik path, the charging of karma stops 

well  before  the  last  step.

[10]  The  Terminology  Related  to  Pudgal

Is  the  pudgal  eternal  (Sat)?

Eternal  means  indestructible  (avinashi).  Pudgal 
means puran-galan (input-output; charge-discharge; inﬂ ux-
outﬂ ux). It is not considered eternal. The original Pudgal 
which  is  in  the  form  as  Parmanu  (the  smallest,  most 
indivisible,  indestructible  particle  of  inanimate  matter) 
is  eternal,  it  is  such  that  it  never  increases  or  decreases 
(aguru-laghu),  it  is  indestructible.  The  eternal  element 
of  inanimate  matter  (jada  tattva)  is  fundamentally  in  the 
form  as  Parmanu.  The  pudgal  is  not  in  the  form  as  [the 
eternal  element  of]  inanimate  matter,  the  Parmanu  of  the 
pudgal  are  inanimate. 

The  parmanu  that  have  become  distorted  (vikrut)  or 
vibhaavik (unnatural; charged), are referred to as pudgal. The 
prakruti  is  also  pudgal.  In  every  living  being,  everything 
other than the Soul is pudgal. There are only two, the pure 
90

Soul and the pudgal. The pudgal that makes up the body is 
the unnatural pudgal. The unnatural pudgal means that there 
are  other  eternal  elements  within  it  such  as  dharmastikaya 
(the  eternal  element  that  supports  motion),  adharmastikaya 
(the  eternal  element  that  supports  inertia),  kaal  (the  eternal 
element  of  Time),  aakash  (the  eternal  element  of  Space), 
all  of  them  are  there. Anything  that  has  all  the  six  eternal 
elements  in  it  is  called  pudgal. 

When  a  mixture  of  the  six  eternal  elements  happens, 
that  is  then  called  pudgal.  Thereafter,  it  continues  to 
disintegrate  (visarjan)  on  its  own,  constantly.  [Therefore,] 
Let  go  of  the  ‘reins’  [hold  or  control  over  the  pudgal]  of 
your  own  accord. 

An  aggregate  of  two  or  more  Parmanu  (skandha) 
cannot be called pudgal, that is still referred to as Parmanu. 
A  tree  or  the  wood  of  a  tree  is  called  pudgal.  There  is  no 
Soul  in  the  wood,  but  it  is  due  to  [the  initial  presence  of 
the] Soul that the state of the pudgal has become like this!

In the pudgal, the stock that is undergoing puran is in 
the  form  of  an  aggregate,  and  the  stock  that  is  undergoing 
galan  is  natural.  From  that  aggregate,  during  galan,  the 
discharge  happens  naturally  in  the  form  as  parmanu.

The  [swabhaavik]  Pudgal  is  independent,  it  has  no 
dependency  on  the  Soul.  If  it  were  to  become  dependent 
on  It  even  for  a  moment,  then  it  would  become  dependent 
forever.  The  Soul  would  not  let  go  of  it.  But  both  are 
independent,  neither  one  is  under  the  control  of  the  other. 
No  one  can  take  control  of  another.

The electricity within the body is of the eternal element 

of  inanimate  matter,  it  is  its  temporary  state  (avastha).

[To  believe,]  ‘I  am  Chandu,’  means  one  believes, 
‘I  am  the  pudgal.’  By  believing  ‘I  did  it,’  he  became  the 
doer.  So  the  pudgal  [parmanu]  adhered  to  him,  that  itself 
91

is karma. Once he realizes, ‘I am the Self, not the pudgal,’ 
then  karma  will  no  longer  be  bound. 

The  pudgal  alone  does  not  bind  karma,  but  the 
[charging  relative]  self  which  is  together  with  the  pudgal 
has a wrong belief, that is why karma is bound. The wrong 
belief is also pudgal. In this, the ego simply believes that ‘I 
am doing it.’ In this, the original Self is not doing anything. 
In the presence of the Self, the ego believes that ‘I am doing 
it,  I  am  suﬀ ering.’

Anger, pride, deceit, greed and ego are all considered 
pudgal.  The  prakruti  and  the  pudgal  are  considered  one. 
Even the mishrachetan (the I with wrong belief that arises as 
when the eternal elements of the Self and inanimate matter 
come  into  close  proximity  with  each  other)  is  considered 
pudgal. As long as there is ignorance of the Self (agnanta), 
the  eﬀ ects  of  anger,  pride,  deceit,  and  greed  will  be  there. 
Anger,  pride,  deceit,  and  greed  by  their  inherent  nature 
increase  and  decrease  whereas  the  Self’s  inherent  nature  is 
such  that  It  does  not  increase  and  decrease. 

The pure Pudgal [Parmanu] are swabhaavik (natural) 
whereas the relative pudgal is the only one which is vibhaavik 
(unnatural;  charged).  It  has  arisen  due  to  the  pressure  of 
circumstances. 

The  vibhaavik  pudgal  is  eﬀ ective,  the  swabhaavik 

Pudgal  is  not.

Attachment and abhorrence happen due to the eﬀ ect of 
the pudgal, and then, from that attachment and abhorrence the 
eﬀ ect of the pudgal arises once again. This cycle continues. 

When attachment and abhorrence occur in the pudgal, 
it  leads  to  bondage,  and  when  attachment  and  abhorrence 
do  not  occur,  it  is  called  freedom.

Four  of  the  ﬁ ve  senses  are  vitaraag  (absolutely  free 

92

from  attachment)  on  one  side  [from  the  context  of  the  two 
parties  involved],  whereas  the  sense  of  touch  is  prone  to 
attachment  on  both  sides.  Sexual  desire  comes  under  the 
sense  of  touch.

There  is  no  problem  with  the  pure  Pudgal,  but  if 
the  [overall]  eﬀ ect  of  the  vibhaavik  pudgal  is  Seen,  then 
attachment  will  not  arise.  What  would  happen  if  You  See 
the  end-result  of  having  eaten  something?

The  ‘quick-sand’  like  pudgal  is  such  that  the  greater 
the  eﬀ ort  you  make  to  come  out  of  it,  the  deeper  you  sink 
into  it. 

It is the very same [ﬁ lled karmic] stock that becomes 

a  woman  and  a  man.

The pure Soul and the prakruti by their inherent nature 
and  by  their  intrinsic  functional  properties  are  completely 
diﬀ erent,  that  is  why  they  can  be  identiﬁ ed.  Gold,  copper, 
all  the  metals,  and  all  the  gases  such  as  hydrogen,  oxygen, 
etc. are all indeed considered to belong to the same eternal 
element  of  inanimate  matter.

All  the  atom  bombs  out  there,  they  all  belong  to  the 
eternal  element  of  inanimate  matter.  The  clouds,  the  rain 
and  the  wind,  they  are  all  pudgal  and  they  are  managed 
by  ‘vyavasthit’.

Just  as  the  resultant  state  (paarinaamik  bhaav)  of 
metals  is  different  from  non-metals,  the  paarinaamik 
bhaav  of  the  Self  is  completely  diﬀ erent  from  that  of  the 
non-Self.  The  paarinaamik  bhaav  of  the  non-Self  will 
continue  getting  heavier  whereas  the  paarinaamik  bhaav 
of  the  Self  is  that  It  gets  lighter. When  the  body  dies,  the 
causal  body  leaves  with  the  Self.  Due  to  the  parmanu  of 
the  causal  body,  the  embodied  soul  has  weight.  The  Self 
does  not  have  weight. 

The  pudgal  has  the  tendency  to  descend  (adhogami) 

93

and  the  Self  has  the  tendency  to  ascend  (urdhvagami). 
Merit  karma  weighs  less  and  demerit  karma  weighs  more. 
As  demerit  karma  increases,  the  embodied  soul  descends 
[to a lower life-form]. When both merit and demerit karma 
come  to  an  end,  moksha  (the  state  of  ultimate  liberation) 
is  attained. 

The  authority  (satta)  of  the  pudgal  is  also  subject 
to  vyavasthit.  The  pudgal  does  not  have  the  independent 
authority,  therefore,  if  this  sense  of  doership  that  ‘I  am  the 
doer’ leaves, then nothing like karma remains! And that will 
only  happen  when  he  realizes  his  own  form  as  the  Self. 

So  what  is  the  pudgal  dependent  on?

In the inherently natural state [as pure Parmanu], it is 
independent (swadhin) and in the unnatural state [as vibhaavik 
parmanu],  it  is  dependent  on  scientific  circumstantial 
evidences. Therefore, the pudgal itself is not the one wielding 
the  authority;  the  self  is  wielding  the  authority. 

The  Self  is  such  that  It  prevails  as  the  Self 
(Swaparinaami) whereas the body is an eﬀ ect of the pudgal. 

When anger, pride, deceit, and greed arise in the body, 
when  joy  and  sorrow  arise,  if  the  Self  does  not  become 
engrossed  in  that  and  It  Knows  that  every  circumstance 
of  the  pudgal  is  an  eﬀ ect  of  the  non-Self  (parparinaam), 
that  is  known  as  samyak  Charitra  (the  right  Conduct  as 
the  Self). 

Karma are actually an eﬀ ect and they continuously ﬂ ow 
like  a  river.  As  they  are  an  eﬀ ect,  the  Self  has  absolutely 
nothing to do with them. The Self does not get involved in 
the  causes  and  the  eﬀ ects.  That  is  all  of  the  pudgal. 

Sarjan  (the  sowing  of  causes;  creation)  is  in  your 
[the  ego’s]  control  and  visarjan  (giving  oﬀ   the  eﬀ ects  of 
causes  sown;  disintegration)  is  under  the  control  of  the 
94

pudgal.  Therefore,  whatever  causes  you  sow,  sow  them 
correctly.

To remain engrossed in the temporary states (avasthao) 
is  referred  to  as  worldly  life,  which  verily  means  pudgal 
ramanata.  Other  than  [the  belief  that]  ‘I  am  the  Self’, 
starting  from  [the  belief  that]  ‘I  am  Chandubhai’  and 
everything  after  that  is  all  considered  pudgal  ramanata. 
The  entire  world  is  engrossed  in  the  temporary  states  of 
the  non-Self  complex  (paudgalik  ramanata). Amidst  that, 
the  one  who  worships  the  Self  for  even  a  moment,  will 
deﬁ nitely  attain  liberation.

The food is made up of pudgal, the drink is made up of 
pudgal and the engrossment is in the pudgal. There is a limit 
with regard to food and drink, but the engrossment is unlimited. 
Liberation  is  attained  through  Atma  ramanata  (dwelling  as 
the  Self).  To  become  free  of  the  pudgal  is  called  virti. 

On the Kramik path, people keep ‘toying with’ [enjoy 
using]  the  sadhan  (the  tools  or  means  to  attain  the  goal) 
alone. The goal (saadhya) is forgotten. People ‘toy with’ the 
scriptures, they ‘toy with’ with the rosary; these are all ‘toys’ 
of  the  pudgal.  The  Self  has  nothing  to  do  with  it.  Pudgal 
ramanata  results  in  worldly  life  (sansaar),  not  moksha. 

The  tools  through  which  the  Self  is  to  be  attained, 
once  It  has  been  attained,  let  go  of  those  tools.  Thereafter, 
there  is  no  need  to  keep  ‘worshipping’  [using]  them!  Once 
the  tongs  have  been  used  to  pour  the  tea,  they  should  be 
set  aside,  the  tongs  do  not  have  to  be  drunk. 

Divide  something  with  the  same  amount  that  it  had 
been  multiplied  by,  only  then  will  there  be  no  remainder. 
That  itself  has  been  referred  to  as  liberation.

The entire world is being run by the pudgal. The pudgal 
does the atikraman (aggression towards other living beings 
through  the  mind,  speech  or  body)  too.  The  pudgal  is  the 
95

one  taking  birth,  getting  divorced,  dying;  it  is  all  nothing 
but the pudgal. This is the language of the Gnanis! In fact, 
the Self does not die, nor does It take birth. It is the relative 
self  (pratishthit  atma)  that  lives  and  dies.

The  pudgal  is  mishrachetan  (the  I  with  wrong  belief 
that  arises  as  when  the  eternal  elements  of  the  Self  and 
inanimate  matter  come  into  close  proximity  with  each 
other),  the  one  that  has  been  ﬁ lled  with  the  intent  of  the 
self (chaitanyabhaav), it is power chetan. The power chetan 
that has been charged undergoes galan in the next life. That 
which happens through the involvement of the self is puran 
and  when  parparinati  (to  believe  ‘I  am  doing’  in  what  are 
the  eﬀ ects  of  the  non-Self)  arises,  that  is  galan. 

Due  to  illusion  (bhranti),  it  seems  that  it  is  deﬁ nitely 
the  Self  who  does  everything,  but  in  reality,  all  of  this  is 
nothing but a ‘play’ of the pudgal. Illusion is akin to seeing 
two  lights  when  you  accidentally  put  pressure  on  your  eye 
with  your  hand. 

The pudgal collides with another pudgal. Chetan never 

collides  with  another  Chetan.

There are four things in the world; addition, subtraction, 
multiplication  and  division.  Addition  and  subtraction  are 
done  by  the  pudgal  and  multiplication  and  division  are  of 
the  worldly-interacting  self  (vyavahaar  atma).  Attachment 
is  multiplication,  abhorrence  is  division.  To  get  in  bed  at 
night and make ‘plans’ [fantasize] is akin to multiplication. 

Due  to  the  multiplication  done  by  the  worldly-
interacting  self  (vibhaavik  atma),  the  vishrasa  (pure  phase 
Parmanu)  become  prayogsa  (charged  phase  of  parmanu). 
Then  from  prayogsa,  they  become  mishrasa  (charged 
parmanu  waiting  to  give  eﬀ ect)  and  from  those  mishrasa, 
when  division  occurs,  those  many  revert  back  to  vishrasa. 

Causal  parmanu  -  prayogsa

96

Eﬀ ective  parmanu  -  mishrasa

Subsequently,  after  giving  oﬀ   the  eﬀ ect,  they  [the 

mishrasa]  keep  reverting  back  to  vishrasa  constantly. 

Multiplication  and  division  is  the  inherent  nature  of 
the  worldly-interacting  self.  The  seed  of  multiplication  is 
encompassed  within  the  division,  and  the  seed  of  division 
is encompassed within the multiplication. That is what ‘we’ 
refer  to  as  disorder. 

E.g.:
1) I felt cold and thought of wearing asweater Asking 
for  a  sweater  is  multiplication.
2)  Wearing  the  sweater  is  addition.
3)  Feeling  hot  and  thinking  of  taking  the  sweater  oﬀ  
is  division.
4)  Taking  the  sweater  oﬀ   is  subtraction.  Subtraction 
happens according to scientiﬁ c circumstantial evidences.

Dadashri  says,  “‘Our’  division  has  left  no  remainder. 

Now  there  is  nothing  left.” 

If  it  snows  at  night  in  Kashmir  and  a  pile  of  snow 
that  looks  like  Lord  Buddha  forms,  then  that  is  addition. 
In  the  morning  when  the  sun  rises  and  it  [the  statue 
formed  from  the  snow]  starts  melting,  the  addition  has 
been  subtracted.

The Gnani always keeps dividing what was multiplied.

The  Gnani  Purush  remains  vitaraag  (absolutely 
detached)  everywhere.  For  Him,  everything  is  equal.  ‘He’ 
goes  everywhere  to  do  darshan  (devotional  viewing).  ‘He’ 
is not partial towards any pudgal. ‘He’ does not feel, ‘Mine 
is  a  Jain  [a  person  whose  religion  is  Jainism]  pudgal’  or 
‘Mine  is  a  Vaishnav  [a  member  of  a  Hindu  sect  holding 
Vishnu or Lord Krishna to be the supreme being, generally 
seeking salvation through devotional worship of the God or 
97

His avatars] pudgal’. He divides it everywhere and balances 
it  out.

Jada  (inanimate  matter)  has  such  a  geometry  that  it 
gets  solved  in  its  theorem,  so  won’t  this  theorem  of  yours 
[the mishrachetan] also be solved? Jada is such that, when 
vyavasthit  leaves  you  with  something  disagreeable,  it  does 
so after giving you knowledge, and when vyavasthit leaves 
you  with  something  agreeable,  then  you  deﬁ nitely  derive 
enjoyment  from  it!  One  is  certainly  beneﬁ tting  from  both 
contexts!  What  a  simple  solution  Dadashri  has  given  us!

This is all the karamat (craftsmanship) of the pudgal, 
and the organization is also of the pudgal. There is absolutely 
nothing  of  the  Self  in  this,  so  why  the  need  to  interfere? 
Where  is  the  need  to  give  a  good  or  bad  opinion?

What  does  the  established  principle  (siddhant)  say?

It  is  the  pudgal  that  eats  pudgal;  the  Self  does  not 
eat.  Hence,  where  is  the  need  to  renounce  eating  a  certain 
food  item?

When  a  watermelon  is  being  cut,  the  Self  within  it 
does  not  get  cut.  Before  cutting  a  watermelon,  the  Gnani 
does  a  prayer  (vidhi)  and  seats  the  pure  Soul  on  the  side.

The pudgal eats and the developing I does the egoism 

of  ‘I  ate’. 

The  inherent  nature  that  one  pudgal  has,  is  the  same 
inherent nature that every pudgal has. The pudgal is certainly 
working within its own inherent nature. To eat or to not eat 
is based on the law of attraction and repulsion between the 
two pudgals. When one sits down to eat, he ends up eating 
a great amount uncontrollably, as if there is a monster within 
pulling  the  food!  The  pudgal  [parmanu]  within  the  body 
are  pulling  the  pudgal  [food  item]  on  the  outside.  That  is 
indeed  why  when  the  food  is  taking  time  to  be  served,  he 
98

is  unable  to  wait.  He  continues  dipping  his  hands  in  some 
item  or  the  other! 

The eater does not Know and the Knower does not eat. 
The pudgal never gets satisﬁ ed. It always remains a beggar. 

Whatever pudgal you contemptuously reject, you will 
not  get  that  for  many  lives  to  come. You  will  get  it  in  this 
life,  but  not  in  the  next  life.  If  you  don’t  have  contempt 
towards anything, then you can get everything whilst sitting 
at  home.  That  is  what  the  grandeur  of  the  Self  is  like! 

When  we  see  all  such  things  like  an  ‘ornamental’ 
[scenic]  place  or  ‘ornamental’  paths  [of  religion],  a  sense 
of  enjoyment  in  the pudgal arises.  Due  to  this,  the  worldly 
life  (sansaar)  becomes  endless.

Shrimad Rajchandra has said, “With a decrease in the 
belief that ‘I am a Jain’ (Jain pudgal bhaav), the awareness 
of  ‘I  am  pure  Soul’  (Atma  dhyan)  will  come  into  eﬀ ect.” 

For  a Vaishnav,  the Vaishnav  pudgal  will  not  let  him 
attain  moksha,  and  for  a  Jain,  the  Jain  pudgal  will  not  let 
him  attain  moksha.

Whatever one had been worshipping until now, it was 
indeed the pudgal that was being worshipped! That is indeed 
what is obstructing one! That itself is what takes on the form 
of  a  veil.  So  [being]  a  Jain  or  a Vaishnav  is  all  an  illusion 
brought  about  by  the  pudgal  (paudgalik  maya).  ‘You’  have 
to become free of that. The pudgal of a renunciate obstructs 
a  renunciate. A  Kshatriya  [a  member  of  second  of  the  four 
Hindu castes comprising the warriors] pudgal, a Vaishya [a 
member  of  the  third  of  the  four  Hindu  castes,  comprising 
the merchants and farmers] pudgal, a Shudra [a member of 
the  fourth  and  lowest  of  the  Hindu  castes,  comprising  the 
artisans  and  laborers]  pudgal;  each  person  is  obstructed  by 
their  own  pudgal. 

All of this is considered a ‘play’ of the pudgal alone, 

99

as long as there is no attachment or abhorrence. Otherwise, 
one  will  incur  a  liability.  In  fact,  it  is  the  pudgal  ﬁ ghting 
each  other,  hitting  each  other,  the  Self  is  Seeing  that.  If 
one becomes engrossed (tanmayakaar) in that, then he will 
suﬀ er  a  beating. 

Wherever  there  is  duality,  good-bad,  proﬁ t-loss,  then 
it is something that people have created. There is no duality 
in  God’s  eyes.  From  God’s  perspective,  this  is  all  nothing 
but  pudgal;  whether  you  call  it  the  ‘play’  of  the  pudgal  or 
the  ‘wrestling’  of  the  pudgal.

Even if you don’t desire to do so, yet it happens. What 
does  this  imply?  This  is  all  the  unfolding  of  the  karma  of 
the  past  life;  it  is  just  a  bundle  of  unfolding  karma.

What  do  You  need  to  do  after  realizing  the  Self? 
‘You’  need  to  become  pure  and  reside  in  Your  ‘home’  [as 
the Self]. All the rest will clear on its own. The ‘hurricane’ 
on  the  outside  will  calm  down  on  its  own.

The mind, speech and body are an eﬀ ect. There is no 

need  to  stick  your  hand  in  it  whatsoever.

The body has latched on like a shadow. Due to illusion 
(bhranti), one believes ‘I am this shadow.’ At noon, when the 
sun reaches equilibrium, the shadow gets absorbed. Similarly, 
when  One  prevails  in  equanimity,  everything  goes  away. 

If you become one with the pudgal, you have to become 
destructible  and  if  You  remain  separate  from  it,  then  You 
are  indestructible. You  become  one  with  the  pudgal  due  to 
the  sense  of  doership.

When  the  sense  of  ownership  (swamipanu)  over  the 
pudgal  is  relinquished,  One  can  experience  the  sense  of 
ownership  as  the  Self  (Swaswamipanu).

The  external  conduct  is  of  the  pudgal  and  the  Gnan 
is of the Self. Therefore, the external conduct and the Gnan 
have  nothing  to  do  with  each  other.

100

The aﬄ  iction is of the pudgal and the Knower of that 

is  the  Self. 

In the worldly sense, no one has ever become jitendriya 
jina  (one  who  has  conquered  the  pleasures  derived  from 
the  ﬁ ve  sense  organs).  It  is  possible  to  become  that  only  if 
they  attain  Gnan. 

It is possible to go beyond the sense organs (atindriya 
pratyaksh) through the Self; everything that is perceived by 
the sense organs is only through the pudgal. This is Dada’s 
observation  through  Gnan.

For You,  the  gneya  (objects  to  be  Known)  are  not  in 
the  form  as  Parmanu,  they  are  in  aggregate  form.  It  is  all 
puran-galan.  ‘You’  cannot  See  the  puran, You  can  See  the 
galan. 

What  would  Lord  Mahavir  have  in  His  perspective? 

Be  it  a  chaste  woman,  a  prostitute,  a  thief,  a 
philanthropist,  a  wise  person,  a  crazy  person;  He  only  saw 
the  same  [fundamental]  thing  in  everyone,  the  pudgal.  Just 
as  one  sees  only  the  gold  in  all  types  of  jewelry,  similarly, 
You  have  to  See  that  it  is  the  same  pudgal  in  all  types  of 
prakruti. Ultimately, You have to See only your own pudgal, 
not  that  of  others.

For  the  Gnani,  it  is  the  ultimate  pudgal.  For  those 
going to moksha, it is the ultimate pudgal. Whatever pudgal 
they  have,  it  is  the  kind  of  pudgal  that  liberates  everyone.

Which part of the Gnani’s subtle body goes outside? It 
is the part of the pudgal, moreover, it is subject to external 
circumstances  (parsatta).

Other  than  the  pure  Chetan  (the  Self),  everything  is 

pudgal. 

The pudgal of a Gnani Purush is divine and the pudgal 

101

of a Tirthankar Lord is even more divine; it is the topmost 
in  the  entire  universe!

Dadashri  says,  “The  word  ‘pudgal’  is  there  in  the 
scriptures, but it took me twenty years to discover its exact 
meaning! I hadn’t understood it in 1945 either.” If one were 
to  simply  understand  the  diﬀ erence  between  puran-galan 
and  the  pure  Soul,  One’s  [spiritual]  work  would  be  done.

Five  of  the  eternal  elements  have  been  categorized 
simply  as  one,  the  Pudgal  and  the  sixth  is  the  Self.  So 
there  are  only  two  things  in  each  body;  the  Self  and  the 
Pudgal. If one can learn to distinguish between the two, he 
will ﬁ nd the Self! But how can one distinguish between the 
two  without  the  grace  of  the  Gnani?

[11]  Pudgal  Bhaav

What  can  be  referred  to  as  ‘pudgal  bhaav’?

When  you  are  walking  along,  if  you  see  someone 
making fresh jalebi (a crispy, deep-fried Indian sweet soaked 
in sugar syrup), then the bhaav (inner intent) to eat it arises 
on  its  own,  doesn’t  it!  That  is  called  pudgal  bhaav.  The 
bhaav  is  considered  pudgal  alone.  There  is  nothing  of  the 
Self  in  it. 

A  desire-based  tendency  is  called  bhaav.

There  are  two  kinds  of  bhaav.  One  is  pudgal  bhaav 
(the  desire  based  tendency  of  the  non-Self  complex;  the 
belief  that  ‘I  am  Chandubhai’)  and  the  other  is  the  bhaav 
of  the  worldly-interacting  self  (vyavahaar  atma).  All  the 
bhaav (likes; dislikes) of the mind, speech, and body are the 
bhaav  of  the  pudgal,  such  as  ‘I  like  the  taste  of  this,  I  like 
this.’ Based on that, the worldly-interacting self does its own 
bhaav,  which  in  turn  gives  rise  to  worldly  life  (sansaar).

The  property  of  gold  cannot  be  in  the  copper,  and 
the  property  of  copper  cannot  be  in  gold;  they  are  both 
102

completely  diﬀ erent.  Similarly,  all  the  bhaav  of  the  mind, 
speech, and body are pudgal bhaav, they are not the bhaav 
of  Chetan  (the  Self).  They  are  both  completely  separate. 
All  these  bhaav  of  the  pudgal  are  such  that  they  undergo 
puran-galan (input-output; charge-discharge; inﬂ ux-outﬂ ux) 
by  their  inherent  nature.

As  long  as  the  pudgal  bhaav  (the  belief  that  ‘I  am 
Chandubhai’)  has  not  been  destroyed,  one  cannot  become 
the  pure  Soul.

In the state of ignorance of the Self, one believes the 
mishrachetan  (the  I  with  wrong  belief  that  arises  as  when 
the eternal elements of the Self and inanimate matter come 
into  close  proximity  with  each  other)  to  be  Chetan. 

For  attachment  and  abhorrence  to  arise  is  your  [the 
worldly-interacting self’s] true nature (dharma) and for bhaav 
(like;  discharge  attachment)  and  abhaav  (dislike;  discharge 
abhorrence)  to  arise  is  the  pudgal’s  true  nature.  Bhaav  and 
abhaav are dependent on vyavasthit, but all You have to do 
is  See  them.  And  if  you  interfere  in  them,  then  they  will 
stay. Otherwise, by Seeing them, they will leave. The bhaav 
are  saying,  ‘We  are  on  our  path  of  puran-galan, You  keep 
walking  on  Your  path  of  becoming  vitaraag  (absolutely 
detached)!’  Then  the  two  will  become  separate.  One  just 
needs  to  become  vitaraag. 

The One who has bhed Gnan (Knowledge that separates 
the  Self  from  the  non-Self)  can  constantly  See,  ‘This  is 
pudgal  bhaav  and  this  is  the  bhaav  of  the  Self.’  Good  and 
bad thoughts are all pudgal bhaav. The Self has nothing to 
do with that. The thoughts are gneya (objects to be Known) 
and  the  Self  is  the  Knower  (Gnata).

The jada bhaav (the intents of the non-Self; the intents 
that  are  lifeless),  the  prakruti  bhaav  (the  belief  that  ‘I  am 
the  prakruti’)  jump  around  within.  ‘You’  should  not  listen 
103

to them. The lepayamaan bhaav (worldly desires and intents 
that tend to anoint) are jada bhaav, amidst them, ‘I’ [the Self] 
remain  totally  unanointed  (nirlep).  The  lepayamaan  bhaav 
are not My Real form, they are of jada (inanimate matter).

The entire world is confused by jada bhaav. The jada 
bhaav jump about in the Gnani as well. But the Gnani has 
gotten  to  Know  them,  so  He  does  not  listen  to  them. 

If  you  have  witnessed  the  scene  of  an  earthquake,  if 
you  have  experienced  that,  then  that  image  will  not  leave 
for months or years. Those are lepayamaan bhaav. The One 
who  has  Gnan  can  keep  them  separate,  there  is  no  need  to 
be  afraid. 

Dadashri says, “If someone is causing a disruption to 
everyone in satsang, then the feeling would arise within that, 
‘He is worthless, he is bad.’ Such a commotion would arise 
within, but then ‘we’ would say, ‘He is actually a benefactor.’ 
Then everything will become silent within. The moment you 
call him worthless, the moment you say something negative 
about him, the ‘dogs’ [jada bhaav] within will immediately 
start  ‘barking’.”

When  you  say  the  other  person  is  at  fault,  when  it 
is  your  desire  to  see  him  as  being  at  fault,  at  that  very 
moment,  all  the  lepayamaan  bhaav  will  engulf  you.  And 
upon saying, ‘No, he is a very good man, he is a benefactor,’ 
it  will  all  stop.  For  the  One  who  succeeds  in  this  spiritual 
Science, even prarabdha (destiny; the eﬀ ect of past karma) 
will thereafter continue to help Him. It may only sometimes 
not  go  as  thought,  for  a  short  while.  As  long  as  One  has 
not  perfected  the  experience  of  the  established  principle 
(siddhant)  in  its  entirety,  Swapurusharth  (the  Real  eﬀ ort  to 
progress towards the absolute Self after Self-realization) and 
Swaparakram  (extraordinary  eﬀ ort  as  the  Self  after  Self-
Realization  to  break  certain  entrenched  habits  of  the  self) 
are  needed.  When  something  spoils  within,  when  you  start 
104

seeing  the  faults  of  others,  then  understand  that  it  is  those 
jada  bhaav  that  are  bothering  you.

There  are  two  bhaav,  one  is  jada  bhaav  and  the 
other is chetan bhaav (the bhaav of the worldly-interacting 
self).  If  you  end  up  ‘signing’  due  to  the  jada  bhaav,  then 
a  fault  will  be  bound,  otherwise  not.  In  other  words,  if  the 
chetan bhaav mixes [with the jada bhaav], then a fault will 
be  bound.  The  One  who  understands  just  this  much,  His 
[spiritual]  work  is  done.

Chetan  (the  Self)  has  the  bhaav  of  Knower  and  Seer 
and  many  other  bhaav,  which  are  such  that  they  never 
increase  or  decrease  (aguru-laghu).  Whereas  the  inherent 
nature  to  increase  and  decrease  (guru-laghu)  is  a  property 
(guna)  of  the  vibhaavik  pudgal. 

‘I  did  it’  is  a  jada  bhaav.  ‘I  did  samayik,  I  did 

pratikraman,  I  did  penance,’  all  those  are  jada  bhaav.

When  the  demarcating  belief  sets  in  that,  ‘These  are 
jada bhaav and these are Chetan bhaav,’ when a single ray 
of  light  like  that  emerges,  and  is  ‘digested’,  that  is  called 
samyaktva  (the  right  belief  that  ‘I  am  pure  Soul’).

[12]  The  Pudgal  and  the  Self

Does  the  Self  have  weight?

The  original  Self  does  not  have  weight,  but  the 
vyavahaar atma (worldly-interacting self) can have weight. 
Along  with  the  original  Self,  there  are  other  [charged] 
parmanu.  The  weight  of  those  parmanu  is  believed  to  be 
the  weight  of  the  vyavahaar  atma.

Anything  that  is  done  without  a  change  in  the 

fundamental  belief  leads  to  bondage.

The  Parmanu  and  the  Self  are  independent  of  each 
other. One does not have inﬂ uence over the other. God [the 
Self]  has  become  bound  by  the  parmanu.

105

In Dada’s words, the pudgal has latched onto the Self, 
not  the  other  way  round. The  pudgal  that  has  arisen  out  of 
the six eternal elements has itself become a jail for the Self.

Dadashri  says  all  this  after  Seeing  it  in  Keval  Gnan 

(absolute  Knowledge).

Who  is  the  doer  of  the  bhakti  (devotional  worship)? 
The pudgal. The very inherent nature of the pudgal is such 
that it dances in tune with the Self. Through bhakti, the veils 
of ignorance over the Self (avaran) break and You can See. 

When can the pudgal have bhakti for Chetan (the Self)? 
Only after the Self has been attained. By having bhakti for 
the One who has attained the Self, the Self can be attained.

The pure Self is ‘uneﬀ ective’ [not causing any eﬀ ect to 
arise] whereas it is the pudgal alone that is always eﬀ ective. 
But  due  to  the  false  attribution  of  ‘I-ness’  in  this  eﬀ ect  of 
the  pudgal,  causes  are  created,  which  in  turn  give  rise  to 
corresponding  eﬀ ects.

If  your  hair  blows  while  you  are  walking,  does  it 
bother  you?  In  the  same  way,  the  pudgals  of  worldly  life 
(sansaar)  cannot  bother You  [the  Self].

You  have  become  the  owner  of  that  which  is  not 
yours,  that  is  why  there  is  no  limit  to  the  misery. The  One 
who  becomes  the  owner  of  what  is  His  own,  will  become 
the  owner  of  the  entire  universe.

When One eats with pure applied awareness as the Self 
(shuddha upayog), then both, the food and ‘I’, are separate. 
But  the  moment  he  says,  “I  ate,”  poison  is  added.

After ‘tasting’ [experiencing] the bliss of the pure Soul, 
all the pleasures of the pudgal should seem bitter like neem, 
bitter like poison. As long as the feeling of sweetness does 
not  leave,  one  cannot  become  free.

How many things are there to renounce? Inﬁ nite things. 

106

The  [belief  of]  ‘I  am  Chandubhai’  [the  pudgal]  was  to  be 
relinquished, but instead of that you relinquished the entire 
Self!  Imagine  the  state  you  would  be  in  now?

The pudgal is chanchal (active; restless) by its inherent 

nature,  whereas  the  Self  is  achal  (steady).

By  however  much  the  restlessness  increases,  by  that 
much one goes towards the pudgal and away from the Self. 
All the ﬁ ve sense organs and the mind are made of pudgal. 
They cannot be conquered. When they become the objects to 
be  Known  (gneya)  and  One  becomes  the  Knower  (Gnata), 
that is when One becomes jitendriya jina (the One who has 
the Knowledge of the Self, hence He is no longer the owner 
of  the  ﬁ ve  sense  organs  or  the  pleasures  derived  through 
them).  When  the  one  [the  discharging  relative  self]  who 
had  previously  believed  itself  to  be  the  Knower  becomes 
the gneya, and fundamentally, when the pure Soul becomes 
the Knower, that is when the [spiritual] work will be done. 

The  One  who  Knows  and  understands  the  pudgal 

alone,  is  known  as  the  Gnata. 

The  One  who  Knows  the  Self,  Knows  the  pudgal. 
If  either  one  is  Known,  the  other  is  automatically  Known. 
When One comes to Know ‘Who am I?’, the entire pudgal 
that  remains  also  becomes  Known.  On  the  Kramik  path,  it 
is  very  diﬃ  cult  to  Know  the  Self.  The  Self  is  Known  in 
entirety  in  the  ﬁ nal  life  [before  liberation].  On  the  Akram 
path, One gets to Know the Self in just two hours. Thereafter, 
whatever  remains  is  to  be  cleared. 

The  speech  of  the  Gnani  is  dependent  upon  the 
active  evidence  (nimit).  Each  person  needs  to  be  explained 
diﬀ erently,  based  on  their  understanding  power.

It  is  due  to  the  pudgal  that  ignorance  of  the  Self  has 
occurred, moreover, it is through the pudgal that one attains 
Gnan  too.  The  support  is  indeed  of  the  pudgal.

107

The  Self  is  constantly  steady  indeed. After Gnan,  the 
pudgal  can  become  so  steady  that  one  has  to  call  it  God. 
It  doesn’t  become  unsteady  in  any  circumstance.

Ultimately, the pudgal has to become nishkriya (without 
activity; not active), just like the Self. After One attains the 
experience  of  the  Self,  the  pudgal  becomes  nishkriya.

When  other  people  deem  you  [your  external  being] 
to  appear  like  a  Kevali  (the  absolutely  enlightened  One), 
Know  that  you  have  become  a  Kevali.  Meaning  that  it  is 
only when the pudgal becomes Kevali, that moksha can be 
attained. The [original] Self is certainly Kevali, but ‘I am a 
Kevali’ has to come into the developing ‘I’s understanding.

The  Lord  who  has  become  Kevali  does  not  have 
any  sense  of  doership  at  all.  ‘He’  does  not  have  anything 
whatsoever to do with the mind, speech and body. ‘He’ stays 
completely  separate  from  that. 

The Gnani is the protector of only the Self, of only the 
inherent  nature  as  the  Self  (Swabhaav),  not  of  the  pudgal.

- Dr.  Niruben Amin

108

Table of Contents

Section 1: The Six Eternal Elements

[1] The Universe Has Come Into Existence Through the Six 
Eternal Elements

Page

The Genesis Happened Through Science 
The Intellect Does Not Reach There! 
The Real and the Relative 
In Reality, the Permanence Can Be Seen 
No One Is Their Controller 
Each Eternal Element Is Completely Independent 
Dada Is the World’s Observatory! 
Worldly Life Arose Through the Mixing of the Six 
The Self Is Constantly Undergoing Change On Account of the... 
The Difference Between Temporary and Constantly Undergoing... 
The Revolving of the Six Eternal Elements 
These Are the Six Eternal Elements of the Universe 
What Is Considered an Eternal Element? 
In the Real, They Have Nothing to Do With Each Other! 
What Is the Self Entrapped In? 
The Six Have Been Together Since Time Immemorial 
The Vikalp Are Limited, the Properties of the Self Are Unlimited 
Only the One Who Is Free, Can Free Others! 
Where There Is Absence of the Intellect, the Knowledge of the... 

[2] The Self, an Indestructible Eternal Element

1
4
7
8
8
10
11
12
15
17
22
23
25
26
28
29
30
33
34

35
The Real Form of the Self 
The Difference Between the Eternal Elements of the Self and That... 36
39
The Embodied Soul and the Self 
40
Of the Six, the Self Is Unique 
44
Who Is Pure and Who Is Impure? 
44
The Insights on the Gita, Through the Perspective of the Gnani 

[3] The Eternal Element That Supports Motion – The 
Eternal Element That Supports Inertia

Motion Happens Because of the Eternal Element That Supports... 
The Intent to Move Arises Due to Vibhaav 
There Is Freedom in Knowing Superficially 

49
50
53

109

The Eternal Element That Supports Inertia Makes It Still 
Who Makes the Intent to Move? 
Why Does a Dismembered Tail Move? 
That Is the Eternal Element That Supports Motion 
Those Are Not Parmanu 
The Proportion Is Different in Everyone 
That Eternal Element Is Permanent, Real 
The Eternal Element That Supports Motion Even Takes One to... 
In Going to Moksha, the Self Is a Non-Doer Right Until the End 
The Self Has No Difficulties in the Course of Worldly Life 

[4] The Eternal Element of Time

The Eternal Element of Time Makes the New, Old 
Externally Induced Problems Arise for the One Seeing the... 
That Is the Inherent Nature of Time 
Time Also Causes the Extinction of the Lineage of the Gnanis 
Time From the Perspective of Scientists 
The Knowledge of the Eternal Elements Is the Subtlest of All 
Time Flows in the Form of Atoms of Time 
The Atoms of Time Are Only to the Extent of One Kalp... 
Time in the Real and the Relative Sense… 
Time Applies to the Object to Be Seen, Not the Seer 
Time Is Not an Illusion! 
A Circumstance Always Exists With Its Time 
All Circumstances Are Prone to Dissipation by Their Inherent... 
The Developing I Is Indeed the King of Intents! 
The Five Agnas Make One Beyond Time 
The Gnani Is Beyond Time 
Where There Are Adjectives, There Is a Time Limit 
It Is Not Predetermined; It Is Vyavasthit 
The Line of Demarcation Between Time and Purusharth 
Why Are There Sixty-Three Shalaka Purush? 
Gnani Purush, the Bestower of Liberation 

[5] The Eternal Element of Space

[5.1] Space Is an Indestructible Eternal Element

54
54
58
61
64
65
67
68
69
73

74
76
78
79
79
80
81
82
84
88
89
89
90
92
93
95
96
97
101
102
106

The Self Is Distinct From All the Other Eternal Elements 

108

110

111
The Eternal Element of Space Provides Space 
That Which Is Visible to the Eye Is Not the Eternal Element of...  112
114
The Color of the Sky 
115
The Self Does Not Occupy Space 
118
The Realm of the Self? 

[5.2] The Unique Effects of Space!

Everything Changes as the Kshetra Changes 
Even the Antahkaran Occupies Space! 
One Moves Forward Based on Space 
All of This Is Based on Evidences 
Karma and Gnan, in the Very Same Space! 
The Effect of a Place on Thoughts... 
The Karmic Accounts of Connection With Location 
The Aura and Influence of Even the Location! 
From Within the Boundary Towards Becoming Boundaryless... 

[5.3] The Mystery Behind Different Faces

Who Molded Everyone? 
Each and Every Grain Is Different… 
The Face Is Based on Space 
Even Two Leaves of a Tamarind Tree Are Different! 
Examine It Very Minutely 
The Same Speech, the Same Time, a Different Space! 
Where Does Niyati Come Into Play In This? 
The Rule of Binding the Realm of Existence for the Next Life... 
Why Isn’t There Just One Religion? 
Nature Controls Even Karma! 
Knowledge and Space Are the Basis of Illusory Effort 
The Antahkaran Is Also Based on Space 
Space Changes By Changing the Bhaav 
Only a Jeweler Can Recognize a Diamond! 

122
122
124
126
131
132
134
137
139

140
142
143
146
147
149
150
153
153
155
156
159
160
161

[6] Worldly Life Means a Business Partnership of the Six 
Eternal Elements

The Six Partners 
Space Gave Them a Place 
The Goods Belong to Inanimate Matter 
The Eternal Element That Supports Motion Does the Carting 

165
165
166
166

111

The Eternal Element That Supports Inertia Does the Storing 
The Management Is Done by the Eternal Element of Time 
The Supervisor of All, the Eternal Element of the Self! 
This Is How the Business Functions With the Six Partners 
The Self Has Taken on the Ownership 
Worldly Life Arose Through Visheshbhaav 
God Is a One-Sixth Partner in This 
The Internal Quarrels! 
The Six Became Twelve and... 
The Self Simply Has to Remain as the Knower-Seer... 
Devoutly Practise Only the Agnas! 

167
167
168
169
170
170
173
174
177
178
179

Section 2: Parmanu, an Indestructible Eternal Element
[1] The Real Form of Parmanu

Its Real Form Is Roopi 
Parmanu, One or Countless? 
The True Understanding of Skandha… 
There Is No Word for It in English… 
Even Scientists Have Limits! 
The Difference Between Pudgal and Parmanu… 
The Independent Energy of the Pudgal 
The Energy Gets Released When the Atom Is Split 
Does Energy Arise by Coming Together? 

181
182
184
186
187
189
192
194
197

[2] The Properties of Pudgal Parmanu

200
Everything That Has Form Is Pudgal Indeed! 
203
The Beauty Always Wears Away! 
206
Who Is Beautiful, the ‘I’ or the Parmanu? 
210
Inanimate Matter Has Form, the Self Is Formless 
211
Even the Six Types of Taste Are Pudgal! 
212
Tactility, a Property of the Pudgal 
The Law Pertaining to the Tactility of the Pudgal… 
213
Smell Is a Property; a Pleasant or an Unpleasant Odor Is a Phase  215
217
Words Are a Phase of the Pudgal 
The World Means the Changing States of the Pudgal... 
218
The Difference Between the Effects of the Pudgal and the Effects... 220
221
The Attributes of the Prakruti, the Inherent Nature of the... 

112

A Phase Is an Effect of the Inherent Nature 
The Hand Belongs Entirely to the Pudgal! 

[3] Kriyavati Shakti

Kriyavati Shakti; Is It of the Self or of Inanimate Matter? 
The Difference Between Parmanu and Pudgal… 
The Arising, the Steady State, the Dissolution of the Pudgal... 
Observe the Craftsmanship of the Pudgal Through the Divine... 
Unaffected Despite Being Present! 
Of the Two, Only the Pudgal Catches a Hold of the Effects! 
After Vibhaav, the Vikrut Pudgal Arises 
It Becomes as per the Envisioning 
The Energy of the Pudgal Is Also Magnificent! 
Only the Gnani Has Seen the Craftsmanship of the Pudgal! 
The Doer, the Meditator; Both Are Pudgal 
The Self is Not the Doer in Any Way! 

[4] The Pudgal Is Prasavdharmi

Ekodaham, Bahusyam 
Confusion Due to Prasavdharma! 
One Image in the Ocean and Numerous in Water Pots! 
[5] Prayogsa - Mishrasa - Vishrasa

The Exclusive Discovery of the Tirthankar Lords! 
Prayogsa, Drawn in Through the Entire Body... 
That Which Gives Effect Is Mishrasa 
The Karma Are Bound Due to a Sense of Doership 
The Physical Body, the Subtle Body, the Causal Body… 
Sanchit Karma, Prarabdha Karma, Kriyaman Karma… 
The Plating Happens According to the Bhaav 
The Speech Gets ‘Colored’ by Kashay 
That Which Is Subject to Vyavasthit Is Mishrasa 
The Planning Manifests as an Effect... 
There Is No Prayogsa, After Self-Realization 
Mishrasa the Entire Life… 
Now, Karma Do Not Get Charged 
Now the Possessions Are Also Discharge 
Through the Agnas, They Become Pure 

113

225
232

234
239
241
242
244
245
248
249
256
260
262
266

273
274
276

280
281
285
288
289
292
293
295
296
298
300
300
302
306
307

Liberation Attained With an Absolutely Blemish-Free State 
…Not Through Pratikraman, Simply By ‘Prevailing in... 
Ultimate Closure Through Samayik-Pratikraman… 
When One Becomes Steady... 
The Science of the Vitaraag Lords Is From the Grossest to the... 

308
310
311
315
317

[6] The Link Between Bhaav and Parmanu

320
The Parmanu Get Arranged According to the Bhaav 
324
The Science of Parmanu Is Profound! 
The Profound Science Behind the Conversion of the Causal Body... 327
332
The Karmic Account of the New and the Old Kashay… 

[7] The Science of the Effects of Parmanu

The Coming Together of Parmanu 
The Proportion of Parmanu Is Different 
The Parmanu of Krodh… 
That Is the Internal Pull of the Positive With the Negative! 
Attachment and Abhorrence, the Root Cause of Worldly Life! 
Even Celestials Beings Have Attachment and Abhorrence... 
There Is No Attachment in the Self! 
The Principle of Attraction and Repulsion… 
That Is Magnetism! 
Even Renunciation Is Repulsion! 
Pratikraman Is Needed for Attachment and Abhorrence 
The Parmanu of the Self-Realized One and the Ignorant One… 
The Difference Between Nirvana and Death... 
Those With Matching Parmanu Are Indeed Attracted Here! 
The Parmanu of a Tirthankar! 

[8] The Effects of the Parmanu of Food

The Indent From Within Is Supplied From the Outside 
The Effects of Food... 
The Mystery Behind the Illness TB… 
One Has Always Eaten Ladoos Made From Crematorium Ashes! 
[9] The Pudgal Constantly Undergoes Puran-Galan

Puran - First Galan - Second Galan… 
Pur + Gal = Pudgal 
The Pure Soul and Puran-Galan… 

114

336
339
341
344
348
349
350
351
355
356
357
360
362
365
370

375
380
381
384

387
388
389

In the State of Ignorance of the Self, Puran Doesn’t Stop, but It...  392
394
Mahatma’s Karma Are Galan Alone 
397
Everything Is an Illusion of the Pudgal! 
399
At the End, There Is Akram Even on the Kramik Path! 

[10] The Terminology Related to Pudgal

401
The Tattva Are Eternal 
The Vibhaavik and Swabhaavik Form of the Pudgal 
402
During Puran, Skandha Form and During Galan, They Revert to...  406
407
Even Electricity Is Considered Pudgal! 
408
The Difference Between Doing and Being Active… 
411
Kashay Is Pudgal… 
412
Attachment and Abhorrence Is Bondage 
414
The Weight of the Pudgal Is the Basis for the Next Life Form 
418
What Is the Pudgal Dependent On? 
419
That Is the Right Conduct as the Self… 
420
Engrossed in the Non-Self or Dwelling as the Self? 
424
No One Dies or Lives! 
428
The Arithmetic of the Body… 
432
The Pudgal Eats Pudgal… 
437
Even a Religious Pudgal Can Become a Spiritual Roadblock! 
444
The ‘Play’ Is of the Pudgal! 
447
Except for the Self, Everything is Subject to the Pudgal! 
448
One Believed the Pudgal to Be the Self! 
450
The Body Is Like a Shadow 
452
Who Is the Afflicted? Who Is the Knower? 
453
Lord Mahavir Saw One Pudgal… 
455
Everything Besides the Pure Soul Is Pudgal! 
458
In Kaliyug, These Are Useful Scriptures… 
459
Priority Only of the Self! 

[11] Pudgal Bhaav

Bhaav Is a Desire-Based Tendency 
‘We’ Go to ‘Our’ Home... 
They Are All Pudgal Bhaav 
Know Them, But Do Not Listen To Them! 
Chetan’s Bhaav Is Only as the Knower-Seer! 
There, All the Gnanis Are One! 

115

461
464
466
468
475
477

[12] The Pudgal and the Self

How Much Does the Self Weigh? 
Nothing Besides the Pudgal Has Latched Onto the Self! 
The Pudgal Dances in Tune With the Self… 
Who Hits? Who Gets hurt? 
The Self Is ‘Uneffective’! 
The Moment You Become the Eater, It Becomes Poison! 
Relinquished the Entire Self! 
The One Who Knows the Pudgal Is the Knower! 
Whose Name? Whose Gnan? 
The Self by Nature Is Steady, Similarly the Pudgal Is Restless 
Moksha Is Attained When the Pudgal Becomes a Kevali 
The Protector of the Self Is the Gnani! 

481
482
484
485
486
487
488
489
491
493
493
494



116

Aptavani 14 Part-2
Section 1: The Six Eternal Elements

[1]
The Universe Has Come Into Existence 
Through the Six Eternal Elements

The Genesis Happened Through Science

Questioner:  In  Tattvadarshan  [a  section  in  a  Jain 
scripture],  after  describing  the  six  eternal  elements  such 
as  jeevatmak  and  Pudgal  Parmanu,  and  so  on,  it  expounds 
that  the  saiyog  (coming  together)  as  well  as  the  vibhaag 
(division; separation) [of these eternal elements] establishes 
an  endless  natural  occurrence  (srushti)  which  is  without  a 
beginning  or  an  end  (anaadi  anant).  So  please  explain  the 
point about saiyog and vibhaag.

Dadashri: So what is described in Tattvadarshan is that 
these six eternal elements are constantly undergoing change 
(parivartansheel). Hence, this entire universe has come into 
existence  on  account  of  the  coming  together  (saiyog)  and 
the  dissipation  (viyog)  [of  the  eternal  elements]. Therefore, 
this endless natural occurrence should not have anyone who 
is its creator.

Questioner:  The  word  ‘saiyog’  is  used  whereas  the 
word  ‘viyog’  is  not  used,  ‘vibhaag’  is  used.  Please  explain 
the  word  ‘vibhaag’  a  little.  ‘You’  referred  to  saiyog  as 
scientific circumstantial evidence, but what about vibhaag?

2

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri: The discharging of karma (nirjara), that is 
all  vibhaag. Anything  that  is  divisible  is  an  endless  natural 
occurrence, meaning that it is meant to be divided, moreover, 
there  is  no  need  for  anyone  in  that.  There  is  no  need  for 
anyone  to  bring  them  together  (saiyog),  it  certainly  keeps 
happening on its own. Hence, the ‘no beginning and no end’ 
is also proved.

Questioner: You say that the entire universe is based 

upon Science, then who is the creator of Science?

Dadashri: There is no creator of Science. By Science 
‘we’ mean to say that this world remains in existence on the 
basis of these six eternal elements.

Questioner:  Within  all  of  creation,  each  and  every 
atom  contains  scientific  properties  that  have  a  specific 
function;  so  who  placed  these  properties  within  each  atom 
with exact calculations?

Dadashri: There  is  no  one  to  place  them;  it  happens 
naturally. If there were to be someone to place them, then it 
would mean that there is some fool who will not let all of us 
go to moksha (the state of ultimate liberation) at all.

Hence, no one has created this at all. This certainly is, 
this certainly was, and this certainly always will be. This is 
without  a  beginning  (anaadi)  and  this  has  no  end  (anant). 
Hence, this most certainly is. If we say, “It had happened,” 
for  that  which  is  eternal  (sanatan),  then  it  is  our  mistake. 
For something that is temporary (vinashi), we can say, “This 
had happened.”

There  are  six  permanent  [elements];  for 
these 
permanent [elements,] there is no such thing as ‘it is going 
to  happen’  or  ‘it  is  not  going  to  happen’. Whose  discovery 
is  it  of  whether  it  is  going  to  happen  or  it  is  not  going  to 
happen?  The  one  who  believes  himself  to  be  temporary,  is 

[1] The Universe Has Come Into Existence...

3

the one who keeps seeing the temporary elements. The One 
who  is  permanent  (avinashi)  keeps  Seeing  the  permanent. 
Hence, there are both kinds of perspectives.

Questioner:  I  didn’t  quite  understand  one  thing. You 
said that the world is eternal with reference to time, but there 
must  be  some  fundamental  cause  of  its  genesis  (utpatti), 
mustn’t there?

Dadashri: This has all arisen scientifically. One should 
know how things actually are in this world. In reality, there 
are  six  eternal  elements  in  this  world,  they  are  permanent 
elements, and all that which is visible to the eyes, all of those 
are the temporary states (avastha) [of the eternal elements] 
that  are  visible.  Eternal  elements  are  permanent,  and  the 
states of the eternal elements are nothing but temporary. As 
all of this is not easily understood, so then people fabricated 
that God is the creator of this. The concept of a creator is for 
small children, not for people with understanding. In reality, 
there is no creator.

Questioner: So has nature created the creation, is that 

how it is?

Dadashri: Nature has not created it; it has come about 
naturally.  ‘We’  can  See  in  ‘our’  Gnan  (Knowledge),  how 
this world has come into existence.

Hence,  God  has  not  created  this  world.  If  God  had 
created  this  world,  then  what  would  His  occupation  be? 
What  would  He  do  after  creating  it?  Would  He  sit  around 
idly?

Questioner: God has not created it, and it is also not 

possible for it to come into existence without God.

Dadashri: It is actually something that happens through 
many evidences (naimittik). It has not happened through God’s 
independent  will.  God  is  the  doer  (karta)  of  all  this  in  the 

4

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

sense of being an evidentiary doer. No one is the doer in the 
sense  of  being  an  independent  doer.  No  [individual]  person 
has created this world, and it has not formed without it being 
created. What this means is that it has come into existence as 
a result of many evidences. And as a [single] evidence (nimit) 
cannot be the doer, there is no [specific] creator of this.

Questioner: One is neither the doer nor the non-doer, 

and one is also both?

Dadashri:  Yes,  it  is  with  reference  to  context.  In 
a  certain  context,  with  reference  to  ignorance  of  the  Self 
(agnan),  one  is  actually  a  doer,  however  with  reference  to 
Knowledge of the Self (Gnan), One is not the doer.

This  world  has  arisen  from  the  six  eternal  elements. 
And in reality, it has not arisen, it certainly has been around 
forever,  it  certainly  exists  without  a  beginning  or  an  end. 
There  is  no  seventh  eternal  element  in  the  world.  The 
collective form arising from these six eternal elements is in 
every living being. In as many living beings as there are, the 
six eternal elements are bound to be present.

The six eternal elements that are there in this world, they 
exist  in  the  elemental  form.  They  prevail  completely  within 
the  inherent  nature  of  their  own  vastutva  (what  an  eternal 
element  is  and  what  it  comprises  of).  The  entire  world  has 
arisen from the coming together of these six eternal elements. 
How can the one with intellect understand this world?

The Intellect Does Not Reach There!

The eternal elements cannot be understood through the 
five senses (indriyagamya), the eternal elements are such that 
they  can  be  understood  through  Knowledge  (Gnangamya). 
So  all  of  these  other  avastha  (temporary  states)  that  are 
visible, those avastha are temporary. Hence, we have come 
this  far  having  seen  only  that  which  is  temporary,  and  we 

[1] The Universe Has Come Into Existence...

5

have  only  brought  forth  the  experience  of  that  which  is 
temporary. Thus, all of this certainly feels temporary to us.

Questioner:  Some  understanding  should  be  gained 
regarding  this,  as  to  how  did  this  come  about?  What  does 
shaashwat mean?

Dadashri: [It means] Eternal (sanatan).

Questioner:  Dada,  you  had  given  the  example  that, 
‘Where  is  the  beginning  and  where  is  the  end  of  a  circle?’ 
This analogy that you gave does not resolve the question.

Dadashri:  It  would  not,  that  is  true.  But  the  fact  is 
that this world is persisting because of the eternal elements. 
Human beings are only able to see the temporary states; they 
cannot see the eternal elements. Therefore, they are discussing 
the  eternal  elements  while  dwelling  within  the  temporary 
states;  so  the  concept  cannot  be  grasped.  It  is  only  upon 
dwelling as the eternal element, and thereafter discussing the 
eternal  elements,  that  the  concept  can  be  grasped.  Meaning 
that, it is only after One becomes eternal and then discusses 
the eternal, that the concept can be grasped.

Questioner: You have not yet mentioned what the six 

eternal elements are.

Dadashri:  Yes,  I  will  tell  you.  The  eternal  elements 
of Chetan (the Self), jada (inanimate matter; in the form of 
Pudgal Parmanu), gatisahayak (that which supports motion), 
sthitisahayak (that which supports inertia), kaal (Time), and 
aakash (Space). That’s it; these six permanent elements exist 
in this world. It is only after scientists go beyond the theory 
of  relativity  that  this  concept  will  be  understood.  It  is  after 
going  beyond  the  theory  of  relativity  that  the  beginning  of 
the [theory of] Reality happens.

Questioner: What is the theory of Reality?

Dadashri: There are only three theories to be Known. 

6

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

But as we progress towards that [the theory of Reality], there 
are no words for that. I can definitely explain that to you, but 
you will only understand the fundamental concept once you 
Know It [the Self]. Meaning that, that [the theory of Reality] 
is where [the concept of] these six eternal elements is found. 
‘The six eternal elements, how this [world] is functioning in 
this  way,  and  what  God  is  doing,’ You  will  come  to  Know 
all of this at that time.

The moment the theory of relativity has been crossed 
over, the relative is crossed [comes to an end] and the Real 
begins. As it is, one is still wandering about in the theory of 
relativity  itself,  one  has  not  moved  beyond  that. Therefore, 
this much needs to be known, and if you want to unveil the 
Self (Atma), then come and understand this [from ‘us’] and 
then You too will be able to become That one day.

There  are  three  theories;  the  theory  of  relativity,  the 
theory  of  Reality,  and  the Absolutism  theory.  So  ‘we’  talk 
about this Reality while prevailing in the Absolute!

Questioner:  I  teach  my  students  whatever  I  myself 
have  studied  and  whatever  I  know.  But  in  order  for  my 
students  to  understand  what  I  know,  I  have  to  first  come 
down to their level and then gradually bring them up.

Dadashri: Yes, yes, right.

Questioner: So then they can reach my level or even 
go beyond the level I’m at. So can You not come down [to 
our level] in the same way and take us up?

Dadashri: There [in Absolutism,] no language exists. 
‘You’ can understand Reality through language, but it cannot 
show  You  the  Absolute.  Up  until  now,  ‘we’  have  spoken 
with You only after having come down [to Your level].

Questioner:  Please  say  something  about  Reality  that 

will generate some interest.

[1] The Universe Has Come Into Existence...

7

Dadashri:  Really  speaking,  there  are  six  eternal 
elements  in  this  world.  Relatively  speaking,  there  are  only 
phases, no eternal elements.

Questioner: Tell us again about the relative, what did 

you say is in the relative? Are there phases in the relative?

Dadashri: There are phases in the relative, and in the 
Real,  there  is  the  eternal.  There  are  six  eternal  elements. 
This  is  the  ‘originality’  [origin]  of  the  world.  What  is  the 
origin of the world? It is this, there is nothing beyond this.

The Real and the Relative

Only  that  which  is  eternal  (sanatan)  is  referred  to  as 
Real, and everything in the form of a mixture that arose from 
the coming together of these [eternal elements] is relative.

Questioner: What is Real and relative? What are these 
two  and  what  is  the  relationship  between  the  two? What  is 
the link?

Dadashri:  The  permanent  eternal  elements  are  the 
Real. Now of the six, pure Chetan (the eternal element with 
the function of Knowing and Seeing; the Self) is permanent, 
and  the  other  five  that  are  permanent,  they  do  not  have 
Chetan  bhaav  (the  function  to  Know  and  See).  They  have 
infinite other types of gunadharma (intrinsic properties that 
have a specific function). It is simply due to the gunadharma 
of  all  of  these  [eternal  elements]  that  this  relative  belief 
(bhaav)  has  arisen.  The  Self  actually  remains  as  the  Self 
constantly. Be It within a donkey, within a dog, within every 
individual,  the  Self  always  remains  as  Chetan  constantly. 
‘It’  has  not  changed  even  for  a  moment,  it  is  simply  the 
belief that becomes wrong.

Questioner:  Is  Reality  a  manifestation  (aavirbhaav) 

of the Real?

8

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri:  Yes,  it  is  indeed  a  manifestation.  It  is 

nothing else at all.

In Reality, the Permanence Can Be Seen

Questioner:  That  which  is  visible  in  Reality,  what 

exactly is Seen in that?

Dadashri:  Permanence.  In  this  world,  the  relative 

shows the temporariness.

Questioner: All this appears to be temporary.

Dadashri: At present, the permanent cannot be Seen. 
When the Gnani Purush (the One who has realized the Self 
and is able to do the same for others) gives Gnan, One can 
See  the  permanent,  all  the  eternal  elements  themselves, 
through One’s own perspective. Now, the permanent cannot 
be Seen all at once. However, as One has become permanent, 
it means that gradually and progressively, One will be able 
to  See  the  permanent  thereafter.  Ultimately,  how  much  is 
included  in  this  permanent?  Ultimately,  these  six  eternal 
elements  that  exist,  only  they  are  Seen.  For  You  [after 
attaining this Gnan], at present, only Chetan alone is Seen. 
When can Pudgal Parmanu (the smallest, most indivisible, 
indestructible particles of inanimate matter) be Seen? When 
absolute Knowledge (keval Gnan) is attained. However, this 
path is of Seeing the original eternal elements.

The  theory  of  Reality  has  to  do  with  the  eternal 
elements.  No  saint  or  holy  man  understands  what  God  is 
at the elemental level. They only understand [God] through 
their thoughts and imagination.

No One Is Their Controller

Questioner:  These  eternal  elements 
mentioned, is there anyone who has control over them?

that  You 

Dadashri:  No  one  has  a  control  over  this  world  at 

[1] The Universe Has Come Into Existence...

9

all; everyone is independent. The Self is completely separate 
from this.

Questioner: If all six of them are independent, distinct, 
separate,  different,  then  how  do  the  interactions  between 
them happen?

Dadashri: Yes, that is indeed what needs to be Seen.

There is no owner of this world, there is no one who 
runs it, yet there is niyati (the level of spiritual development 
of a soul as it progresses naturally on the track of evolution). 
The  manager  is  vyavasthit  shakti  (the  natural  energy  that 
brings together the scientific circumstantial evidences to give 
result), moreover, it is an inanimate energy (jada shakti).

Questioner:  ‘This  energy  is  inanimate  (jada)’;  who 

came to Know this?

Dadashri: It is He, the One who becomes the Self, the 
One  who  becomes  the  Knower-Seer.  The  Self  is  Itself  the 
Knower  of  everything.  There  is  endless  energy  within  the 
eternal element of inanimate matter (jada) too.

Questioner: Which came first, Chetan or jada?

Dadashri: There is no such thing as first or last. They 
all  come  together  and  become  the  collective  (samuchchay) 
[federal cause].

If  you  try  to  analyze  the  first  and  the  last,  then  you 
will  have  to  wander  for  infinite  lifetimes.  You  will  not  be 
able to go to moksha. Even a snake has to straighten out to 
enter its burrow.

There is no need at all to control these eternal elements. 
These  six  eternal  elements  are  themselves  moving  about 
on  their  own. Worldly  life  (sansaar)  means  samsaran  (that 
which  is  constantly  undergoing  change).  Samsaran  means 
that the eternal elements are constantly undergoing change. 

10

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

It is happening naturally, no one has to do anything. If there 
were someone running this, then he would tire us out! There 
is no one at all who is superior over this, there is no owner 
at all, there is no creator of this at all. This entire world has 
arisen through Science, and ‘we’ are saying this after having 
Seen  it  Ourself.  ‘We’  are  taking  personal  responsibility  for 
this, [in saying] there is no creator.

Each Eternal Element Is Completely Independent

Questioner:  Of  the  six  eternal  elements,  besides  the 
Self, do the other five eternal elements have an independent 
existence?

Dadashri: Yes, the other five eternal elements have an 
independent existence to the very same extent that the Self 
has. All the eternal elements are completely independent.

Questioner: Is that with respect to the Self, or are the 

other five eternal elements independent?

Dadashri:  They  are  all  independent,  completely 
independent. They have nothing to do with each other, and 
even now, they are independent, [the Self] has nothing to do 
with  them.  The  Self  is  not  under  anyone’s  control,  and  no 
one is under the control of the Self.

Questioner: But the Self is akriya (not connected with 

any activity), the Self does not do anything?

Dadashri: Yes, It is totally akriya.

Questioner: If It has not done anything, then how did 
It become associated with the pudgal (the non-Self complex 
that undergoes influx and outflux)?

Dadashri:  ‘It’  certainly  dwells  within  the  pudgal. 
All  of  these,  the  six  eternal  elements  are  indeed  together. 
However, not a single eternal element enters into any other 

[1] The Universe Has Come Into Existence...

11

eternal  element;  they  are  certainly  separate.  No  eternal 
element can affect another eternal element.

The  only  difference  between  them  is  that  there  is  no 
Chetan  bhaav  (the  function  to  Know  and  See)  within  any 
of  the  other  five  eternal  elements,  whereas  Chetan  bhaav 
exists  within  the  Self.  It  is  not  that  the  Self  alone  gets  the 
‘prize’. Each one has its own special intrinsic property that 
has a specific function (gunadharma) that does not exist in 
the  others.  There  is  this  special  gunadharma  of  Knowing 
and Seeing within the Self which is not present in the other 
eternal  elements.  Pudgal  Parmanu  has  a  different  special 
gunadharma  within  it.  The  Pudgal  Parmanu  has  this 
property  within  it  of  having  a  visible  form  (roopi),  which 
does not exist in the other five. So, ultimately, each one has 
a special property within it.

The  entire  world  is  filled  with  the  eternal  elements. 
The  Self  alone  is  the  eternal  element  that  Knows  and  Sees 
(Chetan  tattva);  It  Itself  is  the  absolute  Self  (Parmatma). 
And  the  other  eternal  elements  are  jada  (insentient),  they 
are not Chetan (with the property to Know and See). They 
are without Chetan bhaav, but they have many other kinds 
of gunadharma.

If  the  other  eternal  elements  did  not  exist  in  the 
world, then the Self would not exist either. All these eternal 
elements are interconnected (avinabhaavi) [in the sense that 
they cannot be or exist without the other].

Dada Is the World’s Observatory!

This  is  the  world’s  observatory.  This  Dada  is  the 
authority  over  the  four  Vedas  [the  oldest  scriptures  of 
Hinduism].  Therefore,  everything  should  become  clear  in 
your  mind,  only  then  will  you  understand,  and  only  then 
will  there  be  a  solution.  Otherwise,  even  if  you  had  been 
harping on about this falsehood for a thousand years; nothing 

12

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

is  going  to  be  achieved.  So  ask  until  you  understand.  It  is 
worth asking over here.

Do you like all of these discussions? This is actually a 
Science. Nowhere in the world has this Science come forth. 
This is the cash bank of divine solution! This is the very first 
time it is being disclosed publicly!

The  Knower  of  one  eternal  element  is  referred  to  as 
a Gnani. The One who Knows the Self alone is referred to 
as  a  Tattvagnani.  The  One  who  has  Known  all  the  eternal 
elements,  the  One  who  even  Knows  what  each  eternal 
element is doing, He is referred to as a Sarvagnya.

The  result  of  Knowing  the  Self  is  moksha.  There  is 
moksha  even  amidst  endless  suffering.  The  One  who  has 
Known  the  Self  becomes  the  Knower-Seer  of  all  of  the 
eternal elements.

Worldly Life Arose Through the Mixing of the Six

Questioner:  What  is  sthir  (still;  steady)  in  this 

universe?

Dadashri: There is nothing that is steady in anything 
that  can  be  perceived  through  the  five  sense  organs. 
Everything  that  is  relative  is  chanchal  (active;  unsteady; 
restless)  by  its  inherent  nature.  The  Self  is  steady.  All  the 
eternal elements are steady by their inherent nature, but it is 
when they become released from here [from worldly life and 
come into the Real] that is when they become steady. Until 
then, as a mixture form [in the relative,] they are all indeed 
active. Therefore, there is no thing that is steady at all. Truly 
speaking, the Self is steady, but It came into association with 
that  which  is  active,  and  so  it  also  has  to  wander  around 
in  an  active  state.  The  moment  It  becomes  free  from  here 
[the  worldly  life,  the  relative],  once  It  comes  to  Know  Its 
own  properties  and  inherent  nature,  and  the  Gnani  Purush 

[1] The Universe Has Come Into Existence...

13

separates  It,  thereafter  It  attains  mukti  (liberation  from  the 
cycle  of  birth  and  death).  There,  in  that  final  liberation,  It 
remains  steady  forever,  because  there  are  no  other  eternal 
elements  there.  If  there  were  other  eternal  elements  there, 
then they would harass It, they would drag It into the ‘flow’ 
[of worldly life] once again.

Questioner:  The  Self  is  permanent,  but  then  why 
did the mixing with this pudgal (the non-Self complex that 
undergoes  influx  and  outflux)  happen?  What  is  the  reason 
for that?

Dadashri: There  is  no  reason  for  them  to  mix. These 
six  eternal  elements  indeed  exist  together,  that  is  what  is 
referred to as lok (region of space in the universe where there 
is worldly existence). But what is lok? The answer is, sansaar 
(worldly  life).  So  then,  what  is  sansaar?  Samsaran.  What 
is  samsaran?  Constantly  undergoing  change.  So  these  six 
eternal  elements  come  together  mutually  [as  a  mixture]  and 
keep revolving around each other. They never come together 
[in  the  form  of  a  compound].  There  is  nothing  to  separate 
because they keep revolving around each other [in the form 
of a mixture]. Even now, they are separate. They are separate 
even in the human body. However, all this has actually arisen 
scientifically, so people have become perplexed.

Vastu  (an  eternal  element)  means  [it  is]  avinashi 
(permanent). When these six eternal elements (dravya) come 
together, temporary states (avastha) arise.

Questioner: Do these six eternal elements ever merge 

into each other?

Dadashri:  They  do  merge.  All  this  has  indeed 
happened because the six eternal elements have merged with 
each other [in the form of a mixture].

Questioner:  Do  they  actually  merge  into  each  other 

completely?

14

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri:  What  I  mean  to  say  is  that  they  undergo 
change;  all  of  them,  the  six  eternal  elements  are  such  that 
they  bring  about  a  change.  The  eternal  element  of  Space 
(aakash) is a location (kshetra) and within it, the Parmanu 
(the  smallest,  most  indivisible,  and  indestructible  particle 
of  inanimate  matter)  move  about  like  this.  The  Self  and 
the  Parmanu,  they  all  come  together  and  give  rise  to  this 
mixture.  That  which  has  genesis  (utpatti),  has  dissolution. 
Hence, that [the coming together of the two eternal elements] 
gives rise to a temporary state (avastha). So, it will undergo 
dissolution.  However,  the  Self  is  not  something  that  has 
arisen and It is not going to undergo dissolution. This world 
has arisen simply on the basis of these six eternal elements.

Questioner:  All  this  has  happened  because  of  the 
interaction between the six eternal elements. So is that still 
happening, or has it happened once and then stopped?

Dadashri: No, it is constantly happening and continues 

functioning. It keeps happening and continues functioning.

Questioner: Do they also become free from it and do 

new ones enter into it too?

Dadashri: They  [the  phases]  arise,  they  remain  for  a 
while,  and  then  they  get  destroyed.  This  keeps  happening 
constantly.

Questioner: So when they get destroyed, does moksha 

happen?

Dadashri:  No.  Just  as  a  person  is  born,  lives  for  a 
while, and then dies; that is how this entire world functions.

Questioner: Now dravya and vastu...

Dadashri:  That  from  which  properties  (guna)  and 

phases (paryay) arise is the dravya (eternal element).

Questioner: And vastu?

[1] The Universe Has Come Into Existence...

15

Dadashri: Dravya is itself the vastu.

Questioner:  In  the  discussion  we’re  having,  the 
eternal elements (tattva) that we talk about, and the eternal 
elements that the Jains [a person whose religion is Jainism] 
talk about, what is the difference between the two?

Dadashri:  They  are  the  same;  there  is  no  difference 

at all.

Questioner:  How  does  the  Self  keep  changing?  ‘It’ 

keeps undergoing change?

Dadashri: Of everything that is visible, if it all appears 
to be of the same kind, then that is not considered as changing. 
Everything is indeed Seen one after another. The Self (pote; 
the developing ‘I’) Knows and Sees everything. And all the 
eternal  elements  indeed  keep  revolving  around  each  other 
naturally.  In  doing  so,  each  eternal  element  comes  closer 
to  the  other. Amongst  them,  when  the  Self  and  the  Pudgal 
[Parmanu]  come  close  to  each  other,  an  adjustment  takes 
place  within  the  two,  in  which  new  properties  arise,  which 
are  not  inherent  to  either  of  them.  Completely  new  effects 
(vishesh parinaam) arise. Neither wishes for this to happen, 
but  this  is  what  ends  up  happening  naturally.  The  inherent 
nature of all the eternal elements [the properties and phases, 
but not the elemental matter] indeed is to constantly change 
(parivartansheel).

The Self Is Constantly Undergoing Change On 
Account of the Object to Be Known

Questioner:  ‘You’  mentioned  that  everything  in 
the  world  is  such  that  it  is  constantly  undergoing  change 
(parivartansheel),  the  Self  is  also  such  that  It  is  constantly 
undergoing change. How can Chaitanya (the Self; that which 
Knows  and  Sees)  be  such  that  It  is  constantly  undergoing 
change? Please explain that a little.

16

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri:  Chaitanya  has  Its  own  intrinsic  properties 
that have a specific function (gunadharma). ‘It’ has properties 
(guna),  which  also  have  specific  functions  (dharma).  The 
properties  are  permanent,  whereas  their  functions  are 
constantly changing. However many things there are in this 
world  that  are  permanent,  sanatan,  eternal,  they  all  have 
both, properties along with their functions. So what are the 
properties  of  the  Self? They  are  infinite  Knowledge  (anant 
Gnan),  infinite  Vision  (anant  Darshan),  infinite  energy 
(anant shakti), the abode of infinite bliss (anant sukhdham); 
there  are  many  other  properties. All  of  these  properties  of 
the  Self,  they  are  Its  permanent  ones.  Now  what  are  their 
functions?  The  permanent  properties  that  exist  within, 
such  as  infinite  Knowledge;  Knowledge  (Gnan)  means 
illumination  (prakash)  of  a  kind.  The  temporary  state  of 
that  illumination  which  arises  on  the  outside  [of  the  Self], 
that  is  constantly  changing,  meaning  that  the  Knowledge 
keeps  changing  based  on  the  object  to  be  Known  (gneya). 
The  object  to  be  Known  is  constantly  changing,  so  the 
Knowledge  also  becomes  such  that  It  changes  constantly. 
[It’s the same for] Vision (Darshan); the objects to be Seen 
(drashya)  are  constantly  changing,  so  the  Seer  (Drashta) 
also  becomes  such  that  It  [It’s  Vision]  changes  constantly. 
Based  on  those  [the  objects  to  be  Known  and  Seen],  the 
Self (pote) has Its own temporary states [of Knowledge and 
Vision], those temporary states are constantly changing.

Questioner: The original Self is considered unchanging 

(aparivartansheel), isn’t it?

Dadashri: The  fact  is,  if  these  [objects  to  be  Known 
and  Seen]  are  constantly  changing,  then  only  that  which  is 
constantly changing can See them. That which is unchanging 
would  not  be  able  to  See  them.  This  is  because  if  It  Itself 
is unchanging, then what would It See? If the Seer remains 
the  same  and  the  objects  to  be  Seen  keep  changing,  then 

[1] The Universe Has Come Into Existence...

17

that would not do, would it? When the object to be Seen is 
gone, the Seer goes away along with it. When the object to 
be Seen is gone once again, the Seer goes away along with 
it.  This  is  because  the  phases  of  the  eternal  elements  are 
temporary  and  constantly  changing.  The  properties  of  the 
eternal  elements  are  permanent  and  constantly  changing*1 
whereas the elemental matter (dravya) of the eternal elements 
is permanent and unchanging.

The Difference Between Temporary and Constantly 
Undergoing Change…

Questioner:  Now  Dada,  what  is  the  difference 
between that which is temporary (vinashi) and that which is 
constantly undergoing change (parivartansheel)?

Dadashri: That which is temporary will certainly get 
destroyed  completely.  An  eternal  element  can  constantly 
undergo change despite being eternal, whereas a temporary 
thing cannot be considered as having a constantly changing 
nature at all. In terms of that which is constantly changing, 
only  a  certain  part  of  it  is  temporary.  And  even  the  Self 
is  constantly  undergoing  change.  All  six  of  these  eternal 
elements are constantly undergoing change.

Questioner: In what way are the six eternal elements 
constantly undergoing change? Are the six eternal elements 
and  the  completely  new  effect  (vishesh  parinaam)  that  has 
arisen in the presence of the Self, changing constantly?

Dadashri: The vishesh parinaam as well. It is actually 

a vishesh parinaam with respect to worldly life.

Questioner: Yes, but that is indeed what is constantly 

changing, is it not?

Dadashri:  But  even  with  respect 

to 

the  Real 

* For specific clarity on this, refer to Aptavani 3, Gujarati book page number 60 
to 62, The Properties of the Self: Knowledge-Vision

18

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

(Swaabhavik;  the  inherent  nature  of  the  eternal  elements), 
That  is  constantly  undergoing  change.  The  temporary  state 
(avastha) that the eternal elements have, the temporary states 
of  the  Self,  the  temporary  states  of  the  Pudgal  [Parmanu], 
those temporary states are destructible (vinashi).

Questioner: Due to the inherent nature of that which 
is permanent to constantly undergo change, temporary things 
tend to arise. Please explain that using an example.

Dadashri: All  of  this  that  is  constantly  changing  and 
all of this that is visible, is temporary. After a moment, it can 
change into anything, it may become a cloud, or something or 
another happens, doesn’t it? The permanent eternal element 
(avinashi tattva) is not visible, and whatever is visible, it is 
the temporary that is visible. All the temporary things keep on 
changing, but the eternal elements that are within them, they 
are  permanent,  they  are  constantly  changing.  They  simply 
keep moving within, they do not do anything else. And one 
moment they [the temporary things] appear one way and the 
next  moment  they  appear  some  other  way.  One  moment,  a 
cloud will appear in this direction, the next moment it breaks 
away  and  goes  away  from  here  to  somewhere  else,  then  in 
an  instant  a  rainbow  appears  and  then  in  another  instant, 
it  all  disappears. The  original  form  (mool  swaroop)  [of  the 
eternal elements] is permanent. In this world, all that which 
is  in  the  original  form  is  indeed  permanent,  all  that  which 
is temporary can be seen, whereas that which is permanent 
cannot be seen with the eyes.

All these Parmanus are permanent. They certainly keep 
revolving  like  this,  they  are  constantly  revolving.  The  time 
it takes for one Parmanu to cross another is referred to as a 
samay  (the  smallest,  most  indivisible  unit  of  Time).  Based 
on  that,  the  evidence  (nimit)  of  Time  was  deduced.  So,  all 
of this indeed keeps undergoing change constantly. This Self 
and everything else too, they keep undergoing change indeed.

[1] The Universe Has Come Into Existence...

19

Questioner: The  constant  revolving  of  the  Parmanu, 
are  You  referring  to  that  as  constantly  undergoing  change 
(parivartansheel)?

Dadashri:  What  else,  then?  To  not  remain  in  one 
condition. The  condition  keeps  on  changing,  the  temporary 
state (avastha) keeps changing constantly indeed...

Questioner:  ‘You’  referred  to  that  as  constantly 
undergoing  change  (parivartansheel),  so  how  is  the  Self 
permanent as well as constantly undergoing change?

Dadashri:  When  can  anything  be  considered 
permanent?  It  can  only  be  an  eternal  element  (vastu)  if  it 
is  constantly  undergoing  change,  otherwise  it  cannot  be  an 
eternal element at all.

Questioner: Then, is every eternal element constantly 

undergoing change?

Dadashri: Yes, every eternal element...

Questioner:  Both,  destructible  as  well  as  permanent 

(avinashi)?

Dadashri:  No,  the  temporary  states  (avastha)  are 
destructible, but actually within [those temporary states], the 
eternal elements are constantly undergoing change, meaning 
that the phases (paryay) constantly keep changing.

Questioner: Do the phases change while It [the Self] 

remains in Its inherent nature (Swabhaav)?

Dadashri: While It remains in Its inherent nature.

Questioner: The Self is permanent, now what is it of 

the Self that changes?

Dadashri: This  Self,  the  original  Self  (mool  Chetan) 
is the elemental matter (dravya), then within that, there are 
properties (guna). So in terms of properties, there is infinite 

20

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Knowledge,  infinite Vision,  infinite  energy;  so You  are  not 
Seeing through the [property of] Knowledge, You are Seeing 
through  the  phases  (paryay).  Knowledge  is  actually  Its 
property. A  property  cannot  alter.  Only  Its  phase  alters;  the 
property  remains  constantly  with  It.  The  temporary  things 
are  constantly  changing;  in  that,  the  energy  of  Knowledge 
(Gnanshakti) of the Self undergoes change. This is because 
the Seer of the temporary states is the Knowledge. So as the 
temporary  state  changes,  the  phase  of  Knowledge  changes. 
The phases are constantly changing indeed. Nevertheless, in 
that process, the Knowledge certainly remains pure only, It 
remains completely pure, It remains totally pure.

Questioner:  In  what  form  does  the  Knowledge 

change? In the form of phases?

Dadashri:  Yes.  And  the  One  who  Knows  even  His 
own phases is the Self (pote), the pure Soul (Shuddhatma).

Questioner: But It gives rise to temporary things?

Dadashri:  It  is  only  because  this  is  temporary  that 
it  can  indeed  be  seen  in  this  way.  If  one  thing  is  going 
somewhere  else,  then  we  would  see  the  vibrations  of  it  as 
the third thing. When we look at the sky, within a moment, 
a  cloud  may  appear.  If  the  cloud  is  black,  then  we  would 
not  be  able  to  see  anything,  but  after  two  minutes,  after 
five minutes, when it shifts a little, something red becomes 
visible. What is the reason for this? Just a little while ago, it 
was not visible. So one may say, there was a change in the 
evidence, and due to that…

Questioner:  Then  call 

in  form 
(roopantar),  do  not  refer  to  that  as  constantly  changing 
(parivartan).

that  a  change 

Dadashri:  That  cannot  be  referred  to  as  a  change  in 
form.  A  change  in  form  is  applicable  to  just  one  eternal 

[1] The Universe Has Come Into Existence...

21

element.  A  change  in  form  is  applicable  to  the  eternal 
element that has a visible form (roopi tattva), it only applies 
to Pudgal Parmanu, and that too, it is certainly considered as 
constantly changing. A change in form is actually considered 
to  be  at  the  gross  level,  it  refers  to  the  external  part.  The 
original Pudgal Parmanu are constantly undergoing change. 
That  which  is  always  pure  within,  that  is  referred  to  as  an 
eternal element (tattva). What are the properties of the Self? 
They  are  Knowledge  and  Vision.  The  property  remains 
steady, and what are the temporary states (avastha)? All that 
which is visible, all that which can be Known, those are all 
temporary states.

Questioner:  The  word  ‘parivartansheel’  (constantly 
undergoing change) seems to be used in the ordinary sense.

Dadashri: It certainly is a word of the commonplace 

language; it is not [a word of] in the original sense.

Questioner: What is it in the original sense?

Dadashri: But the meaning of the word in the original 
sense is of no use at all. How would it help you? The language 
that is in use over here, only that will be of any help.

These  people  are  analyzing  the  Self  in  depth.  To  ask 
everything  [about  the  Self]  is  considered  as  analyzing  the 
Self in depth. There is a lot of difference between analyzing 
the  Self  in  depth  and  analyzing  worldly  life  in  depth, 
analyzing anger, pride, deceit, and greed in depth, analyzing 
merit karma in depth, and analyzing demerit karma in depth. 
The  time  spent  on  this  is  completely  different  altogether! 
No  one  in  this  world  would  waste  time  on  this  at  all. This 
is because discussion about this does not happen at all. No 
one in the world in any place, can discuss what ‘we’ discuss 
over here.

Questioner: When You say, “Did you not understand 

22

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

this?”  Niruben  is  recording  whatever  You  are  speaking. 
However,  the  taped  record  does  not  say,  “What  exactly 
are  you  trying  to  convey?” That  is  why  one  should  ask  for 
clarification.

Dadashri:  The  one  asking  for  clarification  should 
go  ahead  and  ask.  Let  me  tell  you  what  the  value  is  of 
the  time  that  goes  into  asking.  If  one  remains  in  such  an 
internal  state  of  being  (dhyan)  for  just  one  hour,  even  then 
his  [spiritual]  work  will  be  done.  This  is  because  the  Lord 
does not consider this internal state of being as prevailing in 
the  pudgal;  He  considers  it  to  be  relative-Real.  The  entire 
world is talking about the relative, whereas this is talk about 
the relative-Real.

The Revolving of the Six Eternal Elements

Questioner: How does the sixth eternal element come 

together with other five eternal elements?

Dadashri:  These  six  eternal  elements  keep  on 
revolving  [around  each  other]  in  this  world.  Moreover, 
all  these  eternal  elements  are  such  that  not  one  helps  the 
other, not one obliges the other, not one is the ‘doer’ of the 
other,  not  one  harasses  the  other;  the  eternal  elements  are 
such that they do not become one with each other. So, all of 
them are pure. These eternal elements are simply constantly 
undergoing  change  and  revolving  around  in  the  space 
(aakash) that there is in this world, that is all.

Now,  truly  speaking,  these  six  eternal  elements  are 
not  dependent  on  each  other  at  all.  It  only  seems  as  if  this 
dependency  is  there.  They  are  not  dependent  at  all;  they 
certainly remain within their own inherent nature. The world 
is very vast; it is worth understanding. All the thoughts that 
are arising for you, share them, mention them, ask…ask in 
totality!

[1] The Universe Has Come Into Existence...

23

Questioner: When did the engrossment due to coming 

close to each other occur?

Dadashri: All these Parmanu keep revolving like this, 
and  Chetan  is  also  revolving.  The  moment  the  two  come 
into close proximity, engrossment arises, a veil immediately 
appears. Then when they are separated, the veil breaks and 
they remain separate.

Questioner: They came together, that definitely means 

that they were once separate.

Dadashri:  When  all  six  of  them  keep  circling  round 
and round, as they revolve, that is when they come together.

Questioner: So have the six been revolving right from 

the beginning?

Dadashri:  Yes…that’s  it.  That  is  how  they  came 
together.  So  the  revolving  of  the  six  eternal  [elements]  is 
referred to as the world.

These Are the Six Eternal Elements of the Universe

The fact is, no one has created this world at all. All the 

eternal elements are permanent indeed.

Questioner:  Dada,  which  ones  are  they? What  is  the 
function of those six eternal elements? I want to understand 
all of that.

Dadashri:  All  the  eternal  elements  are  carrying  out 
their own functions. Of these, first there is the Self (Atma), 
which  is  referred  to  as  the  original  Chetan,  It  is  referred 
to  as  Chetan,  and  second,  there  is  jada  (eternal  element  of 
inanimate matter), the one that is referred to as anu (atom) 
isn’t  it?  Anu-Parmanu,  that  one.  The  third  is  the  energy 
that  takes  them  back  and  forth,  which  neither  of  the  two 
have.  It  is  called  dharmastikaya  (the  eternal  element  that 
supports motion; also known as gatisahayak). Now, if only 

24

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

dharmastikaya existed, then if one were to leave from here, 
then  he  would  never  come  to  a  stop.  Hence,  to  make  one 
still, there is sthitisahayak (the eternal element that supports 
inertia;  also  known  as  adharmastikaya).  That  makes  four, 
doesn’t  it? The  fifth  eternal  element  is  aakash  (Space),  the 
one  in  which  every  eternal  element  seeks  out  space;  they 
need  space,  don’t  they?  How  can  they  function  without 
space?  So,  the  one  that  provides  space  is  the  fifth  eternal 
element,  aakash.  And  the  sixth  one  is  the  eternal  element 
called  kaal  (Time). And  Time  actually  comes  with  anu,  its 
own kaalanu (atoms of Time).

Hence,  these  are  the  six  eternal  elements.  ‘Time’, 
Space,  that  which  supports  motion,  that  which  supports 
inertia, inanimate matter, and this Self. Of these, inanimate 
matter alone is roopi (has a visible form).

Questioner: What does roopi mean?

Dadashri:  Roopi  means  it  is  entirely  visible,  it  can 
be experienced through the sense organs (indriya), so it has 
form.  So,  this  inanimate  matter  alone  has  form.  The  Self 
does  not  have  form,  even  Space  does  not  have  form.  Even 
Time does not have form. That which supports motion does 
not  have  form.  That  which  supports  inertia  does  not  have 
form. Five are formless (aroopi) and one has form. Five are 
achetan  (without  the  property  to  Know  and  See),  and  only 
the  Self  is  Chetan  (with  the  property  to  Know  and  See). 
That  is  how  this  [world]  has  formed  from  these  six  eternal 
elements.

This is a very subtle concept; it is worth Knowing this 
from  the  Gnani  Purush. After  having  Known  this,  nothing 
else  remains  to  be  Known.  The  forty-five  Aagams  (Jain 
scriptures) of the entire world are encompassed within this.

The Tirthankar Lords (living fully enlightened beings 
whose  presence  turn  every  place  They  go  into  a  place  of 

[1] The Universe Has Come Into Existence...

25

pilgrimage and whose darshan grants final liberation to the 
One  who  has  attained  Self-realization)  mention  that  there 
is  the  eternal  element  of  the  Self,  then  the  eternal  element 
of  inanimate  matter,  thirdly  there  is  the  eternal  element  of 
Time, then fourthly there is the eternal element of Space, and 
then the eternal elements that support motion and inertia. All 
five of these [except for Time] are considered astikaya (that 
which can have more than one pradesh or spatial unit). The 
Tirthankar Lords have discovered these six eternal elements, 
through absolute Knowledge (keval Gnan).

What Is Considered an Eternal Element?

It  can  be  referred  to  as  an  eternal  element  only  if  it 
possesses  intrinsic  properties  that  have  a  specific  function 
(gunadharma) and it is Sat (eternal; the absolute truth).

Questioner: What can be considered as Sat?

Dadashri: The sat (truth) of this worldly life is actually 
temporary, it is referred to as satya (the truth). What people 
refer  to  as  the  truth  in  worldly  life,  that  truth  is  temporary. 
And  that  which  is  truly  Sat  is  permanent.  That  permanent 
is  Your  form.  Whereas  this  truth  of  the  world  is  untruth 
(asatya) in the eyes of God. This is actually relative truth; it 
is  not  Real  truth.  Real  truth  can  never  be  destructible.  Can 
you  get  anywhere  by  trying  to  turn  relative  truth  into  Real 
truth?

What  else  do  you  want  to  ask,  did  you  get  the 

clarification of Sat?

Questioner: It is still not completely clarified.

Dadashri: Yes,  so  tell  me.  What  do  you  want  to  ask 

now?

Questioner: Is the Self considered as Sat?

Dadashri: However many permanent eternal elements 

26

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

there  are,  they  are  all  considered  Sat.  The  six  eternal 
[elements]  that  exist,  they  are  all  considered  Sat.  The  Self 
is Sat.

In the Real, They Have Nothing to Do With Each 
Other!

Questioner:  Are  the  eternal  elements  of  Space, 
that  which  supports  motion,  that  which  supports  inertia, 
inanimate matter, and Time related to (sapeksh) each other? 
For example, when going from here to there, motion (gati) 
is considered to have happened, then there is the stationary 
state  (sthiti);  and  when  there  is  no  motion,  there  is  no 
stationary state, so there is no space (aakash).

Dadashri:  Where  there  is  motion  and  a  stationary 

state, there is space.

Questioner:  So  this  point  has  actually  turned  out  to 
be regarding the non-relative [space]. This point is not about 
relative space.

Dadashri: Actually,  the  Self  does  not  occupy  space, 
nor  does  It  have  a  stationary  state.  A  stationary  state  is 
with  respect  to  something,  motion  is  also  with  respect  to 
something.

The  embodied  soul  (dehadhaari  atma)  cannot  be 
without space, can it! Over here [in the world], you will not 
find a Soul that is not embodied. Therefore, in the Real, all 
the eternal elements have nothing to do with each other, they 
do not have any relationship at all. So, if You [as the Self] 
are  residing  here,  and  there  is  another  eternal  element  next 
to You, then it’s not as if the Self is the owner that It can tell 
the other eternal elements to go away from here.

Questioner: When an embodied soul (jeev) came from 
avyavahaar  rashi  (uncategorized  souls  that  have  not  yet 

[1] The Universe Has Come Into Existence...

27

entered worldly interactions) into vyavahaar rashi (worldly 
nomenclature),  at  that  time,  did Time  latch  on  to  it  first  or 
did inanimate matter, or what latched on to it? Which eternal 
element latches on first?

Dadashri: It entered into this [worldly nomenclature] 
on  the  basis  of  Time.  It  then  flows  like  a  current.  In  any 
current  that  is  flowing,  would  it  have  its  turn  [to  join  the 
sea]  or  not?  Similarly,  the  embodied  soul  also  enters  into 
this  [worldly  nomenclature].  There  is  no  one  who  throws 
it  into  that.  Niyati  (the  level  of  spiritual  development  of  a 
soul  as  it  progresses  naturally  on  the  track  of  evolution)  is 
responsible for this. Niyati means a flow!

If  niyati  were  to  say,  “I  did  this.”  Then  Time  would 
reply, “Who are you to do it, it only happened because I was 
around.”  So,  not  a  single  one  lets  the  other  take  the  credit. 
This proves that there is no superior.

Many  people  actually  believe  that  this  world  is 
definitely dependent on niyati. The writers of the scriptures 
raised an objection to that. Otherwise, niyati would develop 
arrogance  that,  ‘Everything  runs  because  of  me  alone!’  So, 
no  one  in  this  world  can  say,  “The  world  runs  because  of 
me.”  The  Self  cannot  say,  “This  is  functioning  because  of 
me.”  The  Pudgal  cannot  say  that  either.  That  is  how  this 
is;  all  of  this  is  based  on  evidences  that  are  instrumental 
in  the  process  (nimit-naimittik).  The  moment  these  two, 
the  sun  and  the  ocean,  come  together,  this  water  vapor  is 
generated. If they had not come together, then it would not 
have generated. You agree with this, don’t you?

Questioner: Yes.

Dadashri: Nevertheless, who plays the major role? It 
is the role of the Pudgal, primarily. ‘We’ [as the Self] are not 
too  concerned  with  Time. As  it  is,  what  do  ‘we’  and  Time 
have to do with each other? ‘We’ are not able to recognize it, 

28

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

‘we’ don’t even know about it. So, it is deducted. ‘We’ have 
nothing  to  do  with  motion  and  inertia.  So  these  three  are 
deducted, and that leaves the fourth one, aakash. We already 
know that aakash is that which gives space. Therefore, space 
has nothing to do with ‘us’ [the Self]. Now, four have been 
deducted.  All  that’s  left  is  the  scuffle  between  these  two 
eternal elements, inanimate matter and the Self; whereas the 
other four eternal elements help them along.

What Is the Self Entrapped In?

Questioner: Just as the Self has become entrapped in 
the  eternal  element  of  inanimate  matter,  in  the Pudgal,  can 
It become entrapped in any other eternal element?

Dadashri:  Primarily  in  this  inanimate  matter,  in  the 

Pudgal alone.

Questioner:  Does  It  become  entrapped  in  the  eternal 

element of Space or any other eternal element?

Dadashri: Truly speaking, ‘we’ [the Self] have become 
entrapped  in  all  the  eternal  elements;  ‘we’  are  currently 
entrapped  in  the  five  other  eternal  elements.  All  of  them 
have bound ‘us’.

Questioner:  Does  God  [the  Self]  become  entrapped 
only in space, or has He become entrapped in all the eternal 
elements?

Dadashri:  It  is  not  like  that.  The  Self  is  entrapped 
by  all  the  eternal  elements,  and  there  is  a  scientific  reason 
behind  it.  It  is  a  scientific  problem.  What  is  considered 
becoming  entrapped?  Say  I  have  gone  out  wearing  a  dhoti 
(loose  lower  garment  worn  by  Hindu  men),  and  there  is  a 
gust  of  wind. The  dhoti  blows  in  the  wind  and  gets  caught 
on a thorny bush. So then as I try to undo it from the thorns, 
another gust of wind comes and the other side of the dhoti 

[1] The Universe Has Come Into Existence...

29

gets caught. So, the bush does not let me off. So what would 
we realize? Have I gotten entrapped or has the bush gotten 
entrapped?

Questioner: You have gotten entrapped.

Dadashri:  Yes.  Similarly,  the  Self,  the  owner  of 
infinite  energies,  has  become  entrapped!  But  what  can  be 
done with that energy, of what use is it?

Questioner:  We  should  not  believe  that  the  Self  is 
entrapped only in inanimate matter, It is entrapped in all the 
eternal elements.

Dadashri: Not only is the Self entrapped in inanimate 
matter, but It has also become entrapped within all the other 
eternal  elements.  When  the  realization  happens  that,  ‘The 
eternal  elements  that  have  bound  me,  they  are  like  this, 
and  I  am  like  this,’  that  is  when  the  separation  will  occur. 
On  the  contrary,  this  has  actually  progressed  [in  the  wrong 
direction]  because  in  a  state  of  gross  unawareness,  it  [the 
deluded  self]  believes,  ‘This  is  also  my  property,  and  this 
formless  is  also  my  property.’  Mind  you,  the  other  eternal 
elements  are  certainly  formless  indeed.  So  then,  it  [the 
deluded self] became like that.

Questioner: Except for inanimate matter, they are all 

formless.

Dadashri:  In  spite  of  being  formless,  they  are  not 
Chetan  (with  the  property  to  Know  and  See).  And  by 
claiming  Chetan  (the  Self)  [alone]  is  formless,  if  you  rely 
upon just that, then you will take a beating!

The Six Have Been Together Since Time Immemorial

Questioner: Where was the Self when the five eternal 

elements were not around?

Dadashri:  There  has  never  been  a  day  in  which 

30

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

these five eternal elements were not around. Right now, the 
[deluded] self remains [in worldly life] only on their basis. 
It  is  when  it  realizes  Its  own  Real  form  (Swaroop)  that  It 
becomes  free  from  here,  so  the  five  eternal  elements  come 
to  a  stop  [stop  having  an  effect  on  the  Self].  However,  the 
five  eternal  elements  are  undoubtedly  together  with  the 
Self,  whether  in  the  form  of  a  small  insect  or  a  large  one, 
or in the form of a tree. There are the five eternal elements 
even  within  a  tree,  within  the  smallest  of  insects,  within 
two-sensed living beings, within three-sensed living beings, 
within  the  four-sensed  living  beings,  and  the  five  eternal 
elements  are  certainly  together  even  within  the  five-sensed 
living beings.

All  six  eternal  elements  are  together  in  this  body. 
These  eternal  elements  are  in  the  form  of  a  mixture;  they 
are not in a compound form. Hence, they can be separated. 
If  a  compound  is  formed,  then  the  gunadharma  (intrinsic 
properties  that  have  a  specific  function)  of  the  Self  would 
change, and the gunadharma of inanimate matter would also 
change.

Nothing  of  the  Self  has  become  impure  in  that.  The 
Self  is  one  of  the  circumstantial  objects  in  this  [mixture]. 
The  coming  together  of  all  six  of  these  eternal  elements  is 
circumstantial.  So  the  Gnani  Purush  separates  them  once 
again  and  extricates  the  Self  [for  us].  The  Self  is  certainly 
pure,  It  is  certainly  immaculate,  it  is  simply  the  belief  that 
is wrong.

The Vikalp Are Limited, the Properties of the Self 
Are Unlimited

The world is actually very vast, extensive; it is worth 
understanding it. Nothing has been created at all. All of this 
confusion is simply arising out of the very same six eternal 
elements,  nothing  else.  Even  in  that,  there  are  so  many 

[1] The Universe Has Come Into Existence...

31

things, there are so many vikalp (the wrong belief that ‘I am 
Chandubhai’ and all the relative ‘I-ness’ that stems from it)! 
So  then,  if  someone  were  to  ask,  ‘How  many  vikalp  must 
there  be?  Is  there  any  limit  to  them?’  The  reply  would  be 
that  there  is  no  such  thing  in  this  world  that  is  unlimited. 
Everything  has  a  limit.  If  things  did  not  have  a  limit,  then 
no  one  would  have  been  able  to  tackle  them.  There  would 
not even be any discussion about moksha at all. Everything 
indeed  has  a  limit.  It  is  because  these  [vikalp]  have  a  limit 
that  we  are  able  to  attain  moksha,  otherwise  these  visible 
outbursts  (kadhapo),  the  internal  turmoil  and  restlessness 
(ajampo) as well as worries would go on endlessly.

Questioner: If everything has a limit, then where did 

the word ‘infinite’ (anant) come from?

Dadashri: Infinite does not apply to this [vikalp]. What 
does this and infinite have to do with each other? All of this 
has a limit. We actually refer to the properties of the Self as 
infinite,  and  that  too,  for  the  purpose  of  explaining  to You 
[the  developing  Self].  This  is  because  they  [the  six  eternal 
elements]  do  not  need  to  Know  the  six  eternal  elements  at 
all. This is actually for the purpose of you becoming aware 
of Your own Self, of what You are like. Besides, they do not 
have to Know any of that, do they! In fact, in order to make 
the  one  who  has  lost  awareness  realize  who  he  actually  is, 
You  have  to  tell  him,  ‘You  are  full  of  infinite  Knowledge, 
You  are  full  of  infinite  Vision.’  However,  the  One  who  is 
already  in  the  experiential  awareness  as  the  Self  (bhaan) 
never needs to be told anything, isn’t it!

If  these  [vikalp]  were  unlimited,  then  these  people 
would not look alike the way they all do. Some would have 
three  legs,  some  would  have  three  and  a  half  legs,  some 
would  have  three  hands,  some  would  have  four  hands, 
some  would  have  three  eyes.  But  no,  that  is  not  so.  If 
these  [the  vikalp]  were  unlimited,  then  the  people  coming 

32

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

from  another  town  would  look  altogether  different,  the 
ones from yet another town would look different. So, these 
[the  vikalp]  are  limited;  they  are  exact.  No  matter  which 
country  you  go  to,  people  have  two  legs,  and  everything 
else looks similar.

Questioner: One eternal element does not merge with 
another eternal element at all, they both remain completely 
separate, don’t they?

Dadashri:  They  do  not  merge.  By  the  engrossment 
arising  out  of  the  two  coming  together  in  close  proximity, 
temporary states (avastha) tend to arise.

Questioner:  Do  the  temporary  states  arise  because 
they merge with each other, or by them coming close to one 
another?

Dadashri:  Yes,  that  is  exactly  what  it  is.  As  they 
revolve around, they come together, so the temporary states 
keep  changing.  There  is  no  change  in  the  original  eternal 
elements at all.

Questioner:  Nevertheless,  all  those  eternal  elements 

are going to remain separate, aren’t they?

Dadashri:  Yes,  they  are  forever  separate.  They  are 
separate even now. Even though they are present in the body 
right now, yet they are all separate.

Questioner: Are their gunadharma (intrinsic properties 

that have a specific function) always different?

Dadashri:  They  are  all  different,  independent,  their 
gunadharma  are  different!  Thus,  ‘we’  can  separate  these 
eternal  elements.  Just  as  a  goldsmith  separates  gold  and 
copper  when  they  are  in  a  mixed  form,  in  the  same  way, 
the Gnani Purush can separate these [eternal elements]. The 
bhed Vignani (a spiritual Scientist who has the experiential 

[1] The Universe Has Come Into Existence...

33

Knowledge  to  separate  the  Self  and  the  non-Self),  the  One 
who  is  a  representative  of  God,  He  can  separate  them. 
Hence, ‘we’ are able to make such a separation. So the Self 
becomes  separate. As  the  Self  separates,  karma  cannot  get 
bound. As  long  as  there  is  such  awareness  of  ‘I  am  doing 
this,’ karma get bound. The moment the awareness of ‘who 
am I’ is attained, karma do not get bound.

Questioner:  There  must  be  a  cause  for  even  the 

existence (astitva) of the Self, mustn’t there?

Dadashri:  Existence  does  not  have  a  cause,  does  it! 
The existence that It has, what is that like? ‘It’ has existence, 
It has vastutva (what the Self is and what It comprises of), 
It  is  eternal.  There  is  not  a  single  cause  applicable  to  that 
which is eternal. All the causes apply to the temporary states. 
The  developing  ‘I’  (pote)  prevails  in  the  temporary  states, 
moreover,  all  that  which  is  visible,  those  are  all  temporary 
states too.

Only the One Who Is Free, Can Free Others!

There are only six eternal elements in this world, and 
each  is  in  its  own  individual  inherent  nature  (swabhaav). 
And each one is carrying out its own function only, yet the 
six eternal elements are present since infinite time. Five are 
achetan  (without  the  property  to  Know  and  See),  and  the 
sixth,  the  Self  is  Chetan  (with  the  property  to  Know  and 
See), which Knows everything indeed. One eternal element 
[Pudgal  Parmanu]  is  such  that  whatever  interference  the 
[developing]  self  does,  it  becomes  exactly  like  that.  The 
developing  self  sees  that  which  has  a  visible  form  (roopi) 
and  it  assumes  that  form.  The  original  Self  is  formless 
(aroopi).  As  the  developing  self  interferes,  that  which  has 
form becomes disturbed, but neither of them get destroyed. 
The temporary states get destroyed. By interfering, worldly 
life  arises,  and  by  not  doing  that,  there  is  moksha.  When 

34

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

does It not interfere? When the developing Self comes into 
the experiential awareness as the Self (bhaan).

The  One  who  has  Knowledge  beyond  the  Vedas  [the 
oldest scriptures of Hinduism] is known as a bhed Vignani, 
the One who separates the Self and all the other five eternal 
elements.  ‘Our’  spiritual  powers  (siddhi)  work  towards 
enabling  people  to  attain  the  elemental  form  as  the  Self 
(tattva Swaroop).

Where There Is Absence of the Intellect, the 
Knowledge of the Self Exists

If  One  wants  to  Know  the  eternal  elements  (tattva 
vastu),  then  they  can  only  be  Known  where  the  intellect 
(buddhi) is absent. The eternal elements cannot be [Known] 
elsewhere.  This  is  because  the  intellect  has  limitations, 
whereas Knowledge is unlimited. The Gnani Purush has to be 
around. The Gnani Purush is around very rarely in the world. 
The Gnani is rarely ever around, isn’t it! There is nothing in 
the world that is outside of the Gnani’s Knowledge. ‘We’ are 
saying this after having Seen it. This is not something pulled 
out from a book. That which is from a book would not help, 
would it! That which is in a book is always lifeless (jada). 
And  what  about  anything  that  you  have  grasped  from  the 
book, what is that like? That too is lifeless. ‘It’ [Knowledge] 
should  be  acquired  directly  from  the  Gnani.  ‘It’  should  be 
direct illumination, only then will there be a solution. Dada 
has constant awakened awareness as the Self, that is why He 
is able to understand It, He has fully understood the Self. All 
of this can only be Seen through the unveiled Self.



[2]
The Self, an Indestructible Eternal 
Element

The Real Form of the Self

Questioner: What is the Self?*2

Dadashri:  The  Self  is  an  eternal  element  (vastu). 
Vastu  means  that  It  is  an  eternal  thing,  and  It  has  Its  own 
elemental  matter  (dravya),  properties  (guna),  and  phases 
(paryay).  ‘It’  maintains  Its  own  vastutvapanu  (prevalence 
in  the  Knowledge  of  what  the  Self  is  and  what  It  is  not). 
‘It’ also maintains all of Its own properties, and It also has 
temporary states (avastha).

Of the six eternal elements, one is an eternal element 
which  has  the  property  to  Know  and  See  (Chetan  tattva). 
What  we  refer  to  as  the  Self  (Atma),  the  pure  Soul 
(Shuddhatma), or God (Bhagwan), that is the eternal element 
that  has  the  property  to  Know  and  See.  Whereas  the  other 
five  eternal  elements  are  achetan  (without  the  property  to 
Know  and  See).  This  means  that  there  is  no  Chetanta  (the 
property to Know and See) in them.

Therefore,  of  all  the  eternal  elements,  if  there  is  one 

*  There  is  elaborate  discussion  about  the  elemental  matter-properties-phases  of 
the eternal element of the Self in Aptavani 14 Part 3 and Part 4.

36

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

that is the greatest, then it is the absolute Self (Parmatma). 
The  absolute  eternal  element,  the  One  which  is  the  leader, 
the  One  which  is  the  greatest  of  the  eternal  elements,  the 
One  which  is  the  owner  of  infinite  energy  (shakti),  that  is 
the  absolute  Self.  The  Self  is  the  absolute  eternal  element, 
the One which has Chetan (the property to Know and See). 
None  of  the  other  [eternal  elements]  have  the  property  to 
Know and See. The other eternal elements have a great deal 
of  energy,  tremendous  energy.  That  is  certainly  why  the 
world  appears  this  way.  However,  as  there  is  no  property 
to  Know  and  See  within  them,  so  there  is  no  Knowledge 
(Gnan)  in  them. And,  where  there  is  no  Knowledge,  there, 
the Self does not exist, the absolute Self does not exist.

The eternal element that has the property to Know and 
See  is  not  just  one,  there  are  infinite  Chetan  (the  element 
that has the property to Know and See). If we were to gather 
Them all, then They would all have the same inherent nature 
(swabhaav). Suppose we have many gold bars, even if there 
are tens of millions of them, they are still considered to be 
gold  only,  aren’t  they!  Therefore,  They  have  been  referred 
to as the eternal element that has the property to Know and 
See. That eternal element is independent, and It is without a 
beginning (anaadi) or an end (anant).

There  are  infinite  Atma  (Self;  Soul),  and  They  all 
certainly  exist,  and  They  will  always  remain.  Nothing  is 
going to happen to Them. This is something that the Vitaraag 
Lords, that Lord Mahavir has said. ‘It’ [the Self] always has 
existence. ‘It’ is an indestructible (avinashi) eternal element; 
It  is  in  that  form  even  in  moksha  (the  state  of  ultimate 
liberation).  ‘It’  is  like  that  even  now,  but  the  experiential 
awareness of the Self (bhaan) should happen.

The Difference Between the Eternal Elements of 
the Self and That Which Is Not the Self…

The Self (Atma) can never actually become that which 

[2] The Self, an Indestructible Eternal Element

37

is  not  the  Self  (anatma).  Chaitanya  (the  Self;  that  which 
Knows and Sees) can never become achaitanya (that which 
does not have the property to Know and See). Not a single 
piece of It ever becomes achaitanya. Whereas for that which 
is achaitanya, just as we cut onions and slice them, similarly 
no  matter  how  many  slices  we  would  make  of  the  division 
that is not the Self (anatma vibhaag), not a single slice would 
turn  out  to  be  such  that  it  contains  ‘light’  [Knowledge  and 
Vision]. They are both completely different eternal elements. 
Moreover,  they  are  inherently  natural  (swabhaavik)  eternal 
elements.  They  are  no  ordinary  things.  Swabhaavik  means 
that they have their own inherent nature.

There  is  nothing  about  the  Self  that  is  destructible 
(vinashi).  ‘Its’  inherent  nature,  even  Its  properties  are  not 
destructible.  It  is  only  the  temporary  states  (avastha)  of 
the  Self  that  arise  and  undergo  dissolution. That  constantly 
keeps  on  happening.  Whereas  the  Self  (pote)  maintains 
Its  permanence  (dhruv).  Now,  all  the  temporary  states  of 
the  Self  are  Chetan  (have  the  property  to  Know  and  See) 
whereas  all  the  temporary  states  of  the  Pudgal  [Parmanu] 
are achetan (without the property to Know and See).

The  Self  is  shuddha  Chetan  (the  pure  Knower-Seer). 
That  which  is  visible  here,  that  is  the  mishrachetan  (the  I 
with  wrong  belief  that  arises  as  when  the  eternal  elements 
of the Self and inanimate matter come into close proximity 
with  each  other).  And  the  pure  Knower-Seer  is  the  pure 
Soul, and that Itself is the absolute Self.

Questioner: Does the Self have an impure form?

Dadashri: This form as the prakruti (the visible form 
created in an ignorant state by the continuous instillation of 
the false attribution that ‘I am Chandubhai’ in the past life) 
is the impure form of the Self.

In  the  Real  (Nishchay),  the  absolute  eternal  element 

38

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

is  in  the  form  as  God,  whereas  in  the  relative  (vyavahaar), 
it  would  certainly  be  different,  wouldn’t  it! You  are  sitting 
separately and this man is sitting separately. Each one’s space 
is  definitely  different,  no  space  can  be  occupied  by  two  to 
four  things  simultaneously,  can  it?  That  is  known  as  being 
different in the relative sense. And from the Real viewpoint, 
our Self is just one and the same [by their properties]. Just 
as  what  this  Soul  is  like,  that  Soul  is  also  like  that,  all  of 
them have the very same inherent nature.

Questioner:  The  Chetan  tattva  is  acceptable,  but 
shouldn’t  there  be  another  eternal  element  which  supports 
this Chetan tattva?

Dadashri:  No,  there  can  never  be  anything  that 
supports  It.  The  eternal  element  that  has  the  property  to 
Know  and  See  (Chetan  tattva)  is  indeed  the  Self,  and  It  is 
inherently  natural.  The  Chetan  tattva  exists  within  you  in 
its entirety. ‘It’ exists in every living being, and It has never 
needed  anything  from  anyone.  There  is  no  dependency 
(avalamban),  the  eternal  element  that  Knows  and  Sees  is 
without  any  dependency  whatsoever.  If  It  were  to  have  a 
dependency, then people would have killed It. However, the 
Self is Itself God.

Questioner: So is It absolutely free of dependency on 

anything relative (niralamb)?

Dadashri: Yes, It is absolutely free of dependency.

Questioner:  But  with  regards  to  the  eternal  element 
Chetan,  in  the  Advaita  Vedanta  (an  outlook  or  school  of 
Hinduism), they have used the words ‘paraatpar Chaitanya’ 
for that.

Dadashri:  Paraatpar  Itself  means  the  pure  Knower-
Seer (shuddha Chetan). ‘It’ does not have any dependency. 
Despite having a body, if ‘I’ [the Gnani Purush] am able to 

[2] The Self, an Indestructible Eternal Element

39

say  that  ‘I’  am  absolutely  free  of  dependency  on  anything 
relative, then what must the original Self be like!

The Embodied Soul and the Self

Questioner:  Some  refer  to  it  as  the  embodied  soul 

(jeev) and some refer to it as the Self (Atma).

Dadashri: The fact is, in the Lord’s language, He was 
referring to It [the Self] as jeev, whereas what do our people 
of  today  understand  jeev  to  be? They  refer  to  the  one  who 
is  living  as  jeev.  And  when  the  person  dies,  they  say  that 
one  has  died.  So,  we  refer  to  the  temporary  state  as  jeev, 
whereas  the  Lord  used  to  refer  to  the  original  Self  as  jeev. 
So now if we refer to the original Self as the Atma, then we 
will understand the meaning of jeev.

What  can  be  referred  to  as  jeev?  That  which  lives 
and  dies  is  called  jeev.  The  Self  remains  as  It  is,  but  the 
Lord has referred to the original Self as jeev. So if you want 
to  understand  this  in  His  language,  then  it  will  take  time. 
Therefore, we should refer to It as the Atma, meaning that It 
refers to a permanent eternal element.

Questioner:  Our  Self,  the  Self  within  all  animals,  as 
well as the Self in all inanimate matter (jada vastu), are they 
in reality the same or are they different?

Dadashri:  They  are  indeed  different.  The  inanimate 
matter in which no one has ownership, in those, there is no 
Self.

Questioner:  On  what  basis  would  the  inanimate 

matter continue to exist?

Dadashri:  That  eternal  element  is  in  the  form  of 
Parmanu  (the  smallest,  most  indivisible  and  indestructible 
particle of matter), it is indestructible, it is independent, and 
it is inanimate.

40

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

If someone were to ask, “Is the Self (Sat Chit Anand) 
pervaded  within  the  inanimate  matter?”  Then  the  response 
would be, “No, the Self is not pervaded within the inanimate 
matter,  nor  is  inanimate  matter  pervaded  within  the  Self. 
They both certainly remain separate in their own way. They 
never become one (ekakaar) at all. Despite being together in 
the body, the intrinsic properties that have a specific function 
(gunadharma) of both are nonetheless different.”

That  which  can  be  seen  through  the  eyes,  heard 
through the ears, tasted through the tongue, is all inanimate 
matter.  That  which  is  perceived  through  the  five  sense 
organs  is  inanimate  matter.  The  Self  (Chetan)  can  only  be 
Seen  through  divya  chakshu  (divine  Vision  through  which 
the Real and the relative is Seen as separate).

Questioner:  Is  this  eternal  element  of  the  Self  not 
common  to  the  rest  of  these  eternal  elements  that  support 
motion and inertia, the eternal elements of Time, and Space?

Dadashri:  No,  why  would  It  be  common?  ‘It’  has 
nothing  to  do  with  them.  If  the  Self  becomes  one  with 
inanimate matter, then it would become inanimate. Besides, 
this inanimate matter does not even know the Self, however 
the Self Knows it.

Questioner:  Is  this  property  of  Knowing  only  in  the 

Self?

Dadashri: Yes.  Meaning  that  It  Knows  Its  own  Self. 
Furthermore, It can exhibit feelings (laagni) [in the vibhaavik 
state], It has many other types of properties.

Of the Six, the Self Is Unique

No  one  can  recognize  the  Self  (Chetan),  that  this  is 
Chetan. The Self cannot be seen; the Self cannot be heard. 
Even the actions (kriya) of the Self are not visible.

Questioner:  That  which  is  without  action  (akriya), 

[2] The Self, an Indestructible Eternal Element

41

that  which  is  steady  (adol),  why  has  that  been  referred  to 
as the Self?

Dadashri: That which is steady, that which is without 

action, only that can be the Self.

Questioner: Please explain how that is so.

Dadashri: What  is  the  meaning  of  Chetan? The  One 
who has the function of Knowing (jaanpanu) all this that is 
happening, the One who Knows, that is Chetan! Of all these 
six eternal elements, there is only one eternal element, that 
of Chetan, who Knows all of this. Inanimate matter does not 
Know anything. Therefore, Gnan-Darshan (Knowledge and 
Vision  of  the  Self)  is  known  as  Chetan.  The  One  who  has 
Knowledge and Vision is Chetan. There is both Knowledge 
and Vision even in this tree.

Of  all  the  six,  only  the  Self  (Atma)  is  Chetan  (with 
the  property  to  Know  and  See).  Therefore,  It  can  Know 
the  feelings  (laagni)  that  arise  and  everything  else.  That 
which  has  such  experiential  awareness  as  the  Self  (bhaan) 
is Chetan; no matter what you do to It, It has the awareness, 
It Knows that. All the other [eternal elements] would not be 
aware of that.

All the other eternal elements are achetan (without the 
property to Know and See). There are many properties within 
them, their own inherently natural properties, but there are no 
feelings within them, within any of them. Even if we were to 
keep crushing them, they would not be affected at all.

If  you  worship  the  Self  as  being  formless  (aroopi) 
only,  then  that  worship  will  end  up  reaching  the  other  four 
[eternal elements] that are formless. Besides the Self which 
is free from association (asang), it will reach all the others. 
These are not properties of the Self alone. Now, the Self is 
formless,  but  it  is  not  the  Self  alone  that  is  formless.  Our 

42

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

people believe the Self alone to be formless. ‘Space’ is also 
formless.  Then,  the  eternal  element  that  supports  motion 
is  also  formless.  The  eternal  element  that  supports  inertia 
is  formless,  and  the  parmanu  (smallest  indivisible  unit) 
of  Time  are  also  formless.  It  is  only  this  inanimate  matter 
(Pudgal Parmanu) alone that has a visible form (roopi), the 
Pudgal  [Parmanu]  alone  is  visible  (murt).  It  will  not  do  to 
worship the Self alone as being invisible (amurt). The other 
four eternal elements are also invisible.

All  the  eternal  elements  are  such  that  they  never 
increase  or  decrease  by  their  inherent  nature  (aguru-laghu 
swabhaav).  The  [vibhaavik]  pudgal  (the  pudgal  formed 
from parmanu that have deviated from their inherent nature) 
that we have to get rid of, its inherent nature is such that it 
increases  and  decreases. Anger,  pride,  deceit,  and  greed  is 
the  vikaari  pudgal  (parmanu  that  have  deviated  from  their 
inherent nature; same as vikrut pudgal and vibhaavik pudgal), 
and  by  its  inherent  nature,  it  increases  and  decreases.  The 
inherent nature to never increase or decrease belongs to all 
the eternal elements. All the six eternal elements are nirlep 
(non-smearable; untouched; unaffected). That is why we refer 
to them as immiscible (tankotkirna). All of them are steady 
(avichal)  indeed.  It  is  the  [vibhaavik]  pudgal  alone  that  is 
chanchal  (active).  In  fact,  all  the  others  are  indestructible 
(avinashi).  Therefore,  by  worshipping  (bhajana)  these 
properties alone, the worship of the Self does not happen.

Questioner: I can clearly see some of the Self (Chetan) 

with these physical eyes, what is that?

Dadashri:  No,  Chetan  cannot  be  seen  with  the  eyes, 
It  cannot  be  seen  through  imagination  (kalpana).  Chetan 
is  nirvikalp  (that  which  cannot  be  imagined).  In  fact,  It  is 
something  that  can  only  be  experienced.  Sugar  is  sweet, 
but  the  sweetness  is  not  something  that  is  visible.  Is  the 
sweetness visible?

[2] The Self, an Indestructible Eternal Element

43

Questioner: It is not visible.

Dadashri:  When  we  say  [the  word]  ‘sweet,’  what 
would  one  see?  Actually,  the  moment  you  put  it  in  your 
mouth,  you  will  understand  what  it  is.  Therefore,  Chetan 
is  something  that  comes  into  experience.  Where  niraakul 
anand  (the  bliss  of  a  state  that  is  free  of  uneasiness  and 
agitation)  prevails,  where  niraakulta  (a  blissful  state  free 
of  uneasiness  and  agitation  attained  after  Self-realization) 
prevails, that is Chetan. A state of uneasiness and agitation 
(aakulta-vyaakulta) cannot be Chetan.

Questioner:  No  matter  what  stage  the  Gnani  Purush 
are in, whatever spiritual experience They have had, is that 
the form that They will be Seeing?

Dadashri: No, it is not like that. How long would that 
last? As long as one has egoism, until then one will see things 
as  being  different. After  becoming  egoless  (nirahamkaari), 
even if there are ten million egoless people, they would see 
the  eternal  element  as  being  of  the  same  type,  and  if  there 
are a hundred people with egoism, then they would see five 
hundred types of eternal elements.

Questioner: Whatever form He has Seen, if He attains 

that eternal element, then would He actually come back?

Dadashri:  No,  why  would  He  come  back  after  that? 
This  is  because,  after  attaining  that  eternal  element,  He 
would not have any desires. As long as one has desires, all 
of this commotion will exist.

And all of this, this Vitaraag Vignan (the Science that 
leads  to  the  absolute  state),  is  worth  Knowing.  For  You, 
after You get a ‘taste’ of that bliss, then come here the next 
day  and  sit  comfortably  with  this  [intent  of  Knowing  the 
Vitaraag  Vignan]  in  mind.  Thereafter,  You  will  understand 
what  ‘we’  are  saying.  If  you  try  to  assess  It  using  your 

44

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

intellect, then how would you be able to assess It? ‘This’ is 
not such a thing [that can be assessed through the intellect]. 
This is because ‘we’ are without [beyond] the intellect. ‘We’ 
do  not  have  even  an  iota  of  intellect.  And  as  long  as  the 
intellect exists, nothing will be understood correctly.

Who Is Pure and Who Is Impure?

Questioner:  If  ‘I’  am  pure  Soul,  then  how  did  this 

Chandubhai become impure?

Dadashri: These six eternal elements are indestructible. 
The temporary states (avastha) arise due to the six revolving 
around each other.

This  Chandubhai,  he  is  the  form  as  the  pudgal  (the 
non-Self  complex  that  undergoes  influx  and  outflux),  and 
the  developing  I  (pote)  believes  ‘I  am  Chandubhai’;  that  is 
why  these  mistakes  keep  happening.  In  reality,  that  is  not 
one’s Real form. The developing I (pote) has never become 
impure  at  all,  but  it  simply  has  the  wrong  belief  (bhranti) 
of being impure. This is because You were indeed pure, but 
it  is  because  of  wrong  belief  that  you  came  to  believe,  ‘I 
am this Chandubhai.’ However, relatively speaking, you are 
Chandubhai.  Really  speaking,  You  are  the  pure  Soul,  not 
relatively  speaking.  Now  what  You  should  do  is  remain 
only  in  the  ‘really  speaking’,  and  what  you  had  believed 
yourself  to  be  in  the  ‘relatively  speaking’,  that  was  called 
egoism. ‘You’ are actually Chetan, nature cannot create You, 
moreover  nature  is  lifeless  (nirjeev).  Hence,  nature  has  not 
created You. ‘You’ are not a ‘creature’ [creation] of nature.

The Insights on the Gita, Through the Perspective 
of the Gnani

Questioner:  ‘You’  said  that  the  genesis  of  the  world 
is,  “Spontaneous  (swayam),  it  has  been  around  since  time 
immemorial.”  Then  in  the  Gita,  it  is  written,  “The  highest 

[2] The Self, an Indestructible Eternal Element

45

abode, where not even the sun or the moon can reach, that 
is My abode.” So would that abode be beyond the world or 
would it definitely be within the world?

Dadashri: It certainly is in the world, it is over here [in 
the Self], where else would it be? You are misunderstanding 
that.  The  ones  with  deviated  perspectives  (vaanki  drashti) 
will  see  everything  incorrectly.  Those  with  the  right  belief 
of  ‘I  am  pure  Soul’  (samyak  drashti)  will  See  it  correctly. 
When  the  right  belief  of  ‘I  am  pure  Soul’  arises,  then  the 
correct thing will be Seen.

Questioner: There is a very well-known verse, ‘Neither 
the  sun  nor  the  moon  illuminates  that  eternal  element  [the 
Self].’

Dadashri:  Chetan  is  actually  such  that  It  illuminates 

the sun itself. Yes, then it says:

“Naasato  vidhyate  bhaavo,  naabhaavo  vidhyate  satah.”
“The relative has no permanence, the Real never ceases to be.”

- Bhagavat Gita, Part 2, Shloka 16

[that  which 

“Asatno  bhaav  nathi,”  means 

is 
destructible] has no existence at all. Asat means that which 
is not an eternal element; there is no existence at all of that 
over  here.  And  there  is  no  non-existence  (abhaav)  of  the 
Sat.  Sat  means  eternal  element  (vastu).  That  which  exists 
in  the  past,  the  present,  and  the  future  is  called  Sat.  It 
remains  in  existence  in  all  three  time  periods.  That  which 
never undergoes destruction is called Sat, and that which is 
destructible  (vinashi)  is  called  asat.  The  Gita  says,  “Those 
who are tattvadarshi (with complete experience of the Self) 
conclusively  See  that  ‘this’  is  indestructible,  and  ‘this’  is 
destructible.  That  which  has  pervaded  (vyaapt)  throughout 
this entire body, Know that to be indestructible.” “This entire 
body has been pervaded by the Self.” It is because the Self 

46

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

is  present,  that  this  body  is  in  existence  [alive];  otherwise, 
if this Self were to not be present, then the body would not 
exist, that is what it is trying to say. “No one has the power 
to destroy that which does not wear away (avyay).” No one 
has the power to destroy that which is indestructible, that is 
what the Gita says. Then...

It says, “The Self is permanent (nitya), It is indestructible 
(avinashi),  It  is  unconfined  illumination  (aprameya).  The 
bodies  of  all  these  embodied  souls  [that  stand  before  you 
in  the  battlefield]  are  destructible,  so  oh  Arjun,  fight  this 
battle.”  It  is  actually  in  the  worldly  sense  that  people  die. 
However, in the Lord’s language, no one dies, nor is anyone 
born. These bodies are born and these bodies die. Someone 
can  be  considered  to  have  died  when  he  has  been  finished 
off  forever.  Whereas  here,  this  arises,  then  it  comes  to  an 
end, then it arises again, then it comes to an end.

Questioner:  Utpaat  (genesis;  beginning;  creation), 
vyay (dissipation; coming to an end; destruction) and dhruv 
(permanence)?

Dadashri:  Yes.  And  the  Self  has  permanence,  It 
remains  forever,  and  the  temporary  states  keep  arising  and 
get  destroyed;  they  arise  and  get  destroyed,  they  arise  and 
get destroyed. The youthful age had come about, hadn’t it? 
Had  it  not  come  about  for  you?  Then  it  came  to  an  end, 
didn’t it?

Questioner: Yes, it did.

Dadashri: This old age has arisen. Then it will come 
to  an  end,  won’t  it?  All  this  continues  to  arise  and  then 
get  destroyed.  “The  one  who  believes  the  Self  to  be  the 
killer, or the one who believes the Self to be dead, neither 
of  them  understand.  This  is  because  it  is  not  possible  for 
anyone  to  kill  this  Self.  Contrarily,  those  who  believe  that 
It  [the  Self]  is  dead,  all  of  those  people  do  not  understand 

[2] The Self, an Indestructible Eternal Element

47

either.  This  is  because  this  Self  does  not  die  nor  can  It 
get  killed. This  Self  never  takes  birth  nor  does  It  die.  It  is 
not  even  that  It  was  not  around  in  the  past  or  that  It  will 
not  be  around  in  the  future;  It  certainly  exists  in  the  past, 
the  present,  and  the  future.  ‘It’  is  without  birth  (ajanma), 
permanent (nitya), eternal (shaashwat), It has existed since 
time immemorial. That is why even though the body dies, It 
cannot be killed. Oh Arjun! The One who Knows the Self to 
be  indestructible  (avinashi),  permanent,  without  birth,  and 
unchanging  (avikaari),  such  a  Self-realized  One  (Purush) 
can  understand,  ‘How  can  It  kill  anyone  and  in  what  way 
as  well  as  how  can  It  make  anyone  else  kill  another?’  He 
understands  all  that.  The  truth  is,  the  Self  gives  up  old 
garments  and  puts  on  new  ones.”  [Bhagwat  Gita,  Part  2, 
Shloka  16  to  22]  There  is  nothing  else  to  it.  People  have 
both,  flights  of  imagination  as  well  as  the  confusion  that, 
‘This one [living being] has died.’

Questioner:  In  the  Gita,  Lord  Krishna  told  Arjun, 
“Moksha is indeed inside Me,” so is moksha indeed within?

Dadashri: Yes, of course it is within, it’s not as though 

you can find it outside!

Questioner: Lord Krishna said, “It is within Me.”

Dadashri: Yes, it is indeed within Him. Where would 

He bring it from outside?

Questioner:  So,  it  is  the  intention  of  the  Gita  to 
convey, ‘You let go of everything else. Worship Me alone.’ 
That is what is written inside it.

Dadashri: What it is trying to convey is, ‘This Krishna 
is  who  I  am,’  and  Krishna  means  the  Self.  The  Self  exists 
within each and everyone’s body, that Self is Itself Krishna, 
and  moksha  verily  lies  within  It.  That  is  what  it  [the  Gita] 
is conveying.

48

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Questioner:  Is  that  why  it  has  been  said,  “The  Self 
is Itself the absolute Self (Atma so Parmatma)”? Is the Self 
Itself Krishna?

Dadashri:  Yes,  when  Lord  Krishna  says,  “This  that 
I  am  doing…,”  there  He  is  speaking  as  the  Self.  So,  there 
has been a mistake in understanding [what He was saying]. 
People have understood that He is talking as an individual, 
meaning,  ‘I  am  the  doer,  and  I  Myself  created  this  world.’ 
It  is  not  like  that;  He  is  speaking  as  the  Self.  Come  and 
understand  the  entire  Gita  from  ‘us’  [the  Gnani  Purush], 
then you will be able to understand it.



[3]
The Eternal Element That Supports 
Motion – The Eternal Element That 
Supports Inertia
Motion Happens Because of the Eternal Element 
That Supports Motion

These [eternal elements of] inanimate matter (jada) and 
the Self (Chetan) require energy to move from here. Neither 
the Self has this energy nor does inanimate matter have this 
energy. The Self does not have the intrinsic property to move. 
The  Parmanu  (smallest,  most  indivisible  and  indestructible 
particles  of  inanimate  matter)  cannot  move  back  and  forth 
from  here,  nor  can  this  Self  move  back  and  forth. There  is 
the  eternal  element  called  gatisahayak  which  moves  them 
back  and  forth,  which  changes  the  location  of  the  two.  It 
helps them and it puts them into motion.

Questioner: How does that motion happen? Does the 

motion happen through positive and negative power?

Dadashri:  No,  no.  There  is  the  eternal  element  of 
gatisahayak which itself puts objects into motion, it helps in 
the relative (vyavahaar). When the intention to move arises 
within  the  [worldly-interacting]  self  *3,  the  moment  there  is 

*  Wherever  there  is  discussion  about  the  self  having  the  intention  to  move, 
understand the self to mean the worldly-interacting self (vyavahaar atma).

50

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

a subtle sign that it wants to move, then the eternal element 
that supports motion helps it.

Questioner:  In  the  Bhagavad  Gita,  a  reference  has 
been made to the para prakruti (the prakruti that is closer to 
the ‘I’, the mishrachetan; also known as pratyaksh prakruti) 
and  apara  prakruti  (the  prakruti  that  is  further  away  from 
the  ‘I’,  the  mind,  the  speech,  the  body;  also  known  as 
paroksh prakruti).

Dadashri:  That  is  referring  to  the  prakruti  (non-Self 
complex). Apara (that which is farther away from me) and 
para  (that  which  is  near  me)  both  refer  to  the  prakruti. 
Now this is a different thing; this body which is made up of 
these five elements (panch mahabhoot; according to ancient 
Indian philosophy, the five elements that are the basis of all 
cosmic creation: earth, water, fire, air, and space), does not 
have  the  property  of  movement.  If  it  wants  to  move  from 
here, if it wants to go from here, then it would not be able 
to  go  a  mile  from  here.  Even  the  Self  does  not  have  the 
property of movement.

Questioner:  In  the  Upanishad  [ancient  Sanskrit  texts 
of  spiritual  teaching  and  ideas  of  Hinduism],  there  is  the 
description  that,  ‘The  Self  is  in  motion  (gatimaan)  and  the 
Self is not in motion.’ So, which of these two is correct?

Dadashri: Neither is the Self in motion, nor are these 
five elements [the body] in motion. That eternal element that 
supports motion is within, and that eternal element does a lot 
of work; it does not move anything intentionally of its own 
accord, it is only when the desire [to move] arises within the 
self, that it starts functioning.

The Intent to Move Arises Due to Vibhaav

The  moment  it  [the  worldly-interacting  self]  has  the 
intent (bhaav) to move, this is the eternal element that helps 

[3] The Eternal Element That Supports...

51

it,  which  draws  it  away  from  here.  Otherwise,  neither  the 
Self  nor  inanimate  matter  have  such  an  energy  at  all,  nor 
do they have such a property that they can move away from 
here  of  their  own  accord. Therefore,  the  one  that  does  that 
is  the  eternal  element  that  supports  motion. As  the  eternal 
element  that  supports  motion  is  present,  they  keep  on 
moving,  so  then  how  can  they  come  to  a  stop  once  again? 
The answer is, there is another eternal element, sthitisahayak 
(inertia),  which  helps  to  stop  them.  So  wherever  one  finds 
it convenient to sit, it will help one to get seated there. So, 
the fact that you are sitting is on account of the sthitisahayak 
tattva (the eternal element that supports inertia).

Questioner:  Does  the  eternal  element  of  the  Self  do 

the bhaav of moving? Whose bhaav is it?

Dadashri:  It  is  the  Self  alone  that  has  the  energy 
to  do  bhaav.  Meaning  that,  It  can  either  prevail  in  the 
inherent nature as the Self (Swabhaav) or it can also assume 
identification with that which is not the Self (visheshbhaav). 
Yes, so through visheshbhaav, it has the desire to move away 
from  here,  such  a  bhaav  arises.  So,  there  is  just  its  desire, 
and  secondly,  there  is  an  eternal  element  that  helps  it  by 
taking it there. That has been referred to as dharmastikaya, 
gatisahayak tattva (the eternal element that supports motion). 
This one wants to move, and that one helps it to move. Just 
as there is a fish floating in a flowing stream of water, it is 
not swimming of its own accord, however even if it is just 
floating  in  the  water,  it  will  still  move  forward.  Would  the 
fish  move  forward  or  not?  The  water  would  take  it  ahead. 
The eternal element that supports motion is similar to this.

If  the  eternal  element  that  supports  motion  were  to 
be  the  only  one,  then  no  one  would  sit  at  all. There  would 
be  constant  scurrying  about  hither  and  thither.  Even  these 
houses would keep on moving, and people would also keep 
on  moving.  There  would  be  no  end  to  it.  So,  the  worldly 

52

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

activities would not be accomplished. Therefore, there is the 
eternal element that supports inertia which keeps the houses 
still. All of you who are seated, it keeps you still. Then when 
you want to go, it lets you go.

How  can  the  eternal  element  of  inanimate  matter 
move? It can move only if that eternal element [that supports 
motion]  is  present.  Just  as  if  we  were  to  throw  a  log  in  a 
river, then who moves it along? How does the log do that? 
If  we  throw  a  log  in  the  river  at  Chanod  (a  village  in  the 
Vadodara  district  in  Gujarat)  and  pull  it  out  at  Bharuch  (a 
city at the mouth of the Narmada river in Gujarat), then who 
made it move there?

Questioner:  From  the  relative  viewpoint,  if  it  is  the 
eternal  element  of  inanimate  matter,  then  the  solution  can 
only come about through inanimate matter.

Dadashri:  No,  it  is  not  like  that.  It  is  the  water  that 
pulls it along, we can see that overtly. Similarly, all of these 
people get pulled along. Who takes them back and forth? It 
is the eternal element referred to as gatisahayak, it is able to 
make others move.

Questioner: Dharmastikaya, adharmastikaya, what is 

all that? I did not understand that.

Dadashri: Those are all technical terms. Dharmastikaya 
is the same as gatisahayak and adharmastikaya is the same 
as sthitisahayak. Since they are technical terms, that is why 
you  do  not  understand  them.  That  which  has  been  written 
in  our  simple  language  is  correct;  that  which  has  been 
written in our pure Gujarati language. Moreover, it is in our 
rural, colloquial language. Through that, we can understand 
everything well. That [word] ‘adharmastikaya’ has nothing 
to  do  with  dharmadharma  (relative  religion),  it  simply 
contains the word ‘dharma’.

[3] The Eternal Element That Supports...

53

There Is Freedom in Knowing Superficially

Questioner:  Are  gatisahayak  and  sthitisahayak 

energies or do they also have atoms?

Dadashri: No, no, they are in the form of pradesh (large 
regions;  large  spatial  units). They  are  so  large  that  whatever 
desire arises in whomever, they help them with that. They do 
not have atoms; they have pradesh. They are called pradesh, 
but that cannot be understood through the intellect.

Questioner: What did You say, ‘gatisahayak is in the 

form of pradesh’?

Dadashri: Even the Self has infinite pradesh (smallest 
amount of space that a single parmanu occupies on the Self).

Questioner: Dada, please tell us about pradesh. What 

is a pradesh?

Dadashri: Do not speak [interpret it] according to your 
language;  moreover,  these  are  simply  words  that  have  been 
given, that is all. It is only when One reaches that [spiritual] 
state  that  they  can  be  understood  in  all  their  subtlety.  It  is 
of no use for you; do not delve too deeply into that. Where 
did this water come from? One would say that it came from 
a  tank.  Through  what  will  it  flow?  Through  the  pipe.  Then 
once  we  wash  our  hands  and  feet,  once  we  wash  our  face 
and take a bath, where does the water go? It goes down the 
gutter.  That  is  all,  this  is  all  that  needs  to  be  known.  What 
does the gutter flow into? Into the river. There is freedom in 
knowing superficially, whereas if one delves further to seek 
out the deeper meaning, then he would have to stick around 
in  the  very  same  place.  All  you  need  to  know  is  what  is 
helpful, isn’t it? Say you sit in a car and start asking, “What’s 
its model? What materials is it made from?” Is there a need 
to know all of that? You sit in the car and go to the station, 
then the car goes back to its place and you go to your home.

54

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

The Eternal Element That Supports Inertia Makes 
It Still

Questioner: Dada, what is the function of the eternal 

element that supports inertia (adharmastikaya)?

Dadashri: That which makes things still is the eternal 
element  that  supports  inertia.  After  putting  something  into 
motion,  what  can  be  done  if  it  does  not  stop?  The  eternal 
element  that  supports  inertia  makes  it  still.  Otherwise,  the 
motion  alone  would  continue  on.  That’s  all;  none  of  these 
people  would  sit  down.  They  would  keep  moving  about 
hither and thither, day and night. However, there is this entire 
eternal  element  that  supports  inertia,  that  is  why  everyone 
goes off to sleep peacefully. This car moves because of the 
eternal  element  that  supports  motion.  Otherwise,  it  would 
not  move,  and  it  comes  to  a  stop  because  of  the  eternal 
element  that  supports  inertia.  When  the  time  unfolds  for 
the  eternal  element  that  supports  inertia  to  function,  it  [the 
object] comes to a stop [becomes still]. When the influence 
of the eternal element that supports motion is over, when it 
gets  used  up,  then  the  eternal  element  that  supports  inertia 
starts functioning.

Do  people  not  say,  “I  have  lost  the  courage  to  walk. 
I  can  no  longer  get  up  and  walk.”  So  what  has  gone?  The 
answer is, it is not of the pudgal, it is not of the Self; it is the 
eternal  element  that  supports  motion  that  has  gone.  When 
the courage to get up has been depleted; at the time of death, 
the  energy  to  get  up  becomes  depleted  completely,  at  that 
time, the eternal element that supports motion has depleted 
completely [in that person].

Who Makes the Intent to Move?

Questioner: So is it this eternal element that supports 
motion  that  brings  one  closer  like  that,  or  is  it  that  these 
circumstances tend to arise?

[3] The Eternal Element That Supports...

55

Dadashri: No, the eternal element that supports motion 
does not work like that. All the eternal elements are indeed 
constantly  undergoing  change  (parivartansheel)  by  their 
inherent  nature,  however  the  eternal  element  that  supports 
motion  actually  helps  only  when  the  Pudgal  [Parmanu] 
become unnatural (vikrut) and the Self becomes unnatural.

Questioner:  Dada,  the  eternal  element  that  supports 
motion  that  You  mentioned,  is  it  an  eternal  element  that 
causes motion (gati), or is it an eternal element that assists 
after the motion has begun?

Dadashri: It is an eternal element that assists.

Questioner:  So  then,  who  is  it  that  gives  rise  to 

motion?

Dadashri:  It  is  not  a  request  of  the  eternal  element 
of the Self Itself, it is of the vyatirek guna (completely new 
properties of a third component that arises when the eternal 
elements  of  the  Self  and  inanimate  matter  come  together). 
So,  it  is  not  a  property  of  the  Self,  it  is  not  a  property  of 
inanimate  matter.  So,  it  [the  eternal  element  that  supports 
motion] actually assists when the desire to move arises.

Questioner: So, is motion a vyatirek guna of the Self?

Dadashri:  No,  it  is  of  both  the  Self  and  inanimate 
matter.  [The  eternal  element  that  supports]  Motion  assists 
only these two eternal elements.

Questioner:  The  entire  worldly  life  has  arisen  on 
account  of  the  visheshbhaav  of  inanimate  matter  and  the 
Self,  so  how  do  the  eternal  elements  that  support  motion 
and inertia work within that?

Dadashri:  Neither  the  Self  nor  inanimate  matter  have 
their  own  energy  to  move  away  from  here,  nor  do  they  have 
this [property] in their inherent nature at all. Just as when we 

56

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

pour water, if there is a slope, then the water will flow along the 
slope, without due respect to anyone. If there is a cavity along 
the way, then it will flow into the cavity and move along. It is 
not concerned with anyone. Similarly, inanimate matter and the 
Self do not have the energy to move from here to another place, 
however, it [the worldly-interacting self] has the bhaav (intent) 
that, ‘I want to go this way.’ So then, if that bhaav is there, then 
it [the eternal element that supports motion] helps it.

Questioner:  Is  the  bhaav  of  inanimate  matter  or  of 

the Self?

Dadashri:  It  is  of  the  [worldly-interacting]  self.  A 
person may do a bhaav within, such as, ‘I want to take this 
much along with me.’

Questioner:  Is  it  the  Self  or  inanimate  matter  that 

does this bhaav?

Dadashri:  It  is  the  assumed  self  [the  worldly-

interacting self].

Questioner:  Okay,  so  then  why  does  it  do  the  bhaav 

in that place?

Dadashri:  It  is  because  of  the  bhaav  that  this  [the 
eternal  element  that  supports  motion]  becomes  active,  it 
takes it away.

Questioner: And how does it work with regards to the 

kshetra (location)?

Dadashri: With regards to the kshetra, the proportion 
of anger, pride, deceit, and greed increases or decreases. The 
proportion  does  not  remain  the  same  because  the  kshetra 
changes,  whereas  the  bhaav  takes  a  person  there. A  person 
may decide, ‘I want to go to Kolkata in the morning.’

Questioner: So what function do the eternal elements 

that support motion and inertia have in that?

[3] The Eternal Element That Supports...

57

Dadashri:  They  assist.  If  it  [the  worldly-interacting 
self]  does  the  bhaav,  then  they  help;  if  it  does  not  do  the 
bhaav, then they do not assist.

Questioner:  How  can  one  make  use  of  the  eternal 

elements that support motion and inertia?

Dadashri: We cannot make use of them.

Questioner: So then how are they being used?

Dadashri: Actually,  when  you  decide,  ‘I  want  to  go 
from  here  to  there,’  then  it  starts  to  function.  So,  it  gets 
credited  within  according  to  your  desires.  This  is  because 
neither of the two have the energy to move. Therefore, when 
the worldly-interacting self has the desire, that is when this 
[the eternal element that supports motion] assists him. And if 
there is the eternal element of Space (aakash), then one can 
stand in that [space]. If one wants to remain in the relative 
(vyavahaar), then space is needed. If one wants to remain in 
the  Real  (Nishchay;  as  the  Self),  then  space  is  not  needed. 
Therefore, if one wants to remain in the relative, then time is 
needed. This is because it [the relative] is temporary (anitya). 
In  the  Real,  in  that  which  is  permanent  (nitya),  time  is  not 
required. All the six [eternal elements] are certainly within us.

Questioner:  So  is  it  also  possible  to  make  any 
improvements  in  the  eternal  elements  that  support  motion 
and inertia, or does that also happen only through bhaav?

Dadashri:  Everything  certainly  happens 

through 
bhaav.  Whoever  has  a  pure  bhaav,  for  him,  that  is  pure. 
However, one does not know how to do a pure bhaav, does 
he!  Or  else,  if  he  knew  how  to  do  that,  then  a  lot  of  his 
[spiritual] work would certainly get done, wouldn’t it!

There  are  many  houses  with  huge  corrugated  roofing 
sheets  that  get  blown  away  entirely!  Who  does  that?  The 

58

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

eternal element that supports motion does that. It is an eternal 
element.  It  is  not  this  wind  alone  that  does  that.  There  is 
an  eternal  element  that  resides  within  the  wind;  when  that 
eternal  element  starts  functioning,  only  then  does  it  [the 
corrugated  roofing  sheet]  blow  away,  otherwise,  it  would 
not  blow  away.  Once  the  roof  of  your  house  has  blown 
away, then it does not stop right there. So where does it go? 
It moves from here and falls thousands of feet away. Would 
it  fall  or  not?  That  happens  through  the  eternal  element 
that supports motion. Then there is the eternal element that 
supports  inertia.  When  the  corrugated  roofing  sheets  blow 
away  from  here,  they  would  indeed  keep  on  flying.  If  the 
eternal  element  that  supports  motion  alone  were  to  exist, 
then the corrugated roofing sheets would not fall down later 
on, they would keep on flying. That is why there is a need 
for the other eternal element, the one that supports inertia.

Questioner: Is the eternal element that supports inertia 

what we refer to as gravity?

Dadashri:  No,  no,  forget  it.  Gravity  does  not  have 

anything to do with it.

Why Does a Dismembered Tail Move?

Have you ever seen a lizard’s tail get cut off?

Questioner: Yes, Dada.

Dadashri: What did you notice?

Questioner:  Once  the  tail  gets  cut  off,  even  then  the 

tail keeps moving, on its own…

Dadashri: And what does the lizard do?

Questioner: The lizard darts off.

Dadashri: The lizard darts off whereas the tail keeps 
flailing around. Then what is the reasoning behind that? The 

[3] The Eternal Element That Supports...

59

tail  keeps  flailing  like  this,  up  and  down.  What  does  that 
suggest? What must be happening? Who must be moving it?

Questioner: The Self.

Dadashri:  The  Self  has  gone  along  with  the  lizard. 
Now  what  has  been  left  behind?  So  the  entire  world  refers 
to it as the Self. This is not the Self.

Questioner: So then what is it?

Dadashri:  It  is  the  eternal  element  that  is  lifeless, 
the  one  that  does  not  have  the  property  to  Know  and  See 
(achetan tattva).

Questioner: Then how is it able to move about to and 

fro?

Dadashri: How do these engines run? Do the engines 
not  run? All  these  cars  and  other  motorized  vehicles,  they 
are  inanimate  objects  that  move  about,  they  are  not  chetan 
(animate;  living).  The  Self  does  not  have  Its  own  property 
to move about.

Therefore, these doctors have  never seen Chetan (the 
Self). No one has ever seen Chetan. People who are moving 
about  cannot  be  considered  Chetan.  Someday,  there  will 
actually  be  mechanical  people.  When  mechanical  people 
will  be  made,  they  will  be  moving  around.  Yes,  they  will 
even talk and do everything else.

Questioner:  Is  that  what  they  refer  to  as  robots  in 

English?

Dadashri: Yes, so that is not Chetan.

Now,  people  are  not  able  to  bring  a  solution  for  this. 
So,  what  people  say  is  that,  ‘The  jeev  (life  force)  is  going 
away from this [body], and when the jeev has departed, the 
body becomes lifeless.’ They say that, don’t they? The jeev 

60

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

cannot  be  cut,  whereas  the  tail  got  cut.  The  very  moment 
the tail gets cut, Chetan moves from it and indeed becomes 
one  in  that  [the  lizard].  It  [Chetan]  does  not  separate,  and 
then the lizard flees with the entire Chetan. The tail gets left 
behind.

Questioner: Is there still some jeev (life) in the tail, is 

that why it flails around?

Dadashri: The jeev has gone further away, it left with 
the  lizard;  no  jeev  remains  in  this  [the  tail].  Even  the  big, 
prominent  saints  have  become  puzzled  by  this. The  fact  is, 
‘we’,  the  Gnani  Purush,  disclose  everything  as  it  is.  What 
is this like? The jeev (the life force; the Self) is always the 
illuminator (prakashak), and the jeev (embodied soul) cannot 
be  cut  into  pieces.  If  it  were  to  be  cut  into  pieces,  then  it 
would  die.  If  it  dies,  then  the  entire  jeev  would  depart.  Or 
else,  the  lizard  would  move  on,  and  the jeev would  remain 
behind; however, that does not happen. So what must be the 
reason behind this?

What is actually referred to as jeev? It is where there 
are feelings (laagni), where there is the sensation of pleasure 
or pain (vedana). There is no feeling in this tail. Even if we 
were to place a flame on the tail that was cut, it would not 
have any feeling of it. Whereas the lizard that darted off, it 
would  have  feelings  in  the  same  situation.  Therefore,  the 
jeev  actually  went  with  the  lizard.  Chetan  cannot  be  cut; 
pieces  cannot  be  made  of  Chetan.  What  has  Lord  Krishna 
said?  It  is  not  possible  to  cut Chetan.  Chetan  can  never  be 
cut into two pieces. Chetan exists as a whole. When I asked 
scientists  in  America,  they  said,  “It  definitely  is  Chetan.” 
They refer to it as ‘the Soul’. I told them, “It is not the Soul. 
The  Soul  does  not  have  pieces.”  If  just  this  much  were  to 
be understood, then one’s [spiritual] work would indeed be 
done!

[3] The Eternal Element That Supports...

61

The  Self  is  not  something  that  can  be  seen  with  the 
eyes, nor can It be seen through anything else. ‘It’ can actually 
pass right through a mountain. How subtle must It be?

Questioner: Extremely subtle.

Dadashri:  The  subtlest  of  all.  ‘It’  can  pass  right 
through a mountain, It can pass right through a wall. So, It 
contracts and goes entirely in the lizard. So if the entire jeev 
immediately moves into the lizard and remains with it, then 
why does this tail that has been cut keep moving around? If 
it is moving around, then why does the moving stop? What 
is the reason behind it? What are the causes?

It  is  because  it  [the  cut  tail]  does  not  have  the  Self. 
The  inherent  nature  (swabhaav)  of  the  Self  is  such  that 
the  moment  the  front  part  is  separated  [from  the  tail],  It 
contracts  into  that  part.  It  is  the  inherent  nature  of  the  Self 
to contract and It can also expand. When It enters the body 
of an elephant, then It even expands greatly. When It enters 
the body of an ant, then It contracts. This is all the inherent 
nature of the Self.

That Is the Eternal Element That Supports Motion

Questioner: There must indeed be some kind of inertia, 
right? Just as when an engine pushes the train carriages just 
once and the carriages move for a while, similarly, this one 
[the  cut  tail]  must  simply  have  a  slight  push  from  Chetan, 
even though Chetan may not be in it?

Dadashri: It is not even a push from Chetan. There is 
an  eternal  element  named  gatisahayak  (motion),  that  is  the 
one  that  starts  to  deplete  [from  the  tail].  It  is  also  referred 
to  as  dharmastikaya.  And  later  on,  when  that  depletes 
completely, then the tail will remain still on account of the 
eternal  element  that  supports  inertia  (adharmastikaya),  it 
will become still.

62

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Questioner:  But  Dada,  the  energy  that  Chetan  had 
before,  the  tail  moves  because  of  the  push  of  that  energy, 
doesn’t  it?  Otherwise,  it  should  keep  moving  forever, 
shouldn’t it?

Dadashri:  It  is  not  because  of  the  push.  Rather  than 
the  push,  it  is  an  entirely  different  thing.  The  fact  is,  there 
is  a  filled  stock  within  each  and  everyone’s  body,  there  is 
an  eternal  element  named  gatisahayak  that  is  filled  within, 
there  is  an  eternal  element  named  aakash  (Space)  that  is 
filled  within.  All  of  these  eternal  elements,  they  start  to 
deplete immediately [upon the tail being cut].

Questioner:  So,  as  long  as  that  eternal  element  [that 

supports motion] is present, that [tail] continues to move?

Dadashri:  The  eternal  element  of  Space  remains 
within, but this eternal element that supports motion leaves. 
So,  the  tail  flails  around  [for  some  time],  thereafter  the 
eternal  element  that  supports  inertia  alone  remains. That  is 
why the tail becomes still.

Say  you  throw  this  ball  once  from  here;  two  to  four 
people witness you throwing it. And then other people came 
in  from  outside;  they  had  not  seen  you  throw  the  ball.  So 
then  when  the  ball  bounces  again,  those  people  will  say, 
“Who  is  making  this  ball  bounce?”  So  what  response  will 
you give them, if it bounces once more?

When you throw a ball from here, then after bouncing 
to a height of three feet, would it bounce to a height of three 
and a half feet, the second time around?

Questioner:  It  would  bounce  to  a  height  of  two  and 

a half feet.

Dadashri:  Two  and  a  half  feet.  The  third  time,  it 

would be two feet, the fourth time...

Questioner: One and a half feet.

[3] The Eternal Element That Supports...

63

Dadashri: Who makes it bounce again?

Questioner: It is influenced by the eternal element of 

the Self, that is why it bounces.

Dadashri:  When  you  threw  the  ball,  you  assisted 
it,  you  gave  it  the  property  of  motion.  Then  it  remains  in 
motion. So as long as its motion does not come to an end, it 
does not stop. It will not stop even if you say, “Hey, I was 
the one who threw you, so stop now!”

Questioner: The lizard that fled entirely alive, taking 
the  Self  with  it,  it  also  moves  on  account  of  the  eternal 
element that supports motion. Does it move because of the 
presence of the Self, or does it move because of the eternal 
element that supports motion?

Dadashri: It moves only if the Self is present. This is 

because, once the Self departs, it cannot move.

Questioner:  But  does  the  Self  make  it  move?  Is  the 

Self the doer? Is It the doer of the movement?

Dadashri:  The  Self  is  not  [the  doer].  However,  it 
[the  body  of  the  lizard]  has  been  charged  because  of  [the 
presence of] the Self. It is because of the discharging of that 
which has been charged, that the tail keeps moving.

Questioner: The Self cannot walk, can It? It’s not as 

if the Self has the energy to walk?

Dadashri:  But  it  [the  body  of  the  lizard]  has  been 
charged  because  of  the  Self. And  if  the  Self  were  to  leave 
from the lizard today, then it would not walk at all.

Questioner: But the Self is a non-doer (akarta), isn’t 

It?

Dadashri: Yes, It certainly is a non-doer, but as it [the 

developing I] was charged, the other self arose, didn’t it?

64

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Questioner: The other self?

Dadashri:  The  lizard  is  indeed  considered  the  other 
self.  It  has  been  referred  to  as  the  pratishthit  atma  (the 
discharging relative self), it is the one that continues moving. 
And the tail that gets cut off, it does not move methodically. 
It keeps flailing, it keeps wiggling.

Those Are Not Parmanu

Questioner:  So  why  did  the  function  of  the  eternal 

element that supports motion stop only in the tail?

Dadashri:  It  is  because  the  Self  separated  from  the 
tail  and  went  into  the  lizard! As  long  as  the  Self  remains, 
all the other eternal elements remain. The moment the Self 
leaves,  all  the  others  leave.  The  other  eternal  elements  are 
not  such  that  they  can  contract  or  expand.  The  Self  is  the 
only eternal element that can contract and expand.

The two eternal elements, the ones that support motion 
and inertia come together and then [the body] moves around. 
When that eternal element [of the Self] leaves from within, 
that  is  the  end  of  it! That  eternal  element  exists  within  the 
entire body of the lizard.

Questioner:  Now,  the  tail  is  made  of  all  of  these 
parmanu and the parmanu revolve around the center, those 
parmanu are still in motion. The tail is dead, but the parmanu 
are still in motion, aren’t they?

Dadashri:  The  parmanu  do  not  have  anything  to  do 
with  this!  Everything  is  independent,  each  one  has  its  own 
[function].

Questioner: So that tail will decay after a few days.

Dadashri: It will decompose.

Questioner: What will happen to it?

[3] The Eternal Element That Supports...

65

Dadashri: And the parmanu that it was composed of, 
they will revert to how they were. In this, the parmanu that 
had  become  a  mixture,  they  separate  to  the  form  in  which 
they were.

Clarity is needed, isn’t it? I had tired myself out while 
pondering over this during childhood; I wondered, ‘Is it the 
jeev (the Self; life) that leaves [upon death] or what is it that 
leaves?’ When I understood this eternal element, when these 
eternal  elements  came  to  light  for  me  at  Surat  Station,  that 
is when I understood all of this!

The Proportion Is Different in Everyone

Questioner: Does the property of the eternal element 

that supports inertia exist to a greater extent in trees?

Dadashri: There is very little, and the eternal element 

that supports motion is also very little.

Questioner:  So  Dada,  in  everyone,  are  the  eternal 
elements  that  support  motion  and  inertia  present  according 
to their prakruti?

Dadashri:  Yes,  according  to  the  prakruti.  As  the 
eternal  element  that  supports  inertia  is  greater  in  it,  it  is 
characterized by stillness. In many living beings, the eternal 
element  that  supports  motion  is  greater,  so  it  keeps  on 
moving, and in others, there is both inertia and motion, they 
are in equal proportions, so they are characterized by both.

Questioner: All  these  bodily  functions  that  carry  on, 

who are they dependent on? Who carries them out?

Dadashri:  I  told  you,  didn’t  I,  the  eternal  element 
that supports motion carries them out. Moreover, the eternal 
element that supports motion helps based on the merit karma 
and demerit karma one has. If there is merit karma, then the 
eternal element that supports motion keeps helping.

66

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Questioner: Dada, is there anything like good or bad 
when  it  comes  to  the  eternal  elements  that  support  motion 
and inertia?

Dadashri:  No,  they  even  help  a  person  with  demerit 
karma and they even help a person with merit karma. They 
are  impartial.  The  eternal  element  of  Space  does  not  help 
anyone.

Questioner:  So  then  are  the  eternal  elements  that 

support motion and inertia present in the human life-form?

Dadashri: They are present in all, they are present in 

everyone; without them, this world cannot function at all.

Questioner:  So  Dada,  if  you  go  from  here  to  Santa 
Cruz, then can we say that the eternal element that supports 
motion helped you do so?

Dadashri: Yes, it is certainly the eternal element that 

supports motion that does so!

Questioner: So then what does this jeev do?

Dadashri:  The  jeev,  the  pratishthit  atma  had  done 
the bhaav. On the basis of the vyatirek guna, the pratishthit 
atma  moves  with  the  help  of  the  eternal  element  that 
supports  motion.  Based  on  what  the  pratishthit  atma  says, 
the  eternal  element  that  supports  motion  becomes  active. 
The  stock  of  this  eternal  element  that  supports  motion  has 
been filled within. Now, if you ask a person to get up, then 
he may not be able to get up at all. The stock that has been 
filled within him is that of the eternal element that supports 
inertia, so how can he do that? Whereas some have a restless 
disposition,  such  a  person  cannot  sit  even  for  a  moment. 
People will say he has ants in his pants, so he cannot remain 
seated. So the eternal element that supports motion is filled 
to a greater extent in him.

The  Lord  had  said  to  fill  [the  stock]  in  equal 

[3] The Eternal Element That Supports...

67

proportions.  Normality  is  the  solution  to  this  worldly  life. 
Do  not  undertake  intensive  penance  the  entire  night.  Go  to 
sleep  for  a  while;  as  you  have  had  something  to  eat,  that 
will put some strain on the body. Yet people will say, “The 
mooah  (mortal  one)  stays  up  all  night,  carried  away  [with 
work].”

That Eternal Element Is Permanent, Real

Questioner: That eternal element that supports inertia 

which You mentioned, is it relative or Real?

Dadashri:  It  is  definitely  Real;  it  cannot  be  relative. 
That which is eternal is always Real indeed. And the eternal 
element  that  gives  It  [the  Self]  motion  cannot  be  made 
into  pieces.  The  eternal  element  that  supports  motion  is 
as  undivided  as  the  lokaakash  (the  region  of  space  in  the 
universe in which all six eternal elements exist). So wherever 
You  [the  Self]  need  it  to  carry  out  a  task,  You  will  get  it 
from  there.  Now  just  like  the  eternal  element  that  causes 
motion, the eternal element that causes [an object] stillness 
is  also  undivided.  It  is  also  indestructible.  And  on  top  of 
that,  the  inherent  nature  of  each  one  is  like  this  [specific]. 
They  are  all  based  on  their  own  intrinsic  properties  with  a 
specific function (gunadharma).

This  inanimate  matter  and  the  Self  are  permanent 
eternal  elements.  So,  if  they  want  to  move  from  here,  then 
they would require the eternal element that assists movement 
to be present, then they will be able to do so.

Questioner: Does the very same eternal element that 
supports  motion  give  motion  to  the  pudgal  as  well  as  the 
self?

Dadashri: Yes, the very same eternal element.

The  energy  that  gives  motion  is  an  energy  without 
a  beginning,  it  is  indestructible,  it  is  infinite.  It  is  present 

68

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

throughout  the  three  time  periods  [the  past,  the  present, 
and  the  future],  and  that  energy  moves  every  parmanu. 
That  energy  is  within  atoms  (anu),  but  it  is  outside  of  the 
Parmanu, it is outside the Self. That energy does not move 
anything  at  all  of  its  own  accord,  but  it  assists  in  moving. 
This is the eternal element that supports motion.

The Eternal Element That Supports Motion Even 
Takes One to Moksha!

the 

Questioner:  At 

time  of  death,  a  vimaan 
(mythological  flying  vehicle)  from  above  takes  the  jeev 
away;  they  talk  about  the  vimaan  that  takes  the  Self  away, 
don’t they?

Dadashri:  A  vimaan  is  something  used  to  explain  to 
these people who have a childlike level of development. It is 
actually the eternal element that supports motion that takes 
it. So, as it is not possible to explain to these people about 
the eternal element that supports motion, they refer to it as 
a vimaan.

Questioner: If we do the bhaav, then would the eternal 
elements that support motion and inertia help us even now?

Dadashri: Yes.

Questioner: So whatever we want to do, we can do so 
only with their help. If we want to go to moksha, then how 
should  we  take  the  assistance  of  the  eternal  elements  that 
support motion and inertia?

Dadashri:  They  are  indeed  being  used  [even  now]. 
When  you  came  here  from  your  home,  it  is  because  of  the 
bhaav you had done in the past life. ‘You’ are not doing new 
bhaav right now.

Questioner:  Right  now,  ‘we’  [mahatmas]  are  doing 

the bhaav of going to moksha, aren’t ‘we’?

[3] The Eternal Element That Supports...

69

Dadashri: Right now, You are not doing any bhaav.

Questioner: Then?

Dadashri:  It  is  actually  the  bhaav  that  was  done  in 
the  past  life  that  is  unfolding  now.  So,  that  is  all  discharge 
karma.  Both  the  eternal  elements  that  support  motion  and 
inertia are [in the form of] discharge karma. When new karma 
are bound, they have to be discharged once again. They are 
considered  as  discharge  [karma]  all  the  way  to  the  point  of 
them assisting One to reach ultimate liberation (moksha).

Questioner:  That  is  exactly  what  I  am  asking;  are 

they helpful or not in going to moksha?

Dadashri: Once they take One all the way to moksha, 

that is when that discharge comes to an end.

Questioner:  How  should  ‘we’  [mahatmas]  make  use 

of them to go to moksha?

Dadashri: ‘You’ do not have to make use of them. In 

fact, they themselves will take You [there].

Questioner:  Dada,  the  application  or  use  of  those 

eternal elements happens automatically, doesn’t it?

Dadashri: It definitely is automatic.

Questioner: But ‘we’ do have to do the bhaav, don’t 

‘we’?

Dadashri: The bhaav were done in the past life, this is 
the result of that. ‘You’ do not have to do any new [bhaav]. 
Their  work  is  completed  only  after  they  have  helped  You 
reach all the way to moksha.

In Going to Moksha, the Self Is a Non-Doer Right 
Until the End

For how long does one feel bound? There is bondage 

70

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

as long as the ego is present. From the moment One believes, 
‘Now I have become free,’ that itself is moksha!

Questioner: How does one go to moksha?

Dadashri:  ‘You’  [as  the  Self]  do  not  have  to  do 
anything  at  all  for  that.  It  is  through  Its  very  inherent 
nature  that  It  takes  You  there.  If  all  these  karma  were  to 
discharge,  then  the  inherent  nature  of  the  Self  is  to  ascend 
(urdhvagami).  The  pudgal  makes  it  descend  (adhogami). 
The  pudgal  clusters  around  it  and  takes  it  down.  In  this 
tussle between the two, when its [the developing I’s] belief 
(bhaav)  as  the  pudgal  goes  away,  then  the  developing  ‘I’ 
(pote) automatically goes to moksha.

Questioner: Does the Real form (swaroop) of the Self 

remain the same as it is?

Dadashri:  Yes.  Moreover,  the  eternal  element  that 
supports motion even goes all the way [to moksha] to see 
It off. ‘It’ cannot go there without the help of the eternal 
element  that  supports  motion.  It  [the  eternal  element 
that  supports  motion]  pays  off  this  much  of  the  karmic 
account,  the  karmic  account  of  taking  It  all  the  way  to 
moksha.

Questioner:  [A  karmic  account]  With  whom?  Is  it 

with the eternal element that supports motion?

Dadashri:  This  eternal  element  that  supports  motion 
is the one that is paying it off, isn’t it! It is from the worldly 
perspective  [relative  viewpoint]  that  one  says,  “One  has 
become  the  embodiment  of  moksha.”  However,  in  Reality, 
the  Self  has  always  been  the  embodiment  of  moksha.  This 
[the eternal element that supports motion] is simply assisting. 
The developing ‘I’ had the desire, that is why it is assisting 
in that.

Questioner:  When  the  Self  goes  to  moksha,  only 

[3] The Eternal Element That Supports...

71

these two eternal elements, the ones that support motion and 
inertia remain, nothing else remains. So due to what reasons 
do these two eternal elements remain with It?

Dadashri:  Whichever  eternal  elements  have  work 
that  is  pending,  those  eternal  elements  remain.  Those 
which do not have work pending, not a single one of those 
eternal  elements  remain.  Now,  the  work  of  taking  the  Self 
to  moksha  remains,  which  is  of  the  eternal  element  that 
supports motion, and the work of making the Self still over 
there  is  of  the  eternal  element  that  supports  inertia.  These 
two eternal elements do their work and then go off to their 
‘home turf’. The very arrangement is like that.

Questioner:  Is  the  Self  in  a  certain  state  at  that  time 

so that these two eternal elements…

Dadashri: No, no state or anything like that. The Self 
[developing  ‘I’]  wants  to  go  to  moksha.  Such  a  bhaav  had 
been made, and so based on that bhaav, the eternal elements 
that  support  motion  and  inertia  have  joined  in.  If  you  do 
a  bhaav  of  going  to  Navsari  from  here,  then  the  eternal 
element that supports motion keeps working and the eternal 
element that supports inertia also keeps working.

Questioner:  Now,  the  Kevali  (those  who  have 
attained  absolute  Knowledge  from  the  Tirthankar  Lords), 
the  Tirthankar  Lords  who  have  gone  to  moksha  from  this 
earth  after  attaining  absolute  Knowledge  (keval  Gnan), 
those  Souls  that  have  gone  to  moksha  must  have  had 
support  from  the  eternal  element  that  supports  motion, 
mustn’t they?

Dadashri: As far as the eternal element that supports 
motion is concerned, the discharge karma [of the developing 
‘I’]  is  indeed  ready  within.  It  takes  the  Self  up,  that  is  all. 
There is no doership of its own in that.

72

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

That is why Shrimad Rajchandra said:

“As per the previously planned causes, the Self ascends 
and  remains  as  the  Self  in  the  abode  of  the  absolutely 
liberated Souls.”

“Purva  prayogaadi  kaaranaa  yogthi,  urdhvagaman 

Siddhalay prapt susthit jo.”

Therefore,  the  eternal  elements  that  support  motion 
and  inertia  have  been  planned  in  the  past  [life],  meaning 
they have been charged. Therefore, as part of the discharge, 
they take the Self there, to moksha. This does not happen on 
account of any doership of today. What has been charged is 
now  being  discharged.  Someone  might  ask,  “Sir,  on  what 
basis did It ascend? Did It do it with Its own energy?” The 
response would be, “No, it is not like that at all.” The relative 
(vyavahaar) is nirmalya (the final discharge; not chargeable 
anymore).  Therefore,  that  which  has  been  charged  in  the 
past, with this final discharge, it places the Self all the way 
up  there.  It  places  Us  [the  Self]  right  over  there,  in  Siddha 
Kshetra  (location  at  the  crest  of  the  universe  which  is  the 
permanent abode of the absolutely liberated Souls who have 
attained ultimate liberation). Not only that, but the fact that 
you are coming here and moving around here is because of 
what  had  been  planned  in  the  past  life.  It  is  our  planning 
from the past that brings us here, and Their [the Kevali, the 
Tirthankar Lords who are ready to go to moksha] planning 
from  the  past  takes  them  to  Siddha  Kshetra,  because  there 
is nothing left [to discharge] now, is there!

Our  coming  and  going  carries  on  because  of  the 
planned  causes  from  the  past  life. The  causes  based  on  the 
planning from the past life as well as the new planning have 
become  ready  [to  give  effect].  You  will  need  them  going 
forward,  won’t  you?  In  this  way,  the  final  planning  from 
the past life takes You [the Self] all the way to Siddha gati 

[3] The Eternal Element That Supports...

73

(the  realm  of  the  absolutely  liberated  Souls).  Who  helped 
You reach there? How was the Self taken up there? Firstly, 
the  inherent  nature  of  the  Self  is  to  ascend,  and  secondly, 
the  eternal  element  that  supports  motion  that  assists  It,  the 
eternal element that supports motion assists It naturally and 
swiftly  takes  It  right  up  there.  This  is  actually  a  Science 
(Vignan).

The Self Has No Difficulties in the Course of 
Worldly Life

That’s it, it is through the six eternal elements only that 
this worldly life is functioning. And if the Self separates from 
these six eternal elements, then It goes to moksha, It goes to 
Siddha  gati.  Then  [It  remains]  in  Siddha  gati  forever,  then 
there  is  permanent  bliss;  there  is  no  other  eternal  element 
there,  so  entanglement  does  not  arise.  Here,  as  the  other 
eternal elements are present, entanglements have arisen.

Throughout  the  course  of  worldly  life,  the  Self  has 
certainly  remained  as  the  Self,  and  It  has  not  moved  at 
all.  When  the  time  comes  for  It  to  go  to  moksha,  for  It  to 
leave the final body, even then, it is the eternal element that 
supports  motion  that  takes  It  there.  Even  in  that,  the  Self 
certainly  remains  constantly  as  the  Self.  So,  what  ‘we’  are 
saying is that no Self has experienced any difficulty, that is 
what the course of worldly life is like.



[4]
The Eternal Element of Time

The Eternal Element of Time Makes the New, Old

Everything  in  this  world  is  constantly  changing. 
Therefore,  the  fact  that  the  new  continues  to  become  old 
is  dependent  upon  Time.  Hence,  Time  is  at  work.  It  is  an 
eternal thing, it is ever-lasting, it is permanent. The fact that 
these eternal elements revolve is on account of Time.

Questioner: If It is Chetan, if It is pure consciousness, 

then why is It dependent on Time?

Dadashri:  No,  none  of  them  are  dependent  on  the 
other  in  that  way,  but  it  is  because  of  the  eternal  element 
of Time (kaal tattva) that the new becomes old. The eternal 
element of Time does all of that.

Questioner: So is Time not the same for everyone?

Dadashri: What can poor Time do? Its job is to turn 
what is new into old, and ultimately, to destroy it. In addition, 
its job is to create anew. It does not have anything to do with 
anything else, does it! Whatever our karmic account is, that 
is what gets settled.

Questioner: You mentioned that to destroy and create 

anew is actually a function (dharma) of Time?

[4] The Eternal Element of Time

75

Dadashri: ‘Time’ itself does not do that; that happens 

based on the evidence (nimit) of Time.

Questioner:  Yes,  that  makes  sense  that  it  happens 
on  the  basis  of  Time  being  an  evidence;  so  Time  becomes 
instrumental in that process, isn’t it?

Dadashri:  It  becomes  instrumental  in  the  process. 
‘Time’,  it  is  simply  constantly  making  what  is  new  into 
old.  Causing  things  to  arise  and  undergo  dissolution,  that 
is  all  the  work  of  the  element  of  Time.  That  which  arises 
and undergoes dissolution is not eternal. They are temporary 
states (avastha) of the eternal.

Now,  these  six  eternal  [elements]  that  exist,  they  are 
constantly undergoing change, they are constantly revolving. 
So the Parmanu, Chetan, all of these are constantly revolving 
like  this.  That  is  natural.  When  they  revolve  around  each 
other, temporary states arise. The temporary states that arise, 
all of them are destructible. So now, how can the temporary 
states  be  measured  to  see  how  long  they  will  last?  The 
answer is, there is the eternal element named kaal, or Time.

How does Time help? It is because of Time that we all 
came  together,  at  this  time.  We  may  have  decided  that  we 
will  arrive  at  ten  o’clock,  but  it  may  not  be  exactly  at  ten; 
there may be many different timings within that. That which 
we  are  speaking  is  all  a  forecast.  Coming  events  cast  their 
shadows  before.  So  you  are  knowing  things  based  on  that, 
but  who  is  doing  all  this  work?  It  is  certainly  Time  that  is 
doing it; that is how the world is functioning.

This  pudgal,  the  input  and  output  (puran-galan),  the 
coming together and dissolution of circumstances; how can 
one  recognize  them? The  answer  is,  through Time.  If  there 
were  no Time,  then  the  new  would  never  become  old. The 
eternal  element  of Time  does  exist;  it  is  no  ordinary  thing. 
How  did  the  new  become  old?  How  can  it  be  proved?  Is 

76

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

there  any  scope  of  verification?  Is  it  all  haphazard?  And 
subsequently, how can a person attain peace?

Externally Induced Problems Arise for the One 
Seeing the Temporary State

Questioner:  You  said  everything 
changing, nothing is undergoing destruction.

is  constantly 

Dadashri: To  make  each  thing  old  is  the  function  of 
Time. And then, all those temporary states keep undergoing 
dissolution  on  their  own.  The  eternal  element  does  not 
change whatsoever in this process. The eternal element does 
not become old; it is the temporary states that become old. 
It  is  the  temporary  states  that  arise,  the  temporary  states 
that  become  old,  and  then,  it  is  these  temporary  states  that 
undergo dissolution, that is all.

Questioner: So then nothing new forms at all?

Dadashri:  The  fact  is,  there  is  nothing  new  being 

formed in this world at all!

Questioner:  So  when  a  birth  takes  place,  does  that 

also count as a temporary state?

Dadashri:  Yes,  but  in  that  process,  nothing  new  is 
being created in this world. In fact, it is people who consider 
it to be a birth. Those who see the temporary states have this 
externally-induced problem (upadhi); for Those who See the 
eternal element, there is no problem.

Questioner: But Time is doing that, isn’t it?

Dadashri: No one is doing it, even Time is instrumental 
in  this  process.  Everyone  is  considered  an  evidentiary 
instrument. If anyone were to become a doer, then he would 
take over the world.

Questioner: So does that mean that in this case, things 

are happening automatically?

[4] The Eternal Element of Time

77

Dadashri:  Naturally  and  spontaneously.  Just  as  the 
water  of  the  Narmada  river  keeps  flowing  from  there  and 
meets  the  ocean  of  its  own  accord.  In  such  a  case,  people 
use their intellect and wonder, ‘Who is taking it there? How 
does it know that the ocean is in that direction?’ It happens 
naturally and spontaneously. It certainly continues happening 
naturally  and  spontaneously.  That  is  how  one  should  view 
everything,  this  world.  God  Himself  is  involved  in  this, 
too.  However,  He  is  not  an  independent  doer.  Naturally 
and  spontaneously,  everyone  is  considered  an  evidentiary 
instrument.  This  might  happen  through  the  instrument  of 
Time,  whereas  that  might  happen  through  the  instrument 
of  something  else,  this  other  thing  might  happen  through 
the instrument of yet another thing; in this way, through the 
coming  together  of  the  evidentiary  instruments,  everything 
continues to happen.

Questioner: But the fact that we met You, is that also 

through an instrument?

Dadashri: Only [through] an instrument.

Questioner:  But  had  we  actually  met  before  or  not, 

would that be possible or not?

Dadashri: All those circumstances must certainly have 
come together. Whoever we come across in bodily form, that 
is  not  simply  a  chance  encounter.  They  have  been  coming 
for  infinite  lifetimes.  The  circumstances  keep  changing.  If 
you had come across those circumstances in the past [life], 
only then would you come across those circumstances today 
[in  this  life].  You  come  across  those  for  whom  a  positive 
opinion  has  been  formed,  and  you  also  come  across  those 
for whom a negative opinion has been formed. If a negative 
opinion  has  been  formed,  that  circumstance  will  cause  you 
pain and then leave, whereas if a positive opinion has been 
formed,  then  that  circumstance  will  give  you  pleasure  and 

78

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

then  leave.  To  have  a  positive  opinion  is  referred  to  as 
attachment (raag). To have a negative opinion is referred to 
as abhorrence (dwesh).

Of  what  use  is  something  that  looks  attractive  on  the 
basis of Time? Based on Time, this rose is looking attractive 
today.  Tomorrow,  on  the  basis  of  Time,  it  will  appear 
wilted.  It  is  actually  on  the  basis  of  Time  that  something 
appears attractive or unappealing. The authority of the Self 
(Swasatta)  is  not  subject  to  Time.  It  is  a  different  thing 
altogether. Everything that is dependent on Time is forgotten. 
It is worth Seeing only the attractiveness of the Self, of the 
Real form as the Self.

That Is the Inherent Nature of Time

Questioner:  So  Dada,  is  it  really  the  case  that 
everything  should  change  because  of  Time?  And  when  it 
becomes very old, should it collapse?

Dadashri: ‘Time’ makes everything very old. We had 
an enclosure behind the house (vaado) over here previously; 
when  it  became  very  outdated,  then  even  its  supporting 
pillars collapsed. You witnessed that, didn’t you?

Questioner: Yes,  the  supporting  pillars  in  the  middle 

had collapsed.

Dadashri: But in the Kathyavadi language [a dialect of 
Gujarati], it is called a vaado. These two pillars have fallen 
down, this one has become like this. Likewise, there are no 
clay  tiles  on  the  roof.  How  can  this  even  be  considered  a 
vaado?  They  were  very  valuable  when  they  were  around. 
Now, these people have demolished them and have even built 
houses over them. That is how it is everywhere. What is new 
always  becomes  old.  ‘Time’  is  always  wearing  everything 
down, in its own way. Even gold gradually erodes. Similarly, 
even the scriptures wear away.

[4] The Eternal Element of Time

79

Time Also Causes the Extinction of the Lineage of 
the Gnanis

The  inherent  nature  of  Time  is  such  that  it  makes  one 
unaware  (ajagrut)  even  where  One  has  awakened  awareness 
(jagruti). That is why ‘we’ are constantly cautioning, “Beware!”

Questioner:  But  does  the  jagruti  not  last  once  it  is 

attained?

Dadashri:  That  jagruti  will  not  go  away.  However, 
the current era of the time cycle is such that when it shows 
even  an  inkling  of  its  potential  [the  force  of  the  discharge 
karma],  the  awakened  awareness  will  be  reduced,  that  is 
how it is. The current era of the time cycle is very strange.

And  at  the  same  time,  One  has  Akram  Vignan, 
meaning that this is a Science that has been attained without 
exhausting  all  the  karma.  So,  while  exhausting  the  karma, 
you  will  have  to  bear  some  repercussions.  It  would  not  be 
problematic  for  me,  as  I  actually  do  not  have  many  karma 
remaining.

The lineage of the Gnanis carries on, but it continues 
to  become  extinct  on  account  of Time. The  inherent  nature 
of  Time  is  such  that  it  is  able  to  cause  the  extinction  of 
each and every one. When a Gnani manifests, then a lineage 
comes about once again; Time extinguishes it. No one else 
has the strength to extinguish it or to destroy it.

Time From the Perspective of Scientists

Questioner:  Time  is  also  considered  the  fourth 
dimension.  There’s  length,  height,  width,  and  along  with 
that, time has been placed as the fourth dimension.

Dadashri: Who has done this?

Questioner:  Scientists  have.  Time  is  the  fourth 

dimension.

80

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri: Yes, of course, Time is definitely there! One 
can  definitely  not  do  without  Time.  The  Time  may  be  the 
same for everyone, but space is never the same, everyone’s 
space is different.

How  was  Time  deduced?  The  answer  is,  this  world 
is  in  motion,  there  is  a  constant  change  in  one’s  state. The 
amount  of Time  it  takes  for  one  Parmanu  to  cross  another 
Parmanu has been referred to as samay.

Therefore, this Time is in the form of kaalanu (atoms 
of  Time),  it  is  in  the  form  of  atoms  (anu).  It  is  only  when 
those atoms of Time come into a certain proportion that all 
those other things work, otherwise it does not help.

The Knowledge of the Eternal Elements Is the 
Subtlest of All

Questioner:  We  have  understood  the  other  eternal 
elements, but why haven’t we understood the eternal element 
of the Self?

Dadashri: Even the others have not been understood; 
in  fact,  they  have  only  been  understood  superficially  at 
present. It takes a long time to understand them in depth.

Questioner:  Dada,  what  else  needs  to  be  understood 

about Time in depth? ‘Time’ means Time.

Dadashri:  Oh! Actually,  there  are  so  many  atoms  of 
Time,  this  entire  world  is  filled  with  the  atoms  of  Time. 
In  fact,  this  is  all  very  profound;  none  of  this  can  be 
understood.  Moksha  can  be  attained  only  by  understanding 
it superficially. For what purpose do we need to understand 
it in depth? All you need to know is that water runs through 
a gutter. Thereafter, why do you need to know how deep the 
gutter is, how wide it is, how much of it has corroded, how 
much  of  it  has  eroded,  and  so  on? Water  comes  from  over 

[4] The Eternal Element of Time

81

here, and it goes from over there. If just this much is known, 
it is more than enough.

Questioner:  So  the  Self  is  also  just  as  easy  to 

understand as Space, Time, inertia...

Dadashri:  No,  not  a  single  one  of  them  is  easy  [to 
understand].  The  Self  is  very  difficult  [to  understand],  no 
one  has  understood  the  Self  even  in  the  slightest,  not  even 
as much as a strand of hair’s worth.

Questioner:  But  with  Your  grace,  with  the  grace  of 
the  Gnani  Purush,  we  have  found You,  so  then  it  certainly 
is easy, isn’t it?

Dadashri:  Yes,  but  here,  only  our  mahatmas  (those 
who  have  received  Self-realization  through  Gnan  vidhi) 
understand It. However, no one outside does. These ascetics 
and  the  like  may  wander  around  in  the  Himalayas  or  any 
other  place,  but  they  do  not  understand  anything;  it  is  all 
in vain. In fact, they will say, “God is the creator. God has 
created all of this, and God exists even in this wooden post.” 
That is what they say. If that is so, mortal one (mooah), how 
can we burn wood?

Time Flows in the Form of Atoms of Time

Questioner:  It  is  said  that  Time  is  in  the  form  of 

atoms, isn’t it?

Dadashri: Yes, there are atoms of Time.

Questioner: So are they referred to as Parmanu?

Dadashri: No, those atoms are different!

Questioner:  So  can  these  atoms  [of  Time]  not  be 
considered  jada  (inanimate)?  Do  atoms  of  Time  not  have 
a  visible  form  (roop)? Are  atoms  of Time  considered  to  be 
formless (aroopi)?

82

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri: They are all formless, only the element of 

inanimate matter alone has form.

Questioner:  Dada,  you  said  that  there  are  infinite 

atoms of Time; are those atoms like the atoms in physics?

Dadashri: Yes, but these atoms can be seen, whereas 

those atoms of Time cannot be seen.

Questioner:  Is  the  smallest  indivisible  unit  of  Time 
(samay)  a  non-living  entity  (nishchetan  chetan)  or  is  it  a 
living entity (chetan)?

Dadashri: It is a non-living entity and it is formless.

Questioner: Nevertheless, it has atoms of Time?

Dadashri: The atoms of Time are flowing in the form 
of atoms. ‘Time’ is in the form of atoms, which is why they 
can be recalled.

The Atoms of Time Are Only to the Extent of One 
Kalp...

Whatever  Lord  Krishna  had  said,  that  speech  goes 
into  Time  and  atoms  of  Time  get  bound.  There  are  atoms 
of  Time  from  that  point  in  time.  Similarly,  whatever  was 
spoken during the time of Lord Mahavir, during the time of 
Lord Rushabhdev, all of those atoms are present somewhere 
in this universe. If there is someone to recall them, then they 
will  speak  again.  If  one  were  to  pull  them  together  today, 
then the very same words would be expressed.

However,  all  of  those  energies,  that  art  has  been 
destroyed.  Otherwise,  people  used  to  use  that.  If  someone 
goes through the effort (sadhana) today, if someone carries 
out  the  practice,  then  they  would  be  able  to  recall  those 
atoms and listen to them once again.

Questioner: How would one be able to recall them?

[4] The Eternal Element of Time

83

Dadashri: There is no method to it. If scientists reach 
all  the  way  there,  then  they  can  do  so.  But  who  can  recall 
them? Those who are in the final grade, those who are at 360 
degrees; no one else can recall those parmanu. However, in 
reality, they do exist.

Questioner:  So  Dada,  what  are  they  called?  If  they 

are able to recall Time?

Dadashri:  They  are  not  recalling  Time.  They  are 
recalling what They [the Tirthankar Lords or Lord Krishna] 
had  said.  The  atoms  of  Time  are  helpful  in  the  sense  that 
you can listen once again to what was said on that day. You 
can listen to them, but you need such energy to do so. I have 
not  seen  anyone  with  such  energy  in  this  era  of  the  time 
cycle. Right now, I do not have such energy either.

Questioner:  So  from  where  can  that  energy  be 

attained?

Dadashri:  What  is  the  purpose  of  attaining  such  an 
energy?  You  are  getting  so  many  ‘vegetables’,  so  why  do 
you need that? Where would one end up if he attained such 
energy? He would learn to jump [from one point in time to 
another]. Then he would have to go to the species that jumps 
around!  Have  you  seen  the  species  that  jumps  around?  No 
one except for monkeys are able to jump around, isn’t that 
right?

Our  [worldly]  science  has  not  yet  reached  that  far,  to 
the inner Science. And this is not a feat for anyone besides 
those with absolute Knowledge (keval Gnan). It has stalled 
even for ‘us’; that is precisely where it has stalled.

Questioner:  So  would  the  parmanu  of  Hitler  or 

Churchill still be in the air?

Dadashri:  No.  Their  speech  is  certainly  there,  the 
atoms of the speech spoken at that time are certainly there. 

84

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

All  those  atoms  of  Time  are  certainly  moving  about.  It  is 
when  the  six  eras  of  the  [current]  time  cycle  come  to  an 
end  that  everything  will  be  completely  destroyed.  Then 
everything will arise anew.

Questioner: Will all of that be destroyed?

Dadashri: Yes, the world is not going to get destroyed. 
People  may  say  that  the  entire  universe  will  be  destroyed, 
but that does not happen. Would there ever be destruction of 
the world? Would eternal elements ever undergo destruction? 
Temporary  things  undergo  destruction,  hence,  temporary 
states (avastha) undergo destruction.

Questioner:  Within  these  atoms  of  Time,  would 
the  speech  exist  to  the  extent  of  one  kalp  (one  complete 
revolution  of  the  time  cycle  comprising  12  time  periods,  6 
of  the  ascending  cycle  and  6  of  the  descending  cycle)  or 
infinite kalp?

Dadashri: Of only one kalp, the rest get destroyed. The 
moment the kalp changes, it all gets destroyed. After a certain 
balance accumulates, then everything stops. Otherwise, there 
would be no end to this world, would there! It is to the extent 
of  two  chovisi  (the  succession  of  twenty-four  Tirthankar 
Lords in the third and fourth era of each half-cycle of time); 
one  is  the  Avsarpini  chovisi  (the  succession  of  twenty-four 
Tirthankar  Lords  in  the  ascending  half-cycle  of  time)  and 
the other is the Utsarpini chovisi (the succession of twenty-
four Tirthankar Lords in the descending half-cycle of time). 
There are forty-eight Tirthankar Lords during this time and 
thereafter everything that is encompassed within that [kalp] 
gets destroyed.

Time in the Real and the Relative Sense…

Questioner: What is a samay? The time between birth 

and death, is that considered one samay?

[4] The Eternal Element of Time

85

Dadashri:  No,  that  is  not  just  one  samay.  There  are 
very many samay between birth and death; there may have 
even been two to four divorces in that duration. What is the 
meaning  of  samay?  Samay  means  to  turn  the  new  into  old 
and  the  old  into  new.  Now  do  you  want  to  know  anything 
else about samay? This is what it means.

Questioner: This kaal that You refer to, the word kaal 
that You  use,  in  that,  say  the  tuber  of  a  thought  sprouts,  a 
thought begins and then it comes to an end, are You referring 
to that period of time as kaal?

Dadashri: No, that period of time is considered very 

long.

Questioner: Then what are You referring to as kaal?

Dadashri: “This shirt is dirty,” by the time you try to 
say just this much, you have gone beyond kaal. Kaal keeps 
changing from one samay to the next (samay parinaamik).

Questioner:  These  rituals  of  the  Kramik  path  [that 
are done for a set  amount of  time], are they  within kaal or 
outside of kaal?

Dadashri:  They  are  within  the  overt  kaal.  When 
a  large  amount  of  kaal,  when  an  innumerable  amount  of 
kaal  accumulates,  that  is  when  a  ritual  of  the  Kramik  path 
(traditional step-by-step path of spiritual progress) takes place.

Questioner:  The  ritual  of  the  Kramik  path  does  take 
place, but it is indeed within the interval of samay, isn’t it? 
That ritual is dependent on samay, isn’t it?

Dadashri: All rituals of the Kramik path are dependent 
on  samay.  No  original  indestructible  eternal  element  is 
dependent on samay.

Questioner:  The  ritual  which  is  taking  place  is 
dependent  on  samay,  and  if  one  believes  that  there  will  be 

86

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

progress  through  that,  then  he  will  never  be  free,  will  he, 
Dada?

Dadashri:  No,  he  will  never  become  free.  It  is  the 
pudgal  alone  that  is  dependent  on samay.  Mukti  (liberation 
from the cycle of birth and death) is not dependent on samay.

Questioner:  The  word  ‘samay’  comes 

in  Jain 
terminology  and  the  Tirthankar  Lords  have  mentioned  the 
word  ‘samay’.  Could You  please  explain  that  a  little,  what 
is samay?

Dadashri: What are you referring to as samay?

Questioner: Everything, however short or long, that is 

passing by, that is samay.

Dadashri: Wow! Correct. So, you are referring to the 
fundamental thing as samay. So, the smallest unit of Time is 
referred to as samay. Then after that, there is reference to an 
hour, a minute, a pal (measure of time equal to 24 seconds).

This  Time  that  exists,  it  is  also  divisible  all  the  way 
up  to  a  samay.  A  samay  cannot  be  divided  any  further.  A 
samay  cannot  be  split  into  two  parts.  Now,  a  samay  is  so 
small  that  it  is  much  shorter  than  the  blink  of  an  eye.  A 
samay is much shorter than a pal. A pal can be divided, but 
a samay cannot be divided further. There can be one samay, 
two  samay,  three  samay,  but  samay  cannot  be  divided  into 
pieces. Therefore, samay is incorporated within Time (kaal), 
it is its smallest [unit]. It is its indivisible part.

Now,  kaal  is  of  two  types.  One  is  vyavahaar  kaal 
(relative  time;  time  used  in  the  relative);  what  do  we  call 
that?  We  refer  to  it  as  a  pal,  a  vipal  (one  sixteenth  of  a 
second), then a minute, an hour, a day, a week, a fortnight, 
a  month,  and  all  the  way  to  a  year.  Whereas  the  original, 
the  true  kaal  is  the  Nishchay  kaal  (Real  Time;  the  eternal 
element of Time), that is referred to as a samay.

[4] The Eternal Element of Time

87

What  part  can  we  refer  to  as  a  samay?  This  atom 
has a visible form (roopi); its [inanimate matter’s] smallest 
division  is  referred  to  as  a  Parmanu. An  atom  is  divisible; 
these  people  [scientists]  can  split  an  atom,  however,  a 
Parmanu  is  indivisible.  Now,  the  entire  universe  is  filled 
with Parmanu. When one Parmanu crosses over to another 
Parmanu,  or  when  one  Parmanu  crosses  one  spatial  unit 
(pradesh), when it crosses one Parmanu while moving, that 
has  been  referred  to  as  a  samay.  That  is  the  rule  that  has 
been established.

The vyavahaar kaal is relative, whereas Nishchay kaal 

is Real.

Questioner:  Does  vyavahaar  kaal  mean  all  these 
years that have passed by, two years have passed, five years 
have passed; is that what it is?

Dadashri: Years, minutes, seconds, it is twelve o’clock, 
it  is  this  time;  all  of  that  is  relative.  Whereas  Nishchay 
kaal  has  parmanu  of  its  own,  it  is  systematic.  Therefore, 
it is permanent, it is Real. It is one type of eternal element 
(dravya); it is an eternal element (tattva).

Questioner:  The  time  that  You  mentioned,  a  samay, 

can we not see it?

Dadashri:  No,  samay  is  not  something  that  can  be 

seen.

Questioner: Why do we say, “It is eight o’clock”?

Dadashri: That is actually vyavahaar kaal. Vyavahaar 
kaal  is  actually  something  that  we  have  set.  This  is  not 
what  is  referred  to  as  Nishchay  kaal.  Samay  is  referred  to 
as  Nishchay  kaal. After  that,  time  moves  further  on. After 
samay,  there  is  [the  amount  of  time  taken]  to  blink,  then 
moving forward there are minutes, hours, years; however, at 
the fundamental level, it starts from here.

88

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

The  world  has  not  reached  up  to  samaysaar  (the 
essence  of  the  smallest  unit  of Time). The  indivisible  form 
of  Time  is  samay.  In  which  case  is  time  considered  to  be 
divisible? Well, if a year were to be divided, then it can be 
divided into twelve months. If a month were to be divided, it 
can be divided into thirty days. If a day were to be divided, 
it can be divided into twenty-four hours. If an hour were to 
be divided, it can be divided into sixty minutes. If a minute 
were  to  be  divided,  it  can  be  divided  into  sixty  seconds. 
However,  these  people  have  discovered  that  the  smallest 
part of a second is a samay. What a discovery the spiritual 
Scientists  have  made!  Lord  Mahavir  and  the  twenty-four 
Tirthankar Lords, [made this discovery] in Their time. ‘They’ 
had reached all the way up to a samay, the smallest division 
of Time. I have not even reached five hundred samay; They 
had reached one samay.

The  One  who  recognizes  a  samay  attains  absolute 
Knowledge  (keval  Gnan).  Our  people  know  about  a  pal 
and  vipal,  but  they  do  not  know  beyond  a  vipal.  Our 
people  have  reached  up  to  the  level  of  an  atom,  but  not  to 
the  level  of  a  Parmanu.  When  One  reaches  the  level  of  a 
Parmanu,  absolute  Knowledge  is  attained.  Our  people  do 
not understand Space yet, do they!

The Lord has revolutions that span one samay. These 
people do not have revolutions that span even a second. The 
[smallest, indivisible] unit of Time is samay. If One attains 
revolutions  that  span  one  samay,  then  He  is  a  keval  Gnani 
(One with absolute Knowledge).

Time Applies to the Object to Be Seen, Not the Seer

Questioner:  In  the  time  that  currently  prevails,  the 
change of time that happens in the relative sense as well as 
in reality, the change that keeps happening in everything due 
to Its [the Self’s] presence, is time actually involved in that? 

[4] The Eternal Element of Time

89

The cycle where things have a beginning and an end has its 
own duration, is that relative time?

Dadashri:  Yes,  the  relative  time  that  exists,  that  is 
not  the  time  applicable  to  the  Seer.  That  which  sees  the 
beginning, that which sees the end, that is not the time that 
is applicable to the Seer. Now, it is the intellect that sees the 
beginning and the end. The intellect sees that the beginning 
has taken place, however, it cannot see that completely. That 
is  why  ‘we’  do  not  deem  it  [the  intellect]  to  be  the  Seer 
(Drashta).

Questioner:  Now,  where  complete  Vision  (sarvansh 

Darshan) exists, is time involved in that case?

Dadashri:  When  it  comes  to  Darshan,  time  is  not 
applicable.  Time  is  applicable  to  the  objects  to  be  seen 
(drashya), time is not applicable to the Seer.

Time Is Not an Illusion!

Questioner:  Some  people  say  that  even  time  is  an 

illusion.

Dadashri: No, no, it is not an illusion. Nothing in the 
world  is  an  illusion.  Nothing  is  the  illusion;  the  illusion  is 
the illusion. Not [perceiving the] illusion [as an illusion] is 
the illusion. Say you go to a sandy desert, and you see water 
in the distance, that is an illusion. The illusion is the illusion. 
Nothing else is an illusion at all. Did you understand a little 
bit  of  this  or  not?  Is  this  discussion  not  something  that  the 
mind  can  register?  This  discussion  is  beyond  the  intellect, 
and all the discussions in the world are of the intellect.

I have seen this ‘current’ [of niyati] flowing. You will 
have  to  understand  how  this  ‘current’  is  flowing,  will  you 
not? Will such falsehood do?

A Circumstance Always Exists With Its Time

Everything that is happening in this world is a scientific 

90

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

circumstantial evidence. They are merely circumstances. No 
one is the doer of these. It is indeed the circumstances that 
are running all of this. The circumstances come together and 
the activity happens. Who brings the circumstances together? 
No one is bringing them together. It happens automatically; 
the  time  of  that  circumstance  (sanjog  kaal)  brings  them 
together. Whatever is going to happen at a certain time, that 
is the [purview of the] eternal element of Time.

As  long  as  the  circumstantial  evidences  do  not  come 
together,  until  then,  no  one  can  even  make  tea.  Every 
circumstance indeed comes with its time.

The  circumstance  and  the  time  of  that  circumstance 
are  always  together,  and  when  the  duration  of  that 
circumstance  increases  to  a  great  extent,  then  an  atkan  (a 
major  impediment  on  the  path  of  liberation)  tends  to  arise. 
So, find that out. And when an incessant experience of that 
happens, when the very same circumstance lasts for a long 
time, then understand that this is an atkan that has come.

What  is  going  to  happen  at  8:35?  That  is  in  the 
awareness of Time. It is an evidence. The dravya (physical 
evidences), the kshetra (location), the time (kaal), the intent 
(bhaav),  and  a  lifetime  (bhav).  When  all  of  these  come 
together,  that  is  when  an  action  takes  place.  When  time 
comes  together  with  all  of  these,  that  is  when  the  entire 
action gets completed.

All Circumstances Are Prone to Dissipation by 
Their Inherent Nature

The  fact  is,  whosoever  has  a  karmic  account,  that  is 
indeed  where  the  circumstances  will  come  together.  Now 
when  ‘we’  come,  Mumbai  will  get  ten  days  [of  ‘our’  time]. 
People will not get more time to meet ‘us’, will they! There 
is  nothing  else;  circumstances  and  the  pure  Soul,  just  these 
two.  When  a  thought  arises  in  the  mind,  the  moment  it  is 

[4] The Eternal Element of Time

91

Seen, it means that You have Known that a circumstance has 
arisen.  That  is  a  subtle  circumstance,  and  moreover,  those 
circumstances are prone to dissipation by their inherent nature.

Therefore, you do not need to say, “It is good if these 
circumstances go away.” Guests will keep coming over here, 
won’t they? They may come from Vadodara, they may come 
from here, they will keep on coming, won’t they? For those 
who come, the mahatmas will welcome them, they will take 
care  of  them,  but  they  never  have  the  thought,  ‘When  will 
they go back?’ do they! The reason for this is that they have 
all understood the Knowledge that circumstances are prone 
to dissipation by their inherent nature.

Questioner:  Here,  we  know  that  they  are  going  to 

leave when the time comes.

Dadashri: Yes.  On  the  contrary,  even  if  you  were  to 
say,  “Go,”  they  would  still  not  leave.  If  you  were  to  tell 
them,  “Now,  please  go  today,  we  have  some  work  to  do,” 
then they would respond, “I am definitely going to leave the 
day  after  tomorrow.  You  can  go  ahead  with  whatever  you 
have  to  do.  I  will  be  fine  even  if  you  are  not  here.  I  will 
do  the  cooking.”  So,  they  would  still  not  leave.  There  is  a 
duration of time attached with them; that circumstance will 
not  leave  until  its  time  is  over,  will  it!  However,  in  many 
cases, when guests have come, the hosts keep feeling within, 
‘Now when will they leave, when will they leave?’ Now, our 
mahatmas Know that it is vyavasthit, and the circumstances 
are  prone  to  dissipation  by  their  inherent  nature.  So  then, 
even if a negative intent were to arise within, they would do 
pratikraman (three-step process of reversal from aggression 
through  thought,  speech,  or  action.  It  consists  of: alochana 
or  confessing  the  mistake  to  the  Lord  within,  pratikraman 
or asking for forgiveness for that mistake, and pratyakhyan 
or  making  the  firm  resolve  to  never  repeat  the  mistake, 
and  asking  for  the  energy  for  the  same),  wouldn’t  they! 

92

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Would they do so or not if a negative intent were to arise? 
Negative  intents  will  certainly  arise  in  every  human  being. 
However, all these people do pratikraman afterwards. They 
[the circumstances] are prone to dissipation by their inherent 
nature, so then why are you doing this? Are they not prone 
to dissipation by their inherent nature?

Questioner: They are certainly prone to dissipation. A 

circumstance that has arisen will definitely dissipate.

Dadashri:  It  happens  automatically,  then  whether  it 
is  a  pleasurable  circumstance  or  a  painful  one.  Happiness 
is  also  prone  to  dissipation;  unhappiness  is  also  prone  to 
dissipation.  Does  happiness  remain  forever?  That  cannot 
really be happiness, can it! This is actually imaginary; it is 
simply an imagination.

Questioner: This is actually like a role in a movie.

Dadashri: The world has certainly been running since 
time  immemorial.  Meaning  that,  no  circumstance  lasts  in 
this. They appear for a short time and then come to an end!

Questioner: Is it the influence of time?

Dadashri: Time is certainly everywhere. It is not that 

the time is wrong, it is our understanding that is wrong.

That  is  indeed  why  in  some  eras  of  the  time  cycle, 
there  is  a  prevalence  of  dharma  (religion).  In  this  era  of 
the time cycle [Kaliyug], what is visible is that there is the 
prevalence  of  adharma  (irreligion).  But  in  Reality,  that  is 
not so.

The Developing I Is Indeed the King of Intents!

Questioner:  So  Dada,  is  there  some  kind  of  a  vidhi 
(silent auspicious blessings performed by the Gnani for the 
salvation of others) through which the current times can be 
improved? Can good times be brought about?

[4] The Eternal Element of Time

93

Dadashri: If your intention (bhaavna) changes, then a 
better time will come. If negative intentions arise, then bad 
times will come.

Questioner:  Does  that  mean  that  intent  (bhaav)  has 

an effect on time?

Dadashri: Everything indeed is based on bhaav. Time 
has  nothing  to  do  with  it. There  is  neither  a  good  time  nor 
a bad time. If your bhaav is positive, then it is a good time, 
and if your bhaav is negative, then it will be a bad time.

Questioner:  Meaning  that,  based  on  our  bhaav,  we 

can get whatever we want from time?

Dadashri:  All  things  can  be  attained.  You  [the 
developing I] are indeed the king. All these changes happen 
due to your bhaav.

The Five Agnas Make One Beyond Time

Questioner: Time with respect to relativity (sapekshta) 
meaning the past, the present, and the future, and time with 
respect to Reality (nirpekshta), what is the difference in the 
time for both of these?

Dadashri: Time does not affect Reality at all, [it does 
not  affect]  the  eternal  elements  that  are  Real. Time  and  all 
this applies only to that which is relative.

Questioner: Now, in the relative, there is nothing but 

the time period of the past.

Dadashri: Call it what you want, the past or whatever 
else, but all this applies to the relative. Nothing at all applies 
to  that  which  is  Real,  that  is  known  as  nirpeksh.  God  is 
nirpeksh.  Nothing  affects  Him,  nor  does  anything  obstruct 
Him, be it timing or anything else; that is certainly why ‘we’ 
say,  “Dada’s  devotees  are  not  affected  by  time,  karma,  and 
maya (illusion induced by worldly life).”

94

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Questioner:  The  category  of  devotees  actually  falls 
under  time  (kaal),  doesn’t  it?  It  falls  under  the  relative, 
doesn’t it?

Dadashri:  It  is  because  I  did  not  quite  know  how  to 
say it, that is why I am saying devotee; however, all of these 
people  are  actually  considered  to  be  Gnanis.  On  our  path, 
‘we’  do  not  refer  to  them  as  devotees,  do  ‘we’?  ‘We’  refer 
to  them  as  mahatmas.  If  They  remain  in  this  Gnan,  in  the 
five  Agnas  (the  five  special  directives  given  by  the  Gnani 
Purush that sustains the enlightened state after Gnan Vidhi), 
then time, karma, and maya do not affect Them.

Questioner: In order to attain moksha, if we take the 
support of that which is relative, of that which is bound by 
time, then can we really attain moksha?

Dadashri: ‘You’ do not need that at all, do You! The 
one  who  is  bound  by  time,  when  the  time  comes,  he  will 
separate from You. For You, Your state is different.

Questioner: That is true, but if we take the support of 

that time, then would we actually reach there?

Dadashri:  ‘You’  do  not  have  to  take  the  support  of 

time at all, do You!

Questioner: It is true that ‘we’ do not have to take its 

support, but if we do, then can we reach there?

Dadashri:  But  You  shouldn’t  at  all;  if  one  takes  its 
support, then for him things will be ruined. What is the use 
of taking the support of time? And there is no such time; the 
kind  of  time  that  is  still  (sthir)  does  not  exist  whatsoever, 
that You can take its support. Time keeps ticking by, it keeps 
slipping away.

Questioner: But the time during which the hupanu (the 
prevalence of the I) and the sense of ‘my-ness’ (marapanu) 
are bound, that time is still, isn’t it?

[4] The Eternal Element of Time

95

Dadashri:  No,  even  that  time  is  not  still;  time  keeps 
ticking  by.  Time  certainly  keeps  ticking  by.  Therefore,  a 
relationship can never be formed with it, can it?

The Gnani Is Beyond Time

Questioner:  God  is  beyond  Time  (kaalatit);  He  is 
beyond  samay.  God  cannot  be  found  through  samay,  He 
cannot  be  found  through  any  tool.  Whereas  we  are  linked 
to  samay,  be  it  being  born,  be  it  living  life  or  be  it  seeing 
dreams or the creative activity of the divine. So how can we, 
whilst  being  linked  to  time,  be  able  to  recognize  the  One 
who is beyond Time (kaalatit)?

Dadashri:  No,  no,  ‘I’  [as  the  Gnani  Purush;  the 
realized  Self]  am  beyond  Time,  ‘I’  am  beyond  the  dravya, 
‘I’  am  beyond  kshetra  (location),  ‘I’  am  beyond  intent,  and 
‘I’  am  even  beyond  lifetimes.  ‘I’  am  also  beyond  the  body, 
‘I’  am  also  beyond  the  mind,  ‘I’  am  beyond  the  speech  too. 
These  points  are  correct.  ‘We’  are  not  bound  by  the  dravya, 
kshetra,  time,  and  intent.  No  one  can  keep  ‘us’  in  bondage. 
Samay cannot keep ‘us’ in bondage. Whereas for you, when 
it is your time to go to sleep, you’ll say, “Now it is time for 
me to go to sleep.” You are bound by time. You are bound by 
kshetra; [you’ll say,] “I won’t be able to sleep anywhere else 
but here.” So, mortal one, you have become bound over here!

Questioner: This is all a creative play of the mind, but 
this breathing that is taking place, that is definitely linked to 
time also, isn’t it?

Dadashri:  What  have  You  [the  Self]  got  to  do  with 
that?  ‘I’  am  completely  separate  from  this  breathing,  from 
this body.

Questioner: If One attains the state of living as though 
he is dead, then would He be considered to have reached a 
state that is beyond Time, like You?

96

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri: But it should happen, shouldn’t it! To live 
as though you are dead! If One lives as though he is dead, 
then if his son is squandering money, then what would that 
dead  person  do?  He  would  keep  on  Seeing  it. That  is  how 
One’s life should be.

Questioner: The dravya, the kshetra, the time, and the 

intent; which of these factors do mahatmas face the most?

Dadashri: The fact is, what has happened to You now? 
Before,  you  were  in  the  form  that  was  not  the  form  as  the 
Self  (pardravya  swaroop),  and  now  You  have  become  the 
Real  form  as  the  Self  (Swadravya  Swaroop).  You  were  in 
the realm of the non-Self (parkshetra), You have now come 
into the realm of the Self (Swakshetra). You were in parkaal 
(time as it relates to the relative), now You have come into 
Swakaal  (Time  as  it  relates  to  the  Real).  What  is  Swakaal 
like?  It  is  eternal,  whereas  in  parkaal,  it  was  destructible. 
And  You  have  come  into  the  inherent  nature  as  the  Self 
(Swabhaav), You have become free from parbhaav (the state 
as  the  non-Self).  And  for  that  which  is  discharge  (galan), 
no  change  can  actually  happen  in  that.  The  discharge  will 
continue happening in accordance with the dravya, kshetra, 
time,  and  intent  that  were  bound.  That  which  has  already 
been set in stone cannot be changed.

What  does  Gnani  Purush  mean?  A  mirror!  You 
see  whatever  you  are.  This  is  because  the  Gnani  Purush 
prevails  in  the  Real  form  as  the  Self  (Swadravya),  in  the 
realm as the Self (Swakshetra), in the inherent nature as the 
Self  (Swabhaav),  and  in  the  Time  as  it  relates  to  the  Real 
(Swakaal). ‘He’ remains in the Self (Swa) in all four ways. 
Even if one simply touches His big toe, one’s salvation will 
happen.

Where There Are Adjectives, There Is a Time Limit

Questioner:  Could  You  please  explain  the  similarity 

[4] The Eternal Element of Time

97

and  difference  between  the  eternal  element  that  is  beyond 
Time and Akram Vignan?

Dadashri: [The word] ‘Akram’ is actually an adjective 
in  [the  phrase]  Akram  Vignan.  However,  Vignan  (Science) 
and the eternal element that is beyond Time are one and the 
same thing. Therefore, there are two kinds of adjectives. To 
understand this Science, there is the stepwise (Kramik) path 
and the step-less (Akram) path. So, ours is the Akram path, 
that  is  all.  Otherwise,  the  word  Vignan  is  itself  the  eternal 
element that is beyond Time. There is no difference in that, 
and  by  having  an  adjective,  it  means  to  say  that  adjectives 
are  always  there,  wherever  there  is  a  need.  However,  no 
adjective can ever last [forever] with regard to the Self. An 
adjective  means  something  that  applies  for  a  given  amount 
of time; thereafter, it no longer applies.

Questioner:  Therefore,  whichever  adjective  is  out 

there, it has a time limit?

Dadashri:  Yes,  it  definitely  has  a  time  limit;  that  is 
referred  to  as  an  adjective.  What  this  means  is  that  it  is 
something that has been attained based on time. Thereafter, 
when the time limit is over, the adjective no longer applies.

It Is Not Predetermined; It Is Vyavasthit

This  is  actually  considered  speech  that  comes  forth 
with the experience of the Self. These types of things are not 
written in the scriptures, nor would your work [for liberation] 
get done. Even with millions of efforts, even after millions of 
lifetimes, the Self cannot be attained. And if you go and ask 
an ascetic, then he will respond, “What have you renounced? 
Even  if  you  renounce  for  many  lifetimes,  it  is  not  possible 
to  attain  the  Self;  It  is  not  an  easy  thing  to  attain.”  ‘We’ 
have  been  around  for  infinite  lifetimes;  is  it  as  though  ‘we’ 
have  been  around  only  for  two  to  five  lifetimes?  ‘We’  have 
been wandering for infinite lifetimes, so would ‘we’ not have 

98

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

attained such a higher state at some point in time? The truth 
is, no; even though the mortal one had sat near a Tirthankar 
Lord, yet he was not able to attain [the Self].

These chovisi (the succession of twenty-four Tirthankar 
Lords) keep on arising; one goes there and sits around Them. 
He  listens  to  everything,  but  he  remains  unchanged.  The 
Lord said that, in this, the fault is not of the Tirthankar, nor 
is it the fault of that living being. It is because the time has 
not ‘ripened’ for him. The time has to be right, doesn’t it!

Questioner:  Then  Dada,  is  all  of  this  predetermined 

(nishchit)?

it 

It 

Dadashri: 

is  predetermined,  but 

is  not 
predetermined in that way. ‘It is predetermined to happen,’ 
is  correct,  and  ‘It  is  not  predetermined  to  happen,’  is  also 
correct.  That  is  indeed  why  ‘we’  refer  to  it  as  vyavasthit 
(a  result  of  scientific  circumstantial  evidences);  you  carry 
on  doing  the  work.  It  will  become  ruined  if  [you  believe] 
it  is  all  predetermined.  Predetermined  solely  means  that 
whatever  is  going  to  happen  is  certainly  going  to  happen, 
but  it  is  not  like  that.  If  it  were  predetermined  in  that  way, 
then you would never come here. Or else, you do come here, 
but  what  would  your  intents  be  like?  You  would  have  the 
intent, ‘What would it have mattered had I not come?’ You 
would spoil all your intents; the intents would spoil.

Questioner: Yes, one’s morality and intent can spoil.

Dadashri: Yes, that is how it is. The Gnani Purush will 

actually say it as it is, you should follow according to that.

Everyone is giving time a push. In every activity, time 
is also the main factor. Nothing can happen without the time 
being right. Therefore, allow the right time to unfold. Do not 
go against it. Besides, nothing can happen without the time 
being right.

[4] The Eternal Element of Time

99

Questioner: So is Time essential for everything, does 

Time work independently?

Dadashri: Yes, but if Time were to be the main factor, 
then Time would arrogantly say to everyone, “It is because 
I  am  here  that  all  of  you  can  exist.”  So,  they  [the  other 
evidences]  would  also  tell  Time,  “You  go  to  your  father’s 
home. Things will carry on without you, don’t be arrogant.”

Questioner: So, is one not dependent even on Time?

Dadashri: No, that is why it is said that it is dependent 
on vyavasthit. “If all of us come together, then the work can 
get done.” They tell Time, “If we all come together, then all 
the work will get done.” So if everything were dependent on 
Time, then what would be left to be done? One may say, “He 
will  definitely  attain  moksha  when  the  right  time  unfolds.” 
But it is not like that.

Questioner:  Then  what  should  be  done  about  the 

karma that is bound in a state of ignorance of the Self?

Dadashri: Those will definitely continue to be bound. 
One  does  not  have  the  awareness  [of  the  Self]  and  so  he 
says such things, “It will happen when the time is right.” By 
speaking incorrectly in this way, negative karma are bound. 
Subsequently, things definitely turn out negatively.

The fact is, when the time is right, one will encounter 
all such tools that will take him to moksha; he will find the 
right scriptures, he will find the Gnani Purush.

Questioner:  Do  all  the  circumstances  come  together 

in accordance with that?

Dadashri:  Yes,  he  will  find  all  the  tools.  All  the 
circumstances will keep changing. Would one get all of the 
tools or not, when the time is right?

Questioner: One would get everything.

100

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri:  He  will  find  a  Gnani  Purush,  he  will  find 
everything.  So,  although  both,  you  and  I,  were  around,  but 
[at that time], the time was not right. Today, the time came 
to unfold, so you came across Me.

Questioner: It is only when the time is right that such 

Gnan manifests, isn’t it?

Dadashri:  Even  a  mango  tree  would  never  yield 

mangoes if the time was not right.

Questioner:  Dada,  so  that  means  that  moksha  is 

dependent on Time, isn’t it?

Dadashri: If we say to Time, “Time, you are the only 
one  doing  this,”  then  Time  would  become  the  boss  of  the 
entire  world.  So  Time  would  wield  the  authority,  and  if  it 
were  to  wield  the  authority,  it  means  that  this  is  not  the 
Science of the absolutely detached Lords (vitaraag Vignan). 
If  any  eternal  element  is  considered  to  wield  the  authority, 
then that cannot be vitaraag Vignan. There is no boss in this 
world.

If someone says, “God has created this world,” then it 
is not the Science of the absolutely detached Lords. ‘They’ 
have said, “To say that Time is the only one that wields the 
authority  is  not  fact.” There  are  federal  [collective]  causes. 
The causes [for the world coming into being] are all federal 
causes.

Questioner:  Then  what  is  the  importance  of  Time? 

There isn’t any, is there?

Dadashri:  No,  Time  is  one  of  the  causes.  This  is  a 
parliamentary  system.  There  is  nothing  more  to  it.  This 
world  is  in  a  non-egoistic  form.  No  one  can  claim,  “I  did 
this.”  That  is  why  the  Gnanis  say,  “‘We’  clearly  state  that 
‘we’  are  a  nimit  (instrumental  in  the  process).  ‘We’  are  not 
the doer of this.”

[4] The Eternal Element of Time

101

The Line of Demarcation Between Time and 
Purusharth

One  person  came  to  the  Lord  and  said,  “Lord,  do 
something  so  that  I  attain  moksha  in  this  very  life.  I  am 
ready to follow whatever self-restraints (saiyam) you tell me 
to  follow.”  So  the  Lord  responded,  “You  may  be  ready  to 
follow the self-restraints, but your bhavsthiti (predetermined 
number of lives and lifespan until the attainment of moksha 
based on one’s filled stock of karma; spiritual development) 
has not yet ‘ripened’ [ready to unfold].” So the man asked, 
“Lord,  what  is  this  new  thing  now?  It  is  just  the  two  of  us 
here, You  and  I.  I  am  here  to  follow  the  self-restraints  and 
You  are  here  to  give  them  to  me;  why  did  You  bring  this 
botheration in the middle?” So the Lord responded, “Nothing 
will  happen  without  the  bhavsthiti  coming  to  unfold.”  The 
One granting the self-restraints is present, and the one taking 
them on is also very brave. Even then He says, “No.” Is He 
using  the bhavsthiti  as  an  excuse?  ‘He’  is  not  using  that  as 
an excuse, He is telling the truth. So, in fact, for whomever 
the  bhavsthiti  has  come  to  unfold,  it  will  work  out  for  him 
over here. But if the poor man’s bhavsthiti has not yet come 
to unfold, then how can it work out for him?

Questioner:  Can  that  bhavsthiti  be  made  to  unfold 
before  its  time,  or  will  it  unfold  only  when  it  is  time  for  it 
to do so?

Dadashri: It will unfold at that very time. Even where 
there is the possibility to make it unfold sooner, it can only 
be  done  if  it  was  already  within  the  rule  to  unfold  sooner. 
One  has  not  been  given  that  control.  But  it  can  be  made 
to  unfold  sooner,  if  there  is  a  strong  person  like  that  out 
there, then he may get such a karmic account. So you may 
feel  that  he  has  started  to  reduce  his  bhavsthiti.  However, 
it was definitely going to reduce, that is why it is reducing 
in  this  way.  It  is  actually  because  such  a  person  has  a  lot 

102

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

of  egoism,  so  there  is  a  corresponding  amount  of  force. 
There is nothing that will do, nor is there anything that will 
not  do.  Everyone’s  worldly  interaction  is  different,  isn’t  it! 
For some, it will do. For others, it will not do. All of these 
people  are  sitting  here,  but  everyone’s  worldly  interactions 
are different. Do any of them have faces that are exactly the 
same?  They  all  have  two  eyes,  a  nose,  ears,  but  there  are 
still  so  many  differences  which  are  evident.  There  is  a  big 
difference in the karmic account within each person.

Questioner: If one is going to attain this only when the 
bhavsthiti has come to unfold, then where does Purusharth 
(real spiritual effort to progress as the Self) come into this?

Dadashri:  Mind  you,  where  is  there  any  Purusharth 
at  all!  People  are  actually  referring  to  wrong  belief  as 
purusharth.  They  consider  [illusory]  effort  to  be  [true] 
purusharth.  How  can  there  be  any  Purusharth  without 
becoming  the  Purush  (the  Self)?  However,  if  that  is  not 
referred to as purusharth, then people would give up. As it 
is the Kramik path (traditional step-by-step path of spiritual 
progress), it has to be referred to as purusharth, doesn’t it? 
“Yes...let  me  do  something.”  That’s  all,  and  that  too,  with 
ego. Later on, this ego will also have to be dissolved.

‘Time’  is  not  doing  the  Purusharth,  the  Purush  is 

doing the Purusharth.

Why Are There Sixty-Three Shalaka Purush?

Questioner:  In  Jainism,  there  is  reference  to  the 
twenty-four  Tirthankar  Lords.  In  other  sources,  there  is 
reference  to  the  twenty-four  reincarnations  (avatar),  and  to 
the  twenty-four  prophets.  Why  are  there  twenty-four  of  all 
of these, why are there never twenty-three or twenty-five?

Dadashri: Actually, there are not twenty-four; they are 
a part of the sixty-three Shalaka Purush (human beings with 
extraordinary, super human energies and accomplishments).

[4] The Eternal Element of Time

103

Questioner: But why sixty-three? Who decided that?

Dadashri: It is natural; it is a natural adjustment.

Questioner:  I  accept  this,  but  who  decided  on  sixty-

three? Why did they not decide on sixty-two?

Dadashri: Otherwise, they could have kept sixty-four. 
And this is not just for one revolution [of the time cycle;] it 
is always this very same number. It is natural! Just as when 
2  H  and  O  come  together,  and  when  other  causes  come 
together,  water  is  formed  immediately.  Now,  some  person 
may  say,  “No,  why  is  there  not  just  one  H  here?  Why  are 
there not 3 H?” So, it is a natural thing. These words of the 
Tirthankar  Lords,  the  Tirthankar  Lords  Themselves  do  not 
say that this is Their Gnan. No one can claim, “This Gnan is 
my own understanding. It is the same Gnan that has carried 
forward  since  ancient  times,  which  continues  today.  Even 
time keeps flowing naturally. That is indeed the rule; this is 
a natural adjustment. Nothing has a say in it. Nothing can be 
changed in that which is natural. Like 2 H and O, isn’t it? It 
is a scientific thing like that. Otherwise, it could have been 
decided  that  sixty-three  is  not  a  good  number,  and  so  even 
sixty-four could have been set. However, this is scientific. It 
is so beautiful; how beautiful is the arrangement of nature! 
And it is a systematic arrangement!

When  I  did  not  have  Gnan,  I  used  to  have  certain 
thoughts,  such  as,  ‘This  concept  of  a  year  is  also  a  man-
made  arrangement.  The  years,  the  days,  these  are  certainly 
arrangements made by people; even Diwali has been arranged 
out  of  a  figment  of  their  imagination.  If  these  three  seasons 
were the reason behind [the concept of a year], then it seems 
that this has been arranged out of a figment of their imagination. 
The  seasons  will  certainly  keep  changing.  It  is  the  nature  of 
seasons  to  always  keep  on  changing,  but  based  on  that,  how 
can  it  be  decided  that  a  year  has  passed?  So  then,  I  thought 

104

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

a  lot  about  it,  ‘Last  year,  mangoes  were  available  during  the 
month of May, and this year, they are also available during the 
month  of  May.  Similarly,  many  trees  bear  fruit  every  twelve 
months.’ Therefore,  one  of  the  essences  of  this  world  is  [the 
concept  of]  twelve  months.  Another  essence  is  [the  concept 
of]  a  month.  On  what  basis  is  it  a  month?  There  are  fifteen 
days during which the moon is present, and fifteen days during 
which  it  is  not  present.  And  then,  the  moon  is  visible  once 
again. Therefore, this [concept of a] month is an essence.

I  had  thought  a  lot  about  all  this.  I  had  actually  seen 
many phases, after which I settled onto this. Otherwise, I too 
used to doubt all this before, such as, ‘Why is this like this?’ 
However, this has all been set up [naturally]. It is only after 
that, that I found closure and inner satisfaction. Before, I used 
to  feel  that  people  have  just  made  this  up  and  are  forcibly 
making  it  fit.  But  no,  it  has  not  been  forcibly  made  to  fit. 
This is but natural. Then people refer to the fortnight, should 
one believe that or not? Yes, you should also believe in [the 
concept of] a fortnight. This is because for fifteen days, [the 
visibility  of]  the  moon  continues  to  increase  and  decrease. 
One  can  definitely  see  that. And  once  the  fifteen  days  are 
complete,  something  altogether  new  arises.  Therefore, 
believe in a fortnight. Should one believe in a week or not? 
The fact is, it is ‘effective’ [an effect]. There is a reason why 
there are seven days and not fifteen; there are causes behind 
that. Those seven days are constantly changing.

Questioner: What is the reason behind that? What is 

the cause?

Dadashri:  There  are  many  causes.  Right  now, 
this  twenty-four-hour  day  is  correct;  it  is  all  systematic. 
Therefore,  this  vyavahaar  kaal  (time  used  in  the  relative; 
relative time) is not a concept conceived out of imagination. 
Well, it is a concept conceived out of imagination, but it is 
a natural concept, it is not a concept conceived by humans.

[4] The Eternal Element of Time

105

Hours,  minutes,  seconds;  all  of  that  is  systematic. 
Watches were created from them. So then are watches wrong? 
Even they are proper adjustments. Then from these, we have 
created other problems. They make those hourglasses, don’t 
they?

Questioner: Yes, that is true, they are used for [timing 
the]  samayik  ((introspection  process  for  a  specific  time  in 
which  One  remains  as  the  Self  and  Sees  the  faults  of  the 
non-Self)).

Dadashri: Yes, so when the sand falls within so many 
minutes,  then  we  know  that  we  are  done.  The  watch  is  a 
similar thing. Look at its movement; you can tell how much 
time  has  passed  from  its  movement.  The  watch  is  also  a 
movement. Therefore, all of this [has been set] with a lot of 
understanding.

Likewise, over the course of infinite time cycles, infinite 
chovisi keep on arising. But why only twenty-four? That is 
a  question  arising  from  the  intellect.  Over  here,  a  question 
pertaining to Gnan is needed. This is a question arising from 
the intellect. Just as a person has only certain kinds of limbs, 
two eyes, and a nose; all of that is systematic. Now, in that 
case, would anyone raise an objection to that saying, ‘Why 
is  that  so?’  This  question  [of  the  intellect]  is  akin  to  that. 
Therefore,  one  cannot  delve  too  deep  into  certain  matters. 
The world, it is vyavasthit, it is arranged, it is exact. And this 
is something that has been going on since time immemorial. 
And its flow is exact; it is just that on the account of Time, 
the changes continue to take place. However, the flow is the 
very  same.  It  is  on  the  basis  of  Time  which  ara  (division 
of the time cycle) is unfolding currently, then based on that 
current ara, the arrangements keep taking place over there. 
Anything  that  has  been  arranged  sequentially,  happens  in 
that  order;  the  intellect  will  not  work  there.  We  will  have 
to shut off the intellect there. The intellect works in certain 

106

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

matters, all the way to the end. However, in certain matters, 
it does not work beyond a certain point. Would we say, “Why 
does  this  person  have  two  arms  and  two  legs?  He  should 
also have four of each.” All of this discussion is beyond the 
limits of the intellect. Wherever you look, humans have two 
arms and two legs!

Questioner:  Such  an  intellect  will  later  ask,  “Why 

only four? Why not six?”

Dadashri:  Yes,  then  there  would  be  no  end  to  the 

intellect. It becomes endless.

Questioner:  But  this  twenty-four  must  be  some  kind 

of a mathematical rule, right?

Dadashri:  All  of  this  is  indeed  mathematical.  It  is 
entirely  mathematical.  It  is  nothing  else  at  all.  Time  is  a 
factor in the mathematical equation, it has been included in 
the calculation. What is the only thing that changes? Humans, 
by  their  inherent  nature,  have  entrenched  deluded  beliefs 
acquired  through  societal  influence  (gruhit  mithyatva). 
If  there  were  to  be  a  worst  disease  out  there,  it  would  be 
this  one,  the  entrenched  deluded  beliefs.  These  entrenched 
deluded beliefs that have been filled in, are very difficult to 
get rid of. It is because of these entrenched deluded beliefs 
that absolute Knowledge (keval Gnan) has been impeded.

Questioner: Is it on account of the current era of the 

time cycle?

Dadashri:  Yes,  on  account  of  the  current  era  of  the 

time cycle.

Gnani Purush, the Bestower of Liberation

Time  is  a  decided  thing;  it  does  not  spare  anyone  at 
all.  A  decided  thing  does  not  spare  anyone  at  all.  That  is 
why  our  people  say,  “He  has  attained kaal  dharma  [passed 

[4] The Eternal Element of Time

107

away].”  What  does  that  mean?  It  is  definitely  the  function 
(dharma) of Time; it indeed takes what it needs to take. No 
one can do anything about it. Even God cannot do anything 
about  it.  It  even  took  away  Lord  Mahavir  at  the  age  of 
seventy-two!

Questioner: So is karma dependent on Time?

Dadashri: ‘Time’ is certainly the principal thing, isn’t 
it!  However, Time  is  itself  dependent  on  something  else.  It 
is  dependent  on  many  other  things.  It  is  not  independent 
like things which are not dependent on anything. If it were 
independent, then it would express egoism that, ‘All of this 
is  functioning  because  of  me.’  If  Time  were  independent, 
then  it  would  claim,  ‘This  is  functioning  because  of  me,  I 
am the one running it.’ If God were independent, He would 
say, ‘I am the one running this.’ This world is such that no 
one  can  claim,  ‘I  am  running  it.’  God  [the  Self]  Himself  is 
trapped  in  this,  isn’t  He!  Only  He  knows  His  entrapment, 
the  poor  thing!  ‘He’  really  wants  to  become  free,  but  how 
can He become free? It is only if one meets a Gnani Purush 
that He can be set free. Otherwise, no one can set Him free. 
The Gnani Purush has Himself become free, so He can set 
others free. And that is why He is Himself the bestower of 
liberation  (mokshadata).  ‘He’  has  come  to  give  the  gift  of 
moksha.



[5]
The Eternal Element of Space

[5.1]
Space Is an Indestructible Eternal Element

The Self Is Distinct From All the Other Eternal 
Elements

Questioner: What is the difference between the eternal 

element of Space (aakash) and the Self (Atma)?

Dadashri: The eternal element of Space is non-living 
(nishchetan), there is no Chetan (the property to Know and 
See) in it, whereas the Self has Chetan. There is this much 
of  a  difference  in  the  fundamental  properties  of  these  two 
eternal elements. There are many other differences. Amongst 
all the eternal elements, if there is one fundamental property 
that is the most important and unique, then it is the property 
referred to as Chetan, which is in the Self, therefore It is the 
absolute  Self  (Parmatma).  That  property  does  not  exist  in 
the  eternal  element  of  Space,  nor  does  it  exist  in  any  other 
eternal  element.  The  Self  is  formless  (aroopi)  just  as  the 
eternal element of Space. Both the eternal elements are the 
same  in  terms  of  being  formless.  What  is  the  fundamental 
property  of  the  eternal  element  of  Space?  It  is  to  provide 
space.  Its  fundamental  property  is  to  provide  space  to 

[5.1] Space Is an Indestructible Eternal Element

109

everything. The Self does not have this property to provide 
space,  and  the  property  of  the  Self  referred  to  as  Chetan 
does not exist in the eternal element of Space.

Questioner: You have said somewhere that the Self is 

like the eternal element of Space.

Dadashri:  I  am  simply  giving  you  an  example  that 
just as Space is an eternal element that is formless, similarly, 
the Self is formless. However, the eternal element of Space 
is achetan (without the property to Know and See), whereas 
the Self is Chetan (has the property to Know and See). The 
eternal element of Space does not have any kind of feelings 
(laagni),  whereas  the  Self  has  feelings,  It  is  Knowledge. 
Whereas  this  [the  eternal  element  of  Space]  does  not  have 
any  feelings  or  Knowledge,  that  is  why  ‘we’  say  that  the 
Self does not exist within it.

The  intention  behind  saying  that  the  Self  is  like  the 
eternal element of Space is that nothing can harm the eternal 
element of Space. Similarly, there is nothing in this world that 
can harm the Self. That which you refer to as the pure Soul, 
there is nothing that can cause harm to It. The eternal element 
of Space is everywhere; the Self is not present everywhere.

Now  where  does  the  embodied  soul  (chetan)  dwell? 
Where can chetan be found? It exists wherever there is the 
eternal element of Space. It does not exist wherever space is 
occupied by the others [the other eternal elements]. It exists 
where there is the eternal element of Space. However much 
space there is in whichever form, there is that much chetan 
there.

Questioner: Aakash, meaning the space that is empty, 
and  the  Self,  is  there  anything  like  either  of  the  two  being 
larger or smaller?

Dadashri:  These  two  Parmanu  occupy  their  own 
space, so a third Parmanu cannot fit in that space, however, 

110

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

the  Self  can  pass  right  through  them.  Mind  you,  this  entire 
discussion is very profound. The important thing is that You 
have attained the pure Soul. The rest is just what people ask; 
they ask all kinds of things, whatever springs to their minds.

It  is  when  the  Self  is  separated  from  all  the  other 
eternal elements that the Self becomes nirlep (non-smearable; 
without any tendency of karma to adhere to it). It is only when 
absolute Knowledge (keval Gnan) is attained that It becomes 
exactly separate from the others. That is a Scientific thing.

Questioner:  Dada,  the  most  important  thing  is  to 
separate the Parmanu and Chetan, isn’t it; the rest of them 
[the other eternal elements] are mostly separate, aren’t they?

Dadashri:  They  are  separate,  but  they  have  to  be 
separated.  Otherwise,  when  these  two  are  separated,  the 
other  eternal  elements  would  cling  on.  Hence,  they  all 
need  to  be  separated.  Besides,  the  Self  is  completely  pure, 
It  is  certainly  separate.  ‘It’  is  amidst  all  the  other  eternal 
elements, and it [the worldly-interacting self] is surrounded 
by all the eternal elements.

Questioner:  The  eternal  element  of  Space  coexists 
with the eternal element of the Self, doesn’t it? It cannot be 
separated, can it?

Dadashri: It too becomes separate.

Questioner:  Even  the  eternal  element  of  Space 

becomes separate?

Dadashri: ‘It’ becomes separate even from the eternal 
element  of  Space.  ‘It’  is  anavgaahak  (that  which  does  not 
occupy space). ‘It’ does not need to occupy space. ‘It’ exists 
in Space, yet It does not occupy space; that is how It resides 
in  Siddha  Kshetra  (location  at  the  crest  of  the  universe 
which  is  the  permanent  abode  of  the  absolutely  liberated 
Souls who have attained ultimate liberation)!

[5.1] Space Is an Indestructible Eternal Element

111

Questioner: How is it possible that the Self Itself does 

not occupy space?

Dadashri: This is not something that the intellect can 
understand,  otherwise  [the  intellect  will  say]  Space  would 
remain with It, wouldn’t it!

Questioner: Yes,  Space  would  certainly  remain  with 

It.

Dadashri:  If  Space  were  to  remain  with  It,  then  that 

means there would be a mixture of the two.

Each  and  every  person’s  bhaav  (intent,  belief)  is 
certainly  different.  This  is  because  the  space  for  each  one 
is different. The space is always going to be different, isn’t 
it!  As  long  as  [the  Self]  does  not  go  to  moksha,  space  is 
required. In moksha, no space is required. The Self does not 
have a need for space. The sun has actually occupied space. 
Did you understand a little?

Questioner:  Dada,  do  all  six  eternal  elements  exist 
even in Devlok (a cosmic plane where celestial beings live)?

Dadashri: Everywhere. There is nothing in this world 

that is without the mixture of the six eternal elements.

Questioner: So, did you not say that there is only the 
eternal  element  of  Space  in  alok  (a  region  in  the  universe 
where  there  is  only  the  element  of  Space,  and  no  other 
eternal element); there are no other eternal elements there.

Dadashri: Alok and the Self have nothing to do with 
each other! The Self does not need even the eternal element 
of Space. That which does not have dependency on anything 
is the Self! ‘It’ is referred to as God!

The Eternal Element of Space Provides Space

These  six  eternal  elements  are  permanent  elements. 

112

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Moreover,  the  inherent  nature  of  each  one  is  different;  the 
eternal element of Space is a single entity. ‘Space’ is so vast, 
yet it is just one entity, it is indivisible.

Questioner: It is continuous (akhand).

Dadashri:  The  eternal  element  of  Space  does  not 
create anything, nor does it get created. It is not something 
that can be created. This eternal element of Space can neither 
be considered jada (inanimate), nor chetan (living). ‘Space’! 
Yes, it too is an eternal element.

Now, where are all of these eternal elements carrying 
out their work? Whose place (bhoomika) is it? Whose location 
(kshetra)  is  it?  Do  all  of  these  [eternal  elements]  not  need 
a place to carry out their play? All these [eternal elements] 
need  a  place  to  reside,  to  move  about,  so  from  where  can 
they get such a place? Would they not need someone to give 
them  that  place?  The  element  that  is  referred  to  as  Space 
which  provides  that  space,  is  also  eternal.  This  open  area, 
the one that is called Space, that Space is an eternal element. 
All the other [eternal elements] reside within it.

This  eternal  element  of  inanimate  matter  (jada)  and 
chetan [vibhaavik chetan; the self that has deviated from its 
inherent  nature]  need  space  to  reside  in,  they  need  space. 
They are able to reside on account of space. They do not have 
a place of their own, the ownership is of the eternal element 
of Space. Therefore, Space is an independent element. It is a 
complete eternal element and it is indestructible (avinashi). 
Where you are sitting right now, that is referred to as space.

That Which Is Visible to the Eye Is Not the Eternal 
Element of Space

Questioner:  How  can  it  be  said  that  the  eternal 

element of Space is indestructible?

Dadashri:  So  when  was  it  created?  That  which  is 

[5.1] Space Is an Indestructible Eternal Element

113

not  created  cannot  get  destroyed,  that  is  all  indestructible. 
And that which is created and gets destroyed is destructible 
(vinashi).

Even  scientists  cannot  perceive  it.  They  can  only 
perceive  what  they  can  discern  through  the  intellect.  They 
are not capable of anything beyond that! ‘Space’ is actually 
a permanent thing. Don’t you feel it is permanent?

Questioner: I do, but it seems that there are changes 

taking place in it.

Dadashri: There can never be changes of any kind in 
it. It is a permanent eternal element; it has its own temporary 
state  (avastha);  the  eternal  element  does  not  change.  Each 
[eternal  element]  has  temporary  states;  the  pure  Soul  has  a 
temporary  state.  Every  temporary  state  of  It  is  destructible 
(vinashi),  whereas  the  eternal  element  is  indestructible. 
Water is a temporary state, so then it becomes water vapor, 
and  then  the  water  vapor  once  again  becomes  water,  it 
becomes ice; these are all temporary states. Nothing happens 
to the eternal element. Now, all these relatives are temporary 
adjustments,  the  ‘I’  is  permanent.  Do  you  want  to  remain 
in  the  permanent  stage  or  a  temporary  stage? All  these  are 
phases and ever changing; scientists cannot see the eternals. 
The world has not seen the eternal element of Space; people 
can see its temporary states. Have you ever seen the eternal 
element of Space?

Questioner: We have not seen it, but we experience it.

Dadashri:  It  is  not  something  that  can  be  seen  with 

the eyes.

Questioner: But it can be experienced, can’t it?

Dadashri:  It  does  seem  as  though  this  is  hollow, 
it  is  space.  Nothing  Real  can  be  seen  with  these  eyes.  It 
can  only  be  Seen  through  the  divya  chakshu  (the  divine 

114

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Vision  through  which  the  Real  and  the  relative  is  Seen  as 
separate;  the  divine  eyes).  When  that  divine  Vision  comes 
into exactness, that is when it [the Real; the eternal element 
of  Space]  can  be  Seen.  Through  the  divine  Vision,  it  first 
comes into the understanding.

The eternal element of Space is actually independent; 
it is as independent as God. The Parmanu are independent. 
The eternal element of Space cannot be divided into pieces. 
The  inherent  nature  of  the  eternal  element  of  Space  is  of  a 
uniform type.

It can have aggregates (skandha). There might be more 
of it collected together in some places and less in others, but 
the entity as a whole does not break.

Of  the  indestructible  elements,  there  is  only  one  that 
you can understand to some extent, that this is indestructible; 
that  is,  you  can  perceive  Space  alone. You  cannot  perceive 
any  other  indestructible  element.  That  too,  you  can  only 
perceive  the  tangible  aspect  of  Space,  you  cannot  perceive 
the fundamental aspect.

The Color of the Sky

Therefore,  even  the  sky  is  not  perceivable.  What  is 
visible here is the color of a hollow space. Even if the hollow 
space  is  very  deep,  that  hollow  space  does  not  have  any 
color. The ocean gives off a reflection. The reflection of the 
entire  ocean  falls  on  the  hollow  space  and  that  is  the  very 
color that is seen. The light of the sun falls on the ocean and 
its reflection is given off above. It is because of this that it 
appears  blue,  that  is  not  Space,  it  is  the  sky  [open  space], 
it  is  not  pudgal.  Water  is  pudgal,  and  the  light  of  the  sun 
falls on it. So, it is because of its reflection that the color is 
visible. Water is also colorless.

Questioner: But is the color of Space blue?

[5.1] Space Is an Indestructible Eternal Element

115

Dadashri: ‘Space’ does not have any color of any sort. 
‘Space’  itself  is  not  Parmanu;  neither  is  it  empty  nor  does 
it have any color. It is just Space. A person can understand 
Space, that there is such a thing as Space.

Questioner:  So  there  is  no  color  in  it,  nor  are  there 

any materials in it, nor is there gravity in it.

Dadashri: There is nothing. ‘Space’ is a place for the 
other five eternal elements to reside. This Space is permanent 
and it is a place for the other five eternal elements which are 
permanent, to reside in. ‘Space’ is nothing else. It is simply 
an open area, avkaash.

Questioner:  But  Dada,  it  would  indeed  be  up  above, 

wouldn’t it?

Dadashri:  Not  [just]  up  above,  it  is  down  below 
and  everywhere  else.  Space  is  everywhere.  The  cilantro 
[coriander]  that  we  eat,  there  is  space  inside  it.  There  is 
space  even  in  this  diamond.  There  is  space  in  this  gold, 
silver; there is space inside everything. If there is no space 
in an object, then it would never break. There is less space 
in a diamond, so it does not break easily.

Questioner: Dada, when will we be able to see all of 

that?

Dadashri: Do you want to see that, or do you want to 

go to moksha?

Questioner: We are definitely going to moksha.

Dadashri: So then why worry about all of that? There 
are actually many things like this; there are billions of things 
like this.

The Self Does Not Occupy Space

Questioner: So which eternal elements are in Siddha 

116

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Kshetra  (location  at  the  crest  of  the  universe  which  is  the 
permanent abode of the absolutely liberated Souls who have 
attained ultimate liberation)?

Dadashri: There is no need to consider Siddha Kshetra 
at  all.  There  are  no  eternal  elements  in  Siddha  Kshetra  at 
all,  are  there!  Over  there,  there  is  only  the  absolute  Self 
(Parmatma). Where can eternal elements be found? Eternal 
elements  are  found  where  there  is  atattva  (the  non-eternal; 
the relative).

Questioner:  Does  the  eternal  element  of  Space  exist 
in  alok  (a  region  in  the  universe  where  there  is  only  the 
element  of  Space,  and  no  other  eternal  element),  in Siddha 
Kshetra?

Dadashri:  ‘Space’  is  everywhere,  isn’t  it!  The  Self 
does  not  need  space.  ‘It’  does  not  take  up  space.  The  Self 
does not occupy space, It is anavgaahak. Now, do not delve 
too  deep  into  all  of  this.  What  will  you  gain  from  delving 
deep into this?

Questioner:  Does  the  Self  occupy  space  in  Siddha 

gati (realm of the absolutely liberated Souls)?

Dadashri:  The  truth  is,  that  would  be  considered  as 
having  taken  on  a  dependency  (avalamban).  [‘It’  requires] 
No space or anything like that, It is anavgaahak. ‘It’ has no 
need to occupy space.

Questioner: What does anavgaahak mean?

Dadashri:  ‘It’  does  not  occupy  space.  All  objects 

occupy space.

Questioner: Dada, why is space not needed in Siddha 

Kshetra?

Dadashri:  Look,  you  are  delving  too  deep  into  it 
again;  be  careful,  don’t  delve  too  deep  into  this.  On  the 

[5.1] Space Is an Indestructible Eternal Element

117

contrary, you will forget other things. I have told him not to 
discuss other topics beyond a certain limit. He still does not 
fully  understand  certain  [more  important]  points  regarding 
this,  yet  he  is  asking  about  all  of  this  to  this  extent.  So, 
one  keeps  fostering  false  notions. What  is  after  that? What 
is  after  that?  What  is  after  that?  The  fundamental  thing  is 
that  the  inherent  nature  of  the  Self  is  such  that  It  does  not 
occupy  space.  ‘It’  does  not  need  space. And  in  our  case,  it 
[the worldly-interacting self] occupies space for only as long 
as it has this body.

The  Knowledge  regarding  lok  (region  of  space  in  the 
universe  where  there  is  worldly  existence)  is  to  be  Known 
just once. Whereas the only thing that should be maintained 
in  Your  attentive  awareness  is  that  You  want  to  clear  [the 
‘files’] with equanimity.

Questioner: So then, what exists over there in Siddha 

Kshetra?

Dadashri:  There  is  nothing  at  all  over  there. All  the 
absolutely  liberated  Souls  reside  there;  They  do  not  have 
bodies, They are bodiless. And They are two-thirds the size 
of  the  body  in  which  They  became  liberated.  ‘They’  have 
steadiness  (sthirata).  Despite  being  formless  (niraakaar), 
They  have  a  form  (aakaar).  ‘They’  do  not  have  to  do 
anything  there,  They  remain  in  eternal  bliss  (parmanand), 
constant  eternal  bliss!  ‘They’  remain  only  in  the  inherent 
nature  as  the  Self.  Whereas  this  is  a  visheshbhaav  (an 
assumed  identification  with  that  which  is  not  One’s  own) 
that  has  arisen,  a  bhrantibhaav  (wrong  belief  that  ‘I  am 
Chandubhai’)  has  arisen.  When  the  wrong  belief  comes  to 
an end, One becomes That, One is indeed the absolute Self 
(Parmatma).

Questioner:  So,  the  Self  does  not  need  any  space  at 

all over there?

118

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri:  None  at  all,  there  is  no  dependency  at  all 
[over there]! There are no [eternal elements of] Time, Space, 
motion, inertia, or inanimate matter; there is the Self alone.

Questioner: The Self would naturally occupy Its own 

space, does It not have Its own personal space?

Dadashri: The Self does not occupy any space. But as 
long as it has taken on a body, it occupies space. The Self is 
anavgaahak. The Self does not require space for Itself. What 
is considered as occupying space? Where there is difficulty 
in  coming  and  going,  there,  it  is  considered  as  occupying 
space. Therefore, the Self does not have any need for space. 
If  It  were  to  occupy  space,  then  It  would  be  an  occupant, 
[It would have to] pay rent, it [Space] would make a claim, 
wouldn’t  it!  Just  as  claims  are  made  here  [by  the  owner  of 
the space occupied]. And it is because this pudgal (the non-
Self complex that undergoes influx and outflux; the body) is 
there, that is indeed why the space is being occupied!

Questioner: I see; space is being occupied because it 

has a pudgal.

Dadashri: Yes…, moreover, It is niralamb (absolutely 
free  of  dependency  on  anything  relative).  ‘It’  has  no 
dependency of any kind whatsoever. That is why It becomes 
eternally blissful.

Questioner: You  had  once  said,  “All  of  that  other  is 
a worldly discussion, whereas what ‘we’ are saying has the 
stamp of the Self (alaukik; that which is beyond the worldly) 
on it; it has a stamp of approval on it.”

Dadashri: It is because it has the stamp of the Self on 
it that one understands it. The stamp of the Self is not found 
elsewhere.

The Realm of the Self?

Questioner:  Of  these  four,  the  dravya  (worldly-

[5.1] Space Is an Indestructible Eternal Element

119

interacting self; physical evidences), kshetra (location), time 
(kaal), and intent (bhaav), how does the Self exist in relation 
to kshetra?

Dadashri:  Kshetra  refers  to  the  space  which  is 
occupied; that is what is referred to as kshetra. The amount 
of space its existence occupies, that much space is referred 
to as its kshetra. The space, that which is called open space, 
that  region  is  referred  to  as  kshetra. And  what’s  more,  that 
kshetra  continues  to  change.  The  dravya,  the  kshetra,  the 
time  (kaal),  the  intent  (bhaav),  and  a  lifetime  (bhav)  keep 
on  changing.  And  these  [first]  four  are  actually  constantly 
changing.  In  terms  of  a  lifetime,  say  one  has  a  lifetime  as 
a  human  being,  then  it  may  even  last  for  five,  fifty,  one 
hundred  years  or  so,  but  these  [first]  four  definitely  keep 
changing constantly.

Questioner: How does the dravya (elemental matter) 

of the Self change?

Dadashri:  Not  the  dravya  of  the  Self,  whatever 
physical matter that has adhered to the Self through having 
this worldly intent [meaning the worldly-interacting self]; all 
of those keep on changing. The kshetra keeps on changing, 
based  on  that,  the  time  keeps  on  changing,  and  based  on 
that, the bhaav (intent, belief) also keeps on changing. Right 
now, a bhaav that is free of fear (nirbhay bhaav) will arise. 
If one goes to a place of fear, then [the bhaav of] fear will 
arise. It keeps changing constantly, from one samay (smallest 
unit  of  Time)  to  the  next.  It  keeps  changing  constantly 
for  every  living  being.  It  is  the  Gnani  Purush  alone  who 
is  not  bound  (apratibaddh).  The  One  who  moves  about 
constantly unbound by the dravya (the physical evidences), 
kshetra, time, and intent; no one can go to moksha without 
serving at the divine feet of such a Gnani Purush. For Him, 
for  the  Gnani,  there  is  no  place  that  can  ever  make  Him 
bound. These  things,  the  dravya,  the  kshetra,  the  time,  and 

120

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

the  intent,  they  are  all  such  that  they  lead  to  bondage;  yet 
they  cannot  bind  the  Gnani,  He  is  not  bound  [by  them]. 
Despite being amongst those things that cause bondage, He 
remains  unbound.  These  things  are  indeed  such  that  they 
lead  to  bondage.  However,  it  is  because  one  has  ignorance 
of  the  Self  that  one  is  bound.  If  One  is  a  Gnani,  then  they 
cannot bind Him. Even in terms of kshetra, if the one who 
is  ignorant  of  the  Self  is  made  to  sit  here,  he  will  take  a 
liking to it. “I am seated here, I will not like it over there,” 
he will say.

Did  you  get  some  clarity;  did  you  understand  this 

discussion?

Questioner:  Dada,  what  You  are  discussing  is  about 
the realm of the non-Self (parkshetra); I want to ask about 
the realm of the Self (Swakshetra).

Dadashri:  Oh,  okay...the  fact  is,  One  remains  as  the 
Self  through  these  four  intents:  Swadravya  (the  elemental 
matter  as  the  Self),  Swakshetra  (the  realm  as  the  Self), 
Swabhaav  (the  inherent  nature  as  the  Self),  and  Swakaal 
(Time as it relates to the Real). That verily is the pure Soul, 
nothing  else.  [The  word]  Swakshetra  has  been  used  simply 
for  the  purpose  of  removing  one  from  this  parkshetra. 
Kshetra  refers  to  the  infinite  pradesh  of  the  Self;  however, 
that kshetra is not what ‘we’ are referring to, but that word 
has been used here to explain that [parkshetra]. There is no 
need  for  it,  all You  need  is  the  pure  Soul,  that  is  it.  There 
is  no  need  to  delve  further  into  this.  Even Time  is  not  like 
that  with  regard  to  the  Self.  ‘Time’  does  not  apply  to  the 
Self.  The  Self  does  not  have  bhaav  (intent;  belief);  It  only 
has  Swabhaav.  ‘It’  is  the  Knower-Seer  by  Its  very  inherent 
nature.  But  it  is  for  the  sake  of  explaining  the  four  things 
that  are  external  to  the  Self  that  ‘we’  are  using  [the  word] 
‘Swa’,  so  that You  come  into  the  Self  (Swa)  from  the  non-
Self (par).

[5.1] Space Is an Indestructible Eternal Element

121

Besides, One certainly is the pure Soul. Completely in 
One’s  inherent  nature  in  every  sense,  meaning  that  there  is 
no other inherent nature as the Self, but to be the Knower-
Seer and in permanent bliss, that verily is Its Swabhaav; that 
is to say, One’s own inherent nature. And the bhaav that is 
not  in  the  Pudgal  [Parmanu],  and  the  bhaav  that  is  not  as 
the  Self,  that  has  been  referred  to  as  parbhaav  (the  state 
as  the  non-Self).  It  is  not  of  the  Self,  yet  it  is  believed  to 
be of the Self, that parbhaav is dependent upon parkshetra. 
It  is  referred  to  as  parkshetra  up  to  that  point. As  long  as 
one believes the parbhaav to be one’s own, until then there 
is  parkshetra;  even  the  dravya  (physical  evidences),  all  of 
that is considered to be of the non-Self (par). Therefore, all 
this has been explained in order to make You come into the 
Self  (Swa).  And  once  the  pure  Soul  has  been  understood, 
it’s complete, all the [spiritual] work is done. Otherwise, It 
[the  Self]  does  not  have  any  kshetra  or  anything  like  that, 
such as Swakshetra. That has simply been described by the 
scripture writers.

The  mind,  speech,  and  body  are  parkshetra.  The 
‘I’  (Hu)  is  Swakshetra.  Both  their  kshetras  are  certainly 
separate.  The  Self  is  kshetragnya  (the  Knower-Seer  of  the 
relative  self).  ‘It’  is  the  Knower  and  the  Seer  of  the  [par]
kshetra  (relative  self),  yet  it  has  become  kshetrakaar  (to 
become one with the relative self).



[5.2]
The Unique Effects of Space!

Everything Changes as the Kshetra Changes

Therefore, the value is of the kshetra (location), of the 

place, isn’t it!

Questioner:  So  does  the  kshetra  differ  for  every 

human being as well?

Dadashri:  The  dravya,  the  kshetra,  the  time  (kaal), 
and the intent (bhaav), all four certainly keep changing for 
human beings.

Questioner: But they are different for everyone, aren’t 

they? They are different for Chandubhai.

Dadashri: They are different for everyone, that is why 

all the faces are different!

Questioner: So, the location of two people is different 
in the very same room. This man is sitting there, I am sitting 
here, so the location of both...

Dadashri: Even then, you are in your location and he 

is in his location.

Even the Antahkaran Occupies Space!

There  is  space  as  long  as  this  body  is  around.  Space 

[5.2] The Unique Effects of Space!

123

would definitely be there, wouldn’t it? Just look, can anybody 
else sit where you are sitting right now?

Questioner: They cannot. So would that be considered 

as having taken on a dependency (avalamban)?

Dadashri:  Then  what  else  can  it  be  considered? 
It  is  like  living  in  someone  else’s  [the  eternal  element  of 
Space]  home  and  on  top  of  that,  one  behaves  arrogantly! 
This  ‘house’  [body]  belongs  to  someone  else,  whereas  this 
house  [the  space]  in  which  satsang  (a  spiritual  discourse) 
is conducted is different. But then again, even this ‘house’, 
meaning  this  body,  is  someone  else’s  [of  the  parmanu]. 
Where You [the Self] are residing right now is this space. If 
You  want  to  occupy  any  space,  then  shouldn’t You  ask  for 
permission from the one who owns the space?

Questioner:  Just  as  this  body  occupies  space,  do 
the  mind,  intellect,  chit  (subtle  component  of  vision  and 
knowledge  in  the  inner  functioning  instrument  called 
antahkaran), ego also occupy space?

Dadashri: They are all within the body; they occupy 
space within the body. They have drawn out a contract within 
it that, ‘I will need this much space.’ Inside [the body,] they 
have  drawn  out  a  contract  that,  ‘I  want  this  much  space  to 
set up shop in this zone.’ Do you not feel that you have built 
on someone else’s terrain?

Questioner: That is definitely true.

Dadashri: You have to sleep in someone else’s terrain 

at night.

Questioner:  So  does  everything  except  for  the  Self 

occupy space?

Dadashri: Yes.

Questioner:  Fundamentally,  it  is  the  property  of  the 

124

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

pudgal  (the  non-Self  complex  that  undergoes  influx  and 
outflux) to occupy space, isn’t it? It is pudgal that occupies 
space, doesn’t it?

Dadashri: Yes.

Questioner: So it is still going to occupy space even 

after the Self leaves.

Dadashri:  The  pure  Parmanu  have  already  occupied 
that space. They have nothing to do with this; they actually 
remain interwoven.

Questioner: With Space?

Dadashri: Yes. The Space is there on their basis; they 

are there on the basis of Space. That is how it all is.

Questioner: So this sense of ownership over the pudgal 

that arises amidst this, that is why there is a dependency.

Dadashri:  Everyone  in  the  world  has  this  sense  of 
ownership of ‘it is indeed mine’ arising. They [the Parmanu] 
do not have anything like that.

Questioner:  Don’t  the  Parmanu  have  anything  to  do 

with it?

Dadashri: Nothing at all!

One Moves Forward Based on Space

Questioner:  There  is  a  different  type  of  ego  in 
everyone.  In  him,  there  is  the  ego  of  being  an  engineer.  In 
me, there is the ego of being a doctor.

Dadashri: Yes, it is different.

Questioner: What is it based on?

Dadashri:  It  is  based  on  the  space  [location  on  the 

path of spiritual evolution] being different.

[5.2] The Unique Effects of Space!

125

Questioner: But is it not based on karma?

Dadashri:  No,  it  is  on  the  basis  of  the  space 
being  different.  Thereafter,  it  is  on  the  basis  of  karma. 
Fundamentally, everyone’s space is different.

Questioner: Dada, it is easy to understand that space 
is different in this. But in fact, how would it be regarding the 
inner space? In this case, this man is sitting here, that man 
is  sitting  there.  Does  the  eternal  element  of  Space  not  help 
in this [spiritual] development?

Dadashri: Why would it not help?

Questioner: How would that be? Meaning, how does 
space  play  a  role  in  whether  one  becomes  a  doctor  or  an 
engineer?

Dadashri: One moves forward only if there is space, 

otherwise things would not move forward at all.

Questioner: I didn’t quite understand that.

Dadashri:  If  there  is  no  space,  then  nothing  moves 
forward  at  all,  does  it!  One  does  not  become  a  doctor  just 
like that. When the timing, the space, and all the other causes 
come  together  that  is  when  he  has  thoughts  of  becoming  a 
doctor. One does not bind karma of one’s own accord.

Questioner: You had once said that when one reaches 
a certain ‘mile’ on the path of natural and spiritual evolution 
(samsaran  marg),  then  certain  veils  of  ignorance  over  the 
Self  (avaran)  break,  so  then  his  faith  gets  established  in, 
‘There is happiness only in the occupation as a bricklayer.’ 
So, then he becomes a bricklayer.

Dadashri:  But  it  is  only  if  space  is  the  main  factor, 
only then can all of that happen. Space is the main factor in 
everything.

126

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

All of This Is Based on Evidences

Questioner:  So  what  comes  first,  the  swabhaav 

(inherent nature of the prakruti) or the space?

Dadashri: It is on account of the swabhaav that space 
is attained once again, and similarly, it is on account of space 
that the swabhaav is attained, they are all linked.

Questioner: Are they linked with each other?

Dadashri: So for each one of them, all of this actually 
happens  based  on  evidences  (nimit-naimittik).  The  main 
factor is space.

Questioner: This is the first time we have heard about 

space from You, Dada.

Dadashri: Such discussions have taken place before.

Questioner:  No,  we  have  heard  it  only  in  Your 

satsang. We have not heard it elsewhere.

Dadashri:  Would  such  discussions  ever  happen  in 
other places? This discussion would definitely not exist out 
there, would it! Of all the discussions that we are having here, 
not  a  single  point  can  be  found  elsewhere. This  is  because 
this  is  an  unprecedented  discussion.  It  is  a  discussion  that 
has  never  been  heard,  known,  experienced,  or  thought  of 
before. And in fact, the discussion about space would never 
take place anywhere else, would it!

Questioner: Dada, one becomes a doctor, and then the 
very same living being becomes a lawyer, so what factor is at 
work in one going from being a doctor to becoming a lawyer?

Dadashri:  It  is  simply  that  he  has  come  into  such  a 

space; the drawing is verily like that.

Questioner:  But  Dada,  the  fundamental  factor  is  our 

karma, isn’t it?

[5.2] The Unique Effects of Space!

127

Dadashri:  Karma  is  not  the  fundamental  factor; 
karma  is  a  dependent  factor.  Karma  is  based  on  space,  and 
the space is based on karma. So the fundamental factor here 
is the space. Karma is actually an overt thing; it comes much 
later  on.  But  what  the  Lord  has  said  is  that  the  world  is 
functioning  on  the  basis  of  the  dravya,  kshetra,  time,  and 
intent.

Questioner: So is the kshetra alone the main thing?

Dadashri:  The  kshetra  [the  location  the  worldly-
interacting  self  is  on  the  path  of  spiritual  evolution]  is  the 
main  thing.  In  terms  of  time,  everyone  is  listening  at  this 
time,  but  the  kshetra  alone  is  different  for  everyone.  The 
intent  is  based  on  that  kshetra. And  the  karma  is  based  on 
the  intent,  and  everything  proceeds  based  on  the  karma. 
This  world  then  started  functioning.  All  this  is  the  result 
(parinaam) of the karma.

Questioner:  Meaning,  that  which  is  visible  to  the 

eyes.

Dadashri: [Not only] That which is visible, even that 

which is not visible, all of that too.

Questioner: So then where does dravya (the worldly-
interacting  self)  come  into  this?  The  intent  arose  based  on 
the  kshetra,  so  the  karma  got  bound  based  on  the  kshetra, 
and  the  world  started  functioning  based  on  the  karma,  so 
where did the dravya go?

Dadashri: Who came into that space? It is the worldly-
interacting self that did. Are you turning the wedding party 
into one without a groom? What kind of a person are you? 
You  are  asking,  “If  the  wedding  party  has  left,  then  where 
is the groom?” Hey, the wedding party would never proceed 
without  the  groom.  Yet  you  are  asking  about  the  worldly-
interacting  self.  That  which  comes  into  the  kshetra  is  the 

128

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

worldly-interacting self. So that worldly-interacting self has 
come  to  be  based  on  the  kshetra.  This  [the  intent]  arose 
through  the  worldly-interacting  self,  and  that  is  why  all 
of  this  has  carried  on.  The  intent  arose  within  it  [worldly-
interacting self], on the basis of time. The worldly-interacting 
self,  the  kshetra,  the  time...Once  the  [right]  time  comes  to 
unfold, the intent arises.

Questioner: So first, the worldly-interacting self came 

into the kshetra?

Dadashri: The worldly-interacting self first came into 

the kshetra, and based on that, then…

Questioner: The intent arose.

Dadashri:  No;  when  the  time  comes  to  unfold,  then 
the intent arises, and subsequently karma gets charged. It is 
only  when  a  certain  time  comes  to  unfold  that  a  particular 
intent arises; otherwise, the intent would not arise at all.

This is all a very subtle discussion; what need do You 

have for all of this? All You need is the Self.

Questioner:  Dada,  the  dravya  that  You  mentioned 
in  this,  is  that  dravya  the  one  with  vishesh  parinaam 
(completely new result that arises when two eternal elements 
come together)?

Dadashri: Vishesh parinaam of what?

Questioner:  Then  which  dravya  would 

it  be 

considered?

Dadashri: ‘This’ very one. ‘This’ one that is here.

Questioner:  But  who  does  ‘this’  refer  to?  I  did  not 
understand that. Meaning, is it Chetan or pudgal, which one 
is it?

Dadashri: The  illusory  form,  the  bhranti  chetan  (the 

[5.2] The Unique Effects of Space!

129

worldly-interacting  self;  the  developing  I  with  the  wrong 
belief of ‘I am Chandubhai’).

Questioner:  Has  the  worldly-interacting  self  been 

referred to as the dravya?

Dadashri: Yes. The Self (Chetan) that is free of illusion 
would  not  occupy  space;  It  would  not  come  here.  Karma 
arises  at  the  end  moment.  It  is  not  involved  in  anything 
else.  Fundamentally,  if  one  comes  across  the  space,  then 
everything  moves  ahead.  That  is  why  the  Lord  had  asked, 
“Has the kshetra changed?” If the answer is yes, then things 
will move ahead.

Questioner:  So  then  on  what  basis  does  one  acquire 

the space, Dada?

Dadashri: It is actually based on the law [of the path 
of  spiritual  evolution]. As  the  entire  group  moves  forward, 
the  place  of  each  person  continues  to  change.  It  is  not  the 
case that one remains in that space forever.

Questioner:  So  then,  in  this  case  where  the  karma 
keep arising based on the dravya, the kshetra, the time, and 
the intent, is that entirely a kind of natural process?

Dadashri: Then what else?

Questioner: Is there no sense of doership in that?

Dadashri: The sense of doership would actually arise 

when one develops intellect (buddhi).

Even  though  everyone  is  listening  at  the  very  same 
period  of  time,  yet  their  space  is  different.  Wherever  you 
look, their space is different.

Questioner:  And 

that 

is 

indeed  why  everyone 

understands differently.

Dadashri: And the intent would definitely be different. 

130

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

As  the  space  is  different,  the  intent  would  definitely  be 
different. They may all be studying in the same school, yet 
their intent would definitely be different.

Questioner:  So  the  shape  of  this  body  is  a  photo  of 

the ego, isn’t it?

Dadashri:  Then,  of  what  else?  If  the  ego  is  naive, 
then the body will be heavyset. If the ego is shrewd, then the 
body will be lean. If it is a crazy ego, then one will be crazy. 
If  the  ego  is  intensely  greedy,  then  the  person  will  become 
intensely  greedy.  Whatever  the  ego  is  like,  the  person  will 
be like that.

Questioner: Has my ego become the way it is because 
of the space I have gotten, or have I gotten this space because 
my ego is going to become like this?

Dadashri: It is because of the space that there is this 
ego,  and  it  is  because  of  the  ego  that  there  is  this  space. 
They are both reciprocal.

The  world  is  scientific.  Is  this  world  a  falsehood?  It 
functions  without  anyone  doing  anything,  doesn’t  it,  just 
look! You too delved deep into it. It is actually these people 
who delve into it.

Questioner:  Dada,  we  believe  in  just  one  thing,  that 

we want to go to moksha.

Dadashri: Yes, that is all.

No two living beings can occupy the same space. And 

that too, as the space is different, their karma are different.

Questioner:  It  is  actually  the  physical  that  has 

circumstances, but what circumstances does the Self have?

Dadashri:  The  Self  has  actually  come  across  many 

circumstances.

[5.2] The Unique Effects of Space!

131

Questioner: Someone has become a dog and why did 

I become Chandubhai?

Dadashri:  It  is  because  the  circumstances  were 

different.

It  is  because  of  the  space  that  the  intents  differ. And 
when the space and the intent got multiplied, different things 
arose and the world came into being.

Questioner: Can the physical circumstances bind the 

self?

Dadashri: They indeed have, haven’t they! That is why 
the  [worldly-interacting]  self  [vyavahaar  atma]  is  shouting, 
‘Set me free, set me free.’ The Gnani Purush can set it free.

Karma and Gnan, in the Very Same Space!

Questioner: Can knowledge (gnan) and karma coexist, 

or what needs to be done first?

Dadashri: What is the problem with coexisting?

Questioner: This question arose, that can both happen 

at the same time?

Dadashri:  The  fact  is,  karma  needs  space,  whereas 
[both,  Real  and  relative]  knowledge  does  not  need  space. 
Therefore,  they  can  coexist  in  the  same  place.  One  needs 
space and the other does not, that is why they can coexist.

Questioner: Please explain this further, I didn’t quite 

understand!

Dadashri:  Any  type  of  karma  requires  space,  and 
knowledge  does  not  require  space,  so  they  can  coexist. 
Whereas other things occupy space, so they cannot coexist.

Questioner: Besides karma, what other things occupy 

space, in the worldly sense?

132

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri:  All  these  devotional  acts  (bhakti)  occupy 
space,  knowledge  alone  is  without  space;  it  does  not  need 
space.

Questioner:  A  completely  scientific  answer.  It  is 
exactly  scientific,  Dada.  Knowledge  definitely  does  not 
occupy space.

Dadashri: You understood it, didn’t you?

Questioner: I got the gist.

Dadashri:  That  is  why  they  can  coexist.  The  fact  is, 
karma  is  an  effect  of  knowledge.  If  they  are  not  together, 
then  it  cannot  be  karma  at  all. They  can  both  coexist;  why 
is  it  that  they  can  coexist?  Knowledge  does  not  occupy 
space,  whereas  karma  does,  so  they  can  both  occupy  the 
same  space  at  the  same  time.  Whereas  karma  and  bhakti 
(devotional  acts  done  on  the  basis  of  the  knowledge  one 
has  about  the  God  he  worships)  cannot  coexist.  Both  need 
space, whereas knowledge does not need space. And in this 
world, [Real] bhakti (devotional acts to approach nearer and 
nearer to the Self) cannot be carried out without Knowledge; 
there are all kinds of bhakti. How much bhakti must be out 
there that is being done with Knowledge?

The Effect of a Place on Thoughts...

Questioner:  Can  a  place  and  the  time  really  affect 

thoughts?

Dadashri:  It  is  indeed  due  to  their  effect  that  these 
thoughts are affected. The actual place and the time do not 
change, do they!

Questioner:  Basically,  what  I  was  trying  to  say  was 
that just recently when I had gone to Surat, my inner Vision 
(Darshan)  had  become  a  bit  dimmer.  When  I  come  to 
Vadodara,  the  Vision  becomes  clearer.  Whereas  when  I  go 
to Surat or Mumbai, it has an effect on my inner Vision.

[5.2] The Unique Effects of Space!

133

Dadashri:  That  will  have  an  effect.  Each  and  every 
place brings about an effect. Even when we sit underneath this 
tree, it will have a different effect. When we sit underneath 
that  other  tree,  it  will  have  a  different  effect.  Even  the  tree 
will have an effect on one. Whether it’s the place, the time, 
or even the tree, be it the dravya (physical evidences, such 
as people) or things, all of them will have an effect.

Questioner:  So  then  to  clear  off  or  discharge  the 
karma,  we  definitely  have  to  go  to  many  places;  so  then 
what should we do at that time to ward off the effect of the 
place and the time?

Dadashri: The one who is being affected is not You. 
‘You’ should See the one being affected. ‘Your’ place is free 
from  the  effect.  There  is  nothing  in  this  world  that  is  free 
from  effects,  whereas  You  are  free  from  effects.  So,  there 
is no problem with the effects; the effects will keep arising. 
There  is  not  a  single  place  that  will  refrain  from  [giving 
an]  effect. And  it  is  indeed  the  nature  of  the  pudgal  to  be 
affected.  It  is  indeed  ‘effective’  [prone  to  change  based  on 
the  effect];  the  mind,  speech,  and  body  are  all  ‘effective’. 
Furthermore, it is a puzzle; additionally, it is not solvable. Is 
the word ‘puzzle’ appropriate, or will we need to use some 
other word?

Questioner:  No,  it  is  correct.  It  is  correct,  it  is 

definitely appropriate.

Dadashri:  Fine.  All  the  parmanu  that  have  been 

acquired will have to be purified once again.

Questioner:  Just  as  people  have  vibrations,  locations 
also have vibrations, don’t they? Is the atmosphere like that?

Dadashri:  Everything  has  an  atmosphere.  Even  a 
tree has its atmosphere, even a location has its atmosphere. 
When we go to a certain location, negative thoughts arise.

134

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

If  you  were  to  go  to  Kurukshetra  [the  land  on  which 
the  war  of  Mahabharat  was  fought],  then  you  would  have 
thoughts  only  of  fighting  over  there.  If  two  people  happen 
to be passing by there, they would indeed end up fighting.

Questioner:  So,  even  this  room  has  an  atmosphere, 

doesn’t it?

Dadashri: Everything has an atmosphere.

Questioner: When we go to a certain place, we acquire 
knowledge;  when  we  go  to  another  place,  anger  arises.  Is 
there a difference from one place to another? Is it true that 
different intents arise in different locations?

Dadashri: Yes, the intent changes at every location.

The Karmic Accounts of Connection With Location

Questioner:  This  connection  that  is  associated  with 
location,  for  example,  the  connection  that  I’ve  had  with 
Aurangabad  [a  city  in  the  Indian  state  of  Maharashtra; 
Niruma’s  hometown],  what  is  the  cause  behind  that? What 
must be the significance behind it?

Dadashri: In terms of connection [with the location], 
when there is merit karma, the connection [with the location] 
will seem pleasant, you will find it pacifying.

Questioner:  No,  but  Dada,  I  had  to  come  here  to 

Aurangabad.

Dadashri:  This  is  actually  the  karmic  account  with 
this place. The dravya (the physical evidences), the kshetra, 
the time, the intent, and a lifetime keep changing constantly. 
One  connection  [with  a  location]  may  cause  us  to  engage 
in conflict, another connection [with a location] may pacify 
you. How did you find the connection with this location?

Questioner: I found it to be pacifying.

[5.2] The Unique Effects of Space!

135

Dadashri:  Pacifying,  and  moreover  what  type  of 

pacification?

Questioner: Happiness, filled with happiness.

Questioner: The relationship that has formed between 
mahatmas and the Amin family [Niruma’s family], what are 
the causes behind that? Must there be some karmic account 
between us from the past life?

Dadashri: It is a karmic account (hisaab).

Questioner: Or is it considered a circumstance (saiyog)?

Dadashri:  The  fact  is  that  one  keeps  coming  across 
those with whom one has a karmic account. So if you happen 
to  meet  a  dog  ten  times  in  a  day,  then  you  should  realize 
that  you  have  some  acquaintance  with  it.  And  every  time, 
the moment you enter a room, if you happen to see a lizard, 
if you keep feeling revulsion, then you should know that it is 
your karmic account. Why do you keep coming across it over 
and  over  again?  Moreover,  you  happen  to  see  the  lizard  as 
soon as you enter, and revulsion arises. So without a karmic 
account, no one can cause revulsion to arise within you, and 
without  a  karmic  account,  no  one  can  attract  you.  The  fact 
that someone attracts you, that too is a karmic account. The 
fact that revulsion arises is also a karmic account.

Questioner:  We  should  just  ‘set  fire’  to  the  karmic 

account, then that will be the end of it.

Dadashri: Yes, ‘we’ have indeed ‘set fire’ to the karmic 

account, that is indeed why this much has been cleared.

Questioner: But why don’t You spray more ‘acid’ on it?

Dadashri: Yes, ‘we’ will spray more on it.

Questioner: And can forgiveness be sought or not for 
the connection with a location? Forgiveness cannot be sought 

136

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

from anything that is non-living, can it? Can forgiveness be 
sought only from a living person?

Dadashri: In reality, it is you who have to become wise 
[come  into  the  awareness  of  ‘I  am  pure  Soul’].  You  should 
maintain  in  your  belief  that  the  place  is  definitely  good. 
Fundamentally, it was because of your own fault that the place 
turned out to be bad. A place cannot be bad, can it! If you are 
not straightforward, then the place will appear to be bad.

Questioner: I did not understand that, Dada.

Dadashri: Actually,  it  is  not  as  if  a  place  is  good  or 
bad.  The  only  thing  is  that  when  [an  ignorant]  one  who  is 
the sufferer or enjoyer goes there, if his intents are negative, 
then the place will give that person the corresponding effect. 
The  place  itself  is  not  like  that.  If  it  were  to  be  bad,  then 
wouldn’t it affect the Gnani Purush wherever He goes? But 
the answer is no.

On  the  contrary,  everything  is  certainly  detached 
(vitaraag), the place and everything! This [the one with the 
ego]  is  the  only  one  who  has  attachment  and  abhorrence 
(raag-dwesh). Yet, wherever he goes, he feels that the other 
evidence is engaging in attachment and abhorrence.

Questioner:  So  then  is  there  any  system  to  improve 
that  kshetra  or  the  time,  or  by  simply  setting  that  into 
practice… not just for us alone, but so that it [the kshetra or 
the time] improves for everyone…

Dadashri:  There  is  no  longer  any  need  for  You  to 
improve it. This is because for You, it is discharge, isn’t it! For 
the other people in the world, they certainly have to improve 
that [intent]. As soon as their intent changes, all the other four 
will  improve.  Everything  improves  through  the  intent.  The 
moment one changes his intent, everything improves.

Say,  one  has  the  intent  to  hit  someone,  such  as,  ‘He 

[5.2] The Unique Effects of Space!

137

is nothing in comparison to me, I will really straighten him 
out.’ As such an intent was made, he will encounter a hostile 
location; even the time will be filled with hostility, meaning 
that he will encounter the person in the evening and he will 
even have such an [hostile] intent arising, moreover, he will 
come across a [hostile] person too, then oh...a physical fight 
will break out in the evening time.

Questioner:  Why  did  you  say  ‘in  the  evening  time’ 

(sandhya)?

Dadashri:  Of  all  the  times  [in  the  day],  the  evening 
time  is  the  most  disagreeable.  The  junction  point  between 
lightness and darkness is called sandhya.

Every person has to become prepared to such an extent 
that  no  place  seems  burdensome  to  him.  The  place  may 
grow weary of the person, but the person himself should not 
grow weary of it. One has to become prepared to this extent. 
Otherwise,  there  are  infinite  places;  there  is  no  end  to  the 
locations. There are infinite locations.

The Aura and Influence of Even the Location!

Questioner: Dada, however many places there are on 
this earth, those verily are all the locations, aren’t they? For 
us human beings, all of these are the locations, aren’t they?

Dadashri:  There  are  many  locations  for  human 
beings,  and  there  are  some  locations  that  are  so  frigid  and 
so scorching that it is not possible for humans to live there. 
There are such locations too.

Questioner:  But  in  terms  of  this  location  over  here; 
for  example,  this  man  lives  here  and  You  have  come  and 
stayed  here,  so  this  location  certainly  has  a  lot  of  merit 
karma, doesn’t it? Can we say that?

Dadashri: It certainly has a lot of merit karma!

138

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Questioner: Is it because You stayed here?

Dadashri:  No,  because  even  if  I  hadn’t,  all  these 

people are indeed living here, aren’t they?

Questioner:  Yes,  but  this  [location]  is  considered 

special, isn’t it?

Dadashri:  Yes,  merit  karma  of  the  location,  of  the 

place, definitely exists. People can also benefit there.

Questioner: It can also prove to be beneficial?

Dadashri: Yes. Say someone does not believe in God 
and  he  ends  up  going  there,  then  he  will  start  thinking  and 
will say, “It seems true, there must be something like God. 
I feel some kind of bliss.”

Questioner: Yes,  we  feel  bliss.  So  wherever You  go, 

that location becomes pious.

Dadashri:  That  is  why  these  Tirthankar  Lords  have 
been referred to as a Tirthankar; because wherever They go, 
that place becomes a place of pilgrimage (tirth). ‘We’ do not 
have  the  kind  of  influence  that  the  Tirthankar  Lords  have; 
it is less.

The karmic account of a location is very…a very small 
shop in a jewelry market would be very valuable, whereas of 
what value would a shop anywhere else be, no matter how big 
it is? Therefore, the value is of the location, of that place only.

Questioner: Should we mahatmas not have intents for 

the time and the location?

Dadashri: They certainly are doing that; those are all 
discharge  intents  actually.  Intents  can  only  be  charged  as 
long as [there is the belief that], ‘I indeed am Chandubhai.’ 
Otherwise, intents cannot be charged, can they!

When  can  the  location  change?  It  is  when  one’s 
inherent  nature  (swabhaav)  changes.  If  one  has  a  dusham 

[5.2] The Unique Effects of Space!

139

swabhaav (nature of the relative self that is characterized by 
anger,  pride,  deceit,  greed,  and  a  lack  of  unity  in  thought, 
speech,  and  action),  then  he  will  come  to  this  location 
[Bharat  Kshetra;  one  of  the  three  locations  in  the  universe 
where  human  beings  reside,  the  other  two  are  Mahavideh 
Kshetra and Airavat Kshetra]. Mine must also be a dusham 
swabhaav,  that  is  why  I  had  to  come  here.  Now  if  One’s 
swabhaav  changes  [after  Gnan],  then  the  location  can 
change; One can go to Mahavideh Kshetra (one of the three 
locations  in  the  universe  where  human  beings  reside,  the 
other two are Bharat Kshetra and Airavat Kshetra).

From Within the Boundary Towards Becoming 
Boundaryless...

Questioner:  Once  You  had  put  in  different  words 
somewhere  that,  the  developing  I  (pote)  has  created  a 
boundary.

Dadashri:  Everyone  is  certainly  within  a  boundary. 
One cannot come outside of the boundary, and the One who 
comes out of the boundary, for Him, it has become complete. 
Otherwise, one cannot come out of the boundary, one does 
not  come  out  of  the  boundary,  one  cannot  come  outside  of 
the  circle.  [The  intellect  has  a  boundary,  it  is  limited.  The 
Gnan is boundaryless; It is unlimited.]

Questioner: One is trying to gain the understanding [of 
beyond the boundary] while remaining within the boundary. 
Does  he  attain  that  understanding  by  remaining  within  the 
boundary,  or  is  the  understanding  of  beyond  the  boundary 
encompassed in this?

Dadashri:  The  One  who  comes  into  the  periphery 
of  the  boundaryless,  for  Him,  the  [spiritual]  work  is  done. 
However, there is only one way; it will happen through the 
One who has Himself become boundaryless.



[5.3]
The Mystery Behind Different Faces

Who Molded Everyone?

One  person  asked  me,  “God  has  made  all  the  faces 
different. How must He have done that? What must He have 
made them in?” I replied, “Oh mortal one, God has not made 
them.”  Then  he  asked,  “But  how  must  all  of  these  people 
have been molded differently without God doing it?” I told 
him,  “All  types  of  different  molds  must  have  been  used!” 
He  responded,  “How  many  such  molds!”  Hey  mortal  one, 
this has not happened through molds. He then asked, “So on 
what basis are they all different?” I said, “If ever God were 
making them, then they would look as if they all came from 
the same mold in a factory.”

Questioner: Just as all the roses look like roses.

Dadashri: The very same! They would all have looked 
the same, but that is not the case. So he asked, “How does 
this  happen?  What  is  this?  God  has  made  different  faces 
for  everyone.  How  must  He  have  made  them?”  I  told  him, 
“Not  one  living  being  is  the  same.”  They  cannot  become 
adjustable at all. The reason for this [all faces being different] 
is a completely different thing.

Who  created  this  design?  That  raises  a  dilemma, 

[5.3] The Mystery Behind Different Faces

141

doesn’t it? That is why people imagined that it cannot ever 
happen without God.

Questioner:  Even  that  is  a  contradictory  point.  Even 
if someone were to make them, it would not be possible to 
make them like this.

Dadashri:  Those  which  are  formed  from  molds  are 
identical, aren’t they! If there were ten kinds or a hundred kinds 
of  molds,  then  every  hundred  or  two  hundred  people  would 
be  identical,  so  then  there  would  be  a  continuous  problem, 
wouldn’t  there? When  the  husband  would  come,  you  would 
have to look for some signs. You’d say, “Hey, I had applied 
vermillion  on  him,  this  person  is  not  the  one!” There  would 
have to be some mark for identification, wouldn’t there? You 
would have to resort to creating some mark for identification.

Questioner:  But  Dada,  one  cannot  even  imagine  the 

fiasco that would create.

Dadashri: God has not done this. People believe that 
if  God  really  exists,  then  He  would  arrange  everything  by 
keeping  everything  different  and  separate,  otherwise  how 
would a person’s wife recognize him? But how did all such 
arrangements  take  place  without  God?  The  answer  to  this 
is, ‘The space is different. Whether a living being is sitting, 
standing,  or  lying  down,  the  space  is  different  for  every 
living being, and the differences are on account of this.’

So  that  person  tells  me,  “God  has  made  everything 
wonderfully;  just  look,  none  of  these  faces  are  identical.” 
I  told  him,  “If  God  had  made  them,  then  poor  God  would 
never have any free time. It is actually because the space is 
different,  it  is  based  on  that  that  all  of  this  has  happened.” 
The  time  is  the  same  for  everyone.  When  I  am  speaking, 
although everyone is listening at the same time, their space 
is different. A person like you with a Ph.D. would understand 
that the space is different, wouldn’t you?

142

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Questioner: It is different.

Dadashri: That is why there are all these differences. 
That  is  why  ‘we’  have  said,  “It  is  vyavasthit  (a  result  of 
scientific circumstantial evidences).” It is so systematic that 
no mistakes of any kind would ever be found. If God were 
to make this Himself, then there would have been mistakes. 
This is because God does not have any intellect whatsoever, 
whereas  all  this  is  the  work  of  the  intellect.  God  has 
Knowledge  but  no  intellect  whatsoever.  This  has  actually 
been  made  by  nature;  this  is  but  natural!  How  beautiful  is 
this  creation! And  that  too,  it  has  come  about  on  the  basis 
of  vyavasthit.  When  ‘we’  say  that  God  does  not  have  any 
intellect,  then  God  would  actually  laugh,  but  if  you  were 
to  say  so,  He  would  get  upset!  Therefore  you  should  not 
say  that.  Do  not  say  what  ‘we’  say.  ‘We’  have  a  different 
kind of friendship with Him. ‘Our’ ‘marriage’ to Him is of 
a different kind, whereas you are not ‘married’ to Him. You 
have become acquainted with Him, but you are not ‘married’ 
[to Him].

Questioner:  We  are  not  ‘married’,  but  we  are 

‘engaged’, aren’t we?

Dadashri: Yes, the ‘engagement’ has taken place, but 

not the ‘wedding’.

Each and Every Grain Is Different…

If there is a small waterfall somewhere, and when you 
go there, will you not see water bubbles? Some bubbles may 
be  this  size;  others  may  be  this  size.  There,  can  you  see 
anyone who created them?

Questioner: No.

Dadashri:  And  the  bubbles  may  vary  in  size,  but  is 
there  a  change  in  their  design?  They  are  half  round,  and 
their design and the shape is the same, but the size is not the 

[5.3] The Mystery Behind Different Faces

143

same. Likewise, they burst at different times. Now, someone 
may ask, “Why do these bubbles vary in size?” The answer 
is, as the water falls, its space changes. The space is not the 
same. Space does so much work!

Questioner: What you are saying is wonderful, Dada.

Dadashri: Every grain is different in the khichdee (an 
Indian  dish  made  from  rice  and  lentils).  Do  they  look  the 
same? There is a difference in each one. This is because the 
space  of  each  one  is  different.  Each  grain  has  boiled  in  its 
own space.

Just  imagine,  all  of  this  is  based  on  space.  This  is  a 

very vast Science; it is a Science that is worth knowing!

The Face Is Based on Space

If  the  face  of  every  human  being  were  the  same, 
then it would be impossible to identify them. And then our 
worldly interactions would not function well. Upon leaving 
the movie theater, it would be next to impossible to identify 
your husband, wouldn’t it?

Questioner: The  category  of  the  Self  is  the  same  for 
everyone isn’t it, Dada? So why is there a difference in this?

Dadashri:  There  is  always  a  difference  in  the  space, 
for  every  living  being.  The  space  in  which  one  person  is 
residing, no one else can come into that space.

Questioner: I see. So can that space not be replaced?

Dadashri:  No.  It  means  that,  it  is  because  of  one’s 
own  space  that  this  difference  is  there.  Just  look,  what  a 
wonderful arrangement it is! The face is according to space; 
one’s height and everything else, is all based on space!

Questioner: Are  the  differences  due  to  the  attributes 

of the prakruti?

144

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri: All  of  this  is  different.  Can  a  father  and  a 
son occupy the same space? Would their space be different 
or  not?  Or  would  it  coincide?  So  the  body  and  everything 
else  is  on  the  basis  of  space.  Therefore,  as  many  living 
beings as there are, there is that much space, and that many 
faces  are  all  different.  Otherwise,  you  would  never  be  able 
to find your son if you were to look for him.

And  if  people  were  not  different,  then  the  husbands 
and  wives  would  keep  getting  mixed  up.  A  man’s  wife 
would go with another man, and he would go with someone 
else’s wife. How would anyone be recognized if all the faces 
looked the same?

Just look, there are all kinds of shapes of people, novel 

shapes. There are so many changes in the shape!

If there were no change in the space, then everyone’s 
faces  would  look  the  same.  So  what  a  predicament  that 
would be! People would be put in difficulty! How beautifully 
arranged  the  world  is!  No  one  has  created  it.  It  has  come 
about without being created.

Questioner:  Very  rarely  do  we  get  to  see  photos  of 

two people who look identical.

Dadashri:  Not  very  rarely;  there  is  not  a  single 
person like that. Where have you seen two people who look 
identical?

Questioner:  Such  photos  have  been  released,  just 
recently such photos have been released. Both look identical.

Dadashri:  No,  they  may  appear  to  be  identical,  but 

that is not so, in exactness.

Questioner:  Can  there  be  people  just  like  these  on 

other planets?

Dadashri: It is the very same everywhere.

[5.3] The Mystery Behind Different Faces

145

Questioner: Would there be someone exactly the same 
as him over there? Take Pravinbhai for example, would there 
be another Pravinbhai just like him over there?

Dadashri:  No,  no,  no.  What  is  the  reason  for  that? 
The  space  of  every  living  being  is  different,  therefore  the 
design of every individual is different. No two living beings 
can live in the same space at the same time. The time may 
be  the  same  for  all,  but  the  space  differs.  That  is  why  the 
face  cannot  be  the  same  for  every  living  being.  The  cows 
and buffaloes may all appear the same to you. But no, they 
cannot  be  the  same,  there  would  definitely  be  a  difference. 
The  reason  is,  as  the  space  is  different,  so  there  would 
definitely be a difference.

Actually, even the scientists do not know this yet. They 
would  not  realize  this.  This  is  a  place  where  the  intellect 
cannot  reach.  It  becomes  easy  once  they  have  been  told. 
The intellect would not reach there at first. But I found the 
answer. Thereafter, I did not raise questions as to, ‘Why do 
these differences exist?’ or ‘Why is it like this?’ Some have 
very  large  noses,  some  have  flat  noses,  some  have  pointed 
noses, some noses are wide, some may have a nose like this. 
Have you ever seen people with flat noses? Have you seen 
them all? There are a wide variety of them.

Questioner:  So  then  why  are  all  the  idols  of  the 

Tirthankar Lords in the temples identical?

Dadashri:  They  cannot  be  identical.  Idols  cannot  be 

identical. The idol of Lord Neminath is always black.

Questioner: Not black; the face, the shape…

Dadashri:  That  is  based  on  who  sculpted  them,  was 
it  this  person  [the  sculptor]  or  someone  else  [space]?  Has 
it  been  sculpted  by  space?  If  space  were  to  sculpt  them, 
each  one  would  be  different.  It  is  actually  the  one  with  a 

146

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

chisel  who  sculpts  them.  If  the  stone  breaks  a  little  more 
than  required,  then  he  would  carve  the  nose  a  certain  way. 
He may have intended to shape it one way, but he ends up 
shaping it another way.

Even Two Leaves of a Tamarind Tree Are Different!

Questioner: There is not a single thing that is identical. 
You  have  said  that  not  even  two  leaves  of  a  tamarind  tree 
are identical.

Dadashri: Nothing is identical.

Questioner:  One  would  definitely  not  know  this, 

Dada. How would a scientist know this?

Dadashri:  They  would  not.  Why  is  he  himself 
different?  So,  he  thinks  that  there  has  to  be  someone  else 
who is doing the sculpting.

Questioner: Then he gets stuck there, and so he stops 

thinking about it.

Dadashri:  He  gets  tired  and  lets  go  of  it.  However, 
this space is ‘our’ discovery. When I had not yet discovered 
it,  I  used  to  think,  ‘What  are  these  differences  based  on? 
And  what  properties  are  there  that  they  remain  different?’ 
Then, once the discovery was made, that is when I came to 
know.  Because  otherwise,  whom  would  we  allow  to  enter 
our home if everyone were to look identical? Then it would 
not  be  fun  either,  would  it? When  the  groom  arrives  at  the 
wedding,  they  would  lose  him.  Then,  someone  else  would 
come  along.  Whereas  this  is  actually  running  so  smoothly, 
isn’t  it?  Where  did  all  these  designs  come  from?  That  is  a 
wonder, isn’t it!

Questioner: These fingerprints, they are also different 

for every person.

Dadashri: Yes, they are different.

[5.3] The Mystery Behind Different Faces

147

Questioner: The courts are functioning based on that.

Dadashri:  Yes,  the  courts  are  functioning  based  on 
that.  The  fingerprint  of  the  thumb  acts  as  a  signature;  the 
courts are functioning based on that.

Questioner: Even the lines on people’s palms are not 
identical, are they, Dada? They are all completely different, 
the lines on the palms are different.

Dadashri:  As  the  space  is  different,  everything  is 
different. Even the hair on the head is different, the nose is 
different; everything is different.

Questioner: Would two strands of hair which are right 

next to each other also be different?

Dadashri:  Everything  is  different. The  space  of  both 
is different, isn’t it! The space for all is different. Even the 
two  eyes  are  different,  aren’t  they?  The  space  for  both  is 
different. The two ears are different; one ear may be hearing 
well while the other may be slightly deaf.

As the space is different, there are differences in every 
individual. So, a certain number of people become soldiers, a 
certain number become carpenters, a certain number become 
women;  that  is  the  kind  of  ‘crop’  that  would  yield.  How 
wonderful is this vyavasthit!

Examine It Very Minutely

Questioner:  We  say  that  there  is  life  (jeev)  even 
in  the  vegetation.  Now,  the  taste  of  all  the  mangoes  on  a 
mango tree is identical. Whereas in humans, if someone has 
five  children,  the  thoughts,  speech,  and  actions  of  all  five 
children varies.

Dadashri: Even in the mangoes, there are differences. 
You do not have the capacity to examine it so minutely, you 
do  not  have  the  capacity  to  understand  that.  Every  mango 

148

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

has a different taste. There is a difference even in every leaf. 
They may look the same, they may smell the same, but there 
is some difference. This is because, the law of the world is 
that  as  there  is  a  change  in  space,  there  will  inevitably  be 
differences. Did you understand?

Questioner: Yes.

Dadashri:  You  can  see  the  differences  within  all 
human beings, but the cows and buffaloes cannot see them. 
To the cows, all humans appear to be the same. Similarly, we 
cannot see the differences in these leaves, in these mangoes. 
For everything, as the space changes, there will definitely be 
differences.  This  space  is  different,  that  space  is  different. 
Did  you  understand  the  law  of  this  Science? There  will  be 
a difference when there is a change in space, and also when 
there is a change in time.

If  you  were  to  make  rotli  (flat  bread)  right  now,  the 
taste of the first rotli would be different and the taste of the 
second rotli would be different. They may all appear similar, 
but you do not have the capacity to examine it so minutely, 
so you don’t have the ability to investigate it in that detail. 
The person making it is the same, the place is the same, but 
the time keeps changing, doesn’t it! So there will definitely 
be  a  change  in  the  taste.  That  is  indeed  why  some  people 
become  famous  for  their  savory  fritters. Why  is  that?  Hey, 
what  does  he  do  differently  with  the  savory  fritters?  It  is 
his intent, the time, and the space. So this is how the world 
functions.  As  the  time  and  the  space  changes,  everything 
else will definitely change. Our intent changes. Say this lady 
was making rotli right now. While making the first two, she 
feels,  ‘I  want  to  feed  them  the  best  rotli  today.’  Just  then, 
along  comes  an  acquaintance.  Upon  seeing  the  person,  her 
intent  spoils,  ‘What  is  he  doing  here?’  From  that  moment 
on,  the  rotlis  become  ruined,  even  if  the  dough  is  the  very 
same. No two roses are identical. There is a change in each 

[5.3] The Mystery Behind Different Faces

149

flower. You cannot see that subtlety. As there is a change in 
the kshetra, there are all these differences.

No  living  being  (jeev)  resides  within  another  living 
being. And  if  there  is  one,  say  it  is  in  a  subtle  form,  yet  it 
is not inside the living being, it is outside the living being; 
it is inside the body of that living being, but it is not inside 
the  living  being  itself.  Meaning  that,  the  place,  the  space 
that  each  individual  has,  the  space  that  one  has  occupied, 
there  is  no  other  [living  being]  within  that  space,  hence  as 
each one’s space is different, consequently each individual’s 
effort  would  be  different,  each  individual’s  work  would  be 
different.  Everyone’s  circumstances  are  different  and  so 
everything happens according to the circumstances.

If extra fertilizer has fallen on one spot, then the plants 
there  will  thrive  and  grow  bigger,  whereas  if  no  fertilizer 
fell on another spot, then the plant there would be small. If 
there is a hole in one place, and if water has become logged 
there,  then  the  plants  growing  there  will  wilt  away. This  is 
how the world is. Meaning that, this world is one that is full 
of differences. Did you understand some of this?

The Same Speech, the Same Time, a Different Space!

When  I  speak,  everyone  hears  the  same  thing  at  the 
same time. So everyone receives the same content. But why 
does there end up being a variation [in understanding]? It all 
happens due to the space the body has occupied. No one else 
is sitting in the place where you are sitting, right? The space 
where  you  are  sitting,  the  other  person’s  space,  everyone’s 
space is different, isn’t it? Is the space different or not?

Questioner: The place is different.

Dadashri:  The  seating  is  different,  yet  they  are 
listening  to  the  same  thing.  Everyone  is  listening  at  the 
same  time,  but  they  are  not  listening  in  the  same  space. 

150

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

They  are  listening  at  the  same  time,  and  there  is  only  one 
person  who  is  doing  the  talking.  For  all  the  one  hundred 
thousand people, the timing is the very same. When ‘we’ are 
speaking,  it  all  appears  to  be  the  same,  yet  as  the  space  is 
different, everything will end up being different. Therefore, 
if  the  space  becomes  the  same,  then  everything  else  will 
become the same. So, people become perplexed, ‘Why is it 
like this? Why is it all different?’ That is what people ask.

The  intent  arises  according  to  the  place,  moreover 
the  one  who  is  within  is  different,  so  the  space  remains 
different,  and  that  is  why  different  kinds  of  intents  arise.  I 
may  say  one  thing,  but  a  different  kind  of  intent  may  arise 
within both, you and this other person; they are different for 
both. For some, a contradiction may arise that, ‘What Dada 
is  saying  is  wrong.’  Therefore,  everything  is  dependent  on 
space.  As  the  space  is  different  for  everyone,  therefore  it 
brings about a different effect for each person. That is why 
what each person grasps is different.

So  there  is  One’s  existence  (astitva)  and  there  is  [the 
element  of]  Space.  Whereas  with  regards  to  the  original 
location  [the  original  Self],  fundamentally  in  One’s  own 
realm [of the Self], there is no difference in that space.

Where Does Niyati Come Into Play In This?

Questioner:  These  two  boys  were  to  attain  a  certain 
amount of knowledge from this man and so they did. The man 
is speaking the same speech, yet the fifteen other people that 
are  around  remain  unaffected  by  it.  So  for  these  two  boys, 
it happened because it was meant to happen. Therefore, that 
is  niyati  (the  level  of  spiritual  development  of  a  soul  as  it 
progresses naturally on the track of evolution), isn’t it?

Dadashri:  No,  that  is  not  niyati.  Niyati  applies  only 
when  the  space  is  the  same.  If  everyone  were  to  be  in  the 
same  space,  then  niyati  would  apply.  In  fact,  the  space  is 

[5.3] The Mystery Behind Different Faces

151

different for each one. Niyati does not apply at all. Niyati is 
actually one of the factors.

Questioner: So then why the disparity?

Dadashri:  This  itself  is  the  law  of  niyati.  Niyati 
means  that  the  flow  [of  evolution  of  a  soul]  continues  to 
move  ahead. The  flow  is  like  these  policemen  marching  in 
lines of a hundred. In our case, a person may be sitting here 
right now, then he gets up and moves further up, so another 
person  comes  to  sit  where  he  was  originally  sitting.  So  the 
space is different for every individual, isn’t it! The space of 
each person who is sitting here right now is different, isn’t it!

Questioner:  The  fact  that  everyone  gets  a  different 

space, on what basis is that?

Dadashri: It is on the basis of niyati. What is the theory 
of niyati (niyativaad)? One’s state in niyati begins from the 
moment a jeev (living being) comes from avyavahaar rashi (a 
state of uncategorized souls that have not yet entered worldly 
interactions)  into  vyavahaar  rashi  (worldly  nomenclature). 
One  remains  in  that  state  until  liberation  is  attained.  Niyati 
means that whatever mile [of spiritual development] a living 
being  is  on,  it  will  have  the  relative  knowledge  and  vision 
(gnan-darshan) of that mile only.

Questioner:  And  is  niyati  also  the  basis  for  the 

kshetra?

Dadashri:  Yes,  niyati  is  also  the  basis  for  that.  For 
everyone, the external space is subject to niyati. Furthermore, 
niyati  alone  is  not  able  to  do  all  of  this.  If  it  were  niyati 
alone, then no other solution would be needed in the world. 
However, after acquiring the space, this egoism does all the 
work.

Questioner: Is the process of attaining liberation also 

dependent on niyati?

152

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri:  Whatever  space  there  is,  it  is  dependent 
upon  niyati.  The  instrumental  entity  (nimit)  through  which 
the  process  of  bondage  is  occurring,  is  also  the  very  same 
instrumental  entity  through  which  the  process  of  liberation 
goes  on.  Therefore,  niyati  has  nothing  to  do  with  this. 
Niyati  just  provides  you  with  the  space  and  all  other  such 
adjustments in the interim. Niyati is at work, but niyati is the 
same for everyone, in equal proportions. If a hundred people 
have set out, then there should be space for a hundred people 
to stand in, shouldn’t there? As one has a physical body, one 
needs that much space to stand in. And the self certainly has 
its own place, because as long as it is the worldly self, it will 
inevitably occupy space!

Questioner:  Niyati  is  also  involved  in  the  process  of 

becoming bound, isn’t it, Dada?

Dadashri: Niyati is not instrumental in the process of 
becoming bound. Niyati is actually helpful; it is helpful even 
in the process of becoming bound, and it is helpful even in 
the  process  of  becoming  liberated.  Niyati  does  not  actually 
cause any problems.

Questioner: So every living being would definitely be 

passing through that space, wouldn’t it?

Dadashri: Definitely. When one reaches the sixteenth 
mile, then whatever was the state of the previous living being 
at that point, that is the very same state that he will attain.

Questioner: Is it the case that every living being must 
pass through that mile, and every living being will have the 
exact same experience?

Dadashri: Yes. When a living being comes to a certain 
step  on  the  sixteenth  mile,  he  has  a  certain  experience  that 
he gains from it; now, if another living being encounters the 
very same step, then he too will have the same experience.

[5.3] The Mystery Behind Different Faces

153

The Rule of Binding the Realm of Existence for the 
Next Life...

Questioner: When is that place, what you refer to as 

space, decided? Is it at the time of birth?

Dadashri: Forty-eight minutes before the time of death. 
At the time of death, a balance sheet of one’s entire life gets 
tallied, and that too, in the last forty-eight minutes... If those 
forty-eight minutes are taken care of [spent in awareness as the 
Self,] then the person’s spiritual work will be accomplished.

Questioner: So how is one to understand reincarnation 

(punarjanma)?

Dadashri: No one, not even God, has any involvement 
with  reincarnation;  it  is  one’s  karmic  account.  Everyone’s 
karmic accounts are different. Why are the karmic accounts 
not  the  same?  This  is  because,  of  all  those  who  are  sitting 
here, are they all sitting in different places or not? Therefore, 
the space is different for each one, subsequently their karma 
are different. So, their karmic accounts are entirely different. 
And  as  one  expresses  egoism,  he  binds  nothing  but  merit 
and  demerit  karma,  for  which  he  has  to  take  birth  again  to 
suffer their effects.

Questioner: Just today, while sitting on the bus, I was 
thinking  about  how  everyone’s  faces  are  so  different,  there 
is no resemblance whatsoever.

Dadashri: No, but this clarification that I have given 
is  a  very  significant  clarification.  It  is  because  the  space 
is  different  that  the  faces  are  different,  and  that  is  why  the 
worldly life is carrying on.

Why Isn’t There Just One Religion?

Questioner:  Why  have  various  types  of  religions 

(dharma) emerged?

154

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri:  The  space  that  people  occupy  varies,  so 
their  thoughts  differ,  that  is  why  various  types  of  religions 
have emerged.

Questioner:  Dada,  the  true  dharma  of  humans  is 
Sat Chit Anand (to be the Self; to be in the form of eternal 
Knowledge and Vision and bliss), so then why are there so 
many  religions? And  when  will  all  these  religions  become 
one?

Dadashri:  When  everyone’s  faces  become  identical 
that  is  when  all  the  religions  will  become  one.  You  may 
say,  “This  should  not  be  used,”  whereas  the  other  person 
will  say,  “This  should  be  used.”  The  minds  are  different, 
the faces are different, the space is different. The space for 
everyone  sitting  here  is  different,  isn’t  it!  As  long  as  the 
space is different, there cannot be one religion.

Questioner: So when would they become one?

Dadashri:  The  space  can  never  become  one.  So 
however many people come into this space in this way, those 
many people will attain the Self and will leave [worldly life] 
quickly.  Until  then,  people  will  have  to  indeed  continue 
suffering  in  the  ‘heat’.  Some  may  have  a  higher  degree  of 
‘fever’, while others may have a lesser degree of ‘fever’.

Questioner:  We  worship  different  forms  and  use 
different  names  and  call  out  to  Him  [a  particular  God].  In 
that, when we observe all such things as the affinity towards 
Him, and the formation of that [religion], what is all that?

Dadashri:  These  are  in  fact  varieties  of  the  relative. 
There are infinite types of varieties. This is because, as every 
living  being  occupies  a  different  space,  there  are  endless 
types of varieties.

Questioner:  The  reason  for  each  individual’s  face 
being  different  is  the  space,  but  I  do  not  quite  understand 

[5.3] The Mystery Behind Different Faces

155

the link that because of this reason this is the effect that has 
come about. How did that come to be?

Dadashri:  The  fundamental  factor  is  space,  nothing 
else. Now, how does this work in this scenario? In this, the 
causes are set in such a way that space is 50 % of the causal 
factor  and  the  remaining  50%  are  due  to  the  other  things. 
But whatever has the higher percentage is what is normally 
considered  to  be  the  cause.  One  cannot  say  that  only  one 
thing  is  the  cause,  that  space  alone  is  the  cause,  but  the 
reason  ‘we’  say  that  space  is  the  fundamental  factor  is  that 
space represents 50% of the cause.

Nature Controls Even Karma!

Questioner: Whatever space one acquires, is it bound 

through one’s karma?

Dadashri:  Yes,  that  is  all  indeed  due  to  karma.  The 
dravya,  the  kshetra,  the  time,  and  the  intent  are  all  bound 
through karma indeed. One acquires a kshetra based on that. 
Right now, the fact that you are sitting in this kshetra, that 
is your karmic account for sure. So all of the karma is pre-
arranged. But who controls this karma? Nature controls it.

This  space  that  you  are  sitting  in,  did  you  know  that 
this  is  the  exact  space  you  would  be  sitting  in?  Did  you 
know that Dada will be talking to you at this time?

Questioner: No.

Dadashri:  Vyavasthit  brings 

these 
circumstances,  and  our  work  gets  done.  There  is  no  need 
for God in all of this.

together  all 

Questioner:  Through  which 

causes  do 

the 

circumstances come together?

Dadashri:  Say  you  do  not  drink  alcohol,  but  if  you 
were  to  say  right  now  that  it  is  good  to  drink  alcohol,  or 

156

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

that there is nothing wrong with drinking alcohol, then you 
will  encounter  the  circumstance  of  [drinking]  alcohol  [in 
your next life]. Therefore, everything in this world that has 
come together for you is on account of your bhaav (belief; 
intent).  You  alone,  you  are  whole  and  sole  responsible  for 
your life. Nobody else is responsible. God is not responsible 
for  your  life.  God  does  not  do  anything;  He  is  residing 
within,  vitaraag  (absolutely  free  from  all  attachment  and 
abhorrence).

Knowledge and Space Are the Basis of Illusory Effort

Now,  you  may  never  be  stealing,  but  one  day  you 
may  be  sitting  somewhere  in  public,  at  which  time  all 
your  discharging  karma  is  good  for  the  most  part,  but  a 
man  sitting  nearby  gets  up  and  goes  outside,  leaving  some 
gold  and  precious  jewelry  lying  around.  So  an  intent  to 
steal  them  arises  in  your  mind.  So  that  is  considered  as  a 
negative  purusharth  (illusory  effort;  karmic  cause)  arising, 
even though you do not steal the jewelry. The fact that this 
intent arose is considered negative purusharth.

Questioner: Meaning that a seed has been sown once 
again. Now, that happened through the push of an evidence, 
didn’t it?

Dadashri:  No,  it  happened  due  to  the  negative 
purusharth. It is only on account of the nimit that you went 
there  and  left  from  there,  but  you  are  the  one  doing  the 
negative purusharth.

Questioner: This is where I had the confusion; I could 
not find a solution in my mind that if this intent that arises 
within is due to the push of an evidence, then that too cannot 
be in our control.

Dadashri:  No,  it  is  not  like  that.  Of  course  that  is 
definitely in your control! Why do you not fall into a well?

[5.3] The Mystery Behind Different Faces

157

Questioner: Those who want to fall in it, do so, Dada.

Dadashri:  They  may  do  so,  but  why  doesn’t  anyone 
else? The  negative-positive  intents  that  arise  are  dependent 
upon today’s knowledge. As one becomes more cultured, he 
does not greatly like the intent of hitting others, does he?

Questioner: Yes, that is not to be found.

Dadashri:  There  is  not  much  killing  and  stealing 
in  developed  cultures,  is  there?  They  may  be  stealing  at  a 
subtle  level,  but  there  is  no  overt  stealing.  This  is  because 
all of those people have come to that state having done the 
purusharth to put an end to [overt] stealing.

Questioner: That purusharth that they do...

Dadashri: That is illusory effort (bhrant purusharth).

Questioner:  For  those  who  have  not  attained  Gnan, 
the automatic purusharth that is happening of moving from 
ill intents towards good intents, is that...

Dadashri:  It  is  never  automatic  in  that  sense.  There 
definitely  is  knowledge  behind  the  illusory  effort;  it  is 
worldly  knowledge.  Worldly  knowledge  is  indeed  there  as 
long as one has not attained the Knowledge of the Self. So, 
when  you  hit  someone,  that  knowledge  becomes  the  cause 
of teaching him that he should not fight again.

So  he  attains  that  knowledge.  He  would  not  have 
attained that knowledge had you not hit him. One cannot see 
one’s own mistakes, can he! It is only when he takes a big 
beating that he will realize, ‘This is the result of the mistake 
I had made.’ So then he will not make that mistake again.

Questioner:  In  any  such  incident  that  has  happened, 
the  push  of  the  instrumental  evidence  causes  the  intent  to 
arise  within,  then  does  that  also  happen  because  of  such 
knowledge or does it happen naturally?

158

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri:  It  happens  based  on  the  knowledge;  not 
nature  or  anything  like  that.  You  are  indeed  the  projector, 
and this is the projection. Whatever you do, you will receive 
the  effect  of  that  one  after  another…  Now,  on  what  basis 
does one project? The answer is, it is based on the relative 
knowledge one attains.

Questioner: Yes, but why does everyone not attain the 
same  knowledge?  From  a  single  circumstance  that  arises, 
the knowledge that everyone attains is different, why is that?

Dadashri:  That  will  remain  different  right  until 
the  end.  This  is  because  everyone’s  seat  is  different;  the 
space  is  different;  so  it  will  certainly  remain  different. The 
differences in thinking will remain right until the end. Time 
and  everything  else  is  the  same,  but  the  space  is  different. 
Yes,  otherwise  everything  was  indeed  niyati  (the  level  of 
spiritual development of a soul as it progresses naturally on 
the  track  of  evolution).  If  it  were  to  be  niyati  alone,  then 
the entire world would be dependent upon niyati. However, 
nature has not allowed anyone to become arrogant. No one 
can claim, “I did it.”

As the time is not fixed, therefore the thoughts are not 
fixed either; everyone’s thoughts are different. It is the space 
alone that is the only thing that is different, nothing else is 
different.

The  eternal  element  which  this  body  is  made  up  of, 
is the same eternal element that the cows and buffaloes are 
made  up  of.  It  is  the  very  same  eternal  element;  it  is  only 
due to the difference in the space that there is a difference in 
these intents. And as there is a difference in the intents, this 
entire world has come into being. Did you understand what 
is in your control?

Questioner:  Thinking  or  giving  rise  to  intents  is  in 

our control.

[5.3] The Mystery Behind Different Faces

159

Dadashri: You should turn them around.

Questioner:  However  much  space  is  predetermined, 

one will receive in accordance with that, won’t he?

Dadashri: The  space  is  different. Two  people  cannot 

sit in the same place, can they!

Questioner:  That  is  true,  and  a  person  has  at  least 

something of his own, doesn’t he?

Dadashri: Furthermore, it is his bhaav (belief; intent) 
that is considered his own. That is referred to as his bhaav. 
There is the dravya, the kshetra, the time, and the intent. So 
time  is  of  just  one  type;  the  dravya  meaning  the  I  (hu),  is 
of  just  one  type.  However,  this  is  his  bhaav,  the  bhaav  of 
the  one  acquiring  the  Knowledge  of  the  Self  [during  Gnan 
vidhi],  and  this  place;  the  place  affects  one  and  the  bhaav 
affects one; both give rise to an effect. The Knowledge is of 
only one type.

Questioner:  Does  the  effect  arise  from  the  charge 

karma (bhaavkarma)?

Dadashri:  Yes,  but  what  is  the  charge  karma  based 

on? It is based on space.

Questioner: Then what is space based on, Dada?

Dadashri: [The eternal element of] Space is not based 
on anything at all, it is free of support (niradhaar). ‘Space’ 
is actually its own place indeed; that is Space itself. ‘Space’ 
means  aakash.  ‘Space’  is  certainly  there,  but  in  whichever 
part of space this one [the developing I] comes, in that part 
of space, this kind of effect will take place.

The Antahkaran Is Also Based on Space

Questioner:  Are  the  mind,  intellect,  and  chit  active 

because of the presence of the Self?

160

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri: Yes, all of this is being sustained because of 
the presence of the Self. It has all arisen due to Its presence, 
and it is due to that too that it is all being sustained.

Questioner: So none of them are independent?

Dadashri: None of them are independent at all.

Questioner: Now if the mind, intellect, chit, and ego 
are  active  because  of  the  presence  of  the  Self,  then  why 
don’t they work in the same way for everyone?

Dadashri:  That  cannot  happen,  everyone’s  space 
is  different,  isn’t  it!  If  the  space  were  to  be  the  same  for 
everyone, then it can happen.

The  space  is  different  for  every  living  being,  that  is 
why  everyone  sees  things  differently.  Due  to  that,  upon 
having  different  bhaav  (belief;  intent)  everyone  attracts 
different parmanu. That is why they acquire different forms.

Space Changes By Changing the Bhaav

Questioner:  Every 

individual  has  a  different 

experience; how can that be? Why does that happen?

Dadashri: It is because the space is different. There is 

a difference in the space.

If  the  space  were  to  be  the  same,  then  the  bhaav 
would  be  the  same.  So  if  there  is  a  fetus  growing  in  the 
mother’s  womb,  then  both  would  have  the  same  bhaav,  as 
their  space  is  the  same. And  based  on  the  space,  the  intent 
changes. If you go to a certain place, you may get thoughts 
of violence. If you go to some other place, while interacting 
with  a  person,  selfish  thoughts  related  to  money  will  arise, 
or some other thoughts will arise. All kinds of thoughts will 
change according to the place. So based on the kshetra, the 
bhaav changes and everything  moves  forward according to 
the bhaav.

[5.3] The Mystery Behind Different Faces

161

Questioner:  But  the  fact  that  each  person  gets  a 
different  space,  there  must  also  be  some  reason  for  that, 
mustn’t there?

Dadashri: Yes, there is a reason even for that.

Questioner: What is the reason?

Dadashri: The reason for that is the karmic accounts 

of one’s past life.

Questioner:  One  acquires  the  space  in  accordance 

with that, so the bhaav would arise accordingly.

Dadashri: And one should definitely receive a space. 
As each one has a karmic account, each one should definitely 
receive a space.

Questioner: What should we do right now so that we 

acquire a better space in the next life?

Dadashri:  Yes,  you  should  change  your  bhaav;  [the 
bhaav  should  arise  that,]  ‘How  can  I  give  happiness  to 
everyone?’  If  you  have  the  bhaav  to  give  happiness  even 
to  the  one  who  hurts  you,  then  you  will  acquire  very  good 
things in the next life.

Only a Jeweler Can Recognize a Diamond!

Questioner:  Then  why  does  everyone  have  different 

suspicions?

Dadashri:  That  is  because  everyone  has  a  different 
space,  and  every  space  is  different.  If  the  space  were  the 
same,  then  different  things  would  not  arise  for  everyone. 
Different  things  arise  for  everyone  because  the  space  is 
different. And  everyone  has  to  occupy  a  space,  don’t  they? 
Wouldn’t  they  need  to  occupy  different  spaces?  What  do 
you think?

Questioner: That is true, but for that too…

162

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri:  It  is  because  the  space  is  different  that 
everything appears different to us. And if the space were the 
same, then the same kind of bhaav would arise for everyone. 
This is because the time would be the same for everyone.

All  the  ladoos  (ball-shaped  Indian  dessert)  may  be 
from  the  same  batch,  yet  they  taste  different  to  everyone; 
isn’t that interesting! A person may be as good as gold, yet 
everyone’s opinion about him differs.

The dravya, the kshetra, the time, and the intent. These 
people  [on  the  Kramik  path]  refer  to  it  as  kshetra,  whereas 
‘we’  [in  Akram]  refer  to  it  as  space,  so  that  gave  rise  to 
confusion.  So  people  tell  me  that  they  have  never  heard  of 
the word ‘space’.

Questioner:  No,  but  You  explained  it  in  exactness, 
Dada. By explaining it this way, we understand it properly.

Dadashri: You can understand it completely, such that 
you will not have to ask about it again, will you! Not only 
will  you  not  have  to  ask,  but  you  will  also  not  have  any 
doubts as to why everyone’s faces and other things differ. If 
someone were to shove doubt in your mind by asking, ‘You 
say that God is not the creator, but then why are everyone’s 
faces  different?’  Then  you  would  be  lost  for  words!  You 
would  start  scratching  your  head!  [However]  If  you’ve 
heard about this just once, then no one can make you be at 
a  loss  for  words,  can  they?  Those  who  want  to  disconcert 
you, know many tactics.

For  how  long  did  you  recall  all  this  discussion  about 

space at night?

Questioner: It lasted up until now.

Dadashri:  Whereas  as  soon  as  these  people  leave, 

they’ll forget about it.

Questioner: But how can they forget this?

[5.3] The Mystery Behind Different Faces

163

Dadashri:  No,  but  these  people  forget  everything. 
Where does the chit of people dwell? ‘Once we reach home, 
we’ll  have  those  fenugreek  fritters  which  were  made;  with 
some tea and all that.’ People’s attention is not very focused 
on  this  for  the  most  part. Their  attention  is  focused  for  the 
most part on the ‘chutney’ [the trivial worldly things]. Some 
may have the desire to go to the movies...

Whereas for someone like this fellow here, who does 
not  want  anything  at  all,  the  chit  remains  focused  only  on 
this.  Has  everyone  understood  space  now?  It  doesn’t  take 
long  to  forget  it,  isn’t  it?  Whereas  you  remembered  it  all 
night long!

Questioner: For me, up until now, the only film that 
has  been  running  in  my  mind  is,  ‘What  an  amazing  point 
this Dada has revealed!’

Dadashri: Whereas for the others, it lasts only for as 
long as they hear it, and nothing thereafter. As soon as they 
leave, they are back to how they were before!

One should have the eye of a diamond expert; however 
much  you  develop  the  expertise  in  identifying  a  diamond, 
that much you will be able to recognize it. If you have not 
yet  developed  such  expertise,  then  you  will  lose  out  on 
everything.

Questioner:  This  brings  us  back  to  the  same  point; 

one will recognize it based on one’s space.

Dadashri: That’s it, one recognizes it based on one’s 
space.  Very  few  people  have  a  little  bit  of  expertise  in 
diamonds  but  even  then  they  have  not  become  completely 
professional  jewelers.  This  is  because,  say  we  try  to  sell  a 
diamond  here  in  Baroda  itself,  and  we  ask  all  the  jewelers 
in Vadodara, then some would give a quote for a thousand, 
some would say one thousand and fifty, and some would say 

164

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

nine  hundred  and  fifty;  but  it  would  be  within  that  range. 
Whereas if we were to take the same diamond to Mumbai, 
then  they  would  give  a  quote  for  eighteen  hundred. And  if 
we  were  to  take  the  very  same  diamond  to  Madras,  they 
would give a quote for twenty-five hundred. And if we were 
to  take  the  very  same  diamond  to  Paris,  they  would  give  a 
quote for seven thousand…

Questioner: How would the word ‘space’ have come 
to You? Many people have not understood this word ‘space’. 
Many  influential  people  have  used  it,  those  who  speak 
English have used this word, they have said that as long as 
there is space, there is no liberation.

Dadashri:  That  is  correct,  what  they  are  saying  is 

correct.



[6]
Worldly Life Means a Business 
Partnership of the Six Eternal Elements

The Six Partners

There are six partners in this body. Six partners have come 
together to run this worldly life. The universe is filled with the 
six  eternal  elements  only!  These  six  partners  have  formed  a 
‘limited company’. Who do you think are the six partners?

Questioner: Inanimate matter (parmanu) [jada].

Dadashri: What else?

Questioner: ‘Space’ (aakash), then Time (kaal).

Dadashri: That’s three, then what else?

Questioner: The eternal element that supports motion 
(gatisahayak tattva), the eternal element that supports inertia 
(sthitisahayak tattva), and the Self (Atma).

Dadashri: Yes,  these  six  get  together  and  say,  “Let’s 
form  a  partnership  and  start  up  a  business.”  All  of  this  is 
a  business  deal  of  the  six  partners. All  six  are  running  the 
business in a partnership; they have formed a corporation.

Space Gave Them a Place

These six partners say, “We want to start up a business.” 

166

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

So then they all get together and ask, “Hey, but where is the 
space to do so? We’ll need a compound, won’t we? A place 
for our factory.” Would that not be needed if we wanted to 
start up a factory?

Questioner: It would be needed.

Dadashri: Now the Self asks, “Whose place is this?” 
To which Space replies, “This entire place is mine, however 
much we need. There is unlimited space, however much we 
want  to  use.  The  space  is  all  mine,  so  go  ahead.”  It’s  just 
like when people say, “If we want to build a factory, then I’ll 
provide  the  land. You  provide  everything  else,  I  won’t  put 
any cash in the business.” ‘Space’ provided the place [in this 
partnership]. In this way, Space became one of the partners.

The Goods Belong to Inanimate Matter

So  then,  what  about  the  goods  that  are  needed? Who 
would be the supplier of that? The answer is, Parmanu. The 
eternal element of inanimate matter is just the supplier. The 
one who has the matter says, “Whatever stock you need, just 
call me. I will supply you with everything.” Hence, the stock 
is provided entirely by the Parmanu, the eternal element that 
has  form.  Then  the  Parmanu  says,  “All  the  material  that 
you  need  will  be  provided  by  me,  but  that  will  be  without 
‘carting’ [transportation] charges. I do not do ‘carting’. The 
responsibility  of  transporting  it  will  not  fall  on  my  head.” 
So  the  eternal  element  that  does  the  ‘carting’  is  moreover 
different.

The Eternal Element That Supports Motion Does 
the Carting

So  we  tell  the  supplier,  “Why  don’t  you  just  drop  it 
off over here!” He responds, “No, assign a contractor to do 
the  ‘carting’,  that  is  not  our  job.  Ask  for  whatever  goods 
you  need,  then  assign  it  to  the  ‘carting’  department.”  So 

[6] Worldly Life Means a Business Partnership...

167

who does the ‘carting’? It is the eternal element referred to 
as  gatisahayak  (the  eternal  element  that  supports  motion). 
The  element  that  supports  motion  does  all  the  ‘carting’,  it 
picks up all the supplies and delivers them. So is this the one 
responsible for transporting everything? The answer is, yes, 
we tell the ‘carting’ contractor, “Please pick up the stock and 
drop it off.” The ‘carting’ is done by the element that supports 
motion, so it will pick up whatever stock there is and drop it 
off, that is all. The one who picks up and delivers the stock 
is the eternal element that supports motion. The element that 
supports motion says, “I will provide the ‘carting’.” So, this 
one,  the  eternal  element  that  supports  motion,  became  the 
third partner.

The Eternal Element That Supports Inertia Does 
the Storing

And  the  fourth  partner  is  the  eternal  element  that 
supports  inertia  (sthitisahayak).  Once  the  one  doing  the 
‘carting’  starts  to  ‘cart’  the  stock,  he  will  keep  on  moving, 
so  if  he  doesn’t  stop,  then  how  will  we  unload  the  stock? 
So  the  eternal  element  that  supports  inertia  is  the  one  that 
helps him. The one bringing the stock will bring it, the one 
taking it away will take it away; the ‘carting’, the cleaning 
and all that will be done automatically. And the element that 
supports  inertia  says,  “Let’s  store  the  stock  in  one  place  in 
a  storage  room.”  So  the  element  that  supports  inertia  does 
both, the unloading and the storing of the stock.

The Management Is Done by the Eternal Element 
of Time

Questioner: ‘Time’ is left, Time! What is the function 

of the eternal element of Time?

Dadashri: As far as Time is concerned, say something 
needs to be delivered by a certain deadline, so all the work 
should  be  completed  within  that  set  time  period.  So,  Time 

168

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

does its work. ‘Time’ says, “The management is all mine.” 
‘Time’,  the  atoms  of  Time,  they  bring  together  all  the 
circumstantial evidences [to complete the work].

Questioner: Dada, so the action and its reaction, does 

that happen on the basis of the atoms of Time?

Dadashri: No, that does not happen because of them; 
however,  based  on  that,  it  can  be  deduced  that,  ‘This  has 
become  old,  and  this  is  new.’  ‘Time’  consists  of  atoms  of 
Time. Now Time says, “On what basis will this be decided?” 
To which the answer is, “It will be based on me. I will keep 
turning the new into old.” So Time tells the manager, “You 
then have to discard it. It is my business to turn the new into 
old.” So Time’s function is management.

The Supervisor of All, the Eternal Element of the 
Self!

Amongst  all  of  those  partners,  the  eternal  element  of 
the  Self  keeps  a  watch  on  everyone.  ‘It’  keeps  a  watch  on 
everything  that  is  happening  and  on  everyone.  So  like  a 
supervisor,  It  does  not  have  to  ‘do’  anything. All  It  has  to 
‘do’ is supervise. That is the function of the eternal element 
of  the  Self  in  this.  What  are  It’s  duties  in  the  partnership 
of the six? ‘It’ has to supervise. ‘It’ is not supposed to talk 
to or scold anyone, or do anything like that at all. ‘It’ does 
not  have  to  transport  goods  back  and  forth,  nothing  like 
that  at  all.  The  only  thing  the  Self  has  to  do  is  to  keep  a 
watch on everyone, as to, ‘How is all of this working out?’ 
If  there  is  a  mistake  happening,  It  is  to  make  them  aware 
of that and explain it to them. All You [the Self] have to do 
is to observe how everything is working out. ‘You’ have to 
oversee everything; for example, “Hey, how come there was 
a  delay  in  transporting  this?”  That  is  all,  You  do  not  have 
to  reprimand.  Observe;  You  simply  have  to  keep  Seeing 
only. ‘You’ simply have to keep Seeing the work that all the 

[6] Worldly Life Means a Business Partnership...

169

others  are  doing.  Keep  overseeing  the  others.  Do  not  scold 
anyone; do not do anything like that. What is Your function? 
It  is  to  keep  overseeing  all  the  others.  Overseeing  is  Your 
role. The arrangement is under the control of someone else. 
‘Your’ job is that of a superintendent, of simply Seeing and 
Knowing,  that  is  all.  Do  not  get  involved  in  anything  else. 
The  eternal  element  that  keeps  a  watch  on  all  such  things 
like, what stock came in and what stock left, is the Self; that 
is who You Yourself are.

This Is How the Business Functions With the Six 
Partners

This is a business that all these eternal elements have 
started up. There are six partners, of which Space provides 
the place, and each of the remaining five partners have their 
own function; that is how they started this partnership.

There are six eternal partners in this world. The element 
of the Self is also a partner, the element of inanimate matter 
is  also  a  partner,  then  the  element  that  supports  motion  is 
a  partner,  the  element  that  supports  inertia  is  a  partner,  the 
one  that  provides  the  space  is  a  partner  too.  ‘Time’  is  a 
partner.  Each  one  has  its  own  function  in  this.  They  have 
made a demarcation of their individual work. And the Self’s 
function  is  to  observe  all  of  this,  Its  function  is  to  oversee 
everything.  That  was  the  extent  of  Its  partnership.  It  was 
only to the extent of overseeing. Instead, it started to claim, 
“This is mine, this is mine.” It took over everything entirely 
[by claiming], “What are all of you doing? I am indeed the 
one doing everything, how could all of this happen without 
me?”

Amongst  these  six  partners,  the  Self  is  a  one-sixth 
partner. And yet it claims, “I am indeed the one doing all of 
this.”  So  the  other  five  partners  have  become  outraged,  so 
they take vicious revenge. Would they get outraged or not? 

170

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Why don’t you tell the truth? It has taken all the credit for 
itself by claiming, “I am the only one doing everything.” So 
the other partners say, “Hey, we are doing all the work and 
you are taking all the credit for it!”

The Self Has Taken on the Ownership

So, one of them says, “Where were you before? I am 
the  one  doing  the  ‘carting’.” Then  another  one  says,  “Hey, 
the  stock  is  mine.”  Yet  another  says,  “Hey,  the  place  is 
mine,  so  why  are  you  kicking  up  a  fuss  amidst  this?” And 
yet another says, “What do you have to do with this? Hey, 
at  present,  we  are  responsible  for  all  of  these  things.”  The 
five other partners say, “Who runs everything when you are 
asleep? Are we not partners? We are all equal partners.”

So, all of the eternal elements are doing their respective 
work.  In  the  midst  of  that,  we  [the  self  that  has  deviated 
from  its  inherent  nature]  ourselves  claim,  “This  is  I.  I  did 
this. I did this. I did this. This is mine.” By claiming, “This 
is mine,” the partnership of all the other partners is negated 
and  so  all  of  them  have  filed  lawsuits.  Now  tell  me,  can 
anyone  be  happy  when  lawsuits  are  filed?  If  the  business 
is  functioning  with  everyone’s  presence,  then  shouldn’t  we 
acknowledge their partnership by saying, “Dear fellow, you 
did this work!”

Those other partners are not inconsequential. What are 
they  like?  They  will  say,  “Bring  it  on,  we  will  even  take 
your  father  to  task!”  So  they  keep  on  retaliating,  and  the 
lawsuits  carry  on. They  even  manage  to  find  attorneys  like 
this gentleman here. When the attorneys take one side, then 
discord  arises  within  the  other.  The  conflicts,  the  disputes, 
all keep carrying on within.

Worldly Life Arose Through Visheshbhaav

Now  tell  me,  wouldn’t  an  attorney  need  to  be  hired? 

[6] Worldly Life Means a Business Partnership...

171

So  the  other  partners  hired  an  attorney  like  this  gentleman 
here.

Questioner:  But  Dada,  we  had  one  clause  in  our 
arbitration,  that  if  we  meet  a  Gnani,  then  He  will  help  us 
settle the matter; that was acceptable to all.

Dadashri: [The thought may arise in you,] ‘But why 
is this dispute taking place? I am the only one here. So then, 
who  is  nagging  and  complaining  from  within  right  now? 
Why  don’t  you  let  me  sleep  right  now?’  But  they  will  not 
let  you  sleep.  Has  this  not  happened  before?  Have  you  not 
experienced it?

Questioner: It goes on; oh it goes on a lot!

Dadashri:  Are  you  experienced  in  that?  Are  you  an 

expert?

Questioner: Experienced, but not an expert. I see the 

dispute going on, the dispute goes on for a long time.

Dadashri:  Well,  I  had  actually  become  an  expert.  I 
would  not  be  able  to  sleep  at  all;  how  could  sleep  come? 
Until  the  Gnan  had  not  manifested,  I  would  not  be  able  to 
sleep well. I lost my reputation because of that. As if I had a 
great reputation! Although I had only about ten acres of land 
and a roof over my head, yet the amount of pompousness I 
had was as if I were the governor of Khambhaat [a province 
in Gujarat]! Moreover, I would not even obey the governor 
of  Khambhaat.  I  was  such  that  I  would  not  even  obey  the 
king  Gaekwad  [He  was  king  of  the  state  of  Baroda  from 
1875 to 1939 and brought great reforms during his rule.]!

Questioner:  It  is  written  in  one  of  the  Aptavanis 
(a  series  of  fourteen  volumes  compiled  from  Dadashri’s 
speech)  that  the  other  eternal  elements  have  discord  with 
the pure Soul, so how did You make those eternal elements 
agreeable?

172

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri:  After  One  attains  the  Knowledge  of  the 
Self, they become agreeable. If ignorance of the Self prevails, 
then  they  will  disregard  you.  When  one  does  egoism,  the 
other eternal elements say, “Is this yours alone? We all have 
a  partnership  in  this.” And  when  Gnan  is  attained,  the  ego 
departs,  so  all  the  rest  become  pure.  All  of  these  disputes 
exist because of ignorance of One’s own Self. It is because 
of  ignorance  that  the  self  ends  up  taking  on  the  entire 
ownership.  There  are  six  partners,  yet  the  self  alone  says, 
“This is mine, I am indeed the owner.”

The visheshbhaav (an assumed identification with that 
which is not One’s own) that has arisen, the egoism that has 
arisen, is not within the Self. The Self has remained the very 
same, but as these two [inanimate matter and the Self] came 
together, the visheshbhaav arose, so the belief of ‘I am doing 
it’  arose.  That  is  why  all  these  disputes  are  going  on.  That 
is  why  when  One  separates  from  them,  when  One  realizes 
this [One’s real form as the Self], then One no longer does 
such things [like expressing egoism]. Then disputes will not 
remain. All of this, the quarrels carry on in the worldly arena 
because of ignorance of the Self.

Now,  all  the  other  partners  have  become  upset.  They 
have  filed  a  lawsuit,  they  keep  retaliating  and  giving  one 
[the self] a beating. Now, one does not know how to become 
free from that. The self feels, “All these others are bad.” But 
no, hey you, mortal one, why don’t You [the Self] separate 
from  them,  otherwise  you  will  suffer.  Hence,  ‘we’  release 
the Self from this entanglement.

In  this  body,  in  this  ‘shop’  called  ‘Chandubhai’, You 
were one of the six partners, and you ended up taking over 
their  part  of  the  partnership  with  the  belief,  ‘I  indeed  am 
Chandubhai, and I am doing everything.’ All these disputes 
are because of this. And now You have taken Your share out 
of the partnership, so You are released. ‘You’ were supposed 

[6] Worldly Life Means a Business Partnership...

173

to simply keep Seeing; why would You then stick your hand 
into that?

God Is a One-Sixth Partner in This

Questioner:  By  giving  this  example, You  have  made 

a significant point about the six eternal elements.

Dadashri:  It  is  a  very  significant  point.  It  is  only 
when  there  are  six  eternal  elements  in  a  body  that  a  body 
can form. Now by ‘six eternal elements’ it means that there 
are six partners in this body.

No one in this world can claim, “I am doing this!” No 
one has a right to say so. Not even God [the Self] can claim, 
“I  have  made  this!”  If  God  were  to  say,  “I  have  made  this,” 
then  the  other  eternal  elements  would  say,  “Go  ahead  then, 
create another world, we are moving aside.” And if they move 
aside,  then  God  would  end  up  twiddling  his  thumbs!  Now, 
if  the  other  eternal  elements  were  to  become  arrogant,  then 
God would say, “I am moving aside.” So then the other eternal 
elements would say, “No sir, we all have an equal right!” This 
is  actually  an  equal  partnership  of  all  six  eternal  elements. 
Therefore, God is not the universe, and the universe is not God.

Questioner: It is said that there is no God. All of this 

is merely a natural process.

Dadashri:  No,  no,  that  is  a  hundred  percent  wrong. 
God  is  a  one-sixth  partner  in  this  universe.  ‘He’  is  not  the 
owner, He is one of the partners.

Questioner:  So  are You  saying  that  where  there  is  a 
living being, where there is the Self, there God has one-sixth 
of the partnership?

Dadashri:  God  is  in  every  creature,  whether  visible 
or invisible, not in [man-made] creation. There is no God in 
[man-made] creation.

174

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

In  order  to  make  this  body  function,  there  are  six 
partners. One is God, and there are five others. Now God is 
saying, “I am doing everything,” and that is why the dispute 
is going on in ‘court’. Those five other partners have filed a 
lawsuit in ‘court’.

The Internal Quarrels!

These six partners are within this body. If we ask, “Why 
does  divisiveness  due  to  difference  of  opinion  (matbhed) 
arise  internally?”  Would  divisiveness  due  to  difference  of 
opinion  arise  within  us  or  not?  One  side  may  be  saying 
something  like  this,  and  the  other  side  is  saying  something 
like that; would they speak thus or not?

There should be no divisiveness due to differences of 
opinion  of  any  kind  within  the  entire  body.  There  should 
be no divisiveness due to difference of opinion in the body. 
People  make  it  a  priority  to  get  rid  of  divisiveness  due  to 
difference of opinion in India. However, there should be no 
divisiveness due to difference of opinion internally. And if it 
were to arise internally, then it would be a fiasco. Then there 
would  be  tension.  What  would  happen  next?  Compression 
would arise, wouldn’t it?

Questioner:  What  does  it  mean  to  have  divisiveness 
due  to  difference  of  opinion  internally?  Please  explain  this 
using an example.

Dadashri:  Say  Chandubhai  greets  someone;  upon 
seeing  that  person,  he  says,  “Come  in,  come  in.”  But 
internally something speaks [the thought arises in the mind], 
‘What does this worthless person want?’ On the contrary, this 
is what is being spoken internally. Does it ever happen that 
some third entity says something quite absurd sometimes?

Questioner:  Not  just  sometimes,  it  happens  almost 

every time.

[6] Worldly Life Means a Business Partnership...

175

Dadashri: Daily?

Questioner: After having invited them in by mistake, 

we feel, ‘Darn, why did I invite him in?’

Dadashri:  So  this  divisiveness  due  to  difference  of 
opinion  is  everywhere.  In  the  home,  internally,  there  are 
disputes and divisiveness due to difference of opinion. It is 
just recently, after You have been given Gnan that they have 
decreased. Otherwise, before that, the chaos used to persist 
all day long. [You may ask,] “Hey, what have I done to you 
that  all  of  you  are  fighting  in  my  home?”  To  which  they 
respond, “Don’t you know how you have caused us damage? 
All six partners have an equal share in the business, yet you 
are  claiming,  ‘I  did  it.’  That  is  not  acceptable  to  us.”  All 
these quarrels are due to this.

You  are  saying,  “I  did  it.”  Do  not  speak  in  this  way. 
You  may  casually  [‘dramatically’]  say,  “I  did  it,”  in  your 
worldly interactions. However, in saying, “I did it,” you are 
not too much at fault. Everything is scientific circumstantial 
evidence.  Everyone  is  collectively  involved.  Instead,  you 
have become adamant that, “I alone have done everything,” 
and  on  top  of  that,  you  have  actually  believed  that  to  be 
fact  in  your  mind,  you  have  actually  ousted  all  the  other 
partners. And  that  is  why  the  other  partners  are  bickering, 
quarreling,  fighting,  wreaking  havoc,  and  creating  chaos 
within.  So,  when  this  ‘I-ness’  goes  away,  there  will  be  no 
quarrel of any kind. See, haven’t all the quarrels decreased? 
Yes...  Otherwise,  it  was  all  about,  “I,  I,  I…”  Even  this 
businessman had a lot of such quarrels going on within, isn’t 
it? They have all decreased now, haven’t they?

Questioner: Yes, Dada.

Dadashri: This is because the Self is not the only one 
doing over here, all of them are coming together and doing 
it collectively. They are all partners. But what would happen 

176

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

if the Self alone were to take all the credit? That is why, now 
[after Gnan] You feel, ‘There is not as much quarrelling as 
there was before!’ There is not as much as before, is there?

Questioner: No, Dada.

Dadashri:  Gradually,  even  that  will  come  to  a  stop. 
For this man here, there used to be a war going on, it used 
to go on like the quarrels between India and Pakistan; all of 
that  has  stopped.  Now,  it  is  very  mild  within,  one  quarrel 
may  arise  with  this  one,  two  quarrels  may  arise  with  that 
one, things like that. A dispute may arise from here or from 
there, so then it goes on for a bit.

Questioner:  But  Dada,  what  were  the  other  five 

partners going to do if the Self were not there?

Dadashri:  You  cannot  speak  that  way.  Those  five 
would say, “If even one of us were not present, You would 
fall apart.”

Questioner:  So  then  where  do  the  other  five  eternal 

elements go when the Self goes to moksha?

Dadashri:  They  are  enjoying 

independent 
happiness in their own way. They have not incurred any loss.

their 

Questioner: But the partnership is because of the Self, 

isn’t it?

Dadashri: No, it is not because of It. Not one of them 
is  dependent  on  the  others,  not  one  of  them  relies  on  the 
help of the others, not one of them incurs a loss on account 
of the others, not one of them pushes the others, not one of 
them  helps  the  others,  not  one  of  them  obliges  the  others; 
nothing  at  all.  It  is  simply  the  ego  that  has  arisen,  which 
claims, “I did it.” And when the ego gets uprooted, even that 
is recognized immediately, isn’t it?

Questioner: It is recognized immediately.

[6] Worldly Life Means a Business Partnership...

177

Dadashri:  See,  haven’t  all  of  the  quarrels  decreased 

within? You don’t have many quarrels anymore, do you?

There  are  just  six  partners  in  everyone. There  are  six 
partners  in  a  rose  too,  but  there  is  no  quarreling.  However, 
the moment one becomes the owner of the five sense organs, 
the punches start to be thrown. Whereas in a rose, all six are 
equal. That is why the leaves are the same, the fragrance is 
the  same. As You  clear  [the  files]  with  equanimity,  as You 
prevail only as the Knower-Seer, the rest of the five partners 
will behave properly, they will do their work properly. They 
will not complain.

How  can  people  understand  such  a  world?  It  is  only 
when  one  gets  the  clarification  of  ‘Who  is  the  doer?’  and 
‘Who  am  I  really?’,  that  is  when  ‘we’  can  tell  him  [the 
developing ‘I’], “Dear fellow, Your inherent nature is that of 
the continuous Knower, You should keep Seeing. Vyavasthit 
(result  of  scientific  circumstantial  evidence)  is  the  doer.” 
‘We’ explain this to You, don’t ‘we’? Only then does ultimate 
closure come about.

The Six Became Twelve and...

The  name  of  this  ‘shop’  is  ‘Chandubhai’.  But  who  is 
Your own? There are six partners in this ‘shop’, but you are 
the only one who latches on, saying, “It is indeed mine, it is 
indeed mine.” That is what causes the quarrels.

There are six partners in this. And when a person gets 
married, six more partners associated with the ‘shop’ called 
‘Chandraben’ are added, so it turns into a large corporation. 
Then,  within  that  corporation,  a  baby  boy  is  born,  who 
brings with him six more partners. Then, when a baby girl is 
born, she brings with her six more partners. So, the husband 
and  wife  make  twelve.  Then  comes  along  the  son’s  wife; 
his  wife  has  a  baby  boy.  In  this  way,  the  partners  keep  on 
increasing. So then what else will happen, if not a battle?

178

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Now,  these  six  partners  are  collectively  running 
everything,  and  when  another  six  are  added,  it  turns  into 
a  corporation.  These  people  do  not  realize  this.  Not  even 
the  priest  [who  weds  the  couple]  reveals  that  a  corporation 
is  being  formed.  The  corporation  increases  day  by  day, 
doesn’t  it?  How  can  one  become  free  from  this?  How  can 
one become free from the misery?

That  is  how  this  world  is.  This  should  be  known, 
shouldn’t  it!  If  this  is  known,  then  a  solution  can  come 
about.  If  one  does  not  know  this,  then  he  will  continue  to 
become  entangled,  won’t  he!  Therefore,  this  belief  that  ‘I 
am this body’ that has been established within you, ‘we’ free 
you from that. Otherwise, one can never, not in any lifetime, 
become free from the belief that ‘I am this body’.

The Self Simply Has to Remain as the Knower-Seer...

Did you like these partners?

Questioner: I did.

Dadashri: Now if these partners are working of their 
own  accord,  then  why  should  You  interfere  unnecessarily? 
Do You like this or not?

Questioner: I like it.

Dadashri: So what do You do now, regarding all the 

administration...

Questioner: ‘I’ keep Seeing it.

Dadashri: Yes,  that  is  all,  keep  Seeing  it. After  ‘we’ 
give  you  Gnan,  what  remains  for  You  is  this,  You  should 
keep Seeing.

Is that what You are doing now or are You doing things 

contrary to what You have been told to do?

Questioner: I do exactly that.

[6] Worldly Life Means a Business Partnership...

179

Dadashri:  Do  You  now  behave  as  a  superintendent? 

‘You’ are no longer claiming, “I am doing it,” are You?

‘We’  continue  to  observe  and  review  on  ‘our’  own, 
and ‘we’ remain as the superintendent over everyone. There 
are  no  issues.  Everyone’s  work  carries  on.  There  are  no 
complaints  or  objections  from  any  of  the  partners.  They 
bring and take away whatever stock is needed.

Questioner:  Fundamentally,  It  [the  Self]  is  free  from 
all attachment and abhorrence (vitaraag), yet It gave rise to 
this drama from that state?

Dadashri:  Even  the  other  eternal  elements  are  free 
from  all  attachment  and  abhorrence,  they  do  not  have  any 
attachment or abhorrence. In the process of carrying out the 
drama, You [the Self] gave rise to the ‘I’ (aham); from that 
point  onwards,  the  fighting  and  the  retaliation  began,  “Is 
everything  yours  alone? We  will  get  back  at  you.” Then,  it 
carried on from there...

Questioner:  Dada,  you  gave  a  great  example  of  the 

partnership of the six eternal elements!

Dadashri: Yes...it is wonderful!

This discussion is something that would not be found 
in  any  of  the  scriptures.  This  is  a  very  subtle  discussion. 
There is a jointly-owned partnership of the six within! This 
is Yours  and  this  is  of  the  others;  when You  separate  from 
the partnership, then the court cases will cease.

Devoutly Practise Only the Agnas!

So, ‘we’ are simply talking about this so that everyone 
understands.  Otherwise,  by  simply  understanding  the  six 
eternal  elements,  your  problems  will  not  be  solved.  You 
should  first  get  solutions  to  the  questions  that  perplex 
you.  The  six  eternal  elements  are  actually  a  Science.  It  is 

180

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

something worth knowing. And that which is worth knowing 
does  not  need  to  be  devoutly  practised  daily.  Knowing  it 
just once should bring about closure and inner satisfaction in 
the mind. And that which brings a solution to the questions 
that  arise  daily  is  something  that  is  worth  practising 
devoutly. If there are many things to see in a city, then one 
will  say,  “After  seeing  all  of  them  once,  there  is  no  need 
to  be  burdened  by  it  any  longer!”  Isn’t  it?  Similarly,  after 
listening  to  this  discussion  about  the  six  eternal  elements 
once, there is no problem. It is considered known. It is of no 
help [thereafter]. It would be considered helpful if it brought 
about  solutions  to  the  questions  that  perplex  you  daily  in 
worldly interactions. ‘You’ should not delve too deeply into 
these subtle matters. ‘You’ should keep doing all that which 
is helpful for the Self.



Section 2: Parmanu, an 
Indestructible Eternal Element

[1]
The Real Form of Parmanu

Its Real Form Is Roopi

‘Parmanu’  are  everywhere  in  the  world.  The  entire 

world is filled with Parmanu.

That  which  can  be  seen  with  the  eyes,  heard  with  the 
ears,  and  experienced  through  these  sense  organs  is  all  the 
eternal element with a visible form (roopi). In its original form, 
in its real form, it is indestructible, and as a temporary state, it 
is destructible. As Parmanu, it is indestructible, whereas as an 
atom (anu), all that is visible here, all of that is destructible. It 
is the only eternal element that has a visible form; nevertheless, 
the original eternal element is not visible. It is only its temporary 
state that is visible. Inanimate matter (jada) has form, the Self 
(Chetan)  is  formless.  Therefore,  we  can  recognize  inanimate 
matter,  whereas  we  cannot  recognize  the  Self.  That  which 
cannot  be  recognized  through  these  physical  eyes,  can  be 
recognized through the ‘divine eyes’ (divya chakshu).

Questioner: Who discovered these Parmanu?

Dadashri: The Tirthankar Lords discovered them, and 
they  have  come  into  the  Gnanis  understanding.  What  the 
former Saw, came into the understanding of the latter.

182

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Questioner:  The  scientists  are  trying  to  discover  the 

origin of the Pudgal Parmanu.

they 

trying 

Dadashri:  What  are 

to  discover? 
Their  origin?  You  should  tell  them  that  anything  that  is 
indestructible  can  never  have  an  origin.  That  which  has 
an  origin  undergoes  destruction  permanently,  so  tell  the 
scientists  that  it  does  not  have  an  origin.  However,  as  long 
as  they  are  understanding  through  their  intellect,  they  will 
not  be  able  to  understand  the  eternal  element.  Even  ‘we’ 
cannot  See  it  through  absolute  Knowledge  (keval  Gnan); 
however, this discussion at the level of absolute Knowledge 
has come into ‘our’ understanding.

These people have discovered that other thing, haven’t 
they! They have discovered the atom. The Parmanu is much 
much  smaller  than  the  atom.  They  have  even  managed  to 
see the atom.

Questioner: So that means Parmanu is subtle, isn’t it?

Dadashri: It is something that cannot be seen with the 
eyes. That which cannot be divided any further, that which 
cannot  be  broken  down,  is  referred  to  as  Parmanu.  These 
pudgal  (the  non-Self  complexes  that  undergoes  influx  and 
outflux) have indeed been formed from Parmanu.

Parmanu, One or Countless?

Questioner:  Is  there  one  Parmanu,  or  are  they 

countless?

Dadashri:  There  are  infinite  Parmanu.  However, 
one  can  separate  them  into  individual  units.  A  separated 
individual  unit  is  referred  to  as  a  Parmanu.  So,  there  are 
infinite such Parmanu.

Questioner:  Is  it  the  case  that  when  two  Parmanu 
come together, there is a certain temporary state, and when 

[1] The Real Form of Parmanu

183

three  come  together,  there  is  a  certain  temporary  state,  and 
when four come together, there is a certain temporary state?

Dadashri: That keeps changing.

Questioner: When  they  are  in  the  form  as  Parmanu, 
is there only one Parmanu or are there countless Parmanu?

Dadashri:  There  are  infinite  Parmanu  and  there  are 
also infinite Chetan (the Self). Of the six eternal indestructible 
elements,  some  of  them  are  infinite.  The  eternal  element 
of  Space  is  only  one  [single].  Then,  the  eternal  element 
that  supports  motion  is  only  one.  The  eternal  element  that 
supports inertia is also only one.

Questioner:  What  I  want  to  know  is,  have  infinite 

Parmanu arisen out of one Parmanu?

Dadashri:  Not  a  single  one  has  arisen  from  another. 
Not a single one of them has anything to do with the other. 
Countless Parmanu have not arisen from one Parmanu, nor 
has one Parmanu arisen from countless Parmanu. They exist 
in  accordance  with  their  own  inherent  nature.  Therefore, 
no  one  is  a  doer  of  anything  in  this.  It  is  simply  due  to 
circumstances  that  two  [Parmanu]  adhere  to  each  other, 
three  adhere,  the  fourth  one  adheres,  and  once  it  becomes 
visible  through  a  particular  instrument,  people  refer  to  that 
as an atom (anu). However, that which is not visible through 
any instrument is referred to as Parmanu.

Questioner: The Parmanu that You refer to, the ones 
that are not visible, is that [one] Parmanu or are they [more 
than one] Parmanu?

Dadashri: Parmanu [at the elemental state]. There are 

infinite Parmanu.

Questioner: Yes, but fundamentally there is only one, 

isn’t there?

184

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri: No, there cannot be just one. If there were 

only one, then how would an atom form?

Questioner:  Yes,  so  if  two  Parmanu  came  together, 

then where did so many Parmanu come from?

Dadashri: Where are they going to come from? They 
already exist here. Their existence is within this world. None 
of  them  have  had  to  go  and  come  back.  They  were  here, 
they are here, and they will remain here. They are always in 
existence indeed.

Questioner:  Now,  a  substance  is  visible.  From  a 
substance, there is the level of the atom; beyond the level of 
the  atom,  there  are  Parmanu.  Now,  have  infinite  Parmanu 
arisen from the multiplication (prasav) of one Parmanu?

they  all  have 

Dadashri: No, there is no such connection amongst 
each  other.  They  are  all  in  accordance  with  their  own 
inherent  nature.  However, 
the  same 
properties. The properties that are in one Parmanu are the 
same  properties  that  are  in  all  the  other  Parmanu.  It  is 
not  as  if  this  [substance]  has  formed  from  these  [atoms], 
nor  have  these  [Parmanu]  formed  from  those  [atoms]. 
Wherever it is said that it has been formed, it is some sort 
of a creation. There is no creation of the eternal elements 
in  this  world.  If  there  is  any  creation  in  this  world,  then 
it is simply these man-made objects alone. All these pots, 
homes,  and  so  on  are  all  creation.  Whereas,  these  are  all 
temporary  states  (avastha)  that  are  arising  through  an 
evidentiary doer (nimit). This cloud is not a creation; it is 
a temporary state.

The True Understanding of Skandha…

Questioner:  From  the  relative  perspective,  all  these 
pudgal (non-Self complexes that undergo influx and outflux) 
are separate, but from the Real perspective, is it just one?

[1] The Real Form of Parmanu

185

Dadashri:  From 

the  Real  perspective,  Pudgal 

[Parmanu] is not one.

Questioner: Then?

Dadashri:  It  is  in  fact  from  the  perspective  of  those 
who  want  to  become  free,  they  are  the  ones  who  have 
claimed this to become free from the pudgal. It’s like that for 
those  who  want  to  become  free.  Otherwise,  even  from  the 
relative  perspective,  they  are  infinite,  and  they  are  infinite 
also from the Real perspective. This is because in the form 
as Parmanu, they are pure. The entire pudgal is in the form 
as Parmanu.

Questioner:  What  is  referred  to  as  a  skandha,  a 
skandha  of  Parmanu?  What  is  the  difference  between  all 
of these?

Dadashri:  When  two  or  more  Parmanu  unite,  when 
many  of  them  unite,  when  they  form  one  unit,  that  is 
referred  to  as  a  skandha.  A  skandha  means  that  they  have 
gelled together, when they all join together and a small piece 
forms; that is called a skandha. Everything that is visible in 
this world is a skandha.

Questioner:  Can  inanimate  matter  be  recognized 

through its characteristics?

Dadashri: [It can be recognized] Through its inherent 
nature.  ‘Parmanu’  aren’t  [visible],  are  they!  In  our  case, 
there  are  skandha;  big  solid  aggregates  [of  two  or  more 
Parmanu].

Questioner: The pudgal?

Dadashri: Yes.

Questioner:  The  effects  that  arise  over  here  from 
within,  are  they  also  in  the  form  of  a  solid  aggregate,  as  a 
skandha?

186

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri: No, at first [in the past life] they are in the 
form as Parmanu, then they form aggregates. Pudgal means 
that which was filled in (puran) and that which continues to 
empty out (galan).

Questioner:  Dada,  this  point  about  the  formation  of 
an  aggregate  from  Parmanu  is  a  novel  one.  At  first,  they 
are in the form as Parmanu, and later they form aggregates. 
How does it convert from the former to the latter?

Dadashri: There  is  not  just  a  single  Parmanu  in  this 
body,  it  is  made  up  entirely  of  aggregates.  That  is  referred 
to as a skandha. Parmanu are actually not visible. It is only 
after  they  become  atoms,  that  these  scientists  can  discover 
them;  otherwise,  other  people  cannot  discover  them.  We 
can  only  see  it  when  it  becomes  large  enough,  like  a  grain 
of  millet.  Our  eyes  are  not  capable  of  seeing  anything  so 
subtle, are they! And we don’t have microscopes. We would 
be able to identify them if we had microscopes.

‘Parmanu’ are permanent; they are eternal. These two 
[atoms  and  skandha]  can  be  perceived  by  people,  but  the 
Self  cannot  be  perceived.  And  the  other  thing  that  can  be 
perceived is space.

There Is No Word for It in English…

Questioner:  The  English  word  for  ‘anu’  is  atom,  so 

what is the English word for Parmanu?

Dadashri: There is no English word for ‘Parmanu’ here. 
There cannot be any word for it. There are words for that which 
is visible; there cannot be words for that which is not visible.

Questioner:  Dada,  there  is  no  English  word  for 
‘Parmanu’, so can we refer to it as an atom, when we speak 
about Parmanu?

Dadashri:  An  atom  is  actually  a  temporary  state 

(avastha) of the Parmanu.

[1] The Real Form of Parmanu

187

Questioner:  Western  philosophy  uses 

the  word 

‘matter’; is that itself Parmanu?

Dadashri:  Matter  is  not  Parmanu,  but  matter  is  a 

phase of the Parmanu.

It is only the temporary states that can be understood 
through the intellect. It is just the temporary state that can be 
seen through the eyes or grasped through the intellect; that is 
not the original eternal element. So, those people were able 
to  see  the  atom,  and  they  were  even  able  to  analyze  that  it 
is  possible  to  divide  this  further,  whereas  Parmanu  cannot 
be divided further.

Questioner:  Scientists  are  such  that  if  you  tell  them 
that the Parmanu are like this, and that they cannot be broken 
down,  then  they  would  need  to  conduct  an  experiment  and 
if they are unable to prove that in the experiment, then they 
will not believe that this is a fact.

So,  how  can  you  prove  to  the  scientists  over  here 

[abroad, out of India] that the Parmanu are indivisible?

Dadashri: They are actually indivisible, so no matter 
how  many  divisions  one  makes  to  reach  it,  but  when  the 
ultimate  division  takes  place,  it  cannot  be  seen  through 
the  eyes  nor  through  a  microscope.  So,  it  is  not  something 
that  can  be  perceived  through  the  sense  organs  or  through 
the  intellect.  So,  they  will  have  to  go  beyond  the  intellect, 
and there, they must bear in mind that this is the Reality; it 
begins from this. And they will also have to accept that there 
is something that is beyond the intellect, where the intellect 
cannot reach.

Even Scientists Have Limits!

Questioner:  Won’t  prominent  scientists  be  able  to 
discover  Parmanu,  the  way  they  have  discovered  small 
atoms?

188

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri:  Yes,  atoms  can  be  discovered,  atoms  are 
visible. And they are also convinced that atoms are such that 
they can be divided and broken down further. So the doubt 
remains that there must be something that is indivisible.

Questioner: Scientists cannot see these Parmanu, but 
perhaps they may say that there is such a thing as Parmanu.

Dadashri: Yes, so although they may not say Parmanu, 
they  will  understand  that  this  [atom]  is  divisible,  so  there 
should  be  something  that  is  indivisible.  There  has  to  be 
something at the other end of the spectrum. There is always 
something at the other end of the spectrum.

Questioner:  Dada,  the  particles  that  are  smaller  than 
an atom, they refer to them as subatomic particles in English. 
These people have reached up to this point.

Dadashri:  That’s  it,  they  will  not  be  able  to  go  any 

further.

Questioner: And  yet  they  believe,  they  theorize  that 
even subatomic particles can be further divided into smaller 
particles, but these people have not yet reached the level of 
Parmanu.

Dadashri: They will not be able to reach the level of the 
Parmanu, will they! This is because it is not something that 
can  be  grasped  by  the  sense  organs  nor  is  it  something  that 
can be grasped through the intellect. It is not something that 
can be understood through the intellect or the sense organs.

Questioner:  For  many  years,  the  scientific  history 
has  been  such  that  five  hundred  years  ago,  they  believed 
that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  an  atom  but  it  is  not  possible 
to  go  beyond  that.  However,  the  scientists  of  today  have 
progressed further through efforts and inquiry. Now if they 
want to go further, then why can they not reach the level of 
Parmanu?

[1] The Real Form of Parmanu

189

Dadashri:  You  would  be  able  to  separate  Parmanu 
only  if  you  are  able  to  see  them!  If  it  were  possible  to 
perceive  them  through  the  intellect,  through  the  eyes,  if 
they  were  perceivable  through  the  sense  organs,  then  they 
would  be  seen,  wouldn’t  they!  And  it  is  approximately  at 
that  point  that  you  will  have  to  stop.  This  is  because  the 
original eternal element is not such that it can be seen [at the 
gross level]. The Gnanis alone can understand it. Moreover, 
even  ‘we’  will  come  to  Know  it  after  some  time,  through 
absolute Knowledge (keval Gnan).

The keval Gnanis (the Ones with absolute Knowledge), 
meaning  those  who  have  become  absolute,  completely 
absolute [can See them]. ‘We’ too, have become absolute, but 
it is not complete. Once One becomes completely absolute, 
that is when One can Know what this is in its entirety!

The Difference Between Pudgal and Parmanu…

Questioner: This mind, speech, and body are also an 

effect of Parmanu, aren’t they, Dada?

Dadashri: All of that is parmanu, and there is nothing 
else  besides  Parmanu.  Do  not  refer  to  them  as  Parmanu, 
refer  to  them  as  the  pudgal.  Fundamentally,  the  pudgal  is 
not in the form as Parmanu, it is in the form as a temporary 
state (avastha).

Questioner: Are pudgal and Parmanu the same thing 

or different?

Dadashri: They are both considered to be different.

Questioner: So then what are the definitions of pudgal 

and Parmanu?

Dadashri:  That  which  cannot  be  divided  further 
is  Parmanu.  And  only  Parmanu  in  the  true  sense  can  be 
referred to as Parmanu. This pudgal has become vibhaavik 

190

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

(deviated from its inherent nature). This pudgal has taken on 
a form that is not one’s own (visheshbhaav).

There are two kinds of pudgal. One that has acquired 
visheshbhaav [referred to as the vibhaavik pudgal; the pudgal 
formed from parmanu that have deviated from their inherent 
nature]. And the other is the original Pudgal, which is in its 
inherent  nature  (swabhaavik),  which  exists  in  the  form  as 
Parmanu [these are referred to as Pudgal Parmanu]. In the 
vibhaavik pudgal, there are aggregates of parmanu, whereas 
in its natural form, it is in the form as Parmanu.

As far as the pudgal is concerned, only the body that 
humans or every living being has acquired can be referred to 
as pudgal; nothing else can be referred to as pudgal.

Questioner: So is this [a tape recorder] not considered 

as pudgal?

Dadashri: No.

Questioner:  So  even  if  a  certain  thing  has  atoms,  it 
cannot be referred to as pudgal! Pudgal means it has to be 
living.

Dadashri:  It  can  be  said  that  they  [the  Pudgal 
Parmanu] are kriyakaari (‘effective’ such that they take on 
the effect and give result), they come together and they can 
also separate. When the time unfolds, they separate.

Questioner: Can two Souls (Atma; the Self) fit within 

one pudgal?

Dadashri: Millions of Souls can actually occupy one 
pudgal.  This  is  because  the  pudgal  that  is  being  occupied 
is a vibhaavik pudgal. Hundreds of thousands of Souls can 
exist within a vibhaavik pudgal. As one has become this big, 
it can be understood how many living beings there must be 
within  it!  People  have  no  idea  about  the  vibhaavik  pudgal. 

[1] The Real Form of Parmanu

191

So what people refer to as the pudgal, it is only the vibhaavik 
pudgal that is being referred to as the pudgal.

‘Pudgal’  [in  its  original  form,  the  eternal  element 
called  Parmanu]  is  permanent,  and  You  [in  the  original 
form,  the  Self]  are  also  permanent;  when  You  understand 
this, salvation happens.

Questioner: Is the Pudgal also permanent?

Dadashri:  Yes,  the  original  Pudgal  Parmanu  is 
permanent  by  its  inherent  nature.  If  You  understand  this 
vibhaavik  pudgal  as  being  vibhaavik  (unnatural;  deviated 
from  its  inherent  nature),  then  You  will  also  be  able  to 
understand  the  swabhaavik  Pudgal  (Parmanu  in  its  pure 
natural form); it is permanent.

Questioner: So One’s Vision (Darshan) should unveil 
to the point of understanding that the Pudgal [Parmanu] is 
permanent and the Self is also permanent?

Dadashri:  Yes,  and  this  pudgal  [physical  body]  is 
actually  the  unnatural  (vikrut)  pudgal,  it  is  not  the  original 
Pudgal Parmanu that is in its inherent nature! The unnatural 
pudgal  is  destructible,  it  increases  and  decreases  by  its 
inherent  nature  (guru-laghu  swabhaav),  whereas  the  true 
Pudgal Parmanu is such that it never increases or decreases 
by its inherent nature (aguru-laghu swabhaav).

Questioner:  What  is  the  difference  between  the 

swabhaavik Pudgal and the vibhaavik pudgal?

Dadashri: The swabhaavik Pudgal is not visible, so it 
is meaningless to talk about it right now. People do not even 
know about it. The Self-realized Gnanis Know exactly what 
the swabhaavik Pudgal is, however the general public does 
not know anything about it at all.

Questioner:  Now,  this  part  that  is  the  prakruti  (non-

192

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Self complex) is not really in the form as the Pudgal, is it? 
Meaning that the prakruti is not in the form as Parmanu, is 
it?

Dadashri:  The  prakruti  is  in  the  form  as  pudgal. 
The  Parmanu  are  pure,  whereas  the  prakruti  is  ‘colored’ 
parmanu;  parmanu  that  have  been  ‘colored’  with  bhaav 
(intent;  belief).  Whatever  bhaav  they  have  been  ‘colored’ 
with,  that  is  the  type  of  parmanu  they  are.  As  the  ‘color’ 
was  picked  up  after  the  [vibhaavik]  pudgal  had  formed, 
that  is  why  it  [the  prakruti]  is  referred  to  as  pudgal. Then, 
once they discharge, upon giving effect in accordance with 
whichever bhaav they had been ‘colored’ with, they become 
pure once again.

Questioner: The pudgal has no existence without the 

Self (Chetana), does it?

Dadashri: That  is  true.  However,  in  the  fundamental 
state, the Pudgal exists in the form as Parmanu. It does not 
exist  in  any  other  form.  His  point  is  correct;  how  can  the 
pudgal exist without the presence of the Self? Well it does; 
in the form as Parmanu, It is eternally independent. It exists 
devoid of the Self.

The Independent Energy of the Pudgal

Questioner:  In  reference  to  the  point  that  You  have 
made,  that  this  is  all  pudgal,  how  compatible  is  the  energy 
of the pudgal with the energy of the Self?

Dadashri: The power of the pudgal is comparable to 
that of the power filled in the batteries of a torch; so as long 
as those cells are in the torch, the torch will be operational. 
Once the power [in the battery] exhausts, the torch will not 
work. Similarly, the power that is instilled in the pudgal in 
the presence of the Self is in the form of these three batteries 
of  the  mind,  speech,  and  body.  So  as  long  as  these  three 

[1] The Real Form of Parmanu

193

batteries are filled with power, there is ‘light’, and when the 
power  exhausts,  the  ‘light’  goes  out.  The  power  continues 
to be charged once again. The old batteries discharge, while 
new batteries continue to be charged.

Questioner:  So You  have  spoken  about  the  changes, 
but  how  much  power  is  there  in  the  pudgal,  how  much 
energy does the pudgal have?

Dadashri:  The  energy  of  the  pudgal  is  paudgalik 
(worldly;  of  the  non-Self  complex),  it  is  not  the  energy  of 
the Self. So, its energy is different. Had this power not been 
filled,  then  the  Pudgal  Parmanu  were  certainly  separate.  It 
is actually because power has been filled in, that it functions 
as  if  it  is  like  chetan  (living;  animate).  It  functions  so 
wonderfully,  as  if  it  is  living  indeed.  The  mind,  intellect, 
chit,  ego,  anger,  pride,  deceit,  and  greed;  everything  is 
there. It functions as if it is living, but there is no life in it 
whatsoever.  It  is  simply  ‘powered’  [charged  energy];  it  is 
only  the  power  atma  (the  self  that  has  been  powered  with 
life  energy). The  worldly-interacting  self  (vyavahaar  atma) 
means  the  power  atma,  whereas  the  Nishchay  Atma  is  the 
Real Self. The Real Self does not ‘do’ anything whatsoever 
in  this  body.  ‘It’  continues  to  only  illuminate  every  living 
being;  It  does  not  ‘do’  anything  else.  To  ‘do’  is  not  in  Its 
inherent  nature  at  all.  Anything  that  is  being  done  is  the 
state as the pudgal. It is the power atma*4 alone that is doing 
everything.

There  is  no  problem  if  these  batteries  discharge  and 
new  power  is  not  charged,  however,  for  the  people  of  the 
world, the old ones continue to discharge and new ones get 
charged.

Questioner: But just as there is the energy of the Self, 

how much energy does the pudgal have?

* There is detailed satsang on power chetan in Aptavani 14 parts 3.

194

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri:  Not  a  single  component  in  the  energy  of 
the pudgal is weak; it is very powerful. There is tremendous 
energy  in  the  pudgal,  there  is  boundless  energy,  but  You 
do not need to make use of that energy. What help can the 
pudgal  be  to  You?  Just  as  the  Self  has  boundless  energy, 
this  too  has  boundless  energy,  but  the  boundless  energy  of 
the  Self  is  of  a  different  kind,  and  the  energy  of  this  [the 
pudgal]  is  of  a  different  kind.  This  energy  [of  the  pudgal] 
is  achetan  (that  which  is  devoid  of  the  Self;  without  the 
property  to  Know  and  See),  whereas  that  energy  [of  the 
Self]  is  Chetan  (with  the  property  to  Know  and  See). This 
energy [of the pudgal] has form, whereas that energy [of the 
Self] is formless.

Questioner: All the energy that has currently arisen in 
the world, for example, this electricity being generated from 
the force of water, that is doing so much work in the world; 
similarly,  all  this  paudgalik  energy  that  has  arisen,  would 
that  energy  remain  if  the  relative  knowledge  and  vision 
(gnan-darshan)  and  the  worldly-interacting  self  (chetana) 
were not around?

Dadashri: It is a tremendous energy. As it is, even if the 
relative  knowledge  and  vision,  the  worldly-interacting  self 
(chetana) were not around, there would still be tremendous 
energy in the Parmanu.

On the contrary, it is because of the relative knowledge 
and vision and the worldly-interacting self that this unnatural 
energy (vikrut shakti) has arisen. The original energy [of the 
Parmanu] is actually a phenomenal energy. ‘One’ [the Self] 
has  extensive  Vision  (Darshan),  yet  presently  It  remains 
veiled.

The Energy Gets Released When the Atom Is Split

Questioner: When  they  made  the  atomic  bomb,  they 

generated all the energy from inanimate matter.

[1] The Real Form of Parmanu

195

Dadashri:  There  is  actually  immense  energy  in 
inanimate matter (jada), there is more energy than even the 
Self (Chetan). Inanimate matter actually has enough energy 
to  annihilate  the  entire  world.  The  only  thing  it  lacks  is 
laagni (Knowledge and bliss in this case). People have made 
use of the atom.

Questioner:  The  electrons,  neutrons,  and  protons  in 

matter?

Dadashri: All of that is inanimate.

Questioner: In science, there are atoms; these people 
do  not  exactly  understand  the  relation  between  what  we 
refer to as electrons and energy.

Dadashri: There is no energy in Parmanu. When the 
Parmanu  come  together  to  form  atoms,  that  is  when  there 
is  energy.  The  smallest  division  of  an  atom  is  a  Parmanu. 
Thereafter, the Parmanu is indivisible; therefore, there is no 
energy in what is indivisible. There is energy in that which 
can  be  divided.  So,  the  atom  can  be  broken  down;  it  is 
divisible. As soon as a skandha is formed, it can be divided.

Questioner:  Is  it  true  that  whatever  is  visible  in  the 
form  of  a  substance  is  made  up  of  atoms  and  Parmanu? 
In  every  substance,  that  which  is  the  non-Self  (anatma)  is 
fundamentally [made up of] atoms and Parmanu, isn’t it?

Dadashri: Yes, of course!

Questioner: Even with respect to atoms and Parmanu, 
there is talk of electrons and protons at present. Even within 
these,  there  are  different,  novel  elements,  and  they  have 
energy. So is that in the form of Chetan shakti (life energy; 
the energy to Know and See)?

Dadashri: No, no, that energy is different. There is no 
Chetan shakti in any of them. Each one of them has energy 

196

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

in them, which is different. The energy is definitely present; 
they  definitely  have  energy.  There  is  so  much  energy  in 
those atoms and Parmanu that the Self cannot become free 
from them. Just imagine!

The  atom  possesses  so  much  energy  that  it  can 
completely  annihilate  the  entire  world!  It  is  after  two 
Parmanu come together, or three come together that energy 
arises [in invisible form].

Questioner:  Of  the  six  eternal  elements,  which  one 

does physical energy fall under?

Dadashri:  It  is  in  the  atoms  and  Parmanu,  in  the 
Pudgal. All the energy has arisen as a result of the Parmanu 
coming together. It contains a great deal of energy itself.

Questioner: Does the energy arise after the Parmanu 

come together?

Dadashri: It is when the atom is split that the energy 

arises, it gets released.

Questioner:  And  when  the  Parmanu  are  brought 

together…

Dadashri:  Energy  does  not  get  released  when  they 
come together. Energy is released only upon splitting them. 
Energy is released by splitting them.

Questioner: Based on the discussions that are currently 

taking place, is there energy even in those Parmanu?

Dadashri:  The  Parmanu  certainly  have  [their  own 
natural]  energy!  However,  as  the  Parmanu  are  indivisible, 
no changes can take place in the energy.

Questioner:  The  Parmanu  come  together  to  form 
atoms  in  a  certain  arrangement.  Now,  what  happens  to  the 
Parmanu when the atom is split?

[1] The Real Form of Parmanu

197

Dadashri:  It  is  possible  to  split  the  atom  using 
whichever  method  you  use  to  split  it,  and  that  gives  rise 
to energy. Now, people have extracted the energy generated 
from splitting the atom.

Questioner:  But  what  is  that  energy  from?  Whose 

energy is it?

Dadashri: The atom has tremendous energy.

Questioner:  The  Parmanu  remain  exactly  the  same, 

don’t they? The aggregated Parmanu that were split…

Dadashri:  The  divisions  that  form  from  the  atom, 
are even smaller particles of the atom. They do not become 
Parmanu.  When  the  atom  is  split,  subatomic  particles  are 
formed.

Questioner:  It  does  not  happen  on  account  of  the 
inherent  energy  within  the  atom,  does  it  happen  due  to  an 
external energy?

Dadashri: It is not external; it is the intrinsic energy. 
There is a tremendous amount of energy stored within. The 
external  [energy]  has  nothing  to  do  with  this.  Each  one  is 
dependent  on  its  own  energy.  All  these  eternal  elements 
have their own inherent energy.

Questioner: The atom can only be split if the external 

energy is greater, otherwise it does not split.

Dadashri:  It  can  actually  be  split  using  certain 

methods.

Does Energy Arise by Coming Together?

Questioner: This  nuclear  energy  that  they  talk  about 
is  the  energy  that  is  released  by  splitting  an  atom.  This 
energy  is  released  when  an  atom  is  split.  So  this  proves 
that if this much energy is released by splitting it, then how 
much energy would be needed to bring them together?

198

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri:  No  energy  at  all  is  needed  for  them  to 
come  together;  that  itself  is  known  as  Parmanu.  To  come 
together  is  its  inherent  nature  and  to  separate  is  also  its 
inherent  nature.  It  is  simply  that  we  are  setting  out  to  split 
them;  otherwise,  it  is  indeed  its  inherent  nature  to  undergo 
input and output (puran-galan).

Questioner:  So  then  when  this  splitting  occurs,  how 

much energy does it produce?

Dadashri: The energy in fact arises because they are 
split. They are going against nature. They are not doing it as 
a  natural  process;  they  are  following  an  unnatural  process. 
The Parmanu gather on their own, and they also separate on 
their  own. The  Parmanu  are  inherently  active  (sakriya),  so 
they carry out the activity (kriya) on their own indeed.

Questioner:  If  inanimate  matter  is  doing  this,  then 

how much energy must the Self have?

Dadashri: Yes,  the  energies  of  the  Self  have  entered 
into this on account of illusion (bhranti), that is why this is 
happening.

Questioner: Yes, so that is on account of illusion. So 
then  how  much  energy  must  there  be  in  the  original  Self, 
that is what I meant to ask.

Dadashri: There  is  infinite  energy;  that  is  something 

altogether different!

Questioner: Can this infinite energy be understood by 

anyone else besides the Tirthankar Lords?

Dadashri:  No,  it  does  not  fully  come  into  anyone 
else’s  understanding.  ‘One’  should  feel  absolutely  free  of 
any dependence whatsoever (niralamb). When the awareness 
arises in the developing ‘I’ that ‘Nothing can do anything to 
Me  [as  the  Self],’  then  so  many  energies  will  manifest! A 

[1] The Real Form of Parmanu

199

transformation  takes  place  by  ‘touching’  the  One  with  the 
energy.

Questioner:  What  the  world  refers  to  as  energy,  is 
energy  that  has  arisen  due  to  either  the  integration  or  else 
the  disintegration.  Energy  is  released  when  two  things  that 
have  come  together,  or  else  many  things  that  are  situated 
close  to  one  another,  are  separated.  This  energy,  what  the 
world  refers  to  as  energy,  is  that  verily  considered  as  the 
coming together and dissociation of the unnatural effects?

Dadashri:  There  is  no  dissociation  or  anything  like 
that. Everything has atoms; energy is released as long as it 
is split.

Questioner: The  energy  that  the  world  knows  about, 

is it in the form of fusion energy?

Dadashri: Energy is released from fused atoms [when 

they are split], after becoming fused.

Questioner: This energy is from the coming together 

and the dissociation, so is it relative?

Dadashri: Yes, it is all relative. It is such a powerful 

energy!

Questioner: Yesterday, we saw rocks; they were white 

on one side and grey on the other side.

Dadashri:  Yes,  there  are  all  kinds  of  varieties.  The 
stones form in a certain way in one area, they are different in 
another  area,  they  form  differently  in  yet  another  area.  One 
location may have a specific kind of formation, and another 
location  may  have  a  different  kind  of  formation.  Just  look; 
kerosene can be extracted, coal-tar can be extracted, so many 
different varieties! The intellect cannot comprehend this.



[2]
The Properties of Pudgal Parmanu

Everything That Has Form Is Pudgal Indeed!

Therefore, there is one eternal element that is Chetan 
(with  the  property  to  Know  and  See),  the  remaining  five 
eternal elements are jada (inanimate; non-living). [There is 
no property of Knowing and Seeing in the other five.] And 
of the eternal elements that are jada, one has a visible form 
(roopi).  Of  the  six,  only  one  eternal  element  has  a  visible 
form, whereas the other five are formless (aroopi). Why are 
you not saying anything?

Questioner: I am taking it in.

Dadashri:  But  if  someone  were  to  ask,  “Which  one 
has  form?  Which  one  is  formless?”  Then  I  would  give  an 
answer, wouldn’t I?

Questioner:  There  is  no  need  to  ask,  please  explain 

it to us.

Dadashri:  Then  I  will  explain  it  to  you  in  the  way 

that I can.

That which has form is the eternal element of inanimate 
matter; it is in the form of atoms and Parmanu. It is never 
formless.

[2] The Properties of Pudgal Parmanu

201

Questioner:  So  just  as  there  are  living  entities  (jeev) 
in this world, there are also non-living entities (ajeev), aren’t 
there?

Dadashri: Yes, there are also non-living entities. That 
which has form is visible; the form which is visible through 
the  eyes,  which  can  be  heard  through  the  ears,  which  can 
be tasted through the tongue, which can be smelled through 
the  nose,  which  can  be  touched,  all  of  that  is  a  non-living 
entity. As long as it has a form, it is a non-living entity, and 
that which is formless is the living entity. The living entity 
is formless; It cannot be seen, It cannot be heard through the 
ears. ‘It’ cannot be perceived through these sense organs. ‘It’ 
is  beyond  the  senses,  It  cannot  be  recognized  through  the 
sense  organs.  Everything  that  can  be  experienced  through 
the sense organs is non-living.

In  this,  as  the  Pudgal  [Parmanu]  is  endowed  with 
the property of having form, it has a visible representation, 
whereas  the  others  are  invisible  (amurt).  The  Self  is  also 
invisible and the other four eternal elements are also invisible.

And  what  is  the  inherent  nature  of  these  Parmanu? 
Their color keeps on changing constantly. The Self does not 
have  the  property  of  color  or  any  such  thing.  This  person 
has  a  fair  complexion,  and  this  other  person  has  a  dark 
complexion; so the colors are constantly changing depending 
on  the  kind  of  parmanu  a  person  has.  Furthermore,  the 
texture (sparshna) keeps on changing.

Questioner: Dada, with reference to both, the prakruti 
(the  non-Self  complex)  and  the  Purush  (the  Self),  ‘Not  a 
single  property  of  the  prakruti  is  in  Me,  and  not  a  single 
property of Mine is in the prakruti.’ But there must be some 
common properties that the prakruti and the Purush share? 
Aren’t there any?

Dadashri: No.

202

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Questioner:  This  [the  Self]  is  formless,  It  is  subtle. 

Can the mind be considered subtle?

Dadashri: No, all of that has form.

Questioner: What  about  thoughts? What  about  those 

we refer to as subtle circumstances?

Dadashri:  All  of  that  has  form.  The  entire  prakruti 
has nothing but form. The mind-speech-body, all of that has 
form.

Questioner:  Is  there  not  a  single  common  property 

between the two?

Dadashri: No, they have nothing in common.

Questioner:  The  way  I  understood  it  with  reference 
to phases (paryay) is that the impure phases are common to 
both. Isn’t there any such perspective?

Dadashri:  There  is  no  such  thing.  This  prakruti  that 
has  form  is  entirely  destructible  (vinashi),  whereas  that 
which  is  formless  is  indestructible  (avinashi).  That  which 
has  form  keeps  on  changing,  the  formless  does  not  keep 
on  changing.  That  which  has  form  undergoes  input  and 
output  (puran-galan),  and  the  Self  is  formless.  So,  all  of 
their  properties  are  different.  There  is  no  commonality  in 
the intrinsic functional properties (gunadharma) of the two. 
Where did you note down all these points from?

Questioner:  Dada,  there  are  all  these  terms  that  are 
used,  aren’t  there?  Terms  such  as  subtle  circumstances, 
gross circumstances...

Dadashri: Gross circumstances have form, but so do 

the subtle circumstances.

Questioner:  Don’t  we  say,  “I  am  subtle.”  Similarly, 

the circumstances are also subtle...

[2] The Properties of Pudgal Parmanu

203

Dadashri: That subtle is different. What ‘we’ actually 
mean  by  ‘I  am  subtle’  is  that  the  prakruti  is  gross  and  the 
Self  is  subtle;  that  is  what  ‘we’  mean  to  say.  Otherwise, 
the  Parmanu  are  the  subtlest. The  subtlest  means  that  they 
cannot be seen [with these physical eyes]. Even the Pudgal 
[Parmanu]  are  like  that.  The  original  Pudgal  Parmanu  are 
such  that  they  cannot  be  seen,  however  by  their  inherent 
nature,  they  have  form  [they  can  be  Seen  through  absolute 
Knowledge]. The entire prakruti has form. Everything keeps 
on changing. It keeps on changing thereafter.

No  matter  how  beautiful  the  praakrut  (that  which 
pertains  to  the  non-Self)  is,  there  is  no  telling  when  it  will 
change  its  guise.  No  matter  how  appealing  this  fruit  is, 
it  is  going  to  rot  later  on.  Even  a  blossoming  flower  will 
eventually wilt. There’s no telling when that which pertains 
to the non-Self will go bad, is there?

The Beauty Always Wears Away!

It is on account of this eternal element with form, the 
eternal  element  of  the  Pudgal  [Parmanu],  that  this  world 
has  arisen.  It  is  indeed  the  eternal  element  with  form  that 
perplexes  one.  However,  it  is  because  one  sees  the  [beauty 
of the] form (roop), that he becomes perplexed. As one sees 
the [beautiful] form, everything within him takes a turn for 
the worse.

Questioner: Does it take a turn for the worse because 

he believes it to be beautiful?

Dadashri:  It  is  because  he  sees  the  [beauty  of  the] 
form (roop). He does not believe it to be beautiful. It has a 
[beautiful] form.

Questioner: It has a [beautiful] form?

Dadashri:  It  definitely  has  a  [beautiful]  form!  Form 
[beauty]  is  an  inherent  nature  of  the  Pudgal  [Parmanu].  It 

204

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

is its inherent nature to have form (roop), taste (ras), smell 
(gandh),  tactility  (sparsh).  There  might  be  a  woman  who 
appears  perfect,  like  a  rose  flower,  but  the  awareness  does 
not  remain  that  this  [beautiful]  form  is  a  property  of  the 
[vibhaavik] pudgal; it is ever changing.

When the [beautiful] form is at its peak, he selects her 
[for marriage], and then two years later, when she becomes 
ill, the [beautiful] form has faded.

Questioner:  Then  does  the  [beautiful]  form  keep 

fading as each year passes by?

Dadashri:  Yes,  one  should  at  least  envision  what 
she  would  look  like  when  she  turns  fifty. At  that  time,  he 
will  get  fed  up  of  looking  at  her.  Is  there  not  a  difference 
between  the  way  she  was  when  he  selected  her  and  when 
she turns fifty?

Questioner:  Yes,  that  [beautiful]  form  has  changed 

now.

Dadashri:  So  then  he  gets  fed  up  of  looking  at  her. 
But  what  can  he  do?  What  can  be  done  now  that  he  has 
already married her!

A  man  may  have  married  a  woman  with  a  fair 
complexion,  but  when  she  suffers  some 
illness,  her 
complexion becomes dark. Then what can be done? A brass 
pot  can  be  buffed,  but  can  she  be  buffed?  Is  it  possible 
to  buff  her?  So  then  why  should  you  keep  seeking  a  fair-
complexioned wife? The one you get is the right one. If she 
were fair-complexioned and her complexion becomes dark, 
then  what  would  become  of  you?  People  don’t  understand 
all this, do they?

Questioner:  They  do  understand  it,  but  when  the 

situation comes into effect, they forget.

Dadashri: Yes, they are clever people, aren’t they?

[2] The Properties of Pudgal Parmanu

205

So  this  property  of  form,  what  must  it  belong  to? 
Everything  that  has  form  is  a  property  of  this  [vibhaavik] 
pudgal.  How  appealing  do  all  the  varieties  of  fruit  appear! 
That  is  all  [vibhaavik]  pudgal.  And  have  you  ever  seen 
those dried fruits? Have you ever seen a fair-complexioned 
woman? What  do  those  dried  fruits  look  like? All  of  those 
are indeed considered ‘fruits’ also. However, it is only when 
one ‘tastes’ them that he realizes [what they are]. The ‘taste’ 
he  gets  when  he  marries  [is  different],  but  when  she  says 
something quite absurd, that is when he gets fed up. Whereas, 
with  regards  to  a  fruit,  it  appears  to  be  very  appealing  on 
the  outside,  because  it  is  pudgal,  isn’t  it!  And  our  people 
become  pleased;  [they’ll  say,]  “She  is  fair-complexioned.” 
Hey  mortal  one,  just  try  and  marry  a  fair-complexioned 
woman; you’ll end up a fool! He gets married, and then he 
gets fed up.

Questioner:  [A  beautiful]  Form  is  nothing  but  an 
object of pleasure for the eyes. It is only the eyes that take 
in the [beauty of the] form.

Dadashri:  The  fact  is,  fundamentally,  the  natural 
form (swabhaavik roop) is not discernible to the eyes. This 
unnatural  form  (visheshbhaavi  roop)  is  discernible  to  the 
eyes. And everything in this world that has deviated from its 
inherent  nature  (visheshbhaav)  is  due  to  form.  The  natural 
form  is  not  destructible,  whereas  this  unnatural  form  is  a 
temporary adjustment.

Questioner: What is the connection between the form 

(roop) and the name (naam)?

Dadashri:  Everything  indeed  has  form.  How  else 
would  anything  be  recognized?  People  have  named  them, 
such as, this is called a cow, this is called a buffalo, this is 
called  a  bull,  this  is  called  this.  Moreover,  in  the  language 
used  by  Muslims,  the  names  and  words  may  be  different, 

206

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

yet  the  meaning  is  the  same  for  everyone.  The  words 
are  different,  likewise  the  language  is  different,  so  in 
one  [language]  they  may  use  the  word  ‘God’,  in  another 
they  may  say  ‘Bhagwan’,  in  yet  another,  they  may  say 
‘Allah’.  The  names  are  all  different,  nevertheless  they  are 
an  association  used  to  distinguish  something. A  name  is  a 
suggestive association.

Questioner: In many scriptures of the Vedanta (one of 
the six schools of Hindu philosophy), the name and the form 
have been referred to as an illusion.

Dadashri:  The  name  and  the  form  are  temporary 

adjustments.

Questioner: Now, what connection does it [that which 
has  name  and  form]  have  with  existence  (asti),  illusion 
(bhranti), and material pleasures (preya)?

Dadashri:  It  [that  which  has  a  name  and  form] 
definitely has an existence. And [because of illusion], it has 
connections only with material pleasures (preya). It does not 
have  a  connection  with  that  which  is  spiritually  beneficial 
(shreya).  They  [the  name  and  the  form]  take  one  towards 
material  pleasures  and  in  order  to  go  towards  that  which 
is  spiritually  beneficial,  Real  spiritual  effort  to  progress  as 
the  Self  (Purusharth)  must  be  done.  These  naturally  take 
one towards material pleasures; the name and the form. The 
form  is  a  kind  of  thing  that  attracts  a  person.  The  form  is 
such  that  it  can  even  cause  a  true  brahmachari  (a  person 
practicing celibacy through the mind, speech and body; One 
who is prevailing as the Self) to become attracted.

Who Is Beautiful, the ‘I’ or the Parmanu?

Questioner:  Once  there  was  a  discussion  that  in 
worldly  interaction,  that  which  takes  on  a  form  inevitably 
acquires a name.

[2] The Properties of Pudgal Parmanu

207

Dadashri: That  is  actually  for  those  embodied  living 
beings  who  have  not  yet  been  named  (avyavahaar  rashi); 
when  they  enter  into  worldly  nomenclature  (vyavahaar 
rashi),  a  name  is  given  to  them.  It  is  considered  worldly 
interaction when it [the embodied living being] has a name.

Questioner: Does that mean it acquires a form first?

Dadashri:  Every  living  being  certainly  has  a  form. 
The  absolutely  liberated  Souls  (Siddha)  have  Swaroop-roop 
(a form which is the Real form as the Self; the Real form as 
absolute Knowledge). The Real form is the fundamental form, 
and everywhere else, there is the bhrant swaroop (the illusory 
form). Therefore, ‘I’ am separate from the name and the form. 
This paudgalik swaroop (form as the non-Self complex) that 
has ended up becoming mine, ‘I’ am separate from that. That 
form (roop) is really the form as the non-Self complex.

Questioner:  The  paudgalik  swaroop  has  also  been 

referred to as form (roop)?

Dadashri:  There  is  roop  and  there  is  swaroop  (the 

Real form). Swaroop is also considered roop.

Questioner: But One’s own form is actually the Real 

form as the Self (Swa-swaroop), isn’t it?

Dadashri: And this form as the non-Self (par-swaroop), 

which one believes to be his own, is also considered roop.

Questioner: But this actually has form, doesn’t it? The 
form  as  the  non-Self  is  considered  to  have  form,  whereas 
This [Swa-swaroop] is considered formless.

Dadashri:  Yes,  but  it  is  because  the  developing  I 
believes, ‘I am that form,’ that is why it is known as swaroop 
(one’s own form).

Questioner:  But  that  is  the  form  as  the  illusory  self 

(bhrant swaroop)?

208

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri: Yes.

Questioner:  Form  (roop)  also  causes  confusion  and 

so does knowledge (gnan), doesn’t it?

Dadashri:  ‘Knowledge’  (Gnan)  does  not  cause 
confusion,  ignorance  of  the  Self  (agnan)  causes  confusion. 
Ignorance  arises  because  of  form.  That  is  why  it  causes 
confusion.  ‘Knowledge’  is  actually  considered  illumination 
(prakash), and illumination does not cause confusion.

Questioner: The name causes confusion, doesn’t it?

Dadashri:  The  name?  It  is  due  to  that,  that  all  the 
wrong  beliefs  actually  start  arising;  that  is  the  fundamental 
primary  cause.  ‘One’  has  lost  One’s  own  Real  form  as  the 
Self  and  has  become  the  one  with  a  name;  that  is  the  root 
cause.

The  eternal  element  with  form  has  become  such  that 
it changes the belief of the self. Then one will claim, “I am 
handsome.  I  am  fair-complexioned.” What  would  one  say? 
Hey mortal one, if you keep claiming, “I am this, I am this,” 
with reference to parmanu, when will there ever be an end 
to this? So people are confused in this way. No male ascetic 
nor any female ascetic can ever become free from this, nor 
can a monk or a nun become free from this. As long as the 
original element is not Known, what can be done?

The  Self  is  not  fair-complexioned,  nor  is  It  dark-
complexioned, nor is It yellow or red or green, It is none of 
these  things...these  are  all  properties  of  the  eternal  element 
with  form.  If  a  person  appears  very  fair  in  complexion  and 
handsome, that is the eternal element with form, the Self has 
nothing to do with this at all. However many forms and colors 
there are, they are all properties of the non-Self (anatma).

Questioner:  One  has  to  understand  that  the  one  with 

form is pudgal and the formless One is the Self.

[2] The Properties of Pudgal Parmanu

209

Dadashri: The Self is indeed formless and the Pudgal 
has  form.  So  ‘I’  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  Pudgal.  So 
then no confusion remains, does it! No matter how beautiful 
anything is, even the most beautiful rose flowers, no matter 
how beautiful they are, what do You have to do with them? 
Those are all properties of the Pudgal. And the Pudgal has 
form  and  the  Self  is  formless;  it  is  because  of  the  coming 
together of the two that this has been created, a third identity 
with completely new properties (visheshbhaav) has arisen!

Pudgal means that which has been filled in [charged] 
and  that  which  then  empties  out  [discharges].  That  which 
has  emptied  out,  gets  filled;  that  which  has  been  filled  in, 
empties  out.  Everything  that  is  visible  in  the  world  is  all 
pudgal and how beautiful it appears! It actually does appear 
beautiful, doesn’t it?

Questioner: Yes, it does.

Dadashri: That  is  indeed  why  the  world  has  become 

trapped in it.

Questioner:  It  appears  to  be  both;  it  appears  to  be 

ugly and it also appears to be beautiful.

Dadashri: Actually that is itself contextual [relative]. 
As  there  is  something  beautiful,  there  will  be  something 
ugly;  as  there  is  something  ugly,  there  will  be  something 
beautiful.  If  one  was  not  ugly,  then  another  would  not 
be  considered  beautiful.  So,  this  point  is  contextual.  This 
pudgal  actually  has  many  properties,  but  it  does  not  have 
the property of Knowing. It cannot Know, nor does it have 
feelings, nor does it experience anything. Everything that is 
visible is all a property of the pudgal; whatever is visible in 
the world, all of that. Even the pupils of the eye are [made 
up  of]  pudgal. There  are  all  sorts  of  beautiful  pupils,  some 
have pupils like those of a cat, some have black ones, there 
are so many kinds of pupils!

210

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

There  are  many  varieties  of  form. All  the  forms  that 
exist, they are all a property of the pudgal. No matter how 
beautiful  the  eyes  may  appear,  that  too  is  a  property  of  the 
pudgal.

The eye is primarily made up of luminous parmanu.

No matter what kind of body one possesses, no matter 
how  attractive  one  appears,  even  then  it  is  temporary.  The 
Self does not have an attractive appearance (laavanya), the 
Self is actually of an entirely different sort.

Inanimate Matter Has Form, the Self Is Formless

On  what  basis  has  the  Self  been  referred  to  as  being 
formless (aroopi)? It is because inanimate matter has form, 
that is why the Self is formless, otherwise It has nothing to 
do  with  form.  The  Self  which  resides  in  Siddha  gati  (the 
realm of the absolutely liberated Souls) is neither formless, 
nor does It have form; It is not any of these things. ‘It’ does 
not have any of these properties. It is actually on the basis of 
the Pudgal that It can be recognized. That is why It has to be 
referred to as formless. ‘It’ has nothing to do with that. This 
is  only  mentioned  for  the  purpose  of  contemplation,  and  It 
is not merely formless.

Questioner:  The  properties  of  the  Self  and  the 

functions of those properties are different, aren’t they?

Dadashri:  [To  be]  Invisible  (amurt)  and  formless 
(aroopi)  are  not  properties.  The  properties  of  the  Self 
are  actually  infinite  Knowledge,  infinite  Vision,  infinite 
energy,  infinite  bliss,  to  not  hurt  nor  be  hurt  (avyabaadh). 
Everything  else  is  actually  considered  analysis.  Based  on 
that, the scripture writers have said that if you worship It as 
being  formless,  then  it  will  also  apply  to  the  other  [eternal 
elements].  If  you  worship  It  as  being  invisible,  then  it  will 
also apply to the other [eternal elements]. This Pudgal alone 

[2] The Properties of Pudgal Parmanu

211

is visible (murt), all the other [eternal elements] are invisible. 
All  [the  eternal  elements]  are  indeed  free  from  association 
(asang).  The  property  of  nirlep  (to  be  unaffected  by  any 
intents that tend to anoint) applies to the Self; despite being 
so close together, no coating [of charged parmanu] adheres 
to  It  whatsoever.  Nor  does  that  adhere  to  any  of  the  other 
five  [eternal  elements],  hence  they  are  all  nirlep.  That  is 
certainly why we refer to them as tankotkirna (immiscible); 
nothing  touches  them,  nothing  adheres  to  them,  not  even 
if  they  come  close  together.  Then  there  is  the  property  of 
avichal (fixed; steady); the Pudgal alone is chanchal (active; 
unsteady), all the others are avichal. All the eternal elements 
are  indestructible  (avinashi). This  is  not  in  reference  to  the 
Self  alone.  Therefore,  by  worshipping  these  [properties],  it 
does  not  reach  the  original  element  [of  the  Self].  On  the 
basis  of  these  two  eternal  elements,  we  should  understand 
that  the  Pudgal  is  entirely  visible,  and  ‘I’  am  invisible. 
However,  in  reality,  the  Self  that  resides  in  Siddha  gati  is 
neither visible nor is It invisible. Over there, the Self is the 
Self. This  is  actually  the  theory  of  relativity,  that  is  why  it 
has  been  necessary  to  say  this. As  the  Pudgal  is  visible,  if 
we  refer  to  This  [the  Self]  as  being  invisible,  then  It  can 
be  recognized.  How  else  would  It  be  recognizable?  If  the 
Pudgal  were  not  visible,  then  what  need  would  there  be  to 
refer to the Self as invisible?

Even the Six Types of Taste Are Pudgal!

There  are  six  types  of  taste:  bitter,  sweet,  pungent, 
salty, astringent, and sour. They are properties of inanimate 
matter.  There  are  all  kinds  of  tastes  in  the  world,  but  each 
and  every  taste  is  paudgalik.  These  are  properties  of  the 
Pudgal.

This  mango  tastes  sweet.  The  reason  why  this  part 
turned out to be sweet and that part turned out to be sour is 
also a property of inanimate matter; the bhaav (preference or 

212

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

attachment) [for a specific taste] is of the self. If You [as the 
Self] neutralize the bhaav (interest; attachment) with abhaav 
(no interest; equanimity), then there is no problem if you eat 
it. Consequently, it is the pudgal that eats the pudgal. Should 
You  not  neutralize  the  preference?  Otherwise,  according  to 
‘our’ new system, You should say, “The eater eats, and I, the 
‘non-eater’,  am  the  Knower  of  this.”  So  that  initial  bhaav 
[interest] has gone entirely, hasn’t it!

Tactility, a Property of the Pudgal

The  Pudgal  Parmanu  simply  keep  on  undergoing 
change  (parivartan),  only  the  temporary  states  (avastha) 
keep on changing. They are the very same Pudgal Parmanu 
and  they  have  intrinsic  properties  with  a  specific  function 
(gunadharma)  and  they  have  temporary  states.  What  are 
those  temporary  states  like?  One  moment  it  may  appear  to 
be yellow, in another moment it may appear to be red, in yet 
another moment it may appear to be white, in one moment it 
may be like this, in another moment it may be like that; they 
simply  keep  on  changing.  Moreover,  the  Pudgal  Parmanu 
have  the  property  of  tactility  (sparsh),  which  is  of  eight 
types: light, heavy, smooth, rough, hot, cold, sticky, dry. [In 
one  moment,  that  which  is]  Rough  becomes  smooth.  One 
moment  it  may  become  like  this,  it  may  become  coarse,  it 
may  become  hot,  in  another  moment,  it  may  become  cool; 
these are all the properties of tactility. Therefore, it is because 
of all of these properties that all of this, the world has arisen.

If  one’s  hand  feels  hot  to  touch,  then  he  will  say, 
“Oh,  I  seem  to  have  a  fever!”  ‘Hey  mortal  one,  what  is  it 
to You  [the  Self]?’  This  is  simply  the  property  of  tactility; 
the  Self  does  not  have  any  such  property  of  becoming  hot 
like this at all. This is very important to understand. Yet one 
claims,  “I  have  a  fever,  my  body  is  feeling  hot  to  touch.” 
Now,  mind  you,  the  Self  does  not  even  have  the  property 
or  the  inherent  nature  of  having  a  fever.  Fever  is  actually 

[2] The Properties of Pudgal Parmanu

213

the inherent nature of the pudgal, instead one takes it to be 
his  own  form,  by  claiming,  “I  have  a  fever.”  So  then,  it  is 
inevitable  that  an  entanglement  will  arise.  Then,  once  one 
says this, a psychological effect arises. Moreover, it is not a 
true  effect,  but  a  psychological  effect  definitely  arises. The 
entire world is nothing but a psychological effect. It is really 
nothing else but a very powerful psychological effect.

Questioner:  This  has  turned  out  to  be  something 

completely different from what was in my understanding.

Dadashri:  The  property  of  tactility  does  not  exist 
in  the  Self,  whereas  the  property  of  tactility  exists  in  the 
non-Self. It [an object; the parmanu] may feel cold, it may 
become  hot,  then  it  may  become  sticky,  it  may  feel  rough; 
all  of  these  are  not  the  properties  of  the  Self,  they  are  the 
intrinsic functional properties (gunadharma) of the pudgal.

Moreover,  the  tactility  keeps  on  changing  constantly. 
Sometimes, it becomes a heavy load, sometimes it becomes 
a light load. It all keeps on changing. The Self has no ‘load’ 
[weight]  of  any  kind.  If  we  were  to  weigh  [the  body]  with 
the  Self  and  then  if  someone  were  to  say,  “Weigh  it  [my 
body]  after  removing  the  Self,”  then  both  weights  would 
indeed  be  the  same.  The  Self  does  not  have  a  ‘load’.  The 
changes  keep  on  happening  later  on  [in  the  body  after  the 
Self leaves].

The Law Pertaining to the Tactility of the Pudgal…

The  body  is  made  up  of  parmanu.  In  spite  of  having 
attained this Gnan, it becomes red hot within. It becomes red 
hot due to its own inherent nature. Every single thing has its 
own inherent nature; it has its own intrinsic properties with 
a specific function.

Whatever bhaav (intent) one had done in the past life, 
the  parmanu  [colored;  coated]  with  that  intent  lie  within. 

214

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

If  one  had  had  an  angry  (ugra)  intent  in  the  past  life,  then 
there  are  parmanu  coated  with  that  [angry]  intent  within. 
Those  hot  parmanu  lie  within,  so  when  the  circumstances 
come together, when the scientific circumstantial evidences 
come  together,  they  come  into  effect  and  when  the  self 
becomes engrossed (tanmayakaar) in them, it is considered 
as  krodh  (anger  with  a  violent  intent).  If  the  Self  does  not 
become engrossed in it, then it is not considered as krodh, it 
is considered as ugrata (discharging anger). So, none of our 
mahatmas  become  engrossed  because  the  Self  has  become 
separate.

Questioner:  What  is  the  scientific  understanding 

behind the parmanu of anger, pride, deceit, and greed?

Dadashri: In this body, one has brought forth not only 
hot parmanu but also cold parmanu. Moreover, one has also 
brought  forth  parmanu  that  attract  as  well  as  parmanu  that 
repel. Greed arises through the parmanu that attract. Hence, 
this entire world is made up of all kinds of parmanu.

Therefore, when anger (krodh) is about to arise, at that 
time, there is a machine within called the krodhak (that which 
causes one to become angry) which starts up. It causes one 
to become angry. At that time, all the parmanu colored with 
anger become red hot; it feels as though the machinery has 
heated up. We would feel as though this machine has heated 
up. At  that  time,  if  the  check  nut  is  tightened,  it  does  not 
work.  In  cases  where  a  police  inspector  is  reprimanding  a 
person, even then the anger still rages on within that person. 
When  he  is  being  reprimanded,  the  anger  may  stop  on  the 
outside, but it certainly rages on within.

All  of  this  is  made  up  of  parmanu.  Anger,  pride, 
deceit,  and  greed  and  their  effects  keep  on  arising.  The 
mind  is  ‘effective’  [in  the  form  of  an  effect],  the  speech  is 
‘effective’, and the body is ‘effective’. And in the midst of 

[2] The Properties of Pudgal Parmanu

215

that, because the [worldly-interacting] self does not have the 
awareness  of  its  own  Real  form  as  the  Self,  it  feels,  ‘This 
effect  is  indeed  happening  to  me.’ All  these  people  believe 
that  and  consequently  dwell  in  that.  The  parmanu  are 
simply dwelling in their properties. In the midst of this, the 
developing  I  feels,  ‘This  has  latched  onto  me.’  Therefore, 
it  is  only  after You  become  the  pure  Soul  that You  realize, 
‘Actually,  these  are  all  things  that  are  not  of  the  Self,  they 
are happening outside [the realm of the Self].’

Questioner:  The  biggest  thing  of  all  is  that  the 
developing  I  does  not  have  the  understanding  pertaining  to 
the law of tactility of the pudgal.

Dadashri: At present, no one else in this world is able 
to understand that, however, ‘we’ know the law pertaining to 
the tactility of the pudgal. Who is going to be able to drop 
how many bombs? The one firing simply believes that once 
I fire the bullet, it is done. He fired the bullet, but how would 
the  poor  fellow  know  the  law  of  whether  or  not  the  bullet 
will make contact? And what control does he have over that 
anyway? The authority is that of vyavasthit. There is nobody 
[no such existence out there] who has the authority.

Smell Is a Property; a Pleasant or an Unpleasant 
Odor Is a Phase

Questioner: There is fragrance within a rose; can that 

be considered the Self?

Dadashri:  No. All  pleasant  and  unpleasant  odors  are 
properties of inanimate matter, and there is no such property 
in the Self.

Questioner:  There  are  the  properties  of  the  subtle 
body:  words,  form,  taste,  smell,  and  tactility.  These  have 
been  referred  to  as  the  five  forms  of  one  of  the  primary 
elements, haven’t they?

216

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri: They are actually in the gross body.

Questioner:  My  experience  is  that  when  upsham 
samkit (state in which the right belief that ‘I am pure Soul’ 
remains  for  a  very  short  time)  happens,  a  fragrance  arises 
from within.

Dadashri: But what is the benefit of such fragrance? 
Fragrance  is  [a  property]  of  the  pudgal.  Samkit  (the  right 
belief that ‘I am pure Soul’) is of the Self.

Questioner: Then what is that [fragrance] a sign of?

Dadashri:  All  of  that  will  happen.  And  as  far  as 
fragrance  is  concerned,  when  one  attains  Self-realization, 
He certainly becomes filled with fragrance. For many, after 
attaining our Gnan, fragrance pervades their entire vicinity. 
The  fragrance  spreads  everywhere.  That  is  a  different 
matter;  that  is  something  that  concerns  the  pudgal.  That  is 
the aura of the power and influence (prataap) of the Gnan. 
Nonetheless, it has nothing to do with the Self. There is no 
property of fragrance in the Self at all, but all of that arises 
as a result of Its power and influence.

On the contrary, of all these properties that are in the 
pudgal, not a single property is in the Self. Be it a pleasant 
odor or an unpleasant odor or any of that. If a pleasant odor 
is  detected,  then  there  will  be  an  unpleasant  odor  waiting 
at  the  other  end.  Yes,  so  do  not  apply  Your  awareness  to 
pleasant odors, otherwise Your awareness will become stuck 
on unpleasant odors. So, apply Your awareness on the Self. 
Pleasant  and  unpleasant  speech,  objects  that  are  pleasing 
and unpleasing to the eyes, pleasant and unpleasant tastes of 
the tongue; these are all properties of the pudgal.

After  attaining  Self-realization,  there  is  no  such 
property  of  the  Self  like  a  pleasant  odor  or  an  unpleasant 
odor.  The  Self  is  the  abode  of  infinite  properties. As  these 
properties begin to manifest, bliss arises.

[2] The Properties of Pudgal Parmanu

217

A  pleasant  odor  that  emanates  is  not  a  property,  it  is 
a  phase  (paryay)  of  the  pudgal. The  pudgal  in  which  there 
is a pleasant odor also has an unpleasant odor lying within. 
In every pudgal of the world, both pleasant and unpleasant 
odors  lie  within.  When  a  pleasant  odor  emanates,  an 
unpleasant  odor  lies  dormant  within.  Oil  turns  rancid  after 
two  months,  then  it  gives  off  such  an  unpleasant  odor  that 
one would not like the smell of it at all.

Milk that has been delivered at nine o’clock, does not 
spoil at nine o’clock, but it begins to spoil from that moment 
onwards. It is dependent on the passage of time. As the time 
changes, it begins to change of its own accord, and it spoils 
due to the internal circumstances only.

Someone may ask me, “Are you smelling this flower?” 
[Then,  I  would  respond,]  “‘We’  are  in  ‘our’  Gnan,  and  the 
pudgal is smelling the pudgal.”

Words Are a Phase of the Pudgal

The  Parmanu  have  four  types  of  properties:  form, 
taste,  smell,  and  tactility.  Words  are  not  a  property  of  the 
Parmanu.  It  is  only  when  the  Parmanu  collide  with  each 
other  that  words  are  produced;  they  are  not  a  permanent 
property of the Parmanu. What happens when you squeeze 
[the rubber ball on] a horn?

Questioner: It produces a sound.

Dadashri: Now, why does a sound get produced when 
you squeeze the rubber ball? This is something you should 
think about; there are Parmanu in the space inside the rubber 
ball of the horn; because wherever there is space, there are 
Parmanu. Now, when you squeeze it like this, the Parmanu 
are  pushed  out,  and  they  are  pushed  out  with  a  force.  As 
they are pushed out, there is friction, so a sound is produced. 
That is all; this is not a property of the Parmanu.

218

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

The  Atma  means  Chetan  (the  Self),  Parmatma  (the 
absolute  Self).  It  is  not  possible  to  replicate  even  a  single 
property of It. Those which can be replicated are properties 
of  the  pudgal.  Speech  is  a  taped  record.  Thoughts  are  a 
discharge. That which discharges is pudgal.

Questioner: For many years, twenty-four seven, I have 

been hearing the sound of crickets chirping; what is that?

Dadashri:  There  are  all  kinds  of  sounds  (naad), 
[even]  the  anaahad  naad  (the  silent  sound  of  the  universe 
that  is  thought  to  transcend  space  and  time),  they  are  all 
pudgal, they fall in the division of the non-Self. When one 
gets  an  illness,  they  stop.  Only  the  ‘string’  of  the  Self  is 
such that it can come into one’s hands. The ‘string’ of other 
things cannot come into one’s hands. They may give peace 
of mind, but one cannot attain Self-realization through them.

The World Means the Changing States of the 
Pudgal...

Questioner: They do say that the world is destructible 

(vinashi).

Dadashri:  No,  no,  the  world  cannot  be  destructible, 

can it! The world is eternal, it is everlasting.

Questioner: 

Isn’t  everything  besides 

the  Self 

considered to be destructible?

Dadashri: That  which  is  destructible  are  actually  the 
temporary states (avastha) that have arisen. This fan that has 
been built is destructible, but fundamentally, in the form of 
the  eternal  element  it  is  made  of,  it  cannot  be  destructible, 
can it!

Questioner:  Can  only  the  fundamental  element  be 
considered as the world? Its original element and its original 
state, are these considered to be the world?

[2] The Properties of Pudgal Parmanu

219

Dadashri:  No.  Take,  for  example,  iron.  Iron  will 
continue to disintegrate and end up as the original Parmanu. 
All  of  this  has  formed  from  Parmanu  alone.  All  of  these 
things have been formed from Parmanu. All objects that have 
formed from Parmanu are destructible, whereas the Parmanu 
[themselves]  are  not  destructible.  Not  a  single  Parmanu 
decreases or increases in this world. Even if you were to set 
It on fire or cut It, not a single Atma decreases or increases.

Questioner:  The  taste,  form,  smell  that  are  in  the 
Parmanu,  are  they  in  the  form  of  a  seed,  or  do  they  reside 
as sanskaar (karmic impressions)?

Dadashri:  They  are  not  in  the  form  of  a  seed,  there 
cannot  be  any  seeds  in  this,  can  there?  There  are  various 
temporary  states  of  the  Parmanu  [that  tend  to  arise]  under 
certain circumstances. When other Parmanu come together, 
it  gives  rise  to  a  certain  temporary  state,  when  other  new 
ones come together, it gives rise to another temporary state 
of this kind; all the temporary states keep on changing. From 
the  very  same  milk,  we  can  make  buttermilk,  and  then  use 
that to make a yoghurt soup, and from the very same milk, 
we can make a milky rice pudding. The base material is the 
same, but different forms tend to arise due to different things 
coming together.

Questioner: Is there any involvement of the power of 

sanskaar in this?

Dadashri: All this has certainly arisen because of the 
power  of  sanskaar,  hasn’t  it!  Otherwise,  the  pudgal  would 
have  been  playing  about  on  its  own.  However,  this  blood 
that oozes forth, the bones, the flesh, the pus that forms, is 
because of the power of sanskaar [vibhaav in this context]. 
Otherwise,  how  would  blood  ooze  out  of  the  pudgal? 
However, there is the power of sanskaar in it, meaning that 
the Self became involved in it.

220

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

To  the  eyes,  a  woman  may  appear  to  be  dark-
complexioned, or she appears in a different way, she appears 
short,  she  appears  a  certain  way.  How  beautiful  someone 
appears to be is all a property of the Parmanu. There is so 
much  energy,  and  yet  nothing  of  the  Self  gets  used  in  this. 
The  Self  has  never  gotten  wrung  out  after  being  washed. 
Had  the  Self  been  wrung  out  after  being  washed,  then  It 
would have been used up to a certain extent. However, the 
Self has not been used.

The Difference Between the Effects of the Pudgal 
and the Effects of the Parmanu...

Questioner: It is written here, “I am telling you once 
again, so listen. The intents that arise in the antahkaran (the 
mind-intellect-chit-ego  complex),  such  as  attachment  and 
abhorrence,  pleasure  and  pain,  are  of  the  non-Self.  Taste, 
smell,  and  so  on,  charging  karma  (bhaavkarma),  subtle 
discharging  karma  (dravyakarma),  and  gross  discharging 
karma  (nokarma)  are  effects  of 
the  pudgal  (pudgal 
parinaam).” What are all these effects of?

Dadashri:  These  are  all  effects  of  the  pudgal. 
Attachment and abhorrence are effects of the pudgal, pleasure 
and pain are also effects of the pudgal. Then tactility is also 
an effect of the pudgal, taste is also an effect, smell is also 
an effect of the pudgal, then charge karma, subtle discharge 
karma,  gross  discharge  karma  are  all  effects  of  the  pudgal. 
These are all effects of the pudgal, that is what the above is 
conveying.

Everything that is visible to the eyes, heard through the 
ears, all of that is gross discharging karma. It is all an effect 
of the pudgal, there is no effect of the Self in this. None of 
that is an effect of the Self, that is what it is conveying.

Questioner:  Form,  taste,  smell,  tactility;  these  are 

actually properties of the Parmanu, aren’t they?

[2] The Properties of Pudgal Parmanu

221

Dadashri:  That  is  all  considered  to  be  the  effects  of 

the pudgal.

Questioner:  Actually, 

the  original 
Parmanu, the Parmanu that are in the elemental form, these 
are said to be their permanent properties: form, taste, smell, 
and tactility.

terms  of 

in 

Dadashri: Yes, but all of that is considered to be the 
pudgal itself and they are considered its effects. Right now, a 
person may appear to be red, then blue, then he may appear 
to have become yellow. Within no time, all of these effects 
may change, so these are effects of the pudgal.

Questioner:  But  the  properties  do  not  change,  do 

they, Dada?

Dadashri:  Yes,  so  the  properties  are  verily  of  the 
Pudgal  Parmanu,  but  these  are  considered  to  be  effects  of 
the pudgal. These are not the effects of the Self.

Everything else is just unnecessary botheration. Once 
the  two  divisions  [inanimate  matter  and  the  Self]  become 
separate,  a  conclusion  comes  about.  This  is  the  very  thing 
‘we’  strive  to  explain  each  day  to  those  who  have  taken 
Gnan. And to those who have not taken Gnan, ‘we’ explain 
this point from the very beginning.

Likewise,  the  phases  of  the  pudgal  and  the  phases 
of  the  Pudgal  Parmanu  are  of  a  different  kind. The  phases 
of  the  pudgal  keep  on  changing;  red,  yellow,  green,  all  the 
colors  keep  on  changing;  smoothness,  warmth,  everything 
[all that which is experienced through the five sense organs] 
keeps changing. All those phases keep on changing.

The Attributes of the Prakruti, the Inherent Nature 
of the Prakruti…

The  Pudgal  has  four  properties:  tactility,  form,  taste 

222

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

and  smell;  they  [the  phases]  keep  changing. Words  are  not 
a property; they are a phase. The form has lustre and all the 
forms are natural. Whatever properties the Pudgal has, they 
are inherently natural properties. They are intrinsic properties 
(anvay  guna);  they  are  not  vyatirek  guna  (completely  new 
properties of a third component that arises when the eternal 
elements  of  the  Self  and  inanimate  matter  come  together). 
Whereas  these  others  [anger,  pride,  deceit,  and  greed] 
are  actually  vyatirek  guna.  However,  words  are  not  even 
vyatirek guna, they are phases. So, they only arise if we end 
up ‘squeezing’ [the horn] based on the circumstances.

Questioner:  Words,  taste,  tactility,  form,  and  smell; 

these five are the properties of which object?

Dadashri:  [Hearing]  Words  is  a  property  of  the  ear, 
taste is of the tongue, tactility is of the skin, form is of the 
eyes, and smell is of the nose.

Questioner: So are the mind, intellect, chit, ego all an 

effect of the pudgal?

Dadashri: Everything is indeed of the pudgal.

Questioner: And anger, pride, deceit, and greed?

Dadashri:  They  are  all  [an  effect  of  the  vibhaavik] 
pudgal,  but  they  are  not  properties  of  the  [swabhaavik] 
Pudgal.  They  can  only  arise  in  the  presence  of  the  Self, 
otherwise they would not arise.

Questioner:  If  they  are  not  the  properties  of  the 
pudgal,  then  are  the  pudgal  and  the  prakruti  one  and  the 
same?

Dadashri: They are one and the same, there is actually 

no difference between them.

Questioner:  But  the  prakruti  does  have  attributes, 

doesn’t it?

[2] The Properties of Pudgal Parmanu

223

Dadashri:  It  does  have  attributes,  but  what  kind  of 
attributes? They are all destructible. They are all unstable; it 
does not take long for them to change.

Questioner: This prakruti can make a mess of things. 

The prakruti can sabotage everything.

Dadashri: It can become unstable all of a sudden, there 
is no stability with regards to the attributes of the prakruti! 
So, we can list out all of the attributes of the prakruti today, 
but by the next morning, it will show entirely new types of 
attributes.  It  is  very  inconsistent,  whereas  the  properties  of 
the Self are permanent. The properties of the Self that have 
been established, they all remain eternally.

And  there  are  many  kinds  of  attributes  of  the  prakruti 
in  this  world.  One  may  be  honest,  forgiving,  having  a  high 
moral conduct; one may have acquired many different types of 
attributes. People may say, “This is a man worthy of reverence,” 
but it does not take time for those attributes to come to an end. 
These  are  attributes  of  the  pudgal,  of  the  prakruti.  Of  what 
use are all these attributes? They are actually attributes of the 
pudgal, of what use are they [to You, the Self]? Is a ‘chutney’ 
to be made out of them, afterwards? Because, sooner or later, 
the attributes of the pudgal will have to be discarded.

Questioner:  People  try  to  set  the  pudgal  at  a  certain 
state,  and You  have  dismissed  all  of  that  in  the  matter  of  a 
moment.

Dadashri: What ‘we’ are saying is that all these worldly 
attributes  such  as  pity,  peace,  forgiveness,  mercifulness, 
generosity,  and  so  on  and  so  forth...all  those  attributes;  if 
people associate such attributes with you, if they say things 
like, “He is very wise, he has an obliging nature,” then what 
should You [as the Self] do? Should You deposit them in the 
bank? If someone were to tell you, “Give me yours and take 
these,” then should You deposit them in the bank?

224

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Questioner: No.

Dadashri: All of those attributes are destructible, what 
would  You  gain  by  acquiring  them?  On  the  contrary,  the 
Lord  has  gone  as  far  as  to  say,  ‘Do  not  undertake  a  lot  of 
effort in trying to acquire these destructible attributes.’ Upon 
acquiring  all  these  destructible  attributes,  subsequently  if 
delirium  arises,  then  that  very  same  person  will  bite  others, 
and  curse  at  others,  and  throw  stones,  and  speak  however 
he  pleases,  will  he  not!  Where  did  all  those  attributes  go? 
These attributes which exist on the basis of the triguna (the 
three  physiological  qualities  of  the  physical  body:  sattva, 
rajas, and tamas); as long as the vatta, pitta, and kapha (the 
three types of dosha that each prakruti is influenced by, they 
comprise of the five elements of fire, air, water, earth, space 
in  which  one  or  more  elements  dominate;  vatta  -  air  and 
space, pitta - fire, kapha - earth and water) have not increased 
disproportionately,  these  attributes  remain  as  they  are. And 
when all three of them increase disproportionately, delirium 
arises,  and  mania  ensues!  Therefore,  come  into  Your  own 
properties,  the  properties  of  the  Self;  those  are  permanent, 
they can never be destroyed, they do not cause delirium.

They [the attributes of the prakruti] are fine from the 
context  of  worldly  life.  What  the  people  of  the  world  are 
doing is not wrong. This is because those poor people are at 
that stage. They have not moved from that point at all.

Questioner:  But  are  these  attributes  really  needed  in 

order to become eligible for liberation?

Dadashri:  No,  there  is  no  need  for  those  attributes, 
there is a need to be free from the intoxication of the ego and 
doership  (nishkefi).  Of  what  use  are  those  attributes?  They 
are all simply attributes of the prakruti. They are attributes 
of the pudgal, should they be placed on a pedestal? There is 
no need for the attributes of the pudgal whatsoever.

[2] The Properties of Pudgal Parmanu

225

Questioner:  These  attributes  would  indeed  be  in  the 
Self,  wouldn’t  they?  They  cannot  be  those  of  the  prakruti, 
can they?

Dadashri: Anything  that  can  be  experienced  through 
the five sense organs does not contain even a single property 
of the Self.

You  [the  relative  self]  are  dependent  on  the  prakruti, 
and  the  attributes  of  the  prakruti  and  the  properties  of  the 
Self are completely different.

People try to derive the essence from the attributes of 

the pudgal. The essence will never be derived from it.

The very nature of the pudgal is such that everything 
keeps  on  changing.  ‘You’  should  keep  on  Seeing  it. 
Everything that comes, later leaves. When it leaves, another 
thing  comes.  There  is  no  escaping  it.  When  you  let  go  of 
something  that  is  rough,  another  thing  that  is  smooth  will 
come. Then, you will also have to let go of the thing that is 
smooth. And something that is rough comes once again. Its 
inherent  nature  is  that  of  puran-galan  (to  fill  in  and  empty 
out). So, if a ‘friendship’ is bound with that which is smooth, 
then  there  will  be  trouble!  If  you  ‘befriend’  the  other,  then 
that  which  is  smooth  will  not  affect  you,  will  it!  Whom 
should  you  ‘befriend’?  When  you  come  across  something 
that  is  rough,  say,  “Yes,  now  I  like  it.” And  the  other  [that 
which  is  smooth]  is  something  that  you  are  bound  to  like 
anyway.  So,  turn  what  you  don’t  like  into  something  that 
you like. And the Self actually has infinite perspectives, so 
no matter which perspective you change It [the Knowledge] 
to and place It on, it will appear that way to it.

A Phase Is an Effect of the Inherent Nature

There  is  water  inside  every  coconut.  Then  our  [so-
called]  intelligent  people  established,  “Look  here,  look  at 

226

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

how God has filled water in this! How else would water get 
inside  this?”  Their  wisdom  cannot  fathom  that!  How  else 
would  water  be  entering  inside  it?  So  they  think  that  God 
filled  it  in  there.  So  they  begin  to  feel  love  for  God.  They 
don’t even know from where God got the water. Surely He 
must be bringing it from somewhere, from some lake?

Questioner:  The  coconut  trees  grow  by  the  seaside, 
yet  the  water  inside  turns  out  to  be  sweet.  Is  water  being 
filled inside it due to the inherent nature? How exactly is it?

Dadashri:  It  is  indeed  the  inherent  nature  that  is  at 
work in that case. Each thing comes with its inherent nature.

Questioner:  Are  there  so  many  infinite  kinds  of 

inherent nature?

Dadashri: There are as many kinds of inherent nature 

as there are things.

Questioner:  Is  there  any  connection  between  the 

infinite phases and the infinite [kinds of] inherent nature?

Dadashri: What does ‘infinite phases’ mean? They are 
an  effect  of  the  inherent  nature  (swabhaav).  For  something 
to  rise  or  to  fall,  those  are  all  considered  phases. A  visible 
object having a particular nature, what is that like? As it [the 
nature] rises or falls, those are all considered phases.

Questioner:  The  inherent  nature  that  is  visible,  be  it 
rising or falling, increasing or decreasing, undergoing change; 
has that been referred to as a temporary state (avastha)?

Dadashri:  Yes,  the  fact  that  it  [the  inherent  nature] 
becomes less intense or more intense, that is called a phase.

Questioner:  So  depending  upon  what  the  inherent 
nature  is  at  a  particular  time,  that  is  the  temporary  state  of 
the inherent nature; is that what You mean to say?

Dadashri: Yes.

[2] The Properties of Pudgal Parmanu

227

Questioner:  And  that  is  indeed  what  we  can  see, 
isn’t  it? This  formation  of  a  coconut  tree,  the  formation  of 
mango  tree,  a  neem  tree;  all  of  these  can  be  referred  to  as 
the inherent nature of the pudgal, can’t they?

Dadashri: Yes.

Questioner: And it is because there is the presence of 
the  Self  in  it  that  such  an  inherent  nature  arises,  isn’t  that 
so?

Dadashri: It would never happen without the presence 
[of  the  Self],  would  it!  Everything  is  indeed  functioning 
because of Its presence.

Questioner:  The  fact  that  this  pudgal  became  bitter, 
that is the inherent nature of that pudgal. Then for a mango 
to  become  sweet,  to  become  sour,  for  water  to  fill  inside  a 
coconut, all of that is also the inherent nature of that pudgal. 
But that cannot happen without the presence of the Self, so 
then, how does the Self help in that? What is the connection 
between that and the Self?

Dadashri:  The  truth  is,  the  word  ‘pudgal’  is  used  to 
refer to certain things. But otherwise, the inherent nature is 
of the Parmanu, and this can occur without the presence of 
the  Self.  The  pudgal,  however,  has  arisen  only  due  to  the 
presence of the Self. The parmanu that have deviated from 
their  inherent  nature  (vikaari  parmanu)  are  referred  to  as 
pudgal.

Questioner: Now, have those parmanu deviated from 

their inherent nature because of the presence of the Self?

Dadashri:  Yes,  the  deviated  state  of  the  parmanu  is 

called pudgal.

Questioner:  Now,  for  this  to  become  sour,  salty,  all 
the  different  tastes  that  exist,  they  are  the  properties  of  the 

228

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

original  Pudgal,  aren’t  they?  But  only  the  pudgal  that  has 
deviated from its inherent nature can have such properties!

Dadashri:  They  are  definitely  the  properties  of  the 
Parmanu. However, this that is being experienced is of the 
ones that have deviated from their inherent nature.

Questioner:  Meaning  that,  even  those  [Parmanu] 
which have not deviated from their inherent nature definitely 
have these properties too?

Dadashri: Yes.

Questioner:  But  are  there  any  such  Parmanu  in  the 
world  that  have  formed  without  the  presence  of  the  Self? 
The  deviation  from  the  inherent  nature  means  these  ones 
that are sour, salty...

Dadashri:  Even  if  they  have  not  deviated  from  their 

inherent nature, they still exist.

Questioner:  But  these  properties  are  even  present  in 

them too, aren’t they?

Dadashri:  Yes,  properties  such  as  sourness  and 

saltiness are present [in them].

Questioner: The Parmanu that are in the pure form, the 
ones which have not deviated from their inherent nature in any 
way whatsoever; can such pure Parmanu exist in this world, 
or have all the parmanu deviated from their inherent nature?

Dadashri: No, for the most part, they are pure indeed!

Questioner:  Now,  do  those  pure  Parmanu  have  the 

properties of sourness, saltiness?

Dadashri:  They  have  all  of  the  original  properties. 
They have all eight properties of tactility in them. If some of 
them come together, then they become coarse, they change 
in one way or another.

[2] The Properties of Pudgal Parmanu

229

Questioner: So does that happen without the presence 

of the Self?

Dadashri:  Yes,  so  the  ones  that  have  deviated  from 
their  inherent  nature  are  different,  and  the  ones  in  their 
original  nature  (nirvikaari)  are  different.  The  latter  has 
inherently  natural  properties  (swabhaavik  guna).  It  is  from 
these inherently natural properties that these properties that 
have deviated from their inherent nature (vikaari guna) arise.

Questioner: Is it only if the inherently natural ones are 
present that the ones that have deviated from their inherent 
nature  can  arise?  These  properties  that  have  deviated  from 
their inherent nature cannot arise without the presence of the 
Self. So what instrumental role does the presence of the Self 
play in them deviating from their inherent nature?

Dadashri: In the presence of the sun, power gets filled 

in the solar cells, doesn’t it?

Questioner: Yes, solar power.

Dadashri: Does the sun know anything about that?

Questioner: The sun does not know about that.

Dadashri:  It  all  happens  through  its  presence.  The 

illumination itself is at work.

Questioner: Yes, so in the same way, the illumination 
of the Self must also be helping in some way in that, right?

Dadashri:  It  does,  the  illumination  itself  is  at  work. 
Don’t ‘we’ say that the Self, God, does not ‘do’ anything; It 
simply gives illumination to every living being.

Questioner: But to give illumination is one thing, and...

Dadashri: ‘We’ simply say that It gives illumination, 
but  the  truth  is,  the  illumination  emanates,  and  that  [the 
aham; the ‘I’] acquires it, by being in close proximity.

230

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Questioner: I didn’t quite understand that.

Dadashri: Is it as though the sun is generating it [the 

power in the solar cell]?

Questioner:  It  is  illuminating  by  its  inherent  nature. 
The  Parmanu  are  in  their  inherent  nature,  they  exist  in 
the  pure  phase  (vishrasa).  Similarly,  God  is  naturally 
illuminating,  so  then,  who  is  in  the  middle  that  is  making 
them deviate from their inherent nature?

Dadashri:  The  one  who  is  looking  for  moksha.  The 

one who is bound.

Questioner:  So  does  its  Real  form  fall  under  the 
division of the illumination? The one who is bound, whose 
side is he on? Is he on the side of the illumination or on the 
side of these parmanu?

Dadashri: On the side of the parmanu.

Questioner: Is he made up of parmanu?

Dadashri: He is made of parmanu. He is the deviated 

form of the parmanu.

Questioner: Who is that, Dada?

Dadashri:  The  ego  (ahamkaar)  and  the  ‘my-ness’ 

(mamata). The one who is bound is trying to become free.

Questioner:  So  fundamentally,  it  is  simply  the  ego, 

isn’t it?

Dadashri:  He  likes  being  bound.  Despite  going 

through so much misery, he likes being bound.

Questioner: Dada, how does the ego work in making 
a neem tree bitter, in making the coconuts fill up with water? 
For the neem tree to become bitter, how is the ego involved 
in generating the bitterness?

[2] The Properties of Pudgal Parmanu

231

Dadashri: The ego does not do any other work at all; 
it just has the bhaav (inner intent) arise naturally. It has the 
authority to have bhaav. It does not have any other authority.

Questioner: And moreover, it is the very one that says, 

“I am pure Soul.” So does it also become the pure Soul?

Dadashri: Yes, it becomes the pure Soul in that way, 

on the basis of circumstances.

Questioner:  If  it  encounters  someone  who  frees  it, 
then  it  even  becomes  free.  Then,  what  happens  to  those 
parmanu?

Dadashri: They all dissolve; they go back to the way 

they were before.

Questioner: To the pure Parmanu phase (vishrasa)?

Dadashri: To the pure Parmanu phase. Transformation 
back  into  the  pure  phase  is  constantly  going  on;  even 
otherwise they are continuously becoming pure.

The  vibhaavik  pudgal  (the  pudgal  formed  from  the 
parmanu  that  have  deviated  from  their  inherent  nature; 
same  as  vikrut  pudgal,  vibhaavik  parmanu,  vikaari  pudgal 
and vikaari parmanu) is the one that is ‘touching’ the Self. 
For  all  those  who  possess  a  physical  body,  the  two  are 
together.  Whereas  the  temporary  states  of  the  swabhaavik 
Pudgal  (Parmanu  in  its  pure  natural  form)  keep  changing. 
This  body  is  made  up  of  infinite  parmanu,  but  these  are 
vibhaavik  parmanu.  Whereas  all  the  other  Parmanu  are 
in  their  inherent  nature.  To  feel  cold,  to  feel  hot,  to  find 
it  spicy  on  the  tongue,  to  exude  a  fragrant  odor,  to  exude 
a  foul  odor;  these  are  [the  inherently  natural]  properties  of 
the pudgal. Vyavasthit (the result of scientific circumstantial 
evidences)  has  nothing  to  do  with  them  [the  inherently 
natural properties of the pudgal]. [Vyavasthit only gives the 
effect of the causes bound.]

232

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

The Hand Belongs Entirely to the Pudgal!

Questioner:  If  we  let  go  of  sankalp-vikalp  (all  the 
relative ‘I-ness’ and ‘my-ness’ that stem from the belief that 
‘I am Chandubhai’), then will they remain in the next life?

Dadashri:  No.  Whatever  is  let  gone  of  is  gone.  Just 
like  in  the  farm,  after  sowing  cotton  seeds  in  the  field,  the 
farmer  goes  out  to  check,  ‘Has  anything  besides  cotton 
grown  in  the  field?’  Then  what  does  he  do  to  that?  Have 
you ever seen them plucking the weeds out?

Questioner: They uproot them.

Dadashri:  Now,  once  they  have  been  uprooted,  they 
will not appear again, will they! [Similarly,] Once the vikalp 
(the wrong belief that ‘I am Chandubhai’ and all the relative 
‘I-ness’ that stems from it) have been uprooted, they are gone.

Someone may say, “You are very dark-complexioned,” 
but  if  You  have  cleared  off  the  vikalp  relating  to  this,  then 
it will not affect You. However, as long as you yourself call 
other people dark-complexioned, you have placed a value for 
that vikalp. So, you should devalue its importance. When you 
don’t call others dark-complexioned, and if someone says that 
you are dark-complexioned, then it will not affect You; once 
the devaluation has taken place, it gets cleared off. To increase 
or decrease the value of something is in Our hands. By saying, 
“Why did you say I am dark-complexioned?” the value placed 
on it increases. This prevalence as a dark-complexioned, fair-
complexioned,  red,  yellow-complexioned  person;  all  these 
colors  that  exist  are  the  properties  of  inanimate  matter,  and 
one  falsely  attributes  them  onto  one’s  self,  by  saying,  “I  am 
dark-complexioned.”  Hey,  mortal  one,  You  are  not  dark-
complexioned.  Furthermore,  bitter,  sour,  bland,  sweet,  salty, 
pungent, sweet, these are all properties of inanimate matter.

Now,  it  is  because  we  falsely  attribute  the  properties 
of  inanimate  matter  as  our  own  that  these  problems  arise. 

[2] The Properties of Pudgal Parmanu

233

As  we  falsely  attributed  the  properties  of  inanimate  matter 
as our own, the vikalp arose. And because these vikalp arose 
we lost the nirvikalp state (the state free from wrong beliefs 
and  with  the  right  belief  of  ‘I  am  pure  Soul’),  moreover, 
we  have  ended  up  becoming  the  husband  of  a  wife.  One 
will  say,  “I  am  your  husband,  don’t  you  know?” To  which 
the  wife  will  retort,  “I  definitely  know,  I’ve  known  right 
from the very beginning, you’ve become the boss!” Can you 
ever  boss  over  anyone?  Even  the  government  maintains  a 
democracy, so should we also not have a democracy in our 
homes? Should we not maintain a democracy?

Questioner: We should.

Dadashri: But people don’t do that, do they?

Who does the ‘hand’ [synonymous to the playing cards 
held  by  a  player  in  a  game  of  cards]  belong  to?  The  ‘hand’ 
belongs entirely to the Pudgal! The ‘hand’ belongs to the Pudgal 
alone. The inherent nature of the Pudgal is all these properties 
that we can perceive: form, taste, tactility, and smell. Moreover, 
there are so many varieties of form, so many varieties of taste, 
of smell, of tactility; all of those are the ‘hand’ of the Pudgal! 
Yet we believe all those properties to be our own!

The  smallest  microorganisms  are 

living  beings, 
whereas  the  Parmanu  are  inanimate  matter.  And  that  too, 
both  of  them  have  energy.  When  the  atom  was  split,  this 
energy was discovered, wasn’t it! So, even inanimate matter 
has  energy  too,  doesn’t  it!  But  that  is  a  non-living  energy 
(jada shakti), whereas this is a living energy (Chetan shakti; 
the energy of the Self to Know and See); there is this much 
of a difference between the energy of the two.

There is infinite energy in the Self, but there are veils 
over It. That veil is not of this body. The body is faultless; 
but the veil is of the parmanu the body has brought with it. 
It is comparable to pitch darkness.



[3]
Kriyavati Shakti

Kriyavati Shakti; Is It of the Self or of Inanimate 
Matter?

Questioner:  Of  the  six  eternal  elements,  be  it  the 
inanimate matter (jada) or the Self (Chetan), be it the Pudgal 
(Parmanu in their natural pure form) or the Self, they both 
have  kriyavati  shakti  (the  unique  energy  or  property  to  be 
inherently  active),  which  the  other  eternal  elements  do  not 
have. So, what kind of energy is that?

Dadashri: It’s like this, each eternal element actually 

has its own individual [unique] inherent energy [property]!

Questioner:  That  is  correct;  but  it  has  been  written 
that,  ‘It  is  only  the  Pudgal  and  the  Self  that  have  the 
kriyavati shakti, and the other four [eternal elements] do not 
have this.’

Dadashri:  No,  the  kriyavati  shakti  is  in  the  Pudgal 
alone, not in both; it is not in the Self. The Pudgal alone is 
sakriya (continuously in some kind of activity). None of the 
others are kriyavaan (to be inherently active; to be ‘effective’ 
such that it takes on the effect and gives result) at all.

Questioner:  How  does  it  do  that?  I  wanted  to 

understand that.

[3] Kriyavati Shakti

235

Dadashri:  Kriyavaan,  that  indeed  is  the  inherent 
nature of Pudgal. If there is snow falling over here, you may 
see  different  shapes  taking  form.  In  some  places,  you  may 
see a shape in the form of Lord Mahavir’s idol, you may see 
a  different  shape  elsewhere.  In  some  cases,  it  may  appear 
like an animal. Doesn’t the falling snow form shapes? Does 
that not happen?

Questioner: Yes, it does.

Dadashri:  Hence,  the  inherent  nature  of  the  Pudgal 
is such that it takes on a form. That actually is the inherent 
nature of the Pudgal. It undergoes puran (influx or coming 
together) and that very same then undergoes galan (outflux 
or  dissipation).  The  moment  the  self  has  a  bhaav,  that 
entire activity [of charging/influx] occurs immediately. This 
is  because  it  [the  Pudgal]  is  the  one  who  possesses  the 
kriyakaari shakti (the energy to procure results on its own). 
The moment the bhaav of the self is seen to arise, vibrations 
arise  and  everything  becomes  kriyavaan  (‘effective’  such 
that it takes on the effect and gives result).

Questioner: So, it will become kriyavaan only if the 
bhaav of the self arises, right? Otherwise it will not become 
kriyavaan, will it?

Dadashri: No, even otherwise, the inherent nature of 
the  Pudgal  is  to  be  kriyavaan;  however,  it  is  not  like  the 
changes that happen in the bones and the flesh.

Questioner:  Does  that  mean  that  there  is  dormant 
energy  lying  within  the  Pudgal,  but  that  energy  is  then 
awakened by the self?

Dadashri:  It  is  not  dormant,  that  energy  exists 
permanently. That energy is openly manifested in the Pudgal. 
No one needs to activate it whatsoever!

When snow falls over here, does it not create all kinds 

236

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

of  shapes  and  figures? Various  kinds  of  shapes  and  figures 
tend to form, do they not? That is an amassing of the energy 
of  Pudgal.  That  is  the  energy  at  work  when  puran  (influx 
or charging) takes place and at the time of galan (outflux or 
discharging), that energy is also at work. None of the others 
have such a kriyavaan shakti. It is the Pudgal alone that has 
this  kriyavaan  shakti,  and  it  is  verily  due  to  this,  that  the 
world  has  come  into  existence.  If  the  kriyavaan  shakti  of 
the Pudgal were to not exist, then the world would not have 
come  into  existence.  Each  [Pudgal]  has  its  own  individual 
energy  or  property. That  is  the  basis  for  this  world  coming 
into  existence,  otherwise  this  world  would  definitely  not 
come into being!

Just  like,  when  a  photographer  has  a  desire  to  take  a 
photograph of something. Then, after taking the photograph, 
he sees, ‘How do the eyes and all that appear in the photo?’ 
All of that is the energy of the Pudgal.

What would you like to ask?

Questioner:  It  has  been  said  that  both,  the  eternal 
element of inanimate matter (Pudgal) and the eternal element 
of the Self, have kriyavati shakti.

Dadashri: No, the Self is absolutely akriya (in the state 
as a non-doer; in the state as the Knower-Seer). It is actually 
due to illusion (bhranti) that people consider the Self to be 
a  doer.  It  is  only  one  [eternal  element]  that  is  kriyavaan, 
this Pudgal alone. If the Self were to be kriyavaan, then It 
would be deemed a doer. The one that carries out the kriya 
(activity)  would  be  deemed  the  doer;  and  there  is  bondage 
for the one who becomes the doer.

Questioner: But aren’t they saying that It [the Self] is 

actually the doer of Its own inherent nature?

Dadashri:  In  fact,  each  eternal  element  (dravya)  is 

[3] Kriyavati Shakti

237

the  ‘doer’  of  its  own  inherent  nature;  however,  this Pudgal 
is  the  doer  in  every  way,  with  regards  to  its  natural  state 
(swabhaav) as well as its unnatural state (vibhaav).

Questioner: So why is it that we cannot see any kriya 

of the pudgal where there is no Self?

Dadashri: The kriya of the pudgal is indeed going on 
even  when  the  Self  is  not  present.  Say  there  is  a  piece  of 
wood  lying  around,  it  will  continue  to  decay.  Even  a  bone 
will continue to deteriorate. If you were to throw a piece of 
flesh  right  now,  from  that  moment  on,  it  will  continue  to 
decay. So, every thing is constantly in its own kriya indeed. 
It is kriyavaan (inherently active) regardless of whether the 
Self is present in it or not. It is kriyavaan by its own inherent 
nature.

It  is  because  both  Chetan  and  Pudgal  have  been 
referred  to  as  being  sakriya  (continuously  in  some  kind  of 
activity) that people have become engulfed in this ignorance; 
and  it  is  verily  because  of  that,  that  all  the  people  of  the 
world  are  wandering  aimlessly.  If  the  incorrect  thing  is 
known, then incorrect things will happen. In that case, what 
can poor God do? And if one were to ask these people [the 
mahatmas],  “Please  state  the  properties  of  the  Self?”  They 
will  say,  “Gnata-drashta  (the  Knower-Seer),  akriya  (the 
state  as  a  non-doer).” They  will  say  all  that!  Have  you  not 
read somewhere that It is akriya?

Questioner: Yes, I have definitely come across that in 

my reading!

Dadashri: So if you happen to read things contrary to 
that any more, put it aside, then Your [spiritual] work will be 
done, otherwise it will not be done at all! If it were to enter 
your mind even slightly, it will take you somewhere or the 
other on the wrong track! This is because that discussion is 
not correct. That is the reason why I have asked you not to 

238

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

read religious books! The reason being, they are not correct. 
You  will  get  a  solution  only  if  you  ask  ‘us’  [the  Gnani 
Purush], otherwise a solution will not come about and you 
will get more confused. In fact, this illusion has arisen from 
the very moment the Self was referred to as being kriyavaan.

What  is  the  Self  like  in  Its  inherently  natural  state? 
The  answer  is,  It  is  akriya  (in  the  state  as  a  non-doer;  in 
the  state  as  the  Knower  and  Seer).  And  even  right  now, 
the  Self  within  the  body  is  in  Its  inherently  natural  state; 
It  has  not  become  vibhaavik  (that  which  has  deviated  from 
its  inherent  nature)  even  to  the  slightest.  Whenever  you 
look  at  It,  It  is  the  very  same  indeed.  ‘It’  does  not  have 
even the slightest energy to become vibhaavik. ‘Its’ form is 
such that It cannot change whatsoever! The Self that I have 
seen,  I  have  not  even  on  a  single  day  seen  any  change  in 
It  whatsoever.  Nevertheless,  if  you  want  to  say  that  It  has 
activity, then people can say that the Self is the doer of the 
activity of Knowing (Gnan kriya) and the activity of Seeing 
(Darshan  kriya);  that  is  Its  inherently  natural  activity.  The 
eternal  element  that  supports  motion  (dharmastikaya),  the 
eternal  element  that  supports  inertia  (adharmastikaya)  and 
the  eternal  element  of  Space  are  also  in  their  inherently 
natural activity. However, we cannot consider that [as being 
active]. Of the six eternal elements, it is the eternal element 
of the Pudgal alone that can be considered as being sakriya 
(continuously in some kind of activity) and it is due to this 
property  of  being  sakriya,  that  the  eternal  element  of Time 
(kaal)  was  identified.  Otherwise,  the  eternal  element  of 
Time would have never been identified. The very reason for 
the  eternal  element  of Time  to  be  cognized  is  the  Pudgal’s 
property of being sakriya. Just as when sand falls from the 
top chamber of an hourglass into the bottom one, once all the 
sand  has  fallen  into  the  bottom  chamber,  we  would  know, 
‘Oh,  forty-eight  minutes  are  up!’  The  hourglass  was  filled 

[3] Kriyavati Shakti

239

with sand bearing in mind the forty-eight minutes. Similarly, 
all of this is becoming old on the basis of time. Things come 
into  being  and  then  they  are  prone  to  dissolution.  Things 
come  into  being  and  they  continue  to  undergo  dissolution. 
Do you understand what I am trying to say? Are you getting 
clarity?

Questioner: Yes.

Dadashri:  If  something  is  lacking  clarity,  then  ask 
over  and  again;  discuss  it.  Do  not  read  all  other  things 
like  that  again.  It  may  infect  you  with  some  ‘disease’ 
[misinformation]  such  that  it  will  end  up  ruining  even  the 
clarity that had been established within.

The Difference Between Parmanu and Pudgal…

Questioner:  So  then,  the  doership  is  of  the  Pudgal 

alone, that is the one aspect I do understand.

Dadashri:  Yes,  the  doer  is  indeed  the  Pudgal.  All 
these  activities  are  also  of  the  Pudgal.  All  these  activities 
are  of  inanimate  matter  alone.  It  is  sakriya  by  its  inherent 
nature. The Self cannot ‘do’ any activity at all.

Questioner:  What  is  the  meaning  of  sakriya?  Dada, 

can you please explain that?

Dadashri:  Sakriya  means  it  is  continually  in  some 

kind of kriya (activity).

This  entire  vibhaav  (the  unnatural  state)  is  the 
craftsmanship  (karamat)  of  the  Pudgal.  Even  in  the 
absence of the Self, everything comes into being due to the 
craftsmanship  of  the  Pudgal.  Pudgal  means  anatma  (the 
non-Self). The  craftsmanship  is  like  a  maze. A  person  may 
go  to  the  toilet,  but  who  makes  him  relieve  himself?  The 
Pudgal. Whatever craftsmanship is happening in this world; 
it is the independent craftsmanship of the Pudgal.

240

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

And those that form aggregates (skandha) are actually 
the  swabhaavik  Pudgal;  its  inherent  nature  is  such  that  it 
aggregates.  The  Pudgal  Parmanu  come  together  naturally. 
Sometimes, if any two atoms (anu) may have come together, 
then it will be an aggregate of two atoms; if there are three 
atoms, then the three atoms will come together and they will 
all then get joined with each other.

Questioner: So does that mean that the pure Parmanu, 
the  ones  that  are  in  the  form  of  vishrasa,  do  they  undergo 
puran-galan (influx-outflux)?

Dadashri:  They  are  kriyakaari  (‘effective’  such  that 
they take on the effect and give result), they are sakriya; but 
that  is  also  considered  as  [swabhaavik]  puran-galan.  Only 
the  mishrachetan  (the  I  with  wrong  belief  that  arises  as 
when the eternal elements of the Self and inanimate matter 
come into close proximity with each other) can be referred 
to as pudgal, the rest cannot be called pudgal.

Questioner:  You  have  said  that  there  is  a  difference 

between the pudgal and the Parmanu, have you not?

Dadashri:  The  difference  between  the  Parmanu  and 
the pudgal is that, first of all, there are two types of pudgal; 
there  is  the  pure  Pudgal,  and  there  is  the  visheshbhaavi 
pudgal  (the  pudgal  with  completely  new  properties  that 
arises  when  the  Self  and  inanimate  matter  come  into  close 
proximity).  Say  snow  fell  over  here  and  a  large  statue  was 
formed,  and  later  it  melts;  that  is  referred  to  as  the  pure 
Pudgal.  Whereas  this  here  is  the  impure  pudgal,  the  one 
that has arisen due to the coming together of the two eternal 
elements.

Questioner:  Is  there  some  kind  of  energy  within  the 

pure Soul that makes all of this happen?

Dadashri:  ‘It’  does  not  have  any  energy  to  ‘do’  at 

[3] Kriyavati Shakti

241

all.  As  It  does  not  have  any  energy  to  ‘do’,  It  has  Itself 
become  bound  by  the  Pudgal. All  this  energy  to  ‘do’  is  of 
the Pudgal. All this is the business, the craftsmanship of the 
Pudgal alone. The Pudgal is sakriya (continuously in some 
kind of activity) of its own accord. The world does not know 
of  this  sakriya  property  of  the  Pudgal  known  as  karamat 
(craftsmanship).

The Arising, the Steady State, the Dissolution of the 
Pudgal...

Questioner:  Is  it  not  the  energy  of  the  pudgal  that 
brings  about  the  utpatti  (arising;  genesis),  sthiti  (the  steady 
state) and laya (dissipation)?

Dadashri: What else? It is the inherent nature of every 
pudgal  to  undergo  the  constant  phenomenon  of  arising, 
maintaining  a  steady  state,  and  dissolution.  This  happens 
even  when  the  Self  is  not  present,  and  it  will  continue 
happening  even  if  the  Self  is  present.  When  a  person  dies, 
even if the life force (jeev) within has departed, the change 
will  indeed  continue  to  take  place.  That  has  nothing  to  do 
with the Self.

Questioner:  Without  the  presence  of  the  Self,  the 
arising, the maintaining of a steady state and the dissolution 
cannot arise in the mishrachetan, can it?

Dadashri:  It  continues  to  happen  in  everyone. There 
is no connection with It whatsoever! The Self and the pudgal 
have nothing to do with each other.

Questioner: Even in the mishrachetan?

Dadashri:  This  pudgal  is  a  discharging  pudgal.  The 
Self is needed when charging occurs. [Charging takes place 
because  of  becoming  engrossed.]  The  pudgal  would  arise 
only  if  the  Self  were  present,  right?  Nothing  whatsoever 

242

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

can happen without the presence [engrossment] of the Self, 
can it!

Questioner: This cloth can be fabricated because it is 
inanimate (jada), however the pudgal is not inanimate, is it?

Dadashri: This pudgal is actually mishrachetan; it too 
undergoes the phenomenon of arising (utpatti), maintaining 
a steady state (sthiti) and dissipation (laya). This is because, 
this happens not only for all the destructible (vinashi) things 
that exist out there but also for the indestructible (avinashi) 
ones  too.  [This  has  to  be  understood  in  a  different  way  for 
both cases.]

Observe the Craftsmanship of the Pudgal Through 
the Divine Vision as the Self

The entire world has come into existence through each 
and  every  Parmanu.  Each  and  every  Parmanu  has  its  law. 
Hence, this world is not a falsehood.

Questioner:  Each  Parmanu  has  its  very  own  energy, 

does it not?

Dadashri:  Yes,  of  course,  there  is  energy  within  it. 
There  is  only  one  eternal  element  that  has  such  energy.  It 
is this Pudgal Parmanu which has form and is visible; it is 
swayam karyakaari (such that it functions of its own accord).

Questioner:  But  Dada,  what  about  the  formless 

Pudgal; the one we refer to as pure Parmanu?

Dadashri:  That  Parmanu  in  a  way  is  formless,  but 
from the perspective of keval Gnan (absolute Knowledge), it 
does have form. It can be seen through absolute Knowledge. 
Meaning  that,  we  cannot  see  it  through  our  physical  eyes. 
The Gnanis can perceive its form; as such They cannot see 
it, but They can understand it.

Questioner: [a verse from a spiritual hymn]

[3] Kriyavati Shakti

243

‘kare chhe kon e samje to ukle kaayami koydo.’

‘If  one  were  to  understand  who  the  doer  is,  then  the 

puzzle would be solved forever.’

Dadashri:  It  is  possible  to  find  closure  if  one 

understands ‘who the doer is’. What is the next line?

Questioner:  ‘Karamat  pudgalni  baaji,  swabhaavik 

Gnan netre jo.’

‘Observe the craftsmanship of the Pudgal through the 

divine Vision as the Self.’

Dadashri:  Yes,  ‘swabhaavik  Gnan  netre’  means  See 
who is doing this through the divine Vision as the Self (divya 
drashti);  that  is  what  it  is  telling  us.  This  craftsmanship 
(karamat) that is going on is the ‘hand’ of the Pudgal. What 
that means is that, say the weather is fine right now, but half 
an hour later, there is fog everywhere such that you cannot 
even see the person standing in front of you. So who came 
to do that, was there some middleman coming to do that?

Questioner:  No  one  comes  to  do  that;  it  happens 

naturally.

Dadashri: Yes, imagine all the things that arise? Have 
you  not  seen  such  things  happening  outside?  Who  causes 
the whirlwinds?

Questioner: Vyavasthit.

Dadashri: And  people  say,  “God  does.  God  has  gas, 
that  is  why  it  is  happening!”  People  even  say  things  like 
that, but one should not talk this way.

Moving  about  is  entirely  an  intrinsic  functional 
property of the division that is the non-Self; it is not of the 
Self. The  Self  neither  sleeps  at  night  nor  during  the  day.  It 
is  the  division  that  is  the  non-Self  that  sleeps;  the  one  that 
does the activity is the very one that sleeps.

244

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

The  craftsmanship  (karamat)  of  the  Pudgal  is  a  very 
subtle  point.  It  is  not  easy  to  understand.  What  ‘we’  have 
Seen  and  Known  is  unprecedented.  Let  me  give  you  an 
example.  Say,  amongst  all  those  who  are  sitting  here,  no 
one has the wish to sneeze, however, if at that time someone 
does  a  vaghar  (first  cooking  step  of  tempering  spices  like 
asafoetida,  mustard  seeds,  chilies  in  heated  oil  or  ghee)  in 
the  kitchen,  then  everyone  will  start  to  sneeze.  So  if  you 
are the doer, then why don’t you stop the sneezes! But you 
cannot stop them. That is the craftsmanship of the Pudgal.

Then someone may say, “Show us the doership of the 

Pudgal.”

Even  if  the  lady  was  doing  the  vaghar  behind  closed 
doors,  it  is  not  her  wish  nor  is  it  the  wish  of  those  who 
are  going  to  eat  the  food  to  cough  and  sneeze,  but  it  does 
happen, doesn’t it? And then one claims, “I coughed.” That 
is all egoism.

Sitting  here,  ‘we’  can  See  the  craftsmanship  of  each 
and every Pudgal. If you do not believe it, then drink some 
milk, drink some nectar, drink some alcohol and drink some 
poison;  then  you  will  know  what  the  craftsmanship  of  the 
Pudgal is like!

Unaffected Despite Being Present!

The  Parmanu  have  tremendous  power,  similarly,  the 
Self  also  has  infinite  power.  However,  the  form  of  that 
power  is  different.  God’s  [the  Self’s]  power  is  to  be  the 
Knower and Seer of the universe, and the power of this [the 
Parmanu] is actually used in the creation, dissolution and all 
that. The Self is Itself akriya (in the state as a non-doer; in 
the state as the Knower-Seer).

Questioner:  Once  the  Self  leaves  the  body,  what  do 

all the activities of the body fall under?

[3] Kriyavati Shakti

245

Dadashri: Thereafter, the gross activities of the body 
come to a stop. God’s [the Self’s] presence is necessary for 
those activities. It is due to Its presence that all this functions. 
If It leaves the ‘temporary dwelling’, the activities will come 
to a stop; [however] It does not ‘do’ anything.

Questioner:  This  pudgal 

that  becomes  sakriya 
(continuously in some kind of activity) due to the presence 
of the Self, does its effects then touch the Self?

Dadashri: The Self does not get affected at all; it is the 
pudgal  alone  that  gets  affected. The  effect  has  not  reached 
the  Self  at  all,  yet  one  believes,  ‘This  is  what  happened  to 
me.’ But no such thing has happened at all.

Of the Two, Only the Pudgal Catches a Hold of the 
Effects!

Questioner:  The  changing  temporary  states  of  the 
Pudgal, the fact that the Pudgal transforms into a temporary 
state,  that  phenomenon  is  indeed  what  we  refer  to  as 
sakriyata (to be in a continuously active state).

Dadashri:  No,  no,  no,  the  temporary  states  of 

everything can be changed.

Questioner:  So  then,  what  do  we  consider  as  the 

sakriyata of the Pudgal?

Dadashri: This entire world has arisen due to sakriyata 
alone. Due to the sakriyata of the Pudgal itself, meaning that 
if the sakriyata were arising because someone or something 
pushed  it,  then  sakriyata  cannot  be  considered  a  property 
[of  the  Pudgal].  Sakriyata  is  a  permanent  property.  Of  all 
the six eternal elements, the Pudgal permanently prevails in 
a sakriya (continuously active) state; which in fact is why it 
stands  out  from  the  rest.  The  other  five  are  akriya  (devoid 
of activity) and they all comprise of their dravya (elemental 

246

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

matter), guna (properties) and paryay (phases). They all keep 
changing,  they  constantly  undergo  change  (parinaman);  all 
of  that  happens.  Even  the  Pudgal  is  constantly  undergoing 
change,  but  the  property  of  sakriyata  is  different.  Without 
any influence of anything or anyone, without any hindrance 
from  anyone  or  anything,  the  Pudgal  is  sakriya  of  its  own 
accord, by its inherent nature.

Questioner:  Isn’t  the  transformation  of  the  Pudgal 
from  one  temporary  state  into  another  temporary  state 
referred  to  as  its  sakriyata?  As  in  the  case  where  water 
becomes ice...

Dadashri:  The  elemental  matter,  properties  and 
phases  cannot  be  considered  as  sakriyata  (being  in  a 
continuously  active  state).  Sakriyata  is  actually  its  [the 
Pudgal Parmanu’s] inherent nature. That is indeed why this 
world  appears  the  way  it  does,  due  to  the  sakriyata  of  the 
Parmanu  themselves.  Humans  have  not  created  all  of  that. 
This  is  actually  prevalence  in  a  continuously  active  state 
(sakriyapanu) in the Real sense. Whereas the prevalence of 
the  pudgal  [mishrachetan]  being  in  a  continuously  active 
state is not exact sakriyapanu; it has happened due to some 
other influence.

Questioner:  This  pudgal  that  makes  up  the  body, 

what is it?

Dadashri: The  pudgal  that  makes  up  this  body  is  an 
unnatural  state  [of  the  Pudgal].  This  sakriyapanu  [of  the 
pudgal] is considered an unnatural state.

Questioner: When  the  vibhaav  of  the  self  [the  belief 
of  ‘I  am  Chandubhai’]  arises,  and  its  influence  falls  on  the 
Pudgal,  that  is  the  exact  moment  when  this  unnatural  state 
of the pudgal arises, right?

Dadashri:  Yes,  but  this  is  referred  to  as  the  vikrut 

[3] Kriyavati Shakti

247

kriya  pudgal  (the  pudgal  in  an  unnatural  state);  it  is  not 
the natural Pudgal and the one that is sakriya is the natural 
Pudgal.  It  is  an  inherently  natural  property  of  the  Pudgal, 
which  is  why  this  disorder  (vikriya)  has  taken  place  in  the 
world.  Otherwise  what  kind  of  property  would  it  be  that 
when  the  [worldly-interacting]  self  has  an  intent,  the  body 
keeps  being  formed?  Who  formed  it?  Who  is  responsible? 
The answer is, ‘Nobody is responsible.’ Don’t the eyes and 
pupils etc., all get formed?

Questioner: What would we consider the bhaav (inner 
intent)  done  by  the  self,  would  we  consider  it  as  sakriyata 
(being  in  a  continuously  active  state)  or  phases  or  what 
would we consider it as?

Dadashri: No, no, it’s not like that. It is not sakriyata 
at  all,  it  is  its  vibhaavik  bhaav  (the  wrong  belief  of  ‘I  am 
Chandubhai’),  a  visheshbhaav.  There  is  absolutely  no 
property of sakriyata in the Self, nor is it in any other place 
whatsoever, neither is it in any of the other eternal elements, 
not even in the eternal element of Space (aakash).

This vibhaavik [form] is an unnatural activity (vikriya) 
that  has  taken  place.  It  is  definitely  the  activity  of  the 
pudgal, but it is considered unnatural activity, that is why it 
ends up smelling foul and everything else happens; whereas 
the other [the natural Pudgal Parmanu], they do not end up 
smelling  foul  or  nothing  like  happens  to  them;  they  only 
continue undergoing change.

Questioner: We are referring to puran-galan (influx-

outflux) itself as sakriyata, aren’t we?

Dadashri: Yes, puran-galan itself is sakriyata, its [the 
pudgal’s] property of puran-galan, that itself is sakriyata. It 
is not this alone that undergoes puran-galan. The very same 
puran-galan  continues  to  happen  in  those  pure  Parmanu. 

248

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Puran-galan, puran-galan, puran-galan, that very sakriyata 
is ongoing; that will constantly be there for every Parmanu.

Questioner:  This  vikrut  bhaav  of  the  pudgal  [the 
parmanu  in  a  charged  state],  is  that  considered  its  new 
temporary state (vishesh avastha)?

Dadashri: The arising of the vikrut bhaav of the self 
[the wrong belief of ‘I am Chandubhai] and the vikrut bhaav 
of the pudgal, that itself is the vishesh avastha.

After Vibhaav, the Vikrut Pudgal Arises

The Self prevails as the Knower and Seer. Everything 
besides  the  Self  is  puran-galan;  it  is  the  craftsmanship 
(karamat) of the Pudgal. It is because of our [the developing 
I’s]  attachment  (raag)  that  the  Pudgal  becomes  vikrut 
(charged with the bhaav). The clouds, the rain and hail, are 
they  all  different  things? They  are  one  and  the  same,  [they 
are] Pudgal. Is there really a difference between the Pudgal 
and such large hailstones?

Questioner: That is also Pudgal.

Dadashri:  They  are  all  one  and  the  same,  [they  are] 
Pudgal.  It’s  just  that  when  things  come  together,  when  the 
two  eternal  elements  come  together,  this  unnaturalness 
(vikrutata)  arises.  The  unnaturalness  does  not  arise  in  the 
original  Self  (mool  Atma),  the  unnaturalness  arises  in  the 
Pudgal, because the Pudgal itself is kriyakaari (such that it 
procures results on its own).

Questioner: Does the Pudgal have its own energy to 

undergo change or not?

Dadashri:  Of  course!  It  has  boundless  energy  of  its 
own.  It  is  indeed  through  its  own  energy  that  it  undergoes 
change.  The  Pudgal  has  created  this  body  through  its  own 
energy  indeed.  The  Self  plays  no  part  in  this.  The  Self 

[3] Kriyavati Shakti

249

has  just  done  the  experiment,  and  that  too,  the  experiment 
was  done  collectively,  in  the  presence  of  the  two  [eternal 
elements].  The  original  Self  has  not  done  the  experiment 
independently. The original Self remains as It is.

Questioner:  Are  the  two  elements,  the  jeev  and  the 

pudgal, sakriya (continuously in some kind of activity)?

Dadashri:  The  jeev  [meaning  the  bavo;  the  internal 
one with wrong beliefs and anger, pride, deceit and greed] is 
sakriya and the pudgal is sakriya. The pudgal [the physical 
body;  Mangaldas]  is  inanimate  (achetan)  and  the  jeev  is 
charged chetan, power chetan (pudgal that has been powered 
with life energy in the presence of the Self). However, they 
are both like the pudgal! Because, what has the life energy 
been filled in? It has been filled in the Pudgal.

Questioner: Yes, but how can the pudgal be considered 

sakriya?

Dadashri:  It  is  sakriya  by  its  inherent  nature;  the 

activities continue to happen in accordance with time.

It Becomes as per the Envisioning

Questioner:  So  then  what  is  the  main  gunadharma 

(intrinsic property with a specific function) of the Pudgal?

Dadashri:  It  has  a  visible  form  (roopi)  and  it  is 
kriyakaari  (‘effective’  such  that  it  takes  on  the  effect  and 
gives result), these are its main gunadharma. It is such that 
it  can  carry  out  the  activities  on  its  own.  It  can  procure 
results  on  its  own,  despite  being  inanimate.  For  example, 
whatever  you  [as  the  self]  envision,  an  effect  materializes 
on its own in the form of a statue on the outside! And it is 
due to this, that man had the illusion of, ‘Who else but me 
could do this?’

The  inherent  nature  of  the  Pudgal  is  such  that  it 

250

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

becomes as per the envisioning of the self. That is why the 
entire  world  has  become  perplexed  as  to  ‘Who  is  the  doer 
of  this?’  Hey  mortal  one!  There  is  this  wonderful  property 
within  that  eternal  element  [the  Pudgal  Parmanu]  of  being 
kriyakaari  (‘effective’)  on  its  own,  and  that  is  why  it  is 
considered  sakriya.  And  what  is  the  Self  called?  The  Self 
is  referred  to  as  akriya  (being  in  the  state  as  a  non-doer; 
being  in  the  state  as  the  Knower-Seer).  So  all  this  is  the 
craftsmanship  of  the  Pudgal.  [If  one  were  to  ask,]  “Who 
made  these  eyes?  Who  made  the  ears?”  The  answer  is,  “It 
made  them.”  Isn’t  it  a  wonder!  It  is  not  alone  in  making 
them. The self’s vibhaavbhaav (the wrong belief that ‘I am 
Chandubhai’)  is  subtle.  So  based  on  the  kind  of  desire  the 
self  [with  the  wrong  belief  that  ‘I  am  Chandubhai’]  has, 
the  Pudgal  gets  everything  done.  It  gets  everything  done 
in accordance with whatever kind of desire there is. In this 
world,  everyone  has  only  two  ears,  right?  Two  arms,  two 
legs, and all such things, isn’t it! And what is more, it is all 
within  limit.  If  there  were  no  limit,  then  some  would  have 
twelve  hands,  others  would  have  twenty  hands,  and  some 
would have ten to fifteen legs. But that is not the case; there 
is  this  limit,  a  limit  to  the  desires.  There  is  also  a  limit  to 
the moha (illusory attachment). Moreover, everything has a 
limit; it is not unlimited.

Who  sits  inside  a  cow  to  create  a  calf?  Who  creates 
that?  People  don’t  have  an  answer  to  these  questions.  The 
Gnani Purush has Seen how this actually happens! Therefore, 
based on the slightest of intent that arises for the [worldly-
interacting]  self,  an  exact  design  is  created  within.  That  is 
how this eternal element with form is, it is itself kriyakaari 
(‘effective’).

Everything  that  can  be  experienced  through  the  five 
sense organs is exhibiting the energies of the Self. There is 
tremendous  energy!  Just  imagine  what  this  kalpshakti  (the 

[3] Kriyavati Shakti

251

energy  or  property  of  envisioning  of  the  Self)  alone  can 
accomplish!!

There are six eternal elements within the universe. So, 
the world is filled with Parmanu. It is due to these Parmanu 
that  the  Self  encounters  great  difficulties  in  traversing 
worldly life. And that is why all this has arisen.

It is because these Parmanu are there, that the vikalp 
(the  wrong  belief  of  ‘I  am  Chandubhai’)  arises,  otherwise 
this  vikalp  would  never  arise!  Therefore,  where  there  is 
no  Pudgal,  there  is  no  effect  there  at  all.  The  rest  of  the 
five  eternal  elements  are  not  obstructive,  it  is  the  Pudgal 
alone  that  obstructs.  The  difficulty  has  arisen  because  of 
this Pudgal alone. The inherent nature of the Pudgal is such 
that it becomes whatever the self envisions. Whatever vikalp 
arises  for  the  self,  that  is  the  form  the  Pudgal  takes  on. 
Whatever the self envisions, the Pudgal takes on that form 
accordingly. That is why an illusion arises for the self as to, 
‘Am  I  this  or  am  I  that?’  Then  everything  moves  forward 
with the illusion!

The self believes, ‘This activity has been done by me.’ 
This  wrong  belief  has  arisen  for  it,  and  consequently  an 
entangled state got established. This entangled state can never 
go  away.  One  Himself  is  Brahm  (the  Self),  but  he  became 
brahma  (the  creator)  and  then  the  brahma  became  bhramit 
(deluded). Thereafter,  he  was  trying  very  hard  to  get  rid  of 
the  entanglement,  but  in  the  process,  more  entanglements 
were  created. After  coming  into  the  deluded  state,  nothing 
besides a multiplication [of the entanglements] happens; and 
that results only in a deluded state once again!

Imagine  what  a  tremendous  pressure  has  come  upon 
the  Self!  Such  terrible  pressure  has  come  upon  It  that  so 
many  veils  have  come  over  It  and  imagine  the  kind  of 
circumstances  It  has  had  to  encounter?  Depending  on  the 

252

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

knowledge  of  the  self,  a  corresponding  effect  takes  form 
over there! So wonderful are the properties of the Parmanu, 
[which  are  a  circumstance  in  close  proximity  to  the  Self,] 
that depending on the knowledge of the self, a corresponding 
effect manifests over here immediately.

Questioner: Well, that happens only because the part 

related to the Self did that, right?

Dadashri: Yes, it is actually due to the presence of the 
Self  that  this  Pudgal  becomes  this  way.  The  knowledge  is 
of the self and the craftsmanship (karamat) is entirely of the 
Pudgal. The knowledge that is used during the craftsmanship 
is of the self. The energy [of the Pudgal] is such that many 
different tasks can occur at the same time. The craftsmanship 
cannot  create  the  knowledge  and  the  knowledge  cannot  do 
the  craftsmanship.  It  is  not  the  Self’s  energy  of  Knowing-
Seeing  (Chetan  shakti)  that  affects  the  sakriyata  of  the 
Pudgal, rather it is the self’s energy of having wrong beliefs 
(vikalp shakti).

The Self does not change. The envisioning property of 
the  [worldly-interacting]  self  (kalp)  gave  rise  to  the  wrong 
belief of ‘I am this’ (vikalp). It is simply the belief that leads 
to  the  forming  of  this  body;  in  this,  the  belief  itself  does 
not  do  any  work,  but  due  to  the  belief,  the  Parmanu  get 
drawn in and the inherent nature of the Parmanu themselves 
is such that they procure results on their own.

Questioner:  What  causes  the  Pudgal  [Parmanu]  to 

get drawn in?

Dadashri: They get drawn in automatically.

Questioner:  And  then  they  become  charged  when 

they come in contact with the Self?

Dadashri:  No,  once  they  get  drawn  in,  when  the 
time  is  right,  they  become  charged  automatically.  They 

[3] Kriyavati Shakti

253

take on a visible form (murt) of their own accord; a visible 
representation  (murti)  manifests  [in  the  next  life]. The  Self 
does not have to do anything. The moment the vibhaav (the 
wrong  belief  of  ‘I  am  Chandubhai’)  arises,  they  get  drawn 
in;  once  they  are  pulled  in,  they  continue  to  do  their  work 
on  their  own.  Thereafter,  from  them,  the  entire  body  gets 
formed,  everything  gets  formed. All  of  that  is  the  work  of 
the Pudgal alone; the Self has nothing to do with that.

No  one  is  the  [independent]  ‘doer’  [creator]  of  the 
pudgal.  Depending  on  the  belief  that  one  has,  it  gets  ready 
accordingly. Then if one sees cross-eyed, that too is a belief. 
Don’t  people  see  cross-eyed? What  is  more,  that  belief  too 
is as per the law of nature (niyam)! This world is based on 
the law of nature. Meaning that it is not outside the law of 
nature.

Questioner: I didn’t quite understand that.

Dadashri:  All  humans  do  not  have  more  than  two 

legs.

Questioner:  Meaning  that,  the  pudgal  that  arises  out 

of the belief is based on the law of nature?

Dadashri:  Everything  is  based  on  the  law  of  nature. 
How many wrong beliefs will occur, all of that is based on 
the law of nature!

Questioner:  Is  the  wrong  belief  itself  based  on  the 

law of nature too?

Dadashri: The law of nature exists; otherwise, if that 
law of nature was to not exist, then that wrong belief would 
never become the right belief, it would become unregulated.

Questioner:  So,  just  as  the  wrong  beliefs  are  subject 
to the law of nature, similarly, is the pudgal also subject to 
the law of nature?

254

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri:  Everything  is  as  per  the  law  of  nature. 
Nothing is outside the law of nature. The reign is not of the 
God of death (Yamaraj); the governance is as per the law of 
nature (niyamraj).

Questioner: Isn’t the wrong belief, the pudgal?

Dadashri:  If  you  want  to  consider  it  as  pudgal,  you 
can  do  so.  But  when  can  it  be  considered  a  pudgal?  The 
belief  can  actually  be  removed  whereas  the  pudgal  will  in 
fact  change  on  its  own;  nothing  else.  It  is  the  very  same 
pudgal,  instead  of  this  change,  another  change  occurs  (the 
pudgal simply transforms). Whereas the belief actually gets 
destroyed completely.

Questioner: So what you are saying is that this pudgal 

is in the form of parmanu?

Dadashri: Yes, parmanu.

Questioner: And what about the belief?

Dadashri:  Belief  is  actually  considered  as  a  kind  of 

tendency (vrutti).

By looking in this direction, you cannot see the ocean; 
does it mean that there is no such thing as an ocean? If you 
turn  the  person  this  way,  the  ocean  will  be  seen.  That  is 
indeed  what  all  the  arguments  in  the  world  are  about.  One 
man  says,  “There  is  no  other  thing  besides  the  Self.” Then 
someone else says, “There is no such thing as the Self in this 
world.” Now, how can a solution be found? A person speaks 
based on what he can see.

Questioner: Who is the seer that arises within?

Dadashri:  It  is  the  wrong  belief.  When  that  wrong 
belief turns into the right belief, that is when there is nothing 
besides the Self. And [to believe that] there is no such thing 

[3] Kriyavati Shakti

255

as  the  Self,  is  a  wrong  belief.  All  the  problems  are  there 
because  of  the  beliefs  only.  Nothing  besides  the  belief  has 
spoiled. The Knowledge (Gnan) has not become spoiled, the 
belief has become spoiled.

Questioner: That is actually what You have said, that 
when the two eternal elements come together, it gives rise to 
this vishesh parinaam (a completely new effect).

Dadashri:  Yes,  a  completely  new  effect.  The  effect 
takes form according to our [the developing I’s] bhaav. [The 
Pudgal] That  which  keeps  changing  on  its  own  through  its 
own inherent nature is different, whereas this is our bhaavna 
(intention;  effect  of  the  developing  I’s  bhaav);  the  ‘design’ 
is ours. One person’s nose is like this, another one’s nose is 
like that, that is all our own design, no one else’s. Otherwise, 
the Self would be considered partial. The Self is not partial; 
all this liability is our very own indeed.

In this case, the self becomes a culprit, because those 
Parmanu give effect as per its own bhaav. There would be 
no  problem  if  they  [the  bhaav]  were  arising  of  their  own 
accord. But the self is doing the bhaav, and more so, due to 
ignorance of the Self.

Questioner: It charges.

Dadashri:  It  charges,  that  is  why  it  becomes  the 

culprit of doing that.

Questioner: Dada, when I come across an overpowering 
file,  sometimes  [the  belief  that]  ‘I  am  Chandubhai’  takes 
over.

Dadashri:  No  matter  how  overpowering  a  file  is, 
when it comes your way, You should say, ‘I must say, look 
at  the  craftsmanship  (karamat)  of  the  Pudgal!’  Regardless 
of  what  the  file  is  like,  what  does  it  have  to  do  with You? 
Whether the other person gets angry or does anything else, 

256

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

but  ultimately,  that  is  the  craftsmanship  of  the  Pudgal 
alone,  isn’t  it!  That  which  is  inanimate  but  behaves  as  if 
it is animate, that can be considered as craftsmanship only, 
isn’t it! And ‘we’ have proven this fact. So now, You should 
Know that this is all the craftsmanship of the Pudgal.

When  Mr.  Lalchand  punches  Mr.  Fulchand  three 
times, that is also the craftsmanship of the Pudgal. And then 
if Mr. Fulchand punches Mr. Lalchand four times in return, 
that  is  also  the  craftsmanship  of  the  Pudgal  indeed.  The 
[worldly-interacting]  self  has  to  act  in  accordance  with  the 
craftsmanship of the Pudgal. For the people who don’t have 
Self-realization,  the  self  prevails  in  an  engrossed  state;  for 
the Gnanis (those who have Self-realization and can impart 
the  same  to  others),  the  Self  remains  separate.  When  the 
pudgal  broke  apart  the  pudgal,  people  got  alarmed  and  on 
top of that, they claimed, “I broke it apart, I tore it apart, I 
split it.”

There  are  endless  kinds  of  infinite  craftsmanship 
(karamat)  of  the  Pudgal;  why  have  fear  of  it?  What  is 
there  to  be  scared  about?  There  is  the  craftsmanship  of  a 
carpenter,  the  craftsmanship  of  a  blacksmith,  similarly,  this 
is the craftsmanship of the Pudgal. At present, the Self has 
not ‘done’ anything in this; It has not ‘done’ a single thing. 
It is simply due to Its presence that things keep happening.

The Energy of the Pudgal Is Also Magnificent!

Questioner:  In  inanimate  things,  when  an  atom 
(anu) is split into [smaller] subatomic particles, tremendous 
energy  is  released;  so  then  can  that  be  considered  as  being 
inanimate?

Dadashri:  Lord  Krishna  has  mentioned  two  kinds 
of energies in this world; one is the energy of the non-Self 
(anatma shakti) and the other is the energy of the Self (Atma 

[3] Kriyavati Shakti

257

shakti).  The  energy  of  the  non-Self  is  an  inanimate  energy 
(jada shakti). There is absolutely no Chetan (the function of 
Knowing  and  Seeing)  in  inanimate  matter,  similarly,  there 
is nothing inanimate in the Self either; both the energies are 
different. By saying that there is Chetan in inanimate things, 
people  have  been  misled.  If  that  were  the  case,  then  there 
would  be  no  need  to  separate  ‘the  grit  and  stones  from  the 
wheat’  [separate  the  non-Self  and  the  Self],  would  there? 
Then everyone would indeed easily become God!

Questioner:  What  relationship  does  the  Self  have 

with karma?

Dadashri: ‘It’ has a relative relationship. It is indeed 
by  believing  that  the  karma  are  its  own,  that  the  self  has 
become  trapped! The  karma  themselves  are  very  powerful, 
are they not? All the Gods [the Self] are entrapped in karma, 
are They not?

Questioner:  Does  karma  entrap  the  self,  or  does  the 

self bind karma?

Dadashri:  No,  the  karma  entraps  the  self.  There  is 
that much energy in the pudgal. It was when the atom (anu) 
was  split  that  we  realized  how  much  energy  there  is  in  the 
pudgal.

Questioner:  If  the  self  so  choses,  it  can  shed  the 

karma, can it not?

Dadashri:  How  can  the  one  who  is  bound  shed  the 
karma?  It  can  only  do  that  when  It  comes  into  Its  inherent 
nature  as  the  Self  (Swabhaav).  When  can  the  self  come 
into  Its  inherent  nature?  It  can  happen  when  one  goes  to 
the One who has come into His inherent nature as the Self. 
And  when  One  comes  into  the  inherent  nature  as  the  Self, 
the  karma  will  be  shed.  Once  One  comes  into  the  inherent 
nature as the Self, One can get rid of any kind of karma. It is 

258

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

only when the Gnani Purush burns to ashes so many karma 
within an hour [in the Gnan vidhi], that the laksh (awakened 
awareness of ‘I am pure Soul’) is established; otherwise, this 
awakened awareness would not be established.

Questioner:  Dada,  the  Parmanu  that  are  pure  prior 
to becoming charged, they too have their own energy, don’t 
they?

Dadashri: There is a lot of energy in the Parmanu [in 
each  and  every  Parmanu],  tremendous  energy.  And  when 
we  are  charging  [karma],  Our  energy  [as  the  Self]  is  not 
being  used,  it  is  just  the  bhaav  alone.  It  is  simply  our  [the 
developing I’s] power [bhaav] alone that enters into it. This 
[charging] happens on the basis of the intrinsic energy of the 
Parmanu itself. Everything is going on the wrong way simply 
due to the belief that ‘I am doing’. We only need spectacles 
when  our  eyesight  goes  bad;  otherwise,  if  our  eyesight  is 
fine,  we  would  not  need  them.  So  all  of  this  is  indeed  due 
to  our  very  own  ‘blindness’.  As  a  change  occurred  in  the 
darshan  (belief  of  the  self)  [the  Vision,  Knowledge  and 
Conduct  as  the  Self  has  deviated  from  Its  inherent  nature], 
the  knowledge  (gnan)  changed  and  that  is  why  there  is  a 
change  in  the  conduct.  Meaning  that,  if  the  belief  and  the 
knowledge  change,  everything  else  will  change.  With  the 
[keval] Darshan (absolute Vision as the Self) that ‘we’ have 
given  You,  the  rest  [Knowledge  and  Conduct]  will  change 
for You.

In  this  body,  it  is  only  the  anatma  (the  part  that  is 
the  non-Self)  that  is  changing  [puran-galan;  charging-
discharging] everything.

There  is  so  much  energy  in  this  pudgal  that  it  can 
smash  you  [the  ego]  to  fragments,  then  imagine  what  your 
state would be like if you happen to come into conflict with 
someone who does not have Self-realization?

[3] Kriyavati Shakti

259

Questioner: The Self is separate from this body, but it 
has been veiled by the Pudgal. The Self is Itself all powerful, 
so  why  can  It  not  free  Itself  from  the  veils  of  this  Pudgal 
with Its own energy?

Dadashri:  The  energy  of  the  Pudgal  is  no  less.  The 
energy that is within an atom is no ordinary energy; it is not 
as if the Self can push it aside and come out. The energy of 
the Pudgal is an inanimate energy and this energy of the Self 
is  the  energy  of  Knowing  and  Seeing.  It  is  only  when  one 
gets the realization of who One really is, when He comes to 
Know  ‘who  am  I’  that  He  can  become  free,  otherwise  that 
cannot  happen. As  long  as  the  developing  I  does  not  have 
the Knowledge of Its own identity, until then this weakness 
remains  and  the  moment  Self-realization  occurs,  once  the 
Knowledge  of  the  Self  (Atma  Gnan)  is  attained,  the  Self 
becomes free.

Questioner:  In  spite  of  the  Self  having  the  function 
of Knowing and Seeing, how does It come to be trapped by 
this inanimate energy?

Dadashri:  It  is  because  these  eternal  elements  are 
all  in  close  proximity  with  each  other  in  the  universe,  that 
the  Self  has  become  trapped.  With  the  coming  together  of 
the  two  eternal  elements,  neither  loses  its  own  intrinsic 
functional  properties  (gunadharma),  but  a  third  completely 
new property with specific functions arises. Therefore, it is 
the ego that has arisen as the third completely new property 
with specific functions. When the self attains Self-realization, 
the ego is destroyed.

The fact that this [worldly-interacting] self accepts all 
the attributes of the body to be its own by believing ‘this is 
happening to me’ is called a wrong belief (bhranti).

Otherwise,  there  is  no  such  property  at  all  as  raag 
(attachment) in the Self. And if raag is not there, then dwesh 

260

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

(abhorrence) cannot be there either. If one property were to 
be present, then the opposite of that specific property would 
also be present. But the Self does not have any such dualistic 
properties  whatsoever;  It  is  the  abode  of  independent 
properties.  ‘It’  has  absolute  properties.  Nevertheless,  this 
has  arisen  due  to  a  wrong  belief.  This  Pudgal  has  such  a 
tremendous energy that it can make one delusional.

Only the Gnani Has Seen the Craftsmanship of the 
Pudgal!

It  is  the  Pudgal  that  is  doing  everything  but  these 
people  are  believing,  ‘I  am  doing  it’;  here  the  I  is  also  the 
pudgal.  Therefore,  the  Pudgal  is  doing  everything.  No  one 
besides the Tirthankars and the Gnanis can understand this 
craftsmanship  (karamat)  of  the  Pudgal. This  craftsmanship 
that  ‘we’  have  actually  Seen  cannot  be  described.  ‘We’ 
have  Seen  its  shape  and  the  way  it  works,  but  ‘we’  cannot 
describe it. It is an indescribable phenomenon. Words have 
limitations but this is a limitless element.

People claim that God is doing everything, because they 
neither know of nor do they understand the craftsmanship of 
the Pudgal.

The  entire  workmanship  is  due  to  the  craftsmanship 
of  the  Pudgal.  Before  I  used  to  think  that  this  is  all  my 
creation,  and  that  I  was  the  creator,  but  after  attaining 
Gnan,  I  understood  that  this  is  the  craftsmanship  of  the 
Pudgal.  Hey,  this  craftsmanship  of  the  Pudgal  is  actually 
the craftsmanship of inanimate matter.

Questioner: The fact that the Self has been referred to 
as  being  completely  akriya  (in  a  state  as  the  Knower-Seer; 
in the state as a non-doer); I don’t quite understand that.

Dadashri:  ‘It’  is  definitely  akriya,  It  is  akriya 
permanently. When the one who is doing this activity right 

[3] Kriyavati Shakti

261

now, Sees Himself as akriya, then He will have become God. 
How  can You  See  to  that  extent?  If  the  word  ‘akriya’  is  in 
Your belief (shraddha), then that is considered as conviction 
(pratiti).  But  when  You  See  Yourself  as  akriya,  when  this 
comes  into  Your  experience,  then  You  will  have  become 
God. Is [the word] ‘akriya’ in Your belief or not?

Questioner: Yes,  it  is,  but  I  wish  to  get  clarification 

on that.

Dadashri:  Well,  it  is  not  at  the  gross  level  (sthool). 
Activity  is  always  taking  place  at  the  gross  level.  It  [being 
akriya]  is  not  at  the  gross  level;  it  is  in  fact  very  subtle 
(sookshma). It is extremely subtle. You are interpreting this 
concept  of  doing  activity  as  per  your  own  understanding; 
like a potter turning the pottery wheel.

Questioner: What are the activities at the gross level 

dependent upon?

Dadashri: They are dependent upon the ego.

Questioner: Who is the ego dependent upon?

Dadashri: The ego’s existence is on the basis of one’s 
own ignorance of the Self (agnan). Ignorance of the Self is 
the root cause. Once it leaves, the ego will leave. Once the 
ego leaves, everything will go away.

Questioner:  Shrimad  Rajchandra  has  referred  to  the 

Self as being sakriya-akriya; how is that?

Dadashri:  Yes,  that  is  actually  correct.  But  that  has 
been  said  for  you  to  understand  that,  as  long  as  you  have 
egoism,  the  self  is  considered  sakriya  (to  be  continually  in 
some  kind  of  activity),  and  when You  have  Gnan,  the  Self 
is akriya (in a state that is devoid of activity; in the state as 
the  non-doer).  Therefore,  do  not  refer  to  the  Self  as  being 
sakriya. What does sakriya mean [in this context]? It is being 

262

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

said  from  the  relative  viewpoint  (vyavahaar).  By  relative 
viewpoint it means, say our car is moving on the road and a 
person gets hit by the car, then the policeman will tell all of 
us, “Come on, let’s go [to the police station].” At that time, 
it  will  not  be  acceptable  for  me  to  say,  “No,  I  am  a  Gnani 
Purush!”  I  have  to  say,  “I  am A.  M.  Patel.”  Hence,  this  is 
what is meant by being sakriya from the relative viewpoint.

The Doer, the Meditator; Both Are Pudgal

Questioner:  Dada, You  had  said  that  the  doer  of  the 
activity  and  the  doer  of  the  dhyan  (meditation)  are  both 
separate,  so  who  exactly  are  these  two?  The  pudgal  is  the 
doer of the activity, so then who is the doer of the meditation?

Dadashri: Actually,  both  of  them  are  pudgal  indeed. 
But the pudgal that is the doer of the activity is the achetan 
pudgal  (inanimate  pudgal;  physical  body)  and  that  other  is 
the  chetan  pudgal  (animate  pudgal),  it  is  the  pudgal  that 
is  mishrachetan  (the  developing  I  with  the  wrong  belief  of 
‘I  am  Chandubhai’).  Based  on  Akram  Vignan  (the  spiritual 
Science  of  the  step-less  path  to  Self-realization),  they  are 
both pudgal; the Self has nothing to do with this. And based 
on the Kramik path (traditional step-by-step path of spiritual 
progress),  the  [worldly-interacting]  self  is  the  doer  of  the 
meditation; based on their belief, that is the Self.

So,  the  two  can  be  separated;  the  pudgal  [that  is  the 
mechanical chetan] experiences the effect of pain or pleasure 
(bhogave)  while  the  pudgal  that  is  the  mishrachetan  does 
the dhyan. The first pudgal is the doer (karta), and because 
it  is  the  doer,  it  is  the  same  pudgal  that  later  becomes  the 
bhokta  (the  one  who  experiences  the  effects;  the  sufferer). 
And the pudgal that does the dhyan is the doer of the dhyan 
and  is  the  bhokta  of  the  dhyan  only.  Depending  upon  the 
type of dhyan done, the expression on the face will change. 
If it has not been done too intensely, then the face may not 

[3] Kriyavati Shakti

263

have a pained expression; but if it has been done intensely, 
then his face will have a pained expression.

Questioner: Now Dada, in the case where the pudgal 
is the doer, and in the other case where the mishrachetan is 
the doer, at that time, is the original Self simply prevailing 
as the Knower-Seer?

Dadashri:  Yes.  This  is  how  they  have  caused  the 
confusion;  they  have  taken  the  worldly-interacting  self 
(vyavahaar  atma)  to  be  the  Real  Self  (Nishchay  Atma). 
Secondly,  upon  believing  the  Self  to  be  the  doer  from 
the  relative  viewpoint,  they  have  gone  on  believing  this 
permanently.  And  that  is  why  they  have  believed  the  Self 
to  be  the  bhokta.  That  is  why  they  consider  the  Self  to  be 
the tyaagi (the renunciate); they believe that one will attain 
liberation  only  through  renunciation,  and  not  otherwise. 
Imagine  what  a  grave  mistake  has  been  persisting!  The 
mistake  is  such  that  everything  has  become  a  mishmash, 
and  it  was  to  destroy  this  very  mistake  that  Kundakund 
Aacharya  [a  Self-realized  Digambara  Jain  monk  who  lived 
around 600 years after Lord Mahavir attained nirvana (final 
liberation  from  all  karma,  from  the  physical  body  and  the 
worldly  cycle  of  birth  and  death)  and  who  authored  many 
Jain  texts  such  as  Samaysaar  and  Niyamsaar]  wrote.  The 
entire mistake has been destroyed but it should set in one’s 
understanding, shouldn’t it?

The  self  is  the  doer  only  by  the  relative  viewpoint, 
but  from  the  Real  viewpoint  (Nishchay),  the  Self  is  a  non-
doer (akarta). Nishchay means in Reality; as per Its inherent 
nature, the Self is a non-doer. In the same way, this Pudgal 
is  the  doer  from  the  relative  viewpoint  as  well  as  from  the 
Real viewpoint.

The  world  is  simply  existing  based  on  evidences 
(naimittik).  No  one  is  the  [independent]  doer  of  anything. 

264

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

The  doership  of  the  Pudgal  is  to  be  sakriya  (continuously 
in some kind of activity) by its inherent nature. Other things 
support  that.  The  Self  is  completely  akriya  (in  the  state  as 
the Knower-Seer; in the state as a non-doer).

The Pudgal is the only one which is sakriya as well as 

akriya. As long as it is a single Parmanu, it is akriya.

The  Self  is  [the  only  thing]  worth  realizing,  whereas 

all these other things are impersonations.

Questioner: They are activities of inanimate matter.

Dadashri:  Activities  of  inanimate  matter  would  be 
better,  but  these  are  all  simply  impersonations  [arising  due 
to the ego and the intellect].

This can only be understood when ‘we’ explain using 

examples.

Questioner:  But  who  else  is  there  to  give  such 
clarifications  in  the  current  era  of  the  time  cycle?  There  is 
no one else.

Dadashri:  The  mind,  speech  and  body  are  naturally 
kriyakaari (‘effective’ such that they take on the effect and 
give  result).  They  simply  continue  doing  everything  and 
the  Knowledge  and  Vision  of  the  Self  are  also  naturally 
‘effective’. If all these things are lying around, then the Self 
continues to See and Know them, naturally!

The Self constantly prevails in the activity of Knowing 
(Gnan kriya) only. All the other activities are being carried 
out  by  the  Pudgal.  Upon  saying,  “I  am  doing,”  veils  of 
ignorance come over the Gnan (Knowledge of the Self). The 
intellect  then  enters  the  picture.  Just  as  you  would  cover  a 
light bulb with a piece of cloth, similarly there is a veil of the 
intellect  over  the  Knowledge  of  the  Self. As  One  becomes 
free  of  the  prevalence  of  the  I  in  the  relative  (hupanu),  the 

[3] Kriyavati Shakti

265

stains of karma start to clear away, thus infinite Knowledge 
manifests, infinite Vision manifests.

Since time immemorial, the stains of karma have been 
adhering  on  all  the  pradesh  (smallest  amount  of  space  that 
a  single  parmanu  occupies  on  the  Self)  of  the  Self.  When 
such karmic effects are stuck on It, how can the energies of 
the Self be realized?

Humans do not have the energy to prevent even a single 
strand  of  hair  from  growing.  Oh,  mortal  one!  When  you 
have no control over your own hair, where else do you have 
any  control?  No  human  being  has  the  authority  to  become 
sakriya  or  to  become  akriya.  No  one  has  the  independent 
authority to go relieve themselves, neither does anyone have 
the independent authority to not go relieve themselves. This 
is because this world is being run entirely by Pudgal.

Who does the activity? The Pudgal does. That is why 
Lord Krishna has said, “Oh mortal one! How are you going 
to prevent it? How can you restrain the senses? Is there any 
solution out there that can restrain them?”

Questioner:  ‘I  do  not  have  to  do  anything  at  all,’  is 
that  called  inactivity  (nishkriyata)  or  is  that  considered  as 
being the Self (Chetanta) in its entirety?

Dadashri: That  is  considered  as  being  the  Self  in  its 
entirety. Having [the belief that,] ‘I have to do something’ is 
verily  the  illusion. With  great  difficulty,  ‘we’  have  brought 
You from the state of doing activities into the state of akriyata 
(in  the  state  as  the  non-doer).  Who  would  now  engage  in 
those  activities  once  again?  That  is  why  ‘we’  have  given 
You  a  guarantee.  your  household  will  run  properly,  You 
do  not  have  to  ‘do’  any  activities  for  that,  it  will  actually 
continue  to  happen  on  it  own, You  just  keep  Seeing.  Now, 
activity does not remain [for You]. What does entering into 
an activity mean? It means to stick your hand in worldly life 

266

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

once again. Akriyata (the state as the non-doer; the state as 
the  Knower-Seer)  alone  is  the  main  thing,  but  no  one  can 
remain akriya. There is not a single man in this world who 
can remain akriya. And if One is able to remain in the state 
as  the  non-doer  (akriya)  through  Dada’s  Agnas,  then  that 
is the absolute. If one can come into an akriya state in this 
world, it is beneficial; it is as good as a blessing.

The Self is Not the Doer in Any Way!

Questioner:  Does  akriya  mean  non-doership?  So  the 
question  is,  does  sakriya  mean  to  prevail  as  the  Knower-
Seer (Gnata-Drashtapanu)?

Dadashri:  To  prevail  as  the  Knower-Seer  is  itself 
considered as being akriya. What is considered as sakriya, it 
is this Pudgal; it has the inherent nature of doing activities.

Questioner: To prevail as the Knower-Seer, is that not 

an activity?

Dadashri: No, ‘we’ had said that once, just to explain 
something. The activity of Seeing and Knowing have to be 
done but in Reality those activities are not like the activities 
done  in  the  relative.  It  is  the  Pudgal  alone  that  is  sakriya. 
The Self is indeed constantly akriya.

Questioner:  Every  eternal  element  (padaarth)  is 
endowed  with  its  activity  that  transforms  it,  so  when  this 
transformation  or  change  is  constantly  taking  place,  is  that 
not considered an activity?

Dadashri: No. The activity is actually being done by 
this Pudgal alone. Meaning that, the activities of the Pudgal 
[Parmanu]  are  going  on  constantly.  They  are  themselves 
sakriya;  things  like  the  formation  of  our  body  and  then  its 
dispersal,  thereafter  they  [the  Parmanu]  dissipate.  They 
come  to  be  bound  and  then  they  disperse.  They  have  the 

[3] Kriyavati Shakti

267

property of being sakriya, which is not present in any of the 
other eternal elements. The remaining five eternal elements 
are  not  sakriya  (continuously  in  some  kind  of  activity);  all 
five of them are akriya (in a state that is devoid of activity).

The Pudgal will continue to become new and old, that 

in itself is sakriyata.

Questioner:  Krupaludev  has  referred  to  It  [the  Self] 
as being akriya in the ultimate sense, in the state as the Self 
(Parmarthe akriya), and as being sakriya in the state as the 
Knower-Seer.

Dadashri:  That  is  actually  what  the  scripture  writers 
have  spoken  to  make  people  understand,  but  in  doing  so, 
people have ended up understanding that the Self is engaging 
in activity. But, the scripture writers have said, “The Self is 
the doer of the activity of Knowing and Seeing, It does not 
‘do’ any other activity.” They have actually given this [used 
the  word  ‘activity’]  as  a  supporting  example  (odambo). 
However, the Self does not even have the property of being 
sakriya,  so  how  can  It  be  engaging  in  any  activity?  What 
you  have  in  your  belief  is  not  what  Krupaludev  intended 
to  say.  ‘He’  would  not  write  such  things.  ‘He’  would  not 
have  written  any statement  irresponsibly;  that  carries  grave 
liabilities.  Not  even  an  aacharya  (Self-realized  master)  of 
today  would  write  that  either.  The  Self  does  not  have  the 
property of being sakriya, It only has the property of being 
akriya (in the state as the Knower-Seer).

Questioner:  Has  It  been  referred  to  as  akriya  from 
the  viewpoint  that  It  does  not  have  a  sense  of  doership 
(kartabhaav)?

Dadashri: No, it is not like that.

Questioner:  However, 
(padaarth) is endowed with activity.

every 

eternal 

element 

268

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri:  No,  the  Self  is  not  endowed  with  activity 
at  all.  Everywhere  that  Krupaludev  has  written,  that  ‘every 
eternal element is endowed with activity,’ in reference to the 
word ‘sakriyata’, it is not like what we understand the word 
‘sakriyata’  to  be.  It  is  actually  referring  to  the  property  of 
constantly undergoing change (parinamanata; to be the doer 
of its own inherent nature); [to consider the Self to have] the 
property of sakriyata would be very dangerous.

Questioner:  Has  It  been  referred  to  as  sakriya  from 

the perspective of the Self undergoing change?

Dadashri: The Self is not sakriya from any perspective 
whatsoever;  to  constantly  undergo  change  is  actually  Its 
inherent nature.

Questioner: Dada, just as all these images are reflected 
in  the  mirror,  can  we  say  that  the  mirror  is  akin  to  being  a 
Knower-Seer?

Dadashri:  To  be  in  the  function  as  the  Knower-Seer 
is  like  being  the  mirror,  meaning  that  there  is  no  sense  of 
doership  of  the  Self  in  that.  Everything  is  being  reflected 
within  It  and  when  any  eternal  element  is  undergoing 
change, that is not considered as sakriyata.

Questioner:  Shrimad  Rajchandra  has  written  in  one 

place that,

‘‘All  eternal  elements  are  endowed  with  activity,’ 
[its  meaning  is  that]  every  eternal  element  is  Seen  to  have 
some  kind  of  resultant  change  taking  place.  Even  the 
Self  is  endowed  with  activity,  therefore  it  is  a  doer.  Lord 
Mahavir  has  elaborated  that  this  doership  is  trifold;  ‘In  the 
absolute  state  as  the  Self,  in  the  resulting  inherent  nature 
as  the  Self,  the  Self  is  the  doer  of  Its  own  Real  form  [as 
Knowledge]. With regard to worldly interactions that happen 
automatically [without planning], the self is the doer of the 

[3] Kriyavati Shakti

269

subtle  discharge  karma;  with  regard  to  worldly  interactions 
that require planning and efforts, the self is the doer [builder] 
of houses-cities, etc.’’

‘‘Sarva  padaarth  arth  kriyasampann  chhe,  kai  ne 
kai  parinaam  kriya  sahit  j  sarva  padaarth  jovama  aave 
chhe.  Atma  pan  kriyasampann  chhe,  mate  karta  chhe.  Te 
kartapanu  trividh  shri  Jine  vivechyu  chhe;  Parmarththi 
swabhaav  parinatie  nij  swaroopno  karta  chhe.  Anupcharit 
vyavahaar  thi  te  atma  dravyakarma  no  karta  chhe  ane 
upchaarthi ghar-nagar aadino karta chhe.’’

Shrimad Rajchandra – Vachanamrut pg. 394

Dadashri: So, from the relative viewpoint, the self is 
the doer of the dravyakarma (the subtle discharge karma); in 
Reality it is the doer of Its own inherent nature as the Self.

Questioner:  The  statement  that  is  written  here  that, 

‘Even the Self is endowed with activity’…

Dadashri:  The  thing  is  that  as  far  as  the  Self  is 
concerned,  here  [in  Akram]  You  have  already  come  to 
know  what  the  Self  is.  But  otherwise,  on  the  Kramik  path 
(traditional  step-by-step  path  of  spiritual  progress),  they 
believe this one [the one doing the activities] to be the Self. 
So  they  would  undoubtedly  feel  that  it  is  endowed  with 
activity! That is indeed why they are doing all these rituals 
(kriya), forming committees and all that. By ‘rubbing away 
and wearing away’ [purifying] the self through severely set 
penance,  they  turn  the  self  into  a  diamond;  whereas  what 
does  absolute  Knowledge  states?  ‘That  is  not  so.  Why  are 
You continuously doing such severe penance? ‘You’ See this 
Self  and  make  Yourself  become  that  Self.’  ‘You’  See  the 
original Self and You make Yourself become that Self. Just 
like  when  you  have  seen  a  bus  and  you  have  to  make  a 
copy of that bus, similarly, do that here, that is what it says. 

270

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Instead  what  are  they  [people  on  the  Kramik  path]  doing? 
They themselves are continuously doing the rituals.

Questioner: The  people  on  the  Kramik  path  who  are 
continually  doing  such  rituals  (kriya),  do  they  have  that 
‘model’ in their mind?

Dadashri:  If  that  were  the  case,  then  their  salvation 
would  definitely  happen,  wouldn’t  it!  The  world,  everyone 
in  the  world,  would  not  have  that  at  all.  [Although,]  They 
definitely say, “The Self within is pure.”

Questioner:  So  Dada,  from  this  discussion,  a  very 
clear distinction has been made between the Kramik and the 
Akram  path;  that  there  is  no  such  ‘model’  on  the  Kramik 
path,  and  on  the  Akram  path,  You  have  given  us  such  a 
‘model’, You have given us the state of the pure Soul.

Dadashri:  ‘We’  have  made  You  the  ‘model’  Itself, 

now You have to ‘repair’ this [pudgal].

Questioner:  This  is  where  the  very  basic  and 
fundamental  difference  comes  in.  And  thereafter,  the 
difference  spreads  even  further  as You  delve  deeper  within 
it.

Dadashri:  They  hold  their  ear  lobes  from  behind, 

whereas we hold them directly.

Questioner:  Those  people  have  to  do  an  important 
type of ritual, but for that, they require a ‘chisel’, just like a 
sculptor does, do they not?

Dadashri:  The  ‘chisels’  are  needed.  Even  if  one  has 
the  ‘chisel’  today,  the  kriya  (ritual)  will  happen  only  if  he 
had  had  the  intention  (bhaavna)  to  do  so  in  the  past  life! 
Now,  if  one  does  the  bhaav  today  that  he  wants  to  take 
on  the  ‘chisel’,  then  it  will  happen  in  his  next  life  [on  the 
Kramik path].

[3] Kriyavati Shakti

271

Questioner:  Yes,  and  on  the  Akram  path,  there  are 

actually no ‘chisels’ at all.

Dadashri:  Nothing  of  the  sort.  ‘One’  just  Sees  this 
way  and  that  way  and  it  [the  spiritual  work  of  attaining 
liberation] will be done. It will happen just by continuously 
Seeing.

Just  look  at  the  astounding  greatness  and  importance 
of Akram Vignan these mahatmas have humbly represented 
through their experiences! How simple and easy it is!! There 
is nothing to be done at all!

There is no fault of theirs in that, the Kramik path itself 
is that way. The entire belief of that path is like that. [Their 
belief is] ‘I am verily this, the Self’ and that is indeed what 
has to be made steady (sthir). So, they go to meditate on the 
Self by standing on huge stones. Due to the fear of falling, 
in  order  to  ensure  that  they  do  not  fall,  they  remain  alert 
and they practice kayotsarg (standing in an upright position 
and  meditating  on  the  properties  of  the  pure  Soul  after 
renouncing  the  mind,  speech  and  body)  in  this  way.  They 
believe  the  kashay  atma  (the  self  which  has  anger,  pride, 
deceit  and  greed)  to  be  the  Self;  they  do  not  believe  the 
indriya  atma  (the  physical  self  which  is  ‘effective’  through 
the  sense  organs;  Mangaldas)  to  be  the  Self,  because  they 
actually  consider  that  to  be  the  body.  So,  [they  believe],  ‘I 
am renouncing this’ meaning that ‘I am separate from this’. 
Therefore,  [first]  there  is  the  indriya  atma  [Mangaldas;  the 
physical body], the second one is the kashay atma [the bavo; 
the  the  internal  one  with  wrong  beliefs  and  anger,  pride, 
deceit and greed] and the third one is the darasal Atma (the 
Real  Self),  the  akashayi  Atma  (the  Self  that  is  free  of  all 
kashay) [the original Self]!

Questioner: None of them know about power chetan, 

do they?

272

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri: That is why ‘we’ said, “This Science is one 
that has been coming along from the past, it is not mine.” So 
they said, “Do not say that! ‘Yours’ is a special Science. All 
this  is  not  in  the  science  that  has  been  coming  along  from 
the past. Not a word of this is in that, on top of that, Yours 
is exclusive and it is absolutely novel.” ‘We’ said, “No, why 
would I want to take on that liability? That which is of the 
twenty-four Tirthankars is the correct one.”

If someone robs you of ten thousand rupees, at that time 
You will have the experiential awareness as the Self (bhaan), 
‘That  pudgal  is  pretty  strong  that  it  can  rob  ten  thousand 
from  this  pudgal.’ At  that  time,  the  experiential  awareness 
that prevails that ‘this is the craftsmanship (karamat) of the 
Pudgal’,  is  keval  Darshan  (absolute  Vision).  No  one  had 
understood  this  in  this  world.  To  prevail  in  the  constant 
awareness  (khyaal)  that,  ‘In  whatever  is  being  done  in  this 
world,  whether  the  world  finds  it  acceptable  or  not,  yet  ‘I’ 
am not doing anything at all,’ that is keval Darshan. Having 
the  understanding  set  in  that  ‘this  is  the  craftsmanship  of 
the Pudgal,’ that is keval Darshan. To Know that ‘these are 
the skillful activities of the Pudgal,’ that is keval Gnan. If it 
comes into experience that ‘this is the craftsmanship of the 
Pudgal,’  then  it  is  keval  Charitra  (absolute  Conduct  as  the 
Self).



[4]
The Pudgal Is Prasavdharmi

Ekodaham, Bahusyam

Questioner:  Ekodaham  bahusyam,  can  you  please 

explain that?

Dadashri: ‘I’ was the only one and then all these came 
about. ‘I’ was just one, and all these [forms] arose? How is 
that possible? People have understood this differently.

Questioner: Dada, what is its exact meaning?

Dadashri:  As  the  Self,  ‘I’  am  just  one,  and  with 
tadaakaar  bhaav  (by  taking  on  the  form  as  the  pudgal 
whilst  remaining  totally  separate  from  it)  in  the  world,  I 
take  on  endless  forms.  This  is  because  the  pudgal  is  such 
that it has many forms, ‘I am the maternal uncle (mama), I 
am the paternal uncle (kaka), I am the fua (father’s sister’s 
husband), I am this and I am that.’ ‘I’ am just one, but I take 
on many forms.

Questioner: So what energy is at work here? What is 

the difference between this energy and that other energy?

Dadashri:  The  other  is  an  inanimate  energy  (jada 
shakti)  entirely,  whereas  this  is  the  energy  of  the  Self 
(Chetan  shakti).  The  former  is  an  energy  that  gives  rise  to 
many  visible  forms  (roopi  shakti),  infinite  forms;  and  it  is 

274

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

prasavdharmi; from one, it has the inherent nature to show 
or give rise to endless other visible forms.

This  world  is  such  that  it  can  take  on  many  visible 
forms; that is why people are confused. The inherent nature 
of the pudgal is such that it can take on many visible forms. 
The confusion will go away if You understand this; You will 
then become free of everything.

Questioner: The two energies are different, is that so?

Dadashri:  They  [the  two  eternal  elements]  are  very 
different, the two have nothing to do with each other at all. It 
is just that they are in contact (sansarg) with each other, but 
otherwise there is no relationship between them whatsoever. 
Hey! Neither one is under the control of the other.

Confusion Due to Prasavdharma!

So,  it  is  worth  understanding  this  world.  How  many 

things can be made from wheat?

Questioner: Many things. There are many things that 

can be made out of wheat.

Dadashri: How many things can be made out of it?

Questioner: I have not calculated that, but there must 

be many things that can be made from it.

Dadashri:  This  world  is  filled  with  parmanu  having 
the  potential  to  show  endless  other  visible  forms  from  one 
(prasavta).  The  parmanu  are  prasavdharmi  (having  the 
inherent  nature  to  give  rise  to  endless  visible  forms  from 
one).

What  is  the  nature  of  the  pudgal  actually  like?  It  is 
prasavdharmi.  Everything  that  is  visible  in  this  world,  it  is 
all prasavdharmi. So, if you are sitting here, and somebody 
has  set  up  many  mirrors  around  you,  then  even  if  you  are 

[4] The Pudgal Is Prasavdharmi

275

only  one,  many  reflections  of  you  would  be  seen  in  the 
mirrors, would they not?

Questioner: Yes.

Dadashri: So in that case, you are sitting in just one 
place, but [in the mirror] it is prasavdharmi [endless visible 
forms of you are seen].

What’s  more,  if  someone  has  placed  five  hundred 
thousand  pieces  of  mirrors,  then  you  will  see  an  image  of 
‘Chandubhai’ in each one of them. And if only one piece of 
mirror is placed, then you will see only one.

If you stand in front of them and raise your two hands 
like  this,  then  all  the  mirrors  will  show  your  image  with 
two hands raised; imagine the antics! If you tell the mirror, 
“Hey, just show one, do not show many of the same,” then 
will  the  mirror  let  go  of  its  nature? All  of  them  will  show 
[your image], will they not? It would confuse one, wouldn’t 
it? But what can one do?

So, the inherent nature is such that it can give rise to 
endless  visible  forms  from  one;  infinite  visible  forms  from 
one. Meaning that, things continue to be formed. From one 
to two, from two to four and from four, endless forms keep 
on arising. The inherent nature of the pudgal is such that it 
can  give  rise  to  endless  visible  forms  from  one.  The  Self 
does  not  have  this  inherent  nature  of  giving  rise  to  endless 
other visible forms from one. The eggs just keep on getting 
laid, they keep on getting laid, that is all. Subsequently, one 
would definitely get perplexed, and would start to believe, ‘I 
am the only one that seems to be laying these eggs, so these 
eggs  are  definitely  mine.’  Now,  how  can  any  resolution 
come about, tell me? So, people get perplexed and to what 
extent?  To  the  extent  that  they  even  believe  God  to  be  the 
doer.  If  they  consider  God  to  be  the  doer,  then  how  long 
will their belief last? They believe, ‘God has done all of this 

276

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

to me.’ That is definitely not exact, is it! And that which is 
not  exact  cannot  last  for  long.  So  they  become  perplexed 
once again. So, it [that belief] does not help when it is really 
needed, at a critical time. The inherent nature of the Self is 
not  prasavdharmi.  That  is  why  You  have  benefitted,  after 
becoming the Self. Whereas for the pudgal, endless visible 
forms keep on arising from one.

Just  like  something  may  be  spoken  on  just  one 
television, but it can be heard throughout the world; that is 
prasavdharma.

One Image in the Ocean and Numerous in Water 
Pots!

There is one moon in the sky, but if you place a hundred 
thousand  water  pots  near  the  shore  of  the  ocean,  then  you 
will see only one moon in the ocean, but a hundred thousand 
will be seen in the hundred thousand water pots. Such a vast 
ocean, but only one moon to be seen; and just imagine there 
is an image in each and every water pot! Each water pot will 
say, “The entire moon is visible in us too.” So the water pot 
is considered as being bound, isn’t it! The water pot is akin 
to  the  ego  arising,  a  divisiveness  has  arisen;  whereas  for 
the ocean, there is no divisiveness, so it does not have any 
problems, does it? Therefore, the ones with divisiveness are 
all ‘water pots’. Endless visible forms from just one, and all 
of that just keeps going on, there is no end to that.

Questioner:  But  even  though  endless  forms  of  the 
pudgal are arising, yet only one of the original one is present.

Dadashri: Yes, the original one that is present is only 
one. You can see only one moon in the ocean, why is that?

Questioner:  It  is  because  the  ocean  is  just  a  single 
mass of water, whereas those are separate masses of water. 
That is why many visible forms of the moon are seen.

[4] The Pudgal Is Prasavdharmi

277

Dadashri:  There  is  only  one  moon,  but  all  of  this  is 
such  that  from  one,  imagine  how  many  more  forms  keep 
arising  (bahusyam)!  So  this  is  the  language  that  is  used  to 
convey  this  phenomenon,  but  people  have  interpreted  it  as 
per their own understanding.

Questioner: When I was young, the way I understood 
it  was  that  one  Soul  gives  rise  to  two,  and  then  four,  and 
then five. That is the kind of understanding I had.

Dadashri: No, not just you, everyone had understood 
it  that  way.  That  is  why  ‘we’  don’t  delve  too  deep  into 
bahusyam. Then people would get perplexed and why would 
‘we’ get involved in such a complication?

Questioner:  Has  bahusyam  been  mentioned 

in 

reference to the pudgal?

Dadashri:  It  is  because  of  the  pudgal  that  there  are 
endless  forms  visible  (bahusyam);  that  is  definitely  what  it 
means to convey.

Questioner: For that, You had once told me a phrase. 
I had asked, “Dada, why do you explain this in brief only? 
Please  explain  it  at  length,  so  that  people  can  understand.” 
At  which You  replied,  “If  ‘we’  were  to  explain  it  in  detail, 
then  it  would  ‘proliferate’,  that  is  indeed  why  ‘we’  only 
speak  about  it  briefly.  If  someone  understands  it,  then  it  is 
good; otherwise, it doesn’t matter.”

Dadashri:  In  fact,  by  speaking  in  detail,  it  will 
proliferate.  This  entire  worldly  life  that  is  in  existence,  it 
is made of pudgal alone. By going into detail about puran-
galan  (charge-discharge),  there  is  proliferation  [of  worldly 
life].

If the awareness of the Self is applied for the pudgal, 
then the pudgal is such that it can give rise to endless visible 
forms from one (prasavdharmi). So then, it will keep giving 

278

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

rise  to  new  things.  Just  look  at  this,  ‘children’  keep  on 
getting  born!  If  the  applied  awareness  (upayog)  as  the  Self 
prevails, then the ‘children’ will not be born.

Questioner:  Please  explain  about 

the  applied 

awareness as the Self in this.

Dadashri: For example, when drinking tea, the applied 
awareness  as  the  Self  would  be  to  simply  See  and  Know, 
that is it; there would be no interest in drinking the tea.

Any 
prasavdharmi.

insistence  for 

it 

is  akin 

to 

it  becoming 

Questioner:  Dada,  this  prakruti  is  prasavdharmi,  so 
then  is  Gnan  (the  Knowledge  of  the  Self)  the  opposite  of 
prasavdharmi?

Dadashri:  No,  Gnan  does  not  oppose  it  or  do  any 
such  thing.  Nothing  affects  Gnan,  nothing  obstructs  It, 
nothing  fights  It;  that  is  known  as  Gnan  and  that  verily  is 
Vignan  (absolute  Knowledge)!  This  worldly  knowledge  is 
matignan (worldly knowledge acquired through the medium 
of  the  sense  organs  and  the  intellect).  The  Real  matiGnan 
(Knowledge  of  the  Self  that  has  been  digested  and  that  is 
in  experience)  is  different,  whereas  this  is  actually  sumati-
kumati (knowledge acquired through both, the good and the 
misleading intellect); both are together.

Questioner: After taking Gnan, is there a cessation of 

vikalp (the wrong belief of ‘I am Chandubhai’)?

Dadashri:  Thereafter,  no  vikalp  arise  whatsoever. 
[The  wrong  belief  of]  ‘I  [am  Chandubhai]’  is  a  vikalp  and 
[the belief of] ‘[this is] mine’ is a sankalp. When ‘we’ give 
Gnan,  the  [wrong  beliefs  of]  ‘I  am  Chandubhai’  and  ‘this 
is  mine’  go  away.  For  that  person,  the  sankalp  and  vikalp 
have  gone.  Thereafter,  all  that  remains  for  Him  is  to  keep 

[4] The Pudgal Is Prasavdharmi

279

Seeing.  To  keep  Seeing  what  thoughts  are  arising  in  one’s 
own mind.

That is how this world is, it’s like a maze. Those who 
have gone beyond the intellect (abudha) will not get trapped 
in it, only those with intellect get trapped in it.

What  was  the  result  of  that?  How  can  the  intellect 

work in that case? Even the intellect gets tired of working.

Questioner: This cannot be understood by the intellect.

Dadashri: Instead, it is better for You [the Self] to go 
to  Your  own  realm,  Your  own  home  [in  the  Real  form  as 
the  Self;  moksha],  rather  than  getting  bogged  down  in  the 
nagging quarrels. How can one find a solution for that? It is 
impossible to find a solution for that!



[5]
Prayogsa - Mishrasa - Vishrasa

The Exclusive Discovery of the Tirthankar Lords!

Questioner: What is vishrasa?

Dadashri:  This  is  a  word  given  by  the  Tirthankar 
Lords. These words appear to be very important, but people 
are  not  able  to  understand  them.  So,  there  are  three  such 
words,  prayogsa,  mishrasa,  and  vishrasa.  The  Tirthankar 
Lords have revealed a wonderful thing, but if people cannot 
understand it, then what can they do? They will butt heads 
with  each  other.  This  is  in  fact  something  that  should  be 
understood through a Gnani. Now, what was the first word?

Questioner: Vishrasa.

Dadashri:  The  world  is  filled  entirely  with  Pudgal 
Parmanu  (the  smallest,  most  indivisible,  indestructible 
particle  of  inanimate  matter).  They  are  completely  pure 
Parmanu; they are not atoms (anu). They can neither be seen 
through the eyes nor through a microscope. They are solely 
Gnangamya (can be experienced through the Knowledge of 
the Self). That eternal element cannot be understood through 
anything else. When those Parmanu come together, an atom 
is formed.

Although  they  have  been  given  the  name  Pudgal 

[5] Prayogsa - Mishrasa - Vishrasa

281

Parmanu, they are really not pudgal, the poor things. They 
are in fact vishrasa Parmanu (pure phase Parmanu). These 
vishrasa  Parmanu  alone  are  such  that  they  do  not  undergo 
puran-galan;  however,  their  fundamental  inherent  nature 
is  such  that  they  all  come  together.  Thereafter,  they  form 
into  large  skandha  (aggregates  of  two  or  more  Parmanu) 
which later dissipate. The Tirthankar Lords refer to the pure 
Pudgal  Parmanu  of  the  entire  world  as  vishrasa.  Vishrasa 
means  they  are  absolutely  pure.  Even  if  the  Parmanu  have 
come  together  and  formed  an  atom,  they  do  not  lose  their 
purity.  Therefore,  this  entire  world  is  densely  packed  with 
these vishrasa Parmanu.

Questioner:  The  Tirthankar  Lords  have  referred  to 

the Parmanu which are in their pure form as vishrasa.

Dadashri: No one besides the Tirthankar Lords have 

understood these vishrasa Parmanu.

Questioner:  This  word  is  not  to  be  found  anywhere 

else.

Dadashri: It can never be anywhere else at all.

Prayogsa, Drawn in Through the Entire Body...

Questioner: How do the vishrasa Parmanu get drawn 

in?

Dadashri:  Vishrasa  refers  to  the  pure  Parmanus  that 
are on the outside; the ones that are to be found throughout 
the open space (aakash), they are called vishrasa. So, when 
one  gets  angry,  or  has  pride,  they  immediately  get  drawn 
in  [the  body].  They  enter  within  after  becoming  prayogsa 
(parmanu  in  the  charged  phase).  When  they  enter  within, 
they  are  in  the  form  of  prayogsa.  The  moment  one  does 
anger,  pride,  deceit,  and  greed,  they  immediately  become 
prayogsa.

Now,  the  moment  a  person  without  Self-realization 

282

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

(an  agnani),  the  one  with  the  belief  of  ‘I  am  Chandubhai’, 
has  a  slightly  bad  thought,  these  parmanu  enter  within. 
On  the  outside,  these  Parmanu  are  in  fact  pure,  they  are 
definitely vishrasa, but the moment that bad thought arose, 
the  vishrasa  Parmanu  immediately  got  drawn  in.  At  that 
moment,  they  become  prayogsa  and  then  enter  within. 
The  moment  you  [the  developing  I]  do  a  bhaav,  they  get 
drawn  in  right  away.  If  no  bhaav  is  done,  they  will  not 
get  drawn  in.  As  the  parmanu  enter  within,  they  go  from 
vishrasa  to  prayogsa,  meaning  that  they  undergo  a  prayog 
(an experiment; a process); they come into a laboratory.

Questioner:  Those  prayogsa  parmanu  get  drawn  in 

through the entire body, isn’t it?

Dadashri:  They  can  be  referred  to  as  prayogsa  only 
after they enter the body; the prayogsa come into being as a 
result of being drawn in.

Questioner: So when they enter the body, from where 

do they enter the body?

Dadashri: Through  the  sense  organs. When  a  person 
becomes angry, he draws the parmanu through his nose, that 
is prayogsa. Prayogsa occurs first. The moment one becomes 
angry, the parmanu immediately get drawn within. For some 
people,  they  get  drawn  in  through  the  nose  and  the  mouth, 
whereas for others, they can even get drawn in through the 
hands,  the  legs,  through  all  of  that.  As  one  trembles  with 
anger like this, the parmanu get drawn in through the hands, 
the legs, and everywhere else. Do some people not tremble 
[with anger] like this?

Questioner: They do; the moment one becomes angry, 

one trembles like that.

Dadashri:  So,  they  get  drawn  in  from  all  the  sides. 
Not  only  are  they  drawn  in  through  the  nose,  but  they  are 

[5] Prayogsa - Mishrasa - Vishrasa

283

also  drawn  in  from  everywhere  else.  That  is  [the  process 
where]  these  vishrasa  Parmanu  become  prayogsa.  And 
those  that  have  become  prayogsa,  they  are  referred  to  as 
mishrasa  in  the  next  life.  And  the  mishrasa  parmanu  are 
those  that  are  ready  to  give  effect.  The  prayogsa  parmanu 
do not give effect, they are extremely subtle parmanu.

Questioner:  Dada,  those  pure  Parmanu,  all  of  them 

are similar, are they not?

Dadashri:  There  is  no  difference  between  the  pure 
Parmanu. The moment the Parmanu get pulled in, they have 
entered  into  a  process.  To  enter  into  a  process  means  that 
they  have  all  become  parmanu  plated  with  anger.  What’s 
more, those parmanu which have become plated with anger, 
will give rise to the same amount of anger in the next life.

Questioner:  When  anger  arose  within,  the  parmanu 
that  got  drawn  within  were  pure  Parmanu.  Is  that  when 
they underwent some kind of process; some kind of change 
must have taken place in the parmanu, right? There must be 
an  electrical  charge  or  some  other  kind  of  charge  that  gets 
drawn in along with it, right?

Dadashri:  The  moment  the  anger  arises  the  color  of 
anger  gets  plated  onto  the  parmanu. And  based  on  the  ego 
that arose, the parmanu become plated with that ego.

Questioner:  So,  do  the  parmanu  plated  with  the  ego 
remain  completely  separate?  Are  the  parmanu  plated  with 
ego different, and those plated with anger different?

Dadashri:  Yes,  they  are  all  different. And,  those  are 
the very ones that give effect. The Parmanu on the outside 
are all of the same kind. Based on whatever [bhaav] you do, 
that is the kind of parmanu they become. If you inflate your 
chest  [become  proud],  then  all  the parmanu  become  plated 
with pride (maan).

284

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Questioner:  But  Dada,  that  means  that  when  the 
parmanu  get  drawn  in,  some  change  occurs  in  those 
parmanu?

Dadashri:  It  is  indeed  because  a  change  happened 

that they became prayogsa.

Questioner:  Just  as  they  say  out  there,  that  the 
parmanu  all  have  a  charge,  an  electrical  charge;  do  these 
parmanu have such a charge?

Dadashri: Yes, they indeed become charged.

Questioner: Where does such a charge come from?

Dadashri:  There 

is  an  electrical  body  within; 
everything gets charged on the basis of that electrical body. 
But  when  you  get  angry,  that  in  turn  causes  the  parmanu 
of  anger  to  get  charged.  If  you  become  greedy,  then  the 
parmanu  get  charged  with  greed,  if  you  become  proud, 
then the parmanu get charged with pride; all such parmanu 
continue to arise; the ‘seeds’ [causes] are being sown.

The  prayogsa  are  extremely  subtle,  whereas  the 

mishrasa are gross.

Questioner:  So,  the  charge  actually  comes  from 
within, doesn’t it? It is only after the parmanu get drawn in 
that they get charged within, isn’t it?

Dadashri:  They  enter  within  after  having  become 
charged. At the point of entry, they get charged from within 
automatically;  they  cannot  become  charged  outside.  They 
get pulled into the body naturally due to the [body trembling 
with] anger. And if there is no medium to pull the parmanu, 
then when the hands shake like this, they get pulled in from 
everywhere.  Even  the  legs  shake. The  hair  may  even  stand 
up, and the parmanu get pulled in from there.

These prayogsa then become mishrasa in the next life. 

[5] Prayogsa - Mishrasa - Vishrasa

285

When these mishrasa ‘ripen’, they dissipate after giving the 
effect. They all definitely do exist within.

Questioner:  At  the  time  when  they  dissipate  after 
giving  the  effect,  do  they  end  up  sowing  new  seeds  in  the 
process?

Dadashri: Actually, the new seeds are sown by you if 
you have the belief that ‘I am Chandubhai’. So, the moment 
you  become  engrossed  in  the  mind,  a  new  seed  is  sown. 
And  if You  do  not  become  engrossed,  then  a  seed  will  not 
be sown.

Those  that  were  vishrasa  are  now  referred  to  as 
prayogsa  parmanu.  The  form  of  parmanu  changed  the 
moment the bhaav was expressed by the developing I. Now 
that  they  have  become  prayogsa,  they  do  not  dissipate  just 
like  that.  The  prayogsa  parmanu  then  become  mishrasa 
naturally, of their own accord indeed. And once they become 
mishrasa, this body forms automatically. No one has to form 
this  body;  the  body  gets  formed  on  its  own.  The  prayogsa 
parmanu  cannot  form  the  body.  The  prayogsa  parmanu 
are  at  the  planning  stage,  and  thereafter,  there  is  nobody’s 
visible effort or planning at all in the process of the prayogsa 
parmanu  transforming  to  mishrasa  and  the  body  becoming 
formed from that.

That Which Gives Effect Is Mishrasa

Questioner: The parmanu that turn into mishrasa, into 

prayogsa, are they the ones that are referred to as pudgal?

Dadashri: The parmanu that become prayogsa cannot 
be  referred  to  as  pudgal.  Only  the  mishrasa  parmanu  are 
considered pudgal.

Questioner: After prayogsa happens…

Dadashri:  Prayogsa  means  that  [in  accordance  with 

286

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

the  developing  I’s bhaav]  a  red  or  yellow  color  gets  plated 
onto  the  parmanu.  Then  those  parmanu  are  ‘fed’  [inputted 
in the cause-effect cycle], and thereafter the ‘result’ [output] 
that comes out, those are mishrasa.

Questioner: The bhaav that arises on this end, which 
is the basis for those parmanu getting pulled in, is that bhaav 
also considered pudgal?

Dadashri: That [discharge] bhaav is considered galan 

(mishrasa; discharge; outflux).

Questioner: Is that considered galan?

Dadashri:  From  that  galan  (discharge  bhaav),  this 

[puran; charge bhaav] arises once again.

Questioner: That galan, is that actually pudgal?

Dadashri: That galan will cause the puran (prayogsa; 

charging; influx) to be pulled in.

Questioner: But can we consider that galan to be the 

bhaav of the pudgal?

Dadashri:  It  is  definitely  the  galan  of  the  pudgal 
alone. This  pudgal  remains  as  pudgal  as  long  as  galan  has 
not happened. Once the galan (mishrasa; discharge; outflux) 
takes place, it pulls in yet another puran (prayogsa; charging; 
influx). And for us [after this Gnan], at the time when galan 
happens, charging does not take place; that is what ‘we’ [the 
Gnani Purush] are saying.

Questioner: So then what is the position of the aham 
(the ‘I’) in all this? The one that Dada refers to as the arising 
of  the  vishesh  parinaam  (completely  new  result  that  arises 
when  two  eternal  elements  come  together).  The  aham  that 
has  arisen  as  the  vishesh  parinaam,  that  is  also  considered 
as pudgal, isn’t it?

Dadashri: It is definitely pudgal; the ahambhaav (the 

[5] Prayogsa - Mishrasa - Vishrasa

287

state  as  the  ‘I’)  and  all  of  that!  The  mind,  intellect,  chit, 
ego  is  all  pudgal;  everything  besides  the  Self  is  pudgal. 
Whatever  circumstances  have  been  encountered,  all  of  that 
is the pudgal alone. As long as the parmanu are in prayogsa 
form,  they  cannot  be  considered  as  [vibhaavik]  pudgal. 
[However, they are considered as vidharmi pudgal.]*5

Questioner:  But  this  aham,  whose  bhaav  is  it 
considered  to  be?  Whose  result  is  it?  Has  it  arisen  on  the 
basis  of  the  parmanu  that  are  undergoing  galan?  Meaning 
that, is it considered to be under the section of the parmanu 
or does it fall under the section of the Self (Chetan)?

Dadashri:  It  is  of  the  mishrachetan  (the  developing 
I  with  the  wrong  belief  of  ‘I  am  Chandubhai’)  only.  This 
entire pudgal is considered mishrachetan. The very meaning 
of  pudgal  is  mishrachetan.  Prayogsa  means  prayog  chetan 
(the  parmanu  charged  in  accordance  with  the  bhaav  of  the 
developing I). You cannot see the prayog chetan.

Questioner:  What 

exactly 

is 

considered 

as 

mishrachetan?

Dadashri: A mixture of the two, your [the developing 
I’s]  bhaav  and  the  [discharge]  parmanu,  is  known  as 
mishrachetan.

The prayogsa are at a subtle level. In the next life, they 
take on a gross form [become mishrasa] and they dissipate 
after giving effect.

The prayogsa parmanu that get drawn in are the causal 
parmanu;  they  are  in  cause  form. And  later,  when  they  go 
into  the  womb,  they  give  rise  to  the  effective  body  (karya 
deha).  ‘We’  fundamentally  bring  a  stop  to  the  arising  of 
the  causal parmanu;  hence  they  no  longer  take  on  a  causal 

*  For  further  details,  read Aptavani  14  Part  1,  Sec  1,  CH  7  Heading:  Vibhaav 
Arises From the Constant Samsaran of The Six Elements!

288

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

form. But this can happen very rarely, when a path like this 
arises  as  an  exception,  once  in  a  million  years. And  when 
one  does  not  have  Gnan,  the  parmanu  continue  to  become 
prayogsa once again, and from that they turn into mishrasa 
once  again;  the  cycle  continues  on  and  on.  One  may  be 
eating  bread  [a  human  being]  in  this  life  and  will  then  end 
up eating fodder [as an animal] in the next life. It is Kaliyug 
(current era of the time cycle characterized by lack of unity 
in  thought,  speech  and  action)  indeed!  In  Kaliyug,  one  can 
definitely fall spiritually!

The Karma Are Bound Due to a Sense of Doership

Questioner:  So  in  this  case,  how  would  the  subtle 

karma get bound?

Dadashri:  You  say,  “I  did  this,”  when  the  doer  is 
actually  the  unfolding  karma  (udaykarma). You  are  not  the 
only  one  who  says  this.  Even  great  saints  and  monks  say, 
“I  am  doing  it;”  moreover,  they  believe  it  too.  Now,  what 
nature says is, ‘For that which is happening on its own, why 
are you saying, “I am doing it”?’ By saying ‘I am doing it’, 
karma gets bound. The moment he says that, in that instant, 
he  gives  rise  to  the  corresponding  karma.  That  is  why  he 
will  take  on  a  bodily  form.  The  moment  the  parmanu  get 
drawn  in,  it  means  that  the  process  of  molding  a  physical 
form (murti) will definitely take place; that is prayogsa.

To  whom  do  these  prayog  karma  (charged  phase 
parmanu)  go?  They  are  governed  by  vyavasthit  shakti  (the 
energy  that  brings  together  the  scientific  circumstantial 
evidences  to  give  result).  And  there,  it  transforms  them 
into a gross form which then gives an ‘exact’ effect. Those 
prayogsa  karma  are  in  a  subtle  form,  and  this  [vyavasthit 
shakti]  transforms  them  into  mishrasa,  which  then  give 
effect. And if one has had the desire for sexual pleasures [in 
the past life], then vyavasthit will not only provide him with 

[5] Prayogsa - Mishrasa - Vishrasa

289

a  wife,  it  will  also  give  him  a  mother-in-law,  a  father-in-
law,  a  brother-in-law,  a  sister-in-law,  and  many  others.  So, 
in seeking out just this one thing, sexual pleasures, so many 
other ‘extra’ worldly entanglements ensue! All of this is the 
work  of  vyavasthit.  Prayogsa  means  that  nothing  else  has 
happened yet; the [charged] parmanu have just accumulated 
within.  The  prayog  (the  experiment;  the  processing)  has 
happened;  the  ‘color’  has  been  plated  on  the  parmanu.  So 
that is verily what is known as karma.

Questioner: At times, you have said that these are the 
karmic parmanu. So are the pure Parmanu different and the 
karmic parmanu different?

Dadashri: Yes, they are different. The ones [mishrasa 
parmanu] that are in the space within, they are the ones that 
pull them [the gross parmanu] in, but they [the ones within] 
are  in  the  subtle  form,  and  based  on  the  subtle  ones,  the 
gross ones enter from the outside. Only thereafter, can they 
give effect. On the basis of the past life account, the karma 
that have been bound are within. Then at the time of giving 
effect, the parmanu enter from outside, and then give effect.

Questioner: And  at  the  time  of  binding,  only  subtle 
ones  are  bound,  and  at  the  time  of  giving  effect,  the  gross 
ones come from outside?

Dadashri:  Yes,  they  do.  The  parmanu  have  the 
energy to give effect, but they can do so only when all the 
circumstances come together. The part that has visible form 
(roopi) is considered to be a part of the gross parmanu.

The Physical Body, the Subtle Body, the Causal 
Body…

Questioner:  When  a  corpse  is  placed  on  a  funeral 
pyre,  at  that  time  the  physical  body  gets  burnt  in  the  fire, 
but the subtle body goes away immediately, does it not?

290

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri:  The  parmanu  do  not  burn  at  all,  do  they! 
Those  parmanu  are  so  subtle,  whereas  in  comparison,  this 
fire  is  at  the  gross  level.  Therefore,  it  cannot  affect  the 
parmanu  at  all. All  three  bodies  are  considered  pudgal  (the 
non-Self complex that undergoes influx and outflux). (1) The 
physical  body  (sthool  deha),  (2)  the  subtle  body  (sookshma 
deha), and (3) the causal body (kaaran deha). All the faults 
are  of  the  subtle  body,  through  which  the  causal  body  pulls 
the parmanu. The parmanu of this physical body have come 
to be burned, the subtle body has not come to be burned. The 
subtle body gives rise to the causal body, which in turn gives 
rise  to  the  effects  (karya). The  parmanu  of  the  causal  body 
are extremely subtle, such that they take on the shape of our 
body.  But  depending  on  which  life  form  one  goes  to,  when 
the  parmanu  of  the  father  and  mother  come  together,  those 
subtle parmanu which were in the form of the causal body, 
start to transform into the physical body; the effective body 
(karya deha) comes into being and then continues to grow.

Questioner: The subtle ones which have transformed 
into  the  physical  ones,  will  they  transform  back  into  the 
subtle ones? Will the seeds be sown once again?

Dadashri:  They  will  continue  to  transform  from  the 
physical to the subtle, then from the subtle to the physical; 
thereafter, the same old cycle of cause and effect continues. 
Those  subtle  parmanu  are  so  subtle,  that  on  one  side  the 
mother’s food continues to go in, and on the other side all of 
those  parmanu  start  transforming  into  the  physical  [form]. 
Once  a  baby  is  born,  it  is  quite  small,  then  as  it  feeds  on 
tangible food, it grows. The parmanu are the very same, and 
it is based on those parmanu themselves that the baby gets 
food.  If  the  [karmic  account  of  the]  parmanu  are  such  that 
the mothers’ milk is for three days only, then the baby will 
get the mother’s milk only for three days. Otherwise he will 
get goat’s milk. That is how precisely all of this is arranged.

[5] Prayogsa - Mishrasa - Vishrasa

291

On the contrary, what do people say? The living being 
(jeev)  enters  in  at  six  months.  So  when  the  baby  starts 
moving in the womb, people perform a religious ceremony 
for  the  mother  and  the  baby.  They  say  that,  until  then  the 
living  being  was  not  present.  But  no,  that  is  not  so.  The 
moment the living being leaves from here, its new life starts 
from  that  very  moment  [in  the  next  body].  Just  like  the 
embryo  in  the  egg,  this  embryo  too  is  in  an  unconscious 
state. Thereafter, once certain sense organs have developed, 
it comes into a conscious state. The sense organs continue to 
manifest  day  by  day;  they  continue  to  develop.  If  we  were 
to  observe  what  happens  within,  we  would  see  the  ears 
growing,  the  nose  growing,  the  hands  growing;  everything 
would  be  developing  on  its  own.  The  ‘shoots’  would  just 
keep  on  sprouting.  At  first,  it  is  just  a  small  mass,  like  a 
potato, then slowly, gradually...

Questioner:  It  is  written  in  the  Vedas  [the  oldest 
scriptures  of  Hinduism]  that  life  enters  only  when  the  first 
breath is taken.

Dadashri:  No,  all  those  talks  are  not  experience 
based,  they  are  not  fact;  they  are  a  worldly  interpretation. 
The embryo can only develop if a living being is present in 
it, otherwise it cannot develop.

Questioner:  Does  the  living  being  enter  the  chicken 

egg after making a hole in it?

Dadashri:  No,  that  is  all  hearsay  and  that  is  exactly 
what’s been written down. The development of the embryo 
can  occur  only  when  all  the  scientific  circumstantial 
evidences inclusive of time, come together.

Questioner:  Where  do  the  parmanu  of  the  causal 

body lie in the physical body?

Dadashri: The causal body permeates throughout the 
entire physical body; however, it is in the form of parmanu. 

292

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

It is from those parmanu that subsequently [in the next life] 
the effective body develops. Those parmanu are in the subtle 
form, then in the next life, the effective body develops.

The effect can happen only from the causes. The causal 
body is like the seed of a banyan tree. In that seed lies the 
entire tree; similarly, in the causal body lies this body.

The banyan seed contains chetan (the living being; the 
life-force)  and  it  also  contains  the  [blueprint  of  the]  entire 
tree.  The  leaves  and  everything  else  are  within  the  seed; 
everything  is  in  a  compact  form.  When  the  circumstances 
come  together  on  the  outside,  they  start  sprouting.  From 
which  point  will  the  tree  start  to  bend,  that  is  all  designed 
within the seed.

Sanchit Karma, Prarabdha Karma, Kriyaman 
Karma…

Questioner:  The  karma  that  are  going  to  become 
sanchit  (accumulated  within),  they  all  gather  in  the  chit. 
Amongst  all  of  these,  the  mind,  the  intellect,  the  chit  and 
the ego, do these karma collect in the chit?

Dadashri:  There  are  three  kinds  of  karma:  they  are 
prarabdha,  sanchit  and  kriyaman.  Of  those,  the  prarabdha 
karma and the kriyaman karma are visible to us, whereas the 
sanchit karma are not visible. Sanchit means [accumulated] 
stock [of karma]. When the time is right for that accumulated 
stock  of  karma,  they  come  to  unfold  (prarabdha  karma; 
come into effect).

Questioner: When the time is right, do they come to 

unfold so that they can be experienced?

Dadashri:  Yes,  when  the  time  is  right  they  come  to 
unfold, that is when they are called prarabdha [karma]. And 
what does kriyaman mean? The visible activity that is seen 
after the karma unfolds, is called kriyaman [karma].

[5] Prayogsa - Mishrasa - Vishrasa

293

Questioner: Where  is  the  stock  of  the  sanchit  karma 

stored?

Dadashri:  The  sanchit  karma  are  stored  in  the  part 
that is the heart. Sanchit karma are in the form of parmanu, 
they  are  not  karma. And  they  are  very  tiny  parmanu. They 
require  very  little  space  in  the  heart,  and  in  fact,  in  that 
small space reside many parmanu. Then when those sanchit 
karma become ready to give effect, they become mishrasa. 
And this body has become mishrasa, so then, it keeps giving 
effect. One has to suffer both, the bitter and the sweet effects. 
Once  the  effects  have  been  suffered,  the  parmanu  become 
vishrasa once again.

Now, when you say, “There was a worthless man called 
Jasubhai who lived in my village,” that verily is considered 
as doing viradhana (to speak contrary to fact about a person, 
leading  to  spiritual  descent)  towards  God.  God  definitely 
resides  within  him,  doesn’t  He!  So,  as  the  breath  is  drawn 
in through your nose, at that very time the parmanu become 
prayogsa.  The  prayog  (experiment;  process  of  charging  of 
parmanu) took place because you spoke in that way. Hence, 
a demerit (paap) was charged; the parmanu became charged 
with demerit. And if you were to say, “I would like to give 
a donation,” at that time, the parmanu become charged with 
merit  (punya).  So  the  parmanu  that  have  become  charged 
with  demerit  give  off  a  painful  effect.  And  the  moment 
you had thoughts of donating, at that time the parmanu are 
drawn in, but they will give off an effect of merit.

The Plating Happens According to the Bhaav

Now the moment we say, “I did this, and look at how 
well  I  did  it,”  the  prayogsa  takes  place,  the  parmanu  get 
plated in accordance with the bhaav (inner intent) and enter 
within. If one has the bhaav to curse at someone, then that 
bhaav gets plated onto the parmanu. That bhaav makes those 

294

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

parmanu  become  bhaavatmak  (charged  in  accordance  with 
the  bhaav);  the  parmanu  become  plated  [with  the  bhaav]. 
Or else, upon saying, “That particular lawyer is worthless,” 
the  parmanu  enter  within,  and  because  you  said  the  word 
‘worthless’,  the  parmanu  get  a  plating  of  ‘worthless’  on 
them.

Questioner:  So  the  pure  Pudgal  Parmanu  that  were 
there, they got spoiled after having entered within. They got 
plated within.

Dadashri:  They  became  plated.  A  plating  of 
‘worthlessness’ was placed on them. And if you were to say, 
“He is a wonderful person,” then a plating of that would also 
get  placed  on  them.  What  is  prayogsa?  If  a  plating  occurs 
on  the  parmanu,  then  the  prayog  (experiment)  has  taken 
place.  Hence,  it  is  referred  to  as  making  the  preparation. 
Yes, getting the parmanu ready with the plating on it!

When a person who is not Self-realized (agnani) does 
any  bhaav,  when  he  has  thoughts  filled  with  attachment  or 
abhorrence,  then  the  parmanu  get  drawn  in.  Upon  being 
drawn  in,  they  get  colored  with  the  bhaav  the  person  had. 
With  a  ‘golden’  bhaav,  a  ‘golden’  plating  will  happen, 
and  with  a  ‘silver’  bhaav,  a  ‘silver’  plating  will  happen. 
Depending  on  the  bhaav  with  which  the  plating  happened, 
the  parmanu  will  give  off  a  similar  effect  at  the  time  of 
suffering.  The  plating  that  takes  place  with  a  kashay  laden 
bhaav  (an  intent  with  anger,  pride,  deceit  and  greed)  gives 
off  extremely  bitter  effects.  The  plating  that  takes  place 
with a vishay laden bhaav (an intent of indulging in sensual 
pleasures)  gives  off  a  mixed  effect,  both  bitter  and  sweet. 
Therefore,  whatever  bhaav  we  have  done,  those  are  all 
tantamount  to  the  karmic  account  (hisaab)  we  bind.  One 
plating  gives  off  a  pleasurable  sensation  (shata),  and  the 
other  gives  off  a  painful  sensation  (ashata);  they  are  both 
platings.  When  you  have  the  thought  today  that,  ‘I  want 

[5] Prayogsa - Mishrasa - Vishrasa

295

to  harm  that  person,’  that  is  an  ashubha  bhaav  (hurtful  or 
inauspicious intent), which in turn transforms these vishrasa 
Parmanu  into  prayogsa  parmanu.  If  the  plating  is  that  of 
a  shubha  bhaav  (helpful  or  auspicious  intent),  then  those 
parmanu  will  give  off  a  sensation  of  pleasure,  and  if  the 
plating is that of an ashubha bhaav, then they will give off a 
sensation of pain (dukh); but prayogsa will happen for sure.

The Speech Gets ‘Colored’ by Kashay

This world is filled entirely with pure Parmanu called 
vishrasa. So, when does interference take place in them? The 
moment you say to someone, “Hey, are you senseless! What 
are  you  doing?”  an  immediate  effect  takes  place  on  those 
parmanu,  based  on  what  your  kashay  (anger,  pride,  deceit 
and greed) is. Every time a person who is not Self-realized 
speaks, it is always kashay laden. If he speaks lovingly, then 
it is laden with raag kashay (attachment), meaning that it is 
lobh kashay (greed). Even if a statement is uttered with love, 
it is still considered as kashay laden, and if it is uttered with 
abhorrence (dwesh), it is also considered as kashay laden.

Now,  when  kashay  laden  speech  comes  forth  for  us, 
that  speech  affects  these  vishrasa  Parmanu.  It  dyes  them, 
it  colors  them,  it  makes  them  colorful.  Depending  on  the 
type  of  kashay,  a  corresponding  color  gets  plated  onto  the 
parmanu,  and  then  they  get  pulled  in,  within  us.  They  are 
known as prayogsa.

Questioner:  Does  one’s  leshya  (the  aura  or  coloring 
of  the  soul  based  on  its  association  with  the  karmic  matter 
or  based  on  one’s  internal  state  of  being)  change  in  this 
process?

Dadashri:  Yes,  the  leshya  changes  completely  [due 
to  the  effect  of  kashay].  When  do  karma  form?  When  the 
parmanu become prayogsa, that is when karma gets bound.

And say in business, if you sell fabric after stretching 

296

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

it whilst measuring it, then at that time there are two things 
that  take  place,  the  yogkriya  (an  activity  involving  your 
physical  body)  and  your  dhyan  (internal  state  of  being);  so 
based  on  the  multiplication  of  these  two,  the  parmanu  get 
pulled in. Now, pure Parmanu are getting drawn in, but due 
to the internal state of being during the activity, those pure 
vishrasa  Parmanu  become  charged  (prayogsa).  So  what 
kind  of  prayogsa  is  it? Well,  if  one  is  in  dharmadhyaan  (a 
virtuous internal state of being), then the prayogsa parmanu 
are in accordance with that, but if his internal state of being 
is of the other kind [adverse or with the intent to cheat the 
customer by stretching the cloth to sell less cloth], then the 
parmanu  will  be  charged  in  accordance  with  that.  If  the 
internal state of being is one befitting a hellish lifeform, then 
such will be the prayogsa parmanu.

Now, up to what point does one draw these parmanu in? 
As long as one has the awareness that ‘I am Chandubhai’, as 
long as the I prevails in the relative (hupanu), these vishrasa 
Parmanu will get drawn in. But the moment Self-realization 
is attained, when the awareness that ‘I am Chandubhai’ goes 
away, then One will no longer draw the Parmanu in.

That Which Is Subject to Vyavasthit Is Mishrasa

Questioner: At the time of death, the two bodies, the 

electrical and the causal bodies leave along with…

Dadashri: They  all  leave  together,  they  leave  behind 
only  this  physical  body;  the  physical  form  which  is  no 
longer useful is the only one that is left behind, everything 
else leaves together.

Questioner:  How  does  the  causal  body  (kaarman 

sharir) leave? Does it have a shape?

Dadashri: It leaves in the form of prayogsa parmanu. 
The  causal  body  is  nothing  but  prayogsa  parmanu.  When 

[5] Prayogsa - Mishrasa - Vishrasa

297

the  time  comes  for  them  to  unfold,  then  they  are  known 
as  mishrasa.  Prayogsa  is  considered  as  karma  [cause],  and 
mishrasa  is  considered  as  bhogavato  (the  effect  of  karma; 
that  which  is  to  be  suffered  or  experienced). The  prayogsa 
are  those  that  were  bound  in  the  past  life  and  they  are 
accumulated  within  the  body,  and  based  on  them,  in  this 
life, the mishrasa all give effect.

Questioner: After they get drawn in, do they become 

prayogsa once again?

Dadashri:  When  the  mishrasa  gives  their  effect,  as 
the  effect  feels  bitter,  we  get  upset  with  someone;  at  that 
moment,  the  parmanu  become  prayogsa  once  again.  And 
if  you  become  happy,  then  at  that  moment  too,  prayogsa 
happens.  The  very  parmanu  that  have  become  prayogsa 
[become mishrasa in this life], when they unfold to dissipate, 
the mishrasa give off the effect and dissipate; that is known 
as sansaar fal (the effect or fruit of worldly life).

The  prayogsa  [parmanu]  refers  to  those  which  are 
in  the  form  of  a  plan.  Then  they  become  mishrasa;  they 
are  the  very  ones  that  manifest  as  an  effect  (roopak). And 
those  which  manifest  as  an  effect  are  what  we  experience, 
and  what’s  more,  they  [the  mishrasa  parmanu]  keep  on 
discharging  (nirjara;  exhausting;  shedding  off),  for  the 
entire world, for every living being.

Prayogsa refers to those [parmanu] that have become 
avasthit  (charged  because  of  absorption  in  an  effect  or 
situation) whereas mishrasa refers to those that are vyavasthit 
(unfolding to give an exact effect of a cause). Those which 
have  become  avasthit  subsequently  manifest  as  an  effect. 
And  the  effects  that  the  mishrasa  [parmanu]  give  off  are 
on  the  basis  of  the  precise  laws  of  vyavasthit  (scientific 
circumstantial  evidence).  So  then,  once  the  mishrasa 
undergo  discharge,  they  become  as  they  were  originally, 

298

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

they become vishrasa. Once the bitter or sweet effects have 
been suffered, the parmanu become the way they originally 
were; the moment they have finished giving off their effect, 
they  become  vishrasa.  Therefore,  the  cycle  of  prayogsa, 
mishrasa, vishrasa keeps going on.

Prayogsa  refers  to  the  temporary  state  (avastha)  of 
the parmanu on which a process (prayog) happens when the 
worldly-interacting self (vyavahaar atma) becomes engrossed 
(tanmay)  in  a  situation.  The  prayogsa  [parmanu]  can  be 
turned  around.  Just  as  the  time  one  gets  between  writing  a 
letter and going to post it, where you can decide whether you 
want to post it or not; similarly, before the prayogsa turn into 
mishrasa,  if  one  has  the  awareness,  then  he  can  turn  them 
around. But once they become mishrasa, they will definitely 
materialize.  Then  they  can  no  longer  be  turned  around. 
After  becoming  charged,  the  parmanu  remain  accumulated 
within.  Up  until  the  time  the  prayogsa  give  off  their  effect 
and dissipate, that temporary state of the parmanu is known 
as  mishrasa.  The  mishrasa  parmanu  give  off  their  effect, 
become pure and transform back into vishrasa.

These prayogsa parmanu do not affect us [in this life]. 
When the causes happen, those parmanu become prayogsa 
and remain within. When they become ready to give effect 
and  they  manifest  externally  to  give  effect,  they  manifest 
as  the  udaykarma  (unfolding  karma);  therefore,  they  are 
called mishrasa. No one can escape those. The prayogsa can 
be  changed.  If  one  were  to  come  to  ‘us’,  ‘we’  can  change 
it  for  him.  Even  God  cannot  change  the  mishrasa.  There 
is  no  choice  but  to  undergo  the  unfolding  karma  that  has 
solidified! And the parmanu that fall away after the bitter or 
sweet  unfolding  karma  have  been  suffered,  those  parmanu 
become vishrasa, pure.

The Planning Manifests as an Effect...

Questioner: No matter what circumstances come my 

[5] Prayogsa - Mishrasa - Vishrasa

299

way,  what  if  I  completely  prevent  them  from  becoming 
mishrasa ...

Dadashri:  If  they  are  allowed  to  become  prayogsa, 
then  they  will  definitely  turn  into  mishrasa.  Where  the 
prayogsa are not allowed to form at all [there mishrasa will 
definitely not happen]. And when one gets reborn in this life, 
the prayogsa that were charged in the past life automatically 
become  mishrasa.  When  the  prayogsa  transform  into 
mishrasa,  they  are  seen  in  the  form  of  a  body.  Then  once 
they give off their effect and dissipate, they become vishrasa 
once again. If at that point in time, shuddha Charitra (pure 
Conduct  as  the  Self;  being  the  Knower-Seer)  arises  in  the 
heart, then pure vishrasa will come into effect.

Questioner: So, when the prayogsa parmanu become 
mishrasa,  is  there  really  any  effort  (purusharth)  from  our 
side?

Dadashri:  No,  the  prayogsa  turn  into  mishrasa 
automatically; there is no purusharth in that. Prayogsa means 
the parmanu are in the form of a plan, whereas mishrasa are 
related to the effect. The planning is decided by the people 
[who are not Self-realized]. Thereafter, when the work starts 
according  to  the  plan  [through  vyavasthit  shakti],  only  that 
is  mishrasa.  Once  they  become  mishrasa,  after  giving  off 
the  bitter  or  sweet  effects  which  have  to  be  suffered,  they 
dissipate.  One  [the  ego]  has  no  choice  but  to  suffer  the 
bitter  or  sweet  effects.  Bitterness  arises  within,  sweetness 
arises within. When the sweetness arises, how elevated one 
becomes! In the same way, the bitter taste arises. That too is 
a kind of a taste, isn’t it?

Now, when the mishrasa are cleared with Gnan, they 
become vishrasa. And mishrasa happens even for the people 
of  the  world  [who  are  not  Self-realized],  which  then  give 
effect  and  discharge,  but  because  of  ignorance  of  the  Self, 

300

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

they once again acquire new parmanu. After Self-realization, 
the acquisition of new parmanu ceases. The reason for this 
is that One has the conviction of ‘I am pure Soul’, and the 
[old] conviction of ‘I am Chandubhai’ has vanished for him.

There Is No Prayogsa, After Self-Realization

The  entire  world  is  filled  with  pudgal  only.  But  all 
Parmanu that are in the natural form (swabhaavik), those are 
called  vishrasa. As  long  as  the  belief  of  ‘I  am  Chandubhai’ 
prevails,  even  if  one  does  religious  rituals  all  day  long,  the 
parmanu  keep  entering  within;  puran  (influx  in  the  form 
of  charging)  continues  to  happen.  If  you  were  to  ask,  “Hey 
parmanu,  why  do  you  keep  entering  my  home?”  then  they 
will  say,  “You  yourself  are  pudgal.  If You  are  the  Self,  then 
we  definitely  cannot  come  in.  But  yes,  as  you  are  saying  ‘I 
am Chandubhai,’ we are entering.” Now, You say, “I am pure 
Soul,”  therefore  all  of  these  parmanu  do  not  get  drawn  in. 
No  matter  what  activity  (kriya)  is  being  done,  the  parmanu 
cannot enter. And if the parmanu enter within, it means that 
the pudgal continues to undergo puran (influx; charging) and 
thereafter the galan (outflux; discharging) is bound to happen.

But for the One who has attained the Self, the parmanu 
will not enter at all. So then where is the possibility of them 
giving  any  effect?  Neither  bitter  effects,  nor  sweet  ones. 
‘One’  prevails  only  in  the  bliss  of  the  Self. As  such,  these 
bitter  or  sweet  effects  prevent  the  bliss  of  the  Self  from 
arising,  and  make  one  dwell  only  in  the  bitter  or  sweet 
effects. Whereas  that  other  is  One’s  own  spontaneous  bliss 
of the Self, due to which contentment prevails; it gives rise 
to constant contentment. The bliss of One’s own Self is such 
that it will not matter even if You do not have anything.

Mishrasa the Entire Life…

Vishrasa 

are  natural 
(pure  phase  Parmanu) 
(swabhaavik).  They  do  not  have  a  pudgal  (bodily  form). 

[5] Prayogsa - Mishrasa - Vishrasa

301

They  are  aguru-alaghu  (neither  heavy,  nor  light;  neither 
increase  nor  decrease).  It  is  the  vikrut  (unnatural)  pudgal, 
the  vikaari  pudgal  (parmanu  that  have  deviated  from  their 
original  nature),  the  one  from  which  blood  and  pus  comes 
out, that is mishrasa. That pudgal is the one which becomes 
guru-laghu (heavy or light; increase or decrease).

Now,  in  fact  the  entire  world  is  also  encompassed  in 
mishrasa. What is mishrasa? From the moment one is born 
until one goes to the funeral pyre, that is all mishrasa. What 
else  arises  from  them? The  answer  is,  new prayogsa  arises 
once again. The prayogsa that arise in this life will become 
mishrasa in the next life. Therefore, it is this very mishrasa 
that are being suffered constantly. The suffering (bhogavato) 
is due to the mishrasa. Now, if the mishrasa were to become 
vishrasa  without  any  new  karmic  bondage  being  created, 
then  One  [the  Self]  would  become  free.  Otherwise,  One 
cannot become free.

If  someone  hurls  abuse  at  you,  then  what  You  have 
to  do  now  is  clear  it  with  equanimity  (sambhaave  nikaal). 
When [You remain in the awakened awareness of] ‘I am pure 
Soul’,  and  after  Seeing  the  pure  Soul  in  the  other  person, 
You clear [the file] with equanimity, then the parmanu that 
were mishrasa, become vishrasa once again.

Do ‘we’ not say, “By clearing a file with equanimity, 
the parmanu become pure.” It is indeed because You See the 
pure Soul at that time that the parmanu become pure. These 
parmanu  are  actually  constantly  unfolding  to  give  effect; 
and more so, they dissipate after becoming pure, hence they 
don’t  lay  any  claim  again. Therefore,  the  parmanu  ‘get  set 
up in’ [return back to] the Parmanu, and the [awakened] Self 
‘gets set up in’ [prevails as] the Self, that is what is referred 
to  as  moksha. Therefore,  there  is  no  longer  the  question  of 
coming into bondage once again. Once the Self has become 
free, It cannot have any bondage.

302

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

The  prayogsa  have  been  charged  in  the  past  life. 
When  those  prayogsa  later  become  subject  to  scientific 
circumstantial  evidence,  they  turn  into  mishrasa  and  then 
become evident in this life. The mishrasa have to be suffered 
in this life.

Questioner:  Dada,  if  those  parmanu  are  suffered 
whilst remaining in Gnan, then would they become vishrasa 
once again?

Dadashri:  Yes,  if  they  are  purified  by  remaining  in 
Gnan,  then  they  will  become  vishrasa.  Meaning  that  You 
are  thereafter  no  longer  responsible  for  them.  For  how 
long  are  You  responsible  for  the  parmanu?  For  as  long  as 
they do not turn into vishrasa. Therefore, the parmanu that 
were charged in a state of ignorance of the Self, need to be 
purified by remaining in Gnan.

Now, Karma Do Not Get Charged

Questioner: If we want to ensure that prayogsa do not 

arise within us at all, then what should we do?

Dadashri: For those who take Gnan (the Knowledge 
of  the  Self  and  the  doer  given  in  the  Gnan  vidhi)  that  is 
exactly what has been done!

Questioner: We [mahatmas] have taken this Gnan, so 
I want to understand, ‘What state are we in?’ Does prayogsa 
happen for us anymore? When the mishrasa come to unfold, 
and  are  giving  off  their  bitter  or  sweet  effects,  at  that  time 
what  would  our  state  be  considered  as,  now  that  we  have 
taken Gnan?

Dadashri: Because you are unable to tolerate the bitter 
effects, as a reaction, you get irritated with the other person.

Questioner:  That  definitely  ends  up  happening  in 

reality. It tends to happen.

[5] Prayogsa - Mishrasa - Vishrasa

303

Dadashri: In Reality, it is not You who gets irritated; 
You are the pure Soul, and it is this ‘Chandubhai’ who gets 
irritated.

Questioner: Yes, it is ‘Chandubhai’ who gets irritated.

Dadashri: Yes, now if one were to get irritated in an 
ignorant  state,  then  at  that  time,  he  would  once  again  be 
drawing  in  parmanu.  But  after  attaining  Gnan,  the  energy 
that  was  pulling  the  parmanu  is  no  longer  there.  This  is 
because  the  one  who  was  pulling  them  has  gone,  he  has 
become  separate.  So,  what  do  You  now  have  to  do?  The 
parmanu are no longer being pulled in, but if you ‘go into’ 
[become engrossed in] them once again, then they will come 
to  unfold  again;  the  very  same  ones.  It’s  similar  to  when  a 
letter  has  been  sent  out  without  being  signed,  it  will  then 
come back to be signed.

Questioner:  So,  does  that  mean  that  prayogsa  does 

not arise for us [mahatmas] anymore?

Dadashri: But how can they arise? They cannot arise 

at all.

Questioner:  Yes,  the  one  who  would  carry  out  the 
prayog  (process;  experiment)  has  become  separate,  so  the 
prayog cannot ever take place, right!

Dadashri: Yes,  there  is  no  doer! They  would  arise  if 

there was a doer.

Questioner:  But  Dada,  the  discharge  ego  that  still 

remains, and one gets heated up, all that is still…

Dadashri:  That 

[discharge  ego]  cannot  charge 
anything.  But  whatever  goes  by  without  being  Seen  and 
later  You  become  aware  that  ‘this  was  a  mistake’,  then 
that  will  come  back  again  and  You  will  have  to  clear  that 
[with  equanimity].  It  will  not  do  if  it  is  sent  off  without  a 

304

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

‘signature’. Each one has to have a ‘signature’. Each paper 
has  to  be  ‘signed’;  signed  with  the  ‘signature’  of  samata 
(equanimity  that  prevails  for  One  who  is  in  the  experience 
of the Self).

Questioner: Of samata?

Dadashri:  Yes,  of  clearing 

it  with  equanimity 

(sambhaave nikaal).

Questioner:  So,  the  awakened  Self  will  now  have  to 
pay proper attention and ensure that He signs everything off 
and only then will it be cleared with equanimity?

Dadashri: Yes, but wherever it is sticky, the signature 
will not happen, and it will remain pending; hence suffocation 
arises.  So  then,  the  same  thing  will  come  once  again  in 
this  very  life. That  much  of  a  karmic  account  still  remains 
pending for You to clear off. If you have a pile of clothes to 
wash and you forget to wash two of them, then they will be 
returned for washing, won’t they?

Questioner: Yes.

Dadashri: All of them will have to be washed.

This  Science  is  of  a  different  kind,  therefore  here 
You are no longer held responsible. ‘You’ have become the 
pure Soul, isn’t it! This will not do at all on the traditional 
Kramik path. On the Kramik path, one would definitely end 
up  binding  karma.  For You  [on  the  Akram  path],  ‘this’  [no 
more prayogsa] is the prize. Eat, drink and be merry.

After  taking  this  Gnan,  there  is  a  difference  between 
You [a mahatma] getting angry and a person without Gnan 
getting angry. For You, the Pudgal Parmanu do not get drawn 
in. Your anger is not capable of pulling the pudgal, whereas 
those  other  people’s  anger  pulls  in  the  pudgal  [parmanu] 
quite strongly, it pulls them in by the bulk.

[5] Prayogsa - Mishrasa - Vishrasa

305

Therefore, those [parmanu] that were vishrasa become 
prayogsa.  Prayog  (experiment;  process)  refers  to  the 
parmanu becoming ‘joined’ [colored; plated] with the intent 
of this [worldly-interacting; vibhaavik] self. Those parmanu 
that have become prayogsa are the causal parmanu, and the 
effective  parmanu,  they  later  give  effect  in  the  mishrasa 
form.  So,  for  You,  the  mishrasa  remain  and  the  prayogsa 
have  ceased.  Whereas,  for  the  whole  world  [those  without 
Self-realization],  the  prayogsa  and  the  mishrasa  continue, 
yet  however  many  mishrasa  there  are,  they  all  definitely 
turn back into vishrasa. The mishrasa turn into vishrasa, but 
[for those in a state of ignorance of the Self,] new ones will 
have been bound along with that. And for You, the mishrasa 
turn  into  vishrasa  and  no  new  ones  are  bound.  For  You, 
the  mishrasa  will  continue  to  turn  into  vishrasa;  prayogsa 
does not happen. All the liability would come if the prayog 
(experiment; charging process) was ongoing, but the prayog 
itself has ceased altogether.

Questioner: Why do the parmanu that are undergoing 

dissipation come back into the cycle [of being charged]?

Dadashri: With  [the  belief  that,]  ‘I  am  doing  it’,  the 
cycle will repeat. If You don’t ‘do’, then the cycle will not 
repeat.  That  too,  this  cycle  is  ongoing  because  of  a  fault 
you  have  committed.  What  is  your  fault?  Someone  else  is 
the  doer,  and  you  believe,  ‘I  am  doing  it’.  So  ‘this’  is  the 
punishment for that fault.

Questioner:  The  cycle  will  repeat  only  if  the  bhaav 

(the belief) of ‘I am doing it’ prevails, isn’t it?

Dadashri: Yes, it will only happen if that is the case.

Questioner:  So,  wherever  the  sense  of  doership 
(kartabhaav) arises, does that mean that there, the cycle will 
repeat?

Dadashri:  The  entire  world  prevails  in  the  sense  of 

306

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

doership  only.  The  monks,  the  renunciates,  they  are  all 
indeed  prevailing  in  the  sense  of  doership.  They  have  the 
awareness that, ‘We indeed are the ones doing.’ It is solely 
because  of  this  Gnan  that  You  have  become  free  of  the 
prevalence in doership (kartapanu), meaning that You have 
become the pure Soul.

Now the Possessions Are Also Discharge

So now karmic accounts will not be bound. Otherwise 
[without  Gnan],  the  karmic  accounts  with  the  entire  world 
would  indeed  continue  to  proliferate,  whereas  for  You  the 
limit has been reached; the discharge has a limit, ‘Only this 
much is left.’

Questioner: Only those that are pending from the past 

life, that’s all.

Dadashri: Yes, only those many parmanu.

Questioner:  Do  we  refer  to  that  limit  as  parigrah 
(worldly  possessions;  worldly  acquisitions)?  Is  the  limit 
referring  to  reducing  the  parigrah  or  should  one  limit  the 
parigrah?

Dadashri:  Everything  is  discharge.  Increasing  the 
parigrah  is  discharge,  and  limiting  the  parigrah  is  also 
discharge.

Questioner: That is also discharge?

Dadashri: Yes, and to remain aparigrahi (one who is 
in a state free from worldly attachment or acquisitiveness) is 
also discharge. The aparigrahi state has come into effect [in 
this life] due to the bhaav [done in the past life] of wanting 
to  remain  aparigrahi.  But  that  too  is  discharge.  That  is 
also  something  that You  will  have  to  relinquish.  That  state 
cannot  come  along  with  You  over  there,  in  moksha.  That 
state is actually helpful for certain ‘stations’ [on the Kramik 

[5] Prayogsa - Mishrasa - Vishrasa

307

path],  so  it  will  help  for  those  ‘stations’.  But  it  is  of  no 
help  whatsoever  for  these  ‘stations’  [on  the  Akram  path]. 
These  are  the  very  ‘stations’  that  You  have  to  solve  [with 
equanimity].  ‘You’  have  to  solve  all  of  those,  because You 
have to clear [discharge] all the parmanu.

Through the Agnas, They Become Pure

When you curse at someone in your mind, then whether 
it  becomes  ‘hot’  within  or  whatever  else  happens  within,  if 
You  clear  it  with  equanimity,  then  the  parmanu  will  become 
vishrasa and dissipate. The Pudgal has a complaint. Now what 
does  it  say?  The  Pudgal  says,  “‘You’  have  become  the  pure 
Soul; Dada has made You free and even though we do accept 
that, but what about us? Dada cannot free us. Dada has freed 
us as much as was possible. The rest has to be done by You, 
because  you  are  the  one  responsible. We  were  actually  pure, 
but  you  were  the  one  who  spoiled  us.  ‘You’  cannot  become 
[completely]  free  without  purifying  us.”  The  reason  for  this 
is,  the  parmanu  claim,  “We  have  not  become  impure  on  our 
own; you plated us with your bhaav, and that is why we have 
become impure. So, if You make us pure, then You will become 
free; otherwise You will not become free. Put us back into the 
state we were originally in. That is Your responsibility.”

They  say,  “You  latched  on  to  us.  If  You  now  claim 
that  ‘I  am  free,’  if You  now  push  us  away,  it  will  not  do.” 
So,  You  ask,  “How  should  we  solve  this?”  The  answer  is, 
“Follow the Agnas (the five special directives that preserve 
the  awareness  as  the  Self  in  Akram  Vignan)  as  Dada  has 
said, and enjoy your food peacefully. Then put your hand on 
your stomach and sleep; rest a little. But live in accordance 
with Dada’s Agnas constantly.”

So  that  is  why  ‘we’  have  said,  “Keep  clearing  with 
equanimity.”  If  someone  hurls  abuse  at  you,  then  keep 
clearing that with equanimity. Now, if those parmanu [within] 

308

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

get heated up, it means that a bitter effect has unfolded. And 
for those that give rise to happiness within, understand that 
a sweet effect has unfolded. As You keep Seeing them, they 
will  give  off  the  effect  and  leave,  meaning  that  they  will 
become pure. All those Parmanu will then dissipate.

Liberation Attained With an Absolutely Blemish-
Free State

“Not even a single parmanu can be seen to touch It,
Behold the absolutely blemish-free steady form as the Self,
Pure, free from karma, exclusive oneness with the Self,
Behold the neither increasing nor decreasing, invisible, 
natural form as the Self.’’

‘‘Ek  parmanumatrani  made  na  sparshata,
Poorna  kalank  rahit  adol  swaroop 
jo,
Shuddha niranjan Chaitanyamurti ananyamai,
jo.’’
Aguru-laghu  amurt  sahajpad  roop 

- Shrimad Rajchandra

Dadashri:  ‘He’  [Shrimad  Rajchandra]  is  saying  that 
if  there  is  no  ‘touch’  of  even  a  single  parmanu,  then  One 
can  prevail  in  an  absolutely  blemish-free  steady  state. 
Whosoever’s  parmanu  you  have  acquired,  once  they  are 
returned  back  to  them,  and  no  one  raises  a  red  flag,  then 
know that everyone has given you the green signal, meaning 
that the Parmanu have been returned.

Questioner:  So  Dada,  when  You  say,  “Even  the 
parmanu  will  have  to  be  purified,”  is  this  what  you  are 
referring to?

Dadashri:  Yes.  They  will  have  to  be  [purified]  for 

sure!

‘We’ used to travel by train before. At that time, about 
fifty to a hundred people would come to see ‘us’ off and then 
they would sing a few spiritual hymns (pados) and enliven 

[5] Prayogsa - Mishrasa - Vishrasa

309

the  atmosphere  across  the  entire  station.  What  would  they 
not do when overcome with love? It so happened that there, 
one man told me, “Dada, please do not go today.” So ‘we’ 
realized  that  he  is  showing  ‘us’  a  red  flag;  while  everyone 
else  is  showing  a  green  signal.  In  that  case,  ‘we’  would 
explain to him [why ‘we’ have to go] and if he understands, 
then it’s fine, otherwise ‘we’ would have to postpone ‘our’ 
trip. This is because, One cannot attain liberation (moksha) 
by  hurting  others  or  pushing  them  away.  Saying,  “Get  out 
of  my  way,  let  me  go  to  moksha,”  will  not  do.  You  may 
be allowed to push your way into a movie theatre, but You 
cannot go to moksha like that. When everyone gives You the 
green signal saying, “Sir, go ahead and please set up a path 
like yours for us too,” that is when You can go to moksha!

Questioner:  But  Dada,  the  point  is  that  ninety-nine 
people have given You the green signal and there is only one 
who is showing You a red flag, so how can You justify that?

Dadashri:  ‘You’  are  not  to  look  for  justification. As 
that  person  is  showing  you  the  red  flag,  you  can  ask  him 
the  reason  and  check  to  see  if  he  is  technically  correct  or 
not. If You feel that he is technically correct, then postpone 
your  trip.  And  if  he  is  not  technically  correct,  if  he  is  off 
track,  then  all  the  other  mahatmas  will  say  to  him,  “Dear 
fellow, don’t be adamant like this.” But, it is only when You 
check  technically  that You  will  know  what  the  problem  is. 
He may say, “My brother is in a state where he is likely to 
die  any  moment  now,”  then  ‘we’  would  analyze  that,  ‘Yes, 
he  is  technically  correct,’  so  ‘we’  would  postpone  the  trip. 
Should  You  not  check  in  this  manner,  or  do  You  want  to 
go  [to  moksha]  by  pushing  others  aside  as  You  go?  What 
do  You  think,  should  You  not  check  that?  Moreover,  has 
anyone attained moksha by pushing others aside?

So, all the parmanu will have to be settled. The karmic 
account of each and every parmanu will have to be settled. 

310

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

All these parmanu that have been taken from other people, 
once they have been returned, You will become free!

This  means  that  no  blemish  remains,  because  no  one 
has raised a red flag. Hence the blemish-free steady form as 
the  Self;  ‘we’  are  steady  in  that  form,  so  no  one  can  make 
‘us’ waver from that at all!

…Not Through Pratikraman, Simply By 
‘Prevailing in Equanimity’ and ‘Seeing’!

Questioner: How can the spoiled parmanu be purified 

and returned?

Dadashri: When someone hurls abuse at you and if at 
that time, You maintain samata (equanimity that prevails for 
One who is in experience of the Self), then all the parmanu 
are purified.

Questioner: What if samata is not maintained? Then 

will those parmanu still remain impure?

Dadashri: The parmanu become pure only if samata 

prevails.

Questioner: And what if it does not prevail?

Dadashri: If it does not prevail, then they will remain 

spoiled.

Questioner:  What  if  one  does  pratikraman  for  that 

later on?

Dadashri: Even then, they will remain spoiled.

Questioner: If pratikraman is done, then they will be 

purified, won’t they?

Dadashri:  The 

impurities  will  remain; 

it  [the 

purification] will not be like that of samata.

Questioner:  You  have  said  that  we  just  have  to 

[5] Prayogsa - Mishrasa - Vishrasa

311

maintain the firm resolve that ‘I want to clear the files with 
equanimity,’  then  whether  it  happens  or  not,  is  immaterial. 
So, supposing the file was not cleared with equanimity, then 
would they [the parmanu] still remain to be purified?

Dadashri: Yes, of course they would still be pending 
purification! However, as You are following the Agnas, for 
the most part, they will be cleared off.

Questioner: Okay, so if One decides that He wants to 
clear  with  equanimity,  then  for  the  most  part,  they  will  be 
cleared off?

Dadashri: Yes, they will be cleared off.

Questioner: And thereafter, if one does pratikraman, 

they will get cleared off completely, won’t they?

Dadashri: Yes.

Ultimate Closure Through Samayik-Pratikraman…

The  stains  keep  getting  Seen  and  you  keep  on  doing 

pratikraman.

Questioner:  These  parmanu  become  pure  through 
samayik (introspection process for a specific time in which 
One remains as the Self and Sees the faults of the non-Self), 
don’t they?

Dadashri:  They  do,  a  great  many  become  pure. 
Ultimate closure (nivedo) can come about through samayik. 
Pratikraman is the work of Pragnya (the direct light of the 
Self),  therefore  a  lot  of  things  can  be  cleared.  Whereas  in 
samayik, It [the Self] is Seeing [as separate], so everything 
gets  purified.  However  many  faults  are  Seen,  those  many 
[parmanu] get purified.

Questioner:  In  samayik,  it  is  the  work  of  the  Self 

alone, is it not?

312

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri: Straight, direct.

Questioner: To purify each and every parmanu, if We 
remain  as  the  Knower-Seer  and  keep  Seeing  that  which  is 
happening, then do they become pure?

Dadashri: That’s it.

Questioner:  Or  do 

they  become  pure 

through 

pratikraman?

Dadashri:  No,  no,  they  get  purified  only  when  One 

prevails as the Knower-Seer.

Questioner:  So 

then  what  happens 

through 

pratikraman, Dada?

Dadashri:  The  way  pratikraman  works  is,  if  a  big 
mistake has been made where the opposite person has been 
hurt,  then You  have  to  tell  ‘Chandubhai’,  “Chandubhai,  do 
not do such things. As atikraman (aggression towards other 
living  beings  through  the  mind,  body,  or  speech)  has  been 
done,  you  have  to  do  pratikraman.”  If  no  atikraman  has 
been done, if no one has been hurt, then there is no need to 
do pratikraman.

Questioner:  But  don’t  the  parmanu  get  purified 

through pratikraman?

Dadashri:  No,  pratikraman  cannot  purify 
the 
parmanu. Right upon Seeing them as separate, You become 
free.  As  they  are  Seen  as  pure,  they  become  free  and  so 
do  You.  The  world  sees  them  as  impure,  because  they  are 
seeing  through  the  bhaav  (belief;  state)  of  ‘I  am  the  doer’. 
And now, You have the bhaav of ‘I am not the doer’, and so 
they become free.

Questioner:  What  is  the  effect  of  pratikraman? 
You  said  that  the  parmanu  do  not  become  pure  through 
pratikraman. So then, what happens through pratikraman?

[5] Prayogsa - Mishrasa - Vishrasa

313

Dadashri: When would the parmanu actually become 
pure? It is when they are Seen. And the effect that pratikraman 
has on the parmanu is related to the hurt caused to the other 
person. If the effect of the hurt caused to the other person is 
left pending to clear, then he will bind vengeance. As far as 
is possible, such an effect should not be caused to anyone on 
our  account. That  is  why You  should  tell  Chandubhai,  “Do 
pratikraman.” Therefore, the effect would no longer remain 
for the other person; that is all.

Questioner:  Suppose  you  hurt  my  feelings  and  then 
you  do  pratikraman,  then  will  the  effect  [of  the  hurt]  not 
remain for me?

Dadashri:  In  general  terms,  to  the  people  out 
there,  it  can  be  said  that  purification  happens  through 
pratikraman.  In  reality,  the  pudgal  [parmanu]  has  to  be 
purified through Gnan. When that is not being done, ‘we’ 
tell  people  this  in  the  general  sense,  “Do  pratikraman.” 
So  when  pratikraman  is  done,  He  [as  the  Self]  remains 
separate  from  them  [the  pudgal  parmanu].  So  it  is 
considered as purifying them.

Questioner:  Yes,  we  are 

this 
[‘Chandubhai’] is the prakruti (the relative self with inherent 
characteristic  traits).  It  is  because  of  the  prakruti,  that  we 
end up speaking like that.

realizing 

that 

Dadashri: ‘You’ are aware that it is the prakruti that 
is doing it, but You should purify it with Gnan. That which 
was  filled  in  due  to  ignorance  of  the  Self,  let  go  of  it  with 
Gnan.  Because  although  this  is  the  prakruti,  all  of  it  is 
actually parmanu. What are those parmanu like? The answer 
is,  they  are  mishrasa  parmanu.  Mishrasa  refers  to  those 
that  have  been  filled  in  [charged  in  the  past  life],  as  well 
as result-giving. Due to the filled parmanu, the speech ends 
up coming out that  way, meaning that  those parmanu gave 

314

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

off their effect. At that time, if You send those parmanu off 
after purifying them, then You will no longer have a quarrel 
[pending account] with those parmanu.

Hence,  You  should  purify  them  in  this  way  and 
clear  them  off.  So,  once  the  Parmanu  become  vishrasa, 
You are free. Now, not all of these people [mahatmas] are 
able  to  perform  the  required  activities  of  purification,  so 
‘we’  tell  these  people,  “Do  pratikraman.”  So  then,  they 
[the  parmanu]  become  pure.  How  can  this  person  do  all 
of  those  activities?  This  spiritual  Knowledge  (Vignan) 
is  in  fact  scientific!  The  jagruti  is  definitely  there,  and 
that  too,  it  [the  pratikraman]  is  not  to  be  done  by  You, 
‘Chandubhai’  has  to  do  it.  All  You  have  to  do  is  Know 
whether ‘Chandubhai’ did it or not! It is ‘Chandubhai’ who 
does the atikraman as well, isn’t it?

Questioner: Yes, it is indeed he who does the atikraman. 

Is that why he has to be made to do the pratikraman?

Dadashri:  Yes,  the  pratishthit  atma  (discharging 
relative self) is the one who does the atikraman, and it is the 
pratishthit  atma  that  has  to  do  the  pratikraman.  ‘You’  are 
not to do the pratikraman. It has to be done by the one who 
commits  the  fault.  The  faults  are  happening  in  discharge 
and  the  pratikraman  is  to  be  done  for  that  discharge. 
The  atikraman  is  also  being  done  in  discharge  and  the 
pratikraman  for  that  is  also  discharge.  [This  statement  is 
only applicable for those who have attained Self-realization 
through the Akram path.]

Questioner:  The  Nishchay  Atma  (the  awakened  Self 
in this context) does in fact not bind any karma whatsoever, 
so  then  there  is  no  such  thing  as  nishchay  pratikraman,  is 
there?

Dadashri:  The  Nishchay  Atma  has  in  fact  become 
completely  free.  But  what  does  this  prakruti  say?  “You 

[5] Prayogsa - Mishrasa - Vishrasa

315

are the one who spoiled us, we were actually in the form 
as  pure  Parmanu.  So  make  us  pure  now.”  What  does 
it  say?  “We  were  vishrasa  Parmanu  but  you  turned  us 
into  prayogsa,  and  that  is  why  we  have  come  into  effect 
as  mishrasa.”  Convert  the  mishrasa  back  to  vishrasa. 
Meaning, purify the parmanu. Now, nothing else remains 
to be done.

When One Becomes Steady...

Questioner: So, on the one hand, you have shown us 
the process of how the parmanu become steady (sthir). Now 
on  the  other  hand,  how  do  they  become  unsteady  (asthir) 
and restless (chanchal)?

Dadashri: The very nature of these pudgal [parmanu] 

is to be chanchal.

Questioner: So then how can they become steady?

Dadashri: After attaining this Gnan, day by day, they 
gradually  become  steady.  They  gradually  draw  closer  and 
closer [revert back] to their fundamental inherent nature.

Questioner: In their fundamental inherent nature, are 

they actually steady?

Dadashri:  In  their  fundamental  inherent  nature, 
they  are  indeed  steady.  This  here  is  actually  an  unnatural 
state  (vikrut  swabhaav).  In  the  unnatural  state,  the  pudgal 
parmanu are restless and unsteady.

Questioner: How did they become vikrut (unnatural), 

Dada?

Dadashri:  Due  to  the  engrossment  arising  out 
of  the  coming  together  of  the  two  [the  eternal  elements 
of  inanimate  matter  and  the  Self],  the  visheshbhaav 
(identification  with  that  which  is  not  One’s  own)  arose. 

316

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

I  discovered  visheshbhaav  while  reading  Krupaludev’s 
book.* 6  Krupaludev  has  written  that  ‘vibhaav  does  not 
mean  viruddh  bhaav  (an  opposing  bhaav),  it  means 
visheshbhaav.’* 7  So  look  at  that,  are  we  not  making  a 
scientific point here! It’s like this, when the sun and ocean 
are  both  present,  water  vapor  gets  generated.  Neither  the 
sun  nor  the  ocean  has  generated  the  water  vapor,  yet  it  is 
a  fact  that  water  vapor  gets  generated  and  then  turns  into 
clouds, from which rain falls. Who did all of that?

Questioner: The pudgal by its very nature is restless, 
but  in  its  fundamental  inherent  nature,  it  is  steady.  I  didn’t 
quite understand that.

Dadashri:  Every  eternal  element  is  steady  indeed. 
In  their  fundamental  inherent  nature,  every  eternal  element 
(vastu) is steady indeed, they cannot be chanchal (restless). 
The  pudgal  alone  can  be  considered  chanchal.  But  in  its 
fundamental  inherent  nature,  meaning  that  in  the  elemental 
form,  in  the  Real  form,  the  spontaneous  inherent  nature  of 
the Parmanu is steady.

Questioner:  So,  in  vishrasa  form,  they  are  steady,  is 

that it?

Dadashri:  Even  before  they  revert  back  to  vishrasa, 
that  is  the  case;  but  when Your  Vision  towards  the  Pudgal 
[Parmanu]  becomes  like  that  of  Lord  Mahavir’s,  when 
Your  Vision  reaches  360  degrees,  then  they  can  indeed  be 

*  Dadashri  is  making  a  general  statement  here,  as  a  reference,  to  give  people 
confirmation.  Otherwise,  upon  attaining  spontaneous  Self-realization  in  1958, 
the most profound infinite clarities were revealed to Him.
*  Shrimad  Rajchandra  Vachanamrut,  Page  No.  759  (205)  Vibhaav  does  not 
mean viruddh bhaav (opposing intent) but visheshbhaav (identification with that 
which is not One’s own). For the Self to prevail as the Self is known as bhaav 
or Swabhaav. When the eternal elements of the Self and inanimate matter come 
into close proximity, due to engrossment, the Self goes out of Its Swabhaav and 
comes  into  effect  as  visheshbhaav;  that  is  vibhaav.  Understand  that  the  same 
applies to inanimate matter.

[5] Prayogsa - Mishrasa - Vishrasa

317

considered as being steady. Considered as steady means they 
[the Parmanu] are such that they do not have attachment or 
abhorrence (raag-dwesh) even in the slightest; they are not 
emotional in the slightest.

Questioner:  So,  they  do  not  become  kampayman 

(unsteady; emotional) in any situation?

Dadashri:  They  do  not  become  kampayman.  The 
word ‘kampayman’ is exact. When uninterrupted steadiness 
arises, that is when pure vishrasa happens.

The Science of the Vitaraag Lords Is From the 
Grossest to the Subtlest Level!

Questioner:  What  is  the  boundary  [of  the  parmanu] 
with  reference  to  the  gross  (sthool),  the  subtle  (sookshma), 
the  subtler  (sookshmatar)  and  the  subtlest  (sookshmatam) 
levels?

Dadashri: The gross level is what all these doctors can 

see. The grossest parmanu can be seen with a microscope.

The Parmanu that are pure, the vishrasa, they are the 

subtlest.

The  parmanu  that  are  prayogsa  are  the  subtler  ones. 
The  prayogsa  parmanu  are  verily  the  causal  body  (kaaran 
deha).

The  parmanu  that  are  mishrasa  are  the  subtle  ones; 
those  verily  make  up  the  pratishthit  atma  (discharging 
relative self).

The speech that comes forth is based on the parmanu 
that  are  within.  Even  the  mind  is  made  of  parmanu.  An 
opinion means egoism (ahamkaar) is at work. Opinions are 
made  up  of  parmanu  plated  with  egoism.  If  One  has  this 
Gnan, and if all the causal (kaaran) parmanu are destroyed, 

318

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

then the vitaraag state (a state where One is absolutely free 
of  attachment  and  abhorrence)  would  come  about,  but  this 
is not so quick and easy to attain.

The  vitaraag  Lords  Saw  infinite  gneya  (the  objects 
to  be  known)  as  just  one  gneya.  Similarly,  this  ‘Dada’  has 
Seen just one gneya; He has Seen the Pudgal alone. In the 
fundamental sense, the Pudgal is only one; the Pudgal that is 
in the original inherent nature, the one that is vishrasa! The 
world  comprises  of  one  [type  of  Parmanu],  ‘net’  [overall], 
pure Parmanu!

In the process of becoming prayogsa, impurity arose; 
in  mishrasa  form,  the  impurity  came  into  effect,  and  once 
the  impurity  comes  to  an  end,  they  become  vishrasa.  The 
final state of the Pudgal is vishrasa.

Everything out there in worldly life does not belong 
to the Self; if that is Known and experienced, then it can 
be  understood  that  the  parmanu  that  make  up  this  body 
do  not  belong  to  the  Self.  Progressing  in  this  way,  it  can 
be  Known  that  not  even  a  single  parmanu  belongs  to  the 
Self.

If  one  understands  prayogsa,  a  lot  of  [spiritual] 
progress can be made. ‘We’ refer to prayogsa as charge, and 
mishrasa as discharge.

These people were not able to understand this [prayogsa, 
mishrasa, vishrasa], that is why ‘we’ said it in this simple, 
colloquial  language;  that  is  when  they  started  to  shape  up. 
Think  about  it! Would  a  discovery  of  the  Tirthankar  Lords 
be  any  ordinary  thing?  It  is  said  that  nowadays,  people  are 
more  educated  as  compared  to  those  in  the  past;  but  these 
people  of  today  do  not  even  know  how  to  write  the  words 
spoken  during  the  reign  of  the  Tirthankar  Lords.  And  the 
word  ‘tankotkirna’  that  They  have  spoken,  is  such  a  word 

[5] Prayogsa - Mishrasa - Vishrasa

319

that  no  one  in  the  world  can  give  its  meaning;  there  is  no 
other word for it.

So grateful are we to the Tirthankar Lords, the Ones 
who discovered prayogsa! Not a single living being (jeev) 
can  refrain  from  giving  rise  to  prayogsa. After  prayogsa 
arises,  there  is  no  choice  but  to  undergo  mishrasa. What 
is  mishrasa?  Giving  the  bitter  or  sweet  effects  is  indeed 
the function of mishrasa parmanu. People claim that God 
gives  the  effect.  No,  only  the  mishrasa  parmanu  give 
the  effect,  and  from  that  effect,  a  ‘seed’  [cause]  is  sown 
again;  and  that  too,  God  does  not  have  to  sow  the  seed 
from His home.



[6]
The Link Between Bhaav and Parmanu

The Parmanu Get Arranged According to the 
Bhaav

Questioner: There has to be a link somewhere between 

the parmanu and the bhaav (inner intent), right?

Dadashri:  Yes,  it  is  all  there!  The  parmanu  get 
arranged in accordance with the bhaav. When this man has 
the bhaav, ‘I want to donate money,’ and that other man has 
the bhaav, ‘I want to donate money,’ then the parmanu for 
both will get arranged [in accordance with their bhaav]. But 
the parmanu for both will be different.

Questioner: Yes, that makes sense that the bhaav will 

be different based on each individual.

Dadashri:  What  kind  of  bhaav,  of  what  intensity, 
and  for  what  purpose,  that  would  have  to  be  considered. 
Everything is encompassed in that. That would be different 
for both people.

Questioner:  That  may  be  different  for  everyone,  but 
the  main  thing  is  that  they  are  parmanu  after  all,  are  they 
not?

Dadashri:  So,  the  parmanu  come  together,  nothing 

[6] The Link Between Bhaav and Parmanu

321

else.  However,  vyavasthit  is  indeed  the  result  of  the  bhaav 
[done in the past life]!

Questioner: Yes, the main effect is that of the bhaav.

Dadashri:  In  fact,  this  [body]  is  just  a  ‘toy’  made 
up  of  parmanu  that  arises  in  the  middle.  The  parmanu  get 
arranged in accordance with the bhaav.

Questioner: So what is this ‘toy’ made up of parmanu?

Dadashri:  This  body  has  been  formed  from  these 
parmanu;  that  has  happened  through  the  bhaav,  has  it  not! 
This body that has formed, it has formed in accordance with 
the bhaav, has it not!

Questioner: Yes, but are those parmanu gross (sthool) 

or subtle (sookshma)?

Dadashri: The parmanu are subtle, but they are visible 
at  the  gross  level.  That  is  because  they  are  roopi  (have  a 
visible form)! As they aggregate, they become visible at the 
gross level. The original parmanu are subtle.

Questioner: And is the bhaav gross or subtle?

Dadashri:  The  bhaav  is  subtle  and  the  parmanu 
which  it  attracts  are  also  considered  subtle.  The  parmanu 
then  become  visible  at  the  gross  level,  so  as  an  effect,  the 
entire body becomes visible.

Questioner:  The  parmanu  are  subtle  and  so  is  the 
bhaav. They are equally subtle, but do the parmanu become 
visible at the gross level when the two come together?

Dadashri: No.

Questioner: Then?

Dadashri:  Only  those  parmanu  that  are  drawn  in 
by  the  bhaav  become  subtle.  Subsequently,  other  parmanu 

322

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

aggregate together, they become [visible at the] gross [level], 
they form a visible representation (murti), the body.

Questioner: Which other parmanu aggregate together?

Dadashri: Whatever the desire is, whatever is in that 
bhaav,  it  gets  sculpted  in  a  physical  form  on  the  outside. 
The body gets formed according to the bhaav.

Questioner: Is this body a collection of parmanu?

Dadashri: It is a collection of parmanu and this body 

has form.

Questioner:  Everything  that  exists  in  the  world,  all 
that  which  is  a  collection  of  parmanu,  is  that  how  they  all 
took shape?

Dadashri: Yes, they have all taken shape, that is all.

Questioner:  But  once  all  the  parmanu  separate  from 

the collection, do they come together again?

Dadashri: The problem [this cycle of cause-effect] is 

verily due to that.

Questioner: When the body dies, those parmanu will 

separate, won’t they?

Dadashri:  The  parmanu  will  then  dissipate.  When 
we  burn  the  body,  they  dissipate,  and  they  revert  to  the 
way  they  were  before.  The  original  eternal  element  (mool 
tattva) doesn’t increase or decrease. We may feel that a lot 
of  destruction  has  occurred,  but  there  is  no  loss  incurred 
from the context of the eternal element. There is no loss or 
damage incurred at all.

Questioner: Say a man dies today and he is going to 
be  born  again.  Then  whatever  parmanu  he  had,  do  those 
same parmanu go along with the pure Soul (Shuddhatma)?

[6] The Link Between Bhaav and Parmanu

323

Dadashri:  No,  the  parmanu  of  the  physical  body  do 

not go with It.

Questioner:  Then  how  do  they  go  so  that  his  new 

birth can take place?

Dadashri:  The  causal  parmanu  are  the  ones  that  go 

[with It].

Questioner:  Yes,  the  causes,  but  all  of  those  causes 

are in the form of parmanu, are they not?

Dadashri: Meaning that, the parmanu that got charged 
due to attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh), those definitely 
exist!

Questioner:  The  parmanu  charged  with  the  bhaav 
(inner  intent)  of  attachment  and  abhorrence,  do  those 
parmanu  mix  with  the  bhaav  and  go  as  the  causal  body 
(kaaran deha) to the next [physical] body?

Dadashri:  The  moment  the  bhaav  of  attachment  is 
done, the parmanu are drawn in, and they get colored with 
the  bhaav  of  attachment.  And  if  one  has  abhorrence,  the 
parmanu that are drawn in become colored with abhorrence. 
The coating happens on the parmanu at that time, and then 
those  colored  parmanu  go  with  the  Self.  In  the  ignorant 
state,  this  activity  actually  keeps  going  on;  this  cycle  [of 
cause and effect] continues.

Questioner:  So 

those  parmanu  charged  with 
attachment  and  abhorrence,  do  they  go  along  into  the  next 
body?

Dadashri: They go in a subtle form with It.

Questioner: And they then give the result in the next 

body.

Dadashri: The  ones  that  were  colored  go  in  a  subtle 

324

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

form  and  they  ‘ripen’  in  the  next  body.  It’s  like  when  a 
mango  tree  blossoms  with  flowers,  we  cannot  consider  the 
flowers  as  mangos.  Juice  will  not  come  out  of  them.  But 
when  the  flowers  mature,  they  become  mangos.  At  first 
the  mangos  taste  sour,  then  eventually  when  they  ripen, 
they  taste  sweet.  So  the  parmanu  charged  with  attachment 
‘ripen’  and  give  effect  and  so  do  the  parmanu  charged 
with  abhorrence.  Those  charged  with  attachment  give  off 
an  effect  of  happiness  and  those  charged  with  abhorrence 
give off an effect of unhappiness. They give off the effect of 
unhappiness  and  then  dissipate.  The  moment  they  give  off 
their effect, they immediately become pure once again. This 
means that the coloring on them has cleared away. Once the 
effect of unhappiness has been given off, the coloring clears 
away; this cycle keeps going on.

Questioner: After the attachment and abhorrence have 

already unfolded in effect, do those parmanu dissipate?

Dadashri: Those parmanu dissipate. Now as those are 
dissipating, at that moment whatever bhaav one has, say he 
found the effect of the unhappiness that unfolded to be bitter, 
so he starts complaining, ‘He did this to me, he did that to 
me!’  He  immediately  draws  in  new  parmanu  that  become 
charged  with  abhorrence.  The  old  [parmanu  charged  with] 
abhorrence dissipate.

Questioner:  The  old  ones  [parmanu  charged  with 
abhorrence]  dissipate  and  new  ones  form. At  that  point,  if 
the state as the Knower-Seer prevails, then no new ones will 
form, right?

Dadashri:  Then  they  will  immediately  become  pure 
and dissipate, It [the Knower-Seer state] will not allow new 
coloring to occur.

The Science of Parmanu Is Profound!

This  is  so  profound  a  Science  that  the  moment  you 

[6] The Link Between Bhaav and Parmanu

325

have  a  single  bad  thought,  these  Parmanu  that  are  on  the 
outside, they immediately get joined [with the thought] and 
enter  within  and  that  is  the  karmic  account  that  is  bound; 
they  then  [in  the  next  life]  give  off  an  exact  effect  and 
subsequently they dissipate. They do not leave just like that. 
So, no one has to come and give the effect  or  do any  such 
thing. There  is  actually  no  one  out  there  who  gives  off  the 
effect. There is no such God who will come to give you the 
effect! Neither are there any celestial beings who will come 
to  give  you  the  effect.  These  celestial  beings  are  actually 
used  as  an  analogy,  so  that  people  can  worship  [what  they 
represent]. They  are  analogies  that  have  been  given  so  that 
the  [corresponding]  energies  can  arise  within.  The  planets 
(grah) have all been given symbolic forms. There are grah 
[here meaning different forms of prejudice] within just like 
the grah [planets] on the outside.

The  parmanu  that  we  draw  in  through  abhorrence, 
when  we  speak  badly  or  have  a  bad  bhaav,  at  that  time, 
the  parmanu  that  get  charged  are  so  bad  that  they  give  off 
a  bitter  effect,  one  that  we  do  not  like.  When  we  have  a 
good  bhaav,  it  brings  forth  a  good  effect;  a  sweet  effect. 
And  when  we  do  not  have  a  good  or  bad  bhaav,  with 
[the  awareness  of]  ‘I  am  pure  Soul,’  the  sense  of  doership 
(kartabhaav)  comes  to  an  end,  so  the  old  ones  give  effect 
and dissipate and no new ones are drawn in. That is how this 
[spiritual] Science works; there is an entire systematic way 
in which it functions. This is not like some sort of religion. 
As  long  as  One  has  not  come  into  this  Science,  religion  is 
there  to  develop  his  eligibility.  Religion  is  there  for  him 
to  develop  his  eligibility,  so  that  he  becomes  qualified  [to 
attain the Science]. Whereas, this Science is entirely nothing 
but Science.

The  parmanu  are  indeed  doing  everything.  Just  like 
if a person were to dissolve this much opium or something 

326

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

like  that  in  water  and  drink  it,  would  God  have  to  come 
to  kill  him? Who  would  kill  him?  Similarly,  all  this  is  like 
opium.  The  parmanu  that  are  drawn  within  become  of 
different kinds; like nectar, like opium, all kinds of different 
parmanu. Whatever kind of bhaav one has, that is how the 
parmanu  become.  That  is  how  extraordinary  (alaukik)  the 
energy of the Self is! Even inanimate matter (jada) has such 
extraordinary  energy  that  it  can  take  on  so  much.  I  have 
Seen the energy of inanimate matter, that is why I am saying 
that  this  is  a  very  vast  Science. The  Self  definitely  has  the 
energy,  that  is  something  that  the  entire  world  accepts  too. 
However,  the  energy  of  inanimate  matter  is  tremendous  as 
well; that energy is such that it can increase beyond that of 
the Self. That is precisely why this one [the developing self] 
has  become  trapped,  hasn’t  it?  Otherwise,  after  becoming 
trapped  in  them,  why  would  the  [developing]  self  not  be 
able  to  free  itself  whenever  it  wants?  The  answer  is  ‘No. 
Until One comes to Know this Science, He cannot become 
free.’ So long as the developing I (pote) does not come into 
the Real Science, he cannot become free.

So  this  is  all  a  Science.  Religion  is  only  to  a  certain 
extent.  It  brings  about  the  eligibility  in  a  person;  he  comes 
into  a  specific  kind  of  ‘formation’  [qualification].  After 
coming  into  that  ‘formation’  [qualification],  he  can  attain 
this  [Science]. This  Science  will  only  work  if  it  is  attained 
after reaching a certain normality, otherwise it will not.

Just  upon  having  a  bhaav  arise,  the  parmanu  change 
entirely. And the inherent nature of the [worldly-interacting] 
self is fundamentally also such that it can become whatever 
it envisions. Therefore, what envisioning do ‘we’ give You? 
That You  are  nothing  but  the  pure  Soul.  ‘You’  are  nothing 
else in any other way, and in Reality, that is exactly the way 
it  is.  ‘We’  are  not  making You  say  a  baseless  statement. A 
baseless  statement  will  not  last,  it  will  not  last  for  even  an 

[6] The Link Between Bhaav and Parmanu

327

hour. At most, it may last for six months through blind faith; 
even  then,  it  will  not  last  for  long.  It  will  certainly  break 
down and it will not give one inner peace. ‘I am pure Soul’ 
is the nirvikalp state (the state free from the wrong belief of 
‘I am Chandubhai’ and all the relative ‘I-ness’ and ‘my-ness’ 
that  stem  from  it),  therefore,  in  that  state,  the  parmanu  do 
not get drawn in. In the state of vikalp (the wrong belief of 
‘I am Chandubhai’ and the relative ‘I-ness’ that stems from 
it), the parmanu get drawn in.

The Profound Science Behind the Conversion of 
the Causal Body to the Effective Body…

Questioner:  Now  those  charged  parmanu  that  are 

there, are they the causal body (kaaran deha)?

Dadashri: Yes, the causal body (kaaran sharir) refers 
to  the  charged  parmanu.  The  causal  body  goes  along  with 
the Self.

Questioner: And after one takes birth, the discharging 

starts?

Dadashri: No. The moment one enters the womb, the 
effective body starts to develop. The effective body continues 
developing  until  the  time  of  birth.  Now  the  body  may  be 
small, but the effects of the entire life are contained within 
that  small  body.  So  as  the  circumstances  come  together  on 
the outside, the effects will unfold to give result.

The  body  is  so  small,  but  within  it  lie  [the  parmanu 
of]  sexuality  and  sexual  impulses  for  the  female  gender  (stri 
vishayvikaar).  The  parmanu  of  sexuality  are  already  within, 
but  they  are  not  apparent  immediately  after  birth.  After 
thirteen-fourteen, fifteen, or even twenty years, the [parmanu 
of] sexual impulses will sprout for him. When the time is right, 
they become ready to give effect. However, the entire stock [of 
charged parmanu] is contained within this small body.

328

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Questioner:  It  is  just  like  the  seed  of  a  banyan  tree; 

the entire tree is contained within it.

Dadashri: The entire banyan tree is contained within 
the  seed.  Similarly,  everything  is  contained  within  this 
‘seed’  [the  effective  body].  The  ‘seed’  is  considered  the 
birthplace [origin; source]; based on that, we are then born 
over here. The formation of the effective body begins from 
the  moment  one  enters  the  womb.  By  the  time  birth  takes 
place,  the  formation  of  the  effective  body  is  complete. The 
fellow  may  be  small,  but  the  entire  stock  [of  the  charged 
parmanu] is filled within. If he is to marry four times, then 
the stock for marrying four times is indeed filled within.

Questioner:  How  many  children  he  will  have,  how 
much  of  this  will  be  there,  what  is  going  to  happen,  all  of 
that…

Dadashri: The entire guise! Then, as the effects give 

result, they start to discharge.

Questioner:  Would  both,  discharge  and  charge, 

continue until one takes Gnan?

Dadashri:  Discharge  and  charge  both  continue.  That 
is called sansaar (worldly life), isn’t it! The one who suffers 
the  discharge,  for  him,  there  is  also  charging.  Otherwise, 
what will he do in his next life? He is an agnani (one without 
Self-realization), isn’t he!

Questioner: So, are these parmanu only in the ‘seed’ 
or are they on the outside also? The ‘seed’ that is the causal 
body, that causal body is indeed the charged parmanu, right?

Dadashri:  The  causal  body  has  now  converted  into 
the  effective  body.  After  entering  the  womb,  the  charged 
parmanu  would  indeed  be  in  the  ‘seed’,  wouldn’t  they! 
Now that the effective body has come into being, that itself 
will  give  results.  This  effective  body  was  formed  from  the 

[6] The Link Between Bhaav and Parmanu

329

charged  parmanu  that  were  there;  all  those  parmanu  were 
used  up.  They  were  used  up  and  took  on  a  different  form. 
The  parmanu  that  were  in  the  form  of  causes,  all  of  those 
were  used  up  and  now  the  discharging,  effective  form  has 
come into being. Now the effective [body] will give results. 
The former parmanu [charged ones] are not needed in this.

Questioner: Are  the  charged  parmanu  in  the  ‘seed’, 
or are they also on the outside? Besides being in the ‘seed’, 
can the charged parmanu also exist on the outside? Because 
You said that the causal body was formed from the charged 
parmanu.

Dadashri:  The  parmanu  that  have  become  charged, 
those indeed make up the causal body. What does ‘charged 
parmanu’ mean? If one has charged the parmanu with a red 
color, then they will be red; if they have been charged with 
a  green  color,  they  will  be  green.  If  someone  has  charged 
them  with  a  yellow  color,  then  they  will  be  yellow.  Then 
those  yellow  parmanu  convert  into  the  effective  state.  The 
corresponding effect is formed and through that effect, they 
then  give  off  the  result.  If  the  parmanu  are  black,  then  the 
entire body will appear black. Those parmanu [charged with 
the black color] are not present anymore at that time.

Questioner: Then the effect has come.

Dadashri:  All  the  parmanu  have  become  effective. 
Now  when  the  time  is  right,  the  effect  will  start  giving  off 
the result.

Questioner:  At  the  time  the  ‘seed’  was  formed,  the 
collection of the charged parmanu, they were encompassed 
in the ‘seed’. Besides those, do any parmanu remain on the 
outside?

Dadashri:  Once  the  ‘seed’  becomes  effective,  the 
other  [former/charged]  parmanu  do  not  remain  at  all,  they 

330

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

are  not  even  in  there  [in  the  womb].  They  are  not  in  the 
[new  effective]  body.  The  parmanu  of  the  effective  body 
are the subtlest of all, however the gross parmanu do exist 
on the outside.

Questioner: Outside, meaning where?

Dadashri: Outside, everything that you see with your 

eyes, that you eat, that you drink.

Questioner: Those for sure. The ones that are on the 

outside are there for sure.

Dadashri: No, no, not those. Whatever you eat, those 
are seeds from the past life. The parmanu from the past life 
are the very ones that unfold and based on them, things come 
together on the outside. But what are the ones on the outside 
like?  They  are  the  ones  that  are  consumed  [what  you  eat] 
at  the  gross  level;  those  on  the  outside  are  the  parmanu  in 
gross [physical] form. So if you are to eat only two of these 
mustard  seeds,  then  those  two  parmanu  which  are  within 
become ready to unfold, so you will only be able to eat two 
mustard seeds. You will not be able to eat a third one.

Questioner:  I  see,  so  the  effect  is  being  given  off 

through those parmanu on the outside?

Dadashri: Yes.

Questioner:  Is  it  the  same  with  vishay  (sexuality), 

Dada?

Dadashri:  Everything.  Everything.  Say  you  eat  a 
guava  today.  You  don’t  eat  one  every  day,  so  what  is  the 
reason that you ate one today? The answer is, the parmanu 
for guava that were within, came to unfold today. Whichever 
parmanu  become  ready  to  unfold,  they  bring  everything 
together  [on  the  outside].  All  the  circumstances  come 
together  in  the  form  of  an  effect.  And  one  will  even  end 

[6] The Link Between Bhaav and Parmanu

331

up eating it. And on top of that, what does he say? ‘I ate a 
guava.’ Hey mortal one, who are You to eat anything? If You 
were the one eating it, then why didn’t You eat it yesterday? 
This is the nonsense he speaks.

Questioner: Everyone says such things, isn’t it Dada? 

The entire world is verily saying such things.

Dadashri: I am not saying this to anyone in particular. 
I am simply stating that one speaks such nonsense. He says, 
‘I ate a guava.’ Then yesterday when it was offered to you, 
why didn’t you eat it? So these parmanu that come together 
on  the  outside,  are  not  something  that  even  doctors  can 
understand. I said to one doctor, “You are telling this person 
to eat more of this and less of that today. You tell them all 
this,  but  on  what  basis  is  it  that  something  gets  eaten  or 
does not get eaten? He replied ‘If one doesn’t eat it, then it 
won’t be eaten, and if one eats it, then it will be eaten.” Oh 
ho  ho!...  One  will  end  up  eating  according  to  the  internal 
design.  One  will  be  able  to  eat  only  in  accordance  with 
whatever the internal design is. There will be absolutely no 
deviation from that design.

Questioner: That is exactly how vyavasthit unfolds, is 

that what you are saying?

Dadashri:  Call  it  whatever  you  want,  but  what  I  am 
saying  is  that,  one  will  end  up  eating  as  per  the  internal 
design only.

Questioner: So, the subtle parmanu which are in the 
‘seed’  [the  effective  body],  do  they  keep  on  coming  across 
the circumstance of the gross parmanu thereafter?

Dadashri:  It  is  a  type  of  attraction  that  just  takes 
place. It’s like if you have gone out somewhere, but before 
leaving,  you  haven’t  told  your  wife  to  make  a  bitter  gourd 
curry. However, when you return home, a bitter gourd curry 

332

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

is waiting for you along with other dishes, and you even eat 
it.  What  is  the  basis  for  this?  Is  it  without  any  basis?  The 
answer  is,  ‘No,  not  a  single  parmanu  is  without  basis.’  If 
we ask, “Is Mr. Lalbhai eating it?” The answer is, “No, Mr. 
Lalbhai  doesn’t  even  have  the  power  to  go  relieve  himself 
[at will], so how can he have the power to eat [at will]?” This 
is with a basis. There is an attraction for the other relevant 
parmanu on the outside [based on the subtle ones inside].

One may have been served four chapattis, but two are 
eaten and two remain in the plate, why is that? Well, people 
cannot understand these subtle things!

The Karmic Account of the New and the Old 
Kashay…

Questioner: The ego that is in me right now, does that 
same  amount  of  ego  go  with  me  after  death,  or  does  more 
or less of it go with me, or does a new ego arise in the next 
life?

Dadashri: A new one arises.

Questioner: So none of the past life ego goes?

Dadashri:  The  one  from  the  past  life  dissolves 
completely. It is a new karmic account (hisaab), so the ego, 
the  anger,  pride,  deceit,  and  greed,  all  of  that  is  new;  it  is 
not of the past life.

Questioner: The  increase  or  the  decrease  in  the  new 

one, on what basis is that?

Dadashri: The one in this life is a new one, but that is 
because it is actually the balance. The karmic stock that he 
has [accumulated] in his entire life, he takes the balance of 
that with him [to the next life].

Questioner: So then, that is of the past life, isn’t it?

Dadashri:  No,  it  cannot  be  considered  as  that  of  the 

[6] The Link Between Bhaav and Parmanu

333

past  life.  The  balance  of  that  filled  karmic  stock  is  taken, 
and based on that balance, the [new] karmic stock unfolds. 
The anger, pride, deceit, and greed that is currently present, 
that in fact, dissolves entirely.

This  karmic  stock  is  fundamentally  that  of  the  past 
life only. However, ‘of the past life’ does not mean the way 
you are saying it. It is the balance of all that you have done 
in this life, and your anger, pride, deceit, and greed actually 
dissolve  completely  in  this  very  life. Whatever  is  currently 
there, it dissolves.

Questioner: The greed and the ego?

Dadashri:  Nothing  remains.  A  new  one  will  arise. 
Right now, all of this [discharging anger, pride, deceit, greed 
and ego] is not something that you can control.

Questioner:  After  a  child  is  born,  from  where  does 

that ego arise?

Dadashri:  That  which  was  dormant,  manifests;  it 

doesn’t arise.

Questioner: So it is definitely there with him, isn’t it?

Dadashri: Yes, it is there for sure. But all the karmic 
stock  is  from  the  past  life.  By  ‘of  the  past  life’,  it  doesn’t 
refer  to  the  karmic  stock  of  the  past  life. The  anger,  pride, 
deceit, and greed of the past life have actually dissolved and 
whatever new karmic accounts were bound in the past life, 
the balance of that is manifesting. The balance of the karmic 
accounts that were bound is manifesting.

Questioner: Then why are the karma of many lifetimes 

remaining?

Dadashri:  It  is  because  he  keeps  sowing  seeds;  the 
same process keeps repeating, he keeps sowing seeds anew.

Questioner: Do the past ones dissolve?

334

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri:  Yes,  as  the  past  ones  dissolve,  he  keeps 

sowing new seeds once again.

Questioner:  So,  there  may  either  be  more  seeds  or 

less.

Dadashri: Yes, those may be less, but he keeps sowing 
[new]  seeds.  You  [mahatmas]  have  not  sown  many  [new] 
seeds.  So,  for  you,  something  different  will  happen  in  the 
next  life,  it  will  not  be  like  it  is  now.  In  fact,  as  you  have 
come  over  here  [to  the  Gnani],  those  kinds  of  seeds  have 
been sown.

If  you  have  jatismarangnan  (knowledge  of  one’s 
previous identities), then you will know what kinds of seeds 
have been sown.

Questioner: But that jatismarangnan will arise, won’t 

it?

Dadashri: What for? Why do you need that?

Questioner: Aren’t You saying that it will arise?

Dadashri:  No,  no.  But  there  is  no  need  for  it!  If  we 

try to attain it, then we will miss out on our main thing.

Questioner:  What  goes  with  the  subtle  body?  If  a 
completely  new  ego  is  arising  due  to  the  karmic  accounts 
bound in the past life, then in that balance carried forward, 
do all those past causes go along with the subtle body?

Dadashri: All the [charged] parmanu go along with it.

Questioner:  Meaning  the  parmanu  of  greed,  pride, 

etc.?

Dadashri:  No,  no,  they  will  all  accumulate  [within] 
and  thereafter,  they  will  manifest  over  there.  Right  now, 
the  parmanu  are  still  in  an  adulterated  form,  those  are  the 
causal  parmanu.  Then  when  the  effect  arises,  that  is  when 

[6] The Link Between Bhaav and Parmanu

335

they are referred to as anger, pride, deceit, and greed. Until 
then, they are in the form of parmanu. This is why ‘we’ are 
telling  you  that  it  is  not  of  this  life.  Those  [parmanu  that 
have been charged up until now] of this life have been burnt 
and cleared up.

The  [discharging]  karmic  account  of  this  life  will  in 
fact  dissolve  [the  balance  of  the  karmic  accounts  charged 
will go with you to the next life], so, whatever your nature 
is currently, it will all dissolve. [A new one will arise] From 
scratch, that of the past life will dissolve completely. In the 
next life, your nature will not be like what it is currently.



[7]
The Science of the Effects of Parmanu

The Coming Together of Parmanu

Have  you  understood  ‘vyavasthit’?  What  would 
happen to you if you had to go to a place where you would 
be insulted?

Questioner: Dada, You have said that it is not possible 
for  one  parmanu  to  come  together  with  another  parmanu*8 
outside the law of vyavasthit. So all these verbal abuses that 
come in bulk, is that all just vyavasthit?

Dadashri:  You  made  a  very  good  point.  You  have 
grasped  this  minute  point  of  ‘ours’.  The  coming  together 
of  each  parmanu  is  not  outside  the  law  of  vyavasthit.  So, 
when  this  one  word  comes  out  in  the  form  of  speech,  and 
if  we  were  to  separate  the  parmanu  within  that  speech, 
this  entire  room  would  be  filled  up.  The  coming  together 
of  two  completely  auspicious  (chokhkha)  parmanu  cannot 
happen outside the law of vyavasthit. So what is there to say 
about these inauspicious (kadroopa) parmanu? Every single 

*  Throughout  this  chapter,  wherever  there  is  reference  to  pure  or  impure 
parmanu,  understand  them  to  be  the  parmanu  of  the  vibhaavik  pudgal.  This 
is  not  a  discussion  regarding  the  pure  phase  Parmanu.  The  pure  Parmanu 
are  completely  distinct  from  this.  Vyavasthit  applies  only  to  vibhaavik  pudgal 
parmanu.

[7] The Science of the Effects of Parmanu

337

parmanu is subject to the law of vyavasthit. And there isn’t 
a  single  parmanu  that  can  remain  in  one  place.  They  are 
constantly revolving.

The parmanu that are acquired take on a form (roopi), 
so they take on a form as subtle parmanu. They accumulate 
within  and  they  later  manifest  in  a  gross,  tangible  form. 
The activity takes place thereafter. One has accumulated the 
parmanu of the entire universe. One has not left alone even 
a single transaction.

Hence,  this  world  is  entirely  an  effect  of  parmanu. 
This entire Science was originally here [in India]. Later, this 
Science went from here to the foreign [countries].

Now, what were those [pure phase] Parmanu like? All 
the  Parmanu  that  are  in  the  world,  the  Parmanu  that  have 
form, all of them are pure indeed. But a man says, “You are 
a worthless person.” Neither does the one saying ‘worthless’ 
have  any  awareness  [of  the  consequences],  nor  does  the 
listener. Now, based on how much the listener gets affected, 
those  many  parmanu  enter  within  him,  and  the  [effect  of 
those] parmanu reaches the speaker as well. The effect does 
not reach the Siddha Lords (absolutely liberated Souls). The 
parmanu do not affect the absolutely liberated Souls.

However much you quarrel, that many parmanu linked 
to the other person will enter within you. Things will spoil 
for the other person and for you too.

If  you  had  made  a  comment  to  someone  that,  “This 
judge isn’t good,” and later when you go before that judge, 
then  by  simply  looking  into  your  eyes,  the  judge  will 
understand  the  [effect  of  the]  parmanu  accumulated  within 
you due to speaking negatively about him. The [effect of the] 
parmanu reach him. Similarly, if you had said to someone, 
“This  judge  is  good,”  then  in  a  short  while,  the  judge  will 
experience a positive effect due to the positive parmanu for 

338

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

him that are accumulated within you. It is not worth thinking 
negatively or positively at all. [It is worth Seeing the pure.]

Based  on  whatever  parmanu  have  been  accumulated 
within  [charged],  [at  the  time  of  discharge]  such  are  the 
thoughts  that  become  imprinted,  and  those  very  parmanu 
then  come  to  unfold.  If  one  was  indeed  the  thinker,  then 
he  would  only  have  thoughts  that  he  likes.  But  whatever 
parmanu  were  accumulated  within  are  the  ones  that  are 
coming out. Thoughts are dependent on circumstances.

In every parmanu, one end is positive and the other end 
is negative. Everyone in our country should say “welcome” 
to  the  rain,  in  one  united  voice.  On  the  contrary,  when  it 
rains,  some  say,  “Don’t  fall  right  now.”  Others  say,  “Fall 
quickly.” Yet  others  say,  “Fall  after  two  days.”  If  someone 
has worn new clothes and it starts raining, then he will curse 
at  the  rain.  Everyone  speaks  to  the  rain  according  to  what 
suits them. So what can the poor rain do?

The parmanu that are unfolding are in a normal state of 
motion (veg), but by thinking upon them, people spur them 
into  an  emotional  state  (aaveg).  If  one  becomes  engrossed 
in the thoughts, then a seed is sown. But if One becomes the 
Knower-Seer  of  them,  then  all  the  parmanu  become  pure 
and dissipate.

Once the parmanu of the subtle ego have accumulated, 
it is very difficult to remove them. The arrangement of these 
parmanu  are  such  that,  the  moment  the  ego  arises,  it  will 
definitely get a beating.

There  is  a  difference  in  the  karmic  account  of  every 
parmanu. If you were to give your parmanu to him, he would 
find them to be light. He would say, “How light!” And if I 
were  to  receive  those  parmanu,  then  I  would  find  them  to 
be of no significance. Such are the effects of parmanu! This 
is because the mind has not been tamed, the mental strength 

[7] The Science of the Effects of Parmanu

339

has not yet developed; it is now developing gradually. As the 
energies  of  the  Self  increase,  the  mental  strength  will  also 
develop. Does everyone experience unhappiness to the same 
extent?  No,  because  in  everyone,  the  parmanu  of  courage 
of the mind are different. Someone who has the parmanu of 
courage  will  say,  “Only  four  robbers  have  come!”  He  will 
eat peacefully and ignore them, whereas others will tremble.

The Proportion of Parmanu Is Different

No  Soul  can  become  a  father  or  a  son.  No  Soul  can 
become  a  husband  or  a  wife.  All  of  that  is  an  effect  of 
parmanu.

The  reason  being,  even  this  [male]  body  of  yours 
is  made  of  parmanu.  Her  [female]  body  is  also  made  of 
parmanu. But yours is made of [parmanu of] anger and pride 
and hers is made of [parmanu of] maya, meaning deceit and 
greed. Both bodies are formed from parmanu. If a man lives 
with  a  woman  and  accumulates  the  parmanu  of  deceit  and 
illusory  attachment,  then  he  will  become  a  woman  in  his 
next life. And if a woman lives with a man and accumulates 
parmanu  that  males  normally  have,  while  accumulating 
less  parmanu  of  deceit  and  illusory  attachment,  then  she 
will become a man [in the next life]. The Soul remains the 
very  same.  Through  satsang,  if  the  parmanu  of  deceit  and 
illusory  attachment  decrease,  then  she  will  become  a  man 
[in the next life].

There  are  three  genders  in  men.  There  are  also  three 
genders  in  women  and  in  bisexuals  (napunsak).  There 
are  male,  female  and  neutral  parmanu  in  everyone.  The 
body  is  made  up  of  parmanu,  there  are  these  three  types 
of  parmanu  within. Those  parmanu  are  in  a  mixture  form. 
There  are  three  types  of  parmanu  in  every  living  being; 
parmanu  which  have  a  masculine  (purush-ling),  feminine 
(stri-ling)  and  neuter  (napunsak-ling)  gender.  All  living 

340

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

beings  are  made  up  of  just  these  three  types  of  parmanu. 
As  it  is,  men  generally  do  not  have  breasts.  But  if  that 
[feminine] type of parmanu were to increase, then that man 
would appear womanlike. If the masculine type of parmanu 
were to increase in a woman, then you would see a bit of a 
mustache here [on her face]. This is all based on the balance 
of the three types of parmanu. If the neuter type of parmanu 
increase  greatly,  then  the  person  will  attain  a  lifeform  in 
hell. All  the  living  beings  in  hell  are  considered  napunsak. 
They experience tremendous suffering there. When it comes 
to  suffering,  women  come  second  in  number  and  men  are 
last [they experience the least suffering].

When the feminine type of parmanu become dominant, 
the  person  will  naturally  exhibit  feminine  attributes  and 
when  the  masculine  type  of  parmanu  are  accumulated  [in 
greater number], the person will naturally exhibit masculine 
attributes. There is nothing more to this.

That  is  why  I  have  told  men  what  happens  when 
they  worship  the  Mataji  (Goddess).  The  feminine  type  of 
parmanu become beautiful. Meaning that the feminine type 
of parmanu present in men become beautiful. What happens 
because  of  that?  His  hyperness  will  subside;  he  will  gain 
steadiness.  Aren’t  there  hyper  people?  They  cannot  stay 
still; they can’t sit still in one place.

The  feminine  parmanu  [in  women]  are  full  of  moha 
(illusory  attachment).  Whereas  the  feminine  parmanu  [in 
men]  become  beautiful.  Men  are  without  moha,  therefore, 
they gain some steadiness. They gain the kind of steadiness 
that women have. Otherwise, they keep scurrying back and 
forth all day long. They cannot sit still for even a moment. 
Whereas  women  can  easily  remain  steady,  as  if  nothing  is 
going to happen! And for men, they feel in their mind, ‘Will 
this happen or will that happen? Will this happen or will that 
happen?’

[7] The Science of the Effects of Parmanu

341

Questioner: What is the meaning of ling (gender)?

Dadashri:  Everything  besides  the  Self  is  considered 
ling. Besides the Self, the pudgal (the non-Self complex that 
undergoes influx and outflux) is ling. There are three types 
of ling: stri-ling, purush-ling and napunsak-ling.

Then ling also refers to the clothes one wears [the attire 
of a renunciate or a householder]. Subsequently, everything 
is considered ling.

Questioner: Is an idol also considered ling?

Dadashri:  Everything  is  considered  ling.  All  this 
which  is  in  the  pudgal  state  (bhaav)  is  considered  ling 
[whereas the Self is aling (without a gender)].

In fact, all of this is scientific; it is a Science. ‘Your’ 
main concern should be how to attain liberation. There is no 
end  to  this  Science  [of  the  effect  of  parmanu].  It  is  worth 
understanding it once by asking, “Dada, please explain this 
to us. What is this in reality?” So then the intent or the desire 
to know that, will no longer remain in the mind.

The Parmanu of Krodh…

What is krodh (anger with violent intent)? It is in fact 
the parmanu of the outer [discharge] prakruti. If you become 
engrossed in the temporary states, then sparks fly. But if You 
don’t  become  engrossed,  if  You  do  not  allow  any  positive 
and  negative  links  to  arise  within,  then  sparks  will  not  fly. 
‘You’  are  pure  Soul,  so  those  ugra  parmanu  (parmanu 
colored  with  the  intent  of  anger)  are  not  Yours.  When  the 
ugra parmanu unfold, You should not become engrossed in 
them,  You  should  just  keep  Seeing  them  [as  separate]. All 
of this is arising out of ignorance alone. There are two types 
of  ignorance;  that  of  worldly  interactions  or  the  relative 
[misunderstanding]  and  that  of  Gnan.  Discharging  anger 
(ugrata)  arises  due  to  misunderstanding  in  the  relative.  In 

342

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

the true sense, it is not worth becoming angry in the relative. 
Things  can  spoil,  but  the  intent  should  not  spoil;  that  is 
how  it  should  be.  Krodh  (anger  with  violent  intent)  does 
not  remain  after  Gnan;  it  is  then  considered  gusso  (anger 
without violent intent). The reason being, thereafter, a tanto 
(lingering link) does not remain in the slightest.

Questioner:  What  is  the  difference  between  aasakti 
(discharge  attachment  that  arises  due  to  attraction)  and  a 
lingering  link?  Does  aasakti  mean  excessive  attachment,  is 
there ‘my-ness’ or a sense of ownership in it?

Dadashri: My-ness is a different thing and aasakti is 

a different thing.

Questioner: And lingering link?

Dadashri:  A  lingering  link  is  a  type  of  shraddha 
(belief; conviction), a wrong belief, a deluded belief (mithya 
shraddha),  which  is  why  the  lingering  link  remains.  Once 
the  deluded  belief  leaves  and  the  right  belief  (samyak 
shraddha)  sets  in,  and  the  right Vision  of  ‘I  am  pure  Soul’ 
(samyak Darshan) is established, this lingering link [towards 
the  Self]  begins.  So  this  is  kshayak  samkit  (the  permanent 
conviction of the right belief, ‘I am pure Soul’). [Although,] 
There is no assurance for attaining samkit in the current era 
of the time cycle, but this is kshayak samkit.

Questioner: But, the word tanto is new to me.

Dadashri: Let me explain it to you. When we had gone 
on  jatra  (pilgrimage),  even  if  someone  had  said  something 
to you at night, there was no lingering link prevailing within 
You  the  next  morning.  When  you  meet  that  person  again, 
you sit with him as if nothing has happened. Whereas before 
attaining  this  Gnan,  the  effects  would  remain  within;  that 
verily is the lingering link.

Questioner: But just like we use the phrase ‘lingering 

[7] The Science of the Effects of Parmanu

343

link’  for  negative  things,  similarly  when  we  have  a  lot  of 
attachment, excessive attachment, what is that called?

Dadashri: The lingering link of that too will remain. 
After all the lingering links are destroyed, aasakti remains. 
Attraction  and  repulsion  both  remain,  but  there  is  no 
lingering link.

People who are proud and angry are good, people who 
are greedy and deceitful are not. Are the parmanu of greed 
limited  to  those  accumulated  in  just  one  life?  They  have 
been accumulating for infinite lives. The parmanu of anger 
are  subtle  but  they  can  be  seen  in  the  eyes.  The  parmanu 
that one dies with, those parmanu carry forward. One monk 
became so angry that he ruptured a blood vessel in his brain 
and died. Then [in the next life] he became a cobra, known 
as  Chandkoshio.  Lord  Mahavir  went  and  liberated  him. 
As  he  had  accumulated  parmanu  of  anger  in  the  state  as  a 
monk, he made an adjustment [cause]; therefore, in order for 
the disadjustment [effect] to take place, he had to inevitably 
become a poisonous cobra. So, he had to face this adjustment 
for just one lifetime. He suffered the consequences and then 
went back to where he was [to the human life-form].

The disillusioned people of the world have discovered 
that there is anger and love in the self. As such, there is no 
such attribute of love in the [original] Self and the love that 
is  in  the  [worldly-interacting]  self  is  pure  love.  That  love 
is not considered the same as worldly love; it is a different 
thing  altogether.  [There  is  absolutely  no  attachment  or 
abhorrence in that love.] While this [worldly] love increases 
in  one  instant  and  decreases  in  the  next.  That  is  actually 
aasakti;  that  cannot  be  pure  love.  Why  don’t  you  go  and 
ask what love there is between an iron filing and a magnet? 
Anger  comprises  of  hot  parmanu  whereas  love  comprises 
of mild [cool] parmanu. All of this is nothing but parmanu, 

344

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

it is the craftsmanship (karamat) of the Pudgal. Everything 
that is seen with the physical eyes is not Real.

To  Know  is  Gnan  and  to  ‘do’  is  anger.  The  entire 
world loses awareness completely. At that time [when anger 
is  arising],  there  is  no  awareness  [of  the  Self]  whatsoever. 
Even  if  one  is  a  religious  guru,  yet  the  awareness  does  not 
prevail  for  him!  Does  hot-temperedness  prevail  for You  or 
not? At  the  most,  it  is  the  body  that  becomes  heated,  such 
are  the  properties  of  the  body.  There  are  many  properties 
of  the  pudgal  parmanu. Yes,  there  are  cold  parmanu,  there 
are  hot  parmanu,  there  are  dry  parmanu,  there  are  smooth 
parmanu.  So  these  are  the  properties  of  the  parmanu;  they 
are  the  ones  that  exhibit  the  effect.  Just  imagine,  a  person 
without  Self-realization  becomes  engrossed  the  minute 
anger  arises,  and  he  himself  becomes  angry.  He  says,  “I 
became  angry,”  whereas  a  Self-realized  person  will  Know 
it  [as  separate];  that  is  the  only  difference. Then  gradually, 
even those effects will subside.

After giving You Gnan, instead of the parmanu of anger 
[charge parmanu], the parmanu of ugrata (discharging anger) 
remain; and instead of the parmanu of greed [charge parmanu], 
the parmanu of attraction [discharge parmanu] remain. In fact, 
You Know that Chandubhai spoke harshly or he caved in. As 
long as that is Known, it is considered ugra (discharge anger). 
As  long  as  the  Self  does  not  become  engrossed  in  them,  it 
cannot  be  called  krodh  (charge  anger).  Those  are  considered 
properties of the parmanu, and if the Self becomes engrossed 
in  them,  then  it  is  called  krodh.  Otherwise,  it  is  considered 
as  having  spoken  while  being  in  a  state  absolutely  free  from 
attachment and abhorrence (vitaraagata).

That Is the Internal Pull of the Positive With the 
Negative!

Everything  is  the  internal  pull  (khenchan)  of  the 

[7] The Science of the Effects of Parmanu

345

parmanu.  There  are  two  kinds  of  parmanu  in  attraction 
and  repulsion  (aakarshan-vikarshan).  The  parmanu  of 
abhorrence that you have brought with you, cause abhorrence. 
The  parmanu  of  attachment  that  you  have  brought  with 
you, cause attachment. When anger arises, during anger, the 
parmanu  have  volatility  (ugrata)  in  them  [repulsion],  and 
when  greed  arises,  there  is  attraction  towards  the  parmanu 
related  to  money.  Greed  arises,  attachment  arises;  how  can 
that be stopped? The parmanu that you have brought along 
with  you,  they  will  definitely  unfold.  People  refer  to  the 
attraction  of  the  pudgal  as  attachment.  That  attachment  is 
not  really  attachment;  rather,  it  is  a  mistake  in  the  belief. 
Attachment arises due to the property of attraction between 
parmanu  that  have  a  compatible  nature.  It  is  actually  the 
craftsmanship  of  the  Pudgal.  If  a  mother  and  child  are 
sitting together, the moment the mother gets up to leave, the 
child will also get up and follow her. The child is not doing 
this  with  the  understanding  that  ‘My  mother  is  leaving, 
so  I  should  follow  her.’  Rather,  he  is  doing  this  due  to  the 
attraction  of  the  parmanu  of  their  bodies.  The  attraction  of 
the parmanu occurs only when the positive [charge] and the 
negative [charge] come together.

Worldly  relations  are  going  to  come  to  an  end;  and 
these  temporary  relations  that  exist,  such  as  a  husband  and 
wife, a mother and child, are all only scientific circumstantial 
evidences.  People  are  simply  believing,  ‘I  am  his  father.’ 
Hey! How were you going to become a father? Weren’t you 
this  other  person’s  son!  This  person’s  son  has  become  this 
child’s father. These are all wrong beliefs.

Questioner: The parmanu that make up blood are the 

same, they in fact maintain relationships.

Dadashri: They maintain relationships as well as pull 
them apart. The parmanu of attachment and abhorrence have 
been  filled  in.  In  one  instant,  that  person  becomes  happy, 

346

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

so they hug you and in the next instant, they feel unhappy, 
so  they  slap  you.  These  are  the  effects  of  attachment  and 
abhorrence.

Questioner:  No,  but  what  I  have  learnt  is  that  this 
attraction is always there in blood relations and it is beyond 
the  intellect  or  feelings  for  each  other.  So  compared  to  all 
other  types  of  relationships,  blood  relationships  are  not  so 
easy to break.

Dadashri:  There  is  no  such  thing  as  a  blood 
relationship. It is just that their blood matches. Forget about 
blood  relationships,  but  there  are  no  such  relationships  of 
bone or of flesh either. If blood relationships did exist, if the 
blood were being passed down from your ancestors, then the 
anger, pride, deceit and greed would indeed remain [within 
the  family].  Instead,  there  are  cases  where  the  father  is  an 
angry  person  and  his  son  is  mild-tempered.  So  there  is  no 
such  thing  as  this.  It’s  just  that  people  see  things  that  way 
and  so  they  speak  that  way;  they  call  it  a  ‘blood  relation’. 
In  reality,  there  is  no  relation  [of  their  blood];  the  relation 
is  only  from  the  worldly  perspective.  There  is  no  mixture 
whatsoever of even one parmanu between people. You have 
to  say  it  from  the  worldly  perspective  that,  “These  people 
are from one family, those who are related by blood.”

Questioner:  Isn’t  it  the  case  that  there  is  a  greater 
attraction  between  people  having  similar  parmanu  or  the 
parmanu of people having similar prakruti?

Dadashri: That is exactly what has happened. People 
having  similar  prakruti  are  all  born  close  to  each  other  in 
the next life.

Questioner: Where  there  are  similar  parmanu,  there, 
they attract each other, and where the parmanu are different, 
there, they do not get along.

Dadashri:  Similar  parmanu  attract,  and  when  those 

[7] The Science of the Effects of Parmanu

347

very parmanu change, there is repulsion. Meaning that, this 
is all nothing but magnetic properties that have arisen.

Questioner:  So,  that  is  the  inherent  nature  of  the 

prakruti. The body cannot go outside of that nature.

Dadashri:  This  magnet  only  attracts  iron.  If  we 
were to place brass or anything else next to it, nothing will 
happen.  So  when  it  is  agreeable  to  him,  the  parmanu  will 
get  attracted  and  he  will  then  say,  “I  got  attracted.”  ‘I  got 
attracted’  is  an  illusion.  He  will  say,  “I  got  attracted  even 
though I didn’t want to.”

Questioner:  But  Dada,  that  is  what  I  was  saying, 
that there is bound to be attraction and repulsion within the 
parmanu of the body. To make the effort of removing them 
is like walking in the wrong direction.

Dadashri: You  do  not  have  to  think  about  removing 
them.  They  cannot  be  removed  at  all;  they  would  never 
come out. ‘You’ simply have to withdraw your bhaav from 
them. ‘You’ have to withdraw these bhaav of attachment and 
abhorrence. Therefore, You have to maintain vitaraagata (a 
state  absolutely  free  of  attachment  and  abhorrence),  that  is 
all. The parmanu will continue giving off their effects.

Whatever  kind  of  parmanu  you  have  filled  within, 
that  is  the  kind  of  effect  they  will  give.  That  is  why  ‘we’ 
say,  “No  matter  what  happens,  clear  it  [with  equanimity].” 
Whatever  was  filled  in,  is  what  will  come  out.  What  is 
the  only  thing  that  gets  withdrawn?  The  answer  is,  the 
attachment and abhorrence that we had for those things, that 
gets  withdrawn.  Does  attachment  and  abhorrence  happen 
anymore? They don’t, do they?

Questioner: No, Dada.

Dadashri:  The  One  for  whom  attachment  and 
abhorrence does not arise is considered vitaraag. ‘You’ need 

348

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

to become vitaraag. Attachment and abhorrence should not 
occur.  There  is  no  need  to  ‘do’  anything.  The  habits  will 
remain;  they  will  not  go  away. The  habits  of  the  body,  the 
habits of the mind, all of those will not go away.

Attachment and Abhorrence, the Root Cause of 
Worldly Life!

As long as the parmanu match, oneness (abhedta) will 
prevail.  Then  later,  it  will  turn  into  enmity.  Where  there  is 
aasakti  (discharge  attachment  that  arises  due  to  attraction), 
enmity will indeed be there. Aasakti is akin to poison itself. 
The more the aasakti in the body, the more the restlessness 
(chanchalta).

Despite  making  a  strong  decision 

to  not  have 
attachment,  the  body  will  become  attracted  towards  the 
thing  it  has  attachment  for.  This  is  because  attachment  is 
itself nothing but parmanu. Hence, one himself is not doing 
this,  but  the  inherent  nature  of  the  parmanu  of  attachment 
is  like  that.  The  property  named  attachment  or  abhorrence 
is not in the Self. They are actually parmanu; the parmanu 
colored with attachment, colored with abhorrence are lying 
within.

That  which  is  liked  and  that  which  is  disliked,  in  a 
bigger form is referred to as attachment and abhorrence. The 
parmanu of attachment are for giving happiness and pleasure 
and  the  parmanu  of  abhorrence  are  for  giving  unhappiness 
and  pain.  Worldly  life  is  persisting  due  to  attachment  and 
abhorrence.  The  seed  of  worldly  life  is  attachment  and 
abhorrence.  Due  to  which  there  is  an  illusion  of  suffering 
imagined pain and pleasure.

When  you  have  a  lot  of  abhorrence  for  someone, 
the  parmanu  of  attachment  will  inevitably  arise  and  when 
you  have  a  lot  of  attachment  for  someone,  the  parmanu  of 
abhorrence  will  inevitably  arise.  Which  is  why  ‘we’  have 

[7] The Science of the Effects of Parmanu

349

said,  “Become  vitaraag.”  Oh  awakened  One!  If  You  are 
faced with an effect that causes abhorrence, then remove it 
from  its  roots.  It  is  from  this  very  seed  of  abhorrence  that 
attachment will arise. Hence, abhorrence is never of any use. 
Abhorrence should actually be pulled out with its roots and 
thrown  away,  but  it  should  be  done  so  while  prevailing  in 
equanimity (samata).

Even Celestials Beings Have Attachment and 
Abhorrence...

Sometimes when the husband is disagreeable, the wife 
is straightforward; she is such a good wife. Many times the 
husband  is  completely  straightforward  whereas  the  wife  is 
disagreeable all the time. There are all kinds of karmic stock 
here in worldly life.

Questioner:  The  ones  with  mutually  opposing 

parmanu come together; why is that?

Dadashri: To make them aware, otherwise they would 
fall asleep. Both would fall asleep. They would sleep for six 
months. They would not even come out to see the sun. They 
are  such  that  they  would  just  remain  in  bed.  The  fun  is  in 
the  fact  that  they  all  oppose  each  other.  Otherwise,  no  one 
would want to attain liberation, would they!

The very same karmic stock is present in the celestial 
life-form (devgati). It is the same karmic stock everywhere!

Questioner:  Do  the  celestial  life-forms  have  shape? 

Do they all have different looks and forms and all that?

Dadashri: They do have a beautiful form, but nothing 
else  [like  childhood  and  old  age].  If  they  did  not  have  a 
beautiful form, then they would have no value, would they! 
They would be considered worthless, wouldn’t they? If they 
did not have a beautiful form, then how would they understand 
the worth of another devi (female celestial being)? The dev 

350

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

(male celestial beings) will realize all such things as, ‘I have 
this  devi  whereas  he  has  a  more  beautiful  devi.’  ‘He  has  a 
really nice devi. She is not like mine. That one’s devi is not 
very nice.’ The devis also talk amongst themselves, “I have 
one  who  is  dull  and  unimpressive,  but  I  have  to  spend  my 
whole life with him, what can I do?” Whereas here, we can 
change  things  if  we  want  to.  The  government  has  passed 
divorce laws; all kinds of laws have been passed.

Questioner:  If  all  the  karma  in  the  celestial  life-
form are in the form of discharge, then wouldn’t one attain 
liberation directly from there, once all those karma come to 
an end?

Dadashri: No one can attain liberation from any other 
place  [besides  the  human  life-form].  The  karma  can  never 
come to an end there. Karma come to an end in the human 
life-form  alone.  That  happens  through  vitaraagata  (a  state 
absolutely  free  of  attachment  and  abhorrence).  It  happens 
when  a  certain  number  of  years  are  spent  in  vitaraagata. 
There is no vitaraagata in the celestial life-form. So all such 
hope is useless. There is no liberation except from here, the 
human life-form.

There Is No Attachment in the Self!

The  craftsmanship  of  the  Pudgal  is  itself  vitaraag.  If 
You  become  vitaraag, You  will  have  won.  Why  don’t You 
become vitaraag! Then Your work would be done. It is not 
a  test  of Your  vitaraagata  if  you  are  just  sitting  amongst  a 
few resting snakes. Instigate the snakes slightly, then check 
to see where Your vitaraagata did not prevail.

There is no property named attachment in the Self, yet 
people say, “My Self is full of attachment and abhorrence.” 
But  what  is  it  actually?  There  is  an  electrical  body  within 
this  [physical]  body.  The  entire  body  gets  attracted  like  a 
magnet  when  matching  parmanu  are  encountered.  And 

[7] The Science of the Effects of Parmanu

351

people say, “I got attracted. I have feelings of attachment.” 
But  what  is  the  opinion  of  the  vitaraag  Lords  (absolutely 
enlightened  Lords)?  ‘They’  say,  “‘You’  should  Know  how 
this body is dancing; Know where it got attracted and where 
it didn’t get attracted.”

After attaining Gnan, the kashay leave. What remains 
thereafter  is  attraction  and  repulsion,  which  is  in  the  non-
Self part. The aggregates (skandha) of parmanu magnetized 
with attraction and repulsion are in the non-Self. Attraction 
occurs even when you do not desire it. That is indeed why 
we  can  understand  that  this  is  not  attachment,  but  the  non-
Self  part  is  being  attracted  to  the  other  non-Self  part.  In 
fact,  it  can  be  considered  attachment  only  if  the  [worldly-
interacting] self becomes engrossed in that [attraction].

The Principle of Attraction and Repulsion…

Questioner: Who governs the Self?

Dadashri:  No  one  governs  It. The  entire  governance 
is  natural.  No  one  at  all  is  the  [individual]  doer  of  the 
world.  Everything  continues  happening  through  scientific 
circumstantial  evidence.  Neither  has  any  God  ‘done’ 
anything.  Governance  does  not  need  to  be  ‘done’.  If  there 
were  someone  ‘doing’  the  governing,  there  would  be  an 
effect; it would give an effect. There is nothing effective in 
This [in the elemental matter of the Self].

Questioner: Who decides all such things as this Soul 
will go into this body and that Soul will go into that body?

Dadashri: There  is  no  need  for  us  to  decide  that. As 
one  encounters  the  parmanu  related  to  one’s  own  karmic 
account, one gets pulled towards them due to attraction. The 
world is functioning entirely on [the law of] attraction alone.

Questioner:  How  does  the  attraction  between  the 

body and the Soul occur?

352

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri: There is no attraction between the body and 
the  Soul.  Attraction  does  not  arise  for  the  Soul  anywhere. 
The other eternal elements which are with the Soul, it is due 
to the attraction of those eternal elements that the Soul gets 
pulled.

All  kinds  of  abhyaas  (practices;  habits)  have  taken 
place.  If  attraction  has  been  there  for  a  long  time,  then 
repulsion  of  the  same  will  occur.  That  is  not  the  inherent 
nature of the Self; it is the inherent nature of the pudgal.

Questioner:  If  one  does  good  deeds,  one  attains  a 
birth  in  the  celestial  realm  (Devlok);  so  who  justifies  all  of 
that, that this one should go to the celestial realm and...

Dadashri:  Justify...  Well,  don’t  we  take  this  oral 
medication?  What  does  the  doctor  say?  “Take  these  pills. 
Where  is  the  pain?” The  patient  says,  “Here,  in  my  head.” 
Hey! How will the medicine [taken orally] reach the head? 
How  will  the  medicine  know  that  it  has  to  go  from  here 
to  there?  The  [natural]  law  in  the  world  is  such  that  the 
ailment and its corresponding medicine will mutually attract 
one another. Based on the same [natural] law, if someone’s 
accumulated  parmanu  make  him  worthy  of  a  celestial  life-
form,  then  the  celestial  realm  will  pull  him  there.  If  his 
accumulated  parmanu  make  him  worthy  of  a  life-form  as 
a  donkey,  then  he  will  be  pulled  there.  If  his  accumulated 
parmanu  make  him  worthy  of  a  life-form  in  hell,  then 
he  will  be  pulled  there.  This  is  all  nothing  but  the  pull  of 
attraction.  The  entire  world  is  functioning  on  [the  law  of] 
attraction.  The  sun,  the  moon,  all  of  them  are  functioning 
based on [the law of] attraction. Therefore, there is no need 
for anyone to justify it.

Attraction occurs only if the parmanu match with each 
other. One sees exactly as per the parmanu that are within. 
There is no such thing like misery in this world. Everything 
has been filled within only.

[7] The Science of the Effects of Parmanu

353

Questioner: At  the  time  of  parting,  our  eyes  well  up 

with tears. What is that?

Dadashri: All of that certainly has to do with parmanu. 
If the parmanu are of attraction, then tears will fill the eyes 
at the time of separation, and if the parmanu are of repulsion, 
then there will be joy at the time of separation.

Why  do  people  let  the  relatives  cry  when  their  loved 
one passes away? If they allow them to cry, then the parmanu 
of  ‘my-ness’  (mamata)  will  flow  out  through  the  eyes. 
Thereafter,  the  person  will  feel  relieved.  Instead,  people 
stop  them  from  crying.  Hey!  You  shouldn’t  stop  them.  He 
will feel relieved only if he cries. If he doesn’t cry, then his 
burden will increase. That is why if they cry near ‘us’, ‘we’ 
don’t try to console anyone by rubbing their back. ‘We’ let 
them cry, so that all the bad parmanu empty out. At home, 
the mother will rub the child’s back.

‘We’  are  the  embodiment  of  compassion,  so  when 
‘we’  see  people  cry,  ‘we’  also  feel  like  crying.  But  if  ‘we’ 
were to cry, what would happen to them? It is just that ‘we’ 
don’t stop anyone from crying. Why would ‘we’ allow those 
parmanu  to  remain?  Let  them  come  out,  the  parmanu  of 
‘my-ness’ and other garbage-filled parmanu will come out.

The  body  is  made  of  parmanu;  it  is  nothing  besides 
that. Depending on the parmanu that one has within, that is 
what  one  experiences  via  the  body.  By  shaking  hands  with 
any odd type of person, those types of parmanu enter within. 
It would be better to remain alone, rather than interact with 
a person who has a lower quality of parmanu. That person’s 
parmanu will affect you.

Having loving or disagreeable feelings are on account 
of  the  parmanu.  When  your  parmanu  and  his  parmanu  do 
not match, then despite him being dear to you, he will still 
seem disagreeable to you.

354

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

There  is  a  difference  in  the  parmanu  making  up  the 
body  for  each  individual.  [Looking  at  a  vegetable  curry 
served,]  Just  as  there  is  a  difference  in  each  piece  of  the 
same vegetable in that curry, similarly, there is a difference in 
the parmanu within each individual. That is why everyone’s 
personality  is  not  the  same.  Those  with  an  identical  stock 
of  parmanu  and  those  with  an  opposing  stock  of  parmanu 
come together.

If  you  keep  remembering  a  person  over  and  over 
again,  his  ‘disease’  will  enter  within  you.  Whomever  you 
have  a  lot  of  thoughts  about,  that  person’s  parmanu  will 
enter  within  you.  To  remember  is  akin  to  the  attraction  of 
matching parmanu. When those parmanu no longer remain, 
the person will no longer be remembered.

The  inherent  nature  of  the  world  is  that  there  is 
attraction  between  similar  parmanu.  A  greedy  person  will 
come across another greedy person. This world is filled with 
parmanu.

The  repulsion  and  attraction  is  of  the  parmanu.  One 
end of the parmanu is positive and the other end is negative. 
One  remains  aware  during  repulsion,  but  during  attraction, 
he  does  not  remain  aware.  Attraction  is  a  property  of  the 
pudgal  [parmanu].  When  one  parmanu  matches  another, 
they pull each other. The body, the mind, the intellect which 
are made up of parmanu, they are the ones that get pulled. 
Repulsion also occurs in some places.

The  property  of  attraction  is  of  the  parmanu,  but  as 
long as one has not attained Gnan, it cannot be referred to as 
attraction. This is because, he definitely believes in his mind 
that, ‘I am the one who did this.’ Whereas for the One who 
has attained Gnan, He Knows, ‘The body got pulled due to 
the attraction and I didn’t ‘do’ anything, I only Knew it.’

There is an immense science in this very body. It is an 

[7] The Science of the Effects of Parmanu

355

incredible  machine.  After  attaining  Gnan,  [as  one  follows 
the 5 Agnas] chokhkha parmanu (pure parmanu; auspicious 
parmanu)  keep  getting  filled  within  and  the  impure  stock 
keeps emptying out. What happens at the time of singing these 
songs [which denote devotion towards the Knowledge of the 
Self]?  With  the  activity  starting  off  in  the  body,  chokhkha 
parmanu  enter  within,  whereas  parmanu  of  boredom  and 
other such parmanu come out. As you clap your hands and 
become  filled  with  joy,  the  useless,  impure  garbage-filled 
parmanu come out; and the moment one [parmanu] comes 
out, another must enter. So chokhkha parmanu enter within. 
That  is  indeed  why  ‘we’  put  on  a  ‘drama’  of  clapping  our 
hands!  ‘We’  ourselves  sing,  and  make  you  sing  the  praises 
of  the  vitaraag  Lords.  So,  you  become  filled  with  joy,  and 
purification  starts  to  happen.  This  is  Akram  Vignan.  We 
sing  these  songs  for  the  very  purpose  of  emptying  out  the 
garbage-filled  stock  within.  Purification  starts  to  happen. 
What an easy path! Whatever tubers of ignorance there are 
within,  they  continue  dissolving  by  singing  [these  songs], 
and  the  right  belief  of  ‘I  am  pure  Soul’  (samkit)  continues 
taking hold within.

That Is Magnetism!

Questioner:  Attachment  is  an  effect  of  the  ego  and 

attraction is a property of the pudgal [parmanu].

Dadashri:  Attachment  is  a  property  of  the  ego. 
Attachment  and  abhorrence  are  both  properties  of  the  ego. 
Attraction is considered a property of the pudgal [parmanu].

Questioner: Does attraction of the pudgal remain for 

the One whose ego is no more?

Dadashri: It does not remain for Him, but the attraction 
of the pudgal towards another pudgal remains. If the ego no 
longer remains for You, then it [the attraction] will not affect 
You,  but  it  will  remain  for  Chandubhai. After  attaining  this 

356

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Gnan,  new  interest  (ras)  does  not  arise. As  long  as  the  old 
interest  has  not  been  pulled  out  completely,  things  will  not 
get  settled  once  and  for  all.  Where  new  interest  is  arising, 
there worldly life will persist. This [attraction and repulsion] 
is  merely  an  effect.  They  are  not  causes;  they  are  simply 
things that are to be cleared [discharged]. When both causes 
and effects exist at the same time, it is known as worldly life.

If you have not understood the definition of gold and 
you  refer  to  brass  as  gold,  then  it  certainly  means  that  you 
have not understood its value, isn’t it? Even brass, when it is 
buffed, looks like gold, but one should know the definition 
of  gold  along  with  its  properties.  Similarly,  [One  should 
Know,] ‘What is anger? What is greed? What is attraction? 
What  is  repulsion?’  They  are  properties  of  the  pudgal 
parmanu. This is all a Science. Science means that it should 
be understood in exactness. It is necessary to understand this 
point minutely. There is no need to ‘do’ anything.

The Self that ‘we’ have given You, has been given in 
a  state  that  is  absolutely  untainted,  It  has  definitely  been 
given  as  being  absolutely  free  from  association  (asang). 
Now,  the  only  thing  is  to  understand  this.  The  awareness 
of  Knowledge  does  not  prevail  that  much  and  the  pull  of 
this pudgal is still there. The pull of the pudgal is there and 
you had sided with the pudgal for infinite lives and You are 
now, all of a sudden, no longer siding with it. Meaning that, 
You are now opposing it. ‘You’ have become the pure Soul, 
therefore You are now not siding with the pudgal. However, 
the  pull  of  the  pudgal  that  has  been  there  for  infinite  lives 
does  not  go  away.  Now,  where  is  that  pull  likely  to  cause 
[spiritual]  harm?  It  is  likely  to  cause  harm  in  the  attraction 
between  men  and  women.  So  there,  a  lot  of  awareness 
should be maintained.

Even Renunciation Is Repulsion!

This  world  is  functioning  on  the  basis  of  [the  law 

[7] The Science of the Effects of Parmanu

357

of]  attraction  alone,  and  in  that,  the  living  being  himself  is 
expressing  the  egoism  of,  “I  did  this  and  I  did  that.”  One 
keeps  taking  a  beating  for  that.  In  addition,  although  one 
gets married due to attraction, yet he claims, “I got married!” 
Hey  mortal  one!  How  can You  get  married? And  now,  you 
have actually ended up with a wife!

Questioner:  So 

leave  after 
renouncing everything, is it considered repulsion for them? 
Whatever they renounce, is that considered repulsion?

these  people  who 

Dadashri:  When  there  are  no  more  such  parmanu 
within,  one  automatically  separates  from  her  [the  wife]. 
At  that  time,  he  will  claim,  “I  renounced.”  He  is  simply 
expressing egoism.

It  is  worth  understanding  this  world  at  a  very  subtle 
level.  This  world  is  not  like  what  people  say  it  is,  neither 
is  it  like  what  these  scientists  say  it  is. The  scientists  have 
reached  up  to  a  certain  limit,  and  they  are  not  wrong. 
Whatever  they  have  discovered,  they  have  understood  that 
much. And that is not the work of their intellect; it is a gift 
[natural insight] that they have.

Pratikraman Is Needed for Attachment and 
Abhorrence

Questioner:  Do  we  have  to  do  pratikraman  for 

attraction?

Dadashri:  Of  course.  If  the  body  is  experiencing 
attraction  and  repulsion,  then You  have  to  tell  Chandubhai, 
“Hey  Chandubhai,  attraction  is  taking  place  here,  so  do 
pratikraman.” Then the attraction will stop. Both attraction 
and  repulsion  are  such  that  they  cause  you  to  wander  life 
after life.

Do You or do You not need to bring about a solution 
for the things that you dislike? ‘You’ should also bring about 

358

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

a  solution  for  the  things  that  you  like;  they  are  not  to  be 
accumulated.  Do  not  hold  onto  things  that  you  like,  bring 
about a solution for that, and also bring about a solution for 
this [that which is disliked]. That which is liked is the filled 
stock of attachment that is discharging, while that which is 
disliked is the filled stock of abhorrence that is discharging. 
Therefore,  a  solution  has  to  be  brought  about  for  the 
abhorrence. So in those instances, remain the way ‘we’ do, 
always in harmony and oneness with everyone! [The reason 
being,  abhorrence  causes  divisiveness  to  arise.  By  being  in 
harmony and oneness with everyone, the divisiveness comes 
to an end and abhorrence dissolves.]

Questioner:  It  can  generally  be  understood  that 
abhorrence has to be cleared, however the fact that attachment 
has to be cleared, is a profound point.

Dadashri: All  of  that  will  in  fact  have  to  be  cleared. 
How  can  it  be  acceptable  without  it  being  cleared?  The 
accumulated stock will have to be handed over. ‘You’ have 
to  hand  over  each  and  every  parmanu  to  whomever  they 
belong  and  become  free.  ‘You’  will  have  to  hand  over  the 
ones  that  are  disliked  as  well  as  the  ones  that  are  liked. 
Thereafter,  You  have  to  become  vitaraag.  Now,  this  is 
discharge illusory attachment (charitra moha), meaning the 
filled  karmic  stock  has  to  be  removed;  the  account  of  the 
filled karmic stock has to be cleared off. Clear that discharge 
illusory attachment with equanimity.

The  parmanu  are  present  in  the  balance  brought 
forward,  and  they  have  to  be  expended,  however  it  is  only 
when  the  circumstantial  evidences  come  together  that  the 
parmanu accumulated within can unfold.

‘You’  have  to  become  free  by  returning  whatever 
parmanu  you  had  accumulated  in  the  past.  What  has 
Krupaludev  said?  ‘You’  have  to  return  whatever  parmanu 

[7] The Science of the Effects of Parmanu

359

you  had  accumulated  from  whoever  in  the  past.  Why 
should  You  keep  something  after  Knowing  that  it  belongs 
to someone else?

The Knowledge of the eternal elements (tattva Gnan) 
is pure [without any adulteration]. Where not even a single 
Parmanu  is  adulterated,  there  the  Self  is  pure  and  the 
Knowledge regarding the Parmanu is also pure.

Through the Knowledge that separates the Self and the 
non-Self  (bhed  Gnan),  ‘we’  have  separated  You  in  such  a 
way  that  not  even  a  single  parmanu  is Yours.  People  have 
inappropriately taken things that belong to others. Hey! When 
people go to their grave, do they take those misappropriated 
things with them?

The  world  is  constantly  undergoing  change  at  every 
moment. Each and every Parmanu is constantly undergoing 
change  in  every  samay  (the  smallest,  indivisible  unit  of 
time).  People  are  looking  for  permanent  happiness  in  this 
ever-changing world. How is that possible?

The  Science  of  the  vitaraag  Lords  is  exact,  but  as 
people don’t understand it and because of the increase in the 
parmanu of illusory attachment, a peculiarity of this current 
era of the time cycle, everyone has become strange.

Questioner: Does karma have parmanu?

Dadashri:  Karma  is  indeed  made  up  of  parmanu, 
but  as  long  as  the  belief  of  ‘I  am  the  body’  exists,  they 
appear  to  be  animate  (chetan).  Once  the  belief  of  ‘I  am 
the  body’  leaves,  the  parmanu  appear  chokhkha  (purified; 
unadulterated; lighter; clearer).

There  is  no  choice  but  to  pay  off  the  installments 
related  to  the  parmanu  which  make  up  the  body.  It’s  not 
worth interfering with that. When both, the parmanu of the 
mind  and  the  body,  come  together,  a  severe  assault  occurs; 

360

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

terrible  restlessness  prevails.  If  one  is  not  able  to  handle 
such terrible restlessness, he will throw himself in the ocean.

When  the  parmanu  of  speech  are  used  up,  a  lot  of 
the body’s energy is expended. ‘Our’ speech is spoken with 
vitaraagata, so none of that happens.

The  parmanu  will  come  out  from  the  body  in  the 
same  way  they  were  acquired.  They  are  acquired  through 
vibrations  and  they  leave  through  vibrations.  The  Self  is 
steady  (achal).  Those  which  were  acquired  through  the 
mind,  speech  and  body,  will  unfold  through  the  vibrations 
of the mind, speech and body.

When the tubers made up of explosive parmanu burst, 
that is the mind. The causal mind (bhaav mun) is equivalent 
to  the  [worldly-interacting]  self’s  state  of  engrossment  in 
the  explosive  parmanu  (ranjaymaanpanu).  When  the  time 
comes for the [charged] parmanu to unfold [in the next life], 
they give their effect. When one spoils his intent, vibrations 
arise. If One prevails as the Knower, the vibrations gradually 
start to diminish.

Anger,  pride,  deceit,  and  greed  arise  due  to  the 
vibrations.  Near  a  Gnani,  they  empty  out,  whereas  near  an 
ignorant person, the vibrations increase.

Worldly life is filled with parmanu that can shake up 

even the greatest of Gnanis, so beware!

The Parmanu of the Self-Realized One and the 
Ignorant One…

One man kept having thoughts like, ‘Whose things shall 
I take? How can I gather things? How can I [find something 
to]  eat  [by  taking  from  others]?’  From  that  moment,  ‘we’ 
knew that he was attracting parmanu that would take him to 
the animal life-form. The good parmanu that are pulled in, 
are very light; they are considered light-weighted parmanu. 

[7] The Science of the Effects of Parmanu

361

Even for ‘us’, the parmanu are going to be pulled when we 
are  together,  but  they  are  very  light-weight  parmanu,  they 
hardly  have  any  weight.  And  the  person  who  says  things 
like,  “Whose  [things]  can  I  take?  From  whom  should  I 
steal?” would have heavy-weighted parmanu.

It is like this; place a Self-realized person on one side 
and  an  ignorant  person  on  the  other.  They  are  of  the  same 
age,  with  similar  bodies,  similar  size  chests;  everything  is 
the  same.  If  you  place  them  both  in  water,  they  will  both 
displace  the  same  amount  of  water.  The  volume  of  water 
would be the same. But if you were to place them both on 
a  weighing  scale,  you  will  not  believe  to  what  extent  the 
weighing scale will tip for the ignorant one!

Questioner:  What  kind  of  weighing  scale  is  this?  Is 
this an ordinary weighing scale or a spiritual weighing scale?

Dadashri:  No,  no,  an  ordinary  weighing  scale.  I  am 
just speaking in general, at the gross level. I am speaking in 
a way that people living a worldly life can understand. Now, 
that state of ignorance of the Self is considered the first level 
of  madness.  Then  the  second  level  of  madness  is  of  those 
in  a  mental  hospital.  Moreover,  if  those  with  the  first  and 
second level of madness are placed on a weighing scale, the 
person with the second level of madness would be heavier. 
The  more  chokhkha  (auspicious;  clear)  the  parmanu,  the 
lighter  they  are.  That  is  indeed  why  we  have  this  saying 
that, ‘When a mad person hits us with his hand, it feels as if 
he has hit us with a club.’ Have you ever heard this?

Questioner: Yes, such a person’s hand is heavy.

Dadashri: Therefore, as the [worldly-interacting] self 
attains a higher life-form, the [body] weight becomes lighter, 
the  parmanu  become  lighter.  The  self  goes  to  a  higher  or 
lower life-form based on the weight of the parmanu.

The pudgal [parmanu covering the Self] must decrease. 

362

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

If the pudgal [parmanu] do not decrease, then know that it is 
like a stone within. If the pudgal [parmanu] decrease, then 
the [energy of the] Self will increase.

Questioner:  Dada,  what  do  you  mean  by  the  pudgal 

[parmanu] decreasing?

Dadashri:  As  the  parmanu  of  the  mind,  speech  and 
body  decrease,  on  the  other  side,  the  energy  of  the  Self 
increases. If these parmanu do not decrease, then one is like 
a statue made of stone.

Questioner:  Does  that  mean  that  the  weight  of  the 

body also reduces?

Dadashri:  Everything.  As  all  the  parmanu  start 

decreasing, one becomes light like a flower.

Questioner: So Dada, how does the pudgal decrease?

Dadashri: As the love for that side [the Self] increases, 
the love for this side [the pudgal] decreases. Meaning that, 
the limitless parmanu of the mind, speech and body, they all 
start  decreasing.  The  parmanu  of  the  mind  and  all  the  rest 
become stronger [heavier] due to the influence of ignorance 
of the Self, whereas with Self-realization, they dissipate.

The Difference Between Nirvana and Death...

Questioner: What is a charam sharir?

Dadashri:  Charam  sharir  refers  to  the  final  body 
[before  attaining  final  liberation].  All  of  the  parmanu  that 
make  up  that  body  are  the  final  ones.  There  are  limitless 
parmanu  in  this  world.  The  parmanu  of  the  lowest  grade 
are  for  underdeveloped  people.  All  the  uncivilized  people 
are  underdeveloped;  they  have  heavy-weighted  parmanu. 
The  body  weight  of  such  people  is  also  very  heavy.  The 
highest  level  of  parmanu  in  the  entire  world,  even  higher 
than  those  of  celestial  beings,  are  those  that  Lord  Mahavir 

[7] The Science of the Effects of Parmanu

363

had, are those that the Tirthankars had. Simply upon seeing 
Them, we feel bliss. Just upon looking at Them, we would 
feel in our minds that we want to just remain seated there.

Questioner: So, are they light-weighted?

Dadashri:  The  parmanu  are  verily  such;  they  are 
attractive parmanu! We keep having an affinity for whatever 
They  speak!  We  find  it  sweet!!  As  the  body  [life-form] 
develops,  the  level  of  all  the  parmanu  keep  changing  to  a 
higher level. And what are the ultimate parmanu like? They 
are the ones that make up the charam sharir. Charam sharir 
means that even if someone were to strike the body with a 
sword,  it  would  not  cause  any  wound.  Otherwise,  no  one 
would allow anyone with a charam sharir to attain liberation. 
That is why Lord Mahavir was able to attain nirvana (final 
liberation  from  all  karma,  from  the  physical  body  and  the 
worldly cycle of birth and death)! Goshala [Lord Mahavir’s 
disciple]  threw  the  tejoleshya  at  him.  Tejoleshya  means,  he 
had looked with a fixed gaze at the sun, which gave rise to 
the  tejoleshya  (power  of  fire  or  electricity  harnessed  from 
the rays of the sun) within him. And if that tejoleshya were 
to  be  thrown  at  someone,  it  would  burn  them  to  ashes.  He 
burned two of Lord Mahavir’s disciples to ashes in this way 
and  then  he  threw  the  tejoleshya  at  Lord  Mahavir,  but  he 
was  not  able  to  burn  Lord  Mahavir  to  ashes.  However,  the 
Lord did have rectal bleeding for six months! Such was this 
Goshala! He was a disciple of the Lord, he had learned that 
art  [of  tejoleshya]  from  the  Lord,  and  he  even  used  all  of 
that on the Lord!

Questioner: So, this charam sharir is considered the 

final body?

Dadashri:  That  in  fact  is  the  charam  deha  (the  final 
body  before  final  liberation),  oh  ho  ho!  Otherwise,  Lord 
Mahavir  would  not  have  attained  nirvana;  He  would  have 

364

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

died! The One who has a charam sharir attains nirvana and 
no one can kill Him.

Questioner: Dada, you have four degrees pending, so 

can this [body of yours] be considered charam sharir?

Dadashri:  When  ‘our’  four  degrees  are  completed 
[when 360 degrees are attained], that is when ‘we’ will have 
a charam sharir.

Questioner:  Dada,  what  is  the  difference  between 

nirvana and death?

Dadashri: Nirvana means that a new body is no longer 
going  to  be  acquired;  [it  is]  the  final  body.  Now,  there  are 
no  more  parmanu  left  that  can  give  rise  to  another  body. 
And  for  the  one  who  dies,  a  new  body  would  definitely 
have  arisen.  One  has  died  for  infinite  lives,  but  they  were 
all  kumaran  (deaths  without  having  the  awareness  as  the 
Self), they were not samadhi maran (blissful deaths during 
which  One  is  in  the  awareness  as  the  Self),  whereas  now, 
there  will  be  samadhi  maran.  The  reason  being,  whenever 
worldly  difficulties  arise,  do You  prevail  as  Chandubhai  or 
do You prevail as the Self?

Questioner: ‘I’ prevail as the Self.

Dadashri:  Yes,  so  when  death  is  imminent,  One 
prevails  as  the  Self  from  within!  The  moment  a  disaster  is 
imminent, One does not wait outside, He enters His ‘home’ 
[the Self]; that is samadhi maran.

Questioner:  Will  mahatmas  have  a  death  where 

samadhi (a blissful state as the Self) prevails?

Dadashri:  If  they  follow  ‘our’  Agnas,  then  ‘we’  will 
be present at that time, and they will have a samadhi maran.

Questioner:  Does  that  mean  that  at  the  time  of 

samadhi maran We will prevail as the Self?

[7] The Science of the Effects of Parmanu

365

Dadashri:  Yes,  samadhi  maran;  at  that  time,  One  is 
indeed  prevailing  as  the  Self!  For  mahatmas,  during  their 
final moments, Dada will be readily present!

Those With Matching Parmanu Are Indeed 
Attracted Here!

There  is  not  a  single  parmanu  of  abhorrence  to  be 
found  in  the  body  of  the  Gnani  Purush.  As  there  is  not 
a  single  parmanu  of  attachment  in  the  pratishthit  atma 
(discharging  relative  self)  of  the  Gnani  Purush,  therefore 
there is no abhorrence either. However, attachment may arise 
[in  the  body]  naturally  and  spontaneously,  but  abhorrence 
will  definitely  never  arise  naturally  or  spontaneously.  The 
Gnani  has  come  to  bestow  liberation,  He  has  not  come  to 
produce ‘mangos’.

Questioner:  People  with  all  kinds  of  prakruti  have 
come  to  You.  Would  they  all  have  come  for  liberation? 
Would that have been the main purpose?

Dadashri: They have also brought along merit karma 

with them, moreover, their parmanu also match ‘ours’.

Questioner:  The  parmanu  that  we  all  have,  they 

would actually not match a single one of ‘yours’.

Dadashri:  They  may  be  different,  but  [some]  do 

match ‘our’ parmanu.

Questioner:  So,  in  this  case,  would  ‘your’  parmanu 
and  the  parmanu  of  all  those  who  have  met  ‘you’,  match 
for sure?

Dadashri:  ‘Our’  parmanu  match  everyone  else’s. 
‘Our’  parmanu  [those  with  the  purpose  of  liberation]  are 
common to all. If someone has parmanu similar to ‘our’s’, 
he  will  be  drawn  here  to  ‘us’.  It  is  only  when  one  has 
parmanu which are more or less similar to ‘our’s’, that we 
come across each other, otherwise not.

366

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Questioner:  If  he  has  parmanu  similar  to Yours,  and 
I also have parmanu similar to Yours, then he and I would 
definitely connect, right?

Dadashri:  You  and  him  will  not  connect.  You  will 
connect  with  ‘us’.  The  parmanu  within  you  which  are  of 
a  different  kind,  those  are  within  ‘us’.  He  does  not  have 
parmanu  similar  to  yours  in  him.  ‘We’  have  the  same  kind 
of parmanu that are within him. You do not have parmanu 
similar to his in you.

Questioner: ‘You’ have a store-house of parmanu.

Dadashri:  As  such,  ‘we’  do  not  have  a  store-house; 

‘our’ parmanu match everyone’s.

Questioner: So is the quantity of Your parmanu more 

or is their quality such that they match with everyone?

Dadashri:  Each  and  every  parmanu  of  ‘ours’  is 
indeed such that it is helpful to everyone. They are similar to 
those that everyone has, and only those people come across 
‘us’. Others are not able to meet ‘us’. ‘We’ had shown this 
gentleman;  whilst  living  in  Mamani  Pol,  when  someone 
would  come  up  the  stairs,  ‘we’  would  say,  “This  man  who 
is  coming  up  the  stairs,  will  go  back  down  just  now.  Just 
watch!”  After  a  while,  that  person  would  have  gone  back 
down! He would not be able to come here.

Questioner:  Many  have  gone  back.  Besides  those, 
there  are  also  many  who  meet  You  and  then  never  come 
back, right?

Dadashri:  The  connection  does  not  happen  at  all. 
Something  will  tell  him  ‘no’  from  within.  So  this  entire 
world has a basis (aadhaar); it is not baseless (niradhaar). 
God  [the  Self]  is  in  His  form  and  the  parmanu  are  in  their 
form. All of that has its basis, it is within the law, and it is 
vyavasthit. And yes, it is the regulator of the world.

[7] The Science of the Effects of Parmanu

367

Questioner: These parmanu, the subtle parmanu, the 
ones that draw us towards You, do they have anything to do 
with the Self?

Dadashri: They have nothing to do with each other. The 
Self  does  not  have  anything  to  do  with  anyone  whatsoever. 
The  Self  is  independent,  It  is  in  the  form  of  eternal  bliss 
and by Its inherent nature, It is the same in all. There are no 
differences at all. All the differences are of the parmanu. One 
may ask, “Then, why are there differences everywhere?” The 
answer is, “The differences are there because the space that 
each  one  occupies  is  different.  If  there  was  just  one  space, 
then nothing like this would have happened.”

Questioner:  What  power  controls  the  parmanu,  and 
in what state are these parmanu bound? The parmanu have 
come  into  different  spaces,  they  are  of  different  shapes; 
these parmanu have come together in different amounts. So 
what power is controlling them?

Dadashri:  Who  would  be  the  controller?  They 
themselves  are  the  controller,  by  their  inherent  nature. 
The  world  is  constantly  undergoing  change.  The  world  is 
certainly  flowing  along.  There  is  no  need  for You  to  make 
it  function.  Vyavasthit  brings  together  the  circumstances; 
everything is indeed in one’s karmic account. The parmanu 
are constantly revolving.

When the parmanu are compatible, attraction happens 
and  when  they  are  not,  repulsion  happens.  If  they  are  very 
distinctly  compatible,  then  viraho  (the  pain  of  separation 
from  a  loved  one)  will  arise.  Now  all  mahatmas  have  the 
same  bhaav  for  the  Gnani  Purush,  because  the  parmanu 
within  ‘us’  match  the  parmanu  within  every  mahatma,  and 
only  those  mahatmas  meet  ‘us’.  Now  when  your  parmanu 
of  repulsion  empty  out  and  when  the  parmanu  that  match 
‘ours’ start filling within You, You will become like ‘us’.

368

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

‘Our’  parmanu  are  strong,  similar  to  how  termites 
cannot affect [wood that is on] fire. No one’s parmanu can 
affect ‘us’.

When  you  remember  Dada  Bhagwan,  His  parmanu 
get  drawn  within  you,  the  moment  you  remember  Him. 
Therefore,  recall  the  people  who  are  the  most  [spiritually] 
elevated of all. Recall people who are considered to be the 
most [spiritually] elevated in society, not royalty, but highly 
spiritually elevated people.

Questioner: Simandhar Swami.

Dadashri: Yes, the moment you recall Him, His live, 
direct  parmanu  will  enter  within  you.  That  is  indeed  why 
people  in  the  past  used  to  recite  the  names  of  the  Satis 
(women of high moral conduct)! Now, if you were to recall 
the  names  of  bad  people,  then  their  parmanu  would  also 
enter  within.  If  you  keep  saying  “Kasturi,  Kasturi”  [name 
of a person sitting in satsang] then those parmanu will get 
drawn  within  and  if  you  keep  saying,  “Alcohol,  alcohol,” 
then  those  parmanu  will  get  drawn  within.  This  is  how 
everything  in  the  world  functions  at  the  subtle  level.  In  all 
of  this,  what  does  satsang  represent?  It  is  something  that 
takes  You  towards  greater  things.  There,  even  the  darshan 
that  You  do  is  of  that  which  is  [spiritually]  elevated,  what 
you speak is also of that which is [spiritually] elevated, even 
when you think, it is of that which is [spiritually] elevated; 
the worship or devotion is for everything that is [spiritually] 
elevated.

When  you  curse  at  someone,  when  kashay  happens, 
vibrations  are  created  and  the  parmanu  that  enter  within  at 
that  time,  enter  through  the  nose. When  the  hands  tremble, 
the  parmanu  enter  through  each  and  every  pore.  Likewise, 
by  singing  ‘Dada  Bhagwan  na  aseem  jay  jaykar  ho’, 
auspicious parmanu enter through each and every pore. This 

[7] The Science of the Effects of Parmanu

369

body has formed from parmanu. The Self is not made up of 
parmanu.  When  you  sing  out  loud  the  devotional  songs  of 
Dada Bhagwan, inauspicious parmanu leave and auspicious 
ones  enter.  When  you  laugh  in  ‘our’  presence,  those  many 
parmanu of ignorance will leave and the parmanu of Gnan 
will  set  within.  In  this  body,  no  vacuum,  meaning  space 
without ‘air’ [parmanu], can remain.

When  a  garland  is  placed  around  ‘our’  neck,  the 
flowers  don’t  have  any  value;  the  value  is  of  the  bhaav 
(inner  intent).  ‘We’  fill  the  garland  that  is  placed  around 
‘our’  neck  with  parmanu  and  return  it.  Those  parmanu 
will have an effect on you. Each and every parmanu of the 
Gnani  Purush  is  ‘cool’.  By  touching  them,  you  experience 
nothing  but  ‘coolness’.  When  you  touch  ‘our’  feet,  you 
acquire  extraordinary  parmanu.  This  [worldly  life]  is  such 
a  huge  entanglement.  Each  and  every  parmanu  gives  rise 
to entanglements alone. It is not possible to escape from it. 
That  is  why  the  Lord  said,  “If  you  meet  a  Gnani  Purush, 
then remain with Him!”

How  can  disasters  come  your  way  after  you  have 
met  ‘us’? Why  would  they  come? The  disasters  are  in  fact 
bidding  you  farewell.  All  of  that  is  actually  the  karmic 
account of parmanu.

When  you  come  here  for  satsang,  the  doors  to  the 
‘room’  [of  Self-ignorance]  definitely  close.  The  parmanu 
from  ‘outside’  [the  ‘room’]  do  not  enter  within  you.  The 
parmanu  of  ‘our’  room  [in  Mamani  Pol,  Baroda]  are  such 
that  no  matter  how  agitated  a  person  is,  he  experiences 
peace  when  he  comes  here.  The  miseries  of  an  unhappy 
person are alleviated. Self-ignorance (maya) would actually 
not even be able to enter here. Here, there are no discussions 
related to the relative. Even if discussions related to worldly 
interactions  happen,  there  is  vitaraagata  (a  state  absolutely 
free from attachment and abhorrence) in them.

370

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

The Parmanu of a Tirthankar!

The bodies of all the living beings in the universe are 
made  up  of  parmanu.  Those  parmanu  are  of  four  types. 
Impure  (ashuddha)  parmanu,  meaning  where  one  is  doing 
impure  deeds,  like  burning  people’s  houses  down  without 
any  reason,  just  for  one’s  enjoyment.  Aren’t  there  people 
who  do  such  things?  The  parmanu  of  their  bodies  are  like 
that.  Then  there  are  those  who  do  inauspicious  (ashubha; 
bad)  deeds,  where  one  hurts  others  for  one’s  own  selfish 
needs.  Their  parmanu  are  like  that.  Then  there  are  those 
that  do  auspicious  (shubha;  good)  deeds,  like  the  monks 
and saints! Then there are even some who for the most part 
don’t  do  anything  inauspicious.  Those  who  do  auspicious 
deeds,  their  parmanu  are  of  a  high  quality.  Whereas  the 
parmanu  of  the  Lord  are  actually  pure  (shuddha).  No  one 
in  the  entire  universe,  not  even  the  celestial  beings  would 
have  such  parmanu;  and  what  extraordinary  attractiveness 
(laavanyata),  such  that  you  have  never  seen!  There  would 
be no famine in the vicinity of the Lord. ‘Our’ Gnan is that 
of  the  Tirthankar  Lords.  What  the  Tirthankar  Lords  have 
Known,  ‘our’  Gnan  is  the  very  same,  but  there  is  a  big 
difference  between  Them  and  ‘us’.  Near  where  ‘we’  are, 
we  have  indeed  seen  famine  arise,  haven’t  we!  So  ‘our’ 
parmanu  are  not  as  influential  or  that  collectively  strong. 
Within a thirty-mile radius [of a Tirthankar Lord’s vicinity], 
even  dogs  become  quiet! Whereas  dogs  become  quiet  only 
around  where  ‘we’  are  seated,  but  not  elsewhere.  ‘Our’ 
fragrance  reaches  those  sitting  upstairs,  but  they  would 
not  be  able  to  understand  where  it  is  coming  from!  ‘Our’ 
fragrance only reaches up to a certain limit. It doesn’t reach 
very far.

There  is  no  difference  in  the  keval  Gnan  (absolute 
Knowledge)  of  a  Tirthankar  Lord  and  of  a  Kevali  (the 
absolutely  enlightened  One),  but  to  become  a  Tirthankar 

[7] The Science of the Effects of Parmanu

371

is  a  naamkarma  (name  determining  karma).  Meaning  that 
They are instrumental in bestowing liberation to many living 
beings.  The  body  of  a  Kevali  is  considered  a  human  body 
and  the  body  of  a  Tirthankar  Lord  is  in  fact  considered  a 
wonder  of  this  world.  Even  celestial  beings  cannot  acquire 
such  a  body.  No  celestial  beings,  not  even  Mahendra  [the 
king  of  the  celestial  realm]  would  have  such  a  body.  The 
highest of all parmanu in the entire world are what comprise 
a  Tirthankar  Lord’s  body;  they  were  in  Lord  Mahavir’s 
body.  Even  though  He  lived  in  that  body  for  seventy-two 
years [only], the parmanu were of the highest quality.

Questioner: What kind of parmanu were they that He 

attained the state of God?

Dadashri: It is like this, the one who has the intent to 
steal will accumulate the parmanu of stealing; they will be 
added to his balance. The one who has the intent to practice 
law  will  accumulate  the  parmanu  of  practicing  law  and  if 
he wants to be a carpenter, he will accumulate the parmanu 
of carpentry. Whereas for the Lord? If one wants to do the 
work of a Tirthankar, then he will accumulate the parmanu 
for the work of a Tirthankar. ‘They’ are born solely for the 
purpose of people’s salvation. What is in it for Themselves? 
So imagine, what those parmanu must be like?

Questioner:  All  of  those  are  pure  parmanu,  aren’t 

they?

Dadashri:  The  parmanu  are  pure,  but  when  can  the 
Parmanu  be  considered  pure  [in  the  Real  sense]?  When 
their purification takes place. ‘Their’ parmanu are not pure, 
but they are considered of a very high quality.

Questioner:  The  Parmanu  in  this  world,  the  ones  in 

the original form, they are all the same, aren’t they?

Dadashri:  In  their  original  form,  they  are  the  same, 

372

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

but  these  ones  are  in  fact  colored  with  bhaav.  So  every 
living  being  has  parmanu  that  are  colored  with  bhaav. 
The  parmanu  have  been  colored  with  one’s  own  bhaav. 
A  carpenter’s  [parmanu]  are  colored  with  the  bhaav  of 
carpentry, a thief’s [parmanu] are colored with the bhaav of 
stealing, a Tirthankar Lord’s [parmanu] are colored with the 
bhaav  of  a  Tirthankar’s  work  and  a  Gnani’s  [parmanu]  are 
colored with the bhaav of a Gnani.

Questioner:  But  the  body  of  a  Tirthankar  is  actually 
the  charam  sharir,  so  He  will  have  to  let  go  of  all  those 
bhaav and leave, won’t He?

Dadashri:  ‘He’  will  indeed  leave  after  letting  go  of 
all the bhaav. All the parmanu that He has acquired, He has 
done  so  by  having  the  intention  of  ‘I  want  to  help  towards 
the  salvation  of  the  world.  May  the  world  attain  the  bliss 
that  I  have  attained.’  ‘His’  body  is  not  meant  for  writing 
scriptures.  The  speech  that  emanated  from  Him  while 
helping the people attain salvation, it is precisely from this, 
that people have made the scriptures.

Questioner: So, have these parmanu come with Him 

from the time He bound the status of a Tirthankar?

Dadashri:  The  day  He  bound  the  Tirthankar  name-
determining karma, the Tirthankar status-determining karma, 
the parmanu were accumulated and based on those [charged] 
parmanu, the gross parmanu have come together right now. 
Even Lord Mahavir had difficulty protecting those parmanu. 
‘He’ had a very difficult time protecting them. ‘He’ had an 
attractive  body;  one  would  get  attracted  by  just  looking  at 
it. Even the celestial beings would keep staring at Him. The 
male  and  female  celestial  beings  would  look  at  Him  and 
smile gently thinking, ‘I must say, what a body!’

Questioner: What do you mean by protecting?

Dadashri:  So  that  no  one  would  kidnap  Him.  Thugs 

[7] The Science of the Effects of Parmanu

373

would want to kidnap Him; all people would want to kidnap 
Him because He had an attractive body.

Questioner: Even the thugs would find it attractive?

Dadashri:  Yes,  everyone  would.  So  He  had  to  be 
protected  very  well.  But  why  would  He  always  be  saved? 
It  was  because  of  His  merit  karma.  Why  were  people  not 
able to kidnap Him or rob Him even when they tried? It was 
because of the merit karma. ‘He’ had brought that with Him, 
the grandeur. But people would definitely be scared for His 
safety.  Even  if  He  was  not  to  be  protected,  no  one  would 
be able to bother Him at all, no one would be able to touch 
Him; and what a beautiful body!

Questioner:  There  must  be  many  people  wanting  to 

kidnap Dada, the Gnani Purush, right?

Dadashri:  The  body  of  the  Gnani  Purush  is  of  this 
Kaliyug (current era of the time cycle characterized by lack 
of  unity  in  thought,  speech  and  action),  so  what  substance 
would it have? This body is actually of the Dushamkaal (an 
era  of  moral  and  spiritual  decline  characterized  mainly  by 
misery) whereas the Lord’s body was that of the fourth era 
of the time cycle.

In  ‘us’,  all  eight  [subtle  discharging]  karma  are  of  a 
high  quality,  but  they  are  not  like  those  of  the  Tirthankar. 
This is because the state as a Tirthankar is in fact the highest 
state  in  the  entire  world.  Of  all  the  parmanu  that  exist,  the 
highest  of  all  parmanu  would  get  pulled  over  there  and  fit 
there. ‘Their’ body is made up entirely of parmanu, but they 
are of the highest quality. The shape of that body is different, 
the  bones  and  blood  are  different;  they  are  very  beautiful. 
The body is such that one would naturally get attracted to it. 
The speech is different. It is very sweet, extremely sweet; it 
is speech that is syadvaad. Syadvaad means that the speech 
would  not  be  hurtful  to  anyone,  not  to  the  Muslims,  the 

374

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Parsis  or  any  of  the  other  eighteen  castes.  The  speech  is 
such that it would not be hurtful to anyone’s religion even to 
the slightest. Imagine how amazing those Tirthankars were!

Being  a  Tirthankar  means  that  He  has  the  highest  of 
merit karma in the entire universe. The parmanu of His entire 
body  are  of  the  highest  kind.  They  are  completely  unique. 
Even  the  parmanu  of  celestial  beings  are  nowhere  close  to 
these  ones,  such  are  these  parmanu!  At  present,  the  One 
with  such  parmanu  is  Lord  Simandhar  Swami.  Simandhar 
Swami is the current living Tirthankar Lord. The [effects of 
the] parmanu of the current living Tirthankar Lord permeate 
all  around.  One  can  benefit  greatly  from  a  current  living 
Tirthankar!



[8]
The Effects of the Parmanu of Food

The Indent From Within Is Supplied From the 
Outside

All this is based on scientific circumstantial evidences. 

Not even a single parmanu in this world can be changed.

If you sit down to eat right now, you yourself do not 
know  what  you  are  going  to  eat! The  person  preparing  the 
food  does  not  know  what  they  will  make  tomorrow!  How 
this  happens  is  also  a  wonder!  How  much  of  that  you  will 
be able to eat and how much you will not be able to eat, all 
the parmanu for that are already arranged [within].

Questioner:  So  does  that  mean  that  we  cannot  know 

how they are arranged?

Dadashri:  Of  course  We  can  Know,  We  can  Know 
everything.  This  puzzle  of  mine  has  been  solved.  ‘I’  am 
sitting here after having Known it.

Whatever you are eating, you are only eating what the 

parmanu within like.

It  is  indeed  the  parmanu  within  the  body  that  are 
asking  for  it.  When  the  circumstances  come  together  [for 
the  parmanu]  to  come  into  fruition,  they  unfold,  and  when 
the time is right, it [the food] comes before you.

This  one-year-old  baby  girl  was  offered  every  item 

376

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

that  was  served  on  the  plate.  Then  I  gave  her  a  piece  of 
magas  (an  Indian  sweet  made  from  chickpea  flour,  sugar 
and  clarified  butter).  She  looked  at  it,  but  did  not  touch  it. 
Then I offered her some moong beans, but she did not touch 
them.  Then  I  offered  her  a  small  piece  of  jalebi  (a  crispy, 
deep-fried  Indian  sweet  soaked  in  sugar  syrup),  which  she 
quickly  snatched  and  put  in  her  mouth.  Why  is  that?  She 
does  not  have  any  understanding  that  this  is  this  particular 
food item. But no, it is such that the parmanu within her are 
asking  for  it.  So  it  comes  before  her. And  once  it  has  been 
eaten, she does not remember it.

Questioner: There is also like and dislike for food, is 

there not?

Dadashri:  Of  course,  there  is!  That  is  there  for 
everything. There is a big difference between not liking [the 
taste  of]  a  food  item  and  having  a  dislike  [abhorrence]  for 
a  food  item. A  person  may  want  to  eat  something  sour  but 
is  unable  to,  then  again,  that  is  a  different  thing.  That  is 
the  interference  of  the  parmanu  within.  They  prevent  you 
from  eating  that  item.  In  1960,  you  may  say,  “I  don’t  like 
ladoos  (ball-shaped  Indian  dessert)  made  from  jaggery.” 
And  in  1970  you  may  even  say,  “I  don’t  like  ladoos  made 
from  sugar,  but  I  like  the  ones  made  from  jaggery.”  What 
is  the  reason  for  this?  Scientific  circumstantial  evidences. 
The  parmanu  within  have  changed.  Those  [parmanu]  that 
are asking from within, have all changed, whereas that one, 
the  worldly  person  [without  Self-realization],  will  think,  ‘I 
am indeed the one doing all this.’

If we were to ask him, “If you are the one doing it and 
you  want  to  eat  it,  then  why  can’t  you  eat  it?”  He  would 
say, “But what can I do? I don’t like it.” So, we would ask 
further, “Hey, but why is that? Even though you want to eat 
it, you don’t like it. Whose interference is this?” He believes 
that  not  liking  it  has  become  his  nature.  Now  how  can  he 

[8] The Effects of the Parmanu of Food

377

understand  this?  He  is  not  aware  that  there  is  some  other 
interference!

Who  is  the  one  that  is  eating  this?  The  parmanu  are 
pulling  it.  Why  is  it  that  you  do  not  eat  what  you  do  not 
like? The parmanu within are saying ‘no’. And why is it that 
you  like  this  item? The  parmanu  within  are  pulling  it,  that 
is why you are eating it. Whereas people say, “Every grain 
you eat has your name written on it.” That is not a scientific 
discovery; it is not exact.

The subtle parmanu within are pulling the gross ones 
[the food]. The attraction between the two continues. In the 
midst  of  that,  one  does  the  egoism  of  ‘I  drank  it  and  I  did 
this.’

The  puran  and  galan  (influx  and  outflux;  charge  and 
discharge)  is  neither  under  my  authority  nor  is  it  under 
your  authority;  it  is  subject  to  parsatta  (the  authority  of 
another entity; subject to external circumstances). These are 
scientific  circumstantial  evidences,  and  even  a  doctor  can 
eat only what the parmanu within pull.

When  one  drinks  alcohol,  he  is  really  not  drinking 
it,  but  it  is  the  parmanu  within  that  are  pulling  it.  ‘Our’ 
Science, Akram Vignan, says that, as it is the parmanu that 
are pulling it, what is his fault in this? He is simply doing the 
egoism of ‘I drank it.’ Moreover, he will say, “I didn’t want 
to drink it, yet I ended up drinking it.” Hey! You didn’t want 
to  drink  it,  but  you  did.  How  can  you  say  it  both  ways?  It 
is the parmanu within that are pulling it. This is a scientific 
discovery.

We had gathered all the doctors in Aurangabad. I asked, 
“How  does  one  eat?”  One  can  only  eat  however  much  the 
parmanu within are pulling. Only that particular item will be 
eaten off the plate, and the other items will remain uneaten.

This  is  not  something  the  world  can  accept,  that  is 

378

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

why  ‘we’  are  not  disclosing  it.  Otherwise,  ‘we’  are  ready 
to  do  so  with  proof.  But  ‘we’  are  not  disclosing  this.  This 
Science  has  never  before  been  disclosed,  that  is  why  ‘we’ 
don’t wish to disclose this Science [to the public].

It is just that, at times, in order to save someone from 
their  addiction,  ‘we’  would  talk  about  it.  It  is  not  the  fault 
of  the  addict.  Do  not  have  abhorrence  towards  the  addict. 
The parmanu within are pulling it and according to that, he 
ends up consuming it. Then he will say, “I consumed it, that 
is why this happened.” Do you not end up eating something 
even  when  you  do  not  have  the  desire  to  do  so?  What  do 
you think?

Questioner: When the parmanu are pulling it, what is 

the function of the mind at that time?

Dadashri:  When  the  parmanu  are  pulling  it,  the  ego 
is saying, ‘I don’t want to drink it.’ Because this egoism was 
done, the [charge] mind arose. Otherwise, the mind does not 
complain at all. If these ones [the parmanu] are pulling that 
[the food], then We [the Self] continue Seeing and Knowing 
that the ones pulling are these [parmanu] and the one being 
pulled is this [food], then what connection remains with the 
mind?  When  is  there  a  connection  with  the  mind?  [When 
one  does  the  egoism  of,]  ‘I  am  drinking’,  a  connection  is 
established. With [the egoism of,] ‘I didn’t want to eat it, but 
I ended up doing so,’ that is also a connection with the mind.

And  if  the  parmanu  within  are  not  pulling  it,  then 
there  is  such  an  arrangement  set  within,  that  it  [the  food] 
will  be  thrown  out  immediately.  If  one  keeps  on  putting 
food  within,  it  will  end  up  getting  vomited  out.  Then  he 
will  go  to  the  doctor  and  say,  “Sir,  I  vomited,  I  vomited.” 
Hey, it is these internal ones [the parmanu] that caused the 
vomiting; what is the person’s fault in this?

In one moment, he will say, “I drank some tea.” Then 

[8] The Effects of the Parmanu of Food

379

in the next moment, he will say, “I vomited.” Hey, it cannot 
be  both  ways.  If  you  did  drink  it,  then  you  wouldn’t  have 
vomited, and if you vomited, then you did not drink it. How 
can these two things happen together? Don’t you feel there 
is a contradiction? Who is the one rejecting it? It is indeed 
the parmanu within that are at work here.

These scientists went to the moon and all these people 
made discoveries. ‘Our’ discovery is far superior than all of 
them, but ‘we’ have kept it concealed.

If ‘we’ ask, “Do you like the taste of this?” He will say, 
“Yes, I like it a lot.” If ‘we’ ask “Do you have an ardent desire 
(shok) for it?” He will say, “No, I don’t have an ardent desire 
for it.” Hey, what is the meaning of this? ‘I like it’ means that 
it  is  being  pulled  from  within,  and  ‘I  have  an  ardent  desire 
for it’ proves that you are the doer. Now, the worldly people 
[without  Self-realization]  have  no  awareness  of  this  at  all. 
[They say,] “I like this a lot. I don’t like this.” Hey, on what 
basis do you not like this? To like something means to pull it.

Questioner: The one accepting it and the one rejecting 

it, are both the doers separate?

Dadashri:  No,  the  doers  are  not  separate.  No  one  is 
rejecting  it  at  all.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  just  being  accepted 
continuously.  It  is  only  when  some  disagreeable  thing  has 
come along, that it [the body] rejects that thing. Otherwise, 
it is indeed the parmanu that keep pulling. They are the ones 
rejecting,  and  they  are  the  ones  accepting,  but  in  the  midst 
of  that,  one  keeps  saying,  “I  drank  tea.  I  had  breakfast.  I 
did this. I did that.” All the people of the world, the ascetics 
and  monks  alike,  are  wandering  aimlessly  because  they  do 
not  know  this  Science.  ‘I’  have  Seen  how  these  things  are 
being pulled. Now how can people [without Self-realization] 
understand  this?  The  poor  things!  However,  verify  this 
concept  through  the  increasing  stages  of  experience  as  the 

380

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Self; You will be able to understand this, because ‘we’ have 
given You this Gnan. Other people who have not been given 
Gnan,  will  not  be  able  to  understand  this.  No  matter  how 
much  ‘we’  disclose  this  concept  to  them,  they  will  not  be 
able  to  understand  it.  They  will  think  that  this  concept  is 
incorrect. They will keep saying things like, “I do exist and 
I ate it myself and I am knowing it.”

These  buffalos  from  the  town  of  Anand  may  have 
grazed  on  someone  else’s  farm,  and  the  milk  that  they 
produce  is  used  to  make  the  tea  that  someone  in  Mumbai 
is drinking! The parmanu within have so much energy that 
they can pull something such as tea all the way from Ceylon 
and bring it to your table!

That is why I am scolding these humans, “Mortal ones, 
you don’t even have the energy to go to the toilet, so why are 
you bragging so much! Find out which energy this is and the 
energy  that  is Yours  [the  Self’s],  that  you  don’t  know. You 
don’t  know  which  ‘current’  [authority]  is  Yours.  You  have 
needlessly latched on to the authority that is not Yours!”

The Effects of Food...

There is an electrical body (tejas sharir) in everyone. 
It is common in each and every body. The tejas sharir is the 
electrical  body  which  carries  out  all  of  the  inner  functions 
like  digestion,  etc.  It  carries  the  blood  up  and  down.  Its 
machinery  is  set  up  in  the  spinal  cord  and  its  ‘wires’  reach 
everywhere.  It  runs  everything,  including  the  digestion  of 
food. This is not just a body; it is a machinery. It needs to be 
cared  for,  does  it  not!  Even  this  machinery  needs  the  right 
food,  regularity,  and  care.  This  is  the  Science  of  parmanu. 
That is why the right, pure food, along with care is necessary.

This  entire  body  is  made  of  parmanu.  When  food 
comes for this body, be selective in what you feed it. Don’t 
just feed it anything.

[8] The Effects of the Parmanu of Food

381

So  the  one  who  eats  a  non-vegetarian  diet,  if  he  is 
eating  meat,  his  mind  will  be  a  certain  way,  his  tendencies 
will be violent. If there is an argument going on somewhere, 
he will head over there without even drinking his tea; that is 
how his tendencies would be racing. ‘You are what you eat. 
What  you  drink  determines  how  you  speak.’  Even  though 
everyone  is  drinking  water  coming  from  the  same  source, 
the  one  who  eats  meat  will  have  this  feeling  of  ownership 
that, ‘This is my water pot, this is my water.’ That is why, if 
a person were to drink the water at his home for fifteen days 
straight, that person would also learn to speak like him. Why 
is that? One will say, “Because that person drank the water 
at  his  home.” That  is  indeed  why  ‘we’  tell  you,  “Drink  the 
water  from  ‘our’  home,  even  if  you  have  to  ask  for  it,  ask 
for something to eat, consume some drinks like tea or water 
by  asking  for  them.  At  least  have  something,  then  ‘our’ 
parmanu will enter within you.”

What  the  parmanu  are  saying  is,  “We  are  vitaraag 
(absolutely free from attachment and abhorrence). You will 
get  however  much  happiness  you  desire.  That  happiness 
is  at  your  own  expense,  not  ours.”  If  you  eat  these  chilli 
fritters  just  once  and  they  remain  in  your  memory,  then 
those  parmanu  will  give  rise  to  such  ‘bitterness’  later  on, 
that I can’t even describe!

Why does the work of eating never end for the eater? 
If  you  are  indeed  the  eater,  then  it  should  definitely  come 
to an end. But this is puran and galan (influx and outflux). 
Whatever is being eaten, it is the body that is consuming it. 
‘Your’  own  ‘food’  is  actually  to  be  eternally  blissful,  why 
don’t You ‘consume’ that! But you don’t know that.

The Mystery Behind the Illness TB…

Questioner: After  receiving  Gnan,  one  still  becomes 

ill, what is that?

382

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri:  The  bad  parmanu  are  leaving  and  good 
ones are entering. Whereas for those who do not have Gnan, 
not only are the parmanu that are leaving bad, but the ones 
entering are also bad.

When  the  head  starts  to  ache,  do  you  have  to  do 
anything to bring on the headache? And what if you were to 
ask someone, “Can you bring on a headache?” This actually 
happens  due  to  the  internal  parmanu  and  the  external 
circumstantial evidences.

The doctors normally see the germs, but what are the 
germs  subject  to? They  are  subject  to  the  parmanu  that  lie 
within; due to the ones that are ready to give effect, a fever 
arises and turmoil begins. They [the parmanu] give off their 
effect  and  become  neutral  [pure].  Based  on  one’s  merit 
karma,  the  good  parmanu  tend  to  come  together.  Even  the 
medicine ends up being helpful. All these arrangements are 
of  a  completely  different  kind.  What  these  people  believe 
is  not  even  one  percent  true.  ‘We’  are  actually  Seeing  this 
constantly in ‘our’ Gnan.

One person doesn’t contract TB even if he is fed butter 
with  TB  germs  in  it,  whereas  another  person  living  ten 
houses away from a TB infected person, ends up contracting 
it.  The  main  reason  for  that  is  those  parmanu  are  within 
you. The moment the external circumstances come together, 
those  parmanu  unfold  at  the  gross  level  and  one  ends  up 
contracting TB.

[Someone may say,] This is simply a supposition from 
your side. People say that the TB germs have entered from 
outside,  so  then  how  did  they  enter  for  this  person  [living 
ten houses away]? Why don’t the nurses and doctors contract 
TB? To that, they answer, “They have the resistance power.” 
Hey!  Why  are  you  saying  incorrect  things?  Whenever 
something  lodges  itself  in  the  lungs  and  remains  there  for 

[8] The Effects of the Parmanu of Food

383

an  extended  period  of  time,  the  process  of  rotting  begins. 
The  natural  law  for  germs  is  that  they  will  go  wherever 
their food is. Therefore, you should remove whatever waste 
material there is within, then the germs will not come.

Questioner: How can we prevent food [for the germs] 
from being formed within? That can never be prevented, can 
it?

Dadashri:  What  ‘we’  are  trying  to  say  is  that  before 
one contracts TB, before the TB germs enter, get rid of the 
waste  material  that  the TB  germs  feed  on.  Once  the  germs 
enter, they will multiply and take control.

What  happens  is,  the  moment  the  thinking  process 
starts  within,  the  parmanu  related  to  those  thoughts  come 
together.  Say  you  had  thoughts  about  burning  a  beehive, 
so  you  pulled  the  parmanu  of  destruction.  By  burning  the 
beehive,  you  make  those  parmanu  stronger.  The  parmanu 
are  like  that,  that  is  why  the  germs  arose.  Not  just  for  a 
beehive,  but  for  every  living  being;  however  many  living 
beings  you  kill,  those  many  will  take  revenge  and  disease 
will arise.

In addition, they [the parmanu] also heal. Just imagine 
what  the  craftsmanship  of  nature  is  like!  It  is  such  that 
nothing  at  all  needs  to  be  done.  When  so  many  things  are 
going  on  [automatically]  within,  why  are  you  needlessly 
exercising  the  egoism  of  doing  things  on  the  outside? Are 
you the one running this?

Therefore, 

the  energy  of 

these  Parmanu 

is  so 
tremendous,  that  even  God’s  energy  does  not  compare  to 
it. This is actually a Science. Even the Parmanu [alone] are 
not such that they can do anything. If the Self (Chetan) were 
not present, then they too would not be able to do anything. 
Whereas  here,  the  visheshbhaav  (identification  with  that 
which  is  not  One’s  own)  of  the  self  is  arising;  that  is  why 

384

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

feelings like, ‘It would be very nice if this were to happen, 
it would be very nice if this were to happen, it would be bad 
if  this  were  to  happen,’  tend  to  arise.  Whatever  we  [as  the 
developing  I]  consider  as  being  good  or  bad,  well,  nature 
takes it even further [brings it into effect].

One Has Always Eaten Ladoos Made From 
Crematorium Ashes!

The  Gnani  Purush  does  not  need  to  suffer  [external] 
penance.  That  is  why  His  face  appears  to  be  eternally 
blissful.  When  this  [antahkaran;  ego]  gets  heated,  by  its 
[the  heat’s]  inherent  nature,  it  also  undergoes  puran-galan 
(influx-outflux;  charging-discharging,  filling  in-emptying 
out).  When  it  heats  up,  it  becomes  red  hot,  and  then  in  no 
time, it cools down.

Doesn’t  one  cry  at  the  time  of  crying?  And  doesn’t 
one also laugh at the time of laughing? For the last twenty 
years, I have not laughed about anything, I have not laughed 
about  any  particular  thing,  any  pudgal  (non-Self  complex 
that undergoes influx and outflux) whatsoever. What is there 
to laugh about? All of this is nothing but ethvado (food left 
over  in  a  plate  after  eating;  refuse). And  everywhere,  it  is 
nothing  but  ethvado  that  is  being  eaten.  People  are  eating 
nothing  but  the  ‘ladoos’  (ball-shaped  Indian  dessert)  made 
from  the  crematorium  ashes.  It  is  the  very  same  ethvado; 
there is no new ethvado being added. Pudgal means ethvado. 
Puran-galan,  puran-galan,  puran-galan…  There  are  just 
two  things;  the  pure  Soul  and  puran-galan,  but  imagine 
how many scriptures have been written for them! Oh ho ho! 
There are only two things. The puran keeps happening, and 
that  can  then  not  refrain  from  undergoing  galan,  can  it!  If 
you  eat,  you  will  have  to  go  to  the  bathroom.  And  many 
times you vomit, don’t you? Let the puran and galan happen 
on its own, otherwise you will become miserable. If you eat 

[8] The Effects of the Parmanu of Food

385

but don’t go to the toilet, you will become miserable. If you 
drink water but don’t urinate, you will become miserable.

There  are  two  parts,  Chetan  (the  Self)  and  jada 
(inanimate matter). Pudgal is a part of the inanimate matter. 
Even  if  you  don’t  want  to  eat,  you  still  have  to  eat.  Even 
if  you  don’t  want  to  suffer  (bhogavu;  consume;  enjoy; 
indulge  in)  something,  you  still  have  to.  The  interest  for 
something (ruchi) and the disinterest for something (aruchi) 
are the siblings of attachment and abhorrence, which is why 
worldly  life  persists.  [The  moment  One  becomes]  Vitaraag 
(absolutely  free  from  attachment  and  abhorrence),  there  is 
liberation.

There  are  some  people  like  ‘us’,  who  do  not  even 
enjoy eating! Why would ‘we’ enjoy eating? To go through 
this  hassle  of  chewing  with  your  teeth;  would  anyone  like 
going through all this trouble? But what can be done where 
there is no choice at all! However, ‘we’ remain separate from 
this  one  [file  one],  so  ‘we’  do  not  have  any  problem,  but 
other people really don’t like it. The one who has become a 
thinker,  that  thinker  can  understand  everything  like,  ‘What 
is all this for? Why should we have to brush our teeth every 
day? Why does that process not end? If we brush our teeth 
properly today, then the work should be done, shouldn’t it? If 
not today, then after eight days, but it should end, shouldn’t 
it? Has it ended for anyone?’ The reason for that is, would 
anything  ever  come  to  an  end  in  puran  and  galan?  What 
did  the  Lord  say?  Puran  and  galan  can  never  end.  After 
galan has happened, puran keeps happening, after puran has 
happened, galan keeps happening; this is the very business 
that has been started. What ‘we’ are saying about this puran 
and galan is that, if you are a thinker, then ‘we’ will tell you 
frankly  that  as  you  continue  to  minus  the  objects  that  are 
subject  to  puran  and  galan,  then  it  is  possible  to  attain  the 
Self. But one does not understand this, does he!

386

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

That is why Krupaludev has said that a Gnani Purush 
is  extremely  rare.  He  has  personally  written,  “Had  I  met  a 
Gnani,  I  would  have  followed  Him  [to  liberation].  I  would 
not have had to face these problems of people believing that 
I am a Gnani and I want to renounce, but am not able to do 
so.” Because on the Kramik path, one has to renounce, there 
is no other choice. As long as the ultimate goal has not been 
attained,  one  has  no  choice  but  to  renounce.  Because  there 
is  galan  (discharging)  along  with  puran  (charging).  And 
here  on  the  Akram  path,  ‘we’  bring  an  end  to  the  puran! 
Once the puran has stopped, only the discharge remains. If 
One  understands  this  spiritual  Science  in  its  entirety,  then 
samadhi (a blissful state) will prevail for Him no matter what 
the situation. But he should come to ‘us’ and understand it. 
He should understand everything by asking questions.

Have You understood it or have You left it incomplete?

Questioner: Dada, it is coming into my understanding. 

It is gradually starting to ‘fit’ [sink in].



[9]
The Pudgal Constantly Undergoes Puran-
Galan

Puran - First Galan - Second Galan…

[Puran  (charging)  was  done  in  the  past  life,  then  in 
this  life]  Eating  is  the  first  galan  (discharge)  and  going  to 
the toilet is the second galan.

Questioner: Is eating not puran?

Dadashri:  In  worldly  terms,  it  is  puran,  but  in  the 
language  of  the  Gnani,  that  too  is  galan.  Puran  is  in  your 
hands  to  a  certain  extent.  To  a  certain  extent  only,  not 
completely.  One  has  the  authority  [over  the  causes  part] 
and  if  one  attains  Gnan,  then  it  [the  ability  to  change  the 
causes]  comes  under  His  authority.  Or  else  if  One  attains 
matiGnan  (Knowledge  of  the  Self  that  has  been  digested 
and  is  in  experience)  and  shrutGnan  (Knowledge  of  the 
Self  obtained  through  listening  or  reading  the  words  of 
an  enlightened  One),  then  it  comes  somewhat  under  His 
authority. MatiGnan and shrutGnan are the basis for [coming 
into]  One’s  authority  [as  the  Self].  Otherwise,  as  per  the 
indriya  gnan  (the  knowledge  attained  through  the  medium 
of the sense organs and the intellect), eating is puran, and as 
per the exact Gnan (yatharth Gnan), it is galan. ‘We’ refer 
to eating as the first galan. Even earning money, that too is 

388

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

[the first] galan and it too is subject to vyavasthit. If just this 
much  were  to  be  understood,  then  one  would  keep  getting 
abundant free time for the Self.

Questioner: I want to understand charge and discharge, 

as well as puran and galan.

Dadashri:  Puran  requires  effort  whereas  galan 
continues to happen on its own. Therefore, go discover what 
needs effort and what continues to happen on its own! At the 
time of eating, does effort have to be made or not? Chewing 
and all that has to be done; well, in reality that is not puran, 
but to the world it appears as puran, which then undergoes 
galan. You do not have to worry about that galan.

Questioner: Does it keep happening automatically?

Dadashri:  Yes.  Actually,  this  [eating]  is  not  [the 
original]  puran.  [The  original]  Puran  was  done  in  the  past 
life,  due  to  which  these  circumstances  have  come  together 
for  him.  It  is  appearing  as  puran  to  you,  and  that  will 
undergo  galan.  Therefore,  in  puran,  some  effort  has  to  be 
done, whereas galan occurs without any effort. That is why 
I  told  you,  “After  attaining  this  Gnan,  You  have  stopped 
doing  puran.  Now  for You,  the  galan  is  entirely  subject  to 
vyavasthit;  the  galan  will  continue  to  happen  on  its  own. 
‘You’  do  not  have  to  worry  about  it.” What  have  ‘we’  told 
you? “Only galan remains for You, puran has stopped. The 
charging  has  stopped  and  only  the  discharge  remains.  So 
now, for You, that is [subject to] nothing but vyavasthit. And 
so, You  keep  doing  that  [Purusharth  (real  spiritual  effort)] 
to  go  towards  the  Self.  This  [discharge;  the  relative]  will 
continue  happening  according  to  vyavasthit.” Are You  able 
to  understand  that  in  this,  in  the  discharge,  no  sense  of 
doership remains for You at all?

Pur + Gal = Pudgal

This [everything that can be seen in this world] is all 

[9] The Pudgal Constantly Undergoes Puran-Galan

389

a  play  of  the  parmanu.  Whatever  puran  had  occurred,  is 
now  undergoing  galan.  The  circumstances  [that  had  come 
together] are now dissipating.

Questioner:  Looking  back,  I  can  see  that  in  every 

matter I have always received discredit (apjash).

Dadashri: So now you want to do something so that 
you receive credit (jash)? Do you not like being discredited?

Questioner: I don’t like it.

Dadashri: Whatever puran you had done up till now, 
that  is  what  has  undergone  galan. As  that  galan  ended  up 
discrediting  you,  it  means  that  you  had  not  known  how 
to  do  puran  [in  the  past  life]. You  had  not  known  what  to 
‘purchase’  at  the  time  of  the  original  puran.  This  beating 
that you have suffered right now, is due to that. Keep Seeing 
the credit that you receive and also keep Seeing the discredit 
that  you  receive. The  reason  being,  credit  and  discredit  are 
both pudgal; they both undergo puran-galan.

It  is  written  as  ‘pudgal’,  but  really  it  is  ‘purgal’. 
The  ‘r’  has  become  a  ‘d’  here.  So,  in  the  combined  form 
pur  +  gal,  is  considered  as  puran  and  galan;  whereas,  the 
pure Soul is Chetan. When you go from here to the market 
and  bring  back  vegetables,  then,  leaving  from  here  to  get 
vegetables is referred to as pur, and returning is referred to 
as  gal.  This  entire  world  is  pudgal.  The  word  ‘pudgal’  is 
worth understanding.

Questioner: Here, we have got its exact meaning.

Dadashri: This can be understood only if you get the 
exact meaning. This is a Vignan (Science). Vignan meaning, 
this is something that the scientists would accept.

The Pure Soul and Puran-Galan…

And in fact, ‘we’ say it clearly, don’t ‘we’? That, there 

390

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

is  the  pure  Soul  and  puran-galan.  Credit  and  debit,  credit 
and debit. There is nothing else going on whatsoever. Would 
anyone’s  money  deposited  in  the  bank  remain  still?  It  will 
come and go. People keep two types of accounts: puran and 
galan.  Withdrawing  [money  from  the  bank]  is  galan,  and 
depositing is puran.

Whatever puran you had done in the past life, whatever 
you  had  credited,  that  is  continuously  being  debited  in  this 
life. And  right  now,  if  the  crediting  is  going  on  anew,  then 
it  will  be  useful  in  the  next  life.  Then,  it’s  like  the  money 
deposited  in  the  bank,  you  can  spend  that  for  the  rest  of 
your  life.  Whatever  type  of  puran  is  done,  that  is  the  type 
of galan that will come.

So,  have  you  understood  this  in  brief,  in  short? 
‘Come  to  the  short’,  otherwise  this  is  such  that  there  is  no 
end  to  this.  There  are  five  things  in  this  world.  There  are 
three  in  this  body;  puran,  galan  and  the  pure  Soul.  And 
there  are  only  two  things  on  the  outside;  bhojanalay  and 
shaochalay. Bhojanalay is something that is worth enjoying 
and shaochalay is something that is worth letting go of. So 
the entire world is encompassed in this much, in these five 
words. Moreover, all of this can even be encompassed in just 
these two words, the pure Soul and circumstances (saiyog); 
there are just these two. When the people of the world do not 
even  understand  concepts  that  are  subtle  (guhya),  how  can 
they  understand  concepts  that  are  even  subtler  (guhyatar)? 
Then, what is there to say about ‘our’ discussions, they are 
in fact at the subtlest (guhyatam) level.

With  whatever  intent  you  do  puran,  that  is  the  intent 
with  which  the  galan  will  happen.  What  happens  is  that 
when a person speaks, the parmanu that get drawn in at that 
time, all become like that [charged based on the intent with 
which the person spoke]. So, the time when those parmanu 
got  drawn  in,  is  referred  to  as  ‘pud’,  and  thereafter,  when 

[9] The Pudgal Constantly Undergoes Puran-Galan

391

those  parmanu  undergo  galan  after  giving  off  the  effect, 
that is referred to as ‘gal’. They enter within and then they 
undergo galan after giving off the effect. Puran happens at 
the  time  karma  are  bound,  and  galan  happens  at  the  time 
karma are released. That is what is referred to as pudgal. At 
the  time  they  undergo  galan,  it  is  called  nirjara  and  at  the 
time they undergo puran, it is called bandh.

Say  you  bring  a  wicked  person  here;  he  is  currently 
undergoing puran (filling in; charging) of wickedness. Even 
if  you  put  him  in  an  ‘ocean’  of  virtuousness,  he  will  still 
keep  undergoing  the  puran  of  wickedness  whilst  the  galan 
(emptying  out;  discharging)  of  virtuousness  keeps  taking 
place.  But  for  the  one  who  is  undergoing  the  galan  of 
wickedness,  ‘we’  can  make  him  virtuous.  Whatever  stock 
was  filled  in,  is  indeed  what  is  undergoing  galan.  Even 
though  this  neem  tree  is  being  watered  with  sweet  water, 
yet  there  is  bitterness  in  each  and  every  leaf.  If  you  cut  it 
with an axe, the axe will smell bitter. Just look at how much 
bitterness there is even in a small neem tree! Just look at this 
craftsmanship  of  the  Pudgal!  No  matter  what  efforts  you 
make,  even  if  you  water  it  with  sweet  water,  its  bitterness 
will continue to increase. There is not a single thing in this 
world that does not undergo puran-galan. Its very nature is 
puran-galan. It is but natural.

This  puran-galan  is  applicable  everywhere.  Galan 

happens naturally and so does puran.

As You have received Gnan, the process of galan is not 
accompanied with puran. Just like how a spinning top does 
not do puran, it just does galan. The puran of the spinning 
top  is  done  by  a  person  [by  winding  the  string]  whereas 
the  galan  is  done  by  the  spinning  top.  That  is  how  it  is  in 
this  case  too;  the  [developing]  I  who  is  the  representative 
of  the  Self,  does  the  puran  and  the  ‘spinning  top’  [the 
non-Self  complex],  does  the  galan.  The  three  ‘tops’  of  the 

392

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

mind,  speech  and  body  keep  spinning,  day  and  night.  The 
representative  of  the  Self,  the  ego,  does  the  puran.  ‘I  am, 
I  am.’  It  doesn’t  even  pay  heed  to  the  Self.  It  doesn’t  even 
know  anything  about  the  Self!  It  claims,  ‘I  indeed  am  the 
one.’ The pudgal itself is doing the puran-galan, but it [the 
ego] is believing that ‘I am doing it.’

However  much  is  filled  within,  only  that  much  will 
undergo  galan.  No  one  will  bother  you  for  that  which  has 
not been filled. The entire pudgal is subject to vyavasthit.

With  whatever  intent  the  puran  was  done,  the  galan 
will happen with that same intent. At the time of making a 
donation, if the intent arises that, ‘I only gave the donation 
because they pressured me,’ then the same thing will happen 
at  the  time  of  galan.  If  you  happily  donate  of  your  own 
accord,  then  at  the  time  of  galan,  the  effect  will  be  of  a 
different  kind.  So  for  us  [mahatmas],  the  pudgal  [puran-
galan; discharge effects] will keep on happening. Arguments 
will occur, other things will occur, all that will happen, but it 
is lifeless. The living part has been pulled out from it. Only 
the  non-living  part  (achetan)  remains,  which  continues  to 
undergo galan.

What  is  profit  and  loss?  It  is  [subject  to]  puran-
galan.  The  Self  is  a  permanent  thing,  and  all  these  things 
are  subject  to  puran-galan.  When  puran  occurs,  he  will 
have attachment saying, “It’s increased, it’s increased.” And 
when  galan  occurs,  he  will  have  abhorrence  saying,  “It’s 
gone,”  and  thus,  he  binds  worldly  life.  In  fact,  one  is  the 
absolute  Self  (Parmatma),  but  in  this  worldly  life  which  is 
subject  to  puran-galan,  he  suffers  a  beating,  due  to  wrong 
understanding.

In the State of Ignorance of the Self, Puran Doesn’t 
Stop, but It Changes

‘You’  are  the  Self  whereas  this  [body]  is  actually  the 

[9] The Pudgal Constantly Undergoes Puran-Galan

393

pudgal. The pudgal will indeed continue to undergo puran-
galan.  Don’t  they  eventually  cremate  it!  Don’t  they  put  it 
on the bier!

Questioner: How can one stop puran from occurring?

Dadashri:  The  one  who  has  not  taken  Gnan,  cannot 
stop  the  puran,  but  he  can  change  it.  While  doing  a  bad 
deed towards someone, if the intent arises in his mind, ‘This 
should  not  be  so,  this  should  not  be  so,’  that  is  puran.  Or 
else, while doing a good deed, if he feels in the mind, ‘This 
should  be  done,’  that  too  is  puran.  That  puran  will  then 
undergo galan on its own.

Making a change in the puran is the only thing in our 
control, but only to a small extent. And that too, the thought 
will  arise  only  if  the  circumstances  are  present,  otherwise 
it will not. Whilst doing something bad, the intent of doing 
good that arises, can happen only if all the circumstances are 
favorable,  otherwise  they  won’t  allow  it.  One  himself  does 
not have any independent authority [to do so].

Questioner: If we feel that someone is a bad person, 
that they are despicable, if we see their faults and we become 
engrossed  (tanmayakaar)  with  these  thoughts,  then  is  that 
also puran?

Dadashri:  No,  [for  mahatmas]  it  is  not  puran,  it  is 

galan.

Questioner: Is becoming engrossed also galan?

Dadashri:  Becoming  engrossed  is  also  galan.  This 
is  Dada’s  vitaraag  Vignan  (the  Science  that  leads  to  the 
absolute  state).  If  You  [a  mahatma]  saw  someone’s  faults 
and  you  became  engrossed  in  that  fault,  even  then,  it  is 
galan. It is the galan of the puran that had already occurred. 
Puran is not taking place.

Krupaludev  says,  “For  a  living  being  to  attain  the 

394

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

natural  and  spontaneous  state  [as  the  Self],  the  vitaraag 
(absolutely detached) Lord has referred to that as liberation.” 
This is indeed what is applicable for us, mahatmas. To attain 
the  natural  and  spontaneous  state  [as  the  Self]  means  that 
You  don’t  have  to  bother  about  considering  the  pudgal  as 
good  or  bad.  ‘You’  simply  need  to  Know  that.  Why  are 
You  bothering  to  consider  it  as  good  or  bad?  Whatever 
puran was done, is now undergoing galan. If you ate some 
radishes, then four hours later when you go to urinate, you 
will  think,  ‘Oh  dear,  why  does  it  smell  like  radishes?  I  ate 
radishes  four  hours  ago.  It  should  not  smell  like  radishes 
now.’  But  what  can  you  do? The  puran  that  you  had  done, 
is now undergoing galan.

If  you  ate  restaurant  food  ten  years  ago  and  you  get 
dysentery today, what fault is it of the restaurant food? You 
may  have  eaten  all  kinds  of  food  in  restaurants,  but  when 
you  get  dysentery  after  attaining  Gnan,  people  will  ask, 
“How could you get dysentery?” Hey mortal one, the puran 
for that had been done. Now that its galan is occurring, why 
are you complaining?

Mahatma’s Karma Are Galan Alone

After this Gnan, the belief of being the doer that you 
had in the state as the body, that sense of doership (kartapanu) 
has  gone,  therefore  You  have  become  akarta  (the  non-
doer).  Now  everything  is  under  the  control  of  vyavasthit. 
Everything happens according to its inspiration. Up to what 
point is it considered puran? Puran was happening as long 
as  you,  in  the  state  as  the  body,  had  the  belief  that  ‘I  am 
the  doer.’  [Now,  after  Gnan,]  New  puran  has  stopped. The 
old  [stock]  is  undergoing  galan.  Whatever  was  filled  in,  is 
what  comes  out,  it  keeps  undergoing  galan.  New  [puran] 
will not happen. If a person has a miserly nature, then that 
miserliness will come into effect. If a person is noble, then 
that  nobility  will  come  into  effect.  Whatever  filled  stock 

[9] The Pudgal Constantly Undergoes Puran-Galan

395

there is, that is what will keep coming into effect. So this is 
Akram Vignan.

And on the Kramik path, how it works is that you have 
to  renounce  everything.  By  letting  go  of  everything,  you 
have  to  become  ‘alone’. Therefore,  step-by-step;  today  this 
was  renounced.  In  this  lifetime,  this  much  was  renounced. 
In that lifetime, up to this extent was renounced. However, 
on  the  one  side,  the  renunciation  is  indeed  happening,  but 
on the other side, new things are also being bound, so there 
is no end to this.

Questioner: But Dada, many times when the galan is 

happening, we do not like it. Is there a reason for this?

Dadashri:  It  is  not  liked,  but  who  is  it  that  does  not 
like it? It’s simply your opinion that has now changed, that, 
‘This  is  of  no  use.’  And  whatever  puran  has  been  done, 
cannot refrain from undergoing galan, can it!

Questioner: We have brought so much stock with us 
that it will keep on undergoing galan. When will we become 
free from this?

Dadashri: Whatever is filled in is in accordance with 
however  much  greed  one  has. Whatever  type  of  greed  you 
have  for  specific  things,  those  many  types  of  puran  [take 
place].  If  you  have  the  greed  to  own  land,  you  will  keep 
buying land. There are many kinds [of greed]; the greed to 
eat, the greed to enjoy the pleasures derived from the sense 
organs, the greed to enjoy in any way possible!

If  you  go  to  a  wedding  and  are  greeted  with  a  lot  of 
respect,  then  puran  will  happen.  Your  chest  will  become 
inflated.  Then,  if  someone  doesn’t  greet  you  with  respect, 
at that time, galan happens and you become depressed! The 
ego undergoes puran-galan, does it not?

Then, anger too, undergoes puran-galan. When anger 

396

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

arises,  the  instant  it  comes  out,  it  is  at  500  degrees,  then  it 
becomes  400  degrees,  then  300  degrees,  then  200  degrees, 
then 100 degrees. Like this, it keeps decreasing till it reaches 
zero. Haven’t you experienced this? Greed is also like that; 
it  undergoes  puran-galan.  Everything  keeps  undergoing 
puran-galan.

However  much  puran  of  moha  (illusory  attachment) 
has been done for your sons and daughters, that will indeed 
undergo  galan  now.  So  whatever  comes,  clear  it  with 
equanimity. At that time, as Dada’s words come to mind, it 
will get cleared.

From  the  moment  you  get  married,  the  galan  of 
married life begins. Then one day, when it has all undergone 
galan,  the  old  man  will  go  this  way  and  the  old  lady  will 
go that way.

Such  is  the  nature  of  puran-galan.  Puran  increases 
regularly, little-by-little, while galan happens all of a sudden. 
That is how it is, the nature of galan is different, isn’t it!

People  are  saying  that  the  population  has  increased. 
So,  I  told  them,  “It  has  not  increased,  puran  has  occurred. 
Slowly and gradually, every decade, this much puran keeps 
happening indeed, but what about when galan happens?

Questioner: [It happens] All of a sudden.

Dadashri:  There  is  no  material  thing  in  this  world 
that  is  unchanging  (achal).  [Only]  This  mount  Meru  is 
unchanging, its shape does not change; the puran and galan 
of parmanu does occur, but its shape does not change.

If  You  remain  as  the  Knower-Seer  of  all  the  kriya 
(activities  of  the  mind,  speech  and  body),  then  all  the 
activities  are  in  the  form  of  galan.  Bad  habits  and  good 
habits are all in the form of galan. Everything that is pudgal 
continues to undergo puran-galan; simply keep Seeing that, 

[9] The Pudgal Constantly Undergoes Puran-Galan

397

do  not  interfere  in  that.  If  you  try  to  stick  your  hand  in  it, 
you will be swept away, [therefore] just keep Seeing it. The 
One  who  has  Known  this  puran-galan  is  the  Knower-Seer 
and  eternally  blissful  (Gnata-Drashta-Parmanandi).  That 
very Self is the absolute Self (Parmatma).

Everything Is an Illusion of the Pudgal!

The  puran  that  was  done  is  undergoing  galan,  and 
that which has undergone galan is verily what is undergoing 
puran;  You  are  to  See  that.  ‘You’  are  Gnanakaar  (the 
Knower),  Atmakaar  (the  Self),  so  why  are  you  becoming 
kshetrakaar  (one  with  the  body)?  [By  believing,]  ‘I  am 
wealthy, I am bankrupt,’ you become kshetrakaar.

So, how long should you continue wandering aimlessly 
in  this  puran-galan?  You  have  not  found  any  happiness 
in  it.  This  happiness  from  temporary  adjustments  is  of  no 
use.  That  is  why  you  are  searching  for  your  own  eternal 
happiness.  Let  the  puran-galan  continue,  but  if  the  belief 
(bhaav)  related  to  it  [that  ‘I  am  this’]  is  relinquished  and 
Self-realization occurs, You can attain permanent happiness. 
Then that happiness will never come to an end. In fact, even 
attachment and abhorrence happen due to puran-galan.

Atindriya  sukh  is  the  bliss  of  the  Self  that  You 
experience  without  the  help  of  any  external  things.  Indriya 
sukh  (pleasures  derived  from  worldly  or  material  things  as 
perceived  by  the  five  sense  organs)  are  subject  to  puran-
galan  and  are  imaginary;  they  do  not  last.  If  one  day, 
someone  were  to  tell  you  to  eat  imaginary  mango  pulp, 
would  you  be  able  to  eat  it?  No,  you  would  only  eat  real 
mango pulp, right?

‘You’ are not to derive ‘taste’ [enjoyment or suffering] 
from  that  which  undergoes  puran-galan.  During  puran, 
do  not  take  subtle  pride  (garva)  and  during  galan,  do  not 
become disappointed.

398

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

This was the filled karmic stock, that is shedding off, 
that  is  called  pudgal. After  shedding  off,  they  go  away  on 
their own. Thereafter, they will not bother You again.

Questioner:  Is  there  anything  else  in  this  world 
besides  the  eternal  element  of  the  Self  and  the  illusion  of 
the pudgal?

Dadashri: There is nothing besides the eternal element 
of  the  Self  and  the  illusion  of  the  pudgal.  But  what  things 
are  included  in  the  illusion  of  the  pudgal?  What  have You 
understood  about  that?  The  reason  being,  the  ego,  anger, 
pride, deceit, and greed, that is the illusion of the pudgal. If 
that is what You have understood, then it is correct.

Questioner:  Have  the  Tantric  techniques  and  rituals 
arisen through the illusion of the pudgal or is there something 
of the Self in it?

Dadashri: The Self has nothing at all to do with this! 
The  Self  is  indeed  the  Self,  It  is  the  absolute  Self. All  that 
other, is an illusion of the pudgal. That is indeed why ‘we’ do 
not get involved in it! Otherwise, wouldn’t ‘we’ have learned 
that technique and ritual? ‘We’ too would have learned it. If 
it  was  a  part  of  the  Self,  then  ‘we’  would  have  gone  and 
learned  it.  ‘We’  Know  that  this  is  all  a  ‘toilet’  [a  place  of 
galan;  nothing  but  discharge;  has  no  value  or  importance]. 
That is why, ‘we’ do not get involved in it at all. If it were 
a  ‘kitchen’  [place  of  puran;  where  preparations  or  changes 
can  be  done],  then  ‘we’  would  have  gotten  involved. What 
is the need to get involved in a ‘toilet’?

“Be it a particle of dust or the prosperity of a Vaimanik dev,
‘See’ them all as pudgal, of that same inherent nature.”

“Rajkan  ke  riddhi  vaimanik  devni,
Sarve  manya  pudgal  ek  swabhaav  jo”

- Shrimad Rajchandra.

[9] The Pudgal Constantly Undergoes Puran-Galan

399

Rajkan  meaning,  just  one  particle  of  dust,  the 
smallest  particle,  which  has  no  value.  This  value,  which 
is  the  beginning  of  all  values,  up  to  the  point  where  the 
value  becomes  complete,  the  prosperity  of  a Vaimanik  dev 
(a  category  of  celestial  beings),  which  is  the  highest  of 
all  states;  all  these  states  are  considered  pudgal,  meaning 
that  they  are  in  the  form  of  puran-galan.  So  He  [Shrimad 
Rajchandra] is saying that none of this is Ours [of the Self]. 
The inherent nature of all of that is the same, puran-galan. If 
puran has occurred, it will then undergo galan. Even if you 
were to become Mahendra (the king of the celestial beings), 
meaning  that,  before  you  become  that,  the  puran  for  that 
happened, and therefore, in order for the galan to occur, you 
become Mahendra. The moment you became Mahendra, the 
galan  starts,  and  when  the  galan  ends  for  you,  it  will  be 
over [meaning, the state as Mahendra comes to an end]. The 
puran to attain the Mahendra state was done in the lifetime 
as a human, and the galan [for that] is being done over there 
[in the celestial life-form].

At the End, There Is Akram Even on the Kramik 
Path!

Questioner: In the last step of the Kramik path, does 

bhaavkarma get charged or not?

Dadashri: Not in the last step. In fact, all the charging 

stops many steps before that.

Questioner: If the charging has stopped, then shouldn’t 

it all come to an end before the final step?

Dadashri: No, thereafter the galan still remains! The 
galan of anger, pride, deceit and greed will indeed continue!

Questioner:  As  the  charging  gradually  comes  to  a 

stop, does the Kramik path become Akram later on?

Dadashri: It becomes just like the Akram path for them. 

400

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

The  last  part  is  like  Akram. As  long  as  [the  living]  anger, 
pride,  deceit  and  greed  are  there,  the  charging  continues. 
After  that  [charging]  comes  to  an  end,  of  the  other  entire 
part that remains, some of that undergoes galan. Thereafter, 
there  is  oneness  [the  developing  ‘I’  becomes  one  with  the 
original Self].

Questioner:  The  state  of  the  Tirthankar  at  the  very 
end,  that  would  indeed  be  the  state  that  One  has  on  the 
Akram path, wouldn’t it?

Dadashri: That is the Akram path. It is Akram for the 

part which is liberated.



[10]
The Terminology Related to Pudgal

The Tattva Are Eternal

Questioner: It has been said that the pudgal is eternal 
(Sat),  but  how  can  that  which  is  subject  to  puran-galan 
(charge-discharge; influx-outflux) be considered eternal?

Dadashri:  That  which  is  eternal  is  never  subject  to 
puran-galan;  it  never  increases  or  decreases  (aguru-laghu). 
Meaning, it does not undergo puran, it does not undergo galan, 
it  does  not  increase,  it  does  not  decrease,  it  doesn’t  become 
thin. That is called eternal. That which undergoes puran-galan 
is not eternal (asat), it is destructible (vinashi). But that which 
is the original Pudgal, the one in the form as Parmanu, that 
is eternal, that is indestructible (avinashi). There is no puran-
galan in that, it does not increase or decrease.

Questioner:  Yes,  but  isn’t  the  pudgal  one  of  the  six 

tattva (eternal elements)?

Dadashri: No, that is simply referred to as Parmanu. 
They call it ‘pudgal’ in order to recognize it. Pudgal refers 
only to the part which undergoes puran-galan.

Questioner:  That  which  is  jada  (inanimate  matter), 
that  is  an  eternal  element,  isn’t  it? We  refer  to  that  jada  as 
an eternal element, and from that jada, this…

402

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri: That is Parmanu.

Questioner: Isn’t it the case that this body is formed 
only  when  the  phases  of  the  pudgal  arise  from  the  jada 
Parmanu?

Dadashri:  Not  the  phases  of  the  pudgal. The  pudgal 

itself is formed from those Parmanu.

Questioner: It is true that it is formed from Parmanu, 

but the original eternal element is jada, is it not?

Dadashri: Jada.

Questioner: So then, is the pudgal in the form as jada 

(inanimate; lifeless)?

Dadashri:  No,  do  not  ever  say  that  it  is  in  the  form 
as jada. There is nothing in this world that is in the form as 
jada. The pudgal cannot be in the form as jada, the Parmanu 
which make up the pudgal are jada.

The Vibhaavik and Swabhaavik Form of the Pudgal

Questioner: What  is  the  difference  between  the  Soul 

(Atma) and the pudgal?

Dadashri:  The  Soul  is  simply  one  of  the  eternal 
elements.  Therefore,  It  does  not  increase  or  decrease.  ‘It’ 
is  an  eternal  element  that  exists  naturally  (swabhaavik), 
whereas  the  pudgal  is  not  a  naturally  occurring  eternal 
element.

Questioner: What can be considered as pudgal?

Dadashri:  Well,  these  parmanu  that  have  become 

distorted (vikrut), they are considered pudgal.

Questioner:  Yes,  but  do  people  not  consider  this  [a 
tape  recorder]  as  pudgal?  The  people  of  the  world  call  it 
lifeless (nirjeev). Can this be considered pudgal?

[10] The Terminology Related to Pudgal

403

Dadashri: [The pudgal is] Not that which exhibits the 
inherent nature (swabhaav) of the original Parmanu, but [it 
refers  to]  that  which  has  become  distorted,  that  which  has 
become deformed (vikaari). This wood came about when it 
took on the form as a tree, right?

Questioner: So, that can be considered pudgal, right?

Dadashri: Yes,  to  consider  that  as  pudgal  is  correct. 

That which has taken on the form as a tree.

Questioner: You  said  that  the pudgal  is  the  prakruti. 

What does that mean?

Dadashri: The prakruti (non-Self complex) is indeed 
also nothing but the pudgal. Everything other than the Soul 
is  nothing  but  the  pudgal,  whether  you  call  it  prakruti  or 
pudgal. There are only two, the pure Soul and pudgal. And 
the Parmanu are a completely different thing, they are pure. 
Even if the Parmanu have formed into a large cluster, they 
are still pure!

Questioner: That means that all that which is without 

the Soul, is pudgal, then whatever it may be.

Dadashri: Except for the Soul, everything in the body 

is pudgal.

The  [swabhaavik]  Pudgal  is  indeed  something  that  is 
constantly changing. The Soul does not undergo change. But 
the [vibhaavik] pudgal is a mixture [form]. This pudgal that 
has come about is not the swabhaavik Pudgal (the Parmanu 
in  its  pure  natural  form),  it  is  the  visheshbhaavi  pudgal 
(pudgal  made  up  of  parmanu  that  exhibits  completely 
new  properties).  The  visheshbhaavi  pudgal  refers  to  that 
in  which  there  is  a  mixture  of  the  eternal  element  that 
supports  motion  (dharmastikaya),  the  eternal  element  that 
supports inertia (adharmastikaya) and all that. If it were the 
swabhaavik  Pudgal,  then  there  would  be  no  problem,  but 

404

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

this has become a mixture. That is why it is difficult to make 
sense of it!

In  this  pudgal,  the  Soul  is  Chetan  (the  living  entity; 
the Self), It is the pure Self. Besides this pure Self, the rest 
of  it  is  pudgal. The  Soul  is  not  pudgal.  The  Soul  does  not 
undergo puran or galan. ‘It’ is only one eternal element; It 
is Chetan. Now do you want to ask anything else?

Questioner: The pudgal is entirely made up of atoms 

(anu), isn’t it?

Dadashri: Actually, with regards to the pudgal, when 
all  the  six  eternal  elements  come  together,  [the  worldly-
interacting  self  and  the  other  five  eternal  elements;  the 
original Self is separate by Its inherent nature], that is called 
pudgal. People have considered the pudgal to be made up of 
atoms alone, but if you really look at it, the pudgal contains 
a  mixture  of  all  these  things  [the  six  eternal  elements]. 
However,  people  have  understood  that  the  pudgal  is  made 
up  of  atoms  alone,  made  up  only  of  the  eternal  element 
which has a visible form (roopi tattva).

Pudgal refers to that which has undergone puran, and 
it continues to undergo galan. Galan means to discharge and 
puran means to charge. So that is, charge-discharge. ‘We’ are 
stopping the charging part and only the discharge remains.

This  entire  body  is  a  combination  of  the  six  eternal 
elements, and what’s more, what is its inherent nature like? 
It  is  such  that  it  will  disintegrate  (visarjan).  After  the  six 
eternal elements come together, what is it called? It is called 
pudgal. And the pudgal then continues disintegrating on its 
own. Therefore, let go of the reins of these five ‘horses’, the 
five  sense  organs.  They  are  continuously  disintegrating.  It 
is  said,  “If You  want  to  attain  liberation,  then  let  go  of  the 
reins.  Hand  the  reins  over  to  vyavasthit  and  You  let  go  of 
them.” But how can one let go of the reins without realizing 

[10] The Terminology Related to Pudgal

405

‘Who am I?’ On the contrary, one will say, “I am indeed the 
five sense organs, I am indeed this one.” Meaning that, I am 
not  only  the  ‘horses’,  but  I  am  the  rider  as  well,  I  am  also 
the one who falls, I am also the one who becomes spoiled, 
I  myself  am  everything.  That  is  why  by  giving  Gnan,  the 
Gnani  liberates  You  [the  developing  ‘I’]  from  this.  After 
liberating  You,  once  You  let  go  of  the  reins,  You  will 
immediately realize that this pudgal is indeed disintegrating 
on  its  own.  If  we  try  to  stop  the  beard  from  growing,  it 
doesn’t stop, does it? Does it stop?

Questioner: No.

Dadashri:  Similarly,  none  of  this  is  such  that  it  will 
stop. The disintegration keeps happening on its own indeed. 
One simply expresses the egoism that, ‘I did this, I did this.’ 
Just as the beard doesn’t stop growing, similarly none of this 
stops. Everything keeps happening indeed.

Questioner:  I  am  trying  to  understand  this  one 
[phrase]:  ‘The  combination  of  the  six  eternal  elements  is 
purgal [pudgal], [which undergoes] disintegration.’

Dadashri:  What  this  [phrase]  is  trying  to  say  is  that 
this  world  has  arisen  due  to  the  coming  together  of  these 
six eternal elements. What is the result of this? The answer 
is, the purgal [pudgal] that formed undergoes disintegration.

This  body  has  indeed  been  constantly  undergoing 
disintegration  from  the  moment  one  was  born.  In  that 
process,  one  believes,  ‘I  am  growing  up.’ The  reply  would 
be,  ‘No,  it  is  constantly  undergoing  disintegration.’  The 
purgal [pudgal] may be present in a great amount, but it is 
undergoing  disintegration. Yet,  the  body  appears  to  be  this 
small.  The  more  the  pudgal,  the  smaller  the  body.  So,  the 
little children have more pudgal, they have more filled stock 
of karma. As the child grows up, it empties out.

406

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Questioner:  The  entire  pudgal  continues  to  undergo 

galan.

Dadashri: Yes, it takes time to discharge. That is why 
elephants have less karma and ants have more. The body of 
an  elephant  is  large,  so  it  has  less  karma. And  ants  have  a 
lot of karma.

The  entire  basement  [basis]  of  this  world  rests  on 

puran-galan.

During Puran, Skandha Form and During Galan, 
They Revert to Parmanu...

Questioner:  When  the  Soul  separates  from  this 
pudgal  [at  the  time  of  death],  then  with  which  of  the  other 
five  eternal  elements  do  the  anger,  pride,  deceit  and  greed 
merge?

Dadashri: They do not merge with any eternal element. 
That is indeed the entity the Lord has referred to as pudgal.

Questioner:  Is  that  indeed  what  is  referred  to  as 
vishesh  parinaam  (a  completely  new  effect  that  arises  as  a 
result  of  the  two  eternal  elements,  the  Self  and  inanimate 
matter, coming together)?

Dadashri:  Yes,  vishesh  parinaam.  But  they  [anger, 
pride, deceit and greed] are considered to be of the pudgal, 
not of the Soul. The pudgal is not an eternal element. That 
is the understanding those people have given. The Parmanu 
are the eternal element.

Questioner:  But  Dada,  when  these  Parmanu  come 
together  and  form  skandha  (aggregates  of  two  or  more 
Parmanu),  the  Soul  does  not  come  together  in  that.  So 
should we not refer to those as pudgal?

Dadashri:  No,  they  cannot  be  called  pudgal.  Now, 
these  people  refer  to  them  as  pudgal.  The  language  has 

[10] The Terminology Related to Pudgal

407

become  like  that.  Otherwise,  the  only  things  that  can  be 
referred to as pudgal are creatures of any sort; meaning trees, 
plants and other things that are living. For them, other than 
their  Soul,  the  remaining  part  is  called  pudgal.  Wherever 
there  is  a  tree,  the  wood  of  that  tree  is  called  pudgal.  The 
tree  is  also  called  pudgal.  Then  when  it  is  cut  down,  the 
wood is also called pudgal.

Questioner:  The  Soul  has  left  from  it.  The  eternal 

element of the Soul would not be in it.

Dadashri:  The  eternal  element  of  the  Soul  has  left 
from it, but it is due to [the initial presence of] the Soul that 
the  state  of  these  parmanu  has  become  like  this!  Why  did 
the state of the parmanu become like this?

In the pudgal, the stock that is undergoing puran is in 
the form of skandha, and the stock that is undergoing galan 
is  natural.  While  undergoing  puran,  skandha  are  formed, 
and  in  galan,  the  skandha  undergoes  galan  by  naturally 
[through  scientific  circumstantial  evidences]  reverting  back 
to the form as Parmanu.

Even Electricity Is Considered Pudgal!

The  vibhaavik  pudgal  (pudgal  formed  from  parmanu 
that have deviated from their inherent nature) is temporary. 
The swabhaavik Pudgal (Parmanu in its pure natural form) 
is permanent. The [swabhaavik] Pudgal has no dependency 
on the Soul, it is independent. Not even for a moment has it 
become dependent. If it were to become dependent even for 
a  moment,  then  it  would  become  dependent  forever.  Then 
the  Soul  would  not  let  go  of  it,  after  it  has  come  under  Its 
control. But neither is the Soul under anyone’s control, nor 
is anyone under the control of the Soul.

Questioner:  Can  the  Pudgal  be  Known?  Can  the 

Pudgal be controlled?

408

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri:  It  can  be  Known.  The  Pudgal  cannot 
control  You,  and  You  cannot  control  the  Pudgal.  It  cannot 
do anything to You, and You cannot do anything to it. Each 
one  is  independent  and  they  are  nonviolent  towards  each 
other.

Questioner: When blood circulates in the body, does 

the Soul touch [affect] it or not?

Dadashri:  No,  they  do  not  have  anything  to  do  with 
each  other.  This  mind  and  everything  else  is  only  of  this 
pudgal.

Questioner: This electricity that is there, under which 
eternal  element  does  it  fall?  Does  it  fall  under  an  eternal 
element or not?

Dadashri:  Under  the  eternal  element  of  inanimate 

matter.

Questioner: That  is  the  eternal  element  of  Parmanu, 

the one that is immortal?

Dadashri:  That  [electrical  body]  is  actually  a  phase 
(paryay) of the Pudgal Parmanu. Because you have seen it, 
have  you  not?  Have  you  seen  it  coming  and  going  or  not? 
Does it come and go? It fills and then it empties. Everything 
that fills and empties is pudgal.

Questioner: This electricity never dies. Meaning that, 
the  electricity  is  continuously  there,  therefore  electricity  is 
an eternal element. It exists forever. Can it be considered an 
eternal element or not?

Dadashri:  No,  a  phase  means  that  it  is  a  temporary 

state (avastha). It stops, it arises, it stops.

The Difference Between Doing and Being Active…

Questioner: The Self (Chetan) has become trapped in 

[10] The Terminology Related to Pudgal

409

the  pudgal,  so  where  is  It  in  the  pudgal,  and  how  much  of 
the pudgal does It occupy?

Dadashri:  The  Self  is  not  trapped  at  all.  ‘It’  has  not 
occupied any part of the pudgal. ‘It’ is in Its own division. 
The pudgal is in its own division. They both have their own 
independent places.

The developing I (pote) says, “I am Chandubhai.” He 
believes that this pudgal is what ‘I am’. The doer (karta) is 
the pudgal, but he believes, ‘I did it.’ That is why the pudgal 
has adhered to him.

Whose nature is it to do activity? People will say, “It is 
my nature to do activity! If I were not there, then who would 
do  it?  If  the  pudgal  is  the  doer,  then  why  does  this  bench 
not do anything? Why does this desk not do anything?” Hey 
mortal one, those cannot be called pudgal.

Questioner: What is being referred to as pudgal? The 
part that is carrying out these activities is indeed the pudgal 
part, is it not?

Dadashri: Everything that is with the jeev (embodied 
soul;  living  being;  relative  self)  is  considered  pudgal. 
However,  this  [desk,  bench]  cannot  be  considered  pudgal. 
This is actually the inherent nature of Parmanu, to decay, to 
rot. Whereas this [vibhaavik pudgal] is in fact puran-galan. 
In whichever way the puran was done, that is indeed how it 
is undergoing galan.

Pudgal refers to that which has undergone puran and 
is  now  worthy  of  undergoing  galan.  Moreover,  the  pudgal 
arises once again from that galan. Until the Self is realized, 
the pudgal  continues  to  arise  from  the galan  and  from  that 
pudgal,  galan  happens  once  again.  Puran-galan,  puran-
galan keeps happening indeed.

This  very  process  has  been  going  on  since  infinite 

lifetimes.

410

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

‘I know this and I did this,’ is neither a property (guna) 
of  the  Soul  nor  of  jada  (inanimate  matter).  The  Soul  does 
indeed  Know,  but  It  does  not  ‘do’  anything.  And  in  fact, 
jada itself does not even have the property of ‘doing’, it has 
the  property  of  being  active  (kriya).  It  has  the  property  of 
being active, however, that is activity that happens naturally 
(swabhaavik  kriya),  [of  its  own  accord].  Whereas  this 
pudgal that has arisen, that is a distorted (vikrut), a deformed 
(vikaari) process in itself!

Questioner:  Who  binds  karma?  Does  the  Soul  bind 

karma or does the pudgal bind karma?

Dadashri:  It  is  like  this,  with  the  belief  of  ‘I  am 
Chandubhai’  karma  is  charged,  and  when  You  get  the 
realization  that  ‘I  am  not  Chandubhai’,  then  karma  will  no 
longer be bound.

Questioner:  Chandubhai  is  the  pudgal,  whereas  the 
Self  is  a  different  thing.  The  one  doing  the  karma  is  the 
pudgal, so then why should they bind the Self?

Dadashri:  The  belief  of  the  [worldly-interacting]  self 
itself  is  wrong,  that  of  ‘I  am  Chandubhai’.  Therefore,  due 
to this wrong belief, the karma are bound. The pudgal alone 
does  not  bind  the  karma,  but  it  is  the  wrong  belief  of  the 
[worldly-interacting] self. The wrong belief is also the pudgal; 
the ego is at work there. If that egoism becomes fractured for 
You, then it [the binding of karma] will come to an end. It is 
indeed  this  egoism  that  binds  karma,  and  nature  releases  it. 
When the time is right, nature releases all the karma, and the 
egoism suffers it and binds karma [anew]. It suffers the karma 
and binds karma. That’s it, this is the work of egoism indeed. 
When there will be no egoism, karma will not be bound.

Questioner:  So  You  are  trying  to  say  that  the  Self 
binds  karma  through  the  pudgal  and  it  releases  it  through 
the pudgal.

[10] The Terminology Related to Pudgal

411

Dadashri: It is not like that. The [original] Self does 
not  get  involved  in  this  at  all.  Really  speaking,  the  Self  is 
indeed  free,  It  is  independent. This  ego  binds  karma  in  the 
presence of the Self, and the ego is also the one that suffers 
the karma.

Questioner:  The  ego  that  is  the  one  suffering  the 
karma, it does so through the medium of the pudgal, doesn’t 
it?

Dadashri: Yes, but there is no other way, is there? The 
ego is also pudgal and these karma are also pudgal. Both are 
one  and  the  same,  but  you  can  refer  to  them  differently  if 
you want. Who suffered it?

Kashay Is Pudgal…

Questioner: These kashay are definitely subject to the 
pudgal, and they give effect through the pudgal only, don’t 
they?

Dadashri: They themselves are considered part of the 

pudgal. They are one part of the pudgal.

Questioner: Is anger the inherent nature of the pudgal 

or the prakruti?

Dadashri:  The  prakruti  is  indeed  the  pudgal;  this 
entire thing. There is nothing like Chetan in the prakruti at 
all; all of that is nothing but pudgal.

Questioner: So, are anger, pride, deceit and greed part 

of the pudgal?

Dadashri: All of that is pudgal indeed.

Questioner:  The  effect  that  is  displayed  by  anger, 

pride, deceit, and greed, what is the reason for that?

Dadashri: All of that exists as long as there is ignorance 
of the Self (agnanta). Anger, pride, deceit and greed, which 

412

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

have the inherent nature of increasing and decreasing, are of 
the  pudgal. All  that  which  does  not  increase  or  decrease  is 
of the Self. If you are feeling angry but don’t say anything, 
you would recognize it, wouldn’t you? Of course you would.

Questioner:  The  pudgal  has  been  referred  to  as  the 
one  who  caused  the  puzzle,  ignorance  of  the  Self  (agnan) 
has not been referred to as the cause of the puzzle.

Dadashri:  That  itself  is  the  pudgal.  The  pudgal  is 

verily ignorance indeed!

Anger,  pride,  deceit,  greed,  ego,  are  all  considered 
pudgal.  They  are  mishrachetan,  but  that  is  still  considered 
pudgal.

That  which  is  prone  to  rising  and  falling  (udayast)  is 
all  pudgal,  it  is  not  Yours. Anger,  pride,  deceit,  and  greed 
are  all  such  that  they  increase  and  decrease,  they  are  not 
Yours.

Attachment and Abhorrence Is Bondage

[There is] The pure [swabhaavik] Pudgal, whereas the 
relative pudgal, namely the vibhaavik pudgal, has arisen due 
to circumstances.

The swabhaavik Pudgal is not effective, the vibhaavik 

pudgal is effective.

Questioner:  Dada,  You  said  that  if  there  is  a  cause, 
then the effect will arise, so did the cause come first or the 
effect? What came first?

Dadashri: Now that is a question of the intellect!

Questioner:  If  there  is  a  body,  if  the  pudgal  exists, 

then attachment and abhorrence will definitely arise!

Dadashri:  Yes,  but  even  if  the  pudgal  exists,  the 
pudgal  is  an  effect.  What  you  are  referring  to  as  pudgal, 

[10] The Terminology Related to Pudgal

413

I  am  calling  that  an  effect,  meaning  that,  if  this  effect  is 
there, then this attachment and abhorrence will happen. Just 
like  how  causes  and  effect,  effect  and  causes  will  indeed 
continue constantly.

Questioner: How did the first pudgal arise? Which is 

first, the pudgal or attachment-abhorrence?

Dadashri: You are going in circles once again! Which 

would be considered the first bead in this rosary?

The  entire  worldly  life  is  made  up  of  pudgal.  But 
when attachment and abhorrence arise for the pudgal, that is 
called bondage, and when attachment and abhorrence do not 
arise for the pudgal, that is called mukti (freedom; liberation 
from the cycle of birth and death).

Four of the five sense organs are vitaraag (absolutely 
free  from  attachment)  on  one  side  [with  regards  to  one  of 
the two parties involved], whereas the sense of touch makes 
both  parties  involved  are  raagi  (prone  to  attachment). And 
there is the presence of the mishrachetan, which is the most 
harmful of all. If there is vitaraagata (a state absolutely free 
of attachment and abhorrence) in both parties involved, then 
One can become free. Sexual desire comes under the sense 
of  touch. A  beautiful  scene  and  the  one  seeing  it  are  both 
pudgal.  One  is  raagi  and  the  other  is  vitaraagi  (absolutely 
detached). A  beautiful  song  and  the  one  listening  to  it  are 
both  pudgal.  One  is  raagi  and  the  other  is  vitaraagi.  A 
fragrance  and  the  one  smelling  it  are  both  pudgal.  One  is 
raagi and the other is vitaraagi.

The  ‘quick-sand’  like  pudgal  is  such  that  the  greater 
the  effort  you  make  to  come  out  of  it,  the  deeper  you  sink 
into it.

As long as this Pudgal is pure and natural, there is no 
problem, but if the [overall] effect of the vibhaavik pudgal is 

414

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Seen, then attachment will not arise. If you were to observe 
how the food that you eat looks before you eat it and what 
its state is after you eat it, then you too will not like it.

The Weight of the Pudgal Is the Basis for the Next 
Life Form

The  Purush  (the  Self)  and  the  prakruti  (the  non-Self 
complex)  are  both  different.  The  Purush  is  referred  to  as 
pure Soul. The prakruti is referred to as pudgal; its inherent 
nature is paudgalik (made up of pudgal parmanu). The pure 
Soul’s  inherent  nature  is  that  of  Gnan.  There  is  no  Gnan 
in  the  pudgal  and  there  is  no  pudgal  in  the  other  [the  pure 
Soul].  Hence,  with  respect  to  their  own  inherent  nature, 
both  are  completely  different  indeed.  We  can  separate  the 
copper  and  the  gold  from  this  [item]  if  we  recognize  their 
[individual]  inherent  natures.  This  experiment  is  similar  to 
that.

It is the very same [filled karmic] stock that becomes a 
woman and a man. If one were to learn just these two things, 
‘Who is doing all this?’ and ‘Who am I?’ then freedom can 
be attained. But everyone has become perplexed in the face 
of  this  Science. This  is  something  that  even  those  who  are 
very  deep  thinkers  are  not  able  to  understand.  Even  those 
who  have  left  after  renouncing  everything  are  not  able  to 
understand this ‘hand’ [the workings of the pudgal].

Whether one becomes a woman or a man, it is all the 
same  pudgal.  All  these  metals  that  exist,  they  are  indeed 
made of the very same pudgal.

Questioner: All of them?

Dadashri: All of them; the very same pudgal.

Questioner: But they all have their own independent 

inherent nature, don’t they? What does the Science say?

[10] The Terminology Related to Pudgal

415

Dadashri:  No,  they  have  all  come  together  based  on 
the evidences. This [metal] came across these evidences, so 
it became gold. This [metal] came across these evidences, so 
it became copper. It all depends on the evidences.

Questioner:  So  fundamentally,  it  is  the  same  eternal 

element?

Dadashri: [Yes,] In fact, fundamentally it is the same 
eternal element. In general, you cannot compare them with 
this  [the  original  eternal  element  of  Parmanu].  All  metals 
and  non-metals  are  fundamentally  made  up  of  the  same 
eternal element.

However  many  gases  that  exist,  like  oxygen  and 
hydrogen, are all made up of the eternal element of inanimate 
matter. There is nothing else. These are all the ‘goods’ of the 
same eternal element. However many colors there are, they 
are all of the same eternal element.

These  clouds  are  of  two  types.  All  the  elders  here 
know  that  although  it  has  become  cloudy,  these  are  warm 
clouds.  So  the  weather  won’t  be  cool.  On  the  contrary, 
it  will  be  hot  and  humid  even  at  midnight.  And  on  some 
days,  when  it  becomes  cloudy  at  midday,  they  [the  elders] 
will say that they are cool clouds. So, the weather will feel 
cool. Therefore,  there  are  all  kinds  of  parmanu. When  two 
[clouds]  come  together  and  bang  into  each  other,  thunder 
ensues. Look, it even sets people straight! That person will 
suddenly wake up.

Questioner: Do atom bombs and hydrogen bombs go 

off due to friction only?

Dadashri:  However  many  bombs  there  are,  they  are 
all  of  the  eternal  element  of  inanimate  matter.  This  entire 
relative world (vyavahaar) of ours is of the eternal element 
of inanimate matter! What you eat is [made up of] inanimate 

416

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

matter.  All  of  this  is  nothing  but  the  eternal  element  of 
inanimate  matter.  You  simply  [think  that  you]  walk,  you 
move  about.  This  wind  that  blows  from  here,  it  blows  the 
corrugated roofs off and sends them a mile from here. Hey, 
even  the  corrugated  roofs  blew  off?  The  answer  is,  ‘Yes, 
even  the  corrugated  roofs  blew  off.’  Don’t  they  blow  off? 
That  is  the  pudgal  indeed. The  pudgal  is  managed  by  ‘this 
one’  [vyavasthit].  Otherwise,  where  does  wheat  actually 
grow and whom does it end up going to over here? Does it 
come  ‘walking’  [moving  along]  all  the  way  from  Haryana 
[a  state  in  India]?  Are  rotlis  (Indian  flatbread)  made  at 
your  home  too?  Look,  the  wheat  is  ‘walking’,  the  millet  is 
‘walking’, everything is ‘walking’. Is it ‘walking’ or not? It 
is the eternal elements that are moving them along.

Just  as  the  paarinaamik  bhaav  (resultant  state)  of 
metals is different from non-metals, the paarinaamik bhaav 
of the Self is completely different from that of the non-Self. 
The paarinaamik bhaav of the non-Self will continue getting 
heavier  whereas  the  paarinaamik  bhaav  of  the  Self  is  that 
It gets lighter. What is this ‘load’ [weight] due to? The Self 
does not have weight, but the causal body that goes with the 
Self  is  in  the  form  of  parmanu,  that  definitely  has  weight, 
doesn’t it?

Now,  the  inherent  nature  of  the  pudgal  is  to  descend 
(adhogami). How does the pudgal’s inherent nature become 
prone  to  descend  even  further?  The  answer  is,  it  is  neither 
based on the thickness of the body nor on the heaviness of 
the body, but it is based on how big the ego is and how long 
and  wide  it  is.  Someone  may  be  skinny  like  me  but  may 
have an ego as big as the world. And another may be strong 
like this, weighing two hundred and fifty kilograms, but he 
may not have much of an ego. Even though he is heavy, he 
does not sink.

Ego is weight. The very meaning of ego is weight and 

[10] The Terminology Related to Pudgal

417

to  descend.  Gradually,  as  the  strength  of  this  one  [the  ego] 
increases, one descends, one descends towards a lower life-
form (adhogati). Whereas the inherent nature of the Self is 
to gradually ascend towards a higher life-form (urdhvagati); 
but  as  the  weight  of  this  pudgal  gets  added  on,  it  pulls  the 
Self down.

Questioner: The pudgal takes It down, doesn’t it!

Dadashri:  The  ‘weighty’  [heavy]  pudgal  gets  added 
on. How is it that the weighty pudgal gets added on? It is a 
pudgal comprising of demerit karma. All that is considered 
weighty.  Even  the  one  comprising  of  merit  karma  is 
considered weighty, but it is less weighty.

It  brings  one  down. As  the  demerit  karma  increases, 
one tends to descend. As the demerit karma starts to decrease, 
one  keeps  ascending.  As  the  merit  karma  increases,  one 
tends to ascend. Then, when both, merit and demerit karma, 
come  to  an  end,  One  is  considered  to  have  completed  the 
upward journey.

Questioner: Yes,  that  is  correct.  When  both  come  to 

an end, it is over.

Dadashri:  Yes,  as  long  as  he  is  engaged  in  demerit 
karma,  he  will  descend.  Is  there  engagement  in  demerit 
karma right now?

Questioner:  Dada,  that  is  indeed  the  only  thing  that 

is going on!

Dadashri:  Then  the  result  of  that  will  indeed  be  in 

accordance to that, won’t it?

Questioner:  One  will  then  descend  to  a  lower  life-

form.

Dadashri:  Is  that  something  you  have  to  go  ask  a 

policeman?

418

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

What Is the Pudgal Dependent On?

Questioner:  The  suffering  of  karma  that  comes,  that 
is impartial, isn’t it? And it is also dependent on vyavasthit, 
isn’t it?

Dadashri:  Yes,  it  is  dependent  on  vyavasthit.  The 
authority (satta) of the pudgal is also subject to vyavasthit. 
The pudgal does not have the independent authority.

Questioner:  The  pudgal  does  have  authority,  does  it 

not?

Dadashri: The pudgal does not have any authority at 

all; it is subject to vyavasthit.

Questioner:  Then  nothing  like  karma  remains,  does 

it?

Dadashri:  That  is  true.  There  is  no  such  thing  as 

karma.

Questioner:  Then  even  merit  and  demerit  karma  do 

not exist, right?

Dadashri:  Karma  exists  due  to  the  false  attribution 
of  the  belief  ‘I  am  the  doer’,  and  because  of  that,  there  is 
merit  and  demerit  karma.  If  the  sense  of  doership  leaves, 
then karma also leave.

Questioner:  How  long  does  the  pudgal’s  parsatta 

(authority over the non-Self) last?

Dadashri: The pudgal’s? For as long as you are within 
the boundary of this form [as the non-Self]. If You are within 
Your own boundary, then the authority of the pudgal remains 
outside that boundary. If You go outside Your boundary, into 
the foreign, all that is subject to the authority of the pudgal. 
There it will catch you [and say] “Why have you come into 
my boundary?”

[10] The Terminology Related to Pudgal

419

It  is  possible  for  all  karma  to  dissolve  here,  but  one 

has to realize his [true] Self.

Questioner: All  these  pudgal  that  are  there,  who  are 

they dependent on?

Dadashri: On the one who is experiencing restlessness 
(ajampo). Where is there any dependency for the One who 
is not experiencing restlessness?

Questioner:  That  is  true,  but  who  are  all  of  these 

dependent on?

Dadashri:  In  the  inherently  natural  state  as  the  Self 
(Swabhaav  dasha),  One  is  independent  (Swadhin);  One 
is  dependent  on  the  Self  alone. And  in  the  unnatural  state 
(vibhaav dasha), one is dependent on scientific circumstantial 
evidences.

The pudgal itself is not the one wielding the authority; 
the  Self  is  wielding  the  authority.  Speech  is  not  dependent 
on the Self. That is why ‘we’ refer to it as being dependent 
on another entity (paradhin). What ‘we’ mean to say is that 
it is subject to vyavasthit.

That Is the Right Conduct as the Self…

No one can stop the effects of the pudgal. The Gnani 
has made a seat for You, seated You in it, given You Gnan 
and said that You will not face any obstacles.

The  body  is  an  effect  of  the  pudgal  whereas  within, 
the effect as the Self (Swaparinaam) prevails. The world is 
entirely an effect of the pudgal.

Anger,  joy,  sorrow,  everything  has  been  filled  in  this 
body, but when the Self does not become engrossed in them 
and Knows every circumstance of the pudgal to be an effect 
of  the  non-Self  (parparinaam),  that  is  known  as  samyak 
Charitra (the right Conduct as the Self).

420

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Questioner:  ‘You’  have  given  a  very  nice  analogy, 
that the water in a river is always flowing at every moment.

Dadashri:  Just  like  the  river,  the  unfolding  of  karma 
is flowing continuously. It is nothing else but the unfolding 
of karma, and what is this unfolding [of karma] considered? 
It  is  an  effect.  The  unfolding  [of  karma]  is  considered  an 
effect. A  river  is  indeed  flowing.  It  is  not  a  cause;  it  is  an 
effect. Therefore, the effect and the Self have nothing to do 
with  each  other.  That  which  is  not  involved  in  the  causes 
and the effects is the Self. The causes and the effects are all 
of the pudgal.

Sarjan (the sowing of causes; creation) is in your [the 
ego’s]  control.  Visarjan  (giving  off  the  effects  of  causes 
sown;  disintegration)  is  under  the  control  of  the  pudgal 
[vyavasthit  in  this  case].  Therefore,  whatever  causes  you 
sow,  sow  them  correctly.  The  pudgal  will  not  refrain  from 
giving the effects of whatever causes you have sown.

Don’t think about the effects, they are not under Your 
[the Self’s] control. [To prevail as the] Knower-Seer (Gnata-
Drashta) is Your effect and to bring about continuous change 
is an effect of the pudgal. What is the use of interfering in 
matters where You have no control? What would happen if a 
clerk were to sign on behalf of the collector? Hey, the clerk 
would be afraid all day long.

Engrossed in the Non-Self or Dwelling as the Self?

This  world  is  characterized  by  engrossment  in  the 
temporary  states  of  the  non-Self  complex  (paudgalik 
ramanata)! If one worships the Self even for a moment, he 
will  definitely  attain  liberation. To  remain  engrossed  in  the 
temporary states (avastha) is referred to as worldly life. To 
remain  engrossed  in  the  temporary  states  of  the  non-Self 
complex  is  pudgal  ramanata.  ‘I  am  Chandubhai,  I  am  a 
lawyer,  I  am  his  maternal  uncle,  I  am  his  father-in-law,  I 

[10] The Terminology Related to Pudgal

421

am his paternal uncle.’ This continues all day long! To keep 
claiming, “If you do this in business, you will profit, if you 
do that in business, you will incur a loss,” that is all pudgal 
ramanata.  Just  as  worldly  people  claim,  “I  earned  money 
this way, and I progressed that way and I incurred this loss, 
and  this  and  that,”  there  is  this  commotion  all  day  long! 
When one keeps claiming things about himself like, “I have 
a habit of waking up early in the morning. As soon as I get 
up in the morning, I have to have a cup of tea in bed. Then 
the  second  cup  of  tea  [with  breakfast]…”,  Know  that  this 
is  pudgal  ramanata.  There  is  nothing  but  engrossment  in 
whichever  temporary  state  that  arises;  engrossment  in  the 
temporary  state  of  sleeping,  engrossment  in  the  temporary 
state of dreaming. In the waking state, when he sits down to 
drink tea, he becomes engrossed in that. When he goes to his 
business,  then  he  becomes  engrossed  in  the  business.  Even 
foreigners  [not  Indians]  remain  engrossed  [because  they 
have  a  prakruti  that  is  natural  and  spontaneous].  Whereas 
these  people  [Indians]  are  not  even  engrossed.  When  they 
are at home, they think of the business. They are engrossed 
in  the  business  whilst  eating.  While  eating,  their  chit  is 
engrossed  in  the  business.  That  is  how  much  perversity 
we [Indians] have! It is called perversity, and the One who 
remains engrossed in the Self attains liberation.

The food is made up of pudgal, the drink is made up 
of  pudgal  and  the  engrossment  is  in  the  pudgal.  Everyone 
in  this  world  has  only  these  three  things.  They  have  been 
given many names. There is a limit with regard to food and 
drink, but the engrossment is unlimited. The entire world is 
engrossed in the pudgal!

There 

is  pudgal  ramanata,  praakrut  ramanata 
(engrossment  in  the  temporary  states  of  the  non-Self 
complex)  and  there  is  only  this  one  that  is  Ours,  Atma 
ramanata  (dwelling  as  the  Self).  Dwelling  only  in  One’s 

422

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

own  state  as  the  Self.  This  pudgal  ramanata  gives  rise  to 
worldly  life  whereas  liberation  is  attained  through  Atma 
ramanata.

To become free of the pudgal is called virti.

Until  You  acquired  this  Gnan,  you  were  ‘being 
entertained by’ [engrossed in] nothing but the pudgal. ‘I am 
Chandubhai and all this is mine. I am her husband and I am 
his father and I am his maternal uncle.’ Even the scriptures 
are considered pudgal. The ascetics and monks keep ‘being 
entertained  by’  the  scriptures,  which  are  also  considered 
‘toys’ made up of pudgal. As long as this is going on, Atma 
ramanata  will  not  arise.  Atma  ramanata  happens  after 
One  ‘tastes’  [experiences;  realizes]  the  Self.  And  pudgal 
ramanata is verily known as worldly life. There will be no 
end to it. No matter who you are [in the relative], what does 
that have to do with God [the Self]? If you were to ask the 
Lord,  “What  is  this  person  engrossed  in?”  the  Lord  would 
say,  “He  is  engrossed  in  the  pudgal.” You  say,  “Sir,  he  has 
knowledge of all the scriptures.” [The Lord would say,] “We 
have  no  problem  with  that.  He  will  get  the  fruits  of  that 
knowledge.  But  what  is  he  engrossed  in?”  The  answer  is, 
“He is engrossed in the pudgal.” So ascetics and monks are 
‘toying with’ the scriptures, then they are also ‘toying with’ 
the rosary. Is the rosary animate (chetan)? The rosary beads 
are made of wood. So put a stop to it and end that chapter.

Moreover,  people  are  reading 

these  books  [the 
scriptures]  due  to  societal  influence. The  scriptures  too  are 
pudgal. They are one of the many [spiritual] tools (sadhan). 
All the tools are pudgal. One has to attain the Self through 
the  tools  of  the  pudgal.  However,  those  [the  scriptures] 
are  just  a  tool. And  as  far  as  tools  are  concerned,  once  the 
work has been accomplished through that tool, it should be 
put  aside.  Tools  are  not  meant  [to  be  used]  forever.  Once 
you have attained your goal, you should let go of the tools. 

[10] The Terminology Related to Pudgal

423

Instead,  one  keeps  enjoying  using  the  tools  all  the  time.  Is 
this  appropriate?  Tools  are  meant  to  be  used  to  attain  the 
goal. On the contrary, the tools themselves have become the 
cause  of  bondage!  The  tools  that  were  meant  to  free  you, 
have instead bound you. Does this happen or not? Once you 
have finished using the tongs, you should set them aside.

If someone is doing something, you cannot tell them, 
“Do  not  do  this.”  This  is  because  everyone’s  pudgal  is 
different.  You  have  no  right  whatsoever  to  say  anything. 
Yes, you do have the right to ask them this much, “Are you 
dwelling  as  the  Self  or  engrossed  in  the  pudgal?” You  can 
ask them that. If they say, “I am dwelling as the Self” then 
that is fine. Dwelling as the pure Soul is the main thing. Up 
until now, there was this engrossment in the pudgal. All this 
is indeed considered pudgal, right! Whatever form you call 
it,  whether  you  call  it  this  form  or  that  form,  but  in  every 
form, it is all nothing but pudgal. All those who are on the 
path which uses tools, they are all engrossed in the non-Self!

Questioner:  So,  in  whichever  way  the  pudgal  was 

charged...

Dadashri:  That  is  exactly  how  the  galan  (discharge) 
occurs.  You  had  multiplied  by  seventeen  and  now  you  are 
wondering why you can’t divide by three? Hey, if you divide 
it  by  the  same  amount  that  you  had  multiplied  it  by,  only 
then will there be no remainder.

Questioner:  But  these  activities  (kriya)  are  not 
becoming  nil,  are  they?  You  are  saying  that  the  pudgal  is 
doing the activities, so now in order to make them nil, will 
we have to divide them again in the same way?

Dadashri: The pudgal is indeed doing all the work in 
that way. But this one [the relative self] interferes by saying, 
“Why are you dividing it by 17? Divide it by 3 or by 5.”

424

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Questioner:  Otherwise,  was  it  going  to  become  nil 

by itself?

Dadashri: Yes, it gets cleared on its own.

Questioner: But this one is multiplying it or dividing 

it, so there is some remainder.

Dadashri: When these people are interfering, they are 
bound to bring ‘clouds’ [veils of ignorance] over themselves. 
They  keep  on  bringing  ‘clouds’,  all  twelve  months  of  the 
year.  In  fact,  where  there  is  no  interference,  that  much  is 
good. Otherwise, these people keep interfering in everything 
and  anything.  And  for  You  [after  attaining  Gnan],  this 
interference is not there, so there is peace of mind.

No One Dies or Lives!

Questioner: So if the awareness is neither of the pudgal 

nor of the Self, then whose awareness is it considered?

Dadashri:  It  is  definitely  of  the  pudgal.  It  is  this 
pudgal  that  fights,  the  pudgal  does  atikraman  (aggression 
towards  other  living  beings  through  the  mind,  speech  or 
body), the pudgal does kraman (activity of the mind, speech 
and body that does not hurt anyone), the pudgal gets married, 
the  pudgal  becomes  a  widow,  the  pudgal  dies,  the  pudgal 
takes  birth.  But  this  cannot  be  spoken  outside.  It  can  be 
spoken  here  [in  satsang].  This  point  is  contextual.  Outside 
[in worldly life; in the relative], ‘we’ have to speak just the 
way you do that, ‘The soul takes birth and the soul dies.’

Questioner: How does the pudgal do atikraman?

Dadashri:  It  is  like  this,  the  pudgal  does  not  do 
atikraman  alone.  This  world  itself  is  being  run  by  the 
pudgal.  The  wars  are  indeed  being  waged  by  the  pudgal. 
The pudgal is running all of this. How can others understand 
the language of the Gnanis? The Gnanis speak after Seeing, 
whereas others have to bring it into their conviction (pratiti).

[10] The Terminology Related to Pudgal

425

Questioner:  Whatever  is  happening  to  the  pudgal  is 
happening based on vyavasthit, but how can it do atikraman?

Dadashri:  It  can  do  kraman  and  it  can  also  do 

atikraman. It is indeed the one doing everything, isn’t it?

Questioner: It can only happen if Chetan mixes with 

the Pudgal, right?

Dadashri: That verily is called the pudgal. ‘We’ tend 
to refer to these Pudgal Parmanu as Pudgal; that is all. They 
are actually just Parmanu. But the Lord has referred to the 
mishrachetan as pudgal. What is pudgal? It is mishrachetan, 
the  one  that  has  been  filled  with  the  intent  of  the  self 
(chaitanyabhaav). The puran that occurred undergoes galan 
in  the  next  life.  Once  again,  it  gets  charged  through  puran 
and  discharges  through  galan.  And  atikraman  is  galan. 
However,  if  that  atikraman  happened  through  the  self  [the 
one who believes ‘I am doing this, this is happening to me’; 
mishrachetan],  then  it  is  puran.  If  it  has  been  done  with  a 
sense of doership, then it is puran. If it has been done in a 
state free of doership, then it is galan.

Questioner: Dada, if this Chandubhai does it, then he 
does not have any attachment or anything else, so then what 
are atikraman and pratikraman to him?

Dadashri: Attachment and all that actually belongs to 
Chandubhai  [the  bavo;  the  internal  one  with  wrong  beliefs 
and  anger,  pride,  deceit  and  greed;  the  one  with  the  mind, 
intellect, chit and ego].

That is why ‘we’ have said over here, ‘In the language 
of the Gnanis, no one lives or dies.’ That is what is said here, 
isn’t it? ‘No one lives or dies in the language of the Gnanis. 
It  is  the  pratishthit  atma  (charging  relative  self)  who  lives, 
due to bhrantiras (the belief that perpetuates the illusion that 
‘I am Chandubhai, this is mine, and I am the doer’).’

426

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Hey, no one is at fault whatsoever! No one appears to 
be at fault to ‘us’. No one is at fault at all. It is because of 
the divisive form (bhed swaroop) that one is deemed to be at 
fault. It is due to the intellect that causes divisiveness (bhed 
buddhi) that others appear to be at fault.

The  one  for  whom  the  divisive  intellect  leaves,  for 
him,  the  perspective  of  oneness  arises.  With  that,  there  is 
nothing like seeing someone at fault, there is only pure love.

Questioner: What we eat is pudgal and what we drink 

is pudgal. Is all of that pudgal?

Dadashri: All of that is pudgal.

Questioner:  So  then  is  this  body  also  pudgal?  This 

medicine that we take, is that all pudgal?

Dadashri: Pudgal.

Questioner: So does the pudgal help the pudgal?

Dadashri: Yes. When one pudgal collides with another 
pudgal, then the entire pudgal gets demolished. The pudgal 
helps and it also wreaks havoc. The Self is not like that.

Questioner: ‘It’ is something completely different.

Dadashri:  In  fact,  people  refer  to  the  pudgal  as  the 

Self. That is the only problem, really.

Questioner: Well, this is just the pudgal but it is really 
something. This  pudgal  can  cause  a  lot  of  harm  to  another 
pudgal. The pudgal is also the one who wreaks havoc.

Dadashri:  It  does  all  kinds  of  things!  Then  again, 
it  brings  about  peace  too.  It  gives  judgement  and  it  also 
becomes the accused, it is also the lawyer.

The pudgal is the one who makes one feel hungry and 
the pudgal is the one who satisfies the hunger. The pudgal is 

[10] The Terminology Related to Pudgal

427

also  the  one  who  ripens  everything  to  fulfil  the  hunger.  It  is 
also the pudgal that cooks [the food], it is also the pudgal that 
sells [the food], and it is also the pudgal that eats [the food]. It 
is all a ‘play’ of the pudgal. In that, the hupanu (the prevalence 
of the I) or saying, ‘I am the doer’ is an illusion (bhranti). This 
entrapment is due to one becoming engrossed [in the pudgal]. 
We may say, “This belief (bhaav) is wrong. Come out of it.” 
But  how  can  people  come  out  of  it?  Without  a  Gnani,  one 
cannot come out of it. One needs a guide who knows the path, 
doesn’t he? And one also needs Self-realization. Without Self-
realization, one cannot come out of it. That is indeed why the 
entire world has also become trapped. What an entrapment!!

The worries and quarrels that are happening, are also 
happening to the pudgal, they are not happening to the Self.

Questioner:  The  Self  has  become  trapped.  Does  It 

want to become free now?

Dadashri:  Actually,  It  is  free  indeed.  But  once  that 
realization arises, then It can become completely free. ‘You’ 
have become free now, have You not?

It is all a ‘play’ of the pudgal! In the language of the 
Gnanis,  no  one  dies  at  all,  and  in  worldly  terms,  everyone 
dies. In [a state of] illusion, this is how it appears.

An  illusion  is  akin  to  seeing  two  lights  [instead  of 
one], when pressure is placed on the eye with the hand like 
this. Is that seen or not? Hey, there aren’t two, there is only 
one.  But  the  person  will  say,  “There  are  certainly  two.”  If 
we  say,  “There  is  one,”  and  he  doesn’t  agree  with  us,  then 
the  moment  we  pull  away  his  hand  [from  his  eye],  he  will 
immediately see only one.

Questioner: Do the Gnanis also have to consume the 
pudgal  (food;  medicine)  for  the  pudgal  (the  body)  as  long 
as this pudgal exists?

428

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri: What can even the Gnanis do? The Gnanis 

too have no choice; no one has a choice.

Questioner: So then, if this pudgal can become better 
by  consuming  that  which  has  arisen  from  within  it,  then 
what is wrong with making use of that?

Dadashri:  But  the  control  is  not  in  your  hands.  It 
has  its  own  dravya-kshetra-kaal-bhaav  (physical  matter  or 
evidences, location, time and intent). So that will not work. 
When  the  time  is  right,  people  will  say,  “Who  caused  you 
to  have  a  cough?”  The  answer  is,  ‘The  pudgal  caused  the 
cough.’ “Who will cure it?” The answer is, ‘The pudgal will 
cure it.’ “Who is unhappy?” The answer is, ‘The pudgal is.’ 
But  one  does  not  understand  that,  does  he!  When  he  has 
divisiveness  due  to  differences  of  opinion  (matbhed)  with 
his wife, they both become unhappy. Moreover, they are not 
able to sleep at night.

The  pudgal  is  colliding  with  [another]  pudgal.  The 

Chetan (Self) never collides with [another] Chetan.

The Arithmetic of the Body…

There  are  four  things  in  the  world.  The  addition  and 
subtraction are occurring on their own indeed, because that 
is the inherent nature of the pudgal. The multiplication and 
division  are  done  by  the  developing  I  (pote;  the  worldly-
interacting  self),  which  leaves  a  remainder.  Oh  mortal  one, 
divide  it  such  that  there  is  no  remainder,  then  it  will  be 
solved.

The  addition  and  subtraction  are  of  the  pudgal.  The 
multiplication  and  division  are  of  the  [worldly-interacting] 
self. With attachment there is multiplication, with abhorrence 
it  gets  divided.  To  become  elevated  is  multiplication,  to 
become  depressed  is  division,  and  when  one  gets  in  bed  at 
night  and  makes  ‘plans’  [fantasizes],  that  is  multiplication. 

[10] The Terminology Related to Pudgal

429

I first started with the division; once the division was done 
in  such  a  way  that  no  remainder  was  left,  then  it  came  to 
an  end.  The  multiplication  and  division  were  never  of  the 
pudgal;  they  are  of  the  [worldly-interacting]  self  alone. 
Now,  when  you  say,  “This  is  not  right,  this  is  not  how  it 
should  be,”  the  multiplication  of  the  vishrasa  (pure  phase 
Parmanu)  happens,  which  is  prayogsa  (the  charged  phase 
of  parmanu).  From  prayogsa,  they  then  [in  the  next  life,] 
become mishrasa (charged parmanu waiting to give effect). 
From  mishrasa,  they  once  again  revert  to  vishrasa.  The 
causal  parmanu  are  prayogsa,  the  effective  parmanu  are 
mishrasa.  Subsequently,  after  giving  off  the  effect,  the 
process  of  them  reverting  to  vishrasa  goes  on  constantly. 
However, if the parmanu stop becoming prayogsa, it means 
that  there  will  be  no  mishrasa  arising,  so  everything  will 
come to an end.

One  believes  the  body  to  be  his  own.  As  one  has 
aaropit  bhaav  (the  false  attribution  of  the  belief  that  ‘I  am 
Chandubhai’),  the  world  is  not  seen  as  it  really  is.  That  is 
why  one  does  the  multiplication  and  then  keeps  doing  the 
division.  The  Pudgal  Parmanu  are  natural  (swabhaavik), 
but  the  state  of  the  self  is  unnatural  (vibhaavik).  Hence 
multiplication  and  division  are  the  inherent  nature  of 
the  illusory  self.  The  seed  of  multiplication  is  actually 
encompassed  within  the  division,  and  the  seed  of  division 
is  encompassed  within  the  multiplication.  That  is  what 
‘we’  refer  to  as  disorder.  In  this  world,  there  are  only  four 
things:  addition,  subtraction,  multiplication  and  division. 
The  majority  of  living  beings  are  under  illusion.  They  are 
doing nothing else but multiplying. When you multiply two 
numbers  and  the  result  is  not  agreeable,  what  is  the  reason 
for that? This entire world is filled with worldly happiness. 
And  when  you  do  not  experience  happiness,  then  wouldn’t 
you  understand  that  there  must  be  some  mistake  that  still 
remains?

430

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

The  circumstances  begin  to  add  up  early  in  the 
morning.  ‘We’  do  not  have  beggary  for  anything,  yet  in 
worldly  interaction,  ‘we’  were  made  to  do  a  beggarly  deed 
[multiplication] and ‘we’ told this young girl, “Please bring 
a  sweater.” Asking  for  it  was  multiplication  and  wearing  it 
was  addition.  It  is  natural  for  subtraction  of  this  addition 
to  take  place.  That  is  why,  ‘we’  now  feel  hot.  So,  to  feel 
like  taking  the  sweater  off  is  division. Then,  taking  off  the 
sweater  means  the  subtraction  took  place.  The  subtraction 
occurred  when  the  circumstantial  evidences  came  together, 
and that is when ‘we’ took the sweater off.

People here in India as well as abroad state, “Wouldn’t 
everyone  here  also  know  how  to  do  the  multiplication, 
division,  addition  and  subtraction?”  Everyone  would 
definitely  know.  There  are  only  these  four  things  in  this 
world, there is no fifth thing whatsoever. All the other infinite 
things that you can see, have arisen out of these four things 
only.  Instead,  people  keep  on  scaring  others  [by  saying,] 
“Don’t cheat. Don’t steal!” “Oh mortal one, who is the one 
saying this? And who is the doer?” Understand the nature of 
these  four  things.  The  entire  world  is  doing  division.  They 
just keep adding zeros and then after subtracting, they bring 
down the value to bring about no remainder, but to no avail. 
‘Our’  division  is  actually  such  that  there  is  no  remainder 
anymore.  ‘We’  no  longer  have  to  add  zeros  or  bring  down 
anything after subtracting.

Say you go to the Himalayas and it is snowing there. 
As you are walking along, you see a pile of snow that looks 
like Lord Buddha. In another place, you see a pile of snow 
that  looks  like  a  temple  of  Lord  Mahadev  [Shiva]. And  in 
a third place, you see a pile of snow that looks like a wash 
basin. Doesn’t the snow fall equally everywhere? When the 
snow fell at night, that was addition and once the sun rises 
in the morning, everything starts to melt, that is subtraction. 

[10] The Terminology Related to Pudgal

431

Now upon seeing the statue of Lord Buddha, when one yells 
with excitement, “Hey, look a statue of Lord Buddha!” One 
keeps  doing  the  multiplication,  moreover,  one  tells  others, 
“Go  look  over  there,  there  is  a  statue  of  Lord  Buddha.” 
However,  by  the  time  people  get  there  to  see  it,  it  has 
melted. At that time, the intent changes within, that is akin 
to  division  happening.  ‘Our’  division  leaves  no  remainder. 
When it is cleared with equanimity, it is considered division 
with no remainder.

Just  look,  he  has  a  Jain  [a  person  whose  religion  is 
Jainism] pudgal, whereas this one is a Vaishnav [a member 
of  a  Hindu  sect  holding  Vishnu  or  Lord  Krishna  to  be  the 
supreme being, generally seeking salvation through devotional 
worship  of  the  God  or  His  avatars]  pudgal.  Moreover,  all 
these [pudgals] are such that they raise objections. The Lord 
told  a  person,  “This  pudgal  is  obstructing  you.” Therefore, 
one should not raise objections. No matter where the Gnani 
goes  to  do  darshan  (devotional  viewing  of  an  idol  in  a 
temple),  you  should  not  raise  any  objection  to  that.  That 
is  because,  He  has  only  one  method,  that  of  vitaraagata 
(absolute  detachment).  ‘He’  is  not  partial  towards  anyone 
whatsoever. ‘He’ has only one method, to balance it out by 
dividing  that  which  has  been  multiplied,  or  by  multiplying 
that  which  has  been  divided.  ‘He’  would  either  multiply  or 
divide  as  required,  meaning  that  He  makes  them  balance 
each  other  out,  He  makes  them  equal.  Whereas,  what  does 
the  world  like?  They  like  multiplication  alone.  They  will 
ask,  “Why  did  you  divide?”  While  the  work  of  the  Gnani 
Purush is to make it equal; vitaraagata!

Jada (inanimate matter) is the kind of geometry that it 
gets solved in its own theorem, so won’t this theorem of yours 
also  be  solved?  Jada  is  such  that,  when  vyavasthit  leaves 
you with something disagreeable, it does so after giving you 
knowledge, and when vyavasthit leaves you with something 

432

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

agreeable,  it  does  so  after  making  you  derive  enjoyment 
from it. We are in fact benefitting in both contexts.

The  organizing  is  of  the  Pudgal,  and  the  karamat 
(craftsmanship)  is  also  of  the  Pudgal,  so  then  why  are  you 
interfering  in  it?  What  is  the  need  to  interfere  in  that?  If 
you  interfere  (dakho),  then  the  effects  of  that  interference 
(dakhal) will undoubtedly arise. If the organizing [role] was 
yours,  only  then  would  your  opinion  be  of  use.  Therefore, 
in  this,  a  solution  will  come  about  only  if  the  opinion  is 
destroyed.

The Pudgal Eats Pudgal…

On  the  Kramik  path  they  tell  you,  “Renounce  this, 
renounce  that.”  The  question  arises,  ‘Hey,  why  are  you 
making everyone renounce everything?’ When the pudgal is 
eating pudgal, why are you interfering in that?’ The Reality 
is different.

Questioner: That is correct.

Dadashri:  It  is  the  pudgal  that  eats  pudgal;  the  Self 

does not eat.

If a child comes across some outlaws who cut off the 
ears and nose and make a curry out of that, then what would 
happen? What effect would arise? They are making a curry 
of the pudgal, not of the Self, are they?

When  it  is  the  pudgal  that  eats  pudgal,  how  does  it 

oblige or not oblige the Self?

The  people  who  have  not  realized  [the  Self],  believe 
that  from  wherever  they  cut  the  ‘cantaloupe’  [the  pudgal, 
the  body,  a  fruit,  something  to  be  consumed],  they  are 
indeed  cutting  the  Self,  and  those  who  Know  the  Self,  go 
ahead  and  cut  the  cantaloupe  from  wherever  they  please. 
If they want to mash it, they mash it, but [they Know that] 

[10] The Terminology Related to Pudgal

433

the  Self  will  not  be  cut.  The  entire  world  is  nothing  but  a 
‘cantaloupe’. Even the celestial beings become ‘consumed’ 
[as  objects  of  enjoyment].  The  female  celestial  beings  get 
‘consumed’. Some are intelligent, some are not so intelligent, 
and some don’t have any intellect. They are all nothing but 
‘cantaloupes’!

As You have realized the pure Soul, cut the cantaloupe 
with a knife from wherever you want to, after doing a prayer 
(vidhi) whereby the God within the cantaloupe is made to sit 
outside. The one cutting is a ‘cantaloupe’ and the one being 
cut is also a ‘cantaloupe’.

The pudgal is the one who eats and the developing I is 
simply  expressing  the  egoism  of  “I  ate.”  He  has  no  idea  at 
all that it is actually another entity. He takes someone else’s 
pain onto himself.

If  some  suffocation  arises  or  if  something  causes  an 
obstruction,  then  he  will  get  constipation.  All  of  that  is 
nothing but the pudgal. Even sickness is related to the pudgal. 
‘See’  the  pudgal,  do  not  become  one  with  the  pudgal;  See 
what  is  happening.  But  how  can  one  See  unless  his  moha 
(illusory  attachment)  decreases? As  long  as  the  moha  does 
not  break,  the  illusion  will  not  dispel. When  only  a  certain 
type of moha remains, that is when he will meet ‘us’. ‘We’ 
then  remove  that  moha  for  him.  Once  ‘we’  annihilate  his 
moha  for  him,  He  will  be  able  to  See.  Unless  the  moha  is 
annihilated, Gnan can never arise! For how many days can 
one have the feeling of vairaag (dispassion for worldly life)? 
Vairaag does not last.

Questioner: Does the pudgal have energy [to control]?

Dadashri: The inherent nature of the pudgal is puran-
galan. If we say that the energy of this speech is under the 
control of the pudgal, but well, it is indeed the pudgal that 
does  everything.  When  hunger  arises,  does  the  body  do 

434

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

anything?  When  one  wants  to  go  to  the  toilet,  can  he  [the 
pudgal; the ego; the developing I] exercise control over the 
pudgal? [Hence] The authority is not of the pudgal, but its 
inherent nature is that of puran-galan.

Questioner:  I  did  not  understand  that  properly.  Are 
you referring to its inherent nature of constantly undergoing 
change?

Dadashri:  The  entire  world  definitely  keeps 

undergoing change.

Questioner:  Is  the  inherent  nature  of  one  pudgal  the 

same for every pudgal?

Dadashri:  Yes,  the  inherent  nature  of  every  pudgal 
is the same. To feel hungry, to feel thirsty, to have feelings, 
to feel tired, to become white, to become black, to become 
yellow.

Questioner: Yes, that is correct.

Dadashri:  The  inherent  nature  that  one  pudgal  has, 
is  the  same  inherent  nature  that  every  pudgal  has.  It  is  the 
same inherent nature in all cases.

If  the  pudgal  was  in  control,  without  vyavasthit  [in 
the  picture],  then  no  one  would  get  hungry,  but  that  is  not 
the  case.  The  pudgal  is  certainly  working  within  its  own 
inherent nature.

Questioner: I cannot maintain control when I eat.

Dadashri:  To  keep  eating  uncontrollably  is  the 
inherent nature of the pudgal. It is the pudgal [the parmanu 
within]  that  is  pulling  the  pudgal  [the  food  item].  If  five 
hundred  people  were  to  sit  down  to  eat  right  now,  and  if 
you were to tell a man who has etiquette to sit down to eat, 
he  would  decline  the  offer.  But  if  he  does  sit  down  to  eat, 
and  it  is  taking  time  for  the  rice  to  be  served,  then  he  will 

[10] The Terminology Related to Pudgal

435

keep  dipping  his  hand  in  [tasting]  the  lentil  soup  or  in  the 
vegetables. Because that is the inherent nature of the pudgal.

Although it is the pudgal that is asking [for the food], 
yet one falsely claims, “I asked.” Although he doesn’t know 
that,  but  upon  checking,  he  indeed  feels,  ‘There  is  no  one 
else in this who is asking.’ What would one feel if he were 
to check that?

Questioner: He would not find anyone else.

Dadashri: “There is certainly no one else, is there? I 
am the only one,” he will say. The pudgal is indeed the one 
asking for all this.

Questioner: Food, water, everything?

Dadashri:  Everything,  the  pudgal  is  also  the  one 
asking  to  take  a  bath. The pudgal  is  also  the  one  asking  to 
brush the teeth.

The  body  is  the  eater.  The  eater  does  not  Know  and 
the Knower does not eat. The doer of the activity is not the 
Self (partattva) and the Knower is the Self (Swatattva)! The 
one  who  is  robbing  and  the  one  who  is  being  robbed  are 
both the non-Self (anatma).

Questioner: No one has ever become satisfied through 

the pudgal.

Dadashri: That is indeed why no one has ever become 
satisfied.  Even  in  the  case  of  the  pudgal,  it  will  certainly 
remain  beggarly  to  some  extent!  So  then  what  would  be 
wrong  in  calling  it  a  beggar  right  from  the  beginning?  At 
least then it will get settled once and for all, at least it will 
come to an end!

Life  after  life,  you  have  been  contemptuous  towards 
the pudgal, that is indeed what is obstructing you. There is 
no  such  thing  in  this  world  that  you  cannot  receive  whilst 

436

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

sitting in one place, that is what the grandeur of the Self is 
like!

The  karamat  (craftsmanship)  of  the  pudgal  is  such 
that  whichever  thing  you  contemptuously  reject,  you  will 
never  come  across  it  again. You  may  get  it  in  this  life,  but 
not in the next life.

In worldly terms, people refer to things as being good 
or bad, but in the language of the Lord, they are considered 
the  same,  ‘An  eternal  element  is  an  eternal  element.’  The 
Pudgal [Parmanu] is in its inherent nature and the Self is in 
Its inherent nature.

What  is  the  inherent  nature  of  the  Pudgal  like?  To 
come  together  and  to  disperse,  to  come  together  and  to 
disperse. At that time, people will say, “It has all dispersed 
completely.” The Pudgal does not have any preference that 
it  should  disperse.  It  simply  disperses  and  comes  together, 
disperses and comes together.

If you boil this rice, it will become cooked. So people 
will  say,  “This  is  cooked  rice,  but  that  rice  is  still  raw.” 
Hence, they keep getting agitated and keep interfering. But 
it is in fact due to the habit that had been formed previously 
[that one says], “This is good and this is bad. If this happens 
then  it  is  good  and  if  this  happens  then  it  is  bad.”  There 
is  nothing  like  good  or  bad  in  the  Pudgal.  The  Pudgal  is 
indeed in its inherent nature.

The Pudgal will not let go of its inherent nature. The 
Self  (Chetan)  will  not  let  go  of  Its  inherent  nature.  The 
Self remains in Its own inherent nature whilst this one [the 
ego] interferes, ‘This is mine and that is mine. This is mine 
and  that  is  also  mine.  And  the  woman  whom  I  married 
and brought home is also mine.’ Just look at the externally 
induced suffering one has invited!

[10] The Terminology Related to Pudgal

437

Questioner:  Dada,  nowadays  this  has  become  more 

prevalent, this has become excessively prevalent.

Dadashri:  It  is  more;  right  now,  the  ‘my-ness’ 
(mamatva) has reached its peak. Therefore, the beating that 
one  suffers  is  also  in  line  with  that! You  are  someone  who 
would  sit  with  those  who  have  exactness  in  their  worldly 
interactions, whereas this crowd that you are interacting with 
is indeed the company of those who do not have exactness 
in their worldly interactions!

Even a Religious Pudgal Can Become a Spiritual 
Roadblock!

Questioner: When we do something on the ‘ornamental 

path’ [in religion], we feel a type of self-satisfaction.

Dadashri:  It  is  illusory  satisfaction  and  peace  of 
some  sort  prevails.  Just  like  how  a  mountain  in  some 
areas appears to be very scenic, it is naturally ‘ornamental’ 
[attractive].  There,  you  feel,  ‘It  looks  so  beautiful!  What 
a  scenic  atmosphere!’  In  this  way,  some  atmospheres  feel 
‘ornamental’.  That  is  all  paudgalik  masti,  the  ‘play’  of  the 
pudgal. All  the  paths  are  ‘ornamental’.  Not  only  do  people 
like  them  but  they  are  also  completely  contradictory.  [One 
will  think,],  ‘Until  now  I  was  travelling  North,  so  why  am 
I now travelling South?’ The answer is, ‘You have to go in 
whichever direction the road leads you.’ What is the point of 
that? Who has shown such a path that takes you North and 
then takes you South? Even if you take a different road that is 
heading North, it may turn to the Northeast. Not completely 
East,  but  Northeast.  But  it  certainly  wouldn’t  turn  towards 
the Southeast! So complete awareness is needed, is it not?

Questioner:  That  is  all  a  ‘play’  of  the  pudgal,  is  it 

not?

Dadashri:  It  is  all  a  ‘play’  of  the  pudgal.  The 

438

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

enjoyment  that  worldly  people  are  indulging  in  is  a  ‘play’ 
of the pudgal.

Questioner:  Dada,  worldly  life  increases  due  to  this 

‘play’ of the pudgal, doesn’t it?

Dadashri:  Not  only  does  worldly  life  increase,  it 

becomes endless.

Questioner:  If  it  becomes  endless,  then  it’s  like  a 
noose  around  the  neck.  He  thinks  he  is  doing  something, 
but instead, he now has a noose around his neck!

Dadashri: He suffers a beating due to being in a state 

of gross unawareness of the Self!

Questioner:  In  Krupaludev’s  book,  it  says,  “With  a 
decrease in the belief that ‘I am a Jain’ (Jain pudgal bhaav), 
the awareness of ‘I am pure Soul’ (Atma dhyan) will come 
into effect.” Why does He say that? ‘He’ is saying it exactly. 
The Jains say that if the pudgal bhaav decreases, then...

Dadashri: ‘He’ is not saying that. When the karma of 
‘I am a Jain, I am a Jain’ leaves, that is when the awareness 
of ‘I am pure Soul’ will come into effect.

Questioner:  To  have  the  belief  that  ‘I  am  a  Jain,’  is 

that the Jain pudgal bhaav?

Dadashri:  Yes.  That  indeed  is  the  disease,  which  is 
why the karma adhered to him! The religion of the vitaraag 
(absolutely  detached)  Lords  has  no  karma;  it  is  the  Real 
religion. Whereas this is the Jain religion. The Jain religion 
is  a  relative  religion.  Each  and  every  sentence  written  by 
Krupaludev  is  worth  reading.  Each  and  every  sentence  is 
worth understanding.

Even  murtis  (physical  representation; 

idols)  are 
that  have  been  developed.  The  Lord  has 
something 
mentioned four nikshep (aspects to understand something in 

[10] The Terminology Related to Pudgal

439

exactness and in the relevant context). One is naam nikshep 
(identifying  someone  based  on  the  name  given),  then  there 
is sthapna nikshep (identifying someone based on a physical 
representation in the form of an idol). Then there is dravya 
nikshep.  Dravya  nikshep  refers  to  [identifying  someone 
based  on]  whatever  karmic  stock  one  has  filled  in. A  Jain 
would have filled the karmic stock of a Jain; he would keep 
doing ritualistic practices such as pratikraman and samayik. 
Whereas  a  Vaishnav  would  keep  bathing  the  idol  [of  Lord 
Krishna]. Whatever karmic stock one has filled is what keeps 
coming out. A Jain would be prevailing as a Jain pudgal. A 
Vaishnav  would  be  prevailing  as  a Vaishnav  pudgal. When 
that  pudgal  will  empty  out  completely  for  him,  he  will 
become  free  from  its  bondage,  that  is  when  a  solution  will 
come  about. As  long  as  that  pudgal  is  there,  a  new  pudgal 
will  arise.  As  the  old  one  discharges,  a  new  one  is  being 
bound at the same time, new karma are being charged.

For  a Vaishnav,  the Vaishnav  pudgal  will  not  let  him 
attain  moksha,  and  for  a  Jain,  the  Jain  pudgal  will  not  let 
him attain moksha.

Questioner:  What  is  a  Jain  pudgal  and  a  Vaishnav 

pudgal?

Dadashri: It is whomever he has worshipped; whatever 
worshipping  he  has  done,  it  is  indeed  of  the  pudgal  only, 
isn’t  it!  He  went  to  do  darshan  [at  the  temple],  he  went  to 
bow  down  to  the  maharaj  (spiritual  teacher);  all  of  that  is 
worship of the pudgal only, isn’t it? What does the Self have 
to do with that? One is bound to pick up the ‘rust’ of whatever 
one  becomes  involved  in.  But  these  are  all  steps.  In  a  Jain 
pudgal,  the  discharge  of  worshipping  the  celestial  goddess 
(mataji) is not liked. In this one [the Vaishnav pudgal], there 
is worship of the celestial goddess and many other things. In 
all of this, it is nothing but the pudgal indeed! There are all 
kinds of religious sects.

440

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Questioner:  Then  it  says,  “With  the  decrease  in  the 
belief that ‘I am a Jain’, the awareness of ‘I am pure Soul’ 
will  come  into  effect.” Why  does  He  say  that? What  He  is 
saying is exact but this is of the Kramik path, is it not?

Dadashri: No, no. It is not of the Kramik path; [it is 
applicable]  everywhere.  Jain  pudgal  bhaav  means  the  one 
who is a Jain relinquishes other pudgals and keeps acquiring 
a Jain pudgal. A Vaishnav would have acquired a Vaishnav 
pudgal. This [Jain] person would have learned to do samayik 
and  some  other  things;  he  would  have  learned  many  other 
things.  All  of  those  are  pudgal  bhaav  that  he  would  have 
learned.  He  will  have  to  then  relinquish  all  of  those  Jain 
pudgal [bhaavs]. There is also bondage because of them.

That  is  called  a  Jain  pudgal  bhaav.  A  Sthanakvasi 
(a  member  of  a  Jain  sect  that  does  not  believe  in  temple 
worship) has a Sthanakvasi pudgal, a [Sthanakvasi] pudgal 
bhaav.  A  Deravasi  (a  member  of  a  Jain  sect  that  believes 
in  temple  worship)  has  a  Deravasi  pudgal  bhaav.  This 
Vaishnav pudgal bhaav (the belief that ‘I am a Vaishnav’) is 
pliant  like  a  hollow  wooden  box,  whereas  this  Jain  pudgal 
bhaav  is  hard  like  a  copper  sheet.  So  one  has  to  wander 
a  lot  due  to  this  pudgal.  This  Jain  pudgal  is  like  a  copper 
utensil; it does not break. That veil does not break, whereas 
this Vaishnav pudgal is like a wooden box. One day it will 
decay and break.

Right  now,  the  path  to  moksha  is  open  for  Jains.  A 
real Jain pudgal existed when there were true Jains around. 
Today,  they  are  only  Jain  by  name.  So,  this  is  not  a  true 
Jain pudgal. Therefore, this pudgal is such that it can break. 
They  are  Jain  by  name  because  they  were  born  into  a  Jain 
family,  and  those  others  were  true  Jains.  They  were  not 
only  Jains  in  bhaav  (at  the  cause  level)  but  also  in  dravya 
(effect). And  these  [current  Jains]  are  Jain  only  by  birth.  If 
a  person  who  [in  the  past  life]  was  a  Brahmin  [a  member 

[10] The Terminology Related to Pudgal

441

of  the  highest  class  of  the  four  Hindu  castes,  spiritually 
and  socially,  comprising  the  priests,  religious  teachers  and 
scholars]  takes  birth  in  a  Jain  family  [in  this  life]  and  thus 
becomes  a  Jain,  that  does  not  mean  he  can  be  considered 
a  true  Jain.  Therefore,  this  pudgal  can  break.  It  is  a  pliant 
pudgal in this era of the time cycle!

So  [being]  a  Jain  or  a  Vaishnav  is  all  a  wrong  belief 
brought  about  by  the  pudgal  (paudgalik  maya).  You  have 
to come out of that wrong belief (maya). While doing these 
religious  practices  (sadhana),  the  religious  tools  (sadhan) 
are  themselves  an  illusion;  you  have  to  become  free  from 
them.  When  a  Jain  sadhu  (ascetic)  gives  a  sermon,  people 
of other religions get up and walk away. This is not the case 
for a Gnani.

There  is  a  vast  difference  between  the  vitaraag  path 
and  the  Jain  path.  Not  a  single  pudgal  affects  the  vitaraag 
path, whereas the Jain pudgal affects the Jain path. The Jain 
pudgal will eventually have to be exhausted! On the vitaraag 
path,  everyone  can  accomplish  their  [spiritual]  work,  even 
the  Jains  and  the  Vaishnavs.  The  Jains  are  very  shrewd  in 
understanding [the Gnan] but are weak in clearing [the veils 
over the Self].

It is very difficult to exhaust a Jain pudgal. After ‘we’ 
give  you  Gnan,  if  something  negative  arises,  then  Know 
that it is the Jain pudgal that is exploding. Just like if some 
fireworks were exploding in a store, the owner would know 
that  the  fireworks  are  exploding  and  not  him.  As  long  as 
there is ignorance of the Self, one will not know whether it 
is the fireworks exploding or whether it is him.

When  the  Jain  pudgal  bhaav  leaves,  the  Self  will  be 

attained.

Questioner:  Dada,  even  after  taking  Gnan,  many 
people still have this atkan (spiritual roadblock) of, ‘Why are 

442

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

these  people  eating  root  vegetables?’  Why  doesn’t  upayog 
(the applied awareness as the Self) remain there?

Dadashri:  That  is  what  the  Tirthankar  Lords  have 
called  a  Jain  pudgal.  They  have  brought  Jain  atkans  with 
them  and  they  continue  to  dwell  in  them. A  Vaishnav  will 
have a Vaishnav atkan. A Jain will not have such an atkan. 
He will have a Jain atkan. But those atkans are nothing but 
the pudgal; the Self is not like that. The Self is the Knower 
of  the  atkan,  such  that,  ‘This  atkan  has  arisen.’  And  ‘we’ 
have  given You  that  same  Self;  the  Self  that  can  Know  all 
the atkans. ‘It’ can Know all of them, can It not?

Questioner: Absolutely. The atkan of not eating after 

sunset, the atkan of not eating root vegetables.

Dadashri:  Yes,  those  are  all  atkans  of  Jains;  the 
atkans  of  renunciates.  For  all  these  renunciates  who  have 
taken Gnan, these types of atkans will arise once again for 
them.  So  there  are  different  types  of  atkans.  What  do You 
have to do with the atkans? ‘You’ simply have to See them.

‘Hey,  you  cannot  go  to  a  derasar  (Jain  temple)’;  a 
Vaishnav  pudgal  is  indeed  like  that.  Vaishnavs  will  have 
to  exhaust  their  Vaishnav  pudgals  and  Jains  will  have  to 
exhaust  their  Jain  pudgals.  Because  no  pudgal  will  be  of 
any use in moksha. So everything must be exhausted.

“For the Self to come into Its natural and spontaneous 
state, is what the revered vitaraag Lords refer to as moksha.”
“Sahaj  swaroope  aa  jeevni  sthiti  thavi  tene  Shri 

vitaraag moksha kahe chhe.”

- Shrimad Rajchandra

‘Our’  state  has  become  natural  and  spontaneous 
whereas  You  still  have  to  come  into  the  natural  and 
spontaneous  form.  But  that  pudgal  obstructs You,  that  Jain 
pudgal; that Jain pudgal will have to be exhausted.

[10] The Terminology Related to Pudgal

443

A  Vaishnav  has  a  Vaishnav  pudgal,  a  Jain  has  a  Jain 
pudgal.  All  those  will  have  to  be  exhausted.  Once  You 
understand  [how  to  do  so]  from  ‘us’,  it  will  get  exhausted. 
‘For the Self to come into Its natural and spontaneous state’ 
means that if people here are singing, at that time you should 
sing,  if  they  are  eating,  at  that  time  you  should  eat,  if  they 
are getting up, you should get up, when it is time to sleep, 
go to sleep; don’t interfere. If you don’t want to drink, then 
say,  ‘I  don’t  want  to  drink  tea’,  but  don’t  interfere.  ‘You’ 
shouldn’t  feel,  ‘Why  is  this  happening  to  me?’  How  can 
anything  happen  to You?  How  can  anything  happen  to  the 
Self?

‘You’  have  attained  Self-realization;  the  awakened 
awareness  (laksh)  has  been  established.  If  You  don’t 
interfere  in  what  is  happening,  then  that  is  the  natural  and 
spontaneous state.

After attaining Gnan, what obstructs a Jain on the path 
to  moksha?  The  Jain  pudgal.  What  about  someone  who  is 
not a Jain? The answer is, a non-Jain pudgal. Which pudgal 
would  obstruct  a  renunciate  or  an  ascetic?  The  renunciate 
pudgal  obstructs  them.  Which  pudgal  is  hard  [to  break]? 
The  renunciate  pudgal.  Which  pudgal  is  better  than  that 
[easier to break]? The Jain pudgal. Which pudgal is better, 
more pliable than that? A non-Jain pudgal.

After  Gnan,  the  pudgal  obstructs.  For  renunciates, 
their  pudgal  obstructs  them  greatly. As  they  have  filled  in 
all  such  egoism  of,  ‘I  am  a  religious  teacher  (maharaj),  I 
am  a  renunciate  (tyaagi),  I  am  a  saiyami  (someone  who  is 
in  control  of  their  kashay  with  egoism)’! All  the  parmanu 
colored  with  that  egoism  have  now  solidified.  What  does 
he  need  to  do  now?  If  he  keeps  saying,  “All  the  types  of 
egoism  I  have  done  so  far  are  all  wrong,”  then  the  egoism 
will leave. If he repents, then it will leave.

444

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

If  someone  is  facing  trouble,  if  someone  is  suffering 
from  injustice,  at  that  time  my  fighting  spirit  gets  stirred 
up.  ‘We’  would  Know  that  this  is  an  atkan  at  work.  These 
are all considered pudgal. A Kshatriya [a member of second 
of  the  four  Hindu  castes  comprising  the  warriors]  pudgal, 
a Vaishya  [a  member  of  the  third  of  the  four  Hindu  castes, 
comprising the merchants and farmers] pudgal; all of them 
are bothersome, all of them cause torment. The beliefs cause 
torment.

The ‘Play’ Is of the Pudgal!

God does not know how to meddle in this way. All of 
this is nothing but meddling, moreover, it is the meddling of 
the  eternal  element  of  inanimate  matter  (jada  tattva);  God 
[the  Self]  is  in  fact  just  God.  The  one  who  gets  confused, 
suffers.  The  Gnani  Purush  frees  one  from  this  suffering; 
because the One who is free can free others.

This  is  all  a  ‘play’  of  the  pudgal.  To  learn,  to  teach, 
to  pass,  to  renounce,  to  become  an  aacharya  (a  religious 
teacher),  to  become  a  disciple;  this  is  all  a  ‘play’  of  the 
pudgal.  ‘A  ‘play’  of  the  pudgal’  means  that  the  work  gets 
done  once  all  the  scientific  circumstantial  evidences  come 
together. Amidst  that,  God  [the  Self]  has  become  confused 
thinking,  ‘What  must  all  this  be?  I  am  supposed  to  be 
eternally happy, why has all this come my way?’

The  laborers  are  doing  the  laborious  work,  and 
the  superintendents  remain  as  supervisors.  This  entire 
craftsmanship  is  of  the  pudgal,  but  the  confusion  is  of  the 
self. The confusion is due to the pressure of circumstances. 
The  circumstances  keep  changing  from  one  moment  to  the 
next.  The  former  ones  [circumstances]  leave  and  others 
come; there are countless circumstances.

Questioner:  In  our  job,  say  there  is  a  worker  who 
reports to us, and is not doing the work properly and we have 

[10] The Terminology Related to Pudgal

445

to let him go, then do we incur a liability or is it considered 
vyavasthit?

Dadashri: No, it is not like that. What liability? If you 
have abhorrence, then you would incur a liability. If one has 
attachment  or  abhorrence,  then  one  would  incur  a  liability. 
All  other  actions,  no  matter  what  they  are,  are  the  ‘play’  of 
the pudgal. If there is no attachment or abhorrence, then it is 
simply the ‘play’ of the pudgal. The pudgal are fighting with 
each other. Wherever there is attachment or abhorrence, there 
one incurs a liability. Therefore, You should check within to 
See  whether  you  have  abhorrence  towards  the  other  person 
or  not.  Check  this  much.  Moreover,  after  attaining  Gnan, 
abhorrence does not remain, that is for sure. And if abhorrence 
still  arises  within  you,  then  it  means  that  you  have  let  the 
worker go, therefore you incur a liability. Nevertheless, what 
kind  of  liability  is  it?  If  it  is  discharge  [abhorrence],  then 
you  incur  a  liability,  but  a  liability  in  the  form  of  discharge 
is not a grave liability. It is a [grave] liability only if there is 
attachment  or  abhorrence  [at  the  charge  level],  otherwise  it 
is not. While doing any activity, if attachment or abhorrence 
arises,  then  it  is  a  liability. A  wrong  or  bad  deed  can  never 
happen  without  abhorrence  underlying  in  us.  Good  deeds 
happen due to the underlying attachment. After attaining this 
Gnan, those deeds become separate [from Us, the Self].

Questioner:  The  doer  himself  has  become  separated 

entirely!

Dadashri:  And  if  even  the  slightest  of  abhorrence 
arises, then one will bind vengeance. ‘You’ can openly See 
even the slightest of abhorrence. ‘He has some abhorrence, 
otherwise this would not have happened to such an extent.’ 
‘You’  can  See  it  as  an  open  fact.  ‘You’  can  definitely  See 
all  of  its  attributes,  can’t  You!  Anything  that  exists  would 
have its own attributes, wouldn’t it? So, you have not let the 
worker go with abhorrence, have you?

446

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Questioner: No.

Dadashri: Then there is no problem. If he is not doing 
the  work...and  this  is  all  worldly  interaction,  isn’t  it?  In 
that,  the  one  who  is  letting  him  go  is  separate  and You  are 
separate. Isn’t the one who is letting him go separate?

Questioner: Yes.

Dadashri: That is called the ‘play’ of the pudgal. The 
pudgal  collide  with  each  other,  they  scold  each  other,  they 
fight with each other. The One who Sees that is the Knower, 
It  is  the  Self. And  the  moment  one  becomes  that  form  [as 
the  pudgal],  if  he  gets  involved  in  it,  then  he  will  suffer 
a  beating.  When  does  one  get  involved  in  it?  It  happens 
when  one  has  become  deeply  entangled  in  it,  when  he  has 
become  interwoven  into  those  thoughts.  If  He  becomes 
separate  from  that,  then  there  is  no  problem.  But  after  it 
[letting  go  of  the  person  with  abhorrence]  has  happened, 
You should tell Chandubhai, ‘Do pratikraman. You let that 
man go, so repent for that. Bring about a solution.’ Even if 
abhorrence  did  not  arise,  You  should  still  say  this  to  him. 
Then it will become clean! Don’t people add some ‘tinopol’ 
[cloth  whitener]  when  they  wash  their  clothes?  So,  for  Us, 
the  ‘tinopol’  [pratikraman]  is  free,  whereas  the  other  one 
has to be bought from the market.

Questioner: ‘My obeisance to the Lord of the fourteen 
worlds who as the Self is only the Seer, who Sees the pure 
Soul in all and the ‘wrestling’ [play] of the pudgal.’

Dadashri: This is all a ‘wrestling’ of the pudgal. The 
entire world is a ‘wrestling’ of the pudgal. In that ‘wrestling’, 
someone  may  raise  their  hand,  someone  may  hit  us  on  the 
head  with  their  hand;  it  is  all  simply  ‘wrestling’.  If  he  is 
hitting us, that too is ‘wrestling’.

It  is  all  entirely  in  the  hands  of  the  pudgal.  God  has 

[10] The Terminology Related to Pudgal

447

only  one  thing,  the  pure  applied  awareness  as  the  Self 
(shuddha  upayog).  It  is  fine  even  if  no  applied  awareness 
is placed on worldly life, but how can one understand this?

This  good  or  bad  that  you  see,  it  is  the  vibhaavik 
(unnatural; charged) state of the pudgal. Do not differentiate 
between the two, that this is good and this is bad. Those that 
are  immersed  in  duality  have  made  all  these  distinctions. 
These  are  all  wrong  beliefs  (vikalp).  The  One  who  is  free 
from all wrong beliefs (nirvikalpi) Sees both, the good and 
the bad, as unnatural states.

Like-dislike,  good-bad,  profit-loss;  who  created  all 
these dualities? Society did. There is no duality in the Lord’s 
eyes. If there are grains on this side and feces on this side, 
then from the Lord’s perspective, both are ‘material’. What 
does  the  Lord  refer  to  them  as?  ‘All  are  materials.’  [All  of 
this is nothing but pudgal.]

Except for the Self, Everything is Subject to the 
Pudgal!

It is the pudgal that interferes, it quarrels; the Self does 
not  have  anything  to  do  with  it. After  attaining  this  Gnan, 
One  can  understand  that  the  Self  is  vitaraag  (absolutely 
free from attachment and abhorrence), so why is it that the 
pudgal  quarrels?  It  does  not  do  as  You  wish.  Even  if  You 
have the desire, it does not do so. That happens, doesn’t it? 
Why  is  that?  This  pudgal  is  the  unfolding  of  the  karma  of 
the  past  life;  it  is  just  a  bundle  of  unfolding  karma.  When 
such  a  time  comes,  it  manifests.  When  the  time  comes,  it 
manifests. Amidst that, a person who is ignorant of the Self 
expresses the egoism of, “I am doing this.” He is not actually 
doing it; it is the karma that keeps unfolding. This body and 
everything  else  is  subject  to  the  unfolding  karma.  Hence, 
the  movement  of  the  hands  and  legs  is  subject  to  that. The 
intellect, mind, and all that are subject to the pudgal. Even 

448

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

the ego is subject to it, but it then gives rise to a new ego by 
claiming, “I am doing this.” What he believes is an illusion. 
Karma get bound through that, and then the world functions 
according to that karma. And after ‘we’ give you the Gnan, 
that  ego  of  doership  leaves  immediately,  thereafter  the  ego 
as the sufferer remains. So who does this quarrelling? This 
pudgal  does.  ‘You’  are  to  keep  Seeing  that.  This  [person] 
or  that  [person],  what  are  these  two  pudgals  doing?  Are 
they  fighting  or  are  they  doing  something  else?  ‘You’  are 
to  keep  Seeing  both.  Otherwise  new  karma  will  get  bound 
once again.

Questioner:  One  will  have  to  clear  all  of  the  pudgal 

parmanu; only then will one attain moksha, correct?

Dadashri: That will indeed happen. Once You reside 
in Your ‘home’ [as the Self] after becoming pure, then that 
[pudgal  parmanu]  will  become  clear  on  its  own.  If  you 
attempt to ‘do’ it, then it will not happen. The moment You 
shut all the doors and sit [prevail as the Self], it will continue 
to  go  out  on  its  own.  By  the  morning,  the  ‘hurricane’  will 
have  ended  and  everything  will  have  become  calm.  If  you 
take any part in it, then it will be ruined. Therefore, You do 
not have to ‘do’ anything. Just as nothing needs to be done 
in  the  process  of  dying.  It  is  like  that,  nothing  needs  to  be 
done  at  all.  If  You  are  sleeping  in  Your  ‘home’,  then  it  is 
cleared.

Do  not  stick  your  hand  in  the  effect.  The  body,  the 
mind,  speech,  and  body  are  just  an  effect,  what  is  there  to 
be done in that? So there is no need to do anything, is there!

One Believed the Pudgal to Be the Self!

All the grandeur is there, yet He has no interest in it. The 
grandeur is of the pudgal. How could it be of the Self? The 
pudgal  may  have  prosperity,  yet  One  does  not  get  involved 
in the pudgal, ‘Just look, this is the pudgal.’ Yet people [not 

[10] The Terminology Related to Pudgal

449

Self-realized] are interested in that only. Their mind, intellect, 
chit and ego dwell in that alone. Whereas some people [after 
attaining Gnan] are not interested in that at all.

Questioner: Dada, what is the reason that people get 

drawn towards the pudgal?

Dadashri:  One  believes  himself  to  be  the  pudgal. 
‘I  indeed  am  this  Chandubhai.’  So  then  the  pudgal  enters 
within  due  to  the  wrong  belief.  He  believes  that  he  is  the 
pudgal and feels that he indeed is this [the pudgal].

Questioner: He is not that and yet he believes himself 

to be the pudgal. What is the reason behind that?

Dadashri:  He  does  not  believe  himself  to  be  the 
pudgal. In fact, he says, “I am definitely the Self,” but he is 
referring to the pudgal as the Self. Who is he truly referring 
to as the Self? This pudgal. If he were to refer to the Self as 
the Self, then he would attain salvation!

Questioner: Yes, but why does he refer to the pudgal 

as the Self?

Dadashri:  Because  people  tell  him  so.  When  people 
tell  you,  “You  are  a  Jain,”  then  you  believe,  ‘I  am  a  Jain.’ 
When  people  say,  “You  are  this  lady’s  husband,”  then  you 
take  on  the  belief,  ‘I  am  the  husband.’  You  do  not  say,  “I 
am  the  Soul,”  do  you?  You  say,  “I  am  the  husband,”  don’t 
you? Therefore, that belief becomes established firmly. ‘We’ 
refer to that as a wrong belief. This psychological effect has 
overcome  him.  ‘We’  simply  break  that  wrong  belief,  ‘we’ 
fracture it. The Self does not enter the pudgal and the pudgal 
does not become the Self; it is simply a belief. Which is why 
‘we’  are  saying  that  there  is  no  Chetan  (Self)  whatsoever  in 
this physical body. Whatever work this physical body is doing, 
there is no such thing like Chetan in it whatsoever. But this is 
not something that can be spoken in public. The entire public 

450

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

would claim, “I am this indeed. I myself am Chetan.” It is not 
Chetan, yet it eats, it drinks, it reads the scriptures, it teaches 
the scriptures to others. In spite of it not being Chetan, it does 
all kinds of work as though it were Chetan.

The Body Is Like a Shadow

The  body  in  fact  arises  like  a  shadow.  When  you  do 
this [wave your hand] to a shadow and tell it, ‘Go away, go 
away’, what does it do? Does the shadow mimic you or does 
it go away? “Hey, I am doing this. Why are you mimicking 
me?”  So  this  body  latches  onto  you  like  a  shadow.  It  is  an 
image of the pudgal. Due to illusion we have believed that 
‘I  am  indeed  this’,  and  that  is  why  it  appears  to  be  like 
Chetan.  But  at  noon,  if  we  go  looking  for  the  shadow,  we 
won’t  be  able  to  find  one.  We  will  not  find  it  anywhere. 
Hey,  where  did  the  shadow  go?  It  got  absorbed.  When  it 
becomes noon, the sun reaches equilibrium. Similarly, when 
the  Self  prevails  in  equanimity,  that  [pudgal]  will  go  away 
immediately.  The  moment  One  prevails  in  equanimity,  it 
[the pudgal] goes away.

One finds his own gestures to be bitter, but they are of 
the pudgal, and the opinion is of the intellect. But they have 
been filled by oneself.

If  you  become  one  with  the  pudgal,  the  pudgal  is 
destructible, so you too have to become destructible. If You 
remain separate from the pudgal, then You are indestructible, 
You  will  realize  Your  immortality.  Due  to  the  sense  of 
doership, you become one with the pudgal.

Everything  that  is  included  in  ‘my’  is  pudgal;  it  is 
entirely  pudgal.  From  the  relative  viewpoint  you  have  to 
say, “This is my coat. This is mine.” You have to say ‘my’ 
and all that in worldly interactions, but if You don’t make it 
Yours [in the Real], nothing will touch You, will it! There’s 
no problem in saying that, but only if You are clear of what 

[10] The Terminology Related to Pudgal

451

is  Yours  [in  the  Real].  Nevertheless,  you  still  have  to  say 
it  in  worldly  interactions,  don’t  you?  If  a  policeman  asks, 
“Whose  house  is  this?”  Then  ‘we’  would  reply,  “It  is  our 
house.” But from within, [‘we’ Know that] it is not ‘ours’.

All  of  these  are  simply  effects  of  the  pudgal.  If Your 
bliss  and  niraakulta  (a  blissful  state  free  of  uneasiness  and 
agitation attained after Self-realization) is disturbed even to 
the  slightest,  then  that  is  an  effect  of  the  pudgal,  nothing 
else. One has taken the effect of the pudgal on himself [by 
believing], ‘This happened to me.’

The  pudgal  is  effective  by  its  inherent  nature.  It 
gives  two  kinds  of  effects.  It  gives  shata  (the  sensation  of 
pleasure) and it gives ashata (the sensation of pain). It gives 
these  two  effects  constantly.  Do  not  allow  these  effects  to 
touch  You.  ‘Your’  inherent  nature  is  such  that  neither  the 
sensation of pleasure affects You, nor does the sensation of 
pain  affect You.  ‘We’  may  say  things  out  aloud  in  order  to 
give everyone encouragement, “Goodness! You have grown 
up  nicely.”  ‘We’  do  say  this,  but  that  is  not  how  it  is  in 
‘our’  mind.  The  person  who  does  the  activity  has  certain 
expectations, ‘we’ fulfill those expectations.

When  the  sense  of  ownership  (swamipanu)  [over  the 
pudgal]  is  relinquished,  One  becomes  the  owner  of  the  Self. 
Have You experienced that You are not the owner of this body?

Questioner: Yes.

Dadashri: Have You experienced that You are not the 

owner of this mind?

Questioner: Yes.

Dadashri:  In  this  way You  will  experience  the  sense 
of  ownership  as  the  Self  (Swaswamipanu).  The  more  the 
sense  of  ownership  over  the  pudgal  gets  relinquished,  the 
more You will experience the sense of ownership as the Self.

452

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

The external conduct (vartan) and Gnan have nothing 
to  do  with  each  other.  Gnan  prevails  in  Its  own  nature  and 
the external conduct is of the pudgal. The external conduct 
may be good or bad; it is not pure.

One has believed the inherent nature of the pudgal to 
be one’s own and has set up residence there. So when would 
this ever get solved?

Who Is the Afflicted? Who Is the Knower?

Questioner:  When  the  pudgal  is  feeling  the  effect 
of  pleasure  and  pain,  Chandubhai  may  be  crying  and  ‘I’ 
am  Seeing  Chandubhai,  then  would  that  be  considered  as 
being separate at the experiential level or as being separate 
through words?

Dadashri:  At  the  experiential  level.  The  fact  that 
Chandubhai  is  affected,  means  that  it  is  a  weakness.  The 
dullness that Chandubhai exhibits is in the form of discharge, 
and no one has any choice in the discharge!

Lord  Mahavir  had  a  wooden  spike  pierce  him  here 
[through  his  ear].  So  for  those  six  to  eight  months  that  it 
remained [in his ear], what would the Lord’s facial expression 
have been like? It looked afflicted.

Questioner:  It  would  definitely  have  been  afflicted 

due to the pain!

Dadashri: Does that mean that karma adhered to Him? 
And  even  then,  a  solution  came  about.  The  karma  cleared 
away  completely  for  Him.  No  karma  adhered  to  Him  even 
though  He  was  afflicted.  This  is  because  He  as  the  Self  is 
not afflicted, the body is afflicted. Similarly, You as the Self 
are  not  involved  in  the  kashay  of  anger,  pride,  deceit  and 
greed,  it  is  the  pudgal.  The  pudgal  eventually  gets  cleared 
once  and  for  all.  It  should  definitely  get  discharged.  ‘You’ 
should not feel wearisome about it.

[10] The Terminology Related to Pudgal

453

All You have to do is See what You are a customer of. 

What are You a customer of?

Questioner: The Self.

Dadashri: Yes,  a  customer  of  the  pure  Soul.  In  spite 
of this, there is nothing wrong in Seeing the pudgal. Pudgal 
means pudgal.

Lord Mahavir Saw One Pudgal…

Ascetics,  renunciates  and  high-ranking  Jain  monks 
have been saying this for the last two thousand years. When 
a  baby  snake  hatches  from  its  egg  and  you  try  to  touch  it, 
it will immediately raise its hood towards you, even though 
it  has  yet  to  learn  how  to  be  a  snake.  Similarly,  the  sense 
organs  are  showing  their  effect  [raising  their  hood],  that  is 
the  inherent  nature  of  the  sense  organs.  You  may  say  that 
you  don’t  want  to  listen  to  something,  but  you  still  end  up 
hearing  it.  Even  if  you  don’t  want  to  look  at  something, 
you still end up seeing it. That is their inherent nature. Now 
these  sense  organs  are  pudgal,  they  are  made  of  parmanu. 
They  undergo  puran-galan. There  is  nothing  of  the  Self  in 
them.  The  Self  really  does  not  enjoy  or  suffer  the  effect. 
The  sense  organs  are  enjoying  or  suffering  the  effect,  but 
the developing I believes, ‘I am enjoying it.’ One expresses 
such  egoism  and  has  the  wrong  belief  of  ‘I  enjoyed  it.  I 
suffered the pain too. It affected me.’

Hence, it is not the Self who suffers the pain, the sense 
organs  do.  But  the  entanglement  of  ‘I  am  this’  has  arisen. 
Find  me  one  person  who  has  conquered  even  one  of  the 
sense organs!

In the worldly sense, no one has ever become jitendriya 
jina (one who has conquered the pleasures derived from the 
five  sense  organs).  ‘One’  can  become  jitendriya  jina  only 
if  they  attain  this  Gnan.  It  is  not  possible  to  conquer  the 

454

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

sense  organs  whilst  still  being  ignorant  of  the  Self.  That 
is  because  the  sense  organs  undergo  puran-galan  by  their 
inherent nature. The moment one sense organ is conquered, 
another one will erupt.

To  go  beyond  the  sense  organs  (atindriya  pratyaksh) 
is  the  skill  of  the  Self.  Everything  that  is  perceived  by  the 
sense  organs  is  the  skill  of  the  pudgal.  ‘We’  are  describing 
this after having Known and Seen it in absolute Knowledge 
(keval Gnan).

In this world, the pudgal alone is the gneya (an object 

to be Known).

Questioner: Are all the gneya in the form as pudgal?

Dadashri: Yes, they are not in the form as Parmanu, 
but  they  are  in  aggregate  form  (skandha).  Whatever  has 
undergone  puran-galan  is  gneya.  ‘You’  may  not  See  the 
puran that has occurred, but You can certainly See the galan. 
Pudgal refers to that which has undergone puran; just keep 
Seeing how it undergoes galan.

What  did  Lord  Mahavir  ultimately  See?  Whether  a 
person  appeared  to  be  crazy,  wise,  a  thief,  a  rascal,  a  liar, 
a  prostitute  or  a  chaste  woman,  He  only  Saw  the  same 
pudgal in all of them. Just as there are many types of gold 
jewelry,  but  you  don’t  see  that,  and  instead  you  see  only 
the gold; similarly, You shouldn’t See the prakruti (inherent 
characteristic traits) of people, instead You should be Seeing 
that  everyone  indeed  comprises  the  same  pudgal  only. 
Beyond that, You simply have to See your own pudgal, do 
not  See  the  pudgal  of  others.  Do  you  still  enjoy  watching 
movies? Don’t you go to the cinema?

Questioner: I have not gone for many years.

Dadashri: Then that is good. There are many types of 
scenery,  and  as  long  as  you  enjoy  looking  at  that,  then  all 

[10] The Terminology Related to Pudgal

455

that  is  the  same  as  liking  or  not  liking  a  woman.  The  One 
who  does  not  like  to  See  anything  on  the  outside  [in  the 
relative] and likes to See only all that which is within; that 
indeed is the pure Soul.

Bhojanalay (something worth enjoying; the place where 
puran takes place) and shaochalay (something worth letting 
go of; the place where galan takes place), puran-galan and 
Shuddhatma  (pure  Soul);  there  are  only  these  five  things. 
Is there any reference to strived (the sexual orientation as a 
female) in that? Do you or do you not perceive this person 
as a woman? This person is a woman, you would know that, 
wouldn’t you? Or would you forget that?

Questioner: I can’t forget that.

Dadashri: You can’t forget it, can you? Well then, you 

would be estranged from the Self to that extent!

Everything Besides the Pure Soul Is Pudgal!

Questioner: All of the activities that Dada does, as far 

as I understand, are all considered pudgal, aren’t they?

Dadashri:  Yes,  pudgal,  but  the  type  of  pudgal  that 
liberates. That pudgal has come to liberate you. It grants you 
a  complete  sense  of  freedom. All  the  efforts  that  it  makes 
are to liberate [others]. Everything that ‘we’ are doing right 
now, what is that for? To become free. This is the ultimate 
pudgal. All the efforts of the ultimate pudgal are going on. 
Everything that you can see is all coming to liberate, not to 
bind.

Questioner: This subtle body that goes, which part of 

it goes and how does it go? Please explain the process.

Dadashri: Where does it go?

Questioner:  The  Gnani  can  go  anywhere  through  the 
subtle body, to America, to Mumbai, everywhere. What is that?

456

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri: That is all pudgal. There is nothing else in 
that and it is something that is outside of One’s control. To 
believe that it is in one’s control is egoism.

Questioner: Many times you say, “We are able to go 

anywhere through the subtle body.”

Dadashri:  However  much  has  come  within  the 

evidence [of vyavasthit] will go.

Questioner: Yes, but what is that? Which part of this 

body goes?

Dadashri: The part of the pudgal.

Questioner:  So,  is  it  the  pure  Chetan?  When  Dada 
Bhagwan  becomes  present,  is  that  activity,  the  external 
activity based on the pure Chetan?

Dadashri:  It  is  not  based  on  anything;  it  is  a  natural 
activity. Those are the activities that happen naturally due to 
the attraction of the subtle body within.

Questioner: But is that included in the pudgal part?

Dadashri:  It  is  all  considered  pudgal.  Everything 
besides the pure Chetan is pudgal. The world believes it to 
be  Chetan.  What  the  world  believes  to  be  Chetan,  there  is 
no Chetan in that at all.

Questioner:  So,  what  about  when  one  visualizes  the 

Self within?

Dadashri: That is all a part of the pudgal, not of the 

Self.

Questioner: What about when a saint has a vision of 
the celestial goddess (mataji) and she speaks? What is that?

Dadashri:  That  is  the  overt  pudgal,  the  completely 

overt pudgal, the gross pudgal.

[10] The Terminology Related to Pudgal

457

Questioner: So, such temporary states of the pudgal, 

are these pudgals closer to Chetan?

Dadashri:  As  one  comes  closer  to  [realizing]  Chetan, 
the pudgal starts to become subtler day-by-day. So, ours would 
have  all  started  to  become  subtler.  Those  saints  would  be 
insisting unduly in front of the celestial goddess, whereas these 
people with the subtle pudgal would not insist or have undue 
insistence. The former are considered to have gross [pudgal].

Questioner: So based on that, You are saying that all 

these people have not yet ‘reached’ [realized] Chetan?

Dadashri:  Not  a  single  person  has  ‘reached’  Chetan 
yet. This world has not even ‘reached’ the shadow of Chetan.

Questioner: The  pudgal  of  the  Gnani  Purush  is  also 

divine, is it not?

Dadashri:  Of  course!  If  He  were  to  simply  touch 
someone, that person’s work would be done. And even more 
divine  than  His  is  the  pudgal  of  a  Tirthankar  Lord.  ‘They’ 
have the topmost pudgal in the entire universe!

Questioner:  But  one  would  never  get  to  see  that, 
would  he?  One  would  not  be  able  to  see  that  through  the 
physical  eyes,  would  he?  Can  a  more  divine  pudgal  or  the 
most divine pudgal be seen through the physical eyes?

Dadashri: Yes,  they  can  be  seen. The  pudgal  for  the 
most  part  will  be  seen  by  others  only.  What  other  kind  of 
‘eyes’  [vision]  do  people  have?  If  people  cannot  even  see 
Their  pudgal,  then  what  is  the  point  in  Them  becoming  a 
Tirthankar?

Questioner: But is that possible in the current era of 

the time cycle?

Dadashri: There are no Tirthankars in this era of the 

time cycle!

458

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

In Kaliyug, These Are Useful Scriptures…

The  nimit  (one  who  is  instrumental  in  a  process)  is 
pudgal and the one with upadaan (spiritual development) is 
also pudgal.

Questioner: As a matter of fact, each and every word 
of Yours will end up creating the new scriptures of Kaliyug 
(current era of the time cycle characterized by lack of unity 
in thought, speech and action).

Dadashri:  These  are  indeed  the  new  scriptures. And 

later on, people will only make use of these.

Questioner: The first clarification that You gave was 
regarding pudgal, that it refers to puran-galan. I don’t think 
that anyone after Lord Mahavir has understood this concept, 
this clarification of puran-galan that You gave.

Dadashri:  No,  but  how  would  people  understand 
this  without  the  Gnani  Purush?  People  are  not  capable  of 
this  at  all.  People  keep  saying  [the  word]  ‘pudgal’.  What 
is  pudgal?  The  response  is,  “The  body.”  So,  another  name 
for the body is pudgal. I spent an extensive amount of time 
over the course of twenty years to discover this, that this is 
pudgal and all these are other words, and this is pudgal, and 
how can God be found, and all things like that.

This word ‘pudgal’ is a ground-breaking discovery. So, 
even if you simply understand that this is puran-galan, then 
it is more than enough. This is puran-galan and You are the 
pure  Soul.  So  if  You  See  what  undergoes  puran-galan  and 
subtract  all  of  that  out,  then  You  are  indeed  the  pure  Soul. 
Now,  people  surely  do  not  have  the  understanding  to  this 
extent, do they? That is why they need to come to the Gnani. 
By teaching them this, by talking about such things, they will 
understand  [and  say],  ‘What You  are  saying  is  correct,’  but 
then they find it difficult to put it into practice, isn’t it!

[10] The Terminology Related to Pudgal

459

Questioner: Dada, the meaning of the word ‘pudgal’ 
has actually been written in the scriptures in this way, hasn’t 
it? You  are  saying  that,  “‘We’  discovered  its  meaning  after 
twenty years.”

Dadashri: ‘Our’ meaning was written recently; it was 
all recently published in the Aptavani. Otherwise, this had not 
been disclosed, had it! People have understood it; they have 
come  to  know  it  from  these  new  books  [Aptavani].  During 
the  discussions  in  satsang,  this  concept  was  discussed. 
People did not actually know what pudgal is, they just kept 
saying [the word], “Pudgal, pudgal.”

Questioner:  Dada,  which  year  was  this?  When  did 

you begin the endeavor to understand the word pudgal?

Dadashri: This started in 1932. I had not understood 
[the  word]  ‘pudgal’  in  the  years  1940,  1942.  I  had  not 
understood it even in 1945.

Questioner: Dada, there is a difference in the pudgal 
that You  are  talking  about,  the  entire mishrachetan  and  the 
pudgal that undergoes puran-galan, which those people talk 
about, isn’t there?

Dadashri:  They  all  do  talk  about  the  pudgal  and 
puran-galan,  but  they  do  not  understand  what  the  words 
actually  mean.  They  do  not  understand  any  of  that.  Right 
now,  even  the  high-ranking  Jain  monks  do  not  understand 
this.

Priority Only of the Self!

Questioner:  Everything  in  worldly  life  (sansaar)  is 

pudgal indeed.

Dadashri:  It  is  all  nothing  but  pudgal.  But  what  is 
the  intention  behind  referring  to  it  as  pudgal  alone?  The 
Gnani says that all this is a mixture, but the intention behind 

460

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

referring  to  it  as  pudgal  alone  is  that,  our  concern  is  only 
with  the  Self,  isn’t  it? And  if  we  try  to  clarify  these  other 
things,  then  one  will  forget  That,  one  will  forget  the  Self. 
That  is  why  the  Gnani  Purush  refers  to  all  that  as  pudgal 
alone.  There  are  actually  five  eternal  elements  altogether 
[referring  to  the  five  eternal  elements  that  remain  once  the 
worldly-interacting  self  or  the  developing  ‘I’  is  separated], 
but He refers to that as pudgal only. This is the Self and all 
of that is only one thing, the pudgal.

Questioner:  These  five  eternal  elements  should  be 

Seen, shouldn’t they?

Dadashri:  Right  now  there  is  no  need  to  See  them. 
Right now See only the Self. ‘See’ that which is made up of 
the five eternal elements.

Questioner: What are each of the five eternal elements 

doing?

Dadashri:  Movement  is  not  the  inherent  nature  of 
Pudgal; it is another’s inherent nature. But put everything in 
the [category of] Pudgal, because that is not the Self. ‘Your’ 
concern is with the Self.

And  in  this  body,  there  are  only  two  things,  the  Self 
and  the  Pudgal.  The  one  who  learns  how  to  distinguish 
between the Self and the Pudgal, if he understands this, then 
he will ‘find’ [realize] the Self. But man does not have such 
capacity, it is beyond the intellect of man. Where discussions 
beyond  the  intellect  take  place,  that  is  where  this  concept 
lies. So one may go up to a certain extent in distinguishing 
[between  the  two],  but  he  does  not  know  how  to  do  it  [in 
exactness]. That is why this is a task for the Gnani Purush. 
The  Lord  Himself  resides  within  the  Gnani  Purush.  What 
cannot be accomplished through His grace! Is there anything 
in this world that cannot be accomplished through His grace!



[11]
Pudgal Bhaav

Bhaav Is a Desire-Based Tendency

Questioner: What is this ‘pudgal bhaav’?

Dadashri:  Right  now,  you  will  not  have  the  thought 
of eating jalebi (a crispy, deep-fried Indian sweet soaked in 
sugar syrup). But if you are walking through the market and 
someone  is  making  fresh  jalebi  and  you  smell  its  aroma,  a 
bhaav (inner intent) of wanting to eat jalebi will arise within 
you.  That  is  called  a  pudgal  bhaav.  The  jalebi  makes  you 
have the bhaav. Does it, or does it not?

Questioner: It does, it does.

Dadashri: There was nothing as long as you had not 
seen  the  jalebi. The  moment  you  see  it,  it  makes  you  have 
the bhaav.

Questioner: What if one uses the bhaav of the self for 

the pudgal?

Dadashri: Any bhaav done by the self is itself pudgal. 
The  bhaav  itself  is  pudgal.  A  desire-based  tendency  is 
referred to as bhaav. The bhaav is itself pudgal.

Can  the  gold  and  copper  in  a  piece  of  jewellery  be 

separated?

462

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Questioner: They can.

Dadashri:  And  once  they  have  been  separated,  if 
you  see  a  little  bit  of  rust,  you  would  know  that  it  is  not  a 
property of gold, but of copper. Similarly, ‘we’ have shown 
You  the  Gnan  of  which  bhaav  belongs  to  the  pudgal  and 
which bhaav belongs to the Self.

There are two kinds of bhaav within. What are all these 
bhaav of? They are all of the pudgal (paudgalik), not of the 
Self.  That  is  why  ‘we’  have  said,  “Amidst  all  the  intents 
that tend to anoint (lepayamaan bhaav) of the mind, speech, 
and  body,  ‘I’  remain  totally  unanointed.”  The  lepayamaan 
bhaav arise within, all kinds of lepayamaan bhaav arise. At 
the  age  of  sixty,  one  may  even  have  a  lepayamaan  bhaav 
arise  within  that  ‘Although  I  have  practiced  brahmacharya 
(celibacy  through  the  mind,  speech  and  body)  for  thirty 
years  but  now  I  want  to  get  married.’  Such  a  thought  may 
arise at the age of sixty, but that is not the bhaav of the Self, 
it is the bhaav of the pudgal. If the bhaav to steal arises in 
a rich person, does that make him a thief? No, the bhaav is 
arising  within.  The  puran  (charging)  you  had  done  [in  the 
past life] will undergo galan (discharge); at that time don’t 
get confused. Whatever bhaav you had charged will certainly 
not  refrain  from  discharging.  And  with  whatever  bhaav 
you  had  charged  the  karma,  the  discharge  will  definitely 
happen in accordance with that very bhaav. So, at the time 
of  discharge,  even  though,  You  have  Gnan  today,  but  that 
discharge  will  take  place  according  to  the  bhaav  that  was 
charged  previously,  won’t  it!  The  karma  that  were  bound 
in  a  state  of  ignorance,  will  certainly  continue  discharging, 
won’t they!

The  bhaav  that  arise  of  the  mind,  speech  and  body, 
meaning of the pudgal, such as, ‘I like the taste of this’ and ‘I 
like the taste of that’, those bhaav are of the pudgal. Based on 
that, the [worldly-interacting] self does its own bhaav, which 

[11] Pudgal Bhaav

463

in turn gives rise to worldly life (sansaar). Whatever bhaav 
of the mind, speech and body that arise, those bhaav are all 
of the pudgal. The one who understands just this much, his 
[spiritual] work is done. If one has the bhaav to eat undhiyu 
(a  Gujarati  mixed  vegetable  curry)  or  the  bhaav  to  attend  a 
wedding, those bhaav are all of the pudgal.

What  science  says  is  that,  say  this  item  is  made  of 
gold and copper; then the bhaav (properties) of gold do not 
enter into copper, and the bhaav of copper do not enter into 
gold. Even though they are together, they are such that they 
remain in their own bhaav.

This ascetic claims, “I have renounced, I have left my 
wife  and  children.”  To  that,  the  Lord  says,  “What  do  You 
as  the  Self  have  to  do  with  that?  These  bhaav  are  of  the 
pudgal.”  Now,  this  is  all  happening  in  ‘the  shop  across  the 
street’,  and  one  believes,  ‘I  did  a  lot.’  But  the  Lord  says, 
“No, You have not done anything.”

Renouncing  the  home,  the  wife  and  the  children,  all 
those are the bhaav of the pudgal. Getting married is also a 
bhaav of the pudgal. One believes the bhaav of the pudgal to 
be his own, and that is what causes this worldly life to persist. 
This is because he believes, ‘No one besides me can do the 
bhaav. Everything else is jada (lifeless; inanimate).’ But he 
does  not  know  that  these  bhaav  are  of  jada  (the  inanimate 
matter). Even these bhaav themselves are inanimate. If one 
understands  that  these  bhaav  are  Chetan  (living;  animate; 
that of the Knower-Seer) and these bhaav are jada (lifeless; 
inanimate), then he is free.

What  are  the  bhaav  of  the  pudgal  like?  After  they 
arise, they leave. The bhaav that does not go away is Yours. 
Pudgal  means  whatever  bhaav  have  been  filled  in,  they 
will undergo galan. As they are going to leave, they are the 
bhaav of the pudgal, they are not Yours.

464

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

This is a very subtle point, isn’t it!

Questioner: One can only be considered as pure Soul 
when the pudgal bhaav (the belief that ‘I am the pudgal’) is 
destroyed, right?

Dadashri:  Yes,  the  moment  the  pudgal  bhaav  is 

destroyed, One becomes the pure Soul.

Questioner:  But  that  never  gets  destroyed,  right! 

When we are poked with a needle, it certainly hurts us.

Dadashri:  No,  the  fact  that  it  hurts  is  a  different 
thing.  It  does  not  hurt  the  Self  at  all,  it  hurts  the  one  who 
has  the  pudgal  bhaav.  In  this  case,  even  the  mishrachetan 
(developing  I  with  the  wrong  belief  of  ‘I  am  Chandubhai’) 
is  ultimately  nothing  but  the  pudgal.  It  is  indeed  the 
mishrachetan  at  work  here,  isn’t  it;  and  that  is  nothing  but 
the pudgal.

It  is  definitely  pudgal,  but  as  long  as  one  does  not 
have Gnan, it is considered chetan (the self). This is because 
through the egoism he believes, ‘I am this’; that is an aaropit 
bhaav (false attribution of the belief that ‘I am Chandubhai’). 
So after attaining the Knowledge of the Self, the bhaav goes 
away; the pudgal bhaav itself goes away in that instant. The 
[developing] ‘I’ no longer remains the owner of the pudgal. 
So where the developing ‘I’ Himself is no longer its owner, 
what concern does He have with it?

‘We’ Go to ‘Our’ Home...

Questioner:  Attachment  and  abhorrence  no  longer 
times,  abhaav  (dislike;  discharge 

arise,  however,  at 
abhorrence) arises.

Dadashri: That is fine. The main thing that concerns 
You is that there is no attachment and abhorrence, whereas 
abhaav is the inherent nature of the pudgal. In some places, 

[11] Pudgal Bhaav

465

bhaav (like; discharge attachment) may arise and in others, 
abhaav  may  arise,  but You  no  longer  have  attachment  and 
abhorrence.

To not have attachment and abhorrence is Your dharma 

(true nature). Abhaav and bhaav are the pudgal’s dharma.

Everything  has  been  ruined  because  one  has  not 
understood  the  exact  meaning  of  raag  (attachment).  One 
believes it to be attachment when he has bhaav for someone 
and  abhorrence  when  he  has  abhaav  for  someone.  But  this 
bhaav  and  abhaav  is  the  inherent  nature  of  the  pudgal. 
The attraction that occurs in the home, it is the body being 
attracted; that is not at all the inherent nature of the Self.

Questioner: Is it considered vyavasthit when bhaav or 

abhaav arise for something?

Dadashri: Bhaav and abhaav are definitely subject to 
vyavasthit.  ‘You’  just  have  to  See  them.  They  are  pudgal 
bhaav;  bhaav  arises  and  leaves  subject  to  vyavasthit.  The 
abhaav  that  occurs  is  in  accordance  with  vyavasthit.  ‘You’ 
should also See that; then it will go away. Thereafter, if You 
do not challenge it, there is no problem. If you interfere in 
it,  it  will  stay  and  lay  a  claim  against  you,  ‘We  are  on  our 
path, you go on yours. Why are you interfering with us? You 
go on your path of becoming vitaraag (absolutely detached). 
We  are  going  on  our  path  of  puran-galan.’  What  is  their 
path? That of puran-galan. Whatever abhaav one has filled 
in,  that  abhaav  will  unfold  and  subsequently  leave.  The 
abhaav  that  has  undergone  puran  will  certainly  unfold  as 
abhaav at the time of galan. It will then manifest as abhaav 
and  leave.  ‘You’  have  to  keep  Seeing  that.  Based  on  that, 
You  should  understand  that  the  abhaav  you  had  filled  in 
is  what  is  coming  out.  If  you  had  filled  bhaav,  then  bhaav 
would  come  out;  but  they  will  both  ‘bite’  you.  ‘You’  may 
See one to be bigger and the other to be smaller, but You are 

466

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

indeed Seeing both of them. Therefore, You should bid them 
farewell and remain vitaraag (absolutely detached).

All You need to do is become vitaraag. All other bhaav 
that are Seen are of the pudgal. The pudgal is going on its 
path  and  You  are  going  on  Your  path.  It  will  not  interfere 
with  You  and  You  should  not  interfere  with  it.  They  [the 
bhaav] will automatically leave on their own.

They Are All Pudgal Bhaav

Questioner: One situation arises due to the unfolding 
of  karma,  and  another  situation  arises  due  to  the  bhaav  of 
the Self. So, how can we know whether it has happened due 
to  the  unfolding  of  karma  or  due  to  the  bhaav  of  the  Self? 
What are their characteristics?

recognize  both  of 

Dadashri:  One  can 

them. 
Approximately  ten  thousand  people  [those  who  have  taken 
Gnan]  would  be  able  to  recognize  that,  ‘This  is  a  pudgal 
bhaav that has come. This is a jada bhaav (the intent of the 
non-Self;  the  intents  that  are  lifeless)  and  this  is  a  Chetan 
bhaav  (bhaav  of  the  Self).’  You  would  recognize  both, 
wouldn’t you?

They can be differentiated immediately. Both the tracks 
continue to flow completely separately, continuously, all day 
long, and both are Seen as separate. When [discharge] anger 
erupts, are You not able to See it as separate? Are You able 
to See it as completely separate? And what is Your bhaav at 
that time? At that time, the bhaav of the Self is non-violent 
(ahimsak) and on the outside, the anger is discharging. Isn’t 
that a wonder!

The  bhaav,  the  pudgal  bhaav  that  arise  within  are 
considered  sansaar  bhaav  (worldly  intents).  All  kinds  of 
bhaav arise within; nonetheless, all of those are pudgal bhaav. 
All such bhaav that arise and then dissipate are considered a 

[11] Pudgal Bhaav

467

part of pudgal bhaav. If you latch on to them by saying, “It 
arose in me,” then you will have to suffer a beating.

Questioner: But the pudgal bhaav that arise, the ones 
that We Know, are they in the form of charge or discharge?

Dadashri: In the form of discharge.

Questioner: Is that for any kind [of bhaav], regardless 

of whether a good one or a bad one arises?

Dadashri: [The distinction between] ‘Good’ and ‘bad’ 
has  been  made  by  society;  The  Lord  does  not  make  such 
a  distinction.  In  fact,  [the  distinction  between]  ‘good’  and 
‘bad’ is different based on the society an individual belongs 
to. We consider the slaughtering of a goat as demerit karma, 
whereas others do not. So this ‘good’ and ‘bad’ is a societal 
arrangement. As  far  as  the  Lord  is  concerned,  it  is  all  the 
same. When one wants to attain liberation, there is no need 
to see whether the thoughts are good or bad. Yes, if someone 
is being hurt due to your thoughts, then You have to tell file 
one,  ‘Hey,  you  can  still  repent. Ask  for  forgiveness.’  Your 
only  concern  should  be  that  no  one  gets  hurt.  There  is  no 
need  for  you  to  hurt  anyone.  It  does  not  suit  you.  What’s 
more, it is not possible to attain liberation after having hurt 
someone. No one should be hurt to the slightest extent.

All  the  thoughts  that  arise,  they  are  all  the  bhaav  of 
the pudgal. The entire day, people are functioning based on 
the bhaav of the pudgal, but they believe those bhaav to be 
of Chetan, that is all.

‘He is poor, so I will help him’, ‘It is like this’, ‘It is 
like  that’;  these  are  all  pudgal  bhaav.  The  Lord  does  not 
accept  that.  They  [the  pudgal  bhaav]  are  gneya  (objects  to 
be Known). If they were the bhaav of Chetan, then the Lord 
would  accept  it.  Before  Gnan,  even  you  believed  that  they 
were of Chetan [such as], ‘I had a thought!’

468

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Questioner: In fact, when one says, “I had a thought”, 

it indeed latches on to him.

Dadashri: Now, what does the Kramik knowledge of 

today say? That all of this should stop.

Questioner: Does stopping it mean to keep suppressing 

it?

Dadashri:  One  struggles  terribly  to  stop  it,  but  that 
is  not  possible.  One  will  only  make  progress  if  he  can 
distinguish  between  Gnan  and  agnan  (relative  knowledge). 
But  if  he  accepts  agnan  by  considering  it  to  be  ‘his  own’, 
then  he  will  not  succeed.  ‘I  had  a  thought,’  the  Christians 
say this, the Muslims say this and even the Jains say this. Is 
there any difference between what is said by the Christians, 
the Muslims and the Jains? You used to say the same thing, 
didn’t you? ‘I am the one having thoughts.’

Questioner: Yes.

Dadashri:  Then  they  also  say,  “Why  am  I  getting 

violent thoughts?” These are all pudgal bhaav.

Questioner: The pudgal bhaav have been there since 

time immemorial.

Dadashri:  This  world  is  indeed  nothing  but  pudgal 
bhaav since time immemorial. So many pudgal bhaav tend 
to arise within such as, ‘This wretched person is worthless’, 
‘He is like this’, ‘He is like that’, ‘I will do this’, ‘I will do 
that’.

Questioner: Yes, that happens, that does happen.

Know Them, But Do Not Listen To Them!

Dadashri:  These  jada  bhaav,  these  prakruti  bhaav 
(intents of the non-Self), they keep jumping around within. 
Now,  You  certainly  do  not  have  the  right  to  listen  [be 

[11] Pudgal Bhaav

469

influenced  by;  pay  heed]  to  them.  ‘You’  should  only  listen 
to Chetan bhaav. ‘You’ cannot listen to jada bhaav.

Questioner:  We  cannot  listen  to  them  or  we  should 

not listen to them, Dada?

Dadashri: ‘You’ can certainly listen to them, but You 
should  let  them  go  [by  understanding],  ‘These  jada  bhaav 
are not Mine. This is not My Real form.’

Questioner: They  keep  jumping  around  inside. They 

jump around a lot.

Dadashri:  The  lepayamaan  bhaav  are  jada  bhaav, 
they  are  praakrut  bhaav  (intents  of  the  non-Self).  [Amidst 
them,]  ‘I’  remain  totally  unanointed  (nirlep).  So,  all  these 
that you are talking about are jada bhaav, they are achetan 
(inanimate; lifeless). They may deceive you, but You should 
not listen to them at all, all You have to do is Know them. 
They will keep on jumping around on their own. They will 
kick up a commotion. This happens to ‘us’ too!

Questioner: It happens to You too?

Dadashri:  Yes,  but  ‘we’  have  Known  that  these  are 
jada bhaav. So ‘we’ do not pay any attention to them. ‘You’ 
should only pay attention to the Chetan bhaav.

Questioner: So You are attentive to the Chetan bhaav, 

not to the others.

Dadashri:  ‘We’  do  not  have  anything  to  do  with  the 
others.  Once  You  have  become  the  Self,  once  You  have 
become  the  pure  Soul,  what  connection  do  You  have  with 
the  others?  The  entire  world  is  in  confusion  due  to  jada 
bhaav.  People  do  not  Know  that  ‘I  am  the  Self  and  these 
are jada’; they do not have such Knowledge.

‘We’  have  made  the  separation  for  You,  otherwise 
those jada bhaav would harass you. ‘You’ should tell them, 

470

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

‘Who  are  you  all  to  tell  me  anything?  Who  are  you  who 
have  newly  arisen  to  oppose  me? Who  are  you  to  give  me 
proof?  I  am  the  one  who  gets  Dada’s  authorizing  signature 
on  the  deed,  so  who  are  you  newly  arisen  to  have  come 
here?’ ‘You’ have signed the deed Yourself, so then who is 
Your boss? Can there be a boss over this boss?

Questioner:  This  happened  recently,  so  I  told  them, 
‘Dada  has  said  it,  so  who  are  you?  Get  out.’  Nevertheless, 
they still arise.

Dadashri: Yes,  so  they  are  jada  bhaav.  ‘You’  cannot 
listen to them at all, not even for a moment! The jada bhaav 
will  show  You  this  and  that.  Why  are  You  getting  scared? 
They are not Yours! They harass people a lot. Even though 
You have signed [the deed], they will tell You, ‘Tear it up.’ 
They will even say, ‘Hey, do you want to ruin me? Who do 
you think you are?’ Those are called jada bhaav. They arise 
for you, don’t they?

Questioner: They arise in great numbers.

Dadashri: A  lot  of  them  arise,  don’t  they? A  woman 
immolated herself in front of this man’s house. He saw her 
on  fire.  He  cannot  forget  that  image.  Now  tell  me,  what 
difficulty would that create for him?

Questioner: Moreover, thoughts keep arising that, ‘If 

I die, what will happen to my wife and children?’

Dadashri:  As  she  was  burning,  she  was  yelling  and 
in  agony.  He  saw  that  scene;  he  bore  witness  to  that.  This 
can  only  be  witnessed  by  someone  with  tremendous  merit 
karma, right? It’s not as if everyone would get an opportunity 
to witness that! He bore witness to it because he must have 
had such a karmic account. But You don’t need to be afraid. 
‘You’ have Dada’s Gnan.

Let  all  those  [scenes]  be  Seen  and  usually  there  is  a 

[11] Pudgal Bhaav

471

time  for  them  to  be  Seen,  maybe  between  two  and  three 
o’clock, so they will automatically arise at that time. Then, 
after  four  o’clock,  there  will  be  nothing  at  all.  Some  days, 
they may arise for three hours and other days they may arise 
for two hours. They do not remain the entire day. Are they 
present the entire day?

Questioner: No.

Dadashri:  So  they  are  jada  bhaav.  Now,  this  man  is 
bound  to  feel  scared.  That’s  because  he  keeps  seeing  it  as 
if  she  is  burning  right  now!  He  can  see  her  screaming  and 
in  torment;  he  can  see  all  of  that. Whatever  he  had  seen  is 
exactly  what  he  keeps  seeing.  Now  tell  me,  how  can  that 
fear  go  away?  It  would  take  time  to  leave,  wouldn’t  it? At 
least You don’t have to deal with anything like that.

Questioner:  But  even  though  Dada  is  watching  over 
me, I still get shaken up a bit. As Dada is watching over me, 
I should become strong, shouldn’t I?

Dadashri:  So  all  is  not  lost.  Once  You  understand 
this point, You will become strong. This point came to light 
only  today,  didn’t  it!  ‘We’  kept  wondering,  ‘What  kind  of 
thoughts must be arising within? Thoughts are normally not 
like  this,  are  they!’  And  upon  investigating,  ‘we’  realized, 
‘You  have  actually  become  entangled  in  the  jada  bhaav. 
Otherwise  it  would  not  affect  you  to  such  an  extent!’  If  it 
lasts for a couple of days, then ‘we’ would speak to you and 
it would all go away. But these jada bhaav are such that no 
one can remove them.

If  someone  were  disturbing  the  entire  satsang,  ‘we’ 
would tell him, “Hey you worthless person, we won’t allow 
this here.” In order to reduce the disruption to satsang, ‘we’ 
would  say  this  with  vitaraagata  (absolute  detachment). 
Nevertheless,  even  afterwards,  all  kinds  of  commotion 
would  arise  within  like,  ‘He  is  worthless,  he  is  a  very  bad 

472

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

person, he is like this and that.’ So to that, ‘we’ would say, 
‘Consider him [the one who opposes you] your benefactor.’ 
With  that,  everything  becomes  silent  [within].  Didn’t  ‘we’ 
tell  you  earlier  on,  that  if  we  ourselves  call  someone  bad, 
that is what they want, and the ‘dogs’ [jada bhaav] will start 
‘barking’  non-stop.  Because  there  are  all  kinds  of  ‘dogs’ 
within.  The  entire  world  is  indeed  entangled  in  this  itself, 
the jada bhaav! One himself is the Self, yet the entire world 
is entangled in jada bhaav. So ‘we’ are actually setting You 
free from them.

Look,  this  mahatma  just  came  back  from  a  month-
long  pilgrimage,  but  has  He  been  disturbed  at  all?  He  says 
that  He  could  see  Dada  everywhere.  This  is  because  He 
had  understood  this  point,  that  in  this,  besides  these  [jada 
bhaav],  there  is  nothing  else.  So  these  are  jada  bhaav.  If 
they were Your bhaav, then it would be a different matter.

Questioner: Should we only listen to Chetan bhaav?

Dadashri: ‘You’ should listen to Chetan bhaav. ‘You’ 

can never listen to jada bhaav.

Questioner:  Now  You  say,  ‘He  is  a  benefactor.’  But 

people ask us, ‘In what way is he a benefactor?’

Dadashri:  As  you  had  called  him  ‘worthless’,  they 
[the jada bhaav] will keep saying negative things about him, 
that  is  why  you  have  to  say,  “He  is  a  benefactor.”  So You 
should Know that because you said something negative, all 
these ‘dogs’ have started barking. You spoke negatively only 
because  it  was  necessary  to  get  rid  of  him,  because  of  the 
difficulty  that  was  arising  due  to  him.  However,  you  don’t 
have  permanent  attachment  or  abhorrence  towards  him. 
But  then  those  jada  bhaav  make  you  have  attachment  and 
abhorrence.  They  will  say,  ‘He  is  like  this  and  he  is  like 
that.’  So  then  ‘we’  tell  them,  ‘He  is  actually  a  benefactor.’ 
That is when they all become silent.

[11] Pudgal Bhaav

473

If  you  say,  ‘This  man  is  actually  a  benefactor’  right 
from  the  start,  then  they  will  not  say  anything  negative 
about  him.  However,  if  you  say,  ‘He  is  being  partial’  then 
they  will  start  talking  [negatively]  in  great  amounts.  That 
is  indeed  the  work  of  jada.  Not  only  will  it  cast  a  net  on 
you,  but  it  will  also  trap  you  completely. That  is  why  ‘we’ 
have  cautioned  everyone  to  beware  of  jada  bhaav. Amidst 
all the lepayamaan bhaav (intents that tend to anoint) of the 
mind, speech and body, ‘I’ remain totally unanointed. They 
are known as lepayamaan bhaav. Even if you don’t want to 
be anointed, they will anoint you.

Aren’t  there  people  here  who  are  very  clever  and 
manipulative? Even if you don’t want to drink tea, they will 
only let you go after making sure that you drink it. Hey, you 
did  something  outside  of  my  authority?  Even  if  you  don’t 
want  to  give  five  rupees,  they  will  make  you  pledge  five 
hundred to their fund.

They  will  plead  with  you,  convince  you,  do  this,  do 
that and then leave. Now, it is because you entertained those 
lepayamaan bhaav that you did not get your way.

Questioner:  It  is  indeed  due  to  that  incident  of 
suffering that I have come to you. Had the incident not taken 
place, I would not have come here.

Dadashri: Yes, so imagine how beneficial that incident 
has become for you, otherwise you would have continued to 
struggle in vain.

Questioner: The jada bhaav within are such that they 

show the other person to be at fault.

Dadashri: It is when you say, ‘He is at fault’, when it 
is your desire to see him as being at fault, that they [the jada 
bhaav] engulf you. Otherwise, if you say, ‘Actually, he is a 
very good man,’ then they will stop. Even ‘we’ have to take 

474

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

such  an  adjustment  sometimes!  ‘We’  usually  do  not  have 
these  [jada  bhaav  arising],  but  it  does  happen  sometimes 
for ‘us’. But ‘we’ are familiar with them, so ‘we’ recognize 
them,  ‘Wow! Where  did  you  jada  bhaav  come  from?  I  am 
removing  everyone’s  jada  bhaav  and  you  have  come  here 
to my home?’

If  You  succeed  in  this  spiritual  Science,  Your  work 
is  done.  Then  prarabdha  (destiny;  effect  of  past  karma) 
will  certainly  continue  to  help.  For  a  short  while,  it  may 
sometimes not go as thought, but thereafter it will definitely 
continue to help You.

Questioner:  That  is  indeed  where  One  needs  to  do 

extraordinary spiritual effort (parakram), right?

Dadashri: Swapurusharth (the Real effort to progress 
towards  the  absolute  Self  after  Self-realization)  normally 
is  with  Swaparakram  (extraordinary  effort  as  the  Self  after 
Self-realization  to  break  certain  entrenched  habits  of  the 
self).

Questioner:  After  receiving  Gnan,  One  should  do 
Purusharth  for  four  to  five  years,  but  now  One  should  do 
parakram.

Dadashri:  At  that  time,  One  should  ensure  that  the 
Gnan  does  not  get  ruined.  With  great  difficulty,  One  has 
protected  the  Gnan,  One  has  perfected  the  [understanding 
of]  Gnan,  so  He  should  do  parakram  to  make  sure  It  does 
not  get  ruined.  The  ‘steamer  ship’  will  certainly  sail  very 
well, but when it is rocking back and forth, that is when One 
will understand It’s [the Gnan’s] value.

Questioner:  But  once  He  comes  into  parakram,  His 

level [of experience of Gnan] will increase greatly.

Dadashri: ‘His’ level will increase; His level will go 

very high.

[11] Pudgal Bhaav

475

Questioner:  Twelve  months  ago,  pratikraman  was 
happening upon seeing a fault in someone. ‘I’ would say [to 
file one], ‘Why did you see faults in him?’

Dadashri:  Was  it  happening  immediately,  shoot-on-

sight [pratikraman]?

Questioner:  Shoot-on-sight.  [‘I’  would  tell  file  one,] 
‘The foundation of Dada’s spiritual Science (Vignan) is that 
the entire world is faultless and the fault is of the sufferer, so 
then why are faults being seen?’ That’s what used to happen. 
But  now  what  happens  is  that  I  continuously  feel  that  the 
other person is definitely at fault.

Dadashri: That is actually those jada bhaav that have 

all amassed within and are confusing you.

Chetan’s Bhaav Is Only as the Knower-Seer!

One  is  jada  bhaav  and  the  other  is  Chetan  bhaav. 
If  the  chetan  bhaav  mixes  [with  the  jada  bhaav],  then  a 
fault  is  bound. And  if  you  end  up  ‘signing’  within  due  to 
the  jada  bhaav,  then  a  fault  is  bound.  If You  don’t  ‘sign’, 
then  You  will  not  bind  anything  due  to  the  jada  bhaav. 
If  You  understand  just  this  much,  then  it  can  be  said  that 
You  have  understood  the  entire  world.  Jada  bhaav  arise 
based  on  scientific  circumstantial  evidences,  and  they 
keep  increasing  and  decreasing.  Their  inherent  nature 
is  to  increase  and  decrease  (guru-laghu).  ‘You’  have  to 
recognize  that  ‘This  is  a  jada  bhaav  and  this  is  a  Chetan 
bhaav.’ ‘We’ have not left anything up for question. Yet, the 
intellect continues to confuse you. That is its nature. If You 
understand  this  in  its  entirety,  then  Your  [spiritual]  work 
will  be  done.  And  people  [who  are  not  Self-realized]  do 
not have any such examination about whether this is a jada 
bhaav  or  a  Chetan  bhaav,  do  they! What  the  whole  world 
believes to be Chetan bhaav, is really jada bhaav. And that 
is why the world continues to remain in existence. One only 

476

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

needs to realize his own Self. For infinite lives, the Self has 
remained  hidden,  such  that  one  didn’t  know  his  own  Self. 
For infinite lives, one has not known who He really is. Isn’t 
that a wonder!

Questioner: Chetan only has two bhaav, that of being 
the Knower and being the Seer, or are there any other bhaav?

Dadashri:  There  are  many  other  bhaav,  but  they  are 
all bhaav that are aguru-laghu (never increase or decrease). 
The Self does not increase or decrease at all. And that which 
increases  and  decreases,  You  [the  Self]  have  to  See  that, 
‘This is a jada bhaav.’

Questioner: This inherent nature of being guru-laghu, 
is it an inherent nature (swabhaav) or is it a property (guna)?

Dadashri: It is a property of the [vibhaavik] pudgal.

Questioner: But I asked that with regards to Chetan.

Dadashri: It is not of Chetan. The inherent nature of 
Chetan is aguru-laghu. That is why Krupaludev has written:

‘‘The state that the Omniscient One saw in Gnan,
The  Lord  was  not  able  to  describe  that  state.
that  form?
How  can  ‘our’  speech  describe 
That  Gnan  only  remains  to  be  experienced!’’

‘‘Je  pad  Shri  Sarvagne  dithu  Gnanma,
Kahi  shakya  nahi  te  pad  Shri  Bhagwan  jo.
Te  swaroopne  anya  vaani 
te  shu  kahe?
Anubhav  gochar  matra  rahyu  te  Gnan  jo!’’

Apoorva Avsar...

If one were to ask the four Vedas [the oldest scriptures 
of  Hinduism],  what  would  they  say?  It  is  inexpressible, 
it  is  indescribable;  so  how  can  they  say  anything?  Even 
the  Vedas  say,  ‘This  is  not  That.  This  is  not  That.’  The 

[11] Pudgal Bhaav

477

Gnan  would  be  with  the  Gnani.  The  Gnan  is  Itself  the 
Self,  and  It  is  with  the  Gnani.  ‘He’  is  able  to  completely 
separate  the  Chetan  bhaav  and  the  jada  bhaav;  He  is 
able  to  differentiate  between  them.  Only  then  can  this  be 
solved,  right!  Otherwise,  it  cannot  be  solved  and  one  will 
be  confused.  Hundreds  of  thousands  of  lifetimes  go  by  in 
search of a path which can solve this in one hour. It is an 
entanglement, isn’t it?

Questioner:  Dada,  besides  the  bhaav  of  being  the 

Knower-Seer, what other bhaav does Chetan have?

Dadashri:  There  are  many  other  bhaav.  The  abode 
of  infinite  bliss,  so  many  other  bhaav,  there  are  unlimited 
bhaav. However much of jada there is, It has the energy to 
become gneyakaar (one with what is being Seen) with that. 
Say there is this mango, then the Self takes on the design of 
the mango; It becomes gneyakaar. Yet, It remains unanointed 
(nirlep);  moreover,  It  does  not  get  affected  by  the  mango. 
The infinite energy is of the absolute Self (Parmatma) only. 
‘It’ definitely represents all the properties It has; there is no 
other Parmatma besides that. The entire world has become 
confused  due  to  this;  and  they  eat  and  drink,  and  become 
confused nonetheless.

There, All the Gnanis Are One!

As  the  people  of  the  world  [those  who  are  not  Self-
realized]  do  not  have  this  awareness  of  the  Self,  they 
keep binding karma. That is why ‘we’ have said that these 
are  jada  bhaav,  they  are  not  One’s  own  Chetan  bhaav. 
Therefore,  they  are  objects  to  be  Known  (gneya)  and You 
are  the  Knower  (Gnata).  ‘You’  only  have  to  See  them. 
Just  as  the  One  who  has  written:  ‘The  One  who  has  Seen 
the  Chetan  bhaav  and  the  jada  bhaav  as  separate  is  the 
Omniscient  One.’  (Je  Chetan-jada  bhaavo  avlokya  shri 
Munindra Sarvagney.)

478

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Questioner:  ‘The  One  who  has  Seen  the  Chetan 
[bhaav]  and  the  jada  bhaav  as  separate  is  the  Omniscient 
One.  When  such  a  clear  belief  manifests  within,  the  One 
in experience of the eternal elements has referred to that as 
Darshan.’  (Je  chetan-jada  bhaavo  avlokya  Shri  Munindra 
Sarvagney. Evi antar aasthaa pragatye, Darshan kahyu che 
Tattvagney.)

Dadashri:  [To  have  the  feeling]  ‘I  like  mango  pulp 
and chapati’ is a jada bhaav. One believes the jada bhaav to 
be his own. He will say, “I have the desire to eat potatoes.” 
That is a jada bhaav, but he believes it to be Chetan bhaav. 
What  has  the  Omniscient  One  said  about  the  desire  to  eat 
potatoes? “This is a jada bhaav. If one believes this to be a 
Chetan bhaav, then what will become of him?” The part that 
is  active  (chanchal),  the  part  that  is  mechanical,  increases 
and  decreases.  The  chit  moves  around,  it  increases  and 
decreases; the intellect increases and decreases. The memory 
waxes and wanes, ‘I do remember, but I forgot.’ And if one 
were to tap on his head twice, and the ‘machinery’ starts up, 
then he will remember.

The  eternal  element  of  inanimate  matter  (jada)  also 
has  bhaav,  but  those  cannot  be  the  bhaav  of  Chetan  (the 
Self). The bhaav of the Self are all Chetan (animate; living; 
that  of  Knowing-Seeing).  The  bhaav  of  jada  are  jada 
(inanimate;  lifeless).  Therefore,  it  is  extremely  difficult  to 
understand that these are jada bhaav. Everyone believes the 
jada  bhaav  to  be  Chetan  bhaav.  ‘I  did  this,  I  did  samayik, 
I  did  pratikraman,  I  did  this,  I  did  that.’ All  these  are  jada 
bhaav.

Questioner:  All  things  like  ‘I  did’  come  under  jada 

bhaav, do they not?

Dadashri: Yes,  this  is  a  very  important  sentence  that 

you have written.

[11] Pudgal Bhaav

479

Questioner: ‘The One who has Seen the Chetan bhaav 

and the jada bhaav as separate is the Omniscient One.’

Dadashri:  The  Omniscient  One  (Sarvagnya)  writes, 
‘This is jada bhaav and this is Chetan bhaav.’ That is why 
‘we’  tell  You,  ‘The  temporary  states  are  simply  natural 
occurrences,  which  do  not  have  a  higher  authority  as  the 
doer,  and  they  are  a  result  of  scientific  circumstantial 
evidences  (vyavasthit).’  ‘I  sat  cross-legged,  I  did  this,  I  did 
samayik [as a ritual on the Kramik path], I sat in padmasana 
(the lotus pose), I did pranayam (breathing exercises), I did 
such and such yoga pose…’

Questioner: The sense of ‘I-ness’ that one has, is that 

jada?

Dadashri: Yes,  moreover,  it  increases  and  decreases. 
All  gneya  are  jada  bhaav  and  their  inherent  nature  is  that 
of guru-laghu; they can increase and they can decrease. By 
not  understanding  this  much,  all  such  entanglements  arise. 
The  entire  spiritual  Science  (Vignan)  is  contained  in  that 
statement. These scriptures have been written verily for this, 
yet  One  is  not  able  to  find  the  Self!  And  the  Self  is  not 
something that can be found!

No one has the experiential awareness of Chetan bhaav 
and jada bhaav. But when ‘we’ give You Gnan, ‘we’ show 
You the jada bhaav like this and ‘we’ show You the Chetan 
bhaav  distinctly  separate  like  this.  There  is  no  difference 
between  ‘this  [Gnan]’  and  what  the  Omniscient  One  Saw; 
that is indeed what ‘we’ are giving You.

The  Chetan  bhaav  that  the  Omniscient  One  has  Seen 
and when the belief that ‘These bhaav are the only ones that 
are  Chetan,’  is  established,  when  a  single  ray  of  light  like 
that  emerges,  when  One  reads  that  and  ‘digests’  it,  that  is 
called samyaktva (the right belief that ‘I am pure Soul’). So, 

480

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

after Seeing that, ‘we’ said, “Amidst all worldly desires and 
intents that tend to anoint, ‘I’ remain totally unanointed. The 
worldly  desires  and  intents  of  the  mind,  speech,  and  body 
are jada bhaav, they are not Chetan bhaav.”

What  is  the  only  difference  in  the  two  views?  The 
answer is, this is a pudgal bhaav and this is the bhaav of the 
Self. The people of the world are not aware of this at all. All 
the Gnanis converge at this station, ‘This is a pudgal bhaav 
and  this  is  the  bhaav  of  the  Self.’  If  one  does  not  get  such 
clarity here, then he cannot be a Gnani. This station is such, 
and the path beyond it is very long, but One must reach here 
first. ‘He’ is then considered to have attained the Knowledge 
of the Self and the non-Self.



[12]
The Pudgal and the Self

How Much Does the Self Weigh?

Questioner:  This  pudgal  or  these  parmanu  that  are 
present;  currently  in  worldly  science  more  emphasis  has 
been placed on these parmanu, but no one has said anything 
from the scientific perspective about the eternal element of 
the Self; that this is also an eternal element.

Dadashri: The scientists do not even know that word!

Questioner: Can It not be sized up scientifically?

Dadashri: They do not even know about It.

Questioner: But can It be understood within science?

Dadashri:  No,  It  is  not  something  that  they  can 
discover.  They  do  suspect  that  there  is  an  eternal  element 
that  gives  life  to  everyone,  but  they  are  not  able  to  figure 
out  which  eternal  element  that  is.  And  they  would  not  be 
ready  to  believe  what  ‘we’  tell  them.  They  would  become 
ready  to  accept  that  only  if  It  were  to  come  into  their  own 
understanding  and  vision.  Therefore,  they  do  not  accept 
‘our’ scriptures.

Questioner: If they were to accept that, then all their 

[spiritual] work would be done.

482

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

Dadashri: The Self is not something that one simply 
believes in. Just as this pudgal can be experienced, the Self 
too can be experienced.

Questioner: Many saints say that the Self can also be 

weighed; is that possible?

Dadashri:  The  worldly-interacting  self  can  be 
weighed.  So  what  they  have  said  is  not  incorrect.  The 
worldly-interacting self has weight; what that means is that 
the  other  [charged]  parmanu  have  come  along  with  the 
original  Self. Those parmanu  have  weight  and  that  is  what 
they believe to be the weight of the Self.

So  they  are  not  wrong  when  they  say  that  the  self 
has weight. It is possible to weigh it. This is because, when 
the  original  Self  goes  from  here  to  another  life-form,  the 
worldly-interacting self goes with it; and the pudgal parmanu 
encompassed within that are the ones that have weight. The 
original Self does not have weight.

Anything  that  is  done  without  a  change  in  the 
fundamental  belief,  leads  to  bondage.  If  the  train  were  to 
head towards Surat instead of Ahmedabad, then the faster it 
moves, the further it will go in the wrong direction.

Nothing Besides the Pudgal Has Latched Onto the 
Self!

The  Parmanu  that  exist  have  neither  a  beginning  nor 
an end. If you give a prize only to God [the Self], then the 
Parmanu will be hurt.

Questioner: Why would the Parmanu be hurt?

Dadashri: No, but they too are entitled [to that prize], 

are they not! They do not have a beginning or an end.

Questioner: They seem to be entitled to it due to the 

influence they have, isn’t it!

[12] The Pudgal and the Self

483

Dadashri: No, they have nothing to do with each other. 
The Parmanu do not have influence over God, neither does 
God have influence over the Parmanu; both are independent 
eternal elements. Otherwise, God would become the doer of 
the  entire  world.  That  would  not  do.  There  is  not  even  an 
iota of such energy [to ‘do’ within God].

Has God become bound or have the Parmanu become 
bound?  In  fact,  the  Parmanu  have  actually  bound  God  to 
such  an  extent  that  they  do  not  allow  Him  to  become  free. 
[The bondage has occurred due to the arising of vibhaav (the 
third  entity  with  completely  different  properties  that  arises 
when the eternal element of the Self and the eternal element 
of  inanimate  matter  come  together).  The  Parmanu  cannot 
independently cause bondage.] People are trying to become 
free.

There are such industrious people in the entire world, 
who can break the bondage of a heavy iron chain, but they 
cannot break the subtle bondage between the pudgal and the 
Self. And  if  they  do  try  to  break  it,  they  would  get  wound 
up  in  even  more  bondage.  The  pudgal  is  actually  a  prison 
for the Self.

Questioner: What kind of illusory attachment (moha) 

must the pudgal have that it does not let the Self go?

Dadashri:  No,  it  is  not  like  that. What  the  pudgal  is 
saying  is,  ‘I  have  become  what  you  have  made  me.  Have 
you  lost  one  or  both  [eyes,  such  that  you  cannot  see  the 
truth]?’  This  pudgal  is  something  that  you  yourself  have 
created!

In Dada’s words, the pudgal has latched onto the Self, 
not the other way round. Whereas, the whole world is saying 
that  it  is  indeed  the  Self  that  has  latched  onto  the  pudgal. 
This is ‘our’ discovery; ‘we’ are saying, ‘It is definitely the 
pudgal that has latched onto the Self,’ after having Seen this 

484

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

‘ourselves’. This pudgal that has arisen out of the six eternal 
elements is a suffocation of a kind for the Self. This pudgal 
is  actually  a  vishesh  guna  (completely  new  property  of  a 
third entity that arises when the two eternal elements of the 
Self and inanimate matter come together).

Questioner:  When  You  say,  “I  am  saying  this  after 

having Seen it myself,” in what exactly do You See?

Dadashri: It is not [through] indriya gnan (knowledge 
obtained  through  the  medium  of  the  sense  organs  and  the 
intellect).  ‘We’  are  saying  it  after  having  Seen  it  through 
atindriya  Gnan  (Knowledge  beyond  the  sense  organs). 
A  solution  has  come  about  for  ‘us’.  This  indriya  gnan  is 
subject  to  the  intellect  and  is  limited,  whereas  that  other 
Gnan [atindriya Gnan] has no limit.

The Pudgal Dances in Tune With the Self…

Questioner:  Who  does  bhakti  (devotional  worship)? 
The  pudgal?  If  the  pudgal  is  doing  it,  and  if  the  Self  can 
never  be  attained  through  the  pudgal,  then  can  the  pudgal 
have bhakti for the Self? And if that is the case, can the Self 
be attained? Through which activity, how much of activity, 
and  what  type  of  activity  of  the  pudgal  can  the  Self  be 
attained?

Dadashri: To have bhakti is the inherent nature of the 
pudgal. However, if one has done something wrong [bound 
wayward  karma],  then  it  will  stop  doing  bhakti.  The  very 
inherent  nature  of  the  pudgal  is  such  that  it  dances  in  tune 
with the Self. If we get rid of our crookedness and obstinacy, 
then the pudgal will continue having bhakti. When ‘we’ give 
this Gnan, the wrong belief of ‘I am Chandubhai’ goes away 
and the right belief of ‘I am pure Soul’ sets in; that indeed is 
having bhakti for the Self. Through that bhakti, the veils of 
ignorance over the Self break and You can See.

[12] The Pudgal and the Self

485

Questioner: If the pudgal has bhakti for the Self, can 

the Self be attained?

Dadashri:  Bhakti  for  the  Self  can  occur  only  after 
attaining the Self. Through that bhakti, the veils of ignorance 
over the Self break and You can See more. That is dependent 
upon whose bhakti the pudgal is doing. By having bhakti for 
the One who has attained the Self, the Self can be attained.

Who Hits? Who Gets hurt?

Questioner:  Does  friction  ever  occur  between  the 

eternal elements of the Soul and inanimate matter?

Dadashri: Friction happens between two living things.

Here,  one  is  the  Self  [living]  and  the  other  is  non-
living, the pudgal. If you keep hitting something that is non-
living, then the one doing the hitting will get hurt. Similarly, 
everything hurts this [worldly-interacting] self.

Questioner: But by hitting it, wouldn’t the non-living 

thing also be affected?

Dadashri: It will be affected, but the one that is living 
is the one that should understand, right! If you keep beating 
something made of iron, what does it have to lose? The one 
beating it will get tired.

Questioner:  But  by  beating  the  iron,  does  anything 

happen to it, something...

Dadashri: No, nothing like that. It’s not as if the Self 

is beating it, an ‘iron’ [the pudgal] is beating the iron.

Questioner: Yes.

Dadashri:  So,  who  is  the  one  beating  the  iron?  The 
answer  is,  the  very  same  thing,  the  pudgal.  The  Self  does 
not  get  involved  in  that.  Only  the  bhaav  of  the  [worldly-
interacting]  self  gets  involved  in  that.  Everything  is 

486

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

happening through its ‘weapons’, but there is no Chetan in 
it,  so  there  is  no  liability,  is  there!  The  entire  world  that 
is  visible  to  the  eyes,  is  all  made  of  parmanu,  there  is  no 
Soul in it. These so-called saints who are wandering around, 
have  certainly  not  realized  the  Self.  The  Self  that  is  to  be 
realized is completely separate. They are not even aware of 
what  the  Soul  is  doing  within. They  believe  that,  ‘The  one 
who is talking, the one who is doing everything, that verily 
is  the  Self.’  Oh  mortal  one,  that  is  actually  power  chetan 
(the  pudgal  that  has  been  powered  with  life  energy  in  the 
presence of the Self).

Questioner: Then does the pure Self have the need for 

a body, does It have the need for a pudgal?

Dadashri: Why?

Questioner: Because the Self cannot live on Its own, 

so It would have the need for a pudgal, wouldn’t It?

Dadashri: If It has needs, then It would be considered 
a  beggar.  As  such,  It  is  not  a  beggar.  It  is  because  of  the 
pudgal  that  It  has  to  live  in  a  ‘location’  which  is  not  Its 
own [dwells in the realm of the non-Self]. Once It becomes 
free  of  the  pudgal,  once  It  comes  out  of  [dwelling  in]  the 
pudgal, then that’s it. One has come to dwell in the scientific 
effect,  in  the  midst  of  circumstantial  evidences.  As  these 
six eternal elements continue to revolve around each other, 
changes tend to take place when these two eternal elements, 
[inanimate]  matter  and  the  Soul,  come  together  into  close 
proximity.

The Self Is ‘Uneffective’!

The pure Self (Chaitanya) is ‘uneffective’ [not causing 
any effect to arise]. The pudgal is always ‘effective’. Because 
the vibhaavik pudgal (the pudgal formed from parmanu that 
have deviated from their inherent nature) is ‘effective’, there 

[12] The Pudgal and the Self

487

is the weight of ‘I-ness’ in it, and that is why the [worldly-
interacting] self appears to be ‘effective’. Therefore, if one’s 
attentive  awareness  is  towards  the  pudgal,  he  will  feel  the 
effect, and if One’s attentive awareness is towards the Self, 
then  He  will  not  feel  the  effect.  Even  if  a  bed  bug  were  to 
bite, it would not affect the Self. This [pudgal] is ‘effective’, 
and in that effect, the false attribution of the ‘I-ness’ is added. 
That is why causes are created, and so there are causes and 
effects, causes and effects.

Just  like  when  you  are  walking  and  your  hair  is 
blowing,  it  does  not  bother  you.  In  the  same  way,  even 
whilst remaining in worldly life (sansaar), the pudgal cannot 
bother You.

There  is  one  thing  that  is  not Yours,  the  pudgal,  and 
the other thing is Your own. Something that is not Yours will 
never  be Yours.  The  things  which  are  not Yours  are  called 
karan  (instruments  of  action,  like  the  mind,  speech  and 
body).  They  are  weapons  and  you  have  become  the  owner 
of these instruments of action. The One who is the owner of 
His own things, He Himself is God.

The Moment You Become the Eater, It Becomes 
Poison!

How can the Self eat? The Self does not have a mouth 
or anything like that. ‘It’ does not have a physical body, so 
how  can  the  Self  eat?  Do  you  believe  the  pudgal  to  be  the 
Self?

Questioner: I believe the pudgal to be the Self, isn’t 

that why I am able to eat?

Dadashri:  It  is  indeed  the  pudgal  that  eats.  It  is  just 
that  you  believe  that  [you  are  the  eater].  The  sensation  of 
tasty food on the tongue is of the pudgal. You have come to 
believe, ‘I am the one enjoying tasty food.’ You are falsely 

488

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

attributing all the effects of the pudgal upon yourself. Why 
have you delved so deep into this?

Questioner:  No,  the  pudgal  is  with  this  Chetan  (the 
Self). That is why it eats. Otherwise what would the pudgal 
eat?

Dadashri: The Self does not do anything in this.

Questioner: No, It does not do anything.

Dadashri:  Nevertheless,  the  pudgal  lives  due  to  Its 

presence.

Questioner: Yes.

Dadashri:  It  lives,  it  eats,  it  drinks;  the  pudgal  does 
all of that. The illusion has arisen in the developing I that, ‘I 
am doing this. Who else could be doing it?’ Even powerful 
judges understand that, ‘There is no one else here right now, 
so I am the one [doing it].’

If  food  is  consumed  with  shuddha  upayog  (the  pure 
applied awareness as the Self), then the food is separate and 
the  ‘I’  is  separate.  But  the  moment  the  ‘I’  gets  involved  in 
that, the moment one says, “I ate,” it immediately gives rise 
to  ‘poison’  [alcohol]  within.  In  addition,  all  the  parmanu 
become colored by that ‘poison’ and subsequently, that gives 
rise to intoxication. However, if one does not say that, then 
nothing  happens.  By  saying,  “I  ate.  I  enjoyed  it,”  one  is 
pouring ‘poison’ on it. The food is not ‘poison’, but due to 
a  lack  of  understanding  it  becomes  akin  to  ‘poison’.  What 
would  happen  if  you  were  to  light  a  firecracker  and  throw 
it  into  a  shop  full  of  fireworks?  That  is  what  these  people 
are  doing  and  then  they  say,  ‘Everything  of  mine  has  been 
burned!’ God does not come to burn things. In fact, it is one 
himself who ruins it all.

Relinquished the Entire Self!

After attaining this bliss, after attaining the Knowledge 

[12] The Pudgal and the Self

489

of  ‘I  am  pure  Soul’,  all  these  pleasures  derived  from  the 
pudgal  taste  [bitter]  like  neem.  ‘We’  had  given  this  simile. 
You  should  understand  all  of  the  similes.  So  how  do  You 
find  this  pudgal  to  be?  It  feels  [bitter]  like  neem,  meaning 
bitter like poison, otherwise the sweetness derived from this 
pudgal  will  not  leave  your  mind.  Even  after  one  has  eaten 
a delicious potato fritter, his chit will still keep going to it.

How many things are there that need to be relinquished? 

Are there one or two, or are there ten, twelve, fifteen?

Questioner: Everything.

Dadashri: Everything means what? One hundred, two 
hundred, five hundred, one thousand, one hundred thousand, 
two hundred thousand, five hundred thousand, one million, 
two billion, five billion?

Questioner:  All  the  things  that  are  related  to  the 

pudgal; everything except for the Self.

Dadashri: So there are infinite things that need to be 
renounced.  You  have  renounced  just  these  potatoes,  these 
onions,  this  and  that;  when  will  that  ever  come  to  an  end? 
Your  life  span  will  be  over  by  then.  In  that  time,  you  will 
not have progressed [on the path of liberation] even a little. 
Then, in your next life, you will be at exactly the same spot. 
Moreover,  if  you  are  born  to  a  Vaishnav  family,  you  will 
surely eat potatoes again.

You did not relinquish what you were supposed to and 
instead, you relinquished the entire Self. You were supposed 
to  relinquish  the  pudgal,  but  instead  you  relinquished  the 
Self, so what kind of state would you be in now?

The One Who Knows the Pudgal Is the Knower!

If  jada  (inanimate  matter)  were  the  one  pulling 
Chaitanya  (the  Self),  then  are  ‘we’  [the  Self]  considered 
even worse than jada?

490

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

However,  the  pudgal  does  shake  up  the  self.  Even 
though  it  [the  pudgal;  a  person  or  any  non-living  item] 
is  not  an  outlaw,  yet  one  tends  to  tremble.  What  is  more, 
if  a  ‘registered’  mail  [from  the  income  tax  department]  is 
received,  then  there  is  nothing  but  anxiety.  Why  should 
You  fear  the  pudgal?  The  Self  remains  just  the  way  It  is. 
The inherent nature of the pudgal is to be chanchal (active; 
restless)  and  the  inherent  nature  of  the  Self  is  to  be  steady 
(achal).  The  more  the  restlessness  increases,  the  more  one 
goes towards the pudgal. The more the steadiness increases, 
the more he goes towards the Self. The five sense organs and 
the  mind  are  made  of  pudgal.  They  cannot  be  conquered. 
They  are  gneya  (objects  to  be  Known)  and  the  Self  is  the 
Knower  (Gnata).  But  instead,  the  mortal  one  believes  the 
jada  (inanimate  object)  to  be  himself.  Meaning  that,  it  is 
verily  due  to  illusion  that  he  believes  the  gneya  to  be  the 
Knower.  When  that  illusion  breaks,  One  is  said  to  have 
become jitendriya jina (the One who has the Knowledge of 
the Self, hence He is no longer the owner of the five sense 
organs  or  the  pleasures  derived  through  them).  The  very 
existence (astitva) of the Self and the pudgal are completely 
separate.  Anything  that  has  existence  will  definitely  have 
its  own  vastutva  (what  an  eternal  element  is  and  what  it 
comprises  of).  The  One  who  Knows  and  understands  only 
the pudgal, is called the Knower.

To  Know  the  Self  is  called  Gnan.  The  One  who 
Knows  the  Self,  Knows  the  pudgal.  The  One  who  Knows 
the  pudgal,  Knows  the  Self.  If  either  one  is  Known,  the 
other can be Known. If there is a mixture of wheat and grit, 
one will say, “Show me what grit looks like.” If we ask him, 
“Don’t you want to know what wheat looks like?” To which 
he will reply, “No, there are only two things, so if you show 
me what grit looks like, then I will understand that this other 
thing  is  wheat.”  He  won’t  have  to  ask  you  anything  else, 
will he?

[12] The Pudgal and the Self

491

When  One  recognizes  ‘Who  am  I?’  then  whatever 
remains  is  the  pudgal.  Just  like  if  we  pick  out  all  the  grit, 
then only the wheat will remain. Don’t have someone show 
you  both.  Why  would  you  pay  the  fee  for  both?  Just  pay 
the  fee  for  one.  You  have  not  Known  the  Self  completely, 
that  is  why  You  have  not  Known  the  pudgal.  Once  You 
Know  the  Self  completely,  everything  else  that  remains  is 
all pudgal. On the Kramik path, it is very difficult to Know 
the Self in Its entirety. That is why, they keep making one do 
penance and renounce things. ‘Do this. Do that.” “Can you 
not understand either one of the two, wheat or grit? Do you 
need to Know both? Then you wouldn’t have to pay the fee 
for both, would you? Then, you would only have to pay the 
fee for one!” On the Kramik path, until you pay the fee for 
both,  you  cannot  Know  either  of  them.  How  can  the  entire 
Self  be  known  there?  The  Self  can  be  Known  in  entirety 
in  the  final  life  [before  liberation].  In  that  life,  there  is  no 
longer  any  need  for  any  penance  or  renunciation,  is  there! 
Renouncing  is  subject  to  parsatta  (the  authority  of  another 
entity;  subject  to  external  circumstances);  it  is  not  in Your 
hands. To ‘do’ anything is subject to parsatta; it is not at all 
in Your authority!

Whose Name? Whose Gnan?

Questioner: I have understood this much, ‘There are 
only  two,  the  Self  and  the  pudgal;  everything  else  is  of  no 
use.’

Dadashri: That  is  what  ‘we’  had  told  you,  that  there 

are only two, the pure Soul and puran-galan.

Questioner: Yes, but every day You keep bringing up 

a third thing, which causes confusion.

Dadashri:  But  ‘we’  have  to  explain  it  in  a  different 
way to others, and ‘we’ have to explain it in a different way 

492

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

to  You.  So  if  ‘we’  have  said  something  at  one  point,  You 
should not hold on to that.

Questioner:  The  speech  of  a  person  in  whom  the 
Self has manifested (pragat Purush) makes one ageless and 
immortal.

Dadashri: Yes,  that  is  correct.  The  Self  is  not  [to  be 
found] in books; It is not in anything. ‘It’ is not in the words, 
It is not in the intent, It is not in the association (sangnya). 
The  Self  is  so  subtle  most  (sookshmatam)  that  It  can  pass 
right  through  not  just  a  wall,  but  through  a  mountain  too. 
But  it  is  not  able  to  pass  right  through  the  ‘entanglements’ 
[the multiplication of wrong beliefs] of the pudgal. Isn’t that 
a wonder! How sticky must the entanglements of the pudgal 
be?

One businessman had come to attain Gnan. ‘We’ asked 
him, “What is your name?” He replied, “I am a businessman, 
the  president  of  this  [company].”  [He  was  asked  for  his 
name yet he announced his status]. Hey, at least show some 
humility  (vinay).  Where  the  pudgal  has  to  be  done  away 
with, why is there a ‘pull’ towards the pudgal? Why should 
you carry the burden of the pudgal? In fact, where the Self 
is  to  be  attained,  there  absolute  humility  (param  vinay)  is 
needed.

Questioner:  Does  the  name  belong  to  the  pudgal  or 

to the Self?

Dadashri: The name would indeed be of the pudgal, 

wouldn’t it! Whatever gets given a name is pudgal.

Questioner:  ‘You’  had  once  said  that  the  pudgal  is 
the  ‘base’  [foundation,  support]  and  the  Self  is  the  Vision 
(Darshan). This ‘base’ of the pudgal is needed to attain the 
Knowledge of the Self.

Dadashri: Yes, that is true. The ignorance of the Self 

[12] The Pudgal and the Self

493

has  occurred  due  to  the  pudgal,  and  it  is  also  through  the 
pudgal that Gnan is attained. The pudgal serves as a support 
at the moment.

Questioner:  So  does  the  gnan  (relative  knowledge) 

arise in accordance with the ego that arises?

Dadashri:  Depending  on  what  the  ego  is  like,  such 

will be the gnan that manifests.

Questioner: Which gnan?

Dadashri:  The  illumination  that  is  not  of  the  Self 

(par-prakash).

The Self by Nature Is Steady, Similarly the Pudgal 
Is Restless

The  Self  within  is  steady  indeed. The  entire  world  is 
dwelling in nothing but the pudgal. Not even for a moment 
have they gone outside the pudgal, and whatever steadiness 
that  arises,  is  the  steadiness  of  the  pudgal.  The  Self  is 
already  steady. The  One  that  remains  steady  at  all  times  is 
called  the  Self.  There  is  no  partial  steadiness  in  Its  case. 
Partial steadiness happens in the pudgal. The Self does not 
have partial steadiness.

Questioner: After attaining this Gnan, even the pudgal 

becomes steady, does it not?

Dadashri:  The  pudgal  does  become  steady,  but  in 
what  way?  In  a  way  that  the  pudgal  can  be  called  God. 
[The pudgal of Lord] Mahavir can certainly be called ‘God’ 
because He [the Self within] is steady.

Moksha Is Attained When the Pudgal Becomes a 
Kevali

Questioner:  In  doing  all  this,  will  there  not  come 
a  time  when  we  will  become  completely  akriya  (devoid 

494

Aptvani-14 (Part-2)

of  activity;  free  of  kashay;  to  come  into  the  state  as  the 
non-doer),  first  from  the  perspective  of  the  Self  and  then 
Chandubhai too will become akriya?

Dadashri:  Yes,  but  you  are  not  to  become  akriya 
through  egoism.  This  path  is  verily  for  the  purpose  of 
becoming akriya automatically.

Questioner: So to become akriya is correct, is it not?

Dadashri: Ultimately one [the pudgal] has to become 
akriya indeed. The pudgal has to become just like the Self. 
The pudgal has to become such that it mimics the Self; and 
by remaining in the Agnas, that will happen; it will become 
akriya. It will become akriya after One attains the experience 
of the Self.

When an impression is given off that One is a Kevali 
(the  absolutely  enlightened  One),  then  Know  that  this 
pudgal has become a Kevali. When the pudgal too becomes 
a  Kevali,  that  is  moksha.  Right  now,  all  of  You  are  in  the 
process  of  making  the  pudgal  a  Kevali.  The  [original; 
absolute]  Self  is  certainly  a  Kevali,  but  it  has  to  come  into 
Your [the developing ‘I’s] understanding that It is a Kevali. 
The absolute Self is such that It can pass right through a large 
mountain. This is because the mountain is gross (sthool) and 
the Self is the subtlest of the subtle (sookshmati-sookshma).

Questioner:  Gnan  is  also  subtle!  Gnan  is  also  the 

subtlest of the subtle!

Dadashri:  ‘That’  indeed  is  the  Self.  There  is  no 

difference between Gnan and the Self.

The Protector of the Self Is the Gnani!

Questioner:  Can  a  Kevali  See  the  Self?  Would  He 

have Seen It?

Dadashri: To See means to become aware. To Know 

[12] The Pudgal and the Self

495

means  to  experience.  [By  saying,]  ‘The  Kevalis  have  Seen 
the Self,’ it means They have become aware of It. What you 
feel are your mistakes, are You able to See them or does that 
come into Your experience? The original Self is That which 
can  be  experienced,  It  is  a  formless  state.  The  state  that  a 
Kevali  Lord  experiences  is  one  in  which  this  pudgal  is  a 
completely separate entity from One’s Self. There is no need 
to See whether what has been done is right or wrong. This 
body is actually just a lifeless statue; it is achetan (that which 
is devoid of the Self). The very sense of doership should not 
be visible at all. ‘You’ do not have anything whatsoever to do 
with the pudgal or with the behavior of the pudgal through 
the  mind,  speech  and  body.  ‘You’  are  completely  separate 
from that. ‘You’ have certainly Seen and Known Your Self; 
that  experiential  awareness  as  the  Self  (bhaan)  has  arisen. 
That has also come into experience slightly. Now, when the 
mool  vastu  (the  original  eternal  element;  the  original  Self) 
comes  into Your  experience  completely,  then  the  [spiritual] 
work is done!

The one who becomes a protector of the pudgal is not 
a Gnani. The Gnani is the protector of the Self, the protector 
of just One’s own inherent nature as the Self (Swabhaav).



Spiritual Glossary

 Gujarati Word

English Translation

aacharya
aadhaar

Aagam

aakaar

a religious teacher; Self-realized master
basis

Jain Scriptures

form

aakarshan-vikarshan attraction and repulsion

aakash

that which gives space; space; open space; eternal 
element of Space 

aakash kshetra

space in this world 

aakash tattva

the element of Space 

aakulta-vyaakulta

state of uneasiness and agitation 

aaropit bhaav

aasakti

aaveg

aavirbhaav

abhaav

abhedta

abhyaas

abudha

achaitanya 

achal

achetan 

achetan pudgal 

the  false  attribution  of  the  belief  that  ‘I  am 
Chandubhai’
discharge attachment that arises due to attraction

an emotional state

manifestation

non-existence;  no  interest;  equanimity;  dislike; 
discharge abhorrence

oneness

practices; habits

beyond the intellect 

that  which  does  not  have  the  property  to  Know 
and See
steady; unchanging

without the property to Know and See; that which 
is devoid of the Self; inanimate; non-living part; 
lifeless
inanimate pudgal; physical body

achetan tattva

that does not have the property to Know and See 

adharma

irreligion

adharmastikaya 

adhogami

adhogati

adol

eternal element that supports inertia; also known 
as sthitisahayak
to descend 

to descend towards a lower life-form

steady

Advaita Vedanta 

an outlook or school of Hinduism

agnan

agnani

agnanta

Agnas

aguru-laghu

aguru-laghu 
swabhaav
aham

ahambhaav

ahamkaar

ahimsak

ajagrut

ajampo

ajanma

ignorance of the Self; relative knowledge 

a person without Self-realization 

ignorance of the Self 

the ﬁ ve special directives or principles that preserve 
the  awareness  as  the  Self  in  Akram  Vignan;  the 
ﬁ ve  special  directives  or  principles  given  by  the 
Gnani  Purush  that  sustain  the  enlightened  state 
after Gnan Vidhi
never  increases  or  decreases;  neither  heavy,  nor 
light;  neither  increase  nor  decrease;  also  known 
as aguru-alaghu 
the inherent nature to never increase or decrease

the ‘I’

the state as the ‘I’

the ego; egoism

non-violent

unaware

restlessness

without birth

ajar amar

ageless and immortal 

ajeev

akarta

akashayi Atma

akhand

Akram

Akram Vignan

akriya

akriyata

alaukik

non-living entities

the non-doer

the original Self; the Self without kashay; the Self 
that is free of all kashay
continuous

step-less

spiritual  Science  of  the  step-less  path  to  Self-
realization
not connected with any activity; without activity; 
without  action;  prevailing  in  the  state  as  the 
Knower-Seer; prevailing in the state as a non-doer; 
devoid of activity; in a state that is devoid of activity
in the state as the non-doer; the state as the Knower-
Seer
that which is beyond the worldly; extraordinary

aling

alok

amurt

anaadi

without a gender

a  region  in  the  universe  where  there  is  only  the 
element of Space, and no other eternal element
invisible 

without a beginning 

anaadi anant

anaahad naad 

no beginning and no end; without a beginning or 
an end
the silent sound of the universe that is thought to 
transcend space and time

anant

this has no end; inﬁ nite

anant Darshan

inﬁ nite Vision 

anant Gnan

anant shakti

inﬁ nite Knowledge 

inﬁ nite energy 

anant sukhdham

inﬁ nite bliss 

anatma

anatma shakti

not the Self; the non-self; the part that is the non-
Self
the energy of the non-Self 

anatma vibhaag

division that is not the Self 

anavgaahak

that which does not occupy space

anekant

anitya

all-encompassing and accepting of all viewpoints

temporary

antahkaran

the mind-intellect-chit-ego complex

anu 

anupcharit 
vyavahaar
anvay guna

apara 

apara prakruti

aparigrahi 

atom

worldly interactions that do not require planning 
or eﬀ ort 
intrinsic properties 

that which is farther away from me

the prakruti that is further away from the ‘I’, the 
mind, the speech, the body; also known as paroksh 
prakruti
one who is in a state free from worldly attachment 
or acquisitiveness

aparivartansheel

unchanging 

apjash

aprameya

discredit

unconﬁ ned illumination

apratibaddh

not bound

Aptavani

ara
aroopi

aruchi

asang

asat

asatya

ashata

ashubha

a  series  of  fourteen  volumes  compiled  from 
Dadashri’s speech
division of the time cycle
without form; formless 

disinterest for something

free from association 

destructible; temporary; not eternal; that which is 
not an eternal element
untruth

painful sensation; sensation of pain

inauspicious; bad

ashubha bhaav

hurtful or inauspicious intent

ashuddha

asthir

asti

astikaya 

astitva

atattva 

atikraman 

atindriya Gnan

impure

unsteady

existence

that which can have more than one pradesh

existence

the non-eternal; the relative

aggression towards other living beings through the 
mind, body, or speech
Knowledge beyond the sense organs

atindriya pratyaksh

to go beyond the sense organs

atindriya sukh

atkan

atma

Atma

Atma dhyan

Atma Gnan

Atma ramanata
Atma shakti
Atmadrashti

Atmakaar

avalamban

bliss of the Self that You experience without the 
help of any external things
a  major  impediment  on  the  path  of  liberation; 
spiritual roadblock
the self that has been powered with life energy

the Self; the Soul

awareness of ‘I am pure Soul’

the Knowledge of the Self 

dwelling as the Self; dwelling in the state as the Self
the energy of the Self 
the  right  belief  that  ‘I  am  pure  Soul’;  Vision  as 
the Self
the Self

dependency 

avaran

avastha

avasthit 

avatar

avichal

avikaari

veils of ignorance over the Self 

temporary state

charged; charged because of absorption in an eﬀ ect 
or situation
reincarnation

steady ; ﬁ xed

unchanging

avinabhaavi

interconnected; cannot be or exist without the other

avinashi

indestructible; permanent

avinashi tattva

permanent eternal element 

avkaash

open area

Avsarpini chovisi

avyabaadh

avyavahaar rashi 

avyay

bahusyam

bandh

bavo

bebhaan

bhaan

bhaav

the succession of twenty-four Tirthankar Lords in 
the ascending half-cycle of time
to not hurt nor be hurt 

a  state  of  uncategorized  souls  that  have  not  yet 
entered worldly interactions; those embodied living 
beings who have not yet been named
that which does not wear away 

more forms keep arising; endless visible forms 

undergo puran

the one in whom the power of the self has been 
ﬁ lled  in;  the  one  with  all  the  wrong  beliefs;  the 
internal  one  with  the  internal  one  with  wrong 
beliefs and anger, pride, deceit and greed; the one 
with the mind-intellect-chit-ego

gross unawareness of the Self 

experiential awareness as the Self

belief;  inner  intent;  preference  or  attachment; 
interest; like; discharge attachment

bhaav mun

causal mind

bhaav-abhaav

The belief of ‘I like this’ and ‘I do not like this’

bhaavak parmanu

those that cause the bhaav to arise

bhaavatmak

bhaavkarma

bhaavna

Bhagwan

charged in accordance with the bhaav

charge karma

intention; eﬀ ect of the developing I’s bhaav

God 

bhajana

bhakti

Bharat Kshetra

bhav

bhavsthiti

bhed buddhi

bhed Gnan

bhed swaroop

bhed Vignani 

bhogavato 

bhogave

bhogavu

bhojanalay

bhokta

worshipping

devotional  acts;  devotional  worship;  devotional 
acts done on the basis of the knowledge one has 
about  the  God  he  worships;  devotional  acts  to 
approach nearer and nearer to the Self

one  of  the  three  locations  in  the  universe  where 
human beings reside, the other two are Mahavideh 
Kshetra and Airavat Kshetra

a lifetime

predetermined number of lives and lifespan until 
the attainment of moksha based on one’s ﬁ lled stock 
of karma; spiritual development

the intellect that causes divisiveness

Knowledge that separates the Self and the non-Self

the divisive form

the One who separates the Self and all the other 
ﬁ ve eternal elements; a spiritual Scientist who has 
the  experiential  Knowledge  to  separate  the  Self 
and the non-Self

the eﬀ ect of karma; that which is to be suﬀ ered or 
experienced; suﬀ ering

experiences the eﬀ ect of pain or pleasure 

suﬀ er; consume; enjoy; indulge in

something that is worth enjoying; the place where 
puran takes place

suﬀ erer; the suﬀ erer or the one who experiences 
the eﬀ ects

bhoomika

place

bhrant chetan

the self with the wrong belief that ‘I am Chandubhai’

bhrant purusharth

illusory eﬀ ort

bhrant swaroop

form as the illusory self; the illusory form

bhranti

wrong belief ; illusion

bhranti chetan 

the worldly-interacting self; the developing I with 
the wrong belief of ‘I am Chandubhai’

bhrantibhaav

wrong belief that ‘I am Chandubhai’

bhrantiras

the belief that perpetuates the illusion that ‘I am 
Chandubhai, this is mine, and I am the doer’

Brahm

brahma

brahmachari 

the Self

the creator

a  person  practicing  celibacy  through  the  mind, 
speech and body

brahmacharya

celibacy through the mind, speech and body

Brahmin

brahmit

buddhi

a member of the highest class of the four Hindu 
castes,  spiritually  and  socially,  comprising  the 
priests, religious teachers and scholars

deluded

intellect

Chaitanya 

the Self; that which Knows and Sees; the pure Self

chaitanyabhaav

ﬁ lled with the intent of the self

chaitanyaghan 
swaroopi

chanchal 

chanchalta

unbroken Knowledge and Vision

active; unsteady; moving; restless

restlessness

charam deha

the ﬁ nal body before attaining ﬁ nal liberation

charam sharir

the ﬁ nal body before attaining ﬁ nal liberation

charitra moha

discharge illusory attachment

Chetan

chetan

the  Self;  to  Know  and  See;  the  eternal  element 
with the function of Knowing and Seeing; with the 
property to Know and See; the One who has the 
Knowledge of all this that is happening, the One 
who Knows; the living entity

animate; living; the living entity; life energy; the 
living  being;  the  life-force;  powered  with  life 
energy in the presence of the Self; the embodied 
soul

Chetan bhaav 

the function to Know and See; the bhaav of the Self

chetan pudgal 

the animate pudgal

Chetan shakti

Chetan tattva

living energy; the energy of the Self to Know and 
See; energy of the Self 

the eternal element of the Self; eternal element that 
Knows  and  Sees;  eternal  element  which  has  the 
property to Know and See 

chetana

Chetana

worldly-interacting self

the Self

Chetanta 

chit

chokhkha

chovisi

dakhal

dakho

the  property  to  Know  and  See;  life  sustaining 
energy; being the Self 

subtle component of vision and knowledge in the 
inner functioning instrument called antahkaran

completely auspicious; pure; auspicious; puriﬁ ed; 
unadulterated; lighter; clearer

the succession of twenty-four Tirthankar Lords in 
the third and fourth era of each half-cycle of time

the eﬀ ects of the interference

to interfere; interference

darasal Atma

the Real Self

Darshan

darshan

the Vision as the Self; Vision

devotional viewing of an idol in a temple; the belief 
of the self

Darshan kriya

the activity of Seeing

dehadhaari atma

the embodied soul 

derasar

Deravasi

dev

devgati

devi

Devlok

a Jain temple

a  member  of  a  Jain  sect  that  believes  in  temple 
worship

male celestial beings

celestial life-form 

female celestial being

a cosmic plane where celestial beings live; celestial 
realm 

dharma

function; religion; true nature

dharmadharma

relative religion

dharmadhyaan 

a virtuous internal state of being

dharmastikaya

the  eternal  element  that  supports  motion;  also 
known as gatisahayak 

dhoti

dhruv

dhyan

loose lower garment worn by Hindu men

permanence 

internal state of being; meditation

divya chakshu

the divine Vision through which the Real and the 
relative is Seen as separate; the divine eyes

divya drashti

divine Vision as the Self

Drashta

drashti

drashya
dravya

dravya nikshep

the Seer 

perspective

objects to be Seen 
elemental  matter;  six  eternal  elements;  physical 
matter; the relative self; eﬀ ect; physical evidences; 
worldly-interacting self
identifying  someone  based  on  whatever  karmic 
stock one has ﬁ lled in

dravya-guna-paryay elemental matter, property and phases 

dravyakarma

subtle discharge karma 

dravya-kshetra-kaal-
bhaav
dukh
dusham swabhaav

Dushamkaal

dwesh

ekakaar

ekantik

ethvado

gal

galan

gandh

garva

gati

gatimaan

gatisahayak 

gatisahayak tattva

Gnan

gnan

physical  matter  or  evidences,  location,  time  and 
intent
pain
nature of the relative self that is characterized by 
anger, pride, deceit, and greed, and a lack of unity 
in thought, speech, and action
an era of moral and spiritual decline characterized 
mainly by misery
abhorrence

become one 

single viewpoint

food left over in a plate after eating; refuse

returning; giving oﬀ  the eﬀ ect

discharge;  empty  out;  discharging;  outflux  or 
dissipation; withdrawing

smell

subtle pride

motion

in motion

the  eternal  element  that  supports  motion;  also 
known as dharmastikaya
the  eternal  element  that  supports  motion;  also 
known as dharmastikaya
the Knowledge of the Self and the doer given in 
the Gnan vidhi; Knowledge of the Self; Knowledge
relative knowledge; knowledge

Gnan kriya

activity of Knowing 

Gnan vidhi

Scientiﬁ c  experiment  to  impart  Self-realization, 
exclusive  to  Akram  Vignan.  This  is  a  scientiﬁ c 
process of 48 minutes wherein the Gnani graces 
the seeker and imparts the Knowledge of the Self

Gnanakaar

the Knower

gnan-darshan

relative knowledge and vision

Gnan-Darshan 

Knowledge and Vision of the Self

Gnangamya

Gnani

Gnani Purush 

that which can be understood through Knowledge; 
which  can  only  be  experienced  through  the 
Knowledge of the Self

The Knower of one eternal element; the One who 
has realized the Self and is able to do the same for 
others; the enlightened One who can enlighten others

the One who has realized the Self and is able to do 
the same for others; the enlightened One who can 
enlighten others

Gnanshakti

the energy of Knowledge 

Gnata

the Knower

Gnata-Drashta

the Knower-Seer

Gnata-Drashtapanu to prevail as the Knower-Seer 

Gnata-Drashta-
Parmanandi

gneya

gneyakaar

grah

gruhit mithyatva

guhya

guhyatam

guhyatar

guna

gunadharma

the Knower-Seer and eternally blissful

the object to be known 

to become one with what is being Seen

the planets; the diﬀ erent forms of prejudice

entrenched  deluded  beliefs  acquired  through 
societal inﬂ uence 

subtle

subtlest

subtler

property

intrinsic  properties  with  a  specific  function  ; 
intrinsic functional properties 

guru-laghu 

heavy or light; increase or decrease

guru-laghu swabhaav the inherent nature to increase and decrease

gusso

anger without violent intent

hisaab

hu

hupanu

indriya

indriya atma 

indriya gnan

indriya sukh

indriyagamya

jaanpanu

jada

karmic account

the I

the prevalence of the I; the I that prevails in the 
relative
sense organs 

the physical self which is ‘eﬀ ective’ through the 
sense organs; the physical body; Mangaldas

the knowledge attained through the medium of the 
sense organs and the intellect

pleasures derived from worldly or material things 
as perceived by the ﬁ ve sense organs

that which can be understood or perceived through 
the ﬁ ve sense organs

the function of Knowing

inanimate  matter;  insentient;  lifeless;  eternal 
element of inanimate matter; inanimate; non-living; 
in the form of Pudgal Parmanu; an inanimate object

jada bhaav

the intent of the non-Self; the intents that are lifeless

jada Parmanu 

the  smallest,  most  indivisible,  indestructible 
particles of the eternal element of inanimate matter

jada Pudgal Parmanu the  smallest,  most  indivisible,  indestructible 
particles of the eternal element of inanimate matter

jada shakti

jada tattva

jada vastu

jagruti

Jain

inanimate energy; non-living energy

the eternal element of inanimate matter 

inanimate matter 

awakened awareness

a person whose religion is Jainism

Jain pudgal bhaav

the belief that ‘I am a Jain’

jalebi

jash

a crispy, deep-fried Indian sweet soaked in sugar 
syrup
credit

jatismarangnan

knowledge of one’s previous identities

jatra

jeev

pilgrimage

the embodied soul; the self; life force; the soul; life; 
the living being; that which believes that it lives 
and dies; the living entity; the relative self

jitendriya jina

the one who has conquered the pleasures derived 
from the ﬁ ve sense organs; the One who has the 
Knowledge of the Self, hence He is no longer the 
owner  of  the  ﬁ ve  sense  organs  or  the  pleasures 
derived through them

Kaal

kaal

Time; the eternal element of Time

time in the relative sense

Kaal tattva

eternal element of Time

kaalanu 

kaalatit

kaaran

kaaran deha

kaaran sharir

kaarman sharir 

kadhapo

kadroopa

Kaliyug

kalp

kalpana

kalpshakti

atom of Time

beyond Time

causal; causes

causal body; also known as kaaran sharir, kaarman 
sharir
causal body; also known as kaaran deha, kaarman 
sharir
causal body; also known as karan sharir, karan deha

visible outbursts 

inauspicious

the  current  era  of  the  time  cycle,  which  is 
characterized by a lack of unity in thought, speech, 
and action
one  complete  revolution  of  the  time  cycle 
comprising  12  time  periods,  6  of  the  ascending 
cycle and 6 of the descending cycle; the Self; the 
[worldly-interacting] self 
imagination

energy or property of envisioning of the Self

kampayman 

unsteady; emotional

karamat 

karan

karta

kartabhaav

kartapanu

karya

karya deha

kashay

craftsmanship

instruments  of  action,  like  the  mind,  speech  and 
body
the doer 

sense of doership 

prevalence in doership; a sense of doership

eﬀ ect

eﬀ ective body

anger, pride, deceit and greed

kashay atma

the  self  with  anger,  pride,  deceit  and  greed;  the 
bavo; the one with all the wrong beliefs

kashaybhaav

an intent laden with anger, pride, deceit or greed

kayotsarg

keval Charitra 

standing in an upright position and meditating on 
the properties of the pure Soul after renouncing the 
mind, speech and body
absolute Conduct as the Self

keval Darshan 

absolute Vision; absolute Vision as the Self

keval Gnan

keval Gnani

Kevali

khenchan

khichdee 

khyaal

kraman

Kramik path

kriya

kriyakaari

kriyakaari shakti 

kriyaman karma

kriyavaan 

kriyavaan shakti

kriyavarti shakti 

absolute Knowledge 

the One with absolute Knowledge; the absolutely 
enlightened One
the One who has attained absolute Knowledge from 
the  Tirthankar  Lords;  the  absolutely  enlightened 
One
internal pull

an Indian dish made from rice and lentils

constant awareness

activity  of  the  mind,  speech  and  body  that  does 
not hurt anyone
traditional step-by-step path of spiritual progress; 
traditional spiritual path of penance and austerities
actions;  activity;  ritual;  activities  of  the  mind, 
speech and body; active

works  on  its  own  from  within;  brings  results; 
materializes in action; procures results on its own; 
‘eﬀ ective’  such  that  they  take  on  the  eﬀ ect  and 
give result
the energy to procure results on its own

The  visible  activity  that  is  seen  after  the  karma 
unfolds
to be inherently active; to be ‘eﬀ ective’ such that 
they take on the eﬀ ect and give result

the energy of the pudgal to do activity; the unique 
energy/property to be inherently active; also known 
as kriyavarti shakti
the energy of the pudgal to do activity; the unique 
energy/property to be inherently active; also known 
as kriyavaan shakti

krodh

krodhak

Kshatriya

kshayak samkit

kshetra

kshetragnya

kshetrakaar

kumaran

laagni

laavanya

anger with violent intent; anger; charge anger

that which causes one to become angry

a  member  of  second  of  the  four  Hindu  castes 
comprising the warriors
the permanent conviction of the right belief that ‘I 
am pure Soul’
location

the Knower-Seer of the relative self

to become one with the relative self; one with the 
body
death without the awareness of the Self

feelings 

an attractive appearance 

laavanyata

extraordinary attractiveness

ladoos

laksh

laya

ball-shaped Indian dessert

awakened awareness of ‘I am pure Soul’

dissipation

lepayamaan bhaav

the intents that tend to anoint

leshya

ling

the  aura  or  coloring  of  the  soul  based  on  its 
association  with  the  karmic  matter  or  based  on 
one’s internal state of being
gender

lobh kashay

greed

lok 

lokaakash 

maan

magas 

maharaj

mahatma

Mahavideh Kshetra

Mahendra

region  of  space  in  the  universe  where  there  is 
worldly existence; the universe; space
the region of space in the universe in which all six 
eternal elements exist

pride

an Indian sweet made from chickpea ﬂ our, sugar 
and clariﬁ ed butter

spiritual teacher; religious teacher

those who have received Self-realization through 
Gnan Vidhi; Self-realized ones in Akram Vignan
one  of  the  three  locations  in  the  universe  where 
human  beings  reside,  the  other  two  are  Bharat 
Kshetra and Airavat Kshetra
the king of the celestial beings

mamata

mamatva

Mangaldas

marapanu

mataji

matbhed

matignan

matiGnan

maya

mishrachetan

mishrasa

mithya shraddha

moha

moksha

‘my-ness’

the ‘my-ness’

the physical body

the sense of ‘my-ness’

Goddess mother

divisiveness due to a diﬀ erence of opinion

worldly knowledge acquired through the medium 
of the sense organs and the intellect

Knowledge of the Self that has been digested and 
is in experience
illusion  induced  by  worldy  life;  Self-ignorance; 
wrong belief
the  I  with  wrong  belief  that  arises  as  when  the 
eternal elements of the Self and inanimate matter 
come  into  close  proximity  with  each  other;  the 
developing  I  with  the  wrong  belief  of  ‘I  am 
Chandubhai’
parmanu that are ready to give eﬀ ect; subtle phase 
parmanu; also known as mishrachetan or vibhaavik 
pudgal;  also  known  as  bhaavak  parmanu;  also 
known  as  karma  fal  (karmic  effect);  charged 
parmanu waiting to give eﬀ ect; eﬀ ective parmanu
deluded belief

illusory attachment 

the state of ultimate liberation There are two stages 
of liberation:
1) freedom from worldly misery, hurt, 
unhappiness also known as causal liberation 
2) ultimate/ﬁ nal liberation from all karma, from 
the physical body, and the worldly cycle of birth 
and death; also known as nirvana.

mokshadata

the bestower of liberation

mooah

mool Atma

mool Chetan

mortal  one;  a  classic  term  used  by  Dadashri  to 
shake up the listener, it literally means ‘one who 
is destined to die’; one who is dying by the second
the original Self 

the original Self 

mool swaroop

the original form 

mool tattva

mool vastu

mukti

murt

murti

naad

naam

the original eternal element 

the original eternal element; the original Self

freedom;  liberation  from  the  cycle  of  birth  and 
death
visible; the visible form

visible  representation;  physical  form;  physical 
representation; idols
sound

name

naam nikshep

identifying someone based on the name given

naamkarma

naimittik

napunsak

name determining karma

happens through many evidences; existing based 
on evidences 
bisexual

napunsak-ling

neuter

nikshep

nimit

nimit-naimittik

niraakaar

niraakul anand

niraakulta

niradhaar

aspects to understand something in exactness and 
in the relevant context

evidence;  the  one  who  is  instrumental  in  the 
process; instrumental entity; evidentiary doer

evidentiary; based on evidences that are instrumental 
in the process
formless

the bliss of a state that is free of uneasiness and 
agitation 
a  blissful  state  free  of  uneasiness  and  agitation 
attained after Self-realization
free of support; baseless

nirahamkaari

egoless

niralamb

absolutely free of dependency on anything relative 

nirbhay bhaav

an intent or state that is free of fear

nirjara

nirjeev

nirlep

discharge of karma; discharging; undergo galan; 
exhausting; shedding oﬀ 

lifeless

untouched;  absolutely  unaffected;  untainted; 
unanointed; non-smearable; to be unaﬀ ected by any 
intents that tend to anoint; without any tendency of 
karma to adhere to it

nirmalya 

nirpeksh

nirpekshta

nirvana

nirvikaari

nirvikalp 

nirvikalpi

Nishchay

the ﬁ nal discharge; not chargeable anymore

that which is Real; God; absolute

with respect to Reality 

ﬁ nal liberation from all karma, from the physical 
body and the worldly cycle of birth and death

the One who is in His original nature 

that which cannot be imagined; the state free from 
wrong  beliefs  and  with  the  right  belief  of  ‘I  am 
pure  Soul’;  the  state  free  from  the  belief  ‘I  am 
Chandubhai’ and all the relative ‘I-ness’ and ‘my-
ness’ that stem from it

the One who is free from all wrong beliefs 

Real; the Self; the Real viewpoint

Nishchay Atma

the Real Self

Nishchay kaal

nishchetan

Time  in  the  Real  sense;  Real  Time;  the  eternal 
element of Time
non-living

nishchetan chetan

non-living entity

nishchit

nishkeﬁ 

nishkriyata

nitya

nivedo

niyam

niyamraj

Niyamsaar

niyati

predetermined

the One who is free from the intoxication of the 
ego and doership
inactivity

permanent 

ultimate closure

the law of nature 

the governance is as per the law of nature 

a  famous  Jain  text  composed  by  Acharya 
Kundakunda
the level of spiritual development of a soul as it 
progresses naturally on the track of evolution

niyativaad

the theory of niyati

nokarma

odambo

paap

gross discharge karma

a supporting example 

demerit karma

paarinaamik bhaav

the resultant state

padaarth

an eternal element

padmasana

the lotus pose

pados

pal

panch mahabhoot

par

para

para prakruti 

spiritual hymns 

a measure of time equal to 24 seconds

according  to  ancient  Indian  philosophy,  the  ﬁ ve 
elements that are the basis of all cosmic creation: 
earth, water, ﬁ re, air, and space
the non-Self

that which is near me

the prakruti that is closer to the ‘I’, the mishrachetan; 
also known as pratyaksh prakruti

paraatpar 

the pure Knower-Seer 

paraatpar Chaitanya the eternal element of the Self 

paradhin

parakram

dependent on another entity

extraordinary spiritual eﬀ ort to progress as the Self

param vinay

absolute humility

paraya

parbhaav

not being of the Self

the state as the non-Self

pardravya swaroop

in the form that is not the form as the Self

parigrah 

parinaam

parinaman

parinamanata

parivartan

worldly possessions; worldly acquisitions

result

constantly undergo change 

constantly undergoing change; to be the doer of its 
own inherent nature
constantly changing; constantly undergoing change

parivartansheel

constantly undergoing change; constantly changing 

parkaal

parkshetra

parmanand

Parmanu

parmanu

Parmarthe akriya

Parmatma

time as it relates to the relative

the realm of the non-Self; the relative self

eternal bliss

the  smallest,  most  indivisible  and  indestructible 
particle of matter
particles of inanimate matter which are not in pure 
form
devoid of activity in the ultimate sense, in the state 
as the Self 
the absolute Self 

parparinaam

an eﬀ ect of the non-Self

par-prakash

illumination that is not of the Self

parsatta

subject to another entity; authority over the non-
Self; subject to external circumstances

par-swaroop

form as the non-Self 

partattva

paryay

paudgalik

paudgalik masti

not the Self

a phase

worldly;  of  the  non-Self  complex;  made  up  of 
pudgal parmanu
the ‘play’ of the pudgal

paudgalik maya

the wrong belief brought about by the pudgal

paudgalik ramanata engrossment  in  the  temporary  states  of  the  non-
Self complex; also known as pudgal ramanata or 
praakrut ramanata
the form as the non-Self complex 

paudgalik swaroop

pote

Pote

power chetan

the developing I; the worldly interacting self

the developing ‘I’; the Self

the pudgal that is powered with life energy in the 
presence of the Self

praakrut

that which pertains to the non-Self

praakrut bhaav

intents of the non-Self

praakrut ramanata

pradesh

engrossment  in  the  temporary  states  of  the  non-
Self complex; also known as pudgal ramanata or 
paudgalik ramanata
region; spatial unit; smallest amount of space that 
a single parmanu occupies on the Self

pragat Purush

a person in whom the Self has manifested

Pragnya 

prakash

prakashak

prakruti 

prakruti bhaav

pranayam

the direct light of the Self

illumination 

the illuminator 

non-Self  complex;  the  visible  form  created  in  an 
ignorant state by the continuous instillation of the 
false attribution that ‘I am Chandubhai’ in the past 
life; the relative self with inherent characteristic traits
the belief that ‘I am the prakruti’, ‘I am the non-
Self complex’
breathing exercises

prarabdha

destiny; eﬀ ect of past karma

prarabdha karma

accumulated  stock  of  karma  which  are  ready  to 
unfold; karma that have come into eﬀ ect;  the karma 
which come to unfold when the time is right

prasav

multiplication

prasavdharma 

prasavdharmi 

prasavdharmi 
swabhaav
prasavta

prataap

pratikraman

pratishthit atma

pratiti

prayog

prayog chetan 

prayog karma

prayogsa

preya

pudgal

the  inherent  nature  to  give  rise  to  many  visible 
forms from one
having the inherent nature to give rise to endless 
visible forms from one

having  the  inherent  nature  to  become  multiple 
visible forms from one 
having the potential to show endless other visible 
forms from one 
the aura of the power and inﬂ uence

Three-step  process  of  reversal  from  aggression 
through thought, speech, or action. It consists of: 
alochana  -  confessing  the  mistake  to  the  Lord 
within,  pratikraman  -  asking  for  forgiveness  for 
that mistake, and pratyakhyan - making the ﬁ rm 
resolve to never repeat the mistake, and asking for 
the energy for the same
charging relative self [for those not Self-realized]; 
discharging relative self [for those who are Self-
realized] 
conviction 

experiment;  processing;  process  of  charging  of 
parmanu; process
parmanu charged in accordance with the bhaav of 
the developing I
charged phase parmanu

parmanu  in  the  charged  phase;  subtler  phase 
parmanu; parmanu charged in accordance with the 
bhaav of the developing I; also known as vidharmi 
pudgal; also known as prayog chetan; also known 
as karma; causal parmanu
material pleasures

inanimate matter; the physical body; the non-Self 
complex  that  undergoes  inﬂ ux  and  outﬂ ux;  the 
bodily form

Pudgal 

pudgal bhaav

pudgal parinaam

Pudgal Parmanu

pudgal ramanata

punarjanma

punya

puran

puran-galan

Purush

Purusharth

purusharth

purush-ling

raag

raag kashay

raag-dwesh

raagi

rajkan

ranjaymaanpanu

ras

roop

roopak

roopantar

roopi

roopi shakti

roopi tattva

the eternal element of inanimate matter; Parmanu 
in their natural pure form

the desire based tendency of the non-Self complex; 
the belief that ‘I am Chandubhai’
the eﬀ ects of the non-Self complex

the  smallest,  most  indivisible,  indestructible 
particles of inanimate matter

engrossment in the temporary states of the non-Self 
complex;  also  known  as  paudgalik  ramanata  or 
praakrut ramanata
reincarnation

merit karma

filled  in;  charging;  influx;  coming  together; 
prayogsa; inﬂ ux in the form of charging; depositing

input and output; to ﬁ ll in and empty out; inﬂ ux-
outﬂ ux;  charging-discharging;  charge-discharge; 
discharge eﬀ ects
the Self-realized One; the Self

Real spiritual eﬀ ort to progress as the Self

eﬀ ort; relative eﬀ ort; illusory eﬀ ort; karmic cause

masculine

attachment

attachment

attachment and abhorrence

one who is prone to attachment

a particle of dust, the smallest particle, which has 
no value
a state of engrossment in the explosive parmanu

taste; interest

form

manifest as an eﬀ ect 

change in form; transformation

with form; to have a visible form

an energy that gives rise to many visible forms 

the  eternal  element  that  has  a  visible  form;  the 
eternal element of inanimate matter

rotli

ruchi

sadhan

sadhana

sadhu

saiyam

saiyami

saiyog

sakriya

ﬂ at bread

having an interest for something

tool; religious tools

religious practices; eﬀ ort

an ascetic

self-restraint

someone  who  is  in  control  of  their  kashay  with 
egoism
circumstance; coming together

inherently  active;  continuously  in  some  kind  of 
activity; continuously active

sakriyapanu

continuously active state

sakriyata

samadhi

samadhi maran

samata

samay 

samay parinaamik

samayik

samaysaar

Samaysaar

sambhaave nikaal

samkit

samsaran 

samsaran marg

samuchchay

to be in a continuously active state

a blissful state as the Self

blissful death during which One is in the awareness 
of the Self
the  equanimity  that  prevails  for  One  who  is  in 
experience of the Self
the smallest, most indivisible unit of time

that which keeps changing from one samay to the 
next
introspection process for a speciﬁ c time in which 
One remains as the Self and Sees the faults of the 
non-Self 
the essence of the smallest unit of Time

a  famous  Jain  text  composed  by  Acharya 
Kundakunda in 439 verses
to clear with equanimity 

the right belief that ‘I am pure Soul’

that which is constantly undergoing change

path of natural and spiritual evolution, starting with 
the entry of a living being (jeev) in the interactive 
life state (vyavahaar rashi) from nigod (dormant 
state), and progressively evolving from a one-sense 
life-form all the way to ﬁ ve-sense life-form, and 
ultimately ending with ﬁ nal liberation
collective; federal

samyak Charitra

the right Conduct as the Self

samyak Darshan

the right vision of ‘I am pure Soul’

samyak drashti

the right belief of ‘I am pure Soul’ 

samyak shraddha

the right belief

samyaktva

sanatan

the right belief that ‘I am pure Soul’

eternal

sanchit karma

the stock of karma accumulated within

sandhya

sangnya

sanjog kaal

sankalp

sankalp-vikalp 

in  the  evening  time;  the  junction  point  between 
lightness and darkness

an association

the time of a circumstance

the belief that ‘this is mine’ 

all the relative ‘I-ness’ and ‘my-ness’ that stem from 
the belief that ‘I am Chandubhai’

sansaar

worldly life 

sansaar bhaav

worldly intents

sansaar fal

the eﬀ ect or fruit of worldly life

sansarg

sanskaar

sapeksh

sapekshta

sarjan

Sarvagnya

in contact 

karmic impressions 

relative; related to 

with respect to relativity

the sowing of causes; creation

the One who Knows all the eternal elements; the 
One who even Knows what each eternal element 
is doing; the Omniscient One

sarvansh Darshan

complete Vision

sat

Sat 

relative truth

indestructible;  the  Self;  the  eternal  element;  the 
absolute truth; the Real truth; eternal

Sat Chit Anand

in the form of eternal Knowledge and Vision and 
bliss; the Self

Sati

satsang

satta

a woman of high moral conduct

a spiritual discourse

authority

sattva, rajas, tamas

satya 

shaashwat

shakti

Shalaka Purush

shaochalay

shata

shok

shraddha

shreya

shrutGnan

shubha

the  three  physiological  qualities  of  the  physical 
body
the truth

eternal

energy 

a  human  being  with  extraordinary,  super  human 
energies and accomplishments

something  that  is  worth  letting  go  of;  the  place 
where galan takes place

a pleasurable sensation; a sensation of pleasure

an ardent desire

faith; belief; conviction

spiritually beneﬁ cial 

the  Knowledge  of  the  Self  obtained  through 
listening  or  reading  the  words  of  an  enlightened 
One
auspicious; good

shubha bhaav 

a helpful intent; a good intent; an auspicious intent

shuddha

pure

shuddha Charitra 

pure Conduct as the Self; being the Knower-Seer

shuddha Chetan

the pure Knower-Seer 

shuddha upayog

the pure applied awareness as the Self

Shuddhatma

the pure Soul

Shudra

Siddha

a member of the fourth and lowest of the Hindu 
castes, comprising the artisans and laborers

the absolutely liberated Souls

Siddha gati 

the realm of the absolutely liberated Souls

Siddha Kshetra 

siddhant

Siddhashila 

siddhi

the location at the crest of the universe which is the 
permanent abode of the absolutely liberated Souls 
who have attained ultimate liberation
the established principle 

the  crescent  shaped  location  at  the  crest  of  the 
universe  which  is  the  permanent  abode  of  the 
absolutely  liberated  Souls  who  have  attained 
ultimate liberation
spiritual power

skandha

sookshma

aggregates of two or more Parmanu

subtle 

sookshma deha

the subtle body

sookshmatam

sookshmatar

subtlest; subtle most

subtler

sookshmati-sookshma subtlest of the subtle

sparsh

sparshna

srushti

Sthanakvasi

sthapna nikshep

sthir

sthirata

sthiti

sthitisahayak

touch; property of tactility 

the texture 

natural occurrence 

a member of a Jain sect that does not believe in 
temple worship
identifying  someone  based  on  a  physical 
representation in the form of an idol

still; steady

steadiness

the inert state; the steady state; the stationary state 

the eternal element that supports inertia; also known 
as adharmastikaya

sthitisahayak tattva 

the eternal element that supports inertia

sthool

gross; at the gross level

sthool deha

the physical body

stri vishayvikaar

sexual impulses for the female gender

stri-ling

strived

sumati-kumati

Swa

Swaabhavik

swabhaav

Swabhaav

feminine

the sexual disposition of a female

knowledge acquired through both, the good and the 
misleading intellect
the Self

with respect to the Real; the inherent nature of the 
eternal elements
inherent nature as the prakruti

inherent nature as the Self

Swabhaav dasha

the inherently natural state as the Self

swabhaavik

swabhaavik guna

inherently natural; inherent nature; natural form; 
naturally
inherently natural properties

swabhaavik kriya

activity that happens naturally

swabhaavik Pudgal Parmanu in its pure natural form

swabhaavik  puran-
galan 

natural inﬂ ux and outﬂ ux, wherein the Parmanu 
come together and dissipate

swabhaavik roop

the natural form

Swadhin

Swadravya

independent; dependent on the Self alone

the form as the Self; the elemental matter as the 
Self; the realm of One’s own Self

Swadravya Swaroop the Real form as the Self

Swakaal

Swakshetra

swamipanu

Swaparakram

Time as it relates to the Real

the realm of the Self

the sense of ownership

extraordinary eﬀ ort as the Self after Self-realization 
to break certain entrenched habits of the self

Swaparinaam

the eﬀ ect as the Self

Swapurusharth

the Real eﬀ ort to progress towards the absolute Self 
after Self-realization

Swaroop

swaroop

Swaroop-roop 

the Real form; the Real form as the Self

one’s own form

a form which is the Real form as the Self; the Real 
form as absolute Knowledge

Swasatta

the authority of the Self

Swaswamipanu

the sense of ownership as the Self

Swa-swaroop

the Real form as the Self 

Swatattva

swayam

the Self

spontaneous 

swayam kriyakaari

syadvaad

tadaakaar bhaav 

that  which  brings  about  results  on  its  own;  that 
which  procures  results  on  its  own;  that  which 
functions of its own accord 
that  which  does  not  hurt  anyone,  and  which  is 
acceptable by all
taking on the form as the pudgal whilst remaining 
totally separate from it

tankotkirna

tanmay

immiscible 

engrossed

tanmayakaar

engrossed

tanto

tattva

a lingering link; a grudge

an eternal element

tattva Gnan

the Knowledge of the eternal elements 

tattva Swaroop

the elemental form as the Self

tattva vastu

eternal elements 

Tattvadarshan 

a section in a Jain scripture

tattvadarshi

Tattvagnani

tejas sharir

tejoleshya

the One with the complete experience of the Self

the One who Knows the Self 

the electrical body

the power of ﬁ re or electricity harnessed from the 
rays of the Sun by gazing directly at it

tirth

place of pilgrimage 

Tirthankar Lord

triguna

tyaagi

udayast

udaykarma

ugra

the absolutely enlightened Lord who can liberate 
others;  a  living  fully  enlightened  being  whose 
presence  turns  every  place  He  goes  into  a  place 
of  pilgrimage  and  whose  darshan  grants  final 
liberation  to  the  One  who  has  attained  Self-
realization
the  three  physiological  qualities  of  the  physical 
body: sattva, rajas, and tamas

a renunciate

prone to rising and falling

unfolding karma

discharge anger

ugra parmanu

parmanu colored with the intent of anger

ugrata

undhiyu

upadaan

upadhi

Upanishad

upayog

upchaar

discharging anger; volatility

a Gujarati mixed vegetable curry

spiritual development

an externally-induced problem

the ancient Sanskrit texts of spiritual teaching and 
ideas of Hinduism

applied  awareness;  the  applied  awareness  as  the 
Self
worldly interactions that require planning and eﬀ ort 

upsham samkit 

the state in which the right belief that ‘I am pure 
Soul’ remains for a very short time

urdhvagami

urdhvagati

utpaat 

utpatti

prone to ascend

to ascend towards a higher life-form

genesis; beginning; creation

genesis ; arising

Utsarpini chovisi

the succession of twenty-four Tirthankar Lords in 
the descending half-cycle of time

vaado

enclosure behind the house 

vaanki drashti

deviated perspectives 

vaghar

Vaimanik dev

vairaag

Vaishnav

Vaishnav pudgal 
bhaav
Vaishya

vartan

vastu 

vastutva 

vastutvapanu 

vatta, pitta, kapha 

vedana

Vedanta

Vedas

veg

first  cooking  step  of  tempering  spices  like 
asafoetida, mustard seeds, chilies in heated oil or 
ghee
a category of celestial beings

dispassion for worldly life

a member of a Hindu sect holding Vishnu or Lord 
Krishna to be the supreme being, generally seeking 
salvation through devotional worship of the God 
or His avatars
the belief that ‘I am a Vaishnav’

a  member  of  the  third  of  the  four  Hindu  castes, 
comprising the merchants and farmers

external conduct

eternal element

what an eternal element is and what it comprises of; 
what the Self is and what It comprises of

prevalence in the Knowledge of what the Self is 
and what It is not
the  three  types  of  dosha  that  each  prakruti  is 
inﬂ uenced by, they comprise of the ﬁ ve elements 
of ﬁ re, air, water, earth, space in which one or more 
elements dominate; vatta - air and space, pitta - ﬁ re, 
kapha - earth and water

the sensation of pleasure or pain 

one of the six schools of Hindu philosophy

the oldest scriptures of Hinduism

normal state of motion

vibhaag

vibhaav 

vibhaav dasha

division; separation

a third identity with completely new properties that 
arises due to the coming together of the Self and 
inanimate matter; unnatural state; the wrong belief 
of ‘I am Chandubhai’
unnatural state

vibhaavbhaav 

the wrong belief that ‘I am Chandubhai’

vibhaavik

vibhaavik bhaav 

deviated  from  its  inherent  nature;  unnatural; 
charged
the wrong belief of ‘I am Chandubhai’

vibhaavik chetan

the self that has deviated from its inherent nature

vibhaavik hu
vibhaavik parmanu

vibhaavik pudgal 

vidharmi pudgal

vidhi

Vignan

vikaari

vikaari guna

vikaari parmanu

vikaari pudgal 

vikalp 

the unnatural I
the parmanu that have deviated from their inherent 
nature; same as vikrut pudgal, vibhaavik pudgal, 
vikaari pudgal and vikaari parmanu

the  pudgal  formed  from  the  parmanu  that  have 
deviated from their inherent nature;  same as vikrut 
pudgal,  vibhaavik  parmanu,  vikaari  pudgal  and 
vikaari parmanu
the pudgal parmanu that have been coated with the 
intent; charged parmanu; also known as prayogsa

silent auspicious blessings performed by the Gnani 
for the salvation of others; a prayer
Science;  the  absolute  Knowledge;  spiritual 
Knowledge; spiritual Science

deformed

properties that have deviated from their inherent 
nature 
parmanu  that  have  deviated  from  their  inherent 
nature; same as vikrut pudgal, vibhaavik pudgal, 
vibhaavik parmanu and vikaari pudgal
parmanu  that  have  deviated  from  their  inherent 
nature; same as vikrut pudgal, vibhaavik pudgal, 
vibhaavik parmanu and vikaari parmanu
the wrong belief that ‘I am Chandubhai’ and all the 
relative ‘I-ness’ that stems from it

vikalp shakti

self’s energy of having wrong beliefs 

vikriya

disorder; unnatural activity

vikrut

unnatural; charged with the bhaav; distorted

vikrut bhaav 

wrong belief 

vikrut kriya pudgal 

the pudgal in an unnatural state

vikrut pudgal 

vikrut shakti

parmanu  that  have  deviated  from  their  original 
form;  same  as  vikaari  pudgal,  vikaari  parmanu, 
vibhaavik parmanu and vibhaavik pudgal
unnatural energy

vikrut swabhaav

an unnatural state

vikrutata

unnaturalness

vimaan

vinashi

vinay

vipal

viradhana 

viraho

virti

mythological ﬂ ying vehicle 

destructible; temporary; relative

humility

one sixteenth of a second

to speak contrary to fact about a person, leading to 
spiritual descent

the pain of separation from a loved one

to become free of the pudgal

viruddh bhaav 

an opposing bhaav

visarjan

vishay

to disintegrate; giving oﬀ  the eﬀ ects of causes sown

the desire for sexual pleasures; sexuality

vishesh avastha

a new temporary state

vishesh guna

vishesh parinaam

visheshbhaav

completely  new  properties;  completely  new 
property of a third entity that arises when the two 
eternal elements of the Self and inanimate matter 
come together
completely new eﬀ ect; completely new result that 
arises when two eternal elements come together

that which is not the Self; an assumed identiﬁ cation 
with  that  which  is  not  One’s  own;  taken  on  a 
form  that  is  not  one’s  own;  a  third  identity  with 
completely new properties; also referred to as the 
vibhaavik pudgal; that which has deviated from its 
inherent nature 

visheshbhaavi pudgal the  pudgal  with  completely  new  properties  that 
arises  when  the  Self  and  inanimate  matter  come 
into close proximity; pudgal made up of parmanu 
that exhibit completely new properties

visheshbhaavi roop

an unnatural form

vishrasa

vitaraag 

Vitaraag Vignan 

vitaraagata

vitaraagi

viyog

vrutti

vyaapt

vyatirek guna 

vyavahaar

vyavahaar atma

pure phase Parmanu; subtlest phase Parmanu

absolutely  detached;  absolutely  free  from  all 
attachment and abhorrence
the  Science  that  leads  to  the  absolute  state;  the 
Science of the absolutely detached Lords

a  state  absolutely  free  from  attachment  and 
abhorrence; absolute detachment
One who is absolutely detached

dissipation 

tendency 

pervaded

completely  new  properties  of  a  third  component 
that arises when the eternal elements of the Self 
and inanimate matter come together
worldly interaction; the relative; relative viewpoint; 
relative world
worldly-interacting self 

vyavahaar kaal

relative time; time used in the relative

vyavahaar rashi

worldly nomenclature

vyavasthit

vyavasthit shakti 

a  result  of  scientific  circumstantial  evidences; 
unfolding  to  give  an  exact  effect  of  a  cause; 
scientiﬁ c circumstantial evidence
the natural energy that brings together the scientiﬁ c 
circumstantial evidences to give result

vyay 

Yamaraj

dissipation; coming to an end; destruction

the God of death 

yatharth Gnan

exact Gnan

yogkriya 

an activity involving your physical body



Akram Vignan Books of Dada Bhagwan in English

1.  Adjust Everywhere
2.  Anger
3.  Aptavani - 1
4.  Aptavani - 2
5.  Aptavani - 4
6.  Aptavani - 5
7.  Aptavani - 6
8.  Aptavani - 8
9.  Aptavani – 9
10.  Aptavani – 14 Part 1
11.  Aptavani – 14 Part 2
12.  Autobiography of Gnani Purush A.M.Patel
13.  Avoid Clashes
14.  Brahmacharya : Celibacy Attained With Understanding
15.  Death : Before, During and After...
16.  Flawless Vision
17.  Generation Gap
18.  Harmony in Marriage
19.  Life Without Conﬂ ict
20.  Money
21.  Noble Use of Money
22.  Non-Violence
23.  Pratikraman : The Master Key That Resolves All Conﬂ icts

(Abridged & Big Volume)

24.  Pure Love
25.  Right Understanding to Help Others
26.  Science of Karma
27.  Science of Speech
28.  The Current Living Tirthankara Shree Simandhar Swami
29.  Simple and Eﬀ ective Science for Self-Realization
30.  The Essence of All Religion
31.  The Fault Is of the Suﬀ erer
32.  The Guru and the Disciple
33.  The Hidden Meaning of Truth and Untruth
34.  The Practice of Humanity
35.  Trimantra
36.  Whatever Has Happened Is Justice
37.  Who Am I?
38.  Worries
The monthly English ‘Dadavani’ magazine is available to download on
https://satsang.dadabhagwan.org/dadavani/

 
Contacts

Dada Bhagwan Foundation

India :
Adalaj 
(Main Center) 

:   Trimandir, Simandhar City, Ahmedabad-Kalol Highway,
    Adalaj, Dist.: Gandhinagar - 382421, Gujarat, India.
    Tel : + 91 79 35002100, +91 9328661166-77
    Email : info@dadabhagwan.org

Bangalore 
Delhi 
Kolkata 
Mumbai 

:  +91 95909 79099
:  +91 98100 98564
:  +91 98300 93230
:  +91 93235 28901

Other Countries :

Argentina 

:  Tel:  +54 9 11 58431163
  Email: info@dadabhagwan.ar

Australia 

:  Tel: +61 402179706
  Email: sydney@au.dadabhagwan.org

Brazil 

:  Tel: +55 11999828971
  Email: info@br.dadabhagwan.org

Germany 

:  Tel: +49 700 DADASHRI (32327474)
  Email: info@dadabhagwan.de

Kenya 

:  Tel: +254 79592 DADA (3232)
  Email: info@ke.dadabhagwan.org

New Zealand  :  Tel: +64  21 0376434

  Email: info@nz.dadabhagwan.org

Singapore 

:  Tel: + 65 91457800
  Email: info@sg.dadabhagwan.org

Spain 

UAE 

UK 

:  Tel: +34 922302706
  Email: info@dadabhagwan.es

:  Tel: +971 557316937
  Email: dubai@ae.dadabhagwan.org

:  Tel : +44 330-111-DADA (3232)
    Email : info@uk.dadabhagwan.org

USA-Canada :   Tel : +1 877-505-DADA (3232)

    Email : info@us.dadabhagwan.org

Website : www.dadabhagwan.org

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
