Publisher:Mr. Ajit C. PatelMahavideh FoundationTri-Mandir, Simandhar City,Ahmedabad-Kalol Highway, Adalaj,Dist.-Gandhinagar-382421,Gujarat, India.Tel. : +91 79 3983 0100, 23974100E-Mail : info@dadabhagwan.org©:All Rights Reserved Mr. Deepakbhai DesaiTri-Mandir, Simandhar City, Adalaj-382421Dist.-Gandhinagar-, Gujarat, India.Edition:1500 copies, November 2010Price:Ultimate Humility(leads to Universal oneness) andAwareness of "I Don't Know Anything"Rs. 70.00Printer:Mahavideh FoundationBasement, Parshwanath Chambers,Nr. RBI, Usmanpura,Ahmedabad-380014Gujarat, India.Tel. : +91 79 27542964 / 300048238765Aptavani - 5As expounded by theGnani Purush "Dada Bhagwan"Originally Compiled in Gujarati by :Dr. Niruben AminPublisher:Mr. Ajit C. PatelMahavideh FoundationTri-Mandir, Simandhar City,Ahmedabad-Kalol Highway, Adalaj,Dist.-Gandhinagar-382421,Gujarat, India.Tel. : +91 79 3983 0100, 23974100E-Mail : info@dadabhagwan.org©:All Rights Reserved Mr. Deepakbhai DesaiTri-Mandir, Simandhar City, Adalaj-382421Dist.-Gandhinagar-, Gujarat, India.Edition:1500 copies, November 2010Price:Ultimate Humility(leads to Universal oneness) andAwareness of "I Don't Know Anything"Rs. 70.00Printer:Mahavideh FoundationBasement, Parshwanath Chambers,Nr. RBI, Usmanpura,Ahmedabad-380014Gujarat, India.Tel. : +91 79 27542964 / 300048238765Aptavani - 5As expounded by theGnani Purush "Dada Bhagwan"Originally Compiled in Gujarati by :Dr. Niruben AminTrimantraThe Three Mantras that Destroy All Obstacles in LifeNamo VitaragayaI bow to the One who is absolutely free from all attachmentand abhorrenceNamo ArihantanamI bow to the living One who has annihilated all internalenemies of anger, pride, deceit and greedNamo SiddhanamI bow to the Ones who have attained the state of total andfinal liberationNamo AayariyanamI bow to the Self-realized masters who impart knowledge ofliberation to othersNamo UvazzayanamI bow to those who have received the Knowledge of the Selfand are helping others attain the sameNamo Loye Savva SahunamI bow to all saints everywhere who have received theKnowledge of the SelfEso Pancha NamukkaroThese five salutationsSavva PavappanasanoDestroy all demerit karmaMangalanam cha SavvesimOf all that is auspiciousPadhamam Havai MangalamThis is the highestOm Namo Bhagavate VasudevayaI bow to all who have attained the absolute Self in human formOm Namah ShivayaI bow to all human beings who have become instruments forsalvation of the worldJai Sat Chit AnandAwareness of the Eternal is Bliss(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Books of Akram Vignan of Dada Bhagwan1.Adjust Everywhere2.Ahimsa : Non-Violence3.Anger4.Aptavani 15.Aptavani 26.Aptavani 57.Aptavani 68.Aptavani 99.Autobiography of Gnani Purush A.M.Patel10.Avoid Clashes11.Brahmacharya : Celibacy Attained With Understanding12.Death : Before, During & After...13.Flawless Vision14.Generation Gap15.Harmony In Marriage16.Life Without Conflict17.Money18.Noble Use of Money19.Pratikraman : The master key that resolves all conflicts( Abridge & Big Volume)20.Pure Love21.Right Understanding to Help Others22.Science of Karma23.Science of Speech24.Shree Simandhar Swami : The Living God25.The Essence Of All Religion26.The Fault Is Of the Sufferer27.The Guru and The Disciple28.Tri Mantra : The mantra that removes all worldly obstacles29.Whatever Happened is Justice30.Who Am I ?31.WorriesTrimantraThe Three Mantras that Destroy All Obstacles in LifeNamo VitaragayaI bow to the One who is absolutely free from all attachmentand abhorrenceNamo ArihantanamI bow to the living One who has annihilated all internalenemies of anger, pride, deceit and greedNamo SiddhanamI bow to the Ones who have attained the state of total andfinal liberationNamo AayariyanamI bow to the Self-realized masters who impart knowledge ofliberation to othersNamo UvazzayanamI bow to those who have received the Knowledge of the Selfand are helping others attain the sameNamo Loye Savva SahunamI bow to all saints everywhere who have received theKnowledge of the SelfEso Pancha NamukkaroThese five salutationsSavva PavappanasanoDestroy all demerit karmaMangalanam cha SavvesimOf all that is auspiciousPadhamam Havai MangalamThis is the highestOm Namo Bhagavate VasudevayaI bow to all who have attained the absolute Self in human formOm Namah ShivayaI bow to all human beings who have become instruments forsalvation of the worldJai Sat Chit AnandAwareness of the Eternal is Bliss(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Books of Akram Vignan of Dada Bhagwan1.Adjust Everywhere2.Ahimsa : Non-Violence3.Anger4.Aptavani 15.Aptavani 26.Aptavani 57.Aptavani 68.Aptavani 99.Autobiography of Gnani Purush A.M.Patel10.Avoid Clashes11.Brahmacharya : Celibacy Attained With Understanding12.Death : Before, During & After...13.Flawless Vision14.Generation Gap15.Harmony In Marriage16.Life Without Conflict17.Money18.Noble Use of Money19.Pratikraman : The master key that resolves all conflicts( Abridge & Big Volume)20.Pure Love21.Right Understanding to Help Others22.Science of Karma23.Science of Speech24.Shree Simandhar Swami : The Living God25.The Essence Of All Religion26.The Fault Is Of the Sufferer27.The Guru and The Disciple28.Tri Mantra : The mantra that removes all worldly obstacles29.Whatever Happened is Justice30.Who Am I ?31.WorriesNote About This TranslationThe Gnani Purush Ambalal M. Patel, also commonly knownas Dadashri or Dada, had said that it would be impossible totranslate his satsangs and the knowledge about the Science ofSelf-Realization verbatim into English because some of themeanings would be lost in the process. Therefore, in order tounderstand precisely the science of Akram Vignan and Self-Realization He stressed the importance of learning Gujarati.Dadashri did however grant his blessings to translate hiswords into English and other languages so that spiritual seekerscould benefit to a certain degree and later progress through theirown efforts.This is a humble attempt to present to the world, theessence of His Knowledge. This is not a literal translation butgreat care has been taken to preserve His original words and theessence of His message. For certain Gujarati words, severalEnglish words or even sentences are needed to convey the exactmeaning; hence, many Gujarati words have been retained withinthe English text for better reading flow. At the first encounter,the Gujarati word will be italicized followed by an immediateexplanation of its meaning in brackets. Thereafter the Gujaratiword will be used in the text that follows. This serves as a two-fold benefit: firstly ease of translation and reading and secondlyit will make the reader more familiar with the Gujarati wordscritical for a deeper understanding of this science. A glossary ofall the Gujarati words is provided at the back of the book. Foradditional glossary, visit our website at :www.dadabhagwan.orgMany people have worked diligently towards achievingthis goal and we thank them all. Please note that any errorsencountered in this translation are entirely those of the translators.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Special note to the reader♦The word Self, with 'S', refers to the awakened Self,which is separate from the worldly soul (non-awakenedself), written with 's'. The term Shuddhatma (pure Soul)is used by the Gnani Purush for the awakened Self, afterthe Gnan Vidhi. Similarly, any word in the middle of asentence, with capitalized first letter, or in inverted comas,e.g. 'You', 'Your', at the beginning of the sentence, refersto the awakened Self. This is an important distinction forthe correct understanding of the difference between theawakened Self, the Self and the non-awakened self, theworldly self.♦Wherever the name 'Chandubhai' is mentioned, thereader should substitute his or her name.♦Dadashri uses the term 'We,' 'us' or 'our' - meaning theGnani Purush and the absolute Self within.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)538Note About This TranslationThe Gnani Purush Ambalal M. Patel, also commonly knownas Dadashri or Dada, had said that it would be impossible totranslate his satsangs and the knowledge about the Science ofSelf-Realization verbatim into English because some of themeanings would be lost in the process. Therefore, in order tounderstand precisely the science of Akram Vignan and Self-Realization He stressed the importance of learning Gujarati.Dadashri did however grant his blessings to translate hiswords into English and other languages so that spiritual seekerscould benefit to a certain degree and later progress through theirown efforts.This is a humble attempt to present to the world, theessence of His Knowledge. This is not a literal translation butgreat care has been taken to preserve His original words and theessence of His message. For certain Gujarati words, severalEnglish words or even sentences are needed to convey the exactmeaning; hence, many Gujarati words have been retained withinthe English text for better reading flow. At the first encounter,the Gujarati word will be italicized followed by an immediateexplanation of its meaning in brackets. Thereafter the Gujaratiword will be used in the text that follows. This serves as a two-fold benefit: firstly ease of translation and reading and secondlyit will make the reader more familiar with the Gujarati wordscritical for a deeper understanding of this science. A glossary ofall the Gujarati words is provided at the back of the book. Foradditional glossary, visit our website at :www.dadabhagwan.orgMany people have worked diligently towards achievingthis goal and we thank them all. Please note that any errorsencountered in this translation are entirely those of the translators.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Special note to the reader♦The word Self, with 'S', refers to the awakened Self,which is separate from the worldly soul (non-awakenedself), written with 's'. The term Shuddhatma (pure Soul)is used by the Gnani Purush for the awakened Self, afterthe Gnan Vidhi. Similarly, any word in the middle of asentence, with capitalized first letter, or in inverted comas,e.g. 'You', 'Your', at the beginning of the sentence, refersto the awakened Self. This is an important distinction forthe correct understanding of the difference between theawakened Self, the Self and the non-awakened self, theworldly self.♦Wherever the name 'Chandubhai' is mentioned, thereader should substitute his or her name.♦Dadashri uses the term 'We,' 'us' or 'our' - meaning theGnani Purush and the absolute Self within.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)538Introduction to The GnaniOne June evening, in 1958 at around six o’clock, AmbalalMuljibhai Patel, a family man, and a contractor by profession,was sitting on a bench on the busy platform number three atSurat’s train station. Surat is a city in south Gujarat, a westernstate in India. What happened within the next forty-eight minuteswas phenomenal. Spontaneous Self-Realization occurred withinAmbalal M. Patel. During this event, his ego completely meltedand from that moment onwards, he became completely detachedfrom all of Ambalal’s thoughts, speech, and actions. He becamethe Lord’s living instrument for the salvation of humankind, throughthe path of knowledge. He called this Lord, ‘Dada Bhagwan.’To everyone he met, he would say, “This Lord, Dada Bhagwanis fully manifested within me. He also resides within all livingbeings. The difference is that within me He is completelyexpressed and in you, he has yet to manifest.”Who are we? What is God? Who runs this world? Whatis karma? What is liberation? Etc. All the world’s spiritualquestions were answered during this event. Thus, nature offeredabsolute vision to the world through the medium of Shree AmbalalMuljibhai Patel.Ambalal was born in Tarasali, a suburb of Baroda andwas later raised in Bhadran, Gujarat. His wife’s name was Hiraba.Although he was a contractor by profession, his life at home andhis interactions with everyone around him were exemplary, evenprior to his Self-Realization. After becoming Self-Realized andattaining the state of a Gnani, (The Awakened One, Jnani inHindi), his body became a ‘public charitable trust.’Throughout his entire life, he lived by the principle thatthere should not be any commerce in religion, and in allcommerce, there must be religion. He also never took moneyfrom anyone for his own use. He used the profits from his businessto take his devotees for pilgrimages to various parts of India.His words became the foundation for the new, direct, andstep-less path to Self-Realization called Akram Vignan. Throughhis divine original scientific experiment (The Gnan Vidhi), heimparted this knowledge to others within two hours. Thousandshave received his grace through this process and thousandscontinue to do so even now. ‘Akram’ means without steps; anelevator path or a shortcut, whereas ‘Kram’ means an orderly,step-by-step spiritual path. Akram is now recognized as a directshortcut to the bliss of the Self.Who is Dada Bhagwan?When he explained to others who ‘Dada Bhagwan’ is, hewould say :“What you see here is not ‘Dada Bhagwan’. What yousee is ‘A. M. Patel.’ I am a Gnani Purush and ‘He’ that ismanifested within me, is ‘Dada Bhagwan’. He is the Lord within.He is within you and everyone else. He has not yet manifestedwithin you, whereas within me he is fully manifested. I myself amnot a Bhagwan. I too bow down to Dada Bhagwan within me.”Current link for attaining the knowledge ofSelf-Realization (Atma Gnan)“I am personally going to impart siddhis (special spiritualpowers) to a few people. After I leave, will there not be a needfor them? People of future generations will need this path, willthey not?” ~ DadashriParam Pujya Dadashri used to go from town to town, andcountry to country, to give satsang and impart the knowledge ofthe Self as well as knowledge of harmonious worldly interactionto all who came to see him. During his final days, in the fall of1987, he gave his blessing to Dr. Niruben Amin and bestowedhis special siddhis upon her, to continue his work. “You will haveto become a mother to this whole world, Niruben” He told heras he blessed her. There was no doubt in Dadashri’s mind thatNiruben was destined to be just that. She had served him withutmost devotion day and night for over twenty years. Dadashri67Introduction to The GnaniOne June evening, in 1958 at around six o’clock, AmbalalMuljibhai Patel, a family man, and a contractor by profession,was sitting on a bench on the busy platform number three atSurat’s train station. Surat is a city in south Gujarat, a westernstate in India. What happened within the next forty-eight minuteswas phenomenal. Spontaneous Self-Realization occurred withinAmbalal M. Patel. During this event, his ego completely meltedand from that moment onwards, he became completely detachedfrom all of Ambalal’s thoughts, speech, and actions. He becamethe Lord’s living instrument for the salvation of humankind, throughthe path of knowledge. He called this Lord, ‘Dada Bhagwan.’To everyone he met, he would say, “This Lord, Dada Bhagwanis fully manifested within me. He also resides within all livingbeings. The difference is that within me He is completelyexpressed and in you, he has yet to manifest.”Who are we? What is God? Who runs this world? Whatis karma? What is liberation? Etc. All the world’s spiritualquestions were answered during this event. Thus, nature offeredabsolute vision to the world through the medium of Shree AmbalalMuljibhai Patel.Ambalal was born in Tarasali, a suburb of Baroda andwas later raised in Bhadran, Gujarat. His wife’s name was Hiraba.Although he was a contractor by profession, his life at home andhis interactions with everyone around him were exemplary, evenprior to his Self-Realization. After becoming Self-Realized andattaining the state of a Gnani, (The Awakened One, Jnani inHindi), his body became a ‘public charitable trust.’Throughout his entire life, he lived by the principle thatthere should not be any commerce in religion, and in allcommerce, there must be religion. He also never took moneyfrom anyone for his own use. He used the profits from his businessto take his devotees for pilgrimages to various parts of India.His words became the foundation for the new, direct, andstep-less path to Self-Realization called Akram Vignan. Throughhis divine original scientific experiment (The Gnan Vidhi), heimparted this knowledge to others within two hours. Thousandshave received his grace through this process and thousandscontinue to do so even now. ‘Akram’ means without steps; anelevator path or a shortcut, whereas ‘Kram’ means an orderly,step-by-step spiritual path. Akram is now recognized as a directshortcut to the bliss of the Self.Who is Dada Bhagwan?When he explained to others who ‘Dada Bhagwan’ is, hewould say :“What you see here is not ‘Dada Bhagwan’. What yousee is ‘A. M. Patel.’ I am a Gnani Purush and ‘He’ that ismanifested within me, is ‘Dada Bhagwan’. He is the Lord within.He is within you and everyone else. He has not yet manifestedwithin you, whereas within me he is fully manifested. I myself amnot a Bhagwan. I too bow down to Dada Bhagwan within me.”Current link for attaining the knowledge ofSelf-Realization (Atma Gnan)“I am personally going to impart siddhis (special spiritualpowers) to a few people. After I leave, will there not be a needfor them? People of future generations will need this path, willthey not?” ~ DadashriParam Pujya Dadashri used to go from town to town, andcountry to country, to give satsang and impart the knowledge ofthe Self as well as knowledge of harmonious worldly interactionto all who came to see him. During his final days, in the fall of1987, he gave his blessing to Dr. Niruben Amin and bestowedhis special siddhis upon her, to continue his work. “You will haveto become a mother to this whole world, Niruben” He told heras he blessed her. There was no doubt in Dadashri’s mind thatNiruben was destined to be just that. She had served him withutmost devotion day and night for over twenty years. Dadashri67in turn had molded her and prepared her to take on thismonumental task.From the time of Pujya Dadashri’s mortal departure onJanuary 2 1988 to her own mortal departure on March 19th2006, Pujya Niruma as she lovingly came to be called bythousands remained true to her promise to Dadashri to carry onhis mission of the world’s salvation. She became Dadashri’srepresentative of Akram Vignan and became instrumental inspreading the knowledge of Akram Vignan throughout the world.She also became an exemplary of pure and unconditional love.Thousands of people from all walks of life and from all over theworld have attained Self-Realization through her and areestablished in the experience of the pure Soul, while carrying outtheir worldly duties and obligations. They experience freedomhere and now, while living their daily life.The link of Akram Gnanis now continues with the currentspiritual master Pujya Deepakbhai Desai whom Pujya Dadashrihad also graced with special siddhis to continue to teach theworld about Atma Gnan and Akram Vignan. He was furthermolded and trained by Pujya Niruma who blessed him to conductGnan Vidhi in 2003. Dadashri had said that Deepakbhai willbecome the decorum that will add splendor to the Lord’s reign.Pujya Deepakbhai, in keeping with Dada’s and Niruma’s traditiontravels extensively within India and abroad, giving satsangs andimparting the knowledge of the Self to all who come seeking.Powerful words in scriptures help the seeker in increasinghis desire for liberation. The knowledge of the Self is the finalgoal of all one’s seeking. Without the knowledge of the Selfthere is no liberation. This knowledge of the Self (Atma Gnan)does not exist in books. It exists in the heart of a Gnani. Hence,the knowledge of the Self can only be acquired by meeting aGnani. Through the scientific approach of Akram Vignan, eventoday one can attain Atma Gnan, but it can only occur by meetinga living Atma Gnani and receiving the Atma Gnan. Only a litcandle can light another candle.89EDITORIALDeep spiritual discussions on the Self have often beenread and heard. Many have pointed towards the ultimate goal oflife, but this is like describing a mountain from the bottom of thevalley! Large volumes have been published describing, what thetruth (satya) is, what the untruth (asatya) is, what stealing(chaurya) is, what non-stealing (achaurya) is, what is worthacquiring (upadeya), what is worth rejecting (heya), whatacquisitiveness (parigraha) is and what non-acquisitiveness(aparigraha) is in worldly interactions. However, the root causeof untruth, violence (himsa), stealing, acquisitiveness and rejectionis not found anywhere. A rare Gnani may have talked about allthis in general but if anyone in the current era of the time cyclehas explored how the kashays (anger, pride, deceit and greed)subtly function in simple events of the day-to-day life; it wouldbe the one and only ‘Akram Scientist’, the supremelycompassionate Shri Dada Bhagwan! In the ‘Akram Vignan’that has manifested through Him, there is the publication of thedeep knowledge about the Self and the non-Self, the relationbetween the Self and the non-Self, the doer in this universe, theregulator of the universe, and there is also the exposition of thehidden knowledge of the science behind interactions in the worldlylife, interactions that are accepted by everyone and are clearlyexperienced by everyone in their daily life. Most reveredDadashri’s speech does not flow out as a lecture, as an addressor as preaching. This is a science that emerges as a taped record,the science that gives complete solutions to actual questionsarising from the seeker about life, from those desirous of Self-realization and from those who are thinkers! Here, there is nocriticism nor is there a long and boring lecture. The answers tothe questions are heart touching; they shatter the intellect andbring forth the direct vision of the Self! This is the unparalleledwonder of the great Gnani Purush (the perfectly enlightenedOne free from all worldly attachments).in turn had molded her and prepared her to take on thismonumental task.From the time of Pujya Dadashri’s mortal departure onJanuary 2 1988 to her own mortal departure on March 19th2006, Pujya Niruma as she lovingly came to be called bythousands remained true to her promise to Dadashri to carry onhis mission of the world’s salvation. She became Dadashri’srepresentative of Akram Vignan and became instrumental inspreading the knowledge of Akram Vignan throughout the world.She also became an exemplary of pure and unconditional love.Thousands of people from all walks of life and from all over theworld have attained Self-Realization through her and areestablished in the experience of the pure Soul, while carrying outtheir worldly duties and obligations. They experience freedomhere and now, while living their daily life.The link of Akram Gnanis now continues with the currentspiritual master Pujya Deepakbhai Desai whom Pujya Dadashrihad also graced with special siddhis to continue to teach theworld about Atma Gnan and Akram Vignan. He was furthermolded and trained by Pujya Niruma who blessed him to conductGnan Vidhi in 2003. Dadashri had said that Deepakbhai willbecome the decorum that will add splendor to the Lord’s reign.Pujya Deepakbhai, in keeping with Dada’s and Niruma’s traditiontravels extensively within India and abroad, giving satsangs andimparting the knowledge of the Self to all who come seeking.Powerful words in scriptures help the seeker in increasinghis desire for liberation. The knowledge of the Self is the finalgoal of all one’s seeking. Without the knowledge of the Selfthere is no liberation. This knowledge of the Self (Atma Gnan)does not exist in books. It exists in the heart of a Gnani. Hence,the knowledge of the Self can only be acquired by meeting aGnani. Through the scientific approach of Akram Vignan, eventoday one can attain Atma Gnan, but it can only occur by meetinga living Atma Gnani and receiving the Atma Gnan. Only a litcandle can light another candle.89EDITORIALDeep spiritual discussions on the Self have often beenread and heard. Many have pointed towards the ultimate goal oflife, but this is like describing a mountain from the bottom of thevalley! Large volumes have been published describing, what thetruth (satya) is, what the untruth (asatya) is, what stealing(chaurya) is, what non-stealing (achaurya) is, what is worthacquiring (upadeya), what is worth rejecting (heya), whatacquisitiveness (parigraha) is and what non-acquisitiveness(aparigraha) is in worldly interactions. However, the root causeof untruth, violence (himsa), stealing, acquisitiveness and rejectionis not found anywhere. A rare Gnani may have talked about allthis in general but if anyone in the current era of the time cyclehas explored how the kashays (anger, pride, deceit and greed)subtly function in simple events of the day-to-day life; it wouldbe the one and only ‘Akram Scientist’, the supremelycompassionate Shri Dada Bhagwan! In the ‘Akram Vignan’that has manifested through Him, there is the publication of thedeep knowledge about the Self and the non-Self, the relationbetween the Self and the non-Self, the doer in this universe, theregulator of the universe, and there is also the exposition of thehidden knowledge of the science behind interactions in the worldlylife, interactions that are accepted by everyone and are clearlyexperienced by everyone in their daily life. Most reveredDadashri’s speech does not flow out as a lecture, as an addressor as preaching. This is a science that emerges as a taped record,the science that gives complete solutions to actual questionsarising from the seeker about life, from those desirous of Self-realization and from those who are thinkers! Here, there is nocriticism nor is there a long and boring lecture. The answers tothe questions are heart touching; they shatter the intellect andbring forth the direct vision of the Self! This is the unparalleledwonder of the great Gnani Purush (the perfectly enlightenedOne free from all worldly attachments).with the sincere purpose of publishing it for the people with theaim that the world come to know Him and get the benefit of Hisextremely rare Gnan and thus attain constant samadhi (the stateof absolute freedom from any effects) amidst situations of physical(vyadhi), mental (aadhi) or outside troubles (upadhi). This,thousands of people with credit karmas like us have attained!Jai Sat Chit Anand- Dr. Niruben Amin1011The Gnani Purush is regarded as the ‘observatory’ ofthe world. The definitive answers to countless questions fromthousands of people have instantly arisen from this observatoryin a natural way, whether they be questions about tattvagnan(the knowledge about all aspects of the Self and the non-Self),about interactions in the worldly life or about daily activities ofthe animals and birds!One great student of tattvagnan, impressed with theexcellence of the most revered Dadashri’s answers, asked,‘Dada, where do you find answers to all these questions?’ andDadashri answered with a smile, ‘I don’t speak this from reading.I speak this after “seeing” it in absolute knowledge (kevalgnan).Another person asked Him, ‘Dada, you answer so manyquestions and yet, not a single mistake is found anywhere; whatis the reason for it?’ Dadashri replied, ‘It comes out of this“tape”, if I try to speak there will be many mistakes!!!’This is the direct experience of the vivid vision of completeegoless state!Dadashri, the embodiment of compassion, has no sect,faction or organized religion, neither is there any kind of refutationor establishment; nor does He establish a religious throne (gadi)or a holder of that throne (gadipati)!!! He has the solecompassionate intention that, the living beings of this world getabsolute freedom from their unbearable internal sufferings andbecome established in the infinite bliss of the Self! If, as a resultof the effect of merit karmas, anyone reaches Him and recognizesHim as the incarnation of Gnan, that person will get salvation!Otherwise, how can the common vision understand thismagnificent Soul; straight, simple, natural, and dressed in a coatand a hat? For that is needed the keen eye of the ‘jeweler’!The manifest speech that has flowed from the supremelycompassionate Dadashri’s mouth has been accurately compiledwith the sincere purpose of publishing it for the people with theaim that the world come to know Him and get the benefit of Hisextremely rare Gnan and thus attain constant samadhi (the stateof absolute freedom from any effects) amidst situations of physical(vyadhi), mental (aadhi) or outside troubles (upadhi). This,thousands of people with credit karmas like us have attained!Jai Sat Chit Anand- Dr. Niruben Amin1011The Gnani Purush is regarded as the ‘observatory’ ofthe world. The definitive answers to countless questions fromthousands of people have instantly arisen from this observatoryin a natural way, whether they be questions about tattvagnan(the knowledge about all aspects of the Self and the non-Self),about interactions in the worldly life or about daily activities ofthe animals and birds!One great student of tattvagnan, impressed with theexcellence of the most revered Dadashri’s answers, asked,‘Dada, where do you find answers to all these questions?’ andDadashri answered with a smile, ‘I don’t speak this from reading.I speak this after “seeing” it in absolute knowledge (kevalgnan).Another person asked Him, ‘Dada, you answer so manyquestions and yet, not a single mistake is found anywhere; whatis the reason for it?’ Dadashri replied, ‘It comes out of this“tape”, if I try to speak there will be many mistakes!!!’This is the direct experience of the vivid vision of completeegoless state!Dadashri, the embodiment of compassion, has no sect,faction or organized religion, neither is there any kind of refutationor establishment; nor does He establish a religious throne (gadi)or a holder of that throne (gadipati)!!! He has the solecompassionate intention that, the living beings of this world getabsolute freedom from their unbearable internal sufferings andbecome established in the infinite bliss of the Self! If, as a resultof the effect of merit karmas, anyone reaches Him and recognizesHim as the incarnation of Gnan, that person will get salvation!Otherwise, how can the common vision understand thismagnificent Soul; straight, simple, natural, and dressed in a coatand a hat? For that is needed the keen eye of the ‘jeweler’!The manifest speech that has flowed from the supremelycompassionate Dadashri’s mouth has been accurately compiled1213PREFACEAll five senses are in their individual functions. The mind(mun), intellect (buddhi), chit (vision and knowledge), and theego (ahamkar) are also in their individual functions (dharma).Then who has failed to remain in its own function? The Self has.The ears hear and one believes, ‘I am hearing’. The eyes seeand one believes, ‘I am seeing’. Similarly, one believes the functionof each of the senses as one’s own. The function of the Self isto ‘see’, to ‘know’, and to remain in the absolute blissful state.Instead, one misses the function of the Self and enters into thefunctions of others. One believes the religion (dharma) of thenon-Self to be one’s own and has forgotten one’s own religion!When the one with the experience of the Self (Atma-anubhavi)imparts the awareness of the Self to the seeker; he attains theawareness of the religion of the Self and then one automaticallystops believing the religion of the non-Self to be one’s ownreligion. Once he is in the religion of the Self, liberation (moksha)prevails here and now for him!Mithya drashti (wrong vision) is to believe that whichone is not.Samyak drashti (right vision) is to believe what one reallyis.Attempt at knowing worldly matters is mithya gnan oragnan (wrong knowledge; relative knowledge or ignorance).Once the wrong faith (shraddha) sets in, the knowledge (gnan)resulting from it will be wrong and therefore the conduct(charitra) will be wrong. Once the Self is known; that is samyakgnan (right knowledge).Intent (bhaav) is charge (cause of new karma) andincidents that happen are discharge (effect of past causes). Bymaking a bhaav to steal, one charges karma for stealing and thisgives effect in the next life. Then, on the basis of this effect, hesteals! And while stealing, if he repents for his intent and actions,if he does pratikraman (to recall the hurt caused, repent for itand resolve to not repeat it); he becomes free from it! In thepath of Akram Vignan, one becomes free from both bhaav(intent) and abhaav (lack of intent) and becomes the Seer andthe Knower.Every living being is flowing forward in the current of life.No one is a doer here. The doer that appears to be the doeris an evidentiary (nimit, instrumental) doer, not an independentdoer. If one were an independent doer, one would be inpermanent captivity (bondage). The evidentiary doer can neverbe made captive. The world naturally goes on as a result offorces of natural circumstances. Only the wrong belief, ‘I did it’,arises in this! Because of this wrong belief of doership the seedof karma for the next life is sown!That is why renowned saint Akha Bhagat said:‘Jo tu jiva toh karta hari; jo tu Shiva toh vastu khari.If you are mortal then God is the doer; if you are Self-realized then it is the right state.’‘Karta mitey toh chhutey karma, ey chhe mahabhajan nomarma.If doership leaves, karmas leave; that is the essence of thehighest quest.’In the ignorant state (agnan, not Self-realized) the self(atma; soul) is the doer of discharge karma, due to unavoidableworldly interactions. The relative self is sachar (mobile); it is the‘mechanical’ self, and the real Self is achar (still). The wholeworld is trying to stabilize the relative self, which by nature isunsteady, so how can it be stabilized? My Self is still and all therest is only the unsteady relative self and it is completely separatefrom Me; only this much is to be known. After that the relativeself will remain as the relative self and the Self will remain as theSelf and both will remain separate!1213PREFACEAll five senses are in their individual functions. The mind(mun), intellect (buddhi), chit (vision and knowledge), and theego (ahamkar) are also in their individual functions (dharma).Then who has failed to remain in its own function? The Self has.The ears hear and one believes, ‘I am hearing’. The eyes seeand one believes, ‘I am seeing’. Similarly, one believes the functionof each of the senses as one’s own. The function of the Self isto ‘see’, to ‘know’, and to remain in the absolute blissful state.Instead, one misses the function of the Self and enters into thefunctions of others. One believes the religion (dharma) of thenon-Self to be one’s own and has forgotten one’s own religion!When the one with the experience of the Self (Atma-anubhavi)imparts the awareness of the Self to the seeker; he attains theawareness of the religion of the Self and then one automaticallystops believing the religion of the non-Self to be one’s ownreligion. Once he is in the religion of the Self, liberation (moksha)prevails here and now for him!Mithya drashti (wrong vision) is to believe that whichone is not.Samyak drashti (right vision) is to believe what one reallyis.Attempt at knowing worldly matters is mithya gnan oragnan (wrong knowledge; relative knowledge or ignorance).Once the wrong faith (shraddha) sets in, the knowledge (gnan)resulting from it will be wrong and therefore the conduct(charitra) will be wrong. Once the Self is known; that is samyakgnan (right knowledge).Intent (bhaav) is charge (cause of new karma) andincidents that happen are discharge (effect of past causes). Bymaking a bhaav to steal, one charges karma for stealing and thisgives effect in the next life. Then, on the basis of this effect, hesteals! And while stealing, if he repents for his intent and actions,if he does pratikraman (to recall the hurt caused, repent for itand resolve to not repeat it); he becomes free from it! In thepath of Akram Vignan, one becomes free from both bhaav(intent) and abhaav (lack of intent) and becomes the Seer andthe Knower.Every living being is flowing forward in the current of life.No one is a doer here. The doer that appears to be the doeris an evidentiary (nimit, instrumental) doer, not an independentdoer. If one were an independent doer, one would be inpermanent captivity (bondage). The evidentiary doer can neverbe made captive. The world naturally goes on as a result offorces of natural circumstances. Only the wrong belief, ‘I did it’,arises in this! Because of this wrong belief of doership the seedof karma for the next life is sown!That is why renowned saint Akha Bhagat said:‘Jo tu jiva toh karta hari; jo tu Shiva toh vastu khari.If you are mortal then God is the doer; if you are Self-realized then it is the right state.’‘Karta mitey toh chhutey karma, ey chhe mahabhajan nomarma.If doership leaves, karmas leave; that is the essence of thehighest quest.’In the ignorant state (agnan, not Self-realized) the self(atma; soul) is the doer of discharge karma, due to unavoidableworldly interactions. The relative self is sachar (mobile); it is the‘mechanical’ self, and the real Self is achar (still). The wholeworld is trying to stabilize the relative self, which by nature isunsteady, so how can it be stabilized? My Self is still and all therest is only the unsteady relative self and it is completely separatefrom Me; only this much is to be known. After that the relativeself will remain as the relative self and the Self will remain as theSelf and both will remain separate!1415To believe ‘I know’ after reading the scriptures boosts theego; and then, where will one go? If he meets the Gnani Purush(One enlightened in the knowledge of the Soul and the universe,who is free from ego and all worldly attachments and enlightensothers), he attains salvation.Who is the one that is in bondage? It is the ego, and thatis the one that needs to be liberated. The Self is already free.Because of ignorance one believes, ‘I am bound’, and afterattaining Gnan he becomes free! Then the ego is gone. Oncethe ego is gone the wrong belief, ‘I am doing, he is doing, theyare doing’, goes away!If the relative self (prakruti) is doing something crooked,You correct it from within. If the relative self gets angry, you dopratikraman (the process of reversal from hurt caused throughmind, speech and body, by recalling it, repenting and resolvingnever to repeat it. This is to be done in the precise manner asshown by Dadashri) within. Once you correct it within, no matterwhat the prakruti does, You are not responsible for it. Therelative self is absolutely separate, and You are to keep itseparate. You are not to get involved in the troubles of the non-Self. The relative self keeps opinions and You are to becomefree of opinions.What is the way of the Vitarags (absolutely enlightenedOnes)? Simply saying, ‘They are wrong, they are makingmistakes’, causes bondage! There, one must not give any opinionwhatsoever. Your Vision must not be spoilt at all!In the path of Akram Vignan (the spiritual Science of thestepless path to Self-realization) all liberties are allowed. Dadashrigives a guarantee that there is no bondage of karma anywhere,with the exception of one danger zone and that is the entry intosexuality that is not rightfully yours.There is a vast difference between abhorrence (dwesh)and dislike (abhaav). Dislike is in the mind. The Gnani too haslikes and dislikes! And abhorrence is egoism. Dislike is the resultof opinions rendered in the past life, and it leaves withpratikraman.Mind should not to be suppressed. One is to pacify it byway of explanations and conciliation.Yamraja (God of death) too becomes subservient tosaiyami (the one who has conquered all anger, pride, deceit andgreed). This means he is not afraid of even death!When something comes in memory, it is due to parigraha(acquisitiveness). To move away from the Self is parigraha.Self-realization is attained through Akram Vignan, whichin turn dissipates anger-pride-deceit-greed! One’s worldlyinteractions become pure and upon seeing this, the world is filledwith wonder!!! One can see such worldly interaction with reveredDadashri. One learns only by seeing this interaction.Absolute humility (param vinaya) arises the instant Self-realization is attained! Final liberation is through absolute humilityand not from actions (kriya). There is humility in the temples.Absolute humility is attained from the Gnani, and this in turnyields two rewards: the highest quality of worldly life (abhyudaya)and the best progress on the path of liberation (aanushangik)!You should not talk negatively about the one to whom youare subservient with humility.The Gnani only looks at the intent, not the actions.If one person kills another, the first stage application ofGnan is that this is being done by the relative self, it was dueto an account of karma between the two involved, or that it wasdue to the coming together of scientific circumstantial evidences,etc. However, the ultimate stage of Gnan is that the Self neverdies, only the perishable things continue to perish. Therefore, the1415To believe ‘I know’ after reading the scriptures boosts theego; and then, where will one go? If he meets the Gnani Purush(One enlightened in the knowledge of the Soul and the universe,who is free from ego and all worldly attachments and enlightensothers), he attains salvation.Who is the one that is in bondage? It is the ego, and thatis the one that needs to be liberated. The Self is already free.Because of ignorance one believes, ‘I am bound’, and afterattaining Gnan he becomes free! Then the ego is gone. Oncethe ego is gone the wrong belief, ‘I am doing, he is doing, theyare doing’, goes away!If the relative self (prakruti) is doing something crooked,You correct it from within. If the relative self gets angry, you dopratikraman (the process of reversal from hurt caused throughmind, speech and body, by recalling it, repenting and resolvingnever to repeat it. This is to be done in the precise manner asshown by Dadashri) within. Once you correct it within, no matterwhat the prakruti does, You are not responsible for it. Therelative self is absolutely separate, and You are to keep itseparate. You are not to get involved in the troubles of the non-Self. The relative self keeps opinions and You are to becomefree of opinions.What is the way of the Vitarags (absolutely enlightenedOnes)? Simply saying, ‘They are wrong, they are makingmistakes’, causes bondage! There, one must not give any opinionwhatsoever. Your Vision must not be spoilt at all!In the path of Akram Vignan (the spiritual Science of thestepless path to Self-realization) all liberties are allowed. Dadashrigives a guarantee that there is no bondage of karma anywhere,with the exception of one danger zone and that is the entry intosexuality that is not rightfully yours.There is a vast difference between abhorrence (dwesh)and dislike (abhaav). Dislike is in the mind. The Gnani too haslikes and dislikes! And abhorrence is egoism. Dislike is the resultof opinions rendered in the past life, and it leaves withpratikraman.Mind should not to be suppressed. One is to pacify it byway of explanations and conciliation.Yamraja (God of death) too becomes subservient tosaiyami (the one who has conquered all anger, pride, deceit andgreed). This means he is not afraid of even death!When something comes in memory, it is due to parigraha(acquisitiveness). To move away from the Self is parigraha.Self-realization is attained through Akram Vignan, whichin turn dissipates anger-pride-deceit-greed! One’s worldlyinteractions become pure and upon seeing this, the world is filledwith wonder!!! One can see such worldly interaction with reveredDadashri. One learns only by seeing this interaction.Absolute humility (param vinaya) arises the instant Self-realization is attained! Final liberation is through absolute humilityand not from actions (kriya). There is humility in the temples.Absolute humility is attained from the Gnani, and this in turnyields two rewards: the highest quality of worldly life (abhyudaya)and the best progress on the path of liberation (aanushangik)!You should not talk negatively about the one to whom youare subservient with humility.The Gnani only looks at the intent, not the actions.If one person kills another, the first stage application ofGnan is that this is being done by the relative self, it was dueto an account of karma between the two involved, or that it wasdue to the coming together of scientific circumstantial evidences,etc. However, the ultimate stage of Gnan is that the Self neverdies, only the perishable things continue to perish. Therefore, the1617world is flawless (nirdosh), the one who kills is faultless, the onewho dies is faultless, and the one who saves the dying is alsofaultless!The root of all misery is ignorance (agnan). Because ofignorance there are kashays (anger-pride-deceit-greed) and it isverily the kashays that bite and sting you day and night!After Self-realization rituals such as chanting, penance,etc., are no longer necessary. Just remaining in the Agnas of theGnani Purush brings moksha.Only upon meeting the Gnani can a separation within beattained and only then is one able to ‘see’ within, and becauseof this one becomes free.When the Gnani speaks of the experiences of the Self,the intellect grasps it, but that too, only when one listens to theGnani’s direct speech that the intellect becomes samyak (right),and only the samyak intellect can grasp it; otherwise it does notpass beyond the ears. The Gnani’s words flow after havingtouched the absolute Self and that is why they are able to touchthe listener; it breaks down all the barriers and consequently hismind, intellect, chit and ego are able to accept them. People’swords are spoken after they have touched their mind; therefore,they only touch the listener’s mind.When there is involvement in circumstances, there will beuneasiness and when one dwells in the Self, there is continuoussteadiness! The Self ‘knows’ the state of the non-Self complexand the Self stays the Self. Thus, all the barriers are brokendown and everything is cleansed.The Gnani is always in a state that is detached from thebody. He is only in the Knower-Seer state. Therefore, no paincan touch Him at all. The nature of the Self is such that no paincan touch It!The one who lays awake all night long after getting hurtand does ‘invention’ (analyses of his situation and looks forsolutions) will make spiritual progress. The progress of the oneremaining in comfort (no worldly problems) will be clouded.To attain moksha is the right of every human being. Oneonly has to surrender to the Gnani.In the current time cycle Akram Vignan is the last trainto moksha; whoever grabs this opportunity will quickly attainmoksha. After this there is no hope for thousands of years!Changes in lifespan cannot be made by anyone, whetherone is a saint, a highly evolved Soul, a Gnani, or a Tirthankar.In samadhi maran (death while being in the state as theSelf) physical pain will not torment him at all. His final hour willbe one of absolute samadhi (state of being unaffected despiteall external and internal turmoil and being the Self). All thosewho have received Self-realization through Akram Vignan willsee Dadashri in their final hour or they will only have theawareness of ‘I am pure Soul’. The body complex will beexperienced as a separate entity; the one dying will beexperienced as a separate entity. A balance sheet of the entirelife will present at the time of death.The Siddha Bhagwants (absolutely enlightened Oneswithout a body) are located only in the Siddha Kshetra (locationat the crest of the universe where all absolutely liberated Soulsultimately reside). They are in absolute knowledge (kevalgnan).They are in eternal infinite bliss (param sukh) and they are ableto ‘see’ and ‘know’ the entire universe.‘To see the pure Soul’, what does it mean? The Soulcannot be seen with these physical eyes. If a valuable diamondis placed in a box and the box is closed, it will be in the awarenessthat, ‘there is a diamond in this box and it is of such and suchkind’; similarly, after attaining Self-realization, the mind-intellect-chit-ego will all accept that, ‘I verily am pure Soul and everyone1617world is flawless (nirdosh), the one who kills is faultless, the onewho dies is faultless, and the one who saves the dying is alsofaultless!The root of all misery is ignorance (agnan). Because ofignorance there are kashays (anger-pride-deceit-greed) and it isverily the kashays that bite and sting you day and night!After Self-realization rituals such as chanting, penance,etc., are no longer necessary. Just remaining in the Agnas of theGnani Purush brings moksha.Only upon meeting the Gnani can a separation within beattained and only then is one able to ‘see’ within, and becauseof this one becomes free.When the Gnani speaks of the experiences of the Self,the intellect grasps it, but that too, only when one listens to theGnani’s direct speech that the intellect becomes samyak (right),and only the samyak intellect can grasp it; otherwise it does notpass beyond the ears. The Gnani’s words flow after havingtouched the absolute Self and that is why they are able to touchthe listener; it breaks down all the barriers and consequently hismind, intellect, chit and ego are able to accept them. People’swords are spoken after they have touched their mind; therefore,they only touch the listener’s mind.When there is involvement in circumstances, there will beuneasiness and when one dwells in the Self, there is continuoussteadiness! The Self ‘knows’ the state of the non-Self complexand the Self stays the Self. Thus, all the barriers are brokendown and everything is cleansed.The Gnani is always in a state that is detached from thebody. He is only in the Knower-Seer state. Therefore, no paincan touch Him at all. The nature of the Self is such that no paincan touch It!The one who lays awake all night long after getting hurtand does ‘invention’ (analyses of his situation and looks forsolutions) will make spiritual progress. The progress of the oneremaining in comfort (no worldly problems) will be clouded.To attain moksha is the right of every human being. Oneonly has to surrender to the Gnani.In the current time cycle Akram Vignan is the last trainto moksha; whoever grabs this opportunity will quickly attainmoksha. After this there is no hope for thousands of years!Changes in lifespan cannot be made by anyone, whetherone is a saint, a highly evolved Soul, a Gnani, or a Tirthankar.In samadhi maran (death while being in the state as theSelf) physical pain will not torment him at all. His final hour willbe one of absolute samadhi (state of being unaffected despiteall external and internal turmoil and being the Self). All thosewho have received Self-realization through Akram Vignan willsee Dadashri in their final hour or they will only have theawareness of ‘I am pure Soul’. The body complex will beexperienced as a separate entity; the one dying will beexperienced as a separate entity. A balance sheet of the entirelife will present at the time of death.The Siddha Bhagwants (absolutely enlightened Oneswithout a body) are located only in the Siddha Kshetra (locationat the crest of the universe where all absolutely liberated Soulsultimately reside). They are in absolute knowledge (kevalgnan).They are in eternal infinite bliss (param sukh) and they are ableto ‘see’ and ‘know’ the entire universe.‘To see the pure Soul’, what does it mean? The Soulcannot be seen with these physical eyes. If a valuable diamondis placed in a box and the box is closed, it will be in the awarenessthat, ‘there is a diamond in this box and it is of such and suchkind’; similarly, after attaining Self-realization, the mind-intellect-chit-ego will all accept that, ‘I verily am pure Soul and everyone1819else is pure Soul’; then there will be no doubt!Worshipping the Gnani is same as worshipping the pureSoul, and it is the same as worshipping the absolute Self(Parmatma), and that worship is the cause for moksha.What is the experience of the bliss of the Self like? Howcan one know it? The hallmark of the bliss of the Self is thatthere is constant nirakudata (freedom from internal and externallyinduced agitation and perplexity). If any perplexity or uneasinessis experienced, then know that the awareness as the Self(upayog) has been missed. Whether the experience is that ofsuffering of pain (ashata-vedaniya) or experience of pleasure(shata-vedaniya), the ‘knowing’ of these is the experience asthe Self.Who has bodily pain? It happens to the body, not to theSelf. That too is vyavasthit (scientific circumstantial evidences).When there is experience of suffering (vedana), You have tocomfort ‘Chandubhai’ and talk to him, ‘Do you have a badheadache? It will get better soon!’ And if you say, ‘I am inpain’, then it clings to you. Change the dictionary. Pain is pleasantand pleasure is unpleasant. Just ‘know’ that, ‘All theseexperiences of pain and pleasure are happening to the neighbor.’As the pure Self, One should start the interaction of beingseparate with the relative self (prakruti). Remain separate fromthe relative self and talk to the relative self, like a warrior; thenthe tormenting of the relative self will go away. Stand ‘Chandubhai’in front of a mirror, pat him on the back and talk to him, comforthim.The Lord has said that Knowledge, vision, conduct andpenance (Gnan, darshan, charitra and tapa) are the fourfoundation pillars of moksha. The highest outer penance is thatof unodari (eating less food than what one has the appetite for).And for final liberation, inner penance is required. Inner penancemeans that, at the time of terrible pain You remain in the homedepartment and do not move away from being the Self. Noshifting in the relative self happens whatsoever; that is the penanceto be done! Being firm in, ‘All these are results of the non-Self,they are not Mine’, is the penance. And that is what givesmoksha! Knowing that the suffering is of the non-Self leads tothe continuous ‘knowing’ of this. And if it is felt that, ‘this ishappening to me’, then one has to suffer. Furthermore if it isexpressed that, ‘I can’t tolerate this’, the suffering is multipliedtenfold! The effect (asar) happens according to the wordsspoken. There (where suffering is concerned) you get the workdone with chivalry.Just look at what the nature of the Self is like! It immediatelybecomes what it envisions. If it envisions one with happiness, itbecomes happy, and if it envisions being sad, it becomes sad!Therefore, be aware that envisioning of sadness does not arise.You should not say, ‘my head is hurting’; there you can only say,‘Chandubhai’s’ head is hurting!’ Do not become engrossed withthe results that happen to the non-Self.The Gnani as well as the Tirthankars are subject to thesuffering of pain (ashata-vedaniya), but they simply ‘know’ thesuffering; they ‘know’ it through absolute knowledge.The chit is only to be kept in the Self, not in the sufferingor in temporary things. When the chit remains in the eternal itbecomes pure. Thereafter one becomes a videhi (beyond thebody complex). The energy of the Self is only in the realm of theSelf. Once that arises the work is done.What is known as obstinacy (aadayee)? Say a personmakes a mistake and he is aware of it but if someone asks himwhy he made the mistake, he will respond by insisting that it wasthe right thing to do; that is known as obstinacy. If he is awareof the mistake and covers it up; that is considered the biggestform of obstinacy.1819else is pure Soul’; then there will be no doubt!Worshipping the Gnani is same as worshipping the pureSoul, and it is the same as worshipping the absolute Self(Parmatma), and that worship is the cause for moksha.What is the experience of the bliss of the Self like? Howcan one know it? The hallmark of the bliss of the Self is thatthere is constant nirakudata (freedom from internal and externallyinduced agitation and perplexity). If any perplexity or uneasinessis experienced, then know that the awareness as the Self(upayog) has been missed. Whether the experience is that ofsuffering of pain (ashata-vedaniya) or experience of pleasure(shata-vedaniya), the ‘knowing’ of these is the experience asthe Self.Who has bodily pain? It happens to the body, not to theSelf. That too is vyavasthit (scientific circumstantial evidences).When there is experience of suffering (vedana), You have tocomfort ‘Chandubhai’ and talk to him, ‘Do you have a badheadache? It will get better soon!’ And if you say, ‘I am inpain’, then it clings to you. Change the dictionary. Pain is pleasantand pleasure is unpleasant. Just ‘know’ that, ‘All theseexperiences of pain and pleasure are happening to the neighbor.’As the pure Self, One should start the interaction of beingseparate with the relative self (prakruti). Remain separate fromthe relative self and talk to the relative self, like a warrior; thenthe tormenting of the relative self will go away. Stand ‘Chandubhai’in front of a mirror, pat him on the back and talk to him, comforthim.The Lord has said that Knowledge, vision, conduct andpenance (Gnan, darshan, charitra and tapa) are the fourfoundation pillars of moksha. The highest outer penance is thatof unodari (eating less food than what one has the appetite for).And for final liberation, inner penance is required. Inner penancemeans that, at the time of terrible pain You remain in the homedepartment and do not move away from being the Self. Noshifting in the relative self happens whatsoever; that is the penanceto be done! Being firm in, ‘All these are results of the non-Self,they are not Mine’, is the penance. And that is what givesmoksha! Knowing that the suffering is of the non-Self leads tothe continuous ‘knowing’ of this. And if it is felt that, ‘this ishappening to me’, then one has to suffer. Furthermore if it isexpressed that, ‘I can’t tolerate this’, the suffering is multipliedtenfold! The effect (asar) happens according to the wordsspoken. There (where suffering is concerned) you get the workdone with chivalry.Just look at what the nature of the Self is like! It immediatelybecomes what it envisions. If it envisions one with happiness, itbecomes happy, and if it envisions being sad, it becomes sad!Therefore, be aware that envisioning of sadness does not arise.You should not say, ‘my head is hurting’; there you can only say,‘Chandubhai’s’ head is hurting!’ Do not become engrossed withthe results that happen to the non-Self.The Gnani as well as the Tirthankars are subject to thesuffering of pain (ashata-vedaniya), but they simply ‘know’ thesuffering; they ‘know’ it through absolute knowledge.The chit is only to be kept in the Self, not in the sufferingor in temporary things. When the chit remains in the eternal itbecomes pure. Thereafter one becomes a videhi (beyond thebody complex). The energy of the Self is only in the realm of theSelf. Once that arises the work is done.What is known as obstinacy (aadayee)? Say a personmakes a mistake and he is aware of it but if someone asks himwhy he made the mistake, he will respond by insisting that it wasthe right thing to do; that is known as obstinacy. If he is awareof the mistake and covers it up; that is considered the biggestform of obstinacy.2021There are two types of prizes. One is to win a lottery andthe other is to be robbed; both are scientific circumstantialevidences.The one whose speech is never associated with sect baseddivisiveness and entrenched opinions, where the speech isabsolutely about the Self, is known as the absolute Self(Brahmaswaroop).There are infinite Souls. In the final liberation state eachand every Soul is separate and remains in eternal bliss of theSelf.The entire worldly life and its interactions are in the formof discharge (galan) and it is scientific circumstantial evidences(vyavasthit). All five senses are subject to unfolding karmaeffect (udayadhin).What causes bondage of karma? The very belief, ‘I amChandubhai’, is the root cause of bondage of karma. One onlyhas to understand the facts. This is a science.When thoughts happen and they torment you, You areonly to ‘see’ them as separate. Thoughts arise in the mind. Themind will say, ‘What if the car collides?’ There You are tosimply ‘see’ the thought and sit in the car peacefully and not getengrossed in the mind. When excessive pain happens tell it, ‘Goto Dada.’The intellect (buddhi) does not let you get out of theworldly life. The intellect shows where profit lies and where losslies; it causes inner burning. The inner burning stops foreverwhen one is graced by the Gnani! Where there is right intellect(samyak buddhi) there are no sect based opinions! There is nodivisiveness of, ‘This is mine and this is yours’!The ‘outer’ intellect is ‘mechanical’ and the ‘inner’ intellectis what makes one independent. That intellect too is ‘mechanical’.The independence it gives you leaves no superior over you. The‘mechanical’ intellect gives worldly things.‘Who am I? What is the basis of my existence?’ It isimperative to know adhaar and adhaari, meaning what supportis and what being supported is. ‘What is worth doing in theworld, what is not worth doing’, ‘what is to be known and whatis not to be known’; only this much needs to be understood.Viraha (pining, the fire of separation from a loved one)means there is no state of ease; it is only then that one becomesfree from the worldly life. The pining of separation should befor the Gnani. This separation generates ‘electricity’ withinand it energizes the Self! Viraha is considered a very valuablething. Those who have come to know the Gnani, for many anera, come to have viraha. Such individuals are bound formoksha.Our real nature is Sat Chit Anand (sat – eternal, chit –knowledge and vision, anand – bliss). The Gnani Purushfractures your wrong belief and establishes the right one. Afterthat You attain the awakened awareness, ‘I am pure Soul’; Youattain Gnan and then there is constant awareness! After thatillusion (maya) and illusory attachment (moha) go away.The illusory attachment (moha) Gautam Swami had forLord Mahavir Swami is called prashasta moha (praiseworthyand the best kind of illusory attachment). With that all worldlyillusory attachments get destroyed and moksha is surely attained.Praiseworthy moha means attachment that happens for the onewho will take You to moksha. It is not harmful moha. It willresult in moksha; there may be a slight delay, but so what?Attachment for the Vitarags, attachment for the things that impartnon-attachment (vitaragata) is called prashasta moha.Where there is doubt (shanka), there is the invasion of acyclone! And for final liberation one has to be entirely doubt-2021There are two types of prizes. One is to win a lottery andthe other is to be robbed; both are scientific circumstantialevidences.The one whose speech is never associated with sect baseddivisiveness and entrenched opinions, where the speech isabsolutely about the Self, is known as the absolute Self(Brahmaswaroop).There are infinite Souls. In the final liberation state eachand every Soul is separate and remains in eternal bliss of theSelf.The entire worldly life and its interactions are in the formof discharge (galan) and it is scientific circumstantial evidences(vyavasthit). All five senses are subject to unfolding karmaeffect (udayadhin).What causes bondage of karma? The very belief, ‘I amChandubhai’, is the root cause of bondage of karma. One onlyhas to understand the facts. This is a science.When thoughts happen and they torment you, You areonly to ‘see’ them as separate. Thoughts arise in the mind. Themind will say, ‘What if the car collides?’ There You are tosimply ‘see’ the thought and sit in the car peacefully and not getengrossed in the mind. When excessive pain happens tell it, ‘Goto Dada.’The intellect (buddhi) does not let you get out of theworldly life. The intellect shows where profit lies and where losslies; it causes inner burning. The inner burning stops foreverwhen one is graced by the Gnani! Where there is right intellect(samyak buddhi) there are no sect based opinions! There is nodivisiveness of, ‘This is mine and this is yours’!The ‘outer’ intellect is ‘mechanical’ and the ‘inner’ intellectis what makes one independent. That intellect too is ‘mechanical’.The independence it gives you leaves no superior over you. The‘mechanical’ intellect gives worldly things.‘Who am I? What is the basis of my existence?’ It isimperative to know adhaar and adhaari, meaning what supportis and what being supported is. ‘What is worth doing in theworld, what is not worth doing’, ‘what is to be known and whatis not to be known’; only this much needs to be understood.Viraha (pining, the fire of separation from a loved one)means there is no state of ease; it is only then that one becomesfree from the worldly life. The pining of separation should befor the Gnani. This separation generates ‘electricity’ withinand it energizes the Self! Viraha is considered a very valuablething. Those who have come to know the Gnani, for many anera, come to have viraha. Such individuals are bound formoksha.Our real nature is Sat Chit Anand (sat – eternal, chit –knowledge and vision, anand – bliss). The Gnani Purushfractures your wrong belief and establishes the right one. Afterthat You attain the awakened awareness, ‘I am pure Soul’; Youattain Gnan and then there is constant awareness! After thatillusion (maya) and illusory attachment (moha) go away.The illusory attachment (moha) Gautam Swami had forLord Mahavir Swami is called prashasta moha (praiseworthyand the best kind of illusory attachment). With that all worldlyillusory attachments get destroyed and moksha is surely attained.Praiseworthy moha means attachment that happens for the onewho will take You to moksha. It is not harmful moha. It willresult in moksha; there may be a slight delay, but so what?Attachment for the Vitarags, attachment for the things that impartnon-attachment (vitaragata) is called prashasta moha.Where there is doubt (shanka), there is the invasion of acyclone! And for final liberation one has to be entirely doubt-2223free (nihshank)! Be doubt-free about the Self. That freedomfrom doubt can only happen when the Gnani Purush gives theknowledge of the Self! Then there will be no charging of newkarma!If you want to progress in the world, you follow the pathof intellect (buddhi) and if you want to attain moksha, followthe path of not using intellect (abuddha)! The wrong intellect(viparit buddhi) turns into the right intellect (samyak buddhi)through satsang with the Gnani and it takes you to finalliberation! When one becomes entirely free from intellect, absoluteknowledge will be attained. There is no use for intellect to attainfinal liberation.Swachhand (to act according to one’s own intellect inmatters of salvation and spiritual progress) can’t be stoppedwithout the Agna (instructions of the Gnani Purush), and unlessswachhand is removed there will be no moksha. Therefore, theAgna of the Gnani is religion (dharma) and it is also penance(tapa)! The worship with understanding of the Agna is the onlyway to moksha. Practicing yoga gives concentration; there issteadiness of the mind for a little while. And if it becomes abovenormal, it will cause great afflictions. It will boost the ego andcreate a distance from the Self.A witnessing state (sakshibhaav) is through the ego! Ifsomeone swears at you and you feel bad, that is the proof thatthe ego is operational within. Witnessing is a stage in the Kramicpath (traditional step-by-step path of spiritual progress). In theend one has to be the Knower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta).To follow according to one’s own intellect in the matter ofthe Self is called swachhand. It creates obstacles in the path ofmoksha.It does not need to be brought into conduct (vartan); ithas to be fitted in understanding (samaj). Conduct (vartan)verily is the fruit of understanding! That which is understood, buthas not resulted in conduct, is called vision (darshan), and whenit comes into conduct it is called gnan. Who is the mother ofgnan? Understanding (samaj) is the mother of gnan. Fromwhere is one to attain that vision? From the Gnani Purush.Complete understanding (samaj) is absolute vision (kevaldarshan) and when it manifests in conduct, it is absoluteknowledge (kevalgnan)!Where anything needs to be done; it is not the path ofmoksha. Where one has to understand, that is where the pathof moksha is. The path of moksha is easy (sahelo), simple(sarad) and without any effort (sugam). So, get Your ‘work’done.Once it is understood that, ‘this is wrong’, the wrong willleave by itself. As the understanding establishes, the gnan(knowledge) arises. That which comes in conduct (vartan) iscalled charitra. Right conduct (samyak charitra) can beexperienced through the senses and absolute conduct (kevalcharitra) is beyond the senses and it is part of Gnan.Vision (darshan) is considered higher than faith(shraddha). Faith may change but vision (darshan) neverchanges! And the intuitive insight (sooj) that arises within is anatural gift. Intuitive insight is the balance sheet of the experiencesof infinite previous lives!When two people talk, it is talk (aakhyan) and whentalking to a large group, it is a lecture (vyakhyan)!Be alert and aware when circumstances are favorable(anukud). Favorable circumstances make one slip downwardspiritually and unfavorable circumstances (pratikud) keep onealert!The intent, with which karma is charged, will be the intentduring the discharge of karma. If the karma was charged with2223free (nihshank)! Be doubt-free about the Self. That freedomfrom doubt can only happen when the Gnani Purush gives theknowledge of the Self! Then there will be no charging of newkarma!If you want to progress in the world, you follow the pathof intellect (buddhi) and if you want to attain moksha, followthe path of not using intellect (abuddha)! The wrong intellect(viparit buddhi) turns into the right intellect (samyak buddhi)through satsang with the Gnani and it takes you to finalliberation! When one becomes entirely free from intellect, absoluteknowledge will be attained. There is no use for intellect to attainfinal liberation.Swachhand (to act according to one’s own intellect inmatters of salvation and spiritual progress) can’t be stoppedwithout the Agna (instructions of the Gnani Purush), and unlessswachhand is removed there will be no moksha. Therefore, theAgna of the Gnani is religion (dharma) and it is also penance(tapa)! The worship with understanding of the Agna is the onlyway to moksha. Practicing yoga gives concentration; there issteadiness of the mind for a little while. And if it becomes abovenormal, it will cause great afflictions. It will boost the ego andcreate a distance from the Self.A witnessing state (sakshibhaav) is through the ego! Ifsomeone swears at you and you feel bad, that is the proof thatthe ego is operational within. Witnessing is a stage in the Kramicpath (traditional step-by-step path of spiritual progress). In theend one has to be the Knower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta).To follow according to one’s own intellect in the matter ofthe Self is called swachhand. It creates obstacles in the path ofmoksha.It does not need to be brought into conduct (vartan); ithas to be fitted in understanding (samaj). Conduct (vartan)verily is the fruit of understanding! That which is understood, buthas not resulted in conduct, is called vision (darshan), and whenit comes into conduct it is called gnan. Who is the mother ofgnan? Understanding (samaj) is the mother of gnan. Fromwhere is one to attain that vision? From the Gnani Purush.Complete understanding (samaj) is absolute vision (kevaldarshan) and when it manifests in conduct, it is absoluteknowledge (kevalgnan)!Where anything needs to be done; it is not the path ofmoksha. Where one has to understand, that is where the pathof moksha is. The path of moksha is easy (sahelo), simple(sarad) and without any effort (sugam). So, get Your ‘work’done.Once it is understood that, ‘this is wrong’, the wrong willleave by itself. As the understanding establishes, the gnan(knowledge) arises. That which comes in conduct (vartan) iscalled charitra. Right conduct (samyak charitra) can beexperienced through the senses and absolute conduct (kevalcharitra) is beyond the senses and it is part of Gnan.Vision (darshan) is considered higher than faith(shraddha). Faith may change but vision (darshan) neverchanges! And the intuitive insight (sooj) that arises within is anatural gift. Intuitive insight is the balance sheet of the experiencesof infinite previous lives!When two people talk, it is talk (aakhyan) and whentalking to a large group, it is a lecture (vyakhyan)!Be alert and aware when circumstances are favorable(anukud). Favorable circumstances make one slip downwardspiritually and unfavorable circumstances (pratikud) keep onealert!The intent, with which karma is charged, will be the intentduring the discharge of karma. If the karma was charged witha cruel intent, cruelty will be there in the intent during dischargeof karma!Salvation is not from scriptural knowledge; it is from theexperiential Gnan. The experience of Gnan can only be obtainedfrom the Gnani Purush, who is the embodiment of absoluteexperience of the Self. Scriptures do not point out our mistakes,they address everyone in a common format. Does a picture ofa lamp give light? The limitation of scriptures is like that of adrawing of a lamp. True light can only be given by a Gnani,who is the enlightened lamp!Where there are kashays (anger-pride-deceit-greed), thereis parigraha (acquisitiveness), and where there is no kashay,there is moksha! After attaining Gnan, in the Akram path,kashays do not occur, because karmas are not bound here(because You are a non-doer). Kashays leave upon Self-realization.What is the reason for attending satsang? It is only tounderstand this much: ‘nothing is to be done’. Continue ‘seeing’the result that unfolds!The theory of destiny (niyativaad) is that the flow ofliving beings in this universe is going on according to some ruleof destiny. But destiny is not the only reason. Other reasonssuch as time (kaad), intrinsic nature (swabhav), self-effort(purusharth) and fate (prarabdha) also come into play.After attaining Self-realization in Akram Vignan, the chitbecomes pure. Pure chit is pure Soul (shuddha chidroop) andthat is the ‘shuddha Atma’ (pure Soul). When most reveredDadashri gives Gnan, the chit becomes completely pure. Andonly because of that the awareness (laksha) ‘I am Shuddhatma’is always there!Wherever the ego leaves, there arises nirakudata (thestate beyond all suffering).The belief, ‘I am Chandubhai’, gives support to theprakruti (the non-Self complex). That support leaves when theGnan, ‘I am pure Soul’, happens. Thus that thing, the ego, fallsoff when it becomes supportless. When the ego falls off onebecomes the non-doer (akarta).How can one go to Simandhar Swami in MahavidehKshetra? By following the Five Agnas of revered Dadashri.What is the difference between the Self (Atma) and thepudgal? The Self is the sole eternal element and the pudgal isof infinite parmanus (subatomic particles). The pudgal isvibhavik (that which has arisen out of a third or extra intent),whereas the Self is swabhavik (original nature). The pudgal issubject to puran (intake) and galan (output).Nothing is to be done. One is only to become deservingof the Gnani’s grace (krupa). What obstructions come in theway to become deserving of that grace? Our obstinacies(aadayee)!The effect of discharge karma (dravya) does not change.If the intent (bhaav) changes, one can become free. One maynot stop stealing, but if his intent behind the stealing changes,then he will stop! By doing pratikraman the intent changes andthat karma gets purified and comes to an end!The world is caught up in trying to remove ego. Dadashrisays that there is no need to become egoless. What is neededis for one to only know the answer to ‘Who I am?’ There is noegoism at all in the Self. You are not ‘Chandubhai’ and yet youbelieve, ‘I am Chandubhai’, and that is ego.What is the reason for the kashays (anger-pride-deceit-greed), for becoming angry and irritable? Ignorance (agnanta).Because of ignorance the ego, attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh), happens constantly! Therefore the root cause of worldlylife is ignorance!2425a cruel intent, cruelty will be there in the intent during dischargeof karma!Salvation is not from scriptural knowledge; it is from theexperiential Gnan. The experience of Gnan can only be obtainedfrom the Gnani Purush, who is the embodiment of absoluteexperience of the Self. Scriptures do not point out our mistakes,they address everyone in a common format. Does a picture ofa lamp give light? The limitation of scriptures is like that of adrawing of a lamp. True light can only be given by a Gnani,who is the enlightened lamp!Where there are kashays (anger-pride-deceit-greed), thereis parigraha (acquisitiveness), and where there is no kashay,there is moksha! After attaining Gnan, in the Akram path,kashays do not occur, because karmas are not bound here(because You are a non-doer). Kashays leave upon Self-realization.What is the reason for attending satsang? It is only tounderstand this much: ‘nothing is to be done’. Continue ‘seeing’the result that unfolds!The theory of destiny (niyativaad) is that the flow ofliving beings in this universe is going on according to some ruleof destiny. But destiny is not the only reason. Other reasonssuch as time (kaad), intrinsic nature (swabhav), self-effort(purusharth) and fate (prarabdha) also come into play.After attaining Self-realization in Akram Vignan, the chitbecomes pure. Pure chit is pure Soul (shuddha chidroop) andthat is the ‘shuddha Atma’ (pure Soul). When most reveredDadashri gives Gnan, the chit becomes completely pure. Andonly because of that the awareness (laksha) ‘I am Shuddhatma’is always there!Wherever the ego leaves, there arises nirakudata (thestate beyond all suffering).The belief, ‘I am Chandubhai’, gives support to theprakruti (the non-Self complex). That support leaves when theGnan, ‘I am pure Soul’, happens. Thus that thing, the ego, fallsoff when it becomes supportless. When the ego falls off onebecomes the non-doer (akarta).How can one go to Simandhar Swami in MahavidehKshetra? By following the Five Agnas of revered Dadashri.What is the difference between the Self (Atma) and thepudgal? The Self is the sole eternal element and the pudgal isof infinite parmanus (subatomic particles). The pudgal isvibhavik (that which has arisen out of a third or extra intent),whereas the Self is swabhavik (original nature). The pudgal issubject to puran (intake) and galan (output).Nothing is to be done. One is only to become deservingof the Gnani’s grace (krupa). What obstructions come in theway to become deserving of that grace? Our obstinacies(aadayee)!The effect of discharge karma (dravya) does not change.If the intent (bhaav) changes, one can become free. One maynot stop stealing, but if his intent behind the stealing changes,then he will stop! By doing pratikraman the intent changes andthat karma gets purified and comes to an end!The world is caught up in trying to remove ego. Dadashrisays that there is no need to become egoless. What is neededis for one to only know the answer to ‘Who I am?’ There is noegoism at all in the Self. You are not ‘Chandubhai’ and yet youbelieve, ‘I am Chandubhai’, and that is ego.What is the reason for the kashays (anger-pride-deceit-greed), for becoming angry and irritable? Ignorance (agnanta).Because of ignorance the ego, attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh), happens constantly! Therefore the root cause of worldlylife is ignorance!2425Who is wealthy? It is he who has a royal and sharingmind. He will spend money whether he has the money or not.Money changes hands every eleven years. If no new cash comesin for eleven years, even a millionaire will become poor! Howdid people preserve their wealth in the old days? Dividing thewealth in four parts: they bought property for twenty-five percentof their wealth, they invested twenty-five percent in gold, theyput away twenty-five percent to earn interest and they investedtwenty-five percent in their business. One will never becomeinsolvent with this system!When big business loss happens, one should know thatthe effect of karma of sin is manifesting. Therefore he shouldstop hectic undertakings in business and peacefully be in satsangand do the most for the Self. At such a time any undertaking willprove to be futile!People refer to the physical body as being chetan (animate,life-spirit). They call that which does work, talks and walks,chetan. But true Chetan does not perform any activities at all;to ‘know’ (jaanvu) and to ‘see’ (jovu); only these two functionsare that of the Chetan (the Soul, the Self). Everything else is ofthe non-Self (anatma)! Even speech is mishrachetan (a mixtureof the Self and the non-Self); it is the ‘mechanical’ self. Speechis not the Self. The Self is stable; it is permanent. Everything elseis mobile and temporary. The meaning of ‘mechanical’ is that itis unsteady; it is mobile (sachar). The Soul is still (achar) andthe universe is mobile-still (sacharachar)!When the chit becomes pure, it is the same as the interimSelf (awakened Self, antaratma).At first conviction (pratiti) is established that, ‘I am pureSoul’. This results in awareness (laksha). Thereafter, in order toestablish the experience of the Self, one has to remain absorbedin the Self. But as long as pending karmas remain to be settled,one cannot remain as the Self. Therefore this is called the stateof ‘interim government’ (antaratma). When all karmas aredischarged one becomes Parmatma (the absolute Self). Afterattaining the pure Self all tendencies (vruttis) of the chit flowtowards the Self.Whether the chit is kept in the pure Soul or in DadaBhagwan, it will remain pure. Chit that is wandering around inworldly matters is called impure chit; it is mishrachetan(mixture of the Self and the non-Self), and when the chitbecomes pure, it is the same as pure Soul. Once the laksha(awareness), ‘I am pure Soul’ has set in; that verily is Self-realization and that is considered the interim state of the Self(antaratma dasha).What is the difference between chit and pragnya?Pragnya is the direct light of the Self. The chit wanders around,however, after it becomes pure, it does not wander. Pragnyashakti (liberating energy of the Self) does not go out of thebody. Pragnya is a part of the Self; it is a direct energy; it keepsGnan separate from ignorance (agnan) at all times!By understanding that which is in the understanding of theGnani, the total karma of the illusion (mohaniya karma) can bedestroyed. ‘Avoid clashes’. It is only when one becomes freefrom all prejudices, that one attains salvation.After attaining Self-realization, through Akram Vignan,the awareness, ‘I am pure Soul’, should remain. It should be inthe vision that, ‘in every living being there is pure Soul’, whetherthat living being is the one who insults you or the one who haspicked your pocket! After knowing the Self everyone has tosettle with his pudgal (non-Self complex) and its interactions.Every individual has the obstruction of the religion that he followsand that is called the religious pudgal. A Jain has a Jain pudgal,a Vaishnav has a Vaishnav pudgal; which is the obstruction inthe path of moksha. Moksha is only possible when these pudgalsare settled.2627Who is wealthy? It is he who has a royal and sharingmind. He will spend money whether he has the money or not.Money changes hands every eleven years. If no new cash comesin for eleven years, even a millionaire will become poor! Howdid people preserve their wealth in the old days? Dividing thewealth in four parts: they bought property for twenty-five percentof their wealth, they invested twenty-five percent in gold, theyput away twenty-five percent to earn interest and they investedtwenty-five percent in their business. One will never becomeinsolvent with this system!When big business loss happens, one should know thatthe effect of karma of sin is manifesting. Therefore he shouldstop hectic undertakings in business and peacefully be in satsangand do the most for the Self. At such a time any undertaking willprove to be futile!People refer to the physical body as being chetan (animate,life-spirit). They call that which does work, talks and walks,chetan. But true Chetan does not perform any activities at all;to ‘know’ (jaanvu) and to ‘see’ (jovu); only these two functionsare that of the Chetan (the Soul, the Self). Everything else is ofthe non-Self (anatma)! Even speech is mishrachetan (a mixtureof the Self and the non-Self); it is the ‘mechanical’ self. Speechis not the Self. The Self is stable; it is permanent. Everything elseis mobile and temporary. The meaning of ‘mechanical’ is that itis unsteady; it is mobile (sachar). The Soul is still (achar) andthe universe is mobile-still (sacharachar)!When the chit becomes pure, it is the same as the interimSelf (awakened Self, antaratma).At first conviction (pratiti) is established that, ‘I am pureSoul’. This results in awareness (laksha). Thereafter, in order toestablish the experience of the Self, one has to remain absorbedin the Self. But as long as pending karmas remain to be settled,one cannot remain as the Self. Therefore this is called the stateof ‘interim government’ (antaratma). When all karmas aredischarged one becomes Parmatma (the absolute Self). Afterattaining the pure Self all tendencies (vruttis) of the chit flowtowards the Self.Whether the chit is kept in the pure Soul or in DadaBhagwan, it will remain pure. Chit that is wandering around inworldly matters is called impure chit; it is mishrachetan(mixture of the Self and the non-Self), and when the chitbecomes pure, it is the same as pure Soul. Once the laksha(awareness), ‘I am pure Soul’ has set in; that verily is Self-realization and that is considered the interim state of the Self(antaratma dasha).What is the difference between chit and pragnya?Pragnya is the direct light of the Self. The chit wanders around,however, after it becomes pure, it does not wander. Pragnyashakti (liberating energy of the Self) does not go out of thebody. Pragnya is a part of the Self; it is a direct energy; it keepsGnan separate from ignorance (agnan) at all times!By understanding that which is in the understanding of theGnani, the total karma of the illusion (mohaniya karma) can bedestroyed. ‘Avoid clashes’. It is only when one becomes freefrom all prejudices, that one attains salvation.After attaining Self-realization, through Akram Vignan,the awareness, ‘I am pure Soul’, should remain. It should be inthe vision that, ‘in every living being there is pure Soul’, whetherthat living being is the one who insults you or the one who haspicked your pocket! After knowing the Self everyone has tosettle with his pudgal (non-Self complex) and its interactions.Every individual has the obstruction of the religion that he followsand that is called the religious pudgal. A Jain has a Jain pudgal,a Vaishnav has a Vaishnav pudgal; which is the obstruction inthe path of moksha. Moksha is only possible when these pudgalsare settled.26272829The Gnani has very little charitra moha (illusoryattachment in discharge) left. However, those under the shelterof the Gnani have to settle this karma. Charitra moha getssettled in proportion to the ‘files’ that get settled. Charitra mohacan only be discharged with focused awareness as the Self(shuddha upayog)!Karma is not bound from doing any action; it is bound bythe inner intent (bhaav)! A donation of five hundred thousanddollars does not result in the binding of merit karma but if at thetime of giving, the meditation was that of, ‘I had to give it dueto pressure from the society or else I would not give even fivedollars’; then this charges a new karma. The effect of this karmawill be that he will not be able to give even five dollars in his nextlife. On what basis does this meditation happen? It is based onone’s inner ‘development’.What is religion (dharma)? What is artha (material wealth,meaning)? What is sexual desire (kaam)? And what is liberation(moksha)?Swarth (selfishness) is generally referred to as worldlyselfishness and the application of this meaning starts fromselfishness at the worldly level all the way up to the ultimatelevel of selfishness about the Soul. Swarth (being selfish) forthe Self is the ultimate meaning. Such a selfish one is the rareAtmagnani (the one with full knowledge of the Self). Thatwhich takes one towards worldly selfishness is sakaam (withexpectation of worldly rewards), and that which takes onetowards the ultimate meaning, the Self, is akaam (withoutdoership). What is religion (dharma)? That which makes onewander life after life is auspicious religion (shubha dharma),pushing away that which is wrong and non-religious (adharma)is called auspicious religion (shubha dharma). And what takesone to moksha is pure religion (shuddha dharma). Givingdonations, doing service, giving help to others, etc., bind creditkarma (punya) and that is relative religion. And that whichfrees one from credit and debit karma is Real religion. Finalliberation is getting freedom from all attachments of the worldlylife and attaining the state of Siddha (absolutely enlightenedOnes without a body). For the one who desires freedom,nothing in the universe can bind him! There is no doer in theuniverse, not even God. The universe runs on scientificcircumstantial evidences!Worshipping child Krishna takes one to Vaikunth (thatwhich contains the chit tendencies). Devotion to YogeshwarKrishna (Krishna as the enlightened One) along with Self-realization leads one to moksha. Lord Krishna has used theword ‘I’ in the Bhagwat Gita for the Self. He has not used it forHis relative self, the friend of Arjuna.There are two types of meditation. One is the meditationassociated with the body complex (pudgal), such as meditationof the kundalini (corporeal energy), meditation of a guru,meditation of a mantra, etc., and the other type of meditationis the meditation as the Self. This meditation leads to the nirvikalpsamadhi (the egoless state). Nirvikalp is a state of no ‘I-ness’. Nirvichaar is a statewithout thoughts, a state like a stone; Except for a Gnani,nirvikalp state cannot be found anywhere.Sankhya and yoga are the two wings on which one canfly to liberation. Sankhya means to know. To know the mind,speech and body and to know the intellect, chit and ego iscalled Sankhya. Without yoga, without the devotion of the mind(to the guru), one cannot make progress.‘Shiva’ means kalyan swaroop (the enlightened One wholiberates others). Samadhi is freedom from any effects of difficulties of body(vyadhi), of mind (aadhi) and from external situations (upadhi).2829The Gnani has very little charitra moha (illusoryattachment in discharge) left. However, those under the shelterof the Gnani have to settle this karma. Charitra moha getssettled in proportion to the ‘files’ that get settled. Charitra mohacan only be discharged with focused awareness as the Self(shuddha upayog)!Karma is not bound from doing any action; it is bound bythe inner intent (bhaav)! A donation of five hundred thousanddollars does not result in the binding of merit karma but if at thetime of giving, the meditation was that of, ‘I had to give it dueto pressure from the society or else I would not give even fivedollars’; then this charges a new karma. The effect of this karmawill be that he will not be able to give even five dollars in his nextlife. On what basis does this meditation happen? It is based onone’s inner ‘development’.What is religion (dharma)? What is artha (material wealth,meaning)? What is sexual desire (kaam)? And what is liberation(moksha)?Swarth (selfishness) is generally referred to as worldlyselfishness and the application of this meaning starts fromselfishness at the worldly level all the way up to the ultimatelevel of selfishness about the Soul. Swarth (being selfish) forthe Self is the ultimate meaning. Such a selfish one is the rareAtmagnani (the one with full knowledge of the Self). Thatwhich takes one towards worldly selfishness is sakaam (withexpectation of worldly rewards), and that which takes onetowards the ultimate meaning, the Self, is akaam (withoutdoership). What is religion (dharma)? That which makes onewander life after life is auspicious religion (shubha dharma),pushing away that which is wrong and non-religious (adharma)is called auspicious religion (shubha dharma). And what takesone to moksha is pure religion (shuddha dharma). Givingdonations, doing service, giving help to others, etc., bind creditkarma (punya) and that is relative religion. And that whichfrees one from credit and debit karma is Real religion. Finalliberation is getting freedom from all attachments of the worldlylife and attaining the state of Siddha (absolutely enlightenedOnes without a body). For the one who desires freedom,nothing in the universe can bind him! There is no doer in theuniverse, not even God. The universe runs on scientificcircumstantial evidences!Worshipping child Krishna takes one to Vaikunth (thatwhich contains the chit tendencies). Devotion to YogeshwarKrishna (Krishna as the enlightened One) along with Self-realization leads one to moksha. Lord Krishna has used theword ‘I’ in the Bhagwat Gita for the Self. He has not used it forHis relative self, the friend of Arjuna.There are two types of meditation. One is the meditationassociated with the body complex (pudgal), such as meditationof the kundalini (corporeal energy), meditation of a guru,meditation of a mantra, etc., and the other type of meditationis the meditation as the Self. This meditation leads to the nirvikalpsamadhi (the egoless state). Nirvikalp is a state of no ‘I-ness’. Nirvichaar is a statewithout thoughts, a state like a stone; Except for a Gnani,nirvikalp state cannot be found anywhere.Sankhya and yoga are the two wings on which one canfly to liberation. Sankhya means to know. To know the mind,speech and body and to know the intellect, chit and ego iscalled Sankhya. Without yoga, without the devotion of the mind(to the guru), one cannot make progress.‘Shiva’ means kalyan swaroop (the enlightened One wholiberates others). Samadhi is freedom from any effects of difficulties of body(vyadhi), of mind (aadhi) and from external situations (upadhi).The light seen during meditation is gneya (thing to be‘known’) and the Knower (Gnata) of that is the Self, and theSelf is the Knower.The purpose of human life is to attain liberation! And forthat, one should find a Gnani Purush and with his grace, thepurpose is fulfilled. Pure Soul (Shuddhatma) and circumstances(saiyog); only these two are there in this universe. And everycircumstance, by nature is prone to dissociate. When onesurrenders all circumstances, moksha happens.The one who does not have artadhyan (meditation thathurts the self) or raudradhyan (meditation that hurts the selfand others) is in the state of samayik (being the Self and‘seeing’ the self) for the whole day. In the path of AkramVignan one can remain in samayik all the time. For the onewho cannot get rid of artadhyan and raudradhyan, to sit ina forty-eight minute samayik and remain free from the formertwo, is said to have done a true samayik. However, in orderto do this, before sitting in the samayik, one has to make aresolution of, ‘Oh God! I, ‘Chandubhai’ am surrendering toyou my name, my body, my self, my illusion and everything.Please give me a vitarag (absolutely unattached) state while Iam doing samayik!’What are the attributes of the one who will become aTirthankar (the absolutely enlightened One with a human bodywho liberates millions)? Such a One has a continuous desire forsalvation of the world, and there is no other desire at all; thisintent of salvation of the world remains the same no matter whattype of food, drink, dwelling or bedding is available. Only thosewho have attained their own absolute salvation can help othersattain the same. Only such a one can make such intent for thesalvation of the entire world. One can arrive at that stage if oneremains in the Agnas of the Gnani and becomes deserving ofHis grace.What does the Swastika symbolize? The four wings indicateentry into different life forms (gati; life forms as a human, animal,in hell and celestial); and the center signifies moksha!‘The physical body that you see is not Dada Bhagwan!The one that you remember is true Dada. What you see is A.M. Patel. And the one manifested within him as the absoluteSelf is Dada Bhagwan! One living as the physical body(dehdhari) cannot be called God. The body is mortal and theabsolute Self is immortal; it is eternal. Dada Bhagwan manifestedin me, when I was sitting on a bench at Surat station, in 1958!’- Dadashri.The worldly interactions of saints are auspicious andinauspicious (shubha-ashubha). The worldly interactions of theGnani are pure (shuddha). The worldly interaction that comesto an end, it is considered as having become pure. A GnaniPurush is the absolute Self in a human body (dehdhariparmatma). He who has not a single gross or subtle mistake isa Gnani Purush.One meets such a Gnani Purush when one’s merit karmasof the highest kind come about to bear their fruit. Such a GnaniPurush has manifested in this era of the time cycle! He is themost revered Dadashri! Many people have reservations abouttaking Dadashri’s Gnan when they already have a guru. Withregards to this, Dadashri says that one should continue with hisguru. One needs a guru for guidance in worldly interactions andfor moksha (liberation) one needs a Gnani. A guru is the onewho teaches the religion of the worldly life. Gurus are saints.They help you become free from the bad deeds, and help youtowards doing good deeds. However, they cannot make youattain the Self; the Gnani Purush gives moksha, within onehour; like cash in hand!What is the difference between a devotee (seeker) andthe Gnani? It is like the servant and the ultimate master.3031The light seen during meditation is gneya (thing to be‘known’) and the Knower (Gnata) of that is the Self, and theSelf is the Knower.The purpose of human life is to attain liberation! And forthat, one should find a Gnani Purush and with his grace, thepurpose is fulfilled. Pure Soul (Shuddhatma) and circumstances(saiyog); only these two are there in this universe. And everycircumstance, by nature is prone to dissociate. When onesurrenders all circumstances, moksha happens.The one who does not have artadhyan (meditation thathurts the self) or raudradhyan (meditation that hurts the selfand others) is in the state of samayik (being the Self and‘seeing’ the self) for the whole day. In the path of AkramVignan one can remain in samayik all the time. For the onewho cannot get rid of artadhyan and raudradhyan, to sit ina forty-eight minute samayik and remain free from the formertwo, is said to have done a true samayik. However, in orderto do this, before sitting in the samayik, one has to make aresolution of, ‘Oh God! I, ‘Chandubhai’ am surrendering toyou my name, my body, my self, my illusion and everything.Please give me a vitarag (absolutely unattached) state while Iam doing samayik!’What are the attributes of the one who will become aTirthankar (the absolutely enlightened One with a human bodywho liberates millions)? Such a One has a continuous desire forsalvation of the world, and there is no other desire at all; thisintent of salvation of the world remains the same no matter whattype of food, drink, dwelling or bedding is available. Only thosewho have attained their own absolute salvation can help othersattain the same. Only such a one can make such intent for thesalvation of the entire world. One can arrive at that stage if oneremains in the Agnas of the Gnani and becomes deserving ofHis grace.What does the Swastika symbolize? The four wings indicateentry into different life forms (gati; life forms as a human, animal,in hell and celestial); and the center signifies moksha!‘The physical body that you see is not Dada Bhagwan!The one that you remember is true Dada. What you see is A.M. Patel. And the one manifested within him as the absoluteSelf is Dada Bhagwan! One living as the physical body(dehdhari) cannot be called God. The body is mortal and theabsolute Self is immortal; it is eternal. Dada Bhagwan manifestedin me, when I was sitting on a bench at Surat station, in 1958!’- Dadashri.The worldly interactions of saints are auspicious andinauspicious (shubha-ashubha). The worldly interactions of theGnani are pure (shuddha). The worldly interaction that comesto an end, it is considered as having become pure. A GnaniPurush is the absolute Self in a human body (dehdhariparmatma). He who has not a single gross or subtle mistake isa Gnani Purush.One meets such a Gnani Purush when one’s merit karmasof the highest kind come about to bear their fruit. Such a GnaniPurush has manifested in this era of the time cycle! He is themost revered Dadashri! Many people have reservations abouttaking Dadashri’s Gnan when they already have a guru. Withregards to this, Dadashri says that one should continue with hisguru. One needs a guru for guidance in worldly interactions andfor moksha (liberation) one needs a Gnani. A guru is the onewho teaches the religion of the worldly life. Gurus are saints.They help you become free from the bad deeds, and help youtowards doing good deeds. However, they cannot make youattain the Self; the Gnani Purush gives moksha, within onehour; like cash in hand!What is the difference between a devotee (seeker) andthe Gnani? It is like the servant and the ultimate master.3031The Gnani comes into the world bearing great karma ofgetting fame and name (yashnaam karma). Because of thesekarmas, the material needs of people are fulfilled. But in that, theGnani does not do anything at all.The Gnani’s toe is the solvent for dissolving the ego andit is from this location that the liberating energy reaches you,when you place your forehead there. The Sarvagnya (the Onefor whom nothing remains to be known) is the One, who noteven for a samaya (time’s smallest measure), stays in the non-Self and is always in the samaya of the Self. For Dadashri allkarmas are alien. Dadashri says that for Him there is shortageof only four degrees in attaining absolute enlightenment. This isdue to the current time cycle of Kaliyug!The only qualification needed on the path of moksha isabsolute humility (param vinaya) and ‘I don’t know anything’.Lack of humility towards the Gnani creates obstacles to one’sown moksha.One should only know about the place where he is going,nothing else is worth knowing. Are arati (lamp wavingceremony), bhakti (devotional chants) and such acts not calledactions (kriyas) in the path of Akram Vignan? No, becausehere one does not become the doer. One remains separateand makes the relative self do it. Thus, there is no devotionalsubservience to any worldly individual here, but one does thistowards one’s own Self. At that time one is in the state ofpragnya, where there is no operation of the intellect. ReveredDadashri Himself used to bow with both hands to the DadaBhagwan within and used to sing, ‘Dada Bhagwan Na AseemJai Jaikar Ho!’ and he used to make others sing and do thesame to Dada Bhagwan within them. This is the highest formof devotion! The listener and the speaker are both havingsatsang (in the company of the Eternal) and such is this AkramScience.3233Who is Dada Bhagwan? The One experienced throughthe Knowledge (Gnan), vision (darshan), conduct (charitra),and penance (tapa) is Dada Bhagwan, whereas the one you seebefore you is A. M. Patel. Tomorrow, that bubble will burst.The Self is most subtle and the body is gross, which people willcremate. How can that which is gross burn away that which issubtle (the Self)? Such a Dada Bhagwan exists within you, andwithin us all. He is the Lord of the fourteen worlds and that iswho You are!!- Dr. Niruben AminThe Gnani comes into the world bearing great karma ofgetting fame and name (yashnaam karma). Because of thesekarmas, the material needs of people are fulfilled. But in that, theGnani does not do anything at all.The Gnani’s toe is the solvent for dissolving the ego andit is from this location that the liberating energy reaches you,when you place your forehead there. The Sarvagnya (the Onefor whom nothing remains to be known) is the One, who noteven for a samaya (time’s smallest measure), stays in the non-Self and is always in the samaya of the Self. For Dadashri allkarmas are alien. Dadashri says that for Him there is shortageof only four degrees in attaining absolute enlightenment. This isdue to the current time cycle of Kaliyug!The only qualification needed on the path of moksha isabsolute humility (param vinaya) and ‘I don’t know anything’.Lack of humility towards the Gnani creates obstacles to one’sown moksha.One should only know about the place where he is going,nothing else is worth knowing. Are arati (lamp wavingceremony), bhakti (devotional chants) and such acts not calledactions (kriyas) in the path of Akram Vignan? No, becausehere one does not become the doer. One remains separateand makes the relative self do it. Thus, there is no devotionalsubservience to any worldly individual here, but one does thistowards one’s own Self. At that time one is in the state ofpragnya, where there is no operation of the intellect. ReveredDadashri Himself used to bow with both hands to the DadaBhagwan within and used to sing, ‘Dada Bhagwan Na AseemJai Jaikar Ho!’ and he used to make others sing and do thesame to Dada Bhagwan within them. This is the highest formof devotion! The listener and the speaker are both havingsatsang (in the company of the Eternal) and such is this AkramScience.3233Who is Dada Bhagwan? The One experienced throughthe Knowledge (Gnan), vision (darshan), conduct (charitra),and penance (tapa) is Dada Bhagwan, whereas the one you seebefore you is A. M. Patel. Tomorrow, that bubble will burst.The Self is most subtle and the body is gross, which people willcremate. How can that which is gross burn away that which issubtle (the Self)? Such a Dada Bhagwan exists within you, andwithin us all. He is the Lord of the fourteen worlds and that iswho You are!!- Dr. Niruben AminCONTENTS1.The Self and the Religion of the Self12.Vision: Right and Wrong153.Knowledge: Right and Wrong164.The Science of Intent175.The Flow of Worldly Life196.The Belief, ‘I Am the Doer’, Is the Seed of Next Life207.The Relative Self and the Real Self218.Wrong Belief of Doership229.Who Is Possessed? The Ego or the Self?2310.Prakruti Does Wrong: Purush Does Right2411.Ways of the Vitarag2612.Get Rid of Opinion2713.Saiyam2814.That Which Comes in Memory Is Parigraha3015.Attaining the Knowledge of the Self3116.Absolute Humility3317.Absolute Humility in the Satsang with theGnani Purush3318.Progression of Understanding3419.Repentance for Sins3620.In Search of Bliss3721.Whose Incantation?3922.After Meeting a Gnani, Nothing Else Is Needed3923.Liberation via the Akram Path4024.There Is No Inner Vision Without Inner Separation4125.Spiritualism and Intellectualism4326.Restlessness in Circumstances and Tranquillityin the Self4427.The Unfolding of Pain Karmas and the Gnani4628.Spiritual Awareness in the World4729.Inventions in Spiritualism4830.The Right to Attain Moksha5131.Grab this Final Opportunity5232.Extension of Life Span5233.At the Time of Death5534.A Wandering Soul Without a Body After Death5635.Absolutely Liberated Souls5736.Darshan of Shuddhatma5837.What Is Life?6538.The Path of Liberation6639.Disrespect Towards the Gnani6840.The Sign of Self Bliss6941.Unfolding of Suffering Versus Awareness of Gnan7042.Torments from the Prakruti7243.Converse with the Sufferer of Pain or Pleasure7444.Penance Is the Fourth Pillar of Moksha7545.The Pain Pleasure Experiencing Karmas7546.The Suffering of the Gnani Purush and the Lord8047.Purification of the Chit Is the Beginning of Liberation8148.Obstinacy8349.All Souls Are Separate8450.The Mystery Behind All that Is Discharging8551.Not Becoming One with the Thoughts8752.‘Go to Dada’9053.The Account of Like and The Account of DislikeAre Separate9054.Intellect Perpetuates Worldly Life9155.‘Outer’ Intellect: ‘Inner’ Intellect9356.Dependency9657.Who Are ‘You’?9958.Doership Perpetuates Worldly Life10059.Niddidhyasan10160.Spiritual Environment10261.Proliferation of the Worldly Life Through Vikalp10262.Liberation Through Akram Vignan10463.All Worldly Interactions Are Relative10764.Humility and Absolute Humility10865.Illusory Impression1093435CONTENTS1.The Self and the Religion of the Self12.Vision: Right and Wrong153.Knowledge: Right and Wrong164.The Science of Intent175.The Flow of Worldly Life196.The Belief, ‘I Am the Doer’, Is the Seed of Next Life207.The Relative Self and the Real Self218.Wrong Belief of Doership229.Who Is Possessed? The Ego or the Self?2310.Prakruti Does Wrong: Purush Does Right2411.Ways of the Vitarag2612.Get Rid of Opinion2713.Saiyam2814.That Which Comes in Memory Is Parigraha3015.Attaining the Knowledge of the Self3116.Absolute Humility3317.Absolute Humility in the Satsang with theGnani Purush3318.Progression of Understanding3419.Repentance for Sins3620.In Search of Bliss3721.Whose Incantation?3922.After Meeting a Gnani, Nothing Else Is Needed3923.Liberation via the Akram Path4024.There Is No Inner Vision Without Inner Separation4125.Spiritualism and Intellectualism4326.Restlessness in Circumstances and Tranquillityin the Self4427.The Unfolding of Pain Karmas and the Gnani4628.Spiritual Awareness in the World4729.Inventions in Spiritualism4830.The Right to Attain Moksha5131.Grab this Final Opportunity5232.Extension of Life Span5233.At the Time of Death5534.A Wandering Soul Without a Body After Death5635.Absolutely Liberated Souls5736.Darshan of Shuddhatma5837.What Is Life?6538.The Path of Liberation6639.Disrespect Towards the Gnani6840.The Sign of Self Bliss6941.Unfolding of Suffering Versus Awareness of Gnan7042.Torments from the Prakruti7243.Converse with the Sufferer of Pain or Pleasure7444.Penance Is the Fourth Pillar of Moksha7545.The Pain Pleasure Experiencing Karmas7546.The Suffering of the Gnani Purush and the Lord8047.Purification of the Chit Is the Beginning of Liberation8148.Obstinacy8349.All Souls Are Separate8450.The Mystery Behind All that Is Discharging8551.Not Becoming One with the Thoughts8752.‘Go to Dada’9053.The Account of Like and The Account of DislikeAre Separate9054.Intellect Perpetuates Worldly Life9155.‘Outer’ Intellect: ‘Inner’ Intellect9356.Dependency9657.Who Are ‘You’?9958.Doership Perpetuates Worldly Life10059.Niddidhyasan10160.Spiritual Environment10261.Proliferation of the Worldly Life Through Vikalp10262.Liberation Through Akram Vignan10463.All Worldly Interactions Are Relative10764.Humility and Absolute Humility10865.Illusory Impression109343566.Naturalness11067.Intense Agony of Separation from the Gnani11468.The State of Sat Chit Anand11569.Prashasta Moha11670.The Mind in Akram Vignan11771.The Origin of Suspicion and the Charging Mind11872.The Path of Intellect and the Path Without Intellect12173.The Agna of the Gnani Purush and Swachhand12274.The Gnani Is Childlike12375.Open Mind12376.Yoga Practices and Self-Realization12477.Witnessing12578.Swachhand12679. Vision, Experience and Conduct12780.Shops of Religion13181.Beware when Circumstances Are Favorable13282.Charge of Karmas and Discharge of Karmas13383.Movement of the Celestials13484.Moving Beyond the Right and the Wrong13485.Moksha Through Scriptures or the Gnani Purush?13586.Moha Begets More Moha13787.Good Deeds Do Not Cancel Bad Deeds13888.Kashay Is the Critical Root Cause of Life After Life13989.The Plight of the Ignorant Old Man14090.There Is No Kashay in Akram Vignan14291.Importance of Satsang14292.Niyati14393.Sat Chit Anand14494. Nirant and Nirakudata14595.The Support of the Ego and the Egoless State14596.The Non-Doer and the Mind14697.Final Darshan14798.The Self Is Never the Sufferer14899.The Enemies Within and the Arihant1493637100.The Goal, the Intent, and the One Who Leads to theGoal150101.The Absolute Self and the Pudgal151102.The Grace of the Gnani152103.Reading Scriptures153104.The Cause Can Be Changed, Not the Effect154105.The Exact Path of Moksha156106.Making Yourself Egoless Is Not Possible157107.The Support of Ignorance158108.Root Cause of the Worldly Life158109.Link of Wealth159110.‘Mechanical’ Chetan162111.Interim Government and Full Government163112.Inner Tendencies Flow Towards the Self164113.Chit and Pragnya165114.Dadashri and His Disciple166115.That Which Lights Has to Be Put Out168116.Obstacles Caused by Conflicts170117.Any Title Is the Ego171118.Can Karmas Be Destroyed by Critical Thinking?172119.Discharging of Karmas – with the Method of theGnanis172120.The Five Agnas Are Shuddha Upayog174121.What Creates Karmas?176122.Dharma, Artha, Kaam and Moksha177123.The Light, the Intent, the Doer, the Circumstances180124.What Leads to Samadhi?182125.The Self Is Without Circumstance188126.Jagat Kalyan190127.The Significance of Temples193128.At the Time of Death194129.Who Is Dada Bhagwan?194130.Worshipping One’s Own Self205(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)66.Naturalness11067.Intense Agony of Separation from the Gnani11468.The State of Sat Chit Anand11569.Prashasta Moha11670.The Mind in Akram Vignan11771.The Origin of Suspicion and the Charging Mind11872.The Path of Intellect and the Path Without Intellect12173.The Agna of the Gnani Purush and Swachhand12274.The Gnani Is Childlike12375.Open Mind12376.Yoga Practices and Self-Realization12477.Witnessing12578.Swachhand12679. Vision, Experience and Conduct12780.Shops of Religion13181.Beware when Circumstances Are Favorable13282.Charge of Karmas and Discharge of Karmas13383.Movement of the Celestials13484.Moving Beyond the Right and the Wrong13485.Moksha Through Scriptures or the Gnani Purush?13586.Moha Begets More Moha13787.Good Deeds Do Not Cancel Bad Deeds13888.Kashay Is the Critical Root Cause of Life After Life13989.The Plight of the Ignorant Old Man14090.There Is No Kashay in Akram Vignan14291.Importance of Satsang14292.Niyati14393.Sat Chit Anand14494. Nirant and Nirakudata14595.The Support of the Ego and the Egoless State14596.The Non-Doer and the Mind14697.Final Darshan14798.The Self Is Never the Sufferer14899.The Enemies Within and the Arihant1493637100.The Goal, the Intent, and the One Who Leads to theGoal150101.The Absolute Self and the Pudgal151102.The Grace of the Gnani152103.Reading Scriptures153104.The Cause Can Be Changed, Not the Effect154105.The Exact Path of Moksha156106.Making Yourself Egoless Is Not Possible157107.The Support of Ignorance158108.Root Cause of the Worldly Life158109.Link of Wealth159110.‘Mechanical’ Chetan162111.Interim Government and Full Government163112.Inner Tendencies Flow Towards the Self164113.Chit and Pragnya165114.Dadashri and His Disciple166115.That Which Lights Has to Be Put Out168116.Obstacles Caused by Conflicts170117.Any Title Is the Ego171118.Can Karmas Be Destroyed by Critical Thinking?172119.Discharging of Karmas – with the Method of theGnanis172120.The Five Agnas Are Shuddha Upayog174121.What Creates Karmas?176122.Dharma, Artha, Kaam and Moksha177123.The Light, the Intent, the Doer, the Circumstances180124.What Leads to Samadhi?182125.The Self Is Without Circumstance188126.Jagat Kalyan190127.The Significance of Temples193128.At the Time of Death194129.Who Is Dada Bhagwan?194130.Worshipping One’s Own Self205(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)12Aptavani-5person would be able to hear. So tell me now, who does thelistening?Questioner: One hears through the ears but only if theliving element (Chetan tattva, the Soul, the Self) is present.Dadashri: The living element never listens to anything atany time at all. It is the Knower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta) and Itis in permanent bliss (parmanand). The Self is infinite knowledge(anant gnan), infinite vision (anant darshan), infinite energy(anant shakti) and infinite conduct (anant charitra). So thendo you believe that hearing is an attribute of the Soul?The Soul does not listen at all. Listening is not its attributeat all. Just as ‘to rust’ is not one of the attributes of gold, hearingis not the attribute of the Soul. Speaking is not its attribute either.Questioner: But the ears can only hear if the Soul(chaitanya tattva) is present, is that not so?Dadashri: The existence and interaction of the wholeworld is based on the presence of the Self. The body will notlive without the Soul, but it is not the Soul that does the listening.Questioner: Then please explain who does the listening?Dadashri: Will you not have to understand this? When aperson says that his Soul hears then it can also be said that theSoul speaks. One may say anything as far as the worldly(laukik) language is concerned, however, it will not beacceptable in the Lord’s alaukik (not of the world, spiritual)language (the Lord here is Lord Mahavir).In this conversation with you, who is speaking right now?Questioner: You are.Dadashri: If ‘Dada Bhagwan’ (the manifest Lord withinthe physical body of the Gnani Purush A. M. Patel) speaks,then Dada’s value is the same as this two thousand rupee tapeAptavani - 5The Self and the Religion of the SelfDadashri: What does the Soul (the Atma) do?Questioner: The Soul is the Knower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta).Dadashri: But you say, ‘I am listening’. Are you the Soul(Self) or the listener?Questioner: I am the Soul.Dadashri: But the Soul cannot hear; only ears can hear,right?Questioner: Is it not the association of the Soul and thephysical body (pudgal)?Dadashri: But who does the hearing, the Soul or theears?Questioner: The Soul is the one doing the hearing; theears are inanimate (jada).Dadashri: Then why not ask a deaf person? Is the Soulnot present in a deaf person too? Then who hears?Questioner: Without the presence of the Soul, none ofthe sense organs can function.Dadashri: There is life in one because of the presence ofthe Soul, but who does the listening, the Soul or the ears?Indeed, if the Soul were the one listening, then even a deaf12Aptavani-5person would be able to hear. So tell me now, who does thelistening?Questioner: One hears through the ears but only if theliving element (Chetan tattva, the Soul, the Self) is present.Dadashri: The living element never listens to anything atany time at all. It is the Knower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta) and Itis in permanent bliss (parmanand). The Self is infinite knowledge(anant gnan), infinite vision (anant darshan), infinite energy(anant shakti) and infinite conduct (anant charitra). So thendo you believe that hearing is an attribute of the Soul?The Soul does not listen at all. Listening is not its attributeat all. Just as ‘to rust’ is not one of the attributes of gold, hearingis not the attribute of the Soul. Speaking is not its attribute either.Questioner: But the ears can only hear if the Soul(chaitanya tattva) is present, is that not so?Dadashri: The existence and interaction of the wholeworld is based on the presence of the Self. The body will notlive without the Soul, but it is not the Soul that does the listening.Questioner: Then please explain who does the listening?Dadashri: Will you not have to understand this? When aperson says that his Soul hears then it can also be said that theSoul speaks. One may say anything as far as the worldly(laukik) language is concerned, however, it will not beacceptable in the Lord’s alaukik (not of the world, spiritual)language (the Lord here is Lord Mahavir).In this conversation with you, who is speaking right now?Questioner: You are.Dadashri: If ‘Dada Bhagwan’ (the manifest Lord withinthe physical body of the Gnani Purush A. M. Patel) speaks,then Dada’s value is the same as this two thousand rupee tapeAptavani - 5The Self and the Religion of the SelfDadashri: What does the Soul (the Atma) do?Questioner: The Soul is the Knower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta).Dadashri: But you say, ‘I am listening’. Are you the Soul(Self) or the listener?Questioner: I am the Soul.Dadashri: But the Soul cannot hear; only ears can hear,right?Questioner: Is it not the association of the Soul and thephysical body (pudgal)?Dadashri: But who does the hearing, the Soul or theears?Questioner: The Soul is the one doing the hearing; theears are inanimate (jada).Dadashri: Then why not ask a deaf person? Is the Soulnot present in a deaf person too? Then who hears?Questioner: Without the presence of the Soul, none ofthe sense organs can function.Dadashri: There is life in one because of the presence ofthe Soul, but who does the listening, the Soul or the ears?Indeed, if the Soul were the one listening, then even a deafAptavani-534Aptavani-5record player, which also ‘speaks’.Questioner: Explain that to me, please.Dadashri: The one who is speaking is not ‘DadaBhagwan’. It is the original taped record that is doing the talking.This is the Science of Akram; the stepless, short cut path to theknowledge of the Self. This is something that has never beenheard before.Hearing is a dharma (intrinsic function, nature) of the ear.Therefore you can say that a deaf person’s ears are not in theirdharma.Now what is the dharma of the eyes?Questioner: It is to see.Dadashri: Yes, it is not the Soul’s dharma to see all this.What is the dharma of the nose?Questioner: To smell.Dadashri: What is the dharma of the tongue?Questioner: To taste.Dadashri: It will know immediately when you putsomething bitter on it. Therefore these five sense organs are intheir dharma. These are the sense organs that convey information;knowledge (gnanendriya) and they are all in their dharma.They are dravyendriya (external, visible sense organs) andbhavendriya (inner invisible sense organs). The bhavendriyawill remain even after the dravyendriya have been exhausted.Therefore both the five gnanendriyas, and bhavendriya are intheir own dharma.Is the mind (mun) in its own dharma, or not?Questioner: I do not understand that.Dadashri: The mind is always thinking. When a wholebunch of thoughts occur, it is called the mind. The mind has twokinds of thoughts. It has good thoughts and it can have badthoughts. It is the dharma of the mind to have both kinds ofthoughts. When one has no thoughts at all, if his mind does notfunction at all, he is considered absent minded. Such absentmindedness makes one’s human life completely useless. Even amad man has a mind, but it functions.Now, even as you are sitting here, can you visualize yourhome in London?Questioner: Yes, I can.Dadashri: Can you see the tables and chairs in it too?Questioner: Yes, I can.Dadashri: That is not the dharma of the mind. Due tolack of understanding, people believe that it is the mind thatwanders off. In fact, the mind does not go anywhere at all. It isthe chit that wanders. The mind cannot leave the body. Whatwanders out of the body is the chit.Questioner: Are the chit and the mind separate entities?Dadashri: Yes, they are separate. You can call themanything in the worldly language but the language of the Lord isbeyond the language of the world. Unless one understands thelanguage of the Lord, he can never attain moksha (liberation).The chit wanders outside the body. While sitting here thechit goes out and sees the home and the table, the clock, etc.,inside it. The function of the mind is to think. The mind thinksgood thoughts and bad thoughts. To see the good and to see thebad is the function (dharma) of the chit.Questioner: Should one consider the chit to be chetan(animate or consciousness), or jada (inanimate or lifeless)?Dadashri: It is a blend of the Self and the non-SelfAptavani-534Aptavani-5record player, which also ‘speaks’.Questioner: Explain that to me, please.Dadashri: The one who is speaking is not ‘DadaBhagwan’. It is the original taped record that is doing the talking.This is the Science of Akram; the stepless, short cut path to theknowledge of the Self. This is something that has never beenheard before.Hearing is a dharma (intrinsic function, nature) of the ear.Therefore you can say that a deaf person’s ears are not in theirdharma.Now what is the dharma of the eyes?Questioner: It is to see.Dadashri: Yes, it is not the Soul’s dharma to see all this.What is the dharma of the nose?Questioner: To smell.Dadashri: What is the dharma of the tongue?Questioner: To taste.Dadashri: It will know immediately when you putsomething bitter on it. Therefore these five sense organs are intheir dharma. These are the sense organs that convey information;knowledge (gnanendriya) and they are all in their dharma.They are dravyendriya (external, visible sense organs) andbhavendriya (inner invisible sense organs). The bhavendriyawill remain even after the dravyendriya have been exhausted.Therefore both the five gnanendriyas, and bhavendriya are intheir own dharma.Is the mind (mun) in its own dharma, or not?Questioner: I do not understand that.Dadashri: The mind is always thinking. When a wholebunch of thoughts occur, it is called the mind. The mind has twokinds of thoughts. It has good thoughts and it can have badthoughts. It is the dharma of the mind to have both kinds ofthoughts. When one has no thoughts at all, if his mind does notfunction at all, he is considered absent minded. Such absentmindedness makes one’s human life completely useless. Even amad man has a mind, but it functions.Now, even as you are sitting here, can you visualize yourhome in London?Questioner: Yes, I can.Dadashri: Can you see the tables and chairs in it too?Questioner: Yes, I can.Dadashri: That is not the dharma of the mind. Due tolack of understanding, people believe that it is the mind thatwanders off. In fact, the mind does not go anywhere at all. It isthe chit that wanders. The mind cannot leave the body. Whatwanders out of the body is the chit.Questioner: Are the chit and the mind separate entities?Dadashri: Yes, they are separate. You can call themanything in the worldly language but the language of the Lord isbeyond the language of the world. Unless one understands thelanguage of the Lord, he can never attain moksha (liberation).The chit wanders outside the body. While sitting here thechit goes out and sees the home and the table, the clock, etc.,inside it. The function of the mind is to think. The mind thinksgood thoughts and bad thoughts. To see the good and to see thebad is the function (dharma) of the chit.Questioner: Should one consider the chit to be chetan(animate or consciousness), or jada (inanimate or lifeless)?Dadashri: It is a blend of the Self and the non-SelfAptavani-556Aptavani-5(mishrachetan); it is not really pure life energy; pureconsciousness (shuddha chetan). And the mind is completelyinanimate (jada).The intellect (the buddhi–intellect is the light of the Selfcoming through the medium of the ego) is in its dharma. Therole of the intellect is to show profit and loss. The moment youenter a train, the buddhi will immediately show, ‘that seat ismuch better’. It will show profit and loss the moment you entera shop.The buddhi does not show me any profit-loss because Ido not have any buddhi. There is a trace of intellect there. Onebecomes the Supreme Self (God) at 360° enlightenment and this‘Patel’ (Dadashri referring to his relative self) is at 356°. Helacks four degrees, and that is why he separated from theSupreme Self. Otherwise ‘this’ (the visible form of Dadashri)too would have been considered Mahavir (the fully enlightenedLord).The buddhi’s function (dharma) is to show profit andloss. Whether one is conducting an important business deal orhis soup is spilling over, does it not arise immediately and carryout its function?Questioner: It does.Dadashri: Besides this, the buddhi has another functionand that is to make decisions. However, its decision-making isnot an independent function. Once the buddhi makes a decision,only if the ego (ahamkar) endorses it, that decision materializesinto action. Without the signature of the ego the decision will notmaterialize at all.Therefore the function of the antahkaran (the innercomplex comprised of the mind, intellect, chit and ego) is likethe parliamentary system comprising four members; the mind,buddhi, chit and ego. If the mind and buddhi agree uponsomething, the ego has to sign off on it. It also has to sign offif the chit and buddhi agree upon something. Therefore, adecision is made based on whatever three of them (either of thetwo plus the ego) agree upon. This talk is completely at the levelof tattvagnan (elemental knowledge), which you will need tounderstand through the intellect (buddhi).You do not have Gnan (the knowledge of the Self,attained in the Gnan Vidhi), do you?Questioner: I do have gnan.Dadashri: What do you consider gnan?Questioner: Gnan means understanding (samaj).Dadashri: Gnan does not mean understanding; it meanslight (prakash). If you have light, you will not stumble. You willnot be affected if something valuable of yours gets broken or ifsomething really terrible happens. Do you get affected when thishappens?Questioner: Yes, I do.Dadashri: Then that is not light. It is all darkness. Nowwhat is the function (dharma) of the ego (ahamkar)?Questioner: It is to continue to exercise the ego. It is tomaintain ahambhaav (‘I-ness’; ‘I am’).Dadashri: No. Wherever you look the ego claims, ‘I didit’. That is all. It simply does the ego of ‘I did it’, ‘I experiencedit!’ Who indulges in the subject (vishay) of the pleasure ofeating a mango; is it the tongue, the intellect or the ego?Questioner: It is the ego that experiences the pleasure ofit.Dadashri: Now the tongue takes the taste and the egosimply claims ‘this is what I did!’ There is no such thing as egoin the Self, but it is something that has arisen. Nevertheless,Aptavani-556Aptavani-5(mishrachetan); it is not really pure life energy; pureconsciousness (shuddha chetan). And the mind is completelyinanimate (jada).The intellect (the buddhi–intellect is the light of the Selfcoming through the medium of the ego) is in its dharma. Therole of the intellect is to show profit and loss. The moment youenter a train, the buddhi will immediately show, ‘that seat ismuch better’. It will show profit and loss the moment you entera shop.The buddhi does not show me any profit-loss because Ido not have any buddhi. There is a trace of intellect there. Onebecomes the Supreme Self (God) at 360° enlightenment and this‘Patel’ (Dadashri referring to his relative self) is at 356°. Helacks four degrees, and that is why he separated from theSupreme Self. Otherwise ‘this’ (the visible form of Dadashri)too would have been considered Mahavir (the fully enlightenedLord).The buddhi’s function (dharma) is to show profit andloss. Whether one is conducting an important business deal orhis soup is spilling over, does it not arise immediately and carryout its function?Questioner: It does.Dadashri: Besides this, the buddhi has another functionand that is to make decisions. However, its decision-making isnot an independent function. Once the buddhi makes a decision,only if the ego (ahamkar) endorses it, that decision materializesinto action. Without the signature of the ego the decision will notmaterialize at all.Therefore the function of the antahkaran (the innercomplex comprised of the mind, intellect, chit and ego) is likethe parliamentary system comprising four members; the mind,buddhi, chit and ego. If the mind and buddhi agree uponsomething, the ego has to sign off on it. It also has to sign offif the chit and buddhi agree upon something. Therefore, adecision is made based on whatever three of them (either of thetwo plus the ego) agree upon. This talk is completely at the levelof tattvagnan (elemental knowledge), which you will need tounderstand through the intellect (buddhi).You do not have Gnan (the knowledge of the Self,attained in the Gnan Vidhi), do you?Questioner: I do have gnan.Dadashri: What do you consider gnan?Questioner: Gnan means understanding (samaj).Dadashri: Gnan does not mean understanding; it meanslight (prakash). If you have light, you will not stumble. You willnot be affected if something valuable of yours gets broken or ifsomething really terrible happens. Do you get affected when thishappens?Questioner: Yes, I do.Dadashri: Then that is not light. It is all darkness. Nowwhat is the function (dharma) of the ego (ahamkar)?Questioner: It is to continue to exercise the ego. It is tomaintain ahambhaav (‘I-ness’; ‘I am’).Dadashri: No. Wherever you look the ego claims, ‘I didit’. That is all. It simply does the ego of ‘I did it’, ‘I experiencedit!’ Who indulges in the subject (vishay) of the pleasure ofeating a mango; is it the tongue, the intellect or the ego?Questioner: It is the ego that experiences the pleasure ofit.Dadashri: Now the tongue takes the taste and the egosimply claims ‘this is what I did!’ There is no such thing as egoin the Self, but it is something that has arisen. Nevertheless,Aptavani-578Aptavani-5Now what will you do to bring the Self in its dharma?What tool do you need to accomplish that?Questioner: Attachment and abhorrence (raag anddwesh) should decrease.Dadashri: See this ring. There is a mixture of copper andgold in it. Now if you were to randomly ask anyone to separatethe gold from the copper, will just anyone do it for you?Questioner: No, they will not be able to.Dadashri: Why is that?Questioner: It is a job of a goldsmith.Dadashri: Everyone else will tell you it is not their job.Therefore, if you want to know the Self, you have to asksomeone who has knowledge of the Self.Questioner: One needs the goldsmith in the form of aSat Purush (Self-realized person).Dadashri: No. All these mahatmas (those who haveattained Self-realization from Dada) are considered Sat Purush.Who is a Sat Purush? It is one who has attained realization ofthe Self and has come into purusharth dharma (the religion ofinner spiritual endeavour of the Self). Sat means eternal. A SatPurush is one who has attained the eternal state. He has theconviction (pratiti) and the awareness (jagruti) of ‘I am pureSoul’. But he is only a Sat Purush; he cannot be called a GnaniPurush. In the Kramic path (the traditional path to Self-realization where austere rituals are required and the seekerprogresses one arduous and gruelling step at a time), the SatPurush is involved in tyaag (renouncing) and atyaag (attaining).The Gnani Purush however is beyond renunciation andacquisition! He grants the gift of moksha to others. He makesothers the embodiment of Gnan (gnanmay). Shrimad Rajchandra(also known as Krupadudev, a Gnani Purush of the Kramiceverything is within its own dharma (function). The ego isconstantly operating where it is needed. Does the ego not gethurt if someone attacks or insults it? Is there not an effect of acompliment (maan) and an insult (upmaan)? Therefore the egois in its own dharma.So, the ears are in their dharma, the eyes are in theirdharma, the nose is in its dharma; each are in their owndharma. Even the eyes, ears and nose of Lord Mahavir werein their own dharma. His mind was in its dharma and his chitwas in its dharma. His buddhi (intellect) and ego (ahamkar)were gone. Yours are in their own dharma too, except the Self;it is not in its dharma. If the Self were to come into its dharma,then both the buddhi and the ego would come to an end. I willexplain to you the reason behind this.Is there not a difference between the intellect (buddhi)and the Self? The Self is the light, and so is the buddhi. Thebuddhi is indirect light whereas the Self is direct light. Indirectlight means it is like rays of sunlight reflecting off a mirror andentering this room. Similarly, the light of the Self falls on theego and that light which comes forth through the medium of theego is the buddhi. The ego represents the mirror and the Selfrepresents the Sun. The Self is the original light. It iscompletely swa-par prakashak (it illuminates the Self and thenon-Self too). The Self illuminates all that is to be known(gneya).The buddhi arises through the medium of the ego. If themedium of the ego were to end, the buddhi would no longerremain. Then the light will be direct. I (the Gnani Purush)receive direct light. What remains for you to do now? You needto get rid of your ego and intellect. How can the ego andintellect dissolve? When the Self returns to its dharma they willboth leave. There is no need to change anything else becauseeverything else is already in its dharma.Aptavani-578Aptavani-5Now what will you do to bring the Self in its dharma?What tool do you need to accomplish that?Questioner: Attachment and abhorrence (raag anddwesh) should decrease.Dadashri: See this ring. There is a mixture of copper andgold in it. Now if you were to randomly ask anyone to separatethe gold from the copper, will just anyone do it for you?Questioner: No, they will not be able to.Dadashri: Why is that?Questioner: It is a job of a goldsmith.Dadashri: Everyone else will tell you it is not their job.Therefore, if you want to know the Self, you have to asksomeone who has knowledge of the Self.Questioner: One needs the goldsmith in the form of aSat Purush (Self-realized person).Dadashri: No. All these mahatmas (those who haveattained Self-realization from Dada) are considered Sat Purush.Who is a Sat Purush? It is one who has attained realization ofthe Self and has come into purusharth dharma (the religion ofinner spiritual endeavour of the Self). Sat means eternal. A SatPurush is one who has attained the eternal state. He has theconviction (pratiti) and the awareness (jagruti) of ‘I am pureSoul’. But he is only a Sat Purush; he cannot be called a GnaniPurush. In the Kramic path (the traditional path to Self-realization where austere rituals are required and the seekerprogresses one arduous and gruelling step at a time), the SatPurush is involved in tyaag (renouncing) and atyaag (attaining).The Gnani Purush however is beyond renunciation andacquisition! He grants the gift of moksha to others. He makesothers the embodiment of Gnan (gnanmay). Shrimad Rajchandra(also known as Krupadudev, a Gnani Purush of the Kramiceverything is within its own dharma (function). The ego isconstantly operating where it is needed. Does the ego not gethurt if someone attacks or insults it? Is there not an effect of acompliment (maan) and an insult (upmaan)? Therefore the egois in its own dharma.So, the ears are in their dharma, the eyes are in theirdharma, the nose is in its dharma; each are in their owndharma. Even the eyes, ears and nose of Lord Mahavir werein their own dharma. His mind was in its dharma and his chitwas in its dharma. His buddhi (intellect) and ego (ahamkar)were gone. Yours are in their own dharma too, except the Self;it is not in its dharma. If the Self were to come into its dharma,then both the buddhi and the ego would come to an end. I willexplain to you the reason behind this.Is there not a difference between the intellect (buddhi)and the Self? The Self is the light, and so is the buddhi. Thebuddhi is indirect light whereas the Self is direct light. Indirectlight means it is like rays of sunlight reflecting off a mirror andentering this room. Similarly, the light of the Self falls on theego and that light which comes forth through the medium of theego is the buddhi. The ego represents the mirror and the Selfrepresents the Sun. The Self is the original light. It iscompletely swa-par prakashak (it illuminates the Self and thenon-Self too). The Self illuminates all that is to be known(gneya).The buddhi arises through the medium of the ego. If themedium of the ego were to end, the buddhi would no longerremain. Then the light will be direct. I (the Gnani Purush)receive direct light. What remains for you to do now? You needto get rid of your ego and intellect. How can the ego andintellect dissolve? When the Self returns to its dharma they willboth leave. There is no need to change anything else becauseeverything else is already in its dharma.Aptavani-5910Aptavani-5path) has called a Gnani ‘a bestower of Gnan’.The Sat Purush lives in moksha; he is liberated but hecannot grant moksha to others. The Sat Purush has theconviction (pratiti) and awareness (laksha) of the Self. He hasthe aspashta (hazy; unclear) experience of the Self. You needthe one who has the clear and distinct (spashta) experience ofthe Self. He sees nothing but the Self wherever he looks. Hedoes not see anyone at fault at all. He does not see faults ineither a pickpocket or a philanthropist. But if you were to askme, ‘Are they both considered equal?’ I will tell you that the onegiving a donation will reap the fruits of his actions and the onepicking a pocket will reap the fruits of his actions. However,neither one is at fault.Questioner: How can he not be at fault?Dadashri: Everyone ‘does’ according to what thecircumstances dictate. The one whose actions are good is actingaccording to what the circumstances dictate, and so is the onewhose actions are bad.Now, in order to bring the Self in its dharma(Atmadharma) one needs a bestower of liberation (moksha): aGnani Purush.Krupadudev (a Gnani Purush) has given us the extractof his entire book. He has said that:‘Beeju kayee shodha maa,‘Search for nothing elseMaatra ek Sat Purush ney khodiiSeek out only the One Sat PurushTemna charan kamadamaaAt His lotus feetSarva bhaav arpan kari dayeeSurrender all intents andVartyo jaa,follow the Gnani’s instructions,Pachhi jo moksha naa madey tohIf then liberation is not experiencedmaari paasey thii leje.’Take it from Me.’Therefore, if you do not attain moksha from one, then heis not a Gnani Purush.Questioner: What is the proof that the Self has comeinto its dharma?Dadashri: All these wrong beliefs such as, ‘I am doing it’and ‘I am this’, will go away. At the moment how many wrongbeliefs such as, ‘I am ‘Chandubhai’. I am this lady’s husband.I am this boy’s father. I am his uncle. I am a businessman.’ etc.,do you have?Questioner: Innumerable ones.Dadashri: Now, when will so many wrong beliefs goaway? They will all go away when the Self comes into its owndharma. The right belief will replace the wrong ones. Rightbelief is called samyak darshan (enlightened vision). The GnaniPurush places the Self in its dharma and the rest are alreadyin their own dharma.When you have a desire to come into your Atmadharma(the religion of the Self), then come here. ‘We’ will bring the Selfin its dharma. When the Self comes into its dharma, everythingelse will be left alone. What do the four Vedas say? They say,‘This is not that, this is not that.’ The Atma you are looking foris not in the Vedas. For that you have to ‘go to a Gnani’. TheSelf is not such that it can be captured or placed in booksbecause it is beyond words; it is indescribable, inexpressible. Sohow can it be placed in the scriptures?Aptavani-5910Aptavani-5path) has called a Gnani ‘a bestower of Gnan’.The Sat Purush lives in moksha; he is liberated but hecannot grant moksha to others. The Sat Purush has theconviction (pratiti) and awareness (laksha) of the Self. He hasthe aspashta (hazy; unclear) experience of the Self. You needthe one who has the clear and distinct (spashta) experience ofthe Self. He sees nothing but the Self wherever he looks. Hedoes not see anyone at fault at all. He does not see faults ineither a pickpocket or a philanthropist. But if you were to askme, ‘Are they both considered equal?’ I will tell you that the onegiving a donation will reap the fruits of his actions and the onepicking a pocket will reap the fruits of his actions. However,neither one is at fault.Questioner: How can he not be at fault?Dadashri: Everyone ‘does’ according to what thecircumstances dictate. The one whose actions are good is actingaccording to what the circumstances dictate, and so is the onewhose actions are bad.Now, in order to bring the Self in its dharma(Atmadharma) one needs a bestower of liberation (moksha): aGnani Purush.Krupadudev (a Gnani Purush) has given us the extractof his entire book. He has said that:‘Beeju kayee shodha maa,‘Search for nothing elseMaatra ek Sat Purush ney khodiiSeek out only the One Sat PurushTemna charan kamadamaaAt His lotus feetSarva bhaav arpan kari dayeeSurrender all intents andVartyo jaa,follow the Gnani’s instructions,Pachhi jo moksha naa madey tohIf then liberation is not experiencedmaari paasey thii leje.’Take it from Me.’Therefore, if you do not attain moksha from one, then heis not a Gnani Purush.Questioner: What is the proof that the Self has comeinto its dharma?Dadashri: All these wrong beliefs such as, ‘I am doing it’and ‘I am this’, will go away. At the moment how many wrongbeliefs such as, ‘I am ‘Chandubhai’. I am this lady’s husband.I am this boy’s father. I am his uncle. I am a businessman.’ etc.,do you have?Questioner: Innumerable ones.Dadashri: Now, when will so many wrong beliefs goaway? They will all go away when the Self comes into its owndharma. The right belief will replace the wrong ones. Rightbelief is called samyak darshan (enlightened vision). The GnaniPurush places the Self in its dharma and the rest are alreadyin their own dharma.When you have a desire to come into your Atmadharma(the religion of the Self), then come here. ‘We’ will bring the Selfin its dharma. When the Self comes into its dharma, everythingelse will be left alone. What do the four Vedas say? They say,‘This is not that, this is not that.’ The Atma you are looking foris not in the Vedas. For that you have to ‘go to a Gnani’. TheSelf is not such that it can be captured or placed in booksbecause it is beyond words; it is indescribable, inexpressible. Sohow can it be placed in the scriptures?Aptavani-51112Aptavani-5Even Shrimad Rajchandra has said that Gnan is with theGnani, without whom one can never attain liberation. Therefore,all you need is a Gnani. The twenty-four Tirthankars have saidthat you need a nimit (someone instrumental in a process) toattain knowledge of the Self (Atmagnan). The Gnani is nevera doer. If I were the doer, I would bind karmas and if you wereto think of me as a nimit, you will not reap the full benefit. Formyself, I have to believe that ‘I am a nimit’, and you have tomaintain utmost humility that it has happened because of theGnani. Everyone has his or her own ‘language’, do they not?Liberation is attained through param vinaya (absolutehumility).When one attains the knowledge of the Self, he comesinto his own swabhav (his own natural state); he becomesaware of the Self (jagrut), he comes into his dharma, so whatelse remains? The rest are already in their dharma, only the Selfwas not in its dharma.Questioner: Dada, after attaining Gnan, is everyoneaccepting of this condition?Dadashri: One will automatically accept it after attainingGnan; no one will accept it before attaining Gnan. I will explainwhy they accept it after Gnan. If you eat a jalebi (sweet snack)first and then drink tea, how will the tea taste?Questioner: It will taste bland.Dadashri: When I put the Self in its own state(swabhav), meaning in its own attributes (gunadharma), thenattraction or infatuation (aasakti) for all other vishays (worldlyobjects of enjoyment) will disappear. What if I were to tell youto get rid of your attractions first?Questioner: Then no one will come here.Dadashri: So in the path of Akram Vignan the first thingthat is ‘done’ for you is to bring the Self into its dharma,whereas in the Kramic path you have to get rid of yourattraction first.Questioner: So does one have to get rid of adharma?Dadashri: We do not have a need for the word‘adharma’. What is adharma? It is the antonym for dharma.Doing good is dharma and doing bad is adharma. But bothinvolve doership, whereas the Self’s dharma is natural andspontaneous; it is sahaj dharma. Now, just because a man’sSelf comes into its dharma, what about his wife; what becomesof her? Does he have to send her away?Questioner: No, but he has to reduce his infatuation(aasakti) towards her.Dadashri: In order for him to do that, he has to becomethe ‘doer’ again.Questioner: Please explain that.Dadashri: After coming into Atmadharma (Self-realization) you are ‘Chandubhai’; you are the husband of thislady and the father of this boy, by the relative viewpoint and bythe real viewpoint You are Shuddhatma (pure Self).‘The world is the puzzle itself; God has not puzzled thisworld at all.’ If the Supreme Lord (Parmatma) had created this‘puzzle’, we would have to summon Him and penalize Him forcausing so many entanglements for everyone. Therefore, Godhas not caused puzzles and entanglements in this world.Nothing can be attained by simply reciting the words, ‘Iam the Self. I am the Self….’ For that the Grace of the Lordhas to happen. Only after attaining God’s grace can You headfor moksha. Now what do we mean by ‘head for moksha’?In the current era of the time cycle one cannot attain finalliberation directly. Nevertheless, here one becomes free fromAptavani-51112Aptavani-5Even Shrimad Rajchandra has said that Gnan is with theGnani, without whom one can never attain liberation. Therefore,all you need is a Gnani. The twenty-four Tirthankars have saidthat you need a nimit (someone instrumental in a process) toattain knowledge of the Self (Atmagnan). The Gnani is nevera doer. If I were the doer, I would bind karmas and if you wereto think of me as a nimit, you will not reap the full benefit. Formyself, I have to believe that ‘I am a nimit’, and you have tomaintain utmost humility that it has happened because of theGnani. Everyone has his or her own ‘language’, do they not?Liberation is attained through param vinaya (absolutehumility).When one attains the knowledge of the Self, he comesinto his own swabhav (his own natural state); he becomesaware of the Self (jagrut), he comes into his dharma, so whatelse remains? The rest are already in their dharma, only the Selfwas not in its dharma.Questioner: Dada, after attaining Gnan, is everyoneaccepting of this condition?Dadashri: One will automatically accept it after attainingGnan; no one will accept it before attaining Gnan. I will explainwhy they accept it after Gnan. If you eat a jalebi (sweet snack)first and then drink tea, how will the tea taste?Questioner: It will taste bland.Dadashri: When I put the Self in its own state(swabhav), meaning in its own attributes (gunadharma), thenattraction or infatuation (aasakti) for all other vishays (worldlyobjects of enjoyment) will disappear. What if I were to tell youto get rid of your attractions first?Questioner: Then no one will come here.Dadashri: So in the path of Akram Vignan the first thingthat is ‘done’ for you is to bring the Self into its dharma,whereas in the Kramic path you have to get rid of yourattraction first.Questioner: So does one have to get rid of adharma?Dadashri: We do not have a need for the word‘adharma’. What is adharma? It is the antonym for dharma.Doing good is dharma and doing bad is adharma. But bothinvolve doership, whereas the Self’s dharma is natural andspontaneous; it is sahaj dharma. Now, just because a man’sSelf comes into its dharma, what about his wife; what becomesof her? Does he have to send her away?Questioner: No, but he has to reduce his infatuation(aasakti) towards her.Dadashri: In order for him to do that, he has to becomethe ‘doer’ again.Questioner: Please explain that.Dadashri: After coming into Atmadharma (Self-realization) you are ‘Chandubhai’; you are the husband of thislady and the father of this boy, by the relative viewpoint and bythe real viewpoint You are Shuddhatma (pure Self).‘The world is the puzzle itself; God has not puzzled thisworld at all.’ If the Supreme Lord (Parmatma) had created this‘puzzle’, we would have to summon Him and penalize Him forcausing so many entanglements for everyone. Therefore, Godhas not caused puzzles and entanglements in this world.Nothing can be attained by simply reciting the words, ‘Iam the Self. I am the Self….’ For that the Grace of the Lordhas to happen. Only after attaining God’s grace can You headfor moksha. Now what do we mean by ‘head for moksha’?In the current era of the time cycle one cannot attain finalliberation directly. Nevertheless, here one becomes free fromAptavani-51314Aptavani-5ignorance.There are two kinds of freedom: First is the freedom fromignorance (agnan mukti). That means the Self comes into itsdharma. The second is absolute freedom from the physicalbody (dehamukti), the attainment of siddhagati (the abode ofall liberated souls). It is possible to become ekavtari; i.e. attainmoksha in just one more life.What is the benefit of attaining freedom from ignorance ofthe Self? One attains a state where he is not affected by anyworldly suffering.What are human beings looking for?Questioner: Freedom from pain and suffering.Dadashri: The Self is by nature blissful and when one isnot affected by pain (dukh), what else remains?Questioner: Surely there must be some keys to knowthe Self?Dadashri: There are no such keys. You simply have togo to a Gnani Purush and tell him, ‘Sir, I have no sense. I ama fool. I have wandered for countless lives but I have not learntor known even a fraction about the Self. Therefore, pleasegrace me; do at least this much for me.’ That is all you haveto do. The Gnani Purush has only come here to give the giftof liberation.And then people complain about what will become of theworldly life interactions (vyavahar). After knowing the Selfeverything that remains is the vyavahar. The Gnani Purushalso gives you knowledge of the worldly life interaction. Hegives you the Five Agnas (five cardinal principles given in theGnan Vidhi by which the state of the Self is preserved andprogress towards final liberation is enhanced). The Gnani tellsyou, ‘These are my Five Agnas. Follow my Agnas and yourworldly life interactions will be pure (shuddha) and yournischay (firm decision) is pure. All other liabilities are mine!’You should experience freedom here and now, in this very life.If You do not, then it is not real moksha. If You do notexperience moksha after meeting me, then I am not a realGnani and the moksha I give is not real either. You must feelliberated here, in this fifth Ara (the current portion of the timecycle, also known as Kaliyug or dushamkaal). You mustexperience liberation here and now, whatever your vocation orappearance. What assurance do you have that you willexperience liberation over there (after death)?Questioner: Does the Self have different types?Dadashri: No, the Self is only of one type.Questioner: Does the Self experience attachment andabhorrence (raag and dwesh)?Dadashri: No. It does not experience attachment orabhorrence; this is a vibhav that has arisen. Vibhav means anattribute that is not of the Self. The Self is by nature vitarag(freedom from attachment and abhorrence). It does not have aniota of attachment or abhorrence. It appears otherwise due toillusion (bhranti).Questioner: Is it true that causes (karma bondage) arecreated due to the effect on the Self, from problems that areinherent in the cycles of birth and death?Dadashri: No. There is no effect on the Self at all. Thenature of the Self does not change at all. It only attains thewrong belief.Questioner: How did the wrong belief set in?Dadashri: It sets in due to one not having the awarenessof the Self; therefore he accepts whatever knowledge othersgive him, and it fits in his understanding. So based on whatAptavani-51314Aptavani-5ignorance.There are two kinds of freedom: First is the freedom fromignorance (agnan mukti). That means the Self comes into itsdharma. The second is absolute freedom from the physicalbody (dehamukti), the attainment of siddhagati (the abode ofall liberated souls). It is possible to become ekavtari; i.e. attainmoksha in just one more life.What is the benefit of attaining freedom from ignorance ofthe Self? One attains a state where he is not affected by anyworldly suffering.What are human beings looking for?Questioner: Freedom from pain and suffering.Dadashri: The Self is by nature blissful and when one isnot affected by pain (dukh), what else remains?Questioner: Surely there must be some keys to knowthe Self?Dadashri: There are no such keys. You simply have togo to a Gnani Purush and tell him, ‘Sir, I have no sense. I ama fool. I have wandered for countless lives but I have not learntor known even a fraction about the Self. Therefore, pleasegrace me; do at least this much for me.’ That is all you haveto do. The Gnani Purush has only come here to give the giftof liberation.And then people complain about what will become of theworldly life interactions (vyavahar). After knowing the Selfeverything that remains is the vyavahar. The Gnani Purushalso gives you knowledge of the worldly life interaction. Hegives you the Five Agnas (five cardinal principles given in theGnan Vidhi by which the state of the Self is preserved andprogress towards final liberation is enhanced). The Gnani tellsyou, ‘These are my Five Agnas. Follow my Agnas and yourworldly life interactions will be pure (shuddha) and yournischay (firm decision) is pure. All other liabilities are mine!’You should experience freedom here and now, in this very life.If You do not, then it is not real moksha. If You do notexperience moksha after meeting me, then I am not a realGnani and the moksha I give is not real either. You must feelliberated here, in this fifth Ara (the current portion of the timecycle, also known as Kaliyug or dushamkaal). You mustexperience liberation here and now, whatever your vocation orappearance. What assurance do you have that you willexperience liberation over there (after death)?Questioner: Does the Self have different types?Dadashri: No, the Self is only of one type.Questioner: Does the Self experience attachment andabhorrence (raag and dwesh)?Dadashri: No. It does not experience attachment orabhorrence; this is a vibhav that has arisen. Vibhav means anattribute that is not of the Self. The Self is by nature vitarag(freedom from attachment and abhorrence). It does not have aniota of attachment or abhorrence. It appears otherwise due toillusion (bhranti).Questioner: Is it true that causes (karma bondage) arecreated due to the effect on the Self, from problems that areinherent in the cycles of birth and death?Dadashri: No. There is no effect on the Self at all. Thenature of the Self does not change at all. It only attains thewrong belief.Questioner: How did the wrong belief set in?Dadashri: It sets in due to one not having the awarenessof the Self; therefore he accepts whatever knowledge othersgive him, and it fits in his understanding. So based on whatAptavani-51516Aptavani-5others tell him he begins to have deep faith (shraddha) that‘truly I am Chandubhai’ and others around him accept it too.Then this belief does not fracture in anyway at all. However, nochanges occur in the Self at all. The Self remains absolutelypure; just like the pure gold is one hundred percent gold. Goldnever becomes impure even when it is mixed with copper; at theelemental level it retains its purity.Vision: Right and WrongDadashri: This is the wrong vision (drashti); it is adeluded vision (mithya drashti) and that is why all the pain andsuffering (dukh) have arisen. And samkit means the right vision;enlightened vision. Has your vision ever become enlightened?Questioner: No.Dadashri: You have roamed the entire cycle of theworldly life and yet your vision has not become enlightened,even for a fraction of a second. What is your name?Questioner: ‘Chandubhai.’Dadashri: Is it a fact that ‘you are Chandubhai’?Questioner: It appears to be an illusion; it feels like anegoistic state.Dadashri: Then who are you?Questioner: I do not know.Dadashri: So why have you not known this until now?Questioner: I have always been perplexed about, ‘Whoam I?’ but I have no answer to it.Dadashri: ‘I am Chandubhai…I am this lady’shusband…I am his father…I am his uncle, etc.,’ are all wrongbeliefs. The Gnani Purush fractures all these wrong beliefs andreplaces them with the right belief. Then the right vision, theenlightened vision (samkit drashti), is attained.Knowledge: Right and WrongPreviously one was involved in understanding wrongknowledge and that caused him to come into karmic bondage.Now he is in the effort to learn the right knowledge; theenlightened knowledge. Since right knowledge is of the Self, hebecomes free.The other one is knowledge too and therefore one findsit interesting. But that knowledge is dependant on other factors(paravalambi); it has to take support of something else here,whereas enlightened knowledge (samyak gnan) gives the blissof the Self; it is knowledge that is dependent on the Self(swavalambi) and it makes one independent.Questioner: There is only one kind of gnan (knowledge),is there not? The Self itself is Gnan. So how can viparit gnan(deluded or wrong knowledge) and this Gnan be different?Dadashri: Viparit means that one is involved in theknowledge, which is not necessary.Questioner: But can it be considered knowledge (gnan)?Dadashri: Of course it is called gnan, is it not? On whatbasis is it considered agnan (ignorance)? It is considered agnanbecause it is not beneficial (for liberation).Questioner: So it is agnan, is it not? It cannot be calledgnan, can it?Dadashri: In the eyes of the world everything is gnan, isit not?Any effort to know anything worldly is illusory knowledge(mithya gnan). Wrong knowledge and wrong conduct (charitra)arise by having the wrong faith (shraddha). This will give onegood experience and it will also give bitter experience in life. ItAptavani-51516Aptavani-5others tell him he begins to have deep faith (shraddha) that‘truly I am Chandubhai’ and others around him accept it too.Then this belief does not fracture in anyway at all. However, nochanges occur in the Self at all. The Self remains absolutelypure; just like the pure gold is one hundred percent gold. Goldnever becomes impure even when it is mixed with copper; at theelemental level it retains its purity.Vision: Right and WrongDadashri: This is the wrong vision (drashti); it is adeluded vision (mithya drashti) and that is why all the pain andsuffering (dukh) have arisen. And samkit means the right vision;enlightened vision. Has your vision ever become enlightened?Questioner: No.Dadashri: You have roamed the entire cycle of theworldly life and yet your vision has not become enlightened,even for a fraction of a second. What is your name?Questioner: ‘Chandubhai.’Dadashri: Is it a fact that ‘you are Chandubhai’?Questioner: It appears to be an illusion; it feels like anegoistic state.Dadashri: Then who are you?Questioner: I do not know.Dadashri: So why have you not known this until now?Questioner: I have always been perplexed about, ‘Whoam I?’ but I have no answer to it.Dadashri: ‘I am Chandubhai…I am this lady’shusband…I am his father…I am his uncle, etc.,’ are all wrongbeliefs. The Gnani Purush fractures all these wrong beliefs andreplaces them with the right belief. Then the right vision, theenlightened vision (samkit drashti), is attained.Knowledge: Right and WrongPreviously one was involved in understanding wrongknowledge and that caused him to come into karmic bondage.Now he is in the effort to learn the right knowledge; theenlightened knowledge. Since right knowledge is of the Self, hebecomes free.The other one is knowledge too and therefore one findsit interesting. But that knowledge is dependant on other factors(paravalambi); it has to take support of something else here,whereas enlightened knowledge (samyak gnan) gives the blissof the Self; it is knowledge that is dependent on the Self(swavalambi) and it makes one independent.Questioner: There is only one kind of gnan (knowledge),is there not? The Self itself is Gnan. So how can viparit gnan(deluded or wrong knowledge) and this Gnan be different?Dadashri: Viparit means that one is involved in theknowledge, which is not necessary.Questioner: But can it be considered knowledge (gnan)?Dadashri: Of course it is called gnan, is it not? On whatbasis is it considered agnan (ignorance)? It is considered agnanbecause it is not beneficial (for liberation).Questioner: So it is agnan, is it not? It cannot be calledgnan, can it?Dadashri: In the eyes of the world everything is gnan, isit not?Any effort to know anything worldly is illusory knowledge(mithya gnan). Wrong knowledge and wrong conduct (charitra)arise by having the wrong faith (shraddha). This will give onegood experience and it will also give bitter experience in life. ItAptavani-51718Aptavani-5is knowledge that is inherently laden with attachment andabhorrence (raag and dwesh).That knowledge is associated with raag-dwesh, whereasthis knowledge (samyak gnan) is without any attachment orabhorrence; it is vitarag gnan. One experiences absence ofattachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh) through knowing-seeing(by the Self), whereas the other gnan (knowledge) causesraag-dwesh from the moment you know and see.The Science of IntentThe mind is a compressed photograph of one’s past life.One man is an officer. His wife keeps nagging himbecause he does not take bribes and how all other officers havesuch nice homes because they take bribes. After a lot of suchnagging the man makes a decision in his mind that he too shouldstart taking bribes.But even before accepting an actual bribe he trembles infear and does not take it. Just by deciding to accept bribes hisbhaav (intent) has changed. However, he is not able to take asingle cent in his entire life. This is because the current life’s mindis based on his past life. Now, in this life, new knowledge hasarisen that he ought to take a bribe. Therefore, in his next life itwill allow him to take bribes.Another officer takes bribes but from within he feels–hasthe inner intent (bhaav), ‘It is wrong to take bribes. How canI do such things?’ Hence in his next life he will not be able totake any bribes. The one who does not take even a dime ofbribe but has an inner intent of doing so, will be caught by God(nature). In his next life he will be a thief and he will perpetuatehis worldly life (sansar).Questioner: So is the one who is repenting becomingfree?Dadashri: Yes, he is becoming free. Therefore, there isa different kind of justice in nature. Do you understand thatthings are not what they seem?Questioner: So does that mean that one should get ridof his inner intent (bhaav)?Dadashri: That is it, it is the inner intent that one needsto get rid of. The problem is with the inner intent, and not withthings and whatever unfolds. As far as God is concerned,whatever happens is immaterial. The inner intent (bhaav) ischarge (for binding new karmas) and whatever is happening isa discharge (effect of the past life’s karmas).Questioner: What is the significance of inner intent in thepath of Akram Vignan?Dadashri: In the path of Akram there is no like-dislike(bhaav-abhaav); he is beyond them. Bhaav-abhaav gives riseto the worldly life; it gives rise to the ‘relative department’ (atemporary state of the non-Self). Positive intents or negativeintents vanish in Akram Vignan and hence new karmas ceaseto be charged and whatever karmas that were previouslycharged simply remain to be discharged. In other words, the‘causes’ have stopped and only ‘effects’ remain. Effect is aresult.Everyone keeps quarrelling over results (that whichunfolds in this life). If your son fails his exams there should beno complaints about his failure. The complaints should come atthe time of preparing for exams. You have to tell him to study.You can caution him, you can even scold him but when he fails,tell him to sit with you and have his dinner peacefully. Consolehim. Tell him not to take a drastic step of suicide, out ofdejection and failure.Questioner: What kind of mistakes makes one do suchbhaav (inner intent): such as accepting a bribe?Aptavani-51718Aptavani-5is knowledge that is inherently laden with attachment andabhorrence (raag and dwesh).That knowledge is associated with raag-dwesh, whereasthis knowledge (samyak gnan) is without any attachment orabhorrence; it is vitarag gnan. One experiences absence ofattachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh) through knowing-seeing(by the Self), whereas the other gnan (knowledge) causesraag-dwesh from the moment you know and see.The Science of IntentThe mind is a compressed photograph of one’s past life.One man is an officer. His wife keeps nagging himbecause he does not take bribes and how all other officers havesuch nice homes because they take bribes. After a lot of suchnagging the man makes a decision in his mind that he too shouldstart taking bribes.But even before accepting an actual bribe he trembles infear and does not take it. Just by deciding to accept bribes hisbhaav (intent) has changed. However, he is not able to take asingle cent in his entire life. This is because the current life’s mindis based on his past life. Now, in this life, new knowledge hasarisen that he ought to take a bribe. Therefore, in his next life itwill allow him to take bribes.Another officer takes bribes but from within he feels–hasthe inner intent (bhaav), ‘It is wrong to take bribes. How canI do such things?’ Hence in his next life he will not be able totake any bribes. The one who does not take even a dime ofbribe but has an inner intent of doing so, will be caught by God(nature). In his next life he will be a thief and he will perpetuatehis worldly life (sansar).Questioner: So is the one who is repenting becomingfree?Dadashri: Yes, he is becoming free. Therefore, there isa different kind of justice in nature. Do you understand thatthings are not what they seem?Questioner: So does that mean that one should get ridof his inner intent (bhaav)?Dadashri: That is it, it is the inner intent that one needsto get rid of. The problem is with the inner intent, and not withthings and whatever unfolds. As far as God is concerned,whatever happens is immaterial. The inner intent (bhaav) ischarge (for binding new karmas) and whatever is happening isa discharge (effect of the past life’s karmas).Questioner: What is the significance of inner intent in thepath of Akram Vignan?Dadashri: In the path of Akram there is no like-dislike(bhaav-abhaav); he is beyond them. Bhaav-abhaav gives riseto the worldly life; it gives rise to the ‘relative department’ (atemporary state of the non-Self). Positive intents or negativeintents vanish in Akram Vignan and hence new karmas ceaseto be charged and whatever karmas that were previouslycharged simply remain to be discharged. In other words, the‘causes’ have stopped and only ‘effects’ remain. Effect is aresult.Everyone keeps quarrelling over results (that whichunfolds in this life). If your son fails his exams there should beno complaints about his failure. The complaints should come atthe time of preparing for exams. You have to tell him to study.You can caution him, you can even scold him but when he fails,tell him to sit with you and have his dinner peacefully. Consolehim. Tell him not to take a drastic step of suicide, out ofdejection and failure.Questioner: What kind of mistakes makes one do suchbhaav (inner intent): such as accepting a bribe?Aptavani-51920Aptavani-5Dadashri: It is an error of his knowledge (gnan). Hedoes not have the ‘decision’ about what real knowledge is. It isbecause of ignorance that bhaav arises. He worries that ‘if Idon’t do it this way, what will become of me in this world?’ Thismeans that his nischay (decision), even on his own knowledge,is broken. He knows that his knowledge is wrong. Now, thisknowledge is not for liberation. It is knowledge of the worldlylife. It is purely temporary and it continues to change accordingto circumstances.The Flow of Worldly LifeEvery living being is ‘flowing’ in the ‘river of life’. Just likethe water flowing in the Narmada River, we are not doinganything. The flow itself takes us ahead. In the past life if one ison the ninth mile and everything there is green and lush with allkinds of wonderful mango trees, almond trees, different fruittrees, and beautiful gardens. In this life one arrives at the tenthmile where there is nothing but desert all around. So then he istroubled and gnawed from within, by the gnan of the ninth mile.He asks for mangos and almonds here in this life, but withoutsuccess. This is how one ‘flows’ forward on and on. This is thework of niyati; a natural progression of evolution of a soul, lifeafter life. However, niyati is only one of the factors; it is notthere as a doer. There is no one or no single entity in this worldwho is the doer. At the same time however, this world has notcome about without a doer. Nevertheless, they are all instrumentaldoers in the process (naimitik karta; apparent doer) and notindependent doers. If they were independent doers, then theywould become bound by their actions. The instrumental doer(naimitik karta) does not become bound by his actions.Questioner: So in this the one who is the doer, is he tobelieve that he is instrumental (nimit) in the process?Dadashri: Yes, he has the understanding that, ‘I am animit’. Many people tell me, ‘Dada you did this for me’, or‘you did that for me’. But I know that I am just a nimit in allthat. The one who becomes the doer binds karmas. Do youbecome a doer of anything?Questioner: From morning until night, I become thedoer.The Belief, ‘I Am the Doer’, Is the Seed ofNext LifeDadashri: Now, do you want to see the proof ofwhether you truly are a doer or not?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: You say, ‘I have to go to sleep by ten and getup at six in the morning.’ Then when you get into bed and pulla blanket over your head, what do you start thinking about? Allof a sudden, you have a thought that you forgot to make a notein your ledger of the five thousand rupees you loaned tosomeone. Would you then be able to sleep? When sleeping isnot under your control, then what is? You even have to set analarm when you want to wake up early, do you not?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: That too is not under your control. Even goingto the toilet is not under your control. Nothing is under yourcontrol. Everything happens naturally, but you ‘adjust’ to it bysaying, ‘I am doing it.’ Everything is operating due to some otherenergy. Neither God nor you are the doer. The very belief, ‘Iam the doer’, is the seed of next life. Will you not have tounderstand all this one day?That is why Saint Akha said:‘Karta mitey toh chhutey karma, ey chhe mahabhajan nomarma.If doership leaves, karmas leave; that is the essence of thehighest quest.’Aptavani-51920Aptavani-5Dadashri: It is an error of his knowledge (gnan). Hedoes not have the ‘decision’ about what real knowledge is. It isbecause of ignorance that bhaav arises. He worries that ‘if Idon’t do it this way, what will become of me in this world?’ Thismeans that his nischay (decision), even on his own knowledge,is broken. He knows that his knowledge is wrong. Now, thisknowledge is not for liberation. It is knowledge of the worldlylife. It is purely temporary and it continues to change accordingto circumstances.The Flow of Worldly LifeEvery living being is ‘flowing’ in the ‘river of life’. Just likethe water flowing in the Narmada River, we are not doinganything. The flow itself takes us ahead. In the past life if one ison the ninth mile and everything there is green and lush with allkinds of wonderful mango trees, almond trees, different fruittrees, and beautiful gardens. In this life one arrives at the tenthmile where there is nothing but desert all around. So then he istroubled and gnawed from within, by the gnan of the ninth mile.He asks for mangos and almonds here in this life, but withoutsuccess. This is how one ‘flows’ forward on and on. This is thework of niyati; a natural progression of evolution of a soul, lifeafter life. However, niyati is only one of the factors; it is notthere as a doer. There is no one or no single entity in this worldwho is the doer. At the same time however, this world has notcome about without a doer. Nevertheless, they are all instrumentaldoers in the process (naimitik karta; apparent doer) and notindependent doers. If they were independent doers, then theywould become bound by their actions. The instrumental doer(naimitik karta) does not become bound by his actions.Questioner: So in this the one who is the doer, is he tobelieve that he is instrumental (nimit) in the process?Dadashri: Yes, he has the understanding that, ‘I am animit’. Many people tell me, ‘Dada you did this for me’, or‘you did that for me’. But I know that I am just a nimit in allthat. The one who becomes the doer binds karmas. Do youbecome a doer of anything?Questioner: From morning until night, I become thedoer.The Belief, ‘I Am the Doer’, Is the Seed ofNext LifeDadashri: Now, do you want to see the proof ofwhether you truly are a doer or not?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: You say, ‘I have to go to sleep by ten and getup at six in the morning.’ Then when you get into bed and pulla blanket over your head, what do you start thinking about? Allof a sudden, you have a thought that you forgot to make a notein your ledger of the five thousand rupees you loaned tosomeone. Would you then be able to sleep? When sleeping isnot under your control, then what is? You even have to set analarm when you want to wake up early, do you not?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: That too is not under your control. Even goingto the toilet is not under your control. Nothing is under yourcontrol. Everything happens naturally, but you ‘adjust’ to it bysaying, ‘I am doing it.’ Everything is operating due to some otherenergy. Neither God nor you are the doer. The very belief, ‘Iam the doer’, is the seed of next life. Will you not have tounderstand all this one day?That is why Saint Akha said:‘Karta mitey toh chhutey karma, ey chhe mahabhajan nomarma.If doership leaves, karmas leave; that is the essence of thehighest quest.’Aptavani-52122Aptavani-5‘Jo tu jiva toh karta hari; jo tu Shiva toh vastu khari.If you are mortal then God is the doer; if you are Self-realized then it is the right state.’No living being has the energy and power (shakti) to doanything! What have they become ‘doer’ of? In fact one is a‘doer’ of swa-parinaam (the state of the Self). So can anyoneever be a ‘doer’ of par-parinaam (the state of the non-Self)?From the time of a man’s birth to death, everything he does ismandatory (farajiyat) and that is all a state of par-parinaam(the non-Self). In all this the belief, ‘I am the doer’, is the seedof the next life.The Relative Self and the Real SelfIn the state of ignorance (agnan) the self (vyavaharatma; the worldly self) is the doer of discharge karmas (dravyakarmas) in that which is essentially anupcharik (that whichcannot be changed and is happening) vyavahar. With such aworldly interaction one is a doer of discharging karmas (dravyakarmas). And after Self-realization the resultant state is foreverthat of the Self (swa-parinaam). In this state, the Self does notbecome vikrut (spoilt). Indeed if one were to become spoilt,then everything would change and that would be the end ofeverything. If you can understand only this much, your work willbe accomplished.One believes, ‘I am the doer.’ Hey you! Where are youin all this? This is all moving and changing (sachar); it is a‘mechanical’ self. The One within is motionless and unchanging(achar); it is the Shuddhatma (the pure Self). The external partis the prakruti (the relative or the non-Self complex whichcomprises the mind, speech and body) and it is the moving part,and the motionless part within is the Self. People are trying tomake still that which is inherently constantly in motion. Theprakruti is by nature restless. This world is such that it cannever be forgotten even for a moment.Wrong Belief of DoershipOne knows all the scriptures and is familiar with them, butwhat is he ignorant of? The Self! He has come to knoweverything but he remains ignorant of the Self. His very belief is,‘If only I do it, then it will get done.’ What is he saying? Heyyou! Go sit on coals! It will get done on its own. Will a personnot automatically get blisters if he sits on coals? On the contrary,in knowing everything else (other than the Self), the egoincreases!The doer is subject to bondage of karmas. Anything andeverything one has done is all bondage. Whether it is renouncing(tyaag) or acquiring (grahan); it is all bondage. Whatever youhave taken, you will have to give back and whatever you havegiven, you will have to take back. You may let go of money youlent to someone but you will have to accept the effect ofrenouncing; when it comes.Questioner: The aim of all scriptures is to experience theSelf, is it not? Then why does that not happen? Why does theegoism increase?Dadashri: The increase in egoism is fine because it is adevelopment of one sort. The final degree in college is that ofPh.D., but not everyone seeking it becomes qualified. Everyonedevelops slowly, that is fine too. Even the increasing ego is fine.Amidst all these, those two to four who are in the final grademeet a Gnani Purush and pass. Until then, this is how theycontinue to develop.First, the ego arises. The ego of people outside India isnatural and spontaneous (sahaj). What is their egoism like? Ifthey have to go somewhere they do egoism of going there, andwhere they are not supposed to go they do egoism of not going,whereas Indian people will go where they are not supposed togo and where they are supposed to go, they will refuse to go.Ours is vikalpi (excessive, unnatural) egoism. They (non-Aptavani-52122Aptavani-5‘Jo tu jiva toh karta hari; jo tu Shiva toh vastu khari.If you are mortal then God is the doer; if you are Self-realized then it is the right state.’No living being has the energy and power (shakti) to doanything! What have they become ‘doer’ of? In fact one is a‘doer’ of swa-parinaam (the state of the Self). So can anyoneever be a ‘doer’ of par-parinaam (the state of the non-Self)?From the time of a man’s birth to death, everything he does ismandatory (farajiyat) and that is all a state of par-parinaam(the non-Self). In all this the belief, ‘I am the doer’, is the seedof the next life.The Relative Self and the Real SelfIn the state of ignorance (agnan) the self (vyavaharatma; the worldly self) is the doer of discharge karmas (dravyakarmas) in that which is essentially anupcharik (that whichcannot be changed and is happening) vyavahar. With such aworldly interaction one is a doer of discharging karmas (dravyakarmas). And after Self-realization the resultant state is foreverthat of the Self (swa-parinaam). In this state, the Self does notbecome vikrut (spoilt). Indeed if one were to become spoilt,then everything would change and that would be the end ofeverything. If you can understand only this much, your work willbe accomplished.One believes, ‘I am the doer.’ Hey you! Where are youin all this? This is all moving and changing (sachar); it is a‘mechanical’ self. The One within is motionless and unchanging(achar); it is the Shuddhatma (the pure Self). The external partis the prakruti (the relative or the non-Self complex whichcomprises the mind, speech and body) and it is the moving part,and the motionless part within is the Self. People are trying tomake still that which is inherently constantly in motion. Theprakruti is by nature restless. This world is such that it cannever be forgotten even for a moment.Wrong Belief of DoershipOne knows all the scriptures and is familiar with them, butwhat is he ignorant of? The Self! He has come to knoweverything but he remains ignorant of the Self. His very belief is,‘If only I do it, then it will get done.’ What is he saying? Heyyou! Go sit on coals! It will get done on its own. Will a personnot automatically get blisters if he sits on coals? On the contrary,in knowing everything else (other than the Self), the egoincreases!The doer is subject to bondage of karmas. Anything andeverything one has done is all bondage. Whether it is renouncing(tyaag) or acquiring (grahan); it is all bondage. Whatever youhave taken, you will have to give back and whatever you havegiven, you will have to take back. You may let go of money youlent to someone but you will have to accept the effect ofrenouncing; when it comes.Questioner: The aim of all scriptures is to experience theSelf, is it not? Then why does that not happen? Why does theegoism increase?Dadashri: The increase in egoism is fine because it is adevelopment of one sort. The final degree in college is that ofPh.D., but not everyone seeking it becomes qualified. Everyonedevelops slowly, that is fine too. Even the increasing ego is fine.Amidst all these, those two to four who are in the final grademeet a Gnani Purush and pass. Until then, this is how theycontinue to develop.First, the ego arises. The ego of people outside India isnatural and spontaneous (sahaj). What is their egoism like? Ifthey have to go somewhere they do egoism of going there, andwhere they are not supposed to go they do egoism of not going,whereas Indian people will go where they are not supposed togo and where they are supposed to go, they will refuse to go.Ours is vikalpi (excessive, unnatural) egoism. They (non-Aptavani-52324Aptavani-5Questioner: But liberation has to be granted to the Self,correct?Dadashri: The Self is already in moksha (liberated). Itdoes not have any misery (dukh) at all. The one experiencingpain and misery is the one that needs to be liberated. The Selfhas never come into bondage; the Self has always been free. Itis because of ignorance of the Self that he believes ‘I am bound’and when he attains the knowledge ‘I am free’, then he becomesliberated. In fact he is not bound; he simply believes he is. Likeeveryone else, he too believes he is in bondage. This is thecompetition amongst people. There are differences of ‘mine’and ‘yours’ which only increase that bondage.Questioner: Dada, is it not difficult to absorb all thisquickly?Dadashri: That is precisely why all this has beenobstructed. That is precisely the reason one does not attainenlightenment, right vision (samkit). That is why it has been said,‘understand Atmagnan (knowledge of the Self). Know whatthe Self is, otherwise there is no liberation’. Writers of scriptureshave given all kinds of examples but one can only move forwardif one understands them. Liberation is only to be found wherethe Atmagnani is. The Gnani can give you knowledge andexplanation of the extent of your ‘doership’. Ordinarily peoplebelieve ‘I am doing samayik. I do penance. I do japa (namechanting)’, etc. They believe ‘I am the Self and I do everything’.Now, the moment the word ‘doing’ comes in, it is all a wrongbelief. ‘I do. He does. They do (karomi, karosi, karotirespectively)’, is all mithyatva (wrong vision).Prakruti Does Wrong: Purush Does RightThe prakruti may do wrong but You correct it fromwithin. What do You have to tell ‘Chandubhai’ when he doessomething wrong? You have to tell him, ‘Chandubhai, what youare doing is wrong, it should not be so.’ So then Your work isIndians) have a natural and spontaneous ego. There (outsideIndia) a thief will continue to steal, a cheater will continue tocheat and a nobleman will continue to be noble, whereas herea noble person will steal and a thief will show nobility! So thisis an amazing country. It is an ‘Indian puzzle’, which no one cansolve. The foreigners will exhaust their intellect but they will notfind a solution for it. Here a nephew will make up excusesbecause he does not want his uncle to borrow his car. The entireego is verily deceitful.Whatever actions one carry out is fine. It increases his egoand through this process he undergoes all different experiences;then ultimately his experiences lead him to the experience of theSelf.Questioner: Then does the ego leave at the final stage?Dadashri: Then he will meet a Gnani. It is a rule thatwhatever the ‘standard’ of the student, there will be anappropriate teacher.The moment one becomes the doer one is subject tokarmic bondage. Whether he becomes the doer of action withexpectation of its rewards (sakaam karmas) or withoutexpectation of rewards (nishkaam karmas); the moment hebecomes the ‘doer’ there is bondage. Doing karmas withoutexpectation of their rewards brings happiness and peace,whereas doing karmas with expectation of their rewards bringspain.Who Is Possessed? The Ego or the Self?Questioner: Does the Self have to wander life after lifebecause it has been possessed by the body complex (pudgal)?Dadashri: Nothing possesses the Self. This is all theproblem of the ego (ahamkar). If the ego is there, the Self isnot, and if the Self is there, the ego is not.Aptavani-52324Aptavani-5Questioner: But liberation has to be granted to the Self,correct?Dadashri: The Self is already in moksha (liberated). Itdoes not have any misery (dukh) at all. The one experiencingpain and misery is the one that needs to be liberated. The Selfhas never come into bondage; the Self has always been free. Itis because of ignorance of the Self that he believes ‘I am bound’and when he attains the knowledge ‘I am free’, then he becomesliberated. In fact he is not bound; he simply believes he is. Likeeveryone else, he too believes he is in bondage. This is thecompetition amongst people. There are differences of ‘mine’and ‘yours’ which only increase that bondage.Questioner: Dada, is it not difficult to absorb all thisquickly?Dadashri: That is precisely why all this has beenobstructed. That is precisely the reason one does not attainenlightenment, right vision (samkit). That is why it has been said,‘understand Atmagnan (knowledge of the Self). Know whatthe Self is, otherwise there is no liberation’. Writers of scriptureshave given all kinds of examples but one can only move forwardif one understands them. Liberation is only to be found wherethe Atmagnani is. The Gnani can give you knowledge andexplanation of the extent of your ‘doership’. Ordinarily peoplebelieve ‘I am doing samayik. I do penance. I do japa (namechanting)’, etc. They believe ‘I am the Self and I do everything’.Now, the moment the word ‘doing’ comes in, it is all a wrongbelief. ‘I do. He does. They do (karomi, karosi, karotirespectively)’, is all mithyatva (wrong vision).Prakruti Does Wrong: Purush Does RightThe prakruti may do wrong but You correct it fromwithin. What do You have to tell ‘Chandubhai’ when he doessomething wrong? You have to tell him, ‘Chandubhai, what youare doing is wrong, it should not be so.’ So then Your work isIndians) have a natural and spontaneous ego. There (outsideIndia) a thief will continue to steal, a cheater will continue tocheat and a nobleman will continue to be noble, whereas herea noble person will steal and a thief will show nobility! So thisis an amazing country. It is an ‘Indian puzzle’, which no one cansolve. The foreigners will exhaust their intellect but they will notfind a solution for it. Here a nephew will make up excusesbecause he does not want his uncle to borrow his car. The entireego is verily deceitful.Whatever actions one carry out is fine. It increases his egoand through this process he undergoes all different experiences;then ultimately his experiences lead him to the experience of theSelf.Questioner: Then does the ego leave at the final stage?Dadashri: Then he will meet a Gnani. It is a rule thatwhatever the ‘standard’ of the student, there will be anappropriate teacher.The moment one becomes the doer one is subject tokarmic bondage. Whether he becomes the doer of action withexpectation of its rewards (sakaam karmas) or withoutexpectation of rewards (nishkaam karmas); the moment hebecomes the ‘doer’ there is bondage. Doing karmas withoutexpectation of their rewards brings happiness and peace,whereas doing karmas with expectation of their rewards bringspain.Who Is Possessed? The Ego or the Self?Questioner: Does the Self have to wander life after lifebecause it has been possessed by the body complex (pudgal)?Dadashri: Nothing possesses the Self. This is all theproblem of the ego (ahamkar). If the ego is there, the Self isnot, and if the Self is there, the ego is not.Aptavani-52526Aptavani-5done. The prakruti can be good today and turn out badtomorrow. You do not have anything to do with it. The Lordsays, ‘You do not ruin Your goal and liberation.’Human nature is such that one becomes like his prakruti.When the prakruti does not improve he says, ‘Ah! Forget it!’Hey you! Do not worry if it does not improve, You just improvethings from within. Then it is not Your responsibility. That is howscientific all this is. There is no responsibility on Your partwhatsoever, for anything that is going on externally. If youunderstand only this much, you will be able to solve yourproblems. Do you understand what I am saying?Questioner: Yes, I do understand.Dadashri: What did you understand?Questioner: I simply have to ‘see’; I am not to becomeone with it (tadatmya).Dadashri: Not like that. Even if you become involvedwith it, You should immediately say, ‘This should not be so. Allthis is wrong.’ The prakruti will do everything because it isirresponsible. But by simply saying this much You become freefrom all liability. Now do you have problems with any of this?Questioner: There is no problem, but this awareness isnot there at the time of anger.Dadashri: Our Gnan is such that it will keep You inawareness. You will do pratikraman (the process of asking forforgiveness for any wrong doing or hurt caused to others) andeverything else. Does awareness remain for you or not?Questioner: Yes it does, Dada.Dadashri: Every time?Questioner: Yes, every time Dada.Dadashri: Our Gnan is such that it will constantly keepYou in awareness and awareness itself is the Self.The prakruti will even have opinions and everything else,but You should become free of opinions. You are separate fromthe prakruti. This ‘Dada’ has made that separation for You.Thereafter You have to play your role separately. You shouldnot get involved in problems of ‘Chandubhai’.Ways of the VitaragThe vitarag Lords have said, to bind the opinion, ‘thesepeople are like this…’ is an offence; a fault.All ‘we’ can do is caution you, but ‘we’ cannot doanything if you take it the wrong way, can ‘we’? Even LordMahavir’s own disciple, Goshada, had turned against Him.While preaching in front of Lord Mahavir, he claimed, ‘I too ama Tirthankar.’ Now, what can Lord Mahavir do here? Suchpeople were to be found even in those days, so if today wecome across a few people like that, can we oppose them?Besides it is good when you have such people around, is it not?What is the science of the Vitarag (absolutely free fromattachment and abhorrence) like? The science states, when youform an opinion, ‘this person is wrong and this person is atfault’, then you are liable. Not only can one not give an opinionbut even the way you ‘look’ at it should not be tainted. I remainsuperfluous – detached. There are so many mahatmas here andI am aware of many facts about their intimate life but why wouldI meddle? This Gnan is not to be abused.Questioner: Such a question does not arise for the Lordbecause to Him there is no such thing as right or wrong.Dadashri: That is in the Lord’s vision. Here such aquestion does arise. Until one becomes a God, he is liable.Questioner: But after that the question of what is rightand wrong becomes irrelevant, does it not?Aptavani-52526Aptavani-5done. The prakruti can be good today and turn out badtomorrow. You do not have anything to do with it. The Lordsays, ‘You do not ruin Your goal and liberation.’Human nature is such that one becomes like his prakruti.When the prakruti does not improve he says, ‘Ah! Forget it!’Hey you! Do not worry if it does not improve, You just improvethings from within. Then it is not Your responsibility. That is howscientific all this is. There is no responsibility on Your partwhatsoever, for anything that is going on externally. If youunderstand only this much, you will be able to solve yourproblems. Do you understand what I am saying?Questioner: Yes, I do understand.Dadashri: What did you understand?Questioner: I simply have to ‘see’; I am not to becomeone with it (tadatmya).Dadashri: Not like that. Even if you become involvedwith it, You should immediately say, ‘This should not be so. Allthis is wrong.’ The prakruti will do everything because it isirresponsible. But by simply saying this much You become freefrom all liability. Now do you have problems with any of this?Questioner: There is no problem, but this awareness isnot there at the time of anger.Dadashri: Our Gnan is such that it will keep You inawareness. You will do pratikraman (the process of asking forforgiveness for any wrong doing or hurt caused to others) andeverything else. Does awareness remain for you or not?Questioner: Yes it does, Dada.Dadashri: Every time?Questioner: Yes, every time Dada.Dadashri: Our Gnan is such that it will constantly keepYou in awareness and awareness itself is the Self.The prakruti will even have opinions and everything else,but You should become free of opinions. You are separate fromthe prakruti. This ‘Dada’ has made that separation for You.Thereafter You have to play your role separately. You shouldnot get involved in problems of ‘Chandubhai’.Ways of the VitaragThe vitarag Lords have said, to bind the opinion, ‘thesepeople are like this…’ is an offence; a fault.All ‘we’ can do is caution you, but ‘we’ cannot doanything if you take it the wrong way, can ‘we’? Even LordMahavir’s own disciple, Goshada, had turned against Him.While preaching in front of Lord Mahavir, he claimed, ‘I too ama Tirthankar.’ Now, what can Lord Mahavir do here? Suchpeople were to be found even in those days, so if today wecome across a few people like that, can we oppose them?Besides it is good when you have such people around, is it not?What is the science of the Vitarag (absolutely free fromattachment and abhorrence) like? The science states, when youform an opinion, ‘this person is wrong and this person is atfault’, then you are liable. Not only can one not give an opinionbut even the way you ‘look’ at it should not be tainted. I remainsuperfluous – detached. There are so many mahatmas here andI am aware of many facts about their intimate life but why wouldI meddle? This Gnan is not to be abused.Questioner: Such a question does not arise for the Lordbecause to Him there is no such thing as right or wrong.Dadashri: That is in the Lord’s vision. Here such aquestion does arise. Until one becomes a God, he is liable.Questioner: But after that the question of what is rightand wrong becomes irrelevant, does it not?Aptavani-52728Aptavani-5Dadashri: Yes, that is true. However this Gnan is not tobe misused. If anyone gets hurt by you, there should be remorsefrom you. I am not giving you this information to be misused.‘We’ have given you freedom in everything, except ‘we’tell you, ‘be cautious where sexuality is concerned!’ This iswhat ‘we’ tell you. However no restrictions are there in sexualinteractions between married partners. ‘We’ caution youagainst illicit sexual interaction because there is grave danger init. ‘We’ make you aware that this is the only place of dangerin the path of Akram Vignan. ‘We’ make you fearless in allother matters.Get Rid of OpinionQuestioner: There is no more abhorrence (dwesh) butwhy does dislike (abhaav) remain?Dadashri: Dislike is different. It is a mental thing whereasabhorrence is due to egoism. Everyone has likes and dislikes. If‘we’ enter a room and see a traditionally prepared seatingarrangement, ‘we’ would sit on it. Then if someone tells ‘us’ tosit elsewhere, ‘we’ would do so, but ‘our’ first ‘liking’ or‘preference’ would be for the traditional seating arrangement.‘We’ do not have any abhorrence but there is presence of‘likes’ and ‘dislikes’. Like-dislike is of the mind, and abhorrenceis of the ego.Questioner: Does like-dislike exist because of opinions?Dadashri: Dislike remains as an effect of prior opinions.For that you have to do pratikraman and turn it around bytelling yourself, ‘that man is very good’, and thereafter you willstart to see good in him.Questioner: Should I do pratikraman (asking forforgiveness coupled with remorse of wrongdoing) orpratyakhyan (sincere pledge to not repeat the offence) for thatopinion?Dadashri: You have to do pratikraman. If you have anopinion that a certain person is bad then you have to change thatopinion to a positive one by saying, ‘he is a good man’. If heappears bad to you, by saying he is good, the change will occur.You see him as being bad due to past opinions. No one is badat all. You simply have to tell your mind this. The opinions arebound by the mind. The mind has a stock. One way or another,you need to tie the mind down. Otherwise it will be free to runwild and cause trouble.Questioner: You once said that we should not pamperthe mind nor should we suppress it, so then what should we do?Dadashri: You do not have to suppress the mind but Youhave to reverse it. In other words, for all people for whom youhave a negative opinion, You should change your opinion bysaying, ‘he is a good man… he is beneficial to me’. Then themind will accept it. The mind can be controlled through Gnan.There is no other way to control it because it is a mechanicalthing. Day by day it is gradually exhausting. It will eventuallycome to an end one day. It does not get new energy and the oldenergy is continually being used up. When the mind tells you thatthe back is hurting, You should say to it, ‘it is good that the legsare not broken!’ This will pacify the mind. You have to do ‘plus-minus’ to it.SaiyamDadashri: What do you consider a saiyam?Questioner: I do not know the definition.Dadashri: This is considered God’s word.Questioner: Does that mean that to remain in theunderstanding of Gnan is called saiyam?Dadashri: All those people who remain in control, whodo not get out of control: that is not called saiyam. Saiyam isAptavani-52728Aptavani-5Dadashri: Yes, that is true. However this Gnan is not tobe misused. If anyone gets hurt by you, there should be remorsefrom you. I am not giving you this information to be misused.‘We’ have given you freedom in everything, except ‘we’tell you, ‘be cautious where sexuality is concerned!’ This iswhat ‘we’ tell you. However no restrictions are there in sexualinteractions between married partners. ‘We’ caution youagainst illicit sexual interaction because there is grave danger init. ‘We’ make you aware that this is the only place of dangerin the path of Akram Vignan. ‘We’ make you fearless in allother matters.Get Rid of OpinionQuestioner: There is no more abhorrence (dwesh) butwhy does dislike (abhaav) remain?Dadashri: Dislike is different. It is a mental thing whereasabhorrence is due to egoism. Everyone has likes and dislikes. If‘we’ enter a room and see a traditionally prepared seatingarrangement, ‘we’ would sit on it. Then if someone tells ‘us’ tosit elsewhere, ‘we’ would do so, but ‘our’ first ‘liking’ or‘preference’ would be for the traditional seating arrangement.‘We’ do not have any abhorrence but there is presence of‘likes’ and ‘dislikes’. Like-dislike is of the mind, and abhorrenceis of the ego.Questioner: Does like-dislike exist because of opinions?Dadashri: Dislike remains as an effect of prior opinions.For that you have to do pratikraman and turn it around bytelling yourself, ‘that man is very good’, and thereafter you willstart to see good in him.Questioner: Should I do pratikraman (asking forforgiveness coupled with remorse of wrongdoing) orpratyakhyan (sincere pledge to not repeat the offence) for thatopinion?Dadashri: You have to do pratikraman. If you have anopinion that a certain person is bad then you have to change thatopinion to a positive one by saying, ‘he is a good man’. If heappears bad to you, by saying he is good, the change will occur.You see him as being bad due to past opinions. No one is badat all. You simply have to tell your mind this. The opinions arebound by the mind. The mind has a stock. One way or another,you need to tie the mind down. Otherwise it will be free to runwild and cause trouble.Questioner: You once said that we should not pamperthe mind nor should we suppress it, so then what should we do?Dadashri: You do not have to suppress the mind but Youhave to reverse it. In other words, for all people for whom youhave a negative opinion, You should change your opinion bysaying, ‘he is a good man… he is beneficial to me’. Then themind will accept it. The mind can be controlled through Gnan.There is no other way to control it because it is a mechanicalthing. Day by day it is gradually exhausting. It will eventuallycome to an end one day. It does not get new energy and the oldenergy is continually being used up. When the mind tells you thatthe back is hurting, You should say to it, ‘it is good that the legsare not broken!’ This will pacify the mind. You have to do ‘plus-minus’ to it.SaiyamDadashri: What do you consider a saiyam?Questioner: I do not know the definition.Dadashri: This is considered God’s word.Questioner: Does that mean that to remain in theunderstanding of Gnan is called saiyam?Dadashri: All those people who remain in control, whodo not get out of control: that is not called saiyam. Saiyam isAptavani-52930Aptavani-5a different thing. That is called saiyamdhari; the one who hassaiyam (one who remains unaffected). He is without kashay(anger, pride, deceit, greed)!The one over whom Yamraj (the God of death) does nothave a grip is called a saiyami. The Lord has praised asaiyamdhari. One should do darshan of such a person whohas subdued Yamraj.Questioner: In what way has he subdued Yamraj?Dadashri: When one is not afraid of death, he isconsidered to have subdued Yamraj. A person who does notfeel, ‘I will die. I am in the grips of Yamraj’, is consideredsaiyamdhari.Look where people have taken the meaning of the word‘saiyam’ today! They have given such an inferior definition tothe Lord’s word. They have brought the Lord’s spirituallanguage down to a worldly level. What people consider as‘saiyam’ is not really ‘saiyam’; it is called ‘exercising control’.People lack discipline and that is why they have to practicecontrol. Every animal has control. Only humans have comeinto a state of ‘decontrol’; they have no awareness (bhaan) atall.Questioner: They have the authority (satta) but they donot have awareness of their responsibility.Dadashri: When man had full authority he abused it. Sothen he became niraashrit (without shelter or support;unprotected). Do these cows and buffalos have any worries?Questioner: No.Dadashri: Only humans have worries. This is becausethey have misused their authority. The moment one worries hebecomes unsupported (niraashrit). Anyone that worries, ‘whatwill happen to me?’ is supportless.That Which Comes in Memory Is ParigrahaThere is no problem with eating snacks but it should notbecome a habit. You should have enough awareness that theSelf does not get dragged into it. If it does, then dopratikraman. What drags you when you are eating?Questioner: The spicy flavour.Dadashri: Do you think about it afterwards?Questioner: No.Dadashri: Then it is not considered eating. It isparigraha (take you away from the Self) if it comes in yourmemory and it is not parigraha if it does not. If you forget tomake an entry in your ledger of accounts, you will keepremembering what needs to be done. Like a fly your mind willhover around that. That is parigraha.The presence of ‘Dada’ in memory is such that it willmake you forget everything. It will easily make you forgetparigraha!Questioner: Ordinarily nothing comes to mind but whenit does and it lasts for a few hours, is that consideredparigraha?Dadashri: Yes, of course! Anything that takes you awayfrom the Self is parigraha. It is the graha (prejudice) that haspossessed you; you have become possessed by the ghost ofparigraha. That is why you forget the Self. For that duration oftime, for an hour or two, you lose awareness (jagruti) of theSelf. Some people lose it for up to twelve hours. And for thosewho have not received Gnan; it carries on. The whole day longsomeone else’s farm gets watered; one does nothing for theSelf. The water pump is his, the engine is his, the water is his,the fuel is his, everything is his and yet the water goes intosomeone else’s farm. After attaining knowledge of the Self, allAptavani-52930Aptavani-5a different thing. That is called saiyamdhari; the one who hassaiyam (one who remains unaffected). He is without kashay(anger, pride, deceit, greed)!The one over whom Yamraj (the God of death) does nothave a grip is called a saiyami. The Lord has praised asaiyamdhari. One should do darshan of such a person whohas subdued Yamraj.Questioner: In what way has he subdued Yamraj?Dadashri: When one is not afraid of death, he isconsidered to have subdued Yamraj. A person who does notfeel, ‘I will die. I am in the grips of Yamraj’, is consideredsaiyamdhari.Look where people have taken the meaning of the word‘saiyam’ today! They have given such an inferior definition tothe Lord’s word. They have brought the Lord’s spirituallanguage down to a worldly level. What people consider as‘saiyam’ is not really ‘saiyam’; it is called ‘exercising control’.People lack discipline and that is why they have to practicecontrol. Every animal has control. Only humans have comeinto a state of ‘decontrol’; they have no awareness (bhaan) atall.Questioner: They have the authority (satta) but they donot have awareness of their responsibility.Dadashri: When man had full authority he abused it. Sothen he became niraashrit (without shelter or support;unprotected). Do these cows and buffalos have any worries?Questioner: No.Dadashri: Only humans have worries. This is becausethey have misused their authority. The moment one worries hebecomes unsupported (niraashrit). Anyone that worries, ‘whatwill happen to me?’ is supportless.That Which Comes in Memory Is ParigrahaThere is no problem with eating snacks but it should notbecome a habit. You should have enough awareness that theSelf does not get dragged into it. If it does, then dopratikraman. What drags you when you are eating?Questioner: The spicy flavour.Dadashri: Do you think about it afterwards?Questioner: No.Dadashri: Then it is not considered eating. It isparigraha (take you away from the Self) if it comes in yourmemory and it is not parigraha if it does not. If you forget tomake an entry in your ledger of accounts, you will keepremembering what needs to be done. Like a fly your mind willhover around that. That is parigraha.The presence of ‘Dada’ in memory is such that it willmake you forget everything. It will easily make you forgetparigraha!Questioner: Ordinarily nothing comes to mind but whenit does and it lasts for a few hours, is that consideredparigraha?Dadashri: Yes, of course! Anything that takes you awayfrom the Self is parigraha. It is the graha (prejudice) that haspossessed you; you have become possessed by the ghost ofparigraha. That is why you forget the Self. For that duration oftime, for an hour or two, you lose awareness (jagruti) of theSelf. Some people lose it for up to twelve hours. And for thosewho have not received Gnan; it carries on. The whole day longsomeone else’s farm gets watered; one does nothing for theSelf. The water pump is his, the engine is his, the water is his,the fuel is his, everything is his and yet the water goes intosomeone else’s farm. After attaining knowledge of the Self, allAptavani-53132Aptavani-5(aradhana), then You will be in constant samadhi (a state freefrom any effects of mental, physical or externally induced pain).This will be the case even for a busy doctor like yourself.Nothing will affect or obstruct you. This is a very phenomenalscience. That is why Kaviraj has written:‘That which has not happened in a million years hashappened here.’Questioner: Is surrendering (sharanagati) required here?Dadashri: No. Here there is no such thing as surrendering.There is oneness (abhedta) here. I do not feel any separationwith anyone here or with anyone else in the rest of the world.Questioner: Your state is very high and mine is very low.Dadashri: It is not like that. You are of my level. Yousimply have to keep seeing me and you will become like me.There is no other way. You become like the one you see.Questioner: Do we not need purity in worldly interactions(vyavahar)?Dadashri: There should be so much purity that yourworldly interactions would be called ‘ideal’. It should be thekind one has never seen before. ‘Our’ interaction is of very highquality.That is how this science is. The Self that I ‘show’ You (inthe Gnan Vidhi) is the Self of absolute knowledge (kevalgnan),and the Self people give in the world is the knowledge of theSelf from the scriptures.Questioner: How can a person digest this Gnan withoutprior qualifications, or earning a right to it?Dadashri: There is no need for any qualifications orrights. This is not based on conduct. What is external conductall about? The whole world places emphasis on externalthe water verily goes into Your own ‘farm’ (Self, swa-kshetra),and not in someone else’s, it does not go in par-kshetra (thenon-Self).Questioner: It does not come in memory for fifteen days,and then it does. Is that parigraha?Dadashri: Yes. That ‘ghost’ is chasing you. Do all the‘ghosts’ of the world come to chase and possess you? You areonly possessed by your ghosts. They are only about certainthings.Attaining the Knowledge of the SelfQuestioner: Is Gnan the solution for getting rid of anger,pride, deceit and greed? Is it possible to attain such a Gnan inthis life?Dadashri: Real Gnan (knowledge) is that which getsrid of your anger, pride, deceit and greed. That is calledGnan.Questioner: How can one attain that?Dadashri: That is the very Gnan I give you here. Allthese people’s anger, pride, deceit and greed are gone.Questioner: Is it so easy to become simple and straight(sarad) in the heart?Dadashri: Whether that happens or not depends onone’s karmic account from the past life. That is a developmentof that individual; the more simple and straight (sarad) hebecomes the better. But all that is applicable in the Kramic path.In the Kramic path a simple and a straightforward man willattain religion (dharma), however even after a million lifetimesthere is no telling when he will attain moksha. And this Scienceis Akram. This is the path of Gnan, which can bring liberationfor a person in just one lifetime. If you follow this Gnanaccording to My Agnas, with devotion and dedicationAptavani-53132Aptavani-5(aradhana), then You will be in constant samadhi (a state freefrom any effects of mental, physical or externally induced pain).This will be the case even for a busy doctor like yourself.Nothing will affect or obstruct you. This is a very phenomenalscience. That is why Kaviraj has written:‘That which has not happened in a million years hashappened here.’Questioner: Is surrendering (sharanagati) required here?Dadashri: No. Here there is no such thing as surrendering.There is oneness (abhedta) here. I do not feel any separationwith anyone here or with anyone else in the rest of the world.Questioner: Your state is very high and mine is very low.Dadashri: It is not like that. You are of my level. Yousimply have to keep seeing me and you will become like me.There is no other way. You become like the one you see.Questioner: Do we not need purity in worldly interactions(vyavahar)?Dadashri: There should be so much purity that yourworldly interactions would be called ‘ideal’. It should be thekind one has never seen before. ‘Our’ interaction is of very highquality.That is how this science is. The Self that I ‘show’ You (inthe Gnan Vidhi) is the Self of absolute knowledge (kevalgnan),and the Self people give in the world is the knowledge of theSelf from the scriptures.Questioner: How can a person digest this Gnan withoutprior qualifications, or earning a right to it?Dadashri: There is no need for any qualifications orrights. This is not based on conduct. What is external conductall about? The whole world places emphasis on externalthe water verily goes into Your own ‘farm’ (Self, swa-kshetra),and not in someone else’s, it does not go in par-kshetra (thenon-Self).Questioner: It does not come in memory for fifteen days,and then it does. Is that parigraha?Dadashri: Yes. That ‘ghost’ is chasing you. Do all the‘ghosts’ of the world come to chase and possess you? You areonly possessed by your ghosts. They are only about certainthings.Attaining the Knowledge of the SelfQuestioner: Is Gnan the solution for getting rid of anger,pride, deceit and greed? Is it possible to attain such a Gnan inthis life?Dadashri: Real Gnan (knowledge) is that which getsrid of your anger, pride, deceit and greed. That is calledGnan.Questioner: How can one attain that?Dadashri: That is the very Gnan I give you here. Allthese people’s anger, pride, deceit and greed are gone.Questioner: Is it so easy to become simple and straight(sarad) in the heart?Dadashri: Whether that happens or not depends onone’s karmic account from the past life. That is a developmentof that individual; the more simple and straight (sarad) hebecomes the better. But all that is applicable in the Kramic path.In the Kramic path a simple and a straightforward man willattain religion (dharma), however even after a million lifetimesthere is no telling when he will attain moksha. And this Scienceis Akram. This is the path of Gnan, which can bring liberationfor a person in just one lifetime. If you follow this Gnanaccording to My Agnas, with devotion and dedicationAptavani-53334Aptavani-5conduct. External conduct is an effect and not a cause. I removeall the causes; thereafter the effects will automatically wash awayon their own.Absolute HumilityQuestioner: Is param vinaya (absolute humility) aconduct?Dadashri: Param vinaya arises on its own. This Gnanwill give rise to it. Just as a child does not touch poison once heis informed of what poison is and what it can do, similarly thisGnan gets rid of lack of humility (avinaya) and gives rise toabsolute humility. You do not have to maintain param vinayabut…Questioner: It happens automatically.Dadashri: Yes, You will automatically remain in paramvinaya.Absolute Humility in the Satsang with theGnani PurushDadashri: You all stand up as ‘we’ enter; there is noneed to do so. Nothing is to be gained in this standing-up-sitting-down exercise. On the contrary one becomes tired doingit.Questioner: But we do that anyway when we worshipthe Lord in the derasar (Jain temple)!Dadashri: There you earn a lot of points for vinaya(humility); but here there is a lot more earning of another kindto be gained. The reward of humility is moksha but moksha isnot the reward for performing rituals (kriya). The humility youmaintain in the derasar is evident and can be seen. It is a ritualfor sure but within you, at a very subtle level, the humility youmaintain will lead you towards moksha. During the time oneperforms such worship of the Lord, one is not being spiteful toanyone.Your humility ‘here’ (in front of the Gnani Purush) willbring you both reward of worldly benefits (abhyudaya) andaanushangik (related to the Self, moksha). If one showshumility to his guru when he is in front of him, but startscriticizing him after he leaves, then everything goes to waste.Do not criticize or slander the one to whom you expresshumility and if you want to criticize him then do not expresshumility towards him. There is no meaning in doing that, isthere?Here there is nothing left for you to do, is there? Thereason I tell you all not to stand up here is because nowadayspeople have so much trouble with their legs and knees. They areconstantly on the run, the whole day long. They are exhaustedgoing up and down the stairs of the railway bridges! So on topof that, if ‘we’ were to tell you to stand up and sit down, whatcan we attain? Instead, why don’t you sit comfortably and atease? You are all free to sit in any manner you choose.Everything, your reverence for Dada, has reached Dada. ThisDada only sees your inner intent and not your external conductor actions.Progression of UnderstandingQuestioner: In order not to see the other person at fault,deal with him with the understanding that his prakruti (non-Selfcomplex) is the doer.Dadashri: That is the understanding and talk of the firststage but in the ultimate understanding, none of this happens.The Self is merely the Knower of this and nothing else. Butinstead one takes it as, ‘he did this, he is the doer for sure.’ Itis just a wrong belief.Questioner: His only child, his son, was killed…Dadashri: He never dies. The main ‘thing’ the Self, theAptavani-53334Aptavani-5conduct. External conduct is an effect and not a cause. I removeall the causes; thereafter the effects will automatically wash awayon their own.Absolute HumilityQuestioner: Is param vinaya (absolute humility) aconduct?Dadashri: Param vinaya arises on its own. This Gnanwill give rise to it. Just as a child does not touch poison once heis informed of what poison is and what it can do, similarly thisGnan gets rid of lack of humility (avinaya) and gives rise toabsolute humility. You do not have to maintain param vinayabut…Questioner: It happens automatically.Dadashri: Yes, You will automatically remain in paramvinaya.Absolute Humility in the Satsang with theGnani PurushDadashri: You all stand up as ‘we’ enter; there is noneed to do so. Nothing is to be gained in this standing-up-sitting-down exercise. On the contrary one becomes tired doingit.Questioner: But we do that anyway when we worshipthe Lord in the derasar (Jain temple)!Dadashri: There you earn a lot of points for vinaya(humility); but here there is a lot more earning of another kindto be gained. The reward of humility is moksha but moksha isnot the reward for performing rituals (kriya). The humility youmaintain in the derasar is evident and can be seen. It is a ritualfor sure but within you, at a very subtle level, the humility youmaintain will lead you towards moksha. During the time oneperforms such worship of the Lord, one is not being spiteful toanyone.Your humility ‘here’ (in front of the Gnani Purush) willbring you both reward of worldly benefits (abhyudaya) andaanushangik (related to the Self, moksha). If one showshumility to his guru when he is in front of him, but startscriticizing him after he leaves, then everything goes to waste.Do not criticize or slander the one to whom you expresshumility and if you want to criticize him then do not expresshumility towards him. There is no meaning in doing that, isthere?Here there is nothing left for you to do, is there? Thereason I tell you all not to stand up here is because nowadayspeople have so much trouble with their legs and knees. They areconstantly on the run, the whole day long. They are exhaustedgoing up and down the stairs of the railway bridges! So on topof that, if ‘we’ were to tell you to stand up and sit down, whatcan we attain? Instead, why don’t you sit comfortably and atease? You are all free to sit in any manner you choose.Everything, your reverence for Dada, has reached Dada. ThisDada only sees your inner intent and not your external conductor actions.Progression of UnderstandingQuestioner: In order not to see the other person at fault,deal with him with the understanding that his prakruti (non-Selfcomplex) is the doer.Dadashri: That is the understanding and talk of the firststage but in the ultimate understanding, none of this happens.The Self is merely the Knower of this and nothing else. Butinstead one takes it as, ‘he did this, he is the doer for sure.’ Itis just a wrong belief.Questioner: His only child, his son, was killed…Dadashri: He never dies. The main ‘thing’ the Self, theAptavani-53536Aptavani-5original nature (swabhav), does not die. Only that which isperishable by nature dies.You will see the world as flawless (nirdosh) indeed. Theone with limited understanding will adjust by saying, ‘that mustbe my karmic account’. Otherwise there is no such thing as,‘He is my son.’ The one who understands the Lord’s language,will he not see the world as flawless? He will see the one whooffers flowers or throws stones as nirdosh (flawless; faultless).He sees both of these as being faultless: the one who takes a lifeand the one who saves a life. He does not see anything beyondthat.And if you want to understand through ‘our’ Gnan, thenyou have to understand that, ‘it is vyavasthit, it is a karmicaccount (hisaab)’. Then as you go further, you will understandthe main thing, ‘No savior can save and no killer can kill, this isall the work of nature’. It is true that it is vyavasthit, but whois doing all this under the support of vyavasthit? He, theKnower, knows that whole thing is done by nature. Nature ishelping every living being, but the current time cycle disturbs thisprocess.Questioner: I do not understand what you said about thetime cycle disturbing this process.Dadashri: This world would be wonderful if the currentera of the time cycle did not disturb it. When such an era arrives,it can take one down to lower life forms (adhogati). Adhogatiis not the work of nature. Nature always actively serves to takeone higher (urdhvagati).There was a time when masters used to hassle servantsand now the time has come where servants hassle the masters.It is a strangeness of this era of the time cycle. If things were toremain within ‘normality’ it would be very beautiful. The masterswould never harass the servants and the servants would nevermisbehave.One has been living with a wrong belief. He becomes afather and believes himself to be a father, but he would soon findout how many days his ‘fatherhood’ would last if he were toscold his son for just a couple of hours! He would be stunned!Truly if there were such a state of fatherhood, there would beno separation from children.Repentance for SinsQuestioner: If we go to the temple every Sunday andconfess to all our wrong doings (demerit karmas) to God, willwe be forgiven?Dadashri: If that were possible then no one would fallsick, would they? Then there would be no misery (dukh) at all,would there? But there is endless misery. The reason to ask forforgiveness is to destroy the root of your demerit karmas(paap), so that they do not sprout again, but you will still haveto suffer the effect; the fruit, won’t you?Questioner: Some roots may sprout again.Dadashri: They may sprout again if they were notdestroyed completely. But regardless of whether the root hasbeen destroyed or not, the fruits of past karmas will still have tobe suffered. Even the enlightened Lords have to suffer them.Lord Krishna too was shot with an arrow in the foot. There isno way out of that. I too have to suffer them.Asking for forgiveness is part of every religion: Christianity,Hinduism, Islam, etc., but their methods are different.Questioner: But no person can have all the four differenttypes of happiness the Lord has given, surely?Dadashri: This is not happiness at all. It is all imagination.It is not real happiness.Questioner: How is one to understand what realhappiness is and what is not, without experiencing it?Aptavani-53536Aptavani-5original nature (swabhav), does not die. Only that which isperishable by nature dies.You will see the world as flawless (nirdosh) indeed. Theone with limited understanding will adjust by saying, ‘that mustbe my karmic account’. Otherwise there is no such thing as,‘He is my son.’ The one who understands the Lord’s language,will he not see the world as flawless? He will see the one whooffers flowers or throws stones as nirdosh (flawless; faultless).He sees both of these as being faultless: the one who takes a lifeand the one who saves a life. He does not see anything beyondthat.And if you want to understand through ‘our’ Gnan, thenyou have to understand that, ‘it is vyavasthit, it is a karmicaccount (hisaab)’. Then as you go further, you will understandthe main thing, ‘No savior can save and no killer can kill, this isall the work of nature’. It is true that it is vyavasthit, but whois doing all this under the support of vyavasthit? He, theKnower, knows that whole thing is done by nature. Nature ishelping every living being, but the current time cycle disturbs thisprocess.Questioner: I do not understand what you said about thetime cycle disturbing this process.Dadashri: This world would be wonderful if the currentera of the time cycle did not disturb it. When such an era arrives,it can take one down to lower life forms (adhogati). Adhogatiis not the work of nature. Nature always actively serves to takeone higher (urdhvagati).There was a time when masters used to hassle servantsand now the time has come where servants hassle the masters.It is a strangeness of this era of the time cycle. If things were toremain within ‘normality’ it would be very beautiful. The masterswould never harass the servants and the servants would nevermisbehave.One has been living with a wrong belief. He becomes afather and believes himself to be a father, but he would soon findout how many days his ‘fatherhood’ would last if he were toscold his son for just a couple of hours! He would be stunned!Truly if there were such a state of fatherhood, there would beno separation from children.Repentance for SinsQuestioner: If we go to the temple every Sunday andconfess to all our wrong doings (demerit karmas) to God, willwe be forgiven?Dadashri: If that were possible then no one would fallsick, would they? Then there would be no misery (dukh) at all,would there? But there is endless misery. The reason to ask forforgiveness is to destroy the root of your demerit karmas(paap), so that they do not sprout again, but you will still haveto suffer the effect; the fruit, won’t you?Questioner: Some roots may sprout again.Dadashri: They may sprout again if they were notdestroyed completely. But regardless of whether the root hasbeen destroyed or not, the fruits of past karmas will still have tobe suffered. Even the enlightened Lords have to suffer them.Lord Krishna too was shot with an arrow in the foot. There isno way out of that. I too have to suffer them.Asking for forgiveness is part of every religion: Christianity,Hinduism, Islam, etc., but their methods are different.Questioner: But no person can have all the four differenttypes of happiness the Lord has given, surely?Dadashri: This is not happiness at all. It is all imagination.It is not real happiness.Questioner: How is one to understand what realhappiness is and what is not, without experiencing it?Aptavani-53738Aptavani-5Dadashri: One will experience it without fail. Happinessthat is not dependent upon any external things will arise;happiness that you have never seen before. Such happiness iscalled bliss (anand).Questioner: It should remain forever.Dadashri: That happiness (sukh) will then never leave.Such bliss has arisen in everyone after taking this Gnan; theyexperience the fact that it has not gone. Then if you were tothrow rocks at that bliss, it will hurt you, but nothing will happento You if You remain in ‘our’ Agnas. ‘Our’ Agnas are veryeasy.In Search of BlissDadashri: Why do you go to work young lady?Questioner: I must have brought that as my fate.Dadashri: Then, what do you do with the money?Questioner: I am looking for the Self.Dadashri: Only a rare person can find the Self. Not allliving beings look for the Self. What are they all looking for?They are all looking for happiness; no living being likesunhappiness. Whether it is the tiniest of insects or a man; no onelikes unhappiness. Now they all do have happiness but they arenot content. What is the reason for that?The happiness they have is not real happiness. Truehappiness is that which once you experience it, there will neverbe any more unhappiness. Everyone is looking for that kind ofhappiness. The experience of this happiness in human birth iscalled moksha (freedom from all forms of suffering – first stageof moksha). Then (the ultimate) moksha occurs when all one’skarmas come to an end. But the first stage of moksha shouldoccur here (in this life).Kashay (anger, pride, deceit and greed) should notoccur. Do you experience any kashay?Questioner: Yes, I do.Dadashri: Do you like kashay?Questioner: I do not like them but they do occur.Dadashri: Kashay verily is pain and unhappiness (dukh).The whole world is in kashay. They do not like kashays butthey are entrapped by them. Everyone is under the control ofkashays, so what can the poor people do? They want so muchnot to get angry and yet inevitably they get angry.What kind of happiness do you want, temporary orpermanent?Questioner: Everyone wants permanent happiness.Dadashri: And yet people do not get permanenthappiness. What is the reason for this?Questioner: Such are our karmas, what else could it be?Dadashri: Whatever the karmas may be, you have notfound anyone who can show you or give you permanenthappiness. If you ask the one who is experiencing suchhappiness to show you how you too can attain it, then yourwork will be done. But you have not found anyone like that. Allwhom you have met were themselves unhappy. Consequentlyneither their unhappiness nor yours has gone.Only the Gnani Purush is in permanent happiness;permanent bliss. He remains in moksha. Your problem will getsolved when you go to Him otherwise you will have to keepon wandering from one life to another. How can happinessever remain in this era of the time cycle? How can it remainwithout knowledge of the Self? Ignorance of the Self is itselfpain.Aptavani-53738Aptavani-5Dadashri: One will experience it without fail. Happinessthat is not dependent upon any external things will arise;happiness that you have never seen before. Such happiness iscalled bliss (anand).Questioner: It should remain forever.Dadashri: That happiness (sukh) will then never leave.Such bliss has arisen in everyone after taking this Gnan; theyexperience the fact that it has not gone. Then if you were tothrow rocks at that bliss, it will hurt you, but nothing will happento You if You remain in ‘our’ Agnas. ‘Our’ Agnas are veryeasy.In Search of BlissDadashri: Why do you go to work young lady?Questioner: I must have brought that as my fate.Dadashri: Then, what do you do with the money?Questioner: I am looking for the Self.Dadashri: Only a rare person can find the Self. Not allliving beings look for the Self. What are they all looking for?They are all looking for happiness; no living being likesunhappiness. Whether it is the tiniest of insects or a man; no onelikes unhappiness. Now they all do have happiness but they arenot content. What is the reason for that?The happiness they have is not real happiness. Truehappiness is that which once you experience it, there will neverbe any more unhappiness. Everyone is looking for that kind ofhappiness. The experience of this happiness in human birth iscalled moksha (freedom from all forms of suffering – first stageof moksha). Then (the ultimate) moksha occurs when all one’skarmas come to an end. But the first stage of moksha shouldoccur here (in this life).Kashay (anger, pride, deceit and greed) should notoccur. Do you experience any kashay?Questioner: Yes, I do.Dadashri: Do you like kashay?Questioner: I do not like them but they do occur.Dadashri: Kashay verily is pain and unhappiness (dukh).The whole world is in kashay. They do not like kashays butthey are entrapped by them. Everyone is under the control ofkashays, so what can the poor people do? They want so muchnot to get angry and yet inevitably they get angry.What kind of happiness do you want, temporary orpermanent?Questioner: Everyone wants permanent happiness.Dadashri: And yet people do not get permanenthappiness. What is the reason for this?Questioner: Such are our karmas, what else could it be?Dadashri: Whatever the karmas may be, you have notfound anyone who can show you or give you permanenthappiness. If you ask the one who is experiencing suchhappiness to show you how you too can attain it, then yourwork will be done. But you have not found anyone like that. Allwhom you have met were themselves unhappy. Consequentlyneither their unhappiness nor yours has gone.Only the Gnani Purush is in permanent happiness;permanent bliss. He remains in moksha. Your problem will getsolved when you go to Him otherwise you will have to keepon wandering from one life to another. How can happinessever remain in this era of the time cycle? How can it remainwithout knowledge of the Self? Ignorance of the Self is itselfpain.Aptavani-53940Aptavani-5Whose Incantation?Questioner: What specific kind of jaap (incantation,chant) should one do for peace of mind and for more awarenessof God?Dadashri: It will happen if you do jaap of the Self.Questioner: The jaap of ‘Sahajatmaswaroopparamguru’ (the natural Self is the absolute guru)’?Dadashri: No, that is not the jaap of your own swaroop(the Self). That is worship of God. Swaroop means ‘who youare’; you will attain complete peace (shanti) if you do jaap ofthat. Why don’t you do jaap of your own Self?Questioner: For a long time this question about whatkind of jaap would bring peace was puzzling me.Dadashri: You will attain constant peace; you will nothave any mental or physical worries if you do jaap of the Self.However, for that you will need the grace of the GnaniPurush.After Meeting a Gnani, Nothing Else Is NeededQuestioner: How necessary are the sadhan (tools ormeans such as scriptures, rituals, chants, penance, fasting,spiritual masters, satsang, etc.) for purification of theantahkaran (the inner complex of mind, intellect, chit andego)?Dadashri: Which tools (means)?Questioner: Jaap, penance, etc.Dadashri: You should utilize these tools (sadhans) untilyou realize the sadhya (the ultimate goal, the Self). But if youmeet a Gnani Purush you don’t have to do anything. He willdo everything for you. If you do not find a Gnani, then you haveto do something; otherwise you end up falling prey to wrongthings. If you do not continue to do the purification(shuddhikaran) the inner complex (mind, intellect, chit andego) will continue to become impure (ashuddha). Don’t youhave to sweep the home everyday? If you meet a Gnani yousimply have to tell him, ‘Please bring about a solution for me.’Then the Gnani Purush will do everything for you within anhour. After that, all You have to do is remain in his Agnas(special instructions). The Self has been attained through thedirect elevator path of Akram Vignan, and therefore do notstick your hand out from a moving elevator (remain in theAgnas); otherwise you will lose it. This elevator is headed formoksha.There are two paths to moksha: one is the Kramic pathand the other is the Akram path. Kramic means to go up(progress) one step at a time and Akram means to go up in anelevator.Liberation via the Akram PathQuestioner: Is there not a straight path to moksha?Dadashri: Then do you want a crooked one?Questioner: I do not want a crooked one but I cannotfind a straight one. I believe the path to liberation is not easy.Dadashri: Yes, that is true. There are two paths tomoksha. There is only one path that is permanent. It is the path,which you say is difficult. Only, it is very rare that this prizedpath (Akram) has come about. It comes once in a million years.Those who get the ticket for that path are forever blessed. Thispath is not forever. This is the path of Akram Vignan and theother is ‘kram vignan’. Kram means step-by-step. One has toclimb one step at a time whereas this path of Akram is anelevator path. It does not matter if you do not like the elevatorpath. ‘We’ will show you the other path. If you have the energyto climb the steps, then what is wrong with that path? And thoseAptavani-53940Aptavani-5Whose Incantation?Questioner: What specific kind of jaap (incantation,chant) should one do for peace of mind and for more awarenessof God?Dadashri: It will happen if you do jaap of the Self.Questioner: The jaap of ‘Sahajatmaswaroopparamguru’ (the natural Self is the absolute guru)’?Dadashri: No, that is not the jaap of your own swaroop(the Self). That is worship of God. Swaroop means ‘who youare’; you will attain complete peace (shanti) if you do jaap ofthat. Why don’t you do jaap of your own Self?Questioner: For a long time this question about whatkind of jaap would bring peace was puzzling me.Dadashri: You will attain constant peace; you will nothave any mental or physical worries if you do jaap of the Self.However, for that you will need the grace of the GnaniPurush.After Meeting a Gnani, Nothing Else Is NeededQuestioner: How necessary are the sadhan (tools ormeans such as scriptures, rituals, chants, penance, fasting,spiritual masters, satsang, etc.) for purification of theantahkaran (the inner complex of mind, intellect, chit andego)?Dadashri: Which tools (means)?Questioner: Jaap, penance, etc.Dadashri: You should utilize these tools (sadhans) untilyou realize the sadhya (the ultimate goal, the Self). But if youmeet a Gnani Purush you don’t have to do anything. He willdo everything for you. If you do not find a Gnani, then you haveto do something; otherwise you end up falling prey to wrongthings. If you do not continue to do the purification(shuddhikaran) the inner complex (mind, intellect, chit andego) will continue to become impure (ashuddha). Don’t youhave to sweep the home everyday? If you meet a Gnani yousimply have to tell him, ‘Please bring about a solution for me.’Then the Gnani Purush will do everything for you within anhour. After that, all You have to do is remain in his Agnas(special instructions). The Self has been attained through thedirect elevator path of Akram Vignan, and therefore do notstick your hand out from a moving elevator (remain in theAgnas); otherwise you will lose it. This elevator is headed formoksha.There are two paths to moksha: one is the Kramic pathand the other is the Akram path. Kramic means to go up(progress) one step at a time and Akram means to go up in anelevator.Liberation via the Akram PathQuestioner: Is there not a straight path to moksha?Dadashri: Then do you want a crooked one?Questioner: I do not want a crooked one but I cannotfind a straight one. I believe the path to liberation is not easy.Dadashri: Yes, that is true. There are two paths tomoksha. There is only one path that is permanent. It is the path,which you say is difficult. Only, it is very rare that this prizedpath (Akram) has come about. It comes once in a million years.Those who get the ticket for that path are forever blessed. Thispath is not forever. This is the path of Akram Vignan and theother is ‘kram vignan’. Kram means step-by-step. One has toclimb one step at a time whereas this path of Akram is anelevator path. It does not matter if you do not like the elevatorpath. ‘We’ will show you the other path. If you have the energyto climb the steps, then what is wrong with that path? And thoseAptavani-54142Aptavani-5within; if there has been a separation within (antar bheda); thenhe is to ‘see’ within. What will he see within if there is noseparation (between the Self and the non-Self) at all?Questioner: What about the thoughts that arise within?Dadashri: Yes, but it is worth seeing for the One whohas the separation within. If there is no separation within, thenone becomes engrossed with thoughts that arise within, sowhat is he going to see? You will not become engrossed withthe thoughts when You are separated from the thoughts, andtherefore You will be able to ‘see’ the thoughts and what theyexactly are, and ‘see’ who has the thoughts. But it is not easyfor such inner separation (antar bheda) to occur. Without theGnani Purush it cannot be attained. Should inner separationnot occur for us? The ego will not allow this separation tooccur.The one whose vision is verily external, who is engrossedin the non-Self; how is he going to see what is within? One’svision depends on where one is dwelling. There is nothing worthseeing within until one attains the Self. Until then, one can be inthat which is good and auspicious (shubha upayog), but that isnot the path of moksha. Just because it is the path of dharma(religion) it still has nothing to do with the path of liberation. Inthe absence of Self-realization, no matter how much innerawareness you maintain, it is still not pure applied awareness(shuddha upayog).Pure applied awareness (shuddha upayog) can bemaintained only after the Gnani Purush gives You Gnan; theKnowledge. What kind of knowledge? The one that helps youdecide, ‘Who am I?’ and it should be with awareness (jagruti).Shuddha upayog (pure applied awareness as the Self) is thepath to moksha. What you are talking about is all shubhaupayog (auspicious awareness). It is a path that takes you fromthe inauspicious to the auspicious.who like the lift, and do not have the energy, can take the lift.Moksha is in the palm of your hand if you meet a Gnaniand if you do not, then you will not attain it even after a millionlifetimes.Questioner: Even the Gnani should be enlightened withtrue knowledge (samyak gnan), should He not? He shouldhave the right knowledge, should he not?Dadashri: Yes, you too should attain the right knowledge(samyak gnan); only then there is moksha for you. Whensamyak darshan (right or enlightened vision), samyak gnan(right or enlightened knowledge) and samyak charitra (right orenlightened conduct) occur, then one attains moksha but nototherwise.Questioner: Would You please make us taste thesweetness of moksha too?Dadashri: Yes, I will. I will do it for any one who asksfor it.There Is No Inner Vision Without InnerSeparationQuestioner: The Gnani Purush says that one has to seewithin. What am I supposed to see within?Dadashri: Whatever has been said in reference to this isa relative statement. The one who has attained the innerknowledge has to see within and the one who has externalknowledge has to see externally. Now, what will the one withexternal knowledge see when he looks within?Questioner: He can only see the external.Dadashri: So what I am saying is, that statement is arelative statement. The one who has attained any innerknowledge; the one who has heard anything about what isAptavani-54142Aptavani-5within; if there has been a separation within (antar bheda); thenhe is to ‘see’ within. What will he see within if there is noseparation (between the Self and the non-Self) at all?Questioner: What about the thoughts that arise within?Dadashri: Yes, but it is worth seeing for the One whohas the separation within. If there is no separation within, thenone becomes engrossed with thoughts that arise within, sowhat is he going to see? You will not become engrossed withthe thoughts when You are separated from the thoughts, andtherefore You will be able to ‘see’ the thoughts and what theyexactly are, and ‘see’ who has the thoughts. But it is not easyfor such inner separation (antar bheda) to occur. Without theGnani Purush it cannot be attained. Should inner separationnot occur for us? The ego will not allow this separation tooccur.The one whose vision is verily external, who is engrossedin the non-Self; how is he going to see what is within? One’svision depends on where one is dwelling. There is nothing worthseeing within until one attains the Self. Until then, one can be inthat which is good and auspicious (shubha upayog), but that isnot the path of moksha. Just because it is the path of dharma(religion) it still has nothing to do with the path of liberation. Inthe absence of Self-realization, no matter how much innerawareness you maintain, it is still not pure applied awareness(shuddha upayog).Pure applied awareness (shuddha upayog) can bemaintained only after the Gnani Purush gives You Gnan; theKnowledge. What kind of knowledge? The one that helps youdecide, ‘Who am I?’ and it should be with awareness (jagruti).Shuddha upayog (pure applied awareness as the Self) is thepath to moksha. What you are talking about is all shubhaupayog (auspicious awareness). It is a path that takes you fromthe inauspicious to the auspicious.who like the lift, and do not have the energy, can take the lift.Moksha is in the palm of your hand if you meet a Gnaniand if you do not, then you will not attain it even after a millionlifetimes.Questioner: Even the Gnani should be enlightened withtrue knowledge (samyak gnan), should He not? He shouldhave the right knowledge, should he not?Dadashri: Yes, you too should attain the right knowledge(samyak gnan); only then there is moksha for you. Whensamyak darshan (right or enlightened vision), samyak gnan(right or enlightened knowledge) and samyak charitra (right orenlightened conduct) occur, then one attains moksha but nototherwise.Questioner: Would You please make us taste thesweetness of moksha too?Dadashri: Yes, I will. I will do it for any one who asksfor it.There Is No Inner Vision Without InnerSeparationQuestioner: The Gnani Purush says that one has to seewithin. What am I supposed to see within?Dadashri: Whatever has been said in reference to this isa relative statement. The one who has attained the innerknowledge has to see within and the one who has externalknowledge has to see externally. Now, what will the one withexternal knowledge see when he looks within?Questioner: He can only see the external.Dadashri: So what I am saying is, that statement is arelative statement. The one who has attained any innerknowledge; the one who has heard anything about what isAptavani-54344Aptavani-5Spiritualism and IntellectualismQuestioner: When we get answers about spirituality(adhyatmik) from Dada or some other vitarag Purush, is itconsidered intellectual understanding?Dadashri: When it comes to you, it becomes intellectual.When you understand it, which you have to do with the intellect(buddhi), it becomes intellectual. Otherwise, it is only Gnanprakash (the direct light of the Self). There is no trace ofintellect within Me. Therefore, when ‘we’ talk, ‘we’ are talkingthrough the direct light of Knowledge (Gnan). Here with ‘us’there is nothing from the books.Questioner: Whatever is put forth in words; does thatnot become intellectual to some extent?Dadashri: No, there is no such rule. Direct as well asindirect light of knowledge can enter into the speech; speech hasnothing to do with the difference.Questioner: Is the limitations in the medium of speech animpediment in the transmission of the direct light (prakash)?Dadashri: Speech of direct light is syadvaad speech; theone that hurts no one and is accepted by the listener, whereasintellectual speech is bound to hurt someone. Because intellectbased speech contains the ‘poison’ of ego.Questioner: If speech is vitarag (void of attachment andabhorrence), can the vitaragata in the speech be accepted andunderstood by the intellect (buddhi) in the recipient?Dadashri: The intellect will understand it but it cannot doso on its own. It can only catch on after it becomes samyak(enlightened, acceptable) through the Gnani Purush.Questioner: The recipient catches on through hisintellectual energies and power, does he not? Or is therelimitation to it…Dadashri: Yes, it is the energy and power of the intellectthat catches it but it can only do so in the presence of a GnaniPurush; the intellect cannot catch on anywhere else. This isbecause the speech that comes out in the presence of the GnaniPurush breaks through the karmic veils and reaches the Selfdirectly and that is why the mind, intellect, chit and ego acceptit. My speech comes out having passed through the Self.Everyone else’s speech comes out having passed through themind. That is why the mind accepts that speech and here theSelf accepts it. Thereafter the mind and the intellect will catch ittoo.Restlessness in Circumstances andTranquillity in the SelfQuestioner: Why does one become restless (asvastha)in circumstances where there is the absence of the VitaragPurush, the Gnani Purush, and tranquil (svastha) in Hispresence?Dadashri: One remains tranquil in His presence for sure.Restlessness is created by the intellect and as long as the intellectremains, the ego too will remain. Intellect laden with ego makesone restless. If such intellect comes to an end then there is noreason for being restless.Questioner: This is not possible in the worldly life, is it?Dadashri: No, it is not possible. Still whatever benefityou get is good. Otherwise by gradually bringing aboutsettlement through the intellect and the ego, tranquillity willautomatically prevail. There is tranquillity in remaining as theSelf, and by remaining in circumstances (avastha) there will berestlessness. Circumstances are all temporary and the Self ispermanent. You can remain tranquil (svastha) by remaining asthe Self, otherwise restlessness (asvastha) will remain.Questioner: The Self is able to ‘see’ and ‘know’ the oneAptavani-54344Aptavani-5Spiritualism and IntellectualismQuestioner: When we get answers about spirituality(adhyatmik) from Dada or some other vitarag Purush, is itconsidered intellectual understanding?Dadashri: When it comes to you, it becomes intellectual.When you understand it, which you have to do with the intellect(buddhi), it becomes intellectual. Otherwise, it is only Gnanprakash (the direct light of the Self). There is no trace ofintellect within Me. Therefore, when ‘we’ talk, ‘we’ are talkingthrough the direct light of Knowledge (Gnan). Here with ‘us’there is nothing from the books.Questioner: Whatever is put forth in words; does thatnot become intellectual to some extent?Dadashri: No, there is no such rule. Direct as well asindirect light of knowledge can enter into the speech; speech hasnothing to do with the difference.Questioner: Is the limitations in the medium of speech animpediment in the transmission of the direct light (prakash)?Dadashri: Speech of direct light is syadvaad speech; theone that hurts no one and is accepted by the listener, whereasintellectual speech is bound to hurt someone. Because intellectbased speech contains the ‘poison’ of ego.Questioner: If speech is vitarag (void of attachment andabhorrence), can the vitaragata in the speech be accepted andunderstood by the intellect (buddhi) in the recipient?Dadashri: The intellect will understand it but it cannot doso on its own. It can only catch on after it becomes samyak(enlightened, acceptable) through the Gnani Purush.Questioner: The recipient catches on through hisintellectual energies and power, does he not? Or is therelimitation to it…Dadashri: Yes, it is the energy and power of the intellectthat catches it but it can only do so in the presence of a GnaniPurush; the intellect cannot catch on anywhere else. This isbecause the speech that comes out in the presence of the GnaniPurush breaks through the karmic veils and reaches the Selfdirectly and that is why the mind, intellect, chit and ego acceptit. My speech comes out having passed through the Self.Everyone else’s speech comes out having passed through themind. That is why the mind accepts that speech and here theSelf accepts it. Thereafter the mind and the intellect will catch ittoo.Restlessness in Circumstances andTranquillity in the SelfQuestioner: Why does one become restless (asvastha)in circumstances where there is the absence of the VitaragPurush, the Gnani Purush, and tranquil (svastha) in Hispresence?Dadashri: One remains tranquil in His presence for sure.Restlessness is created by the intellect and as long as the intellectremains, the ego too will remain. Intellect laden with ego makesone restless. If such intellect comes to an end then there is noreason for being restless.Questioner: This is not possible in the worldly life, is it?Dadashri: No, it is not possible. Still whatever benefityou get is good. Otherwise by gradually bringing aboutsettlement through the intellect and the ego, tranquillity willautomatically prevail. There is tranquillity in remaining as theSelf, and by remaining in circumstances (avastha) there will berestlessness. Circumstances are all temporary and the Self ispermanent. You can remain tranquil (svastha) by remaining asthe Self, otherwise restlessness (asvastha) will remain.Questioner: The Self is able to ‘see’ and ‘know’ the oneAptavani-54546Aptavani-5longer it stretches. However, if You keep ‘seeing’ as the pureSelf then, no matter how many veils there are, it will go awayin no time. It will be settled, but if you stick your hand in it youwill create unnecessary problems.The Unfolding of Pain Karmas and the GnaniQuestioner: When the Vitarag Purush (Gnani Purush)has to endure any physical suffering, for example when your hipfractured, how did You remain free from that circumstance?Surely the pain would be the same as what anyone else wouldexperience?Dadashri: ‘We’ have destroyed all documents of‘ownership’. ‘We’ have destroyed the document, ‘this is mymind, this is my intellect, this is my speech, etc.’ ‘We’ havedestroyed all such documents. The Vitarag refers to Hisspeech, as ‘the original taped record playing’.‘We’ have even destroyed the document that says, ‘thisis my body’; hence ‘we’ call it a ‘Public Trust’. So, when ‘we’have a toothache there is the effect of pain but ‘we’ remain theKnower of that pain; ‘we’ do not become the ‘sufferer’ of thatpain. ‘We’ are not affected whenever someone insults ‘us’ orcurses ‘us’ or whenever there is a financial loss. There is noeffect whatsoever of that which occurs in and to the mind. Anyphysical ailment will have its effect according to its nature but‘we’ remain its Knower and Seer and therefore pain does nottouch ‘us’.Questioner: Is that just stillness of the Vitarag Purushor is it stillness that comes from becoming engrossed in it?Dadashri: ‘We’ never become engrossed in anything.Even with this body ‘our’ relationship with it is like that of aneighbor, and so if something happens to it, it will not touch ‘us’.‘Our’ mind is nothing like it. What is it like? It keeps movingevery second; it does not get stuck in one place.who becomes restless in circumstances; but despite this it is notpossible to maintain tranquillity. Is this because there is a denserveil of the intellect?Dadashri: No, the ruling there is that the Shuddhatma(the pure Self) that ‘Dada’ has given You, is the Seer of all that.If You remain in that state, then there is no problem. Otherwiseif you delve into restlessness and tranquillity, then there is no endto it.Questioner: What is the key to that?Dadashri: Whether one is restless or tranquil the pureSelf is the Knower of both. One meddles in the ‘foreigndepartment’ (the non-Self) and thus becomes restless. Whetherthere is restlessness or tranquillity we (the mahatmas) are onlyconcerned with the ‘knowing’ part. All those circumstances arepaudgalik of the non-Self, and the One who is the Knower ofthe circumstances of the non-Self is called Shuddhatma (thepure Self). Paudgalik means puran (input or charge) and galan(output or discharge). Any circumstance that comes to you, willdo so only if it was previously charged; thus it will come to younow (in this life) and it will discharge.You are bound to get ‘burnt’ if you stick your hand(meddle) in the ‘foreign’. I never stick my hand in the ‘foreign’(the non-Self). Whatever ‘fruit’ (result) that is going to unfold isinevitable. In addition, one becomes liable to receive double theeffect for meddling. One incurs double the loss! You should takeonly one loss. You should continue to ‘know’ that ‘Chandubhai’is restless and the state he is in will be over in fifteen minutes.You will not incur two losses if You just keep ‘seeing’everything.Questioner: Can it be said that the longer the period ofrestlessness, the greater the veil of ignorance?Dadashri: Yes, the greater the veil of ignorance, theAptavani-54546Aptavani-5longer it stretches. However, if You keep ‘seeing’ as the pureSelf then, no matter how many veils there are, it will go awayin no time. It will be settled, but if you stick your hand in it youwill create unnecessary problems.The Unfolding of Pain Karmas and the GnaniQuestioner: When the Vitarag Purush (Gnani Purush)has to endure any physical suffering, for example when your hipfractured, how did You remain free from that circumstance?Surely the pain would be the same as what anyone else wouldexperience?Dadashri: ‘We’ have destroyed all documents of‘ownership’. ‘We’ have destroyed the document, ‘this is mymind, this is my intellect, this is my speech, etc.’ ‘We’ havedestroyed all such documents. The Vitarag refers to Hisspeech, as ‘the original taped record playing’.‘We’ have even destroyed the document that says, ‘thisis my body’; hence ‘we’ call it a ‘Public Trust’. So, when ‘we’have a toothache there is the effect of pain but ‘we’ remain theKnower of that pain; ‘we’ do not become the ‘sufferer’ of thatpain. ‘We’ are not affected whenever someone insults ‘us’ orcurses ‘us’ or whenever there is a financial loss. There is noeffect whatsoever of that which occurs in and to the mind. Anyphysical ailment will have its effect according to its nature but‘we’ remain its Knower and Seer and therefore pain does nottouch ‘us’.Questioner: Is that just stillness of the Vitarag Purushor is it stillness that comes from becoming engrossed in it?Dadashri: ‘We’ never become engrossed in anything.Even with this body ‘our’ relationship with it is like that of aneighbor, and so if something happens to it, it will not touch ‘us’.‘Our’ mind is nothing like it. What is it like? It keeps movingevery second; it does not get stuck in one place.who becomes restless in circumstances; but despite this it is notpossible to maintain tranquillity. Is this because there is a denserveil of the intellect?Dadashri: No, the ruling there is that the Shuddhatma(the pure Self) that ‘Dada’ has given You, is the Seer of all that.If You remain in that state, then there is no problem. Otherwiseif you delve into restlessness and tranquillity, then there is no endto it.Questioner: What is the key to that?Dadashri: Whether one is restless or tranquil the pureSelf is the Knower of both. One meddles in the ‘foreigndepartment’ (the non-Self) and thus becomes restless. Whetherthere is restlessness or tranquillity we (the mahatmas) are onlyconcerned with the ‘knowing’ part. All those circumstances arepaudgalik of the non-Self, and the One who is the Knower ofthe circumstances of the non-Self is called Shuddhatma (thepure Self). Paudgalik means puran (input or charge) and galan(output or discharge). Any circumstance that comes to you, willdo so only if it was previously charged; thus it will come to younow (in this life) and it will discharge.You are bound to get ‘burnt’ if you stick your hand(meddle) in the ‘foreign’. I never stick my hand in the ‘foreign’(the non-Self). Whatever ‘fruit’ (result) that is going to unfold isinevitable. In addition, one becomes liable to receive double theeffect for meddling. One incurs double the loss! You should takeonly one loss. You should continue to ‘know’ that ‘Chandubhai’is restless and the state he is in will be over in fifteen minutes.You will not incur two losses if You just keep ‘seeing’everything.Questioner: Can it be said that the longer the period ofrestlessness, the greater the veil of ignorance?Dadashri: Yes, the greater the veil of ignorance, theAptavani-54748Aptavani-5to perform very lengthy penances (tapas) in order to get thedirect experience of the Self. Was this not the reason for it?Dadashri: That was it. Nowadays one does not have todo that much severe penance. Nowadays, even before strikinga match, there is spontaneous combustion! Why subject peopleto penance when they are already suffering in agony? Alas! Poorpeople are already roasting in the ‘fire pit’!Inventions in SpiritualismThere is no need to bother with those who already havea pure heart, and they are not likely to make much spiritual gaineither.Questioner: So is there benefit for those who arecrooked?Dadashri: It is beneficial only for those who arecrooked. I have seen many people with a clean heart, like thisman here. I tell them they are happy anyway so why should theybother? I tell them that straightforward and good people like youdo not harm the world. But it will take them a very long time toreach the state of the Self, because for them ‘invention’ (seekingand searching) has halted. Their ‘engine’ runs slowly.No one has ever said the things that I am saying.Everyone says that only those with a clean heart will attainreligion and not anyone else. What I am saying is that as longas the necessities of those with a clean heart are fulfilled, it isenough. Their ‘invention’ (searching) stops then.Questioner: But Dada, will it happen if there is a desire,in their heart or in the intellect, to know more?Dadashri: No, it will not happen even if there is a desireto know (jignyasa). Only two to five people will come and theywill be reformed. Such persons help a handful who come; theywill serve other people, and the same time progress themselves.Questioner: So despite the neighbor’s suffering, You(the Self) are not suffering?Dadashri: There is no pain at all due to someone else’spain. Pain is not the nature (swabhav) of the Self; on thecontrary, by Its ‘touch’ the other person is filled with bliss!Spiritual Awareness in the WorldQuestioner: Since the last five years, there is increase inpeople’s spiritual progress. What does this imply?Dadashri: It shows that spiritual tendencies werecompletely gone and now they appear to be increasing. This isbefitting according to the current times. The other thing is thatpain and suffering is going to increase so much so that it willbecome difficult for people to come out of it. Then dispassion(vairagya) will arise in the people. Otherwise people are notlikely to change their ways, are they?Questioner: Then will that be considered a Satyug (eraof the time cycle characterized by unity in thoughts, speech andactions)?Dadashri: People can call it whatever ‘yuga’ (era) theywant but there is going to be a change. Satyug is gone; it willnot come again. In the Kaliyug (the current era of the time cyclecharacterized by lack of unity in thoughts, speech and actions)such beautiful thoughts, which have never been experienced, willbe there!Today the human intellect has developed in such a waythat it has never happened in the last million years. It is becomingviparit (misguided); nevertheless it is highly developed and itwill not take long for it to become samyak (well-guided),leading to the right path. Previously the intellect was notdeveloped.Questioner: That is why, in the past time cycles, one hadAptavani-54748Aptavani-5to perform very lengthy penances (tapas) in order to get thedirect experience of the Self. Was this not the reason for it?Dadashri: That was it. Nowadays one does not have todo that much severe penance. Nowadays, even before strikinga match, there is spontaneous combustion! Why subject peopleto penance when they are already suffering in agony? Alas! Poorpeople are already roasting in the ‘fire pit’!Inventions in SpiritualismThere is no need to bother with those who already havea pure heart, and they are not likely to make much spiritual gaineither.Questioner: So is there benefit for those who arecrooked?Dadashri: It is beneficial only for those who arecrooked. I have seen many people with a clean heart, like thisman here. I tell them they are happy anyway so why should theybother? I tell them that straightforward and good people like youdo not harm the world. But it will take them a very long time toreach the state of the Self, because for them ‘invention’ (seekingand searching) has halted. Their ‘engine’ runs slowly.No one has ever said the things that I am saying.Everyone says that only those with a clean heart will attainreligion and not anyone else. What I am saying is that as longas the necessities of those with a clean heart are fulfilled, it isenough. Their ‘invention’ (searching) stops then.Questioner: But Dada, will it happen if there is a desire,in their heart or in the intellect, to know more?Dadashri: No, it will not happen even if there is a desireto know (jignyasa). Only two to five people will come and theywill be reformed. Such persons help a handful who come; theywill serve other people, and the same time progress themselves.Questioner: So despite the neighbor’s suffering, You(the Self) are not suffering?Dadashri: There is no pain at all due to someone else’spain. Pain is not the nature (swabhav) of the Self; on thecontrary, by Its ‘touch’ the other person is filled with bliss!Spiritual Awareness in the WorldQuestioner: Since the last five years, there is increase inpeople’s spiritual progress. What does this imply?Dadashri: It shows that spiritual tendencies werecompletely gone and now they appear to be increasing. This isbefitting according to the current times. The other thing is thatpain and suffering is going to increase so much so that it willbecome difficult for people to come out of it. Then dispassion(vairagya) will arise in the people. Otherwise people are notlikely to change their ways, are they?Questioner: Then will that be considered a Satyug (eraof the time cycle characterized by unity in thoughts, speech andactions)?Dadashri: People can call it whatever ‘yuga’ (era) theywant but there is going to be a change. Satyug is gone; it willnot come again. In the Kaliyug (the current era of the time cyclecharacterized by lack of unity in thoughts, speech and actions)such beautiful thoughts, which have never been experienced, willbe there!Today the human intellect has developed in such a waythat it has never happened in the last million years. It is becomingviparit (misguided); nevertheless it is highly developed and itwill not take long for it to become samyak (well-guided),leading to the right path. Previously the intellect was notdeveloped.Questioner: That is why, in the past time cycles, one hadAptavani-54950Aptavani-5Questioner: What if they want to attain the knowledge ofthe Self?Dadashri: They will gradually come across such acircumstance, but then something else may get into their heart forwhich they will suffer. Then the ‘invention’ will start again. Whydid this ‘invention’ start for Me? It started because I took a lotof beating. I have climbed out of such deep ravines; I haveclimbed over such mountaintops, life after life. I do not want anyworldly thing at all. You too have climbed high in this world.Others too have climbed high but they do not have the ability toremain as the Knower-Seer; they do not have the ability ofclosely ‘seeing’ (nirikshan) the self. They are all engrossed ineating and drinking, in physical and mental fun. That is why theyforget that other spiritual experience. ‘Our’ nirikshan is of manylifetimes!So where do all the energies of the mind, body andspeech go? They continue to get used up in the gross (sthool,that which is interacting in worldly things). They get used up inthings a laborer can do. Now, what will ‘My’ value be if ‘my’energies were to get used up in things like gardening? Justimagine how much more work can be accomplished in an hour?When energy is used in the gross, then ‘invention’ in the subtlestops. When one becomes altruistic and serves others, hisinterest will continue to develop in that direction. Wherever hegoes he will be welcomed with respect. So his inner ‘invention’halts. When does ‘invention’ occur? It will go on the whole nightwhen someone whacks you on the head a few times!Questioner: Dada, why is it that the spiritual developmentof the good, straightforward, simple and benevolent people isnot as fast as that of the bad people?Dadashri: Bad people can never develop. The badnessin bad people increases and as a result they take a lot of beatingand that is when their ‘invention’ starts. When that happens abad person will overtake the straightforward person in spiritualdevelopment. The straightforward person will develop slowly.He does not meet any obstacles. ‘Invention’ occurs when oneis lost and does not find a way out.The rule of nature is that eighty percent of those who goto moksha go to hell first. If one has not been to hell he will notbe allowed to go to moksha. One has to experience suffering.‘Invention’ stops if one has a comfortable life and he gets foodand drink and is respected wherever he goes.Questioner: Many feel that they are on the path ofdharma and so they do not need to know anything else. Whatis that?Dadashri: Each is progressing through his ownunderstanding of dharma (religion). But it is very difficult tounderstand dharma. What currently is taking place in this worldis not real dharma, it is relative. They are all moving about inthe relative dharma. The whole day long they are doing theirown dharma (religion), are they not?Rendering selfless service to others is verily the definitionof dharma (duty, religion) for the one who is straightforwardand simple. To give happiness to others, to help get rid of theirworldly obstacles, is dharma but that is not considered realdharma.Real religion (dharma) does not arise as long as there isa belief of ‘I am doing it’, ‘I am the doer’, and ‘I am thesufferer’; as long as there is a feeling of ‘I-ness’. It gives rise tothe worldly or relative religions (laukik dharma). Alaukikdharma (religion of the Self, Real religion) arises when oneendures suffering and ‘invention’ begins within. Otherwise howwill ‘invention’ occur?It is not easy to find the Self (the Soul), only theTirthankars did. The Self is not what people believe it to be.Aptavani-54950Aptavani-5Questioner: What if they want to attain the knowledge ofthe Self?Dadashri: They will gradually come across such acircumstance, but then something else may get into their heart forwhich they will suffer. Then the ‘invention’ will start again. Whydid this ‘invention’ start for Me? It started because I took a lotof beating. I have climbed out of such deep ravines; I haveclimbed over such mountaintops, life after life. I do not want anyworldly thing at all. You too have climbed high in this world.Others too have climbed high but they do not have the ability toremain as the Knower-Seer; they do not have the ability ofclosely ‘seeing’ (nirikshan) the self. They are all engrossed ineating and drinking, in physical and mental fun. That is why theyforget that other spiritual experience. ‘Our’ nirikshan is of manylifetimes!So where do all the energies of the mind, body andspeech go? They continue to get used up in the gross (sthool,that which is interacting in worldly things). They get used up inthings a laborer can do. Now, what will ‘My’ value be if ‘my’energies were to get used up in things like gardening? Justimagine how much more work can be accomplished in an hour?When energy is used in the gross, then ‘invention’ in the subtlestops. When one becomes altruistic and serves others, hisinterest will continue to develop in that direction. Wherever hegoes he will be welcomed with respect. So his inner ‘invention’halts. When does ‘invention’ occur? It will go on the whole nightwhen someone whacks you on the head a few times!Questioner: Dada, why is it that the spiritual developmentof the good, straightforward, simple and benevolent people isnot as fast as that of the bad people?Dadashri: Bad people can never develop. The badnessin bad people increases and as a result they take a lot of beatingand that is when their ‘invention’ starts. When that happens abad person will overtake the straightforward person in spiritualdevelopment. The straightforward person will develop slowly.He does not meet any obstacles. ‘Invention’ occurs when oneis lost and does not find a way out.The rule of nature is that eighty percent of those who goto moksha go to hell first. If one has not been to hell he will notbe allowed to go to moksha. One has to experience suffering.‘Invention’ stops if one has a comfortable life and he gets foodand drink and is respected wherever he goes.Questioner: Many feel that they are on the path ofdharma and so they do not need to know anything else. Whatis that?Dadashri: Each is progressing through his ownunderstanding of dharma (religion). But it is very difficult tounderstand dharma. What currently is taking place in this worldis not real dharma, it is relative. They are all moving about inthe relative dharma. The whole day long they are doing theirown dharma (religion), are they not?Rendering selfless service to others is verily the definitionof dharma (duty, religion) for the one who is straightforwardand simple. To give happiness to others, to help get rid of theirworldly obstacles, is dharma but that is not considered realdharma.Real religion (dharma) does not arise as long as there isa belief of ‘I am doing it’, ‘I am the doer’, and ‘I am thesufferer’; as long as there is a feeling of ‘I-ness’. It gives rise tothe worldly or relative religions (laukik dharma). Alaukikdharma (religion of the Self, Real religion) arises when oneendures suffering and ‘invention’ begins within. Otherwise howwill ‘invention’ occur?It is not easy to find the Self (the Soul), only theTirthankars did. The Self is not what people believe it to be.Aptavani-55152Aptavani-5you not have to let the effects of past life karmas discharge? Youwill attain freedom as You deal with them. Your inner intentshould always be that You want to remain at the feet of theGnani. Then You will attain all the freedom. The ego will befreed.Grab this Final OpportunityQuestioner: What should one do if he does not meet aGnani? Should he kill himself?Dadashri: No. No one has said to do that, and no onecan die even if he wants to.Questioner: So what should the world do?Dadashri: Nothing. Keep doing what you have beendoing.Questioner: There has not been any preacher (updeshak)who has showed us or told us, ‘do this much if a Gnani is notaround’.Dadashri: Why are you looking for a preacher at thistime? Kaliyug is here now. The current time is one when peopleget robbed and you are looking for a preacher in such a time?A time of complete darkness is around the corner. Can oneexpect to find a jewelry store open (at such a time)? You did nottake any goods when the jewelry shop was open and now youare out to give those goods to others? Now the worldly life isgoing to go through tremendous pain and suffering. This ‘AkramScience’ is the final light of the way out. Blessed are those whogain from it and the rest have to hope for the best.Extension of Life SpanQuestioner: If a mahatma (the one who has attained theawareness of the eternal) is ‘sacchidanand swaroop’; if he hasbecome brahmanishtha (absorbed in the Self), is it possible forhim to extend his life?All concepts about the Self that one has are simply imaginations.However, it is acceptable according to his understanding. He isenjoying what nature has arranged for him as per the laws ofkarmas. The knowledge of the Self found in the scriptures issangnya gnan (knowledge by association) and it is indirect. Ifyou attain the right direction from a Gnani, you will attain theconviction (pratiti) of the Self and eventually attain absoluteknowledge (kevalgnan).The Right to Attain MokshaQuestioner: Does every human being have the right toattain moksha?Dadashri: It is not a right of just humans; it is a right ofevery embodied Self (jiva). This is because every embodiedSelf is looking for happiness in one place or another and in doingso, has wandered for countless lifetimes. One is looking foreternal happiness, which is moksha. This temporary happinesscannot be happiness. It is all an illusion (bhranti), a wrongbelief. It is nothing but projection (aropit bhaav) of happinesson to external things. If happiness-pleasure is inherent inshrikhand (dessert made from yogurt) would you keep oneating it? Will it not cause problems if you eat too much of it?Therefore, there is no happiness in it. Happiness is proportionalto the projection of the self.Therefore every embodied Self has a right to moksha.Questioner: To go forward on this path, one has to sitat the feet of the Gnani; is that so?Dadashri: The Gnani himself is liberated and thereforeHe can liberate you. He does not dwell in any worldly things andtherefore he can free you in every way. You become like the oneyou worship.Your ego will go away if you stay with the One who hasno ego. Right now you may feel like staying with Dada but willAptavani-55152Aptavani-5you not have to let the effects of past life karmas discharge? Youwill attain freedom as You deal with them. Your inner intentshould always be that You want to remain at the feet of theGnani. Then You will attain all the freedom. The ego will befreed.Grab this Final OpportunityQuestioner: What should one do if he does not meet aGnani? Should he kill himself?Dadashri: No. No one has said to do that, and no onecan die even if he wants to.Questioner: So what should the world do?Dadashri: Nothing. Keep doing what you have beendoing.Questioner: There has not been any preacher (updeshak)who has showed us or told us, ‘do this much if a Gnani is notaround’.Dadashri: Why are you looking for a preacher at thistime? Kaliyug is here now. The current time is one when peopleget robbed and you are looking for a preacher in such a time?A time of complete darkness is around the corner. Can oneexpect to find a jewelry store open (at such a time)? You did nottake any goods when the jewelry shop was open and now youare out to give those goods to others? Now the worldly life isgoing to go through tremendous pain and suffering. This ‘AkramScience’ is the final light of the way out. Blessed are those whogain from it and the rest have to hope for the best.Extension of Life SpanQuestioner: If a mahatma (the one who has attained theawareness of the eternal) is ‘sacchidanand swaroop’; if he hasbecome brahmanishtha (absorbed in the Self), is it possible forhim to extend his life?All concepts about the Self that one has are simply imaginations.However, it is acceptable according to his understanding. He isenjoying what nature has arranged for him as per the laws ofkarmas. The knowledge of the Self found in the scriptures issangnya gnan (knowledge by association) and it is indirect. Ifyou attain the right direction from a Gnani, you will attain theconviction (pratiti) of the Self and eventually attain absoluteknowledge (kevalgnan).The Right to Attain MokshaQuestioner: Does every human being have the right toattain moksha?Dadashri: It is not a right of just humans; it is a right ofevery embodied Self (jiva). This is because every embodiedSelf is looking for happiness in one place or another and in doingso, has wandered for countless lifetimes. One is looking foreternal happiness, which is moksha. This temporary happinesscannot be happiness. It is all an illusion (bhranti), a wrongbelief. It is nothing but projection (aropit bhaav) of happinesson to external things. If happiness-pleasure is inherent inshrikhand (dessert made from yogurt) would you keep oneating it? Will it not cause problems if you eat too much of it?Therefore, there is no happiness in it. Happiness is proportionalto the projection of the self.Therefore every embodied Self has a right to moksha.Questioner: To go forward on this path, one has to sitat the feet of the Gnani; is that so?Dadashri: The Gnani himself is liberated and thereforeHe can liberate you. He does not dwell in any worldly things andtherefore he can free you in every way. You become like the oneyou worship.Your ego will go away if you stay with the One who hasno ego. Right now you may feel like staying with Dada but willAptavani-55354Aptavani-5Dadashri: It is ego when someone claims that he canextend his lifespan. Based on his natural longevity one thinks hecan increase his lifespan if he tries. His longevity is going toincrease and that is why egoism of this kind has arisen withinhim. Nobody can increase anything. In this world no one hascontrol even over his own bowel movement!Questioner: Can a Sat Purush (one who is Self-realized) change destiny created by the creator (vidhata)?Dadashri: Nobody can change anything. On the contrarydestiny controls everyone. No one can change anything at all.All this is nothing but egoism. All this is simply happening.Do not tell anyone that he is wrong because he willcounter attack you and bind enmity towards you. Instead, tellhim, ‘yes, you are right, I do like what you are saying’, and thenmove on. Otherwise there is no end to this. He will not let goof you if you argue with him about being right or wrong; he willcontinue to follow you wherever you go.Questioner: It is not possible to attain God without thegrace of a Sat Purush, so then how can the Sat Purush notchange destiny (creation)?Dadashri: If he is able to change destiny (creation), hespends his accomplished spiritual power and energy (siddhi) asthe Sat Purush. His siddhis will get used up. A Sat Purush hasan inexhaustible amount of siddhis.Questioner: So then, will the person have to suffer hisfate; his destiny?Dadashri: He has no choice but to suffer it. Goshada (adisciple of Lord Mahavir) had destroyed two of the Lord’sdisciples by throwing fireballs at them. So the other disciplesrequested the Lord to keep an eye on Goshada, but the Lordsaid, ‘I am a giver of moksha. I am not a giver of life. I amnobody’s protector.’Questioner: Some great saints have brought peopleback from death by putting life back into them; what kind ofenergy and power is that?Dadashri: If a person can put life back in a dead personand bring them back to life, then he himself would never die,would he? As yet, no one has been born in this world who canput life back into the dead. The one who ‘does’ so is just animit (apparent doer, evidentiary instrument). This happensmany times through my nimit. I admit to being a nimit. But donot take this the wrong way.Questioner: Does that mean that in fact that personnever died?Dadashri: That is right. He did not die. Out of certainbody states; when out of fear, or something else, somethinghappens here in the brahmarandhra (an aperture at the crownof the head through which the soul departs upon death), whichpeople can bring it back down again. For example, in a comaone recovers consciousness with help.Questioner: A mahatma who has nirvikalp samadhi(highest realization in which undisturbed bliss of the Self isexperienced); how does his Self leave the body?Dadashri: His Self will illuminate the whole universewhen it leaves the body.Questioner: What is the sign of the Self, illuminating thewhole universe when it leaves the body in a state of nirvikalpsamadhi? How is one to know that?Dadashri: Only a Gnani Purush or Lord Mahavir canknow that.Questioner: How does a Gnani Purush know that?Dadashri: The Gnani Purush can recognize it the instantHe sees it. It comes to him naturally. Everyone can recognizeAptavani-55354Aptavani-5Dadashri: It is ego when someone claims that he canextend his lifespan. Based on his natural longevity one thinks hecan increase his lifespan if he tries. His longevity is going toincrease and that is why egoism of this kind has arisen withinhim. Nobody can increase anything. In this world no one hascontrol even over his own bowel movement!Questioner: Can a Sat Purush (one who is Self-realized) change destiny created by the creator (vidhata)?Dadashri: Nobody can change anything. On the contrarydestiny controls everyone. No one can change anything at all.All this is nothing but egoism. All this is simply happening.Do not tell anyone that he is wrong because he willcounter attack you and bind enmity towards you. Instead, tellhim, ‘yes, you are right, I do like what you are saying’, and thenmove on. Otherwise there is no end to this. He will not let goof you if you argue with him about being right or wrong; he willcontinue to follow you wherever you go.Questioner: It is not possible to attain God without thegrace of a Sat Purush, so then how can the Sat Purush notchange destiny (creation)?Dadashri: If he is able to change destiny (creation), hespends his accomplished spiritual power and energy (siddhi) asthe Sat Purush. His siddhis will get used up. A Sat Purush hasan inexhaustible amount of siddhis.Questioner: So then, will the person have to suffer hisfate; his destiny?Dadashri: He has no choice but to suffer it. Goshada (adisciple of Lord Mahavir) had destroyed two of the Lord’sdisciples by throwing fireballs at them. So the other disciplesrequested the Lord to keep an eye on Goshada, but the Lordsaid, ‘I am a giver of moksha. I am not a giver of life. I amnobody’s protector.’Questioner: Some great saints have brought peopleback from death by putting life back into them; what kind ofenergy and power is that?Dadashri: If a person can put life back in a dead personand bring them back to life, then he himself would never die,would he? As yet, no one has been born in this world who canput life back into the dead. The one who ‘does’ so is just animit (apparent doer, evidentiary instrument). This happensmany times through my nimit. I admit to being a nimit. But donot take this the wrong way.Questioner: Does that mean that in fact that personnever died?Dadashri: That is right. He did not die. Out of certainbody states; when out of fear, or something else, somethinghappens here in the brahmarandhra (an aperture at the crownof the head through which the soul departs upon death), whichpeople can bring it back down again. For example, in a comaone recovers consciousness with help.Questioner: A mahatma who has nirvikalp samadhi(highest realization in which undisturbed bliss of the Self isexperienced); how does his Self leave the body?Dadashri: His Self will illuminate the whole universewhen it leaves the body.Questioner: What is the sign of the Self, illuminating thewhole universe when it leaves the body in a state of nirvikalpsamadhi? How is one to know that?Dadashri: Only a Gnani Purush or Lord Mahavir canknow that.Questioner: How does a Gnani Purush know that?Dadashri: The Gnani Purush can recognize it the instantHe sees it. It comes to him naturally. Everyone can recognizeAptavani-55556Aptavani-5natural attributes similar to his own.At the Time of DeathQuestioner: Please explain to us what happens at thetime of death. Some one’s eyes stay open and some urinate ordefecate.Dadashri: Nothing of this sort happens to a GnaniPurush. The Gnani’s Self does not leave through any senseorgans. It leaves differently. For the worldly people who have towander from one life to another, the Self departs through thesense organs. For some it leaves through the eyes, for somethrough the mouth; it leaves via any one of the orifices. It is goodif it leaves through an auspicious hole and bad if it leaves throughan orifice people consider as inauspicious because that takes itinto a lower life form. In the past, many saints used to have acoconut cracked on their heads. If they became sick, theywould tell their disciples to crack a coconut on their head. Thatwill lead to even lower life form, if the Self leaves from there inthis manner. The head is the tenth location. If the Self were toleave naturally from there, then its light would be completelydifferent. Its light would illuminate the entire universe.Questioner: Can those who do not have Self-realization(agnanis) also see that light?Dadashri: No, they cannot see it. Those who areGnanis can see all that. Agnanis can only see, ‘this is my wife,this is my mother-in-law, this is my uncle, these are jalebi andthese are ladoos (sweet dishes)’; that is all they can see.Questioner: There is no physical suffering in a blissfuldeath where one is in the awareness of the Self (samadhimaran), is there?Dadashri: Blissful death can occur even in the presenceof physical suffering. It can occur even in the presence ofparalysis. Samadhi maran means that in the last hour of yourlife you begin to ‘see’ Dada or you stay in the awareness of, ‘Iam Shuddhatma’, and that is what the balance sheet (theaccount of life’s karmas) will arrive at.Questioner: So one does not experience any suffering inthat state, does one?Dadashri: There is no suffering in samadhi maran.There is nothing but samadhi (oneness with the Self) in the lasthour. It has been evident so far that all those who have takenGnan and have died, have done so blissfully.Questioner: Does a person miss out if he hasraudradhyan (adverse meditation that hurts the self and others)in that last hour?Dadashri: When that happens, then everything isconsidered a loss. Not just in the state of raudradhyan but alsoif one is in the state of artadhyan (adverse meditation that hurtsthe self). It is artadhyan when, at the time of dying, he feels ‘Iwill not be able to get my fifth daughter married now’ and theprice for this artadhyan will be a life in an animal form.A Wandering Soul Without a Body After DeathQuestioner: After death a jiva (Self with a causal andelectrical body) that has not found a body (sthool deha) enterssomeone’s body to satisfy its hunger; what is that?Dadashri: It’s like this; the bhootas (ghosts) do notbother people. Bhootas are really Devas (one type of celestialbeings). If you have a good relation with them, then they will bebeneficial to you and if the relation was bad, they will causeproblems for you. A jiva that does not enter another body upondeath has to wander around. Until it finds a body, it is calledpretyoni. It cannot live without food and so it has to enter aphysical body in order to eat.Aptavani-55556Aptavani-5natural attributes similar to his own.At the Time of DeathQuestioner: Please explain to us what happens at thetime of death. Some one’s eyes stay open and some urinate ordefecate.Dadashri: Nothing of this sort happens to a GnaniPurush. The Gnani’s Self does not leave through any senseorgans. It leaves differently. For the worldly people who have towander from one life to another, the Self departs through thesense organs. For some it leaves through the eyes, for somethrough the mouth; it leaves via any one of the orifices. It is goodif it leaves through an auspicious hole and bad if it leaves throughan orifice people consider as inauspicious because that takes itinto a lower life form. In the past, many saints used to have acoconut cracked on their heads. If they became sick, theywould tell their disciples to crack a coconut on their head. Thatwill lead to even lower life form, if the Self leaves from there inthis manner. The head is the tenth location. If the Self were toleave naturally from there, then its light would be completelydifferent. Its light would illuminate the entire universe.Questioner: Can those who do not have Self-realization(agnanis) also see that light?Dadashri: No, they cannot see it. Those who areGnanis can see all that. Agnanis can only see, ‘this is my wife,this is my mother-in-law, this is my uncle, these are jalebi andthese are ladoos (sweet dishes)’; that is all they can see.Questioner: There is no physical suffering in a blissfuldeath where one is in the awareness of the Self (samadhimaran), is there?Dadashri: Blissful death can occur even in the presenceof physical suffering. It can occur even in the presence ofparalysis. Samadhi maran means that in the last hour of yourlife you begin to ‘see’ Dada or you stay in the awareness of, ‘Iam Shuddhatma’, and that is what the balance sheet (theaccount of life’s karmas) will arrive at.Questioner: So one does not experience any suffering inthat state, does one?Dadashri: There is no suffering in samadhi maran.There is nothing but samadhi (oneness with the Self) in the lasthour. It has been evident so far that all those who have takenGnan and have died, have done so blissfully.Questioner: Does a person miss out if he hasraudradhyan (adverse meditation that hurts the self and others)in that last hour?Dadashri: When that happens, then everything isconsidered a loss. Not just in the state of raudradhyan but alsoif one is in the state of artadhyan (adverse meditation that hurtsthe self). It is artadhyan when, at the time of dying, he feels ‘Iwill not be able to get my fifth daughter married now’ and theprice for this artadhyan will be a life in an animal form.A Wandering Soul Without a Body After DeathQuestioner: After death a jiva (Self with a causal andelectrical body) that has not found a body (sthool deha) enterssomeone’s body to satisfy its hunger; what is that?Dadashri: It’s like this; the bhootas (ghosts) do notbother people. Bhootas are really Devas (one type of celestialbeings). If you have a good relation with them, then they will bebeneficial to you and if the relation was bad, they will causeproblems for you. A jiva that does not enter another body upondeath has to wander around. Until it finds a body, it is calledpretyoni. It cannot live without food and so it has to enter aphysical body in order to eat.Aptavani-55758Aptavani-5Questioner: Some people do jaap, penance, rosary,etc.; can they still be possessed by a pretyoni?Dadashri: There is no such rule. If you have some pastaccount of karmas, if you have troubled someone and if that soulbecomes a pret, then it will not leave you alone withoutavenging.Questioner: Can reciting the Hanuman Chalisa or theGayatri Mantra have any effect on it?Dadashri: Yes, there is some benefit from that. It (thepretyoni) will stay away. Even if this Navkar Mantra is doneproperly with awareness, it will go away.Questioner: Can you show us Devlokas (the celestialabode)?Dadashri: What good does that do? Why don’t you dosomething for your own Self? There is no joy or benefit in seeingthat. You have been wandering for countless lives. You havebeen there and you have come here too. What is there to see?The Devas have endless sensual pleasures. They are tired ofthat too and they are waiting to become free from that body.How can they be free of that body when their life span ishundreds of thousand of years? Would you feel content andcomfortable if you were fed the kind of elaborate meals theyserve at weddings, for a whole month? Would you not run awayfrom there? That is how the Devas feel; they do not like it there.Absolutely Liberated SoulsQuestioner: Can a Siddha Purush, who may be in thevicinity of a specific circle of influence over nearby planets, guidepeople there?Dadashri: Siddhas do not guide anyone. Those whoguide others are worldly people (sansari). In the worldlylanguage they are considered sansari-siddha.Questioner: They do not have to do anything!Dadashri: Siddhas are beings who have absoluteliberation. They cannot be here. No Siddha can be here in anembodied form. When they talk about siddha here, it is all in aworldly language.Questioner: But is there not a world of Siddhas?Dadashri: There is a Siddha Kshetra, a location whereall Siddha Lords reside. They can never be here.Questioner: Are Siddhas not in a body form?Dadashri: They are not embodied. They are consideredParmatmas (the absolute Souls) and these siddhas are humans.They will come after you or put a curse on you if you insultthem.Questioner: The Siddhas that we talk about are in theform of a light, are they not?Dadashri: Yes. They are in the form of light (prakash).There is only one word for them; it is ‘keval’ (absolute). Theyare in the form of absolute vision, absolute knowledge, infinitebliss, absolute light (keval darshan, kevalgnan, anant sukh,param jyoti swaroop). They are Self-illuminating as well asuniverse-illuminating.Darshan of ShuddhatmaQuestioner: How can one see the pure Self(Shuddhatma)?Dadashri: What does it mean to see the Shuddhatma?If once I show you a diamond in a box and then I close the lid;that does not mean that the diamond is gone. You will be awareof its presence in the box. That is because you have seen it andyour intellect has accepted it. When I give you Gnan your mind,your intellect, your chit, and your ego have accepted that thereAptavani-55758Aptavani-5Questioner: Some people do jaap, penance, rosary,etc.; can they still be possessed by a pretyoni?Dadashri: There is no such rule. If you have some pastaccount of karmas, if you have troubled someone and if that soulbecomes a pret, then it will not leave you alone withoutavenging.Questioner: Can reciting the Hanuman Chalisa or theGayatri Mantra have any effect on it?Dadashri: Yes, there is some benefit from that. It (thepretyoni) will stay away. Even if this Navkar Mantra is doneproperly with awareness, it will go away.Questioner: Can you show us Devlokas (the celestialabode)?Dadashri: What good does that do? Why don’t you dosomething for your own Self? There is no joy or benefit in seeingthat. You have been wandering for countless lives. You havebeen there and you have come here too. What is there to see?The Devas have endless sensual pleasures. They are tired ofthat too and they are waiting to become free from that body.How can they be free of that body when their life span ishundreds of thousand of years? Would you feel content andcomfortable if you were fed the kind of elaborate meals theyserve at weddings, for a whole month? Would you not run awayfrom there? That is how the Devas feel; they do not like it there.Absolutely Liberated SoulsQuestioner: Can a Siddha Purush, who may be in thevicinity of a specific circle of influence over nearby planets, guidepeople there?Dadashri: Siddhas do not guide anyone. Those whoguide others are worldly people (sansari). In the worldlylanguage they are considered sansari-siddha.Questioner: They do not have to do anything!Dadashri: Siddhas are beings who have absoluteliberation. They cannot be here. No Siddha can be here in anembodied form. When they talk about siddha here, it is all in aworldly language.Questioner: But is there not a world of Siddhas?Dadashri: There is a Siddha Kshetra, a location whereall Siddha Lords reside. They can never be here.Questioner: Are Siddhas not in a body form?Dadashri: They are not embodied. They are consideredParmatmas (the absolute Souls) and these siddhas are humans.They will come after you or put a curse on you if you insultthem.Questioner: The Siddhas that we talk about are in theform of a light, are they not?Dadashri: Yes. They are in the form of light (prakash).There is only one word for them; it is ‘keval’ (absolute). Theyare in the form of absolute vision, absolute knowledge, infinitebliss, absolute light (keval darshan, kevalgnan, anant sukh,param jyoti swaroop). They are Self-illuminating as well asuniverse-illuminating.Darshan of ShuddhatmaQuestioner: How can one see the pure Self(Shuddhatma)?Dadashri: What does it mean to see the Shuddhatma?If once I show you a diamond in a box and then I close the lid;that does not mean that the diamond is gone. You will be awareof its presence in the box. That is because you have seen it andyour intellect has accepted it. When I give you Gnan your mind,your intellect, your chit, and your ego have accepted that thereAptavani-55960Aptavani-5is a Shuddhatma (pure Soul) within. After that there is no doubt(shanka) at all.Questioner: What happens if I do not follow the paththat You have showed me?Dadashri: It is possible that may happen, but you haveto have a desire to follow it. If you do not wish to follow thepath, then you may go astray. But if You definitely want tofollow it, then there is no problem even if many karmicobstacles arise in your way. The Gnani’s grace will always beworking for You if you have a firm desire to follow His path.Even if thousands of karmas come, they will be uprootedthrough the Gnani’s grace, but there is no solution for the onewho wants to go the wrong way.Questioner: If the awareness (laksha) of Shuddhatmadoes not go away in a situation with a person, does that meanthat it has been settled with equanimity?Dadashri: If you have interest in other things, then youwill lose the awareness of Shuddhatma. If you have an interestin something, it is bound to latch on to you, is it not? A personwill throw a fit even if his kadhee (soup) gets spilled because hehas an interest in it. One has to get rid of one’s interest and notthe thing itself. Things will not go away even if you try to do so.The whole world attempts to get rid of things. The thing will notgo away; it is in your fate. You have to get rid of your interestin those things.Questioner: The difference between the Kramic pathand the Akram path is the grace of a guru, is it not?Dadashri: Yes, it is the grace of God. That is all. Thereis no such thing as a guru here. Who is a guru here? What isthe definition of a guru? It is the one who has gurukilli(knowledge which will not let the guru sink). Such a guru canguide you. A guru without a gurukilli is considered ‘heavy’.‘Heavy’ means he will sink and along with him, so will you. Herethere is no need for a guru. Many people ask me if they haveto let go of their guru (after Self-realization in Gnan Vidhi) andI tell them, ‘No, you have to keep him.’ You need the worldlyguru, do you not? And here in the path of Akram the grace ofGod is directly upon You. The grace of the Lord of the fourteenworlds is upon You.Questioner: What happens when Gnan manifests?Dadashri: You will not stumble anywhere when Gnanmanifests in you.Questioner: What changes occur within?Dadashri: You experience endless bliss within; you willnot experience any suffering. You will not be affected by anyworries or miseries.Questioner: Can anyone who has realized the Self knowif the other person has attained the same?Dadashri: He can. Just as when you go to the market tobuy vegetables and you can tell which vegetables are good,similarly You can recognize this too.Questioner: Whom do you refer to when you say God?Is it Lord Mahavir?Dadashri: No, not Lord Mahavir. God means the Selfwithin, who is in the form of the absolute Self (Parmatma). Itis the Atma (Self) that we call Parmatma; Lord Mahavir is thattoo. Mahavir was the name given to Him and I am not talkingabout someone with that specific name. When it comes tonames, some people may like the name and others may get aheadache. When we talk about Parmatma, it will not giveanyone a headache.Questioner: ‘Pancham divo Shuddhatma sadhaar –Aptavani-55960Aptavani-5is a Shuddhatma (pure Soul) within. After that there is no doubt(shanka) at all.Questioner: What happens if I do not follow the paththat You have showed me?Dadashri: It is possible that may happen, but you haveto have a desire to follow it. If you do not wish to follow thepath, then you may go astray. But if You definitely want tofollow it, then there is no problem even if many karmicobstacles arise in your way. The Gnani’s grace will always beworking for You if you have a firm desire to follow His path.Even if thousands of karmas come, they will be uprootedthrough the Gnani’s grace, but there is no solution for the onewho wants to go the wrong way.Questioner: If the awareness (laksha) of Shuddhatmadoes not go away in a situation with a person, does that meanthat it has been settled with equanimity?Dadashri: If you have interest in other things, then youwill lose the awareness of Shuddhatma. If you have an interestin something, it is bound to latch on to you, is it not? A personwill throw a fit even if his kadhee (soup) gets spilled because hehas an interest in it. One has to get rid of one’s interest and notthe thing itself. Things will not go away even if you try to do so.The whole world attempts to get rid of things. The thing will notgo away; it is in your fate. You have to get rid of your interestin those things.Questioner: The difference between the Kramic pathand the Akram path is the grace of a guru, is it not?Dadashri: Yes, it is the grace of God. That is all. Thereis no such thing as a guru here. Who is a guru here? What isthe definition of a guru? It is the one who has gurukilli(knowledge which will not let the guru sink). Such a guru canguide you. A guru without a gurukilli is considered ‘heavy’.‘Heavy’ means he will sink and along with him, so will you. Herethere is no need for a guru. Many people ask me if they haveto let go of their guru (after Self-realization in Gnan Vidhi) andI tell them, ‘No, you have to keep him.’ You need the worldlyguru, do you not? And here in the path of Akram the grace ofGod is directly upon You. The grace of the Lord of the fourteenworlds is upon You.Questioner: What happens when Gnan manifests?Dadashri: You will not stumble anywhere when Gnanmanifests in you.Questioner: What changes occur within?Dadashri: You experience endless bliss within; you willnot experience any suffering. You will not be affected by anyworries or miseries.Questioner: Can anyone who has realized the Self knowif the other person has attained the same?Dadashri: He can. Just as when you go to the market tobuy vegetables and you can tell which vegetables are good,similarly You can recognize this too.Questioner: Whom do you refer to when you say God?Is it Lord Mahavir?Dadashri: No, not Lord Mahavir. God means the Selfwithin, who is in the form of the absolute Self (Parmatma). Itis the Atma (Self) that we call Parmatma; Lord Mahavir is thattoo. Mahavir was the name given to Him and I am not talkingabout someone with that specific name. When it comes tonames, some people may like the name and others may get aheadache. When we talk about Parmatma, it will not giveanyone a headache.Questioner: ‘Pancham divo Shuddhatma sadhaar –Aptavani-56162Aptavani-5‘Chandubhai’. They do not even know You, do they?Questioner: When people say ‘my atma’, are theytalking about the pratishthit atma (relative self)?Dadashri: No, the pratishthit atma comes into playafter one attains Self-realization (Gnan). When I give youGnan, a separation occurs between the Shuddhatma (the Self)and the pratishthit atma (the relative self, non-Self complex).You become the pure Self but what else remains? Thepratishthit atma remains. You had created it by instilling thebelief (doing pratishtha) of, ‘This is I…this is I’. Thatpratishthit atma now remains in a form of a discharge. Eventhose who do not have Self-realization will say things like, ‘MyAtma…my Atma is a sinner’; hey speak in this way and thattoo is the pratishthit atma. However, they do not have theseparation between the Shuddha atma and the pratishthitatma.Questioner: After Gnan one realizes that one hasattained an unprecedented occurrence (apurva avasar). So canyou explain that occurrence in detail?Dadashri: Apurva avasar means an occurrence that hasnever occurred before in any past lives; such is this event. In thisevent one attains the awareness of the Self. This is calledapurva avasar.Questioner: Where are all these jivas (living beings)born or created?Dadashri: They were never born nor created. The Selfis indestructible; it is eternal. That which is eternal cannot becreated or born. That which is imperishable cannot be createdor born. All that You ‘see’ around You is an illusion (bhranti).They are all circumstances and circumstances perish.Circumstance of youth, circumstance of old age; they all perishand the Self within remains the same.the fifth kindled light of arati is the support of the pure Self’(questioner quoting a line from Dada’s arati, devotional song).What kind of support (sadhaar) are they talking about?Dadashri: Up until now the body complex (the pudgal,non-Self) was the support of the chetan (the living one;consciousness within); and now the Shuddhatma (the pure Self)is the support of the chetan. Therefore, the Self has become itsown support. Now the non-Self is no longer the support. Thewhole world is supported by the non-Self.If ghee (clarified butter) is placed in a container, anintellectual scholar (pandit) will ponder over whether the gheeis there because of the container or if the container is therebecause of the ghee. A pandit is likely to have such thoughts,but not someone who is not so intellectual. A pandit’s brain isfertile, is it not? So in order to investigate, the pandit turns thecontainer up side down; then he realizes, ‘Oh my! The ghee wasthere because of the container!’ Similarly, for the people of theworld, the Self exists because of their body complex (pudgal).When one’s existence comes to be supported by his own Self(upon Self-realization); when he attains the understanding, ‘I donot exist because of the body’; then that is considered taking thesupport of the Shuddhatma. The one who is dependent uponthe body, the Lord considers as having no support (niraashrit);the Lord considers him as an ‘orphan’ and the one who isdependent upon the Self, the Lord considers as having support(aashrit). Once You come into the support of the Self(sadhaar), there is nothing more left to do.Now, when someone insults ‘Chandubhai’, You have totell ‘Chandubhai’, ‘Chandubhai, you are being insulted but I willhelp you.’ You have to practice handling things in this way. Doyou not have to practice lighting even a firecracker? Otherwiseyou can get burnt. You need practice in everything.Now, when someone scolds you, he is scoldingAptavani-56162Aptavani-5‘Chandubhai’. They do not even know You, do they?Questioner: When people say ‘my atma’, are theytalking about the pratishthit atma (relative self)?Dadashri: No, the pratishthit atma comes into playafter one attains Self-realization (Gnan). When I give youGnan, a separation occurs between the Shuddhatma (the Self)and the pratishthit atma (the relative self, non-Self complex).You become the pure Self but what else remains? Thepratishthit atma remains. You had created it by instilling thebelief (doing pratishtha) of, ‘This is I…this is I’. Thatpratishthit atma now remains in a form of a discharge. Eventhose who do not have Self-realization will say things like, ‘MyAtma…my Atma is a sinner’; hey speak in this way and thattoo is the pratishthit atma. However, they do not have theseparation between the Shuddha atma and the pratishthitatma.Questioner: After Gnan one realizes that one hasattained an unprecedented occurrence (apurva avasar). So canyou explain that occurrence in detail?Dadashri: Apurva avasar means an occurrence that hasnever occurred before in any past lives; such is this event. In thisevent one attains the awareness of the Self. This is calledapurva avasar.Questioner: Where are all these jivas (living beings)born or created?Dadashri: They were never born nor created. The Selfis indestructible; it is eternal. That which is eternal cannot becreated or born. That which is imperishable cannot be createdor born. All that You ‘see’ around You is an illusion (bhranti).They are all circumstances and circumstances perish.Circumstance of youth, circumstance of old age; they all perishand the Self within remains the same.the fifth kindled light of arati is the support of the pure Self’(questioner quoting a line from Dada’s arati, devotional song).What kind of support (sadhaar) are they talking about?Dadashri: Up until now the body complex (the pudgal,non-Self) was the support of the chetan (the living one;consciousness within); and now the Shuddhatma (the pure Self)is the support of the chetan. Therefore, the Self has become itsown support. Now the non-Self is no longer the support. Thewhole world is supported by the non-Self.If ghee (clarified butter) is placed in a container, anintellectual scholar (pandit) will ponder over whether the gheeis there because of the container or if the container is therebecause of the ghee. A pandit is likely to have such thoughts,but not someone who is not so intellectual. A pandit’s brain isfertile, is it not? So in order to investigate, the pandit turns thecontainer up side down; then he realizes, ‘Oh my! The ghee wasthere because of the container!’ Similarly, for the people of theworld, the Self exists because of their body complex (pudgal).When one’s existence comes to be supported by his own Self(upon Self-realization); when he attains the understanding, ‘I donot exist because of the body’; then that is considered taking thesupport of the Shuddhatma. The one who is dependent uponthe body, the Lord considers as having no support (niraashrit);the Lord considers him as an ‘orphan’ and the one who isdependent upon the Self, the Lord considers as having support(aashrit). Once You come into the support of the Self(sadhaar), there is nothing more left to do.Now, when someone insults ‘Chandubhai’, You have totell ‘Chandubhai’, ‘Chandubhai, you are being insulted but I willhelp you.’ You have to practice handling things in this way. Doyou not have to practice lighting even a firecracker? Otherwiseyou can get burnt. You need practice in everything.Now, when someone scolds you, he is scoldingAptavani-56364Aptavani-5Questioner: The Jivatma (embodied Self) comes backafter death, does it not?Dadashri: It does not come back for non-Indians butyours does. That much grace of God is upon you. It entersanother body the moment one dies. It is not really true that itdoes not return for the non-Indians, but their belief is that whenthey die, that is the end for them. In reality, it does come backbut they do not understand that. They do not acceptreincarnation.Questioner: What should we do if an occasion ariseswhen someone is kidnapping our sister or wife? Should weremain vitarag? Should we just be the Gnata-Drashta(Knower-Seer)?Dadashri: Where is it in your control? It is a dischargingeffect of karmas. Anything can occur at that time. You may endup shouting all kinds of abuse. If that were the case for ‘us’,‘we’ would remain vitarag. You are not capable of remainingso. You will be shaken by that.Questioner: Despite having the time and the desire (toprogress spiritually), why are we overcome with laziness?Dadashri: There are two kinds of people; those who arelazy in their work and those who are restless in their work. Eventhose who are restless do not attain anything. It is good to havenormality.You just have to scold ‘Chandubhai’: ‘Why are you beinglazy? You are wasting time unnecessarily.’ You can scold‘Chandubhai’ but you cannot send him to jail or make him fast.Eat, drink and enjoy but You can scold him.Questioner: We have to do the work that comes to us,do we not?Dadashri: It will automatically get done. You do not haveto pamper it. But if you insist, ‘No, but I have to watch overeverything, don’t I?’ then it will take you over. Your work willget done. You simply have to ‘see’ everything and it will getdone in an orderly manner. There are so many scientificcircumstantial evidences that You do not have to worry aboutanything. All You need is an inner intent that you want to remainpure in all worldly interactions (adarsha vyavahar). Yourworldly interaction should not become ruined. If it becomesspoilt, then You should settle it with equanimity.Questioner: What do You mean when You say, ‘theGnan has not been digested’; what are the characteristics ofthat?Dadashri: Not digested means ‘indigestion’.Questioner: What should one do to prevent that? Whatare the signs of ‘indigestion’? Is it possible for one to get‘indigestion’ after taking your Gnan?Dadashri: It happens to only some, not everyone. Whatdo we mean by ‘indigestion’ of Gnan? It is when one becomesbiased towards one side; when one falls short in his worldlyinteractions. For example, when one does not go to college andif he does, he does not pay attention and he keeps saying, ‘I ama pure Self…I am a pure Self’, that is ‘indigestion’. When it isnot considered ‘indigestion’? It is when he is complete in hisworldly interactions (vyavahar), he does not neglect worldlyinteraction (vyavahar). One has to meet all worldly obligationsand all those obligations are mandatory (farajiyat). So it ispointless having such negative inner intent (bhaav) in that whichis mandatory.Questioner: If everyone is a pure Self, does that notcreate disturbances in the way the world works?Dadashri: There would be no direction or managementif everyone were Shuddhatma. One has to gradually becomeAptavani-56364Aptavani-5Questioner: The Jivatma (embodied Self) comes backafter death, does it not?Dadashri: It does not come back for non-Indians butyours does. That much grace of God is upon you. It entersanother body the moment one dies. It is not really true that itdoes not return for the non-Indians, but their belief is that whenthey die, that is the end for them. In reality, it does come backbut they do not understand that. They do not acceptreincarnation.Questioner: What should we do if an occasion ariseswhen someone is kidnapping our sister or wife? Should weremain vitarag? Should we just be the Gnata-Drashta(Knower-Seer)?Dadashri: Where is it in your control? It is a dischargingeffect of karmas. Anything can occur at that time. You may endup shouting all kinds of abuse. If that were the case for ‘us’,‘we’ would remain vitarag. You are not capable of remainingso. You will be shaken by that.Questioner: Despite having the time and the desire (toprogress spiritually), why are we overcome with laziness?Dadashri: There are two kinds of people; those who arelazy in their work and those who are restless in their work. Eventhose who are restless do not attain anything. It is good to havenormality.You just have to scold ‘Chandubhai’: ‘Why are you beinglazy? You are wasting time unnecessarily.’ You can scold‘Chandubhai’ but you cannot send him to jail or make him fast.Eat, drink and enjoy but You can scold him.Questioner: We have to do the work that comes to us,do we not?Dadashri: It will automatically get done. You do not haveto pamper it. But if you insist, ‘No, but I have to watch overeverything, don’t I?’ then it will take you over. Your work willget done. You simply have to ‘see’ everything and it will getdone in an orderly manner. There are so many scientificcircumstantial evidences that You do not have to worry aboutanything. All You need is an inner intent that you want to remainpure in all worldly interactions (adarsha vyavahar). Yourworldly interaction should not become ruined. If it becomesspoilt, then You should settle it with equanimity.Questioner: What do You mean when You say, ‘theGnan has not been digested’; what are the characteristics ofthat?Dadashri: Not digested means ‘indigestion’.Questioner: What should one do to prevent that? Whatare the signs of ‘indigestion’? Is it possible for one to get‘indigestion’ after taking your Gnan?Dadashri: It happens to only some, not everyone. Whatdo we mean by ‘indigestion’ of Gnan? It is when one becomesbiased towards one side; when one falls short in his worldlyinteractions. For example, when one does not go to college andif he does, he does not pay attention and he keeps saying, ‘I ama pure Self…I am a pure Self’, that is ‘indigestion’. When it isnot considered ‘indigestion’? It is when he is complete in hisworldly interactions (vyavahar), he does not neglect worldlyinteraction (vyavahar). One has to meet all worldly obligationsand all those obligations are mandatory (farajiyat). So it ispointless having such negative inner intent (bhaav) in that whichis mandatory.Questioner: If everyone is a pure Self, does that notcreate disturbances in the way the world works?Dadashri: There would be no direction or managementif everyone were Shuddhatma. One has to gradually becomeAptavani-56566Aptavani-5siddha from the human state. One or two will become siddha(absolute enlightenment without a body). Then after some timeanother one or two will become siddha. Therefore, it is not soeasy but it is possible to become siddha. Man can become aParmatma (the absolute Self); he can do so by attaining theknowledge of the pure Self, and then proceed towardsexpressing the absolute Self (with purusharth). The Self itselfbecomes Parmatma (the absolute Supreme Self!)Questioner: One saint had come to our home; he keptreciting, ‘Ohum and Sohum’, what is that?Dadashri: Om ((cid:67)) and Sohum are two words. There isno such word as ‘Ohum’. Om ((cid:67)) is the highest mantra andby reciting it you reap great benefits, and sohum means ‘I amthat, I am the One within.’ Both these mantras are beneficial.What Is Life?Questioner: What is life according to You?Dadashri: According to me life is a jail, a jail! There arefour kinds of jails; one is najar keda (imprisoned by simplewatching). Devlokas (celestial beings) are under this form ofimprisonment. The human beings are in a simple jail. All otherliving beings, besides humans, are in a prison that requires a lotof hard work; this is the animal life form. The fourth jail has thepain of a lifetime sentence; such is the jail of those in hell.Do you like any of these jails?Questioner: I do not like this jail but I have to put upwith it.Dadashri: Yes, what can you do? Where can you goonce you are trapped in it? You are not alone; all the saints,acharyas (religious master teachers), etc., are all trapped in ittoo. Where can they go now? The police will arrest you evenif you were to jump in the lake. ‘Why are you committingsuicide?’ he will ask. They will not even let you commit suicide!These authorities are so good that even if you try to commitsuicide, you will be charged with another wrongdoing. They aretelling you to finish your karmas here.Questioner: What should one do in order to be happyin life?Dadashri: What kind of happiness do you want? Do youwant temporary happiness or eternal happiness?Questioner: Eternal.Dadashri: If you want eternal happiness, then come hereand if you want temporary happiness, I will show you the way.Come here occasionally and do darshan. I will keep blessingyou. Your temporary happiness will continue to increase and ifyou want eternal happiness then come to Me. That happinesswill never leave you once you attain it. You do not want eternalhappiness?Questioner: I want eternal happiness. I will come toYou.The Path of LiberationThe path to liberation (mokshamarg) is no longer inexistence in the current era of the time cycle. There is no traceof it whatsoever. It is as if it has vanished. Even the worldly pathtoday is not correct.Questioner: Is there a need for rituals in the path ofliberation?Dadashri: There are never rituals of these kinds in thepath of moksha. You can attain moksha if you do gnan-kriya(the ‘activity’ of the Self; to ‘see’ and ‘know’). There is nomoksha through agnan-kriya (activity of the non-Self). Thereis no moksha through it even if one were to do samayik thewhole day long, because he is the doer of that; he believes ‘I amAptavani-56566Aptavani-5siddha from the human state. One or two will become siddha(absolute enlightenment without a body). Then after some timeanother one or two will become siddha. Therefore, it is not soeasy but it is possible to become siddha. Man can become aParmatma (the absolute Self); he can do so by attaining theknowledge of the pure Self, and then proceed towardsexpressing the absolute Self (with purusharth). The Self itselfbecomes Parmatma (the absolute Supreme Self!)Questioner: One saint had come to our home; he keptreciting, ‘Ohum and Sohum’, what is that?Dadashri: Om ((cid:67)) and Sohum are two words. There isno such word as ‘Ohum’. Om ((cid:67)) is the highest mantra andby reciting it you reap great benefits, and sohum means ‘I amthat, I am the One within.’ Both these mantras are beneficial.What Is Life?Questioner: What is life according to You?Dadashri: According to me life is a jail, a jail! There arefour kinds of jails; one is najar keda (imprisoned by simplewatching). Devlokas (celestial beings) are under this form ofimprisonment. The human beings are in a simple jail. All otherliving beings, besides humans, are in a prison that requires a lotof hard work; this is the animal life form. The fourth jail has thepain of a lifetime sentence; such is the jail of those in hell.Do you like any of these jails?Questioner: I do not like this jail but I have to put upwith it.Dadashri: Yes, what can you do? Where can you goonce you are trapped in it? You are not alone; all the saints,acharyas (religious master teachers), etc., are all trapped in ittoo. Where can they go now? The police will arrest you evenif you were to jump in the lake. ‘Why are you committingsuicide?’ he will ask. They will not even let you commit suicide!These authorities are so good that even if you try to commitsuicide, you will be charged with another wrongdoing. They aretelling you to finish your karmas here.Questioner: What should one do in order to be happyin life?Dadashri: What kind of happiness do you want? Do youwant temporary happiness or eternal happiness?Questioner: Eternal.Dadashri: If you want eternal happiness, then come hereand if you want temporary happiness, I will show you the way.Come here occasionally and do darshan. I will keep blessingyou. Your temporary happiness will continue to increase and ifyou want eternal happiness then come to Me. That happinesswill never leave you once you attain it. You do not want eternalhappiness?Questioner: I want eternal happiness. I will come toYou.The Path of LiberationThe path to liberation (mokshamarg) is no longer inexistence in the current era of the time cycle. There is no traceof it whatsoever. It is as if it has vanished. Even the worldly pathtoday is not correct.Questioner: Is there a need for rituals in the path ofliberation?Dadashri: There are never rituals of these kinds in thepath of moksha. You can attain moksha if you do gnan-kriya(the ‘activity’ of the Self; to ‘see’ and ‘know’). There is nomoksha through agnan-kriya (activity of the non-Self). Thereis no moksha through it even if one were to do samayik thewhole day long, because he is the doer of that; he believes ‘I amAptavani-56768Aptavani-5raudradhyan? Raudradhyan means to cause any kind of hurtto others and artadhyan means that only he himself is in pain;he does not hurt others at all.Nothing is attained no matter how many resolutions(nischays) he makes, no matter how much he wanders life afterlife. Has he not been wandering for endless lives? One has heardand listened to the ‘liberated One’ (mukta Purush) but one didnot follow His Agnas. To surrender to the Agnas of theliberated One is itself dharma (religion). Only the liberated Onecan liberate you. They have the ‘license’ to do so. You have tounderstand this from a Gnani Purush.We have two paths: a relative path and a real path.Dharmadhyan is taught by many, but no one knows how to doit. ‘We’ teach dharmadhyan here but it is dharmadhyan of avery elevated state. If anyone can grasp it, his work will bedone.Questioner: As one progresses in dharmadhyan, will heeventually progress towards shukladhyan (awareness after theSelf is realized)?Dadashri: No! One cannot go towards shukladhyanfrom dharmadhyan. Shukladhyan is not something one canattain on his own. It cannot manifest without the darshan of aGnani Purush or a Kevalgnani (the One who is the light ofabsolute Knowledge). It is a nirvikalp state (a state without ofany ‘I-ness’). It is a state beyond the senses (atindriya).Therefore, it cannot be attained any other way. I give you both,dharmadhyan as well as shukladhyan.Disrespect Towards the GnaniQuestioner: If any disrespect (avinaya) is occurring in theprocess of asking you questions, or in my speech and actions,even though it is not my intention (bhaav); is that tantamount todoing your viradhana (being insolent towards You)?doing samayik’. The belief, ‘I am the doer’, is and perpetuatesbondage. In the current era of the time cycle it would be goodeven if one attains human life again. One does nothing butartadhyan and raudradhyan his entire life. Also there are onlya few living beings that are bound for a life in hell. If there is littleartadhyan (meditation that hurts the self) and raudradhyan(mediation that hurts the self and others) one can still attain ahuman life again; but people do not even have knowledge ofdharmadhyan (absence of adverse internal meditation that hurtsthe self and the others); if they did, even then their work wouldbe done.Questioner: How can I be in dharmadhyan when thefirst thing I am reminded of, when I get up in the morning, is thecustomers and the business?Dadashri: No one is at fault here. One has no choice butit happens.Questioner: How can I become free from all this?Dadashri: Have you not read in the book?Questioner: I have not read all of it.Dadashri: You cannot attain liberation by yourself. Onlythe one who is free from bondage can free others. He who isdrowning cannot save others. In the same token, he who hasattained moksha can give moksha to others.There are about ten percent of people in this world whowill come back as humans, the rest are the guests of lower lifeforms (tiryanch gati)!Questioner: What if one has a strong determination(nischay) that he wants a human life form and the Jain religionin his next life?Dadashri: Who would not have such a nischay? Butwould he not go to a lower life form if he has artadhyan andAptavani-56768Aptavani-5raudradhyan? Raudradhyan means to cause any kind of hurtto others and artadhyan means that only he himself is in pain;he does not hurt others at all.Nothing is attained no matter how many resolutions(nischays) he makes, no matter how much he wanders life afterlife. Has he not been wandering for endless lives? One has heardand listened to the ‘liberated One’ (mukta Purush) but one didnot follow His Agnas. To surrender to the Agnas of theliberated One is itself dharma (religion). Only the liberated Onecan liberate you. They have the ‘license’ to do so. You have tounderstand this from a Gnani Purush.We have two paths: a relative path and a real path.Dharmadhyan is taught by many, but no one knows how to doit. ‘We’ teach dharmadhyan here but it is dharmadhyan of avery elevated state. If anyone can grasp it, his work will bedone.Questioner: As one progresses in dharmadhyan, will heeventually progress towards shukladhyan (awareness after theSelf is realized)?Dadashri: No! One cannot go towards shukladhyanfrom dharmadhyan. Shukladhyan is not something one canattain on his own. It cannot manifest without the darshan of aGnani Purush or a Kevalgnani (the One who is the light ofabsolute Knowledge). It is a nirvikalp state (a state without ofany ‘I-ness’). It is a state beyond the senses (atindriya).Therefore, it cannot be attained any other way. I give you both,dharmadhyan as well as shukladhyan.Disrespect Towards the GnaniQuestioner: If any disrespect (avinaya) is occurring in theprocess of asking you questions, or in my speech and actions,even though it is not my intention (bhaav); is that tantamount todoing your viradhana (being insolent towards You)?doing samayik’. The belief, ‘I am the doer’, is and perpetuatesbondage. In the current era of the time cycle it would be goodeven if one attains human life again. One does nothing butartadhyan and raudradhyan his entire life. Also there are onlya few living beings that are bound for a life in hell. If there is littleartadhyan (meditation that hurts the self) and raudradhyan(mediation that hurts the self and others) one can still attain ahuman life again; but people do not even have knowledge ofdharmadhyan (absence of adverse internal meditation that hurtsthe self and the others); if they did, even then their work wouldbe done.Questioner: How can I be in dharmadhyan when thefirst thing I am reminded of, when I get up in the morning, is thecustomers and the business?Dadashri: No one is at fault here. One has no choice butit happens.Questioner: How can I become free from all this?Dadashri: Have you not read in the book?Questioner: I have not read all of it.Dadashri: You cannot attain liberation by yourself. Onlythe one who is free from bondage can free others. He who isdrowning cannot save others. In the same token, he who hasattained moksha can give moksha to others.There are about ten percent of people in this world whowill come back as humans, the rest are the guests of lower lifeforms (tiryanch gati)!Questioner: What if one has a strong determination(nischay) that he wants a human life form and the Jain religionin his next life?Dadashri: Who would not have such a nischay? Butwould he not go to a lower life form if he has artadhyan andAptavani-56970Aptavani-5Dadashri: If you do start to become a viradhak(insolent), I will stop the discussion because I will know that thediscussion is going on the wrong path.Questioner: But what if I end up doing your viradhana?Dadashri: You do not have the parmanus (subatomicparticles of matter, the substrate of karmas effect) to do myviradhana. Such doubts would never occur to ‘us’. There cannever be viradhana of the one you do aradhana (worshipfulrespect) of, all daylong, can there? Dada’s aradhana istantamount to doing aradhana of the pure Self (Shuddhatma),which is verily aradhana of the absolute Self (Parmatma) andthat is the cause for moksha.The Sign of Self BlissDadashri: Does such pleasure arise from the Self or thepudgal (the non-Self)?Questioner: From the Self.Dadashri: How can you tell whether it is from the Self orthe pudgal?Questioner: There is an experience that is beyond thesenses (atindriya), is there not?Dadashri: Not everyone is aware of that. The sign ofbliss from the Self is the presence of nirakudata (a state freeof any disturbance). Recognize that your upayog (focusedawakened awareness of the Self) is somewhere else upon theslightest akudata-vyakudata (disturbances in the non-Self);You have lost Your path–Vision (You have ‘become’‘Chandubhai’). If you come home agitated from the heat, youfeel good when you sit under a fan. That is not called shuddhaupayog (pure applied awareness of the Self). You have toremain as the Knower of that too. When you are enduring somekind of suffering, You should remain as the Knower of theexperience of suffering (ashata-vedaniya) and at the same timenirakudata should also remain. You should remain the Knowerof both. It is a mistake to become one (ekakar) with the shata-vedaniya (the experience of pleasure).Unfolding of Suffering Versus Awareness ofGnanQuestioner: Is there not sweetness in pleasurableexperience (shata-vedaniya)?Dadashri: There is sweetness in it but You should‘know’ that. During that moment Gnan should be present that‘this is shata-vedaniya (experience of pleasure) and this isnirakudata (absence of disturbance)’. When ashata-vedaniyaarises You should remain the Knower of that too. On the outsidethere is experience of suffering of pain (ashata-vedaniya) andfrom within there is nirakudata.To become happy or to become unhappy means youbecome the bhokta (the one experiencing). Karmas are boundin both; in becoming the ‘doer’ (karta) and becoming thebhokta (the one experiencing) but no karmas are bound inbeing the Knower (Gnata). You simply have to be theKnower of ‘right now ‘Chandubhai’ is having the experienceof pain or pleasure’. What is the point in ‘becoming’ happy orunhappy?There is no problem whether death comes today or aftertwenty-five years.Questioner: I do not have a fear of dying but I do havea fear of suffering pain during death.Dadashri: What suffering?Questioner: Physical suffering (vyadhi).Dadashri: What is there to fear in that? Is it notAptavani-56970Aptavani-5Dadashri: If you do start to become a viradhak(insolent), I will stop the discussion because I will know that thediscussion is going on the wrong path.Questioner: But what if I end up doing your viradhana?Dadashri: You do not have the parmanus (subatomicparticles of matter, the substrate of karmas effect) to do myviradhana. Such doubts would never occur to ‘us’. There cannever be viradhana of the one you do aradhana (worshipfulrespect) of, all daylong, can there? Dada’s aradhana istantamount to doing aradhana of the pure Self (Shuddhatma),which is verily aradhana of the absolute Self (Parmatma) andthat is the cause for moksha.The Sign of Self BlissDadashri: Does such pleasure arise from the Self or thepudgal (the non-Self)?Questioner: From the Self.Dadashri: How can you tell whether it is from the Self orthe pudgal?Questioner: There is an experience that is beyond thesenses (atindriya), is there not?Dadashri: Not everyone is aware of that. The sign ofbliss from the Self is the presence of nirakudata (a state freeof any disturbance). Recognize that your upayog (focusedawakened awareness of the Self) is somewhere else upon theslightest akudata-vyakudata (disturbances in the non-Self);You have lost Your path–Vision (You have ‘become’‘Chandubhai’). If you come home agitated from the heat, youfeel good when you sit under a fan. That is not called shuddhaupayog (pure applied awareness of the Self). You have toremain as the Knower of that too. When you are enduring somekind of suffering, You should remain as the Knower of theexperience of suffering (ashata-vedaniya) and at the same timenirakudata should also remain. You should remain the Knowerof both. It is a mistake to become one (ekakar) with the shata-vedaniya (the experience of pleasure).Unfolding of Suffering Versus Awareness ofGnanQuestioner: Is there not sweetness in pleasurableexperience (shata-vedaniya)?Dadashri: There is sweetness in it but You should‘know’ that. During that moment Gnan should be present that‘this is shata-vedaniya (experience of pleasure) and this isnirakudata (absence of disturbance)’. When ashata-vedaniyaarises You should remain the Knower of that too. On the outsidethere is experience of suffering of pain (ashata-vedaniya) andfrom within there is nirakudata.To become happy or to become unhappy means youbecome the bhokta (the one experiencing). Karmas are boundin both; in becoming the ‘doer’ (karta) and becoming thebhokta (the one experiencing) but no karmas are bound inbeing the Knower (Gnata). You simply have to be theKnower of ‘right now ‘Chandubhai’ is having the experienceof pain or pleasure’. What is the point in ‘becoming’ happy orunhappy?There is no problem whether death comes today or aftertwenty-five years.Questioner: I do not have a fear of dying but I do havea fear of suffering pain during death.Dadashri: What suffering?Questioner: Physical suffering (vyadhi).Dadashri: What is there to fear in that? Is it notAptavani-57172Aptavani-5vyavasthit? If it is in your vyavasthit to be blind, you willbecome blind. Then why have fear of it? Now that You haveaccepted vyavasthit, there is no need to have any fear.Nothing is going to affect You. Walk around in a fearless(nirbhay) state.Questioner: Fear of suffering pain continues to be there.Dadashri: When there is not going to be any suffering(vedana), why be fearful of it? Suffering comes to those whofear it. How can there be any suffering for those who arefearless? This is just your ‘vanik baggage’ (peculiar characteristicsof a Vania caste), is it not? It is very soft and timid.Is there a difference between an apple and a guava? Aguava is hard and if you find an apple to be softer, then tell‘Chandubhai’ that, ‘Dada has used the term ‘vyavasthit’.’Where is the fear after You say, ‘vyavasthit’?Questioner: I have had a headache for the past twodays, which has been intolerable.Dadashri: The moment you say, ‘I cannot tolerate it’, itpossesses you. What You have to say is, ‘Chandubhai, do youhave a bad headache? I will massage it and it will go down.’ Butit will possess you if you say, ‘I have a headache.’ This is a big‘ghost’.Questioner: I like the experience of pleasure (shata-vedaniya) and dislike the experience of pain (ashata-vedaniya).Dadashri: It is ‘Chandubhai’ who likes it, does he not?You (the Self) should tell Chandubhai to change his dictionary.The painful will bring pleasure and the pleasant will bring pain.The pleasant and the painful are both illusions of the mind. Tryto ‘fit’ these words of Mine and then try it. And then if theyaffect you even in the slightest, come and tell me.Questioner: I am asking You this question to find asolution for it.Dadashri: You should ask me and then do as I tell you.This is the only solution! Never take on the suffering by saying,‘I am hurting’. If someone were to ask you, ‘What is the matterwith you?’ you should say, ‘My neighbor has a headache andI am aware of that’. You are convinced that ‘this’ is Yourneighbor (Chandubhai), are You (the Self) not?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Then why all the suffering of the pain? If theneighbor is crying, do You have to cry along with him? Conflictsare inevitable with the neighbors. Besides, who does not haveconflicts with his wife? Why should You cry when You are noteven married? Only the married cry. You are not married, norare You widowed! Why should You cry? On the contrary, Youshould try to pacify the neighbor by saying, ‘Dear fellow, don’tcry. Don’t worry. I am with you, so don’t cry and don’t worry.’This is what You should say.Torments from the PrakrutiThe Vanik prakruti is such that it becomes afraid evenbefore problems arise. You have to tell ‘Chandubhai’, ‘Nothingis going to happen to you.’ If you see a person that cannot walkyou may have a thought, ‘what if that happens to me too?’When such thoughts occur just say, ‘Chandubhai, nothing isgoing to happen, I am sitting here.’ You say this to remainseparate from ‘Chandubhai’. This is a science. The moment yousay, ‘it happened to me’, you become possessed by the ghostof fear. This is why the world has become ‘possessed’ by theghosts.You are a Parmatma (the absolute Supreme Self), sowhy should You have all this? Have you experienced even a littlebit of the energy and power (shakti) of the Parmatma? Haveyou become aware that You are a Parmatma and that theAptavani-57172Aptavani-5vyavasthit? If it is in your vyavasthit to be blind, you willbecome blind. Then why have fear of it? Now that You haveaccepted vyavasthit, there is no need to have any fear.Nothing is going to affect You. Walk around in a fearless(nirbhay) state.Questioner: Fear of suffering pain continues to be there.Dadashri: When there is not going to be any suffering(vedana), why be fearful of it? Suffering comes to those whofear it. How can there be any suffering for those who arefearless? This is just your ‘vanik baggage’ (peculiar characteristicsof a Vania caste), is it not? It is very soft and timid.Is there a difference between an apple and a guava? Aguava is hard and if you find an apple to be softer, then tell‘Chandubhai’ that, ‘Dada has used the term ‘vyavasthit’.’Where is the fear after You say, ‘vyavasthit’?Questioner: I have had a headache for the past twodays, which has been intolerable.Dadashri: The moment you say, ‘I cannot tolerate it’, itpossesses you. What You have to say is, ‘Chandubhai, do youhave a bad headache? I will massage it and it will go down.’ Butit will possess you if you say, ‘I have a headache.’ This is a big‘ghost’.Questioner: I like the experience of pleasure (shata-vedaniya) and dislike the experience of pain (ashata-vedaniya).Dadashri: It is ‘Chandubhai’ who likes it, does he not?You (the Self) should tell Chandubhai to change his dictionary.The painful will bring pleasure and the pleasant will bring pain.The pleasant and the painful are both illusions of the mind. Tryto ‘fit’ these words of Mine and then try it. And then if theyaffect you even in the slightest, come and tell me.Questioner: I am asking You this question to find asolution for it.Dadashri: You should ask me and then do as I tell you.This is the only solution! Never take on the suffering by saying,‘I am hurting’. If someone were to ask you, ‘What is the matterwith you?’ you should say, ‘My neighbor has a headache andI am aware of that’. You are convinced that ‘this’ is Yourneighbor (Chandubhai), are You (the Self) not?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Then why all the suffering of the pain? If theneighbor is crying, do You have to cry along with him? Conflictsare inevitable with the neighbors. Besides, who does not haveconflicts with his wife? Why should You cry when You are noteven married? Only the married cry. You are not married, norare You widowed! Why should You cry? On the contrary, Youshould try to pacify the neighbor by saying, ‘Dear fellow, don’tcry. Don’t worry. I am with you, so don’t cry and don’t worry.’This is what You should say.Torments from the PrakrutiThe Vanik prakruti is such that it becomes afraid evenbefore problems arise. You have to tell ‘Chandubhai’, ‘Nothingis going to happen to you.’ If you see a person that cannot walkyou may have a thought, ‘what if that happens to me too?’When such thoughts occur just say, ‘Chandubhai, nothing isgoing to happen, I am sitting here.’ You say this to remainseparate from ‘Chandubhai’. This is a science. The moment yousay, ‘it happened to me’, you become possessed by the ghostof fear. This is why the world has become ‘possessed’ by theghosts.You are a Parmatma (the absolute Supreme Self), sowhy should You have all this? Have you experienced even a littlebit of the energy and power (shakti) of the Parmatma? Haveyou become aware that You are a Parmatma and that theAptavani-57374Aptavani-5Parmatma’s shakti has arisen in You?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Then what is the problem? For the one forwhom this little energy of the Self has arisen, there is theconviction that the total energy lies there waiting to express.When You remain unaffected by someone’s insults You willknow that, ‘Wow! There is so much energy!’ Only a smallamount has expressed so far. There is still more to come out.You will gradually experience infinite energy.This ‘A. M. Patel’ (Dada referring to his relative self) ishuman too, is he not? Is he not just like you? Man will haveeverything; what will he not have? But even before any painarises ‘we’ lend ‘our’ support to him by saying, “We’ are hereso why do you worry?’ ‘We’ even tell our neighbor’s neighbor(neighbor of Ambalal, any mahatma, or anyone else) that ‘we’are with him!’ What can be lacking where there is God?It is right if You speak with separation. You should havethe courage of a Kshatriya (the warrior caste). Up until nowyou were supportless (niradhaar). Writers of scriptures havecalled that state ‘niradhaar’. Now You have the support. Nowyou should not give your support (to the wrong knowledge) bysaying, ‘It happened to me’. If you give support to the pain inthis way and thus suffer, that suffering will not go away. Is yourheadache likely to remain or go away if you keep supporting itby saying, ‘I have a headache’?Questioner: It will remain.Dadashri: It will remain if you support it. This is all ascience. You will benefit if You know how to use it. If you areamiss even a little bit, you will be affected. No other harm willcome to you, except you will have to experience the suffering.Questioner: It will discharge with such ashata (painful)intent (bhaav), will it not?Dadashri: It has only come in order to be discharged,but what happens is that it obstructs Your bliss by that much,does it not? The experience of the bliss of the Self is obstructed.There is no problem with the ashata-vedaniya; it will dischargefor sure.Converse with the Sufferer of Pain or PleasureTherefore, change your method so that your suffering isreduced and consequently the inner happiness will increase,because as the external entanglements increase, inner happinesswill be reduced. You have to stand ‘Chandubhai’ in front of themirror and pat his shoulder ‘like this’ and tell him, ‘There is youand there is me. For sure there are two of us, are there not?There is no question about it, is there?’Questioner: No, there are definitely two.Dadashri: It is also confirmed that this neighbor does notknow anything, right? And You are the Knower. The neighbordoes not know about the headache. You are the Knower andtherefore You say, ‘I know the head is hurting. Be patient andit will go down soon.’ Then pat his shoulder. You have to takecare of the neighbor, do You not? Feed him well with good andtasty food. Tell him, ‘Have a meal and go to sleep.’ Why mustyou punish the stomach for someone else’s crime?Questioner: Who is that someone else here?Dadashri: The entire fault lies with the mind. The poorstomach has to starve because of the restlessness of the mind.Here the mind is the culprit and the stomach is the victim. Thefault is of the mind and yet people punish their stomachs. Themind gets out of control when it sees sweets and pastries, thenit creates indigestion in the stomach. Then the next day,because of an upset stomach, he has to fast. Then he will fastin the name of religion or whatever else. He has to fast, doeshe not?Aptavani-57374Aptavani-5Parmatma’s shakti has arisen in You?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Then what is the problem? For the one forwhom this little energy of the Self has arisen, there is theconviction that the total energy lies there waiting to express.When You remain unaffected by someone’s insults You willknow that, ‘Wow! There is so much energy!’ Only a smallamount has expressed so far. There is still more to come out.You will gradually experience infinite energy.This ‘A. M. Patel’ (Dada referring to his relative self) ishuman too, is he not? Is he not just like you? Man will haveeverything; what will he not have? But even before any painarises ‘we’ lend ‘our’ support to him by saying, “We’ are hereso why do you worry?’ ‘We’ even tell our neighbor’s neighbor(neighbor of Ambalal, any mahatma, or anyone else) that ‘we’are with him!’ What can be lacking where there is God?It is right if You speak with separation. You should havethe courage of a Kshatriya (the warrior caste). Up until nowyou were supportless (niradhaar). Writers of scriptures havecalled that state ‘niradhaar’. Now You have the support. Nowyou should not give your support (to the wrong knowledge) bysaying, ‘It happened to me’. If you give support to the pain inthis way and thus suffer, that suffering will not go away. Is yourheadache likely to remain or go away if you keep supporting itby saying, ‘I have a headache’?Questioner: It will remain.Dadashri: It will remain if you support it. This is all ascience. You will benefit if You know how to use it. If you areamiss even a little bit, you will be affected. No other harm willcome to you, except you will have to experience the suffering.Questioner: It will discharge with such ashata (painful)intent (bhaav), will it not?Dadashri: It has only come in order to be discharged,but what happens is that it obstructs Your bliss by that much,does it not? The experience of the bliss of the Self is obstructed.There is no problem with the ashata-vedaniya; it will dischargefor sure.Converse with the Sufferer of Pain or PleasureTherefore, change your method so that your suffering isreduced and consequently the inner happiness will increase,because as the external entanglements increase, inner happinesswill be reduced. You have to stand ‘Chandubhai’ in front of themirror and pat his shoulder ‘like this’ and tell him, ‘There is youand there is me. For sure there are two of us, are there not?There is no question about it, is there?’Questioner: No, there are definitely two.Dadashri: It is also confirmed that this neighbor does notknow anything, right? And You are the Knower. The neighbordoes not know about the headache. You are the Knower andtherefore You say, ‘I know the head is hurting. Be patient andit will go down soon.’ Then pat his shoulder. You have to takecare of the neighbor, do You not? Feed him well with good andtasty food. Tell him, ‘Have a meal and go to sleep.’ Why mustyou punish the stomach for someone else’s crime?Questioner: Who is that someone else here?Dadashri: The entire fault lies with the mind. The poorstomach has to starve because of the restlessness of the mind.Here the mind is the culprit and the stomach is the victim. Thefault is of the mind and yet people punish their stomachs. Themind gets out of control when it sees sweets and pastries, thenit creates indigestion in the stomach. Then the next day,because of an upset stomach, he has to fast. Then he will fastin the name of religion or whatever else. He has to fast, doeshe not?76Aptavani-5Aptavani-575Penance Is the Fourth Pillar of MokshaThe Lord has shown us the wonderful penance of‘unodari tapa’ (the penance of eating less). Divide your mealas follows: two parts food, one part water, one part air; this ishow you should eat.The Lord has not spoken of only the three component ofgnan-darshan-charitra (knowledge-vision-conduct respectively).He has also mentioned the fourth component, which is that oftapa (penance). There are four pillars of moksha. These fourpillars are in the Kramic path as well as in the Akram path.Which penance? It is the penance that takes place during thesuffering of pain (vedana). Headache is a pain that has to besuffered. In reality though, it is not considered suffering. One justhas to continue to ‘know’ the pain. Then there is another kindof suffering, for example when one is faced with a situationwhere his hand is being cut very slowly and sadistically. That issuffering. That is when penance is to be done. What does theLord consider as penance? It is when You are in the ‘homedepartment’; in awareness as the Self (swa-parinati). It is thepenance of not allowing the state of the Self to mix with the stateof the non-Self (par-parinati). To remain steadfast in, ‘these arecircumstances of the non-Self; they are not ‘Mine”, is penance.Such penance was done by Gajsukumar when he was inmeditation of the pure Self. His father-in-law built a clay fire piton his head and filled it with hot burning coals (the father-in-lawwas avenging Gajsukumar’s abandonment of his daughter inorder to follow his spiritual call). He realized then, ‘O ho ho!This father-in-law is helping me by tying a turban of moksha.’In such penance, with the meditation of the pure Self, he wenthigher and higher, attained kevalgnan (absolute knowledge)and went to moksha.The Pain Pleasure Experiencing KarmasYou should tell this body, ‘Hey body, hey mind, heyspeech! Sooner or later people are going to burn you or buryyou. So instead of that, what if I burn you all today, is thereanything wrong in that?’Why suffer something that is not yours? The GnaniPurush has told you what you are not; this you have understoodthrough the intellect, so why suffer after that? So become aKshatriya (a warrior with unflinching determination).You would not like to destroy your one and only home.But if you have a lot of debts and you had to sell it and if afterthe papers had been signed the home gets destroyed, would itnot be foolish of you to cry, ‘my home…my home…!’?Questioner: There is no problem when we use thewords but when suffering of pain (vedaniya) comes, it shows itsmight.Dadashri: What suffering have you had? It is suffering ifyou have paralysis. How can you call this suffering? Stomachache,headache or throbbing of any kind, how can you call thatsuffering? One of our mahatmas had paralysis. He told me,‘Dada, people have come to see this ‘Mangaldas’. And I tooam seeing him.’Questioner: Until one attains spashta vedan (the cleardirect experience of the Self) there will always be some kind ofvedan (experience), like pain or pleasure (shata or ashata),will there not?Dadashri: The nature of vedana (experience) is suchthat if one knows it to be alien (of the non-Self), then he willcontinue to know it as the alien, and will not experience it(vedey). But if he says, ‘I experienced the suffering’, then he willexperience the suffering. And if he says, ‘I cannot bear it’, thenthe experience of the suffering will be ten fold. One must neversay, ‘I cannot bear this pain’.If one leg is broken, then tell the other leg it too can76Aptavani-5Aptavani-575Penance Is the Fourth Pillar of MokshaThe Lord has shown us the wonderful penance of‘unodari tapa’ (the penance of eating less). Divide your mealas follows: two parts food, one part water, one part air; this ishow you should eat.The Lord has not spoken of only the three component ofgnan-darshan-charitra (knowledge-vision-conduct respectively).He has also mentioned the fourth component, which is that oftapa (penance). There are four pillars of moksha. These fourpillars are in the Kramic path as well as in the Akram path.Which penance? It is the penance that takes place during thesuffering of pain (vedana). Headache is a pain that has to besuffered. In reality though, it is not considered suffering. One justhas to continue to ‘know’ the pain. Then there is another kindof suffering, for example when one is faced with a situationwhere his hand is being cut very slowly and sadistically. That issuffering. That is when penance is to be done. What does theLord consider as penance? It is when You are in the ‘homedepartment’; in awareness as the Self (swa-parinati). It is thepenance of not allowing the state of the Self to mix with the stateof the non-Self (par-parinati). To remain steadfast in, ‘these arecircumstances of the non-Self; they are not ‘Mine”, is penance.Such penance was done by Gajsukumar when he was inmeditation of the pure Self. His father-in-law built a clay fire piton his head and filled it with hot burning coals (the father-in-lawwas avenging Gajsukumar’s abandonment of his daughter inorder to follow his spiritual call). He realized then, ‘O ho ho!This father-in-law is helping me by tying a turban of moksha.’In such penance, with the meditation of the pure Self, he wenthigher and higher, attained kevalgnan (absolute knowledge)and went to moksha.The Pain Pleasure Experiencing KarmasYou should tell this body, ‘Hey body, hey mind, heyspeech! Sooner or later people are going to burn you or buryyou. So instead of that, what if I burn you all today, is thereanything wrong in that?’Why suffer something that is not yours? The GnaniPurush has told you what you are not; this you have understoodthrough the intellect, so why suffer after that? So become aKshatriya (a warrior with unflinching determination).You would not like to destroy your one and only home.But if you have a lot of debts and you had to sell it and if afterthe papers had been signed the home gets destroyed, would itnot be foolish of you to cry, ‘my home…my home…!’?Questioner: There is no problem when we use thewords but when suffering of pain (vedaniya) comes, it shows itsmight.Dadashri: What suffering have you had? It is suffering ifyou have paralysis. How can you call this suffering? Stomachache,headache or throbbing of any kind, how can you call thatsuffering? One of our mahatmas had paralysis. He told me,‘Dada, people have come to see this ‘Mangaldas’. And I tooam seeing him.’Questioner: Until one attains spashta vedan (the cleardirect experience of the Self) there will always be some kind ofvedan (experience), like pain or pleasure (shata or ashata),will there not?Dadashri: The nature of vedana (experience) is suchthat if one knows it to be alien (of the non-Self), then he willcontinue to know it as the alien, and will not experience it(vedey). But if he says, ‘I experienced the suffering’, then he willexperience the suffering. And if he says, ‘I cannot bear it’, thenthe experience of the suffering will be ten fold. One must neversay, ‘I cannot bear this pain’.If one leg is broken, then tell the other leg it too canAptavani-57778Aptavani-5became startled as he saw me and commented, ‘you are eatingit like a snack!’ I replied, ‘You know! You have to drink themedicine just like a cup of tea. Unnecessary fear has taken holdof you.’ From then onwards he started to drink his bittermedicine like he did tea. It is all possible if someone is there toshow you the way. You need someone to show you. If I showyou a way to stick your finger in a fire, you will begin to do sotoo. You just need someone to show you how. Nothing touchesor hinders the Self, so be the Self. Nirlep (non-smearable),asang (free from association), not even the association of fireaffects it, so then how can it be affected by any physicalsuffering? Therefore, hang on to this nature of the Self.And just keep ‘seeing’ that it does not result in a state ofthe non-Self (par-parinati). What is par-parinati? Par-parinati is to believe the effects of the non-Self to be of theSelf. A headache is the effect of the non-Self (par-parinaam)and to make a statement, ‘It hurts me’, is called par-parinati.Those who do not have the effect of the Self (swa-parinaam),what else will they see except the effect of the non-Self? AfterSelf-realization, ‘swa’ (the Self) comes in your hands. Theexistence of anger, pride, deceit and greed (krodh-maan-maya-lobh) ceases. Anger, pride, deceit and greed are calledkashays (that which hurts the Self).If you want moksha, it is like taking on the highest ofchallenges. Valour is valour. Not even an atom bomb can affectYou; that is valour and fearlessness. And if you are aShuddhatma (the pure Self), if You remain in the state of theSelf that I have given You, then nothing will touch you. Neitherfire nor water will touch You.You have now become nihshank (doubt-free). Nowremain in my Agnas (special directives) and live out your life.Let this body go if and when it wants to. Let them cut off yourear if they want to. You have to give up your body complex(pudgal). It is not Yours. That which is not Yours to begin withbreak. Be ready to go bankrupt. Now that You have this pathto moksha in your hand you will have to show courage. If ticksget in to the clothes, should you throw out your clothesaltogether? You simply have to pick off the ticks.If someone uses hurtful words towards you, are you ableto tolerate it?Questioner: He is far away so it does not hurt as much.Dadashri: Ordinarily what is the nature of human beings?They tolerate the physical suffering but they cannot tolerateharsh words. They have a belief that everything sticks to them.In fact, it is not as close as you think. There is only a touch(sparsha). There is simply a touch between the Self and thenon-Self (the physical body complex, pudgal); they have neverbeen or become one. The attribute (guna) of the Self is suchthat the moment one says anything, one immediately feels theeffect of what he says. Therefore, you have to use the qualitiesof a Kshatriya. You have to remain in contact with Me for sometime.What is the nature of the Self (Atma)? It instantlybecomes that which it envisions (chintavey). If it envisionsunhappiness, it becomes unhappy and if it envisions beinghappy, then it becomes happy. Therefore, one has to be veryaware that he does not do any chintavan such as, ‘my head ishurting.’Questioner: Such envisioning (chintavan) does nothappen but the atmosphere gets ruined.Dadashri: The atmosphere may change but You cannotsay, ‘my head is hurting’. You have to say, ‘Chandubhai has aheadache.’People are unnecessarily afraid. One man could not takea bitter medicine. So as he was watching, I leisurely ate somebitter medicine as if I was having tea and snacks. That manAptavani-57778Aptavani-5became startled as he saw me and commented, ‘you are eatingit like a snack!’ I replied, ‘You know! You have to drink themedicine just like a cup of tea. Unnecessary fear has taken holdof you.’ From then onwards he started to drink his bittermedicine like he did tea. It is all possible if someone is there toshow you the way. You need someone to show you. If I showyou a way to stick your finger in a fire, you will begin to do sotoo. You just need someone to show you how. Nothing touchesor hinders the Self, so be the Self. Nirlep (non-smearable),asang (free from association), not even the association of fireaffects it, so then how can it be affected by any physicalsuffering? Therefore, hang on to this nature of the Self.And just keep ‘seeing’ that it does not result in a state ofthe non-Self (par-parinati). What is par-parinati? Par-parinati is to believe the effects of the non-Self to be of theSelf. A headache is the effect of the non-Self (par-parinaam)and to make a statement, ‘It hurts me’, is called par-parinati.Those who do not have the effect of the Self (swa-parinaam),what else will they see except the effect of the non-Self? AfterSelf-realization, ‘swa’ (the Self) comes in your hands. Theexistence of anger, pride, deceit and greed (krodh-maan-maya-lobh) ceases. Anger, pride, deceit and greed are calledkashays (that which hurts the Self).If you want moksha, it is like taking on the highest ofchallenges. Valour is valour. Not even an atom bomb can affectYou; that is valour and fearlessness. And if you are aShuddhatma (the pure Self), if You remain in the state of theSelf that I have given You, then nothing will touch you. Neitherfire nor water will touch You.You have now become nihshank (doubt-free). Nowremain in my Agnas (special directives) and live out your life.Let this body go if and when it wants to. Let them cut off yourear if they want to. You have to give up your body complex(pudgal). It is not Yours. That which is not Yours to begin withbreak. Be ready to go bankrupt. Now that You have this pathto moksha in your hand you will have to show courage. If ticksget in to the clothes, should you throw out your clothesaltogether? You simply have to pick off the ticks.If someone uses hurtful words towards you, are you ableto tolerate it?Questioner: He is far away so it does not hurt as much.Dadashri: Ordinarily what is the nature of human beings?They tolerate the physical suffering but they cannot tolerateharsh words. They have a belief that everything sticks to them.In fact, it is not as close as you think. There is only a touch(sparsha). There is simply a touch between the Self and thenon-Self (the physical body complex, pudgal); they have neverbeen or become one. The attribute (guna) of the Self is suchthat the moment one says anything, one immediately feels theeffect of what he says. Therefore, you have to use the qualitiesof a Kshatriya. You have to remain in contact with Me for sometime.What is the nature of the Self (Atma)? It instantlybecomes that which it envisions (chintavey). If it envisionsunhappiness, it becomes unhappy and if it envisions beinghappy, then it becomes happy. Therefore, one has to be veryaware that he does not do any chintavan such as, ‘my head ishurting.’Questioner: Such envisioning (chintavan) does nothappen but the atmosphere gets ruined.Dadashri: The atmosphere may change but You cannotsay, ‘my head is hurting’. You have to say, ‘Chandubhai has aheadache.’People are unnecessarily afraid. One man could not takea bitter medicine. So as he was watching, I leisurely ate somebitter medicine as if I was having tea and snacks. That manAptavani-57980Aptavani-5going to be burnt, is it not? You only have to study this a little.How is an ascetic able to walk bare foot? How are the farmersable to walk bare foot? You too would get used to it after youget burnt once or twice. How can you call suffering that whichcan be cured by taking just one pill? Suffering of pain is thatwhich cannot be reduced, even after you take hundreds of pills.Now nothing is yours. You have surrendered your all tothe Gnani Purush. You have surrendered your mind-body-speech and all illusion, bhaavkarma (charge karma),dravyakarma (subtle discharge karma), nokarma (grossdischarge karma); all have been surrendered, nothing is left withYou.The Suffering of the Gnani Purush and the LordQuestioner: A Gnani suffers with dhairya (stoicism,non-reactive patience) and an agnani suffers with crying, but aGnani still suffers, does he not?Dadashri: Suffering will not go away, but the Gnanisuffers that pain with dhairya (stoicism, non-reactive patience).Dhairya is according to each individual’s capacity. However,Lord Mahavir was absolutely a Knower. He would ‘know’ ofeven a bite from a bed bug but He would not suffer it. Thedegree of suffering is in proportion with the portion of ignorance.You have become the pure Self (Shuddhatma) throughconviction (shraddha, pratiti). When You become the Selfthrough Gnan (experience), then all that will remain, will simplybe the ‘knowing’. Until then there is suffering (vedan). Andduring the suffering, I tell You to remain detached, remain in the‘home department’, as the Self. Do not leave Your homedepartment, no matter how much the external circumstances callfor You to do so. Let them call You twelve hundred times. Whyshould You leave Your ‘office’?Even the Tirthankars have pain-pleasure experiences(shata-ashata vedaniya) but they remain as Knower throughis not going to remain with You. It will go when it is time forvyavasthit to take it away. Therefore, just say, ‘Take it awaywhenever you want to.’ Do not have any fear. No one can takeaway anything from You and no one even has the time to wastedoing so. Even if You say, ‘Here, take it away’, no one will.With this, You will remain fearless (nirbhay). Just say, ‘Letwhatever is going to happen, happen.’Questioner: External ‘files’ do not trouble me as muchbut I become one with (tanmayakar) the inner pain-pleasureexperience (shata-ashata vedaniya).Dadashri: You have to set aside the pain-pleasureexperience (shata-ashata vedaniya). In pleasure experiencingsituations (shata-vedaniya), laziness can set in; then unawareness(ajagruti) will prevail. You should not worry too much aboutpain-pleasure experience situations. In pain experiencing situation(ashata-vedaniya), for example if your hand is experiencing aburning sensation, then You should say, ‘dear hand, if it is invyavasthit then you have to burn, otherwise remain healthy.’ Soeven if you were feeling the burning sensation, it will stop;because if You talk about letting it burn; what is likely tohappen? You should never pamper it; this is just the pudgal (thenon-Self complex), which is under the control of vyavasthit.Whatever pain experiencing situation (ashata-vedaniya) comes;let it come. Courage will be needed, will it not? Is it not betterto suffer with a smile than to suffer in misery? That is why it hasbeen said, ‘the Gnani suffers (experiences) with stoicism, non-reactive patience, and the agnani suffers with crying.’If you lose half your leg, You should tell the self, ‘you stillhave a leg and a half.’ Then if you lose the other half, say,‘instead of two, at least you have one leg.’ This way if you loseall the body parts, you at least have the Self, do you not?Eventually all the parts are going to break down, are they not?Even if someone were to throw gasoline over it and set it alight,even then I am here as the Self. Sooner or later the body isAptavani-57980Aptavani-5going to be burnt, is it not? You only have to study this a little.How is an ascetic able to walk bare foot? How are the farmersable to walk bare foot? You too would get used to it after youget burnt once or twice. How can you call suffering that whichcan be cured by taking just one pill? Suffering of pain is thatwhich cannot be reduced, even after you take hundreds of pills.Now nothing is yours. You have surrendered your all tothe Gnani Purush. You have surrendered your mind-body-speech and all illusion, bhaavkarma (charge karma),dravyakarma (subtle discharge karma), nokarma (grossdischarge karma); all have been surrendered, nothing is left withYou.The Suffering of the Gnani Purush and the LordQuestioner: A Gnani suffers with dhairya (stoicism,non-reactive patience) and an agnani suffers with crying, but aGnani still suffers, does he not?Dadashri: Suffering will not go away, but the Gnanisuffers that pain with dhairya (stoicism, non-reactive patience).Dhairya is according to each individual’s capacity. However,Lord Mahavir was absolutely a Knower. He would ‘know’ ofeven a bite from a bed bug but He would not suffer it. Thedegree of suffering is in proportion with the portion of ignorance.You have become the pure Self (Shuddhatma) throughconviction (shraddha, pratiti). When You become the Selfthrough Gnan (experience), then all that will remain, will simplybe the ‘knowing’. Until then there is suffering (vedan). Andduring the suffering, I tell You to remain detached, remain in the‘home department’, as the Self. Do not leave Your homedepartment, no matter how much the external circumstances callfor You to do so. Let them call You twelve hundred times. Whyshould You leave Your ‘office’?Even the Tirthankars have pain-pleasure experiences(shata-ashata vedaniya) but they remain as Knower throughis not going to remain with You. It will go when it is time forvyavasthit to take it away. Therefore, just say, ‘Take it awaywhenever you want to.’ Do not have any fear. No one can takeaway anything from You and no one even has the time to wastedoing so. Even if You say, ‘Here, take it away’, no one will.With this, You will remain fearless (nirbhay). Just say, ‘Letwhatever is going to happen, happen.’Questioner: External ‘files’ do not trouble me as muchbut I become one with (tanmayakar) the inner pain-pleasureexperience (shata-ashata vedaniya).Dadashri: You have to set aside the pain-pleasureexperience (shata-ashata vedaniya). In pleasure experiencingsituations (shata-vedaniya), laziness can set in; then unawareness(ajagruti) will prevail. You should not worry too much aboutpain-pleasure experience situations. In pain experiencing situation(ashata-vedaniya), for example if your hand is experiencing aburning sensation, then You should say, ‘dear hand, if it is invyavasthit then you have to burn, otherwise remain healthy.’ Soeven if you were feeling the burning sensation, it will stop;because if You talk about letting it burn; what is likely tohappen? You should never pamper it; this is just the pudgal (thenon-Self complex), which is under the control of vyavasthit.Whatever pain experiencing situation (ashata-vedaniya) comes;let it come. Courage will be needed, will it not? Is it not betterto suffer with a smile than to suffer in misery? That is why it hasbeen said, ‘the Gnani suffers (experiences) with stoicism, non-reactive patience, and the agnani suffers with crying.’If you lose half your leg, You should tell the self, ‘you stillhave a leg and a half.’ Then if you lose the other half, say,‘instead of two, at least you have one leg.’ This way if you loseall the body parts, you at least have the Self, do you not?Eventually all the parts are going to break down, are they not?Even if someone were to throw gasoline over it and set it alight,even then I am here as the Self. Sooner or later the body isAptavani-58182Aptavani-5kevalgnan (absolute knowing).The mind will go with You (when You leave this world),the entire baggage will come with You if You do not let itdischarge. Instead, why not let it empty out. One rule is that itwill empty out. By rule, when all four component; dravya(effect, that which is experienced through the mind, speech andbody), kshetra (location or place), kaad (time) and bhaav(inner intent), come together; it will discharge.The Self is absolutely blissful. The body gives pain andpleasure experiences, the mind gives pain and pleasureexperiences, and the speech gives pain and pleasure experiences.Pain (ashata) experience arises even when someone sayssomething to you.Questioner: When there is experience of physical pain,the chit wanders around only there.Dadashri: Yes, the chit will keep wandering aroundthere. It will not go out even if You were to tell it to go outsideand wander. It will remain within.Questioner: Does that not cause karmic bondage allover again?Dadashri: No. You simply have to go through thesuffering; there is no way out of it. Karmas are bound if youbecome the ‘doer’. When You cease to be the ‘doer’, Youbecome free from karmas.Purification of the Chit Is the Beginning ofLiberationWhen the policeman comes looking for you with handcuffsand it has no effect on you; that is called science (vignan).Questioner: So then, what should the chit be engaged in?Dadashri: The chit has to be kept in the Self. Keep it inthat which is eternal. Mantras are not eternal. Nothing in thisworld is eternal except the Self (the Atma). Everything else is atemporary adjustment. All these relatives are temporaryadjustments!Only the Self is permanent. Once the chit settles in theeternal, it will not wander and that is when it becomes free.When you are reciting mantras (mantra-jaap), how long canthe chit remain in it? It will remain there as long as a policemandoes not come along. As soon as a policeman comes along, thereciting stops and the chit moves away from there. Therefore,that is a temporary adjustment. It gives you temporary relief andpeace but it will not do so permanently. There is a need forjaap-yoga (chanting), but only until the knowledge of the eternalis attained. The chit that blends into the eternal becomes pure(shuddha) chit, and One becomes videhi (beyond the body).This is what happens when You become a Shuddhatma. Andwhen You become videhi, You are liberated. You need tobecome videhi. This current state is considered a state ofembodiment (dehi). It is an illusion (bhranti). It begins with thebelief ‘I am Chandubhai’. The Gnani Purush gets rid of this‘sleep’ (ignorance of the Self). The whole world is sleeping withtheir eyes open (spiritually asleep, ignorant of the Self). Sleepingmeans having the awareness, ‘I am doing it’, or, ‘I am the doer.’There is not a single man who has been born in the world whohas independent control and energy over his own bowelmovement and he has no knowledge of where indeed he has theenergy and independent control. His energy is in the domain ofthe Self. The energy of the Self is kshetragnya (in the field ofthe ‘knowing’. Once this kshetragnya energy arises, the workis done! This energy is absolute and complete. All else is anillusion.The tools (sadhan) of penance and chanting are wonderfultools too, but they are merely tools until one attains Self-realization. They are not the ultimate goal. The ultimate goalAptavani-58182Aptavani-5kevalgnan (absolute knowing).The mind will go with You (when You leave this world),the entire baggage will come with You if You do not let itdischarge. Instead, why not let it empty out. One rule is that itwill empty out. By rule, when all four component; dravya(effect, that which is experienced through the mind, speech andbody), kshetra (location or place), kaad (time) and bhaav(inner intent), come together; it will discharge.The Self is absolutely blissful. The body gives pain andpleasure experiences, the mind gives pain and pleasureexperiences, and the speech gives pain and pleasure experiences.Pain (ashata) experience arises even when someone sayssomething to you.Questioner: When there is experience of physical pain,the chit wanders around only there.Dadashri: Yes, the chit will keep wandering aroundthere. It will not go out even if You were to tell it to go outsideand wander. It will remain within.Questioner: Does that not cause karmic bondage allover again?Dadashri: No. You simply have to go through thesuffering; there is no way out of it. Karmas are bound if youbecome the ‘doer’. When You cease to be the ‘doer’, Youbecome free from karmas.Purification of the Chit Is the Beginning ofLiberationWhen the policeman comes looking for you with handcuffsand it has no effect on you; that is called science (vignan).Questioner: So then, what should the chit be engaged in?Dadashri: The chit has to be kept in the Self. Keep it inthat which is eternal. Mantras are not eternal. Nothing in thisworld is eternal except the Self (the Atma). Everything else is atemporary adjustment. All these relatives are temporaryadjustments!Only the Self is permanent. Once the chit settles in theeternal, it will not wander and that is when it becomes free.When you are reciting mantras (mantra-jaap), how long canthe chit remain in it? It will remain there as long as a policemandoes not come along. As soon as a policeman comes along, thereciting stops and the chit moves away from there. Therefore,that is a temporary adjustment. It gives you temporary relief andpeace but it will not do so permanently. There is a need forjaap-yoga (chanting), but only until the knowledge of the eternalis attained. The chit that blends into the eternal becomes pure(shuddha) chit, and One becomes videhi (beyond the body).This is what happens when You become a Shuddhatma. Andwhen You become videhi, You are liberated. You need tobecome videhi. This current state is considered a state ofembodiment (dehi). It is an illusion (bhranti). It begins with thebelief ‘I am Chandubhai’. The Gnani Purush gets rid of this‘sleep’ (ignorance of the Self). The whole world is sleeping withtheir eyes open (spiritually asleep, ignorant of the Self). Sleepingmeans having the awareness, ‘I am doing it’, or, ‘I am the doer.’There is not a single man who has been born in the world whohas independent control and energy over his own bowelmovement and he has no knowledge of where indeed he has theenergy and independent control. His energy is in the domain ofthe Self. The energy of the Self is kshetragnya (in the field ofthe ‘knowing’. Once this kshetragnya energy arises, the workis done! This energy is absolute and complete. All else is anillusion.The tools (sadhan) of penance and chanting are wonderfultools too, but they are merely tools until one attains Self-realization. They are not the ultimate goal. The ultimate goalAptavani-58384Aptavani-5(sadhya) is to know Your own domain of ‘knowership’(kshetragnya). That is the nature (swabhav) of the Self. Thatswabhav is the goal.You will not meet God as long as you are involved inpartiality. Some people are partial towards the Vaishnavreligion, some towards the Shiva sect, some are partial towardsthe Moslem religion, some are partial towards Jainism, etc., andso as long as they are in partiality, they will never meet God.This is the rule. It is God’s rule not to meet those involved inpartiality. God himself is impartial. One will understand this whenhe attains an impartial intent; view. What is the differencebetween those who are involved in sectarianism and those in theworldly life?ObstinacyQuestioner: What is obstinacy (aadayee)?Dadashri: In the unconscious unaware state prior toSelf-realization, when one realizes he has made a mistake, hewill say such behavior was indeed necessary if someone were toquestion his actions. He will be very obstinate and adamant(aado). People will even tell him that he is being obstinate.Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: That is obstinacy. It is different if one is notaware of his mistake and covers it up. But it is a great obstinacyto cover up a mistake one is very aware of. Another type ofobstinacy is if you had a disagreement at night with your wifeand the next morning when she brings you a cup of tea, you willsay, ‘I do not want your tea or anything.’ You becomeobstinate. The disagreement at night was last night. Yesterdaywas Saturday and today is Sunday. But one will drag theincident of Saturday into Sunday. Saturday’s incident stays inSaturday. Sunday is a whole new day.Questioner: What is the solution for breaking thelingering effect (taanto) and the obstinacy (aadayee) that bringsSaturday’s incident into Sunday?Dadashri: There is no need to get rid of the obstinacy.You have to follow Dada’s Agna. There is nothing to be saidwhen you know vyavasthit. What does vyavasthit mean? Youdo not have any dispute or quarrel with anyone; that isvyavasthit. Vyavasthit is vyavasthit! You have to understandvyavasthit completely; and no one is at fault at all in this world.Any mistake there is, is as a result of your own mistake (fromthe past life). Otherwise, why would someone rob only youamidst all the people around you? You will not encounteranything without a mistake on your part.There are two kinds of rewards. One is a million dollarlottery and the other is where only your pocket gets picked; thattoo is a reward. Everything is vyavasthit.All Souls Are SeparateWhen you do not have any biases or prejudices, you areconsidered to have attained Brahmaswaroop (Self-realized).First comes the huge gate of Brahmaswaroop, where alldifferent opinions become one. Brahmaswaroop is one whosespeech is neutral and non-opinionated; it is not biased orprejudicial speech, or speech that would create its ownfollowers. It is the speech that only is related to the Self andcauses no divisions. Such a person is considered to havebecome Brahmaswaroop. After becoming Brahmaswaroop,the Self is the Supreme Self (Atma is Parmatma). So where isthe need to talk about the pure Self (Shuddhatma)?Questioner: Is there only one Brahmaswaroop, or arethere many?Dadashri: There is one and there are also many. Froma certain perspective there is only one and from another, thereare many. That is talking about Brahmaswaroop. Are youAptavani-58384Aptavani-5(sadhya) is to know Your own domain of ‘knowership’(kshetragnya). That is the nature (swabhav) of the Self. Thatswabhav is the goal.You will not meet God as long as you are involved inpartiality. Some people are partial towards the Vaishnavreligion, some towards the Shiva sect, some are partial towardsthe Moslem religion, some are partial towards Jainism, etc., andso as long as they are in partiality, they will never meet God.This is the rule. It is God’s rule not to meet those involved inpartiality. God himself is impartial. One will understand this whenhe attains an impartial intent; view. What is the differencebetween those who are involved in sectarianism and those in theworldly life?ObstinacyQuestioner: What is obstinacy (aadayee)?Dadashri: In the unconscious unaware state prior toSelf-realization, when one realizes he has made a mistake, hewill say such behavior was indeed necessary if someone were toquestion his actions. He will be very obstinate and adamant(aado). People will even tell him that he is being obstinate.Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: That is obstinacy. It is different if one is notaware of his mistake and covers it up. But it is a great obstinacyto cover up a mistake one is very aware of. Another type ofobstinacy is if you had a disagreement at night with your wifeand the next morning when she brings you a cup of tea, you willsay, ‘I do not want your tea or anything.’ You becomeobstinate. The disagreement at night was last night. Yesterdaywas Saturday and today is Sunday. But one will drag theincident of Saturday into Sunday. Saturday’s incident stays inSaturday. Sunday is a whole new day.Questioner: What is the solution for breaking thelingering effect (taanto) and the obstinacy (aadayee) that bringsSaturday’s incident into Sunday?Dadashri: There is no need to get rid of the obstinacy.You have to follow Dada’s Agna. There is nothing to be saidwhen you know vyavasthit. What does vyavasthit mean? Youdo not have any dispute or quarrel with anyone; that isvyavasthit. Vyavasthit is vyavasthit! You have to understandvyavasthit completely; and no one is at fault at all in this world.Any mistake there is, is as a result of your own mistake (fromthe past life). Otherwise, why would someone rob only youamidst all the people around you? You will not encounteranything without a mistake on your part.There are two kinds of rewards. One is a million dollarlottery and the other is where only your pocket gets picked; thattoo is a reward. Everything is vyavasthit.All Souls Are SeparateWhen you do not have any biases or prejudices, you areconsidered to have attained Brahmaswaroop (Self-realized).First comes the huge gate of Brahmaswaroop, where alldifferent opinions become one. Brahmaswaroop is one whosespeech is neutral and non-opinionated; it is not biased orprejudicial speech, or speech that would create its ownfollowers. It is the speech that only is related to the Self andcauses no divisions. Such a person is considered to havebecome Brahmaswaroop. After becoming Brahmaswaroop,the Self is the Supreme Self (Atma is Parmatma). So where isthe need to talk about the pure Self (Shuddhatma)?Questioner: Is there only one Brahmaswaroop, or arethere many?Dadashri: There is one and there are also many. Froma certain perspective there is only one and from another, thereare many. That is talking about Brahmaswaroop. Are youAptavani-58586Aptavani-5comparing Brahmaswaroop with Shuddhatma (the pure Self)?Actually, each and everyone is a Self. Therefore the Souls thatare liberated (gone to Siddha Kshetra; the ultimate location forall liberated Souls) experience the bliss of liberation, and thosethat are bound experience happiness of bondage. If there wereonly one Self, then the one in moksha and the one here wouldenjoy the happiness of moksha. Therefore, every living being isa Self; they are all individually separate. And even in the SiddhaKshetra they are all individual entities. What is the point of goingto moksha if only one went there? Should you give all yourwealth to the one? You will constantly experience the bliss of theSelf when You are in siddhagati. If you were meant to becomeone with all the other souls over there, then what is wrong withstaying here instead? At least the wife will cook wonderful thingsto eat! The worst that can happen is that she will scold you.What other problem do you have here?The Mystery Behind All that Is DischargingWhat the Gnani Purush is saying is that both eating anddrinking are galan (output, discharge, effect). But the worldunderstands them to be puran (intake, charging, or cause),because what they see through their senses is what they considerto be the truth. But that truth is completely different from the realtruth. You have some control or energy over charging (puran),but not complete control. One can have control and energy if heattains knowledge of the Self, but not otherwise; or if he attainsmatignan (mind based or perceptual knowledge), he has atleast that much control and energy because matignan is a basefor control. Matignan (mind based or perceptual knowledge),shrutgnan (literal knowledge) and avadhignan (visual orclairvoyance knowledge) are all foundations of energy andcontrol (bhaav satta).The world calls it puran (filling) when they earn moneyand galan (discharge or effect, emptying) when it is spent. Inreality, earning and spending are both galan (discharge oreffect, emptying) and dependent on vyavasthit. Now, how canthe world understand this? If one understands the control ofvyavasthit, he will become completely free. He can then remainin the Self. You will not be bothered by anything if you onlyunderstand this, will you? You (one who has attained Gnan) willnot forget this and others (those who have not taken Gnan) willforget, no matter how many times you explain it to them,because they still have kashays (anger, pride, deceit and greed).Nothing will remain under the control of the one who haskashays. I give You Gnan; do I ask you to read a book? Thisis a verbal Gnan that is given to You. You do not have to readany books or scriptures and yet You will have the sameknowledge. You will not remember the scriptural knowledge orwhat you have read in books but you will remember verbalknowledge, because those spoken words have the energy of theGnani Purush behind them. Reading from books becomesinanimate.Therefore, the whole world is in the form of galan(discharging state; effect) and that too is under the realm andcontrol of vyavasthit. The mind, intellect, chit and ego are allunder the realm, influence and control of vyavasthit. There is noneed for You to protect them if they are under its control, isthere? You do not have to do anything, do You? You just haveto ‘see’ what vyavasthit does. This discovery of vyavasthit ofmine is very exact. It is precise to the point. That is why I callthis galan (discharging state; effect). I give you preciseclarifications of everything as it is so that You can remain in YourGnan. That is why I had to disclose this Akram Vignan.What people call effect or unfolding of karma(udayakarma) is all a discharge (galan). There is no charging(puran) in it. These five sense organs (indriya) themselves areall dependent on the unfolding of karmas (udayakarmas), sothen would the karmas of these senses also not be dependent onudayakarma? The energy of the five senses that increases andAptavani-58586Aptavani-5comparing Brahmaswaroop with Shuddhatma (the pure Self)?Actually, each and everyone is a Self. Therefore the Souls thatare liberated (gone to Siddha Kshetra; the ultimate location forall liberated Souls) experience the bliss of liberation, and thosethat are bound experience happiness of bondage. If there wereonly one Self, then the one in moksha and the one here wouldenjoy the happiness of moksha. Therefore, every living being isa Self; they are all individually separate. And even in the SiddhaKshetra they are all individual entities. What is the point of goingto moksha if only one went there? Should you give all yourwealth to the one? You will constantly experience the bliss of theSelf when You are in siddhagati. If you were meant to becomeone with all the other souls over there, then what is wrong withstaying here instead? At least the wife will cook wonderful thingsto eat! The worst that can happen is that she will scold you.What other problem do you have here?The Mystery Behind All that Is DischargingWhat the Gnani Purush is saying is that both eating anddrinking are galan (output, discharge, effect). But the worldunderstands them to be puran (intake, charging, or cause),because what they see through their senses is what they considerto be the truth. But that truth is completely different from the realtruth. You have some control or energy over charging (puran),but not complete control. One can have control and energy if heattains knowledge of the Self, but not otherwise; or if he attainsmatignan (mind based or perceptual knowledge), he has atleast that much control and energy because matignan is a basefor control. Matignan (mind based or perceptual knowledge),shrutgnan (literal knowledge) and avadhignan (visual orclairvoyance knowledge) are all foundations of energy andcontrol (bhaav satta).The world calls it puran (filling) when they earn moneyand galan (discharge or effect, emptying) when it is spent. Inreality, earning and spending are both galan (discharge oreffect, emptying) and dependent on vyavasthit. Now, how canthe world understand this? If one understands the control ofvyavasthit, he will become completely free. He can then remainin the Self. You will not be bothered by anything if you onlyunderstand this, will you? You (one who has attained Gnan) willnot forget this and others (those who have not taken Gnan) willforget, no matter how many times you explain it to them,because they still have kashays (anger, pride, deceit and greed).Nothing will remain under the control of the one who haskashays. I give You Gnan; do I ask you to read a book? Thisis a verbal Gnan that is given to You. You do not have to readany books or scriptures and yet You will have the sameknowledge. You will not remember the scriptural knowledge orwhat you have read in books but you will remember verbalknowledge, because those spoken words have the energy of theGnani Purush behind them. Reading from books becomesinanimate.Therefore, the whole world is in the form of galan(discharging state; effect) and that too is under the realm andcontrol of vyavasthit. The mind, intellect, chit and ego are allunder the realm, influence and control of vyavasthit. There is noneed for You to protect them if they are under its control, isthere? You do not have to do anything, do You? You just haveto ‘see’ what vyavasthit does. This discovery of vyavasthit ofmine is very exact. It is precise to the point. That is why I callthis galan (discharging state; effect). I give you preciseclarifications of everything as it is so that You can remain in YourGnan. That is why I had to disclose this Akram Vignan.What people call effect or unfolding of karma(udayakarma) is all a discharge (galan). There is no charging(puran) in it. These five sense organs (indriya) themselves areall dependent on the unfolding of karmas (udayakarmas), sothen would the karmas of these senses also not be dependent onudayakarma? The energy of the five senses that increases andAptavani-58788Aptavani-5decreases in intensity (kshayopsham energy) is dependent uponthe unfolding or discharging of karma. So then what is new inwhat the senses see or know? Can you understand what I amsaying? One may understand this when he is here with me, butin my absence a veil of ignorance will cloud over him. All yourveils are removed in my presence and after taking my Gnan(Self-realization) those veils are removed permanently.What causes karmic bondage?The main cause behind karmic bondage is the belief, ‘Iam Chandubhai’, I am an Acharya Maharaj (a religious masterteacher)’, and the second cause is, ‘this is mine’. Causes are inthe charge form. Wherever there is ‘I and my’ there are causes.There are no causes anywhere else. Charge is considered puranand its discharge is galan. Everything is in the form of galan(discharge).One just has to understand this. This is a science. You can‘see’ everything in this science as it sprouts. What can You not‘see’ in science? Therefore, understand all this. You do not haveto do anything. There is nothing left to do in this science.Wherever something needs to be done; there is no rightknowledge (samkit) there. Any place where you ‘have to do’something; there you will not attain right knowledge (samkit).Not Becoming One with the ThoughtsQuestioner: How can we stop thoughts that trouble usand cause us worries?Dadashri: Whose function (dharma) is it to think?It is not the nature of the Self (Atma) to think, it is thenature of the mind. You may decide that you do not want tolisten to those who insult you or curse you, but it is the natureof the ears to hear and so they will not refrain from hearing.Similarly, it is the nature of the mind to even have thoughts thatyou do not like. That is the mind’s nature. Thoughts are gneyas(objects to be known) and You are the Gnata (the Knower).Therefore, You have to keep ‘knowing’ all thoughts that cometo you; You have to continue to inspect them. You should nothave any opinions about whether they are good or bad.Regardless of the kind of thoughts you have; no matter how badthey are; there is no problem with them. With whatever innerintent they were bound in your past life, is how they willdischarge; You simply have to ‘see’ them discharge and ‘know’the kind of binding that had happened, the discharge of whichis taking place now. This Gnan of ‘ours’ causes no bondage, sothere will not be any binding of new karmas. Karmas are boundwhen you become one (tanmayakar) with thoughts.Questioner: What will the result of these thoughts be?Dadashri: We entrusted the result to vyavasthit (scientificcircumstantial evidences). We do not have any concern withthat. We just need to remain seated in the car at ease. The mindwill say, ‘What if the car crashes ahead?’ You just need to keep‘seeing’, that is all. After entrusting its effect to vyavasthit, weshould just remain seated at ease.Questioner: It is not that easy and straightforward, is it?Dadashri: It is easy and straightforward. You can remainthat way from the moment you decide to do so, because it is allunder the control of vyavasthit. On the contrary, you will be afool if you try to interfere in something that is under someoneelse’s control. The only thing that is in your control is the‘seeing’ and ‘knowing’. Vyavasthit will take care of anythingthat needs to be done. Vyavasthit is such that nothing will beruined. A man may die at the age of seventy-two, but longbefore that he will keep complaining, ‘I am dying, I am dying’,and he gets scared by such a fear. This world is not such thatone should fear it. The mind will even tell ‘us’, ‘What if we havean accident ahead?’ ‘We’ tell the mind that ‘we’ have made anote of what it is saying. Then it will show ‘us’ something else;Aptavani-58788Aptavani-5decreases in intensity (kshayopsham energy) is dependent uponthe unfolding or discharging of karma. So then what is new inwhat the senses see or know? Can you understand what I amsaying? One may understand this when he is here with me, butin my absence a veil of ignorance will cloud over him. All yourveils are removed in my presence and after taking my Gnan(Self-realization) those veils are removed permanently.What causes karmic bondage?The main cause behind karmic bondage is the belief, ‘Iam Chandubhai’, I am an Acharya Maharaj (a religious masterteacher)’, and the second cause is, ‘this is mine’. Causes are inthe charge form. Wherever there is ‘I and my’ there are causes.There are no causes anywhere else. Charge is considered puranand its discharge is galan. Everything is in the form of galan(discharge).One just has to understand this. This is a science. You can‘see’ everything in this science as it sprouts. What can You not‘see’ in science? Therefore, understand all this. You do not haveto do anything. There is nothing left to do in this science.Wherever something needs to be done; there is no rightknowledge (samkit) there. Any place where you ‘have to do’something; there you will not attain right knowledge (samkit).Not Becoming One with the ThoughtsQuestioner: How can we stop thoughts that trouble usand cause us worries?Dadashri: Whose function (dharma) is it to think?It is not the nature of the Self (Atma) to think, it is thenature of the mind. You may decide that you do not want tolisten to those who insult you or curse you, but it is the natureof the ears to hear and so they will not refrain from hearing.Similarly, it is the nature of the mind to even have thoughts thatyou do not like. That is the mind’s nature. Thoughts are gneyas(objects to be known) and You are the Gnata (the Knower).Therefore, You have to keep ‘knowing’ all thoughts that cometo you; You have to continue to inspect them. You should nothave any opinions about whether they are good or bad.Regardless of the kind of thoughts you have; no matter how badthey are; there is no problem with them. With whatever innerintent they were bound in your past life, is how they willdischarge; You simply have to ‘see’ them discharge and ‘know’the kind of binding that had happened, the discharge of whichis taking place now. This Gnan of ‘ours’ causes no bondage, sothere will not be any binding of new karmas. Karmas are boundwhen you become one (tanmayakar) with thoughts.Questioner: What will the result of these thoughts be?Dadashri: We entrusted the result to vyavasthit (scientificcircumstantial evidences). We do not have any concern withthat. We just need to remain seated in the car at ease. The mindwill say, ‘What if the car crashes ahead?’ You just need to keep‘seeing’, that is all. After entrusting its effect to vyavasthit, weshould just remain seated at ease.Questioner: It is not that easy and straightforward, is it?Dadashri: It is easy and straightforward. You can remainthat way from the moment you decide to do so, because it is allunder the control of vyavasthit. On the contrary, you will be afool if you try to interfere in something that is under someoneelse’s control. The only thing that is in your control is the‘seeing’ and ‘knowing’. Vyavasthit will take care of anythingthat needs to be done. Vyavasthit is such that nothing will beruined. A man may die at the age of seventy-two, but longbefore that he will keep complaining, ‘I am dying, I am dying’,and he gets scared by such a fear. This world is not such thatone should fear it. The mind will even tell ‘us’, ‘What if we havean accident ahead?’ ‘We’ tell the mind that ‘we’ have made anote of what it is saying. Then it will show ‘us’ something else;Aptavani-58990Aptavani-5another pamphlet. The mind is not such that it has to hang on tothe previous thought. You should not become one (tanmayakar)with the mind. This world is around because of one becoming‘one’ with the mind. All the intents of the mind are dischargeintents (effects). When you become one with it, it gives rise tonew charging intents (causes). You should not take on thefeelings of elevation or depression. Nothing is going to happen;nothing is going to be ruined. Not even for a moment do I dwellin the worldly life, even then nothing gets ruined.Questioner: So is there no need to harbour fear?Dadashri: You should not have any fear at all. You areShuddhatma (pure Soul); nobody can see You, nobody canhurt You, nobody can kill You, nobody can challenge You! Thisworld remains because of your own ‘ghosts’ (effective mind,speech and body) and irrational fear. Nobody interferes withYou. And if ‘Chandubhai’ is down a little bit, then You need tohelp him. You had no one to confide your problems to. Now Iam with you all the way. Why are you so worried? I am theLord. You are ‘Chandubhai’, therefore do not be afraid. If‘Chandubhai’ is elevated then tell him, ‘This pompousness ofyours is because of my realm.’ Run your ‘foreign department’(non-Self) by remaining in the ‘home department’ (Self). ThisGnan is such that nothing can smear it (nirlep), i.e. it cannot bebesmeared upon; nothing will touch You.It is important for you to understand in detail all the factsabout the mind; to understand all the keys to the mind. Forexample, if a policeman keeps coming and going from here,does that mean he is going to raid us? You should say, ‘No, itis not like that. They are fixing the road ahead.’ So what shouldyou understand? Have they come for your benefit or have theycome to harm you?The mind is neither masculine nor feminine; it is neutral.Therefore, there is no need to worry. You have to maintain theawareness that Dada has told us that we (Self) are the Knower-Seer. Let it be agitated as much as it wants to. At that time Youjust have to maintain Your stillness.‘Go to Dada’And when a lot of pain and suffering comes, You have tosay, ‘Go to Dada!’Questioner: But can we pass our misery on to You?Dadashri: Yes, yes. You have to give it to Dada and say,‘Go to Dada. What is there for you here? I have giveneverything to Dada, so why have you come here?’Questioner: Should we give our happiness too?Dadashri: No, keep your happiness to yourself. I do nothave a need for happiness, so keep it to yourself. Send yourmisery to me if you cannot handle it. If you insult the pain andsuffering a few times by saying, ‘Why have you come here?’ itwill not stay because you have given it away to Dada. Thenature of the pudgal is such that if you insult it, it will not lingeraround.‘Dada Bhagwan’ (the absolute Self within) is achintyachintamani (One that cannot be envisioned of and yet makesyou what you envision). One becomes what one envisions. Ifyou envision (chintavan) Him (Dada Bhagwan) duringdifficulties, all those difficulties will go away. Whatever youenvision; that will be the fruit you will reap. Then what is thereto fear?The Account of Like and The Account ofDislike Are SeparateQuestioner: Many times I do not like someone’sbehavior even if it is good.Dadashri: After the karmic account of liking is over,Aptavani-58990Aptavani-5another pamphlet. The mind is not such that it has to hang on tothe previous thought. You should not become one (tanmayakar)with the mind. This world is around because of one becoming‘one’ with the mind. All the intents of the mind are dischargeintents (effects). When you become one with it, it gives rise tonew charging intents (causes). You should not take on thefeelings of elevation or depression. Nothing is going to happen;nothing is going to be ruined. Not even for a moment do I dwellin the worldly life, even then nothing gets ruined.Questioner: So is there no need to harbour fear?Dadashri: You should not have any fear at all. You areShuddhatma (pure Soul); nobody can see You, nobody canhurt You, nobody can kill You, nobody can challenge You! Thisworld remains because of your own ‘ghosts’ (effective mind,speech and body) and irrational fear. Nobody interferes withYou. And if ‘Chandubhai’ is down a little bit, then You need tohelp him. You had no one to confide your problems to. Now Iam with you all the way. Why are you so worried? I am theLord. You are ‘Chandubhai’, therefore do not be afraid. If‘Chandubhai’ is elevated then tell him, ‘This pompousness ofyours is because of my realm.’ Run your ‘foreign department’(non-Self) by remaining in the ‘home department’ (Self). ThisGnan is such that nothing can smear it (nirlep), i.e. it cannot bebesmeared upon; nothing will touch You.It is important for you to understand in detail all the factsabout the mind; to understand all the keys to the mind. Forexample, if a policeman keeps coming and going from here,does that mean he is going to raid us? You should say, ‘No, itis not like that. They are fixing the road ahead.’ So what shouldyou understand? Have they come for your benefit or have theycome to harm you?The mind is neither masculine nor feminine; it is neutral.Therefore, there is no need to worry. You have to maintain theawareness that Dada has told us that we (Self) are the Knower-Seer. Let it be agitated as much as it wants to. At that time Youjust have to maintain Your stillness.‘Go to Dada’And when a lot of pain and suffering comes, You have tosay, ‘Go to Dada!’Questioner: But can we pass our misery on to You?Dadashri: Yes, yes. You have to give it to Dada and say,‘Go to Dada. What is there for you here? I have giveneverything to Dada, so why have you come here?’Questioner: Should we give our happiness too?Dadashri: No, keep your happiness to yourself. I do nothave a need for happiness, so keep it to yourself. Send yourmisery to me if you cannot handle it. If you insult the pain andsuffering a few times by saying, ‘Why have you come here?’ itwill not stay because you have given it away to Dada. Thenature of the pudgal is such that if you insult it, it will not lingeraround.‘Dada Bhagwan’ (the absolute Self within) is achintyachintamani (One that cannot be envisioned of and yet makesyou what you envision). One becomes what one envisions. Ifyou envision (chintavan) Him (Dada Bhagwan) duringdifficulties, all those difficulties will go away. Whatever youenvision; that will be the fruit you will reap. Then what is thereto fear?The Account of Like and The Account ofDislike Are SeparateQuestioner: Many times I do not like someone’sbehavior even if it is good.Dadashri: After the karmic account of liking is over,Aptavani-59192Aptavani-5dislike will set in. Everything feels good as long as you like it andnot so if you do not. You should not have abhorrence oraversion towards that which you do not like.Questioner: There is no attachment or abhorrence, but itis very difficult to like (bhaav) something once dislike (abhaav)occurs towards it, no matter what.Dadashri: Even if you keep painting him as a goodperson, that paint will not stick. Your karmic account of ‘like’is paid off. Would you have any feeling towards this home if itwere sold?Questioner: No.Dadashri: And how about before selling it? If somethingwere to happen to it you would be affected in the mind. Onceyour karmic account is paid off, you are done with it.Intellect Perpetuates Worldly LifeInfluence of one’s entrenched opinion and prejudices donot go away easily. I am cautioning you towards such influencesbefore they come your way.This science is alaukik (beyond the world). Everythingabout it is alaukik; there is nothing laukik (worldly) in it.Laukik means obstinacy about one’s own belief (matagrahi).Whether one is a Digambari or Shwetambari, Sthanakvasi orDeravasi, Terapanthi (all different sects in the Jain religion),Vaishnav religion, Shaivism or Islam, they are all worldlyreligions, there is nothing wrong with any one of them. You getworldly comforts like cars, a home, etc., for merit karmas donethrough these religions, and here with this ‘religion’ that isalaukik; You get liberation (moksha).Questioner: There is no one more unfortunate than theone who gets fooled by his intellect, having come under Yourshelter.Dadashri: No, one will still get fooled. Even the verysmart ones get fooled. Therefore be aware of this ahead oftime. Whenever the intellect (buddhi) gives you advice, tellher, ‘Madam, go back to your mother’s home. I do not needyou anymore. I do not even want to listen to your advice.’There is no problem in listening to the advice of the mind butthe intellect is the only thing whose advice is not to be listenedto.The intellect will not let you come out of the worldly life.That which does not let You go to moksha is called buddhi(intellect). The intellect shows you profit and loss – worldlybenefit and harm. It will goad you, ‘maybe this will happen’, or,‘that will happen’. It is entrenched in insistence of inflexibleopinions (matagraha). Inflexible about what? It is inflexibleabout opinions. Instead of being heavily insistent (abhigraha)about the Self, one becomes strongly insistent about hisopinions. Now, tell me, when and where will this end up? Hewill not get anywhere even after thousands of life times. Theinner turmoil will never go away, whereas in the presence of theGnani Purush the inner turmoil will stop forever.As the intellect increases, so does the inner turmoil. Theintellect drives you deeper into the worldly life. It is beneficial forthe worldly life but it will raise objections towards moksha. Themind only does the thinking. Where no decisions are made; thatis the mind. Undecided thoughts are what we call ‘the mind’ anddecided thoughts are called ‘buddhi’ (intellect). While sittinghere, if you are lost somewhere else, know that your chit iswandering elsewhere. Your intellect will become right and docilewhen you sit with a Gnani Purush; that is samyak (enlightened)buddhi. What is the enlightened intellect like? It has no opinions,no sectarianism, no differences, and no problems. The intellectwith opinions of segregation is considered wrong intellect(mithya buddhi). It will say, ‘this is mine and this is yours’,hence it will create separation.Aptavani-59192Aptavani-5dislike will set in. Everything feels good as long as you like it andnot so if you do not. You should not have abhorrence oraversion towards that which you do not like.Questioner: There is no attachment or abhorrence, but itis very difficult to like (bhaav) something once dislike (abhaav)occurs towards it, no matter what.Dadashri: Even if you keep painting him as a goodperson, that paint will not stick. Your karmic account of ‘like’is paid off. Would you have any feeling towards this home if itwere sold?Questioner: No.Dadashri: And how about before selling it? If somethingwere to happen to it you would be affected in the mind. Onceyour karmic account is paid off, you are done with it.Intellect Perpetuates Worldly LifeInfluence of one’s entrenched opinion and prejudices donot go away easily. I am cautioning you towards such influencesbefore they come your way.This science is alaukik (beyond the world). Everythingabout it is alaukik; there is nothing laukik (worldly) in it.Laukik means obstinacy about one’s own belief (matagrahi).Whether one is a Digambari or Shwetambari, Sthanakvasi orDeravasi, Terapanthi (all different sects in the Jain religion),Vaishnav religion, Shaivism or Islam, they are all worldlyreligions, there is nothing wrong with any one of them. You getworldly comforts like cars, a home, etc., for merit karmas donethrough these religions, and here with this ‘religion’ that isalaukik; You get liberation (moksha).Questioner: There is no one more unfortunate than theone who gets fooled by his intellect, having come under Yourshelter.Dadashri: No, one will still get fooled. Even the verysmart ones get fooled. Therefore be aware of this ahead oftime. Whenever the intellect (buddhi) gives you advice, tellher, ‘Madam, go back to your mother’s home. I do not needyou anymore. I do not even want to listen to your advice.’There is no problem in listening to the advice of the mind butthe intellect is the only thing whose advice is not to be listenedto.The intellect will not let you come out of the worldly life.That which does not let You go to moksha is called buddhi(intellect). The intellect shows you profit and loss – worldlybenefit and harm. It will goad you, ‘maybe this will happen’, or,‘that will happen’. It is entrenched in insistence of inflexibleopinions (matagraha). Inflexible about what? It is inflexibleabout opinions. Instead of being heavily insistent (abhigraha)about the Self, one becomes strongly insistent about hisopinions. Now, tell me, when and where will this end up? Hewill not get anywhere even after thousands of life times. Theinner turmoil will never go away, whereas in the presence of theGnani Purush the inner turmoil will stop forever.As the intellect increases, so does the inner turmoil. Theintellect drives you deeper into the worldly life. It is beneficial forthe worldly life but it will raise objections towards moksha. Themind only does the thinking. Where no decisions are made; thatis the mind. Undecided thoughts are what we call ‘the mind’ anddecided thoughts are called ‘buddhi’ (intellect). While sittinghere, if you are lost somewhere else, know that your chit iswandering elsewhere. Your intellect will become right and docilewhen you sit with a Gnani Purush; that is samyak (enlightened)buddhi. What is the enlightened intellect like? It has no opinions,no sectarianism, no differences, and no problems. The intellectwith opinions of segregation is considered wrong intellect(mithya buddhi). It will say, ‘this is mine and this is yours’,hence it will create separation.Aptavani-59394Aptavani-5mechanical and some day when one of the parts wears out; thatwill be the end. Mechanical means dependency. Actually, You,the Self, are separate from this mechanical thing; the relative self,the non-Self complex.Don’t you have to put food in your stomach every day?If it were not mechanical, then your work would be done if youate just once; you would not have to eat again. But here thereis an intake (puran) and an output (galan). Everything ismechanical. You are separate from this. You are the Knower ofthis mechanical process. This mechanical thing is an ‘experiment’and you are the ‘scientist’. You are the Knower of what is goingon in this ‘experiment’; what changes are going on in‘Chandubhai’! But instead of that you claim, ‘I am Chandubhai’;how can you afford such a tremendous mistake?Questioner: How can the intellect be mechanical? Doanimals have intellect, more or less?Dadashri: The animals have limited antahkaran (theinner functioning component comprised of the mind, intellect,chit and ego) and in humans it is unlimited. Because of theirlimited antahkaran there is no further development. A cow willcome running to you if you show her a feeding pot. She has atleast that much understanding. Does she have any otherunderstanding besides that? She will not come near you if youwent outside with a stick in your hand. She knows when sleepis needed. She has sexual desire. She knows to eat when sheis hungry. She is also aware of what to eat and what not to;something the humans lack! All animals sniff their food beforethey eat. Humans are the only serious violators of nature.Questioner: How far will the mechanical intellect help orhurt a human being?Dadashri: To the point of destruction! The mechanicalintellect will destroy everything when it becomes above normal– excessive. This world is headed towards total destruction. The‘Outer’ Intellect: ‘Inner’ IntellectThe ‘outer’ intellect is mechanical and the ‘inner’ intellecthelps you to become independent––that intellect is mechanicaltoo.Questioner: What do you mean by independent?Dadashri: Independent means that there is nobodyabove you in this world. There should be no superior over you,not even God. How can you afford to have a superior? Thereis dependency as long as there is a superior. How can youafford dependency? You never know when your superior willscold you. Therefore, you should not have anyone over you. Itis due to lack of understanding that you have one. I have comehere to give you that understanding. I do not have any superior.I am telling you that you too do not have a superior. Understandthis fact.Questioner: What can one attain through the mechanicalintellect?Dadashri: One can attain all external worldly thingsthrough it.Questioner: If it is a mechanical intellect, then shouldeveryone not receive the same amount of external things?Dadashri: Everyone has a different amount of mechanicalintellect; it is never the same in everyone. The intellect dependsupon one’s ‘development’. Different people in differentcontinents have different levels of development of the intellect.So each person has an intellect according to his or her owndevelopment.Questioner: Where does ‘mechanical’ come into this?Dadashri: What you believe yourself to be is allmechanical. You yourself are mechanical. Until you realize theSelf, you are mechanical; it is dependency. Your body too isAptavani-59394Aptavani-5mechanical and some day when one of the parts wears out; thatwill be the end. Mechanical means dependency. Actually, You,the Self, are separate from this mechanical thing; the relative self,the non-Self complex.Don’t you have to put food in your stomach every day?If it were not mechanical, then your work would be done if youate just once; you would not have to eat again. But here thereis an intake (puran) and an output (galan). Everything ismechanical. You are separate from this. You are the Knower ofthis mechanical process. This mechanical thing is an ‘experiment’and you are the ‘scientist’. You are the Knower of what is goingon in this ‘experiment’; what changes are going on in‘Chandubhai’! But instead of that you claim, ‘I am Chandubhai’;how can you afford such a tremendous mistake?Questioner: How can the intellect be mechanical? Doanimals have intellect, more or less?Dadashri: The animals have limited antahkaran (theinner functioning component comprised of the mind, intellect,chit and ego) and in humans it is unlimited. Because of theirlimited antahkaran there is no further development. A cow willcome running to you if you show her a feeding pot. She has atleast that much understanding. Does she have any otherunderstanding besides that? She will not come near you if youwent outside with a stick in your hand. She knows when sleepis needed. She has sexual desire. She knows to eat when sheis hungry. She is also aware of what to eat and what not to;something the humans lack! All animals sniff their food beforethey eat. Humans are the only serious violators of nature.Questioner: How far will the mechanical intellect help orhurt a human being?Dadashri: To the point of destruction! The mechanicalintellect will destroy everything when it becomes above normal– excessive. This world is headed towards total destruction. The‘Outer’ Intellect: ‘Inner’ IntellectThe ‘outer’ intellect is mechanical and the ‘inner’ intellecthelps you to become independent––that intellect is mechanicaltoo.Questioner: What do you mean by independent?Dadashri: Independent means that there is nobodyabove you in this world. There should be no superior over you,not even God. How can you afford to have a superior? Thereis dependency as long as there is a superior. How can youafford dependency? You never know when your superior willscold you. Therefore, you should not have anyone over you. Itis due to lack of understanding that you have one. I have comehere to give you that understanding. I do not have any superior.I am telling you that you too do not have a superior. Understandthis fact.Questioner: What can one attain through the mechanicalintellect?Dadashri: One can attain all external worldly thingsthrough it.Questioner: If it is a mechanical intellect, then shouldeveryone not receive the same amount of external things?Dadashri: Everyone has a different amount of mechanicalintellect; it is never the same in everyone. The intellect dependsupon one’s ‘development’. Different people in differentcontinents have different levels of development of the intellect.So each person has an intellect according to his or her owndevelopment.Questioner: Where does ‘mechanical’ come into this?Dadashri: What you believe yourself to be is allmechanical. You yourself are mechanical. Until you realize theSelf, you are mechanical; it is dependency. Your body too isAptavani-59596Aptavani-5Such weapons should never be created. If someone were to putpoison in Mumbai’s ponds and kill a lot of people; that is notconsidered use of buddhi.Questioner: Is that considered durbuddhi (bad intellect)?Dadashri: It is infinitely worse than bad intellect. It istotal destruction or ruin.Questioner: I want to know the limit of the mechanicalintellect. I want to know the starting point of the ‘inner’ intellectand its limit.Dadashri: What will you do with this knowledge?Questioner: I want to know how much intellect I have.Dadashri: All this is nothing but your ‘outer’ intellect. Ifyou had ‘inner’ intellect, it would quickly take you towards thisside (the side of spirituality, the side of the Self); you wouldadjust with Me right away. You yourself would ask me, ‘Dosomething in order to secure a safe side for me. Do somethingfor my own independence. I do not like this dependency.’DependencyThis is nothing but dependency! Constant dependency(parvashta)! The animals have dependency and so do humans.How can we afford to be this way? You have a problem evenwhen you have a headache, you have a problem when your legshurt, your eyes hurt, your teeth hurt. How can you live with suchtremendous suffering?Do you understand a little bit about dependency?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Have you ever experienced it?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Do you like it?mechanical intellect verily is causing it to be above normal. Theuse of the external intellect (worldly use of intellect) should belimited to the point of necessity. This should be the basis forusing the intellect. For example, it becomes harmful when oneuses it excessively, in instances where one keeps questioningeverything like ‘why is it like this?’ and ‘what is that all about?’when it is not pertinent to one’s needs.Questioner: Is it not necessary for man to protecthimself?Dadashri: They all do that, do they not! No one diesdeliberately.Questioner: Does man not need the atom bomb toprotect himself?Dadashri: These are unnecessary problems, which havebeen created. There are foreign countries with such developments.They even have telephone facilities every sixty-eight miles onhighways. Then people question what they should do if they geta flat tire a few miles away from the next phone! So they wantphones there too so that they do not have to walk.Questioner: So, do they want more facilities than theones they already have?Dadashri: They have turned facilities into difficulties. Itbecame a difficulty when things went beyond the norm.Questioner: When a man uses his intellect (buddhi) toprotect himself it is considered normal, is it not? Is building anatom bomb not for protection?Dadashri: That is not called protection. What happens ifthe other person makes a bomb too? How much fear will thatcreate? This is all done to intimidate others. There is no need forresorting to protection in this manner. Nature is protecting in itsown way. There is no need for causing unnecessary problems.Aptavani-59596Aptavani-5Such weapons should never be created. If someone were to putpoison in Mumbai’s ponds and kill a lot of people; that is notconsidered use of buddhi.Questioner: Is that considered durbuddhi (bad intellect)?Dadashri: It is infinitely worse than bad intellect. It istotal destruction or ruin.Questioner: I want to know the limit of the mechanicalintellect. I want to know the starting point of the ‘inner’ intellectand its limit.Dadashri: What will you do with this knowledge?Questioner: I want to know how much intellect I have.Dadashri: All this is nothing but your ‘outer’ intellect. Ifyou had ‘inner’ intellect, it would quickly take you towards thisside (the side of spirituality, the side of the Self); you wouldadjust with Me right away. You yourself would ask me, ‘Dosomething in order to secure a safe side for me. Do somethingfor my own independence. I do not like this dependency.’DependencyThis is nothing but dependency! Constant dependency(parvashta)! The animals have dependency and so do humans.How can we afford to be this way? You have a problem evenwhen you have a headache, you have a problem when your legshurt, your eyes hurt, your teeth hurt. How can you live with suchtremendous suffering?Do you understand a little bit about dependency?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Have you ever experienced it?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Do you like it?mechanical intellect verily is causing it to be above normal. Theuse of the external intellect (worldly use of intellect) should belimited to the point of necessity. This should be the basis forusing the intellect. For example, it becomes harmful when oneuses it excessively, in instances where one keeps questioningeverything like ‘why is it like this?’ and ‘what is that all about?’when it is not pertinent to one’s needs.Questioner: Is it not necessary for man to protecthimself?Dadashri: They all do that, do they not! No one diesdeliberately.Questioner: Does man not need the atom bomb toprotect himself?Dadashri: These are unnecessary problems, which havebeen created. There are foreign countries with such developments.They even have telephone facilities every sixty-eight miles onhighways. Then people question what they should do if they geta flat tire a few miles away from the next phone! So they wantphones there too so that they do not have to walk.Questioner: So, do they want more facilities than theones they already have?Dadashri: They have turned facilities into difficulties. Itbecame a difficulty when things went beyond the norm.Questioner: When a man uses his intellect (buddhi) toprotect himself it is considered normal, is it not? Is building anatom bomb not for protection?Dadashri: That is not called protection. What happens ifthe other person makes a bomb too? How much fear will thatcreate? This is all done to intimidate others. There is no need forresorting to protection in this manner. Nature is protecting in itsown way. There is no need for causing unnecessary problems.Aptavani-59798Aptavani-5Questioner: No.Dadashri: If you do not like it, why don’t you ask Meabout how you can get rid of it?Questioner: A person can find a solution for it himself.Dadashri: One can only find a solution up to a certainpoint.Dependency increases as one gets older and at the timeof death there is no end to dependency, the need to take helpfrom others. In the old age your teeth will bother you, the bodywill bother you, the children will bother you, and your brotherswill bother you. Your children will tell you, ‘Just sit there and donot talk too much.’ How many such dependencies?Questioner: Does dependency and worries not go handin hand?Dadashri: Worrying is an above normal egoism anddependency is helplessness. Worrying occurs when the egobecomes above normal but not otherwise. Who cannot fallasleep in his home? It is the one who has greater egoism.Questioner: In this matter I am not able to cope and soI worry, so is the next step dependency?Dadashri: That dependency is something that we havecreated ourselves. There is one dependency, which arises on itsown and that is one associated with old age. Worry anddependency have nothing to do with each other.When something goes wrong, then worries will occur.Worries occur depending on the outcome of circumstanceswhereas dependency is sheer helplessness (lachari). Theworld does not like dependency; dependency is weakness(nirbadata). Dependency will go away when weakness goesaway. As long as weakness is present, dependency will not goaway because if we hurt others, they will hurt us back. Whenyou stop hurting or harming anyone, when you stop havingnegative thoughts about others, that is when your dependencywill break.Questioner: Man has worries about all the necessities inlife, so then dependency is bound to come, is it not?Dadashri: That dependency is different. There he hasentered in his own trap. Even if he does not want to get caughtin that trap; the traps will naturally arise. A mouse does not haveany dependency but if it sees food inside a trap it will, out ofgreed, enter the trap. However, that dependency will go awayone day.What is the ‘effect’ of worrying? It will lead to an animallife (being born in the animal kingdom).Questioner: What is the solution so that we do notworry?Dadashri: To turn around by reducing or completelyremoving egoism. If a Gnani Purush is around, the egoism willgo away when he gives you the knowledge of the Self.Questioner: What is helplessness (lachari)?Dadashri: You will understand it if you were to ask ahelpless man. Or if you have a lot of debts, you have difficultyin buying things and your wife complains about why you don’tbuy things for her; you feel tremendous dependency when youdo not have any money.Lord Mahavir’s science is to take one from a state ofdependency (parvashta) into an independent state (swavash)and then dependency will not affect him.Questioner: The Self does not have dependency, doesit?Dadashri: No, the Self does not have any dependency.Aptavani-59798Aptavani-5Questioner: No.Dadashri: If you do not like it, why don’t you ask Meabout how you can get rid of it?Questioner: A person can find a solution for it himself.Dadashri: One can only find a solution up to a certainpoint.Dependency increases as one gets older and at the timeof death there is no end to dependency, the need to take helpfrom others. In the old age your teeth will bother you, the bodywill bother you, the children will bother you, and your brotherswill bother you. Your children will tell you, ‘Just sit there and donot talk too much.’ How many such dependencies?Questioner: Does dependency and worries not go handin hand?Dadashri: Worrying is an above normal egoism anddependency is helplessness. Worrying occurs when the egobecomes above normal but not otherwise. Who cannot fallasleep in his home? It is the one who has greater egoism.Questioner: In this matter I am not able to cope and soI worry, so is the next step dependency?Dadashri: That dependency is something that we havecreated ourselves. There is one dependency, which arises on itsown and that is one associated with old age. Worry anddependency have nothing to do with each other.When something goes wrong, then worries will occur.Worries occur depending on the outcome of circumstanceswhereas dependency is sheer helplessness (lachari). Theworld does not like dependency; dependency is weakness(nirbadata). Dependency will go away when weakness goesaway. As long as weakness is present, dependency will not goaway because if we hurt others, they will hurt us back. Whenyou stop hurting or harming anyone, when you stop havingnegative thoughts about others, that is when your dependencywill break.Questioner: Man has worries about all the necessities inlife, so then dependency is bound to come, is it not?Dadashri: That dependency is different. There he hasentered in his own trap. Even if he does not want to get caughtin that trap; the traps will naturally arise. A mouse does not haveany dependency but if it sees food inside a trap it will, out ofgreed, enter the trap. However, that dependency will go awayone day.What is the ‘effect’ of worrying? It will lead to an animallife (being born in the animal kingdom).Questioner: What is the solution so that we do notworry?Dadashri: To turn around by reducing or completelyremoving egoism. If a Gnani Purush is around, the egoism willgo away when he gives you the knowledge of the Self.Questioner: What is helplessness (lachari)?Dadashri: You will understand it if you were to ask ahelpless man. Or if you have a lot of debts, you have difficultyin buying things and your wife complains about why you don’tbuy things for her; you feel tremendous dependency when youdo not have any money.Lord Mahavir’s science is to take one from a state ofdependency (parvashta) into an independent state (swavash)and then dependency will not affect him.Questioner: The Self does not have dependency, doesit?Dadashri: No, the Self does not have any dependency.Aptavani-599100Aptavani-5One gets affected even when he has a home, a car andother tools of comfort, so then what happens if one of the toolsbreak down? Man lives his life through endless worries.Therefore, come to know and understand what is around youand what it is all about. If you understand it ahead of time it willnot have an effect on you, but if you don’t have theunderstanding, then you have to take everything upon you.People are not able to sleep when they carry their problems ontheir heads. They will fall asleep when their body gets tired.How can you call this a life?Who are you? On what basis do you exist? You have noknowledge of it. Should you not know on what basis ‘this’exists? Should you not understand the relationship betweensupport and the one being supported and on what basis youexist? If someone were to announce that the police are cominghere, people will become anxious even before they arrive. Whyshould there be so much weakness? There is a lot more to theworld. You have seen it for many lives but you cannot rememberit, can you? So it is worth knowing this world.All you need to understand is ‘What is worth doing andwhat is not worth doing; what is worth knowing and what is notworth knowing’.Doership Perpetuates Worldly LifeWhen one begins to see his own mistake, it is thebeginning of right (samkit) vision.Questioner: Does such a person become humble?Dadashri: Humility may or may not come, but it isconsidered samkit drashti when one starts to see his ownmistake. Otherwise, he will not be able to see a single mistakeof his. The belief, ‘I am the doer’, remains.In our Gnan the belief, ‘I am the doer’, is a kusang(association with that which takes you away from your realQuestioner: So does the body experience helplessness -dependency?Dadashri: No, even the body does not experiencehelplessness (lachari). It is the ego that experienceshelplessness.Who Are ‘You’?Questioner: Whatever is meant to happen will happen;no matter what one does.Dadashri: You cannot say, ‘whatever is meant to happenwill happen.’ Gnan is only useful if you do not become affectedwhen someone insults you. You have worries, you get allworked up; weakness arises within you.Questioner: Who has worries? Is it me or my Atma(Self)?Dadashri: You.Questioner: So it is the body that has worries?Dadashri: It happens to you, to the one you yourselfbelieve to be. It happens to the one that believes ‘this body ismine’.Questioner: Worry is not an issue if I claim, ‘I havenothing to do with anything’, is it?Dadashri: If you are not affected by the worldly life, thenthere is no problem. There is no need for you to understand thisGnan then. But does the worldly life affect you in any way? Allthis is relative. It affects you personally, does it not?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: There is a weakness (nirbadata) as long asyou are being affected. Tremendous weakness! Man should nothave any effect at all.Aptavani-599100Aptavani-5One gets affected even when he has a home, a car andother tools of comfort, so then what happens if one of the toolsbreak down? Man lives his life through endless worries.Therefore, come to know and understand what is around youand what it is all about. If you understand it ahead of time it willnot have an effect on you, but if you don’t have theunderstanding, then you have to take everything upon you.People are not able to sleep when they carry their problems ontheir heads. They will fall asleep when their body gets tired.How can you call this a life?Who are you? On what basis do you exist? You have noknowledge of it. Should you not know on what basis ‘this’exists? Should you not understand the relationship betweensupport and the one being supported and on what basis youexist? If someone were to announce that the police are cominghere, people will become anxious even before they arrive. Whyshould there be so much weakness? There is a lot more to theworld. You have seen it for many lives but you cannot rememberit, can you? So it is worth knowing this world.All you need to understand is ‘What is worth doing andwhat is not worth doing; what is worth knowing and what is notworth knowing’.Doership Perpetuates Worldly LifeWhen one begins to see his own mistake, it is thebeginning of right (samkit) vision.Questioner: Does such a person become humble?Dadashri: Humility may or may not come, but it isconsidered samkit drashti when one starts to see his ownmistake. Otherwise, he will not be able to see a single mistakeof his. The belief, ‘I am the doer’, remains.In our Gnan the belief, ‘I am the doer’, is a kusang(association with that which takes you away from your realQuestioner: So does the body experience helplessness -dependency?Dadashri: No, even the body does not experiencehelplessness (lachari). It is the ego that experienceshelplessness.Who Are ‘You’?Questioner: Whatever is meant to happen will happen;no matter what one does.Dadashri: You cannot say, ‘whatever is meant to happenwill happen.’ Gnan is only useful if you do not become affectedwhen someone insults you. You have worries, you get allworked up; weakness arises within you.Questioner: Who has worries? Is it me or my Atma(Self)?Dadashri: You.Questioner: So it is the body that has worries?Dadashri: It happens to you, to the one you yourselfbelieve to be. It happens to the one that believes ‘this body ismine’.Questioner: Worry is not an issue if I claim, ‘I havenothing to do with anything’, is it?Dadashri: If you are not affected by the worldly life, thenthere is no problem. There is no need for you to understand thisGnan then. But does the worldly life affect you in any way? Allthis is relative. It affects you personally, does it not?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: There is a weakness (nirbadata) as long asyou are being affected. Tremendous weakness! Man should nothave any effect at all.Aptavani-5101102Aptavani-5Self). On the contrary it causes intoxication of the ego (keyf).Where there is doership there is no right vision (samkit drashti)at all. Where there is no samkit drashti it is wrong to speak ofmoksha; it is meaningless.NiddidhyasanQuestioner: Dada, is there a difference between yoursmaran (to come in memory) and your niddidhyasan(visualization)?Dadashri: Niddidhyasan occurs with visualization of theface, whereas smaran occurs without visualization. Niddidhyasanin which the face is seen attains a lot. It is not a problem if youcannot see Dada’s face exactly; there is no problem if youcannot see his eyes but You should be able to ‘see’ his form.You can become like the one whose niddidhyasan you do.‘Dada’ is the ‘doer’ of the Self. When ‘Dada’ is ‘seen’ exactly,You can become that. You too will become the ‘doer’ of theSelf. It is good even to have Dada’s smaran and if you haveDada’s niddidhyasan, that too is good.Questioner: The niddidhyasan does not remain constant–continuous.Dadashri: The mind can be restless in Dada’s smaranbut not in His niddidhyasan. The chit has to be present inniddidhyasan. It will only work as long as the chit is present.There is no problem with restlessness of the mind, but thepresence of the chit is necessary and the mind has to sit down;take a back seat, where the chit is present. Nevertheless, ifDada’s smaran is going on the whole day long; it is enough. Butit is better if there is Dada’s niddidhyasan along with it.‘Dada’ appears exact in the dreams. You become likethe one whom you worship; like the one whose niddidhyasanyou do. Niddidhyasan can be successful if the chit remains init.Spiritual EnvironmentQuestioner: Is spiritual progress possible only when oneis born in a wealthy or royal family?Dadashri: Yes. He would get respect wherever he goesif he were born in a royal family or in a noble family. If he goesto his in-law’s place, he would be welcomed with respect. Theone who experiences insults from a young age will make adecision to try to gain respect from others in any way that hecan. So his goal changes and he becomes engrossed in trying toprocure respect. He can afford to have the inner ‘baggage’ ofmaan (pride). He cannot afford any other desires.A birth in India is based on infinite previous lives. Inspirituality, on the other hand, foreigners do not understandrebirth (life after life passage of the Self).Proliferation of the Worldly Life Through VikalpIf you stand in a room full of mirrors you will see ahundred and fifty images of yourself. That is exactly what thisworld is like. You see according to your vikalp (belief of therelative self being the real Self); the belief that ‘I am Chandubhai’.This world is nothing but echoes of your ‘I-ness’; echoes ofyour wrong belief of ‘I-ness’.Questioner: If it is vikalp that creates echoes, then whatis the result of sankalp (‘my-ness’)?Dadashri: Sankalp has nothing to do with it. Onlyvikalp (‘I-ness’, ‘I am Chandubhai’) creates echoes. ‘My’ or‘mine’ is sankalp. First comes ‘I am Chandubhai’ (vikalp), thencomes ‘my-ness’ (sankalp). That ‘this is my body…’ issankalp. Everything arises from vikalp. Therefore, it is vikalp,and not sankalp, that is the obstacle. Nirvikalp is what curesall this. Sankalp arises because of vikalp. There is no vikalp orsankalp when You become nirvikalp.Aptavani-5101102Aptavani-5Self). On the contrary it causes intoxication of the ego (keyf).Where there is doership there is no right vision (samkit drashti)at all. Where there is no samkit drashti it is wrong to speak ofmoksha; it is meaningless.NiddidhyasanQuestioner: Dada, is there a difference between yoursmaran (to come in memory) and your niddidhyasan(visualization)?Dadashri: Niddidhyasan occurs with visualization of theface, whereas smaran occurs without visualization. Niddidhyasanin which the face is seen attains a lot. It is not a problem if youcannot see Dada’s face exactly; there is no problem if youcannot see his eyes but You should be able to ‘see’ his form.You can become like the one whose niddidhyasan you do.‘Dada’ is the ‘doer’ of the Self. When ‘Dada’ is ‘seen’ exactly,You can become that. You too will become the ‘doer’ of theSelf. It is good even to have Dada’s smaran and if you haveDada’s niddidhyasan, that too is good.Questioner: The niddidhyasan does not remain constant–continuous.Dadashri: The mind can be restless in Dada’s smaranbut not in His niddidhyasan. The chit has to be present inniddidhyasan. It will only work as long as the chit is present.There is no problem with restlessness of the mind, but thepresence of the chit is necessary and the mind has to sit down;take a back seat, where the chit is present. Nevertheless, ifDada’s smaran is going on the whole day long; it is enough. Butit is better if there is Dada’s niddidhyasan along with it.‘Dada’ appears exact in the dreams. You become likethe one whom you worship; like the one whose niddidhyasanyou do. Niddidhyasan can be successful if the chit remains init.Spiritual EnvironmentQuestioner: Is spiritual progress possible only when oneis born in a wealthy or royal family?Dadashri: Yes. He would get respect wherever he goesif he were born in a royal family or in a noble family. If he goesto his in-law’s place, he would be welcomed with respect. Theone who experiences insults from a young age will make adecision to try to gain respect from others in any way that hecan. So his goal changes and he becomes engrossed in trying toprocure respect. He can afford to have the inner ‘baggage’ ofmaan (pride). He cannot afford any other desires.A birth in India is based on infinite previous lives. Inspirituality, on the other hand, foreigners do not understandrebirth (life after life passage of the Self).Proliferation of the Worldly Life Through VikalpIf you stand in a room full of mirrors you will see ahundred and fifty images of yourself. That is exactly what thisworld is like. You see according to your vikalp (belief of therelative self being the real Self); the belief that ‘I am Chandubhai’.This world is nothing but echoes of your ‘I-ness’; echoes ofyour wrong belief of ‘I-ness’.Questioner: If it is vikalp that creates echoes, then whatis the result of sankalp (‘my-ness’)?Dadashri: Sankalp has nothing to do with it. Onlyvikalp (‘I-ness’, ‘I am Chandubhai’) creates echoes. ‘My’ or‘mine’ is sankalp. First comes ‘I am Chandubhai’ (vikalp), thencomes ‘my-ness’ (sankalp). That ‘this is my body…’ issankalp. Everything arises from vikalp. Therefore, it is vikalp,and not sankalp, that is the obstacle. Nirvikalp is what curesall this. Sankalp arises because of vikalp. There is no vikalp orsankalp when You become nirvikalp.Aptavani-5103104Aptavani-5As long as there is a belief that, ‘I am Chandubhai’, thereis vikalp; then it does not matter whether one is a spiritualteacher (acharya) or otherwise. When there is awareness of ‘Iam a pure Self’ (Shuddhatma), then You are nirvikalp. Now,once You are nirvikalp, why does that state of nirvikalp notprevail? It is because of a pending karmic account from the pastlife; these are claims of all the kalams (the inviolable laws of life,as shown by Dadashri in the Nine Kalams) you have previouslyviolated.Sankalp and vikalp leave when you become aShuddhatma. Now whatever arises in your mind, is all gneya(that which is to be known). Now as long as one remains avikalpi (‘I am Chandubhai’), he is not able to ‘see’ thesegneyas. He (vikalpi) will indeed say, ‘I have a thought’.However, the self is kalp swaroop (becomes what is imagined).One becomes what one envisions. Why is the Self considerednirvikalp? The answer is that in ignorance (agnan), he haddone vikalp and that is why after Gnan (knowledge of theSelf); He is nirvikalpi. He is nirvikalp because he has returnedto the Self.The Self is the only thing that cannot be envisioned(chintavan). It only happens when the Gnani Purush gets ridof one’s intoxication of the ego.If you have done great vikalp of auspicious things, thattoo will bear results. If you have done the bhaav of killingsomeone then the result will be just that and if you have donethe bhaav to give alms; so will be the result.Questioner: You have said that the world is vyavasthit,then why does one have the vikalp (intent, bhaav) of changing it?Dadashri: These vikalps are the vikalps you didbefore and they are now arising in the form of effect. Theseeds, which were sown, are bound to grow, are they not? Ifyou do not weed out the plants but allow them to grow, theywill shed more seeds. You should weed them out after Youbecome nirvikalp. Settling all matters with equanimity is the‘act’ of ‘weeding’.The world is completely vyavasthit. Why did the Lordnot disclose this fact? He did not disclose this because wickedpeople would misuse it and people would get on the wrongpath. With the knowledge of vyavasthit You will not havesankalp-vikalp. You can understand vyavasthit when yourdoership (kartapanu) goes away; otherwise not. When Youbecome the non-doer, You will understand who the doer is. Oneis not the doer, yet he believes that he is the doer, so how canthis be understood?Questioner: One does not let go of his doership.Dadashri: Yes. That is why he will not let anything elsebe the doer. Otherwise the world is vyavasthit. But because ofdoership, imagination (kalpana) will inevitably arise. Theproblem is solved the moment one becomes the non-doer. Untilthen, the kashays of anger-pride-deceit-greed will not go away.Even if one turns from doing bad deeds to good ones; one is stilla doer and therefore sankalp-vikalp is bound to occur. Andwhen he cannot understand vyavasthit, he will have thoughtslike, ‘What will happen to me?’Liberation Through Akram VignanQuestioner: I have the inner intent (bhavna) of going tomoksha, but what should I do if there is something lacking inthat path?Dadashri: Lacking in what?Questioner: There are karmas, are there not? Do I notcontinue to create and bind karmas?Dadashri: Should you not know how karmas are bound?Questioner: Through auspicious (shubha) and inauspiciousAptavani-5103104Aptavani-5As long as there is a belief that, ‘I am Chandubhai’, thereis vikalp; then it does not matter whether one is a spiritualteacher (acharya) or otherwise. When there is awareness of ‘Iam a pure Self’ (Shuddhatma), then You are nirvikalp. Now,once You are nirvikalp, why does that state of nirvikalp notprevail? It is because of a pending karmic account from the pastlife; these are claims of all the kalams (the inviolable laws of life,as shown by Dadashri in the Nine Kalams) you have previouslyviolated.Sankalp and vikalp leave when you become aShuddhatma. Now whatever arises in your mind, is all gneya(that which is to be known). Now as long as one remains avikalpi (‘I am Chandubhai’), he is not able to ‘see’ thesegneyas. He (vikalpi) will indeed say, ‘I have a thought’.However, the self is kalp swaroop (becomes what is imagined).One becomes what one envisions. Why is the Self considerednirvikalp? The answer is that in ignorance (agnan), he haddone vikalp and that is why after Gnan (knowledge of theSelf); He is nirvikalpi. He is nirvikalp because he has returnedto the Self.The Self is the only thing that cannot be envisioned(chintavan). It only happens when the Gnani Purush gets ridof one’s intoxication of the ego.If you have done great vikalp of auspicious things, thattoo will bear results. If you have done the bhaav of killingsomeone then the result will be just that and if you have donethe bhaav to give alms; so will be the result.Questioner: You have said that the world is vyavasthit,then why does one have the vikalp (intent, bhaav) of changing it?Dadashri: These vikalps are the vikalps you didbefore and they are now arising in the form of effect. Theseeds, which were sown, are bound to grow, are they not? Ifyou do not weed out the plants but allow them to grow, theywill shed more seeds. You should weed them out after Youbecome nirvikalp. Settling all matters with equanimity is the‘act’ of ‘weeding’.The world is completely vyavasthit. Why did the Lordnot disclose this fact? He did not disclose this because wickedpeople would misuse it and people would get on the wrongpath. With the knowledge of vyavasthit You will not havesankalp-vikalp. You can understand vyavasthit when yourdoership (kartapanu) goes away; otherwise not. When Youbecome the non-doer, You will understand who the doer is. Oneis not the doer, yet he believes that he is the doer, so how canthis be understood?Questioner: One does not let go of his doership.Dadashri: Yes. That is why he will not let anything elsebe the doer. Otherwise the world is vyavasthit. But because ofdoership, imagination (kalpana) will inevitably arise. Theproblem is solved the moment one becomes the non-doer. Untilthen, the kashays of anger-pride-deceit-greed will not go away.Even if one turns from doing bad deeds to good ones; one is stilla doer and therefore sankalp-vikalp is bound to occur. Andwhen he cannot understand vyavasthit, he will have thoughtslike, ‘What will happen to me?’Liberation Through Akram VignanQuestioner: I have the inner intent (bhavna) of going tomoksha, but what should I do if there is something lacking inthat path?Dadashri: Lacking in what?Questioner: There are karmas, are there not? Do I notcontinue to create and bind karmas?Dadashri: Should you not know how karmas are bound?Questioner: Through auspicious (shubha) and inauspiciousAptavani-5105106Aptavani-5(ashubha) inner intent.Dadashri: There is no binding of karmas for the onewho does not have auspicious and inauspicious inner intent.There is no binding of karmas for the one with a pure(shuddha) inner intent; the intent of the Self. You bind demeritkarmas (paap) with inauspicious; bad and hurtful inner intentand merit karmas (punya) with auspicious; good and helpfulinner intent. The fruit of paap is bitter and the fruit of punyais sweet. Do you not have a bitter experience when someoneinsults you?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: And what about when someone gives youflowers? It is sweet. The fruit of good intent is sweet, that of badintent is bitter, and the fruit of a pure intent, purity – remainingas the Self, is liberation (moksha).Questioner: When does an embodied self (jiva) attainliberation?Dadashri: One attains liberation when one becomes pure(shuddha) – free from all kashays. Nothing touches purity(shuddhata), but it does touch good (shubha) intent. This is notthe path of the shubha at all. This is the path of purity(shuddhata); it is a nirlep path – a path where nothing cansmear, touch or affect the purity of the Self.This is a science. Science means that it liberates one inevery way. Nothing will touch one if he becomes Shuddha(pure Self), and if there is ‘good’ (shubha), then ‘bad’(ashubha) will affect it. Therefore those who are on the pathof auspicious, benevolent and good intent will have to followthat path of good. Whatever they do is fine for them. But thisis a path of purity (shuddhata, shuddha upayog); everyoneremains in the awareness as the pure Self and so there are noproblems.This is a completely different path. This is a science(vignan). Vignan means with just ‘knowing’ one can beliberated. One does not have to do anything. Whatever isoutside is gnan (knowledge). That knowledge is not kriyakari(working on its own) whereas vignan is. Once You attain thisScience of Akram, it will continue to work on its own fromwithin (kriyakari). It does shuddha kriya, it continues to purifywhat is within, leading to the absolute Self. It will not be affectedby any ashuddhata (impurities) of the non-Self. This is adifferent science; it is Akram Vignan!Questioner: Is this what the Lord refers to as nishkaamkarmas (karmas performed without expectations of reward)?Dadashri: Nishkaam karmas are different. Nishkaamkarmas are a kind of a way of doing something. You needdoership in that. One can do nishkaam karmas when one is adoer. Here there is no doership. This is a state of the Self.Wherever there is doership, there is no purity (shuddhata) – thepurity of the Self. It is the state of doing good deeds.Questioner: What should one do to attain purity(shuddhata)?Dadashri: If you try to ‘do’ anything, you will bindkarmas. Here you simply have to ask for what you want. Anyactions of ‘doing’ will bind karmas; ‘doing’ good will bind goodkarmas and ‘doing’ bad will bind bad karmas, and in purity(shuddhata) there is no such thing. This Knowledge (Gnan)works on its own; one does not have to ‘do’ anything.The Self is just like the Self of Lord Mahavir, but one hasnot realized this, has he? This realization can come throughAkram Vignan. There is a tremendous increase in one’sawareness (jagruti). Worries stop; one becomes free (mukta)!Complete awareness arises. This is the science of absoluteknowledge (kevalgnan); it is not something ordinary. ThereforeYour work of liberation can be accomplished.Aptavani-5105106Aptavani-5(ashubha) inner intent.Dadashri: There is no binding of karmas for the onewho does not have auspicious and inauspicious inner intent.There is no binding of karmas for the one with a pure(shuddha) inner intent; the intent of the Self. You bind demeritkarmas (paap) with inauspicious; bad and hurtful inner intentand merit karmas (punya) with auspicious; good and helpfulinner intent. The fruit of paap is bitter and the fruit of punyais sweet. Do you not have a bitter experience when someoneinsults you?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: And what about when someone gives youflowers? It is sweet. The fruit of good intent is sweet, that of badintent is bitter, and the fruit of a pure intent, purity – remainingas the Self, is liberation (moksha).Questioner: When does an embodied self (jiva) attainliberation?Dadashri: One attains liberation when one becomes pure(shuddha) – free from all kashays. Nothing touches purity(shuddhata), but it does touch good (shubha) intent. This is notthe path of the shubha at all. This is the path of purity(shuddhata); it is a nirlep path – a path where nothing cansmear, touch or affect the purity of the Self.This is a science. Science means that it liberates one inevery way. Nothing will touch one if he becomes Shuddha(pure Self), and if there is ‘good’ (shubha), then ‘bad’(ashubha) will affect it. Therefore those who are on the pathof auspicious, benevolent and good intent will have to followthat path of good. Whatever they do is fine for them. But thisis a path of purity (shuddhata, shuddha upayog); everyoneremains in the awareness as the pure Self and so there are noproblems.This is a completely different path. This is a science(vignan). Vignan means with just ‘knowing’ one can beliberated. One does not have to do anything. Whatever isoutside is gnan (knowledge). That knowledge is not kriyakari(working on its own) whereas vignan is. Once You attain thisScience of Akram, it will continue to work on its own fromwithin (kriyakari). It does shuddha kriya, it continues to purifywhat is within, leading to the absolute Self. It will not be affectedby any ashuddhata (impurities) of the non-Self. This is adifferent science; it is Akram Vignan!Questioner: Is this what the Lord refers to as nishkaamkarmas (karmas performed without expectations of reward)?Dadashri: Nishkaam karmas are different. Nishkaamkarmas are a kind of a way of doing something. You needdoership in that. One can do nishkaam karmas when one is adoer. Here there is no doership. This is a state of the Self.Wherever there is doership, there is no purity (shuddhata) – thepurity of the Self. It is the state of doing good deeds.Questioner: What should one do to attain purity(shuddhata)?Dadashri: If you try to ‘do’ anything, you will bindkarmas. Here you simply have to ask for what you want. Anyactions of ‘doing’ will bind karmas; ‘doing’ good will bind goodkarmas and ‘doing’ bad will bind bad karmas, and in purity(shuddhata) there is no such thing. This Knowledge (Gnan)works on its own; one does not have to ‘do’ anything.The Self is just like the Self of Lord Mahavir, but one hasnot realized this, has he? This realization can come throughAkram Vignan. There is a tremendous increase in one’sawareness (jagruti). Worries stop; one becomes free (mukta)!Complete awareness arises. This is the science of absoluteknowledge (kevalgnan); it is not something ordinary. ThereforeYour work of liberation can be accomplished.Aptavani-5107108Aptavani-5Dadashri: If you want liberation then you will have to getrid of the dualities of good and bad. If one wants to side withgood, then in that state there is abhorrence towards bad thingsand attachment towards good things, whereas in the path ofpurity, the shuddha, there is no abhorrence or attachmenttowards good or bad. In reality there is no such thing as goodor bad. It is just the contaminated vision (maleen drashti) thatsees good and bad and this contaminated vision is the deludedview (mithyatva); it is a poisoned view. ‘We’ get rid of thatpoison.Humility and Absolute HumilityThe entire path of the Vitarags is one of humility(vinaya). This talk of vinaya dharma (the religion of humility)begins from India. The gesture of putting two hands together(gesture of namaste) begins here and it starts from this gestureall the way to the action of prostrating on the floor. There arecountless vinaya dharmas (religions of humility) but whenparam vinaya (absolute humility) arises, moksha occurs.Questioner: Please explain param vinaya.Dadashri: Param vinaya is where there is no debate, nointerference, no laws and no rules. Param vinaya cannot bepreserved where there are rules and where one has to remainbound by those rules. For ‘us’, ‘we’ are the ‘seers’ of whatevervyavasthit does. What else can ‘we’ afford to do?Even in the relative religion there is a path to mokshawhere there is humility (vinaya) and if that humility remainscontinuous, then there is moksha for them for sure.Questioner: Dada, what is the difference betweenhumility (vinaya) and absolute humility (param vinaya)?Dadashri: A tremendous difference. Param vinaya willnot arise in anyone at all. It only arises after attaining theQuestioner: How can one attain as much knowledge asyou have, as a Gnani?Dadashri: All you have to do is to sit with Him (theGnani) and attain His grace, nothing else. Everything onlyhappens through the grace of the Gnani. You can attainkevalgnan (absolute knowledge) through the grace of theGnani. You will bind karmas if you try to do anything becauseyou have not realized ‘who you are’. You will realize who thedoer is when You realize ‘who You are’.All Worldly Interactions Are RelativeYou can attain liberation even by simply understanding‘What worldly life (vyavahar) is’. This worldly life is relative; allthese ‘relatives’ are temporary adjustments and the ‘real’ (theSelf) is the permanent adjustment.To project ‘I am’ in temporary things; is the wrong belief.‘I am Chandubhai, I am her husband,’ etc., are all wrong beliefs.Are you absolutely convinced that you are ‘Chandubhai’? ShallI give you proof of that? If someone were to insult you, wouldyou be affected?Questioner: Not a bit.Dadashri: Would you be affected if someone pickedyour pocket?Questioner: For a little while.Dadashri: Then you are ‘Chandubhai’. If you are‘Chandubhai’ only by vyavahar (for worldly interaction purposeonly) then nothing will affect You.Questioner: If that is so, then what is the differencebetween us (the Self-realized, mahatmas) and other people?One must get rid of, renounce, that which is wrong for sure. Soif we develop that then a change will gradually come.Aptavani-5107108Aptavani-5Dadashri: If you want liberation then you will have to getrid of the dualities of good and bad. If one wants to side withgood, then in that state there is abhorrence towards bad thingsand attachment towards good things, whereas in the path ofpurity, the shuddha, there is no abhorrence or attachmenttowards good or bad. In reality there is no such thing as goodor bad. It is just the contaminated vision (maleen drashti) thatsees good and bad and this contaminated vision is the deludedview (mithyatva); it is a poisoned view. ‘We’ get rid of thatpoison.Humility and Absolute HumilityThe entire path of the Vitarags is one of humility(vinaya). This talk of vinaya dharma (the religion of humility)begins from India. The gesture of putting two hands together(gesture of namaste) begins here and it starts from this gestureall the way to the action of prostrating on the floor. There arecountless vinaya dharmas (religions of humility) but whenparam vinaya (absolute humility) arises, moksha occurs.Questioner: Please explain param vinaya.Dadashri: Param vinaya is where there is no debate, nointerference, no laws and no rules. Param vinaya cannot bepreserved where there are rules and where one has to remainbound by those rules. For ‘us’, ‘we’ are the ‘seers’ of whatevervyavasthit does. What else can ‘we’ afford to do?Even in the relative religion there is a path to mokshawhere there is humility (vinaya) and if that humility remainscontinuous, then there is moksha for them for sure.Questioner: Dada, what is the difference betweenhumility (vinaya) and absolute humility (param vinaya)?Dadashri: A tremendous difference. Param vinaya willnot arise in anyone at all. It only arises after attaining theQuestioner: How can one attain as much knowledge asyou have, as a Gnani?Dadashri: All you have to do is to sit with Him (theGnani) and attain His grace, nothing else. Everything onlyhappens through the grace of the Gnani. You can attainkevalgnan (absolute knowledge) through the grace of theGnani. You will bind karmas if you try to do anything becauseyou have not realized ‘who you are’. You will realize who thedoer is when You realize ‘who You are’.All Worldly Interactions Are RelativeYou can attain liberation even by simply understanding‘What worldly life (vyavahar) is’. This worldly life is relative; allthese ‘relatives’ are temporary adjustments and the ‘real’ (theSelf) is the permanent adjustment.To project ‘I am’ in temporary things; is the wrong belief.‘I am Chandubhai, I am her husband,’ etc., are all wrong beliefs.Are you absolutely convinced that you are ‘Chandubhai’? ShallI give you proof of that? If someone were to insult you, wouldyou be affected?Questioner: Not a bit.Dadashri: Would you be affected if someone pickedyour pocket?Questioner: For a little while.Dadashri: Then you are ‘Chandubhai’. If you are‘Chandubhai’ only by vyavahar (for worldly interaction purposeonly) then nothing will affect You.Questioner: If that is so, then what is the differencebetween us (the Self-realized, mahatmas) and other people?One must get rid of, renounce, that which is wrong for sure. Soif we develop that then a change will gradually come.Aptavani-5109110Aptavani-5knowledge of the Self and with that, one will not feel separationfrom anyone. The vision becomes that of oneness, withoutdivision (abheda) the intellect becomes that of oneness. As longas there is vinaya (humility) there is always the feeling of ‘myLord and I are separate’. However, that vinaya will take oneto param (absolute) vinaya (humility). This vinaya is one of the‘stations’ on the path to moksha.The Gnani Purush does not make a note of your lackof humility (avinaya). You should understand where to showhumility and where not to. ‘We’ recognize that you will makemistakes but ‘we’ cannot make a note of any lack of humilityon your part; how can ‘we’ do so in this dushamkaal (thecurrent era where there is lack of unity of mind-body-speech)?One had to make a note of non-humility in the fourth Ara(section) of the time cycle. Today, ‘we’ have to let go. On thecontrary, ‘we’ have to bless the one who is arrogant andinsolent!Illusory ImpressionWhat is mithya abhaas (illusory impression)? I hadattended a function along with many other important ministersand I was given a seat with them on the stage. Before, when Idid not have Gnan, I used to wish that I could sit on such seats.In those days, I used to put a great value on such things andtoday, if they made me sit in such environment of pomp andcircumstance, I would find it very bothersome. That is calledmithyabhaas.Questioner: But you do not feel that bothersome orunpleasant, do you?Dadashri: No, it does not feel bothersome in that way;I do not have any interest in it. Therefore, I feel free. Now Ihave no interest in anything.Questioner: Our interest is also gradually decreasing,Dada. Then how do we live?Dadashri: That was moha (illusory attachment). Mohamakes one suffer. Now You do not suffer anymore and theworldly life goes on. You now have to settle with equanimitywithout becoming ‘interested’.Questioner: Is that good?Dadashri: That is called a ‘Gnani’. To do anythingwithout interest is called a Gnani.Questioner: If we do anything without interest, does thatnot affect the body?Dadashri: Whatever interest there was, it subjected thebody to a beating of moha. The body was affected by that. Thebody improves when you do something without interest. Itblossoms like a rose. The other way your face looked as if youdrank some castor oil!NaturalnessQuestioner: If the body becomes sahaj (natural andspontaneous), is that dehadhyas (false belief of ‘I am thisbody’)?Dadashri: What do you understand by sahaj? Have youunderstood the term sahaj in the language of the Sahaj (theGnani), or in your own language (interpretation)? If someonepicks your pocket and You are not affected by it, realize thatyour dehadhyas (‘I am this body’) is gone. If someone harassesyou, and you react to it, it means that you still have dehadhyas.To question, ‘Why did he do that to me?’ is dehadhyas.In the Gnani’s language, when the body complex (deha)becomes natural and spontaneous (sahaj), it means thedehadhyas is gone.Questioner: When can we say that the body has becomeAptavani-5109110Aptavani-5knowledge of the Self and with that, one will not feel separationfrom anyone. The vision becomes that of oneness, withoutdivision (abheda) the intellect becomes that of oneness. As longas there is vinaya (humility) there is always the feeling of ‘myLord and I are separate’. However, that vinaya will take oneto param (absolute) vinaya (humility). This vinaya is one of the‘stations’ on the path to moksha.The Gnani Purush does not make a note of your lackof humility (avinaya). You should understand where to showhumility and where not to. ‘We’ recognize that you will makemistakes but ‘we’ cannot make a note of any lack of humilityon your part; how can ‘we’ do so in this dushamkaal (thecurrent era where there is lack of unity of mind-body-speech)?One had to make a note of non-humility in the fourth Ara(section) of the time cycle. Today, ‘we’ have to let go. On thecontrary, ‘we’ have to bless the one who is arrogant andinsolent!Illusory ImpressionWhat is mithya abhaas (illusory impression)? I hadattended a function along with many other important ministersand I was given a seat with them on the stage. Before, when Idid not have Gnan, I used to wish that I could sit on such seats.In those days, I used to put a great value on such things andtoday, if they made me sit in such environment of pomp andcircumstance, I would find it very bothersome. That is calledmithyabhaas.Questioner: But you do not feel that bothersome orunpleasant, do you?Dadashri: No, it does not feel bothersome in that way;I do not have any interest in it. Therefore, I feel free. Now Ihave no interest in anything.Questioner: Our interest is also gradually decreasing,Dada. Then how do we live?Dadashri: That was moha (illusory attachment). Mohamakes one suffer. Now You do not suffer anymore and theworldly life goes on. You now have to settle with equanimitywithout becoming ‘interested’.Questioner: Is that good?Dadashri: That is called a ‘Gnani’. To do anythingwithout interest is called a Gnani.Questioner: If we do anything without interest, does thatnot affect the body?Dadashri: Whatever interest there was, it subjected thebody to a beating of moha. The body was affected by that. Thebody improves when you do something without interest. Itblossoms like a rose. The other way your face looked as if youdrank some castor oil!NaturalnessQuestioner: If the body becomes sahaj (natural andspontaneous), is that dehadhyas (false belief of ‘I am thisbody’)?Dadashri: What do you understand by sahaj? Have youunderstood the term sahaj in the language of the Sahaj (theGnani), or in your own language (interpretation)? If someonepicks your pocket and You are not affected by it, realize thatyour dehadhyas (‘I am this body’) is gone. If someone harassesyou, and you react to it, it means that you still have dehadhyas.To question, ‘Why did he do that to me?’ is dehadhyas.In the Gnani’s language, when the body complex (deha)becomes natural and spontaneous (sahaj), it means thedehadhyas is gone.Questioner: When can we say that the body has becomeAptavani-5111112Aptavani-5(remain in the awareness as the Self); then You will be able to‘see’ real and relative as you go. You will have shuddhaupayog (pure awareness as the Self) at that time. Wheneveryou are talking with anyone, You can maintain shuddhaupayog from within as you carry on the conversation. Yousimply have to ‘see’ whatever ‘Chandubhai’ is doing. It ispossible to maintain upayog in this manner. It is not a difficultthing to do.Shuddha (pure) upayog (applied use of awareness) iswhen you do not become engrossed or absorbed (tanmayakar)with the mind, speech and conduct. It takes time for suchawareness (jagruti) to come. Awareness increases as dischargekashays or the nikaali kashays—those which do not createnew kashay—begin to decrease slowly. From now on, no newkashays are being charged, but the discharge kashays (anger,pride, deceit and greed) within will continue to discharge.If I come to your home and see that you have been upsetwith your wife, I would not take note that you are doingsomething wrong. Your agitation is discharging. Now that I havegiven you Gnan, You will not fall short. But discharge is boundto occur, is it not? All I see is whether your upayog (yourawareness as the Self) was there or not.Questioner: I still do not understand this talk about ‘lookfor the Seer that is ‘seeing’.’ Please explain it to me.Dadashri: We have found the Drashta (the Self). Weare telling a person who does not have Self-realization that‘Where your drashti (vision) falls is really a drashya (scene),meaning that which you are seeing is really the object to be seen.But really you need to investigate who is the one doing theseeing.’ That is what I am saying.Everything on the outside is the corporeal vision. But to‘see’ within; to ‘see’ what the mind is saying, what the mind isthinking, to ‘see’ what the intellect within is doing, what thesahaj (natural and spontaneous)?Dadashri: Sahaj means that even if someone were to dosomething to your body, You would not have attachment orabhorrence (raag or dwesh). Just look at ‘us’ and understandwhat sahaj is. Sahaj means to be in one’s own state, to benatural, to not be in the state of the non-Self. It is to have nosense of ‘I am’ in the relative.Questioner: When does one become sahaj (natural andspontaneous)?Dadashri: When this Gnan advances with producingresults and karmas become few, one progressively becomessahaj. At the moment you are becoming natural a little at a timeand then you will become completely sahaj (natural andspontaneous). As you become free of the dehadhyas, meaningfree from the belief, ‘I am this body’, you move towardsnaturalness (sahajata). However natural You become, that ishow much You become one with the Self. Are you convincedthat you have attained this path?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Whoever is convinced about this will attainliberation. Everything will come to an end; thoughts will end,knowledge will end. Everything has an end, but ignorance has noend.The one who says that the drashti (vision) has fallenupon the One ‘seeing’ (drashta); is very far from the Drashta(the Self). It will take them a very long time to attain that state.We have attained the Drashta state (the Self). What the worldis searching for, we have in our hands. Now our job is to seehow to make use of the pure applied awareness (shuddhaupayog) as the Self. That is called real spiritual endeavour(purusharth).When you leave home and You apply shuddha upayogAptavani-5111112Aptavani-5(remain in the awareness as the Self); then You will be able to‘see’ real and relative as you go. You will have shuddhaupayog (pure awareness as the Self) at that time. Wheneveryou are talking with anyone, You can maintain shuddhaupayog from within as you carry on the conversation. Yousimply have to ‘see’ whatever ‘Chandubhai’ is doing. It ispossible to maintain upayog in this manner. It is not a difficultthing to do.Shuddha (pure) upayog (applied use of awareness) iswhen you do not become engrossed or absorbed (tanmayakar)with the mind, speech and conduct. It takes time for suchawareness (jagruti) to come. Awareness increases as dischargekashays or the nikaali kashays—those which do not createnew kashay—begin to decrease slowly. From now on, no newkashays are being charged, but the discharge kashays (anger,pride, deceit and greed) within will continue to discharge.If I come to your home and see that you have been upsetwith your wife, I would not take note that you are doingsomething wrong. Your agitation is discharging. Now that I havegiven you Gnan, You will not fall short. But discharge is boundto occur, is it not? All I see is whether your upayog (yourawareness as the Self) was there or not.Questioner: I still do not understand this talk about ‘lookfor the Seer that is ‘seeing’.’ Please explain it to me.Dadashri: We have found the Drashta (the Self). Weare telling a person who does not have Self-realization that‘Where your drashti (vision) falls is really a drashya (scene),meaning that which you are seeing is really the object to be seen.But really you need to investigate who is the one doing theseeing.’ That is what I am saying.Everything on the outside is the corporeal vision. But to‘see’ within; to ‘see’ what the mind is saying, what the mind isthinking, to ‘see’ what the intellect within is doing, what thesahaj (natural and spontaneous)?Dadashri: Sahaj means that even if someone were to dosomething to your body, You would not have attachment orabhorrence (raag or dwesh). Just look at ‘us’ and understandwhat sahaj is. Sahaj means to be in one’s own state, to benatural, to not be in the state of the non-Self. It is to have nosense of ‘I am’ in the relative.Questioner: When does one become sahaj (natural andspontaneous)?Dadashri: When this Gnan advances with producingresults and karmas become few, one progressively becomessahaj. At the moment you are becoming natural a little at a timeand then you will become completely sahaj (natural andspontaneous). As you become free of the dehadhyas, meaningfree from the belief, ‘I am this body’, you move towardsnaturalness (sahajata). However natural You become, that ishow much You become one with the Self. Are you convincedthat you have attained this path?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Whoever is convinced about this will attainliberation. Everything will come to an end; thoughts will end,knowledge will end. Everything has an end, but ignorance has noend.The one who says that the drashti (vision) has fallenupon the One ‘seeing’ (drashta); is very far from the Drashta(the Self). It will take them a very long time to attain that state.We have attained the Drashta state (the Self). What the worldis searching for, we have in our hands. Now our job is to seehow to make use of the pure applied awareness (shuddhaupayog) as the Self. That is called real spiritual endeavour(purusharth).When you leave home and You apply shuddha upayogAptavani-5113114Aptavani-5intellect is showing, where the chit is roaming, whether the egowithin is being depressed or elevated; to continuously ‘see’ allthis is verily our Drashta (the Self). The vishay (subject matter)of the vision (drashti) is the object (drashya) and You are theSeer (Drashta).Questioner: Whatever unfolds during any external orinternal situation, if I know that ‘this is not my swabhav(nature)’ then I will gain the experience (anubhav), will I not?Dadashri: Yes, of course you will! The one whounderstands that, ‘this is not my nature’, he becomes establishedin the nature of the Self. This Gnan is such that your awareness(jagruti) does not leave, no matter how much agitated‘Chandubhai’ (the relative self) becomes. Besides, agitation isbound to occur because it is sitting within as a stock (an effectof past life causes), is it not?Discharge is like ‘vomiting’. You cannot get upset withanyone who vomits on you, because it happens against thewishes of that poor person. What can he do? The kashaysdischarge just like vomiting. Then everything empties within andbecomes clean.What is focused awareness of the Self (upayog) like? Ifyou were counting thousand rupee notes, would your focusedawareness drift towards something else? That is called upayog.That is how My upayog is, all the time. Yours too will be thesame if you stay with Me.Questioner: Does that happen because one has varyinginterest in different states or other things?Dadashri: There is no need to cultivate interest. Yousimply have to apply the upayog. You have to say, ‘Chandubhai,you are sitting in the realm and presence of Dada. So whateveris happening here, going on here, apply your upayog andproceed.’ Then You have to continue ‘seeing’, if he misses theupayog, You have to immediately say, ‘Chandubhai, you lostyour upayog, it should not be this way.’If someone gives me a change for a five or a ten-rupeenote, I do not count the change. He may give me 25 or 50 paisaless but how much of my time would be wasted in counting?You do not have to become uninterested- disinclined (nispruha)towards money but do not ruin your upayog behind it. Theupayog is the most important thing.For how long do you have to keep applying thisupayog? To the point where you keep remembering ‘Dada’day and night. You miss His presence and suffer (viraho).When light with the agony of His absence (viraha), ‘electricity’will spark and enlighten everything within! This is the Light ofthe Self.Intense Agony of Separation from the GnaniThe suffering of separation is viraha. What does theseparated one (virahi) mean? Nothing can quell the restlessness.Then understand, that the freedom from worldly entanglementshas occurred. The chit of a new bride will be with her husbandwhen he is at work, even though she is cooking a wonderfulmeal at home.The reality is that the Parmatma (the absolute Self) isabheda swaroop – there is no separation from any living being.If you long to be with the one who is abheda swaroop, thenyour worldly life will run very smoothly and beautifully. Theworldly life is something that can run naturally but peoplecontinue to interfere with its natural process. Just as everythingwithin the body works naturally after you eat a meal, the externalworld runs even more naturally. The rule of nature is that it willsecrete digestive juices in just the right amount so that they willlast you for the rest of your life, but if the foolish humans haveanything to do with it; they will put in so much today that theywill run short the next year!Aptavani-5113114Aptavani-5intellect is showing, where the chit is roaming, whether the egowithin is being depressed or elevated; to continuously ‘see’ allthis is verily our Drashta (the Self). The vishay (subject matter)of the vision (drashti) is the object (drashya) and You are theSeer (Drashta).Questioner: Whatever unfolds during any external orinternal situation, if I know that ‘this is not my swabhav(nature)’ then I will gain the experience (anubhav), will I not?Dadashri: Yes, of course you will! The one whounderstands that, ‘this is not my nature’, he becomes establishedin the nature of the Self. This Gnan is such that your awareness(jagruti) does not leave, no matter how much agitated‘Chandubhai’ (the relative self) becomes. Besides, agitation isbound to occur because it is sitting within as a stock (an effectof past life causes), is it not?Discharge is like ‘vomiting’. You cannot get upset withanyone who vomits on you, because it happens against thewishes of that poor person. What can he do? The kashaysdischarge just like vomiting. Then everything empties within andbecomes clean.What is focused awareness of the Self (upayog) like? Ifyou were counting thousand rupee notes, would your focusedawareness drift towards something else? That is called upayog.That is how My upayog is, all the time. Yours too will be thesame if you stay with Me.Questioner: Does that happen because one has varyinginterest in different states or other things?Dadashri: There is no need to cultivate interest. Yousimply have to apply the upayog. You have to say, ‘Chandubhai,you are sitting in the realm and presence of Dada. So whateveris happening here, going on here, apply your upayog andproceed.’ Then You have to continue ‘seeing’, if he misses theupayog, You have to immediately say, ‘Chandubhai, you lostyour upayog, it should not be this way.’If someone gives me a change for a five or a ten-rupeenote, I do not count the change. He may give me 25 or 50 paisaless but how much of my time would be wasted in counting?You do not have to become uninterested- disinclined (nispruha)towards money but do not ruin your upayog behind it. Theupayog is the most important thing.For how long do you have to keep applying thisupayog? To the point where you keep remembering ‘Dada’day and night. You miss His presence and suffer (viraho).When light with the agony of His absence (viraha), ‘electricity’will spark and enlighten everything within! This is the Light ofthe Self.Intense Agony of Separation from the GnaniThe suffering of separation is viraha. What does theseparated one (virahi) mean? Nothing can quell the restlessness.Then understand, that the freedom from worldly entanglementshas occurred. The chit of a new bride will be with her husbandwhen he is at work, even though she is cooking a wonderfulmeal at home.The reality is that the Parmatma (the absolute Self) isabheda swaroop – there is no separation from any living being.If you long to be with the one who is abheda swaroop, thenyour worldly life will run very smoothly and beautifully. Theworldly life is something that can run naturally but peoplecontinue to interfere with its natural process. Just as everythingwithin the body works naturally after you eat a meal, the externalworld runs even more naturally. The rule of nature is that it willsecrete digestive juices in just the right amount so that they willlast you for the rest of your life, but if the foolish humans haveanything to do with it; they will put in so much today that theywill run short the next year!Aptavani-5115116Aptavani-5Questioner: The intense feeling of missing (viraha) theGnani Purush; this agony within caused by inability to havedirect darshan and contact with the Gnani Purush, what kindof suffering vedana is that?Dadashri: Oh ho ho, that experience! It gives rise to‘electricity’ with which the Self becomes illuminating (tejavaan).It is the most privileged phenomenon one can experience.Such an experience occurs very rarely. It occurs afteracquaintance of many lifetimes. It comes to those who areready to go to moksha. You do not have to be in a hurry forit. You have wasted so many lifetimes, so now what more areyou going to lose in one or two more lifetimes? You havewandered so many lifetimes and you have not become wearyand tired from it, so are you likely to become tired in two morelifetimes?The State of Sat Chit AnandThe Self is verily Sat Chit Anand (sacchidanand; theawareness of the eternal is bliss.). This chit has become asat(that which is changing and is not permanent). Thus pleasure(sukh) is imaginary and pain (dukh) is also imaginary. However,even though they are imagined, their effect is experienced asreal. Sat Chit Anand is Your state.Questioner: Is the state of ‘Sat Chit Anand’ present ineveryone?Dadashri: Yes, it is in every living being and it is verily theParmatma (the absolute Self).The state of ‘Sat Chit Anand’ has two bhaav states.One is swabhav and the other is vibhav. Swabhav meansthat which is of the Self, and here vibhav means ‘additional’,not of the Self, and not opposite or contrary. The wrong belief,‘I am Chandubhai’ (vibhav) is a result of pressure fromcircumstances.Questioner: Does the state of ‘Sat Chit Anand’ haveform or shape, or is it formless?Dadashri: It is formless (aroopi); that it is formless is apoint worth understanding. There is no need to understand rightaway. For the time being you have to understand how to attainit.It has been called formless, shapeless (nirakaar), so fornow just understand that it is formless, you will be able tounderstand the rest later. It has been called nirakaar for acertain purpose. Certain talks of purpose-goal are such that theyare understood only after the goal is realized. The Self is free ofkarmas (niranjan). It has not been affected by karmas. Eventoday the Self within you is a pure Self. It can be ‘seen’ clearly.But you simply have the belief that you have done many baddeeds (paap) and good deeds (punya). All the wrong beliefshave set in. The Gnani Purush breaks the wrong belief andreplaces it with the right one. When the right belief sets in, thenYou become aware that ‘I am God’.Prashasta MohaMaya (deceit, the illusion that deceives the Self) meansignorance of the Self. There is no such thing as maya; it is arelative state. It is temporary and You are permanent. How longwill it stay? It will remain as long as you have moha (illusoryattachment) towards temporary things. When you attain theknowledge, ‘I am pure Self’, when moha for the Self arises;maya will come to an end.Questioner: After some time one should not have mohafor the Self, is that not correct?Dadashri: Moha for the Self is good; that is notconsidered moha. It is called moha in our worldly language.Moha means murchha (attraction); that is not really consideredaffection for the Self; it is considered illusory attachment for theAptavani-5115116Aptavani-5Questioner: The intense feeling of missing (viraha) theGnani Purush; this agony within caused by inability to havedirect darshan and contact with the Gnani Purush, what kindof suffering vedana is that?Dadashri: Oh ho ho, that experience! It gives rise to‘electricity’ with which the Self becomes illuminating (tejavaan).It is the most privileged phenomenon one can experience.Such an experience occurs very rarely. It occurs afteracquaintance of many lifetimes. It comes to those who areready to go to moksha. You do not have to be in a hurry forit. You have wasted so many lifetimes, so now what more areyou going to lose in one or two more lifetimes? You havewandered so many lifetimes and you have not become wearyand tired from it, so are you likely to become tired in two morelifetimes?The State of Sat Chit AnandThe Self is verily Sat Chit Anand (sacchidanand; theawareness of the eternal is bliss.). This chit has become asat(that which is changing and is not permanent). Thus pleasure(sukh) is imaginary and pain (dukh) is also imaginary. However,even though they are imagined, their effect is experienced asreal. Sat Chit Anand is Your state.Questioner: Is the state of ‘Sat Chit Anand’ present ineveryone?Dadashri: Yes, it is in every living being and it is verily theParmatma (the absolute Self).The state of ‘Sat Chit Anand’ has two bhaav states.One is swabhav and the other is vibhav. Swabhav meansthat which is of the Self, and here vibhav means ‘additional’,not of the Self, and not opposite or contrary. The wrong belief,‘I am Chandubhai’ (vibhav) is a result of pressure fromcircumstances.Questioner: Does the state of ‘Sat Chit Anand’ haveform or shape, or is it formless?Dadashri: It is formless (aroopi); that it is formless is apoint worth understanding. There is no need to understand rightaway. For the time being you have to understand how to attainit.It has been called formless, shapeless (nirakaar), so fornow just understand that it is formless, you will be able tounderstand the rest later. It has been called nirakaar for acertain purpose. Certain talks of purpose-goal are such that theyare understood only after the goal is realized. The Self is free ofkarmas (niranjan). It has not been affected by karmas. Eventoday the Self within you is a pure Self. It can be ‘seen’ clearly.But you simply have the belief that you have done many baddeeds (paap) and good deeds (punya). All the wrong beliefshave set in. The Gnani Purush breaks the wrong belief andreplaces it with the right one. When the right belief sets in, thenYou become aware that ‘I am God’.Prashasta MohaMaya (deceit, the illusion that deceives the Self) meansignorance of the Self. There is no such thing as maya; it is arelative state. It is temporary and You are permanent. How longwill it stay? It will remain as long as you have moha (illusoryattachment) towards temporary things. When you attain theknowledge, ‘I am pure Self’, when moha for the Self arises;maya will come to an end.Questioner: After some time one should not have mohafor the Self, is that not correct?Dadashri: Moha for the Self is good; that is notconsidered moha. It is called moha in our worldly language.Moha means murchha (attraction); that is not really consideredaffection for the Self; it is considered illusory attachment for theAptavani-5117118Aptavani-5body. To dwell in the Self means that the dwelling in the non-Self is gone. One’s worldly life moves aside.Questioner: Lord Mahavir sent away Gautam Swamifrom him because Gautam Swami had moha for the Lord. Whatkind of moha was that?Dadashri: That was prashasta moha. Attachmenttowards those headed for moksha is called prashasta moha.Such moha is not harmful. It will give you the Self. Moksha maybe delayed a little, but what objection do we have here?Moha for the Vitarags (absolutely free from attachmentand abhorrence), moha for all that brings You to a state ofvitaragata is prashasta moha. Then why can one not havemoha for an idol of the Lord; it is a thing that will bring youvitaragata and therefore it is called prashasta moha.Questioner: Is moha towards You considered prashastamoha?Dadashri: Yes, moha for the Gnani Purush is veryexalted. One’s moha for that which is worldly decreases aftermany lifetimes of penance and sacrifices; and that is when hemeets a Gnani Purush.The Mind in Akram VignanQuestioner: The mind understands ‘there is a trap on thisside’ and that it cannot afford to be involved in it, and yet on theother hand it keeps having thoughts about worldly things, whatis that?Dadashri: The mind (mun) is contradictory. It does itswork according to our understanding. If you think thatAhmadabad is in the North, then you steer your ‘ship’ of themind in that direction. Then if you think differently and steer itthe wrong direction, are you likely to reach Ahmadabad? So,the mind is like a ship. It will take you wherever you steer it.Therefore, You should steer your mind with a goodunderstanding, through Gnan. Then the mind will run ‘firstclass’. Ordinarily the mind will not catch on to this point butonce it does, it will not let go of it.Questioner: So Dada, what should one do to make itlisten and follow?Dadashri: I will do that for you. The day I give youGnan I awaken the Self within you, and because of that, yourmind turns in this direction.The Origin of Suspicion and the Charging MindWhatever doubts and suspicion arises in your worldly lifeinteraction; it is the function of the mind. They are attributes ofthe mind. When the intellect and the mind get together, they willcreate and get caught up in all kinds of whirlwinds. Just as windprogresses into a whirlwind, that is how a ‘cyclone’ within is setin motion.Questioner: What is the part of the intellect (buddhi) inthat?Dadashri: Yes, the intellect is involved for sure. Whenthe mind says, ‘Yes’, the intellect will say, ‘No, it is like this.’This gives rise to doubts. Therefore, there is a ‘parliament’within. No one has ever become doubt-free where the Self isconcerned; if one were to become doubt-free about the Self,one would attain awareness of the Self.Questioner: Is it necessary to become completelydoubt-free (nihshank) in order to attain moksha (liberation)?Dadashri: One will have to become doubt-free about theSelf. But what is the Self? The Self is not such that people cancomprehend it through their intellect. It is not what peoplebelieve it to be. People have intellect and the Self is notsomething that can be measured through the intellect. It isAptavani-5117118Aptavani-5body. To dwell in the Self means that the dwelling in the non-Self is gone. One’s worldly life moves aside.Questioner: Lord Mahavir sent away Gautam Swamifrom him because Gautam Swami had moha for the Lord. Whatkind of moha was that?Dadashri: That was prashasta moha. Attachmenttowards those headed for moksha is called prashasta moha.Such moha is not harmful. It will give you the Self. Moksha maybe delayed a little, but what objection do we have here?Moha for the Vitarags (absolutely free from attachmentand abhorrence), moha for all that brings You to a state ofvitaragata is prashasta moha. Then why can one not havemoha for an idol of the Lord; it is a thing that will bring youvitaragata and therefore it is called prashasta moha.Questioner: Is moha towards You considered prashastamoha?Dadashri: Yes, moha for the Gnani Purush is veryexalted. One’s moha for that which is worldly decreases aftermany lifetimes of penance and sacrifices; and that is when hemeets a Gnani Purush.The Mind in Akram VignanQuestioner: The mind understands ‘there is a trap on thisside’ and that it cannot afford to be involved in it, and yet on theother hand it keeps having thoughts about worldly things, whatis that?Dadashri: The mind (mun) is contradictory. It does itswork according to our understanding. If you think thatAhmadabad is in the North, then you steer your ‘ship’ of themind in that direction. Then if you think differently and steer itthe wrong direction, are you likely to reach Ahmadabad? So,the mind is like a ship. It will take you wherever you steer it.Therefore, You should steer your mind with a goodunderstanding, through Gnan. Then the mind will run ‘firstclass’. Ordinarily the mind will not catch on to this point butonce it does, it will not let go of it.Questioner: So Dada, what should one do to make itlisten and follow?Dadashri: I will do that for you. The day I give youGnan I awaken the Self within you, and because of that, yourmind turns in this direction.The Origin of Suspicion and the Charging MindWhatever doubts and suspicion arises in your worldly lifeinteraction; it is the function of the mind. They are attributes ofthe mind. When the intellect and the mind get together, they willcreate and get caught up in all kinds of whirlwinds. Just as windprogresses into a whirlwind, that is how a ‘cyclone’ within is setin motion.Questioner: What is the part of the intellect (buddhi) inthat?Dadashri: Yes, the intellect is involved for sure. Whenthe mind says, ‘Yes’, the intellect will say, ‘No, it is like this.’This gives rise to doubts. Therefore, there is a ‘parliament’within. No one has ever become doubt-free where the Self isconcerned; if one were to become doubt-free about the Self,one would attain awareness of the Self.Questioner: Is it necessary to become completelydoubt-free (nihshank) in order to attain moksha (liberation)?Dadashri: One will have to become doubt-free about theSelf. But what is the Self? The Self is not such that people cancomprehend it through their intellect. It is not what peoplebelieve it to be. People have intellect and the Self is notsomething that can be measured through the intellect. It isAptavani-5119120Aptavani-5‘Shuddhatma’, the charging for a new mind (through the subtlemind, also called the bhaav mun) ceases and the gross mindcontinues to discharge. That is its function.Questioner: Does it have an effect?Dadashri: It is the nature of the mind to be effective, isit not? You have to understand that ‘the one who is affected isnot I’, so the effect will not touch You.If someone were to tell you that the car your son hadbeen driving three days ago was involved in an accident and thatit is completely destroyed, you will be affected when you see it.But then if they tell you that he sold the car yesterday; it willimmediately change the effect on you. Everything is effective.But if You have Gnan, it will have no effect on You. That is whyI have said that the mind is effective, speech is effective and thebody too, is effective.Dravya mun (effective mind) is gross mind and bhaavmun (causal mind, inner intent) is subtle mind. One can becomefree if his bhaav mun changes; it does not matter if his dravyamun does not. Consequences or effects are dependent onbhaav mun. One may have thoughts of violence as an effect buthis inner intent may be different. Therefore, the consequencesare based on the inner intent. Penalty for faults or wrong actionsdue to dravya (effect) will have to be faced right here (in thislife) and the consequences of bhaav (charging through innerintent) will have to be faced in the next life.All religions practiced in the world currently are based ona theory, which advocates changing the effect (dravya) ratherthan the inner intent (bhaav). So what happens is people’sbhaav change based on their dravya. Even if they do somethingwrong (as an effect), they reinforce their actions by saying thatit is exactly what they should do. So My discovery is that thegross mind (dravya mun, the discharging mind) that people aretrying to change never can be changed. Hence we put aside theimmeasurable. The Self that is immeasurable, not weighable, canonly be understood through Gnan. Only through the Gnani’sGnan can one have awareness of the Self, otherwise it cannever come into awareness.Questioner: What is the conscious mind? Is it the mind?Dadashri: They are not talking about the mind. They aretalking about the chit. The mind arises in the presence of theSelf and that is what people refer to as bhaav.Questioner: How is it related to the Self?Dadashri: The relationship is simply that of touch, ofproximity. It continues to be charged through being in theproximity to the Self. As long as there is the belief of, ‘I amChandubhai’, ‘I am his father’, it continues to be touched andcharged.Questioner: Can we call it the sthool mun (the grossmind)?Dadashri: No, the gross part is that which does thethinking. It is physical.Questioner: What is the difference between gross(sthool) and subtle (sookshma)?Dadashri: Everyone can understand the gross mind. Theone that does the thinking is the gross mind but no one canknow the subtle mind. Only the Gnani Purush understands it.People keep talking about ‘bhaav mun’ but they cannot graspexactly what it is.Questioner: When can one grasp it?Dadashri: It only occurs when one attains Gnan. One isable to grasp the bhaav mun (subtle mind that charges karmas)a certain time prior to becoming a ‘Gnani’. The one who isdissolving his ego will be able to grasp it. Once you become theAptavani-5119120Aptavani-5‘Shuddhatma’, the charging for a new mind (through the subtlemind, also called the bhaav mun) ceases and the gross mindcontinues to discharge. That is its function.Questioner: Does it have an effect?Dadashri: It is the nature of the mind to be effective, isit not? You have to understand that ‘the one who is affected isnot I’, so the effect will not touch You.If someone were to tell you that the car your son hadbeen driving three days ago was involved in an accident and thatit is completely destroyed, you will be affected when you see it.But then if they tell you that he sold the car yesterday; it willimmediately change the effect on you. Everything is effective.But if You have Gnan, it will have no effect on You. That is whyI have said that the mind is effective, speech is effective and thebody too, is effective.Dravya mun (effective mind) is gross mind and bhaavmun (causal mind, inner intent) is subtle mind. One can becomefree if his bhaav mun changes; it does not matter if his dravyamun does not. Consequences or effects are dependent onbhaav mun. One may have thoughts of violence as an effect buthis inner intent may be different. Therefore, the consequencesare based on the inner intent. Penalty for faults or wrong actionsdue to dravya (effect) will have to be faced right here (in thislife) and the consequences of bhaav (charging through innerintent) will have to be faced in the next life.All religions practiced in the world currently are based ona theory, which advocates changing the effect (dravya) ratherthan the inner intent (bhaav). So what happens is people’sbhaav change based on their dravya. Even if they do somethingwrong (as an effect), they reinforce their actions by saying thatit is exactly what they should do. So My discovery is that thegross mind (dravya mun, the discharging mind) that people aretrying to change never can be changed. Hence we put aside theimmeasurable. The Self that is immeasurable, not weighable, canonly be understood through Gnan. Only through the Gnani’sGnan can one have awareness of the Self, otherwise it cannever come into awareness.Questioner: What is the conscious mind? Is it the mind?Dadashri: They are not talking about the mind. They aretalking about the chit. The mind arises in the presence of theSelf and that is what people refer to as bhaav.Questioner: How is it related to the Self?Dadashri: The relationship is simply that of touch, ofproximity. It continues to be charged through being in theproximity to the Self. As long as there is the belief of, ‘I amChandubhai’, ‘I am his father’, it continues to be touched andcharged.Questioner: Can we call it the sthool mun (the grossmind)?Dadashri: No, the gross part is that which does thethinking. It is physical.Questioner: What is the difference between gross(sthool) and subtle (sookshma)?Dadashri: Everyone can understand the gross mind. Theone that does the thinking is the gross mind but no one canknow the subtle mind. Only the Gnani Purush understands it.People keep talking about ‘bhaav mun’ but they cannot graspexactly what it is.Questioner: When can one grasp it?Dadashri: It only occurs when one attains Gnan. One isable to grasp the bhaav mun (subtle mind that charges karmas)a certain time prior to becoming a ‘Gnani’. The one who isdissolving his ego will be able to grasp it. Once you become theAptavani-5121122Aptavani-5gross mind; we put aside all gross actions; we put aside everyaction of the body. Everything changes after I give you theknowledge of the Self; otherwise you continue to functionthrough the dictates of the discharging mind (dravya mun).No one can know the charging mind (bhaav mun). Theycan understand that there is bhaav mun but they do not knowhow it functions.Questioner: Is that what we call ‘unconscious’?Dadashri: Yes, that happens under the cover of the ego,it does everything in the dark. If the darkness of the ego werenot there, everything would be visible. This is a very subtle thing.The Path of Intellect and the Path WithoutIntellectIf you want to develop in the worldly life, follow the pathof the intellect (buddhi) and if you want to take the path ofliberation, follow the path free of intellect (abuddha). ‘We’ areabuddha; ‘We’ do not have any intellect at all. Intellect makesone sensitive. There are two types of intellect: one is rightintellect (samyak buddhi) and the other is misguided intellect(viparit buddhi). Here when satsang takes place, yourmisguided intellect will take a turn and become right and thatright intellect takes You to moksha.Questioner: Does full enlightenment (kevalgnan) occurafter one becomes intellect-free (abuddha)?Dadashri: Kevalgnan will never happen without onebecoming intellect-free. Wherever there is intellect, there isalways the presence of the worldly interaction ego; even if onehas Self-realization. Wherever there is no intellect, there is noworldly ego.Questioner: So is it better to have intellect or not to haveintellect?Dadashri: There is no need for intellect if you want to goto moksha. The intellect makes you wander around in theworldly life. It looks for profit and loss wherever it can. Evenwhen you are travelling by train, it will show ‘there is benefit insitting here and loss in sitting there’. The hunger of the intellectis such that it can never be satisfied. You need something thathas an end. The whole world moves around in intellect drivenknowledge.Questioner: Should we go beyond the intellect?Dadashri: There is no choice but to go beyond theintellect. There is no liberation until then.The Agna of the Gnani Purush and SwachhandQuestioner: Why is it said that the Vitarag isencompassed within the Agnas of the Gnani Purush?Dadashri: There is no other way besides the Agnas, isthere? The one who does not follow the Gnani’s Agna is notworthy of liberation. He will be able to follow the Agnas whenhe becomes worthy; otherwise, swachhand (to act on theguidance of one’s own ego and intellect) will arise. That is whyShrimad Rajchandra has said:‘Roke jiva swachhand toh, paame avashya moksha,Paamya em anant chhe, bhakhyu Jina nirdosh.Pratyaksh sadguru yogathi swachhand te rokaya,Anya upaya karya thaki praye bamano thaaya.’‘If a being is able to stop his ego oriented actions, he willattain moksha without fail,“Countless have attained moksha in this way”, states theknower of the Absolute.With direct meeting with a Sadguru-Gnani, ego orientedaction is halted,Resorting to any other way, only serves to double it.’Aptavani-5121122Aptavani-5gross mind; we put aside all gross actions; we put aside everyaction of the body. Everything changes after I give you theknowledge of the Self; otherwise you continue to functionthrough the dictates of the discharging mind (dravya mun).No one can know the charging mind (bhaav mun). Theycan understand that there is bhaav mun but they do not knowhow it functions.Questioner: Is that what we call ‘unconscious’?Dadashri: Yes, that happens under the cover of the ego,it does everything in the dark. If the darkness of the ego werenot there, everything would be visible. This is a very subtle thing.The Path of Intellect and the Path WithoutIntellectIf you want to develop in the worldly life, follow the pathof the intellect (buddhi) and if you want to take the path ofliberation, follow the path free of intellect (abuddha). ‘We’ areabuddha; ‘We’ do not have any intellect at all. Intellect makesone sensitive. There are two types of intellect: one is rightintellect (samyak buddhi) and the other is misguided intellect(viparit buddhi). Here when satsang takes place, yourmisguided intellect will take a turn and become right and thatright intellect takes You to moksha.Questioner: Does full enlightenment (kevalgnan) occurafter one becomes intellect-free (abuddha)?Dadashri: Kevalgnan will never happen without onebecoming intellect-free. Wherever there is intellect, there isalways the presence of the worldly interaction ego; even if onehas Self-realization. Wherever there is no intellect, there is noworldly ego.Questioner: So is it better to have intellect or not to haveintellect?Dadashri: There is no need for intellect if you want to goto moksha. The intellect makes you wander around in theworldly life. It looks for profit and loss wherever it can. Evenwhen you are travelling by train, it will show ‘there is benefit insitting here and loss in sitting there’. The hunger of the intellectis such that it can never be satisfied. You need something thathas an end. The whole world moves around in intellect drivenknowledge.Questioner: Should we go beyond the intellect?Dadashri: There is no choice but to go beyond theintellect. There is no liberation until then.The Agna of the Gnani Purush and SwachhandQuestioner: Why is it said that the Vitarag isencompassed within the Agnas of the Gnani Purush?Dadashri: There is no other way besides the Agnas, isthere? The one who does not follow the Gnani’s Agna is notworthy of liberation. He will be able to follow the Agnas whenhe becomes worthy; otherwise, swachhand (to act on theguidance of one’s own ego and intellect) will arise. That is whyShrimad Rajchandra has said:‘Roke jiva swachhand toh, paame avashya moksha,Paamya em anant chhe, bhakhyu Jina nirdosh.Pratyaksh sadguru yogathi swachhand te rokaya,Anya upaya karya thaki praye bamano thaaya.’‘If a being is able to stop his ego oriented actions, he willattain moksha without fail,“Countless have attained moksha in this way”, states theknower of the Absolute.With direct meeting with a Sadguru-Gnani, ego orientedaction is halted,Resorting to any other way, only serves to double it.’Aptavani-5123124Aptavani-5If one tries to do it himself, he will increase hisswachhand two fold. The only solution is to follow the Agna ofthe Gnani Purush. There is no other solution.The Gnani Is ChildlikeWhen a child cries, his crying is not associated with theintellect, the way it is for a twenty-five year old man. The GnaniPurush does not cry with the intellect either. A child and aGnani Purush are similar. They are both without intellect. Forthe child it is like a ‘rising sun’ and for the Gnani Purush it islike a ‘setting sun’. A child has ego but he is not aware of it,whereas ‘we’ have no ego.Wherever one uses intellect, is verily where one bindsdemerit karmas (paap).Questioner: Dada, we will not bind any demeritkarmas if we recite Your name twenty four hours a day, willwe?Dadashri: Reciting Dada’s name is tantamount to recitingthe name of Your own Shuddhatma. Singing of these pados(spiritual songs about Dada’s Gnan) is like singing devotionalsongs of your own Shuddhatma. Here everything is of the Self.Even this arati (the ritual of waving lamps in front of an idol ordeity while singing a hymn) that you do is the arati of the Self.Nothing is mine. Whatever one learns to do here, one willbenefit by that.Open MindWhen the mind does not remain open, entanglementsarise, and the presence of entanglements prevents the smile andlaughter of the liberation (mukta hasya).Questioner: What do you mean by an open mind?Dadashri: Just as a fly hovers around some brown sugar,if the mind hovers around one certain thing; then it is notconsidered an open mind. An open mind is the one that is in tunewith what is present in front of it. One laughs when it is time tolaugh, talks when it is time to talk, sings when it is time to sing;it is open to everything.Yoga Practices and Self-RealizationQuestioner: Can one attain darshan (vision) of theabsolute Self through the practice of yoga?Dadashri: What can practicing yoga not attain? Butyoga of what?Questioner: The natural rajyoga (concentration of themind) that people talk about.Dadashri: Yes, but what do they consider rajyoga?Questioner: Where a focused meditation (ekagrata) ofthe mind occurs.Dadashri: How does the Atma (the Self) benefit fromthat? Do you want moksha or do you want to strengthen yourmind?Questioner: I am just talking about the vision (darshan)of the Parmatma (the Supreme Self).Dadashri: Then why trouble the poor mind unnecessarily?There is nothing wrong with concentrating the mind, but there isno need to trouble the mind if you want realization (darshan) ofthe Supreme Self.Questioner: Can one attain the state of nothingness(shunyata) through one-pointed concentration?Dadashri: Yes, one can, but that is a relative nothingness.It is a temporary adjustment.Questioner: What do the mind and the intellect (buddhi)do at that time?Aptavani-5123124Aptavani-5If one tries to do it himself, he will increase hisswachhand two fold. The only solution is to follow the Agna ofthe Gnani Purush. There is no other solution.The Gnani Is ChildlikeWhen a child cries, his crying is not associated with theintellect, the way it is for a twenty-five year old man. The GnaniPurush does not cry with the intellect either. A child and aGnani Purush are similar. They are both without intellect. Forthe child it is like a ‘rising sun’ and for the Gnani Purush it islike a ‘setting sun’. A child has ego but he is not aware of it,whereas ‘we’ have no ego.Wherever one uses intellect, is verily where one bindsdemerit karmas (paap).Questioner: Dada, we will not bind any demeritkarmas if we recite Your name twenty four hours a day, willwe?Dadashri: Reciting Dada’s name is tantamount to recitingthe name of Your own Shuddhatma. Singing of these pados(spiritual songs about Dada’s Gnan) is like singing devotionalsongs of your own Shuddhatma. Here everything is of the Self.Even this arati (the ritual of waving lamps in front of an idol ordeity while singing a hymn) that you do is the arati of the Self.Nothing is mine. Whatever one learns to do here, one willbenefit by that.Open MindWhen the mind does not remain open, entanglementsarise, and the presence of entanglements prevents the smile andlaughter of the liberation (mukta hasya).Questioner: What do you mean by an open mind?Dadashri: Just as a fly hovers around some brown sugar,if the mind hovers around one certain thing; then it is notconsidered an open mind. An open mind is the one that is in tunewith what is present in front of it. One laughs when it is time tolaugh, talks when it is time to talk, sings when it is time to sing;it is open to everything.Yoga Practices and Self-RealizationQuestioner: Can one attain darshan (vision) of theabsolute Self through the practice of yoga?Dadashri: What can practicing yoga not attain? Butyoga of what?Questioner: The natural rajyoga (concentration of themind) that people talk about.Dadashri: Yes, but what do they consider rajyoga?Questioner: Where a focused meditation (ekagrata) ofthe mind occurs.Dadashri: How does the Atma (the Self) benefit fromthat? Do you want moksha or do you want to strengthen yourmind?Questioner: I am just talking about the vision (darshan)of the Parmatma (the Supreme Self).Dadashri: Then why trouble the poor mind unnecessarily?There is nothing wrong with concentrating the mind, but there isno need to trouble the mind if you want realization (darshan) ofthe Supreme Self.Questioner: Can one attain the state of nothingness(shunyata) through one-pointed concentration?Dadashri: Yes, one can, but that is a relative nothingness.It is a temporary adjustment.Questioner: What do the mind and the intellect (buddhi)do at that time?Aptavani-5125126Aptavani-5Dadashri: They become still for a while and revert to theway they were before. There is nothing of ‘Ours’ (the Self) init. We will not attain our goal and if that yoga (the act of uniting)becomes ‘above normal’ it is very dangerous. Many persons,who practice such yoga, come to me. Their whole bodytrembles even before they touch my toe for darshan, becauseof an overflow of their ego. Wherever you do anything, the egoof doership will increase and the Self—the absolute Self willmove far away from it.WitnessingQuestioner: Sakshibhaav (witnessing) means the endhas come, does it not?Dadashri: Sakshibhaav should remain in everything.Sakshibhaav will not remain the moment someone says,‘Chandubhai is worthless.’ It will not remain even if someonepicks your pocket because sakshibhaav is through the ego.What does sakshibhaav mean? Actually, sakshibhaav is oneof the steps towards becoming vitarag; it is a true step. Thereis great difference between sakshibhaav (to remain as a witnessthrough the ego) and drashtabhaav (to remain as the Seer inthe Self state).There is no Self where there is absence of attributes ofthe Self. This gold is gold as long as its attributes are present.Its own attributes do not become one with attributes of anyother metal. All that you see in the worldly life is attributes ofthe non-Self. The Self is not there. The Self remains as theKnower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta); it does not become a part ofanything else. The Self is never adulterated; it is free fromadulteration.All the methods and paths in the Kramic path are forcreating awareness. In the Kramic path, awareness will keepincreasing. Whatever one becomes vitarag (unattached) towards,he will maintain awareness towards that but he has noawareness of whatever he has attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh) towards. There is attachment-abhorrence in speechesand discourses. There is attachment-abhorrence in people’sgeneral talks and discussions. There is attachment-abhorrence ina good deed. There is no awareness there. Awareness stopsbecause of attachment-abhorrence. Those who become attachedto penance cannot see anything else.SwachhandOne attains moksha if he lets go of his swachhandproceeding according to one’s own intellect and ego. Even aguru must not have swachhand. If a guru has swachhand;then so will his disciples.Questioner: How can a guru not be swachhandi?Dadashri: The guru is swachhandi for sure. The guru’sguru is swachhandi and so there is nothing but the nuisance ofswachhand. Those who lead the worldly life (grahasthi) areswachhandi and so are those who renounce the worldly life(tyaagis). People who are swachhandi have intoxication. Ifthey were to simply understand the definition of swachhand, itwould be more than enough.The one who follows my Agna is out of swachhand.Then no matter how much swachhand you have in the worldlylife, it is not considered swachhand.Swachhand in relation to the Self is consideredswachhand. Some may have a habit of drinking tea at twoo’clock; I do not have any problems with that. I do not evenhave a problem with someone having a habit of snacking atmidnight. That is just a worldly life and it has nothing to dowith the Self. That is a worldly life. It is personal to eachindividual.Whom can you call a sadguru (the ultimate guru)? Wehave all these gurus, but whom do you call a sadguru?Aptavani-5125126Aptavani-5Dadashri: They become still for a while and revert to theway they were before. There is nothing of ‘Ours’ (the Self) init. We will not attain our goal and if that yoga (the act of uniting)becomes ‘above normal’ it is very dangerous. Many persons,who practice such yoga, come to me. Their whole bodytrembles even before they touch my toe for darshan, becauseof an overflow of their ego. Wherever you do anything, the egoof doership will increase and the Self—the absolute Self willmove far away from it.WitnessingQuestioner: Sakshibhaav (witnessing) means the endhas come, does it not?Dadashri: Sakshibhaav should remain in everything.Sakshibhaav will not remain the moment someone says,‘Chandubhai is worthless.’ It will not remain even if someonepicks your pocket because sakshibhaav is through the ego.What does sakshibhaav mean? Actually, sakshibhaav is oneof the steps towards becoming vitarag; it is a true step. Thereis great difference between sakshibhaav (to remain as a witnessthrough the ego) and drashtabhaav (to remain as the Seer inthe Self state).There is no Self where there is absence of attributes ofthe Self. This gold is gold as long as its attributes are present.Its own attributes do not become one with attributes of anyother metal. All that you see in the worldly life is attributes ofthe non-Self. The Self is not there. The Self remains as theKnower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta); it does not become a part ofanything else. The Self is never adulterated; it is free fromadulteration.All the methods and paths in the Kramic path are forcreating awareness. In the Kramic path, awareness will keepincreasing. Whatever one becomes vitarag (unattached) towards,he will maintain awareness towards that but he has noawareness of whatever he has attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh) towards. There is attachment-abhorrence in speechesand discourses. There is attachment-abhorrence in people’sgeneral talks and discussions. There is attachment-abhorrence ina good deed. There is no awareness there. Awareness stopsbecause of attachment-abhorrence. Those who become attachedto penance cannot see anything else.SwachhandOne attains moksha if he lets go of his swachhandproceeding according to one’s own intellect and ego. Even aguru must not have swachhand. If a guru has swachhand;then so will his disciples.Questioner: How can a guru not be swachhandi?Dadashri: The guru is swachhandi for sure. The guru’sguru is swachhandi and so there is nothing but the nuisance ofswachhand. Those who lead the worldly life (grahasthi) areswachhandi and so are those who renounce the worldly life(tyaagis). People who are swachhandi have intoxication. Ifthey were to simply understand the definition of swachhand, itwould be more than enough.The one who follows my Agna is out of swachhand.Then no matter how much swachhand you have in the worldlylife, it is not considered swachhand.Swachhand in relation to the Self is consideredswachhand. Some may have a habit of drinking tea at twoo’clock; I do not have any problems with that. I do not evenhave a problem with someone having a habit of snacking atmidnight. That is just a worldly life and it has nothing to dowith the Self. That is a worldly life. It is personal to eachindividual.Whom can you call a sadguru (the ultimate guru)? Wehave all these gurus, but whom do you call a sadguru?Aptavani-5127128Aptavani-5understanding.What is the mother of gnan (knowledge)? Understanding(samaj) is the mother of gnan. No child can be born withouta mother, can it? Does it drop from the sky? So you do needa mother, do you not? From where can you attain theunderstanding? You have to understand all that from a GnaniPurush. Understand it from the scriptures. The scriptures willnot give you complete understanding but they will give you someunderstanding.The Gnan I give you is keval darshan (absolute vision)and so it includes all the understanding. Now conduct (vartan)will arise from that understanding, but what happens if there isno understanding at all? It will never come into your conduct.Complete understanding is called keval darshan (absolutevision) and when it comes into your conduct, it is calledkevalgnan (absolute knowledge). Kevalgnan is the end andkeval darshan is the beginning.Understanding (samaj) is that which will not let youstumble or fall. One stumbles and falls all day long and yet hebelieves he understands and knows everything. Hey you! Whatdo you call understanding? What is the difference betweenGnan and understanding? Up until the time the understandingcomes into one’s conduct, that gnan (knowledge) is calledunderstanding. That understanding will gradually andautomatically result in Gnan. When it comes into conduct,know that it is Gnan but until then you simply have to keepunderstanding it.The knowledge (gnan) one tries to understand from thescriptures is not kriyakari gnan, meaning it will not workautomatically and give results, whereas this understanding iskriyakari. You will not have to do anything. It is all done by theGnan (Knowledge) from within. Kriyakari gnan is livingknowledge (chetanvantu); it is a science; it verily is the GnanPrabhushri (one of the four disciples of the Gnani PurushKrupadudev Shrimad Rajchandra), who did not have a trace ofswachhand, is considered a sadguru. Everything he did was insurrender to Krupadudev, whether Krupadudev was present ornot. He was a true purush (Self-realized and sincerely followingthe Agnas of the Gnani).Obstacles are created by swachhand. The one who doesnot know anything about religion will create fewer obstacles andswachhand in religion will create more obstacles.Vision, Experience and ConductQuestioner: Is Gnan to be understood or should it comein one’s conduct?Dadashri: It is never meant to be put into conduct; itshould come on its own in conduct. What is the reward ofunderstanding? It is that it will manifest in one’s conduct for sure.If one has the understanding but it does not manifest in hisconduct, then it is considered vision (darshan) and when itcomes into his conduct, it is considered gnan.Questioner: One understands what understanding(samaj), vision (darshan), knowledge (gnan), and conduct(charitra, vartan) is but it does not come into one’s conduct.Dadashri: Yes, it will not happen without Gnan.Understanding (samaj) means ‘undecided’ talks.I do not want to force upon you what I am saying. It hasto be understood by you. My understanding is my own. Nothingis attained by forcing it on anyone. Once you understand it, thenyou will make progress through that understanding. There isnothing to be done in Gnan; it just has to be understood. Doyou think that there must be a difference between Gnan andunderstanding? Understand it from me and that understandingwill gradually materialize in the form of Gnan. You may have theGnan but as long as it does not come into conduct, it is only anAptavani-5127128Aptavani-5understanding.What is the mother of gnan (knowledge)? Understanding(samaj) is the mother of gnan. No child can be born withouta mother, can it? Does it drop from the sky? So you do needa mother, do you not? From where can you attain theunderstanding? You have to understand all that from a GnaniPurush. Understand it from the scriptures. The scriptures willnot give you complete understanding but they will give you someunderstanding.The Gnan I give you is keval darshan (absolute vision)and so it includes all the understanding. Now conduct (vartan)will arise from that understanding, but what happens if there isno understanding at all? It will never come into your conduct.Complete understanding is called keval darshan (absolutevision) and when it comes into your conduct, it is calledkevalgnan (absolute knowledge). Kevalgnan is the end andkeval darshan is the beginning.Understanding (samaj) is that which will not let youstumble or fall. One stumbles and falls all day long and yet hebelieves he understands and knows everything. Hey you! Whatdo you call understanding? What is the difference betweenGnan and understanding? Up until the time the understandingcomes into one’s conduct, that gnan (knowledge) is calledunderstanding. That understanding will gradually andautomatically result in Gnan. When it comes into conduct,know that it is Gnan but until then you simply have to keepunderstanding it.The knowledge (gnan) one tries to understand from thescriptures is not kriyakari gnan, meaning it will not workautomatically and give results, whereas this understanding iskriyakari. You will not have to do anything. It is all done by theGnan (Knowledge) from within. Kriyakari gnan is livingknowledge (chetanvantu); it is a science; it verily is the GnanPrabhushri (one of the four disciples of the Gnani PurushKrupadudev Shrimad Rajchandra), who did not have a trace ofswachhand, is considered a sadguru. Everything he did was insurrender to Krupadudev, whether Krupadudev was present ornot. He was a true purush (Self-realized and sincerely followingthe Agnas of the Gnani).Obstacles are created by swachhand. The one who doesnot know anything about religion will create fewer obstacles andswachhand in religion will create more obstacles.Vision, Experience and ConductQuestioner: Is Gnan to be understood or should it comein one’s conduct?Dadashri: It is never meant to be put into conduct; itshould come on its own in conduct. What is the reward ofunderstanding? It is that it will manifest in one’s conduct for sure.If one has the understanding but it does not manifest in hisconduct, then it is considered vision (darshan) and when itcomes into his conduct, it is considered gnan.Questioner: One understands what understanding(samaj), vision (darshan), knowledge (gnan), and conduct(charitra, vartan) is but it does not come into one’s conduct.Dadashri: Yes, it will not happen without Gnan.Understanding (samaj) means ‘undecided’ talks.I do not want to force upon you what I am saying. It hasto be understood by you. My understanding is my own. Nothingis attained by forcing it on anyone. Once you understand it, thenyou will make progress through that understanding. There isnothing to be done in Gnan; it just has to be understood. Doyou think that there must be a difference between Gnan andunderstanding? Understand it from me and that understandingwill gradually materialize in the form of Gnan. You may have theGnan but as long as it does not come into conduct, it is only anAptavani-5129130Aptavani-5have the knowledge of ‘this is wrong’? It is when thewrongdoing (through the mind, speech and body) naturally willfall off. This falling off and the gnan happen at the same time.Until then the opinion ‘it should not be this way’ is establishedin your understanding anyway. ‘This should not be so’ is ourkeval darshan (absolute understanding, absolute vision). Thenit will result in kevalgnan (absolute knowledge).Questioner: After attaining the understanding (darshan),how long does it take for it to result in Gnan (experience,anubhav)?Dadashri: As the understanding matures and establishes,the Gnan develops that much within. You do not have to worryas to when that will happen. The understanding will automaticallyresult in Gnan; ‘it’ (ignorance) will leave on its own. Therefore,all You have to do is here keep understanding. The Gnan verilyis doing the work. In that You do not have to do anything. Gnancontinues to work even while you are asleep, when you areawake and even in your dreams.For example, if you want to go to Delhi, the first thing youneed to understand is how to get there, then you will reachDelhi, without fail. Understanding is like a seed and Gnan is likea tree. All you need to do is provide the water; meaning theintent (bhaav).Questioner: When it comes into vartan (practice), isthat considered as charitra (conduct)?Dadashri: It is conduct but it is right conduct (samyakcharitra). Absolute conduct (keval charitra) can only beattained–done by a Kevalgnani (absolutely enlightened) and aGnani Purush.Questioner: What is the difference between rightconduct (samyak charitra) and absolute conduct (kevalcharitra)?of the Parmatma (the Supreme Self). Scriptural knowledge isshushka-gnan; it is infertile knowledge; it will not produce anyresults. One makes the same amount of effort and yet it will notyield any fruits! The entire human birth goes to waste. So youwill have to understand everything, will you not? Here You donot have to do anything except simply understand. There is noliberation (moksha) where you have to ‘do’ something. Thepath of liberation only lies where there is understanding (samaj,darshan).The day when the understanding (samaj) results in theGnan experience (anubhav) as the Self, on that day You willno longer have it (acquisitiveness, renunciation). You do nothave to do anything. This is the path of moksha and in thispath You do not have any right to renounce (tyaag) or acquire(grahan). Those who have the right to tyaag-grahan arethose who are on the path of doing good deeds andrenouncing bad ones (shubha-ashubha). That is the path ofillusion (bhranti). This path is a clear path of liberation(moksha).When the understanding (samaj) results in your conduct(vartan), that very understanding results in Gnan (anubhav).Whatever understanding Dada has given You will continue togive you experience (anubhav). In this manner the occurring ofthe experiential Gnan (anubhavgnan) will result in the Gnan.On that day ignorance (agnan) will no longer remain.The path of moksha is easy (sahelo), straightforward(sarad) and attainable (sugam). It is the path of equanimity(sambhavi). It is such that no effort is needed in its progression.Therefore, get your work done because this opportunity is notlikely to come again for infinite lifetimes.Gnan is not something that can be given to others. Gnanarises out of the understanding (samaj) that I give you. Whenwill you understand that Gnan has manifested? When will youAptavani-5129130Aptavani-5have the knowledge of ‘this is wrong’? It is when thewrongdoing (through the mind, speech and body) naturally willfall off. This falling off and the gnan happen at the same time.Until then the opinion ‘it should not be this way’ is establishedin your understanding anyway. ‘This should not be so’ is ourkeval darshan (absolute understanding, absolute vision). Thenit will result in kevalgnan (absolute knowledge).Questioner: After attaining the understanding (darshan),how long does it take for it to result in Gnan (experience,anubhav)?Dadashri: As the understanding matures and establishes,the Gnan develops that much within. You do not have to worryas to when that will happen. The understanding will automaticallyresult in Gnan; ‘it’ (ignorance) will leave on its own. Therefore,all You have to do is here keep understanding. The Gnan verilyis doing the work. In that You do not have to do anything. Gnancontinues to work even while you are asleep, when you areawake and even in your dreams.For example, if you want to go to Delhi, the first thing youneed to understand is how to get there, then you will reachDelhi, without fail. Understanding is like a seed and Gnan is likea tree. All you need to do is provide the water; meaning theintent (bhaav).Questioner: When it comes into vartan (practice), isthat considered as charitra (conduct)?Dadashri: It is conduct but it is right conduct (samyakcharitra). Absolute conduct (keval charitra) can only beattained–done by a Kevalgnani (absolutely enlightened) and aGnani Purush.Questioner: What is the difference between rightconduct (samyak charitra) and absolute conduct (kevalcharitra)?of the Parmatma (the Supreme Self). Scriptural knowledge isshushka-gnan; it is infertile knowledge; it will not produce anyresults. One makes the same amount of effort and yet it will notyield any fruits! The entire human birth goes to waste. So youwill have to understand everything, will you not? Here You donot have to do anything except simply understand. There is noliberation (moksha) where you have to ‘do’ something. Thepath of liberation only lies where there is understanding (samaj,darshan).The day when the understanding (samaj) results in theGnan experience (anubhav) as the Self, on that day You willno longer have it (acquisitiveness, renunciation). You do nothave to do anything. This is the path of moksha and in thispath You do not have any right to renounce (tyaag) or acquire(grahan). Those who have the right to tyaag-grahan arethose who are on the path of doing good deeds andrenouncing bad ones (shubha-ashubha). That is the path ofillusion (bhranti). This path is a clear path of liberation(moksha).When the understanding (samaj) results in your conduct(vartan), that very understanding results in Gnan (anubhav).Whatever understanding Dada has given You will continue togive you experience (anubhav). In this manner the occurring ofthe experiential Gnan (anubhavgnan) will result in the Gnan.On that day ignorance (agnan) will no longer remain.The path of moksha is easy (sahelo), straightforward(sarad) and attainable (sugam). It is the path of equanimity(sambhavi). It is such that no effort is needed in its progression.Therefore, get your work done because this opportunity is notlikely to come again for infinite lifetimes.Gnan is not something that can be given to others. Gnanarises out of the understanding (samaj) that I give you. Whenwill you understand that Gnan has manifested? When will youAptavani-5131132Aptavani-5Dadashri: Right conduct (samyak charitra) is visible toothers whereas absolute conduct (keval charitra) is not. Itcannot be experienced through the senses; it is only experiencedthrough Gnan.Questioner: What is the difference between faith(shraddha), and vision (darshan) or understanding?Dadashri: Darshan is a higher state than faith (shraddha).Faith can even turn into non-faith (ashraddha). If you have faithin someone, that faith may turn; you can even lose faith in thatsame person, but the darshan will not turn or change. You needsomeone (a Gnani) to change the darshan. Does anyone’sdeluded vision (mithya darshan) change? If a person has faithin his guru for six months, that faith may vanish. Actually that isnot even faith; it is trust (vishvas).Questioner: What is the difference between faith(shraddha) and trust (vishvas)?Dadashri: Faith (shraddha) is a state lower than vision(darshan), but it is a steady state; it will not shake. But peoplehave taken its meaning to a very low level. A guru maharajmay ask you to have faith in him for six months, but how canyou if you do not have faith in him to begin with? ‘Sir, I amtrying to make the “stamp” stick, but it will not stick! Tell mesomething that will help establish my faith in you.’ Faith is notsomething you keep or establish. Faith has to come on its own.Sooj (intuition, insight) that occurs within is darshan.Some people have more sooj and some do not have any at all.Sooj is a natural gift. It is not mediated through the ego. Eachperson has sooj according to his or her own capacity. Even asmall child has sooj.Shops of ReligionQuestioner: Religion and religious pursuits of many kindsexist and all of them claim that their religion is right, so whomshould we believe to be right?Dadashri: The religion of the Vitarag (absolutely freefrom attachment and abhorrence). It is worth understanding theVitarag Lords and listening to what they have to say. The ‘righttalk’ (that which liberates) is not to be found in all these ‘shops’of religion. Each shop has its own thing to say. Each is correctfrom its viewpoint; no one is incorrect.Questioner: The thinking behind all talks is that if the ‘I’(as the ego) departs then one can attain something.Dadashri: Go to a ‘shop’ that does not have an ‘owner’and sit there. Where the ‘I-the ego’ has departed, where you donot see any anger-pride-deceit-greed; sit there and listen tothem (Gnanis). Then you will attain moksha. Otherwisemoksha is not going to happen.In a vyakhyan (religious discourse) the speaker isseparate and so is the listener. That is called a vyakhyan, notaakhyan (meaning it is called lecture not discussion), and in thepath of moksha there is no discussion, so how can there belectures? It is beyond discourse and discussion.Questioner: What is the meaning of aakhyan andvyakhyan?Dadashri: Talking to a handful of people is aakhyan andtalking to a crowd is called vyakhyan.Beware when Circumstances Are FavorableQuestioner: I have not experienced love that is free fromattachment (raag); it seems that it is something that is beyondthe average imagination.Dadashri: The karmic account with all the others is ofdwesh (abhorrence), and that has to be settled with equanimity.They are called pratikud (unfavorable, unpleasant) kashays;dwesh kashays, and those of raag (attachment) are consideredAptavani-5131132Aptavani-5Dadashri: Right conduct (samyak charitra) is visible toothers whereas absolute conduct (keval charitra) is not. Itcannot be experienced through the senses; it is only experiencedthrough Gnan.Questioner: What is the difference between faith(shraddha), and vision (darshan) or understanding?Dadashri: Darshan is a higher state than faith (shraddha).Faith can even turn into non-faith (ashraddha). If you have faithin someone, that faith may turn; you can even lose faith in thatsame person, but the darshan will not turn or change. You needsomeone (a Gnani) to change the darshan. Does anyone’sdeluded vision (mithya darshan) change? If a person has faithin his guru for six months, that faith may vanish. Actually that isnot even faith; it is trust (vishvas).Questioner: What is the difference between faith(shraddha) and trust (vishvas)?Dadashri: Faith (shraddha) is a state lower than vision(darshan), but it is a steady state; it will not shake. But peoplehave taken its meaning to a very low level. A guru maharajmay ask you to have faith in him for six months, but how canyou if you do not have faith in him to begin with? ‘Sir, I amtrying to make the “stamp” stick, but it will not stick! Tell mesomething that will help establish my faith in you.’ Faith is notsomething you keep or establish. Faith has to come on its own.Sooj (intuition, insight) that occurs within is darshan.Some people have more sooj and some do not have any at all.Sooj is a natural gift. It is not mediated through the ego. Eachperson has sooj according to his or her own capacity. Even asmall child has sooj.Shops of ReligionQuestioner: Religion and religious pursuits of many kindsexist and all of them claim that their religion is right, so whomshould we believe to be right?Dadashri: The religion of the Vitarag (absolutely freefrom attachment and abhorrence). It is worth understanding theVitarag Lords and listening to what they have to say. The ‘righttalk’ (that which liberates) is not to be found in all these ‘shops’of religion. Each shop has its own thing to say. Each is correctfrom its viewpoint; no one is incorrect.Questioner: The thinking behind all talks is that if the ‘I’(as the ego) departs then one can attain something.Dadashri: Go to a ‘shop’ that does not have an ‘owner’and sit there. Where the ‘I-the ego’ has departed, where you donot see any anger-pride-deceit-greed; sit there and listen tothem (Gnanis). Then you will attain moksha. Otherwisemoksha is not going to happen.In a vyakhyan (religious discourse) the speaker isseparate and so is the listener. That is called a vyakhyan, notaakhyan (meaning it is called lecture not discussion), and in thepath of moksha there is no discussion, so how can there belectures? It is beyond discourse and discussion.Questioner: What is the meaning of aakhyan andvyakhyan?Dadashri: Talking to a handful of people is aakhyan andtalking to a crowd is called vyakhyan.Beware when Circumstances Are FavorableQuestioner: I have not experienced love that is free fromattachment (raag); it seems that it is something that is beyondthe average imagination.Dadashri: The karmic account with all the others is ofdwesh (abhorrence), and that has to be settled with equanimity.They are called pratikud (unfavorable, unpleasant) kashays;dwesh kashays, and those of raag (attachment) are consideredAptavani-5133134Aptavani-5karmas are charged). However, charging of karmas cannotoccur in ‘our’ (the self) absence. So with whatever intent thebinding of karmas occurred, it occurred in ‘our’ presence.Now when it discharges with that same intent, just ‘see’it and ‘know’ that this is how it was bound.Questioner: Can they discharge with the same innerintent that created the bondage in the first place?Dadashri: Not with that same intent (bhaav). Intent willnever lead to release from karmic bondage. A karma that wasbound with a cruel intent, will appear cruel when it discharges.But, today those results are not Yours. They are just discharging.You simply have to ‘see’ what is discharging. From that You cantell what kind of karma was bound, what the intent was withwhich it was bound, and what the root cause of the currentdischarge (nirjara) was.Movement of the CelestialsQuestioner: Do the celestial beings move around in theseven locations (kshetras) that have been described?Dadashri: Devas (celestial beings) can go whereverthere is presence of humans. Actually Devas go more to wherethe Tirthankars are. They come less to our world. They wouldnot come here as long as our world is dirty and smelly. Devaswill go where there is a Gnani Purush. They will go whereverthese vidhis (rituals of worship), and worshipping is beingtaught, even if Gnan is not present.Moving Beyond the Right and the WrongWhat are these religions (dharmas) for? Is the definitionof religion to push away adharma? Is it to hang on to dharmaand get rid of adharma? Is it appropriate to push awaysomeone?Questioner: Adharma (that which hurts others) shouldanukud (favorable, pleasant) kashays; raag kashays. You canlet go of the pleasant and favorable (anukud) ones wheneveryou want, but great awareness (jagruti) is required under sucha circumstance. The unfavorable circumstance (pratikud) isbitter and therefore awareness arises instantly. Favorablecircumstances are sweet.When I did not have Gnan, I used to remain verycautious, alert during favorable (anukud) circumstances. Inunfavorable (pratikud) circumstances you will be made awarewithout fail; it is the favorable circumstances that make uswander life after life. If a person sees a snake enter his home,you will not have to remind him about the snake; he will remainaware and alert. Therefore, it is very critical to remain awakeand alert in this world. It is favorable circumstances that causeyou to doze off and make mistakes.Charge of Karmas and Discharge of KarmasWhen discharge (of karmas) happens, some events arevery sweet and some are very bitter. In both the circumstances,the bitter and the sweet, You have to separate, and simply ‘see’them just like a neighbor. Sweetness and bitterness is theconstant nature of the pudgal (the non-Self complex).Questioner: Let the discharge take place in the body;nothing is worth preserving or looking after in it.Dadashri: There can never be anything worth lookingafter, can there? And what you try to take care of cannot bepreserved either! What You need to preserve is Your Self.Whatever the intent (bhaav) was, at the time of bindingthe karmas, is the intent (bhaav) with which those karmas willdischarge. That is its nature (swabhav). That bondage (bindingof karmas) took place in ‘our’ presence, (‘I am the doer, I amChandubhai’) but the discharge can take place in our absencetoo. Discharge can occur even if there is samvar (no newAptavani-5133134Aptavani-5karmas are charged). However, charging of karmas cannotoccur in ‘our’ (the self) absence. So with whatever intent thebinding of karmas occurred, it occurred in ‘our’ presence.Now when it discharges with that same intent, just ‘see’it and ‘know’ that this is how it was bound.Questioner: Can they discharge with the same innerintent that created the bondage in the first place?Dadashri: Not with that same intent (bhaav). Intent willnever lead to release from karmic bondage. A karma that wasbound with a cruel intent, will appear cruel when it discharges.But, today those results are not Yours. They are just discharging.You simply have to ‘see’ what is discharging. From that You cantell what kind of karma was bound, what the intent was withwhich it was bound, and what the root cause of the currentdischarge (nirjara) was.Movement of the CelestialsQuestioner: Do the celestial beings move around in theseven locations (kshetras) that have been described?Dadashri: Devas (celestial beings) can go whereverthere is presence of humans. Actually Devas go more to wherethe Tirthankars are. They come less to our world. They wouldnot come here as long as our world is dirty and smelly. Devaswill go where there is a Gnani Purush. They will go whereverthese vidhis (rituals of worship), and worshipping is beingtaught, even if Gnan is not present.Moving Beyond the Right and the WrongWhat are these religions (dharmas) for? Is the definitionof religion to push away adharma? Is it to hang on to dharmaand get rid of adharma? Is it appropriate to push awaysomeone?Questioner: Adharma (that which hurts others) shouldanukud (favorable, pleasant) kashays; raag kashays. You canlet go of the pleasant and favorable (anukud) ones wheneveryou want, but great awareness (jagruti) is required under sucha circumstance. The unfavorable circumstance (pratikud) isbitter and therefore awareness arises instantly. Favorablecircumstances are sweet.When I did not have Gnan, I used to remain verycautious, alert during favorable (anukud) circumstances. Inunfavorable (pratikud) circumstances you will be made awarewithout fail; it is the favorable circumstances that make uswander life after life. If a person sees a snake enter his home,you will not have to remind him about the snake; he will remainaware and alert. Therefore, it is very critical to remain awakeand alert in this world. It is favorable circumstances that causeyou to doze off and make mistakes.Charge of Karmas and Discharge of KarmasWhen discharge (of karmas) happens, some events arevery sweet and some are very bitter. In both the circumstances,the bitter and the sweet, You have to separate, and simply ‘see’them just like a neighbor. Sweetness and bitterness is theconstant nature of the pudgal (the non-Self complex).Questioner: Let the discharge take place in the body;nothing is worth preserving or looking after in it.Dadashri: There can never be anything worth lookingafter, can there? And what you try to take care of cannot bepreserved either! What You need to preserve is Your Self.Whatever the intent (bhaav) was, at the time of bindingthe karmas, is the intent (bhaav) with which those karmas willdischarge. That is its nature (swabhav). That bondage (bindingof karmas) took place in ‘our’ presence, (‘I am the doer, I amChandubhai’) but the discharge can take place in our absencetoo. Discharge can occur even if there is samvar (no newAptavani-5135136Aptavani-5Dadashri: Yes, but nowhere in the religious books dothey show you a way to become free from worldly entanglements.They are there for you to do good deeds and be helpful toothers; with them bad deeds and hurtful action will notovercome you. So they teach you something good. With themyou get worldly happiness, you get food and sustenance; youwill not encounter any obstacles. They keep teaching you to begood and to be helpful to others. Very rarely is there a GnaniPurush around. What I am saying, you will not find anywhere,not even in books, because it (knowledge of the Self) isindescribable. Only the Gnani Purush has all that. Whatever heexplains, you will grasp through the intellect and if your Selfaccepts it; then only believe it.You will have to shape up in front of the Gnani. Thereobstinacy (aadayee) will not do at all and if your worries goaway, if the divisiveness due to differences of opinions(matbhed) go away, then realize that it is something worthlistening to. But ordinarily not a single matbhed has gone, one’smeditation (dhyan) has not improved at all, he continues to haveartadhyan (that which hurts the self) and raudradhyan (thatwhich hurts the self and others), which means that one has notattained even a word of dharma (religion) and yet he believeshe has been practicing dharma for forty years. For forty yearshe has been going to the temples and he remains in upashrayas(place of worship). But it is all meaningless. He is wasting histime.One is full of mistakes and yet he cannot see a singlemistake of his own. After Self-realization your partiality towards‘Chandubhai’ does not remain; You will begin to ‘see’ hismistakes. Now tell Me; would you see any mistakes of yourswhen you are ‘Chandubhai’? As ‘Chandubhai’, you are thejudge, you are the lawyer and you are also the accused! Whenwill you ever find a solution to this? How long are you going towander around like this? A peculiar and difficult era of this timebe turned into dharma (that which hurts no one).Dadashri: These dharma and adharma are bothkalpit (products of the illusion), are they not? Are wesupposed to come out of the illusion or remain in it? Thisillusion will make you wander endlessly life after life. Dharmameans to help others and give happiness to every living being.But who is the one that gives happiness? It is the egoism. Thefruit of dharma is worldly happiness and the fruit of adharmais worldly pain and suffering. But even after practicing thesedharmas, one has to go into the animal life form. How doesone take a birth into the animal life form? When one hasthoughts of taking things that do not rightfully belong to him; itis a sign of beastliness, which takes him to a birth in the animalkingdom. Enjoy that which is rightfully yours; your wife, yourchildren, your home, etc. That is considered a humane quality,and to give to others that which is rightfully yours, isconsidered a quality of the celestials.Moksha Through Scriptures or the Gnani Purush?How long do you have to listen to gnan (knowledge)that is not beneficial to you? You do it until you meet a GnaniPurush. You have to do so until you find the real thing, do younot? But when you meet a Gnani Purush, then ask Him foranything! You will receive whatever you ask for in the path ofthe Self, because the Gnani Purush is the bestower ofmoksha. He has come to give you the gift of moksha. He isliberated; he has become liberated and is able to liberateothers. He has the energy and power to liberate countlesspeople. You will receive everything through Him. Now thatyou have met Me, I am telling you that this (the GnaniPurush) is the tool (sadhan) to free yourself from all worldlytroubles.Questioner: Are religious books not written to free usfrom worldly entanglements?Aptavani-5135136Aptavani-5Dadashri: Yes, but nowhere in the religious books dothey show you a way to become free from worldly entanglements.They are there for you to do good deeds and be helpful toothers; with them bad deeds and hurtful action will notovercome you. So they teach you something good. With themyou get worldly happiness, you get food and sustenance; youwill not encounter any obstacles. They keep teaching you to begood and to be helpful to others. Very rarely is there a GnaniPurush around. What I am saying, you will not find anywhere,not even in books, because it (knowledge of the Self) isindescribable. Only the Gnani Purush has all that. Whatever heexplains, you will grasp through the intellect and if your Selfaccepts it; then only believe it.You will have to shape up in front of the Gnani. Thereobstinacy (aadayee) will not do at all and if your worries goaway, if the divisiveness due to differences of opinions(matbhed) go away, then realize that it is something worthlistening to. But ordinarily not a single matbhed has gone, one’smeditation (dhyan) has not improved at all, he continues to haveartadhyan (that which hurts the self) and raudradhyan (thatwhich hurts the self and others), which means that one has notattained even a word of dharma (religion) and yet he believeshe has been practicing dharma for forty years. For forty yearshe has been going to the temples and he remains in upashrayas(place of worship). But it is all meaningless. He is wasting histime.One is full of mistakes and yet he cannot see a singlemistake of his own. After Self-realization your partiality towards‘Chandubhai’ does not remain; You will begin to ‘see’ hismistakes. Now tell Me; would you see any mistakes of yourswhen you are ‘Chandubhai’? As ‘Chandubhai’, you are thejudge, you are the lawyer and you are also the accused! Whenwill you ever find a solution to this? How long are you going towander around like this? A peculiar and difficult era of this timebe turned into dharma (that which hurts no one).Dadashri: These dharma and adharma are bothkalpit (products of the illusion), are they not? Are wesupposed to come out of the illusion or remain in it? Thisillusion will make you wander endlessly life after life. Dharmameans to help others and give happiness to every living being.But who is the one that gives happiness? It is the egoism. Thefruit of dharma is worldly happiness and the fruit of adharmais worldly pain and suffering. But even after practicing thesedharmas, one has to go into the animal life form. How doesone take a birth into the animal life form? When one hasthoughts of taking things that do not rightfully belong to him; itis a sign of beastliness, which takes him to a birth in the animalkingdom. Enjoy that which is rightfully yours; your wife, yourchildren, your home, etc. That is considered a humane quality,and to give to others that which is rightfully yours, isconsidered a quality of the celestials.Moksha Through Scriptures or the Gnani Purush?How long do you have to listen to gnan (knowledge)that is not beneficial to you? You do it until you meet a GnaniPurush. You have to do so until you find the real thing, do younot? But when you meet a Gnani Purush, then ask Him foranything! You will receive whatever you ask for in the path ofthe Self, because the Gnani Purush is the bestower ofmoksha. He has come to give you the gift of moksha. He isliberated; he has become liberated and is able to liberateothers. He has the energy and power to liberate countlesspeople. You will receive everything through Him. Now thatyou have met Me, I am telling you that this (the GnaniPurush) is the tool (sadhan) to free yourself from all worldlytroubles.Questioner: Are religious books not written to free usfrom worldly entanglements?Aptavani-5137138Aptavani-5cycle is approaching, so now that you have met the Gnani, getYour work done, through proceeding with the highest intent(bhavna).There is nothing in this world that you can give to a GnaniPurush that will be useful to him because he has no desire foranything. No desire for money, for fame, for sex, or for respect.The Gnani Purush is desire-free; His mere darshan washesaway all your sins. You experience boundless peace by justsitting with Him.Moha Begets More MohaAs ignorance (agnan) increases, as illusory attachment(moha) increases, one will acquire more means (the instrumentsand tools, living or non-living) for causing more moha. In all thishe entrenches his belief that he is something; that he has suchpunya (merit karma), an effect of which has brought all thesematerial luxuries of mansions, and other things. On the contrary,he becomes trapped even further. The one who has slipped andis sinking in the mud, he becomes even more stuck as hestruggles to get out. Where is this state and where is the path ofliberation of the Vitarag Lords?Even right worldly conduct (samyak aachar) is not to befound anywhere. It has all become traditional social conduct.The mere seeing of right worldly conduct (samyak aachar) isvery pleasing.Questioner: What is the difference between rightworldly conduct (samyak aachar) and worldly conduct(lokaachar)?Dadashri: Worldly conduct (lokaachar) means to dowhat other people in the world do. Samyak aachar is thoughtfulconduct; it is not completely based on thoughts but whateverproportion of thoughts he puts in it, his conduct will becomesamyak (right) to that proportion. Such conduct, when itbecomes complete (samyak aachar), matches the Lord’sscriptures.There is not a single living being that is not looking foreternal happiness. One believes that permanent happiness lies inmoney but then inner turmoil and restlessness begins in that too.Inner burning (badatara) and permanent happiness cannot co-exist. Both are contradictory. It is not the fault of money; it is thefault of the self. He concentrates on money and does not evenlook elsewhere. That is why we have sold out on our values;they have been traded in the pawn shops. How can youconsider this living? We are called arya praja (the spirituallyexalted people of India). This does not suit us. There are threethings in such people: noble conduct, noble thoughts and noblespeech. None of these exist today. People have becomeuncivilized and yet they live under the impression that they haveright conduct and that they will attain liberation. You fools! Youwill not attain anything for thousands of lifetimes with what youare doing. The path to moksha is not like that.Good Deeds Do Not Cancel Bad DeedsQuestioner: Do we not need to hang on to merit karmas(punya) until we reach the path of liberation?Dadashri: Yes, that is why people are preoccupied withlooking for good and auspicious things, are they not? You willattain everything through such punya. Merit karmas (punya)are bound on the path to liberation but you do not need suchmerit karma. What is the kind of merit karmas (punya) of theone on the path of moksha like? His whole life will pass bywithout him even knowing whether the sun comes up or not,his life would be easy. That is the kind of merit karmas one willhave. So then, what are we going to do with merit karmas thatare such that despite having worldly comforts they lead to painand misery?Questioner: Is such a punya not needed until one findsAptavani-5137138Aptavani-5cycle is approaching, so now that you have met the Gnani, getYour work done, through proceeding with the highest intent(bhavna).There is nothing in this world that you can give to a GnaniPurush that will be useful to him because he has no desire foranything. No desire for money, for fame, for sex, or for respect.The Gnani Purush is desire-free; His mere darshan washesaway all your sins. You experience boundless peace by justsitting with Him.Moha Begets More MohaAs ignorance (agnan) increases, as illusory attachment(moha) increases, one will acquire more means (the instrumentsand tools, living or non-living) for causing more moha. In all thishe entrenches his belief that he is something; that he has suchpunya (merit karma), an effect of which has brought all thesematerial luxuries of mansions, and other things. On the contrary,he becomes trapped even further. The one who has slipped andis sinking in the mud, he becomes even more stuck as hestruggles to get out. Where is this state and where is the path ofliberation of the Vitarag Lords?Even right worldly conduct (samyak aachar) is not to befound anywhere. It has all become traditional social conduct.The mere seeing of right worldly conduct (samyak aachar) isvery pleasing.Questioner: What is the difference between rightworldly conduct (samyak aachar) and worldly conduct(lokaachar)?Dadashri: Worldly conduct (lokaachar) means to dowhat other people in the world do. Samyak aachar is thoughtfulconduct; it is not completely based on thoughts but whateverproportion of thoughts he puts in it, his conduct will becomesamyak (right) to that proportion. Such conduct, when itbecomes complete (samyak aachar), matches the Lord’sscriptures.There is not a single living being that is not looking foreternal happiness. One believes that permanent happiness lies inmoney but then inner turmoil and restlessness begins in that too.Inner burning (badatara) and permanent happiness cannot co-exist. Both are contradictory. It is not the fault of money; it is thefault of the self. He concentrates on money and does not evenlook elsewhere. That is why we have sold out on our values;they have been traded in the pawn shops. How can youconsider this living? We are called arya praja (the spirituallyexalted people of India). This does not suit us. There are threethings in such people: noble conduct, noble thoughts and noblespeech. None of these exist today. People have becomeuncivilized and yet they live under the impression that they haveright conduct and that they will attain liberation. You fools! Youwill not attain anything for thousands of lifetimes with what youare doing. The path to moksha is not like that.Good Deeds Do Not Cancel Bad DeedsQuestioner: Do we not need to hang on to merit karmas(punya) until we reach the path of liberation?Dadashri: Yes, that is why people are preoccupied withlooking for good and auspicious things, are they not? You willattain everything through such punya. Merit karmas (punya)are bound on the path to liberation but you do not need suchmerit karma. What is the kind of merit karmas (punya) of theone on the path of moksha like? His whole life will pass bywithout him even knowing whether the sun comes up or not,his life would be easy. That is the kind of merit karmas one willhave. So then, what are we going to do with merit karmas thatare such that despite having worldly comforts they lead to painand misery?Questioner: Is such a punya not needed until one findsAptavani-5139140Aptavani-5comforts). Parigraha means a load on the head; I neverexperience a load of any kind. I do not even feel a load of mybody. Yet Dada lives a normal life; he eats, drinks, he goes toweddings and funerals!The only thing the Vitarags take into consideration iswhether a person is free of kashays or not. They do not lookat whether he is a tyaagi (one who renounces the worldly life)or a grahasthi (one who lives a family life). Is there a kashay-free state or have their kashay become weak in intensity? Thetwo to five percent of ascetics who have a mild or a gooddisposition by nature have weak kashays.Questioner: Is that considered a weakness ofunderstanding?Dadashri: Not in their understanding; there is naturalgoodness in them. Nevertheless the Lord still did not call themkashay-free. ‘I am’ (ego) is kashay.It is possible for kashays to weaken and decrease inintensity by reading books of Krupadudev Shrimad Rajchandra.But people have not realized this. What do we mean by mundkashays? It is when kashays arise, one is aware of them but hewill not let anyone else know about them. It is a state such thatone is able to turn kashays around. Kashay is the nature ofworldly life and a kashay-free state is moksha. The main thingis kashay. If one’s kashays are gone, then his work is done;otherwise even if he is a sadhu (monk) or a sanyasi(renunciate), he has not attained anything. As compared tothese, those with controllable (mund) kashays living a marriedworldly life are better.The Plight of the Ignorant Old ManThis man here can be considered a man with low intensitykashay. But without Gnan, where would his chit go? The wholeday long it remains in his work, his home, his children, his guests,the path to moksha?Dadashri: Yes, that is true but where do we get to seesuch punya in people? There is no stability anywhere.Because, what do people desire? They say they will bind meritkarmas so that no demerit karmic effects, in the form of painand suffering, come their way. However, what does the Lordsay? If you bind merit karmas worth one hundred rupees, thatis how much will be credited to your karmic account. But ifsomeone comes along and you tell him contemptuously, ‘Hey!Move out of my way!’ it creates demerit karmas worth tworupees, but it will not be cancelled out by the merit karmas ofhundred rupees. You will have to experience the effect of bothdemerit karmas (paap) and merit karmas (punya). God is notso naïve. If credit-debit were possible, then there would neverbe any misery in the homes of the Vaniks (mostly Jain faith).But here you have to experience both, happiness as well asmisery. See how precise the Lord is! One can never dosubtraction in karmas.Kashay Is the Critical Root Cause of LifeAfter LifeAfter Self-realization, nothing remains to be done and thatis why I have told you not to do anything. Whatever is beingdone is done by a completely different energy but peopleneedlessly take credit and blame for it. In doing so; theyincrease their number of future lives.Wherever there is kashay, there is nothing but baggageof parigraha (takes one away from the Self) regardless ofwhether it is someone living a worldly life (grahasthi),someone who has renounced the worldly life (tyaagi), orsomeone who lives in the Himalayas. Where there is absenceof kashays there is absence of parigraha, even if one is livingin a palace. Where do I have any parigraha? It may seem thatDada is a parigrahi (living a worldly life with all the worldlyAptavani-5139140Aptavani-5comforts). Parigraha means a load on the head; I neverexperience a load of any kind. I do not even feel a load of mybody. Yet Dada lives a normal life; he eats, drinks, he goes toweddings and funerals!The only thing the Vitarags take into consideration iswhether a person is free of kashays or not. They do not lookat whether he is a tyaagi (one who renounces the worldly life)or a grahasthi (one who lives a family life). Is there a kashay-free state or have their kashay become weak in intensity? Thetwo to five percent of ascetics who have a mild or a gooddisposition by nature have weak kashays.Questioner: Is that considered a weakness ofunderstanding?Dadashri: Not in their understanding; there is naturalgoodness in them. Nevertheless the Lord still did not call themkashay-free. ‘I am’ (ego) is kashay.It is possible for kashays to weaken and decrease inintensity by reading books of Krupadudev Shrimad Rajchandra.But people have not realized this. What do we mean by mundkashays? It is when kashays arise, one is aware of them but hewill not let anyone else know about them. It is a state such thatone is able to turn kashays around. Kashay is the nature ofworldly life and a kashay-free state is moksha. The main thingis kashay. If one’s kashays are gone, then his work is done;otherwise even if he is a sadhu (monk) or a sanyasi(renunciate), he has not attained anything. As compared tothese, those with controllable (mund) kashays living a marriedworldly life are better.The Plight of the Ignorant Old ManThis man here can be considered a man with low intensitykashay. But without Gnan, where would his chit go? The wholeday long it remains in his work, his home, his children, his guests,the path to moksha?Dadashri: Yes, that is true but where do we get to seesuch punya in people? There is no stability anywhere.Because, what do people desire? They say they will bind meritkarmas so that no demerit karmic effects, in the form of painand suffering, come their way. However, what does the Lordsay? If you bind merit karmas worth one hundred rupees, thatis how much will be credited to your karmic account. But ifsomeone comes along and you tell him contemptuously, ‘Hey!Move out of my way!’ it creates demerit karmas worth tworupees, but it will not be cancelled out by the merit karmas ofhundred rupees. You will have to experience the effect of bothdemerit karmas (paap) and merit karmas (punya). God is notso naïve. If credit-debit were possible, then there would neverbe any misery in the homes of the Vaniks (mostly Jain faith).But here you have to experience both, happiness as well asmisery. See how precise the Lord is! One can never dosubtraction in karmas.Kashay Is the Critical Root Cause of LifeAfter LifeAfter Self-realization, nothing remains to be done and thatis why I have told you not to do anything. Whatever is beingdone is done by a completely different energy but peopleneedlessly take credit and blame for it. In doing so; theyincrease their number of future lives.Wherever there is kashay, there is nothing but baggageof parigraha (takes one away from the Self) regardless ofwhether it is someone living a worldly life (grahasthi),someone who has renounced the worldly life (tyaagi), orsomeone who lives in the Himalayas. Where there is absenceof kashays there is absence of parigraha, even if one is livingin a palace. Where do I have any parigraha? It may seem thatDada is a parigrahi (living a worldly life with all the worldlyAptavani-5141142Aptavani-5when he asks you. You do not have to worry whether he hasany experience or not. In business, sometimes your mind willalso tell you, ‘Today there are many customers. My children willget deceived by the customers so let me go to the shop.’ Whywould you want to worry like this? You raised these children,nurtured them, and educated them, got them married, so whyshould you worry about them? We should do what is good forour Self. Now the law is, ‘Sab sabki sambhalo’ (Each one isto mind his own business). These relationships are like thosebetween a vendor and his customers. You had become deeplyinvolved with them due to ignorance (agnan) and now you haveto understand through Gnan.There Is No Kashay in Akram VignanHe who has conquered his kashay bhaav (the intent ofanger, pride, deceit and greed) is called an Arihant. Kashaybhaav do not remain with ‘I am Shuddhatma’. Where thereis shuddha upayog (applied awareness as the Self), there isno kashay bhaav. There is no kashay where there isShuddhatma, and there is no Shuddhatma where there iskashay. Kashays do not occur at all in the path of AkramVignan. In the Kramic path, karmas are definitely boundwherever there is ashata-vedaniya (pain giving experience),whereas in the Akram path, one does not bind any karmas atall, but suffering of the pain is inevitable for the duration of thattime.Questioner: This is the greatness of Akram Gnan, is itnot?Dadashri: Tremendous greatness! This is tremendousprogress! Otherwise, not even a fraction of the kashay willdecrease.Importance of SatsangFrom the time a living being (jiva) comes to be born ineating and drinking. The chit spreads out and gets dissipated inall these things. He acquires merit karmas (punya) with that buthow long is he going to keep reaping the fruits? How long are yougoing to keep sowing and reaping the crop, life after life?Then this man will also give unwarranted advice. Evenwhen the young son does not ask him, he will say, ‘Wait, wait,you will make a mistake’, and then gives him advice. The Lordsays you should give advice to your children when they are ingreat difficulty. Yes, if they keep asking you, then you have toanswer them. The one moving towards or being the Self, will notbe overly wise and give unsolicited advice. When you arecounting money and your son talks to you about the business,you will feel it would be better if he talked less. That is how itshould constantly be for You with reference to the Self.Nevertheless, because your worldly life is still there, you cannotavoid becoming involved with it. But do not get involved with itdeliberately and of your own volition.Questioner: If my son lacks experience and I see that heis going to make a mistake then I will feel like saying something,will I not?Dadashri: If your father were still here, he too wouldsay the same thing about you; that you lack in experience. Andeven his father would say the same thing. That is the nature ofthe people of India. This is what the Lord considers as beingover-wise. Even a sixty-year-old man will be considered achild by his own father. How is he a child when he is agrandfather now?Amongst our Gujaratis, with such knowledge, when afather is on his deathbed he will worry about what will becomeof his children after his death. These are all bad habits.Vyavasthit is the doer. You can only hang on to him (your child)as long as you can see him, is that not so? But what happenswhen he is away from you? So give advice or solutions onlyAptavani-5141142Aptavani-5when he asks you. You do not have to worry whether he hasany experience or not. In business, sometimes your mind willalso tell you, ‘Today there are many customers. My children willget deceived by the customers so let me go to the shop.’ Whywould you want to worry like this? You raised these children,nurtured them, and educated them, got them married, so whyshould you worry about them? We should do what is good forour Self. Now the law is, ‘Sab sabki sambhalo’ (Each one isto mind his own business). These relationships are like thosebetween a vendor and his customers. You had become deeplyinvolved with them due to ignorance (agnan) and now you haveto understand through Gnan.There Is No Kashay in Akram VignanHe who has conquered his kashay bhaav (the intent ofanger, pride, deceit and greed) is called an Arihant. Kashaybhaav do not remain with ‘I am Shuddhatma’. Where thereis shuddha upayog (applied awareness as the Self), there isno kashay bhaav. There is no kashay where there isShuddhatma, and there is no Shuddhatma where there iskashay. Kashays do not occur at all in the path of AkramVignan. In the Kramic path, karmas are definitely boundwherever there is ashata-vedaniya (pain giving experience),whereas in the Akram path, one does not bind any karmas atall, but suffering of the pain is inevitable for the duration of thattime.Questioner: This is the greatness of Akram Gnan, is itnot?Dadashri: Tremendous greatness! This is tremendousprogress! Otherwise, not even a fraction of the kashay willdecrease.Importance of SatsangFrom the time a living being (jiva) comes to be born ineating and drinking. The chit spreads out and gets dissipated inall these things. He acquires merit karmas (punya) with that buthow long is he going to keep reaping the fruits? How long are yougoing to keep sowing and reaping the crop, life after life?Then this man will also give unwarranted advice. Evenwhen the young son does not ask him, he will say, ‘Wait, wait,you will make a mistake’, and then gives him advice. The Lordsays you should give advice to your children when they are ingreat difficulty. Yes, if they keep asking you, then you have toanswer them. The one moving towards or being the Self, will notbe overly wise and give unsolicited advice. When you arecounting money and your son talks to you about the business,you will feel it would be better if he talked less. That is how itshould constantly be for You with reference to the Self.Nevertheless, because your worldly life is still there, you cannotavoid becoming involved with it. But do not get involved with itdeliberately and of your own volition.Questioner: If my son lacks experience and I see that heis going to make a mistake then I will feel like saying something,will I not?Dadashri: If your father were still here, he too wouldsay the same thing about you; that you lack in experience. Andeven his father would say the same thing. That is the nature ofthe people of India. This is what the Lord considers as beingover-wise. Even a sixty-year-old man will be considered achild by his own father. How is he a child when he is agrandfather now?Amongst our Gujaratis, with such knowledge, when afather is on his deathbed he will worry about what will becomeof his children after his death. These are all bad habits.Vyavasthit is the doer. You can only hang on to him (your child)as long as you can see him, is that not so? But what happenswhen he is away from you? So give advice or solutions onlyAptavani-5143144Aptavani-5a worldly life form, until the time it attains final liberation(moksha), everything is vyavasthit. Vyavasthit will take one tomoksha if one does not interfere in things. But one will notrefrain from meddling, will one?Questioner: So then according to what You are saying,even satsang is an unnecessary interference, is it not?Dadashri: Yes, that too is considered interference. Thereis no need to do it. But because one has gone wrong throughhaving acquired a dense wrong vision (gruhit mithyatva), it hasto be set right. Does sugar not dissolve slowly in tea? In thesame token, the Self is slowly going towards moksha.What does even satsang ultimately tell You? Do not ‘do’anything; just keep ‘seeing’.NiyatiQuestioner: If everything is vyavasthit, then where isthe need to do anything? It sounds contradictory.Dadashri: This is all vyavasthit.Questioner: So does that mean that if a person believesin destiny (niyati), everything is decided?Dadashri: No, if he believes in destiny, then he becomesinsistent. He would claim victory. Then destiny would beconsidered God. Destiny is not the cause alone; there are manycollective causes (samucchaya kaaran) in it. That is why I saythat it is scientific circumstantial evidence. If it were just destinyalone, then we would not have to worry at all. Destiny meansif you throw something in the sea, it would definitely reach theshore.Questioner: Does niyati mean prarabdha (effect, causeof which was in the past life)?Dadashri: Prarabdha, naseeb (luck) is not niyati.Niyati is a different thing altogether. Niyati means the flow ofprogress of all embodied souls of this world. This is flowingaccording to some rules of niyati; however there are many othercauses too, e.g. time, space, etc.Sat Chit AnandQuestioner: How can one attain purity of the chit?Dadashri: You are purifying the chit, are you not?People interpret the meaning of chit in their own language. Theybelieve the chit to be something entirely different. The chit isthat bhaav (intent) that arises from the union of knowledge(gnan) and vision (darshan). To purify the chit means to purifyknowledge and vision (gnan and darshan). What can you callthe Shuddhatma (the pure Self)? You can call it ‘shuddhachidroop’. The One whose knowledge and vision have becomepure (shuddha), that is the Self and that verily is the shuddhachidroop.Questioner: Is that what we call ‘Sacchidanand’ (sat-chit-anand)?Dadashri: Sat Chit Anand is a state of experience andthis Shuddhatma is a state of conviction and awareness.Shuddhatma and shuddha chidroop are the same things. Yourchit becomes completely pure when I give You knowledge ofthe Self. Now, only the intellect will bother you. You have to becareful there and turn the intellect around with respect. There isno ego where there the Self is. To say ‘I’ in the wrong place,‘I am Chandubhai’, is ego and to say, ‘I’ in the main place (theSelf) is not considered ego. It is a nirvikalp place – a void ofvikalp, ‘I am’ (ego).When differences of ‘Me-and-you’ arise within a humanbeing; that is when one binds karmas. Do animals ever say, ‘Iam Chandubhai’? They do not have any problems, do they?Therefore, it is this aropit bhaav (the wrong belief, ‘I amAptavani-5143144Aptavani-5a worldly life form, until the time it attains final liberation(moksha), everything is vyavasthit. Vyavasthit will take one tomoksha if one does not interfere in things. But one will notrefrain from meddling, will one?Questioner: So then according to what You are saying,even satsang is an unnecessary interference, is it not?Dadashri: Yes, that too is considered interference. Thereis no need to do it. But because one has gone wrong throughhaving acquired a dense wrong vision (gruhit mithyatva), it hasto be set right. Does sugar not dissolve slowly in tea? In thesame token, the Self is slowly going towards moksha.What does even satsang ultimately tell You? Do not ‘do’anything; just keep ‘seeing’.NiyatiQuestioner: If everything is vyavasthit, then where isthe need to do anything? It sounds contradictory.Dadashri: This is all vyavasthit.Questioner: So does that mean that if a person believesin destiny (niyati), everything is decided?Dadashri: No, if he believes in destiny, then he becomesinsistent. He would claim victory. Then destiny would beconsidered God. Destiny is not the cause alone; there are manycollective causes (samucchaya kaaran) in it. That is why I saythat it is scientific circumstantial evidence. If it were just destinyalone, then we would not have to worry at all. Destiny meansif you throw something in the sea, it would definitely reach theshore.Questioner: Does niyati mean prarabdha (effect, causeof which was in the past life)?Dadashri: Prarabdha, naseeb (luck) is not niyati.Niyati is a different thing altogether. Niyati means the flow ofprogress of all embodied souls of this world. This is flowingaccording to some rules of niyati; however there are many othercauses too, e.g. time, space, etc.Sat Chit AnandQuestioner: How can one attain purity of the chit?Dadashri: You are purifying the chit, are you not?People interpret the meaning of chit in their own language. Theybelieve the chit to be something entirely different. The chit isthat bhaav (intent) that arises from the union of knowledge(gnan) and vision (darshan). To purify the chit means to purifyknowledge and vision (gnan and darshan). What can you callthe Shuddhatma (the pure Self)? You can call it ‘shuddhachidroop’. The One whose knowledge and vision have becomepure (shuddha), that is the Self and that verily is the shuddhachidroop.Questioner: Is that what we call ‘Sacchidanand’ (sat-chit-anand)?Dadashri: Sat Chit Anand is a state of experience andthis Shuddhatma is a state of conviction and awareness.Shuddhatma and shuddha chidroop are the same things. Yourchit becomes completely pure when I give You knowledge ofthe Self. Now, only the intellect will bother you. You have to becareful there and turn the intellect around with respect. There isno ego where there the Self is. To say ‘I’ in the wrong place,‘I am Chandubhai’, is ego and to say, ‘I’ in the main place (theSelf) is not considered ego. It is a nirvikalp place – a void ofvikalp, ‘I am’ (ego).When differences of ‘Me-and-you’ arise within a humanbeing; that is when one binds karmas. Do animals ever say, ‘Iam Chandubhai’? They do not have any problems, do they?Therefore, it is this aropit bhaav (the wrong belief, ‘I amAptavani-5145146Aptavani-5Chandubhai’) that binds karmas.Nirant and NirakudataWhere the ego is at zero (shunyata), there nirakudata(the bliss of the Self) is attained. Not even for a second does thestate of nirakudata arise until the ego comes to zero. One mayattain nirant (a state free from botheration and uneasiness;relative peace). There is a great difference between nirant andnirakudata.Questioner: Please explain the difference.Dadashri: Nirakudata arises after the ego goes awayand nirant occurs when bothersome circumstances are absent.People look for nirant. Nirakudata is one eighth of theattribute of the Siddha Lords (the absolute Self).Questioner: In the complex of the mind-intellect-chit;the chit has the most shakti (energy and power), does it not?Dadashri: The chit is mishrachetan (mixture of the Selfand the non-Self) and the others are matter (pudgal) by nature.The chit is a mixture of knowledge and vision (gnan anddarshan). When it becomes pure one becomes Shuddhatma.As long as one likes the worldly life, when the chit is wanderingin the worldly life, then the Shuddhatma is not there. The chitbecomes steady when it becomes pure through the splendor ofthis Gnan.The Support of the Ego and the Egoless StateYou can demolish a palace that you had built yourself, butthis ‘palace’ (the body complex) has been built by the prakruti(the non-Self complex). Therefore You need to do everythingafter careful and systematic understanding.The Gnani Purush knows how this ‘palace’ was built;where the core foundation that supports the entire structure is;what will cause the first floor to collapse and what will cause thesecond floor to cave in. The Gnani knows all that.The world exists and is sustained, because of support ofthe belief that ‘I am Chandubhai’. Now that You are aShuddhatma; because of, ‘I am Shuddhatma’, the support for,‘I am Chandubhai’, is no longer there; hence everything willcollapse or leave. This thing in my hand is held up because ofthe support of the hand; if I move the hand away, it will fall.Otherwise, it will not leave even if you tried.Questioner: How can one become free from thetendencies (vruttis) that are attached to the support?Dadashri: Does the awareness (laksha) of ‘I amShuddhatma’ remain with you?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Then there is no support (adhaar). Notendencies remain. Whatever tendencies there are, they are ofthe one without support (‘Chandubhai’), not the one withsupport (the Self). From the moment the support, by the onegiving support, leaves; all those tendencies (vruttis) are with theone who has become supportless (niradhaar). You should havethis in Your awareness, that those tendencies are not Yours.There is no such thing as tendency in You. After becoming theSelf, Your tendencies are that of the Self (nijvrutti), and theyremain in the Self.The Non-Doer and the MindWhen the self becomes the Self (Shuddhatma), Youbecome the non-doer (akarta). Then the tubers of the mindwill continue to be destroyed. As the tubers of the mindsprout, it will give rise to another mind, if one becomes thedoer (karta). The tubers of the mind will continue to sprouteven when You are the non-doer. Even when the mind isrestless, it continues to discharge but You should remain inyour upayog (applied awareness as the Self), and ‘see’ whatAptavani-5145146Aptavani-5Chandubhai’) that binds karmas.Nirant and NirakudataWhere the ego is at zero (shunyata), there nirakudata(the bliss of the Self) is attained. Not even for a second does thestate of nirakudata arise until the ego comes to zero. One mayattain nirant (a state free from botheration and uneasiness;relative peace). There is a great difference between nirant andnirakudata.Questioner: Please explain the difference.Dadashri: Nirakudata arises after the ego goes awayand nirant occurs when bothersome circumstances are absent.People look for nirant. Nirakudata is one eighth of theattribute of the Siddha Lords (the absolute Self).Questioner: In the complex of the mind-intellect-chit;the chit has the most shakti (energy and power), does it not?Dadashri: The chit is mishrachetan (mixture of the Selfand the non-Self) and the others are matter (pudgal) by nature.The chit is a mixture of knowledge and vision (gnan anddarshan). When it becomes pure one becomes Shuddhatma.As long as one likes the worldly life, when the chit is wanderingin the worldly life, then the Shuddhatma is not there. The chitbecomes steady when it becomes pure through the splendor ofthis Gnan.The Support of the Ego and the Egoless StateYou can demolish a palace that you had built yourself, butthis ‘palace’ (the body complex) has been built by the prakruti(the non-Self complex). Therefore You need to do everythingafter careful and systematic understanding.The Gnani Purush knows how this ‘palace’ was built;where the core foundation that supports the entire structure is;what will cause the first floor to collapse and what will cause thesecond floor to cave in. The Gnani knows all that.The world exists and is sustained, because of support ofthe belief that ‘I am Chandubhai’. Now that You are aShuddhatma; because of, ‘I am Shuddhatma’, the support for,‘I am Chandubhai’, is no longer there; hence everything willcollapse or leave. This thing in my hand is held up because ofthe support of the hand; if I move the hand away, it will fall.Otherwise, it will not leave even if you tried.Questioner: How can one become free from thetendencies (vruttis) that are attached to the support?Dadashri: Does the awareness (laksha) of ‘I amShuddhatma’ remain with you?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Then there is no support (adhaar). Notendencies remain. Whatever tendencies there are, they are ofthe one without support (‘Chandubhai’), not the one withsupport (the Self). From the moment the support, by the onegiving support, leaves; all those tendencies (vruttis) are with theone who has become supportless (niradhaar). You should havethis in Your awareness, that those tendencies are not Yours.There is no such thing as tendency in You. After becoming theSelf, Your tendencies are that of the Self (nijvrutti), and theyremain in the Self.The Non-Doer and the MindWhen the self becomes the Self (Shuddhatma), Youbecome the non-doer (akarta). Then the tubers of the mindwill continue to be destroyed. As the tubers of the mindsprout, it will give rise to another mind, if one becomes thedoer (karta). The tubers of the mind will continue to sprouteven when You are the non-doer. Even when the mind isrestless, it continues to discharge but You should remain inyour upayog (applied awareness as the Self), and ‘see’ whatAptavani-5147148Aptavani-5is happening and what is not. There is no problem whether youhave bad thoughts or good thoughts, because the one whowants to get rid of his shop, will get rid of his stock whetherit is good or bad.‘Kartapad chhe aagrahi, akartapad chhe niraagrahi.’‘The state of doership is one of insistence; the state of non-doership is insistence-free.’-NavneetNow, there is no insistence for good or bad. There is noinsistence for giving alms. When your karmas for giving almsunfold, and you do so, then they will discharge.‘Avichaar pad te shashwat Gnan.’‘Eternal Gnan is the state where one is not the thinker.’As long as you are engrossed in thoughts, it is a state ofthinking (vichaar pad), and if You remain separate from thosethoughts, it is the state of being separate from thoughts(avichaar pad).Final DarshanQuestioner: How can we go to Mahavideh Kshetra? Isit through merit karmas (punya)?Dadashri: You are binding merit karmas in this life whenyou follow my Agnas, and that will take you to MahavidehKshetra. By following the Agnas, dharmadhyan (absence ofadverse internal meditation, artadhyan or raudradhyan) occursand that will give rewards.Questioner: When auspicious meditation (shubhadhyan)occurs, is it considered dharmadhyan?Dadashri: Yes, but whether it is good (shubha) or bad(ashubha) meditation, it will occur only if there is a doer(karta). After this Gnan, whatever thoughts you have orwhatever you do; if you give alms, etc., it is all a discharge.Questioner: What about when we sing pados (spiritualsongs of Gnan) here in satsang?Dadashri: All that comes under following of my Agnas.The state of dharmadhyan, arising out of following the Agnasof the Gnani, will bring the highest state in a human form in thenext life. By following the Agnas your next life will be beautiful;you will meet Tirthankars, then what more do you want? Youhave already attained the Self. Now You only have to gothrough the final step of doing darshan of the Tirthankar Lordand if You do that just once, it is more than enough. That whichis obstructing Your full enlightenment (kevalgnan), will beremoved. The Gnani Purush will take You all the way to whereHe himself has reached. He cannot take You beyond that point.To go beyond that point, He will take you to the One who hasreached that point (Tirthankar); there is no other way!The Self Is Never the SuffererA nephew of a man who comes here to satsang wasburnt by acid. A burn from a fire is better than a burn fromacid. The doctors became very concerned with his injuries andsaid he would not live more than three hours. I had givenGnan to the young man, and he told the doctors with a smile,‘Cut me whenever you have to, I am separate and Raju isseparate.’ The doctors were stunned listening to him talk in thisway. He survived. He would have died had he not attained thisGnan. Half of the time a person dies from psychologicaleffects of, ‘What has become of me? How did this happen?This will never heal’, etc., whereas Raju said, ‘I am separateand Raju is separate.’ When I went to visit him in the hospital,he was in very good spirits; he told Me, ‘Raju is sleeping nextto Me.’All the doctors were astonished. They had never seenanything like this before. One might question, ‘What is all this?’and the answer is, ‘Dada is behind all this.’ It is the splendorAptavani-5147148Aptavani-5is happening and what is not. There is no problem whether youhave bad thoughts or good thoughts, because the one whowants to get rid of his shop, will get rid of his stock whetherit is good or bad.‘Kartapad chhe aagrahi, akartapad chhe niraagrahi.’‘The state of doership is one of insistence; the state of non-doership is insistence-free.’-NavneetNow, there is no insistence for good or bad. There is noinsistence for giving alms. When your karmas for giving almsunfold, and you do so, then they will discharge.‘Avichaar pad te shashwat Gnan.’‘Eternal Gnan is the state where one is not the thinker.’As long as you are engrossed in thoughts, it is a state ofthinking (vichaar pad), and if You remain separate from thosethoughts, it is the state of being separate from thoughts(avichaar pad).Final DarshanQuestioner: How can we go to Mahavideh Kshetra? Isit through merit karmas (punya)?Dadashri: You are binding merit karmas in this life whenyou follow my Agnas, and that will take you to MahavidehKshetra. By following the Agnas, dharmadhyan (absence ofadverse internal meditation, artadhyan or raudradhyan) occursand that will give rewards.Questioner: When auspicious meditation (shubhadhyan)occurs, is it considered dharmadhyan?Dadashri: Yes, but whether it is good (shubha) or bad(ashubha) meditation, it will occur only if there is a doer(karta). After this Gnan, whatever thoughts you have orwhatever you do; if you give alms, etc., it is all a discharge.Questioner: What about when we sing pados (spiritualsongs of Gnan) here in satsang?Dadashri: All that comes under following of my Agnas.The state of dharmadhyan, arising out of following the Agnasof the Gnani, will bring the highest state in a human form in thenext life. By following the Agnas your next life will be beautiful;you will meet Tirthankars, then what more do you want? Youhave already attained the Self. Now You only have to gothrough the final step of doing darshan of the Tirthankar Lordand if You do that just once, it is more than enough. That whichis obstructing Your full enlightenment (kevalgnan), will beremoved. The Gnani Purush will take You all the way to whereHe himself has reached. He cannot take You beyond that point.To go beyond that point, He will take you to the One who hasreached that point (Tirthankar); there is no other way!The Self Is Never the SuffererA nephew of a man who comes here to satsang wasburnt by acid. A burn from a fire is better than a burn fromacid. The doctors became very concerned with his injuries andsaid he would not live more than three hours. I had givenGnan to the young man, and he told the doctors with a smile,‘Cut me whenever you have to, I am separate and Raju isseparate.’ The doctors were stunned listening to him talk in thisway. He survived. He would have died had he not attained thisGnan. Half of the time a person dies from psychologicaleffects of, ‘What has become of me? How did this happen?This will never heal’, etc., whereas Raju said, ‘I am separateand Raju is separate.’ When I went to visit him in the hospital,he was in very good spirits; he told Me, ‘Raju is sleeping nextto Me.’All the doctors were astonished. They had never seenanything like this before. One might question, ‘What is all this?’and the answer is, ‘Dada is behind all this.’ It is the splendorAptavani-5149150Aptavani-5of this Gnan. Raju is a Kshatriya and so he accepted rightaway when Dada said, ‘You are separate’, whereas people ofyour Vanik class would not refrain from being affected, wouldthey?Questioner: Yes Dada, it would affect them. What kindof karmas would have caused him to be burnt?Dadashri: That kind of work is really for us Kshatriyas.One has to suffer the same intensity of suffering, that he hascaused others. It can be caused to any living being, whetherhuman or animal. This did not come about as a result of tryingto earn money and a daily living. It is a repayment of causingsuffering for others. This kind of repayment is the result of givingeven the slightest misery to others. Kshatriyas can cause as wellas suffer such pain, whereas you can never cause such pain toothers; neither can you suffer it.Questioner: It must be from his past life, surely?Dadashri: This is an effect of causes from the past life.When a baby is born, he comes out headfirst. In thewomb, the child is up-side-down and cannot turn around andyet, is it the mother that pushes him out, is it the doctor that pullshim out, or does he come out on his own? These are all effects;they are results. Whatever the causes were from the past life,their results are produced naturally.The Enemies Within and the Arihant‘Nipje narthi toh koi na rahe dukhi,shatru marine, sau mitra rakhe.’‘If it were possible for humans, no one would remain miserable, by killing the enemies, only the friends will remain.’If it were possible, humans would destroy all theenemies and only have friends. Even then the world would notbe without enemies. Enemies will arise from friends. Instead ofthat, if they leave the enemies alone, then when the friendsbecome enemies, the enemies will become friends and becomeuseful. This world is such that it is not worth killing anyone.Nothing is permanent. You should never think of anyone as anenemy for life.Questioner: What are the ‘enemies’ we talk about whenwe say, ‘Namo Arihantanam’?Dadashri: Arihantanam stands for the inner enemies ofanger, pride, deceit, and greed. The one who has destroyedthese enemies; to such an Arihant I do bow.There are naimitik causes (instrumental causes) in naturaloccurring. Recognize that the inner enemies are in youropposition; they are your enemies. You are not to destroy them;you are not to have abhorrence towards them. So now, Youhave to investigate whether you have invited these enemies or ifyou have come at the invitation of these enemies. Investigate thismuch. Then investigate how You can get rid of them andbecome free from them.The Goal, the Intent, and the One WhoLeads to the GoalQuestioner: If one has developed a habit of doingsadhana (that which is done towards a goal through mind,speech and body) of killing the inner enemies, is he able to killthem that way?Dadashri: There are two kinds of sadhanas.1.Sadhana that is only done for the sadhyabhaav.2.Sadhana that is done for sadhana.Sadhana done with the intent of the Self (sadhyabhaave)is considered the ultimate sadhana, which can, to a certainextent, be attained by humans on their own. These tools(sadhans; scriptures and spiritual gurus) have a limit. For thatAptavani-5149150Aptavani-5of this Gnan. Raju is a Kshatriya and so he accepted rightaway when Dada said, ‘You are separate’, whereas people ofyour Vanik class would not refrain from being affected, wouldthey?Questioner: Yes Dada, it would affect them. What kindof karmas would have caused him to be burnt?Dadashri: That kind of work is really for us Kshatriyas.One has to suffer the same intensity of suffering, that he hascaused others. It can be caused to any living being, whetherhuman or animal. This did not come about as a result of tryingto earn money and a daily living. It is a repayment of causingsuffering for others. This kind of repayment is the result of givingeven the slightest misery to others. Kshatriyas can cause as wellas suffer such pain, whereas you can never cause such pain toothers; neither can you suffer it.Questioner: It must be from his past life, surely?Dadashri: This is an effect of causes from the past life.When a baby is born, he comes out headfirst. In thewomb, the child is up-side-down and cannot turn around andyet, is it the mother that pushes him out, is it the doctor that pullshim out, or does he come out on his own? These are all effects;they are results. Whatever the causes were from the past life,their results are produced naturally.The Enemies Within and the Arihant‘Nipje narthi toh koi na rahe dukhi,shatru marine, sau mitra rakhe.’‘If it were possible for humans, no one would remain miserable, by killing the enemies, only the friends will remain.’If it were possible, humans would destroy all theenemies and only have friends. Even then the world would notbe without enemies. Enemies will arise from friends. Instead ofthat, if they leave the enemies alone, then when the friendsbecome enemies, the enemies will become friends and becomeuseful. This world is such that it is not worth killing anyone.Nothing is permanent. You should never think of anyone as anenemy for life.Questioner: What are the ‘enemies’ we talk about whenwe say, ‘Namo Arihantanam’?Dadashri: Arihantanam stands for the inner enemies ofanger, pride, deceit, and greed. The one who has destroyedthese enemies; to such an Arihant I do bow.There are naimitik causes (instrumental causes) in naturaloccurring. Recognize that the inner enemies are in youropposition; they are your enemies. You are not to destroy them;you are not to have abhorrence towards them. So now, Youhave to investigate whether you have invited these enemies or ifyou have come at the invitation of these enemies. Investigate thismuch. Then investigate how You can get rid of them andbecome free from them.The Goal, the Intent, and the One WhoLeads to the GoalQuestioner: If one has developed a habit of doingsadhana (that which is done towards a goal through mind,speech and body) of killing the inner enemies, is he able to killthem that way?Dadashri: There are two kinds of sadhanas.1.Sadhana that is only done for the sadhyabhaav.2.Sadhana that is done for sadhana.Sadhana done with the intent of the Self (sadhyabhaave)is considered the ultimate sadhana, which can, to a certainextent, be attained by humans on their own. These tools(sadhans; scriptures and spiritual gurus) have a limit. For thatAptavani-5151152Aptavani-5which is beyond the limit of these tools (sadhans), you need thenimit of a Gnani Purush. When you meet the Gnani Purush,you have to tell him, ‘Grace me with the same state that Youhave attained.’ You just have to ask for His grace and in thattoo, the Gnani Purush is not the doer. He is just a nimit(instrumental in the process). It will be done only because he isa nimit, otherwise it will not happen.Questioner: The gurus who are in the path of spiritualquest (sadhanas) do not believe in such a thing as a nimit.Dadashri: That is true. They believe that they have to doso much themselves and that their disciples, for sure, have to doso much. They bind karmas and so do their disciples. However,as they bind karmas they make progress, whereas this is aGnani Purush; He does not become bound and He liberatesothers. The inner intent -of being a doer (kartabhaav) bindskarmas and the inner intent of being a nimit (nimitbhaav)liberates.The Absolute Self and the PudgalQuestioner: The Shuddhatma (the pure Self) is simplythe Knower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta), so then who is the onebothering with ‘doing’ the grace or non-grace? Through whomdoes it get done?Dadashri: No one does anything. All this is just thepudgal (the non-Self complex; the mind, speech, and body arereferred to as the pudgal, which is a compound word of thewords puran: to charge or inflow and galan: to discharge orflow outward).Questioner: Does all the inspiration (prerana) comefrom the pudgal?Dadashri: It is all the pudgal (the non-Self). The ego isalso included in the pudgal. Anger-pride-deceit-greed; they allcome into the pudgal. The entire pudgal goes through puran-galan (influx-output).Even the ego is subject to the puran-galan phenomenon.When a person attends a wedding, as a guest his ego is fed(puran) when he is greeted with a lot of attention; however,when he does not get any attention, the ego will discharge(galan). When anger suddenly erupts, it will be at 500° and thenit will gradually drop down to 400º, to 300º, to 200º, to 100º,and finally to 0º.Even greed is subject to puran-galan. Everything continuesto be puran-galan.Questioner: What is the difference between the Self (theAtma) and the non-Self complex (the pudgal)?Dadashri: The Self is a single element (vastu). Elementmeans that it does not increase or decrease; it has its ownexclusive natural (swabhavik) state. This is not the case with thepudgal. The pudgal is not a natural thing.What do we call a pudgal? Putting food into this body,the non-Self complex, is puran, and emptying the bowels orbladder is galan. Inhaling is puran and exhaling is galan. Theword ‘pudgal’ is derived from the word ‘purgal’, short form ofpur-an-gal-an.There is pudgal and there is Atma (the Self) in thisbody. The one who can know how to separate the two hasfound the Self. But human beings do not have that capability;the Self is beyond the senses, it is beyond the mind andintellect. The Lord resides within the Gnani Purush, so whatcan a person not attain, through the grace of the GnaniPurush?The Grace of the GnaniQuestioner: Will the grace (krupa) of ‘Dada Bhagwan’flow equally on to everyone sitting here?Aptavani-5151152Aptavani-5which is beyond the limit of these tools (sadhans), you need thenimit of a Gnani Purush. When you meet the Gnani Purush,you have to tell him, ‘Grace me with the same state that Youhave attained.’ You just have to ask for His grace and in thattoo, the Gnani Purush is not the doer. He is just a nimit(instrumental in the process). It will be done only because he isa nimit, otherwise it will not happen.Questioner: The gurus who are in the path of spiritualquest (sadhanas) do not believe in such a thing as a nimit.Dadashri: That is true. They believe that they have to doso much themselves and that their disciples, for sure, have to doso much. They bind karmas and so do their disciples. However,as they bind karmas they make progress, whereas this is aGnani Purush; He does not become bound and He liberatesothers. The inner intent -of being a doer (kartabhaav) bindskarmas and the inner intent of being a nimit (nimitbhaav)liberates.The Absolute Self and the PudgalQuestioner: The Shuddhatma (the pure Self) is simplythe Knower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta), so then who is the onebothering with ‘doing’ the grace or non-grace? Through whomdoes it get done?Dadashri: No one does anything. All this is just thepudgal (the non-Self complex; the mind, speech, and body arereferred to as the pudgal, which is a compound word of thewords puran: to charge or inflow and galan: to discharge orflow outward).Questioner: Does all the inspiration (prerana) comefrom the pudgal?Dadashri: It is all the pudgal (the non-Self). The ego isalso included in the pudgal. Anger-pride-deceit-greed; they allcome into the pudgal. The entire pudgal goes through puran-galan (influx-output).Even the ego is subject to the puran-galan phenomenon.When a person attends a wedding, as a guest his ego is fed(puran) when he is greeted with a lot of attention; however,when he does not get any attention, the ego will discharge(galan). When anger suddenly erupts, it will be at 500° and thenit will gradually drop down to 400º, to 300º, to 200º, to 100º,and finally to 0º.Even greed is subject to puran-galan. Everything continuesto be puran-galan.Questioner: What is the difference between the Self (theAtma) and the non-Self complex (the pudgal)?Dadashri: The Self is a single element (vastu). Elementmeans that it does not increase or decrease; it has its ownexclusive natural (swabhavik) state. This is not the case with thepudgal. The pudgal is not a natural thing.What do we call a pudgal? Putting food into this body,the non-Self complex, is puran, and emptying the bowels orbladder is galan. Inhaling is puran and exhaling is galan. Theword ‘pudgal’ is derived from the word ‘purgal’, short form ofpur-an-gal-an.There is pudgal and there is Atma (the Self) in thisbody. The one who can know how to separate the two hasfound the Self. But human beings do not have that capability;the Self is beyond the senses, it is beyond the mind andintellect. The Lord resides within the Gnani Purush, so whatcan a person not attain, through the grace of the GnaniPurush?The Grace of the GnaniQuestioner: Will the grace (krupa) of ‘Dada Bhagwan’flow equally on to everyone sitting here?Aptavani-5153154Aptavani-5(sadshastra) scriptures that show the way to the Self?Dadashri: That is fine but when you get ‘full marks’through the Gnani’s satsang, there is no need to read anything,is there? On the contrary, when you receive full marks, readingwill increase botheration. After attaining such wonderfulawareness (jagruti), your time is wasted.Questioner: What if one reads just as a nimit?Dadashri: It is as a nimit (evidentiary) for sure but it iscircumstance dependent and therefore not under Your control.Questioner: Is it not a weakness of the mind to say thatI have no control over circumstances (sanjog)?Dadashri: No, there is not a single person in this worldwho has any control over circumstances.The Cause Can Be Changed, Not the Effect‘Dravya na palte, bhaav farey toh chhooti shakey chhebhuvno fajeto.’‘Effects cannot change, if causes change, one can be freefrom the fiasco of the next life.’-NavneetDravya means that karma is ready to give its result. Iwill give you an example of how an effect cannot change. If aman has a habit of stealing, does it not happen that he cannotbreak that habit even if he says he wants to? It will onlyhappen when the time is right. Now what Kavi is saying in thiscouplet is that, if one has the bhaav everyday, that ‘stealing isnot right’, then one day he will run out of the bhaav ofstealing. Otherwise, if he continues to have the bhaav ofstealing, he will sow ‘seeds’ of stealing. Therefore stealing willlead to more stealing.This statement has a very profound meaning.Dadashri: No, not equally. It depends on how muchbhaav (intensity of devotion, feelings) one has for ‘DadaBhagwan’.Questioner: Suppose my vessel is bigger, it will holdmore water than someone with a small cup. So does it dependon the size of the vessel or the bhaav?Dadashri: There is no need for a vessel here. If one doesnot know how to do anything I will tell him, ‘Stay here, hangaround here, and if you do not know anything, just keeppolishing those shoes.’You have to become worthy of the grace of the Gnani;there is no need to do anything else. What creates an obstaclein attaining the Gnani’s grace? It is one’s own obstinacy(aadayee).Questioner: Should one not get rid of the obstinacies?Dadashri: No, the obstinacy will not let you reap thebenefits that quickly. Wherever I see obstinacy, I maintaincompassion. Gradually, through compassion, that obstinacy willleave. I have to work harder there.Reading ScripturesQuestioner: Can demerit karmas (sins) be destroyedthrough reading scriptures?Dadashri: No. You bind merit karmas (punyas) throughthat but you do not destroy your demerit karmas. It is calledpunya-anubandhi-punya (discharge of merit karmas, effect thatleads to cause of new merit karmas). Studying the rightscriptures (sadshastra) leads to the study of one’s own Self(swadhyaya). This will help you in concentrating of the chit andthe mind.Questioner: Along with the satsang of the GnaniPurush, should we also not read and contemplate on theAptavani-5153154Aptavani-5(sadshastra) scriptures that show the way to the Self?Dadashri: That is fine but when you get ‘full marks’through the Gnani’s satsang, there is no need to read anything,is there? On the contrary, when you receive full marks, readingwill increase botheration. After attaining such wonderfulawareness (jagruti), your time is wasted.Questioner: What if one reads just as a nimit?Dadashri: It is as a nimit (evidentiary) for sure but it iscircumstance dependent and therefore not under Your control.Questioner: Is it not a weakness of the mind to say thatI have no control over circumstances (sanjog)?Dadashri: No, there is not a single person in this worldwho has any control over circumstances.The Cause Can Be Changed, Not the Effect‘Dravya na palte, bhaav farey toh chhooti shakey chhebhuvno fajeto.’‘Effects cannot change, if causes change, one can be freefrom the fiasco of the next life.’-NavneetDravya means that karma is ready to give its result. Iwill give you an example of how an effect cannot change. If aman has a habit of stealing, does it not happen that he cannotbreak that habit even if he says he wants to? It will onlyhappen when the time is right. Now what Kavi is saying in thiscouplet is that, if one has the bhaav everyday, that ‘stealing isnot right’, then one day he will run out of the bhaav ofstealing. Otherwise, if he continues to have the bhaav ofstealing, he will sow ‘seeds’ of stealing. Therefore stealing willlead to more stealing.This statement has a very profound meaning.Dadashri: No, not equally. It depends on how muchbhaav (intensity of devotion, feelings) one has for ‘DadaBhagwan’.Questioner: Suppose my vessel is bigger, it will holdmore water than someone with a small cup. So does it dependon the size of the vessel or the bhaav?Dadashri: There is no need for a vessel here. If one doesnot know how to do anything I will tell him, ‘Stay here, hangaround here, and if you do not know anything, just keeppolishing those shoes.’You have to become worthy of the grace of the Gnani;there is no need to do anything else. What creates an obstaclein attaining the Gnani’s grace? It is one’s own obstinacy(aadayee).Questioner: Should one not get rid of the obstinacies?Dadashri: No, the obstinacy will not let you reap thebenefits that quickly. Wherever I see obstinacy, I maintaincompassion. Gradually, through compassion, that obstinacy willleave. I have to work harder there.Reading ScripturesQuestioner: Can demerit karmas (sins) be destroyedthrough reading scriptures?Dadashri: No. You bind merit karmas (punyas) throughthat but you do not destroy your demerit karmas. It is calledpunya-anubandhi-punya (discharge of merit karmas, effect thatleads to cause of new merit karmas). Studying the rightscriptures (sadshastra) leads to the study of one’s own Self(swadhyaya). This will help you in concentrating of the chit andthe mind.Questioner: Along with the satsang of the GnaniPurush, should we also not read and contemplate on theAptavani-5155156Aptavani-5Now what do those who have attained knowledge of theSelf have to do? They just have to ‘see’; when You continue to‘see’, then a new seed is not sown. On the contrary, if you(‘Chandubhai’) happen to hurt someone by stealing from him,what do You do? You tell ‘Chandubhai’, ‘Chandubhai, you havedone atikraman (act of transgression), so do pratikraman (torepent and ask for forgiveness).’When people (those who do not have Self-realization)steal, it sows seeds of stealing again. If a man takes bribes andit bothers him to do so and he feels he ought not to take bribes,but if someone asks him, ‘Why do you take bribes?’ and heresponds with, ‘You be quiet. You do not have any sense. Howam I going to get my two daughters married?’ then he hasencouraged this wrong action, and thus strengthened it for thenext life.So when one steals, accepts bribes or cheats, in the innerintent he should maintain that he is doing wrong. He should keepsaying in the mind, ‘I am doing wrong. I must never do this.’This is what he must keep telling himself. No one has controlover effects; water has already turned into ice, so how can itflow now? It will now fall as ice cubes.Questioner: When I am doing something wrong, shouldI have the bhaav of ‘I should not be doing this’ or should Isimply remain as the Knower-Seer?Dadashri: You have to remain as the Knower-Seer, andyou have also been told to do pratikraman, have you not?Questioner: But the bhaav should not arise, should itnot?Dadashri: The bhaav is going to occur but you have tomake ‘Chandubhai’ aware and tell him, ‘Do pratikraman. Whydid you do atikraman?’ Kraman (normal, neutral activities)take place all day long, atikraman (transgression) does not.Atikraman occurs maybe once or twice in an hour; you haveto do pratikraman for it.You should know all your weaknesses. Now You (theSelf) are not weak. You have become the Self. However, in thestate of ignorance, were you not the main cause behind all theatikraman? So, now as a neighbor You have to say,‘Chandubhai, do pratikraman’.Do lots of pratikraman. Whoever is in your circle (ofacquaintance), fifty or hundred people or so, whomever youhave harassed, abused; take an hour to do pratikraman whenyou are not doing anything. In your free time, identify everyindividual (you have hurt) and do his or her pratikraman. Willyou not have to erase all the hurt you have caused others?Thereafter the Gnan will manifest.Questioner: But Dada, I have only harassed those whohave harassed me.Dadashri: Whoever has abused you will have to pay forhis actions; you are not responsible for that. The one who hasabused you has no awareness of his liabilities and responsibility.He is not aware of the consequences. He is enjoying himselfeating wonderful food but in his next life he will have to eatanimal fodder.The Exact Path of MokshaYou have the solution once the ego is gone. As long as theego is present, the world exists. There is either the ego or theSelf. You cannot reap the benefits of the Self as long as thereis ego and when the Self is present, you cannot have the benefitof the ego.Questioner: Can there be benefit of the ego too?Dadashri: The benefits of the ego are where people getto marry their children off; wander around as fathers andAptavani-5155156Aptavani-5Now what do those who have attained knowledge of theSelf have to do? They just have to ‘see’; when You continue to‘see’, then a new seed is not sown. On the contrary, if you(‘Chandubhai’) happen to hurt someone by stealing from him,what do You do? You tell ‘Chandubhai’, ‘Chandubhai, you havedone atikraman (act of transgression), so do pratikraman (torepent and ask for forgiveness).’When people (those who do not have Self-realization)steal, it sows seeds of stealing again. If a man takes bribes andit bothers him to do so and he feels he ought not to take bribes,but if someone asks him, ‘Why do you take bribes?’ and heresponds with, ‘You be quiet. You do not have any sense. Howam I going to get my two daughters married?’ then he hasencouraged this wrong action, and thus strengthened it for thenext life.So when one steals, accepts bribes or cheats, in the innerintent he should maintain that he is doing wrong. He should keepsaying in the mind, ‘I am doing wrong. I must never do this.’This is what he must keep telling himself. No one has controlover effects; water has already turned into ice, so how can itflow now? It will now fall as ice cubes.Questioner: When I am doing something wrong, shouldI have the bhaav of ‘I should not be doing this’ or should Isimply remain as the Knower-Seer?Dadashri: You have to remain as the Knower-Seer, andyou have also been told to do pratikraman, have you not?Questioner: But the bhaav should not arise, should itnot?Dadashri: The bhaav is going to occur but you have tomake ‘Chandubhai’ aware and tell him, ‘Do pratikraman. Whydid you do atikraman?’ Kraman (normal, neutral activities)take place all day long, atikraman (transgression) does not.Atikraman occurs maybe once or twice in an hour; you haveto do pratikraman for it.You should know all your weaknesses. Now You (theSelf) are not weak. You have become the Self. However, in thestate of ignorance, were you not the main cause behind all theatikraman? So, now as a neighbor You have to say,‘Chandubhai, do pratikraman’.Do lots of pratikraman. Whoever is in your circle (ofacquaintance), fifty or hundred people or so, whomever youhave harassed, abused; take an hour to do pratikraman whenyou are not doing anything. In your free time, identify everyindividual (you have hurt) and do his or her pratikraman. Willyou not have to erase all the hurt you have caused others?Thereafter the Gnan will manifest.Questioner: But Dada, I have only harassed those whohave harassed me.Dadashri: Whoever has abused you will have to pay forhis actions; you are not responsible for that. The one who hasabused you has no awareness of his liabilities and responsibility.He is not aware of the consequences. He is enjoying himselfeating wonderful food but in his next life he will have to eatanimal fodder.The Exact Path of MokshaYou have the solution once the ego is gone. As long as theego is present, the world exists. There is either the ego or theSelf. You cannot reap the benefits of the Self as long as thereis ego and when the Self is present, you cannot have the benefitof the ego.Questioner: Can there be benefit of the ego too?Dadashri: The benefits of the ego are where people getto marry their children off; wander around as fathers andAptavani-5157158Aptavani-5mothers, be a husband or a wife! Are these not benefits of theego? The whole world is enjoying the benefits of the ego. I amenjoying the benefit of the Self, as the Self. This arises throughthe Self, and that other arises through the ego.Questioner: Liberation can be attained when illusion(bhranti) goes away, right?Dadashri: Yes, You ‘know’ everything ‘as it is’ when theillusion (bhranti) goes away. When the illusion goes, theignorance (agnan) about the Self goes; when the ignoranceabout the Self goes, the illusory attachment (maya) goes; andwhen maya goes, the ego (ahamkar) goes; when the egocomes down to zero, the solution comes.Making Yourself Egoless Is Not PossibleWhere there is no kind of business at all, that is the Self.Questioner: Who makes all the efforts?Dadashri: The ego does.Questioner: Who becomes excited?Dadashri: The external part of the ego becomes excited;it is really a discharging component and egoism—‘I did it’ doesthe charging.Questioner: When will the absolute egoless state becreated?Dadashri: What purpose do you have in creating thatstate?Questioner: I have come to know that there is no benefitin the ego.Dadashri: So will you get a superior result from beingegoless?Questioner: Then the inner bliss of one’s Self will manifest.Dadashri: It is like this; it is not necessary to do theactivity of becoming egoless. All you need to do is know theanswer to the question ‘Who am I?’ Your real Self has noegoism in it. You are not ‘Chandubhai’ and yet you believe, ‘Iam Chandubhai’, and that is called egoism.The Support of IgnoranceWhen irritation arises within, one tries to stop it; however,irritation is an effect and the effort to stop it is a cause. Somepeople get irritated but they do not try to stop it and on thecontrary they say, ‘Yes, it was worth getting angry.’ That too isa cause. Do you understand that?Questioner: What is the cause behind irritation?Dadashri: Ignorance (agnan). One continues doingraag-dwesh (attachment-abhorrence) due to ignorance. He willkeep saying ‘this is good and this is bad’. It is actually a karmiceffect. In that which is discharging as an effect, one gives it asupport by accepting it, saying, ‘I am cold, it happened to me,I do not like the taste of it.’ That is the support. If the soup istoo salty, it is a problem for the tongue. Why do you have tosay anything? This is how support is given to it and how newcauses are created. One does raag-dwesh his whole life; raagtowards what he likes and dwesh towards that which he doesnot.Questioner: Who does the raag-dwesh? Is it ignorance?Dadashri: Egoism. Egoism exists due to ignorance andegoism continues to do all this. When the support of ignorancefalls, then egoism will fall.Root Cause of the Worldly LifeDo you understand this about causes, or not? When youmeet a friend and you feel happy to see him, it is attachment(raag). What if someone you do not like comes along?Aptavani-5157158Aptavani-5mothers, be a husband or a wife! Are these not benefits of theego? The whole world is enjoying the benefits of the ego. I amenjoying the benefit of the Self, as the Self. This arises throughthe Self, and that other arises through the ego.Questioner: Liberation can be attained when illusion(bhranti) goes away, right?Dadashri: Yes, You ‘know’ everything ‘as it is’ when theillusion (bhranti) goes away. When the illusion goes, theignorance (agnan) about the Self goes; when the ignoranceabout the Self goes, the illusory attachment (maya) goes; andwhen maya goes, the ego (ahamkar) goes; when the egocomes down to zero, the solution comes.Making Yourself Egoless Is Not PossibleWhere there is no kind of business at all, that is the Self.Questioner: Who makes all the efforts?Dadashri: The ego does.Questioner: Who becomes excited?Dadashri: The external part of the ego becomes excited;it is really a discharging component and egoism—‘I did it’ doesthe charging.Questioner: When will the absolute egoless state becreated?Dadashri: What purpose do you have in creating thatstate?Questioner: I have come to know that there is no benefitin the ego.Dadashri: So will you get a superior result from beingegoless?Questioner: Then the inner bliss of one’s Self will manifest.Dadashri: It is like this; it is not necessary to do theactivity of becoming egoless. All you need to do is know theanswer to the question ‘Who am I?’ Your real Self has noegoism in it. You are not ‘Chandubhai’ and yet you believe, ‘Iam Chandubhai’, and that is called egoism.The Support of IgnoranceWhen irritation arises within, one tries to stop it; however,irritation is an effect and the effort to stop it is a cause. Somepeople get irritated but they do not try to stop it and on thecontrary they say, ‘Yes, it was worth getting angry.’ That too isa cause. Do you understand that?Questioner: What is the cause behind irritation?Dadashri: Ignorance (agnan). One continues doingraag-dwesh (attachment-abhorrence) due to ignorance. He willkeep saying ‘this is good and this is bad’. It is actually a karmiceffect. In that which is discharging as an effect, one gives it asupport by accepting it, saying, ‘I am cold, it happened to me,I do not like the taste of it.’ That is the support. If the soup istoo salty, it is a problem for the tongue. Why do you have tosay anything? This is how support is given to it and how newcauses are created. One does raag-dwesh his whole life; raagtowards what he likes and dwesh towards that which he doesnot.Questioner: Who does the raag-dwesh? Is it ignorance?Dadashri: Egoism. Egoism exists due to ignorance andegoism continues to do all this. When the support of ignorancefalls, then egoism will fall.Root Cause of the Worldly LifeDo you understand this about causes, or not? When youmeet a friend and you feel happy to see him, it is attachment(raag). What if someone you do not like comes along?Aptavani-5159160Aptavani-5Questioner: I cannot just push him away but somehowI tolerate him, by suppressing the mind.Dadashri: That is abhorrence (dwesh). That is how youcontinue to have raag-dwesh.What does the Vedanta say about why human beingscannot become Parmatma (the absolute Self)? It is because ofthe presence of mud (impurity), vikshepa (distraction orrestlessness of the mind; projecting the illusion) and agnan(ignorance of one’s real Self). The Jain theory states it isbecause of the presence of raag (attachment), dwesh(abhorrence) and agnan (ignorance of one’s real Self). Agnan(ignorance) is definitely common to both teachings. So thesupport is destroyed if ignorance goes away.Effects continue automatically, but one creates causeswithin; one supports (new) causes by saying, ‘I said it…I didthis…’, etc., Actually, in effect no one has to do anything.Effects occur naturally but one supports them by saying, ‘I amthe doer’. That is an illusion (bhranti) and that verily is thecause.Questioner: What is the cause of that cause?Dadashri: Ignorance. The root cause is ignorance. TheGnani Purush removes this ignorance.Link of WealthWho is rich? It is the one whose mind is as noble as aking’s. He will spend money whether he has the money or not.Grains become lifeless (nirjiv) in three to five years andafter that they will not sprout. Money changes every elevenyears. If a man with an asset of twenty five million has no incomefor eleven years, he will not even have a dime to spend. Just asmedicines have expiration dates, money has an expiration dateof eleven years.Questioner: But people have money their whole life?Dadashri: If this is 1977 then you will not have themoney you had in 1966.Questioner: Where did this eleven-year rule come from?Dadashri: Just as medicine has expiration dates of twoyears or six months, and grains have an expiration period ofthree to five years; money too has an expiration date of elevenyears.Money is transient wealth. Two hundred years, or so,ago if a Vania (business man) had one hundred thousandrupees, he would buy twenty five thousand rupees worth ofproperty, twenty five thousand rupees worth of gold andjewelry, invest twenty five thousand in bonds–interest bearinginstruments and invest the remaining twenty five thousand in hisbusiness. If he needed money for his business he wouldborrow five thousand or so from somewhere. This was theirsystem. So then how would he become bankrupt fast? He hadsecured all four sides for himself. The Vanias today do not dothis.If someone who has not taken Gnan comes to me foradvice and tells me, ‘I cannot make any headway no matterhow hard I try’, I would tell him, ‘At the moment your paap(sin, demerit karma) is in operation, so even if you were toborrow money from someone, you will be robbed on yourway home. For the time being just stay at home and readwhatever scriptures you normally do and continue praying toGod.’Questioner: If everything depends on merit and demeritkarmas, then what is the point of filling in a tender–bidding fora contract?Dadashri: That tender is being filled in accordance withthe unfolding of merit and demerit karmas. Thus I tell you to fillAptavani-5159160Aptavani-5Questioner: I cannot just push him away but somehowI tolerate him, by suppressing the mind.Dadashri: That is abhorrence (dwesh). That is how youcontinue to have raag-dwesh.What does the Vedanta say about why human beingscannot become Parmatma (the absolute Self)? It is because ofthe presence of mud (impurity), vikshepa (distraction orrestlessness of the mind; projecting the illusion) and agnan(ignorance of one’s real Self). The Jain theory states it isbecause of the presence of raag (attachment), dwesh(abhorrence) and agnan (ignorance of one’s real Self). Agnan(ignorance) is definitely common to both teachings. So thesupport is destroyed if ignorance goes away.Effects continue automatically, but one creates causeswithin; one supports (new) causes by saying, ‘I said it…I didthis…’, etc., Actually, in effect no one has to do anything.Effects occur naturally but one supports them by saying, ‘I amthe doer’. That is an illusion (bhranti) and that verily is thecause.Questioner: What is the cause of that cause?Dadashri: Ignorance. The root cause is ignorance. TheGnani Purush removes this ignorance.Link of WealthWho is rich? It is the one whose mind is as noble as aking’s. He will spend money whether he has the money or not.Grains become lifeless (nirjiv) in three to five years andafter that they will not sprout. Money changes every elevenyears. If a man with an asset of twenty five million has no incomefor eleven years, he will not even have a dime to spend. Just asmedicines have expiration dates, money has an expiration dateof eleven years.Questioner: But people have money their whole life?Dadashri: If this is 1977 then you will not have themoney you had in 1966.Questioner: Where did this eleven-year rule come from?Dadashri: Just as medicine has expiration dates of twoyears or six months, and grains have an expiration period ofthree to five years; money too has an expiration date of elevenyears.Money is transient wealth. Two hundred years, or so,ago if a Vania (business man) had one hundred thousandrupees, he would buy twenty five thousand rupees worth ofproperty, twenty five thousand rupees worth of gold andjewelry, invest twenty five thousand in bonds–interest bearinginstruments and invest the remaining twenty five thousand in hisbusiness. If he needed money for his business he wouldborrow five thousand or so from somewhere. This was theirsystem. So then how would he become bankrupt fast? He hadsecured all four sides for himself. The Vanias today do not dothis.If someone who has not taken Gnan comes to me foradvice and tells me, ‘I cannot make any headway no matterhow hard I try’, I would tell him, ‘At the moment your paap(sin, demerit karma) is in operation, so even if you were toborrow money from someone, you will be robbed on yourway home. For the time being just stay at home and readwhatever scriptures you normally do and continue praying toGod.’Questioner: If everything depends on merit and demeritkarmas, then what is the point of filling in a tender–bidding fora contract?Dadashri: That tender is being filled in accordance withthe unfolding of merit and demerit karmas. Thus I tell you to fillAptavani-5161162Aptavani-5order and people will compliment you. Similarly people aroundyou will praise you for your success in your business. This linkmay carry on till one hundred and seven. But then it is goingto change, so be careful and alert. Then when you pick up acard you will pull a fifty seven, then a three and then a hundredand eleven. People will call you a fool. Therefore, do notforsake the name of this ‘Dada—the Self’ or else you willsuffer a lot.Some time later I returned to Mumbai from Jaighadh andthe contractor forgot after a few days what I had told him. Hesuffered a heavy loss and both he and his wife tried to commitsuicide by drinking pesticides. But he had so much punya thathis brother, who happened to be a doctor, was able to savethem in time. The man came to see me immediately. I told him,‘From now on, take Dada’s name and don’t ever repeat whatyou did.’ After that he continued to take Dada’s name, and allhis paap (sin; demerit karmas) were washed–cleansed andeverything settled down.When you say, ‘Dada’, paap will not come near you. Itwill hover around you but it will not touch you. If you becomelax–dose off from your awareness then it will affect you. It willnot affect you in your sleep. If you fall asleep taking Dada’sname and you wake up saying it, then you spent the time inbetween, being the Self.‘Mechanical’ ChetanPeople of the world have no idea as to what is calledChetan (life energy, the Self) in all this. They consider thebody to be the Chetan. They claim that the Chetan carriesout all the activities. But the Chetan does not do anything.‘Knowing’ and ‘seeing’ are its only functions. The rest is of thenon-Self.Who is doing the talking? It is the nischetan chetan(lifeless living element; inert consciousness); it is the ‘mechanical’in the tender but I know on what bases that tender is being filled.Nothing happens outside of these two laws.I tell many people to bring me a completed tender but noone has done so. How can they complete one? It is alldependant upon merit-demerit karmas. Therefore, no matterhow hard you try; you will lose even what you have if yourdemerit karmas unfold. So go home and relax and do a littlework. And if it is time for your merit karmas to unfold, thenwhat need is there for you to go out roaming? You will getwhat you are looking for sitting at home, without much effort.That is why I tell you not to complicate things by trying toohard in circumstances of both paap (unfolding of demeritkarmas) as well as punya (unfolding of merit karmas). In bothsituations, you will get all that you are going to get by workingnormally. Therefore there is no need for anyone to complicatethings by needlessly trying too hard. You just have tounderstand this.One contractor came to me, when we were building ajetty in Jaighadh in 1968, and told me, ‘I have a guru whom Ivisit regularly. Every year my business makes profit and it growseven though I do not wish for it. Is this because of the grace ofmy guru?’ I told him, ‘Don’t believe that it is because of yourguru’s grace because if you lose money you will blame the guruand curse him.’A guru is only a nimit (one of the evidences in theresult; apparent doer) in all this; his blessing too is a nimit (oneof the evidences unfolding). If the guru wants money forhimself, he does not get even four pennies! The man thenasked me what he should do, so I told him, ‘pray to Dada—the Lord within.’ Till then, the link of his punya (merit karmas)had been operating. An example of a link is if you pick up acard in total darkness, say you will pick up a card numberfour, then the next card you pick up will be a five, the next onewould be a six, and so forth. They would come in a properAptavani-5161162Aptavani-5order and people will compliment you. Similarly people aroundyou will praise you for your success in your business. This linkmay carry on till one hundred and seven. But then it is goingto change, so be careful and alert. Then when you pick up acard you will pull a fifty seven, then a three and then a hundredand eleven. People will call you a fool. Therefore, do notforsake the name of this ‘Dada—the Self’ or else you willsuffer a lot.Some time later I returned to Mumbai from Jaighadh andthe contractor forgot after a few days what I had told him. Hesuffered a heavy loss and both he and his wife tried to commitsuicide by drinking pesticides. But he had so much punya thathis brother, who happened to be a doctor, was able to savethem in time. The man came to see me immediately. I told him,‘From now on, take Dada’s name and don’t ever repeat whatyou did.’ After that he continued to take Dada’s name, and allhis paap (sin; demerit karmas) were washed–cleansed andeverything settled down.When you say, ‘Dada’, paap will not come near you. Itwill hover around you but it will not touch you. If you becomelax–dose off from your awareness then it will affect you. It willnot affect you in your sleep. If you fall asleep taking Dada’sname and you wake up saying it, then you spent the time inbetween, being the Self.‘Mechanical’ ChetanPeople of the world have no idea as to what is calledChetan (life energy, the Self) in all this. They consider thebody to be the Chetan. They claim that the Chetan carriesout all the activities. But the Chetan does not do anything.‘Knowing’ and ‘seeing’ are its only functions. The rest is of thenon-Self.Who is doing the talking? It is the nischetan chetan(lifeless living element; inert consciousness); it is the ‘mechanical’in the tender but I know on what bases that tender is being filled.Nothing happens outside of these two laws.I tell many people to bring me a completed tender but noone has done so. How can they complete one? It is alldependant upon merit-demerit karmas. Therefore, no matterhow hard you try; you will lose even what you have if yourdemerit karmas unfold. So go home and relax and do a littlework. And if it is time for your merit karmas to unfold, thenwhat need is there for you to go out roaming? You will getwhat you are looking for sitting at home, without much effort.That is why I tell you not to complicate things by trying toohard in circumstances of both paap (unfolding of demeritkarmas) as well as punya (unfolding of merit karmas). In bothsituations, you will get all that you are going to get by workingnormally. Therefore there is no need for anyone to complicatethings by needlessly trying too hard. You just have tounderstand this.One contractor came to me, when we were building ajetty in Jaighadh in 1968, and told me, ‘I have a guru whom Ivisit regularly. Every year my business makes profit and it growseven though I do not wish for it. Is this because of the grace ofmy guru?’ I told him, ‘Don’t believe that it is because of yourguru’s grace because if you lose money you will blame the guruand curse him.’A guru is only a nimit (one of the evidences in theresult; apparent doer) in all this; his blessing too is a nimit (oneof the evidences unfolding). If the guru wants money forhimself, he does not get even four pennies! The man thenasked me what he should do, so I told him, ‘pray to Dada—the Lord within.’ Till then, the link of his punya (merit karmas)had been operating. An example of a link is if you pick up acard in total darkness, say you will pick up a card numberfour, then the next card you pick up will be a five, the next onewould be a six, and so forth. They would come in a properAptavani-5163164Aptavani-5chetan. It is not exactly the pure Chetan (the Self). Manypeople try to make it still. Hey you! Why are you doing that?Discover your Self. The Self is already still. Why are you makinga habit of trying to still this that is restless by nature? Thisnischetan chetan is inherently unsteady. The very meaning ofmechanical means it is in motion. People are trying to stabilizethat which is naturally unstable and restless; how wrong a paththey are following! That is why they have been wandering forcountless lives.There are two things in this world: one is still (achar) andthe other is moving (sachar). This body is sachar-achar(mixture of the moving and the still). The world too is sachar-achar; it has unmoving as well as moving divisions. The movingpart is the mechanical part; it is the non-Self part, and the non-moving part is the Self. So one can find a solution if heunderstands this, otherwise he will not be able to solve theproblem in a million lifetimes. He may do penance (tapa) andrenounce (tyaag) for millions of years but he will not attainanything.The natural state of the Self is that it does not needanything; it is already in a state of renunciation; it has noattachment to anything, hence it does not need to renounceanything. Therefore the battle of renunciation is unnecessary forthe Self. ‘Tyaage usko aage’––Whatever you renounce nowyou will have to acquire in the future.Interim Government and Full GovernmentQuestioner: Please explain the difference between chitand antaratma.Dadashri: A chit that becomes pure (shuddha) is itselfantaratma. The reason it is called antaratma is because youhave to worship your own Parmatma (the absolute Self) within,and become that (the Shuddhatma). First the pure Self willcome into conviction (pratiti); it will come in your awareness(laksha). Thereafter, in order to remain in the experience(anubhav) of the Self, you have to maintain single focusedawareness of and as the pure Self. But you will not be able todo this throughout the day as long as external ‘files’ exist, andthat is why it is called antaratma. The state of antaratma islike an interim Government and when your ‘files’ end, itbecomes a ‘full Government’; the state of the absolute Self(Parmatma).If you come here (to the satsang of the Akram Gnani)you will find a solution but if you chose to roam a longer path,you will have to go through volumes and volumes of scriptures.There is no end to it.The Parmatma (the absolute Self) is permanent. Themoodhatma (the self that is not awakened to the Self) is notpermanent and the antaratma also goes with you in to the nextlife. The state of moodhatma will not be the same in the nextlife; it will be different.Inner Tendencies Flow Towards the SelfQuestioner: After the chit becomes pure and when itmanifests the knowledge of antaratma, it keeps all externalveils free. Therefore the mind does not get completely expendedtowards external thoughts, but is more focused towards innerthoughts.Dadashri: That means that the tendencies (vruttis) thatused to wander outside now return inwards; they come to theirabode of the Self.Questioner: Does that have an impact on the caringtendencies and feelings in the mind?Dadashri: No change is possible. The mind is inanimate(jada). That which wanders outwardly is not a permanent entity.It is constantly changing every moment. You are the permanentOne in all this; everything else continues to change. You mayAptavani-5163164Aptavani-5chetan. It is not exactly the pure Chetan (the Self). Manypeople try to make it still. Hey you! Why are you doing that?Discover your Self. The Self is already still. Why are you makinga habit of trying to still this that is restless by nature? Thisnischetan chetan is inherently unsteady. The very meaning ofmechanical means it is in motion. People are trying to stabilizethat which is naturally unstable and restless; how wrong a paththey are following! That is why they have been wandering forcountless lives.There are two things in this world: one is still (achar) andthe other is moving (sachar). This body is sachar-achar(mixture of the moving and the still). The world too is sachar-achar; it has unmoving as well as moving divisions. The movingpart is the mechanical part; it is the non-Self part, and the non-moving part is the Self. So one can find a solution if heunderstands this, otherwise he will not be able to solve theproblem in a million lifetimes. He may do penance (tapa) andrenounce (tyaag) for millions of years but he will not attainanything.The natural state of the Self is that it does not needanything; it is already in a state of renunciation; it has noattachment to anything, hence it does not need to renounceanything. Therefore the battle of renunciation is unnecessary forthe Self. ‘Tyaage usko aage’––Whatever you renounce nowyou will have to acquire in the future.Interim Government and Full GovernmentQuestioner: Please explain the difference between chitand antaratma.Dadashri: A chit that becomes pure (shuddha) is itselfantaratma. The reason it is called antaratma is because youhave to worship your own Parmatma (the absolute Self) within,and become that (the Shuddhatma). First the pure Self willcome into conviction (pratiti); it will come in your awareness(laksha). Thereafter, in order to remain in the experience(anubhav) of the Self, you have to maintain single focusedawareness of and as the pure Self. But you will not be able todo this throughout the day as long as external ‘files’ exist, andthat is why it is called antaratma. The state of antaratma islike an interim Government and when your ‘files’ end, itbecomes a ‘full Government’; the state of the absolute Self(Parmatma).If you come here (to the satsang of the Akram Gnani)you will find a solution but if you chose to roam a longer path,you will have to go through volumes and volumes of scriptures.There is no end to it.The Parmatma (the absolute Self) is permanent. Themoodhatma (the self that is not awakened to the Self) is notpermanent and the antaratma also goes with you in to the nextlife. The state of moodhatma will not be the same in the nextlife; it will be different.Inner Tendencies Flow Towards the SelfQuestioner: After the chit becomes pure and when itmanifests the knowledge of antaratma, it keeps all externalveils free. Therefore the mind does not get completely expendedtowards external thoughts, but is more focused towards innerthoughts.Dadashri: That means that the tendencies (vruttis) thatused to wander outside now return inwards; they come to theirabode of the Self.Questioner: Does that have an impact on the caringtendencies and feelings in the mind?Dadashri: No change is possible. The mind is inanimate(jada). That which wanders outwardly is not a permanent entity.It is constantly changing every moment. You are the permanentOne in all this; everything else continues to change. You mayAptavani-5165166Aptavani-5Dadashri and His DiscipleDadashri: Will you do this kind of crooked businessagain? Do you want to become an animal?Questioner: No.Dadashri: You can fall down with these two legs –instead if you had four legs, at least you will not fall, will you?And as a bonus prize you will get a tail so that you can goaround jumping! So do you want something like that or do youwant to be born as a human being again?Questioner: I want to be a human being again.Dadashri: Then you will have to have humane traits. Ifyou treat others the way you would want to be treated, then youwill become a human being. Would you like it if someone wereto call you worthless?Questioner: No, I would not.Dadashri: Therefore, you should think about how theother person would feel if you were to call him worthless. Sogreet him warmly and tell him how good a person he is. He willbe happy.You feel hurt when someone lies to you, so then how hurtwould he be if you were to lie to him?You cannot take anything that is not rightfully yours. Dopeople not take things that do not belong to them?Questioner: Many do.Dadashri: They run away with someone else’s wife too.One should keep a wife of his own. But here, men go aroundlooking for someone else’s wife. No one would object or sayanything, including your family, if you were to have a wife ofyour own. So which hole would be better to fall in?think that it is going to rain but the next minute the rain cloudswill dissipate and move away. These are all illusory effects. Itdoes not mean much. You simply have to investigate what theillusion is, and who the one trapped by it is. That is all You haveto check.The chit remembers ‘Dada’, wherever you look You‘see’ ‘Dada’; that is a very good chit. Many people experiencethis, some to a greater extent than others. Dada Bhagwan isyour own Shuddhatma (your own pure Self). Therefore,whether you keep your chit in Dada Bhagwan or yourShuddhatma, it is the same. Both keep the chit pure(shuddha).The chit engaged in the worldly life is impure (ashuddha)chit. Impure chit is mishrachetan. When it becomes pure, itbecomes pure chetan (shuddha chit). Shuddha chit isshuddha chetan. The awareness, ‘I am Shuddhatma’, is Yourstate. That is called the state of the antaratma (the interimgovernment).Chit and PragnyaQuestioner: Does pragnya shakti go out to wander likethe chit does?Dadashri: Only the chit wanders but it will not do sowhen it becomes pure. Impure chit will keep wandering. It willalso go out to a party where the atmosphere is filled with theeffect of alcohol. There is a lot of energy in the chit and that iswhy people get tired of it.The mind does not trouble people as much, but the chitdoes. The mind does two things; in it sprouts good thoughts andbad thoughts, just like fireworks. Thoughts are gneya (thatwhich is to be known) and You are the Gnata (the Knower).The illusion makes you say, ‘I am thinking, a thought came tome.’Aptavani-5165166Aptavani-5Dadashri and His DiscipleDadashri: Will you do this kind of crooked businessagain? Do you want to become an animal?Questioner: No.Dadashri: You can fall down with these two legs –instead if you had four legs, at least you will not fall, will you?And as a bonus prize you will get a tail so that you can goaround jumping! So do you want something like that or do youwant to be born as a human being again?Questioner: I want to be a human being again.Dadashri: Then you will have to have humane traits. Ifyou treat others the way you would want to be treated, then youwill become a human being. Would you like it if someone wereto call you worthless?Questioner: No, I would not.Dadashri: Therefore, you should think about how theother person would feel if you were to call him worthless. Sogreet him warmly and tell him how good a person he is. He willbe happy.You feel hurt when someone lies to you, so then how hurtwould he be if you were to lie to him?You cannot take anything that is not rightfully yours. Dopeople not take things that do not belong to them?Questioner: Many do.Dadashri: They run away with someone else’s wife too.One should keep a wife of his own. But here, men go aroundlooking for someone else’s wife. No one would object or sayanything, including your family, if you were to have a wife ofyour own. So which hole would be better to fall in?think that it is going to rain but the next minute the rain cloudswill dissipate and move away. These are all illusory effects. Itdoes not mean much. You simply have to investigate what theillusion is, and who the one trapped by it is. That is all You haveto check.The chit remembers ‘Dada’, wherever you look You‘see’ ‘Dada’; that is a very good chit. Many people experiencethis, some to a greater extent than others. Dada Bhagwan isyour own Shuddhatma (your own pure Self). Therefore,whether you keep your chit in Dada Bhagwan or yourShuddhatma, it is the same. Both keep the chit pure(shuddha).The chit engaged in the worldly life is impure (ashuddha)chit. Impure chit is mishrachetan. When it becomes pure, itbecomes pure chetan (shuddha chit). Shuddha chit isshuddha chetan. The awareness, ‘I am Shuddhatma’, is Yourstate. That is called the state of the antaratma (the interimgovernment).Chit and PragnyaQuestioner: Does pragnya shakti go out to wander likethe chit does?Dadashri: Only the chit wanders but it will not do sowhen it becomes pure. Impure chit will keep wandering. It willalso go out to a party where the atmosphere is filled with theeffect of alcohol. There is a lot of energy in the chit and that iswhy people get tired of it.The mind does not trouble people as much, but the chitdoes. The mind does two things; in it sprouts good thoughts andbad thoughts, just like fireworks. Thoughts are gneya (thatwhich is to be known) and You are the Gnata (the Knower).The illusion makes you say, ‘I am thinking, a thought came tome.’Aptavani-5167168Aptavani-5Questioner: The one that is rightfully mine.Dadashri: The hole that is not yours is very deep indeedand one from which you will never be able to crawl out.Therefore, you should be aware in everything you do; you needto be cautious. You are still young and that is why I am showingyou all the danger signals and the pitfalls. I would not sayanything to an old man.Questioner: Yes, yes, I will not take away anyone else’swife.Dadashri: Yes, that is right. You should not even thinkabout doing so. If you feel an attraction towards a woman, youshould say, ‘Dear Dada Bhagwan, forgive me.’You cannot also take money that is not rightfully yours.Don’t people in Mumbai adulterate their goods?Questioner: Businessmen do.Dadashri: If you know any of them, caution them bytelling them that they may continue such practices if they want tohave four legs and a tail in the next life. I guarantee you that youwill not starve if you did not resort to such devious practices.You will have to understand this, will you not? Which countryare you from?Questioner: Bharat (India).Dadashri: We are people of Bharat (India). What areour qualities? We are Aryan (noble and respectful) people!When a person does not behave like an Aryan, we callhim anadi (foolish, thoughtless, and uncivilized). To be anAryan means to have conduct, thoughts, and speech that arenoble and respectful (arya).Do you like what I am saying? Are you getting bored?Questioner: I am sitting here because I like it.Dadashri: Do you ever tell a lie?Questioner: I do.Dadashri: What harm is done by lying?Questioner: It does cause harm.Dadashri: People will lose faith in you; they will not trustyou.Questioner: We tell lies thinking the other person will notcatch on.Dadashri: Yes, but they will lose their trust in you andyou lose your qualities as a human being.Have you ever stolen anything?Questioner: No, I have not.Dadashri: Haven’t you? Do you not like stealing?Questioner: I do, but I am scared.That Which Lights Has to Be Put OutDadashri: Why do you put food in the stomach?Questioner: To satisfy the hunger.Dadashri: When you are hungry, do you have a burningsensation or a pacified one?Questioner: One is bound to feel hunger pangs, surely?Dadashri: Does it not die down?Questioner: No, only after eating does it die down.Dadashri: Then hunger can be considered a ‘fire’, can itnot? What do you eat when there is ‘fire’ in the stomach? Petrolis the fuel for the car and clarified butter and oil is fuel for thestomach. Does just hunger arise (‘becomes alight’) within yourAptavani-5167168Aptavani-5Questioner: The one that is rightfully mine.Dadashri: The hole that is not yours is very deep indeedand one from which you will never be able to crawl out.Therefore, you should be aware in everything you do; you needto be cautious. You are still young and that is why I am showingyou all the danger signals and the pitfalls. I would not sayanything to an old man.Questioner: Yes, yes, I will not take away anyone else’swife.Dadashri: Yes, that is right. You should not even thinkabout doing so. If you feel an attraction towards a woman, youshould say, ‘Dear Dada Bhagwan, forgive me.’You cannot also take money that is not rightfully yours.Don’t people in Mumbai adulterate their goods?Questioner: Businessmen do.Dadashri: If you know any of them, caution them bytelling them that they may continue such practices if they want tohave four legs and a tail in the next life. I guarantee you that youwill not starve if you did not resort to such devious practices.You will have to understand this, will you not? Which countryare you from?Questioner: Bharat (India).Dadashri: We are people of Bharat (India). What areour qualities? We are Aryan (noble and respectful) people!When a person does not behave like an Aryan, we callhim anadi (foolish, thoughtless, and uncivilized). To be anAryan means to have conduct, thoughts, and speech that arenoble and respectful (arya).Do you like what I am saying? Are you getting bored?Questioner: I am sitting here because I like it.Dadashri: Do you ever tell a lie?Questioner: I do.Dadashri: What harm is done by lying?Questioner: It does cause harm.Dadashri: People will lose faith in you; they will not trustyou.Questioner: We tell lies thinking the other person will notcatch on.Dadashri: Yes, but they will lose their trust in you andyou lose your qualities as a human being.Have you ever stolen anything?Questioner: No, I have not.Dadashri: Haven’t you? Do you not like stealing?Questioner: I do, but I am scared.That Which Lights Has to Be Put OutDadashri: Why do you put food in the stomach?Questioner: To satisfy the hunger.Dadashri: When you are hungry, do you have a burningsensation or a pacified one?Questioner: One is bound to feel hunger pangs, surely?Dadashri: Does it not die down?Questioner: No, only after eating does it die down.Dadashri: Then hunger can be considered a ‘fire’, can itnot? What do you eat when there is ‘fire’ in the stomach? Petrolis the fuel for the car and clarified butter and oil is fuel for thestomach. Does just hunger arise (‘becomes alight’) within yourAptavani-5169170Aptavani-5stomach, or does thirst also arise (‘becomes alight’)?Questioner: Thirst also arises.Dadashri: Therefore, thirst too arises (‘becomes alight’),does it not? Is it put out when you add water to it?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Fatigue also arises (‘becomes alight’)?Questioner: Yes, fatigue also arises (‘becomes alight’).Dadashri: When fatigue arises (‘becomes alight’), ‘it’takes a rest of an hour; does sleep arise (‘becomes alight’)?Questioner: Yes, it arises (‘becomes alight’).Dadashri: So all this arises (‘becomes alight’).Therefore the Lord has said that this human life is meantfor putting out all that ‘becomes alight’. Whereas one may ask,‘Lord, I have put out all that was on fire, what else do I haveto do?’ the Lord says, ‘Keep taking my name and makepreparations to be liberated.’ Having been people with nobility,in mind, speech and acts (arya praja), you are all worthy ofliberation.I told one man, ‘people in your neighborhood are veryhonest and honorable, so there must not be any stealing in thatstreet’. He told me, ‘If we got rid of the police substation fromthere, then we would see what would happen. Then peoplethere would not leave behind even the water jugs that are sittingin the toilets!’ So it is just like you said, it is fear that preventspeople from stealing and wrongdoing. There would be noproblem if there was no fear at all, would there be?Questioner: Then there would be no problem.Dadashri: Would you steal something that you like?Questioner: I would get the things I like.Dadashri: Would you take bricks of gold if they werelying around?Questioner: If that were the case, everyone’s mindwould be tempted.Dadashri: People’s minds are not that steady. Theirminds are steady out of fear. Kaviraj one day tells me that thegovernment has to employ police to keep these unworthypeople in line and the burden of the cost for doing this falls onthe good people who have to pay taxes. There must be manyfor whom there is no need to keep police security.Obstacles Caused by ConflictsA magistrate, who after a quarrel with his wife, is not onspeaking terms with her for two months, and yet when he goesto court he slaps a seven year sentence on someone. Hey you!Why do you walk around sulking with a sour face in the home?Why don’t you settle your dispute there first?I have never had even the slightest matbhed (difference ofopinion) with anyone. Why is that?Questioner: If one does not say or act in a way thatcreates differences, then there will be no matbhed (difference ofopinion).Dadashri: What is matbhed? Conflict and clash. If youare walking along and a light pole comes in your path, then youshould have an understanding for it. What would happen if youask the light pole, ‘who do you think you are, coming in myway?’ If a bull comes in your way, will you tell it to move aside?Questioner: That will not work.Dadashri: There you should move aside. What if a snakecomes in your path?Questioner: This world has become a world of animals.Aptavani-5169170Aptavani-5stomach, or does thirst also arise (‘becomes alight’)?Questioner: Thirst also arises.Dadashri: Therefore, thirst too arises (‘becomes alight’),does it not? Is it put out when you add water to it?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Fatigue also arises (‘becomes alight’)?Questioner: Yes, fatigue also arises (‘becomes alight’).Dadashri: When fatigue arises (‘becomes alight’), ‘it’takes a rest of an hour; does sleep arise (‘becomes alight’)?Questioner: Yes, it arises (‘becomes alight’).Dadashri: So all this arises (‘becomes alight’).Therefore the Lord has said that this human life is meantfor putting out all that ‘becomes alight’. Whereas one may ask,‘Lord, I have put out all that was on fire, what else do I haveto do?’ the Lord says, ‘Keep taking my name and makepreparations to be liberated.’ Having been people with nobility,in mind, speech and acts (arya praja), you are all worthy ofliberation.I told one man, ‘people in your neighborhood are veryhonest and honorable, so there must not be any stealing in thatstreet’. He told me, ‘If we got rid of the police substation fromthere, then we would see what would happen. Then peoplethere would not leave behind even the water jugs that are sittingin the toilets!’ So it is just like you said, it is fear that preventspeople from stealing and wrongdoing. There would be noproblem if there was no fear at all, would there be?Questioner: Then there would be no problem.Dadashri: Would you steal something that you like?Questioner: I would get the things I like.Dadashri: Would you take bricks of gold if they werelying around?Questioner: If that were the case, everyone’s mindwould be tempted.Dadashri: People’s minds are not that steady. Theirminds are steady out of fear. Kaviraj one day tells me that thegovernment has to employ police to keep these unworthypeople in line and the burden of the cost for doing this falls onthe good people who have to pay taxes. There must be manyfor whom there is no need to keep police security.Obstacles Caused by ConflictsA magistrate, who after a quarrel with his wife, is not onspeaking terms with her for two months, and yet when he goesto court he slaps a seven year sentence on someone. Hey you!Why do you walk around sulking with a sour face in the home?Why don’t you settle your dispute there first?I have never had even the slightest matbhed (difference ofopinion) with anyone. Why is that?Questioner: If one does not say or act in a way thatcreates differences, then there will be no matbhed (difference ofopinion).Dadashri: What is matbhed? Conflict and clash. If youare walking along and a light pole comes in your path, then youshould have an understanding for it. What would happen if youask the light pole, ‘who do you think you are, coming in myway?’ If a bull comes in your way, will you tell it to move aside?Questioner: That will not work.Dadashri: There you should move aside. What if a snakecomes in your path?Questioner: This world has become a world of animals.Aptavani-5171172Aptavani-5Dadashri: When you say animals, there are humanbeings who have become like the animals too.Questioner: How can I recognize them?Dadashri: You can recognize them. If he raises his horns(ego), will you not understand that he is a bull? Therefore, youshould move aside. I–Dadashri would recognize one evenbefore he comes. I can smell them. Many are like rocks andmany are like light poles.Questioner: Some of us can tell by looking at their faces,can we not?Dadashri: Yes, that is true, but how accurate a‘thermometer’ (within) should the one who knows this in thismanner keep in order to do so?Questioner: It has to be free of prejudice.Dadashri: A man without prejudice is blessed for sure.If you fought with me yesterday and meet me again today, I willput aside yesterday’s incident. If I keep prejudices based on myprevious experiences, it would be a mistake on my part. Evenif you do the same thing with me again today, there is noproblem. The world suffers because of purvagraha (insistencedue to prior impressions and opinions; prejudices), and it isbecause of them that new mistakes are made. You do notbelieve people to be what they are, and what they are not, youbelieve they are!When you call someone a ‘donkey’ or an ‘ass’, you arecalling God an ‘ass’ too. Therefore, think before you call anyoneany names. Conflicts must not exist. You must settle and resolvethem. It is a waste of time and energy to sit around withoutsettling the conflict.Any Title Is the EgoA scholar (pandit) once asks me, ‘What issthitapragnya?’ Now, I am not a scholar, I am a Gnani. Hisego had been inflated without any substance or reason. Iexplained to him that he will attain the state of sthitapragnyawhen his ego goes away, so he should get rid of this ego. Theword ‘pandit’ is merely an adjective, a title; many people havethat. There are many pandits around. One should becomeadjective-free, title-free, for just one day. I am without any title(visheshan, adjectiveless) and that is why people call me aGnani. Otherwise, I am not even a Gnani. I am the title-free(nirvishesh purush, one free from all worldly titles, the base ofwhich is ego).Can Karmas Be Destroyed by Critical Thinking?Questioner: It is said that the entire mohaniya karmas(the karmas that delude) can be destroyed by enquiry–criticalthinking.Dadashri: Yes, but that thinking has to be in front of aGnani Purush; not on your own.There are two kinds of thoughts: one is thoughts out ofone’s own swachhand (guided by the intellect and the ego) andthe other is thoughts that are in the interaction with the GnaniPurush. Tell the Gnani Purush, time and again, what kind ofthoughts come to you; then when He tells you, ‘this is correct’,you can go forward. Otherwise if the thoughts are guided byyour intellect and ego (swachhand), there is no telling wherethey will take you.Everything can be removed through critical thinking.Everything of mine went away through this process. There isnothing in this world, not a single subatomic particle (parmanu)that I have not thought about!Discharging of Karmas – with the Method ofthe GnanisQuestioner: The Gnani remains as the Knower-Seer ofAptavani-5171172Aptavani-5Dadashri: When you say animals, there are humanbeings who have become like the animals too.Questioner: How can I recognize them?Dadashri: You can recognize them. If he raises his horns(ego), will you not understand that he is a bull? Therefore, youshould move aside. I–Dadashri would recognize one evenbefore he comes. I can smell them. Many are like rocks andmany are like light poles.Questioner: Some of us can tell by looking at their faces,can we not?Dadashri: Yes, that is true, but how accurate a‘thermometer’ (within) should the one who knows this in thismanner keep in order to do so?Questioner: It has to be free of prejudice.Dadashri: A man without prejudice is blessed for sure.If you fought with me yesterday and meet me again today, I willput aside yesterday’s incident. If I keep prejudices based on myprevious experiences, it would be a mistake on my part. Evenif you do the same thing with me again today, there is noproblem. The world suffers because of purvagraha (insistencedue to prior impressions and opinions; prejudices), and it isbecause of them that new mistakes are made. You do notbelieve people to be what they are, and what they are not, youbelieve they are!When you call someone a ‘donkey’ or an ‘ass’, you arecalling God an ‘ass’ too. Therefore, think before you call anyoneany names. Conflicts must not exist. You must settle and resolvethem. It is a waste of time and energy to sit around withoutsettling the conflict.Any Title Is the EgoA scholar (pandit) once asks me, ‘What issthitapragnya?’ Now, I am not a scholar, I am a Gnani. Hisego had been inflated without any substance or reason. Iexplained to him that he will attain the state of sthitapragnyawhen his ego goes away, so he should get rid of this ego. Theword ‘pandit’ is merely an adjective, a title; many people havethat. There are many pandits around. One should becomeadjective-free, title-free, for just one day. I am without any title(visheshan, adjectiveless) and that is why people call me aGnani. Otherwise, I am not even a Gnani. I am the title-free(nirvishesh purush, one free from all worldly titles, the base ofwhich is ego).Can Karmas Be Destroyed by Critical Thinking?Questioner: It is said that the entire mohaniya karmas(the karmas that delude) can be destroyed by enquiry–criticalthinking.Dadashri: Yes, but that thinking has to be in front of aGnani Purush; not on your own.There are two kinds of thoughts: one is thoughts out ofone’s own swachhand (guided by the intellect and the ego) andthe other is thoughts that are in the interaction with the GnaniPurush. Tell the Gnani Purush, time and again, what kind ofthoughts come to you; then when He tells you, ‘this is correct’,you can go forward. Otherwise if the thoughts are guided byyour intellect and ego (swachhand), there is no telling wherethey will take you.Everything can be removed through critical thinking.Everything of mine went away through this process. There isnothing in this world, not a single subatomic particle (parmanu)that I have not thought about!Discharging of Karmas – with the Method ofthe GnanisQuestioner: The Gnani remains as the Knower-Seer ofAptavani-5173174Aptavani-5mohaniya karmas, so then does that karmas disappear?Dadashri: All karmas disappear if You remain as theKnower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta). All charitra moha (dischargingillusory attachment) disappears; only the pure awareness(shuddha upayog) of the Self remains. The upayog ‘I amShuddhatma’, should remain. This is the pure Self and that toois the pure Self. Donkeys, dogs, cats, etc., are all pure Self.Even the one who robs you is a pure Self.Human beings of the current era of the time cycle, calleddushamkaal, have an understanding that is filled with illusoryattachment (moha) and attraction (murchha). That is whyKrupadudev Shrimad Rajchandra has called living beings of thisera ‘hutpunyashadi’ (inadequate merit karmas bearers). Allday long they continue to do anger-pride-deceit-greed, attachmentand abhorrence. They follow the tradition of the religion passedon to them by their forefathers. It is all done without anyunderstanding. Each person has a veil (avaran) of his own‘religion-pudgal’ (the non-Self complex which is mired inrelative religion). Regardless of whether one is a Jain or aVaishnav, none are able to attain moksha. For the Jain it is theJain ‘religion-pudgal’ and for the Vaishnav it is the Vaishnav‘religion- pudgal’, and that verily does not allow him to go tomoksha. It is only when such a pudgal discharges completely,that one attains salvation. In the path of moksha, neither the Jainpudgal nor any other ‘religion-pudgal’ will be of any use. Everysuch pudgal will have to be settled.Questioner: The pudgal does not have to present itselfat the gates of moksha anyway! It is verily the Self that has topresent itself there!Dadashri: It is possible to enter moksha after attainingthe state of the Shuddhatma. When attachment-abhorrence(raag-dwesh) in everything goes away, whatever remains iscalled charitra moha (discharging illusory attachment). Whenthe charitra moha discharges completely You attain moksha.Questioner: What is discharge of karmas (nirjara) like?Dadashri: If You are Shuddhatma, then everything isnothing but discharging karmas; what do you want by checkingwhat has discharged? Everyday, do you examine your stools tosee whether it is yellow or black! That too is one kind of adischarge of the body.Questioner: That is true, but when will the discharge(nirjara) end?Dadashri: What will you gain by ending it?Questioner: Then I will be able to know that moksha isat hand.Dadashri: If you try to rush in this manner, you will getcaught up in another thorny bush, which will attach to you. Thisis not a path for rushing. This is a path of maintaining awareness(shuddha upayog). Remain in pure awareness (shuddhaupayog) of the Self; with that the discharge will continueautomatically. You do not have to do anything. That is why I saythat I am not in any hurry to get to moksha. What hurry am Iin? What other moksha do I need when I am experiencingmoksha right here? And that other moksha (final liberation) willhappen naturally, for sure; when it is time it will comeautomatically as ordained at three seconds past three! What isthe need for us to rush?Questioner: Is moksha predetermined?Dadashri: No, do not take it for granted that it ispredetermined. If it were, everyone would remain sleeping; it isnot like that.The Five Agnas Are Shuddha UpayogAll I am telling you is, ‘Remain in the awareness as theAptavani-5173174Aptavani-5mohaniya karmas, so then does that karmas disappear?Dadashri: All karmas disappear if You remain as theKnower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta). All charitra moha (dischargingillusory attachment) disappears; only the pure awareness(shuddha upayog) of the Self remains. The upayog ‘I amShuddhatma’, should remain. This is the pure Self and that toois the pure Self. Donkeys, dogs, cats, etc., are all pure Self.Even the one who robs you is a pure Self.Human beings of the current era of the time cycle, calleddushamkaal, have an understanding that is filled with illusoryattachment (moha) and attraction (murchha). That is whyKrupadudev Shrimad Rajchandra has called living beings of thisera ‘hutpunyashadi’ (inadequate merit karmas bearers). Allday long they continue to do anger-pride-deceit-greed, attachmentand abhorrence. They follow the tradition of the religion passedon to them by their forefathers. It is all done without anyunderstanding. Each person has a veil (avaran) of his own‘religion-pudgal’ (the non-Self complex which is mired inrelative religion). Regardless of whether one is a Jain or aVaishnav, none are able to attain moksha. For the Jain it is theJain ‘religion-pudgal’ and for the Vaishnav it is the Vaishnav‘religion- pudgal’, and that verily does not allow him to go tomoksha. It is only when such a pudgal discharges completely,that one attains salvation. In the path of moksha, neither the Jainpudgal nor any other ‘religion-pudgal’ will be of any use. Everysuch pudgal will have to be settled.Questioner: The pudgal does not have to present itselfat the gates of moksha anyway! It is verily the Self that has topresent itself there!Dadashri: It is possible to enter moksha after attainingthe state of the Shuddhatma. When attachment-abhorrence(raag-dwesh) in everything goes away, whatever remains iscalled charitra moha (discharging illusory attachment). Whenthe charitra moha discharges completely You attain moksha.Questioner: What is discharge of karmas (nirjara) like?Dadashri: If You are Shuddhatma, then everything isnothing but discharging karmas; what do you want by checkingwhat has discharged? Everyday, do you examine your stools tosee whether it is yellow or black! That too is one kind of adischarge of the body.Questioner: That is true, but when will the discharge(nirjara) end?Dadashri: What will you gain by ending it?Questioner: Then I will be able to know that moksha isat hand.Dadashri: If you try to rush in this manner, you will getcaught up in another thorny bush, which will attach to you. Thisis not a path for rushing. This is a path of maintaining awareness(shuddha upayog). Remain in pure awareness (shuddhaupayog) of the Self; with that the discharge will continueautomatically. You do not have to do anything. That is why I saythat I am not in any hurry to get to moksha. What hurry am Iin? What other moksha do I need when I am experiencingmoksha right here? And that other moksha (final liberation) willhappen naturally, for sure; when it is time it will comeautomatically as ordained at three seconds past three! What isthe need for us to rush?Questioner: Is moksha predetermined?Dadashri: No, do not take it for granted that it ispredetermined. If it were, everyone would remain sleeping; it isnot like that.The Five Agnas Are Shuddha UpayogAll I am telling you is, ‘Remain in the awareness as theAptavani-5175176Aptavani-5pure Self (shuddha upayog)’. Do not think about anything else.This is not like a day, which ends soon. This is the process ofthe worldly life. All your karmic accounts will be over if youremain in shuddha upayog. If you start thinking, ‘When will allthis end?’ then some other ‘ghost’ will take over and possessyou. What is the big hurry?I have very little charitra moha (illusory attachment indischarge), whereas you have heaps of it. But yours is alsogradually going down a little at a time. Charitra moha is goingaway. As it leaves, it frees you for sure.From the five hundred thousand ‘guests of charitramoha’ you had, five hundred just left, leaving you with thatmany less, then another five hundred will leave. Then instead offive hundred thousand, four hundred thousand will remain, andthen it will go down to three hundred thousand, then twohundred thousand. It will continue to decrease in this mannerand eventually there will be nothing left. What is the point incounting to see how many remain and how many have gone?Just remain in the awareness of the pure Self so that, along withthe state of samvar (a state free from karmas inflow, charge),there is constant discharge of karmas (nirjara).Questioner: Does this mean that the more I remain inshuddha upayog, the more discharge of karmas will occur?Dadashri: Shuddha upayog is the only thing that is to be‘done’. Your dharma (duty) is shuddha upayog. The more Youmiss the awareness (upayog), the more you will suffer. The FiveAgnas (special directives given by Dadashri in Gnan Vidhi) thatI give You is for the purpose of keeping You in shuddha upayog.To be in–to follow the Five Agnas is itself shuddha upayog.Even following only one of them is shuddha upayog. Is it notpossible for you to practice at least one Agna out of five?Questioner: Dada, the Five Agnas are such that if Ifollow just one, all five are followed automatically.Dadashri: On the contrary, that is better, is it not? Youget benefit of all five by following just one. This is very easy andstraightforward. It is not difficult. There is no one above you toscold you. Otherwise if you had a guru above you, then hewould scold you. The moment you get up in the morning, hestarts his scolding.What Creates Karmas?Questioner: You said that there is planning behindwhatever one experiences now. In this process there is alsokriyaman (effect of effect karma that is experienced throughfive senses in the same life), as well as sanchit (accumulatedkarmas from the past life), so then how is one to understand thekarmas and the cause of those karmas?Dadashri: That planning of the karmas (cause) is notdependent on kriya (that which occurs through thoughts, speechand acts). It depends on your dhyan (meditation, intent,bhaav). You may give a donation of five thousand rupeesbecause someone pressured you to do so, but your dhyan atthe time of giving was not true–exactly as it should have been,meaning it was not in agreement with your actions.Questioner: I did not have a great desire to give.Dadashri: No, it is not the desire (ichchha). There is noneed for desire at all. Desires do not bind karmas. It dependson your dhyan (inner intent, meditation). Desire can be there ornot. At the time of giving the money, if you feel in your mind thatyou would have never given the donation if that had notpressured you, then despite your outwardly altruistic actions,you will go into the animal kingdom because you became boundby this meditation called raudradhyan.Questioner: What does dhyan depend on?Dadashri: It depends on one’s development. It dependson whatever gnan has developed in you.Aptavani-5175176Aptavani-5pure Self (shuddha upayog)’. Do not think about anything else.This is not like a day, which ends soon. This is the process ofthe worldly life. All your karmic accounts will be over if youremain in shuddha upayog. If you start thinking, ‘When will allthis end?’ then some other ‘ghost’ will take over and possessyou. What is the big hurry?I have very little charitra moha (illusory attachment indischarge), whereas you have heaps of it. But yours is alsogradually going down a little at a time. Charitra moha is goingaway. As it leaves, it frees you for sure.From the five hundred thousand ‘guests of charitramoha’ you had, five hundred just left, leaving you with thatmany less, then another five hundred will leave. Then instead offive hundred thousand, four hundred thousand will remain, andthen it will go down to three hundred thousand, then twohundred thousand. It will continue to decrease in this mannerand eventually there will be nothing left. What is the point incounting to see how many remain and how many have gone?Just remain in the awareness of the pure Self so that, along withthe state of samvar (a state free from karmas inflow, charge),there is constant discharge of karmas (nirjara).Questioner: Does this mean that the more I remain inshuddha upayog, the more discharge of karmas will occur?Dadashri: Shuddha upayog is the only thing that is to be‘done’. Your dharma (duty) is shuddha upayog. The more Youmiss the awareness (upayog), the more you will suffer. The FiveAgnas (special directives given by Dadashri in Gnan Vidhi) thatI give You is for the purpose of keeping You in shuddha upayog.To be in–to follow the Five Agnas is itself shuddha upayog.Even following only one of them is shuddha upayog. Is it notpossible for you to practice at least one Agna out of five?Questioner: Dada, the Five Agnas are such that if Ifollow just one, all five are followed automatically.Dadashri: On the contrary, that is better, is it not? Youget benefit of all five by following just one. This is very easy andstraightforward. It is not difficult. There is no one above you toscold you. Otherwise if you had a guru above you, then hewould scold you. The moment you get up in the morning, hestarts his scolding.What Creates Karmas?Questioner: You said that there is planning behindwhatever one experiences now. In this process there is alsokriyaman (effect of effect karma that is experienced throughfive senses in the same life), as well as sanchit (accumulatedkarmas from the past life), so then how is one to understand thekarmas and the cause of those karmas?Dadashri: That planning of the karmas (cause) is notdependent on kriya (that which occurs through thoughts, speechand acts). It depends on your dhyan (meditation, intent,bhaav). You may give a donation of five thousand rupeesbecause someone pressured you to do so, but your dhyan atthe time of giving was not true–exactly as it should have been,meaning it was not in agreement with your actions.Questioner: I did not have a great desire to give.Dadashri: No, it is not the desire (ichchha). There is noneed for desire at all. Desires do not bind karmas. It dependson your dhyan (inner intent, meditation). Desire can be there ornot. At the time of giving the money, if you feel in your mind thatyou would have never given the donation if that had notpressured you, then despite your outwardly altruistic actions,you will go into the animal kingdom because you became boundby this meditation called raudradhyan.Questioner: What does dhyan depend on?Dadashri: It depends on one’s development. It dependson whatever gnan has developed in you.Aptavani-5177178Aptavani-5Even while doing something bad or hurtful, if your dhyan(mediation, inner state) is of a high level; you will bind punya(merit karmas). When a hunter kills a deer, if he repents heavily,‘Why did this action come to me? I have no choice but to dothis to feed my wife and my children’, then the dhyan has risenhigher. Nature does not judge–see one’s kriya (actions); ittakes into consideration one’s dhyan at the time of his actions.It does not even look at one’s desires.When someone robs you, the bhaav (intent; meditation;state of the mind) becomes raudra (violent and hurtful). Suchintent occurs in the darkness (agnan, ignorance). Now whatkind of bhaav occurs in the One where there is pure light; theknowledge of the Self? He will say it is vyavasthit and willmove on without any bhaav or abhaav (positive or negativereaction in inner intent).Dharma, Artha, Kaam and MokshaQuestioner: Dharma, artha, kaam and moksha; canyou explain these four stages (roles) of the human life?Dadashri: Artha is what people generally refer to asworldly intent in life (swarth). Starting from this point, all theway to the point of the ultimate meaning (parmarth), is allartha. This intent (artha) remains all the way to the level ofabsolute enlightenment (Parmatma).What does parmarth mean? It is where there is onlyinterest in matters of the Self. Besides the Self (Atma) there isno other (worldly) interest (swarth) whatsoever. The GnaniPurush is selfish for the Atma.The artha (intent), when it takes you towards selfishness,is sakaam (action done with expectation of worldly rewards),and when it goes towards the salvation of all (parmarth) -ultimate good, it is nishkaam (action done without expectationof worldly rewards). Action (kaam) can take you towardsmoksha (done without expectation of rewards), or worldly life(done with expectation of rewards).Similarly, dharma can make you wander in the worldlylife, and the same dharma can take you to moksha.Questioner: What is the definition of dharma?Dadashri: That which makes wander around is shubha(good) religion and that which takes you to moksha (liberation)is shuddha dharma (pure religion).Why did we give the name ‘dharma’? It was becausethere was adharma (wrong deeds) that it came to be nameddharma (positive or righteous deeds). So we have dharma-adharma (both good deeds and bad deeds). What do peoplewith good moral attributes do? They keep pushing away theirnegative thoughts. To push away the negative, to push awayadharma, is called dharma.Questioner: Does practicing dharma automatically getrid of adharma?Dadashri: There are two kinds of dharma (religion).One is natural (swabhavik dharma); the religion of the Self.The second is extra (vishesh) religion, the religion of the non-Self. When one attains the Self; realizes the pure Self(Shuddhatma), he attains the natural dharma; the religion of theSelf. That is Real religion. In the Real religion nothing needs tobe weeded out, however in the other religion one has todistinguish between what is right and what is wrong.What is the worldly (laukik) religion? It is to give charity,to serve others, oblige others; all that is considered dharma.You bind merit karma with all that. By insulting people, fighting,stealing, hurting people, you bind demerit karma. Real dharmais not to be found where there is (bondage of) merit and demeritkarma. Real dharma is beyond merit or demerit karmas. Meritand demerit karma is considered heya (that which is worthAptavani-5177178Aptavani-5Even while doing something bad or hurtful, if your dhyan(mediation, inner state) is of a high level; you will bind punya(merit karmas). When a hunter kills a deer, if he repents heavily,‘Why did this action come to me? I have no choice but to dothis to feed my wife and my children’, then the dhyan has risenhigher. Nature does not judge–see one’s kriya (actions); ittakes into consideration one’s dhyan at the time of his actions.It does not even look at one’s desires.When someone robs you, the bhaav (intent; meditation;state of the mind) becomes raudra (violent and hurtful). Suchintent occurs in the darkness (agnan, ignorance). Now whatkind of bhaav occurs in the One where there is pure light; theknowledge of the Self? He will say it is vyavasthit and willmove on without any bhaav or abhaav (positive or negativereaction in inner intent).Dharma, Artha, Kaam and MokshaQuestioner: Dharma, artha, kaam and moksha; canyou explain these four stages (roles) of the human life?Dadashri: Artha is what people generally refer to asworldly intent in life (swarth). Starting from this point, all theway to the point of the ultimate meaning (parmarth), is allartha. This intent (artha) remains all the way to the level ofabsolute enlightenment (Parmatma).What does parmarth mean? It is where there is onlyinterest in matters of the Self. Besides the Self (Atma) there isno other (worldly) interest (swarth) whatsoever. The GnaniPurush is selfish for the Atma.The artha (intent), when it takes you towards selfishness,is sakaam (action done with expectation of worldly rewards),and when it goes towards the salvation of all (parmarth) -ultimate good, it is nishkaam (action done without expectationof worldly rewards). Action (kaam) can take you towardsmoksha (done without expectation of rewards), or worldly life(done with expectation of rewards).Similarly, dharma can make you wander in the worldlylife, and the same dharma can take you to moksha.Questioner: What is the definition of dharma?Dadashri: That which makes wander around is shubha(good) religion and that which takes you to moksha (liberation)is shuddha dharma (pure religion).Why did we give the name ‘dharma’? It was becausethere was adharma (wrong deeds) that it came to be nameddharma (positive or righteous deeds). So we have dharma-adharma (both good deeds and bad deeds). What do peoplewith good moral attributes do? They keep pushing away theirnegative thoughts. To push away the negative, to push awayadharma, is called dharma.Questioner: Does practicing dharma automatically getrid of adharma?Dadashri: There are two kinds of dharma (religion).One is natural (swabhavik dharma); the religion of the Self.The second is extra (vishesh) religion, the religion of the non-Self. When one attains the Self; realizes the pure Self(Shuddhatma), he attains the natural dharma; the religion of theSelf. That is Real religion. In the Real religion nothing needs tobe weeded out, however in the other religion one has todistinguish between what is right and what is wrong.What is the worldly (laukik) religion? It is to give charity,to serve others, oblige others; all that is considered dharma.You bind merit karma with all that. By insulting people, fighting,stealing, hurting people, you bind demerit karma. Real dharmais not to be found where there is (bondage of) merit and demeritkarma. Real dharma is beyond merit or demerit karmas. Meritand demerit karma is considered heya (that which is worthAptavani-5179180Aptavani-5relinquishing and ignoring), and the Self-form is consideredupadeya (that which is worthy of acquisition and consideration)and that is real dharma. Therefore real dharma and relativedharma are both separate.If the purpose (artha) of your life results in worldly self-interest, it is called adharma (lack of religion) and if it leads toreligion of the Self, it is called dharma. The same holds true withreference to passion (kaam). If the passion is for the self, it isadharma. If there is dispassion for the self, and passion for theSelf, it is dharma.Questioner: Can any living being survive withoutdharma?Dadashri: No living being is ever outside of dharma. Itis either in dharma or in adharma.Questioner: There are many who do not believe in ahigher God, do they?Dadashri: You should not call those who do not believein God, atheists or agnostics (nastik). It is a tremendous crimeto call them nastik. Why is that? Because those who have theawareness of ‘I am’, they are all astik (theistic), whereasdharma exists in so many different ways. Some believe inethical principles, some believe in truth, some believe in savinglives; that is also one of the steps of dharma. Building templesis not the only dharma. It is acceptable if a person follows thereligion of good conduct and never goes to a temple to dodarshan. He does not need to do anything else. Honesty is thegreatest force of dharma. There is no greater force of dharmathan honesty and ethics.When there is no ethical standard and honesty, one triesto be religious, goes to temple and says, ‘Dear Lord, I cheat mycustomers by stretching the cloth when I measure it, so pleaseforgive me.’ Why do the businessmen stretch the cloth as theymeasure it? I ask them why they stretch the cloth while alsohaving a reverence for God? They tell me, ‘We do it becauseeveryone else does it.’ I ask them, ‘Would you jump into a wellif others do? Why do you stretch the cloth?’ Then they tell me,‘If I stretch a forty yards cloth when I measure it, I can save onefourth of a yard.’ Hey you! Why are you doing a stretchingexercise? You are committing adverse internal meditation(raudradhyan) every time you do this. What will happen toyou? I have seen you sitting in the crowd listening to LordMahavir. The very people who were sitting amongst the crowdlistening to Lord Mahavir’s sermons that enlightened, are stillhere stretching their cloth and they have still not attainedmoksha. They got left behind, lost their opportunity of moksha,for their petty greed, some mere relish that was missing on theirplate; they did not get left behind because they were waiting foran entire plate.Questioner: Truth, non-violence, and honesty are all divineattributes. Is it possible that if a person were to devote himself toone of these attributes, the rest will automatically follow?Dadashri: All of them will come if one latches on to justone of them.The Light, the Intent, the Doer, theCircumstancesQuestioner: Can a man survive through faith? How is heto do that?Dadashri: After you board a ship and you have asuspicion that it is likely to sink, you will get off that ship, butwhat if you have faith (shraddha) in that ship? Would you notremain on board? What do you think? One will immediatelymove away if one does not have faith.Questioner: Many times I have faith when I am doingsome work and yet I end up with difficulties in doing it.Aptavani-5179180Aptavani-5relinquishing and ignoring), and the Self-form is consideredupadeya (that which is worthy of acquisition and consideration)and that is real dharma. Therefore real dharma and relativedharma are both separate.If the purpose (artha) of your life results in worldly self-interest, it is called adharma (lack of religion) and if it leads toreligion of the Self, it is called dharma. The same holds true withreference to passion (kaam). If the passion is for the self, it isadharma. If there is dispassion for the self, and passion for theSelf, it is dharma.Questioner: Can any living being survive withoutdharma?Dadashri: No living being is ever outside of dharma. Itis either in dharma or in adharma.Questioner: There are many who do not believe in ahigher God, do they?Dadashri: You should not call those who do not believein God, atheists or agnostics (nastik). It is a tremendous crimeto call them nastik. Why is that? Because those who have theawareness of ‘I am’, they are all astik (theistic), whereasdharma exists in so many different ways. Some believe inethical principles, some believe in truth, some believe in savinglives; that is also one of the steps of dharma. Building templesis not the only dharma. It is acceptable if a person follows thereligion of good conduct and never goes to a temple to dodarshan. He does not need to do anything else. Honesty is thegreatest force of dharma. There is no greater force of dharmathan honesty and ethics.When there is no ethical standard and honesty, one triesto be religious, goes to temple and says, ‘Dear Lord, I cheat mycustomers by stretching the cloth when I measure it, so pleaseforgive me.’ Why do the businessmen stretch the cloth as theymeasure it? I ask them why they stretch the cloth while alsohaving a reverence for God? They tell me, ‘We do it becauseeveryone else does it.’ I ask them, ‘Would you jump into a wellif others do? Why do you stretch the cloth?’ Then they tell me,‘If I stretch a forty yards cloth when I measure it, I can save onefourth of a yard.’ Hey you! Why are you doing a stretchingexercise? You are committing adverse internal meditation(raudradhyan) every time you do this. What will happen toyou? I have seen you sitting in the crowd listening to LordMahavir. The very people who were sitting amongst the crowdlistening to Lord Mahavir’s sermons that enlightened, are stillhere stretching their cloth and they have still not attainedmoksha. They got left behind, lost their opportunity of moksha,for their petty greed, some mere relish that was missing on theirplate; they did not get left behind because they were waiting foran entire plate.Questioner: Truth, non-violence, and honesty are all divineattributes. Is it possible that if a person were to devote himself toone of these attributes, the rest will automatically follow?Dadashri: All of them will come if one latches on to justone of them.The Light, the Intent, the Doer, theCircumstancesQuestioner: Can a man survive through faith? How is heto do that?Dadashri: After you board a ship and you have asuspicion that it is likely to sink, you will get off that ship, butwhat if you have faith (shraddha) in that ship? Would you notremain on board? What do you think? One will immediatelymove away if one does not have faith.Questioner: Many times I have faith when I am doingsome work and yet I end up with difficulties in doing it.Aptavani-5181182Aptavani-5Dadashri: That is not faith (shraddha); that is trust(vishvas). There can be difficulties in trust, but not in faith.Questioner: That has happened to me.Dadashri: Faith and trust are two different things. Faithis dependent upon belief. Where there is trust, there can also bebreach of trust.This whole world runs on the basis of belief. But why isthere misery in this world? It is because one has the wrongbelief. There would not be any pain or misery at all if one hadthe right belief. Every living being exists solely on beliefs.Except for humans, all other living things are dependent(aashrit). The celestial beings, the animals, etc., all havedependency; humans alone are independent, or without support(niraashrit).Questioner: How are humans independent and how arecelestials dependent?Dadashri: Humans alone are independent. Except forhumans, no other living being, not even the celestials have thebelief, ‘I am the doer’, and when one becomes the doer, one’sdependency on God goes away. What does God say? ‘If youare going to be the doer, then you are free and so am I.’ So thenwhat do you, and God have to do with each other? When youget tired and frustrated, you sit in front of Lord Mahavir’s idolor Lord Krishna’s idol and cry. Then no one will accept you ashis dependent.You only have support, dependence (aashrit), when yourwrong belief, ‘I am the doer’, goes away. But that wrong beliefis not likely to go away, is it?Questioner: ‘Dada’ will make it go away, will He not?Dadashri: He will do it for those who want to get rid ofit. How can He do it for those who do not want to get rid ofit? This is because the Lord has His rules too. What is His rule?It is the Lord’s rule that He does not bind anyone who wantsto be free, and He does not free any one who wants to remainin bondage. Now, should we go and ask people whether theywant to be free or remain bound?Questioner: How can I understand whether I want to befree or remain bound?Dadashri: You can understand it from whether one isnurturing and supporting the causes for bondage or the causesfor liberation. The one who nurtures the causes for liberationwill come across circumstances that will bring liberation. HereGod will continue to help him and God will even continue tohelp the one who nurtures causes for bondage. God’s job isto help.Questioner: Is there any partiality, on God’s part, inhelping? Does God help because He is partial?Dadashri: God does not help or do anything. It is all aresult of natural arrangement and it is all independent. It is dueto scientific circumstantial evidences, because every living beingis independent. Independent means that nature is always helpinghim. If one wants to steal then the moon and the stars are all outthere for him. God’s job is to simply shed light on everything.The main intent (bhaav) of stealing is one’s own. Nature helpshim carry out his intent as he spends his merit karmas inwherever he wants to do. In other words, nature helps bybringing all the right circumstances together. God only continuesto give him the ‘light’.What Leads to Samadhi?Questioner: It is said in the Gita, that when the load ofdemerit karmas (sins, paap) increases, ‘I’ will take birth todestroy them. So who is this ‘I’?Dadashri: That verily is the Self (the Atma). ‘I’ doesAptavani-5181182Aptavani-5Dadashri: That is not faith (shraddha); that is trust(vishvas). There can be difficulties in trust, but not in faith.Questioner: That has happened to me.Dadashri: Faith and trust are two different things. Faithis dependent upon belief. Where there is trust, there can also bebreach of trust.This whole world runs on the basis of belief. But why isthere misery in this world? It is because one has the wrongbelief. There would not be any pain or misery at all if one hadthe right belief. Every living being exists solely on beliefs.Except for humans, all other living things are dependent(aashrit). The celestial beings, the animals, etc., all havedependency; humans alone are independent, or without support(niraashrit).Questioner: How are humans independent and how arecelestials dependent?Dadashri: Humans alone are independent. Except forhumans, no other living being, not even the celestials have thebelief, ‘I am the doer’, and when one becomes the doer, one’sdependency on God goes away. What does God say? ‘If youare going to be the doer, then you are free and so am I.’ So thenwhat do you, and God have to do with each other? When youget tired and frustrated, you sit in front of Lord Mahavir’s idolor Lord Krishna’s idol and cry. Then no one will accept you ashis dependent.You only have support, dependence (aashrit), when yourwrong belief, ‘I am the doer’, goes away. But that wrong beliefis not likely to go away, is it?Questioner: ‘Dada’ will make it go away, will He not?Dadashri: He will do it for those who want to get rid ofit. How can He do it for those who do not want to get rid ofit? This is because the Lord has His rules too. What is His rule?It is the Lord’s rule that He does not bind anyone who wantsto be free, and He does not free any one who wants to remainin bondage. Now, should we go and ask people whether theywant to be free or remain bound?Questioner: How can I understand whether I want to befree or remain bound?Dadashri: You can understand it from whether one isnurturing and supporting the causes for bondage or the causesfor liberation. The one who nurtures the causes for liberationwill come across circumstances that will bring liberation. HereGod will continue to help him and God will even continue tohelp the one who nurtures causes for bondage. God’s job isto help.Questioner: Is there any partiality, on God’s part, inhelping? Does God help because He is partial?Dadashri: God does not help or do anything. It is all aresult of natural arrangement and it is all independent. It is dueto scientific circumstantial evidences, because every living beingis independent. Independent means that nature is always helpinghim. If one wants to steal then the moon and the stars are all outthere for him. God’s job is to simply shed light on everything.The main intent (bhaav) of stealing is one’s own. Nature helpshim carry out his intent as he spends his merit karmas inwherever he wants to do. In other words, nature helps bybringing all the right circumstances together. God only continuesto give him the ‘light’.What Leads to Samadhi?Questioner: It is said in the Gita, that when the load ofdemerit karmas (sins, paap) increases, ‘I’ will take birth todestroy them. So who is this ‘I’?Dadashri: That verily is the Self (the Atma). ‘I’ doesAptavani-5183184Aptavani-5do it with open eyes and there is bondage of karmas if you doit with closed eyes. You are not to do dhyan of kundalini; youhave to do dhyan of the Self. Kundalini is just a tool. You haveto make use of that tool. When one keeps coming back to thebliss of the Self, it is called mukti (liberation).Questioner: How can one attain Sankhya Yoga (one ofthe six Vedic systems of philosophy)?Dadashri: Sankhya on its own is like having just onewing. You cannot fly with that. Therefore, Sankhya and yoga(to join with) are the two wings that you can fly with. How cananyone progress without yoga, without mental worship? Allthese things have been put in place; how wonderful anarrangement is it!Sankhya means that one should know this knowledge:Knowledge of the body’s dharma, the mind’s dharma, theintellect’s dharma, and the Self’s dharma. That is calledSankhya and one cannot attain Sankhya without yoga.Therefore you need to take the yoga of the one (the guru)with whose support you can progress. You need to take hissupport; you have to depend on him; only then will youprogress.Questioner: Who is Shiva? Where is He?Dadashri: Any one that has become the embodiment ofthat which helps others attain the ultimate kalyan swaroop, sucha Purush can be called Shiva.Questioner: What is the difference between nirvichaarand nirvikalp ?Dadashri: There is a tremendous difference between thetwo. Nirvichaar means a state without any thoughts andnirvikalp means a state without vikalp (the belief, ‘I amChandubhai’). When thoughts end one becomes shunya (zero).Some mendicants become vichaar shunya (they do not havenot mean Lord Krishna. The rule is that a great human beingis born whenever the world is overloaded with demerit karmas(sins), which means in every yuga (era) a great One takesbirth.Questioner: They say that Lord Krishna did raas-leela(participated in joyful dancing). Why?Dadashri: God has not played raas-leela at all. Whotold you that Lord Krishna did that? These are just stories. LordKrishna was a great Yogeshwar (the one who had attained theSelf through yoga). People have misused this by associating Himwith raas-leela.There are two methods by which Lord Krishna can beworshipped. People of the elementary level of spiritualdevelopment should worship the form of Balkrishna (the childKrishna) and those who want to attain liberation (moksha)should understand and attain the knowledge of the Selfexpounded by Yogeshwar Krishna in Bhagwat Gita. What doyou want out of these two methods?Questioner: Is bhakti (devotional worship) and dhyan(concentration) a form of intoxication?Dadashri: Yes.Questioner: Then, is it better to live a life of intoxicationor a natural one?Dadashri: It is great if you could live life in a natural waybut where is the natural life anymore? This nature has doneeverything wonderfully. Progress is possible only if it occursnaturally, otherwise there is no progress.Questioner: When I do dhyan of kundalini (yoga ofconcentration on the chakras), is it better to do it with closedor open eyes?Dadashri: It is like this; there is bondage of karmas if youAptavani-5183184Aptavani-5do it with open eyes and there is bondage of karmas if you doit with closed eyes. You are not to do dhyan of kundalini; youhave to do dhyan of the Self. Kundalini is just a tool. You haveto make use of that tool. When one keeps coming back to thebliss of the Self, it is called mukti (liberation).Questioner: How can one attain Sankhya Yoga (one ofthe six Vedic systems of philosophy)?Dadashri: Sankhya on its own is like having just onewing. You cannot fly with that. Therefore, Sankhya and yoga(to join with) are the two wings that you can fly with. How cananyone progress without yoga, without mental worship? Allthese things have been put in place; how wonderful anarrangement is it!Sankhya means that one should know this knowledge:Knowledge of the body’s dharma, the mind’s dharma, theintellect’s dharma, and the Self’s dharma. That is calledSankhya and one cannot attain Sankhya without yoga.Therefore you need to take the yoga of the one (the guru)with whose support you can progress. You need to take hissupport; you have to depend on him; only then will youprogress.Questioner: Who is Shiva? Where is He?Dadashri: Any one that has become the embodiment ofthat which helps others attain the ultimate kalyan swaroop, sucha Purush can be called Shiva.Questioner: What is the difference between nirvichaarand nirvikalp ?Dadashri: There is a tremendous difference between thetwo. Nirvichaar means a state without any thoughts andnirvikalp means a state without vikalp (the belief, ‘I amChandubhai’). When thoughts end one becomes shunya (zero).Some mendicants become vichaar shunya (they do not havenot mean Lord Krishna. The rule is that a great human beingis born whenever the world is overloaded with demerit karmas(sins), which means in every yuga (era) a great One takesbirth.Questioner: They say that Lord Krishna did raas-leela(participated in joyful dancing). Why?Dadashri: God has not played raas-leela at all. Whotold you that Lord Krishna did that? These are just stories. LordKrishna was a great Yogeshwar (the one who had attained theSelf through yoga). People have misused this by associating Himwith raas-leela.There are two methods by which Lord Krishna can beworshipped. People of the elementary level of spiritualdevelopment should worship the form of Balkrishna (the childKrishna) and those who want to attain liberation (moksha)should understand and attain the knowledge of the Selfexpounded by Yogeshwar Krishna in Bhagwat Gita. What doyou want out of these two methods?Questioner: Is bhakti (devotional worship) and dhyan(concentration) a form of intoxication?Dadashri: Yes.Questioner: Then, is it better to live a life of intoxicationor a natural one?Dadashri: It is great if you could live life in a natural waybut where is the natural life anymore? This nature has doneeverything wonderfully. Progress is possible only if it occursnaturally, otherwise there is no progress.Questioner: When I do dhyan of kundalini (yoga ofconcentration on the chakras), is it better to do it with closedor open eyes?Dadashri: It is like this; there is bondage of karmas if youAptavani-5185186Aptavani-5any thoughts), many people too become this way. Once theystop their thoughts then they do not have to worry about thethoughts. Thus gradually, day-by-day, they become vichaarshunya, which means they become like a stone. On the outsidethey appear beautiful, they appear peaceful, but there is noGnan within.Questioner: Many people think that nirvikalp meansnirvichaar.Dadashri: Except for the Gnani, no one can have thestate of nirvikalp. Many can be nirvichaari. From the state ofhaving no thoughts they will have to work towards a state ofhaving thoughts again. Everything comes to a stand still when themind ceases to think. That is why Krupadudev ShrimadRajchandra has said, ‘Kar vichaar toh paam’ (Think so thatyou can attain). Therefore thoughts will be needed right until theend, till you attain the knowledge of the Self, and once you attainthat state there is no need for thoughts. Then thoughts becomegneya (that which is to be known), and You are the Gnata (theKnower).Questioner: When Lord Mahavir gave His last deshna(speech that liberates one), did that mean He had thoughts at thetime?Dadashri: Lord Mahavir too had thoughts until the endbut His thoughts were such that they came and went with eachsamaya (smallest unit of time). That state can be callednirvichaar. When you go to a wedding, people come to greetyou and then they move on to the next guest, don’t they?Therefore one karma unfolds, its thought arises and leaves; thenanother will arise, that thought will arise and leave. In thismanner karmas arise to give result and then dissipate. The Lordwould never get stuck in any thought. The tubers of His mind areall gone and therefore His thoughts do not bother or harass Him.Thoughts do not harass Me either.Thinking is the dharma of the mind. If thoughts come andleave without affecting you, do not touch You at all; it can becalled a state of manolaya (the end of the mind). The mind willnot create a battle, it will appear like a beautiful garden. It willappear like a fountain that throws sprays of water on a hotsummer’s day.The state of nirvikalp is an exalted state. One becomesnirvikalp when his belief, ‘I am the doer’ (the kartapad),breaks. When one’s awareness and belief of, ‘I am the body’(the dehadhyas), goes away, one arrives at the state ofnirvikalp.Questioner: Please say something about the samadhistate and the sushupta state.Dadashri: Today in our country, what people believethe state of samadhi to be is really the state of sushupta. Inthis, they are able to go deep in the layers of the mind, somego deep in the layers of the intellect. At that time they forgetthe external world. That is called the ‘worldly Samadhi;sushupta state’.What is true samadhi? A true samadhi is one whereuninterrupted awareness of the Self is. The true samadhi iswhen there is the awareness of even a tiny dust particle on yourbody, whereas the samadhi that people work towards is a‘cultured’ artificial state. That is not true samadhi; it is called‘cultured’ samadhi. I constantly experience real Samadhi.True samadhi is one where despite circumstances ofmental suffering (aadhi), physical suffering (vyadhi), andsuffering caused by external circumstances (upadhi), there is noeffect, no vibration. My Samadhi will not leave even if someonewere to come here and take me to jail. The same state ofsamadhi will prevail whether I am free or in jail.Questioner: During meditation I see a light (prakash); isAptavani-5185186Aptavani-5any thoughts), many people too become this way. Once theystop their thoughts then they do not have to worry about thethoughts. Thus gradually, day-by-day, they become vichaarshunya, which means they become like a stone. On the outsidethey appear beautiful, they appear peaceful, but there is noGnan within.Questioner: Many people think that nirvikalp meansnirvichaar.Dadashri: Except for the Gnani, no one can have thestate of nirvikalp. Many can be nirvichaari. From the state ofhaving no thoughts they will have to work towards a state ofhaving thoughts again. Everything comes to a stand still when themind ceases to think. That is why Krupadudev ShrimadRajchandra has said, ‘Kar vichaar toh paam’ (Think so thatyou can attain). Therefore thoughts will be needed right until theend, till you attain the knowledge of the Self, and once you attainthat state there is no need for thoughts. Then thoughts becomegneya (that which is to be known), and You are the Gnata (theKnower).Questioner: When Lord Mahavir gave His last deshna(speech that liberates one), did that mean He had thoughts at thetime?Dadashri: Lord Mahavir too had thoughts until the endbut His thoughts were such that they came and went with eachsamaya (smallest unit of time). That state can be callednirvichaar. When you go to a wedding, people come to greetyou and then they move on to the next guest, don’t they?Therefore one karma unfolds, its thought arises and leaves; thenanother will arise, that thought will arise and leave. In thismanner karmas arise to give result and then dissipate. The Lordwould never get stuck in any thought. The tubers of His mind areall gone and therefore His thoughts do not bother or harass Him.Thoughts do not harass Me either.Thinking is the dharma of the mind. If thoughts come andleave without affecting you, do not touch You at all; it can becalled a state of manolaya (the end of the mind). The mind willnot create a battle, it will appear like a beautiful garden. It willappear like a fountain that throws sprays of water on a hotsummer’s day.The state of nirvikalp is an exalted state. One becomesnirvikalp when his belief, ‘I am the doer’ (the kartapad),breaks. When one’s awareness and belief of, ‘I am the body’(the dehadhyas), goes away, one arrives at the state ofnirvikalp.Questioner: Please say something about the samadhistate and the sushupta state.Dadashri: Today in our country, what people believethe state of samadhi to be is really the state of sushupta. Inthis, they are able to go deep in the layers of the mind, somego deep in the layers of the intellect. At that time they forgetthe external world. That is called the ‘worldly Samadhi;sushupta state’.What is true samadhi? A true samadhi is one whereuninterrupted awareness of the Self is. The true samadhi iswhen there is the awareness of even a tiny dust particle on yourbody, whereas the samadhi that people work towards is a‘cultured’ artificial state. That is not true samadhi; it is called‘cultured’ samadhi. I constantly experience real Samadhi.True samadhi is one where despite circumstances ofmental suffering (aadhi), physical suffering (vyadhi), andsuffering caused by external circumstances (upadhi), there is noeffect, no vibration. My Samadhi will not leave even if someonewere to come here and take me to jail. The same state ofsamadhi will prevail whether I am free or in jail.Questioner: During meditation I see a light (prakash); isAptavani-5187188Aptavani-5your wife a few minutes ago and now you are eating a mango?What is the point if you fight with your wife and then she cutsa mango for you? What good is it to fight even once? Do youput up with things, or not? Then she too will put up with thingswhen you fight with her. What can anyone do? Both are‘magistrates’!Questioner: What is the path to attain the main goal ofthe human life?Dadashri: The only reason one acquires a human birth isto attain liberation from here; it is possible to realize God.Liberation can only be attained from the human life form. Onehas strived to look for this path for countless past lives but hehas not found it. It is possible to attain liberation from the humanlife if one finds the right path. Liberation cannot be attained fromany other life form. Freedom from ignorance (agnan) can beattained in the human life; liberation can be attained even whilebeing in the body.Fulfilment of the purpose of human life is attained whenone meets a Gnani Purush. And also all your work gets done.The Self Is Without CircumstanceQuestioner: I do not want moksha but I want to be freefrom circumstances.Dadashri: Wherever there is a circumstance there isalways a dissipation of that circumstance. You are needlesslymaking things difficult; you are approaching it from the wrongangle. When the Self does not encounter any circumstance, itis moksha (final liberation). Gross circumstances (sthoolsaiyog), subtle circumstances (sookshma saiyog), andcircumstances of speech (vani na saiyog) will continue tocome together (saiyogi). However, they are all viyogi(dissipating); temporary by nature. Therefore, you only have toworry about circumstances and that they do not comethis experience the experience of the mind or is it a trueexperience?Dadashri: It is not light (prakash) at all. It is just theimagination. People have believed all such imaginations to be thetruth (satya).When I was 17-18 years old I had conducted a littleexperiment by pressing one of my eyes. I saw a flash of light andsaw light within. I wondered what it was that came and left.Later I realized that it was the light that had left the eye.Anything that is worldly (the non-Self) is never going tobecome the Self and the Self is never going to become the non-Self. Both are distinct and different things.Questioner: What is nirguna?Dadashri: Nirguna is the state in which there is noattribute of the prakruti (the non-Self complex). And sagunameans the One who is an embodiment of the manifest absoluteSelf (the Parmatma); such a One is called Saguna Parmatma.Questioner: What is the path to moksha?Dadashri: Do you feel that you are bound? The one whofeels imprisoned will seek freedom.Questioner: Bondage is there for sure.Dadashri: What do you consider as bondage?Questioner: The current worldly life seems good at themoment.Dadashri: Does it not feel bitter to you?Questioner: If I go deeper, it will feel bitter.Dadashri: Despite so much bitterness, see what thenature of all human beings is like. A man will cut a nice mango,eat it, and go to sleep. Hey you! You were just fighting withAptavani-5187188Aptavani-5your wife a few minutes ago and now you are eating a mango?What is the point if you fight with your wife and then she cutsa mango for you? What good is it to fight even once? Do youput up with things, or not? Then she too will put up with thingswhen you fight with her. What can anyone do? Both are‘magistrates’!Questioner: What is the path to attain the main goal ofthe human life?Dadashri: The only reason one acquires a human birth isto attain liberation from here; it is possible to realize God.Liberation can only be attained from the human life form. Onehas strived to look for this path for countless past lives but hehas not found it. It is possible to attain liberation from the humanlife if one finds the right path. Liberation cannot be attained fromany other life form. Freedom from ignorance (agnan) can beattained in the human life; liberation can be attained even whilebeing in the body.Fulfilment of the purpose of human life is attained whenone meets a Gnani Purush. And also all your work gets done.The Self Is Without CircumstanceQuestioner: I do not want moksha but I want to be freefrom circumstances.Dadashri: Wherever there is a circumstance there isalways a dissipation of that circumstance. You are needlesslymaking things difficult; you are approaching it from the wrongangle. When the Self does not encounter any circumstance, itis moksha (final liberation). Gross circumstances (sthoolsaiyog), subtle circumstances (sookshma saiyog), andcircumstances of speech (vani na saiyog) will continue tocome together (saiyogi). However, they are all viyogi(dissipating); temporary by nature. Therefore, you only have toworry about circumstances and that they do not comethis experience the experience of the mind or is it a trueexperience?Dadashri: It is not light (prakash) at all. It is just theimagination. People have believed all such imaginations to be thetruth (satya).When I was 17-18 years old I had conducted a littleexperiment by pressing one of my eyes. I saw a flash of light andsaw light within. I wondered what it was that came and left.Later I realized that it was the light that had left the eye.Anything that is worldly (the non-Self) is never going tobecome the Self and the Self is never going to become the non-Self. Both are distinct and different things.Questioner: What is nirguna?Dadashri: Nirguna is the state in which there is noattribute of the prakruti (the non-Self complex). And sagunameans the One who is an embodiment of the manifest absoluteSelf (the Parmatma); such a One is called Saguna Parmatma.Questioner: What is the path to moksha?Dadashri: Do you feel that you are bound? The one whofeels imprisoned will seek freedom.Questioner: Bondage is there for sure.Dadashri: What do you consider as bondage?Questioner: The current worldly life seems good at themoment.Dadashri: Does it not feel bitter to you?Questioner: If I go deeper, it will feel bitter.Dadashri: Despite so much bitterness, see what thenature of all human beings is like. A man will cut a nice mango,eat it, and go to sleep. Hey you! You were just fighting withAptavani-5189190Aptavani-5together. It is more than enough if circumstances do not comeforth. That is why the Lord has said:‘Aego mei shashao appa, naanah dunshaan sanjuo.’‘I am an eternal Soul with the attributes of knowledge andvision.’‘Shesha mei baheera bhaava, savee sanjog lakhana.’‘The rest are all external intents, all attributes of thesecircumstances.’‘Sanjog moola jivenah patta dookham parampara.’‘At the root of all life lies infinite suffering life after life.’‘Tammha sanjog sambandham, savvam tiviheyn vosariyami.’‘All these circumstances and their relations, I surrender untoYou.’You are saying that you want to surrender all circumstancesbut you do not want liberation. Is that what you are saying?Questioner: Man does not feel attracted to religion; hegets attracted for a while and then he lets go of it and then heturns towards religion again. Why is that?Dadashri: There is not attraction (aakarshan) alone inthis world. There is attraction and there is repulsion (vikarshan)too; they are attributes of duality (dwandva). The world itself isin the form of duality. There cannot be just attraction orrepulsion alone, otherwise attraction would never occur again. Ifthere is attraction towards only religion, people will get tired ofit because religion that currently exists in the world is not exactand precise religion; it is religion under the influence of illusion(bhranti).Questioner: But there is a need for this illusory religion,is there not?Dadashri: Yes, it is necessary for one’s development.One has to make progress by way of taking a beating. As onesuffers in the repeated beating, the intellect (buddhi) increases.As the intellect increases, so does his inner turmoil and that iswhen he seeks shelter of the religion of the Self.Jagat KalyanQuestioner: Dada, what should one do if a person getstired while reading scriptures, while doing samayik, while doingpratikraman, while worshipping (bhakti)?Dadashri: What has God considered to be a samayik?He has said that for the one who does not experienceartadhyan (adverse internal meditation that hurts the self), orraudradhyan (adverse internal meditation that hurts the self andothers), the entire day is samayik. How wise Lord Mahavir is!He does not leave anything to you to work for. And the Lordwill not accept even a single samayik of these people (who donot have Self-realization). One’s artadhyan and raudradhyanmust stop for a period of 48 minutes (gunthanu). When you dosamayik with the belief, ‘I am Chandubhai’, it is like cuttingdown a neem tree; it will grow back and it will still be bitter,won’t it? Even if we add sugar to it after we cut it down, whydoes it still remain bitter?Questioner: Yes, its very core is bitter Dada.Dadashri: It is that way by nature. Similarly if ‘Chandubhai’stops all attachment and abhorrence (raag and dwesh) and sitsto do samayik, what will he meditate upon when he has notknown or understood the Self, and when he does not knowwhat illusion is or what wrong belief is? So what can even a bigVIP do if he sits down to do samayik, but he does not knowanything else? So such people create a little circle around themand if thoughts of their business, money, or sex creep in, theykeep pushing them outside the circle. Just as you shoo awayyoung baby calves or dogs when they come into yourcompound; that is what they call samayik. Even then one cando this type of samayik because artadhyan and raudradhyanAptavani-5189190Aptavani-5together. It is more than enough if circumstances do not comeforth. That is why the Lord has said:‘Aego mei shashao appa, naanah dunshaan sanjuo.’‘I am an eternal Soul with the attributes of knowledge andvision.’‘Shesha mei baheera bhaava, savee sanjog lakhana.’‘The rest are all external intents, all attributes of thesecircumstances.’‘Sanjog moola jivenah patta dookham parampara.’‘At the root of all life lies infinite suffering life after life.’‘Tammha sanjog sambandham, savvam tiviheyn vosariyami.’‘All these circumstances and their relations, I surrender untoYou.’You are saying that you want to surrender all circumstancesbut you do not want liberation. Is that what you are saying?Questioner: Man does not feel attracted to religion; hegets attracted for a while and then he lets go of it and then heturns towards religion again. Why is that?Dadashri: There is not attraction (aakarshan) alone inthis world. There is attraction and there is repulsion (vikarshan)too; they are attributes of duality (dwandva). The world itself isin the form of duality. There cannot be just attraction orrepulsion alone, otherwise attraction would never occur again. Ifthere is attraction towards only religion, people will get tired ofit because religion that currently exists in the world is not exactand precise religion; it is religion under the influence of illusion(bhranti).Questioner: But there is a need for this illusory religion,is there not?Dadashri: Yes, it is necessary for one’s development.One has to make progress by way of taking a beating. As onesuffers in the repeated beating, the intellect (buddhi) increases.As the intellect increases, so does his inner turmoil and that iswhen he seeks shelter of the religion of the Self.Jagat KalyanQuestioner: Dada, what should one do if a person getstired while reading scriptures, while doing samayik, while doingpratikraman, while worshipping (bhakti)?Dadashri: What has God considered to be a samayik?He has said that for the one who does not experienceartadhyan (adverse internal meditation that hurts the self), orraudradhyan (adverse internal meditation that hurts the self andothers), the entire day is samayik. How wise Lord Mahavir is!He does not leave anything to you to work for. And the Lordwill not accept even a single samayik of these people (who donot have Self-realization). One’s artadhyan and raudradhyanmust stop for a period of 48 minutes (gunthanu). When you dosamayik with the belief, ‘I am Chandubhai’, it is like cuttingdown a neem tree; it will grow back and it will still be bitter,won’t it? Even if we add sugar to it after we cut it down, whydoes it still remain bitter?Questioner: Yes, its very core is bitter Dada.Dadashri: It is that way by nature. Similarly if ‘Chandubhai’stops all attachment and abhorrence (raag and dwesh) and sitsto do samayik, what will he meditate upon when he has notknown or understood the Self, and when he does not knowwhat illusion is or what wrong belief is? So what can even a bigVIP do if he sits down to do samayik, but he does not knowanything else? So such people create a little circle around themand if thoughts of their business, money, or sex creep in, theykeep pushing them outside the circle. Just as you shoo awayyoung baby calves or dogs when they come into yourcompound; that is what they call samayik. Even then one cando this type of samayik because artadhyan and raudradhyanAptavani-5191192Aptavani-5use the term ‘sashtaang namaskar’? Therefore, sashtaangnamaskar is when all the eight parts (all parts of your body)touch the ground; if you do it only once with a pure heart, it ismore than enough!Questioner: Can Gnan be sold? Many people chargefor their lectures.Dadashri: Gnan does not exist wherever there is anyexchange of money. There is worldly gnan there, but there is noGnan of liberation.Questioner: Is there a particular sequence, that a livingbeing having taken birth as a human will be born again as ahuman, or he will take birth elsewhere?Dadashri: When one is born as a human in India, he hasto wander around in all the four life forms. The human beings offoreign countries are not subject to this rule (because they donot believe in life after death). However, there are a few; thereis an exception of some two to five percent. The rest keepprogressing higher.Questioner: Whom do people refer to when they sayVidhata (the creator of the world)?Dadashri: It is nature that they refer to. There is nocelestial God or Goddess by that name. Scientific circumstantialevidence (vyavasthit) is Vidhata. People in India have decidedthat on the sixth day after a baby is born, Vidhata comes andwrites an inscription about the child’s life to unfold. This isacceptable as far as the imagination is concerned but if you wantto know the truth, then it is not so.Questioner: Why does a nirdosh (faultless) young childhave to suffer physical pain?Dadashri: A child has to suffer the unfolding effects of hisown karmas and his mother has to suffer through seeing himdo not occur in it.Questioner: Absence of artadhyan and raudradhyan iscalled samata (a state of equanimity), is it not?Dadashri: But artadhyan and raudradhyan will not goaway. They will remain for sure. For that, before doing thesamayik, you have to establish the discipline (niyam) of, ‘DearLord! I offer to you this ‘Chandubhai’, my name, my body,myself, and my wrong beliefs. Grant me the intent of theunattached state (vitarag bhaav) as I sit to do this samayik.’If you do a vidhi in this way, then it will work.Questioner: In this current era of the time cycle, whatkind of attributes are required to become a Tirthankar?Dadashri: An attribute where one has a constant innerintent (bhavna) for the salvation of the world (jagat kalyan)and nothing else. Regardless of one’s situations, whatever onegets to eat or wherever one gets to sleep – even on the barefloor, what should one’s inner intent be? It should be for thesalvation of the world. Now in whom can such an intent arise?It will only happen to the one who has attained his ownsalvation. How can one bring salvation to the world when hisown salvation has not occurred? It will only occur if he has suchan intent. The Gnani Purush can bring one in that stage if onewere to meet Him. And then he will know how to have suchintent, provided he follows the Agnas of the Gnani Purushonce he comes into that state–the Self.Questioner: Namaskar and vandan (both gesture ofreverence and worship) are the two similar or are they ofdifferent intent?Dadashri: They are both with different intent. Namaskaris much higher. Just the ordinary gesture of putting your handstogether and bowing your head is called vandan, whereas innamaskar many parts of the body touch the ground. Do we notAptavani-5191192Aptavani-5use the term ‘sashtaang namaskar’? Therefore, sashtaangnamaskar is when all the eight parts (all parts of your body)touch the ground; if you do it only once with a pure heart, it ismore than enough!Questioner: Can Gnan be sold? Many people chargefor their lectures.Dadashri: Gnan does not exist wherever there is anyexchange of money. There is worldly gnan there, but there is noGnan of liberation.Questioner: Is there a particular sequence, that a livingbeing having taken birth as a human will be born again as ahuman, or he will take birth elsewhere?Dadashri: When one is born as a human in India, he hasto wander around in all the four life forms. The human beings offoreign countries are not subject to this rule (because they donot believe in life after death). However, there are a few; thereis an exception of some two to five percent. The rest keepprogressing higher.Questioner: Whom do people refer to when they sayVidhata (the creator of the world)?Dadashri: It is nature that they refer to. There is nocelestial God or Goddess by that name. Scientific circumstantialevidence (vyavasthit) is Vidhata. People in India have decidedthat on the sixth day after a baby is born, Vidhata comes andwrites an inscription about the child’s life to unfold. This isacceptable as far as the imagination is concerned but if you wantto know the truth, then it is not so.Questioner: Why does a nirdosh (faultless) young childhave to suffer physical pain?Dadashri: A child has to suffer the unfolding effects of hisown karmas and his mother has to suffer through seeing himdo not occur in it.Questioner: Absence of artadhyan and raudradhyan iscalled samata (a state of equanimity), is it not?Dadashri: But artadhyan and raudradhyan will not goaway. They will remain for sure. For that, before doing thesamayik, you have to establish the discipline (niyam) of, ‘DearLord! I offer to you this ‘Chandubhai’, my name, my body,myself, and my wrong beliefs. Grant me the intent of theunattached state (vitarag bhaav) as I sit to do this samayik.’If you do a vidhi in this way, then it will work.Questioner: In this current era of the time cycle, whatkind of attributes are required to become a Tirthankar?Dadashri: An attribute where one has a constant innerintent (bhavna) for the salvation of the world (jagat kalyan)and nothing else. Regardless of one’s situations, whatever onegets to eat or wherever one gets to sleep – even on the barefloor, what should one’s inner intent be? It should be for thesalvation of the world. Now in whom can such an intent arise?It will only happen to the one who has attained his ownsalvation. How can one bring salvation to the world when hisown salvation has not occurred? It will only occur if he has suchan intent. The Gnani Purush can bring one in that stage if onewere to meet Him. And then he will know how to have suchintent, provided he follows the Agnas of the Gnani Purushonce he comes into that state–the Self.Questioner: Namaskar and vandan (both gesture ofreverence and worship) are the two similar or are they ofdifferent intent?Dadashri: They are both with different intent. Namaskaris much higher. Just the ordinary gesture of putting your handstogether and bowing your head is called vandan, whereas innamaskar many parts of the body touch the ground. Do we notAptavani-5193194Aptavani-5understands it. When I go to the derasar, I ask Lord Mahavir,‘Why do people have so many obstacles even when they do somuch of Your darshan?’ What does Lord Mahavir say? Hesays, ‘It happens because when people come to do Mydarshan, they see me but their mind is on their business or ontheir shoes they leave outside the temple. They are also thinkingabout someone stealing their shoes.’At the Time of DeathQuestioner: People name their children, Rama, ShriKrishna for becoming free from the cycles of birth and death.However, at the time of death one is not able to rememberanything. What should one do so that he will be able to remainin the Self and head for moksha?Dadashri: You are right when you say that a person isnot able to remember anything of this sort. In the final momentsof one’s life, a final balance sheet of his entire life’s karmascomes in memory. This balance sheet has an entry of everythinghe did. If one goes to the derasars for darshan, then thataccount will be big and so some of that will be presented on thebalance sheet. Or else he will think about his daughter that hedid not get married. If the children tell him, ‘Recite the NavkarMantra now’, he will tell them they have no sense. The fool!You are about to die, why don’t you straighten up; wise up? Noone would pay a dime for your intellect. What kind of a man areyou? They are preparing for your departure and you are makingthese new accounts!Therefore, in the final moments, a balance of one’s entirelife will come forth. Nothing else is going to work so you shoulddo ‘this’ (clear off all your worldly accounts with equanimity)first.Who Is Dada Bhagwan?Questioner: Who is ‘Dada Bhagwan’?suffer. The main karmas are those of the child but the motherhad instigated (anumodan) those karmas and therefore she hasto suffer through seeing her child suffer. To do, to help othersdo, and to instigating others into doing; these are the threecauses behind bondage of karmas.Questioner: What is the meaning of the swastika (thereligious Hindu symbol – not the one adopted by Hitler)?Dadashri: The swastika symbol represents the four lifeforms. Its four wings stand for the four different life forms andits center represents moksha (liberation). Ultimately, one willhave to go to moksha from all the four life forms. The four lifeforms are humans, celestials, the animal kingdom and hell. Allthe four are dependent upon one’s demerit karmas (paap) andmerit karmas (punya) and when one attains Gnan (knowledgeof the Self) and has no merit or demerit karmas left; moksha isattained. In the state of moksha, there is neither credit nor debit(of karmas). Here credits will take you to a celestial life form(devagati) or make you a president. One attains a highlyaffluent position because of his credits (merit karmas). And whatif one has a debit? One will have to work in a factory where hewill have to work hard the whole day long and even then he willnot be able to make ends meet. There is moksha if credit anddebit do not occur.The Significance of TemplesQuestioner: If there were no derasars (temples), thenwould someone else manifest for the people, just as You(Dadashri) have manifest for us today?Dadashri: That is fine. What you are saying is a vikalp(a projection). They just happen to be, if we did not havetemples, would we not have something else to resort to? Theywould have found something else. But the temples are a verygood solution. They are India’s greatest science. It is the bestform of indirect worship (paroksha bhakti), provided a personAptavani-5193194Aptavani-5understands it. When I go to the derasar, I ask Lord Mahavir,‘Why do people have so many obstacles even when they do somuch of Your darshan?’ What does Lord Mahavir say? Hesays, ‘It happens because when people come to do Mydarshan, they see me but their mind is on their business or ontheir shoes they leave outside the temple. They are also thinkingabout someone stealing their shoes.’At the Time of DeathQuestioner: People name their children, Rama, ShriKrishna for becoming free from the cycles of birth and death.However, at the time of death one is not able to rememberanything. What should one do so that he will be able to remainin the Self and head for moksha?Dadashri: You are right when you say that a person isnot able to remember anything of this sort. In the final momentsof one’s life, a final balance sheet of his entire life’s karmascomes in memory. This balance sheet has an entry of everythinghe did. If one goes to the derasars for darshan, then thataccount will be big and so some of that will be presented on thebalance sheet. Or else he will think about his daughter that hedid not get married. If the children tell him, ‘Recite the NavkarMantra now’, he will tell them they have no sense. The fool!You are about to die, why don’t you straighten up; wise up? Noone would pay a dime for your intellect. What kind of a man areyou? They are preparing for your departure and you are makingthese new accounts!Therefore, in the final moments, a balance of one’s entirelife will come forth. Nothing else is going to work so you shoulddo ‘this’ (clear off all your worldly accounts with equanimity)first.Who Is Dada Bhagwan?Questioner: Who is ‘Dada Bhagwan’?suffer. The main karmas are those of the child but the motherhad instigated (anumodan) those karmas and therefore she hasto suffer through seeing her child suffer. To do, to help othersdo, and to instigating others into doing; these are the threecauses behind bondage of karmas.Questioner: What is the meaning of the swastika (thereligious Hindu symbol – not the one adopted by Hitler)?Dadashri: The swastika symbol represents the four lifeforms. Its four wings stand for the four different life forms andits center represents moksha (liberation). Ultimately, one willhave to go to moksha from all the four life forms. The four lifeforms are humans, celestials, the animal kingdom and hell. Allthe four are dependent upon one’s demerit karmas (paap) andmerit karmas (punya) and when one attains Gnan (knowledgeof the Self) and has no merit or demerit karmas left; moksha isattained. In the state of moksha, there is neither credit nor debit(of karmas). Here credits will take you to a celestial life form(devagati) or make you a president. One attains a highlyaffluent position because of his credits (merit karmas). And whatif one has a debit? One will have to work in a factory where hewill have to work hard the whole day long and even then he willnot be able to make ends meet. There is moksha if credit anddebit do not occur.The Significance of TemplesQuestioner: If there were no derasars (temples), thenwould someone else manifest for the people, just as You(Dadashri) have manifest for us today?Dadashri: That is fine. What you are saying is a vikalp(a projection). They just happen to be, if we did not havetemples, would we not have something else to resort to? Theywould have found something else. But the temples are a verygood solution. They are India’s greatest science. It is the bestform of indirect worship (paroksha bhakti), provided a personAptavani-5195196Aptavani-5worships the individual form in whom God has manifested. Godcan only manifest in humans, not in any other life form. TheAtma itself is Parmatma (the absolute Self), but it has tomanifest. Once it manifests, once there is an experience of this,all of one’s worries will go away. All of one’s external problemsgo away.Questioner: Where does God manifest?Dadashri: God is not such that he will manifest. Heremains in an un-manifest form.Questioner: He only manifests in someone like You, notanywhere else. That is why we have come here.Dadashri: It will not happen anywhere else; the light willmanifest only in certain person. Then from this light all otherlamps can be lit. But only on extremely rare occasion does thelight illuminate spontaneously. For me this spontaneous lightoccurred at the Surat railway station.Questioner: Even your worldly interaction (vyavahar)came about from auspicious (shubha) interactions, did it not?Dadashri: In the worldly life there are good (shubha)interactions and there are bad (ashubha) interactions. People ofthe world cannot only maintain good interactions. They get stuckin the good and the bad. Saints remain in good interactions andthe One who has gone beyond the four Vedas, such a GnaniPurush, is beyond the good-bad interactions. He is in pure(shuddha) interactions.Questioner: Who can be considered a guru?Dadashri: Anyone with mistakes cannot be a guru. Andwhat kinds of mistakes are acceptable in a guru? Mistakesthose are not harmful to others. Only the guru himself is awareof those mistakes. Such a guru will have subtler (sookshmatar)and the subtlest (sookshmatam) mistakes. Otherwise, where isDadashri: The person you see in front of you is not‘Dada Bhagwan’. The one that comes in your memory is thereal ‘Dada Bhagwan’. The one you see in front of you is ‘A. M.Patel’ and the one sitting within A. M. Patel has manifested inthe form of the absolute Self (Parmatma) and that is ‘DadaBhagwan’.Questioner: When is ‘Dada Bhagwan’ present?Dadashri: He is always present. He is constantly presentin all these people.Questioner: But why do they call you Dada Bhagwan?Dadashri: Whom do you see when you say aapshri(you)? Are you talking about the one you see? You onlyrecognize him, do you not? The person you see is a Patel fromthe town of Bhadran and he runs a construction business. ‘DadaBhagwan’ is the Self (the Atma) that has manifested within.People of the world refer to this as pragat Purush (manifestedSelf).Questioner: Man can never become God or Parmatma(the absolute Self). And yet some people claim to be God;they make claims about being and doing divine miracles, is thatright?Dadashri: There is no need to make such claims. Noone can claim that he is Parmatma, and he is a fool if he does.People call me Bhagwan (God) but whom can you callBhagwan? You can never call this body ‘Bhagwan’. This is A.M. Patel. The entity that you can see is not ‘Dada Bhagwan’.‘Dada Bhagwan’ is the one who has manifested within. Howcan you call anyone with a body (dehdhari), Bhagwan?Questioner: Is God (Bhagwan) in the form of anindividual entity, or energy (shakti)?Dadashri: Both are true but a person benefits more if heAptavani-5195196Aptavani-5worships the individual form in whom God has manifested. Godcan only manifest in humans, not in any other life form. TheAtma itself is Parmatma (the absolute Self), but it has tomanifest. Once it manifests, once there is an experience of this,all of one’s worries will go away. All of one’s external problemsgo away.Questioner: Where does God manifest?Dadashri: God is not such that he will manifest. Heremains in an un-manifest form.Questioner: He only manifests in someone like You, notanywhere else. That is why we have come here.Dadashri: It will not happen anywhere else; the light willmanifest only in certain person. Then from this light all otherlamps can be lit. But only on extremely rare occasion does thelight illuminate spontaneously. For me this spontaneous lightoccurred at the Surat railway station.Questioner: Even your worldly interaction (vyavahar)came about from auspicious (shubha) interactions, did it not?Dadashri: In the worldly life there are good (shubha)interactions and there are bad (ashubha) interactions. People ofthe world cannot only maintain good interactions. They get stuckin the good and the bad. Saints remain in good interactions andthe One who has gone beyond the four Vedas, such a GnaniPurush, is beyond the good-bad interactions. He is in pure(shuddha) interactions.Questioner: Who can be considered a guru?Dadashri: Anyone with mistakes cannot be a guru. Andwhat kinds of mistakes are acceptable in a guru? Mistakesthose are not harmful to others. Only the guru himself is awareof those mistakes. Such a guru will have subtler (sookshmatar)and the subtlest (sookshmatam) mistakes. Otherwise, where isDadashri: The person you see in front of you is not‘Dada Bhagwan’. The one that comes in your memory is thereal ‘Dada Bhagwan’. The one you see in front of you is ‘A. M.Patel’ and the one sitting within A. M. Patel has manifested inthe form of the absolute Self (Parmatma) and that is ‘DadaBhagwan’.Questioner: When is ‘Dada Bhagwan’ present?Dadashri: He is always present. He is constantly presentin all these people.Questioner: But why do they call you Dada Bhagwan?Dadashri: Whom do you see when you say aapshri(you)? Are you talking about the one you see? You onlyrecognize him, do you not? The person you see is a Patel fromthe town of Bhadran and he runs a construction business. ‘DadaBhagwan’ is the Self (the Atma) that has manifested within.People of the world refer to this as pragat Purush (manifestedSelf).Questioner: Man can never become God or Parmatma(the absolute Self). And yet some people claim to be God;they make claims about being and doing divine miracles, is thatright?Dadashri: There is no need to make such claims. Noone can claim that he is Parmatma, and he is a fool if he does.People call me Bhagwan (God) but whom can you callBhagwan? You can never call this body ‘Bhagwan’. This is A.M. Patel. The entity that you can see is not ‘Dada Bhagwan’.‘Dada Bhagwan’ is the one who has manifested within. Howcan you call anyone with a body (dehdhari), Bhagwan?Questioner: Is God (Bhagwan) in the form of anindividual entity, or energy (shakti)?Dadashri: Both are true but a person benefits more if heAptavani-5197198Aptavani-5have a guru. Will that create problems?Dadashri: No, you keep your guru. How can you dowithout a guru? That guru teaches you worldly religion. Heexplains to you which good deeds you should do and whichbad deeds you should not do. However, the process of theworldly life will still remain, will it not? And you wantliberation. So for that you need a Gnani Purush. The GnaniPurush is for God, the Self. The guru is for the worldly life(interactions, vyavahar) and for nischay (the Self) there is theGnani. You need both; then your work will be done.Therefore, keep whatever guru you have. You should go anddo his darshan.Questioner: A Sat Purush (One who has attained theSelf) showers his grace over all equally. But if I have a neemtree and someone else has a mango tree, there is an inherentdifference in the seed. So how can the results be the same?Dadashri: ‘We’ here do not have any problem with theseed. Here you have to ask me with humility (vinaya), ‘PleaseSir, help me know my Self’, and thus attain salvation. Heremoksha is attained through absolute humility (param vinaya).This is the decayed junk of the pudgal (the non-Self) ofthe fifth Ara (the portion of the current time cycle), which cannever be repaired. You try to repair it from one end and it willbreak down at the other end. Instead of doing all that, thisAkram Vignan cleanses you from within and keeps Youseparate.Questioner: Dada gives me the Gnan but what should Ido if I do not have the ability to understand it?Dadashri: There is the Self within you; you are alive;therefore everything will get done. If I stop to look forpeople’s ability to understand then no one will pass. That iswhy, at the beginning, I went to Lord Rushabhdev’s idol andthe difference between a guru and a Parmatma (the absoluteSelf)?The Gnani Purush is considered an embodiment of theabsolute Self (the Parmatma); He is one who does not haveany overt (sthool) or subtle (sookshma) mistake.The world can see two kinds of mistakes: the overt onesand the subtle ones. Even people at large can see the gross andovert mistakes in a person and those with a lot of intellect cansee the subtle mistakes. The Gnani Purush does not have thesetwo types of mistakes.Questioner: Based on what kind of punya (meritkarmas) does one meet a Gnani Purush?Dadashri: It is based on punya-anubandhi-punya(effect of merit karma binds new merit karmas). All the punyayou currently see around is paap-anubandhi-punya (effect ofmerit karmas binding new demerit karmas). This means that aperson has a home, a car and all the comforts due to hispunya but out of those punya negative thoughts arise in himas to how he can deprive or cheat others or how he canadulterate the goods he sells for more profit, how he canenjoy something that is not rightfully his. He is ready to takewhat is not rightfully his so he will also cheat others out theirmoney; that is all paap-anubandhi-punya. He is enjoying allthe comforts due to his punya but in the process he isbinding new paap (sinful karmas), which he will suffer in thenext life.And a person who does not have basic comforts, but haspositive thoughts, ‘that he should not hurt and put anyone indifficulty’, despite having a hard time himself, that is calledpunya-anubandhi-punya. Therefore even his new causes arethose of merit karmas (punya).Questioner: I want to take Gnan from You but I alreadyAptavani-5197198Aptavani-5have a guru. Will that create problems?Dadashri: No, you keep your guru. How can you dowithout a guru? That guru teaches you worldly religion. Heexplains to you which good deeds you should do and whichbad deeds you should not do. However, the process of theworldly life will still remain, will it not? And you wantliberation. So for that you need a Gnani Purush. The GnaniPurush is for God, the Self. The guru is for the worldly life(interactions, vyavahar) and for nischay (the Self) there is theGnani. You need both; then your work will be done.Therefore, keep whatever guru you have. You should go anddo his darshan.Questioner: A Sat Purush (One who has attained theSelf) showers his grace over all equally. But if I have a neemtree and someone else has a mango tree, there is an inherentdifference in the seed. So how can the results be the same?Dadashri: ‘We’ here do not have any problem with theseed. Here you have to ask me with humility (vinaya), ‘PleaseSir, help me know my Self’, and thus attain salvation. Heremoksha is attained through absolute humility (param vinaya).This is the decayed junk of the pudgal (the non-Self) ofthe fifth Ara (the portion of the current time cycle), which cannever be repaired. You try to repair it from one end and it willbreak down at the other end. Instead of doing all that, thisAkram Vignan cleanses you from within and keeps Youseparate.Questioner: Dada gives me the Gnan but what should Ido if I do not have the ability to understand it?Dadashri: There is the Self within you; you are alive;therefore everything will get done. If I stop to look forpeople’s ability to understand then no one will pass. That iswhy, at the beginning, I went to Lord Rushabhdev’s idol andthe difference between a guru and a Parmatma (the absoluteSelf)?The Gnani Purush is considered an embodiment of theabsolute Self (the Parmatma); He is one who does not haveany overt (sthool) or subtle (sookshma) mistake.The world can see two kinds of mistakes: the overt onesand the subtle ones. Even people at large can see the gross andovert mistakes in a person and those with a lot of intellect cansee the subtle mistakes. The Gnani Purush does not have thesetwo types of mistakes.Questioner: Based on what kind of punya (meritkarmas) does one meet a Gnani Purush?Dadashri: It is based on punya-anubandhi-punya(effect of merit karma binds new merit karmas). All the punyayou currently see around is paap-anubandhi-punya (effect ofmerit karmas binding new demerit karmas). This means that aperson has a home, a car and all the comforts due to hispunya but out of those punya negative thoughts arise in himas to how he can deprive or cheat others or how he canadulterate the goods he sells for more profit, how he canenjoy something that is not rightfully his. He is ready to takewhat is not rightfully his so he will also cheat others out theirmoney; that is all paap-anubandhi-punya. He is enjoying allthe comforts due to his punya but in the process he isbinding new paap (sinful karmas), which he will suffer in thenext life.And a person who does not have basic comforts, but haspositive thoughts, ‘that he should not hurt and put anyone indifficulty’, despite having a hard time himself, that is calledpunya-anubandhi-punya. Therefore even his new causes arethose of merit karmas (punya).Questioner: I want to take Gnan from You but I alreadyAptavani-5199200Aptavani-5of the Quran is called gnani. That is why the word GnanAvatar is used. No one except the Gnani Purush can writeGnan Avatar. That is the only difference.Questioner: Can Krupadudev Shrimad Rajchandra becalled a Gnan Avatar?Dadashri: Yes, he was a Gnan Avatar.Questioner: What is the difference between Atmagnaniand Kevalgnani?Dadashri: There is no difference. The Self is the absoluteSelf (kevalgnan swaroop), but there is a difference as far as thesatta (realm) is concerned. The realm does not manifest fully,due to veils of ignorance. The total realm that manifests iskevalgnan. The satta is the same for all Souls. The problem isof the avaran (veils of karmas). For example, some need thickglasses, and some else do not. Will that not make a difference?It is like that.Questioner: Will there be a Yuga Purush (a GnaniPurush, man of the era, the One who liberates millions) afteryou?Dadashri: Of course! How will this world run without aYuga Purush? Nature has a need for one; ‘we’ do not have tokeep a need for one. You do not even have to look at thehoroscope. Everything happens according to the laws of nature.You just have to be prepared. Keep your ‘bags’ ready so thatyou can jump on the train (of moksha) when it arrives!Questioner: How will we know whether it is the righttrain or the wrong one?Dadashri: You should go home when such a doubtarises. Even God does not have a place for anyone who hasdoubts or suspicions. With these trains you should not be tooconcerned or critical about the right or the wrong. Theasked to whom I should give this knowledge of AkramVignan? The requirement was that one needed thirty-threepercent to pass but no one had the qualification above threepercent! The Lord said to give it to those with three percent.Even then I started to give it to those below par, i.e. to thosewith zero percent. Today it is given to those with a minus(negative) percentage!Questioner: What is this scientific process that gives usdarshan of Dada Bhagwan (the Self) and shows us the way atthe mere listening and recitation in the Gnan Vidhi?Dadashri: It is all natural (swabhavik). In that the pureChetan (shuddha Chetan, the Self) is silent. This light is silent;however in that light, can one not get all his work done? Onegets the benefit of the light.Questioner: The moment we think about Dada, Dada ispresent. Is that external action due to the Self (shuddhaChetan)!Dadashri: It is not due to the support; it is a naturaloccurrence. It is natural for the subtle body (sookshma sharira)within to be pulled-attracted.Questioner: But is it not a part of the pudgal (the non-Self complex)?Dadashri: Everything is considered the pudgal. Theworld mistakenly believes it to be the Chetan (the Self), but inreality there is no Chetan (Self) in it at all. No one has reachedthe level of the Chetan (the Self), not even close to its shadow.Questioner: What is the difference between the Gnaniand Gnan Avatar (the incarnation of Gnan)?Dadashri: There is not much difference but it is like this:people who are well versed in scriptures are also referred to as‘gnanis’. These can be scriptures of any kind. Even the knowerAptavani-5199200Aptavani-5of the Quran is called gnani. That is why the word GnanAvatar is used. No one except the Gnani Purush can writeGnan Avatar. That is the only difference.Questioner: Can Krupadudev Shrimad Rajchandra becalled a Gnan Avatar?Dadashri: Yes, he was a Gnan Avatar.Questioner: What is the difference between Atmagnaniand Kevalgnani?Dadashri: There is no difference. The Self is the absoluteSelf (kevalgnan swaroop), but there is a difference as far as thesatta (realm) is concerned. The realm does not manifest fully,due to veils of ignorance. The total realm that manifests iskevalgnan. The satta is the same for all Souls. The problem isof the avaran (veils of karmas). For example, some need thickglasses, and some else do not. Will that not make a difference?It is like that.Questioner: Will there be a Yuga Purush (a GnaniPurush, man of the era, the One who liberates millions) afteryou?Dadashri: Of course! How will this world run without aYuga Purush? Nature has a need for one; ‘we’ do not have tokeep a need for one. You do not even have to look at thehoroscope. Everything happens according to the laws of nature.You just have to be prepared. Keep your ‘bags’ ready so thatyou can jump on the train (of moksha) when it arrives!Questioner: How will we know whether it is the righttrain or the wrong one?Dadashri: You should go home when such a doubtarises. Even God does not have a place for anyone who hasdoubts or suspicions. With these trains you should not be tooconcerned or critical about the right or the wrong. Theasked to whom I should give this knowledge of AkramVignan? The requirement was that one needed thirty-threepercent to pass but no one had the qualification above threepercent! The Lord said to give it to those with three percent.Even then I started to give it to those below par, i.e. to thosewith zero percent. Today it is given to those with a minus(negative) percentage!Questioner: What is this scientific process that gives usdarshan of Dada Bhagwan (the Self) and shows us the way atthe mere listening and recitation in the Gnan Vidhi?Dadashri: It is all natural (swabhavik). In that the pureChetan (shuddha Chetan, the Self) is silent. This light is silent;however in that light, can one not get all his work done? Onegets the benefit of the light.Questioner: The moment we think about Dada, Dada ispresent. Is that external action due to the Self (shuddhaChetan)!Dadashri: It is not due to the support; it is a naturaloccurrence. It is natural for the subtle body (sookshma sharira)within to be pulled-attracted.Questioner: But is it not a part of the pudgal (the non-Self complex)?Dadashri: Everything is considered the pudgal. Theworld mistakenly believes it to be the Chetan (the Self), but inreality there is no Chetan (Self) in it at all. No one has reachedthe level of the Chetan (the Self), not even close to its shadow.Questioner: What is the difference between the Gnaniand Gnan Avatar (the incarnation of Gnan)?Dadashri: There is not much difference but it is like this:people who are well versed in scriptures are also referred to as‘gnanis’. These can be scriptures of any kind. Even the knowerAptavani-5201202Aptavani-5yashnaam karmas.Yashnaam karmas can be very high if one has had theintent, over many era and many lifetimes, for the salvation of theworld. Yashnaam karmas only result from having an inner intentfor the salvation of the world. Yashnaam karmas resultproportionately to however much one has the intent for people’shappiness and their salvation. If one pushes people around it willresult in upyashnaam karmas (defame bringing karmas). Aperson with upyashnaam karmas will not be appreciated nomatter how hard he works. Some people come and tell me, ‘Iwork so hard and still I am not appreciated.’ I tell them, ‘Youhave come with upyash (discredit, defame) and so that is whatyou will get. You have to continue doing what you do andaccept the discredit.’Questioner: When you make us do the vidhi (the specialsilent blessing ceremony of Gnani Purush Dadashri where theseeker or the mahatma places his forehead on the big toe ofDadashri), why do you give importance to the toe as being thelocation for the vidhi?Dadashri: The vidhi is done at the location from whichthe message to God reaches the fastest. It will reach slowerfrom other places. We (you and I) want the message to reachfaster; that is why we (you and I) do that. Did you not like it?Questioner: Everyone likes quick service.Dadashri: That is when these mahatmas say something,‘the amrut (nectar) of immortality flows’; does something likethat flow for you? Have you experienced that somewhat?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Then it is good. The path where the nectar ofimmortality flows is worth it!Questioner: Who is considered the Sarvagnya (theunderstanding needs to be checked, as to whether it is right orwrong.Questioner: Is there a difference between a devotee(bhakta) and a Gnani?Dadashri: Yes, the difference is like that between thesevya (the Lord, the absolute Self) and his devotee (sevak).Eventually the devotee will become the Lord. The Gnani is theLord and the devotees are the worshippers. By worshippingthe Lord one is gradually becoming the Lord. The form (theirreal form; the Self) is the same; the difference is due tocircumstances. Everyone who has attained Self-realization iscalled a ‘gnani’, but if all these ‘gnanis’ were to speak, howwill you deal with that situation? Therefore, a Gnani shouldhave scriptural knowledge (shrutgnan). He should have theknowledge of the scriptures of the Vitarag Lords as well asscriptural knowledge of the path of the Vedanta and that iswhy they are called Gnanis. You cannot call anyone a Gnanijust like that.Questioner: If I ask for blessings (ashirwaad) and Hegives it, will it bear fruit?Dadashri: Yes, but not always. There has to bevachanbud (energy and power in one’s speech) in it for it tobear fruits. Nevertheless, one should give blessings. However,no one can give blessings even if he wants to give. It onlyhappens when the person receiving the blessings is meant to getthe blessings, and that is when the one becomes instrumental(nimit) in the process. The one who has yashnaam karmas(fame bearing karmas, credit bearing karmas where one will bepraised by everyone for anything he does) becomes a nimit inthat. Then they start a ‘business’ of blessing others. How isanyone going to bless others when he does not have even theindependent control over his own bowels? It is just hisyashnaam karmas at work, and prominent people have betterAptavani-5201202Aptavani-5yashnaam karmas.Yashnaam karmas can be very high if one has had theintent, over many era and many lifetimes, for the salvation of theworld. Yashnaam karmas only result from having an inner intentfor the salvation of the world. Yashnaam karmas resultproportionately to however much one has the intent for people’shappiness and their salvation. If one pushes people around it willresult in upyashnaam karmas (defame bringing karmas). Aperson with upyashnaam karmas will not be appreciated nomatter how hard he works. Some people come and tell me, ‘Iwork so hard and still I am not appreciated.’ I tell them, ‘Youhave come with upyash (discredit, defame) and so that is whatyou will get. You have to continue doing what you do andaccept the discredit.’Questioner: When you make us do the vidhi (the specialsilent blessing ceremony of Gnani Purush Dadashri where theseeker or the mahatma places his forehead on the big toe ofDadashri), why do you give importance to the toe as being thelocation for the vidhi?Dadashri: The vidhi is done at the location from whichthe message to God reaches the fastest. It will reach slowerfrom other places. We (you and I) want the message to reachfaster; that is why we (you and I) do that. Did you not like it?Questioner: Everyone likes quick service.Dadashri: That is when these mahatmas say something,‘the amrut (nectar) of immortality flows’; does something likethat flow for you? Have you experienced that somewhat?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Then it is good. The path where the nectar ofimmortality flows is worth it!Questioner: Who is considered the Sarvagnya (theunderstanding needs to be checked, as to whether it is right orwrong.Questioner: Is there a difference between a devotee(bhakta) and a Gnani?Dadashri: Yes, the difference is like that between thesevya (the Lord, the absolute Self) and his devotee (sevak).Eventually the devotee will become the Lord. The Gnani is theLord and the devotees are the worshippers. By worshippingthe Lord one is gradually becoming the Lord. The form (theirreal form; the Self) is the same; the difference is due tocircumstances. Everyone who has attained Self-realization iscalled a ‘gnani’, but if all these ‘gnanis’ were to speak, howwill you deal with that situation? Therefore, a Gnani shouldhave scriptural knowledge (shrutgnan). He should have theknowledge of the scriptures of the Vitarag Lords as well asscriptural knowledge of the path of the Vedanta and that iswhy they are called Gnanis. You cannot call anyone a Gnanijust like that.Questioner: If I ask for blessings (ashirwaad) and Hegives it, will it bear fruit?Dadashri: Yes, but not always. There has to bevachanbud (energy and power in one’s speech) in it for it tobear fruits. Nevertheless, one should give blessings. However,no one can give blessings even if he wants to give. It onlyhappens when the person receiving the blessings is meant to getthe blessings, and that is when the one becomes instrumental(nimit) in the process. The one who has yashnaam karmas(fame bearing karmas, credit bearing karmas where one will bepraised by everyone for anything he does) becomes a nimit inthat. Then they start a ‘business’ of blessing others. How isanyone going to bless others when he does not have even theindependent control over his own bowels? It is just hisyashnaam karmas at work, and prominent people have betterAptavani-5203204Aptavani-5Omniscient)?Dadashri: Kaviraj has used the word ‘Sarvagnya’ for‘us’, but actually this is kaaran Sarvagnya (causal Omniscient).Omniscient is when one is 360 degrees in Gnan (Knowledge).I am at 356 degrees; I am nurturing causes for the state ofperfect Omniscience.When the Omniscient One does not enter into the realmof the non-Self, even for the smallest fraction of time (samaya)and constantly remains as the Self, then He is an Omniscient. Iam totally in a state of being free from all granthi (tubers ofraag-dwesh). Whatever attire–householder attire I was in whenI attained Gnan remains; it cannot be changed. I have noobjection if you take away these clothes from me or if you leavethem the way they are. I do not have any problems even if youwere to rob me.Questioner: How many karmas are you unaffected by?Dadashri: ‘We’ are free from the effect of all karmas.All that remains is that which is necessary for the basicsustenance of this body. Even those karmas are dischargingwithout new charge karmas. ‘We’ do not have any otherthoughts at all.Questioner: So infinite Gnan and infinite darshan hasmanifested within you?Dadashri: Everything has manifested. It only lacks byfour degrees. Whatever a kevalgnan (the absolute Omniscient)can see in His Gnan, that is what I have in my understanding(my darshan). His is called kevalgnan and mine is called kevaldarshan. That is why I say that you can ask me anything aboutthis world.Questioner: Is it possible to have keval darshan(absolute vision) without kevalgnan (absolute knowledge)?Dadashri: Absolute understanding (absolute vision, kevaldarshan) is not possible without kevalgnan in the Kramic path.In the Akram path keval darshan occurs and thereafter it takessome time to attain kevalgnan. These are not the subjects ofintellect. This is the subject of Gnan.Questioner: You are the embodiment of the Self(sakshatkari purush), now if You go to the temple then doesit not raise the pratishtha (set an example and encourage) ofgoing to the temple?Dadashri: Wherever ‘we’ go ‘we’ would go to dodarshan. ‘We’ go for darshan at the derasar, the temple ofMahadevji (Lord Shiva), the temple of deities, and themosque. If ‘we’ do not go then people will also not go for thedarshan. That can create a wrong custom. We cannot createa wrong new custom. ‘We’ have a responsibility for that.‘Our’ solutions are always for people to attain peace andhappiness.This Akram Vignan is so beneficial, so why should evena minute be wasted? You will never get such a chance in anyother lifetime. Therefore, get your work done in this lifetime.Questioner: Dada, you say for us to get our work done,how should we do that?Dadashri: As long as I am here you should not wasteyour time anywhere else. When I go to Baroda you should joinme there if you have time and if you can afford it. Take as muchadvantage of my presence as you can. Come and just sit in mysatsang; you don’t have to do anything else at all.Questioner: Can you please tell us who You are?Dadashri: You are not going to be able to ‘know’ Me.The person you see in front of you is Ambalal Patel from thetown of Bhadran. You cannot ‘know’ Me at all because I amAptavani-5203204Aptavani-5Omniscient)?Dadashri: Kaviraj has used the word ‘Sarvagnya’ for‘us’, but actually this is kaaran Sarvagnya (causal Omniscient).Omniscient is when one is 360 degrees in Gnan (Knowledge).I am at 356 degrees; I am nurturing causes for the state ofperfect Omniscience.When the Omniscient One does not enter into the realmof the non-Self, even for the smallest fraction of time (samaya)and constantly remains as the Self, then He is an Omniscient. Iam totally in a state of being free from all granthi (tubers ofraag-dwesh). Whatever attire–householder attire I was in whenI attained Gnan remains; it cannot be changed. I have noobjection if you take away these clothes from me or if you leavethem the way they are. I do not have any problems even if youwere to rob me.Questioner: How many karmas are you unaffected by?Dadashri: ‘We’ are free from the effect of all karmas.All that remains is that which is necessary for the basicsustenance of this body. Even those karmas are dischargingwithout new charge karmas. ‘We’ do not have any otherthoughts at all.Questioner: So infinite Gnan and infinite darshan hasmanifested within you?Dadashri: Everything has manifested. It only lacks byfour degrees. Whatever a kevalgnan (the absolute Omniscient)can see in His Gnan, that is what I have in my understanding(my darshan). His is called kevalgnan and mine is called kevaldarshan. That is why I say that you can ask me anything aboutthis world.Questioner: Is it possible to have keval darshan(absolute vision) without kevalgnan (absolute knowledge)?Dadashri: Absolute understanding (absolute vision, kevaldarshan) is not possible without kevalgnan in the Kramic path.In the Akram path keval darshan occurs and thereafter it takessome time to attain kevalgnan. These are not the subjects ofintellect. This is the subject of Gnan.Questioner: You are the embodiment of the Self(sakshatkari purush), now if You go to the temple then doesit not raise the pratishtha (set an example and encourage) ofgoing to the temple?Dadashri: Wherever ‘we’ go ‘we’ would go to dodarshan. ‘We’ go for darshan at the derasar, the temple ofMahadevji (Lord Shiva), the temple of deities, and themosque. If ‘we’ do not go then people will also not go for thedarshan. That can create a wrong custom. We cannot createa wrong new custom. ‘We’ have a responsibility for that.‘Our’ solutions are always for people to attain peace andhappiness.This Akram Vignan is so beneficial, so why should evena minute be wasted? You will never get such a chance in anyother lifetime. Therefore, get your work done in this lifetime.Questioner: Dada, you say for us to get our work done,how should we do that?Dadashri: As long as I am here you should not wasteyour time anywhere else. When I go to Baroda you should joinme there if you have time and if you can afford it. Take as muchadvantage of my presence as you can. Come and just sit in mysatsang; you don’t have to do anything else at all.Questioner: Can you please tell us who You are?Dadashri: You are not going to be able to ‘know’ Me.The person you see in front of you is Ambalal Patel from thetown of Bhadran. You cannot ‘know’ Me at all because I amAptavani-5205206Aptavani-5not visible.The speech that this person (A. M. Patel) is speaking isan ‘original taped record’ (recorded tape). Yours is an originaltaped record too, but you have ego and therefore you say, ‘Ispoke. I said this, I said that….’ I do not have an ego so I donot have such a problem. The one that you see is Ambalal ofBhadran and the one sitting within is ‘Dada Bhagwan’. Here‘Dada Bhagwan’ has manifested within me, and within you heremains un-manifested. By sitting, with humility, near themanifested One, yours too will continue to manifest. This is apath of absolute humility (param vinaya). Money is notrequired here. Even service is not required here. Nothing isrequired here. There is no need for dravyapuja (worship ofthe external) here; this is the path of moksha.‘We’ do not have a problem if you are disrespectfultowards ‘us’, but you create obstacles for yourself. You areharming yourself by insulting ‘us’ or cursing ‘us’. You needtremendous humility here. You should not utter a single wrongword here. How quietly you sit before a Tax Officer? Whereasthis is a Gnani Purush: how can you say anything in front ofHim? The Gnani Purush is the Parmatma in an embodiedform. You can attain anything you wish from the Gnani.Worshipping One’s Own SelfQuestioner: Things come even when we do not invitethem. Do we have to invite sleep? It comes on its own.Similarly, will this Gnan come on its own?Dadashri: These relative things are not worth inviting.What is worth inviting? Knowledge of your destination is worthknowing and inviting. The rest will come on its own.Today the efforts in religion that people make arecomparable to farming. They sow seeds and they reap hugeharvests from it.Questioner: There is some farming in our path too, isthere not? Do we not do the arati (singing hymns with lit lamps)also?Dadashri: How can there be any farming in our path?One himself (khud, the self) has become God (Khuda, theSelf)! The arati You do is the arati of the (your own) Self; hereevery person is doing the arati of the Self within. The spiritualsongs (pados) you sing here, is really Your own bhakti(devotional singing) offered to your own Self. Besides the Selfthere is nothing relative here.Questioner: Who is doing the kirtan bhakti (devotionalsinging) of the Self?Dadashri: One himself.Questioner: What part is that?Dadashri: It is the pragnya shakti (the liberating energyof the Self) that is doing it.Questioner: It is not agnya (ignorance), is it?Dadashri: No, agnya can never remain. As long asignorance (agnya) is there, the worldly life will arise. That whichgives advice related to the worldly life is the agnya shakti (theenergy of ignorance).Those who are not aware that we do kirtan bhakti(devotional chanting of our own Self), will miss out, will theynot? You will not miss once You know this. The worship peopledo here is not A. M. Patel’s worship; it is of ‘Dada Bhagwan.’And that ‘Dada Bhagwan’ is sitting within everyone, not just inme. He is within you too and this is His worship. The arati andeverything else is only His, and that is verily why everyoneexperiences bliss (anand). Along with you, I too bow down to‘Dada’ within.Questioner: What is the reason behind everyoneAptavani-5205206Aptavani-5not visible.The speech that this person (A. M. Patel) is speaking isan ‘original taped record’ (recorded tape). Yours is an originaltaped record too, but you have ego and therefore you say, ‘Ispoke. I said this, I said that….’ I do not have an ego so I donot have such a problem. The one that you see is Ambalal ofBhadran and the one sitting within is ‘Dada Bhagwan’. Here‘Dada Bhagwan’ has manifested within me, and within you heremains un-manifested. By sitting, with humility, near themanifested One, yours too will continue to manifest. This is apath of absolute humility (param vinaya). Money is notrequired here. Even service is not required here. Nothing isrequired here. There is no need for dravyapuja (worship ofthe external) here; this is the path of moksha.‘We’ do not have a problem if you are disrespectfultowards ‘us’, but you create obstacles for yourself. You areharming yourself by insulting ‘us’ or cursing ‘us’. You needtremendous humility here. You should not utter a single wrongword here. How quietly you sit before a Tax Officer? Whereasthis is a Gnani Purush: how can you say anything in front ofHim? The Gnani Purush is the Parmatma in an embodiedform. You can attain anything you wish from the Gnani.Worshipping One’s Own SelfQuestioner: Things come even when we do not invitethem. Do we have to invite sleep? It comes on its own.Similarly, will this Gnan come on its own?Dadashri: These relative things are not worth inviting.What is worth inviting? Knowledge of your destination is worthknowing and inviting. The rest will come on its own.Today the efforts in religion that people make arecomparable to farming. They sow seeds and they reap hugeharvests from it.Questioner: There is some farming in our path too, isthere not? Do we not do the arati (singing hymns with lit lamps)also?Dadashri: How can there be any farming in our path?One himself (khud, the self) has become God (Khuda, theSelf)! The arati You do is the arati of the (your own) Self; hereevery person is doing the arati of the Self within. The spiritualsongs (pados) you sing here, is really Your own bhakti(devotional singing) offered to your own Self. Besides the Selfthere is nothing relative here.Questioner: Who is doing the kirtan bhakti (devotionalsinging) of the Self?Dadashri: One himself.Questioner: What part is that?Dadashri: It is the pragnya shakti (the liberating energyof the Self) that is doing it.Questioner: It is not agnya (ignorance), is it?Dadashri: No, agnya can never remain. As long asignorance (agnya) is there, the worldly life will arise. That whichgives advice related to the worldly life is the agnya shakti (theenergy of ignorance).Those who are not aware that we do kirtan bhakti(devotional chanting of our own Self), will miss out, will theynot? You will not miss once You know this. The worship peopledo here is not A. M. Patel’s worship; it is of ‘Dada Bhagwan.’And that ‘Dada Bhagwan’ is sitting within everyone, not just inme. He is within you too and this is His worship. The arati andeverything else is only His, and that is verily why everyoneexperiences bliss (anand). Along with you, I too bow down to‘Dada’ within.Questioner: What is the reason behind everyoneAptavani-5207experiencing bliss at that time?Dadashri: Because, if this ‘Dada Bhagwan’ (within)were in a physical form, then people would think that He issinging and making others sing His own praise. It is in fact notlike that. In the Gita, Lord Krishna has sung it this way too, butpeople are not able to understand, are they? The Lord says,‘You verily are Lord Krishna (the Parmatma).’ Now, how canthey understand this unless they have attained the knowledge ofthe Self?The one listening and the one doing the singing or saying,is ‘doing’ satsang (company of the eternal Self) of the Self.This science (vignan) is such that no one has to do it foranother person. One is automatically ‘doing’ it for one’s ownSelf.Is what you see, ‘Dada Bhagwan’? No, he cannot be‘Dada Bhagwan’. The one you see is A. M. Patel and he is fromthe town of Bhadran. ‘Dada Bhagwan’ is the one who hasmanifested within!In what form is He? He is in the form of Knowledge(Gnan), vision (darshan), conduct (charitra), and penance(tapa). The experience derived from all these, that is ‘DadaBhagwan’.This is Patel. This ‘bubble’ (physical body of A. M. Patelthe Gnani Purush) may burst tomorrow and people will burnit but no one can burn ‘Dada Bhagwan’ because fire is grossand the Self (the Atma) is subtle. How can gross burn thatwhich is subtle? Similarly ‘Dada Bhagwan’ in the form of Gnan,darshan, charitra and tapa, resides within you too! And thatis who you yourself are!Jai Sat Chit AnandGlossaryAadayeeObstinacyAadhiMental sufferingAadoObstinate and adamantAakhyanLecture (not discussion)AanushangikBest progress on the path ofliberation; Related to the Self,mokshaAasaktiInfatuationAashritHaving support; dependenceAbhaavLack of intent; dislikeAbhedaWithout division; onenessAbheda swaroopNo separation from any livingbeingAbhyudayaReward of worldly benefitsAbuddhaFree of intellectAcharStill; unchangingAcharyaSpiritual teacherAchauryaNon-stealingAchintya chintamaniOne that cannot be envisioned,and yet makes you what youenvisionAdarsha vyavaharPure worldly interactionsAdhaarSupportAdharmaNon-religious; that which hurtsothersAdhogatiLower life formsAdhyatmikSpiritualityAgnanRelative knowledge or ignoranceof one’s real SelfAgnan muktiFreedom from ignoranceAgnaniIgnorant of the SelfAgnan-kriyaActivity of the non-SelfAptavani-5207experiencing bliss at that time?Dadashri: Because, if this ‘Dada Bhagwan’ (within)were in a physical form, then people would think that He issinging and making others sing His own praise. It is in fact notlike that. In the Gita, Lord Krishna has sung it this way too, butpeople are not able to understand, are they? The Lord says,‘You verily are Lord Krishna (the Parmatma).’ Now, how canthey understand this unless they have attained the knowledge ofthe Self?The one listening and the one doing the singing or saying,is ‘doing’ satsang (company of the eternal Self) of the Self.This science (vignan) is such that no one has to do it foranother person. One is automatically ‘doing’ it for one’s ownSelf.Is what you see, ‘Dada Bhagwan’? No, he cannot be‘Dada Bhagwan’. The one you see is A. M. Patel and he is fromthe town of Bhadran. ‘Dada Bhagwan’ is the one who hasmanifested within!In what form is He? He is in the form of Knowledge(Gnan), vision (darshan), conduct (charitra), and penance(tapa). The experience derived from all these, that is ‘DadaBhagwan’.This is Patel. This ‘bubble’ (physical body of A. M. Patelthe Gnani Purush) may burst tomorrow and people will burnit but no one can burn ‘Dada Bhagwan’ because fire is grossand the Self (the Atma) is subtle. How can gross burn thatwhich is subtle? Similarly ‘Dada Bhagwan’ in the form of Gnan,darshan, charitra and tapa, resides within you too! And thatis who you yourself are!Jai Sat Chit AnandGlossaryAadayeeObstinacyAadhiMental sufferingAadoObstinate and adamantAakhyanLecture (not discussion)AanushangikBest progress on the path ofliberation; Related to the Self,mokshaAasaktiInfatuationAashritHaving support; dependenceAbhaavLack of intent; dislikeAbhedaWithout division; onenessAbheda swaroopNo separation from any livingbeingAbhyudayaReward of worldly benefitsAbuddhaFree of intellectAcharStill; unchangingAcharyaSpiritual teacherAchauryaNon-stealingAchintya chintamaniOne that cannot be envisioned,and yet makes you what youenvisionAdarsha vyavaharPure worldly interactionsAdhaarSupportAdharmaNon-religious; that which hurtsothersAdhogatiLower life formsAdhyatmikSpiritualityAgnanRelative knowledge or ignoranceof one’s real SelfAgnan muktiFreedom from ignoranceAgnaniIgnorant of the SelfAgnan-kriyaActivity of the non-SelfArthaMaterial wealth; meaningArya prajaSpiritually exalted people of IndiaAsangFree from associationAsarEffectAsatyaUntruthAshata-vedaniyaPain experiencing situationAshirwaadBlessingsAshubhaBadAshuddhaImpureAspashtaHazy; unclearAsvasthaRestlessAtinidriyaBeyond the sensesAtmaSelfAtma-anubhaviOne with the experience of theSelfAtmadharmaThe religion of the SelfAtmagnaniThe one with full knowledge ofthe SelfAtyaagAttainingAvadhignanVisual or clairvoyance knowledgeAvaranVeilAvinayaDisrespectBadataraInner burningBalkrishnaThe child KrishnaBhaanAwarenessBhaavInner intentBhaav munCharging mindBhaav sattaEnergy and controlBhaavkarmasCharge karmasBhaktaDevoteeBhaktiDevotional worshipBhavendriyaInner invisible sense organsBhoktaThe one experiencingBhootasGhostsBhrantiIllusionAgnas FiveFive cardinal principles given inthe Gnan Vidhi by which thestate of the Self is preserved andprogress towards final liberationis enhancedAgnyaIgnoranceAgnya shaktiThe energy of ignoranceAhambhaav‘I-ness’; ‘I am’AhamkarEgoAkaamWithout doershipAkartaNon-doerAkram VignanThe spiritual Science of thestepless path to Self-realizationAkudata-vyakudataDisturbances in the non-SelfAlaukikNot of the world, spiritualAnandBlissAnant charitraIinfinite conductAnant darshanInfinite visionAnant gnanInfinite knowledgeAnant shaktiInfinite energyAnatmaNon-SelfAntahkaranThe inner complex comprisedof the mind, intellect, chit andegoAntar bhedaInner separationAntaratmaAwakened SelfAnubhavgnanExperiential knowledgeAnukudFavorable circumstancesAparigrahaNon-acquisitivenessApurva avasarUnprecedented occurrenceAradhanaDevotion and dedicationAratiThe ritual of waving lamps infront of an idol or deity whilesinging a hymnAroopiFormlessArtadhyanMeditation that hurts the selfArthaMaterial wealth; meaningArya prajaSpiritually exalted people of IndiaAsangFree from associationAsarEffectAsatyaUntruthAshata-vedaniyaPain experiencing situationAshirwaadBlessingsAshubhaBadAshuddhaImpureAspashtaHazy; unclearAsvasthaRestlessAtinidriyaBeyond the sensesAtmaSelfAtma-anubhaviOne with the experience of theSelfAtmadharmaThe religion of the SelfAtmagnaniThe one with full knowledge ofthe SelfAtyaagAttainingAvadhignanVisual or clairvoyance knowledgeAvaranVeilAvinayaDisrespectBadataraInner burningBalkrishnaThe child KrishnaBhaanAwarenessBhaavInner intentBhaav munCharging mindBhaav sattaEnergy and controlBhaavkarmasCharge karmasBhaktaDevoteeBhaktiDevotional worshipBhavendriyaInner invisible sense organsBhoktaThe one experiencingBhootasGhostsBhrantiIllusionAgnas FiveFive cardinal principles given inthe Gnan Vidhi by which thestate of the Self is preserved andprogress towards final liberationis enhancedAgnyaIgnoranceAgnya shaktiThe energy of ignoranceAhambhaav‘I-ness’; ‘I am’AhamkarEgoAkaamWithout doershipAkartaNon-doerAkram VignanThe spiritual Science of thestepless path to Self-realizationAkudata-vyakudataDisturbances in the non-SelfAlaukikNot of the world, spiritualAnandBlissAnant charitraIinfinite conductAnant darshanInfinite visionAnant gnanInfinite knowledgeAnant shaktiInfinite energyAnatmaNon-SelfAntahkaranThe inner complex comprisedof the mind, intellect, chit andegoAntar bhedaInner separationAntaratmaAwakened SelfAnubhavgnanExperiential knowledgeAnukudFavorable circumstancesAparigrahaNon-acquisitivenessApurva avasarUnprecedented occurrenceAradhanaDevotion and dedicationAratiThe ritual of waving lamps infront of an idol or deity whilesinging a hymnAroopiFormlessArtadhyanMeditation that hurts the selfBrahmarandhraAn aperture at the crown of thehead through which the souldeparts upon deathBrahmaswaroopSelf-realizedBuddhiIntellect; light of the Self comingthrough the medium of the egoCharitraConductCharitra mohaIllusory attachment in dischargeof karmaChauryaStealingChetanThe living one; consciousnesswithin; the SelfChetan tattvaLiving element; the Soul; the SelfChintavanEnvisioningChitVision and knowledgeDada BhagwanThe absolute Self withinDarshanVisionDehadhyas‘I am the body’ feelingDehamuktiFreedom from the physical bodyDehdhariOne living as the physical bodyDehdhari parmatmaAbsolute Self in a human bodyDehiEmbodimentDevasCelestial beingsDhairyaStoicism; non-reactive patienceDharmaIndividual functions; religionDharmadhyanAbsence of adverse internalmeditation that hurts the self andthe othersDrashtaThe Seer; The SelfDrashtiVisionDrashyaThat what is to be seen; SceneDravyaEffect, that which is experiencedthrough the mind, speech andbodyDravya munDischarging mindDravyakarmaSubtle discharge karmaDravyapujaWorship of the externalDravyendriyaExternal, visible sense organsDukhPain; sufferingDurbuddhiBad intellectDweshAbhorrenceEkagrataFocused meditationEkakarBecome oneEkavtariAttain moksha in just one morelifeFarajiyatMandatoryGadiThroneGadipatiHolder of that throneGalanDischargeGatiLife formsGheeClarified butterGnanKnowledgeGnanendriyaSense organs of knowledgeGnani PurushPerfectly enlightened One, whois free from ego and all worldlyattachments and enlightens othersGnan-kriyaActivity of the Self; to ‘see’and ‘know’GnataKnowerGnata-DrashtaKnower-SeerGneyaThing to be ‘known’GrahaPrejudiceGrahanAcquiringGrahasthiThose who lead the worldly lifeGranthiKarmic tuberGruhit mithyatvaDense wrong visionGunaAttributeGunadharmaOwn attributesGunthanuPeriod of 48 minutesGurukilliKnowledge which will not let theguru sinkHeyaWorth rejectingBrahmarandhraAn aperture at the crown of thehead through which the souldeparts upon deathBrahmaswaroopSelf-realizedBuddhiIntellect; light of the Self comingthrough the medium of the egoCharitraConductCharitra mohaIllusory attachment in dischargeof karmaChauryaStealingChetanThe living one; consciousnesswithin; the SelfChetan tattvaLiving element; the Soul; the SelfChintavanEnvisioningChitVision and knowledgeDada BhagwanThe absolute Self withinDarshanVisionDehadhyas‘I am the body’ feelingDehamuktiFreedom from the physical bodyDehdhariOne living as the physical bodyDehdhari parmatmaAbsolute Self in a human bodyDehiEmbodimentDevasCelestial beingsDhairyaStoicism; non-reactive patienceDharmaIndividual functions; religionDharmadhyanAbsence of adverse internalmeditation that hurts the self andthe othersDrashtaThe Seer; The SelfDrashtiVisionDrashyaThat what is to be seen; SceneDravyaEffect, that which is experiencedthrough the mind, speech andbodyDravya munDischarging mindDravyakarmaSubtle discharge karmaDravyapujaWorship of the externalDravyendriyaExternal, visible sense organsDukhPain; sufferingDurbuddhiBad intellectDweshAbhorrenceEkagrataFocused meditationEkakarBecome oneEkavtariAttain moksha in just one morelifeFarajiyatMandatoryGadiThroneGadipatiHolder of that throneGalanDischargeGatiLife formsGheeClarified butterGnanKnowledgeGnanendriyaSense organs of knowledgeGnani PurushPerfectly enlightened One, whois free from ego and all worldlyattachments and enlightens othersGnan-kriyaActivity of the Self; to ‘see’and ‘know’GnataKnowerGnata-DrashtaKnower-SeerGneyaThing to be ‘known’GrahaPrejudiceGrahanAcquiringGrahasthiThose who lead the worldly lifeGranthiKarmic tuberGruhit mithyatvaDense wrong visionGunaAttributeGunadharmaOwn attributesGunthanuPeriod of 48 minutesGurukilliKnowledge which will not let theguru sinkHeyaWorth rejectingHimsaViolenceHisaabKarmic accountHutpunyashadiInadequate merit karmas bearersIchchhaDesireJaanvuKnowJaapIncantation; chantJadaInanimateJagat kalyanSalvation of the worldJalebiSweet snackJapaName chantingJivaEmbodied SelfJovuSeeKaadTimeKaamSexual desireKalamsThe inviolable laws of life, asshown by Dadashri in the NineKalamsKalyan swaroopThe enlightened One wholiberates othersKartapad‘I am the doer’; doershipKartapanuDoershipKashayAnger, pride, deceit, greedKashay bhaavThe intent of anger, pride, deceitand greedKevalgnanAbsolute knowledgeKeyfIntoxication of the egoKirtan bhaktiDevotional singingKramic pathTraditional step-by-step path ofspiritual progressKriyaActionKriyakariWorks on its own from withinKriyamanEffect of effect karma that isexperienced through five sensesin the same lifeKshatriyaThe warrior casteKshayopshamIncreases and decreases inintensity in energyKshetraLocation or placeKundaliniCorporeal energyKusangAssociation with that which takesyou away from your real SelfLachariHelplessnessLadoosSweet dishesLakshaAwarenessLaukikWorldlyLokaacharWorldly conductMaanPrideMahatmasThose who have attained Self-realization from DadaMaleen drashtiContaminated visionMatagrahiObstinacy about one’s own beliefMatbhedDivisiveness due to differencesof opinionsMatignanMind based or perceptualknowledgeMayaDeceit; the illusion thatdeceives the SelfMishrachetanMixture of the Self and the non-SelfMithya abhaasIllusory impressionMithya buddhiWrong intellectMithya drashtiDeluded visionMohaIllusory attachmentMohaniya karmaKarma of the illusionMokshaLiberationMokshamargPath to liberationMudImpurityMukta hasyaLaughter of liberationMunMindMundControllableMurchhaAttractionNaimitikInstrumentalHimsaViolenceHisaabKarmic accountHutpunyashadiInadequate merit karmas bearersIchchhaDesireJaanvuKnowJaapIncantation; chantJadaInanimateJagat kalyanSalvation of the worldJalebiSweet snackJapaName chantingJivaEmbodied SelfJovuSeeKaadTimeKaamSexual desireKalamsThe inviolable laws of life, asshown by Dadashri in the NineKalamsKalyan swaroopThe enlightened One wholiberates othersKartapad‘I am the doer’; doershipKartapanuDoershipKashayAnger, pride, deceit, greedKashay bhaavThe intent of anger, pride, deceitand greedKevalgnanAbsolute knowledgeKeyfIntoxication of the egoKirtan bhaktiDevotional singingKramic pathTraditional step-by-step path ofspiritual progressKriyaActionKriyakariWorks on its own from withinKriyamanEffect of effect karma that isexperienced through five sensesin the same lifeKshatriyaThe warrior casteKshayopshamIncreases and decreases inintensity in energyKshetraLocation or placeKundaliniCorporeal energyKusangAssociation with that which takesyou away from your real SelfLachariHelplessnessLadoosSweet dishesLakshaAwarenessLaukikWorldlyLokaacharWorldly conductMaanPrideMahatmasThose who have attained Self-realization from DadaMaleen drashtiContaminated visionMatagrahiObstinacy about one’s own beliefMatbhedDivisiveness due to differencesof opinionsMatignanMind based or perceptualknowledgeMayaDeceit; the illusion thatdeceives the SelfMishrachetanMixture of the Self and the non-SelfMithya abhaasIllusory impressionMithya buddhiWrong intellectMithya drashtiDeluded visionMohaIllusory attachmentMohaniya karmaKarma of the illusionMokshaLiberationMokshamargPath to liberationMudImpurityMukta hasyaLaughter of liberationMunMindMundControllableMurchhaAttractionNaimitikInstrumentalNaseebLuckNiddidhyasanVisualizationNihshankDoubt-freeNijvruttiTendencies that of the SelfNikaali kashaysThose which do not create newkashayNimitApparent doer; evidentiaryinstrumentNiraashritWithout shelter or support;unprotectedNiradhaarSupportless; having no supportNirakaarShapelessNirakudataThe state beyond all suffering;the bliss of the SelfNiranjanFree of karmasNirbadataWeaknessNirdoshFaultlessNirgunaThe state in which there is noattribute of the prakruti (the non-Self complex)NirikshanClosely ‘seeing’NirjaraDischarge of karmasNirjivLifelessNirlepNothing can smear itNirvichaarState without thoughtsNirvikalpState without of any ‘I-ness’NischayFirm decisionNishkaamWithout expectation of rewardsNispruhaUninterested; disinclinedNiyamDisciplineNiyatiA natural progression of evolutionof a soul; the flow of progress ofall embodied soulsNiyativaadThe theory of destinyNokarmasGross discharge karmasPaapDemerit karmasPaap-anubandhi-punyaIn the process of enjoying all thecomforts due to merit karma, anew demerit karma is boundPadosSpiritual songs about Dada’s GnanPanditIntellectual scholarParam sukhEternal infinite blissParam vinayaAbsolute humilityParavalambiDependant on other factorsParigrahaAcquisitiveness; that what takesone away from the SelfPar-kshetraThe non-SelfParmanandPermanent blissParmanusSubatomic particles of matter;the substrate of karmas effectParmarthUltimate meaningParmatmaThe absolute SelfPar-parinaamEffect of the non-SelfPar-parinatiState of the non-SelfParvashtaDependencyPragnya shaktiLiberating energy of the SelfPrakashLightPrakrutiThe relative or the non-Selfcomplex which comprises themind, speech and bodyPrarabdhaFatePrashasta mohaPraiseworthy and the best kindof illusory attachmentPratikramanTo recall the hurt caused, repentfor it and resolve to not repeat itPratikudUnfavorable circumstancesPratishthit atmaThe relative self; the non-SelfcomplexPratitiConvictionPratyakhyanSincere pledge to not repeat theoffencePudgalNon-Self complexNaseebLuckNiddidhyasanVisualizationNihshankDoubt-freeNijvruttiTendencies that of the SelfNikaali kashaysThose which do not create newkashayNimitApparent doer; evidentiaryinstrumentNiraashritWithout shelter or support;unprotectedNiradhaarSupportless; having no supportNirakaarShapelessNirakudataThe state beyond all suffering;the bliss of the SelfNiranjanFree of karmasNirbadataWeaknessNirdoshFaultlessNirgunaThe state in which there is noattribute of the prakruti (the non-Self complex)NirikshanClosely ‘seeing’NirjaraDischarge of karmasNirjivLifelessNirlepNothing can smear itNirvichaarState without thoughtsNirvikalpState without of any ‘I-ness’NischayFirm decisionNishkaamWithout expectation of rewardsNispruhaUninterested; disinclinedNiyamDisciplineNiyatiA natural progression of evolutionof a soul; the flow of progress ofall embodied soulsNiyativaadThe theory of destinyNokarmasGross discharge karmasPaapDemerit karmasPaap-anubandhi-punyaIn the process of enjoying all thecomforts due to merit karma, anew demerit karma is boundPadosSpiritual songs about Dada’s GnanPanditIntellectual scholarParam sukhEternal infinite blissParam vinayaAbsolute humilityParavalambiDependant on other factorsParigrahaAcquisitiveness; that what takesone away from the SelfPar-kshetraThe non-SelfParmanandPermanent blissParmanusSubatomic particles of matter;the substrate of karmas effectParmarthUltimate meaningParmatmaThe absolute SelfPar-parinaamEffect of the non-SelfPar-parinatiState of the non-SelfParvashtaDependencyPragnya shaktiLiberating energy of the SelfPrakashLightPrakrutiThe relative or the non-Selfcomplex which comprises themind, speech and bodyPrarabdhaFatePrashasta mohaPraiseworthy and the best kindof illusory attachmentPratikramanTo recall the hurt caused, repentfor it and resolve to not repeat itPratikudUnfavorable circumstancesPratishthit atmaThe relative self; the non-SelfcomplexPratitiConvictionPratyakhyanSincere pledge to not repeat theoffencePudgalNon-Self complexPunyaMerit karmaPunya-anubandhi-punyaEffect of merit karma binds newmerit karmasPuranIntakePurusharthReal spiritual endeavourRaas-leelaJoyful dancingRajyogaConcentration of the mindRaudradhyanMeditation that hurts the self andothersSacharMobile; changingSadguruThe ultimate guruSadhaarSupport of the SelfSadhanTools or means such asscriptures, rituals, chants,penance, fasting, spiritualmasters, satsang, etc.SadhuMonkSadhyaThe ultimate goal; the SelfSadshastraRight scripturesSahajNatural and spontaneousSahajatmaswaroop paramguruThe natural Self is the absoluteguruSaheloEasySaiyamOne who remains unaffected;He is without kashay (anger,pride, deceit, greed)SaiyogCircumstanceSakaamWith expectation of rewardsSakaam karmasAction with expectation of itsrewardsSakshibhaavWitnessing stateSamadhiA sate free from any effects ofmental, physical or externallyinduced painSamadhi maranBlissful death where one is in theawareness of the SelfSamajUnderstandingSamayaTime’s smallest measureSambhaviPath of equanimitySamkit drashtiEnlightened visionSamucchaya kaaranCollective causesSamvarA state free from inflow of newkarmaSamyakEnlightened; rightSamyak aacharRight worldly conductSamyak buddhiRight intellectSamyak charitraRight or enlightened conductSamyak darshanRight or enlightened visionSamyak drashtiRight visionSamyak gnanRight or enlightened knowledgeSanchitAccumulated karmas from thepast lifeSankalpMy-nessSansariWorldly peopleSanyasiRenunciateSaradSimpleSarvagnyaThe OmniscientSat Chit AnandSat – eternal, chit – knowledgeand vision, anand – blissSattaAuthoritySatyaTruthScharacharMobile-stillSevakDevoteeShaktiEnergy and powerShankaDoubtShantiPeaceSharanagatiSurrenderingShata-ashata vedaniyaPain-pleasure experienceShata vedaniyaExperience of pleasurePunyaMerit karmaPunya-anubandhi-punyaEffect of merit karma binds newmerit karmasPuranIntakePurusharthReal spiritual endeavourRaas-leelaJoyful dancingRajyogaConcentration of the mindRaudradhyanMeditation that hurts the self andothersSacharMobile; changingSadguruThe ultimate guruSadhaarSupport of the SelfSadhanTools or means such asscriptures, rituals, chants,penance, fasting, spiritualmasters, satsang, etc.SadhuMonkSadhyaThe ultimate goal; the SelfSadshastraRight scripturesSahajNatural and spontaneousSahajatmaswaroop paramguruThe natural Self is the absoluteguruSaheloEasySaiyamOne who remains unaffected;He is without kashay (anger,pride, deceit, greed)SaiyogCircumstanceSakaamWith expectation of rewardsSakaam karmasAction with expectation of itsrewardsSakshibhaavWitnessing stateSamadhiA sate free from any effects ofmental, physical or externallyinduced painSamadhi maranBlissful death where one is in theawareness of the SelfSamajUnderstandingSamayaTime’s smallest measureSambhaviPath of equanimitySamkit drashtiEnlightened visionSamucchaya kaaranCollective causesSamvarA state free from inflow of newkarmaSamyakEnlightened; rightSamyak aacharRight worldly conductSamyak buddhiRight intellectSamyak charitraRight or enlightened conductSamyak darshanRight or enlightened visionSamyak drashtiRight visionSamyak gnanRight or enlightened knowledgeSanchitAccumulated karmas from thepast lifeSankalpMy-nessSansariWorldly peopleSanyasiRenunciateSaradSimpleSarvagnyaThe OmniscientSat Chit AnandSat – eternal, chit – knowledgeand vision, anand – blissSattaAuthoritySatyaTruthScharacharMobile-stillSevakDevoteeShaktiEnergy and powerShankaDoubtShantiPeaceSharanagatiSurrenderingShata-ashata vedaniyaPain-pleasure experienceShata vedaniyaExperience of pleasureShraddhaFaithShrikhandDessert made from yogurtShrutgnanLiteral knowledgeShubhaGoodShubha dharmaAuspicious religionShubha UpayogAuspicious awarenessShubha-ashubhaAuspicious and inauspiciousShubhadhyanAuspicious meditationShuddhaPureShuddha chetanPure consciousnessShuddha dharmaPure religionShuddha UpayogPure applied awareness of theSelfShuddhataPurityShuddhikaranPurificationShukladhyanAwareness after the Self isrealizedShunyataAt zeroSiddha BhagwantsAbsolutely enlightened Oneswithout a bodySiddha KshetraLocation at the crest of theuniverse where all absolutelyliberated Souls ultimately resideSiddhagatiThe abode of all liberated soulsSiddhiSpiritual power and energySmaranTo come in memorySoojIntuition; insightSookshma saiyogSubtle circumstanceSookshma shariraSubtle bodySookshmatarSubtlerSooksmatamSubtlestSparshaTouchSpashtaDistinctSthoolGrossSthool saiyogGross circumstanceSugamWithout any effortSukhHappinessSvasthaTranquilSwabhavIntrinsic natureSwachhandGuided by your intellect and egoSwadhyayaStudy of one’s own SelfSwa-parinatiAwareness as the SelfSwarthSelfishnessSwavalambiDependent on the SelfTaantoLingering effectTadatmyaTo become one with itTanmayakarBecome one withTapaPenanceTejavaanIlluminatingTirthankarThe absolutely enlightened Onewith a human body who liberatesmillionsTiryanch gatiLower life formsTyaagRenouncingTyaagisThose who renounce the worldlylifeUdayadhinSubject to unfolding karma effectUnodariEating less food than what onehas the appetite forUnodari tapaThe penance of eating lessUpadeyaWorth acquiringUpadhiExternal problemsUpashrayasPlace of worshipUpayogAwareness as the SelfUpdeshakPreacherUpmaanInsultUpyashnaam karmasDefame bringing karmasUrdhvagatiHigherVairagyaDispassionVartanConductShraddhaFaithShrikhandDessert made from yogurtShrutgnanLiteral knowledgeShubhaGoodShubha dharmaAuspicious religionShubha UpayogAuspicious awarenessShubha-ashubhaAuspicious and inauspiciousShubhadhyanAuspicious meditationShuddhaPureShuddha chetanPure consciousnessShuddha dharmaPure religionShuddha UpayogPure applied awareness of theSelfShuddhataPurityShuddhikaranPurificationShukladhyanAwareness after the Self isrealizedShunyataAt zeroSiddha BhagwantsAbsolutely enlightened Oneswithout a bodySiddha KshetraLocation at the crest of theuniverse where all absolutelyliberated Souls ultimately resideSiddhagatiThe abode of all liberated soulsSiddhiSpiritual power and energySmaranTo come in memorySoojIntuition; insightSookshma saiyogSubtle circumstanceSookshma shariraSubtle bodySookshmatarSubtlerSooksmatamSubtlestSparshaTouchSpashtaDistinctSthoolGrossSthool saiyogGross circumstanceSugamWithout any effortSukhHappinessSvasthaTranquilSwabhavIntrinsic natureSwachhandGuided by your intellect and egoSwadhyayaStudy of one’s own SelfSwa-parinatiAwareness as the SelfSwarthSelfishnessSwavalambiDependent on the SelfTaantoLingering effectTadatmyaTo become one with itTanmayakarBecome one withTapaPenanceTejavaanIlluminatingTirthankarThe absolutely enlightened Onewith a human body who liberatesmillionsTiryanch gatiLower life formsTyaagRenouncingTyaagisThose who renounce the worldlylifeUdayadhinSubject to unfolding karma effectUnodariEating less food than what onehas the appetite forUnodari tapaThe penance of eating lessUpadeyaWorth acquiringUpadhiExternal problemsUpashrayasPlace of worshipUpayogAwareness as the SelfUpdeshakPreacherUpmaanInsultUpyashnaam karmasDefame bringing karmasUrdhvagatiHigherVairagyaDispassionVartanConductVedanaSufferingVibhavAttribute that is not of the SelfVidehiBeyond the body complexVidhataCreatorVignanScienceVikalpiExcessive; unnaturalVikshepaDistraction or restlessness of themind; projecting the illusionViparitMisguidedViparit buddhiWrong intellectViparit gnanDeluded or wrong knowledgeViradhakInsolentVirahaPining, the fire of separationfrom a loved oneVirahoMissing one’s presence andsufferVishaysWorldly objects of enjoymentVishvasTrustVitaragataNon-attachmentVitaragsAbsolutely enlightened OnesVruttisTendenciesVyadhiPhysical problemVyakhyanReligious discourseVyavaharWorldly life interactionsVyavasthitScientific circumstantialevidencesYamrajaGod of deathYashnaam karmasFame bearing karmas; creditbearing karmas where one willbe praised by everyone foranything he doesYogeshwarKrishna (Krishna as theenlightened One)YugaEra(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Persons to ContactDada Bhagwan ParivarAdalaj:Trimandir, Simandhar City,Ahmedabad-Kalol Highway, Adalaj,Dist.: Gandhinagar - 382421, Gujarat, India.Tel : (079) 39830100, Email : info@dadabhagwan.orgAhmedabad:"Dada Darshan", 5, Mamtapark Society,Behind Navgujarat College, Usmanpura,Ahmedabad- 380 014. Tel. : (079) 27540408Rajkot:Trimandir, Ahmedabad-Rajkot Highway, Nr. TarghadiyaChokdi, Maliyasan Village, Rajkot. Tel.: 9274111393Vadodara:"Dada Mandir", 17, Mama ni pol, Opp. Raopura Police Station, Salatvada, Vadodara.Tel. : (0265) 2414142, 9825032901Bhuj:"Trimandir",  B/h Hill garden, Airport Road,Near SahyogNagar, Bhuj (Kutch) Tel. : (02832) 290123Godhra:"Trimandir", Village Bhamaiya, Opp. FCI Godown,Godhra, Dist - Pachmahal Tel. : (02672) 262300Mumbai:Mobile : 9323528901Kolkata:Mobile : 9330133885Bangalore : Mobile : 9341948509U.S.A.:Dada Bhagwan Parivar (USA) +1 877-505-(DADA)3232Dada Bhagwan Vignan Institute : Dr. Bachu Amin,100, SW Redbud Lane, Topeka, Kansas 66606Tel : +1 785 271 0869, Email : bamin@cox.netU.K.:Satsang Activity Centre,College House, 15 CollegeRoad, Harrow, HA1 1BA,Tel. : +44  7956 476 253Email : dadabhagwan_uk@yahoo.comWebsite : www.dadabhagwan.orgKenya:+254  722 722 063Australia:+61 421127947UAE: +971  557316937Singapore: +65  81129229New Zealand: +64 21 0376434Germany:+49 700 32327474VedanaSufferingVibhavAttribute that is not of the SelfVidehiBeyond the body complexVidhataCreatorVignanScienceVikalpiExcessive; unnaturalVikshepaDistraction or restlessness of themind; projecting the illusionViparitMisguidedViparit buddhiWrong intellectViparit gnanDeluded or wrong knowledgeViradhakInsolentVirahaPining, the fire of separationfrom a loved oneVirahoMissing one’s presence andsufferVishaysWorldly objects of enjoymentVishvasTrustVitaragataNon-attachmentVitaragsAbsolutely enlightened OnesVruttisTendenciesVyadhiPhysical problemVyakhyanReligious discourseVyavaharWorldly life interactionsVyavasthitScientific circumstantialevidencesYamrajaGod of deathYashnaam karmasFame bearing karmas; creditbearing karmas where one willbe praised by everyone foranything he doesYogeshwarKrishna (Krishna as theenlightened One)YugaEra(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Persons to ContactDada Bhagwan ParivarAdalaj:Trimandir, Simandhar City,Ahmedabad-Kalol Highway, Adalaj,Dist.: Gandhinagar - 382421, Gujarat, India.Tel : (079) 39830100, Email : info@dadabhagwan.orgAhmedabad:"Dada Darshan", 5, Mamtapark Society,Behind Navgujarat College, Usmanpura,Ahmedabad- 380 014. Tel. : (079) 27540408Rajkot:Trimandir, Ahmedabad-Rajkot Highway, Nr. TarghadiyaChokdi, Maliyasan Village, Rajkot. Tel.: 9274111393Vadodara:"Dada Mandir", 17, Mama ni pol, Opp. Raopura Police Station, Salatvada, Vadodara.Tel. : (0265) 2414142, 9825032901Bhuj:"Trimandir",  B/h Hill garden, Airport Road,Near SahyogNagar, Bhuj (Kutch) Tel. : (02832) 290123Godhra:"Trimandir", Village Bhamaiya, Opp. FCI Godown,Godhra, Dist - Pachmahal Tel. : (02672) 262300Mumbai:Mobile : 9323528901Kolkata:Mobile : 9330133885Bangalore : Mobile : 9341948509U.S.A.:Dada Bhagwan Parivar (USA) +1 877-505-(DADA)3232Dada Bhagwan Vignan Institute : Dr. Bachu Amin,100, SW Redbud Lane, Topeka, Kansas 66606Tel : +1 785 271 0869, Email : bamin@cox.netU.K.:Satsang Activity Centre,College House, 15 CollegeRoad, Harrow, HA1 1BA,Tel. : +44  7956 476 253Email : dadabhagwan_uk@yahoo.comWebsite : www.dadabhagwan.orgKenya:+254  722 722 063Australia:+61 421127947UAE: +971  557316937Singapore: +65  81129229New Zealand: +64 21 0376434Germany:+49 700 32327474