Publisher:Mr. Ajit C. PatelMahavideh FoundationTri-Mandir, Simandhar City,Ahmedabad-Kalol Highway, Adalaj,Dist.-Gandhinagar-382421,Gujarat, India.Tel. : +91 79 3983 0100, 23974100E-Mail : info@dadabhagwan.org©:All Rights Reserved Mr. Deepakbhai DesaiTri-Mandir, Simandhar City, Adalaj-382421Dist.-Gandhinagar-, Gujarat, India.Edition:1500 copies, November 2008Price:Ultimate Humality(leads to Universal oneness) andAwareness of "I Don't Know Anything"Rs. 100.00Printer:Mahavideh FoundationBasement, Parshwanath Chambers,Nr. RBI, Usmanpura,Ahmedabad-380014Gujarat, India.Tel. : +91 79 27542964 / 300048238765Aptavani - 6As expounded by theGnani Purush Dada BhagwanOriginally Compiled in Gujarati by :Dr. Niruben AminPublisher:Mr. Ajit C. PatelMahavideh FoundationTri-Mandir, Simandhar City,Ahmedabad-Kalol Highway, Adalaj,Dist.-Gandhinagar-382421,Gujarat, India.Tel. : +91 79 3983 0100, 23974100E-Mail : info@dadabhagwan.org©:All Rights Reserved Mr. Deepakbhai DesaiTri-Mandir, Simandhar City, Adalaj-382421Dist.-Gandhinagar-, Gujarat, India.Edition:1500 copies, November 2008Price:Ultimate Humality(leads to Universal oneness) andAwareness of "I Don't Know Anything"Rs. 100.00Printer:Mahavideh FoundationBasement, Parshwanath Chambers,Nr. RBI, Usmanpura,Ahmedabad-380014Gujarat, India.Tel. : +91 79 27542964 / 300048238765Aptavani - 6As expounded by theGnani Purush Dada BhagwanOriginally Compiled in Gujarati by :Dr. Niruben AminTrimantra(The Three Mantras)Namo ArihantanamI bow to the Lord who has annihilated all the innerenemies of anger, pride, attachment and greed.Namo SiddhanamI bow to all the Lord who have attained final liberation.Namo AayariyanamI bow to all the Self-realized masters who unfold thepath of liberation.Namo UvazzayanamI bow to the Self-realized teachers of the path ofliberation.Namo Loye Savva SaahunamI bow to all who have  attained the Self and areprogressing in this path in the universe.Eso Pancha NamukkaroThese five salutations.Saava PaavappanasanoDestroy all the sins.Mangalanam cha SaavesimOf all that is auspicious mantras.Padhamam Havai MangalamThis is the highest.(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67) Namo Bhagavate VasudevayaI bow to the One who has become the Supreme Lordfrom a human being.(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67) Namah ShivaayaI bow to all auspicious beings of this universe who arethe instruments of salvation of the world. Jai Sat Chit AnandThe Awareness Of The Eternal Is Bliss(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Books of Akram Vignan of Dada Bhagwan1.Adjust Everywhere2.Ahimsa : Non-Violence3.Anger4.Aptavani 15.Aptavani 26.Aptavani 57.Aptavani 68.Aptavani 99.Autobiography of Gnani Purush A.M.Patel10.Avoid Clashes11.Brahmacharya : Celibacy Attained With Understanding12.Death : Before, During & After...13.Flawless Vision14.Generation Gap15.Harmony In Marriage16.Life Without Conflict17.Money18.Noble Use of Money19.Pratikraman : The master key that resolves all conflicts( Abridge & Big Volume)20.Pure Love21.Right Understanding to Help Others22.Science of Karma23.Science of Speech24.Shree Simandhar Swami : The Living God25.The Essence Of All Religion26.The Fault Is Of the Sufferer27.The Guru and The Disciple28.Tri Mantra : The mantra that removes all worldly obstacles29.Whatever Happened is Justice30.Who Am I ?31.WorriesTrimantra(The Three Mantras)Namo ArihantanamI bow to the Lord who has annihilated all the innerenemies of anger, pride, attachment and greed.Namo SiddhanamI bow to all the Lord who have attained final liberation.Namo AayariyanamI bow to all the Self-realized masters who unfold thepath of liberation.Namo UvazzayanamI bow to the Self-realized teachers of the path ofliberation.Namo Loye Savva SaahunamI bow to all who have  attained the Self and areprogressing in this path in the universe.Eso Pancha NamukkaroThese five salutations.Saava PaavappanasanoDestroy all the sins.Mangalanam cha SaavesimOf all that is auspicious mantras.Padhamam Havai MangalamThis is the highest.(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67) Namo Bhagavate VasudevayaI bow to the One who has become the Supreme Lordfrom a human being.(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67) Namah ShivaayaI bow to all auspicious beings of this universe who arethe instruments of salvation of the world. Jai Sat Chit AnandThe Awareness Of The Eternal Is Bliss(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Books of Akram Vignan of Dada Bhagwan1.Adjust Everywhere2.Ahimsa : Non-Violence3.Anger4.Aptavani 15.Aptavani 26.Aptavani 57.Aptavani 68.Aptavani 99.Autobiography of Gnani Purush A.M.Patel10.Avoid Clashes11.Brahmacharya : Celibacy Attained With Understanding12.Death : Before, During & After...13.Flawless Vision14.Generation Gap15.Harmony In Marriage16.Life Without Conflict17.Money18.Noble Use of Money19.Pratikraman : The master key that resolves all conflicts( Abridge & Big Volume)20.Pure Love21.Right Understanding to Help Others22.Science of Karma23.Science of Speech24.Shree Simandhar Swami : The Living God25.The Essence Of All Religion26.The Fault Is Of the Sufferer27.The Guru and The Disciple28.Tri Mantra : The mantra that removes all worldly obstacles29.Whatever Happened is Justice30.Who Am I ?31.WorriesNote About This TranslationThe Gnani Purush Ambalal M. Patel, also commonly knownas Dadashri or Dada, had said that it would be impossible totranslate his satsangs and the knowledge about the Science ofSelf-Realization verbatim into English because some of themeanings would be lost in the process. Therefore, in order tounderstand precisely the science of Akram Vignan and Self-Realization He stressed the importance of learning Gujarati.Dadashri did however grant his blessings to translate hiswords into English and other languages so that spiritual seekerscould benefit to a certain degree and later progress through theirown efforts.This is a humble attempt to present to the world, theessence of His Knowledge. This is not a literal translation butgreat care has been taken to preserve His original words and theessence of His message. For certain Gujarati words, severalEnglish words or even sentences are needed to convey the exactmeaning; hence, many Gujarati words have been retained withinthe English text for better reading flow. At the first encounter,the Gujarati word will be italicized followed by an immediateexplanation of its meaning in brackets. Thereafter the Gujaratiword will be used in the text that follows. This serves as a two-fold benefit: firstly ease of translation and reading and secondlyit will make the reader more familiar with the Gujarati wordscritical for a deeper understanding of this science. A glossary ofall the Gujarati words is provided at the back of the book. Foradditional glossary, visit our website at :www.dadabhagwan.orgMany people have worked diligently towards achievingthis goal and we thank them all. Please note that any errorsencountered in this translation are entirely those of the translators.* * * * *Translator’s Notes:Dadashri uses the term ‘We,’ ‘us’ or ‘our’ – meaning theGnani Purush and the Enlightened Lord within.Self – with a capital ‘S’ means the pure Soul or the realSelf. Self with a lower case ‘s’ means the relative-self,‘Chandulal’ or the prakruti. Similarly, ‘you’ with a capital ‘Y’means the real You and a lower case ‘y’ refers to the relativeyou.Where Dadashri uses the names ‘Chandubhai’ or‘Chandulal,’ readers should insert their own name.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)530Note About This TranslationThe Gnani Purush Ambalal M. Patel, also commonly knownas Dadashri or Dada, had said that it would be impossible totranslate his satsangs and the knowledge about the Science ofSelf-Realization verbatim into English because some of themeanings would be lost in the process. Therefore, in order tounderstand precisely the science of Akram Vignan and Self-Realization He stressed the importance of learning Gujarati.Dadashri did however grant his blessings to translate hiswords into English and other languages so that spiritual seekerscould benefit to a certain degree and later progress through theirown efforts.This is a humble attempt to present to the world, theessence of His Knowledge. This is not a literal translation butgreat care has been taken to preserve His original words and theessence of His message. For certain Gujarati words, severalEnglish words or even sentences are needed to convey the exactmeaning; hence, many Gujarati words have been retained withinthe English text for better reading flow. At the first encounter,the Gujarati word will be italicized followed by an immediateexplanation of its meaning in brackets. Thereafter the Gujaratiword will be used in the text that follows. This serves as a two-fold benefit: firstly ease of translation and reading and secondlyit will make the reader more familiar with the Gujarati wordscritical for a deeper understanding of this science. A glossary ofall the Gujarati words is provided at the back of the book. Foradditional glossary, visit our website at :www.dadabhagwan.orgMany people have worked diligently towards achievingthis goal and we thank them all. Please note that any errorsencountered in this translation are entirely those of the translators.* * * * *Translator’s Notes:Dadashri uses the term ‘We,’ ‘us’ or ‘our’ – meaning theGnani Purush and the Enlightened Lord within.Self – with a capital ‘S’ means the pure Soul or the realSelf. Self with a lower case ‘s’ means the relative-self,‘Chandulal’ or the prakruti. Similarly, ‘you’ with a capital ‘Y’means the real You and a lower case ‘y’ refers to the relativeyou.Where Dadashri uses the names ‘Chandubhai’ or‘Chandulal,’ readers should insert their own name.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)530Introduction to The GnaniOne June evening, in 1958 at around six o’clock, AmbalalMuljibhai Patel, a family man, and a contractor by profession,was sitting on a bench on the busy platform number three atSurat’s train station. Surat is a city in south Gujarat, a westernstate in India. What happened within the next forty-eight minuteswas phenomenal. Spontaneous Self-Realization occurred withinAmbalal M. Patel. During this event, his ego completely meltedand from that moment onwards, he became completely detachedfrom all of Ambalal’s thoughts, speech, and actions. He becamethe Lord’s living instrument for the salvation of humankind, throughthe path of knowledge. He called this Lord, ‘Dada Bhagwan.’To everyone he met, he would say, “This Lord, Dada Bhagwanis fully manifested within me. He also resides within all livingbeings. The difference is that within me He is completelyexpressed and in you, he has yet to manifest.”Who are we? What is God? Who runs this world? Whatis karma? What is liberation? Etc. All the world’s spiritualquestions were answered during this event. Thus, nature offeredabsolute vision to the world through the medium of Shree AmbalalMuljibhai Patel.Ambalal was born in Tarasali, a suburb of Baroda andwas later raised in Bhadran, Gujarat. His wife’s name was Hiraba.Although he was a contractor by profession, his life at home andhis interactions with everyone around him were exemplary, evenprior to his Self-Realization. After becoming Self-Realized andattaining the state of a Gnani, (The Awakened One, Jnani inHindi), his body became a ‘public charitable trust.’Throughout his entire life, he lived by the principle thatthere should not be any commerce in religion, and in allcommerce, there must be religion. He also never took moneyfrom anyone for his own use. He used the profits from his businessto take his devotees for pilgrimages to various parts of India.His words became the foundation for the new, direct, andstep-less path to Self-Realization called Akram Vignan. Throughhis divine original scientific experiment (The Gnan Vidhi), heimparted this knowledge to others within two hours. Thousandshave received his grace through this process and thousandscontinue to do so even now. ‘Akram’ means without steps; anelevator path or a shortcut, whereas ‘Kram’ means an orderly,step-by-step spiritual path. Akram is now recognized as a directshortcut to the bliss of the Self.Who is Dada Bhagwan?When he explained to others who ‘Dada Bhagwan’ is, hewould say :“What you see here is not ‘Dada Bhagwan’. What yousee is ‘A. M. Patel.’ I am a Gnani Purush and ‘He’ that ismanifested within me, is ‘Dada Bhagwan’. He is the Lord within.He is within you and everyone else. He has not yet manifestedwithin you, whereas within me he is fully manifested. I myself amnot a Bhagwan. I too bow down to Dada Bhagwan within me.”Current link for attaining the knowledge ofSelf-Realization (Atma Gnan)“I am personally going to impart siddhis (special spiritualpowers) to a few people. After I leave, will there not be a needfor them? People of future generations will need this path, willthey not?”   ~ DadashriParam Pujya Dadashri used to go from town to town, andcountry to country, to give satsang and impart the knowledge ofthe Self as well as knowledge of harmonious worldly interactionto all who came to see him. During his final days, in the fall of1987, he gave his blessing to Dr. Niruben Amin and bestowedhis special siddhis upon her, to continue his work. “You will haveto become a mother to this whole world, Niruben” He told heras he blessed her. There was no doubt in Dadashri’s mind thatNiruben was destined to be just that. She had served him withutmost devotion day and night for over twenty years. Dadashri67Introduction to The GnaniOne June evening, in 1958 at around six o’clock, AmbalalMuljibhai Patel, a family man, and a contractor by profession,was sitting on a bench on the busy platform number three atSurat’s train station. Surat is a city in south Gujarat, a westernstate in India. What happened within the next forty-eight minuteswas phenomenal. Spontaneous Self-Realization occurred withinAmbalal M. Patel. During this event, his ego completely meltedand from that moment onwards, he became completely detachedfrom all of Ambalal’s thoughts, speech, and actions. He becamethe Lord’s living instrument for the salvation of humankind, throughthe path of knowledge. He called this Lord, ‘Dada Bhagwan.’To everyone he met, he would say, “This Lord, Dada Bhagwanis fully manifested within me. He also resides within all livingbeings. The difference is that within me He is completelyexpressed and in you, he has yet to manifest.”Who are we? What is God? Who runs this world? Whatis karma? What is liberation? Etc. All the world’s spiritualquestions were answered during this event. Thus, nature offeredabsolute vision to the world through the medium of Shree AmbalalMuljibhai Patel.Ambalal was born in Tarasali, a suburb of Baroda andwas later raised in Bhadran, Gujarat. His wife’s name was Hiraba.Although he was a contractor by profession, his life at home andhis interactions with everyone around him were exemplary, evenprior to his Self-Realization. After becoming Self-Realized andattaining the state of a Gnani, (The Awakened One, Jnani inHindi), his body became a ‘public charitable trust.’Throughout his entire life, he lived by the principle thatthere should not be any commerce in religion, and in allcommerce, there must be religion. He also never took moneyfrom anyone for his own use. He used the profits from his businessto take his devotees for pilgrimages to various parts of India.His words became the foundation for the new, direct, andstep-less path to Self-Realization called Akram Vignan. Throughhis divine original scientific experiment (The Gnan Vidhi), heimparted this knowledge to others within two hours. Thousandshave received his grace through this process and thousandscontinue to do so even now. ‘Akram’ means without steps; anelevator path or a shortcut, whereas ‘Kram’ means an orderly,step-by-step spiritual path. Akram is now recognized as a directshortcut to the bliss of the Self.Who is Dada Bhagwan?When he explained to others who ‘Dada Bhagwan’ is, hewould say :“What you see here is not ‘Dada Bhagwan’. What yousee is ‘A. M. Patel.’ I am a Gnani Purush and ‘He’ that ismanifested within me, is ‘Dada Bhagwan’. He is the Lord within.He is within you and everyone else. He has not yet manifestedwithin you, whereas within me he is fully manifested. I myself amnot a Bhagwan. I too bow down to Dada Bhagwan within me.”Current link for attaining the knowledge ofSelf-Realization (Atma Gnan)“I am personally going to impart siddhis (special spiritualpowers) to a few people. After I leave, will there not be a needfor them? People of future generations will need this path, willthey not?”   ~ DadashriParam Pujya Dadashri used to go from town to town, andcountry to country, to give satsang and impart the knowledge ofthe Self as well as knowledge of harmonious worldly interactionto all who came to see him. During his final days, in the fall of1987, he gave his blessing to Dr. Niruben Amin and bestowedhis special siddhis upon her, to continue his work. “You will haveto become a mother to this whole world, Niruben” He told heras he blessed her. There was no doubt in Dadashri’s mind thatNiruben was destined to be just that. She had served him withutmost devotion day and night for over twenty years. Dadashri67in turn had molded her and prepared her to take on thismonumental task.From the time of Pujya Dadashri’s mortal departure onJanuary 2 1988 to her own mortal departure on March 19th2006, Pujya Niruma as she lovingly came to be called bythousands remained true to her promise to Dadashri to carry onhis mission of the world’s salvation. She became Dadashri’srepresentative of Akram Vignan and became instrumental inspreading the knowledge of Akram Vignan throughout the world.She also became an exemplary of pure and unconditional love.Thousands of people from all walks of life and from all over theworld have attained Self-Realization through her and areestablished in the experience of the pure Soul, while carrying outtheir worldly duties and obligations. They experience freedomhere and now, while living their daily life.The link of Akram Gnanis now continues with the currentspiritual master Pujya Deepakbhai Desai whom Pujya Dadashrihad also graced with special siddhis to continue to teach theworld about Atma Gnan and Akram Vignan. He was furthermolded and trained by Pujya Niruma who blessed him to conductGnan Vidhi in 2003. Dadashri had said that Deepakbhai willbecome the decorum that will add splendor to the Lord’s reign.Pujya Deepakbhai, in keeping with Dada’s and Niruma’s traditiontravels extensively within India and abroad, giving satsangs andimparting the knowledge of the Self to all who come seeking.Powerful words in scriptures help the seeker in increasinghis desire for liberation. The knowledge of the Self is the finalgoal of all one’s seeking. Without the knowledge of the Selfthere is no liberation. This knowledge of the Self (Atma Gnan)does not exist in books. It exists in the heart of a Gnani. Hence,the knowledge of the Self can only be acquired by meeting aGnani. Through the scientific approach of Akram Vignan, eventoday one can attain Atma Gnan, but it can only occur by meetinga living Atma Gnani and receiving the Atma Gnan. Only a litcandle can light another candle.EDITORIALAptavani Series Number Six has one distinguishedsplendor. On the one hand there are ‘problems’ at everymoment in worldly interactions, and on the other hand, one isenmeshed in internal struggles and single-handedly has to solvethem. In the contest between these two, how can one getsolutions for conflicts that arise day and night? Who can helpwith it? This very conflict carves away at one’s insides and histrain never leaves the yard of the station (life passes away).Whoever comes before Dadashri with a list of all theconflicts in his life, Dadashri shows him such a proper solutionthat he moves out of the conflicts!Gnan (knowledge of eternal truth) cannot be attainedthrough words, discourses or service; it can be attained withhelp of the developed vision to understand the meaning of whatlies in the Gnani’s heart, and this is the exclusive right of everyindividual’s expression.How is it possible to know this Vitarag Purush (one freefrom all worldly attachments) as He is? Until today, there wasno such vision, no measure of any kind available to identify Him.That vision can be obtained as a result of one’s previous life’searnings of merit karma (punya) which can remove some of theinfinite veils covering the Self. This removal grants one the visionthat can identify the Gnani and his state! Do we possess thatclear vision? How can the vision be clarified? Only if there wasthe intention formed life after life, to this point in time, that, ‘Imust meet a Gnani Purush who imparts the state of being devoidof all attachments (vitarag state); except for this, I have nodesire for anything else.’ Then, as a result of the Gnani’s grace,there will open up in his vision the knowledge seed of the‘second day of the moon’ (Dadashri uses the simile of a waxingmoon for the state of one who has just acquired Self-realizationand who will eventually arrive at the ‘Full moon’ state, theabsolute knowledge—Keval Gnan state).89in turn had molded her and prepared her to take on thismonumental task.From the time of Pujya Dadashri’s mortal departure onJanuary 2 1988 to her own mortal departure on March 19th2006, Pujya Niruma as she lovingly came to be called bythousands remained true to her promise to Dadashri to carry onhis mission of the world’s salvation. She became Dadashri’srepresentative of Akram Vignan and became instrumental inspreading the knowledge of Akram Vignan throughout the world.She also became an exemplary of pure and unconditional love.Thousands of people from all walks of life and from all over theworld have attained Self-Realization through her and areestablished in the experience of the pure Soul, while carrying outtheir worldly duties and obligations. They experience freedomhere and now, while living their daily life.The link of Akram Gnanis now continues with the currentspiritual master Pujya Deepakbhai Desai whom Pujya Dadashrihad also graced with special siddhis to continue to teach theworld about Atma Gnan and Akram Vignan. He was furthermolded and trained by Pujya Niruma who blessed him to conductGnan Vidhi in 2003. Dadashri had said that Deepakbhai willbecome the decorum that will add splendor to the Lord’s reign.Pujya Deepakbhai, in keeping with Dada’s and Niruma’s traditiontravels extensively within India and abroad, giving satsangs andimparting the knowledge of the Self to all who come seeking.Powerful words in scriptures help the seeker in increasinghis desire for liberation. The knowledge of the Self is the finalgoal of all one’s seeking. Without the knowledge of the Selfthere is no liberation. This knowledge of the Self (Atma Gnan)does not exist in books. It exists in the heart of a Gnani. Hence,the knowledge of the Self can only be acquired by meeting aGnani. Through the scientific approach of Akram Vignan, eventoday one can attain Atma Gnan, but it can only occur by meetinga living Atma Gnani and receiving the Atma Gnan. Only a litcandle can light another candle.EDITORIALAptavani Series Number Six has one distinguishedsplendor. On the one hand there are ‘problems’ at everymoment in worldly interactions, and on the other hand, one isenmeshed in internal struggles and single-handedly has to solvethem. In the contest between these two, how can one getsolutions for conflicts that arise day and night? Who can helpwith it? This very conflict carves away at one’s insides and histrain never leaves the yard of the station (life passes away).Whoever comes before Dadashri with a list of all theconflicts in his life, Dadashri shows him such a proper solutionthat he moves out of the conflicts!Gnan (knowledge of eternal truth) cannot be attainedthrough words, discourses or service; it can be attained withhelp of the developed vision to understand the meaning of whatlies in the Gnani’s heart, and this is the exclusive right of everyindividual’s expression.How is it possible to know this Vitarag Purush (one freefrom all worldly attachments) as He is? Until today, there wasno such vision, no measure of any kind available to identify Him.That vision can be obtained as a result of one’s previous life’searnings of merit karma (punya) which can remove some of theinfinite veils covering the Self. This removal grants one the visionthat can identify the Gnani and his state! Do we possess thatclear vision? How can the vision be clarified? Only if there wasthe intention formed life after life, to this point in time, that, ‘Imust meet a Gnani Purush who imparts the state of being devoidof all attachments (vitarag state); except for this, I have nodesire for anything else.’ Then, as a result of the Gnani’s grace,there will open up in his vision the knowledge seed of the‘second day of the moon’ (Dadashri uses the simile of a waxingmoon for the state of one who has just acquired Self-realizationand who will eventually arrive at the ‘Full moon’ state, theabsolute knowledge—Keval Gnan state).89Where there is no merit karma (punya) or demerit karma(paap), where there is no piousness or unholiness, where thereis no dualism, where the Self has illuminated in the perfectly pureform – such is the state of a Gnani. If one gives adjectives tosuch a Gnani, the giver opens up to liability! To pay respectusing adjectives to the one who has attained the absolute stateis like decorating sunlight with a candle; yet one supports his egoby claiming, ‘How well I described the Gnani!’ What can wesay to this? What can we do?Every talk of the Gnani is original. There is not a drop ofscriptures in His speech, there is no shadow of other preachersat all nor is there the language of any founder of a major religion!His examples and similes are exclusive. Even in His spontaneous,lively humor there is unfailing, deep meaning and originality. Herebefore the Gnani, everyone has the clear experience that he isremoving his own conflicts by himself in his own language!Experiential knowledge is contained in the heart of theGnani. The one who is thirsty can attain satisfaction by dippinghis vessel of surrender in the well of the Gnani’s heart.The Gnani’s speech of knowledge, His words fromexperience, His heartfelt solutions about removing our mistakes,are solutions that are to be found nowhere else. His child likefrankness and innocence come to surface and clearly indicateHim as a Gnani!Every statement of the Gnani dances with joy on thehighest stage of our heart!Whoever has gone to the Gnani with a problem, the Gnaniinitially reads it as it is and ends his misery in such a natural waythat, in just moments, the seeker is left with a feeling of awe andwonder of, ‘Oh! I had this much difference of understanding inmy vision?’ Instead of the outward vision, if the vision wasturned around 180º inward, the resolution could have beenattained a long time ago! But let alone 180º, how can one turneven 1º by his own effort? That is the task of only the GnaniPurush.Where the science of the Self has manifested entirely,where our ‘search for the Self’ of infinite lifetimes can come toan end, how can we afford to miss the opportunity and returnto wander around again in infinite lifetimes?Not only the science of the Soul, but the science ofthe innate nature and makeup of the non-Self complex(prakruti) has simultaneously manifested. This phenomenon hasnot occurred anywhere else, but it is experienced here.Therefore, why not attain freedom from the ‘web’ of therelative-self by taking advantage of this science, and byexperiencing the exact differentiation of the real-Self from therelative-self? For how long will you remain crushed by thepressure of the relative-self? The science of going beyond therelative-self is at arm’s length so why should we not open up thequalities of our own relative self in front of the Gnani? For thosewho want to be free, why should they protect the deformities ofthe relative-self?When can the Gnani be known completely? When theGnani’s ‘knowledge’ is understood, as it is, completely! At thattime, the one who has understood it has probably become theimage of the Gnani!If the world can understand and attain such a Gnani whois a master of this knowledge, then it will delight in the joy of Hispraise. Then the nature of the world can be understood as it isand an absolute, unattached state can be experienced.Any errors that may have occurred due to the limitationsof writing on paper and the vastness of the speech of thosedevoid of all attachments (Vitarags), are those of compilationand for that our apologies and prayers.- Dr. Niruben Amin1011Where there is no merit karma (punya) or demerit karma(paap), where there is no piousness or unholiness, where thereis no dualism, where the Self has illuminated in the perfectly pureform – such is the state of a Gnani. If one gives adjectives tosuch a Gnani, the giver opens up to liability! To pay respectusing adjectives to the one who has attained the absolute stateis like decorating sunlight with a candle; yet one supports his egoby claiming, ‘How well I described the Gnani!’ What can wesay to this? What can we do?Every talk of the Gnani is original. There is not a drop ofscriptures in His speech, there is no shadow of other preachersat all nor is there the language of any founder of a major religion!His examples and similes are exclusive. Even in His spontaneous,lively humor there is unfailing, deep meaning and originality. Herebefore the Gnani, everyone has the clear experience that he isremoving his own conflicts by himself in his own language!Experiential knowledge is contained in the heart of theGnani. The one who is thirsty can attain satisfaction by dippinghis vessel of surrender in the well of the Gnani’s heart.The Gnani’s speech of knowledge, His words fromexperience, His heartfelt solutions about removing our mistakes,are solutions that are to be found nowhere else. His child likefrankness and innocence come to surface and clearly indicateHim as a Gnani!Every statement of the Gnani dances with joy on thehighest stage of our heart!Whoever has gone to the Gnani with a problem, the Gnaniinitially reads it as it is and ends his misery in such a natural waythat, in just moments, the seeker is left with a feeling of awe andwonder of, ‘Oh! I had this much difference of understanding inmy vision?’ Instead of the outward vision, if the vision wasturned around 180º inward, the resolution could have beenattained a long time ago! But let alone 180º, how can one turneven 1º by his own effort? That is the task of only the GnaniPurush.Where the science of the Self has manifested entirely,where our ‘search for the Self’ of infinite lifetimes can come toan end, how can we afford to miss the opportunity and returnto wander around again in infinite lifetimes?Not only the science of the Soul, but the science ofthe innate nature and makeup of the non-Self complex(prakruti) has simultaneously manifested. This phenomenon hasnot occurred anywhere else, but it is experienced here.Therefore, why not attain freedom from the ‘web’ of therelative-self by taking advantage of this science, and byexperiencing the exact differentiation of the real-Self from therelative-self? For how long will you remain crushed by thepressure of the relative-self? The science of going beyond therelative-self is at arm’s length so why should we not open up thequalities of our own relative self in front of the Gnani? For thosewho want to be free, why should they protect the deformities ofthe relative-self?When can the Gnani be known completely? When theGnani’s ‘knowledge’ is understood, as it is, completely! At thattime, the one who has understood it has probably become theimage of the Gnani!If the world can understand and attain such a Gnani whois a master of this knowledge, then it will delight in the joy of Hispraise. Then the nature of the world can be understood as it isand an absolute, unattached state can be experienced.Any errors that may have occurred due to the limitationsof writing on paper and the vastness of the speech of thosedevoid of all attachments (Vitarags), are those of compilationand for that our apologies and prayers.- Dr. Niruben Amin1011PREFACEWhat nature says is, ‘Whatever I give you is verily inaccordance with your own receptacle of intellect (buddhi’sashaya) of the past life. So then, why are you getting disturbedor distressed?’ Whatever you get, enjoy it with happiness! If itwas in one’s receptacle of intellect that, ‘Any kind of a wife willdo, but I cannot live without a wife,’ then he will get ‘any kindof a wife.’ And today, if he sees someone else’s wife, he feelsshort-changed. However, complain as he might, his satisfactionis derived only from the wife at home. No matter how muchcommotion you create, you will not get anywhere. Therefore, bepractical and wisen up! Settle everything with equanimity!By getting disturbed and distressed there will be newbondage of karma and in this way the worldly illusionaryattachments will never come to an end. One is defeated andtrodden down from his wanderings in the worldly life. At last hearrives at only one decision of, ‘It would be good if there couldbe some way to become free.’ Then he will definitely meet witha ‘Gnani Purush’ with whose grace he will become aware of hisreal Self; he will be able to taste his own bliss of the Self. Afterthat, his vision will change and, therefore, the subtle, innercomponent of vision and knowledge (chit) will never leave hisown home and wander around outside. As a result, new causesfor another life are not formed.After speaking angry words to someone, if the mind formsthe opinion that, ‘Things cannot be sorted out without anger,’then there will be karmic charging of speech in the ‘code words’of, ‘I want to say angry words.’ And, instead, if there is theopinion that speaking angry words is wrong and that it shouldnot be done, then the code words of that opinion will be, ‘I donot want to say angry words,’ and the charging will be doneaccordingly. And when there is the constant search of, ‘Whenwill my speech improve?’ then one’s ‘code words’ will change.And the intention of, ‘Let no living being in the world suffer anypain, whatsoever, from my speech,’ will create the ‘codewords’ wherein the charging of the speech that will occur will bethat of the speech of a fully enlightened being’s (Tirthankara’s)liberating sermon!In the current times, people are suffering day and nightfrom wounds caused by words. There are no wounds caused bysticks or cane there. When others hurl the weapon of speechand words, the moment the knowledge of, ‘Speech is of anotherentity and is in the control of another entity,’ given to us by theGnani surfaces, what scope is there for any wounds there?However, if you happen to utter hurtful words, doing repentanceand apology (pratikraman), as shown by the Gnani Purush canbring about a solution for both the parties.Every matter in this world is to be taken in a positive way.If you turn towards the negative, you will go in the wrongdirection and cause others to do the same.Interactions of the worldly life are a museum of puzzles.After one puzzle is settled, the next one will lift its head. Onceyou attain the knowledge of the Self, the world will settledown. This world is not meant for fretting in useless discussionsabout others. This world is as it is. In that, you have to find Yoursafe side.As long as one has the belief, ‘I am hurting the otherperson,’ the other person will definitely have pain as a result ofthese vibrations. And to see things in this way is due to one’sown attribute of ‘sensitiveness.’ It is merely one type of ego. Aslong as this ego is there, the other person will inevitably feel hurt.When that ego gets dissolved, no one will suffer hurt as a result.If we become faultless, then the world is already faultless.The way by which the Gnani came to be liberated fromall karmic effects is the very way he saw, knew and1213PREFACEWhat nature says is, ‘Whatever I give you is verily inaccordance with your own receptacle of intellect (buddhi’sashaya) of the past life. So then, why are you getting disturbedor distressed?’ Whatever you get, enjoy it with happiness! If itwas in one’s receptacle of intellect that, ‘Any kind of a wife willdo, but I cannot live without a wife,’ then he will get ‘any kindof a wife.’ And today, if he sees someone else’s wife, he feelsshort-changed. However, complain as he might, his satisfactionis derived only from the wife at home. No matter how muchcommotion you create, you will not get anywhere. Therefore, bepractical and wisen up! Settle everything with equanimity!By getting disturbed and distressed there will be newbondage of karma and in this way the worldly illusionaryattachments will never come to an end. One is defeated andtrodden down from his wanderings in the worldly life. At last hearrives at only one decision of, ‘It would be good if there couldbe some way to become free.’ Then he will definitely meet witha ‘Gnani Purush’ with whose grace he will become aware of hisreal Self; he will be able to taste his own bliss of the Self. Afterthat, his vision will change and, therefore, the subtle, innercomponent of vision and knowledge (chit) will never leave hisown home and wander around outside. As a result, new causesfor another life are not formed.After speaking angry words to someone, if the mind formsthe opinion that, ‘Things cannot be sorted out without anger,’then there will be karmic charging of speech in the ‘code words’of, ‘I want to say angry words.’ And, instead, if there is theopinion that speaking angry words is wrong and that it shouldnot be done, then the code words of that opinion will be, ‘I donot want to say angry words,’ and the charging will be doneaccordingly. And when there is the constant search of, ‘Whenwill my speech improve?’ then one’s ‘code words’ will change.And the intention of, ‘Let no living being in the world suffer anypain, whatsoever, from my speech,’ will create the ‘codewords’ wherein the charging of the speech that will occur will bethat of the speech of a fully enlightened being’s (Tirthankara’s)liberating sermon!In the current times, people are suffering day and nightfrom wounds caused by words. There are no wounds caused bysticks or cane there. When others hurl the weapon of speechand words, the moment the knowledge of, ‘Speech is of anotherentity and is in the control of another entity,’ given to us by theGnani surfaces, what scope is there for any wounds there?However, if you happen to utter hurtful words, doing repentanceand apology (pratikraman), as shown by the Gnani Purush canbring about a solution for both the parties.Every matter in this world is to be taken in a positive way.If you turn towards the negative, you will go in the wrongdirection and cause others to do the same.Interactions of the worldly life are a museum of puzzles.After one puzzle is settled, the next one will lift its head. Onceyou attain the knowledge of the Self, the world will settledown. This world is not meant for fretting in useless discussionsabout others. This world is as it is. In that, you have to find Yoursafe side.As long as one has the belief, ‘I am hurting the otherperson,’ the other person will definitely have pain as a result ofthese vibrations. And to see things in this way is due to one’sown attribute of ‘sensitiveness.’ It is merely one type of ego. Aslong as this ego is there, the other person will inevitably feel hurt.When that ego gets dissolved, no one will suffer hurt as a result.If we become faultless, then the world is already faultless.The way by which the Gnani came to be liberated fromall karmic effects is the very way he saw, knew and1213experienced. He tells us to follow this same path in order to beliberated from the world.People indulge and take shelter in amusing events in orderto become free from pain and unhappiness and, by doing so,they undertake new karmic risks. Gnanis never waste the energyof the Self in this way. They settle them with equanimity.Even if someone uses abusive language against the GnaniPurush, the Gnani tells him, ‘There is no problem here, myfriend. You must continue to come here to satsang (gathering ofSelf-realized beings); someday there will be a solution for you.’What wonderful grace and equanimity!This world has never been unjust, even for a moment. Theworldly courts may do injustice; it is justice if an innocent personis hanged and it is also justice when a guilty person is acquitted.Therefore, there is no wisdom in being dubious or questioninganything in this world. There is no one born in this world that canbother you, and if there is, then even if you plan a millionstrategies, none will be effective in avoiding him. Therefore, leteverything be and go towards the Self.From which type of knowledge can you have suspicionsabout someone? Even though you may have witnessed somethingwith your own eyes, does it not turn out to be false? There cannever be a solution for suspicions. There can be a solution forthe truth! Where one does not have suspicion is where suspicionwill be. Where one has trust is verily the place there are doubts.Where he has suspicion, there is usually nothing to suspect.Once one has the knowledge of a snake entering his room, hisdoubts about the snake will not go away until he has knowledgeof it leaving the room. Relying on the science given by the GnaniPurush will make one doubt free.That which comes into our memory is a complaint againstus. So we should repeatedly do repentance and apology(pratikraman), as shown by the Gnani Purush, and clear itaway.If we caused pain to someone and if that person issuffering from that pain here in this world, is it possible for us toattain final liberation? The one who is in pain will inflict pain uponothers. Can someone in pain attain final liberation? Therefore,get up – wake up – and come to a decision that, ‘From todayonward I don’t want to cause any hurt whatsoever to any livingbeing in this world.’ Then You will see final liberation comingtoward You. If others give you pain, You are not to see that.Others have that freedom. How can we take away theirfreedom?On the one hand, one wants to be declared free of guiltin the court of the world and on the other hand, one wants tocontinue his claim of, ‘Why did he do this to me? Why did hesay that to me?’ How can anyone become free this way? Andif such a claim is made inadvertently, it should be withdrawn, ofcourse, by doing pratikraman!Your interactions with your wife are to be completed byseeing the supreme Soul in her and not by becoming an ascetic(by renouncing the worldly life). Interactions of the worldly lifeare simply worldly in nature, but to see the pure Self in her isreally the pure awareness of the Self. This is shuddha upayog.Don’t you think the innumerable mistakes that onecontinues to commit are caught in the Gnani’s vision? Of course,they are caught in his vision; however, his awareness is only onthe Self within us. Therefore, there is no result of attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh) in the Gnani.Our internal results from the effects of karma change, andthat is why the internal results in others are disrupted andchange. The Gnani’s internal effects (results) never change underany circumstances.1415experienced. He tells us to follow this same path in order to beliberated from the world.People indulge and take shelter in amusing events in orderto become free from pain and unhappiness and, by doing so,they undertake new karmic risks. Gnanis never waste the energyof the Self in this way. They settle them with equanimity.Even if someone uses abusive language against the GnaniPurush, the Gnani tells him, ‘There is no problem here, myfriend. You must continue to come here to satsang (gathering ofSelf-realized beings); someday there will be a solution for you.’What wonderful grace and equanimity!This world has never been unjust, even for a moment. Theworldly courts may do injustice; it is justice if an innocent personis hanged and it is also justice when a guilty person is acquitted.Therefore, there is no wisdom in being dubious or questioninganything in this world. There is no one born in this world that canbother you, and if there is, then even if you plan a millionstrategies, none will be effective in avoiding him. Therefore, leteverything be and go towards the Self.From which type of knowledge can you have suspicionsabout someone? Even though you may have witnessed somethingwith your own eyes, does it not turn out to be false? There cannever be a solution for suspicions. There can be a solution forthe truth! Where one does not have suspicion is where suspicionwill be. Where one has trust is verily the place there are doubts.Where he has suspicion, there is usually nothing to suspect.Once one has the knowledge of a snake entering his room, hisdoubts about the snake will not go away until he has knowledgeof it leaving the room. Relying on the science given by the GnaniPurush will make one doubt free.That which comes into our memory is a complaint againstus. So we should repeatedly do repentance and apology(pratikraman), as shown by the Gnani Purush, and clear itaway.If we caused pain to someone and if that person issuffering from that pain here in this world, is it possible for us toattain final liberation? The one who is in pain will inflict pain uponothers. Can someone in pain attain final liberation? Therefore,get up – wake up – and come to a decision that, ‘From todayonward I don’t want to cause any hurt whatsoever to any livingbeing in this world.’ Then You will see final liberation comingtoward You. If others give you pain, You are not to see that.Others have that freedom. How can we take away theirfreedom?On the one hand, one wants to be declared free of guiltin the court of the world and on the other hand, one wants tocontinue his claim of, ‘Why did he do this to me? Why did hesay that to me?’ How can anyone become free this way? Andif such a claim is made inadvertently, it should be withdrawn, ofcourse, by doing pratikraman!Your interactions with your wife are to be completed byseeing the supreme Soul in her and not by becoming an ascetic(by renouncing the worldly life). Interactions of the worldly lifeare simply worldly in nature, but to see the pure Self in her isreally the pure awareness of the Self. This is shuddha upayog.Don’t you think the innumerable mistakes that onecontinues to commit are caught in the Gnani’s vision? Of course,they are caught in his vision; however, his awareness is only onthe Self within us. Therefore, there is no result of attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh) in the Gnani.Our internal results from the effects of karma change, andthat is why the internal results in others are disrupted andchange. The Gnani’s internal effects (results) never change underany circumstances.1415If you want to improve someone, then no matter howmuch pain he inflicts upon you, if you do not let a single negativethought about him cross your mind, he will be improved for sure.This is the only way; improve the self and as a result the otherperson improves!If you tell someone, ‘This is your fault,’ directly to him, hewill not accept it and, on the contrary, he will cover up his fault.If you tell someone, ‘You should do it this way,’ he will do justthe opposite. Instead, if you say it in the following manner,‘What benefit will you gain in doing it that way?’ he will stop.Who will accompany you on the funeral pyre? Whichbubble in the flowing water do you hold onto? Who stays withwhom?One is not even aware whether the thing over which heclashes is his own or another’s. Am I the one doing all this oris someone else making me do it? There should be no clashwhatsoever, even at the cost of the physical body! The momentthe inner intent spoils, the moment there is dislike within or theslightest rising of the eyebrow, conflict will start. Others mayclash with us but when we decide not to clash with anyone,then despite circumstances of potential clash, we can avoidclash and, in addition, our ‘common sense’ will develop;otherwise, because of the lack of awareness, the infinite energyof the Self will be smothered and covered up during that clash.How can anyone who wants ‘safety’ in the world, and alsowants to complete the path to ultimate liberation, give any‘scope’ to clash?If, at some point in time, one has heard the Gnan throughwhich the Gnanis have won over the world, then that knowledgewill be helpful. In the end, one has to win over the world!Only when everyone in this world likes us will success beattained. Whose fault is it if the world does not like us? If othersfeel disconnected (aloof) due to difference of opinion with us, itis only because of our own mistake. There, the Gnani, throughhis art of intellect and Gnan art, will quell the disconnection dueto difference of opinions even before it happens.After one attains the awareness of the Self, the duality of‘favorable/adverse’ will cease to exist. As long as there is thedwelling in the temporary state and in the relative-self, there willbe ‘favorable/adverse,’ which is totally the worldly life. As longas ‘sweet’ is felt as ‘sweet,’ ‘bitter’ will be felt as ‘bitter.’ If onedoes not experience ‘sweet’ as sweet, there is nothing to besuffered in the ‘bitter.’ If the ‘knower’ state prevails in ‘sweet,’the knower state will naturally be there in the ‘bitter’ also.Instead, what happens is that due to the old habit of enjoying the‘sweet,’ the bitter comes around to hurt.The inner weaknesses of passion, anger, pride, illusion,greed, etc. (kashays) that are created in favorable circumstancesare easy and sweet. They are the passions of attachment andthey contain greed and deceit and their bondage cannot bebroken. These passions will drown one in the comfort ofpleasures and will cause one to miss out the path to liberationfor a period of infinite lifetimes.People can’t help but give out a feast of applause to theperson who does charity and gives donations. If that person ishungry for recognition and self-validation (maan), he will evenpick from mud, pieces of applause that people throw in and feedon them. Gnanis never ‘accept’ even a feast of thirty-twovarieties offered to them, so where is the danger of any‘sickness’ setting in?Whatever work you do, the work itself has no real value.But if there is attachment-abhorrence while doing it, it will createanother life for you after this life, and if there is no attachment-abhorrence, there is no liability for another life.There will be freedom when one does not see a single1617If you want to improve someone, then no matter howmuch pain he inflicts upon you, if you do not let a single negativethought about him cross your mind, he will be improved for sure.This is the only way; improve the self and as a result the otherperson improves!If you tell someone, ‘This is your fault,’ directly to him, hewill not accept it and, on the contrary, he will cover up his fault.If you tell someone, ‘You should do it this way,’ he will do justthe opposite. Instead, if you say it in the following manner,‘What benefit will you gain in doing it that way?’ he will stop.Who will accompany you on the funeral pyre? Whichbubble in the flowing water do you hold onto? Who stays withwhom?One is not even aware whether the thing over which heclashes is his own or another’s. Am I the one doing all this oris someone else making me do it? There should be no clashwhatsoever, even at the cost of the physical body! The momentthe inner intent spoils, the moment there is dislike within or theslightest rising of the eyebrow, conflict will start. Others mayclash with us but when we decide not to clash with anyone,then despite circumstances of potential clash, we can avoidclash and, in addition, our ‘common sense’ will develop;otherwise, because of the lack of awareness, the infinite energyof the Self will be smothered and covered up during that clash.How can anyone who wants ‘safety’ in the world, and alsowants to complete the path to ultimate liberation, give any‘scope’ to clash?If, at some point in time, one has heard the Gnan throughwhich the Gnanis have won over the world, then that knowledgewill be helpful. In the end, one has to win over the world!Only when everyone in this world likes us will success beattained. Whose fault is it if the world does not like us? If othersfeel disconnected (aloof) due to difference of opinion with us, itis only because of our own mistake. There, the Gnani, throughhis art of intellect and Gnan art, will quell the disconnection dueto difference of opinions even before it happens.After one attains the awareness of the Self, the duality of‘favorable/adverse’ will cease to exist. As long as there is thedwelling in the temporary state and in the relative-self, there willbe ‘favorable/adverse,’ which is totally the worldly life. As longas ‘sweet’ is felt as ‘sweet,’ ‘bitter’ will be felt as ‘bitter.’ If onedoes not experience ‘sweet’ as sweet, there is nothing to besuffered in the ‘bitter.’ If the ‘knower’ state prevails in ‘sweet,’the knower state will naturally be there in the ‘bitter’ also.Instead, what happens is that due to the old habit of enjoying the‘sweet,’ the bitter comes around to hurt.The inner weaknesses of passion, anger, pride, illusion,greed, etc. (kashays) that are created in favorable circumstancesare easy and sweet. They are the passions of attachment andthey contain greed and deceit and their bondage cannot bebroken. These passions will drown one in the comfort ofpleasures and will cause one to miss out the path to liberationfor a period of infinite lifetimes.People can’t help but give out a feast of applause to theperson who does charity and gives donations. If that person ishungry for recognition and self-validation (maan), he will evenpick from mud, pieces of applause that people throw in and feedon them. Gnanis never ‘accept’ even a feast of thirty-twovarieties offered to them, so where is the danger of any‘sickness’ setting in?Whatever work you do, the work itself has no real value.But if there is attachment-abhorrence while doing it, it will createanother life for you after this life, and if there is no attachment-abhorrence, there is no liability for another life.There will be freedom when one does not see a single1617fault in others but sees every single fault of his own. When oneattains the vision, ‘I am bound because of my own mistakes,’one will cease to see fault in others. Therefore, only one’s visionhas to be changed. How can anyone be at fault when everyoneis wandering around bound and dictated by his or her ownkarma? Worldly interactions do not require that one should seefaults of others. The Gnani Purush also lives the worldly life but,even so, he views the world as faultless (nirdosh)!When a thief steals, he is doing so because of the effectof his karma. So what right does anyone have to call him a thief?If one sees the supreme Self in the thief, then he will not be seenas a criminal. Lord Mahavir viewed the whole world as faultless.This was because of this vision of seeing the supreme Self in all.If there is the unfolding karma of a horrible insult, and itcauses the antahkaran (the inner functioning instrument ofcollective components of the mind, intellect, chit and ego in allhuman beings) to turn red-hot from within, and if one does thepenance of ‘seeing’ it from the beginning until the end, thus notbecoming one with it, such penance will take him to liberation.True penance is that which no one else gets even a whiffof. When others come to know of your penance and consoleyou, and you accept their consolation, then they get acommission from your penance.The effect of outer circumstances first arises in the intellectwithin the antahkaran. From the intellect, it reaches the mind.If the intellect does not accept it, the mind will not be affected.But if the intellect accepts it, the mind will take over and then themind will go haywire.How can the interference of intellect stop? If we stoplistening to the intellect’s altercations, and if we insult it, theintellect will shut up. And if we respect the intellect and we‘accept’ it, then it will continue in full form!When the mind takes a turn within with an initial effect, donot proceed in that direction. When there is such twist and stress(amde chadhavu), the bliss of the Self is veiled. Then there isunhappiness followed by hurt and inner burning, followed bysuffocation, and finally worries set in. But if the root is removedbefore it sprouts, it will prevent a tree of misery!Because one loses awareness of what is beneficial anddetrimental to one’s self, the mind is utilized in any and everywhich way, and it gets out of control! This is how restlessnessof the mind increases; so who is at fault here? As long as thereis ignorance, there is ruling of the ego over the mind and for thatreason, there is no ‘control’ over the mind. After Self-realization, the realm of the Self starts, and then spiritual effort(purusharth) arises and the mind is contained.If both ‘knowing and seeing’ are present at everymoment, infinite bliss prevails. One ‘knows’ everything thathappens; one can ‘know’ of what happened in the mind, whatwords were spoken, what kind of behavior took place;however, because one does not ‘see’ who the doer is and whothe real Self is, the experience of bliss is hindered. Our focused awareness of speech, that is to say, (our)upayog of speech, is to ‘see’ ‘whose ego has been hurt by ourspeech and how it has been hurt.Why does our speech hurt others? It is not the words inthe speech that hurt the other person; it is the ego behind thespeech that ignites the burn! To hold, ‘I am right,’ is theprotection of the ego. The ego is not to be protected; the egois such that it protects itself!Not a single word should be used to make fun of others.Not a single word should be used for selfish intents or for takingadvantage of others. When there is no misuse of words – whennot a single word is used with the intent of getting respect; thatis when one’s power of speech will develop.1819fault in others but sees every single fault of his own. When oneattains the vision, ‘I am bound because of my own mistakes,’one will cease to see fault in others. Therefore, only one’s visionhas to be changed. How can anyone be at fault when everyoneis wandering around bound and dictated by his or her ownkarma? Worldly interactions do not require that one should seefaults of others. The Gnani Purush also lives the worldly life but,even so, he views the world as faultless (nirdosh)!When a thief steals, he is doing so because of the effectof his karma. So what right does anyone have to call him a thief?If one sees the supreme Self in the thief, then he will not be seenas a criminal. Lord Mahavir viewed the whole world as faultless.This was because of this vision of seeing the supreme Self in all.If there is the unfolding karma of a horrible insult, and itcauses the antahkaran (the inner functioning instrument ofcollective components of the mind, intellect, chit and ego in allhuman beings) to turn red-hot from within, and if one does thepenance of ‘seeing’ it from the beginning until the end, thus notbecoming one with it, such penance will take him to liberation.True penance is that which no one else gets even a whiffof. When others come to know of your penance and consoleyou, and you accept their consolation, then they get acommission from your penance.The effect of outer circumstances first arises in the intellectwithin the antahkaran. From the intellect, it reaches the mind.If the intellect does not accept it, the mind will not be affected.But if the intellect accepts it, the mind will take over and then themind will go haywire.How can the interference of intellect stop? If we stoplistening to the intellect’s altercations, and if we insult it, theintellect will shut up. And if we respect the intellect and we‘accept’ it, then it will continue in full form!When the mind takes a turn within with an initial effect, donot proceed in that direction. When there is such twist and stress(amde chadhavu), the bliss of the Self is veiled. Then there isunhappiness followed by hurt and inner burning, followed bysuffocation, and finally worries set in. But if the root is removedbefore it sprouts, it will prevent a tree of misery!Because one loses awareness of what is beneficial anddetrimental to one’s self, the mind is utilized in any and everywhich way, and it gets out of control! This is how restlessnessof the mind increases; so who is at fault here? As long as thereis ignorance, there is ruling of the ego over the mind and for thatreason, there is no ‘control’ over the mind. After Self-realization, the realm of the Self starts, and then spiritual effort(purusharth) arises and the mind is contained.If both ‘knowing and seeing’ are present at everymoment, infinite bliss prevails. One ‘knows’ everything thathappens; one can ‘know’ of what happened in the mind, whatwords were spoken, what kind of behavior took place;however, because one does not ‘see’ who the doer is and whothe real Self is, the experience of bliss is hindered. Our focused awareness of speech, that is to say, (our)upayog of speech, is to ‘see’ ‘whose ego has been hurt by ourspeech and how it has been hurt.Why does our speech hurt others? It is not the words inthe speech that hurt the other person; it is the ego behind thespeech that ignites the burn! To hold, ‘I am right,’ is theprotection of the ego. The ego is not to be protected; the egois such that it protects itself!Not a single word should be used to make fun of others.Not a single word should be used for selfish intents or for takingadvantage of others. When there is no misuse of words – whennot a single word is used with the intent of getting respect; thatis when one’s power of speech will develop.1819If there is the slightest feeling of, ‘He did me wrong,’ thenthe verbal interaction with that person will be such that it willcause pain. He whose speech has improved will have a betterworldly life. In this world, no one has the independent power tohurt anyone. One can never control others by means of threats.To do so is open egoism. The world bows and surrenders to theone who is without ego!Understanding is attained when our statement fits everyone.If clashes occur, you should know that a lack of understandinghas prevailed. The root cause of lack of understanding is theego, and that ego will harass you day and night like a ghost,even when there is no external reason for it! Instead, if you havethe opinion, ‘I don’t know anything,’ it will bring everything toan end.It is the ego that does good things. It is also the ego thatdoes bad things. What guarantee is there that the ego that doesgood will not turn around and start doing bad things?When the intellect hesitates with, ‘Should I do this or notdo this?’ then what should one do under such circumstances?He should ‘see’ whether the force within for ‘doing’ is greateror if the force for ‘not doing’ is greater. If the force is greatertowards ‘not doing,’ then he should side towards that. Then, ifit was meant towards ‘doing,’ then scientific circumstantialevidences (vyavasthit shakti) will change it to that side.To rush is a single fault and not to rush is double the fault.So proceed slowly at a rapid pace.To have attachment (raag) is a single fault and to becomeaverse to attachment (niraag) is double the fault. For worldlyinteractions, if one behaves with the attitude of ‘I am the Soul;it is of no concern to me,’ and does not pay his son’s tuition;it is clearly wrong. One is not to become disinterested (niraagi)there. One has to settle the situation without becoming affected.You are to please the other person; you are not tobecome attached to them. While pleasing an angry policeman,do you become attached to him?The truly intelligent person is the one who interacts in lifein a way that creates the least amount of conflict and clash athome and outside the home.Where is our greatness if anyone is afraid of us? Iffrightening anyone changes them for the better, then it might beworth it even if it causes a loss for us!No one will come to deceive us when no deceit remainswithin us. This world is nothing but our own reflection. All thisaround us is only our own photo! Only the effect of our deceit-free state can make others free of deceit! ‘It is my responsibility to get closure and satisfaction ofthose who come across me.’ Once this affirmation fits within us,then sooner or later, without any external arrangements or anyego-based efforts and with our own insight, there will definitelybe a closure with others. We have to change ourselves. We arenot to wait in a ‘queue’ until the other person changes.Today, one becomes clean and free from ego that hurtsothers but how can people suddenly forget the echoes of theego that have prevailed to this point in time? Those echoes willremain. Until those echoes end by themselves, there is no otherchoice but to wait.The mirror will reflect the image of whoever is standing infront of it. Thus, one is to become ‘clear’ like the mirror. Amirror-like clarity does not occur because of blockage of innerimpediments (atkan). And because of that, people do not getattracted toward us. Because of this atkan, other people do noteven like our true statements. And because of that, there is noemanating radiance of smile of liberation and there is tension inone’s speech!2021If there is the slightest feeling of, ‘He did me wrong,’ thenthe verbal interaction with that person will be such that it willcause pain. He whose speech has improved will have a betterworldly life. In this world, no one has the independent power tohurt anyone. One can never control others by means of threats.To do so is open egoism. The world bows and surrenders to theone who is without ego!Understanding is attained when our statement fits everyone.If clashes occur, you should know that a lack of understandinghas prevailed. The root cause of lack of understanding is theego, and that ego will harass you day and night like a ghost,even when there is no external reason for it! Instead, if you havethe opinion, ‘I don’t know anything,’ it will bring everything toan end.It is the ego that does good things. It is also the ego thatdoes bad things. What guarantee is there that the ego that doesgood will not turn around and start doing bad things?When the intellect hesitates with, ‘Should I do this or notdo this?’ then what should one do under such circumstances?He should ‘see’ whether the force within for ‘doing’ is greateror if the force for ‘not doing’ is greater. If the force is greatertowards ‘not doing,’ then he should side towards that. Then, ifit was meant towards ‘doing,’ then scientific circumstantialevidences (vyavasthit shakti) will change it to that side.To rush is a single fault and not to rush is double the fault.So proceed slowly at a rapid pace.To have attachment (raag) is a single fault and to becomeaverse to attachment (niraag) is double the fault. For worldlyinteractions, if one behaves with the attitude of ‘I am the Soul;it is of no concern to me,’ and does not pay his son’s tuition;it is clearly wrong. One is not to become disinterested (niraagi)there. One has to settle the situation without becoming affected.You are to please the other person; you are not tobecome attached to them. While pleasing an angry policeman,do you become attached to him?The truly intelligent person is the one who interacts in lifein a way that creates the least amount of conflict and clash athome and outside the home.Where is our greatness if anyone is afraid of us? Iffrightening anyone changes them for the better, then it might beworth it even if it causes a loss for us!No one will come to deceive us when no deceit remainswithin us. This world is nothing but our own reflection. All thisaround us is only our own photo! Only the effect of our deceit-free state can make others free of deceit! ‘It is my responsibility to get closure and satisfaction ofthose who come across me.’ Once this affirmation fits within us,then sooner or later, without any external arrangements or anyego-based efforts and with our own insight, there will definitelybe a closure with others. We have to change ourselves. We arenot to wait in a ‘queue’ until the other person changes.Today, one becomes clean and free from ego that hurtsothers but how can people suddenly forget the echoes of theego that have prevailed to this point in time? Those echoes willremain. Until those echoes end by themselves, there is no otherchoice but to wait.The mirror will reflect the image of whoever is standing infront of it. Thus, one is to become ‘clear’ like the mirror. Amirror-like clarity does not occur because of blockage of innerimpediments (atkan). And because of that, people do not getattracted toward us. Because of this atkan, other people do noteven like our true statements. And because of that, there is noemanating radiance of smile of liberation and there is tension inone’s speech!2021Once that attraction does occur, every single word ofsuch a person will become divine.Why have we had to suffer the wanderings for infinitelives? It is because of atkan! Because one did not have the blissof the Self, he sank into the atkan of pleasures of the flesh.These impediments can be broken down by the grace of theGnani Purush and, thereafter, by one’s own tremendous spiritualeffort (parakram is extraordinary spiritual effort). Infinite blissprevails when this happens! If the blockade is not rooted out, itwill root us out away from the Gnan and even from the ‘Gnani.’When someone’s shadow is cast on us, his disease willenter into us. No matter how beautiful the virtues of anotherperson may seem to be, after all, they are the virtues of therelative-self (prakruti) only! The virtues of prakruti will cometo an end or are subject to deformation. An Alfonso mango maylook beautiful but it will stink when it rots!There should be instant repentance whenever sexualattraction arises. And there should be the request from the pureSoul of that person for whom the attraction arose for; ‘Grant methe energy to be free from these thoughts of sexuality.’ Becauseof sexuality through thoughts, speech and acts, an account ofvengeance (veyr) is created. This account will ruin manylifetimes.Pratikraman is the process of recalling, repenting andasking for forgiveness with the avowal to not repeat the act ofaggression through thoughts, speech or action, as shown by theGnani Purush, Dadashri. At first, pratikraman will stopaggression (atikraman) and break your wrong intentions. Later,it reaches the person you have hurt, however, you are not to seewhether it reaches him or not. All this is for you only!If pratikraman is done for a tiger, the tiger will do whatwe tell it. There is no difference between a tiger and a humanbeing. Because of the change in our vibrations (that we emit dueto pratikraman), there is an effect on the tiger. As long as wehold that ‘the tiger is a savage animal,’ it will remain savage, andif in our belief and vision there is ‘the tiger is pure Soul,’ the tigeris verily a ‘pure Soul.’When our interference stops, when such vibrations stop,no one will be out there to send us any vibrations. If weinadvertently happen to send out vibrations due to old habits,they can be washed away with pratikraman; that verily ispurusharth - spiritual effort!How can the wedge of karma be fractured? ‘By settlingall files with equanimity.’ The moment you see a ‘file’ (everyoneand everything that is the non-Self), You should make a decisionof, ‘I must settle with equanimity,’ then everything will getarranged accordingly. And in case it happens to be a ‘sticky(difficult) file,’ and a settlement of that file is not done despitethis decision, then You are not liable; here ‘scientific circumstantialevidence’ is responsible.Why is a “sticky” file ‘sticky’? It is because you havemade it so. Instead of seeing the ‘sticky character’ of the stickyfile, if you see the sticky nature of your own file (your relative-self), the manner of seeing a file will change!Only after becoming the Self (purush – the Atma;enlightened), can one take a picture of the nature of the self(prakruti). How can a photo be taken with the camera of theego? For that you need the camera of the Self.The entity that gets puzzled is not the Self. The belief,‘This is mine,’ is what makes mistakes. We are to only ‘see’ theself. We are not to call it ‘good’ or ‘bad.’ Even if the prakruti(the non-Self) attempts to get stuck to You a million times, yourown supreme Self is such that it can never happen. Noexperiment or event of the universe can soil the purity of theSelf. That is who we are!2223Once that attraction does occur, every single word ofsuch a person will become divine.Why have we had to suffer the wanderings for infinitelives? It is because of atkan! Because one did not have the blissof the Self, he sank into the atkan of pleasures of the flesh.These impediments can be broken down by the grace of theGnani Purush and, thereafter, by one’s own tremendous spiritualeffort (parakram is extraordinary spiritual effort). Infinite blissprevails when this happens! If the blockade is not rooted out, itwill root us out away from the Gnan and even from the ‘Gnani.’When someone’s shadow is cast on us, his disease willenter into us. No matter how beautiful the virtues of anotherperson may seem to be, after all, they are the virtues of therelative-self (prakruti) only! The virtues of prakruti will cometo an end or are subject to deformation. An Alfonso mango maylook beautiful but it will stink when it rots!There should be instant repentance whenever sexualattraction arises. And there should be the request from the pureSoul of that person for whom the attraction arose for; ‘Grant methe energy to be free from these thoughts of sexuality.’ Becauseof sexuality through thoughts, speech and acts, an account ofvengeance (veyr) is created. This account will ruin manylifetimes.Pratikraman is the process of recalling, repenting andasking for forgiveness with the avowal to not repeat the act ofaggression through thoughts, speech or action, as shown by theGnani Purush, Dadashri. At first, pratikraman will stopaggression (atikraman) and break your wrong intentions. Later,it reaches the person you have hurt, however, you are not to seewhether it reaches him or not. All this is for you only!If pratikraman is done for a tiger, the tiger will do whatwe tell it. There is no difference between a tiger and a humanbeing. Because of the change in our vibrations (that we emit dueto pratikraman), there is an effect on the tiger. As long as wehold that ‘the tiger is a savage animal,’ it will remain savage, andif in our belief and vision there is ‘the tiger is pure Soul,’ the tigeris verily a ‘pure Soul.’When our interference stops, when such vibrations stop,no one will be out there to send us any vibrations. If weinadvertently happen to send out vibrations due to old habits,they can be washed away with pratikraman; that verily ispurusharth - spiritual effort!How can the wedge of karma be fractured? ‘By settlingall files with equanimity.’ The moment you see a ‘file’ (everyoneand everything that is the non-Self), You should make a decisionof, ‘I must settle with equanimity,’ then everything will getarranged accordingly. And in case it happens to be a ‘sticky(difficult) file,’ and a settlement of that file is not done despitethis decision, then You are not liable; here ‘scientific circumstantialevidence’ is responsible.Why is a “sticky” file ‘sticky’? It is because you havemade it so. Instead of seeing the ‘sticky character’ of the stickyfile, if you see the sticky nature of your own file (your relative-self), the manner of seeing a file will change!Only after becoming the Self (purush – the Atma;enlightened), can one take a picture of the nature of the self(prakruti). How can a photo be taken with the camera of theego? For that you need the camera of the Self.The entity that gets puzzled is not the Self. The belief,‘This is mine,’ is what makes mistakes. We are to only ‘see’ theself. We are not to call it ‘good’ or ‘bad.’ Even if the prakruti(the non-Self) attempts to get stuck to You a million times, yourown supreme Self is such that it can never happen. Noexperiment or event of the universe can soil the purity of theSelf. That is who we are!2223In order to pay off the accounts of the self (prakruti), theSelf has nothing to ‘do’ at all. Those accounts will naturally besettled on their own. The Self has to ‘keep on seeing’ whatunfolds!All losses and deficiency of the relative-self will be paidup naturally provided the ego does not interfere! The relative-self pays off its own losses by itself. Interference is created withthe belief and the approach of, ‘I am the doer’!This spiritual science of Akram Vignan is such that it canblow away all the cyclones of the whole world, but only if wemaintain steadiness with it!Jai Sat Chit Anand- Dr. Niruben AminContents[1]The Instillation of Life1The Receptacle of the Intellect (Buddhi noh Ashaya)2Buddhi’s Ashaya and Bhaav (Inner Intent)4Support for Buddhi’s Ashaya8Nature and Buddhi’s Ashaya11Buddhi’s Ashaya of the Ultimate Kind12The Doer of Pratishtha is Under External Control12Even Ego is a Natural Arrangement14Location According to Ashaya15Idol as a Result of Pratishtha17Who Contemplates on the Soul?17[2]Recording of Speech as Codes19Protection of the Ego25An Interfering Intellect Gives Rise to Clashes27[3]Karma Bondage by Signature (Endorsement)30Penance Increases the Degrees of the Knowledgeas the Self30Pratikraman of the Akram Path and the Kramic Path32The Gnani’s Pratikraman35[4]The Effect of Hurting Someone Creates Echoes36[5]Entanglements of the Worldly Life39The Amazing Web of the Doer Within39Compassion and Equanimity of the Gnani Purush40There is No Closure for Suspicion (Shanka)42Who Joins You in the Funeral Pyre?43Only Gnan Can End Suspicion45The Precise Justice of Nature46One’s Own Vibrations Create One’s Wandering47[6]The Court of Nature492425In order to pay off the accounts of the self (prakruti), theSelf has nothing to ‘do’ at all. Those accounts will naturally besettled on their own. The Self has to ‘keep on seeing’ whatunfolds!All losses and deficiency of the relative-self will be paidup naturally provided the ego does not interfere! The relative-self pays off its own losses by itself. Interference is created withthe belief and the approach of, ‘I am the doer’!This spiritual science of Akram Vignan is such that it canblow away all the cyclones of the whole world, but only if wemaintain steadiness with it!Jai Sat Chit Anand- Dr. Niruben AminContents[1]The Instillation of Life1The Receptacle of the Intellect (Buddhi noh Ashaya)2Buddhi’s Ashaya and Bhaav (Inner Intent)4Support for Buddhi’s Ashaya8Nature and Buddhi’s Ashaya11Buddhi’s Ashaya of the Ultimate Kind12The Doer of Pratishtha is Under External Control12Even Ego is a Natural Arrangement14Location According to Ashaya15Idol as a Result of Pratishtha17Who Contemplates on the Soul?17[2]Recording of Speech as Codes19Protection of the Ego25An Interfering Intellect Gives Rise to Clashes27[3]Karma Bondage by Signature (Endorsement)30Penance Increases the Degrees of the Knowledgeas the Self30Pratikraman of the Akram Path and the Kramic Path32The Gnani’s Pratikraman35[4]The Effect of Hurting Someone Creates Echoes36[5]Entanglements of the Worldly Life39The Amazing Web of the Doer Within39Compassion and Equanimity of the Gnani Purush40There is No Closure for Suspicion (Shanka)42Who Joins You in the Funeral Pyre?43Only Gnan Can End Suspicion45The Precise Justice of Nature46One’s Own Vibrations Create One’s Wandering47[6]The Court of Nature492425Counter-vibrations for Hurting Someone50Memory Event is Bondage52Repentance from the Heart54Clearing the Mistake56[7]The Self is the Light that Never Gets Stained, Even Whenthere is Oneness with the Prakruti, the Relative Self60The Test/Examination of Vyavasthit63[8]The Initial Culprit is the Intellect65The Demarcation between the Intellect and Pragnya66The Nature of Ego68Qualities of a Self-realized Being70The Chain of Cause and Effect71In the State of Non-doership, there is No Bondage72Destiny and Vyavasthit73[9]Beginning of Kashay76Can There Be Kashays in Favorable Circumstances?78The Foundation of Kashay is Ignorance80The Unique Beauty of Akram Vignan80Conviction, Awareness, Experience of the Self81The Illusion – Samipyabhaav81[10]Pleasure-seeking Versus Attraction83Bhaavak and His Colors86Nirakud Anand – Bliss of a State Free of Agitation andBewilderment87Echoes of the Ego in the Worldly Life89The Results (Effects) are Not Under Your Control90[11]The Seer-Knower92The Right Intellect and Pragnya96The Gnani’s Way of Looking at the Antahkaran98The Problem of Wavering in Decision-making99Raag and Niraag100The Senses, Mind, Intellect, Ego and then the Self101Concentration Comes with Interest104[12]Attributes of the Non-self are Unreliable106The Consequences of Viradhana of the Gnani Purush107Key to Pleasing the Gnani108[13]Spiritual Development through Conflicts: Not Reacting toConflict Increases the Energies Within110[14]Seeing the Circumstances as They Are118Take the Beating and Be Free120The Flawless World121Viewing the Mistakes through Upayog123[15]Upayog: Levels of Awareness124Pure Awareness in Worldly Life126Focused Awareness is Upayog128[16]Understanding Moha, the Illusion133[17]The Science of Karma139Equanimity is Not Reacting to the UnfoldingKarma Effect140The Internal Evidences Create the Result142The Difference between Bhaav and Desire143Do You Get Upset if You Hear InsultsRecorded on a Tape?145No Binding of Karma while Doing Karma145Karma is Not the Obstacle to Liberation146[18]Sahaj Prakruti148More Details on Naturalness, Sahajata150From Sahaj to Asahaj to Sahaj151An Effortless State152Sahaj Means the Effortless State153Analysis of the Prakruti1542627Counter-vibrations for Hurting Someone50Memory Event is Bondage52Repentance from the Heart54Clearing the Mistake56[7]The Self is the Light that Never Gets Stained, Even Whenthere is Oneness with the Prakruti, the Relative Self60The Test/Examination of Vyavasthit63[8]The Initial Culprit is the Intellect65The Demarcation between the Intellect and Pragnya66The Nature of Ego68Qualities of a Self-realized Being70The Chain of Cause and Effect71In the State of Non-doership, there is No Bondage72Destiny and Vyavasthit73[9]Beginning of Kashay76Can There Be Kashays in Favorable Circumstances?78The Foundation of Kashay is Ignorance80The Unique Beauty of Akram Vignan80Conviction, Awareness, Experience of the Self81The Illusion – Samipyabhaav81[10]Pleasure-seeking Versus Attraction83Bhaavak and His Colors86Nirakud Anand – Bliss of a State Free of Agitation andBewilderment87Echoes of the Ego in the Worldly Life89The Results (Effects) are Not Under Your Control90[11]The Seer-Knower92The Right Intellect and Pragnya96The Gnani’s Way of Looking at the Antahkaran98The Problem of Wavering in Decision-making99Raag and Niraag100The Senses, Mind, Intellect, Ego and then the Self101Concentration Comes with Interest104[12]Attributes of the Non-self are Unreliable106The Consequences of Viradhana of the Gnani Purush107Key to Pleasing the Gnani108[13]Spiritual Development through Conflicts: Not Reacting toConflict Increases the Energies Within110[14]Seeing the Circumstances as They Are118Take the Beating and Be Free120The Flawless World121Viewing the Mistakes through Upayog123[15]Upayog: Levels of Awareness124Pure Awareness in Worldly Life126Focused Awareness is Upayog128[16]Understanding Moha, the Illusion133[17]The Science of Karma139Equanimity is Not Reacting to the UnfoldingKarma Effect140The Internal Evidences Create the Result142The Difference between Bhaav and Desire143Do You Get Upset if You Hear InsultsRecorded on a Tape?145No Binding of Karma while Doing Karma145Karma is Not the Obstacle to Liberation146[18]Sahaj Prakruti148More Details on Naturalness, Sahajata150From Sahaj to Asahaj to Sahaj151An Effortless State152Sahaj Means the Effortless State153Analysis of the Prakruti1542627Control of Prakruti is with Vyavasthit156The Hassle and Difficulties from the Prakruti156Free Yourself from All Your Past Life Agreements159[19]Settling a File with Equanimity161Do Your Duties without the Intent to Hurt163[20]The Flawless Vision165[21]Equanimity with Sticky Files172Speech, Pleasant or Unpleasant, is an Effect175Speech Energy: Use and Abuse176The Gnani Purush Becomes a Disciple177The Worldly Life is a Drama178[22]Where is the Pain in this Life for You?180Death and Eternal Life184Vyavasthit and Life after Life Account188Does One Take Precautions or Are TheyJust Happening?189[23]What is an Intelligent Person Like?191Do Not Interfere, Just ‘See’195[24]The Weakness of Anger197A Life without Conflict is the Path to Moksha198Kashays Bind Karma for Next Life200When the Illusion that Deludes (Dekhat Bhooli) Ends,Suffering Ends202Charity without Inner Beggary for Fame206The Phenomenal Value of Pratikraman207Getting the Work Done Through the Prakruti208The Root Cause of Separation Due to Differencesin Opinion (Matbhed)211Do You Take Adjustment or do PratikramanWhen there is No Acceptable Solution?212The Intent to Settle with Equanimity and Pratikraman217One More Life to Complete Liberation (Ekavtari) in theAkram Path218[25]This is Worth Knowing and Worshipping220To Dwell as the Self222[26]The Effect of Karma Dissipated by Talking withChandulal226Samayik in Front of the Mirror228Talking with and Correcting the Self in the Mirror229After Self-realization, One is Neither a Femalenor a Male232The Influence of Wrong Company233[27]Atkan: Major Blockade in the Path of Liberation235The Gnani Purush Removes Atkan236Atkan is so Deluding that it Blocks Bliss and Liberation238Atkan versus Heavy Karma239Purusharth and Parakram240Extraordinary Inner War against Atkan243The Biggest Atkan is that of Sex246Being Free from the Major Blockade (Atkan) ofSexuality247Factory of Vengeance250Opinions Obstruct the Bliss Within252Do Penance without Paying a Commission255Premature Fruition of Karmas – Udirana256Parakram– Extraordinary Spiritual Effort261[28]The Secret of the Bliss of the Self264Sit on the Everest of Awareness and ‘See’266The Great Importance of the Original Purush271Go Higher Within to Become the Supreme Self272Moksha Swaroop has Come in Front of You273* * * * *2829Control of Prakruti is with Vyavasthit156The Hassle and Difficulties from the Prakruti156Free Yourself from All Your Past Life Agreements159[19]Settling a File with Equanimity161Do Your Duties without the Intent to Hurt163[20]The Flawless Vision165[21]Equanimity with Sticky Files172Speech, Pleasant or Unpleasant, is an Effect175Speech Energy: Use and Abuse176The Gnani Purush Becomes a Disciple177The Worldly Life is a Drama178[22]Where is the Pain in this Life for You?180Death and Eternal Life184Vyavasthit and Life after Life Account188Does One Take Precautions or Are TheyJust Happening?189[23]What is an Intelligent Person Like?191Do Not Interfere, Just ‘See’195[24]The Weakness of Anger197A Life without Conflict is the Path to Moksha198Kashays Bind Karma for Next Life200When the Illusion that Deludes (Dekhat Bhooli) Ends,Suffering Ends202Charity without Inner Beggary for Fame206The Phenomenal Value of Pratikraman207Getting the Work Done Through the Prakruti208The Root Cause of Separation Due to Differencesin Opinion (Matbhed)211Do You Take Adjustment or do PratikramanWhen there is No Acceptable Solution?212The Intent to Settle with Equanimity and Pratikraman217One More Life to Complete Liberation (Ekavtari) in theAkram Path218[25]This is Worth Knowing and Worshipping220To Dwell as the Self222[26]The Effect of Karma Dissipated by Talking withChandulal226Samayik in Front of the Mirror228Talking with and Correcting the Self in the Mirror229After Self-realization, One is Neither a Femalenor a Male232The Influence of Wrong Company233[27]Atkan: Major Blockade in the Path of Liberation235The Gnani Purush Removes Atkan236Atkan is so Deluding that it Blocks Bliss and Liberation238Atkan versus Heavy Karma239Purusharth and Parakram240Extraordinary Inner War against Atkan243The Biggest Atkan is that of Sex246Being Free from the Major Blockade (Atkan) ofSexuality247Factory of Vengeance250Opinions Obstruct the Bliss Within252Do Penance without Paying a Commission255Premature Fruition of Karmas – Udirana256Parakram– Extraordinary Spiritual Effort261[28]The Secret of the Bliss of the Self264Sit on the Everest of Awareness and ‘See’266The Great Importance of the Original Purush271Go Higher Within to Become the Supreme Self272Moksha Swaroop has Come in Front of You273* * * * *282912Aptavani-6Questioner: So it (pratishthit atma – the relative-self oftoday) continues to function and does everything according tothe way the pratishtha was done?Dadashri: Yes, it is according to the pratishtha. Just asan idol continues to give benefits once pratishtha is done in it,so does this pratishtha; and due to the results of this pratishtha,children study well and excel in their academics.The Receptacle of the Intellect(Buddhi noh Ashaya)Questioner: Is one’s own spiritual effort (purusharth) nota part of this?Dadashri: No, one continues to instill life (pratishtha)and the idol (new self) begins to form, then it starts taking shapeaccording to the ‘design’ he has brought forth in his receptacleof intellect (buddhi’s ashaya). What is meant by receptacle ofintellect? One says, ‘All I want is to do well in my studies.’ Ifthat is the design of the receptacle of his intellect, so will be thefruit for him. Another may have the design that he wants toprogress in his devotion (bhakti), and so his reward will bejust that.If it is in one’s receptacle of intellect carried forward fromthe past that he would to like to live only in a hut, then even ifhe has million rupees, he will not feel comfortable living inanything other than a hut. And the one who has in his receptacle(ashaya) that he would like to live in a bungalow, then despitea debt of five million, he will like living only in a bungalow. Andthe poor disciples and devotees have it such that ‘we will makedo with anything that comes along’ and so they will get anythingas a result.Questioner: So does one’s intent (bhaav) work here?Dadashri: No, it is the receptacle of the intellect; oneAptavani 6[1]The Instillation of LifeThe moment one believes or says ‘I am Chandulal,’ ‘I didthis,’ ‘I did that,’ it immediately gives rise to a new form-idol(murti) of a causal body. This is the instillation of life (pratishtha).Then this new ‘idol’ gives its effects and results. Just as weinvoke life in a stone idol which gives its results, in the samemanner we are invoking new life into this body which gives itsresults. The energized non-Self complex of thoughts, speech andacts (pratishthit atma) forms precisely according to theinstillation of life (pratishtha). This ‘old’ pratishthit atma instillsnew life (new pratishtha). The ‘Chandulal’ (reader should inserthis or her name here throughout the book) of today is thepratishthit atma of the past life, which, in turn, continues to dopratishtha like, ‘I am Chandulal. I am his uncle, etc.,’ and soeverything starts all over again. And when you say ‘I am pureSoul, I am Shuddhatma,’ the pratishtha stops. That is why‘we’ say that after attaining the state of Self-realization(Shuddhatma), new karma ceases.Questioner: No one has given such a clear explanation.Dadashri: You will find a solution if you have a clearexplanation; knowledge of the Soul or Self (Atma Gnan) isneeded. Knowledge of the Self is lacking; its presence givessuch clarity that one can see everything as it is. That is why ‘we’have given the new term ‘pratishthit atma’ which nobody hasdone before.12Aptavani-6Questioner: So it (pratishthit atma – the relative-self oftoday) continues to function and does everything according tothe way the pratishtha was done?Dadashri: Yes, it is according to the pratishtha. Just asan idol continues to give benefits once pratishtha is done in it,so does this pratishtha; and due to the results of this pratishtha,children study well and excel in their academics.The Receptacle of the Intellect(Buddhi noh Ashaya)Questioner: Is one’s own spiritual effort (purusharth) nota part of this?Dadashri: No, one continues to instill life (pratishtha)and the idol (new self) begins to form, then it starts taking shapeaccording to the ‘design’ he has brought forth in his receptacleof intellect (buddhi’s ashaya). What is meant by receptacle ofintellect? One says, ‘All I want is to do well in my studies.’ Ifthat is the design of the receptacle of his intellect, so will be thefruit for him. Another may have the design that he wants toprogress in his devotion (bhakti), and so his reward will bejust that.If it is in one’s receptacle of intellect carried forward fromthe past that he would to like to live only in a hut, then even ifhe has million rupees, he will not feel comfortable living inanything other than a hut. And the one who has in his receptacle(ashaya) that he would like to live in a bungalow, then despitea debt of five million, he will like living only in a bungalow. Andthe poor disciples and devotees have it such that ‘we will makedo with anything that comes along’ and so they will get anythingas a result.Questioner: So does one’s intent (bhaav) work here?Dadashri: No, it is the receptacle of the intellect; oneAptavani 6[1]The Instillation of LifeThe moment one believes or says ‘I am Chandulal,’ ‘I didthis,’ ‘I did that,’ it immediately gives rise to a new form-idol(murti) of a causal body. This is the instillation of life (pratishtha).Then this new ‘idol’ gives its effects and results. Just as weinvoke life in a stone idol which gives its results, in the samemanner we are invoking new life into this body which gives itsresults. The energized non-Self complex of thoughts, speech andacts (pratishthit atma) forms precisely according to theinstillation of life (pratishtha). This ‘old’ pratishthit atma instillsnew life (new pratishtha). The ‘Chandulal’ (reader should inserthis or her name here throughout the book) of today is thepratishthit atma of the past life, which, in turn, continues to dopratishtha like, ‘I am Chandulal. I am his uncle, etc.,’ and soeverything starts all over again. And when you say ‘I am pureSoul, I am Shuddhatma,’ the pratishtha stops. That is why‘we’ say that after attaining the state of Self-realization(Shuddhatma), new karma ceases.Questioner: No one has given such a clear explanation.Dadashri: You will find a solution if you have a clearexplanation; knowledge of the Soul or Self (Atma Gnan) isneeded. Knowledge of the Self is lacking; its presence givessuch clarity that one can see everything as it is. That is why ‘we’have given the new term ‘pratishthit atma’ which nobody hasdone before.Aptavani-634Aptavani-6does not have to make or do the intent. Everything is alreadysettled within according to the receptacle of the intellect. He getsthe ‘idol’ ready through pratishtha, ‘I am Chandulal,’ and theneverything is settled according to what is carried in the receptacleof the intellect.Questioner: ‘I cannot do without a bungalow,’ is thereceptacle of the intellect. So where is the instillation of life(pratishtha) in this?Dadashri: The pratishtha occurs automatically when onesays, ‘I am Chandulal. I did all this. I am her father-in-law. I amhis uncle.’ In this manner, an empty container (khokhu) is formed.Then what kinds of intents (bhaavs) occur? The answer iseverything is ‘sketched out’ according to the receptacle of theintellect. Thereafter, internal changes occur according to thecontents of the receptacle of the intellect.Questioner: Who does the pratishtha?Dadashri: It is the ego that says, ‘I am this…I amChandulal for sure, and this is my uncle.’Questioner: One man drinks alcohol in the bars, anotherworships the Lord in the temple. What is all that?Dadashri: One drinks because he had done deep innerintent (bhaav) in the past life, of, ‘I cannot do without a drink.’So he drinks alcohol and he cannot quit the habit. He is notdoing the pratishtha (the instillation of life) but while speaking,whatever is the intent is what gets ‘printed’ in the receptacle ofthe intellect. It is very important to understand the receptacle ofintellect. For all of us here in Akram Vignan, both (newpratishtha and buddhi noh ashaya) come to a stop; nothingnew is created. In Akram Vignan there is no new pratishthaanymore.Questioner: Dada, please explain buddhi’s ashaya inmore detail.Dadashri: The receptacle of the intellect (buddhi’sashaya) is when one person says, ‘I only want to make a livingthrough stealing and black market.’ Another says, ‘I never wantto steal under any circumstances.’ Another one says, ‘I want toenjoy such and such (be in a remote place),’ and so it will makea solitary place ready for him in order for him to enjoy. Meritand demerit karma (punya and paap) are at work in all this.One will receive all that is needed to enjoy according to thewishes he has made. He will even receive things he did not evenimagine, simply because that was in his receptacle of the intellect(buddhi’s ashaya). And when one has accumulated merit karma(punya), no one will be able to catch him when he steals. Nomatter how many traps they set for him or how vigilant everyoneremains, he will not be caught. And when his merit karma (punya)comes to an end, he will be caught easily. Even a little child willbe able to tell that he is doing something wrong.Buddhi’s Ashaya and Bhaav (Inner Intent)Questioner: So when he makes a decision about whathe wants to enjoy, is it the buddhi’s ashaya (the receptacle ofthe intellect) that is at work?Dadashri: Yes, it works according to buddhi’s ashaya.Whenever one makes an intent (bhaav) to enjoy something, hewill have to enjoy it. Even if it is beyond his imagination, he willhave to go through it, suffer or enjoy, providing he made theintent (bhaav) to do so. This is because in addition to buddhi’sashaya, there is the support of his merit karma (punya).So with the pratishtha of ‘I am this,’ and ‘this is mine,’an entire body is created for one lifetime. Then, while doing theintent (bhaav), whatever was in his buddhi’s ashaya is exactlywhat gets ‘printed’ (gets recorded to give effect). Everyone hasa receptacle of intellect (buddhi’s ashaya).Questioner: Is buddhi’s ashaya constantly changing?Aptavani-634Aptavani-6does not have to make or do the intent. Everything is alreadysettled within according to the receptacle of the intellect. He getsthe ‘idol’ ready through pratishtha, ‘I am Chandulal,’ and theneverything is settled according to what is carried in the receptacleof the intellect.Questioner: ‘I cannot do without a bungalow,’ is thereceptacle of the intellect. So where is the instillation of life(pratishtha) in this?Dadashri: The pratishtha occurs automatically when onesays, ‘I am Chandulal. I did all this. I am her father-in-law. I amhis uncle.’ In this manner, an empty container (khokhu) is formed.Then what kinds of intents (bhaavs) occur? The answer iseverything is ‘sketched out’ according to the receptacle of theintellect. Thereafter, internal changes occur according to thecontents of the receptacle of the intellect.Questioner: Who does the pratishtha?Dadashri: It is the ego that says, ‘I am this…I amChandulal for sure, and this is my uncle.’Questioner: One man drinks alcohol in the bars, anotherworships the Lord in the temple. What is all that?Dadashri: One drinks because he had done deep innerintent (bhaav) in the past life, of, ‘I cannot do without a drink.’So he drinks alcohol and he cannot quit the habit. He is notdoing the pratishtha (the instillation of life) but while speaking,whatever is the intent is what gets ‘printed’ in the receptacle ofthe intellect. It is very important to understand the receptacle ofintellect. For all of us here in Akram Vignan, both (newpratishtha and buddhi noh ashaya) come to a stop; nothingnew is created. In Akram Vignan there is no new pratishthaanymore.Questioner: Dada, please explain buddhi’s ashaya inmore detail.Dadashri: The receptacle of the intellect (buddhi’sashaya) is when one person says, ‘I only want to make a livingthrough stealing and black market.’ Another says, ‘I never wantto steal under any circumstances.’ Another one says, ‘I want toenjoy such and such (be in a remote place),’ and so it will makea solitary place ready for him in order for him to enjoy. Meritand demerit karma (punya and paap) are at work in all this.One will receive all that is needed to enjoy according to thewishes he has made. He will even receive things he did not evenimagine, simply because that was in his receptacle of the intellect(buddhi’s ashaya). And when one has accumulated merit karma(punya), no one will be able to catch him when he steals. Nomatter how many traps they set for him or how vigilant everyoneremains, he will not be caught. And when his merit karma (punya)comes to an end, he will be caught easily. Even a little child willbe able to tell that he is doing something wrong.Buddhi’s Ashaya and Bhaav (Inner Intent)Questioner: So when he makes a decision about whathe wants to enjoy, is it the buddhi’s ashaya (the receptacle ofthe intellect) that is at work?Dadashri: Yes, it works according to buddhi’s ashaya.Whenever one makes an intent (bhaav) to enjoy something, hewill have to enjoy it. Even if it is beyond his imagination, he willhave to go through it, suffer or enjoy, providing he made theintent (bhaav) to do so. This is because in addition to buddhi’sashaya, there is the support of his merit karma (punya).So with the pratishtha of ‘I am this,’ and ‘this is mine,’an entire body is created for one lifetime. Then, while doing theintent (bhaav), whatever was in his buddhi’s ashaya is exactlywhat gets ‘printed’ (gets recorded to give effect). Everyone hasa receptacle of intellect (buddhi’s ashaya).Questioner: Is buddhi’s ashaya constantly changing?Aptavani-656Aptavani-6Dadashri: Yes. As it changes, the imprints in the causalbody are being recorded accordingly.Questioner: What is the difference between intent (bhaav)and receptacle of intellect (buddhi’s ashaya)?Dadashri: Bhaav is like seeing through colored glasses.Then despite having good eyes, whatever one sees throughthose eye glasses is what we call bhaav. Then he acts accordingto those bhaav—intents. It is on this that the entire worldly lifearises.Questioner: If what he sees through the ‘glasses’ is theintent (bhaav), then are the ‘eye-glasses’ (dravya karma ) aneffect of previously caused karma?Dadashri: Yes, the glass is dravya karma. That is whathas entangled you. Everyone’s glasses are different. Everyone’seffect karma (dravya karma) is different. Dravya karma isdischarge karma or ‘effect’ karma. Bhaav karma is chargekarma or cause karma. People do not understand the differencebetween the two because they do not understand that the effectkarma has the cause karma along with it. This is due to the‘glasses’ that are instantly on when one says, ‘I am Chandulal.’People consider that the effects in front of them are the resultsof the causes they see. Dravya karma (effect) people see; theybelieve it to be bhaav karma and the fruit of it they call dravyakarma. When one becomes angry due to bhaav karma, theybelieve that to be dravya karma. But they only see with the‘colored glasses.’This matter of dravya karma is worth understanding. Thematter of the receptacle of intellect is a separate issue.Questioner: But what is the difference between buddhi’sashaya (the receptacle of the intellect) and bhaav (inner intent)?Dadashri: Everyone has bhaav karma but buddhi’sashaya is different for everyone and it is dependent on location(kshetra). What one sees through the glasses of, ‘I am Chandulal,’is called the bhaav. Thereafter, the receptacle of the intellect isformed depending on the location and time (kshetra and kaadrespectively). Buddhi’s ashaya is based on this bhaav. But the glasses by themselves are not of much value. Theway these glasses arise is based on whatever you do in this life.When you do things to make others happy, the glasses are clearand pure and thus you can see well. And if your actions causeunhappiness to others, the glasses will be dirty and you will notbe able to see the right things, and so you will have to experiencegreat misery. So it all depends on what one does according tothese glasses. One has to use the same glasses his whole life. What is the root of all this? The answer is that onealready has the Gnan, the original knowledge within, but he hasthese ‘glasses’ over his Gnan and so he has to look through theglasses and do everything. This is like the blinders they put onbullocks. If there is a little gap in the blinders, then whatever thebullocks see through it causes them worries and suffering (upadhi)due to external causes. One receives everything according to hisreceptacle of intellect (ashaya). If one understands his ashaya,then it is more than enough. Do you understand this buddhi’sashaya?Questioner: Where one decides what kind of worldlyinteractions he wants, is there a receptacle of intellect (buddhi’sashaya) in the decision he makes?Dadashri: When one keeps looking for things that willgive him pleasure, he starts believing that there is pleasure inthose objects. Then he makes a bhaav – decides through intellect– that he can do without a bungalow and that he can get by witha small hut. So, in his next life he will get a hut to live in. Doeseveryone not have different homes that they like, and do theynot sleep soundly in them?Aptavani-656Aptavani-6Dadashri: Yes. As it changes, the imprints in the causalbody are being recorded accordingly.Questioner: What is the difference between intent (bhaav)and receptacle of intellect (buddhi’s ashaya)?Dadashri: Bhaav is like seeing through colored glasses.Then despite having good eyes, whatever one sees throughthose eye glasses is what we call bhaav. Then he acts accordingto those bhaav—intents. It is on this that the entire worldly lifearises.Questioner: If what he sees through the ‘glasses’ is theintent (bhaav), then are the ‘eye-glasses’ (dravya karma ) aneffect of previously caused karma?Dadashri: Yes, the glass is dravya karma. That is whathas entangled you. Everyone’s glasses are different. Everyone’seffect karma (dravya karma) is different. Dravya karma isdischarge karma or ‘effect’ karma. Bhaav karma is chargekarma or cause karma. People do not understand the differencebetween the two because they do not understand that the effectkarma has the cause karma along with it. This is due to the‘glasses’ that are instantly on when one says, ‘I am Chandulal.’People consider that the effects in front of them are the resultsof the causes they see. Dravya karma (effect) people see; theybelieve it to be bhaav karma and the fruit of it they call dravyakarma. When one becomes angry due to bhaav karma, theybelieve that to be dravya karma. But they only see with the‘colored glasses.’This matter of dravya karma is worth understanding. Thematter of the receptacle of intellect is a separate issue.Questioner: But what is the difference between buddhi’sashaya (the receptacle of the intellect) and bhaav (inner intent)?Dadashri: Everyone has bhaav karma but buddhi’sashaya is different for everyone and it is dependent on location(kshetra). What one sees through the glasses of, ‘I am Chandulal,’is called the bhaav. Thereafter, the receptacle of the intellect isformed depending on the location and time (kshetra and kaadrespectively). Buddhi’s ashaya is based on this bhaav. But the glasses by themselves are not of much value. Theway these glasses arise is based on whatever you do in this life.When you do things to make others happy, the glasses are clearand pure and thus you can see well. And if your actions causeunhappiness to others, the glasses will be dirty and you will notbe able to see the right things, and so you will have to experiencegreat misery. So it all depends on what one does according tothese glasses. One has to use the same glasses his whole life. What is the root of all this? The answer is that onealready has the Gnan, the original knowledge within, but he hasthese ‘glasses’ over his Gnan and so he has to look through theglasses and do everything. This is like the blinders they put onbullocks. If there is a little gap in the blinders, then whatever thebullocks see through it causes them worries and suffering (upadhi)due to external causes. One receives everything according to hisreceptacle of intellect (ashaya). If one understands his ashaya,then it is more than enough. Do you understand this buddhi’sashaya?Questioner: Where one decides what kind of worldlyinteractions he wants, is there a receptacle of intellect (buddhi’sashaya) in the decision he makes?Dadashri: When one keeps looking for things that willgive him pleasure, he starts believing that there is pleasure inthose objects. Then he makes a bhaav – decides through intellect– that he can do without a bungalow and that he can get by witha small hut. So, in his next life he will get a hut to live in. Doeseveryone not have different homes that they like, and do theynot sleep soundly in them?Aptavani-678Aptavani-6activity of one’s chit (chintavan) from the past life? (Chit – thesubtle component of vision and knowledge in the inner functioninginstrument called antahkaran).Dadashri: Not chintavan; it is the ashaya – buddhi’sashaya – the intellect’s intention. This life is the fruit of buddhi’sashaya from the past life. He will meet up with a speculator ifthat was in his buddhi’s ashaya. The moment he steps out ofhis house, he will meet up with someone who bets on horses.Even if he decides he does not want to go to the horse racesbefore leaving his home, he will end up going there. That isbuddhi’s ashaya.From your buddhi’s ashaya of your past life, you willknow that in this life you are not going to be influenced by thestock market or that you are not likely to meet a rogue.Support for Buddhi’s AshayaAll of this that is in front of you is dependent on buddhi’sashaya, which is dependent on physical matter (dravya), location(kshetra), time (kaad) and vision through the belief of ‘I amChandulal’ (bhaav – intent). There is no doer-ship of the Selfin it. One believes that one is the doer and that truly is theillusion. This illusion binds karma over and over again. This illusionis never dispelled. From a seed to a tree, and from a tree to aseed, this cycle continues relentlessly. Once the seed isdestroyed, the tree will not grow again. The ego is the seed.Destroy the ego. Eat the fruit that has come, but destroy theseed. That is why ‘we’ say, ‘Go through, suffer or enjoy the‘file’ that comes your way and settle everything with equanimity.’Eat the pulp of the mango and destroy its seed. The ‘pulp’ ofthe mango is the receptacle of the intellect – buddhi’s ashaya.You cannot do anything in that; you will have to eat it. But whileeating, do not say, ‘This is good,’ or ‘This is bad.’ Settleeverything with equanimity.Questioner: Yes, they do.Dadashri: Do they fret all night long as to, ‘Why did heget that and I got this?’ No, they don’t. Why are they contentwith what they have? It is because their buddhi’s ashaya is, ‘Ionly feel comfortable in my home and in my own bed.’ Then itdoes not even matter if it is just a hut. You may comment onhow his bed sags but he will tell you, ‘I can fall asleep only inthis bed; I cannot sleep in a bungalow.’ If you were to feedgourmet meals every day to a person living in primitive areas, hewill not be satisfied. He will feel trapped there and will run awayafter a few days.Many people wear expensive clothes even when theycannot afford them, and many, despite being very rich, wearworn out clothes…that is buddhi’s ashaya.A child will like only his father and mother even if theytreat him badly. The father may not be on talking terms with hisson all his life, but when he dies, he leaves everything to his sonin his will. He leaves everything to his son even though his nephewtook care of him all along. That is called buddhi’s ashaya.Even Dada’s son and daughter died in their infancy. Hisbuddhi’s ashaya was, ‘Why such hassle…why such bother?’ Ifa person has in his ashaya, ‘I will not work for anyone,’ he willnot have to work under anyone. Therefore, everything happensaccording to buddhi’s ashaya.Questioner: So whatever the worldly interaction, whateverthe worldly evidence (nimit), living or non-living, whatevercircumstances that come together, is the ashaya working behindall that?Dadashri: Nothing comes together without buddhi’sashaya.Questioner: Now is buddhi’s ashaya the result of theAptavani-678Aptavani-6activity of one’s chit (chintavan) from the past life? (Chit – thesubtle component of vision and knowledge in the inner functioninginstrument called antahkaran).Dadashri: Not chintavan; it is the ashaya – buddhi’sashaya – the intellect’s intention. This life is the fruit of buddhi’sashaya from the past life. He will meet up with a speculator ifthat was in his buddhi’s ashaya. The moment he steps out ofhis house, he will meet up with someone who bets on horses.Even if he decides he does not want to go to the horse racesbefore leaving his home, he will end up going there. That isbuddhi’s ashaya.From your buddhi’s ashaya of your past life, you willknow that in this life you are not going to be influenced by thestock market or that you are not likely to meet a rogue.Support for Buddhi’s AshayaAll of this that is in front of you is dependent on buddhi’sashaya, which is dependent on physical matter (dravya), location(kshetra), time (kaad) and vision through the belief of ‘I amChandulal’ (bhaav – intent). There is no doer-ship of the Selfin it. One believes that one is the doer and that truly is theillusion. This illusion binds karma over and over again. This illusionis never dispelled. From a seed to a tree, and from a tree to aseed, this cycle continues relentlessly. Once the seed isdestroyed, the tree will not grow again. The ego is the seed.Destroy the ego. Eat the fruit that has come, but destroy theseed. That is why ‘we’ say, ‘Go through, suffer or enjoy the‘file’ that comes your way and settle everything with equanimity.’Eat the pulp of the mango and destroy its seed. The ‘pulp’ ofthe mango is the receptacle of the intellect – buddhi’s ashaya.You cannot do anything in that; you will have to eat it. But whileeating, do not say, ‘This is good,’ or ‘This is bad.’ Settleeverything with equanimity.Questioner: Yes, they do.Dadashri: Do they fret all night long as to, ‘Why did heget that and I got this?’ No, they don’t. Why are they contentwith what they have? It is because their buddhi’s ashaya is, ‘Ionly feel comfortable in my home and in my own bed.’ Then itdoes not even matter if it is just a hut. You may comment onhow his bed sags but he will tell you, ‘I can fall asleep only inthis bed; I cannot sleep in a bungalow.’ If you were to feedgourmet meals every day to a person living in primitive areas, hewill not be satisfied. He will feel trapped there and will run awayafter a few days.Many people wear expensive clothes even when theycannot afford them, and many, despite being very rich, wearworn out clothes…that is buddhi’s ashaya.A child will like only his father and mother even if theytreat him badly. The father may not be on talking terms with hisson all his life, but when he dies, he leaves everything to his sonin his will. He leaves everything to his son even though his nephewtook care of him all along. That is called buddhi’s ashaya.Even Dada’s son and daughter died in their infancy. Hisbuddhi’s ashaya was, ‘Why such hassle…why such bother?’ Ifa person has in his ashaya, ‘I will not work for anyone,’ he willnot have to work under anyone. Therefore, everything happensaccording to buddhi’s ashaya.Questioner: So whatever the worldly interaction, whateverthe worldly evidence (nimit), living or non-living, whatevercircumstances that come together, is the ashaya working behindall that?Dadashri: Nothing comes together without buddhi’sashaya.Questioner: Now is buddhi’s ashaya the result of theAptavani-6910Aptavani-6People say that ‘Atma did vibhaav – bhaav that is externaland not of the Self;’ that it imagined that (it did the kalpana).Allya! If it did have imagination (kalpana), then it would alwayshave a habit of doing so. That is why ‘we’ say that scientificcircumstantial evidences came together, giving rise to the bhaavthat leads to the non-Self (vibhaav). ‘Scientific’ means mysterious(guhya). What does ‘mysterious’ mean? It means that all this(the worldly life) arose after the coming together of dravya,kshetra, kaad and bhaav. The bhaav that occurs with theglasses of, ‘I am Chandulal,’ is vibhaav and that is calledbhaav karma. ‘We’ call that the arising of extra results (visheshparinaam).The coming together of two eternal elements (vastu) givesrise to an additional new result (vishesh parinaam), but all thewhile both the eternal elements retain their original quality andintrinsic property and function (guna-dharma). As long as youdo not come face-to-face with the event of (setting eyes upon)nice juicy cucumbers, is any bhaav for them likely to arise withinyou? But when it does, it gives rise to, ‘These cucumbers are sogood!’ (vishesh parinaam). But is anything likely to happen ifyou don’t see them? Someone may ask, ‘What if we find asolitary place to put everyone where there will be no interactions?’But that will not work. What has already been established, whateverinstillation of life (pratishtha) has been done already, will giveresult without fail and, in the process, one will not refrain frommaking a new pratishtha. It may not be the same, it may becompletely different, but one will not be free from additional newresults (vishesh parinaam). When one attains knowledge ofone’s real Self (Self-realization), he will find the bliss (anand) heis searching for; the vision changes, it becomes pure (shuddha)and consequently vishesh parinaam will arise no more.The reality is that ‘pure knowledge’ (shuddha gnan) isthe Self (Atma), and auspicious or good (shubha), inauspiciousor bad (ashubha) and impure (ashuddha) gnan is the livingentity (jiva). As long as one dwells in the knowledge of good-bad, one is a mortal (jivaatma), one who is unaware of reality(moodhatma). When one attains right vision (samkit), hebecomes Shuddhatma—pure Soul. First, there is the conviction(pratiti) of ‘I am pure Soul (Shuddhatma).’ One cannot becomeShuddhatma just like that; first the conviction has to be there.Then the Gnan arises according to that conviction, and the conduct(vartan) arises according to the Gnan. First, there was a deludedconviction (mithya pratiti), which leads to deluded knowledge(mithya gnan) and hence deluded conduct (mithya vartan).However, in the conduct that automatically follows gnan(knowledge) one does not have to do anything. When deludedfaith (mithya shraddha) and deluded gnan come together, thena corresponding conduct will automatically follow. For all this tohappen, no one has to do anything, yet one claims to be thedoer and that is the ego. If one believes there is fun and happinessin being a bricklayer, he will become a bricklayer. Then, as heattains the conviction, he attains the knowledge of laying bricks.When that knowledge and faith come together, his conduct willimmediately result in bricklaying. He just lays the bricks, oneby one, and they stick. He will not have to examine everybrick in the process.So everything comes together according to one’s buddhi’sashaya. No one has to do anything. If stealing is in the buddhi’sashaya and there is merit karma behind it, then everything willcome together for one to steal. No matter how many illegalactivities he is involved in, and whether thousands of criminalinvestigators are after him, he will not be exposed if his karmicfruition is that of merit karma. And when his demerit karmacomes into fruition, he will be caught easily. What a naturalarrangement this is! It is really his merit karma at work, but hearrogantly thinks, ‘Who can catch me?’ He continues to havesuch ego. All bets will be off when his demerit karma arises!All this is run by merit karma (punya). Who gives youAptavani-6910Aptavani-6People say that ‘Atma did vibhaav – bhaav that is externaland not of the Self;’ that it imagined that (it did the kalpana).Allya! If it did have imagination (kalpana), then it would alwayshave a habit of doing so. That is why ‘we’ say that scientificcircumstantial evidences came together, giving rise to the bhaavthat leads to the non-Self (vibhaav). ‘Scientific’ means mysterious(guhya). What does ‘mysterious’ mean? It means that all this(the worldly life) arose after the coming together of dravya,kshetra, kaad and bhaav. The bhaav that occurs with theglasses of, ‘I am Chandulal,’ is vibhaav and that is calledbhaav karma. ‘We’ call that the arising of extra results (visheshparinaam).The coming together of two eternal elements (vastu) givesrise to an additional new result (vishesh parinaam), but all thewhile both the eternal elements retain their original quality andintrinsic property and function (guna-dharma). As long as youdo not come face-to-face with the event of (setting eyes upon)nice juicy cucumbers, is any bhaav for them likely to arise withinyou? But when it does, it gives rise to, ‘These cucumbers are sogood!’ (vishesh parinaam). But is anything likely to happen ifyou don’t see them? Someone may ask, ‘What if we find asolitary place to put everyone where there will be no interactions?’But that will not work. What has already been established, whateverinstillation of life (pratishtha) has been done already, will giveresult without fail and, in the process, one will not refrain frommaking a new pratishtha. It may not be the same, it may becompletely different, but one will not be free from additional newresults (vishesh parinaam). When one attains knowledge ofone’s real Self (Self-realization), he will find the bliss (anand) heis searching for; the vision changes, it becomes pure (shuddha)and consequently vishesh parinaam will arise no more.The reality is that ‘pure knowledge’ (shuddha gnan) isthe Self (Atma), and auspicious or good (shubha), inauspiciousor bad (ashubha) and impure (ashuddha) gnan is the livingentity (jiva). As long as one dwells in the knowledge of good-bad, one is a mortal (jivaatma), one who is unaware of reality(moodhatma). When one attains right vision (samkit), hebecomes Shuddhatma—pure Soul. First, there is the conviction(pratiti) of ‘I am pure Soul (Shuddhatma).’ One cannot becomeShuddhatma just like that; first the conviction has to be there.Then the Gnan arises according to that conviction, and the conduct(vartan) arises according to the Gnan. First, there was a deludedconviction (mithya pratiti), which leads to deluded knowledge(mithya gnan) and hence deluded conduct (mithya vartan).However, in the conduct that automatically follows gnan(knowledge) one does not have to do anything. When deludedfaith (mithya shraddha) and deluded gnan come together, thena corresponding conduct will automatically follow. For all this tohappen, no one has to do anything, yet one claims to be thedoer and that is the ego. If one believes there is fun and happinessin being a bricklayer, he will become a bricklayer. Then, as heattains the conviction, he attains the knowledge of laying bricks.When that knowledge and faith come together, his conduct willimmediately result in bricklaying. He just lays the bricks, oneby one, and they stick. He will not have to examine everybrick in the process.So everything comes together according to one’s buddhi’sashaya. No one has to do anything. If stealing is in the buddhi’sashaya and there is merit karma behind it, then everything willcome together for one to steal. No matter how many illegalactivities he is involved in, and whether thousands of criminalinvestigators are after him, he will not be exposed if his karmicfruition is that of merit karma. And when his demerit karmacomes into fruition, he will be caught easily. What a naturalarrangement this is! It is really his merit karma at work, but hearrogantly thinks, ‘Who can catch me?’ He continues to havesuch ego. All bets will be off when his demerit karma arises!All this is run by merit karma (punya). Who gives youAptavani-61112Aptavani-6your wages of one thousand rupees? Your boss pays your wagesbut it is all dependent on merit karma. When demerit karma(paap) takes over, the employees will abuse even the boss!Questioner: Is this because the boss must have made theintent (bhaav) to employ him and he must have made the bhaavto work for that boss, and that is why everything has cometogether?Dadashri: No, bhaav is not like that.Questioner: Then is there some kind of a connection ofgive and take?Dadashri: No, nothing like that.Questioner: Then why did he go to work for him?Dadashri: No, that is their karmic account. Neither theboss nor the employee has any relation or acquaintance witheach other in the past life. The boss had in his receptacle of theintellect (buddhi’s ashaya), ‘I want an employee such as this,’and the employee had in his ashaya, ‘I want a boss like that.’All this has been printed in their buddhi’s ashaya, and soeverything comes together without fail.Even the children are born to one according to buddhi’sashaya: ‘It is more than enough even if I have just one son. Hewill uphold my name,’ and so the son will uphold his nameaccording to his buddhi’s ashaya. The Jains will say, ‘It wouldbe nice if our son takes the formal ceremony of renunciation ofthe worldly life (diksha); at least he will be blessed! Then thoseparents will happily allow him to take diksha. Try talking toother parents about diksha! They will refuse because they neverdid such bhaav to begin with.Nature and Buddhi’s AshayaWhen one attains a wife, it is not because he had madebhaav of ‘I want this woman as my wife’; there is no bhaav,no acquaintance or familiarity. He meets up with her accordingto the buddhi’s ashaya. Dravya, kshetra, kaad and bhaav aresuch that when there is a shortage of women, his buddhi’sashaya will be, ‘I will marry any girl that I find, but I must findone!’ So he will find ‘such a one.’ Now he complains that sheis like this and she is like that. Hey! You are the one who madesuch a choice so what are you complaining about? He feelsdiscontent when he sees someone else’s beautiful wife.Nevertheless, he finds satisfaction only in his own home and healso says, ‘I will stay only in my own house.’Nature is telling you, ‘You got what was in your buddhi’sashaya, so why are you complaining?’ He complains when hesees someone else’s bungalow, but ultimately he likes his ownhut.Buddhi’s Ashaya of the Ultimate KindIf his buddhi’s ashaya is, ‘I am tired of all this wanderingaround; it would be nice if I were to meet a Gnani Purush so Ican find liberation,’ then he will meet a Gnani Purush. Now noone is likely to do such a buddhi’s ashaya, are they? How canpeople become free from this infatuation for the worldly life(moha)?The Doer of Pratishtha is Under ExternalControlEffect, location, time and inner intents (dravya, kshetra,kaad and bhaav) are constantly changing. Whatever comes outof your mouth is all an ego, but you continue to do pratishtha(instillation of life) with that. This ego is not your doing either.Dravya, kshetra, kaad and bhaav make you do it. You can getrid of the ego when you receive Gnan from the Gnani Purush.Once the ego is gone, all pratishtha will come to an end. Thenwhere will he go? He will go to moksha!Aptavani-61112Aptavani-6your wages of one thousand rupees? Your boss pays your wagesbut it is all dependent on merit karma. When demerit karma(paap) takes over, the employees will abuse even the boss!Questioner: Is this because the boss must have made theintent (bhaav) to employ him and he must have made the bhaavto work for that boss, and that is why everything has cometogether?Dadashri: No, bhaav is not like that.Questioner: Then is there some kind of a connection ofgive and take?Dadashri: No, nothing like that.Questioner: Then why did he go to work for him?Dadashri: No, that is their karmic account. Neither theboss nor the employee has any relation or acquaintance witheach other in the past life. The boss had in his receptacle of theintellect (buddhi’s ashaya), ‘I want an employee such as this,’and the employee had in his ashaya, ‘I want a boss like that.’All this has been printed in their buddhi’s ashaya, and soeverything comes together without fail.Even the children are born to one according to buddhi’sashaya: ‘It is more than enough even if I have just one son. Hewill uphold my name,’ and so the son will uphold his nameaccording to his buddhi’s ashaya. The Jains will say, ‘It wouldbe nice if our son takes the formal ceremony of renunciation ofthe worldly life (diksha); at least he will be blessed! Then thoseparents will happily allow him to take diksha. Try talking toother parents about diksha! They will refuse because they neverdid such bhaav to begin with.Nature and Buddhi’s AshayaWhen one attains a wife, it is not because he had madebhaav of ‘I want this woman as my wife’; there is no bhaav,no acquaintance or familiarity. He meets up with her accordingto the buddhi’s ashaya. Dravya, kshetra, kaad and bhaav aresuch that when there is a shortage of women, his buddhi’sashaya will be, ‘I will marry any girl that I find, but I must findone!’ So he will find ‘such a one.’ Now he complains that sheis like this and she is like that. Hey! You are the one who madesuch a choice so what are you complaining about? He feelsdiscontent when he sees someone else’s beautiful wife.Nevertheless, he finds satisfaction only in his own home and healso says, ‘I will stay only in my own house.’Nature is telling you, ‘You got what was in your buddhi’sashaya, so why are you complaining?’ He complains when hesees someone else’s bungalow, but ultimately he likes his ownhut.Buddhi’s Ashaya of the Ultimate KindIf his buddhi’s ashaya is, ‘I am tired of all this wanderingaround; it would be nice if I were to meet a Gnani Purush so Ican find liberation,’ then he will meet a Gnani Purush. Now noone is likely to do such a buddhi’s ashaya, are they? How canpeople become free from this infatuation for the worldly life(moha)?The Doer of Pratishtha is Under ExternalControlEffect, location, time and inner intents (dravya, kshetra,kaad and bhaav) are constantly changing. Whatever comes outof your mouth is all an ego, but you continue to do pratishtha(instillation of life) with that. This ego is not your doing either.Dravya, kshetra, kaad and bhaav make you do it. You can getrid of the ego when you receive Gnan from the Gnani Purush.Once the ego is gone, all pratishtha will come to an end. Thenwhere will he go? He will go to moksha!Aptavani-61314Aptavani-6Questioner: Does the ego also depend on effect, location,time and inner intents?Dadashri: Yes, and that is why one does pratishtha. Itwill appear as if it is the ego that is doing the pratishtha, butcircumstances make him do it. That gives rise to pratishtha.Now, circumstances arise out of that pratishtha which againcause you to create new pratishtha. Therefore, You (the realSelf) do not do anything in it. That is why I call it ‘scientificcircumstantial evidences.’ It is the circumstance that makes aperson do things, and he believes, ‘I did it.’ Even the belief, ‘Idid it,’ is caused by circumstances. Someone may ask, ‘Is thatcalled an ego?’ You can say it is verily the ego because the‘doer’ is some other entity, but he claims and believes he did it.Questioner: Does ego arise according to circumstances?Dadashri: Yes, that is correct. It is circumstances thatmake him do everything, including having the ego. Yet he believes,‘I am doing it,’ and because of that, a new pratishtha arises.‘We’ (mahatmas) do not have, ‘I did it,’ in ‘our’ belief. ‘We’know that vyavasthit (scientific circumstantial evidences) make‘us’ do all that, and that is why pratishtha stops occurring. Theone (pratishtha) that was created prior to Gnan, that life willcome; but new creation has ended. When you went on thepilgrimage, it was due to the bhaav you had created previously.Wherever you went are the places you had made the bhaavto visit.Questioner: Does the buddhi’s ashaya change or not?Dadashri: Buddhi’s ashaya depends upon the prevailingcircumstances. If one is surrounded by policemen, it will createfear in him and his buddhi’s ashaya will say that he does notwant to steal anymore. Everything will change accordingly.Buddhi’s ashaya arises according to the coming togetherof physical matter (dravya), location (kshetra), time (kaad) andvision through the belief of ‘I am Chandulal’ (bhaav – intent).But the main intent is there for sure; if you have the intent tosteal, only then will the circumstances come together.Even Ego is a Natural ArrangementQuestioner: ‘Necessity is the mother of invention’; is thatwrong?Dadashri: That is just an exercise of words. However,nature does all this.Questioner: Then what is the basis for this ‘relative’progress?Dadashri: Nature makes it happen. Dravya changes astime changes, and as dravya changes so does bhaav and thenone does egoism of, ‘I did.’ Even the ego is nature’s doing. Hewho gets out of this egoism is freed from this too. Progress iscaused by nature; otherwise, all exercising of words is egoism.People came up with the word ‘prarabdha (fate; destiny)’and that is the reason for our predicament today! That is whyin ‘our’ science ‘we’ have not called anything ‘prarabdha.’Questioner: Is it not that whatever is in vyavasthit iswhat will happen?Dadashri: I am telling you all this for your satisfaction.You continue doing what you are doing and the result is in thehands of vyavasthit, so do not worry or be scared. When theorder comes for you to fight, go fight, and do not worry aboutthe result.Questioner: So should we not plan for anything?Dadashri: Plans have already been made (in past life).So when it comes for you to do anything, continue doing. Planswere already made before the beginning of any event.Aptavani-61314Aptavani-6Questioner: Does the ego also depend on effect, location,time and inner intents?Dadashri: Yes, and that is why one does pratishtha. Itwill appear as if it is the ego that is doing the pratishtha, butcircumstances make him do it. That gives rise to pratishtha.Now, circumstances arise out of that pratishtha which againcause you to create new pratishtha. Therefore, You (the realSelf) do not do anything in it. That is why I call it ‘scientificcircumstantial evidences.’ It is the circumstance that makes aperson do things, and he believes, ‘I did it.’ Even the belief, ‘Idid it,’ is caused by circumstances. Someone may ask, ‘Is thatcalled an ego?’ You can say it is verily the ego because the‘doer’ is some other entity, but he claims and believes he did it.Questioner: Does ego arise according to circumstances?Dadashri: Yes, that is correct. It is circumstances thatmake him do everything, including having the ego. Yet he believes,‘I am doing it,’ and because of that, a new pratishtha arises.‘We’ (mahatmas) do not have, ‘I did it,’ in ‘our’ belief. ‘We’know that vyavasthit (scientific circumstantial evidences) make‘us’ do all that, and that is why pratishtha stops occurring. Theone (pratishtha) that was created prior to Gnan, that life willcome; but new creation has ended. When you went on thepilgrimage, it was due to the bhaav you had created previously.Wherever you went are the places you had made the bhaavto visit.Questioner: Does the buddhi’s ashaya change or not?Dadashri: Buddhi’s ashaya depends upon the prevailingcircumstances. If one is surrounded by policemen, it will createfear in him and his buddhi’s ashaya will say that he does notwant to steal anymore. Everything will change accordingly.Buddhi’s ashaya arises according to the coming togetherof physical matter (dravya), location (kshetra), time (kaad) andvision through the belief of ‘I am Chandulal’ (bhaav – intent).But the main intent is there for sure; if you have the intent tosteal, only then will the circumstances come together.Even Ego is a Natural ArrangementQuestioner: ‘Necessity is the mother of invention’; is thatwrong?Dadashri: That is just an exercise of words. However,nature does all this.Questioner: Then what is the basis for this ‘relative’progress?Dadashri: Nature makes it happen. Dravya changes astime changes, and as dravya changes so does bhaav and thenone does egoism of, ‘I did.’ Even the ego is nature’s doing. Hewho gets out of this egoism is freed from this too. Progress iscaused by nature; otherwise, all exercising of words is egoism.People came up with the word ‘prarabdha (fate; destiny)’and that is the reason for our predicament today! That is whyin ‘our’ science ‘we’ have not called anything ‘prarabdha.’Questioner: Is it not that whatever is in vyavasthit iswhat will happen?Dadashri: I am telling you all this for your satisfaction.You continue doing what you are doing and the result is in thehands of vyavasthit, so do not worry or be scared. When theorder comes for you to fight, go fight, and do not worry aboutthe result.Questioner: So should we not plan for anything?Dadashri: Plans have already been made (in past life).So when it comes for you to do anything, continue doing. Planswere already made before the beginning of any event.Aptavani-61516Aptavani-6Questioner: Should we not think?Dadashri: You do not have to think. You just have toobserve the thoughts that arise and continue doing what you aredoing. There is no need for you to think; thoughts will occur. Ifpeople had the power to stop their thoughts, they would do so.Are you able to stop your bad thoughts?Questioner: No.Dadashri: So what can you do?Questioner: So what is the root of thoughts?Dadashri: They are tubers of the mind.Questioner: What is the root of tubers?Dadashri: The tubers were formed when you becameone with or engrossed (tanmayakar) with your thoughts in yourpast life.Location According to AshayaQuestioner: What is the difference between ashaya anda thought? Is a thought born out of ashaya?Dadashri: Thought and ashaya are two different things.Ashaya is an extract (of the desires from one’s past life) that iscarried forward. Every living being receives their place accordingto their ashaya.Questioner: Are the tubers bound according to theashaya?Dadashri: Tubers are different things. There is noconnection between the tubers and ashaya. Thought is the mainthing; the mind gives rise to a desire from which arises ashaya.And from that ashaya one receives his place or location. It isaccording to your ashaya that you received this body and youreceive all other adjustments. You may not even have (want toexperience) that adjustment now, but you have receivedeverything according to your ashaya.You would not be able to sleep if it were not in yourashaya. If an outlaw has in his ashaya to rob a man; then hewill never encounter a woman to rob. Your thoughts and buddhi(antahkaran – the inner working components of the mind,intellect, chit and ego) will be according to your ashaya andyour whole life will pass according to your ashaya. Now, whycan you not adjust to it?You receive everything according to past ashaya (anextract that is carried forward; every living being receives theirplace according to their ashaya), but you cannot adjust toeverything according to your current knowledge. Nevertheless,you will like only that which is in your ashaya. Changes cannotbe made in the ashaya. After receiving this Gnan, the only thingthat happens is that new tubers are not created and the old onesdissolve away, making you tuber-free (nirgranth). Now, newashaya is not bound and the old one continues to dissolveaway.Questioner: What should one do in order to becometuber-free?Dadashri: You should do introspection (samayik) likethe one they do here. With samayik, a large tuber, which is verytroublesome, will melt away.Questioner: Does one have to make an effort to seeone’s own faults in the samayik? Does one not have to makean effort during samayik?Dadashri: No, effort means to make the mind dosomething; to make the mind do something is considered aneffort, whereas to ‘see’ is not considered ‘doing.’You can now ‘see’ mistakes that you could not ‘see’Aptavani-61516Aptavani-6Questioner: Should we not think?Dadashri: You do not have to think. You just have toobserve the thoughts that arise and continue doing what you aredoing. There is no need for you to think; thoughts will occur. Ifpeople had the power to stop their thoughts, they would do so.Are you able to stop your bad thoughts?Questioner: No.Dadashri: So what can you do?Questioner: So what is the root of thoughts?Dadashri: They are tubers of the mind.Questioner: What is the root of tubers?Dadashri: The tubers were formed when you becameone with or engrossed (tanmayakar) with your thoughts in yourpast life.Location According to AshayaQuestioner: What is the difference between ashaya anda thought? Is a thought born out of ashaya?Dadashri: Thought and ashaya are two different things.Ashaya is an extract (of the desires from one’s past life) that iscarried forward. Every living being receives their place accordingto their ashaya.Questioner: Are the tubers bound according to theashaya?Dadashri: Tubers are different things. There is noconnection between the tubers and ashaya. Thought is the mainthing; the mind gives rise to a desire from which arises ashaya.And from that ashaya one receives his place or location. It isaccording to your ashaya that you received this body and youreceive all other adjustments. You may not even have (want toexperience) that adjustment now, but you have receivedeverything according to your ashaya.You would not be able to sleep if it were not in yourashaya. If an outlaw has in his ashaya to rob a man; then hewill never encounter a woman to rob. Your thoughts and buddhi(antahkaran – the inner working components of the mind,intellect, chit and ego) will be according to your ashaya andyour whole life will pass according to your ashaya. Now, whycan you not adjust to it?You receive everything according to past ashaya (anextract that is carried forward; every living being receives theirplace according to their ashaya), but you cannot adjust toeverything according to your current knowledge. Nevertheless,you will like only that which is in your ashaya. Changes cannotbe made in the ashaya. After receiving this Gnan, the only thingthat happens is that new tubers are not created and the old onesdissolve away, making you tuber-free (nirgranth). Now, newashaya is not bound and the old one continues to dissolveaway.Questioner: What should one do in order to becometuber-free?Dadashri: You should do introspection (samayik) likethe one they do here. With samayik, a large tuber, which is verytroublesome, will melt away.Questioner: Does one have to make an effort to seeone’s own faults in the samayik? Does one not have to makean effort during samayik?Dadashri: No, effort means to make the mind dosomething; to make the mind do something is considered aneffort, whereas to ‘see’ is not considered ‘doing.’You can now ‘see’ mistakes that you could not ‘see’Aptavani-61718Aptavani-6before. There is no change in action. What you can ‘see’ is dueto the power of Gnan.Idol as a Result of PratishthaQuestioner: What is pratishthit atma?Dadashri: Until one attains the knowledge of his trueSelf, the belief of, ‘This Chandulal is who I really am,’ is whatwe call the pratishthit atma (the relative-self, energized non-Self complex of thoughts, speech and acts). This belief, ‘I amChandubhai,’ is a pratishtha (instilling something more into) thatis being done just like doing pratishtha for an idol, and that iswhy it continues to bear its fruits. What is Atma? It is your ownSelf. Your work is done when you acquire awareness of yourreal Self. You should have the realization of ‘Who you are.’Questioner: The pratishthit atma does not haveawareness of the Shuddhatma, does it?Dadashri: How can it have the awareness? It can onlyhave that awareness when the Gnani Purush gives that awareness.Questioner: No, but does the pratishthit atma not haveawareness after you give Gnan?Dadashri: Yes, that is when you became aware and thatis why you started to say ‘I am pure Soul (Shuddhatma).’ Yousaw a change from your old awareness and, therefore, you felt,‘This is not me; I am the Shuddhatma.’Who Contemplates on the Soul?Questioner: ‘The soul (atma, the self) becomes what itcontemplates (chintavan)’; so who does the contemplationhere?Dadashri: The pratishthit atma, the relative-self, doesthe contemplation, not the real Self. The one that does the bhaavof contemplation, the one who holds the bhaav of, ‘I amcontemplating,’ is the pratishthit atma. The real Atma is notlike that. It is absolutely pure – pure as gold.So what ‘we’ are saying is that one will become the Selfif one contemplates on the shuddha, the real Self. And one willbecome something else if he contemplates on that something else.Questioner: But is that not a contemplation of thepratishthit atma?Dadashri: Yes, it is. The pure Soul, the Self, does not doanything. If the pratishthit atma turns ‘this way’ towards theSelf, it will become Shuddhatma and if it turns the ‘wrong way,’away from the Self, then the wrong result will occur. The momentone attains the Self, contemplation (chintavan of Shuddhatma)will occur continuously. However, the complaint such as, ‘I amlike this…this happened to me,’ etc., is all an illusion (moha).Even this interaction with me (satsang) is moha, but it ischaritra moha – a discharging effect. What is charitra moha?It is that which is shed when one employs equanimity. It willthen not touch or affect him again, whereas the other moha,the true moha, will not refrain from sticking to you. Becausethe illusion that charges karma (darshan moha) is gone, onlydischarging illusion (charitra moha) remains for you. This iscalled discharge moha. Those who do not have Gnan still have the belief, ‘I amlike this’ or ‘I am like that,’ in their discharging illusion and,therefore, they become that which they believe. After attainingthe Self, the Gnan, there is awareness of, ‘I am pure Soul…I amShuddhatma,’ and so one continues to become pure (shuddha).Whatever is going to happen to ‘Chandulal’ will continue tohappen. Whatever is in the nature of his prakruti, will continueto unfold. ‘You’ do not have anything to do with ‘that.’ All youhave to do is settle everything with equanimity.* * * * *Aptavani-61718Aptavani-6before. There is no change in action. What you can ‘see’ is dueto the power of Gnan.Idol as a Result of PratishthaQuestioner: What is pratishthit atma?Dadashri: Until one attains the knowledge of his trueSelf, the belief of, ‘This Chandulal is who I really am,’ is whatwe call the pratishthit atma (the relative-self, energized non-Self complex of thoughts, speech and acts). This belief, ‘I amChandubhai,’ is a pratishtha (instilling something more into) thatis being done just like doing pratishtha for an idol, and that iswhy it continues to bear its fruits. What is Atma? It is your ownSelf. Your work is done when you acquire awareness of yourreal Self. You should have the realization of ‘Who you are.’Questioner: The pratishthit atma does not haveawareness of the Shuddhatma, does it?Dadashri: How can it have the awareness? It can onlyhave that awareness when the Gnani Purush gives that awareness.Questioner: No, but does the pratishthit atma not haveawareness after you give Gnan?Dadashri: Yes, that is when you became aware and thatis why you started to say ‘I am pure Soul (Shuddhatma).’ Yousaw a change from your old awareness and, therefore, you felt,‘This is not me; I am the Shuddhatma.’Who Contemplates on the Soul?Questioner: ‘The soul (atma, the self) becomes what itcontemplates (chintavan)’; so who does the contemplationhere?Dadashri: The pratishthit atma, the relative-self, doesthe contemplation, not the real Self. The one that does the bhaavof contemplation, the one who holds the bhaav of, ‘I amcontemplating,’ is the pratishthit atma. The real Atma is notlike that. It is absolutely pure – pure as gold.So what ‘we’ are saying is that one will become the Selfif one contemplates on the shuddha, the real Self. And one willbecome something else if he contemplates on that something else.Questioner: But is that not a contemplation of thepratishthit atma?Dadashri: Yes, it is. The pure Soul, the Self, does not doanything. If the pratishthit atma turns ‘this way’ towards theSelf, it will become Shuddhatma and if it turns the ‘wrong way,’away from the Self, then the wrong result will occur. The momentone attains the Self, contemplation (chintavan of Shuddhatma)will occur continuously. However, the complaint such as, ‘I amlike this…this happened to me,’ etc., is all an illusion (moha).Even this interaction with me (satsang) is moha, but it ischaritra moha – a discharging effect. What is charitra moha?It is that which is shed when one employs equanimity. It willthen not touch or affect him again, whereas the other moha,the true moha, will not refrain from sticking to you. Becausethe illusion that charges karma (darshan moha) is gone, onlydischarging illusion (charitra moha) remains for you. This iscalled discharge moha. Those who do not have Gnan still have the belief, ‘I amlike this’ or ‘I am like that,’ in their discharging illusion and,therefore, they become that which they believe. After attainingthe Self, the Gnan, there is awareness of, ‘I am pure Soul…I amShuddhatma,’ and so one continues to become pure (shuddha).Whatever is going to happen to ‘Chandulal’ will continue tohappen. Whatever is in the nature of his prakruti, will continueto unfold. ‘You’ do not have anything to do with ‘that.’ All youhave to do is settle everything with equanimity.* * * * *Aptavani-61920Aptavani-6[2]Recording of Speech as CodesQuestioner: What is the method for one to improve hisspeech?Dadashri: This is the place; your being in front of theGnani is the way to improve speech. Here you should keepasking questions again and again and arrive at the solutions andclosure.‘Gross circumstances, subtle circumstances andcircumstances of speech are (of) the non-Self (par) and aredependent on the non-Self (paradhin).’When only this simple sentence remains in yourunderstanding and awareness, then no matter what another personsays, it will not have any effect. This sentence is not an imaginarysentence. It is exact. I am telling you that which is ‘exact’ andas it is. I am not telling you to follow my words by respectingthem. ‘Exact’ is only this – that which is ‘exact’ is only this way:You suffer because you do not understand the facts as they are.Questioner: I am able to maintain equanimity throughGnan when someone says anything negative to me. But the mainquestion that remains is, when I speak something bitter andhurtful and then take the support of this great sentence, ‘Grosscircumstances, subtle circumstances and circumstances of speechare of the non-Self and are dependent on the non-Self,’ – doesthat mean I am getting the wrong license (misusing Gnan)?Dadashri: One should never take the support of thatsentence at such times, should one? For times like that, you havebeen given the support of pratikraman. You should dopratikraman if you say hurtful things to others. And when theother person says anything hurtful, there is no hurt at all withinyou if you take the support of the Gnan sentence.When you do pratikraman for saying hurtful things, it willallay the hurt you feel for having done so. So this is how everythingis resolved.Questioner: Speech is inert (jada), yet why is it soeffective?Dadashri: Speech is inert, yet it is the most effective ofall. It is the reason the world perpetuates. The very nature ofspeech is that it is effective.Questioner: How is one to bring about control overspeech?Dadashri: In taking a vow of silence from the Gnani, onecan attain control over speech. Otherwise, one can try to becomesilent on his own, but that is not under his control. And theunfolding of circumstance of silence, the udaya of silence, willnot come on its own. This is because the udaya of silence isdependent upon scientific circumstantial evidences (vyavasthit).Therefore, silence adopted after taking the Agna of the Gnani isbeneficial. The other way to control speech is throughpratikraman (ask for forgiveness from the pure Soul of the oneyou have ‘hurt,’ coupled with remorse of the wrongdoing). Speechis a taped record; only that which has been ‘printed’ (tapedwithin) will come forth, not more, not less. Therefore, these twoare the only ways to control speech.Questioner: What is the meaning of, ‘It has been taped’?Dadashri: When a boss speaks very fast and the secretarywrites everything down, how is he writing all that down? Whatlanguage is that?Aptavani-61920Aptavani-6[2]Recording of Speech as CodesQuestioner: What is the method for one to improve hisspeech?Dadashri: This is the place; your being in front of theGnani is the way to improve speech. Here you should keepasking questions again and again and arrive at the solutions andclosure.‘Gross circumstances, subtle circumstances andcircumstances of speech are (of) the non-Self (par) and aredependent on the non-Self (paradhin).’When only this simple sentence remains in yourunderstanding and awareness, then no matter what another personsays, it will not have any effect. This sentence is not an imaginarysentence. It is exact. I am telling you that which is ‘exact’ andas it is. I am not telling you to follow my words by respectingthem. ‘Exact’ is only this – that which is ‘exact’ is only this way:You suffer because you do not understand the facts as they are.Questioner: I am able to maintain equanimity throughGnan when someone says anything negative to me. But the mainquestion that remains is, when I speak something bitter andhurtful and then take the support of this great sentence, ‘Grosscircumstances, subtle circumstances and circumstances of speechare of the non-Self and are dependent on the non-Self,’ – doesthat mean I am getting the wrong license (misusing Gnan)?Dadashri: One should never take the support of thatsentence at such times, should one? For times like that, you havebeen given the support of pratikraman. You should dopratikraman if you say hurtful things to others. And when theother person says anything hurtful, there is no hurt at all withinyou if you take the support of the Gnan sentence.When you do pratikraman for saying hurtful things, it willallay the hurt you feel for having done so. So this is how everythingis resolved.Questioner: Speech is inert (jada), yet why is it soeffective?Dadashri: Speech is inert, yet it is the most effective ofall. It is the reason the world perpetuates. The very nature ofspeech is that it is effective.Questioner: How is one to bring about control overspeech?Dadashri: In taking a vow of silence from the Gnani, onecan attain control over speech. Otherwise, one can try to becomesilent on his own, but that is not under his control. And theunfolding of circumstance of silence, the udaya of silence, willnot come on its own. This is because the udaya of silence isdependent upon scientific circumstantial evidences (vyavasthit).Therefore, silence adopted after taking the Agna of the Gnani isbeneficial. The other way to control speech is throughpratikraman (ask for forgiveness from the pure Soul of the oneyou have ‘hurt,’ coupled with remorse of the wrongdoing). Speechis a taped record; only that which has been ‘printed’ (tapedwithin) will come forth, not more, not less. Therefore, these twoare the only ways to control speech.Questioner: What is the meaning of, ‘It has been taped’?Dadashri: When a boss speaks very fast and the secretarywrites everything down, how is he writing all that down? Whatlanguage is that?Aptavani-62122Aptavani-6Questioner: Shorthand.Dadashri: And then there is something new beyond that,is it not? It is called ‘code language’ or something like that,right?Questioner: Yes, code language.Dadashri: All this gets typed within in a code languageand shorthand. The moment the feeling arises within (bhaav) of,‘I am the kind of person that I can make anyone shut up withmy speech,’ then such code words lead to a correspondingspeech coming into effect. This is what I mean by a tapedrecord. For you, the current tape (speech) is of the code wordsthat you had created.And even a person who normally speaks indiscreetly andharshly, speaks very pleasantly before a saint; so are we not tounderstand that he is not the speaker? Who is he, the speakerof hurtful words or pleasant ones?Questioner: What kind of awareness (jagruti) shouldwe maintain when we speak?Dadashri: Your awareness is gone for sure when youthrow a stone that hurts and wounds the other person (yourwords are so harsh that they hurt and wound the other person).Your awareness will not go away if your speech is mild. Therefore,your awareness will come when your speech becomes mild.Questioner: So how can we make the ‘stone’ smaller?Dadashri: With pratikraman.Questioner: How can we change the speech that hasalready been taped?Dadashri: You can do so by taking the Agna to not hurtothers with your speech from only the Gnani. Otherwise, it islike changing the will of nature. Therefore, if you try to changeit, do it with the Agnas of the Gnani Purush. The Gnani is suchthat he does not become responsible (He is beyond thoughts,speech and acts) and hence, by taking on your responsibility, theresponsibility vanishes. So this is the only solution.Questioner: Is the ‘taping’ done according to one’s innerintent and awareness at the time of speaking?Dadashri: No, taping does not occur at the time ofspeaking. It has already been recorded before that. What happensto it today? It plays according to the way it was recorded.Questioner: What if one maintains awareness at the timeof speaking?Dadashri: When you scold and intimidate someone andthen feel, ‘He deserved it,’ then the same code gets recordedfor another new account. If you feel ‘I did him wrong,’ then youcreate a new and different code. If you believe you did the rightthing in scolding him, then you created the same code but it willbecome even stronger and heavier in intensity. If you feel, ‘Thatwas very bad. I should not speak this way. Why did I speakthat way?’, then the code will become smaller.Questioner: Does a code arise if there is neither thefeeling, ‘It was the right thing to do,’ nor ‘It was the wrong thingto do’?Dadashri: If you decide to remain silent, then it will remainsilent.Questioner: Sometimes one may not express thingsverbally but there is internal speech going on, is there not? Whatabout the negative bhaav – the negative feelings that continuewithin?Dadashri: You should tell yourself that such negativityshould not be there; it should be beautiful and harmonious within.Questioner: Then will a code for ‘beautiful’ be recorded?Aptavani-62122Aptavani-6Questioner: Shorthand.Dadashri: And then there is something new beyond that,is it not? It is called ‘code language’ or something like that,right?Questioner: Yes, code language.Dadashri: All this gets typed within in a code languageand shorthand. The moment the feeling arises within (bhaav) of,‘I am the kind of person that I can make anyone shut up withmy speech,’ then such code words lead to a correspondingspeech coming into effect. This is what I mean by a tapedrecord. For you, the current tape (speech) is of the code wordsthat you had created.And even a person who normally speaks indiscreetly andharshly, speaks very pleasantly before a saint; so are we not tounderstand that he is not the speaker? Who is he, the speakerof hurtful words or pleasant ones?Questioner: What kind of awareness (jagruti) shouldwe maintain when we speak?Dadashri: Your awareness is gone for sure when youthrow a stone that hurts and wounds the other person (yourwords are so harsh that they hurt and wound the other person).Your awareness will not go away if your speech is mild. Therefore,your awareness will come when your speech becomes mild.Questioner: So how can we make the ‘stone’ smaller?Dadashri: With pratikraman.Questioner: How can we change the speech that hasalready been taped?Dadashri: You can do so by taking the Agna to not hurtothers with your speech from only the Gnani. Otherwise, it islike changing the will of nature. Therefore, if you try to changeit, do it with the Agnas of the Gnani Purush. The Gnani is suchthat he does not become responsible (He is beyond thoughts,speech and acts) and hence, by taking on your responsibility, theresponsibility vanishes. So this is the only solution.Questioner: Is the ‘taping’ done according to one’s innerintent and awareness at the time of speaking?Dadashri: No, taping does not occur at the time ofspeaking. It has already been recorded before that. What happensto it today? It plays according to the way it was recorded.Questioner: What if one maintains awareness at the timeof speaking?Dadashri: When you scold and intimidate someone andthen feel, ‘He deserved it,’ then the same code gets recordedfor another new account. If you feel ‘I did him wrong,’ then youcreate a new and different code. If you believe you did the rightthing in scolding him, then you created the same code but it willbecome even stronger and heavier in intensity. If you feel, ‘Thatwas very bad. I should not speak this way. Why did I speakthat way?’, then the code will become smaller.Questioner: Does a code arise if there is neither thefeeling, ‘It was the right thing to do,’ nor ‘It was the wrong thingto do’?Dadashri: If you decide to remain silent, then it will remainsilent.Questioner: Sometimes one may not express thingsverbally but there is internal speech going on, is there not? Whatabout the negative bhaav – the negative feelings that continuewithin?Dadashri: You should tell yourself that such negativityshould not be there; it should be beautiful and harmonious within.Questioner: Then will a code for ‘beautiful’ be recorded?Aptavani-62324Aptavani-6Questioner: The same words are spoken to five differentpeople, but each person is hurt to a different degree. What canI do about that?Dadashri: You should have the awareness and then speak.Do your best according to your understanding. There is nosolution otherwise. Now, even when ‘Chandubhai’ is talkingjustly, the other person may still be hurt. What can one do then?What is the solution? This happens only with some individuals(with whom you have karmic account), not with everyone. Sohere, if there are no counter-attacks, only then will your ‘fireworks’stop. Otherwise, if one person sets off sparks, sparks will flyfrom you too, even if you do not wish them to. So the sparkswill cease only if everyone decides that they want to stop them,and not otherwise.Questioner: Does the new code give its effect only in thenext life or can it give effect in this life too?Dadashri: What would happen if a potter were to placehis earthenware to bake in a kiln and then remove themprematurely within an hour?Your acceptance of, ‘The next life will be filled witheverything working well,’ is the reason why you have faith in meand keep listening to me for hours on end. In this life, yourspeech, which is the result of taped codes from your past life,will be exhausted and then your speech will not be hurtfulanymore.Questioner: So then, will one become silent (maun)?Dadashri: Yes, silence will be there. By silence it doesnot mean a silence where no words will be uttered; silencemeans only that speech which is necessary for basic worldlyinteractions will come forth. That which was filled into the ‘tank’will be emptied for sure.Dadashri: Yes, a ‘beautiful’ code is bound to come!Questioner: So does one have to attain a new body forthe new code? Instead, what I want is that ‘no code berecorded.’Dadashri: This is for just one life. You are not going tohave codes like these later on. Those who do not have foullanguage today have not changed the code, and those who havefoul language have changed the code, so their speech will change.Therefore, those who have changed it have taken note, whereasthose who have not have missed out. When someone asks me,‘Dada, when will my speech improve?’ …from that can we notdeduce that he is changing the code?Questioner: The one who wants liberation (moksha) shouldnot record any code, should he? What should one do for that?Dadashri: You will not have any difficulty on your pathto moksha. Whatever codes are needed to go to moksha willarise in your next life. Now, whatever ‘stock’ you accumulateby asking me, you will get exactly that code in the next life. Youstill have one more life, do you not?Questioner: What are the codes of a Tirthankara’sspeech like?Dadashri: They have decided on such a code that, ‘Nota single living being be hurt to the slightest extent, by my speech.Definitely not only hurt any living being but also not hurt thefoundation of any living being; not even that of a tree!’ Suchcodes occur only to the enlightened, fully liberated beings(Tirthankars).Questioner: What kind of awareness should be therewhen speaking?Dadashri: The awareness of, ‘Who will be listening andhow will he or she be affected by these words?’Aptavani-62324Aptavani-6Questioner: The same words are spoken to five differentpeople, but each person is hurt to a different degree. What canI do about that?Dadashri: You should have the awareness and then speak.Do your best according to your understanding. There is nosolution otherwise. Now, even when ‘Chandubhai’ is talkingjustly, the other person may still be hurt. What can one do then?What is the solution? This happens only with some individuals(with whom you have karmic account), not with everyone. Sohere, if there are no counter-attacks, only then will your ‘fireworks’stop. Otherwise, if one person sets off sparks, sparks will flyfrom you too, even if you do not wish them to. So the sparkswill cease only if everyone decides that they want to stop them,and not otherwise.Questioner: Does the new code give its effect only in thenext life or can it give effect in this life too?Dadashri: What would happen if a potter were to placehis earthenware to bake in a kiln and then remove themprematurely within an hour?Your acceptance of, ‘The next life will be filled witheverything working well,’ is the reason why you have faith in meand keep listening to me for hours on end. In this life, yourspeech, which is the result of taped codes from your past life,will be exhausted and then your speech will not be hurtfulanymore.Questioner: So then, will one become silent (maun)?Dadashri: Yes, silence will be there. By silence it doesnot mean a silence where no words will be uttered; silencemeans only that speech which is necessary for basic worldlyinteractions will come forth. That which was filled into the ‘tank’will be emptied for sure.Dadashri: Yes, a ‘beautiful’ code is bound to come!Questioner: So does one have to attain a new body forthe new code? Instead, what I want is that ‘no code berecorded.’Dadashri: This is for just one life. You are not going tohave codes like these later on. Those who do not have foullanguage today have not changed the code, and those who havefoul language have changed the code, so their speech will change.Therefore, those who have changed it have taken note, whereasthose who have not have missed out. When someone asks me,‘Dada, when will my speech improve?’ …from that can we notdeduce that he is changing the code?Questioner: The one who wants liberation (moksha) shouldnot record any code, should he? What should one do for that?Dadashri: You will not have any difficulty on your pathto moksha. Whatever codes are needed to go to moksha willarise in your next life. Now, whatever ‘stock’ you accumulateby asking me, you will get exactly that code in the next life. Youstill have one more life, do you not?Questioner: What are the codes of a Tirthankara’sspeech like?Dadashri: They have decided on such a code that, ‘Nota single living being be hurt to the slightest extent, by my speech.Definitely not only hurt any living being but also not hurt thefoundation of any living being; not even that of a tree!’ Suchcodes occur only to the enlightened, fully liberated beings(Tirthankars).Questioner: What kind of awareness should be therewhen speaking?Dadashri: The awareness of, ‘Who will be listening andhow will he or she be affected by these words?’Aptavani-62526Aptavani-6Protection of the EgoQuestioner: You said that speech comes out through theego.Dadashri: It is like this – there is nothing wrong withspeaking; speech is a code word. It gets expressed and the soundscome out, but you should not protect or defend (rakshan) speech.Questioner: Does ‘not protecting speech’ mean that oneshould not feel, ‘I am right in what I said?’Dadashri: ‘I am right’ is the protection (rakshan). Thereis nothing wrong if there is no protection. It will not hurt anyone.When you protect your ego, then it hurts the other person.A little child will not feel hurt even if I were to spank hima lot, but if you were to merely tap him in anger it will make himcry profusely. Therefore, the child does not get upset becauseof physical pain but because his ego is hurt.The scripture writers have said that the ego is such anattribute that it makes everyone completely blind. It creates enmityeven among brothers. It will make one think and wish for financialruin of his own brother; even a father will wish that his son bereduced to nothing. What damage can the ego not do? Therefore,one should recognize and understand, ‘What is the significanceof this ego within, as far as my welfare is concerned?’Questioner: But do we not need the ego to do ourwork?Dadashri: The ego to do the work is always there. Whosays no to that ego? But you should recognize and have theunderstanding of the ego that has caused so much havoc andthereafter you will have no attraction or love for it.Questioner: What should I do when the other persondoes not improve, no matter how hard I try?Dadashri: One has not improved himself and he tries toimprove others – instead it only leads to the other personbecoming spoiled even more. The moment one tries to improvethe other person, the other person becomes worse. Whathappens when the one trying to improve others is spoiled himself?The easiest thing is to improve the self. If you haven’t improvedyourself and you try to improve others, then it is meaningless.Until you improve your ‘self,’ your words will fall on deaf earsand bounce back; if you say, “Don’t do it like this,” then theother person will say, “Go away. I will do it exactly like that!”You have just made him worse!There is no need for ego in this at all. If you try to getyour work done through ego and intimidation, the other personwill get even more aggravated. People will always be sincereto the one who does not have an ego; there is morality withsuch a one.We should not have ego; it hurts everyone. Even a smallchild will become obstinate if you call him ‘stupid’ or ‘senseless’or ‘an idiot’! But if you tell him, ‘Son, you are a very good boy,’he will immediately do what you ask of him.Questioner: And if we praise him excessively with, “Youare very smart,” then will he also become spoiled?Dadashri: Whether we call him stupid or smart, eitherway he will get spoiled. The reason we call him ‘smart’ is so hisego gets encouragement; and if we call him ‘stupid’ then it willhave a reverse psychological effect on him. If you tell a goodperson he is foolish and mad fifty times or so, then he will beginto doubt himself, ‘Maybe I really am foolish!’ In thinking thisway, he will become mad. That is why I give encouragementeven to a mad person by telling him, ‘Nobody in this world isas good and wise as you are.’ Always take the positive in thisworld. Do not go towards the negative. There is a solution(upaya) for the positive. If I tell you that you are smart, and ifAptavani-62526Aptavani-6Protection of the EgoQuestioner: You said that speech comes out through theego.Dadashri: It is like this – there is nothing wrong withspeaking; speech is a code word. It gets expressed and the soundscome out, but you should not protect or defend (rakshan) speech.Questioner: Does ‘not protecting speech’ mean that oneshould not feel, ‘I am right in what I said?’Dadashri: ‘I am right’ is the protection (rakshan). Thereis nothing wrong if there is no protection. It will not hurt anyone.When you protect your ego, then it hurts the other person.A little child will not feel hurt even if I were to spank hima lot, but if you were to merely tap him in anger it will make himcry profusely. Therefore, the child does not get upset becauseof physical pain but because his ego is hurt.The scripture writers have said that the ego is such anattribute that it makes everyone completely blind. It creates enmityeven among brothers. It will make one think and wish for financialruin of his own brother; even a father will wish that his son bereduced to nothing. What damage can the ego not do? Therefore,one should recognize and understand, ‘What is the significanceof this ego within, as far as my welfare is concerned?’Questioner: But do we not need the ego to do ourwork?Dadashri: The ego to do the work is always there. Whosays no to that ego? But you should recognize and have theunderstanding of the ego that has caused so much havoc andthereafter you will have no attraction or love for it.Questioner: What should I do when the other persondoes not improve, no matter how hard I try?Dadashri: One has not improved himself and he tries toimprove others – instead it only leads to the other personbecoming spoiled even more. The moment one tries to improvethe other person, the other person becomes worse. Whathappens when the one trying to improve others is spoiled himself?The easiest thing is to improve the self. If you haven’t improvedyourself and you try to improve others, then it is meaningless.Until you improve your ‘self,’ your words will fall on deaf earsand bounce back; if you say, “Don’t do it like this,” then theother person will say, “Go away. I will do it exactly like that!”You have just made him worse!There is no need for ego in this at all. If you try to getyour work done through ego and intimidation, the other personwill get even more aggravated. People will always be sincereto the one who does not have an ego; there is morality withsuch a one.We should not have ego; it hurts everyone. Even a smallchild will become obstinate if you call him ‘stupid’ or ‘senseless’or ‘an idiot’! But if you tell him, ‘Son, you are a very good boy,’he will immediately do what you ask of him.Questioner: And if we praise him excessively with, “Youare very smart,” then will he also become spoiled?Dadashri: Whether we call him stupid or smart, eitherway he will get spoiled. The reason we call him ‘smart’ is so hisego gets encouragement; and if we call him ‘stupid’ then it willhave a reverse psychological effect on him. If you tell a goodperson he is foolish and mad fifty times or so, then he will beginto doubt himself, ‘Maybe I really am foolish!’ In thinking thisway, he will become mad. That is why I give encouragementeven to a mad person by telling him, ‘Nobody in this world isas good and wise as you are.’ Always take the positive in thisworld. Do not go towards the negative. There is a solution(upaya) for the positive. If I tell you that you are smart, and ifAptavani-62728Aptavani-6your ego gets excessively encouraged, then I know when to‘slap’ it gently. Otherwise, it will get on the wrong track and, ifwe do not encourage it, then it will not even progress.The moment you recognize that ‘ego is harmful,’ everythingwill become straightforward. It is not worth protecting the ego;the ego itself is such that it will naturally protect itself.What is the definition of the worldly life? It is giving andthen taking or else it is taking and then giving. ‘I’ do not giveanything to anyone and ‘I’ do not take anything from anyone.And no one gives to me; ‘I’ remain as the Self.Change your worldly dealings knowing that you will haveto take back whatever you give. Therefore, give only if you canafford to take it back when someone comes to return it.If you go into a step well and say out loud, ‘You are arogue,’ the echo of the step well will say, ‘You are a rogue,’back at you. And if you say, ‘You are the Lord of the fourteenworlds,’ the well will say, ‘You are the Lord of the fourteenworlds.’ Therefore, you should say what you like to hear. Youshould project what you like. This worldly life is all your ownprojection. God has not interfered in it at all.Do not call anyone stupid in this world. Only say they aresmart or they are nice, then your work will get done. One manwas telling his water buffalo, ‘You are very nice, dear. You arevery smart and understanding.’ I asked him, ‘Why are you sayingthis to the buffalo?’ He said to me, ‘She will stop giving me milkif I do not say this.’ If a water buffalo can understand this thenwhy would humans not understand?An Interfering Intellect Gives Rise to ClashesThis world is relative. It is full of worldly interaction. Youcannot say a word to anyone. And if there is absolute humility(param vinaya), then you cannot even look at anyone’sshortcomings or faults. It is not worth looking for faults in anyonein this world. The person looking for fault does not realize whatliabilities he incurs in doing so.Questioner: I do not look for faults or point out mistakesin the other person. I am speaking only for his progress.Dadashri: You should not be looking out for his progress.Nature automatically looks after his progress. You should nothave a desire to make the other person progress. Nature keepsdoing its work for sure. You should take care of your ownobligations.The intellect (buddhi) will trouble you by showing you,‘This will happen if you do this, and that will happen if you doit that way.’ Nothing happens. No one can do anything. Naturecontinues to do its own work. No one comes seeking advice;people just continue dishing out unsolicited advice.If we were to listen to the intellect, then the first rule forour satsang here would be, ‘You can only sit in this way; youcannot sit any other way!’ Where there is true religion, a law of‘no laws’ is the main principle there.Here, we do not have a need for the word ‘intellect(buddhi).’ Try to push away the intellect that makes you interfereand cause conflicts; there is no problem with the intellect thatdoes not lead to this. You will have to understand, will you not?How long can this go on? The intellect will make you emotional.You are not going to benefit anything from this. Everythingdepends on vyavasthit. Here no question remains for the onewho has the slightest faith in vyavasthit. Here there is answerfor every question.Questioner: But you say that effort should be made rightuntil the very end?Dadashri: Where do you have to make the effort? EffortAptavani-62728Aptavani-6your ego gets excessively encouraged, then I know when to‘slap’ it gently. Otherwise, it will get on the wrong track and, ifwe do not encourage it, then it will not even progress.The moment you recognize that ‘ego is harmful,’ everythingwill become straightforward. It is not worth protecting the ego;the ego itself is such that it will naturally protect itself.What is the definition of the worldly life? It is giving andthen taking or else it is taking and then giving. ‘I’ do not giveanything to anyone and ‘I’ do not take anything from anyone.And no one gives to me; ‘I’ remain as the Self.Change your worldly dealings knowing that you will haveto take back whatever you give. Therefore, give only if you canafford to take it back when someone comes to return it.If you go into a step well and say out loud, ‘You are arogue,’ the echo of the step well will say, ‘You are a rogue,’back at you. And if you say, ‘You are the Lord of the fourteenworlds,’ the well will say, ‘You are the Lord of the fourteenworlds.’ Therefore, you should say what you like to hear. Youshould project what you like. This worldly life is all your ownprojection. God has not interfered in it at all.Do not call anyone stupid in this world. Only say they aresmart or they are nice, then your work will get done. One manwas telling his water buffalo, ‘You are very nice, dear. You arevery smart and understanding.’ I asked him, ‘Why are you sayingthis to the buffalo?’ He said to me, ‘She will stop giving me milkif I do not say this.’ If a water buffalo can understand this thenwhy would humans not understand?An Interfering Intellect Gives Rise to ClashesThis world is relative. It is full of worldly interaction. Youcannot say a word to anyone. And if there is absolute humility(param vinaya), then you cannot even look at anyone’sshortcomings or faults. It is not worth looking for faults in anyonein this world. The person looking for fault does not realize whatliabilities he incurs in doing so.Questioner: I do not look for faults or point out mistakesin the other person. I am speaking only for his progress.Dadashri: You should not be looking out for his progress.Nature automatically looks after his progress. You should nothave a desire to make the other person progress. Nature keepsdoing its work for sure. You should take care of your ownobligations.The intellect (buddhi) will trouble you by showing you,‘This will happen if you do this, and that will happen if you doit that way.’ Nothing happens. No one can do anything. Naturecontinues to do its own work. No one comes seeking advice;people just continue dishing out unsolicited advice.If we were to listen to the intellect, then the first rule forour satsang here would be, ‘You can only sit in this way; youcannot sit any other way!’ Where there is true religion, a law of‘no laws’ is the main principle there.Here, we do not have a need for the word ‘intellect(buddhi).’ Try to push away the intellect that makes you interfereand cause conflicts; there is no problem with the intellect thatdoes not lead to this. You will have to understand, will you not?How long can this go on? The intellect will make you emotional.You are not going to benefit anything from this. Everythingdepends on vyavasthit. Here no question remains for the onewho has the slightest faith in vyavasthit. Here there is answerfor every question.Questioner: But you say that effort should be made rightuntil the very end?Dadashri: Where do you have to make the effort? EffortAptavani-62930Aptavani-6is needed for dealing with our interactions in the worldly life.There is no dealing of worldly life interactions here in satsang.Here there is the interaction of pure interaction (shuddhavyavahar). There is absolutely no need for the intellect inshuddha vyavahar.Questioner: Should we use the intellect as a servant ornot?Dadashri: No. there is no need for the intellect when youenter the ‘room of the Self’ wherein there is absolute, pureinteraction (shuddha vyavahar). There is pure interaction hereand outside it is worldly in nature. Even in the worldly life, if theintellect (buddhi) becomes bothersome, you have to let go of it.After saying ‘vyavasthit,’ there is no room for intellectualinterference (vikalp). Those who remain within the Agnas of theGnani Purush will understand what pure interaction is.* * * * *[3]Karma Bondage by Signature (Endorsement)‘Our’ karmas are per our choice, whereas your karmamakes you dance. ‘We’ have freedom therefore ‘we’ remain inpeace. Your karmas too will end gradually and then they will notcome even if you were to invite them. They are not sitting idle,are they? Whatever you had endorsed in the past life is whatcomes calling; otherwise, nothing would come. Whatever typesof contracts you had signed are what will come calling. If it wasone of entanglements, then you will have entanglements. If it wasclear and easy, then clear and easy ones will come. You know,they will even pull you out of satsang and take you away; youhave no choice.Questioner: Maintaining a relationship with it is attachment(raag); is that why it comes calling?Dadashri: It is all nothing but attachment and abhorrence(raag and dwesh). It is only because you have endorsed withthe signature of ‘I am Chandubhai’ in the past life that raag wascreated within ‘him’ (your relative-self); otherwise, there is noone to bother you!There are not as many ‘signatures’ endorsed as you maythink. It is considered an endorsement when it is typed once(past life) and typed over again (current life). So there are notas many as you think.Penance Increases the Degrees of theKnowledge as the SelfThere are all kinds of conduct starting from the level ofAptavani-62930Aptavani-6is needed for dealing with our interactions in the worldly life.There is no dealing of worldly life interactions here in satsang.Here there is the interaction of pure interaction (shuddhavyavahar). There is absolutely no need for the intellect inshuddha vyavahar.Questioner: Should we use the intellect as a servant ornot?Dadashri: No. there is no need for the intellect when youenter the ‘room of the Self’ wherein there is absolute, pureinteraction (shuddha vyavahar). There is pure interaction hereand outside it is worldly in nature. Even in the worldly life, if theintellect (buddhi) becomes bothersome, you have to let go of it.After saying ‘vyavasthit,’ there is no room for intellectualinterference (vikalp). Those who remain within the Agnas of theGnani Purush will understand what pure interaction is.* * * * *[3]Karma Bondage by Signature (Endorsement)‘Our’ karmas are per our choice, whereas your karmamakes you dance. ‘We’ have freedom therefore ‘we’ remain inpeace. Your karmas too will end gradually and then they will notcome even if you were to invite them. They are not sitting idle,are they? Whatever you had endorsed in the past life is whatcomes calling; otherwise, nothing would come. Whatever typesof contracts you had signed are what will come calling. If it wasone of entanglements, then you will have entanglements. If it wasclear and easy, then clear and easy ones will come. You know,they will even pull you out of satsang and take you away; youhave no choice.Questioner: Maintaining a relationship with it is attachment(raag); is that why it comes calling?Dadashri: It is all nothing but attachment and abhorrence(raag and dwesh). It is only because you have endorsed withthe signature of ‘I am Chandubhai’ in the past life that raag wascreated within ‘him’ (your relative-self); otherwise, there is noone to bother you!There are not as many ‘signatures’ endorsed as you maythink. It is considered an endorsement when it is typed once(past life) and typed over again (current life). So there are notas many as you think.Penance Increases the Degrees of theKnowledge as the SelfThere are all kinds of conduct starting from the level ofAptavani-63132Aptavani-6Dadashri: What does ‘doing penance’ mean? When pastkarmic accounts come into fruition, the fruits may be sweet orbitter. One has to ‘do’ penance when the fruit is sweet, as wellas when it is bitter. Discharge karma will not refrain from bringingits sweet or bitter fruit, will it?Questioner: If this man were to insult me with foullanguage, I would immediately realize that it is the fruition of mykarma. He is blameless. So where is the penance in that?Dadashri: This is the penance of Gnan. ‘You’ do nothave to do any penance in this. To ‘see’ with equanimity whenthe mind and the intellect heat up within is penance. One is notto become one with the body and the mind (tanmayakar), notto become ‘Chandulal’ in this. Typically, people heat up alongwith the mind and the intellect.Questioner: Does that mean one has to do penance?Dadashri: Penance does not have to be ‘done’; it occursnaturally.Questioner: As long as penance is occurring, there isincompleteness (apurnata), is there not?Dadashri: Incompleteness remains all the way, until oneattains absolute enlightenment (keval gnan). Mine is consideredan incomplete state and so is yours.Doing penance increases the degrees of the knowledgeas the Self within (gnandasha). Penance gives rise to theultimate purity (shuddhata). I, too, cannot be considered ‘100%pure gold’ and neither can you. Even the Gnani has penance ofthe body.Pratikraman of the Akram Path and theKramic PathQuestioner: You have said that in the path of Akramworldly conduct (vyavahar charitra) all the way to the conductas the Self (atma charitra). There is knowledge (gnan), vision(darshan), conduct (charitra) and penance (tapa). In all this,the conduct as the Self (atma charitra) is the ultimate conduct.Worldly conduct (vyavahar charitra) is visible and evident, butyou cannot have a snapshot of conduct of the Self, because itis not tangible. There is no snapshot of the ultimate four –knowledge, vision, conduct and penance.Questioner: Which is the ultimate penance (tapa)?Dadashri: When someone insults you and you remembermy words (Dadashri’s fourth Agna to settle with equanimity) atthat time and decide, ‘I want to settle (this account) withequanimity,’ that is considered penance. You will experiencepenance (tapa) at that time.All external penance is considered overt penance (sthooltapa). It is penance that others can know or see and its fruit orreward is worldly happiness. Inner penance is subtle penance(sookshma tapa) and its reward is liberation (moksha).When someone insults you with foul language, at that timethe mind, intellect, chit and ego will ‘heat up’ within, and whenyou continue ‘seeing’ this (reaction within) until it all cools down,it is considered subtle penance (sookshma tapa).If a mother-in-law scolds all the time, a smart daughter-in-law will continue to reap the opportunity of the subtle penance.Such penance is freely available, sitting at home, in India. TheGanges River (considered holy in India with purifying properties)flows all the way to the home and yet people do not takeadvantage of it, do they? When your husband says somethingunpleasant, you should ‘do’ penance at that time.Questioner: Where is the place for penance in AkramVignan (science of Dadashri’s step-less path to liberation)?Aptavani-63132Aptavani-6Dadashri: What does ‘doing penance’ mean? When pastkarmic accounts come into fruition, the fruits may be sweet orbitter. One has to ‘do’ penance when the fruit is sweet, as wellas when it is bitter. Discharge karma will not refrain from bringingits sweet or bitter fruit, will it?Questioner: If this man were to insult me with foullanguage, I would immediately realize that it is the fruition of mykarma. He is blameless. So where is the penance in that?Dadashri: This is the penance of Gnan. ‘You’ do nothave to do any penance in this. To ‘see’ with equanimity whenthe mind and the intellect heat up within is penance. One is notto become one with the body and the mind (tanmayakar), notto become ‘Chandulal’ in this. Typically, people heat up alongwith the mind and the intellect.Questioner: Does that mean one has to do penance?Dadashri: Penance does not have to be ‘done’; it occursnaturally.Questioner: As long as penance is occurring, there isincompleteness (apurnata), is there not?Dadashri: Incompleteness remains all the way, until oneattains absolute enlightenment (keval gnan). Mine is consideredan incomplete state and so is yours.Doing penance increases the degrees of the knowledgeas the Self within (gnandasha). Penance gives rise to theultimate purity (shuddhata). I, too, cannot be considered ‘100%pure gold’ and neither can you. Even the Gnani has penance ofthe body.Pratikraman of the Akram Path and theKramic PathQuestioner: You have said that in the path of Akramworldly conduct (vyavahar charitra) all the way to the conductas the Self (atma charitra). There is knowledge (gnan), vision(darshan), conduct (charitra) and penance (tapa). In all this,the conduct as the Self (atma charitra) is the ultimate conduct.Worldly conduct (vyavahar charitra) is visible and evident, butyou cannot have a snapshot of conduct of the Self, because itis not tangible. There is no snapshot of the ultimate four –knowledge, vision, conduct and penance.Questioner: Which is the ultimate penance (tapa)?Dadashri: When someone insults you and you remembermy words (Dadashri’s fourth Agna to settle with equanimity) atthat time and decide, ‘I want to settle (this account) withequanimity,’ that is considered penance. You will experiencepenance (tapa) at that time.All external penance is considered overt penance (sthooltapa). It is penance that others can know or see and its fruit orreward is worldly happiness. Inner penance is subtle penance(sookshma tapa) and its reward is liberation (moksha).When someone insults you with foul language, at that timethe mind, intellect, chit and ego will ‘heat up’ within, and whenyou continue ‘seeing’ this (reaction within) until it all cools down,it is considered subtle penance (sookshma tapa).If a mother-in-law scolds all the time, a smart daughter-in-law will continue to reap the opportunity of the subtle penance.Such penance is freely available, sitting at home, in India. TheGanges River (considered holy in India with purifying properties)flows all the way to the home and yet people do not takeadvantage of it, do they? When your husband says somethingunpleasant, you should ‘do’ penance at that time.Questioner: Where is the place for penance in AkramVignan (science of Dadashri’s step-less path to liberation)?Aptavani-63334Aptavani-6Vignan there is no partiality or side-taking, so how can there benew construction without destruction of the old?Dadashri: This is not a path of construction and neitheris it a path of destruction. This path is only for those who wantto attain liberation (moksha). There is another path for thosewho do not want liberation. ‘We’ give a different belief to thosewho want it. It is extremely difficult to make progress on the Kramicpath, the traditional path to liberation; nevertheless it is thepermanent path. No religion can work when there is no unity inwhat is going on in the mind, the speech and the action. Currently,is this not the state that prevails everywhere?So what do ‘we’ teach people of this current time cyclewhen they want to know religion?If you happen to tell a lie, there is no objection here. Evenif you lie in your mind, there is no objection, but now ask forforgiveness from the pure Soul of the one you have ‘hurt,’ coupledwith remorse of the wrongdoing (pratikraman), and make adecision that you will not tell any more lies (pratyakhyan). ‘We’teach people to do pratikraman.Questioner: We do pratikraman at night (raishi) andpratikraman in the morning (devshi). Is there anything wrongwith that?Dadashri: Pratikraman should be ‘shoot-on-sightpratikraman,’ meaning it should be done the instant you hurtanother being. You cannot afford to keep your debts pending.In the same manner, you cannot afford to keep any pratikramanpending.Questioner: Living beings are constantly binding karma,so should they be constantly doing pratikraman?Dadashri: Of course! They have to be done! There aresome people who have received Gnan Vidhi (mahatmas) whodo up to five hundred pratikramans a day.Questioner: That is reversal of aggression in thoughts,speech and actions by changing the inner intent (bhaavpratikraman). That is not the ritual of pratikraman traditionallypracticed by the Jains with verbal recitations (kriyapratikraman), is it?Dadashri: No, there is no pratikraman in visible actions(kriya). The most one gets in doing kriya pratikraman is acalm mind.Questioner: Is there a discharge of karma (nirjara) in it?Dadashri: Discharge is occurring for every living being.The intention to do pratikraman is good, and therefore thedischarge will be good. But pratikraman should be ‘shoot-on-sight pratikraman.’ What you (addressing the Jain questioner)are doing is effect-discharge pratikraman (dravyapratikraman). For liberation, reversal of aggression in thoughts,speech and actions by changing the inner intent (bhaavpratikraman) is needed.Questioner: There is inner intention (bhaav) along witheffect (dravya), is there not?Dadashri: No, only dravya pratikraman is taking place;there is no bhaav in it. This is because it is very difficult to havebhaav in this the current era (Kaliyug). Bhaav only arises whenthe Gnani Purush graces you by placing his hand on your head.Otherwise bhaav cannot arise.Who is a Gnani Purush? It is He who has no delving inthe state of the non-Self (parparinati), at all. He is constantlyin the state of the Self, day or night. His speech, conduct andhumility win over the minds of others. There is no trace ofadverse internal meditation that hurts the self (artadhyan) or ofadverse internal meditation that hurts the self and othersAptavani-63334Aptavani-6Vignan there is no partiality or side-taking, so how can there benew construction without destruction of the old?Dadashri: This is not a path of construction and neitheris it a path of destruction. This path is only for those who wantto attain liberation (moksha). There is another path for thosewho do not want liberation. ‘We’ give a different belief to thosewho want it. It is extremely difficult to make progress on the Kramicpath, the traditional path to liberation; nevertheless it is thepermanent path. No religion can work when there is no unity inwhat is going on in the mind, the speech and the action. Currently,is this not the state that prevails everywhere?So what do ‘we’ teach people of this current time cyclewhen they want to know religion?If you happen to tell a lie, there is no objection here. Evenif you lie in your mind, there is no objection, but now ask forforgiveness from the pure Soul of the one you have ‘hurt,’ coupledwith remorse of the wrongdoing (pratikraman), and make adecision that you will not tell any more lies (pratyakhyan). ‘We’teach people to do pratikraman.Questioner: We do pratikraman at night (raishi) andpratikraman in the morning (devshi). Is there anything wrongwith that?Dadashri: Pratikraman should be ‘shoot-on-sightpratikraman,’ meaning it should be done the instant you hurtanother being. You cannot afford to keep your debts pending.In the same manner, you cannot afford to keep any pratikramanpending.Questioner: Living beings are constantly binding karma,so should they be constantly doing pratikraman?Dadashri: Of course! They have to be done! There aresome people who have received Gnan Vidhi (mahatmas) whodo up to five hundred pratikramans a day.Questioner: That is reversal of aggression in thoughts,speech and actions by changing the inner intent (bhaavpratikraman). That is not the ritual of pratikraman traditionallypracticed by the Jains with verbal recitations (kriyapratikraman), is it?Dadashri: No, there is no pratikraman in visible actions(kriya). The most one gets in doing kriya pratikraman is acalm mind.Questioner: Is there a discharge of karma (nirjara) in it?Dadashri: Discharge is occurring for every living being.The intention to do pratikraman is good, and therefore thedischarge will be good. But pratikraman should be ‘shoot-on-sight pratikraman.’ What you (addressing the Jain questioner)are doing is effect-discharge pratikraman (dravyapratikraman). For liberation, reversal of aggression in thoughts,speech and actions by changing the inner intent (bhaavpratikraman) is needed.Questioner: There is inner intention (bhaav) along witheffect (dravya), is there not?Dadashri: No, only dravya pratikraman is taking place;there is no bhaav in it. This is because it is very difficult to havebhaav in this the current era (Kaliyug). Bhaav only arises whenthe Gnani Purush graces you by placing his hand on your head.Otherwise bhaav cannot arise.Who is a Gnani Purush? It is He who has no delving inthe state of the non-Self (parparinati), at all. He is constantlyin the state of the Self, day or night. His speech, conduct andhumility win over the minds of others. There is no trace ofadverse internal meditation that hurts the self (artadhyan) or ofadverse internal meditation that hurts the self and othersAptavani-63536Aptavani-6(raudradhyan). And with the total dissolution of the ego, andthe resultant tension-free state, his constant liberating laughter(mukta hasya) is clearly evident to all. Such a one, who is astorehouse of infinite attributes, is a Gnani Purush.The Gnani’s PratikramanIf you are sleeping on the ground and there are pebblespoking and bothering you from under the rug, would you notremove them? Pratikraman only needs to be done whereversomething bothers and upsets you. You remove whatever bothersyou and another removes whatever bothers him. Every person’spratikraman is different.There are cases where a person keeps obliging others butat home, his conduct is improper, so he has to do pratikramanthere. One has to do pratikraman whenever anything bothershim from within. Each individual’s pratikraman is different.‘We’ too have to do pratikraman; ‘ours’ is different andyours is different. You will not be able to see ‘our’ mistakesthrough your intellect. Therefore, they are subtlest(sookshmatam) and subtler (sookshmatar). ‘We’ have to dopratikraman for them. ‘We’ have to do pratikraman for notremaining in focused awareness as the Self (upayog).‘We’ can never afford to forego our focused awarenessas the Self (upayog), can we? ‘We’ have to talk with all thesepeople; ‘we’ have to answer their questions but, nevertheless,‘we’ have to remain in ‘our’ upayog.‘We’ do not have to do pratikraman as long asspontaneity and naturalness (sahajikata) are there. In the stateof naturalness, even ‘You’ do not have to do pratikraman. Anydeviation from naturalness requires pratikraman. Whenever yousee ‘us,’ you will see ‘us’ as spontaneous and natural (sahaj).You will see ‘us’ the same whenever you see ‘us.’ There will beno change in ‘our’ spontaneity and naturalness.* * * * *[4]The Effect of Hurting Someone Creates EchoesWhen you hurt someone, and you can see the pain youare causing that person, you have the awareness that you arehurting them. That is the attribute of the ego called sensitiveness.Sensitiveness is egoism of a kind. As that egoism begins todissolve, the other person will not experience any hurt. Theother person will get hurt as long as you have egoism.Questioner: This statement is applicable to your state.Should something not arise for us too?Dadashri: Yes, it must arise.Questioner: But this solution is only for one’s own self,is it not?Dadashri: Not just for one’s own self, but slowly andsurely the liberating solution (ukel) must occur for everyone. Itis such that only after attaining the liberating solution for one’sown self will there be the same for the other person. Others willfind a solution only when you have the solution. But as long asthe self, the worldly self, i.e., ‘Chandulal,’ has the egoism, theother person will, by rule, experience a reaction. Such egoismmust dissolve, for sure. All this is nothing but effects! There is no such thing asmisery (dukh) in this world. It is only and simply a wrong belief.One believes it to be the truth. Now according to one’s vision(drashti), that is how it really is, is it not? Therefore, what doyou have to do in order to remain unaffected? You have tobecome pure. Everything becomes pure when you become pure.Aptavani-63536Aptavani-6(raudradhyan). And with the total dissolution of the ego, andthe resultant tension-free state, his constant liberating laughter(mukta hasya) is clearly evident to all. Such a one, who is astorehouse of infinite attributes, is a Gnani Purush.The Gnani’s PratikramanIf you are sleeping on the ground and there are pebblespoking and bothering you from under the rug, would you notremove them? Pratikraman only needs to be done whereversomething bothers and upsets you. You remove whatever bothersyou and another removes whatever bothers him. Every person’spratikraman is different.There are cases where a person keeps obliging others butat home, his conduct is improper, so he has to do pratikramanthere. One has to do pratikraman whenever anything bothershim from within. Each individual’s pratikraman is different.‘We’ too have to do pratikraman; ‘ours’ is different andyours is different. You will not be able to see ‘our’ mistakesthrough your intellect. Therefore, they are subtlest(sookshmatam) and subtler (sookshmatar). ‘We’ have to dopratikraman for them. ‘We’ have to do pratikraman for notremaining in focused awareness as the Self (upayog).‘We’ can never afford to forego our focused awarenessas the Self (upayog), can we? ‘We’ have to talk with all thesepeople; ‘we’ have to answer their questions but, nevertheless,‘we’ have to remain in ‘our’ upayog.‘We’ do not have to do pratikraman as long asspontaneity and naturalness (sahajikata) are there. In the stateof naturalness, even ‘You’ do not have to do pratikraman. Anydeviation from naturalness requires pratikraman. Whenever yousee ‘us,’ you will see ‘us’ as spontaneous and natural (sahaj).You will see ‘us’ the same whenever you see ‘us.’ There will beno change in ‘our’ spontaneity and naturalness.* * * * *[4]The Effect of Hurting Someone Creates EchoesWhen you hurt someone, and you can see the pain youare causing that person, you have the awareness that you arehurting them. That is the attribute of the ego called sensitiveness.Sensitiveness is egoism of a kind. As that egoism begins todissolve, the other person will not experience any hurt. Theother person will get hurt as long as you have egoism.Questioner: This statement is applicable to your state.Should something not arise for us too?Dadashri: Yes, it must arise.Questioner: But this solution is only for one’s own self,is it not?Dadashri: Not just for one’s own self, but slowly andsurely the liberating solution (ukel) must occur for everyone. Itis such that only after attaining the liberating solution for one’sown self will there be the same for the other person. Others willfind a solution only when you have the solution. But as long asthe self, the worldly self, i.e., ‘Chandulal,’ has the egoism, theother person will, by rule, experience a reaction. Such egoismmust dissolve, for sure. All this is nothing but effects! There is no such thing asmisery (dukh) in this world. It is only and simply a wrong belief.One believes it to be the truth. Now according to one’s vision(drashti), that is how it really is, is it not? Therefore, what doyou have to do in order to remain unaffected? You have tobecome pure. Everything becomes pure when you become pure.Aptavani-63738Aptavani-6The other person is not at fault in any instance; how canhe be at fault? He believes that happiness is verily in the worldlylife and for him that is the fact. Now if we try to convince himthat his belief is wrong, then it is our mistake. There is somemistake and deficiency within us somewhere. I have seen thisthrough my own experience. As long as I was experiencingthose results within, those effects were experienced by otherstoo. When it stopped being there in the mind, when all doubts(shanka) left, then everything else, the reaction in others, lefttoo.I have climbed those ‘steps,’ I have experienced all that.Whatever you say, I have seen all those steps. I have seen allthat and, therefore, I can show you the path. The Gnan-knowledge that I give to you is the knowledge that is based frommy own experience of the ‘steps’ that I have taken. I am showingyou the same path from which I have gained experience. Thereis no other way, is there?Before, prior to Self-realization, whenever an unhappy(dukh) thought arose, ‘we’ would somehow manage to find,even to our detriment, a way of replacing it with a ‘happy’(sukh) thought or a happy idea. When worries arise, one goesoff to watch a movie or do something else. One allays, ortemporarily holds in abeyance, the suffering (dukh) even at theexpense of another person. He will try and push away thatmisery. After Gnan, however, he does not push away that miseryat the expense of anyone else. Therefore, he has to endure a lotof suffering (internal penance); that has been my experience. Itoo have experienced this because I would not show the mindany new thing (paryaya) for my own happiness at the expenseof another’s misery.And what does the world do? They get involved in otherthings in order to get rid of their pain. Any misery and they cashin on it. How big a stock is there within? ‘We’ are saying thatyou should go ahead and endure the suffering; do not spendyour ‘cash’ (spiritual energies) by substituting the suffering (thenaturally presenting penance) with another source of pleasure.Keep the spiritual energies intact.People resort to instant medicine when they have to endureany pain or suffering. Hey you! You are actually increasing your(karmic) liability and the problem. Suffering does not go awayby pushing it aside or doing something different to alleviate it. Ifyou ‘see’ the suffering with the experience of Gnan, you willdecrease the liability. Pain and suffering does not go away if itis pushed away. On the contrary, it will increase, and the originalamount remains to be faced. The one who overcomes oneepisode of suffering (one event of dukh), will overcome countlesssuffering. He becomes a ‘bandit,’ that is to say he becomesfearless in the face of suffering. I too have overcome countlesssuffering and hence I have become a ‘bandit’!* * * * *Aptavani-63738Aptavani-6The other person is not at fault in any instance; how canhe be at fault? He believes that happiness is verily in the worldlylife and for him that is the fact. Now if we try to convince himthat his belief is wrong, then it is our mistake. There is somemistake and deficiency within us somewhere. I have seen thisthrough my own experience. As long as I was experiencingthose results within, those effects were experienced by otherstoo. When it stopped being there in the mind, when all doubts(shanka) left, then everything else, the reaction in others, lefttoo.I have climbed those ‘steps,’ I have experienced all that.Whatever you say, I have seen all those steps. I have seen allthat and, therefore, I can show you the path. The Gnan-knowledge that I give to you is the knowledge that is based frommy own experience of the ‘steps’ that I have taken. I am showingyou the same path from which I have gained experience. Thereis no other way, is there?Before, prior to Self-realization, whenever an unhappy(dukh) thought arose, ‘we’ would somehow manage to find,even to our detriment, a way of replacing it with a ‘happy’(sukh) thought or a happy idea. When worries arise, one goesoff to watch a movie or do something else. One allays, ortemporarily holds in abeyance, the suffering (dukh) even at theexpense of another person. He will try and push away thatmisery. After Gnan, however, he does not push away that miseryat the expense of anyone else. Therefore, he has to endure a lotof suffering (internal penance); that has been my experience. Itoo have experienced this because I would not show the mindany new thing (paryaya) for my own happiness at the expenseof another’s misery.And what does the world do? They get involved in otherthings in order to get rid of their pain. Any misery and they cashin on it. How big a stock is there within? ‘We’ are saying thatyou should go ahead and endure the suffering; do not spendyour ‘cash’ (spiritual energies) by substituting the suffering (thenaturally presenting penance) with another source of pleasure.Keep the spiritual energies intact.People resort to instant medicine when they have to endureany pain or suffering. Hey you! You are actually increasing your(karmic) liability and the problem. Suffering does not go awayby pushing it aside or doing something different to alleviate it. Ifyou ‘see’ the suffering with the experience of Gnan, you willdecrease the liability. Pain and suffering does not go away if itis pushed away. On the contrary, it will increase, and the originalamount remains to be faced. The one who overcomes oneepisode of suffering (one event of dukh), will overcome countlesssuffering. He becomes a ‘bandit,’ that is to say he becomesfearless in the face of suffering. I too have overcome countlesssuffering and hence I have become a ‘bandit’!* * * * *Aptavani-63940Aptavani-6[5]Entanglements of the Worldly LifeQuestioner: In worldly interactions (vyavahar) whenkarmic tubers sprout, some sprout so heavily that it becomesvery difficult to find a solution.Dadashri: These five sentences of ‘Ours,’ the Five Agnas,are such that they will eventually bring a solution/closure(samadhan) for you. Otherwise, there is no other way to finda solution/closure. That verily is why this world is a mysteriouspuzzle. “The world is the puzzle itself.” It can never be solved.The whole day one is entangled in the worldly life, so how canyou progress spiritually? Puzzles will keep arising. They arise themoment you meet someone.Questioner: As one puzzle ends, another one is poised,waiting with its mouth open.Dadashri: Yes, this worldly life is a museum of puzzles.But if you realize who you really are, then your salvation is there!Otherwise, this puzzle is there for you to drown in. All thesuffering really belongs to another entity, the non-Self (the relative-self). Realizing even this much is experiential knowledge (anubhavgnan). That experience is, ‘This suffering is not mine, it is of thenon-Self’; even then there is salvation.The Amazing Web of the Doer WithinThere are all kinds of ‘k’s within you. ‘K’ means‘karavnara,’ - the one that makes you do. The lobhak makesyou greedy; mohak causes you to have moha, illusionaryattachment; krodhak makes you angry; chetak makes youcautious. Mohak is the one who casts the illusion over You,even when you do not want to.Questioner: The mind shows me, ‘Why bother with allthis and create more problems?’ Why should I think aboutwhether something is binding me or not?Dadashri: No, such a thought will come even when youdo not think about it. The ‘k’ within (karavnara, the one withinthat makes you do) will make you do it. It will continue toentangle you. This world is such that it is not worth thinkingabout anybody. Yet when such thoughts arise, what can you do?You have to take a beating. This world is not for worrying aboutothers. This world is for you to make a ‘safe side’ for yourself.Questioner: Now how can I get rid of this intellectualinterference (panchat) in the affairs of others that has taken holdin my mind?Dadashri: You have to recognize whether it is your‘paternal relative’ or an enemy, whether it is a friend or a foe.When you understand that it is your enemy, then you will notentertain it.Compassion and Equanimity of the Gnani PurushQuestioner: But it (intellectual interference, panchat) isstuck in my head so strongly that it will not go away.Dadashri: Just look! I can see how much reverence youhave for me. I recognize that very well. Nevertheless, some daythe mind will show you ‘Dada is like this’ (it will show negativethings about Dada).Questioner: Oh yes, I even cursed Dada; not Dada butAmbalal Patel!Dadashri: I am aware of all that, even sitting here athome – how that ‘k’ (karavnara), the one within that makesyou do, entraps you and makes you do it (karavdave) andAptavani-63940Aptavani-6[5]Entanglements of the Worldly LifeQuestioner: In worldly interactions (vyavahar) whenkarmic tubers sprout, some sprout so heavily that it becomesvery difficult to find a solution.Dadashri: These five sentences of ‘Ours,’ the Five Agnas,are such that they will eventually bring a solution/closure(samadhan) for you. Otherwise, there is no other way to finda solution/closure. That verily is why this world is a mysteriouspuzzle. “The world is the puzzle itself.” It can never be solved.The whole day one is entangled in the worldly life, so how canyou progress spiritually? Puzzles will keep arising. They arise themoment you meet someone.Questioner: As one puzzle ends, another one is poised,waiting with its mouth open.Dadashri: Yes, this worldly life is a museum of puzzles.But if you realize who you really are, then your salvation is there!Otherwise, this puzzle is there for you to drown in. All thesuffering really belongs to another entity, the non-Self (the relative-self). Realizing even this much is experiential knowledge (anubhavgnan). That experience is, ‘This suffering is not mine, it is of thenon-Self’; even then there is salvation.The Amazing Web of the Doer WithinThere are all kinds of ‘k’s within you. ‘K’ means‘karavnara,’ - the one that makes you do. The lobhak makesyou greedy; mohak causes you to have moha, illusionaryattachment; krodhak makes you angry; chetak makes youcautious. Mohak is the one who casts the illusion over You,even when you do not want to.Questioner: The mind shows me, ‘Why bother with allthis and create more problems?’ Why should I think aboutwhether something is binding me or not?Dadashri: No, such a thought will come even when youdo not think about it. The ‘k’ within (karavnara, the one withinthat makes you do) will make you do it. It will continue toentangle you. This world is such that it is not worth thinkingabout anybody. Yet when such thoughts arise, what can you do?You have to take a beating. This world is not for worrying aboutothers. This world is for you to make a ‘safe side’ for yourself.Questioner: Now how can I get rid of this intellectualinterference (panchat) in the affairs of others that has taken holdin my mind?Dadashri: You have to recognize whether it is your‘paternal relative’ or an enemy, whether it is a friend or a foe.When you understand that it is your enemy, then you will notentertain it.Compassion and Equanimity of the Gnani PurushQuestioner: But it (intellectual interference, panchat) isstuck in my head so strongly that it will not go away.Dadashri: Just look! I can see how much reverence youhave for me. I recognize that very well. Nevertheless, some daythe mind will show you ‘Dada is like this’ (it will show negativethings about Dada).Questioner: Oh yes, I even cursed Dada; not Dada butAmbalal Patel!Dadashri: I am aware of all that, even sitting here athome – how that ‘k’ (karavnara), the one within that makesyou do, entraps you and makes you do it (karavdave) andAptavani-64142Aptavani-6There is No Closure for Suspicion (Shanka)Questioner: But, Dada, it is difficult to arrive at a closure(samadhan).Dadashri: How can there be closure? There can neverbe closure for suspicion or doubt in the world. There can beclosure for a true fact, but never for suspicion.What is suspicion (shanka)? It is a tool to ruin the self.Suspicion is the worst thing in this world and it is one hundredpercent wrong. And typically it exists where there is no (needfor) suspicion. Wherever one keeps faith, therein lies the (needfor) suspicion and where suspicion exists, there is nothing there.In this manner, you take a beating from all sides. ‘We’ haveseen through Gnan that you continue to get hurt in every way.Questioner: I did not understand this point aboutsuspicion of, ‘Wherever we have faith, therein lies the (needfor) suspicion.’Dadashri: It is like this: On what basis are you able tomeasure this vision? Are you able to trust what you see? Lookhere! Even when you see and witness something, it turns out tobe wrong! You see through knowledge gained through yourintellect (buddhi) and thoughts. That will give you such a beatingthat it will reduce you to nothing! That is why ‘we’ tell you tostay away from the intellect. It will not let you sit in peace evenfor a moment. In your case, everything is good. Your overt,expressed intent (bhavna) is good and that is why you got backon track.Questioner: After that, I put a lot of emphasis on doingpratikraman (apology to the pure Soul of one you have ‘hurt’coupled with the remorse of any wrongdoing). I used to get upat dawn and do pratikraman.Dadashri: You learned about pratikraman here and thatmakes you take a beating for it! And for that, ‘we’ havecompassion for you that after taking the beating you will one daybecome wise. One day you will realize, ‘Why are they, the k’s,beating me? What do I, the Self, have to do with it? Whatdoes Dada have to do with it at all? Why did I ever befriendthem that now I have to suffer?’ You will come to this realizationsome day.Questioner: Dada, I have already experienced it; theexperience is not yet to come, it has already come! My experiencewas that I used to feel ‘this old man is harassing me and that Iam going to make this ‘Pateliya’ (derogatory for ‘Patel,’ Dada’slast name) a ‘sacrificial coconut’ (sacrificial lamb).’ But this oldman (Dadashri) made everything better! I told myself, ‘I am freeat last.’ But, Dada, I cursed you so much that there was nomore cursing left. But from within I continued to feel, ‘This Dadais right.’Dadashri: ‘We’ know all that even sitting at home. ‘We’also told you once that ‘we’ do not have any objections, evenif you say negative things about ‘us.’ You just keep coming here.One day, all that will be cleansed! ‘We’ put no value to whatevernegative things you say. All ‘we’ are focused on is to see whatis beneficial for you and your spiritual progress. ‘We’ continueto look out for you, your family and everyone else’s welfare andspiritual good. You speak according to your inherent nature, thenon-Self (prakruti), but your vision is really not so. Even yourtendencies are not so and neither are your thoughts. ‘We’ seeand ‘we’ know all that.Therefore, learn to recognize whether the ‘baggage within’is your friend or your enemy who gives you a beating. Whensuch enemies come, say, ‘Welcome, this is your home,’ andthen send them away.Do you understand and realize that whatever it (the k)shows you within is wrong; it is one hundred percent wrong.Aptavani-64142Aptavani-6There is No Closure for Suspicion (Shanka)Questioner: But, Dada, it is difficult to arrive at a closure(samadhan).Dadashri: How can there be closure? There can neverbe closure for suspicion or doubt in the world. There can beclosure for a true fact, but never for suspicion.What is suspicion (shanka)? It is a tool to ruin the self.Suspicion is the worst thing in this world and it is one hundredpercent wrong. And typically it exists where there is no (needfor) suspicion. Wherever one keeps faith, therein lies the (needfor) suspicion and where suspicion exists, there is nothing there.In this manner, you take a beating from all sides. ‘We’ haveseen through Gnan that you continue to get hurt in every way.Questioner: I did not understand this point aboutsuspicion of, ‘Wherever we have faith, therein lies the (needfor) suspicion.’Dadashri: It is like this: On what basis are you able tomeasure this vision? Are you able to trust what you see? Lookhere! Even when you see and witness something, it turns out tobe wrong! You see through knowledge gained through yourintellect (buddhi) and thoughts. That will give you such a beatingthat it will reduce you to nothing! That is why ‘we’ tell you tostay away from the intellect. It will not let you sit in peace evenfor a moment. In your case, everything is good. Your overt,expressed intent (bhavna) is good and that is why you got backon track.Questioner: After that, I put a lot of emphasis on doingpratikraman (apology to the pure Soul of one you have ‘hurt’coupled with the remorse of any wrongdoing). I used to get upat dawn and do pratikraman.Dadashri: You learned about pratikraman here and thatmakes you take a beating for it! And for that, ‘we’ havecompassion for you that after taking the beating you will one daybecome wise. One day you will realize, ‘Why are they, the k’s,beating me? What do I, the Self, have to do with it? Whatdoes Dada have to do with it at all? Why did I ever befriendthem that now I have to suffer?’ You will come to this realizationsome day.Questioner: Dada, I have already experienced it; theexperience is not yet to come, it has already come! My experiencewas that I used to feel ‘this old man is harassing me and that Iam going to make this ‘Pateliya’ (derogatory for ‘Patel,’ Dada’slast name) a ‘sacrificial coconut’ (sacrificial lamb).’ But this oldman (Dadashri) made everything better! I told myself, ‘I am freeat last.’ But, Dada, I cursed you so much that there was nomore cursing left. But from within I continued to feel, ‘This Dadais right.’Dadashri: ‘We’ know all that even sitting at home. ‘We’also told you once that ‘we’ do not have any objections, evenif you say negative things about ‘us.’ You just keep coming here.One day, all that will be cleansed! ‘We’ put no value to whatevernegative things you say. All ‘we’ are focused on is to see whatis beneficial for you and your spiritual progress. ‘We’ continueto look out for you, your family and everyone else’s welfare andspiritual good. You speak according to your inherent nature, thenon-Self (prakruti), but your vision is really not so. Even yourtendencies are not so and neither are your thoughts. ‘We’ seeand ‘we’ know all that.Therefore, learn to recognize whether the ‘baggage within’is your friend or your enemy who gives you a beating. Whensuch enemies come, say, ‘Welcome, this is your home,’ andthen send them away.Do you understand and realize that whatever it (the k)shows you within is wrong; it is one hundred percent wrong.Aptavani-64344Aptavani-6helped you a lot. You are alive because of pratikraman. Yourhome is limited to just this much. I have a home of so manypeople. However, there is no suspicion towards anyone.Who Joins You in the Funeral Pyre?Questioner: So does that mean that I should not havethe belief that, ‘Whatever I say is correct’?Dadashri: Even if it is the truth, how does it concern ‘us,the Self’? What I am saying is that one has to go alone on hisfuneral pyre, does he not? So why carry the burden of all thisneedless strife?“It went on before you were born and will go on after you die.Never will worldly interactions end; relative is the worldly life…”“Janma pahela chalto ney mooa pachhi chalshey.Atake na koi di vyavahar re, sapeksha sansar re…” - NavneetOne is caught up in the same old misery for infinite lives.The wife and children are of this life, but one has had wife andchildren in every past life. He has done nothing but createdattachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh) and bound karma. Thereis no trace of those relations now! It is karma that keeps givingthe fruits. Sometimes it gives light and sometimes it gives darkness.Sometimes it gives a beating and sometimes it showers flowers.Can any relations be in this?This has been going on since time immemorial. Who arewe to ‘run’ all this? All we have to ‘see’ is how we can becomefree from our karma. ‘We’ the enlightened ones’ have nothingto do with the children. It is nothing but unnecessary burden.Everyone is subject to his karma. If there were such a thing asa true relationship, then everyone in the home would make adecision not to fight. But within an hour or two, they start fighting.This is because it is not under anyone’s control, for sure! It isall nothing but fruition of karma.Karmas unfold and they go off like fireworks! No one isa relation and no one is a beloved here! So where is the groundfor any doubts or suspicion here? ‘You’ are a pure Soul(Shuddhatma), and this ‘neighbor,’ the body, is the only onethat is going to hurt you and bring you pain and suffering. Andyour children are your ‘neighbor’s’ children. Why should ‘we’quarrel with them? And when the neighbor’s children do notlisten and you try to say something to them, they will say, ‘Howcan we be your children? We are ‘Shuddhatma’!’ No onecares about anyone else!Questioner: If we look at the bottom line, then everyonehas come to collect on their karmic debts. All we should beconcerned about when we are settling these karmic debts iswhether we are doing so with equanimity or not.Dadashri: When they are settled with equanimity, salvationis yours.Questioner: You graced me when I was misbehavingand being awkward and difficult. But this much is for sure:everything has been cleansed.Dadashri: It was more than enough that you stuck toDada the way you did. One day, you will understand the bottomline that this was correct.Questioner: You know, Dada, not one day! From thisday onwards! Who knows if tomorrow will even come?Therefore, grant me such energies that I can deal with whateverfew remaining karmas there are and that the intellect does nottake off on the wrong path.Dadashri: When you come here for an hour at a time,it will begin to dissolve slowly and eventually will come to anend.Aptavani-64344Aptavani-6helped you a lot. You are alive because of pratikraman. Yourhome is limited to just this much. I have a home of so manypeople. However, there is no suspicion towards anyone.Who Joins You in the Funeral Pyre?Questioner: So does that mean that I should not havethe belief that, ‘Whatever I say is correct’?Dadashri: Even if it is the truth, how does it concern ‘us,the Self’? What I am saying is that one has to go alone on hisfuneral pyre, does he not? So why carry the burden of all thisneedless strife?“It went on before you were born and will go on after you die.Never will worldly interactions end; relative is the worldly life…”“Janma pahela chalto ney mooa pachhi chalshey.Atake na koi di vyavahar re, sapeksha sansar re…” - NavneetOne is caught up in the same old misery for infinite lives.The wife and children are of this life, but one has had wife andchildren in every past life. He has done nothing but createdattachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh) and bound karma. Thereis no trace of those relations now! It is karma that keeps givingthe fruits. Sometimes it gives light and sometimes it gives darkness.Sometimes it gives a beating and sometimes it showers flowers.Can any relations be in this?This has been going on since time immemorial. Who arewe to ‘run’ all this? All we have to ‘see’ is how we can becomefree from our karma. ‘We’ the enlightened ones’ have nothingto do with the children. It is nothing but unnecessary burden.Everyone is subject to his karma. If there were such a thing asa true relationship, then everyone in the home would make adecision not to fight. But within an hour or two, they start fighting.This is because it is not under anyone’s control, for sure! It isall nothing but fruition of karma.Karmas unfold and they go off like fireworks! No one isa relation and no one is a beloved here! So where is the groundfor any doubts or suspicion here? ‘You’ are a pure Soul(Shuddhatma), and this ‘neighbor,’ the body, is the only onethat is going to hurt you and bring you pain and suffering. Andyour children are your ‘neighbor’s’ children. Why should ‘we’quarrel with them? And when the neighbor’s children do notlisten and you try to say something to them, they will say, ‘Howcan we be your children? We are ‘Shuddhatma’!’ No onecares about anyone else!Questioner: If we look at the bottom line, then everyonehas come to collect on their karmic debts. All we should beconcerned about when we are settling these karmic debts iswhether we are doing so with equanimity or not.Dadashri: When they are settled with equanimity, salvationis yours.Questioner: You graced me when I was misbehavingand being awkward and difficult. But this much is for sure:everything has been cleansed.Dadashri: It was more than enough that you stuck toDada the way you did. One day, you will understand the bottomline that this was correct.Questioner: You know, Dada, not one day! From thisday onwards! Who knows if tomorrow will even come?Therefore, grant me such energies that I can deal with whateverfew remaining karmas there are and that the intellect does nottake off on the wrong path.Dadashri: When you come here for an hour at a time,it will begin to dissolve slowly and eventually will come to anend.Aptavani-64546Aptavani-6Dadashri: That is why the Lord asks, ‘Why don’t yousleep when others are sleeping peacefully?’ One would reply, ‘Isaw a snake coming in. I will sleep when I see it go out.’ Hehas the knowledge of the snake entering the room and he willbe free when he gains the knowledge of it leaving. But he cannotbe free as long as has suspicion in his mind.Questioner: How can suspicion go when I have not seenit leave?Dadashri: Suspicion goes away through the Gnan of theGnani. This world is such that even a snake cannot touch anyone.Seeing through the Gnan, ‘we’ say that this world has neverbeen unjust, even for a moment. The courts of the world, thejudges, the lawyers, etc., may all be the cause of injustice, butnot the world. Therefore, do not be suspicious.Questioner: So should one not harbor any fear? It doesnot matter if one saw the snake; is one to not be afraid?Dadashri: Even if you try not to be afraid, fear willinevitably creep in. It will continue to make you suspicious. Noone can do anything. Suspicion will go away by remaining inGnan.The Precise Justice of NatureThere is no one born in the world that has the energy tohurt you! And if there is such a person, then even if you lookfor hundreds of thousands of ways to avoid him, you will notsucceed in avoiding him! So which way should you turn? Shouldyou be preoccupied in looking for those ways? No, you will notget anywhere. So give up all the running around and go towardsthe Self.Questioner: So we come back to the original talk.Dadashri: Yes, just keep ‘seeing’ whatever is taking place.It is all of the non-Self (par) and it is under the influence of theOnly Gnan Can End SuspicionQuestioner: There are many people who are such thatopinions like, ‘He is a good man, he is useless, he is cunning andgreedy, and he is here to cheat and take my money away,’abound for them.Dadashri: Opinions that become bound are verily thebondage. If a person had taken some money from ‘our’ pocketyesterday, and if he comes here again today, ‘we’ will not havean opinion or suspicion about him as being a thief. This is becauseyesterday the fruition of his karma was like that and who knowswhat the fruition of his karma will be like today?Questioner: But the saying is that life force (praan) andthe inherent nature (prakruti) go together.Dadashri: We do not have to look at praan and prakruti;we have nothing to do with that. That poor man is under theinfluence of the fruition of his karma. He is suffering his karmaand we are suffering ours. We have to remain aware.Questioner: At that time, we may or may not be able tomaintain equanimity.Dadashri: If you do everything according to what ‘we’tell you, that everything is karma-dependent, then your work willbe done. That which is ours will go only if it is meant to. Therefore,there is no reason for you to fear anything.On a dark night, in the light of an oil lamp in a village,you see a snake enter the room; will you be able to sleep,then?Questioner: No, I would be afraid.Dadashri: How will others be if you are the only whoknows about it?Questioner: They will sleep peacefully.Aptavani-64546Aptavani-6Dadashri: That is why the Lord asks, ‘Why don’t yousleep when others are sleeping peacefully?’ One would reply, ‘Isaw a snake coming in. I will sleep when I see it go out.’ Hehas the knowledge of the snake entering the room and he willbe free when he gains the knowledge of it leaving. But he cannotbe free as long as has suspicion in his mind.Questioner: How can suspicion go when I have not seenit leave?Dadashri: Suspicion goes away through the Gnan of theGnani. This world is such that even a snake cannot touch anyone.Seeing through the Gnan, ‘we’ say that this world has neverbeen unjust, even for a moment. The courts of the world, thejudges, the lawyers, etc., may all be the cause of injustice, butnot the world. Therefore, do not be suspicious.Questioner: So should one not harbor any fear? It doesnot matter if one saw the snake; is one to not be afraid?Dadashri: Even if you try not to be afraid, fear willinevitably creep in. It will continue to make you suspicious. Noone can do anything. Suspicion will go away by remaining inGnan.The Precise Justice of NatureThere is no one born in the world that has the energy tohurt you! And if there is such a person, then even if you lookfor hundreds of thousands of ways to avoid him, you will notsucceed in avoiding him! So which way should you turn? Shouldyou be preoccupied in looking for those ways? No, you will notget anywhere. So give up all the running around and go towardsthe Self.Questioner: So we come back to the original talk.Dadashri: Yes, just keep ‘seeing’ whatever is taking place.It is all of the non-Self (par) and it is under the influence of theOnly Gnan Can End SuspicionQuestioner: There are many people who are such thatopinions like, ‘He is a good man, he is useless, he is cunning andgreedy, and he is here to cheat and take my money away,’abound for them.Dadashri: Opinions that become bound are verily thebondage. If a person had taken some money from ‘our’ pocketyesterday, and if he comes here again today, ‘we’ will not havean opinion or suspicion about him as being a thief. This is becauseyesterday the fruition of his karma was like that and who knowswhat the fruition of his karma will be like today?Questioner: But the saying is that life force (praan) andthe inherent nature (prakruti) go together.Dadashri: We do not have to look at praan and prakruti;we have nothing to do with that. That poor man is under theinfluence of the fruition of his karma. He is suffering his karmaand we are suffering ours. We have to remain aware.Questioner: At that time, we may or may not be able tomaintain equanimity.Dadashri: If you do everything according to what ‘we’tell you, that everything is karma-dependent, then your work willbe done. That which is ours will go only if it is meant to. Therefore,there is no reason for you to fear anything.On a dark night, in the light of an oil lamp in a village,you see a snake enter the room; will you be able to sleep,then?Questioner: No, I would be afraid.Dadashri: How will others be if you are the only whoknows about it?Questioner: They will sleep peacefully.Aptavani-64748Aptavani-6are the Lord of the whole world, of the whole universe. Thereis no boss, no superior, over you. You are the absolute supremeSoul (parmatma) for sure! No one is out there to bother you.These are all your own consequences (parinaam). As oftoday, stop creating any vibrations; stop thinking about anyone.When such thoughts arise, erase them with pratikraman (apologyto the pure Soul of one you have ‘hurt’ coupled with the remorseof any wrongdoing) so the whole day will pass without anyvibrations. If you pass the days in this way, it is more thanenough. That verily is spiritual effort (purusharth).* * * * *non-Self (paradhin). And whatever is happening is verily justice,and that truly is scientific circumstantial evidences (vyavasthit).It is justice when an innocent person is given the death sentenceand it is also justice when the culprit goes free. We do not knowhow to ‘see’ who is innocent and who is the culprit. We do notknow how to judge the case. We judge according to our ownlanguage (gnan).One’s Own Vibrations Create One’s WanderingQuestioner: So does that mean that one should not judgewith, ‘This is right and that is wrong’?Dadashri: ‘Right and wrong’ is talk without understanding.One has become a judge through his own understanding.If you do not interfere with anyone, there is absolutelynothing anyone can do to you. I can give you this guarantee inwriting. Even if there is nothing but snakes here, they will noteven touch you; that is how much assurance, guarantee, there isin this world.How do the Gnanis live safely and in bliss? It is becausethey rest after knowing, experiencing, the world; they know,‘Nothing is going to happen to me. No one is going to botherme. I am in every living being. I am the one…I am the one…thereis no one else!’A lot needs to be understood about this world; it is notwhat people believe it to be. The world is not as it is describedin the scriptures. In the scriptures, it is described in a flowerylanguage, full of terminology which an average person cannotunderstand!There is no one to bother you in this world if you stopinstigating and bothering others, if you stop interfering. Thesesufferings are all consequences of your own interference. Whenyou stop interfering, no consequences will come your way. YouAptavani-64748Aptavani-6are the Lord of the whole world, of the whole universe. Thereis no boss, no superior, over you. You are the absolute supremeSoul (parmatma) for sure! No one is out there to bother you.These are all your own consequences (parinaam). As oftoday, stop creating any vibrations; stop thinking about anyone.When such thoughts arise, erase them with pratikraman (apologyto the pure Soul of one you have ‘hurt’ coupled with the remorseof any wrongdoing) so the whole day will pass without anyvibrations. If you pass the days in this way, it is more thanenough. That verily is spiritual effort (purusharth).* * * * *non-Self (paradhin). And whatever is happening is verily justice,and that truly is scientific circumstantial evidences (vyavasthit).It is justice when an innocent person is given the death sentenceand it is also justice when the culprit goes free. We do not knowhow to ‘see’ who is innocent and who is the culprit. We do notknow how to judge the case. We judge according to our ownlanguage (gnan).One’s Own Vibrations Create One’s WanderingQuestioner: So does that mean that one should not judgewith, ‘This is right and that is wrong’?Dadashri: ‘Right and wrong’ is talk without understanding.One has become a judge through his own understanding.If you do not interfere with anyone, there is absolutelynothing anyone can do to you. I can give you this guarantee inwriting. Even if there is nothing but snakes here, they will noteven touch you; that is how much assurance, guarantee, there isin this world.How do the Gnanis live safely and in bliss? It is becausethey rest after knowing, experiencing, the world; they know,‘Nothing is going to happen to me. No one is going to botherme. I am in every living being. I am the one…I am the one…thereis no one else!’A lot needs to be understood about this world; it is notwhat people believe it to be. The world is not as it is describedin the scriptures. In the scriptures, it is described in a flowerylanguage, full of terminology which an average person cannotunderstand!There is no one to bother you in this world if you stopinstigating and bothering others, if you stop interfering. Thesesufferings are all consequences of your own interference. Whenyou stop interfering, no consequences will come your way. YouAptavani-64950Aptavani-6[6]The Court of NatureIf anyone is hurt even in the slightest by us, the case willremain pending in the court of nature. As long as any disputeremains pending in the court of nature, there is no liberation. Allthese people in the world have pending disputes in the court ofnature. Now if you want to bring an end to the conflicts in thecourt, then you have to pardon anyone who insults you andmake sure you do not insult anyone. If you accuse anyone, thenthe case will continue again. When you become a plaintiff, thenyou will have to look for a lawyer. Now (after Self-realization)we do not like it here and we want to become free from thisworld. Therefore, we have to pave the way for it; we have tolet go of everything!No living being (jiva) soul can find liberation (go tomoksha) having hurt any other living being, even in the slightestdegree. A person may be a saint or anyone else for that matter;even if a saint hurts only his disciple, he will be stuck here. It isnot acceptable in the court of nature.Those who are ignorant of the Self (agnanis) are constantlyhurting others. If they are not physically hurting others, their innerintent is constantly just that. Ignorance is violence (agnanta ishimsa) and Gnan is ahimsak bhaav (‘knowledge is intent ofnonviolence’).Now you do not have any desire to hurt anyone, do you?Questioner: I do sometimes.Dadashri: What do you do when you hurt someone?Questioner: Pratikraman (ask for forgiveness from thepure Soul of the one you have ‘hurt,’ coupled with remorse ofthe wrongdoing).Dadashri: The case will not go to the court if you dopratikraman. Deal with it by saying, “Sir, I ask for yourforgiveness.”In ‘our’ case, you will not find an instance where ‘we’hurt anyone, even slightly. Others may act crazy; they do notcare, do they? Only the one who wants to be free, cares, doeshe not?Therefore, if mistakes do not occur, then there is no needfor pratikraman. You have to do pratikraman only when youmake a mistake. If someone tells ‘us,’ ‘Sir, I do not have enoughpower to not make mistakes. I do make mistakes.’ So ‘we’ tellhim, ‘If you do not have the power to not make a mistake, thendo pratikraman.’No matter how crazy and foul words a person may sayto you, if you happen to respond to him, then regardless of howbeautiful your response is, the slightest of negative vibration arisingfrom this is not acceptable. The other person can say all hewants to; he is independent. When children throw stones, arethey not unrestricted? They are unrestricted as long as apoliceman does not stop them. Other people can do whateverthey wish. If the other person creates enmity towards you, hewill not let you go to liberation (moksha) for thousands of lifetimes.That is why ‘we’ tell you, ‘Be careful. If you encounter a difficultand crooked person, do whatever you can to appease him andbecome free from him. It is worth being free from this world.’Counter-vibrations for Hurting SomeoneWhen you hurt anyone in the world, the inner effect andvibration of that hurt, the echo, is bound to affect you. When ahusband and wife get a divorce and the man remarries, the ex-Aptavani-64950Aptavani-6[6]The Court of NatureIf anyone is hurt even in the slightest by us, the case willremain pending in the court of nature. As long as any disputeremains pending in the court of nature, there is no liberation. Allthese people in the world have pending disputes in the court ofnature. Now if you want to bring an end to the conflicts in thecourt, then you have to pardon anyone who insults you andmake sure you do not insult anyone. If you accuse anyone, thenthe case will continue again. When you become a plaintiff, thenyou will have to look for a lawyer. Now (after Self-realization)we do not like it here and we want to become free from thisworld. Therefore, we have to pave the way for it; we have tolet go of everything!No living being (jiva) soul can find liberation (go tomoksha) having hurt any other living being, even in the slightestdegree. A person may be a saint or anyone else for that matter;even if a saint hurts only his disciple, he will be stuck here. It isnot acceptable in the court of nature.Those who are ignorant of the Self (agnanis) are constantlyhurting others. If they are not physically hurting others, their innerintent is constantly just that. Ignorance is violence (agnanta ishimsa) and Gnan is ahimsak bhaav (‘knowledge is intent ofnonviolence’).Now you do not have any desire to hurt anyone, do you?Questioner: I do sometimes.Dadashri: What do you do when you hurt someone?Questioner: Pratikraman (ask for forgiveness from thepure Soul of the one you have ‘hurt,’ coupled with remorse ofthe wrongdoing).Dadashri: The case will not go to the court if you dopratikraman. Deal with it by saying, “Sir, I ask for yourforgiveness.”In ‘our’ case, you will not find an instance where ‘we’hurt anyone, even slightly. Others may act crazy; they do notcare, do they? Only the one who wants to be free, cares, doeshe not?Therefore, if mistakes do not occur, then there is no needfor pratikraman. You have to do pratikraman only when youmake a mistake. If someone tells ‘us,’ ‘Sir, I do not have enoughpower to not make mistakes. I do make mistakes.’ So ‘we’ tellhim, ‘If you do not have the power to not make a mistake, thendo pratikraman.’No matter how crazy and foul words a person may sayto you, if you happen to respond to him, then regardless of howbeautiful your response is, the slightest of negative vibration arisingfrom this is not acceptable. The other person can say all hewants to; he is independent. When children throw stones, arethey not unrestricted? They are unrestricted as long as apoliceman does not stop them. Other people can do whateverthey wish. If the other person creates enmity towards you, hewill not let you go to liberation (moksha) for thousands of lifetimes.That is why ‘we’ tell you, ‘Be careful. If you encounter a difficultand crooked person, do whatever you can to appease him andbecome free from him. It is worth being free from this world.’Counter-vibrations for Hurting SomeoneWhen you hurt anyone in the world, the inner effect andvibration of that hurt, the echo, is bound to affect you. When ahusband and wife get a divorce and the man remarries, the ex-Aptavani-65152Aptavani-6Questioner: One has to tell children something, thesedays, does he not?Dadashri: There is nothing wrong in telling them, butspeak in a way that it does not hurt them and that the echoesof that do not fall on you. You have to make a decision that youdo not want to hurt anyone in the slightest extent.Memory Event is BondageWhy does anything arise in memory (yaad, yaadgiri)?From where does it come? Tell the memory, ‘Why do you keepcoming even when ‘I’ have nothing to do with you, and ‘I’ don’twant anything from you?’ It will reply, ‘This is your complaint(fariyaad). That is why I have come.’ Then you should say,‘Come on, let me attend to it and deal with you.’You should simply do pratikraman (ask for forgivenessfrom the pure Soul of the one you have ‘hurt,’ coupled withremorse of the wrongdoing) for memory of any being, thing orevent, even when you are relaxing. You do not have to doanything else.I have shown you the whole path that I have followed toattain liberation. That path is very easy and straightforward.Otherwise, liberation is not possible. Lord Mahavir (a fullyawakened, enlightened being in India, 2500 years ago) could dothat; no one else can. The Lord was truly a great hero (Mahavir;maha – great; vir – hero). Even then, he had to take so manyhigher and lower level births.Everything will fall into place if you follow what the Gnanitells you.Why does a memory event (yaad) arise? It is becausesomewhere ‘it’ is stuck within. Nevertheless, this is a relativesticking; it is not real. ‘I do not want any temporary thing in thisworld.’ You have decided this much, have you not? So why thendoes a memory event (yaad) arise? Therefore, do pratikramanwife will continue to feel the hurt. The echoes of this hurt willinevitably be there within the man and he will have to clear (payoff) that account.Questioner: Please explain this in more detail.Dadashri: What ‘we’ are trying to convey is that whenyou become instrumental (a nimit) in causing the slightest of pain(dukh) to another being, then its effect will inevitably fall uponyou. You will have to settle that account, so beware.If you scold your assistant at work, will its effect not fallupon you? It will for sure. So tell me, how can the world becomefree from suffering? The one who has become such that no onegets hurt by him, in the slightest degree, is the blissful one. Thereare no two ways about this. The Agnas ‘we’ give you are suchthat you become free from all kinds of miseries. And you will notfind any difficulty in practicing those Agnas. You are free to dowhatever you choose, you are free to eat and drink and roamaround, you are also free to go to see movies if you so desire.If someone wants three buckets of water for his bath, ‘we’ willtell him he can have four. ‘Our’ Agnas are not restrictive in anymanner.Therefore, the effect (asar) within of hurting anyone willnot leave you alone. When you hurt children in your attempts toimprove them, the effect of the hurt caused to them will fall onyou. So talk to them in such a way that it will not cause suchan effect and they will improve. Is there not a difference betweena copper vessel and a glass one? Do you consider them to bethe same? You can repair the dents caused to a copper vesselbut a glass vessel will break. Otherwise, the entire life of thechild is ruined.The beatings and the suffering you endure in life are dueto ignorance of this matter. You may say things to improve thisperson or that person, but the effect of the pain you cause in theprocess will fall on you.Aptavani-65152Aptavani-6Questioner: One has to tell children something, thesedays, does he not?Dadashri: There is nothing wrong in telling them, butspeak in a way that it does not hurt them and that the echoesof that do not fall on you. You have to make a decision that youdo not want to hurt anyone in the slightest extent.Memory Event is BondageWhy does anything arise in memory (yaad, yaadgiri)?From where does it come? Tell the memory, ‘Why do you keepcoming even when ‘I’ have nothing to do with you, and ‘I’ don’twant anything from you?’ It will reply, ‘This is your complaint(fariyaad). That is why I have come.’ Then you should say,‘Come on, let me attend to it and deal with you.’You should simply do pratikraman (ask for forgivenessfrom the pure Soul of the one you have ‘hurt,’ coupled withremorse of the wrongdoing) for memory of any being, thing orevent, even when you are relaxing. You do not have to doanything else.I have shown you the whole path that I have followed toattain liberation. That path is very easy and straightforward.Otherwise, liberation is not possible. Lord Mahavir (a fullyawakened, enlightened being in India, 2500 years ago) could dothat; no one else can. The Lord was truly a great hero (Mahavir;maha – great; vir – hero). Even then, he had to take so manyhigher and lower level births.Everything will fall into place if you follow what the Gnanitells you.Why does a memory event (yaad) arise? It is becausesomewhere ‘it’ is stuck within. Nevertheless, this is a relativesticking; it is not real. ‘I do not want any temporary thing in thisworld.’ You have decided this much, have you not? So why thendoes a memory event (yaad) arise? Therefore, do pratikramanwife will continue to feel the hurt. The echoes of this hurt willinevitably be there within the man and he will have to clear (payoff) that account.Questioner: Please explain this in more detail.Dadashri: What ‘we’ are trying to convey is that whenyou become instrumental (a nimit) in causing the slightest of pain(dukh) to another being, then its effect will inevitably fall uponyou. You will have to settle that account, so beware.If you scold your assistant at work, will its effect not fallupon you? It will for sure. So tell me, how can the world becomefree from suffering? The one who has become such that no onegets hurt by him, in the slightest degree, is the blissful one. Thereare no two ways about this. The Agnas ‘we’ give you are suchthat you become free from all kinds of miseries. And you will notfind any difficulty in practicing those Agnas. You are free to dowhatever you choose, you are free to eat and drink and roamaround, you are also free to go to see movies if you so desire.If someone wants three buckets of water for his bath, ‘we’ willtell him he can have four. ‘Our’ Agnas are not restrictive in anymanner.Therefore, the effect (asar) within of hurting anyone willnot leave you alone. When you hurt children in your attempts toimprove them, the effect of the hurt caused to them will fall onyou. So talk to them in such a way that it will not cause suchan effect and they will improve. Is there not a difference betweena copper vessel and a glass one? Do you consider them to bethe same? You can repair the dents caused to a copper vesselbut a glass vessel will break. Otherwise, the entire life of thechild is ruined.The beatings and the suffering you endure in life are dueto ignorance of this matter. You may say things to improve thisperson or that person, but the effect of the pain you cause in theprocess will fall on you.Aptavani-65354Aptavani-6for it. If you do pratikraman and still the memory event arises,then know that a complaint is still pending. Therefore, all youhave to do is do the pratikraman again.Questioner: Dada, as long as that remains unresolved,should the pratikraman continue? It (relative-self) does not needto be told to do the pratikraman.Dadashri: Yes, you do not have to make him, the relative-self, say it. It will automatically happen once You have decided.Questioner: The unfolding of karma (udaya) keepsoccurring.Dadashri: Udaya continues to happen. But what is udaya?It is the expression and unfolding of the karma that exists withinand it is now ready to present its fruit. That fruit may be sweetor it may be bitter. This is dependant on the nature of theaccount. If a smiling face presents itself to you, then know thatthe karma has come to give happiness (sukh), and if a grim facepresents itself, then know that the karma has come to giveunhappiness (dukh). Therefore, whenever the unfolding of karma(udaya) occurs, know that it has arrived and You have to settleit, with equanimity.Questioner: But the non-Self complex (prakruti), showsa little of its energy at that time, does it not? The prakruti willshow its inherent nature, will it not?Dadashri: Everything may come out, but ‘You’ have tokeep ‘seeing’ it all. That is all your karmic account (hisaab).Questioner: The account of the non-Self complex(prakruti) will have to be finished, will it not?Dadashri: ‘You’ do not have to do anything there. It willhappen on its own. ‘You’ just have to keep ‘seeing’ how muchof the account still remains. ‘You’ are the Seer-Knower (Drashta-Gnata), and with eternal bliss (parmanandi). You will knoweverything.‘Chandubhai’ is the one doing pratikraman; what doYou have to do with it? ‘You’ have to see whether ‘Chandubhai’did the pratikraman or not, or whether he pushed it aside. Ifhe pushed it aside, You will know that too.To ‘keep seeing’ what ‘Chandubhai’ does is independentspiritual effort (purusharth). To miss this ‘seeing’ is spirituallaziness, lack of awareness (pramaad).Questioner: Is it the work of the pure Soul (Shuddhatma)to ‘keep seeing’?Dadashri: That work can be done after realizing the Self;otherwise it cannot be done.Why does a memory event (yaad) arise? It cannot comewithout a cause and a reason. It will happen only if there is somecomplaint (fariyaad). Why does no memory event arise for‘us’? No one has a complaint against ‘us.’ Therefore, whateveryaad arises for you, keep doing pratikraman for it.Questioner: Whatever old baggage there is within, it allmust come as memory events; is that the way it should be?Dadashri: That will definitely come. Whatever stock isgoing to discharge, or charge a new life, will come as a memoryevent (yaad), without fail. If one is Self-realized, that karmicbaggage will discharge and, in the absence of Self-realization,the very same karma will charge new karma and create bondage.The baggage is the same, but in the absence of Self-realization,it forms a karmic seed and, in the presence of Self-realization,the seed is roasted and consumed. Where is the potential for theseed to germinate and grow once it is roasted?Repentance from the HeartThoughts sprout from the tubers that lie within. Thoughtssprout when the evidences arise. A person may otherwise lookAptavani-65354Aptavani-6for it. If you do pratikraman and still the memory event arises,then know that a complaint is still pending. Therefore, all youhave to do is do the pratikraman again.Questioner: Dada, as long as that remains unresolved,should the pratikraman continue? It (relative-self) does not needto be told to do the pratikraman.Dadashri: Yes, you do not have to make him, the relative-self, say it. It will automatically happen once You have decided.Questioner: The unfolding of karma (udaya) keepsoccurring.Dadashri: Udaya continues to happen. But what is udaya?It is the expression and unfolding of the karma that exists withinand it is now ready to present its fruit. That fruit may be sweetor it may be bitter. This is dependant on the nature of theaccount. If a smiling face presents itself to you, then know thatthe karma has come to give happiness (sukh), and if a grim facepresents itself, then know that the karma has come to giveunhappiness (dukh). Therefore, whenever the unfolding of karma(udaya) occurs, know that it has arrived and You have to settleit, with equanimity.Questioner: But the non-Self complex (prakruti), showsa little of its energy at that time, does it not? The prakruti willshow its inherent nature, will it not?Dadashri: Everything may come out, but ‘You’ have tokeep ‘seeing’ it all. That is all your karmic account (hisaab).Questioner: The account of the non-Self complex(prakruti) will have to be finished, will it not?Dadashri: ‘You’ do not have to do anything there. It willhappen on its own. ‘You’ just have to keep ‘seeing’ how muchof the account still remains. ‘You’ are the Seer-Knower (Drashta-Gnata), and with eternal bliss (parmanandi). You will knoweverything.‘Chandubhai’ is the one doing pratikraman; what doYou have to do with it? ‘You’ have to see whether ‘Chandubhai’did the pratikraman or not, or whether he pushed it aside. Ifhe pushed it aside, You will know that too.To ‘keep seeing’ what ‘Chandubhai’ does is independentspiritual effort (purusharth). To miss this ‘seeing’ is spirituallaziness, lack of awareness (pramaad).Questioner: Is it the work of the pure Soul (Shuddhatma)to ‘keep seeing’?Dadashri: That work can be done after realizing the Self;otherwise it cannot be done.Why does a memory event (yaad) arise? It cannot comewithout a cause and a reason. It will happen only if there is somecomplaint (fariyaad). Why does no memory event arise for‘us’? No one has a complaint against ‘us.’ Therefore, whateveryaad arises for you, keep doing pratikraman for it.Questioner: Whatever old baggage there is within, it allmust come as memory events; is that the way it should be?Dadashri: That will definitely come. Whatever stock isgoing to discharge, or charge a new life, will come as a memoryevent (yaad), without fail. If one is Self-realized, that karmicbaggage will discharge and, in the absence of Self-realization,the very same karma will charge new karma and create bondage.The baggage is the same, but in the absence of Self-realization,it forms a karmic seed and, in the presence of Self-realization,the seed is roasted and consumed. Where is the potential for theseed to germinate and grow once it is roasted?Repentance from the HeartThoughts sprout from the tubers that lie within. Thoughtssprout when the evidences arise. A person may otherwise lookAptavani-65556Aptavani-6like a celibate but on his way somewhere, a circumstance mayarise which will make him think about sex.Questioner: Thoughts arise from the entirety ofenvironment, do they not? It is because of circumstantialevidences that one’s moral values and friends come together forhim, is it not?Dadashri: Yes, the external evidences have to arise and,based on that, the tubers of the mind sprout. They would notsprout otherwise.Questioner: Who is the one that leads one to catch onto those thoughts?Dadashri: It is all natural. But at the same time, youshould understand that ‘This intellect (buddhi) is wrong’; fromthere on, the tubers get destroyed. Gnan is the only light in thisworld. One can destroy those tubers if he attains the Gnan, throughwhich he gains the understanding of what is harmful to him.Questioner: But everyone believes and knows that it iswrong to tell lies, it is wrong to smoke, to eat meat, to actwrong, etc., and yet they continue to do so. Why is that?Dadashri: Everyone says, ‘This is all wrong, I should notdo that,’ but they say it superficially. They say it superfluously,not heartily and sincerely. If they say it heartily, then it (thewrongdoing) has no choice but leave after a certain time. Nomatter how bad the mistake may be, if you regret it heartily, thenthat mistake will not occur again. And if the mistake occursagain, there is no problem; the important thing is to continuerepenting heartily.Questioner: So is there a possibility for one to improve?Dadashri: Yes, a great possibility. But there has to besomeone who can improve him. An M.D. or F.R.C.S. doctorwill not do here. One with mistakes will not do here. You needone who is without mistakes as an improver.Now there are some people who wonder why the mistakekeeps occurring even though they have repented for it veryheavily. Actually, if the repenting is done heartily, the mistakewill definitely go away.Clearing the MistakeTo see the mistakes of the self is the Self, the Soul (Atma).To become impartial for the self is being the Self. No karma willtouch You if You are the Self – if You are being the Self, remainingas the Self, ‘seeing’ the self (You are in shuddha upayog).Many people tell me, ‘Your Gnan is true, but when you travelin cars, is it not considered violence to a living being (jivahimsa) because a lot of insects die when they hit the car?’ I toldthem, “We’ are shuddha upayogi.’ The scriptures say that,‘The one who is the Self, remains as the Self, and is in equanimity,Holds the knowledge and the state of meditation as the Self,Wins the minds of others;Removing the mistakes thus, the embodied being becomesliberated.’‘Shuddha upayog ne samatadhari, gnandhyan manohari re;Kalank ko door nivari, jiva vare shivnari’From the moment one begins to see the mistakes of theself, one attains the key to liberation. ‘You’ can see whatevermistake there is in ‘Chandubhai,’ the self. What good is thisGnan if one cannot see the mistakes of the self? That is whyKrupadudev Shrimad Rajchandra (a Gnani Purush who becameenlightened via the Kramic path) had said:‘I am a receptacle of infinite faults, oh compassionate One,What solution is there if I cannot see my own faults?’‘Hoon toh dosh anant nu, bhajan chhoo karunaad,Dithaan nahi nij dosh to tariye kaun upaya?’Aptavani-65556Aptavani-6like a celibate but on his way somewhere, a circumstance mayarise which will make him think about sex.Questioner: Thoughts arise from the entirety ofenvironment, do they not? It is because of circumstantialevidences that one’s moral values and friends come together forhim, is it not?Dadashri: Yes, the external evidences have to arise and,based on that, the tubers of the mind sprout. They would notsprout otherwise.Questioner: Who is the one that leads one to catch onto those thoughts?Dadashri: It is all natural. But at the same time, youshould understand that ‘This intellect (buddhi) is wrong’; fromthere on, the tubers get destroyed. Gnan is the only light in thisworld. One can destroy those tubers if he attains the Gnan, throughwhich he gains the understanding of what is harmful to him.Questioner: But everyone believes and knows that it iswrong to tell lies, it is wrong to smoke, to eat meat, to actwrong, etc., and yet they continue to do so. Why is that?Dadashri: Everyone says, ‘This is all wrong, I should notdo that,’ but they say it superficially. They say it superfluously,not heartily and sincerely. If they say it heartily, then it (thewrongdoing) has no choice but leave after a certain time. Nomatter how bad the mistake may be, if you regret it heartily, thenthat mistake will not occur again. And if the mistake occursagain, there is no problem; the important thing is to continuerepenting heartily.Questioner: So is there a possibility for one to improve?Dadashri: Yes, a great possibility. But there has to besomeone who can improve him. An M.D. or F.R.C.S. doctorwill not do here. One with mistakes will not do here. You needone who is without mistakes as an improver.Now there are some people who wonder why the mistakekeeps occurring even though they have repented for it veryheavily. Actually, if the repenting is done heartily, the mistakewill definitely go away.Clearing the MistakeTo see the mistakes of the self is the Self, the Soul (Atma).To become impartial for the self is being the Self. No karma willtouch You if You are the Self – if You are being the Self, remainingas the Self, ‘seeing’ the self (You are in shuddha upayog).Many people tell me, ‘Your Gnan is true, but when you travelin cars, is it not considered violence to a living being (jivahimsa) because a lot of insects die when they hit the car?’ I toldthem, “We’ are shuddha upayogi.’ The scriptures say that,‘The one who is the Self, remains as the Self, and is in equanimity,Holds the knowledge and the state of meditation as the Self,Wins the minds of others;Removing the mistakes thus, the embodied being becomesliberated.’‘Shuddha upayog ne samatadhari, gnandhyan manohari re;Kalank ko door nivari, jiva vare shivnari’From the moment one begins to see the mistakes of theself, one attains the key to liberation. ‘You’ can see whatevermistake there is in ‘Chandubhai,’ the self. What good is thisGnan if one cannot see the mistakes of the self? That is whyKrupadudev Shrimad Rajchandra (a Gnani Purush who becameenlightened via the Kramic path) had said:‘I am a receptacle of infinite faults, oh compassionate One,What solution is there if I cannot see my own faults?’‘Hoon toh dosh anant nu, bhajan chhoo karunaad,Dithaan nahi nij dosh to tariye kaun upaya?’Aptavani-65758Aptavani-6There is no problem if a mistake (dosh) occurs. Keepfocused awareness on it by being the Self, remaining as the Self,‘seeing’ the self (upayog). Thus the mistakes will continue to beseen. Nothing else needs to be done.All ‘You’ have to do is tell ‘Chandubhai,’ ‘Continue doingpratikraman for all the members of your family. Chandubhai,say it this way; “For any hurt I have caused in the past, in thecurrent or previous countless lives, for any attachment andabhorrence (raag-dwesh), for mistakes of sexual nature (vishay-kashay) and other kashays (anger-pride-deceit and greed); Iask for forgiveness.” Find an hour a day to ‘do’ this. You shouldcontinue to do pratikraman (ask for forgiveness from the pureSoul of the one you have ‘hurt,’ coupled with remorse of thewrongdoing), with awareness as the Self, for everyone at homeand for everyone around you.The entire load will lighten after you do this, otherwise itwill not lighten on its own. ‘We’ have done this with the wholeworld and resolved everything in this manner; that is how ‘we’became free.As long as you hold other people at fault in your mind, itwill not let you be at peace. When you do pratikraman, it willall get erased. Cleanse every sticky file (all interactions of theworldly life are due to karmic accounts and are considered‘files’ – ‘sticky’ refers to the tenacity and the intensity of the file)of attachment and abhorrence (raag-dwesh) with pratikramanwith focused awareness as the Self (upayog), seeing‘Chandubhai’ doing pratikraman. You should especially dopratikraman for the ‘files’ of attachment (raag).No matter how great the enmity, you can be freed fromit in this life with pratikraman. Pratikraman is the only solution.Lord Mahavir’s principle is recalling and confession of a mistake(alochana), apology and remorse for the mistake (pratikraman)and making the decision never to repeat the mistake(pratyakhyan). Where there is no alochana, pratikraman andpratyakhyan, there is no way to liberation (moksha).‘We’ do not have any gross (sthool) or subtle (sookshma)mistakes or faults. The Gnani has only subtler and most subtle(sookshmatar and sookshmatam) mistakes, which do not causeany difficulty to others. Even the most subtle of ‘our’ faults donot escape ‘our’ awareness. Others will not know that ‘our’fault has occurred.‘We’ can also see your mistakes, but our vision is focusedon your pure Soul (Shuddhatma) and not on your unfoldingkarma. We can see everyone’s mistakes, but ‘we’ are not affectedby them. That is why Kavi has written:‘A mother never finds faults,Dada too does not see anyone’s faults, mistakes’‘Maa kadii khod kadhey nahiDadaney dosh koinaa dekhay nahi.’‘We’ know your weaknesses, and weaknesses are alwaysbound to be there. Therefore, ‘our’ forgiveness is natural andspontaneous (sahaj kshama). ‘We’ do not have to forgive you;you receive ‘our’ forgiveness naturally and spontaneously.Spontaneous forgiveness is an attribute of the ultimate state;‘we’ have natural forgiveness for all. Not only that, but ‘we’ alsohave a constant unwavering love for you. That which increasesand decreases is not love; it is attraction. ‘Our’ love does notincrease or decrease. It is pure love, the love of the absoluteSoul – the parmatma – the Self.You should do ‘shoot-on-sight’ (instant) pratikraman forany mistakes. ‘You’ should tell ‘Chandubhai,’ ‘Come on,Chandubhai, do pratikraman.’ If Chandubhai says, ‘I am tooold to do it,’ You should tell him, “We’ will give you the energy.’Then make him say, ‘I am full of infinite energy,’ and thus theenergy comes.Aptavani-65758Aptavani-6There is no problem if a mistake (dosh) occurs. Keepfocused awareness on it by being the Self, remaining as the Self,‘seeing’ the self (upayog). Thus the mistakes will continue to beseen. Nothing else needs to be done.All ‘You’ have to do is tell ‘Chandubhai,’ ‘Continue doingpratikraman for all the members of your family. Chandubhai,say it this way; “For any hurt I have caused in the past, in thecurrent or previous countless lives, for any attachment andabhorrence (raag-dwesh), for mistakes of sexual nature (vishay-kashay) and other kashays (anger-pride-deceit and greed); Iask for forgiveness.” Find an hour a day to ‘do’ this. You shouldcontinue to do pratikraman (ask for forgiveness from the pureSoul of the one you have ‘hurt,’ coupled with remorse of thewrongdoing), with awareness as the Self, for everyone at homeand for everyone around you.The entire load will lighten after you do this, otherwise itwill not lighten on its own. ‘We’ have done this with the wholeworld and resolved everything in this manner; that is how ‘we’became free.As long as you hold other people at fault in your mind, itwill not let you be at peace. When you do pratikraman, it willall get erased. Cleanse every sticky file (all interactions of theworldly life are due to karmic accounts and are considered‘files’ – ‘sticky’ refers to the tenacity and the intensity of the file)of attachment and abhorrence (raag-dwesh) with pratikramanwith focused awareness as the Self (upayog), seeing‘Chandubhai’ doing pratikraman. You should especially dopratikraman for the ‘files’ of attachment (raag).No matter how great the enmity, you can be freed fromit in this life with pratikraman. Pratikraman is the only solution.Lord Mahavir’s principle is recalling and confession of a mistake(alochana), apology and remorse for the mistake (pratikraman)and making the decision never to repeat the mistake(pratyakhyan). Where there is no alochana, pratikraman andpratyakhyan, there is no way to liberation (moksha).‘We’ do not have any gross (sthool) or subtle (sookshma)mistakes or faults. The Gnani has only subtler and most subtle(sookshmatar and sookshmatam) mistakes, which do not causeany difficulty to others. Even the most subtle of ‘our’ faults donot escape ‘our’ awareness. Others will not know that ‘our’fault has occurred.‘We’ can also see your mistakes, but our vision is focusedon your pure Soul (Shuddhatma) and not on your unfoldingkarma. We can see everyone’s mistakes, but ‘we’ are not affectedby them. That is why Kavi has written:‘A mother never finds faults,Dada too does not see anyone’s faults, mistakes’‘Maa kadii khod kadhey nahiDadaney dosh koinaa dekhay nahi.’‘We’ know your weaknesses, and weaknesses are alwaysbound to be there. Therefore, ‘our’ forgiveness is natural andspontaneous (sahaj kshama). ‘We’ do not have to forgive you;you receive ‘our’ forgiveness naturally and spontaneously.Spontaneous forgiveness is an attribute of the ultimate state;‘we’ have natural forgiveness for all. Not only that, but ‘we’ alsohave a constant unwavering love for you. That which increasesand decreases is not love; it is attraction. ‘Our’ love does notincrease or decrease. It is pure love, the love of the absoluteSoul – the parmatma – the Self.You should do ‘shoot-on-sight’ (instant) pratikraman forany mistakes. ‘You’ should tell ‘Chandubhai,’ ‘Come on,Chandubhai, do pratikraman.’ If Chandubhai says, ‘I am tooold to do it,’ You should tell him, “We’ will give you the energy.’Then make him say, ‘I am full of infinite energy,’ and thus theenergy comes.Aptavani-65960Aptavani-6He who starts seeing his own mistakes – when he seesfive or so of them – should realize that now the solution hasbegun.As many mistakes that are seen, that many mistakes leave.One may say that he keeps seeing the same mistake repeatedly.Actually, the same mistake does not come again; just as theonion has layers, each mistake has many layers. Therefore, whenone layer is removed with pratikraman, another layer is there;however, the same layer does not come back. For example, ifthere were thirty layers, then twenty-nine will remain. Whenanother layer goes away, twenty-eight will remain. In this manner,they will decrease to a point where the mistake is completelygone.* * * * *[7]The Self is the Light that Never GetsStained, Even When there isOneness with the Prakruti, the Relative SelfKnow what the original root fact is. What is the main fact?This human life is meant just for knowing this fact only. You justhave to know ‘what is ours and what is not’ in all this. Then youcan lament and cry if you want to. We have erred in our ownworld. It would have been different if we were in someoneelse’s world.Questioner: How is this ‘our’ world at all?Dadashri: Then whose is it? By ‘ours’ it means no oneis our owner; no one is our superior. The world is ours indeed.It is worthwhile if you take the advantage of ‘seeing’ this worldand ‘knowing’ it.Questioner: When we revert into ‘seeing’ and ‘knowing,’we get entrapped and entangled within.Dadashri: The one who becomes entangled is not ‘You.’The belief, ‘This is me, and I am entangled’ is verily the mistake.How wonderful nature appears when you ‘see’ and ‘know.’But when one has worries, he does not see nature, does he?The gardens may be beautiful but they seem like poison to him.The world is forever beautiful; how wonderful these cows andbuffalos look! But by associating with human beings, they haveproblems.Questioner: Do cows and buffalos realize that humansAptavani-65960Aptavani-6He who starts seeing his own mistakes – when he seesfive or so of them – should realize that now the solution hasbegun.As many mistakes that are seen, that many mistakes leave.One may say that he keeps seeing the same mistake repeatedly.Actually, the same mistake does not come again; just as theonion has layers, each mistake has many layers. Therefore, whenone layer is removed with pratikraman, another layer is there;however, the same layer does not come back. For example, ifthere were thirty layers, then twenty-nine will remain. Whenanother layer goes away, twenty-eight will remain. In this manner,they will decrease to a point where the mistake is completelygone.* * * * *[7]The Self is the Light that Never GetsStained, Even When there isOneness with the Prakruti, the Relative SelfKnow what the original root fact is. What is the main fact?This human life is meant just for knowing this fact only. You justhave to know ‘what is ours and what is not’ in all this. Then youcan lament and cry if you want to. We have erred in our ownworld. It would have been different if we were in someoneelse’s world.Questioner: How is this ‘our’ world at all?Dadashri: Then whose is it? By ‘ours’ it means no oneis our owner; no one is our superior. The world is ours indeed.It is worthwhile if you take the advantage of ‘seeing’ this worldand ‘knowing’ it.Questioner: When we revert into ‘seeing’ and ‘knowing,’we get entrapped and entangled within.Dadashri: The one who becomes entangled is not ‘You.’The belief, ‘This is me, and I am entangled’ is verily the mistake.How wonderful nature appears when you ‘see’ and ‘know.’But when one has worries, he does not see nature, does he?The gardens may be beautiful but they seem like poison to him.The world is forever beautiful; how wonderful these cows andbuffalos look! But by associating with human beings, they haveproblems.Questioner: Do cows and buffalos realize that humansAptavani-66162Aptavani-6life force (mishra chetan), ‘I am Chandulal’? (Mishra chetan;mishra – mixed, chetan – life force.)Dadashri: If it touches, You have to ‘see’ that.Questioner: But what if that has an effect on us?Dadashri: You have to ‘see’ that too! What is the job ofthe light? It is to ‘see.’ Whether there is a hill, mud, water,stench, even bushes, it goes into them and comes out; but noneof these things affect the light. If this light is like that, then howwonderful the light of the Self must be!If you are driving in the dark without lights, you will notknow how many insects are crushed and killed, but when youturn on the lights, you will see how many bugs collide with thecar. It is because of the light that you are able to see. Does thatmean that they were not colliding before you turned the lightson? They were. Those who have not received Gnan do not seethis, but we do because we have the light – Self-knowledge. Weget worried and concerned because we can see, whereas theydo not worry. This is how the world works.Questioner: But everyone will have to come to this levelof concern, will they not?Dadashri: After entering the world of recurring, externally-induced problems and resultant suffering (upadhi), one seeksout the path of freedom from external problems; liberation(nirupadhi). But how can one find a way out of the problem ofupadhi when he has not come into the problem, when he doesnot see it as upadhi? He has to understand that he has enteredthe world of suffering (upadhi).One has to understand this only once. This external lightdoes not touch anything and it is because of the light that youcan see the insects colliding; otherwise, you could not see anything.Therefore, once you understand, then there is no problem orare crooked and obstinate such as we are?Dadashri: No, they have only come from the humanform. The poor things remain in touch with humans. They are thedaughters of our own relatives from the past life! And the dogthat barks in our home, too, is our own relative from our pastlife that has come here!Questioner: Does an embodied soul (jiva) take birthinstantly upon death?Dadashri: Instantly. It takes no time. No one is out thereto give life or take it away.Questioner: So, it is on autopilot; everything is happeningby itself (swayam sanchalit)?Dadashri: Yes, it is all happening on its own by its ownnature. Just as it is the nature of water to flow downward, nomatter what you do, nothing will change that nature.Questioner: The non-Self complex of thoughts, speechand actions (prakruti) is such that some are very elated andsome are very depressed.Dadashri: All the prakrutis need to be ‘seen’ only. Thelight from the car’s headlight will ‘touch’ (shine upon) the mud,filth and the stench of a dirty creek, but nothing will touch thelight. The light will ‘touch’ the mud as it moves forward, but themud will not ‘touch’ it; neither will the creek’s dirty water andstench. Nothing will touch the light. We need not harbor any fearthat the light (Self knowledge) will become tainted with ‘mud,’‘stench’ or ‘water.’ Now, if the light from a car’s headlight islike this, just imagine how brilliant and unaffected the light of theSelf would be! The Soul is just in the light form. It illuminateseverything.Questioner: We have become one (tanmayakar) withour non-Self (prakruti), then does the dirt not touch our mixedAptavani-66162Aptavani-6life force (mishra chetan), ‘I am Chandulal’? (Mishra chetan;mishra – mixed, chetan – life force.)Dadashri: If it touches, You have to ‘see’ that.Questioner: But what if that has an effect on us?Dadashri: You have to ‘see’ that too! What is the job ofthe light? It is to ‘see.’ Whether there is a hill, mud, water,stench, even bushes, it goes into them and comes out; but noneof these things affect the light. If this light is like that, then howwonderful the light of the Self must be!If you are driving in the dark without lights, you will notknow how many insects are crushed and killed, but when youturn on the lights, you will see how many bugs collide with thecar. It is because of the light that you are able to see. Does thatmean that they were not colliding before you turned the lightson? They were. Those who have not received Gnan do not seethis, but we do because we have the light – Self-knowledge. Weget worried and concerned because we can see, whereas theydo not worry. This is how the world works.Questioner: But everyone will have to come to this levelof concern, will they not?Dadashri: After entering the world of recurring, externally-induced problems and resultant suffering (upadhi), one seeksout the path of freedom from external problems; liberation(nirupadhi). But how can one find a way out of the problem ofupadhi when he has not come into the problem, when he doesnot see it as upadhi? He has to understand that he has enteredthe world of suffering (upadhi).One has to understand this only once. This external lightdoes not touch anything and it is because of the light that youcan see the insects colliding; otherwise, you could not see anything.Therefore, once you understand, then there is no problem orare crooked and obstinate such as we are?Dadashri: No, they have only come from the humanform. The poor things remain in touch with humans. They are thedaughters of our own relatives from the past life! And the dogthat barks in our home, too, is our own relative from our pastlife that has come here!Questioner: Does an embodied soul (jiva) take birthinstantly upon death?Dadashri: Instantly. It takes no time. No one is out thereto give life or take it away.Questioner: So, it is on autopilot; everything is happeningby itself (swayam sanchalit)?Dadashri: Yes, it is all happening on its own by its ownnature. Just as it is the nature of water to flow downward, nomatter what you do, nothing will change that nature.Questioner: The non-Self complex of thoughts, speechand actions (prakruti) is such that some are very elated andsome are very depressed.Dadashri: All the prakrutis need to be ‘seen’ only. Thelight from the car’s headlight will ‘touch’ (shine upon) the mud,filth and the stench of a dirty creek, but nothing will touch thelight. The light will ‘touch’ the mud as it moves forward, but themud will not ‘touch’ it; neither will the creek’s dirty water andstench. Nothing will touch the light. We need not harbor any fearthat the light (Self knowledge) will become tainted with ‘mud,’‘stench’ or ‘water.’ Now, if the light from a car’s headlight islike this, just imagine how brilliant and unaffected the light of theSelf would be! The Soul is just in the light form. It illuminateseverything.Questioner: We have become one (tanmayakar) withour non-Self (prakruti), then does the dirt not touch our mixedAptavani-66364Aptavani-6worrying. But ‘we’ should ‘know’ that we can see the insectsdying because the light is there. In all this, ‘we’ are not the‘doer’ of anything.Questioner: In the worldly life, there are certain situationswhere we become instrumental ‘doers.’ In those instances wherewe become excessively engrossed (tanmayakar) in our actions,then the reaction is greater.Dadashri: You have to ‘see’ even that. Nothing is goingto change if you miss the ‘seeing.’ You have to continue doingwhat you are doing. Do you drink tea early in the morning ornot? Do you have to be told to do the work of drinking the tea?Even then we cannot say, ‘Do not do any work; it will happenon its own.’ It is a liability to say that. You have to say, ‘Continuedoing the work.’The Test/Examination of VyavasthitIf you are sitting in a car and you are asked to get out ofthe car, realize that it is scientific circumstantial evidences(vyavasthit). If you are then asked to get back in again, it isvyavasthit. And then again, if you are told to get out, that toois vyavasthit. If they tell you to get in the car seven times, it isstill vyavasthit. It is vyavasthit even when they make you getout. Whoever experiences this as is, as vyavasthit, will attainabsolute enlightenment (keval gnan). The vyavasthit that ‘we’have given is such that keval gnan will be attained if oneunderstands it in its entirety. It is the essence of the scriptures ofall the twenty-four enlightened beings called Tirthankars.Questioner: You must have understood vyavasthit first,then you started to give this Gnan, is that right?Dadashri: Yes, it was only after that. Vyavasthit hascome into my experience from many lifetimes and then I openedit to others. Otherwise, I could not do so. It carries a greatliability. To utter even a word of the Tirthankars and preach tosomeone is a tremendous liability. How many times will theknowledge of vyavasthit be there for you when you arerepeatedly asked to get in and out of a car?Questioner: Four or five times and then I would lose mymind.Dadashri: It is the non-Self complex of input and output(pudgal) that loses self-control. ‘You’ should ‘know’ that, ‘It isthis pudgal that has lost it.’ What you should say is, ‘It is thepudgal that lost control; I still came back and got in the car.’‘You’ should ‘know’ that the control is being lost. That is howwonderful this vyavasthit is. It is wrong for one to run awaywhen he loses control and not come back. Once you understandvyavasthit, there is nothing left to interfere with. Whatever isgoing to happen to the pudgal, let it be, but You should not beobstinate. The pudgal will try to make you obstinate.* * * * *Aptavani-66364Aptavani-6worrying. But ‘we’ should ‘know’ that we can see the insectsdying because the light is there. In all this, ‘we’ are not the‘doer’ of anything.Questioner: In the worldly life, there are certain situationswhere we become instrumental ‘doers.’ In those instances wherewe become excessively engrossed (tanmayakar) in our actions,then the reaction is greater.Dadashri: You have to ‘see’ even that. Nothing is goingto change if you miss the ‘seeing.’ You have to continue doingwhat you are doing. Do you drink tea early in the morning ornot? Do you have to be told to do the work of drinking the tea?Even then we cannot say, ‘Do not do any work; it will happenon its own.’ It is a liability to say that. You have to say, ‘Continuedoing the work.’The Test/Examination of VyavasthitIf you are sitting in a car and you are asked to get out ofthe car, realize that it is scientific circumstantial evidences(vyavasthit). If you are then asked to get back in again, it isvyavasthit. And then again, if you are told to get out, that toois vyavasthit. If they tell you to get in the car seven times, it isstill vyavasthit. It is vyavasthit even when they make you getout. Whoever experiences this as is, as vyavasthit, will attainabsolute enlightenment (keval gnan). The vyavasthit that ‘we’have given is such that keval gnan will be attained if oneunderstands it in its entirety. It is the essence of the scriptures ofall the twenty-four enlightened beings called Tirthankars.Questioner: You must have understood vyavasthit first,then you started to give this Gnan, is that right?Dadashri: Yes, it was only after that. Vyavasthit hascome into my experience from many lifetimes and then I openedit to others. Otherwise, I could not do so. It carries a greatliability. To utter even a word of the Tirthankars and preach tosomeone is a tremendous liability. How many times will theknowledge of vyavasthit be there for you when you arerepeatedly asked to get in and out of a car?Questioner: Four or five times and then I would lose mymind.Dadashri: It is the non-Self complex of input and output(pudgal) that loses self-control. ‘You’ should ‘know’ that, ‘It isthis pudgal that has lost it.’ What you should say is, ‘It is thepudgal that lost control; I still came back and got in the car.’‘You’ should ‘know’ that the control is being lost. That is howwonderful this vyavasthit is. It is wrong for one to run awaywhen he loses control and not come back. Once you understandvyavasthit, there is nothing left to interfere with. Whatever isgoing to happen to the pudgal, let it be, but You should not beobstinate. The pudgal will try to make you obstinate.* * * * *Aptavani-66566Aptavani-6[8]The Initial Culprit is the IntellectQuestioner: Which part of the antahkaran is affectedfirst? (Antahkaran – the inner functioning complex of the mind,intellect, chit and ego.)Dadashri: The intellect (buddhi) is affected first. There isno effect if the buddhi is not present.Questioner: During difficult circumstances, what partbeyond the antahkaran is affected?Dadashri: Beyond the antahkaran, nothing is affected.Questioner: Is it affecting the one who believes, ‘I amChandulal’ (pratishthit atma)?Dadashri: That is the relative or charged self (pratishthitatma). Anger, pride, deceit, greed, and the mind, intellect, chit,ego are all in the antahkaran; it is all called the pratishthitatma.Questioner: Then why is there a separation made betweenthe pratishthit atma and the antahkaran?Dadashri: It has not been stated so. Anything other thanthe pure Soul (Shuddhatma) is all pratishthit atma. Then, ifyou ask further, do ‘we’ not have to say that the antahkaranis separate, the sense organs are separate, the mind is separate,etc.?Questioner: If the intellect (buddhi) is affected, then doesthat effect (asar) not reach the mind?Dadashri: From the intellect, it reaches the mind. Therewould be no effect if there were no intellect in the middle.‘We’ are not affected at all because ‘we’ do not haveintellect (buddhi is the indirect light of the Self; it flows throughthe medium of the ego). ‘We’ have all kinds of old past lifeinternal tendencies (mathuras) within which tell ‘us’ all kinds ofthings. But there would be a problem only if there is intellect toreceive their message. Once the intellect (buddhi) accepts it, themind seizes it and then it becomes restless.Questioner: Once the buddhi accepts it, who keepsmulling it over?Dadashri: The buddhi accepts and then it reaches themind. It is the mind that becomes restless and it is also the mindthat mulls over it repeatedly. The mind is contradictory. Onemoment it will take you there and the next moment it will takeyou to another corner. It will keep stirring things over and overand causes a storm within.The Demarcation between the Intellect andPragnyaQuestioner: How can we know whether this has beendone by the direct light of the Self (pragnya) or by intellect?What are the definitions of intellect and pragnya? If aconversation happens, then it is said that intellect has becomeactive and has arisen, so what is intellect?Dadashri: That which causes uneasiness and restlessness(ajampo) is the intellect (buddhi). There is no uneasiness orrestlessness in pragnya. When you experience the slightest ofuneasiness or restlessness, realize that it is the intellect at work.Even when you do not want to use the intellect, is gets used. Itdoes not let you sit in peace. It makes you emotional. Youshould tell the intellect, ‘Listen Madam Intellect, you need toreturn to your own home. Now I do not have any dealings withAptavani-66566Aptavani-6[8]The Initial Culprit is the IntellectQuestioner: Which part of the antahkaran is affectedfirst? (Antahkaran – the inner functioning complex of the mind,intellect, chit and ego.)Dadashri: The intellect (buddhi) is affected first. There isno effect if the buddhi is not present.Questioner: During difficult circumstances, what partbeyond the antahkaran is affected?Dadashri: Beyond the antahkaran, nothing is affected.Questioner: Is it affecting the one who believes, ‘I amChandulal’ (pratishthit atma)?Dadashri: That is the relative or charged self (pratishthitatma). Anger, pride, deceit, greed, and the mind, intellect, chit,ego are all in the antahkaran; it is all called the pratishthitatma.Questioner: Then why is there a separation made betweenthe pratishthit atma and the antahkaran?Dadashri: It has not been stated so. Anything other thanthe pure Soul (Shuddhatma) is all pratishthit atma. Then, ifyou ask further, do ‘we’ not have to say that the antahkaranis separate, the sense organs are separate, the mind is separate,etc.?Questioner: If the intellect (buddhi) is affected, then doesthat effect (asar) not reach the mind?Dadashri: From the intellect, it reaches the mind. Therewould be no effect if there were no intellect in the middle.‘We’ are not affected at all because ‘we’ do not haveintellect (buddhi is the indirect light of the Self; it flows throughthe medium of the ego). ‘We’ have all kinds of old past lifeinternal tendencies (mathuras) within which tell ‘us’ all kinds ofthings. But there would be a problem only if there is intellect toreceive their message. Once the intellect (buddhi) accepts it, themind seizes it and then it becomes restless.Questioner: Once the buddhi accepts it, who keepsmulling it over?Dadashri: The buddhi accepts and then it reaches themind. It is the mind that becomes restless and it is also the mindthat mulls over it repeatedly. The mind is contradictory. Onemoment it will take you there and the next moment it will takeyou to another corner. It will keep stirring things over and overand causes a storm within.The Demarcation between the Intellect andPragnyaQuestioner: How can we know whether this has beendone by the direct light of the Self (pragnya) or by intellect?What are the definitions of intellect and pragnya? If aconversation happens, then it is said that intellect has becomeactive and has arisen, so what is intellect?Dadashri: That which causes uneasiness and restlessness(ajampo) is the intellect (buddhi). There is no uneasiness orrestlessness in pragnya. When you experience the slightest ofuneasiness or restlessness, realize that it is the intellect at work.Even when you do not want to use the intellect, is gets used. Itdoes not let you sit in peace. It makes you emotional. Youshould tell the intellect, ‘Listen Madam Intellect, you need toreturn to your own home. Now I do not have any dealings withAptavani-66768Aptavani-6tough or tender? Some people will simply go to the shop andask the shop keeper to weigh some okra for them and they mayget good okra.And what are you going to do if they turn out to be oldand stale? That is how it is in the worldly life. Only sometimesdo you get stale things; you don’t get it every day. Then thereis also one’s merit karma accumulated from good acts (punya),is there not? A good man’s punya is always good! That punyais always present for him ahead. Only for a meddling person willthe punya be meddlesome.The Nature of EgoQuestioner: What is ego?Dadashri: Ego is not a thing. Someone tells you, ‘Youare Chandubhai,’ and you believe that you are ‘Chandubhai’;that is ego.Questioner: But when it is hurt, there is no awareness ofwhat is right and what is wrong.Dadashri: The ego is always blind; it does not have eyes.Questioner: So is it higher (greater) than the rest of them(mind, intellect and chit)?Dadashri: Yes, it is the leader. It is under the ego’sleadership that all this goes on.Questioner: So then what adjustment should one take atthat time?Dadashri: What adjustment can you take? You (the Self)just have to continue ‘seeing’ how blind the ego is; this is theadjustment you make.The ego is not a thing, not something tangible. When ‘You’believe, ‘This (the relative-self) is I,’ that is all an ego. Only theyou.’ Do you need a candle when the sun is shining? Therefore,there is no need for the light of the intellect after you have thelight of the Self. ‘We’ (the Gnani and the fully enlightened Self)do not have intellect. ‘We’ are without intellect that interferesand makes one emotional (abuddha).Questioner: So does it mean that remaining silent is notemploying the intellect?Dadashri: You cannot maintain silence even if you wantto.Questioner: No, but what if one was able to remainsilent?Dadashri: How can he? The intellect keeps one emotional.It will never keep him in ‘motion’ – in normality. Not for amoment will it let you sit in peace. It will wake you up at twoo’clock in the morning and make you restless. It will not let yourest in peace.Questioner: Intellect is not used if one remains only theknower-seer (gnata-drashta)?Dadashri: There is no problem when one remains theknower-seer. How is the intellect going to be of any use then?Then, the last ‘station’ (final liberation) will come, but the intellectwill not let one remain as the knower-seer.If you go to the market to buy vegetables and you aregetting late for your satsang, the intellect will not let you go untilit takes you to four different shops to shop around. The intellectwill keep you wandering around.Questioner: Then he even brings home stale and over-ripe okra; he buys them from wherever he can. Does that meanthat his intellect did not work?Dadashri: How can you be sure that the okra will beAptavani-66768Aptavani-6tough or tender? Some people will simply go to the shop andask the shop keeper to weigh some okra for them and they mayget good okra.And what are you going to do if they turn out to be oldand stale? That is how it is in the worldly life. Only sometimesdo you get stale things; you don’t get it every day. Then thereis also one’s merit karma accumulated from good acts (punya),is there not? A good man’s punya is always good! That punyais always present for him ahead. Only for a meddling person willthe punya be meddlesome.The Nature of EgoQuestioner: What is ego?Dadashri: Ego is not a thing. Someone tells you, ‘Youare Chandubhai,’ and you believe that you are ‘Chandubhai’;that is ego.Questioner: But when it is hurt, there is no awareness ofwhat is right and what is wrong.Dadashri: The ego is always blind; it does not have eyes.Questioner: So is it higher (greater) than the rest of them(mind, intellect and chit)?Dadashri: Yes, it is the leader. It is under the ego’sleadership that all this goes on.Questioner: So then what adjustment should one take atthat time?Dadashri: What adjustment can you take? You (the Self)just have to continue ‘seeing’ how blind the ego is; this is theadjustment you make.The ego is not a thing, not something tangible. When ‘You’believe, ‘This (the relative-self) is I,’ that is all an ego. Only theyou.’ Do you need a candle when the sun is shining? Therefore,there is no need for the light of the intellect after you have thelight of the Self. ‘We’ (the Gnani and the fully enlightened Self)do not have intellect. ‘We’ are without intellect that interferesand makes one emotional (abuddha).Questioner: So does it mean that remaining silent is notemploying the intellect?Dadashri: You cannot maintain silence even if you wantto.Questioner: No, but what if one was able to remainsilent?Dadashri: How can he? The intellect keeps one emotional.It will never keep him in ‘motion’ – in normality. Not for amoment will it let you sit in peace. It will wake you up at twoo’clock in the morning and make you restless. It will not let yourest in peace.Questioner: Intellect is not used if one remains only theknower-seer (gnata-drashta)?Dadashri: There is no problem when one remains theknower-seer. How is the intellect going to be of any use then?Then, the last ‘station’ (final liberation) will come, but the intellectwill not let one remain as the knower-seer.If you go to the market to buy vegetables and you aregetting late for your satsang, the intellect will not let you go untilit takes you to four different shops to shop around. The intellectwill keep you wandering around.Questioner: Then he even brings home stale and over-ripe okra; he buys them from wherever he can. Does that meanthat his intellect did not work?Dadashri: How can you be sure that the okra will beAptavani-66970Aptavani-6state of, ‘I am pure Soul (Shuddhatma)’ is the egoless(nirahamkar) state. ‘I am a Patel,’ ‘I am 50 years old,’ ‘I ama collector,’ ‘I am a lawyer,’ etc.; it is all ego.Questioner: That which prompts one to do good, is thatthe ego too?Dadashri: Yes, that too is ego. Even that which promptsone to do wrong is also ego. One can never tell when the egowill do wrong from right because it is blind.You might be giving someone some alms and if that manhappens to say something wrong, you may turn around and beathim up. This is because of the ego that gets hurt.Questioner: When a soldier says he is fighting for India,is that also ego?Dadashri: Yes, that is all ego and in the final analysis, itis of no benefit to him. He binds some merit karma. There is notelling when a ‘do-good’ ego will do something wrong. He mightbe fighting for India today and tomorrow he may even startfighting with his captain. There is no telling about him. The egois shameless. You never know when it will turn negative. It is athing that has no goal or aim. When the ego is used for the rightgoal with persistence, it brings worldly success and fame.Questioner: But is the ego not necessary for progress?Dadashri: That ego is naturally there. The ego is notsomething that you can keep at will, even if you try to. It willsomehow manage to slip back in on its own.Questioner: It is written in psychology texts that someego is necessary for personality development, is that true?Dadashri: Such ego is naturally present. It is a law ofnature that the ego arises for proper development and one grows.And as the development approaches a certain level (life afterlife) and reaches its peak, then one takes birth in India. Thereafter,there is no need for development. Who would use such a crazyego once he attains the path to liberation (moksha)? No matterhow good a person is – he may be very generous and charitable– but when he goes home, he has a lot of worries and problems.The whole day long, there is inner suffering (antardah).Qualities of a Self-realized BeingQuestioner: If I have realized the Self, what qualities willI start to have? What changes will take place within me that willtell me that I am on the right path?Dadashri: First, the egoism comes to a stop. Then whenanger, pride, deceit and greed leave, know that the Self hasbeen attained. Have you attained such qualities?Questioner: No, that has not happened yet.Dadashri: Therefore, when such qualities arise, realizethen that you have become the Self. At the moment, you are‘Chandubhai.’ If someone makes a comment, ‘This Dr.Chandubhai ruined my health,’ will that have any affect on youwhile you are sitting here?Questioner: It will affect me.Dadashri: Therefore, you are ‘Chandubhai’! And ifsomeone curses this ‘Ambalal’ (Dadashri’s worldly name), then‘I’ will tell this ‘Ambalal,’ ‘Look, you must have said somethingto him which is why he is cursing you.’ ‘We’ experience completeand continuous separation (from Ambalal). When that separationhappens to you, your puzzle will be solved. Otherwise, the puzzleswill continue to arise every day.Questioner: Are all these puzzles woven into the fabricof our life or are they there for us to suffer the karma?Dadashri: That is the misunderstanding. Human beingsAptavani-66970Aptavani-6state of, ‘I am pure Soul (Shuddhatma)’ is the egoless(nirahamkar) state. ‘I am a Patel,’ ‘I am 50 years old,’ ‘I ama collector,’ ‘I am a lawyer,’ etc.; it is all ego.Questioner: That which prompts one to do good, is thatthe ego too?Dadashri: Yes, that too is ego. Even that which promptsone to do wrong is also ego. One can never tell when the egowill do wrong from right because it is blind.You might be giving someone some alms and if that manhappens to say something wrong, you may turn around and beathim up. This is because of the ego that gets hurt.Questioner: When a soldier says he is fighting for India,is that also ego?Dadashri: Yes, that is all ego and in the final analysis, itis of no benefit to him. He binds some merit karma. There is notelling when a ‘do-good’ ego will do something wrong. He mightbe fighting for India today and tomorrow he may even startfighting with his captain. There is no telling about him. The egois shameless. You never know when it will turn negative. It is athing that has no goal or aim. When the ego is used for the rightgoal with persistence, it brings worldly success and fame.Questioner: But is the ego not necessary for progress?Dadashri: That ego is naturally there. The ego is notsomething that you can keep at will, even if you try to. It willsomehow manage to slip back in on its own.Questioner: It is written in psychology texts that someego is necessary for personality development, is that true?Dadashri: Such ego is naturally present. It is a law ofnature that the ego arises for proper development and one grows.And as the development approaches a certain level (life afterlife) and reaches its peak, then one takes birth in India. Thereafter,there is no need for development. Who would use such a crazyego once he attains the path to liberation (moksha)? No matterhow good a person is – he may be very generous and charitable– but when he goes home, he has a lot of worries and problems.The whole day long, there is inner suffering (antardah).Qualities of a Self-realized BeingQuestioner: If I have realized the Self, what qualities willI start to have? What changes will take place within me that willtell me that I am on the right path?Dadashri: First, the egoism comes to a stop. Then whenanger, pride, deceit and greed leave, know that the Self hasbeen attained. Have you attained such qualities?Questioner: No, that has not happened yet.Dadashri: Therefore, when such qualities arise, realizethen that you have become the Self. At the moment, you are‘Chandubhai.’ If someone makes a comment, ‘This Dr.Chandubhai ruined my health,’ will that have any affect on youwhile you are sitting here?Questioner: It will affect me.Dadashri: Therefore, you are ‘Chandubhai’! And ifsomeone curses this ‘Ambalal’ (Dadashri’s worldly name), then‘I’ will tell this ‘Ambalal,’ ‘Look, you must have said somethingto him which is why he is cursing you.’ ‘We’ experience completeand continuous separation (from Ambalal). When that separationhappens to you, your puzzle will be solved. Otherwise, the puzzleswill continue to arise every day.Questioner: Are all these puzzles woven into the fabricof our life or are they there for us to suffer the karma?Dadashri: That is the misunderstanding. Human beingsAptavani-67172Aptavani-6are in a state of unawareness. What is this unawareness about?They are not aware of their true identity. They have no awarenessof ‘Who am I?’ How strange is that? Do you not feel ashamedto hear this? One is a stranger to his own Self; is that notshameful? And when he goes out, he is so boastful; he walksaround with pomp. Hey you! You have no realization of yourreal Self, so why are you getting excited unnecessarily? Onecannot remain hidden from one’s own Self, can one? You havehidden your self from your own Self. What kind of nonsense isthat?That is why I want to give you this science to awaken youto this awareness. This is not worldly knowledge (gnan); it isscientific spiritual knowledge (Vignan). Gnan cannot be thatwhich brings results on its own (kriyakari). This ‘Vignan’ doesbring results on its own (kriyakari). You do not have to doanything after you receive this Self-realization (Gnan). It is theGnan that continues to ‘do’ the work. Vignan is always living(chetan). Knowledge in the scriptures is simply knowledge ofwords; it cannot become kriyakari (bring results on its own) asit does not give results. At the most, it shows the distinctionbetween right and wrong, whereas this is Akram Vignan, itliberates without any effort.The Chain of Cause and EffectQuestioner: There is a relation between the body andthe Soul, is there not?Dadashri: This body is the result of the soul. It is theeffect of past causes. You become happy if someone gives youflowers and upset if someone insults you. There is no importanceto what you see on the outside, to the activity of thoughts,speech and acts of becoming happy or upset. It is the innerintent (antarbhaav) at the time that charges new karma. Thatkarma then discharges in the next life; that is when it becomeseffective. The mind, body and speech – all three are effective.While undergoing the effect of past karma, causes for new karmaare created simultaneously. These causes then become ‘effective’as thoughts, speech and acts in the next life. This is how thecycle of cause and effect, effec-t and cause, continues.Only in the human life form is it possible to create causes.In the rest of the life forms (animal kingdom, hell, celestial), thereis only effect. Here, in the human life form, we have both causesas well as effects. When ‘we’ give you Gnan, ‘we’ stop thecauses. Then there will be no new effects.Questioner: What is better, to remain ‘effective’ or tocease to be ‘effective’?Dadashri: If everyone can be cured in that way, thenpeople will have no need for anything. Apply a little medicineand people will be cured. They would not feel cold or hot andhence there will be no need for fans or clothes.Questioner: Is it better that this effect of the cause of thecycle of birth and death remains, or is it better that it goes away?Dadashri: Effect can never be removed. Effect meansresult. The result can not be pushed aside, but the causes canbe stopped.Questioner: Are cause and effect related to the innerintent (bhaav)?Dadashri: Yes, effect is a result and no changes can bemade to the effect. The effect is a discharge and the causes, thecharging, take place within as one is undergoing the effects. Thecharging, the cause, can be stopped but we cannot stop thedischarge, the effect.In the State of Non-doership, there is NoBondageQuestioner: What is the process of stopping the causes?Aptavani-67172Aptavani-6are in a state of unawareness. What is this unawareness about?They are not aware of their true identity. They have no awarenessof ‘Who am I?’ How strange is that? Do you not feel ashamedto hear this? One is a stranger to his own Self; is that notshameful? And when he goes out, he is so boastful; he walksaround with pomp. Hey you! You have no realization of yourreal Self, so why are you getting excited unnecessarily? Onecannot remain hidden from one’s own Self, can one? You havehidden your self from your own Self. What kind of nonsense isthat?That is why I want to give you this science to awaken youto this awareness. This is not worldly knowledge (gnan); it isscientific spiritual knowledge (Vignan). Gnan cannot be thatwhich brings results on its own (kriyakari). This ‘Vignan’ doesbring results on its own (kriyakari). You do not have to doanything after you receive this Self-realization (Gnan). It is theGnan that continues to ‘do’ the work. Vignan is always living(chetan). Knowledge in the scriptures is simply knowledge ofwords; it cannot become kriyakari (bring results on its own) asit does not give results. At the most, it shows the distinctionbetween right and wrong, whereas this is Akram Vignan, itliberates without any effort.The Chain of Cause and EffectQuestioner: There is a relation between the body andthe Soul, is there not?Dadashri: This body is the result of the soul. It is theeffect of past causes. You become happy if someone gives youflowers and upset if someone insults you. There is no importanceto what you see on the outside, to the activity of thoughts,speech and acts of becoming happy or upset. It is the innerintent (antarbhaav) at the time that charges new karma. Thatkarma then discharges in the next life; that is when it becomeseffective. The mind, body and speech – all three are effective.While undergoing the effect of past karma, causes for new karmaare created simultaneously. These causes then become ‘effective’as thoughts, speech and acts in the next life. This is how thecycle of cause and effect, effec-t and cause, continues.Only in the human life form is it possible to create causes.In the rest of the life forms (animal kingdom, hell, celestial), thereis only effect. Here, in the human life form, we have both causesas well as effects. When ‘we’ give you Gnan, ‘we’ stop thecauses. Then there will be no new effects.Questioner: What is better, to remain ‘effective’ or tocease to be ‘effective’?Dadashri: If everyone can be cured in that way, thenpeople will have no need for anything. Apply a little medicineand people will be cured. They would not feel cold or hot andhence there will be no need for fans or clothes.Questioner: Is it better that this effect of the cause of thecycle of birth and death remains, or is it better that it goes away?Dadashri: Effect can never be removed. Effect meansresult. The result can not be pushed aside, but the causes canbe stopped.Questioner: Are cause and effect related to the innerintent (bhaav)?Dadashri: Yes, effect is a result and no changes can bemade to the effect. The effect is a discharge and the causes, thecharging, take place within as one is undergoing the effects. Thecharging, the cause, can be stopped but we cannot stop thedischarge, the effect.In the State of Non-doership, there is NoBondageQuestioner: What is the process of stopping the causes?Aptavani-67374Aptavani-6Dadashri: The moment your belief awareness (bhaan)of ‘I am the doer’ breaks, causes cease to be created. Thennew causes will not arise and the old karmic stock within willcontinue to discharge. Now I will explain how the old stockdischarges.For example, there is an irrigation tank with a forty-milelong pipe which fills a large pond here in Ahmedabad. When thepond fills up, you make a phone call to tell them to shut the valveoff to stop the water. They shut off the water, but the watercontinues flowing through the pipe into the pond for awhile. Thisis because there is still water in the forty mile long pipe that youneed to let drain out, do you not? What is that called? ‘We’ callthat ‘discharge.’ This is how charging of new karma stops forthose who attain Gnan from ‘us.’ In this Gnan, your belief andawareness of ‘I am doing’ is destroyed; you attain the knowledgethat vyavasthit does everything and that the pure Soul(Shuddhatma), the Self, is the ‘knower-seer’ (gnata-drashta)of everything. Whatever happens after that, You simply have tokeep ‘seeing’ everything. Therefore, the entire doer-ship, whichis the cause and the basis for charging new karma, is completelygone. Thereafter, whatever discharge remains needs to be dealtwith, with equanimity.Destiny and VyavasthitQuestioner: Do you consider the force, power or energyof scientific circumstantial evidences (vyavasthit shakti) an energyof God, fate or destiny (prarabdha)?Dadashri: No, scientific circumstantial evidences(vyavasthit) and fate (prarabdha) have nothing to do with eachother. If a person believes in destiny (prarabdha), then whatwill people say to him? They will tell him, ‘Make some effort(purusharth); do not rely uselessly on prarabdha.’ Therefore,prarabdha as a support is invalid and lame, whereas vyavasthitis exactly as it is.Questioner: Does vyavasthit mean previously decided?Is it predetermined?Dadashri: Yes, it is predetermined. However, unless onehas complete Gnan, one cannot say, ‘It is vyavasthit.’ Thismind, body, speech are under the control of vyavasthit. Theraising of your arm, the thinking that occurs within, the inspiration(prerana) that comes from within; all are under the control ofvyavasthit. ‘We’ are a pure Soul (Shuddhatma), and everythingelse is under the control of vyavasthit. Therefore, You shouldnot interfere in it. You just have to keep ‘seeing’ whatever ishappening.Questioner: So does the pure Soul (Shuddhatma) comeunder the control of scientific circumstantial evidences(vyavasthit) by that much?Dadashri: No, the Shuddhatma is not in bondage(bandhan). After becoming Shuddhatma, one needs to remainas the knower-seer (gnata-drashta) only.I am telling you all this, having reached the peak. Whateverknowledge worldly people have given – some have given itstanding at the foothills of the mountain, some have climbed upfive feet – then they have spoken. Some have climbed ten feetand then they have spoken. I have climbed so high that my neckreaches over the top and I can see everything at the bottom,whereas the Vitarag Lords, the fully enlightened Ones, havestood on the top of the mountain and then they have spoken.The absolute truth lies at the very top. There can be a slightshortcoming in whatever I say because I am not able to seeeverything on the top. The top, however, is a completely differentmatter!Questioner: Lord Mahavir said that karma cannot bedestroyed by any other individual. Is the Gnani included in thattoo?Aptavani-67374Aptavani-6Dadashri: The moment your belief awareness (bhaan)of ‘I am the doer’ breaks, causes cease to be created. Thennew causes will not arise and the old karmic stock within willcontinue to discharge. Now I will explain how the old stockdischarges.For example, there is an irrigation tank with a forty-milelong pipe which fills a large pond here in Ahmedabad. When thepond fills up, you make a phone call to tell them to shut the valveoff to stop the water. They shut off the water, but the watercontinues flowing through the pipe into the pond for awhile. Thisis because there is still water in the forty mile long pipe that youneed to let drain out, do you not? What is that called? ‘We’ callthat ‘discharge.’ This is how charging of new karma stops forthose who attain Gnan from ‘us.’ In this Gnan, your belief andawareness of ‘I am doing’ is destroyed; you attain the knowledgethat vyavasthit does everything and that the pure Soul(Shuddhatma), the Self, is the ‘knower-seer’ (gnata-drashta)of everything. Whatever happens after that, You simply have tokeep ‘seeing’ everything. Therefore, the entire doer-ship, whichis the cause and the basis for charging new karma, is completelygone. Thereafter, whatever discharge remains needs to be dealtwith, with equanimity.Destiny and VyavasthitQuestioner: Do you consider the force, power or energyof scientific circumstantial evidences (vyavasthit shakti) an energyof God, fate or destiny (prarabdha)?Dadashri: No, scientific circumstantial evidences(vyavasthit) and fate (prarabdha) have nothing to do with eachother. If a person believes in destiny (prarabdha), then whatwill people say to him? They will tell him, ‘Make some effort(purusharth); do not rely uselessly on prarabdha.’ Therefore,prarabdha as a support is invalid and lame, whereas vyavasthitis exactly as it is.Questioner: Does vyavasthit mean previously decided?Is it predetermined?Dadashri: Yes, it is predetermined. However, unless onehas complete Gnan, one cannot say, ‘It is vyavasthit.’ Thismind, body, speech are under the control of vyavasthit. Theraising of your arm, the thinking that occurs within, the inspiration(prerana) that comes from within; all are under the control ofvyavasthit. ‘We’ are a pure Soul (Shuddhatma), and everythingelse is under the control of vyavasthit. Therefore, You shouldnot interfere in it. You just have to keep ‘seeing’ whatever ishappening.Questioner: So does the pure Soul (Shuddhatma) comeunder the control of scientific circumstantial evidences(vyavasthit) by that much?Dadashri: No, the Shuddhatma is not in bondage(bandhan). After becoming Shuddhatma, one needs to remainas the knower-seer (gnata-drashta) only.I am telling you all this, having reached the peak. Whateverknowledge worldly people have given – some have given itstanding at the foothills of the mountain, some have climbed upfive feet – then they have spoken. Some have climbed ten feetand then they have spoken. I have climbed so high that my neckreaches over the top and I can see everything at the bottom,whereas the Vitarag Lords, the fully enlightened Ones, havestood on the top of the mountain and then they have spoken.The absolute truth lies at the very top. There can be a slightshortcoming in whatever I say because I am not able to seeeverything on the top. The top, however, is a completely differentmatter!Questioner: Lord Mahavir said that karma cannot bedestroyed by any other individual. Is the Gnani included in thattoo?76Aptavani-6Aptavani-675Dadashri: No, the Gnani can destroy his own karma andhelp others destroy theirs too. Therefore, Lord Mahavir said thisabout those who are not Gnanis.Questioner: Does a Gnani have control over his non-Selfcomplex of thoughts, speech and actions (prakruti)?Dadashri: No, he does not! But he is not affected by hisprakruti. Prakruti does not have any effect over hisindependence and freedom. Even Lord Mahavir had to dealwith the prakruti.Questioner: Having attained your Gnan, if a person doesnot experience a blissful state (samadhi) because of lots ofkarmic baggage, is it possible that vyavasthit shakti will oneday clean the karmic baggage completely?Dadashri: Vyavasthit does not do any harm in all this.It is the unawareness of the Self (ajagruti) that does damage.If one moves under the influence of ‘our’ five Agnas, then he willexperience continuous samadhi. One has to remain aware(jagrut). When I give you this Gnan, I bring You into theawareness of the Self. Total awareness as the Self is calledabsolute knowledge (keval gnan). One can ‘see’ all one’smistakes (dosh) once the awareness arises. One can ‘see’ up tofive hundred mistakes daily and whatever mistakes are ‘seen,’definitely depart!Here, ours is a ‘science’ (Vignan); from the time one isable to ‘see’ his mistakes, it is the beginning of him becoming aGod. Otherwise, no one can see his own mistakes. How canone see his mistakes when he is the judge, he is the lawyer andhe is the defendant?* * * * *[9]Beginning of KashayQuestioner: I want to know about charge kashays anddischarge kashays (kashays – inner hidden enemies of anger,pride, deceit and greed. Deluded behaviors that obstruct rightknowledge and behavior and that perpetuate karma andinvolvement in the world.)Dadashri: The kashays that you are experiencing now,for example, if you become angry with someone, that is dischargekashay. But with that anger, if there is a presence of your belief(bhaav) of being the doer, then a new seed of ‘charge kashay’is sown again.Questioner: During any discharge that occurs, is therealso not a charge? Is cause karma (bhaav karma) also not init?Dadashri: No. When the karma is discharging, the onewho takes Gnan from ‘us’ can prevent the simultaneous chargingthat occurs. Then karma does not bind at all.Questioner: Is there some kind of a test for proving thatsomething is a ‘charge’ and something else is a ‘discharge’?Dadashri: Yes, there is. You will know everything thathappens. If a charge is taking place, then there is restlessness(ashanti) within; the bliss (samadhi) will break. And if there isno charging, then the samadhi will not leave.Questioner: Can anger occur despite being in samadhi?Dadashri: The anger that occurs is discharge anger, but76Aptavani-6Aptavani-675Dadashri: No, the Gnani can destroy his own karma andhelp others destroy theirs too. Therefore, Lord Mahavir said thisabout those who are not Gnanis.Questioner: Does a Gnani have control over his non-Selfcomplex of thoughts, speech and actions (prakruti)?Dadashri: No, he does not! But he is not affected by hisprakruti. Prakruti does not have any effect over hisindependence and freedom. Even Lord Mahavir had to dealwith the prakruti.Questioner: Having attained your Gnan, if a person doesnot experience a blissful state (samadhi) because of lots ofkarmic baggage, is it possible that vyavasthit shakti will oneday clean the karmic baggage completely?Dadashri: Vyavasthit does not do any harm in all this.It is the unawareness of the Self (ajagruti) that does damage.If one moves under the influence of ‘our’ five Agnas, then he willexperience continuous samadhi. One has to remain aware(jagrut). When I give you this Gnan, I bring You into theawareness of the Self. Total awareness as the Self is calledabsolute knowledge (keval gnan). One can ‘see’ all one’smistakes (dosh) once the awareness arises. One can ‘see’ up tofive hundred mistakes daily and whatever mistakes are ‘seen,’definitely depart!Here, ours is a ‘science’ (Vignan); from the time one isable to ‘see’ his mistakes, it is the beginning of him becoming aGod. Otherwise, no one can see his own mistakes. How canone see his mistakes when he is the judge, he is the lawyer andhe is the defendant?* * * * *[9]Beginning of KashayQuestioner: I want to know about charge kashays anddischarge kashays (kashays – inner hidden enemies of anger,pride, deceit and greed. Deluded behaviors that obstruct rightknowledge and behavior and that perpetuate karma andinvolvement in the world.)Dadashri: The kashays that you are experiencing now,for example, if you become angry with someone, that is dischargekashay. But with that anger, if there is a presence of your belief(bhaav) of being the doer, then a new seed of ‘charge kashay’is sown again.Questioner: During any discharge that occurs, is therealso not a charge? Is cause karma (bhaav karma) also not init?Dadashri: No. When the karma is discharging, the onewho takes Gnan from ‘us’ can prevent the simultaneous chargingthat occurs. Then karma does not bind at all.Questioner: Is there some kind of a test for proving thatsomething is a ‘charge’ and something else is a ‘discharge’?Dadashri: Yes, there is. You will know everything thathappens. If a charge is taking place, then there is restlessness(ashanti) within; the bliss (samadhi) will break. And if there isno charging, then the samadhi will not leave.Questioner: Can anger occur despite being in samadhi?Dadashri: The anger that occurs is discharge anger, butAptavani-67778Aptavani-6Questioner: In kashay, there is ‘kash’ plus ‘aya’; whatis that?Dadashri: That which hurts the self (atma) is all kashay.Questioner: If attachment (raag) does not hurt the self,then why is it called raag kashay?Dadashri: Raag does not hurt the self, but it is a seed forkashay. A large tree grows out of that.Abhorrence (dwesh) is the beginning of kashay andattachment (raag) is the sowing of a seed which will produceresults. What results will it produce? The result will be kashay.Therefore, when the result comes, it will give rise to dwesh. Atthe moment, because there is raag, it appears sweet.Can There Be Kashays in FavorableCircumstances?Questioner: No kashays arise during favorablecircumstances but a lot of kashays occur during unfavorablecircumstances, so what should we do?Dadashri: It is not that kashays occur only in unfavorablecircumstances. Many kashays occur in favorable circumstancesbut there is ‘coolness’ in those kashays. They are calledattachment (raag) kashays. They consist of greed (lobh) anddeceit (kapat). One feels so much coolness and comfort in themthat the tuber of the raag kashay keeps growing day by day.One finds happiness in favorable circumstances, but thathappiness is the one that causes the greatest difficulty.Questioner: In favorable circumstances, there is noawareness that this is a kashay-laden inner intent (kashaybhaav).Dadashri: You will not know about the kashay in suchcircumstances and yet those are the very kashays that kill you.if there is support or intent (bhaav) for the anger within, thenbliss (samadhi) will not remain.Questioner: Is it the same with greed (lobh)?Dadashri: Yes that goes for everything; anger, pride, deceitand illusion-greed. One is a charge bhaav (belief, intent) and theother is a discharge bhaav. What is your name?Questioner: Chandulal.Dadashri: Have you ever confirmed that you areChandulal?Questioner: Everyone has told me that.Dadashri: Even I accept that you are the owner of thatname, but who are ‘you’ really? Karma continues to charge aslong as there is the false assertion (aropit bhaav) of ‘I amChandubhai.’Questioner: Is attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh)kashay-laden intent (kashay bhaav) or is it something different?Dadashri: It is verily a part of kashays. It is not a separatething. Anger (krodh) and pride (maan) are elements ofabhorrence (dwesh), while deceit (kapat, maya) and greed(lobh) are elements of attachment (raag). So anger and prideare elements of abhorrence, while deceit and greed are elementsof attachment. Anger, pride, deceit and greed are not attributesof the Soul and neither are they attributes of the relative-self, thenon-Self complex of input and output, charge and discharge(pudgal).Questioner: So what is that third element?Dadashri: It is an attribute (guna) that arises in thepresence of both the soul Self (Atma) and the non-Self (pudgal).It would not arise if there were no presence of the two.Aptavani-67778Aptavani-6Questioner: In kashay, there is ‘kash’ plus ‘aya’; whatis that?Dadashri: That which hurts the self (atma) is all kashay.Questioner: If attachment (raag) does not hurt the self,then why is it called raag kashay?Dadashri: Raag does not hurt the self, but it is a seed forkashay. A large tree grows out of that.Abhorrence (dwesh) is the beginning of kashay andattachment (raag) is the sowing of a seed which will produceresults. What results will it produce? The result will be kashay.Therefore, when the result comes, it will give rise to dwesh. Atthe moment, because there is raag, it appears sweet.Can There Be Kashays in FavorableCircumstances?Questioner: No kashays arise during favorablecircumstances but a lot of kashays occur during unfavorablecircumstances, so what should we do?Dadashri: It is not that kashays occur only in unfavorablecircumstances. Many kashays occur in favorable circumstancesbut there is ‘coolness’ in those kashays. They are calledattachment (raag) kashays. They consist of greed (lobh) anddeceit (kapat). One feels so much coolness and comfort in themthat the tuber of the raag kashay keeps growing day by day.One finds happiness in favorable circumstances, but thathappiness is the one that causes the greatest difficulty.Questioner: In favorable circumstances, there is noawareness that this is a kashay-laden inner intent (kashaybhaav).Dadashri: You will not know about the kashay in suchcircumstances and yet those are the very kashays that kill you.if there is support or intent (bhaav) for the anger within, thenbliss (samadhi) will not remain.Questioner: Is it the same with greed (lobh)?Dadashri: Yes that goes for everything; anger, pride, deceitand illusion-greed. One is a charge bhaav (belief, intent) and theother is a discharge bhaav. What is your name?Questioner: Chandulal.Dadashri: Have you ever confirmed that you areChandulal?Questioner: Everyone has told me that.Dadashri: Even I accept that you are the owner of thatname, but who are ‘you’ really? Karma continues to charge aslong as there is the false assertion (aropit bhaav) of ‘I amChandubhai.’Questioner: Is attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh)kashay-laden intent (kashay bhaav) or is it something different?Dadashri: It is verily a part of kashays. It is not a separatething. Anger (krodh) and pride (maan) are elements ofabhorrence (dwesh), while deceit (kapat, maya) and greed(lobh) are elements of attachment (raag). So anger and prideare elements of abhorrence, while deceit and greed are elementsof attachment. Anger, pride, deceit and greed are not attributesof the Soul and neither are they attributes of the relative-self, thenon-Self complex of input and output, charge and discharge(pudgal).Questioner: So what is that third element?Dadashri: It is an attribute (guna) that arises in thepresence of both the soul Self (Atma) and the non-Self (pudgal).It would not arise if there were no presence of the two.Aptavani-67980Aptavani-6are those kashays that give you happiness (sukh)?Questioner: It is only now that you have said so that Ido realize that they bring great pain; otherwise, I never knewthat there are kashays in favorable circumstances.Dadashri: Without the Gnani Purush showing them, humanbeings cannot see their mistakes; there are infinite such mistakes.This is not the only mistake. One has been surrounded withinfinite such mistakes.Questioner: Mistakes occur with every step.Dadashri: Have you understood exactly that favorablecircumstances are also called kashays?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: That which constantly keeps you entrenchedin the ‘sweetness of the cool feeling,’ which you will enjoy a lot,are the very kashays that make you wander endlessly.The Foundation of Kashay is IgnoranceQuestioner: What is the basis on which these kashaysexist?Dadashri: It is based on ignorance of the Self (agnan).Ignorance of the Self is the base of all these. All puzzles aresolved when that ignorance goes away. Ignorance goes awaywhen ‘we’ make you understand the Self. Kashays begin toshed as ignorance leaves, and thus attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh) leave. Then the non-Self complex of thoughts, speechand actions (prakruti) begins to fall off. Is this not an easy path?The Unique Beauty of Akram VignanQuestioner: Dada, it is hard to accept and believe onecan attain this Gnan without doing anything.Dadashri: Akram Vignan (Science of Dadashri’s step-The kashays of unfavorable circumstances, like anger and pride,are simple and straightforward; they are not deceptive. They willbe easily recognized by everyone, whereas the kashays offavorable circumstances, like greed and deceit, will flourish aslarge tubers (gaantho). Kashays of unfavorable circumstances,like pride and anger, belong to abhorrence (dwesh). Kashays offavorable circumstances will make one wander for infinite lifetimes.Dear lady, did you understand that?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: So both the favorable and the unfavorablecircumstances are wrong. Therefore, it is worth realizing theSelf. Once you realize the Self, favorable and the unfavorablecease to exist.Questioner: So what effort (purusharth) should one dofor that?Dadashri: Nothing will happen with purusharth. Comehere to satsang. I will show you the Self. Then you will haveonly bliss (anand) and all these kashays will cease.Nothing is attained until one experiences the Self. Peoplesay, ‘Sugar is sweet…sugar is sweet.’ But if you ask them,‘What is that sweetness like?’ they will say, ‘I do not know.’You will know it when you put it in your mouth. That is how itis with the soul – the Self. People talk about the Atma-, but allthat talk is only words; one does not gain anything from them.The kashays will not go away by such talks, and you achievenothing at the end of the day. One has been wandering this wayfor infinite lifetimes and has not had contact with and receivedthe grace and blessing (darshan) of One who has realized theSelf and is able to do the same for others, a Gnani Purush. Hehas not heard that which is eternal (sat) and has not had faithin the sat. Should you not know the sat once?Kashays are dreadfully painful, are they not? And whatAptavani-67980Aptavani-6are those kashays that give you happiness (sukh)?Questioner: It is only now that you have said so that Ido realize that they bring great pain; otherwise, I never knewthat there are kashays in favorable circumstances.Dadashri: Without the Gnani Purush showing them, humanbeings cannot see their mistakes; there are infinite such mistakes.This is not the only mistake. One has been surrounded withinfinite such mistakes.Questioner: Mistakes occur with every step.Dadashri: Have you understood exactly that favorablecircumstances are also called kashays?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: That which constantly keeps you entrenchedin the ‘sweetness of the cool feeling,’ which you will enjoy a lot,are the very kashays that make you wander endlessly.The Foundation of Kashay is IgnoranceQuestioner: What is the basis on which these kashaysexist?Dadashri: It is based on ignorance of the Self (agnan).Ignorance of the Self is the base of all these. All puzzles aresolved when that ignorance goes away. Ignorance goes awaywhen ‘we’ make you understand the Self. Kashays begin toshed as ignorance leaves, and thus attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh) leave. Then the non-Self complex of thoughts, speechand actions (prakruti) begins to fall off. Is this not an easy path?The Unique Beauty of Akram VignanQuestioner: Dada, it is hard to accept and believe onecan attain this Gnan without doing anything.Dadashri: Akram Vignan (Science of Dadashri’s step-The kashays of unfavorable circumstances, like anger and pride,are simple and straightforward; they are not deceptive. They willbe easily recognized by everyone, whereas the kashays offavorable circumstances, like greed and deceit, will flourish aslarge tubers (gaantho). Kashays of unfavorable circumstances,like pride and anger, belong to abhorrence (dwesh). Kashays offavorable circumstances will make one wander for infinite lifetimes.Dear lady, did you understand that?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: So both the favorable and the unfavorablecircumstances are wrong. Therefore, it is worth realizing theSelf. Once you realize the Self, favorable and the unfavorablecease to exist.Questioner: So what effort (purusharth) should one dofor that?Dadashri: Nothing will happen with purusharth. Comehere to satsang. I will show you the Self. Then you will haveonly bliss (anand) and all these kashays will cease.Nothing is attained until one experiences the Self. Peoplesay, ‘Sugar is sweet…sugar is sweet.’ But if you ask them,‘What is that sweetness like?’ they will say, ‘I do not know.’You will know it when you put it in your mouth. That is how itis with the soul – the Self. People talk about the Atma-, but allthat talk is only words; one does not gain anything from them.The kashays will not go away by such talks, and you achievenothing at the end of the day. One has been wandering this wayfor infinite lifetimes and has not had contact with and receivedthe grace and blessing (darshan) of One who has realized theSelf and is able to do the same for others, a Gnani Purush. Hehas not heard that which is eternal (sat) and has not had faithin the sat. Should you not know the sat once?Kashays are dreadfully painful, are they not? And whatAptavani-68182Aptavani-6less path to Liberation; Science of Absolutism) is always attainedthrough the grace of One in total Self-realization (a Gnani). Andeven in the Kramic (step-by-step) path, grace is a must but inthat path, one has to keep doing what the guru directs. There isno doer-ship in Akram. In this path, it is verily spiritual knowledgeof the Self or the real, Self-realization (Gnan), direct Gnan. Thatis why it becomes very easy. That is why this path is called ‘alift’ or ‘an elevator’ path. An elevator path means one does nothave to do anything. One just has to remain in the Agnas (thedirectives given by the Gnani Purush) so new karma will notcharge. Then, moving onward, everything will continue todischarge. It will continue to discharge with the same intent(bhaav) as it was charged.Conviction, Awareness, Experience of the SelfFrom time immemorial, one has lived in illusion. The Selfis in its natural state (swabhav), but there has been an illusion(vibhaav). This illusion in turn has multiplied infinitely (vibhranti);that is considered a state of deep sleep. When one is awakenedfrom this slumber, then he becomes aware (laksha) of the Self.This awakening occurs through Gnan. The Gnani Purush awakensone through the speech of Gnan; the Gnan Vidhi. That awakensthe Self and, thereafter, the awareness (laksha) of ‘I am pureSoul’ will not leave. Once the awareness sets in, then experience(anubhav), awareness (laksha) and conviction (pratiti) willremain. There is always conviction (pratiti) within this awareness(laksha). Now the experience will continue to increase. Thecompletion of the experience is absolute knowledge (keval gnan).The Illusion – SamipyabhaavKashays arise due to ignorance. There are no kashayswith Gnan. After Self-realization, when ‘you’ become angry, itis an effect of the kashays of past life that are discharging. TheLord Mahavir calls that ‘discharge of the illusionary conduct’(charitra mohaniya).‘Our’ neighbor, that is our relative-self ‘Chandubhai,’ hasattained the energy of life (chetan bhaav); the relative-self hasbeen charged. All its inner intent (bhaav), the bhaav of theintellect, the vexation of the mind that arises when someoneinsults him; these are all inner intents (bhaav) of your ‘neighbor’(relative-self). When the mind-intellect-chit-ego get excited, ‘You’should calmly tell ‘Chandubhai,’ ‘Do not get excited; stay calm.’Therefore, You have to play your role as a neighbor. Onoccasions when he gets very upset, then look in the mirror.Would you not see ‘Chandubhai’ the neighbor in the mirror?Then you should place your hand on Chandubhai and say tohim, ‘Calm down. ‘We’ are here with you, so what do you haveto fear?’ Try doing this sometime. Sit in front of a mirror; youare separate and Chandubhai is separate. Both are separatefrom one another but they appear as one because of closeproximity (samipyabhaav) of the two. A new vision (bhaav ordrashti) of ‘oneness’ has arisen, due to their close proximity,but it does not belong to either of the two. There is nothing else.They have been separate indeed from the very beginning. Acomplete wrong belief has set in. You will have the solutionwhen the Gnani Purush gives you the right belief. It is just achanged vision; the mistake is due to the vision.* * * * *Aptavani-68182Aptavani-6less path to Liberation; Science of Absolutism) is always attainedthrough the grace of One in total Self-realization (a Gnani). Andeven in the Kramic (step-by-step) path, grace is a must but inthat path, one has to keep doing what the guru directs. There isno doer-ship in Akram. In this path, it is verily spiritual knowledgeof the Self or the real, Self-realization (Gnan), direct Gnan. Thatis why it becomes very easy. That is why this path is called ‘alift’ or ‘an elevator’ path. An elevator path means one does nothave to do anything. One just has to remain in the Agnas (thedirectives given by the Gnani Purush) so new karma will notcharge. Then, moving onward, everything will continue todischarge. It will continue to discharge with the same intent(bhaav) as it was charged.Conviction, Awareness, Experience of the SelfFrom time immemorial, one has lived in illusion. The Selfis in its natural state (swabhav), but there has been an illusion(vibhaav). This illusion in turn has multiplied infinitely (vibhranti);that is considered a state of deep sleep. When one is awakenedfrom this slumber, then he becomes aware (laksha) of the Self.This awakening occurs through Gnan. The Gnani Purush awakensone through the speech of Gnan; the Gnan Vidhi. That awakensthe Self and, thereafter, the awareness (laksha) of ‘I am pureSoul’ will not leave. Once the awareness sets in, then experience(anubhav), awareness (laksha) and conviction (pratiti) willremain. There is always conviction (pratiti) within this awareness(laksha). Now the experience will continue to increase. Thecompletion of the experience is absolute knowledge (keval gnan).The Illusion – SamipyabhaavKashays arise due to ignorance. There are no kashayswith Gnan. After Self-realization, when ‘you’ become angry, itis an effect of the kashays of past life that are discharging. TheLord Mahavir calls that ‘discharge of the illusionary conduct’(charitra mohaniya).‘Our’ neighbor, that is our relative-self ‘Chandubhai,’ hasattained the energy of life (chetan bhaav); the relative-self hasbeen charged. All its inner intent (bhaav), the bhaav of theintellect, the vexation of the mind that arises when someoneinsults him; these are all inner intents (bhaav) of your ‘neighbor’(relative-self). When the mind-intellect-chit-ego get excited, ‘You’should calmly tell ‘Chandubhai,’ ‘Do not get excited; stay calm.’Therefore, You have to play your role as a neighbor. Onoccasions when he gets very upset, then look in the mirror.Would you not see ‘Chandubhai’ the neighbor in the mirror?Then you should place your hand on Chandubhai and say tohim, ‘Calm down. ‘We’ are here with you, so what do you haveto fear?’ Try doing this sometime. Sit in front of a mirror; youare separate and Chandubhai is separate. Both are separatefrom one another but they appear as one because of closeproximity (samipyabhaav) of the two. A new vision (bhaav ordrashti) of ‘oneness’ has arisen, due to their close proximity,but it does not belong to either of the two. There is nothing else.They have been separate indeed from the very beginning. Acomplete wrong belief has set in. You will have the solutionwhen the Gnani Purush gives you the right belief. It is just achanged vision; the mistake is due to the vision.* * * * *Aptavani-68384Aptavani-6[10]Pleasure-seeking Versus AttractionDadashri: How many ‘files’ do you have?Questioner: I have only one ‘file,’ that of suffering(vedana).Dadashri: Now if you were to tell that file, ‘Do not comehere,’ then if that file is eight feet tall, it will return as eighty feettall. And if you tell it to come soon, its height of eight feet willseem only two feet, and once the duration of suffering (vedana)is over, it will not stay. That which is not going to stay is calleda ‘guest.’ Should you not be cordial to your guest? You have tomaintain control and calmness (saiyam). What do you think?Questioner: Yes, I agree, but I am not able to toleratethe pain (dukh).Dadashri: Not being able to tolerate is a psychologicaleffect. If you recite the name, ‘Dada, Dada (the lord within),’and ask from him, ‘Give me the energies (shakti) to tolerate,’then such energies will arise within you.Questioner: As long there is sukh buddhi, the intellectualbelief that happiness and pleasure reside in that which is gainedthrough the five senses, it is not possible to deal with it in thatmanner, is it?Dadashri: The Self does not have such an intellect (sukhbuddhi). The Self I have given you does not have an iota ofsuch intellect. It has never experienced such pleasure (sukh).The sukh buddhi belongs to the ego; it will run towards pleasure.And to repel from pain is dukh buddhi.There is nothing wrong with enjoying pleasure (sukhbuddhi). It is not of the Self; it belongs to the pudgal, the non-Self. Pleasure arises when someone gives you something. Whenyou get too much of it, it will also give rise to pain (dukhbuddhi). Do you know that?Questioner: Yes, I get tired of it.Dadashri: Therefore, it is the non-Self (pudgal). Pudgalis a thing of input-output or charge-discharge (puran-galan). Soit is not a permanent thing. It is a temporary adjustment. If amango is sweet and you ask for some more, it is not pleasure-seeking (not sukh-buddhi); it is merely an attraction (aakarshan)of the body.Questioner: For me, the body and the tongue have a lotof such attraction.Dadashri: As such attraction continues, You have to remainaware. The sentence I have given to you, ‘I am completelyseparate from all joint activities of the mind, the speech and thebody’ (Mun vachan kayani tamam sangi kriyao thi hoontaddan asang ja chhoo), such awareness (jagruti) shouldremain. And actually it is exactly that way, that is, it is all input-output (puran-galan). There is no binding of new karma if Youmaintain this awareness.Questioner: If that awareness does not remain, then is ita mistake of our worldly conduct (charitra dosh)?Dadashri: It is considered so in the Kramic path.Questioner: But such weakness prevails due to the illusionof discharging karma (charitra moha).Dadashri: In the Kramic path, it is considered aweakness. In that path you have to find a solution for suchAptavani-68384Aptavani-6[10]Pleasure-seeking Versus AttractionDadashri: How many ‘files’ do you have?Questioner: I have only one ‘file,’ that of suffering(vedana).Dadashri: Now if you were to tell that file, ‘Do not comehere,’ then if that file is eight feet tall, it will return as eighty feettall. And if you tell it to come soon, its height of eight feet willseem only two feet, and once the duration of suffering (vedana)is over, it will not stay. That which is not going to stay is calleda ‘guest.’ Should you not be cordial to your guest? You have tomaintain control and calmness (saiyam). What do you think?Questioner: Yes, I agree, but I am not able to toleratethe pain (dukh).Dadashri: Not being able to tolerate is a psychologicaleffect. If you recite the name, ‘Dada, Dada (the lord within),’and ask from him, ‘Give me the energies (shakti) to tolerate,’then such energies will arise within you.Questioner: As long there is sukh buddhi, the intellectualbelief that happiness and pleasure reside in that which is gainedthrough the five senses, it is not possible to deal with it in thatmanner, is it?Dadashri: The Self does not have such an intellect (sukhbuddhi). The Self I have given you does not have an iota ofsuch intellect. It has never experienced such pleasure (sukh).The sukh buddhi belongs to the ego; it will run towards pleasure.And to repel from pain is dukh buddhi.There is nothing wrong with enjoying pleasure (sukhbuddhi). It is not of the Self; it belongs to the pudgal, the non-Self. Pleasure arises when someone gives you something. Whenyou get too much of it, it will also give rise to pain (dukhbuddhi). Do you know that?Questioner: Yes, I get tired of it.Dadashri: Therefore, it is the non-Self (pudgal). Pudgalis a thing of input-output or charge-discharge (puran-galan). Soit is not a permanent thing. It is a temporary adjustment. If amango is sweet and you ask for some more, it is not pleasure-seeking (not sukh-buddhi); it is merely an attraction (aakarshan)of the body.Questioner: For me, the body and the tongue have a lotof such attraction.Dadashri: As such attraction continues, You have to remainaware. The sentence I have given to you, ‘I am completelyseparate from all joint activities of the mind, the speech and thebody’ (Mun vachan kayani tamam sangi kriyao thi hoontaddan asang ja chhoo), such awareness (jagruti) shouldremain. And actually it is exactly that way, that is, it is all input-output (puran-galan). There is no binding of new karma if Youmaintain this awareness.Questioner: If that awareness does not remain, then is ita mistake of our worldly conduct (charitra dosh)?Dadashri: It is considered so in the Kramic path.Questioner: But such weakness prevails due to the illusionof discharging karma (charitra moha).Dadashri: In the Kramic path, it is considered aweakness. In that path you have to find a solution for suchAptavani-68586Aptavani-6weakness. Here, in the Akram path, You do not have theweakness. You have to maintain awareness here. The Self Ihave given you is verily awareness itself.Questioner: Attachment (raag) occurs when one is notaware, does it not?Dadashri: No, it is not like that. Now, after Self-realization, You can never have raag at all. That which occursis attraction (aakarshan).Questioner: This attraction that happens, is that notconsidered a weakness?Dadashri: No, it is not a weakness. The attraction andthe Self have nothing to do with each other. All the attractiondoes is that it will not allow you to experience Your bliss. All itmay do is that it may make You go through one or two morelifetimes (this refers to those who have received Gnan). There isa solution (upaya) for that here. Here they all do a specialintrospective process (samayik) of seeing the tubers (gaantho)and mistakes of the non-Self, the ‘neighbor.’ If you take thisparticular topic (vishay) and ‘see’ it in samayik, then it (thetuber of that particular topic) will start dissolving and it will cometo an end. Whatever you want to dissolve, you can dissolve ithere.Questioner: If there is something like that, it would bequite useful.Dadashri: There is. There is everything here. We willshow you everything here. If there is a specific taste that isbothering you, you have to put that ‘topic’ in the specialintrospective process (samayik) and then keep ‘seeing’ what itshows You within. All the tubers will dissolve merely by ‘seeing’them.Attraction (aakarshan) can never take place in the absenceof thoughts (vichaar). Whenever an attraction is going to occur,there will be a thought first. Thought arises in the mind and themind is made of tubers (gaantho). The greater the number ofthoughts about a certain topic, the larger its tuber!Bhaavak and His ColorsThere are all these ‘k’s’ within you (‘k’ for karavnar =the doer). It is the bhaavak within you that makes you do thebhaav, inner intent. There is within you that which makes youdo greed (lobhak) and that which makes you have pride(maanak). All these ‘k’s within you make you do bhaav. If theone doing the bhaav (the bhaavya), i.e., the relative-self(pratishthit atma), becomes involved in it, then a new ‘picture’is painted; new karma is bound.One’s worldly life (sansar) runs because of the presenceof the Self. It will run even if the Self does not get involved init at all. That is why I have discovered vyavasthit (scientificcircumstantial evidences). In the step-by-step Kramic path, thebelief is that life cannot run without the self’s, the atma’s,involvement in it, whereas ‘we’ have given you the science whichstates that scientific circumstantial evidences – vyavasthit shakti– will run (and take care of) everything.Questioner: When abhorrence (dwesh) occurs to me, isthe soul involved? Who does the dwesh? Am I the one doingit?Dadashri: What happens when the atma (the self) getsinvolved? Attachment and abhorrence (raag and dwesh) willboth happen. Now how will you know that raag and dweshhave occurred? When abhorrence occurs, worries and innerturmoil result. After attaining this Gnan, the Self never getsinvolved. Therefore, there is a constant state of peace, a blissfulstate (nirakudata) beyond easiness (akudata) and uneasiness(vyakudata). When such a state arises for You, it is consideredAptavani-68586Aptavani-6weakness. Here, in the Akram path, You do not have theweakness. You have to maintain awareness here. The Self Ihave given you is verily awareness itself.Questioner: Attachment (raag) occurs when one is notaware, does it not?Dadashri: No, it is not like that. Now, after Self-realization, You can never have raag at all. That which occursis attraction (aakarshan).Questioner: This attraction that happens, is that notconsidered a weakness?Dadashri: No, it is not a weakness. The attraction andthe Self have nothing to do with each other. All the attractiondoes is that it will not allow you to experience Your bliss. All itmay do is that it may make You go through one or two morelifetimes (this refers to those who have received Gnan). There isa solution (upaya) for that here. Here they all do a specialintrospective process (samayik) of seeing the tubers (gaantho)and mistakes of the non-Self, the ‘neighbor.’ If you take thisparticular topic (vishay) and ‘see’ it in samayik, then it (thetuber of that particular topic) will start dissolving and it will cometo an end. Whatever you want to dissolve, you can dissolve ithere.Questioner: If there is something like that, it would bequite useful.Dadashri: There is. There is everything here. We willshow you everything here. If there is a specific taste that isbothering you, you have to put that ‘topic’ in the specialintrospective process (samayik) and then keep ‘seeing’ what itshows You within. All the tubers will dissolve merely by ‘seeing’them.Attraction (aakarshan) can never take place in the absenceof thoughts (vichaar). Whenever an attraction is going to occur,there will be a thought first. Thought arises in the mind and themind is made of tubers (gaantho). The greater the number ofthoughts about a certain topic, the larger its tuber!Bhaavak and His ColorsThere are all these ‘k’s’ within you (‘k’ for karavnar =the doer). It is the bhaavak within you that makes you do thebhaav, inner intent. There is within you that which makes youdo greed (lobhak) and that which makes you have pride(maanak). All these ‘k’s within you make you do bhaav. If theone doing the bhaav (the bhaavya), i.e., the relative-self(pratishthit atma), becomes involved in it, then a new ‘picture’is painted; new karma is bound.One’s worldly life (sansar) runs because of the presenceof the Self. It will run even if the Self does not get involved init at all. That is why I have discovered vyavasthit (scientificcircumstantial evidences). In the step-by-step Kramic path, thebelief is that life cannot run without the self’s, the atma’s,involvement in it, whereas ‘we’ have given you the science whichstates that scientific circumstantial evidences – vyavasthit shakti– will run (and take care of) everything.Questioner: When abhorrence (dwesh) occurs to me, isthe soul involved? Who does the dwesh? Am I the one doingit?Dadashri: What happens when the atma (the self) getsinvolved? Attachment and abhorrence (raag and dwesh) willboth happen. Now how will you know that raag and dweshhave occurred? When abhorrence occurs, worries and innerturmoil result. After attaining this Gnan, the Self never getsinvolved. Therefore, there is a constant state of peace, a blissfulstate (nirakudata) beyond easiness (akudata) and uneasiness(vyakudata). When such a state arises for You, it is consideredAptavani-68788Aptavani-6that 1/8 of the attributes of the siddha have arisen within you(siddhas are accomplished Lords, fully enlightened and in thebodiless state). The world is constantly in the easy-uneasy state(akud-vyakud); it is constantly struggling and that is why theylook for a Gnani.People believe that the soul (atma) does the inner intent(bhaav). In reality, the atma does not do the bhaav. It is thebhaavako, the doer of the bhaav within, that does the bhaav.Then if one believes what the bhaavako shows him to be right,he becomes involved with it. To believe the bhaav that ariseswithin to be right is tantamount to becoming involved with it andtaking part in it. This will sow seeds of new karma.Questioner: Does bhaavak mean old karma?Dadashri: Bhaavak means tubers of the mind. Somehave tubers of pride, some have tubers of greed, some havetubers of anger and some have tubers of sex. These tubers arethe troublemakers. After attaining Gnan, the one who can ‘see’the bhaav (bhaavya) does not get involved in the bhaav and,therefore, bliss (nirakudata) remains. Nirakud Anand – Bliss of a State Free ofAgitation and BewildermentThe happiness that is experienced in the world is happinessthat is linked with the state of easiness-uneasiness (akudata-vyakudata). After becoming a Gnani, the bliss of a state beyondeasiness and uneasiness (nirakud anand) arises.Unaffected bliss (nirakud anand) arises around the GnaniPurush. The non-Self (pudgal) has nothing to do with it, so thenwhere does this bliss come from? The answer is that it is blissof the Self (swabhavik sahaj sukh: swabhavik – of the Self;sahaj – natural; sukh – bliss; swabhavik sahaj sukh verily isthe bliss of the Self). The one who comes to ‘fit’ into this, whoexperiences this, remains in the natural and spontaneous state ofthe bliss of the Self, the state of the Self, and will gradually goon to become fully enlightened.There are two kinds of happiness. One is happiness derivedfrom worldly things – a successful business deal or a profit, orgetting children married – but that happiness is of easiness-uneasiness (akudata-vyakudata). It is happiness of illusion. Butwhen you experience the happiness of the bliss of the unaffectedstate (nirakudata), realize that You have attained the Self.Questioner: What is the happiness of nirakudata?Dadashri: The bliss (anand) that You experience here insatsang; that is nirakud anand. There is no easiness-uneasiness(akudata-vyakudata).What happens in the happiness of akudata/vyakudata isthat a constant, simmering disturbance (jhanjhat) is taking placewithin. Here, such disturbance (jhanjhat) is not there and theoutside world is forgotten (vismrut). If you experience happinessbecause of something, then its nature is happiness of the non-Self (paudgalik), whereas this is natural and spontaneous (sahaj)happiness. Therefore, it is happiness (nirakudata); there is noeasiness-uneasiness. One feels a deep-seated stillness within.There is no jumping with joy (oonmaad) here.We become that with which we associate (parichaya).Questioner: The state that you have attained in this timecycle with what You have given us, is it possible for us to attainthe same state?Dadashri: What other work do You have? You haveattained happiness (nirakudata), have you not?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Nirakudata is 1/8 the attributes of the siddhaLords. You have become 1/8th siddha so all that remains forAptavani-68788Aptavani-6that 1/8 of the attributes of the siddha have arisen within you(siddhas are accomplished Lords, fully enlightened and in thebodiless state). The world is constantly in the easy-uneasy state(akud-vyakud); it is constantly struggling and that is why theylook for a Gnani.People believe that the soul (atma) does the inner intent(bhaav). In reality, the atma does not do the bhaav. It is thebhaavako, the doer of the bhaav within, that does the bhaav.Then if one believes what the bhaavako shows him to be right,he becomes involved with it. To believe the bhaav that ariseswithin to be right is tantamount to becoming involved with it andtaking part in it. This will sow seeds of new karma.Questioner: Does bhaavak mean old karma?Dadashri: Bhaavak means tubers of the mind. Somehave tubers of pride, some have tubers of greed, some havetubers of anger and some have tubers of sex. These tubers arethe troublemakers. After attaining Gnan, the one who can ‘see’the bhaav (bhaavya) does not get involved in the bhaav and,therefore, bliss (nirakudata) remains. Nirakud Anand – Bliss of a State Free ofAgitation and BewildermentThe happiness that is experienced in the world is happinessthat is linked with the state of easiness-uneasiness (akudata-vyakudata). After becoming a Gnani, the bliss of a state beyondeasiness and uneasiness (nirakud anand) arises.Unaffected bliss (nirakud anand) arises around the GnaniPurush. The non-Self (pudgal) has nothing to do with it, so thenwhere does this bliss come from? The answer is that it is blissof the Self (swabhavik sahaj sukh: swabhavik – of the Self;sahaj – natural; sukh – bliss; swabhavik sahaj sukh verily isthe bliss of the Self). The one who comes to ‘fit’ into this, whoexperiences this, remains in the natural and spontaneous state ofthe bliss of the Self, the state of the Self, and will gradually goon to become fully enlightened.There are two kinds of happiness. One is happiness derivedfrom worldly things – a successful business deal or a profit, orgetting children married – but that happiness is of easiness-uneasiness (akudata-vyakudata). It is happiness of illusion. Butwhen you experience the happiness of the bliss of the unaffectedstate (nirakudata), realize that You have attained the Self.Questioner: What is the happiness of nirakudata?Dadashri: The bliss (anand) that You experience here insatsang; that is nirakud anand. There is no easiness-uneasiness(akudata-vyakudata).What happens in the happiness of akudata/vyakudata isthat a constant, simmering disturbance (jhanjhat) is taking placewithin. Here, such disturbance (jhanjhat) is not there and theoutside world is forgotten (vismrut). If you experience happinessbecause of something, then its nature is happiness of the non-Self (paudgalik), whereas this is natural and spontaneous (sahaj)happiness. Therefore, it is happiness (nirakudata); there is noeasiness-uneasiness. One feels a deep-seated stillness within.There is no jumping with joy (oonmaad) here.We become that with which we associate (parichaya).Questioner: The state that you have attained in this timecycle with what You have given us, is it possible for us to attainthe same state?Dadashri: What other work do You have? You haveattained happiness (nirakudata), have you not?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Nirakudata is 1/8 the attributes of the siddhaLords. You have become 1/8th siddha so all that remains forAptavani-68990Aptavani-6completion is 7/8, and that will happen. You have become siddha(free), have you not? You have received the approval stamp,have you not? Then why have fear? If someone comes fromabove and says, ‘Sir, come on to liberation (moksha),’ I will tellhim, ‘What is the big hurry?’ If he says, ‘We feel for you; welove you,’ I would tell him, ‘Do not have feelings for me, I amnot someone you need to have feelings for; I have my mokshawith me!’ What else can be there after the state of happiness,the unaffected state of nirakudata? Otherwise, worries andanxiety will make you run around again and again. Egoism willmake you roam around life after life.Echoes of the Ego in the Worldly LifeEgo makes one blind. The greater one’s ego, the blinderone becomes. Questioner: Is ego not needed to do work?Dadashri: No, that lifeless ego (nirjiv ahamkar) isdifferent. That is not called ego at all. People will not even referto such a person as being egotistic.Questioner: Then which ego is harmful?Dadashri: You all know me as a Gnani Purush, but dopeople outside in the worldly life know that I am a Gnani? Yetpeople will not see anything in me that will lead them to call meegotistic (ahamkari), whereas they might say that about you. Itis the ego that has ruined everything.Questioner: But does the worldly life not run on thisego?Dadashri: The worldly life does not run on the ego. Theego should not go beyond its boundary; otherwise, it will beharmful.Questioner: The echoes of our old ego have fallen onothers; this is why they see us as being egotistic.Dadashri: You will have to wait until the echoes/effectsfrom your old ego go away.There was a boy from a much respected family who hada habit of stealing. He stopped stealing and came to me and toldme, ‘Dada, people still call me a thief.’ I told him, ‘You hadbeen stealing for the last ten years and people did not know ofthat. They considered you an honest man. Now that you are nota thief, even if you are honest, your past ten years of stealing willkeep resonating. So tolerate it for ten years, but do not startstealing again because you may feel in your mind, ‘They call mea thief anyway, so I might as well steal!’ Do not do that.Hollowness, lack of substance and deceit will not go away.For me, too, the echoes prior to my enlightenment still resonatein my relatives.Questioner: How can those echoes go away quickly?Dadashri: They are leaving gradually. When a train leavesfrom here, what do people say? The train has gone to Bombay.Questioner: One is a slow local train; one is the fastRajdhani Express. We want the Rajdhani Express, the fast train.Dadashri: That is the restless nature. If you do not let therice cook all the way, everyone will have to eat uncooked rice.So when you have such food cooking, you have to be patient.The Results (Effects) are Not Under YourControlQuestioner: The one who is doing something wrongknows what he is doing, yet why does he do wrong?Dadashri: When something wrong happens, it is a result,an effect, of a charged karma of past life. If we throw a ball andthen tell the ball to remain exactly where we threw it, is it possible?Aptavani-68990Aptavani-6completion is 7/8, and that will happen. You have become siddha(free), have you not? You have received the approval stamp,have you not? Then why have fear? If someone comes fromabove and says, ‘Sir, come on to liberation (moksha),’ I will tellhim, ‘What is the big hurry?’ If he says, ‘We feel for you; welove you,’ I would tell him, ‘Do not have feelings for me, I amnot someone you need to have feelings for; I have my mokshawith me!’ What else can be there after the state of happiness,the unaffected state of nirakudata? Otherwise, worries andanxiety will make you run around again and again. Egoism willmake you roam around life after life.Echoes of the Ego in the Worldly LifeEgo makes one blind. The greater one’s ego, the blinderone becomes. Questioner: Is ego not needed to do work?Dadashri: No, that lifeless ego (nirjiv ahamkar) isdifferent. That is not called ego at all. People will not even referto such a person as being egotistic.Questioner: Then which ego is harmful?Dadashri: You all know me as a Gnani Purush, but dopeople outside in the worldly life know that I am a Gnani? Yetpeople will not see anything in me that will lead them to call meegotistic (ahamkari), whereas they might say that about you. Itis the ego that has ruined everything.Questioner: But does the worldly life not run on thisego?Dadashri: The worldly life does not run on the ego. Theego should not go beyond its boundary; otherwise, it will beharmful.Questioner: The echoes of our old ego have fallen onothers; this is why they see us as being egotistic.Dadashri: You will have to wait until the echoes/effectsfrom your old ego go away.There was a boy from a much respected family who hada habit of stealing. He stopped stealing and came to me and toldme, ‘Dada, people still call me a thief.’ I told him, ‘You hadbeen stealing for the last ten years and people did not know ofthat. They considered you an honest man. Now that you are nota thief, even if you are honest, your past ten years of stealing willkeep resonating. So tolerate it for ten years, but do not startstealing again because you may feel in your mind, ‘They call mea thief anyway, so I might as well steal!’ Do not do that.Hollowness, lack of substance and deceit will not go away.For me, too, the echoes prior to my enlightenment still resonatein my relatives.Questioner: How can those echoes go away quickly?Dadashri: They are leaving gradually. When a train leavesfrom here, what do people say? The train has gone to Bombay.Questioner: One is a slow local train; one is the fastRajdhani Express. We want the Rajdhani Express, the fast train.Dadashri: That is the restless nature. If you do not let therice cook all the way, everyone will have to eat uncooked rice.So when you have such food cooking, you have to be patient.The Results (Effects) are Not Under YourControlQuestioner: The one who is doing something wrongknows what he is doing, yet why does he do wrong?Dadashri: When something wrong happens, it is a result,an effect, of a charged karma of past life. If we throw a ball andthen tell the ball to remain exactly where we threw it, is it possible?Aptavani-69192Aptavani-6No, it is not. Once you throw the ball, it falls under the controlof another power and the results are inevitable. So whatever themanner in which you threw the ball; if you threw it from a heightof three feet, as a result it will rebound to the height of two feetand if you threw it from a height of ten feet, will bounce backseven feet. But results will automatically come to an end; thebouncing will automatically stop, provided You do not stick yourhand in it again.Questioner: At such a time, can we say that one getsdrawn into doing wrong because he has been doing so from timeimmemorial?Dadashri: It is nothing like that. This is all dependent onvyavasthit shakti – the energy of scientific circumstantialevidences. Therefore, it is not one’s mistake; all he needs tounderstand and know is the answer to, ‘Who am I?’ He needsSelf-realization. When he realizes that, only then will he have theenergy and vigor of freedom. All this bondage continues becausehe does not have this realization.This science of ours is short and simple. If one meets aGnani Purush and attains Gnan from Him, then it is simple. Butnothing happens if he does not meet a Gnani Purush; he cannotaccomplish any of his spiritual work. He can go to a higher lifeform even if he does not meet a Gnani Purush; he can bindmeritorious karma, but he cannot attain liberation.* * * * *[11]The Seer-KnowerQuestioner: After attaining Self-realization, the mindcontinues to have passions (vicar). What is the reason for that?Dadashri: The passions of the mind are objects to beknown (gneya), therefore, they need to be ‘seen and known.’Before, prior to Self-realization, you were in human nature(maanav swabhav) in which there is, ‘Right and wrong,’ ‘Theseare good thoughts and these are bad thoughts,’ etc. Now, Youhave come into the nature of your Self (atma swabhav) inwhich all thoughts become one. They are all gneya, they are justgneya, meaning they are objects (as opposed to subject) to be‘known’ and ‘You’ are the knower (gnata) of them. There is agneya-gnata relation, i.e., an object-knower relation. So tellme, where is the problem?Questioner: Does one need to make any effort(purusharth) to see through the vision of the Self (atma-drashti),or is it seen automatically?Dadashri: It is seen automatically! With the Gnan ‘we’have given you, You see the ‘relative,’ the non-Self, and the‘real,’ the Self. All that is relative is temporary and all that is realis permanent. All these that you ‘see’ are temporary gneya, thenon-Self. Gross circumstances and subtle circumstances are allobjects to be known (gneya) which are temporary and subjectto destruction. You should come here to satsang and ask all the questionsand get your answers. Then You will be aware of everything andAptavani-69192Aptavani-6No, it is not. Once you throw the ball, it falls under the controlof another power and the results are inevitable. So whatever themanner in which you threw the ball; if you threw it from a heightof three feet, as a result it will rebound to the height of two feetand if you threw it from a height of ten feet, will bounce backseven feet. But results will automatically come to an end; thebouncing will automatically stop, provided You do not stick yourhand in it again.Questioner: At such a time, can we say that one getsdrawn into doing wrong because he has been doing so from timeimmemorial?Dadashri: It is nothing like that. This is all dependent onvyavasthit shakti – the energy of scientific circumstantialevidences. Therefore, it is not one’s mistake; all he needs tounderstand and know is the answer to, ‘Who am I?’ He needsSelf-realization. When he realizes that, only then will he have theenergy and vigor of freedom. All this bondage continues becausehe does not have this realization.This science of ours is short and simple. If one meets aGnani Purush and attains Gnan from Him, then it is simple. Butnothing happens if he does not meet a Gnani Purush; he cannotaccomplish any of his spiritual work. He can go to a higher lifeform even if he does not meet a Gnani Purush; he can bindmeritorious karma, but he cannot attain liberation.* * * * *[11]The Seer-KnowerQuestioner: After attaining Self-realization, the mindcontinues to have passions (vicar). What is the reason for that?Dadashri: The passions of the mind are objects to beknown (gneya), therefore, they need to be ‘seen and known.’Before, prior to Self-realization, you were in human nature(maanav swabhav) in which there is, ‘Right and wrong,’ ‘Theseare good thoughts and these are bad thoughts,’ etc. Now, Youhave come into the nature of your Self (atma swabhav) inwhich all thoughts become one. They are all gneya, they are justgneya, meaning they are objects (as opposed to subject) to be‘known’ and ‘You’ are the knower (gnata) of them. There is agneya-gnata relation, i.e., an object-knower relation. So tellme, where is the problem?Questioner: Does one need to make any effort(purusharth) to see through the vision of the Self (atma-drashti),or is it seen automatically?Dadashri: It is seen automatically! With the Gnan ‘we’have given you, You see the ‘relative,’ the non-Self, and the‘real,’ the Self. All that is relative is temporary and all that is realis permanent. All these that you ‘see’ are temporary gneya, thenon-Self. Gross circumstances and subtle circumstances are allobjects to be known (gneya) which are temporary and subjectto destruction. You should come here to satsang and ask all the questionsand get your answers. Then You will be aware of everything andAptavani-69394Aptavani-6Questioner: What? The Atma would not be there?Dadashri: No, what is the Atma, the Self, going to ‘see’if there are no circumstances? If there is no existence ofcircumstances, then there is no existence of the Self either.Questioner: That means matter (jada) and life energy(chetan, the Self) co-exist. Otherwise, that cannot happen, canit?Dadashri: The world is going to remain the same; thisworld is never going to be without gneya. The knower (gnata)will remain and so will that which is to be known (the gneya).Questioner: There are no circumstances in siddha kshetra(location where the fully liberated Soul resides without a body),are there?Dadashri: No, but from there they can see all thecircumstances here. What do they have to ‘see’? All this. WhenI raise my arm, they can see the arm raised here.Questioner: Their attribute of knowing-seeing (gnata-drashta) constantly remains with them, does it not?Dadashri: Yes, that will always remain. Where there isthe Self and the gnata-drashta, the ‘knowing and the seeing,’there lies only bliss (anand); otherwise, the bliss is not there.Questioner: Is there no bliss if there is no state of gnata-drashta?Dadashri: No there is not. The fruit of the knowing-seeing (gnata-drashta) state is bliss. On the one side, onebecomes a gnata-drashta and on the other side bliss (anand)arises. That is how it is. When one goes to a movie, he getsupset if the curtains do not go up; he starts whistling and yelling.Why is that? That is because it bothers him to not be able to seewhat he has come to see. He is not happy until he sees thegneya (the movie he has come to see). That is how the Selfwhen you have such awareness (laksha), then You will not haveto do anything. Nothing needs to be done once Self-realizationhas been attained. Gnan remains in Gnan; ignorance does notcreep in. The Self remains as the gnayak. Gnayak means toremain continuously as the ‘knower.’ No other phase arises forthe Self in this state as the gnayak.Questioner: The term ‘to know’ (janavoo) – does itmean to know the mind or to know the sensation and feelingsfrom the body?Dadashri: You have to ‘know’ everything. You have toknow the thoughts in the mind, what the intellect (buddhi) isdoing; you have to know all the circumstances (sainyog) thatarise within. Can you not know the circumstances that arisewithin? A thought will come and then go. That is a circumstance(sainyog). Whatever comes and then leaves is considered acircumstance. And the ‘seer’ of these circumstances, the onewho does not come or go, the one who remains forever, is theknower, the gnayak. The knower keeps seeing the circumstancesthat come and go. That is the attribute of the Self andcircumstances are, by nature, temporary and prone to dissipation(viyog). Therefore, they will leave even if you ask them to stay.When you were in human nature (maanav swabhav),whenever a thought came, you used to remain engrossed(tanmayakar – to become one with the mind and body) with,‘I am having a thought.’ Now You do not become tanmayakar.He (Chandulal) remains separate because human nature is subjectto input and output (paudgalik) in nature. And now this is thenature of the Self (Atma swabhav). Atma swabhav is permanentand the other is temporary, which will come and then leave.‘You’ have to simply keep ‘seeing’ it.Questioner: What if there was no circumstance at all?Dadashri: The Self would not be there if there was nocircumstance.Aptavani-69394Aptavani-6Questioner: What? The Atma would not be there?Dadashri: No, what is the Atma, the Self, going to ‘see’if there are no circumstances? If there is no existence ofcircumstances, then there is no existence of the Self either.Questioner: That means matter (jada) and life energy(chetan, the Self) co-exist. Otherwise, that cannot happen, canit?Dadashri: The world is going to remain the same; thisworld is never going to be without gneya. The knower (gnata)will remain and so will that which is to be known (the gneya).Questioner: There are no circumstances in siddha kshetra(location where the fully liberated Soul resides without a body),are there?Dadashri: No, but from there they can see all thecircumstances here. What do they have to ‘see’? All this. WhenI raise my arm, they can see the arm raised here.Questioner: Their attribute of knowing-seeing (gnata-drashta) constantly remains with them, does it not?Dadashri: Yes, that will always remain. Where there isthe Self and the gnata-drashta, the ‘knowing and the seeing,’there lies only bliss (anand); otherwise, the bliss is not there.Questioner: Is there no bliss if there is no state of gnata-drashta?Dadashri: No there is not. The fruit of the knowing-seeing (gnata-drashta) state is bliss. On the one side, onebecomes a gnata-drashta and on the other side bliss (anand)arises. That is how it is. When one goes to a movie, he getsupset if the curtains do not go up; he starts whistling and yelling.Why is that? That is because it bothers him to not be able to seewhat he has come to see. He is not happy until he sees thegneya (the movie he has come to see). That is how the Selfwhen you have such awareness (laksha), then You will not haveto do anything. Nothing needs to be done once Self-realizationhas been attained. Gnan remains in Gnan; ignorance does notcreep in. The Self remains as the gnayak. Gnayak means toremain continuously as the ‘knower.’ No other phase arises forthe Self in this state as the gnayak.Questioner: The term ‘to know’ (janavoo) – does itmean to know the mind or to know the sensation and feelingsfrom the body?Dadashri: You have to ‘know’ everything. You have toknow the thoughts in the mind, what the intellect (buddhi) isdoing; you have to know all the circumstances (sainyog) thatarise within. Can you not know the circumstances that arisewithin? A thought will come and then go. That is a circumstance(sainyog). Whatever comes and then leaves is considered acircumstance. And the ‘seer’ of these circumstances, the onewho does not come or go, the one who remains forever, is theknower, the gnayak. The knower keeps seeing the circumstancesthat come and go. That is the attribute of the Self andcircumstances are, by nature, temporary and prone to dissipation(viyog). Therefore, they will leave even if you ask them to stay.When you were in human nature (maanav swabhav),whenever a thought came, you used to remain engrossed(tanmayakar – to become one with the mind and body) with,‘I am having a thought.’ Now You do not become tanmayakar.He (Chandulal) remains separate because human nature is subjectto input and output (paudgalik) in nature. And now this is thenature of the Self (Atma swabhav). Atma swabhav is permanentand the other is temporary, which will come and then leave.‘You’ have to simply keep ‘seeing’ it.Questioner: What if there was no circumstance at all?Dadashri: The Self would not be there if there was nocircumstance.Aptavani-69596Aptavani-6Questioner: Is there awareness of existence there?Dadashri: It is because it has awareness of its existencethat there is so much suffering.Questioner: What is it like in hell?Dadashri: In hell, there is pain (dukh) of the five senses.The suffering and the miseries of the seventh hell (the lowest andworst level of the worlds that a soul may migrate to) are suchthat a person can even die upon hearing about them! There istremendous pain there. The embodied beings (life forms) ofundefined classification (avyavahar rashi) do not have suchmiseries; they have suffocation.The Right Intellect and PragnyaPeople consider intellect (buddhi) as being knowledge(Gnan). But buddhi is an indirect light, whereas Gnan is thedirect light.Questioner: Where does intellect (buddhi) end and theliberating energy and light of the Self (pragnya) begin?Dadashri: Pragnya begins before the buddhi comes toan end. When one meets a Gnani Purush, the Gnani makes himattain the Self, which is when pragnya begins. This pragnya isthe one that takes him to liberation/moksha – final liberation.Pragnya constantly cautions and alerts You, and the buddhikeeps interfering within.Questioner: But the intellect must have some positivefunction, surely?Dadashri: The only time the buddhi is in a positive modeis when it has been made intellect that is used for both the goodof the self and the Self (samyak) by the Gnani Purush. Toproceed according to one’s own understanding is called deludedintellect (viparit buddhi). That is also called contradictoryintellect (vyabhicharini buddhi). The buddhi that the Gnani‘sees’ and ‘knows’ the gneya and the absolute bliss (paramanand) arises. Now what is there to see when You are sleepingalone in a room? What ‘pictures’ will You keep looking at? Atthat time, You will see everything within. Ultimately, You caneven ‘see’ sleep and dreams.Questioner: But one cannot see dreams in the siddhakshetra (location where the fully liberated Soul resides withouta body), can one?Dadashri: No, there are no dreams there. The dreamshappen because of the physical body. At the moment, even thislife is a dream of open eyes. The Gnanis do not sleep; for themthe ‘seeing’ is continuous. They are able to see other places,locations and regions (pradesh).The body has weight. There is misery because of it. TheGnanis find the body to be a great burden. In the siddha kshetra,however, there is no physical body.Questioner: This body we have, is it a result of karma?Dadashri: Yes, it is the result of karma.Questioner: The karma should be completely discharged,should it not?Dadashri: Once the karma have been completelydischarged, it (the body) will go away. When the chit becomespure (shuddha), it can be said that the karma have beendischarged (nirjara). (Chit is one of the inner components ofthe antahkaran (ego-mind-intellect-chit) with the properties ofknowledge and vision gnan and darshan).Questioner: Are there ‘knowing’ (gnatapanu) and‘circumstances’ in the living organisms (avyavahar rashi) whichhave no names – embodied souls in an unnamed state?Dadashri: Their state is a state comparable to ‘being tiedup in a sack.’ There is endless misery there.Aptavani-69596Aptavani-6Questioner: Is there awareness of existence there?Dadashri: It is because it has awareness of its existencethat there is so much suffering.Questioner: What is it like in hell?Dadashri: In hell, there is pain (dukh) of the five senses.The suffering and the miseries of the seventh hell (the lowest andworst level of the worlds that a soul may migrate to) are suchthat a person can even die upon hearing about them! There istremendous pain there. The embodied beings (life forms) ofundefined classification (avyavahar rashi) do not have suchmiseries; they have suffocation.The Right Intellect and PragnyaPeople consider intellect (buddhi) as being knowledge(Gnan). But buddhi is an indirect light, whereas Gnan is thedirect light.Questioner: Where does intellect (buddhi) end and theliberating energy and light of the Self (pragnya) begin?Dadashri: Pragnya begins before the buddhi comes toan end. When one meets a Gnani Purush, the Gnani makes himattain the Self, which is when pragnya begins. This pragnya isthe one that takes him to liberation/moksha – final liberation.Pragnya constantly cautions and alerts You, and the buddhikeeps interfering within.Questioner: But the intellect must have some positivefunction, surely?Dadashri: The only time the buddhi is in a positive modeis when it has been made intellect that is used for both the goodof the self and the Self (samyak) by the Gnani Purush. Toproceed according to one’s own understanding is called deludedintellect (viparit buddhi). That is also called contradictoryintellect (vyabhicharini buddhi). The buddhi that the Gnani‘sees’ and ‘knows’ the gneya and the absolute bliss (paramanand) arises. Now what is there to see when You are sleepingalone in a room? What ‘pictures’ will You keep looking at? Atthat time, You will see everything within. Ultimately, You caneven ‘see’ sleep and dreams.Questioner: But one cannot see dreams in the siddhakshetra (location where the fully liberated Soul resides withouta body), can one?Dadashri: No, there are no dreams there. The dreamshappen because of the physical body. At the moment, even thislife is a dream of open eyes. The Gnanis do not sleep; for themthe ‘seeing’ is continuous. They are able to see other places,locations and regions (pradesh).The body has weight. There is misery because of it. TheGnanis find the body to be a great burden. In the siddha kshetra,however, there is no physical body.Questioner: This body we have, is it a result of karma?Dadashri: Yes, it is the result of karma.Questioner: The karma should be completely discharged,should it not?Dadashri: Once the karma have been completelydischarged, it (the body) will go away. When the chit becomespure (shuddha), it can be said that the karma have beendischarged (nirjara). (Chit is one of the inner components ofthe antahkaran (ego-mind-intellect-chit) with the properties ofknowledge and vision gnan and darshan).Questioner: Are there ‘knowing’ (gnatapanu) and‘circumstances’ in the living organisms (avyavahar rashi) whichhave no names – embodied souls in an unnamed state?Dadashri: Their state is a state comparable to ‘being tiedup in a sack.’ There is endless misery there.Aptavani-69798Aptavani-6Purush ‘plates with gilding,’ Lord Krishna has calledavyabhicharini buddhi. Your intellect (buddhi) will begin tobecome that which is used for the good of the self and the Self(samyak) when you sit with ‘us.’Questioner: But what happens after we leave yourvicinity?Dadashri: However much your buddhi gets ‘gilded,’ thatmuch buddhi will then become right/samyak. Then it will notbother you. Whatever deluded, wrong intellect (viparit buddhi)is there, it will trouble you.Questioner: What kind of effort should we make so thatour entire buddhi remains samyak and not viparit?Dadashri: You have to come here and turn it into samyakbuddhi. You will not be able to do it yourself.Questioner: Does the buddhi become samyak just byus coming and simply sitting here in satsang?Dadashri: The buddhi begins to become samyak whenyou ask questions here and discuss everything and get youranswers here. Then You will not have buddhi. It will take a longtime for you to dislike intellect, but at least it will continue tobecome samyak.Questioner: We have intellect which is used for the goodof the self and the Self (samyak buddhi), deluded, wrong intellect(viparit buddhi) and also the force that facilitates a fullerrealization of the Self (pragnya), so do they all work together?Dadashri: Yes, in order to take You to liberation(moksha), pragnya keeps cautioning You and alerting You. Andthere is the energy of ignorance (agnya) which will not allowyou to go to moksha. Agnya will never let you go to moksha.Agnya is the exhibition of the intellect. The intellect will alwaysshow you worldly profit and loss; it will only show dualities(dwandva) in the world.Questioner: Getting caught up in duality and friction is aconstant part of life. We find duality wherever we go.Dadashri: This world is trapped in duality, is it not? Andthe Gnani is beyond duality (dwandvatita). He knows profit asprofit, and loss as a loss. But loss will not affect Him as loss, andprofit will not affect Him as profit. Where does profit-loss arisefrom? The Self is the knower of whether they arise from ‘my,’the non-self, or from the Self. The Self is the knower of all this.The Gnani’s Way of Looking at the AntahkaranQuestioner: The intellect still interferes. What should wedo?Dadashri: When it starts interfering, you turn your visionaway from there. If you are walking along and a person youdon’t like approaches, don’t you turn your face away? In thesame way, you should look away and move away from the onethat interferes in Your affairs. Who does the interfering? It is thebuddhi – the intellect. It is the nature of the intellect to not letanyone break free from the worldly life.Questioner: When will the intellect come to an end?Dadashri: If you don’t pay too much attention to it, ifyou keep Your vision (drashti) turned away from it, it will getthe message. Then it will come to end by itself. It will continueto interfere as long as You give it a lot of importance, and if You‘accept’ whatever it tells you and take its advice.Questioner: We, the Self, should have some influenceover the mind, intellect, chit and ego, should ‘we’ not?Dadashri: ‘Machinery,’ that which is mechanical, cannever be influenced. Therefore, there can never be an influenceover the mind-intellect-chit-ego (collectively called theAptavani-69798Aptavani-6Purush ‘plates with gilding,’ Lord Krishna has calledavyabhicharini buddhi. Your intellect (buddhi) will begin tobecome that which is used for the good of the self and the Self(samyak) when you sit with ‘us.’Questioner: But what happens after we leave yourvicinity?Dadashri: However much your buddhi gets ‘gilded,’ thatmuch buddhi will then become right/samyak. Then it will notbother you. Whatever deluded, wrong intellect (viparit buddhi)is there, it will trouble you.Questioner: What kind of effort should we make so thatour entire buddhi remains samyak and not viparit?Dadashri: You have to come here and turn it into samyakbuddhi. You will not be able to do it yourself.Questioner: Does the buddhi become samyak just byus coming and simply sitting here in satsang?Dadashri: The buddhi begins to become samyak whenyou ask questions here and discuss everything and get youranswers here. Then You will not have buddhi. It will take a longtime for you to dislike intellect, but at least it will continue tobecome samyak.Questioner: We have intellect which is used for the goodof the self and the Self (samyak buddhi), deluded, wrong intellect(viparit buddhi) and also the force that facilitates a fullerrealization of the Self (pragnya), so do they all work together?Dadashri: Yes, in order to take You to liberation(moksha), pragnya keeps cautioning You and alerting You. Andthere is the energy of ignorance (agnya) which will not allowyou to go to moksha. Agnya will never let you go to moksha.Agnya is the exhibition of the intellect. The intellect will alwaysshow you worldly profit and loss; it will only show dualities(dwandva) in the world.Questioner: Getting caught up in duality and friction is aconstant part of life. We find duality wherever we go.Dadashri: This world is trapped in duality, is it not? Andthe Gnani is beyond duality (dwandvatita). He knows profit asprofit, and loss as a loss. But loss will not affect Him as loss, andprofit will not affect Him as profit. Where does profit-loss arisefrom? The Self is the knower of whether they arise from ‘my,’the non-self, or from the Self. The Self is the knower of all this.The Gnani’s Way of Looking at the AntahkaranQuestioner: The intellect still interferes. What should wedo?Dadashri: When it starts interfering, you turn your visionaway from there. If you are walking along and a person youdon’t like approaches, don’t you turn your face away? In thesame way, you should look away and move away from the onethat interferes in Your affairs. Who does the interfering? It is thebuddhi – the intellect. It is the nature of the intellect to not letanyone break free from the worldly life.Questioner: When will the intellect come to an end?Dadashri: If you don’t pay too much attention to it, ifyou keep Your vision (drashti) turned away from it, it will getthe message. Then it will come to end by itself. It will continueto interfere as long as You give it a lot of importance, and if You‘accept’ whatever it tells you and take its advice.Questioner: We, the Self, should have some influenceover the mind, intellect, chit and ego, should ‘we’ not?Dadashri: ‘Machinery,’ that which is mechanical, cannever be influenced. Therefore, there can never be an influenceover the mind-intellect-chit-ego (collectively called theAptavani-699100Aptavani-6will open with it.If you are not able to make the decision of whether tostay or leave, then just leave. Yes, if you were meant to stayback, then scientific circumstantial evidences (vyavasthit) willbring you back. This is how you should take decisions.Questioner: What should we do if we feel we do notwant to leave under any circumstances and yet at the same timeit keeps telling us, ‘You should go, should you not?’Dadashri: You have to see which side is stronger.Questioner: The stronger one tells us that we have tostay here.Dadashri: Then stay here if the one for staying is stronger.Raag and NiraagQuestioner: What comes first, worldly duties (vyavahar)or the Self and its realm (nischay)?Dadashri: Duties of the worldly life (vyavahar) comefirst but that does not mean You should get attached to worldlyduties.Questioner: So should one become averse to attachment(niraagi) in the worldly life?Dadashri: Having attachment (raag) is a single mistakeand becoming without attachment (niraagi) is double the mistake.One cannot remain niraagi.Questioner: Niraagi in what way? Please explain further.Dadashri: It is when one becomes abhorrent towardsworldly life (nispruha) here. By nispruha with worldly life wemean that when a mother tells her son, ‘Why do you not listento me?’ the son says, ‘I have become Atma’; that is notacceptable. There should be humility (vinaya) and discriminationantahkaran). When the antahkaran comes to end, that is,when it dissolves, everything will come to its natural place. If youdo not become a partner with all that is within the antahkaran,and instead simply keep ‘seeing’ them, then You are separate.For as long as you continue to ‘see’ it, the chit will continue topurify. If just the chit becomes pure, everything else will becomepure too. One wanders life after life because of impure chit.Therefore, this ‘yoga’ of seeing the antahkaran is to be employedto the point where the chit becomes pure.Questioner: What should be done when deceit (kapat)and deceitful thoughts arise within?Dadashri: All of that is the non-Self complex (pudgal).The one doing the thinking is also the pudgal. The Soul, theSelf, is nothing of the sort. There is absolutely no garbage in it.The ‘puzzle’ that arises is also the pudgal, and the one thatcreates it is the pudgal too. Who knows that puzzle? It is theSelf. The Self is the knower of straight-forwardness (saradata)and deceit (kapat). The Problem of Wavering in Decision-makingQuestioner: Until a decision is reached, the mind waverscontinuously.Dadashri: Just because you cannot come to a decision,does that mean you have to remain sitting on the platform? If thewavering of, ‘Should I go now, or should I go later?’ happens,just get on the train that comes along.The inability to arrive at a decision is due to the lack ofaction on the part of the intellect (buddhi). People with intellectcan make quick decisions on anything; they make decisions onthe moment. It does not take them even five minutes. That iswhy ‘we’ have called it ‘common sense.’ Common sense means‘everywhere applicable.’ It is applicable everywhere. This ‘key’of common sense is such that every ‘lock,’ i.e., every problem,Aptavani-699100Aptavani-6will open with it.If you are not able to make the decision of whether tostay or leave, then just leave. Yes, if you were meant to stayback, then scientific circumstantial evidences (vyavasthit) willbring you back. This is how you should take decisions.Questioner: What should we do if we feel we do notwant to leave under any circumstances and yet at the same timeit keeps telling us, ‘You should go, should you not?’Dadashri: You have to see which side is stronger.Questioner: The stronger one tells us that we have tostay here.Dadashri: Then stay here if the one for staying is stronger.Raag and NiraagQuestioner: What comes first, worldly duties (vyavahar)or the Self and its realm (nischay)?Dadashri: Duties of the worldly life (vyavahar) comefirst but that does not mean You should get attached to worldlyduties.Questioner: So should one become averse to attachment(niraagi) in the worldly life?Dadashri: Having attachment (raag) is a single mistakeand becoming without attachment (niraagi) is double the mistake.One cannot remain niraagi.Questioner: Niraagi in what way? Please explain further.Dadashri: It is when one becomes abhorrent towardsworldly life (nispruha) here. By nispruha with worldly life wemean that when a mother tells her son, ‘Why do you not listento me?’ the son says, ‘I have become Atma’; that is notacceptable. There should be humility (vinaya) and discriminationantahkaran). When the antahkaran comes to end, that is,when it dissolves, everything will come to its natural place. If youdo not become a partner with all that is within the antahkaran,and instead simply keep ‘seeing’ them, then You are separate.For as long as you continue to ‘see’ it, the chit will continue topurify. If just the chit becomes pure, everything else will becomepure too. One wanders life after life because of impure chit.Therefore, this ‘yoga’ of seeing the antahkaran is to be employedto the point where the chit becomes pure.Questioner: What should be done when deceit (kapat)and deceitful thoughts arise within?Dadashri: All of that is the non-Self complex (pudgal).The one doing the thinking is also the pudgal. The Soul, theSelf, is nothing of the sort. There is absolutely no garbage in it.The ‘puzzle’ that arises is also the pudgal, and the one thatcreates it is the pudgal too. Who knows that puzzle? It is theSelf. The Self is the knower of straight-forwardness (saradata)and deceit (kapat). The Problem of Wavering in Decision-makingQuestioner: Until a decision is reached, the mind waverscontinuously.Dadashri: Just because you cannot come to a decision,does that mean you have to remain sitting on the platform? If thewavering of, ‘Should I go now, or should I go later?’ happens,just get on the train that comes along.The inability to arrive at a decision is due to the lack ofaction on the part of the intellect (buddhi). People with intellectcan make quick decisions on anything; they make decisions onthe moment. It does not take them even five minutes. That iswhy ‘we’ have called it ‘common sense.’ Common sense means‘everywhere applicable.’ It is applicable everywhere. This ‘key’of common sense is such that every ‘lock,’ i.e., every problem,Aptavani-6101102Aptavani-6(vivek) in life interactions. No one should have complaints aboutour worldly interactions.To be hasty in anything is a single mistake and not to havehaste is double the mistake.Which hole do you want to fall in?Questioner: Neither.Dadashri: Therefore, understand this matter. Is the traingoing to wait for you if you do not hurry? And if you hurry toomuch, you may cause an accident. Therefore, if one hurries, itis considered a single mistake and if one does not hurry, it isdouble the mistake.The Senses, Mind, Intellect, Ego and thenthe SelfQuestioner: How can the mind remain still (sthir)?Dadashri: Have you figured out what advantages theremay be in trying to steady the mind?Questioner: Peace is attained with that.Dadashri: Who has made the mind restless (asthir)?Questioner: We have.Dadashri: Why did you make it restless? Did you do itdeliberately? Not knowing where the benefit (hita) lies and whereharm (ahita) lies for you, you have used your mind in everywhich way. If one had known what was beneficial (hita) andwhat was not beneficial for him (ahita), then one would haveused the mind only for his benefit. Now the mind has gone outof control. Now it can only be made still when one attains theknowledge of benefit-harm (hita-ahita). Therefore when ‘we’give Gnan here, the mind settles down.The mind is contained only with Gnan; it can never becomecontained with anything else. It will remain still for an hour or sowith concentration (ekagrata) or traditional meditation, but thestillness will break down again.Questioner: What is the mind (mun)?Dadashri: The mind is your karmic stock. Do shopowners not bring out their stock the whole year long? They do.That is how this mind is. This mind is the stock of your entirelife. The stock of past life unfolds its effect (udaya) in this lifeand it gives you further ‘instructions.’ During this moment, a newmind is being formed within; currently, the old mind is dischargingand a new one is forming.Questioner: How can one know how the new mind isbeing formed, charged, and the old one is being discharged?Dadashri: When a thought arises in the mind, you becomeengrossed or one with it (tanmayakar); that is not the energyof the Self. There is weakness within and that is why ‘it,’ thenon-Self or the self, becomes engrossed. This happens becauseof ignorance (agnanta). The original Soul, the Self, is not likethat; the Self has infinite energy and infinite knowledge. But theinterfering is due to the self with the belief, ‘I am Chandulal’(pratishthit atma). Hence when one becomes the body and themind (tanmayakar), new karma is charged.Those who are Self-realized will not become tanmayakarwhen thoughts arise. So when the time comes, the mind willdischarge but a new karma will not charge.Questioner: But here, the engrossment occursautomatically.Dadashri: Yes, it happens automatically, and that is theillusion (bhranti)! There is no true spiritual effort (purusharth)of the self here. Until one becomes a purush, the Self, there isno true spiritual effort (purusharth) whatsoever. It is yourAptavani-6101102Aptavani-6(vivek) in life interactions. No one should have complaints aboutour worldly interactions.To be hasty in anything is a single mistake and not to havehaste is double the mistake.Which hole do you want to fall in?Questioner: Neither.Dadashri: Therefore, understand this matter. Is the traingoing to wait for you if you do not hurry? And if you hurry toomuch, you may cause an accident. Therefore, if one hurries, itis considered a single mistake and if one does not hurry, it isdouble the mistake.The Senses, Mind, Intellect, Ego and thenthe SelfQuestioner: How can the mind remain still (sthir)?Dadashri: Have you figured out what advantages theremay be in trying to steady the mind?Questioner: Peace is attained with that.Dadashri: Who has made the mind restless (asthir)?Questioner: We have.Dadashri: Why did you make it restless? Did you do itdeliberately? Not knowing where the benefit (hita) lies and whereharm (ahita) lies for you, you have used your mind in everywhich way. If one had known what was beneficial (hita) andwhat was not beneficial for him (ahita), then one would haveused the mind only for his benefit. Now the mind has gone outof control. Now it can only be made still when one attains theknowledge of benefit-harm (hita-ahita). Therefore when ‘we’give Gnan here, the mind settles down.The mind is contained only with Gnan; it can never becomecontained with anything else. It will remain still for an hour or sowith concentration (ekagrata) or traditional meditation, but thestillness will break down again.Questioner: What is the mind (mun)?Dadashri: The mind is your karmic stock. Do shopowners not bring out their stock the whole year long? They do.That is how this mind is. This mind is the stock of your entirelife. The stock of past life unfolds its effect (udaya) in this lifeand it gives you further ‘instructions.’ During this moment, a newmind is being formed within; currently, the old mind is dischargingand a new one is forming.Questioner: How can one know how the new mind isbeing formed, charged, and the old one is being discharged?Dadashri: When a thought arises in the mind, you becomeengrossed or one with it (tanmayakar); that is not the energyof the Self. There is weakness within and that is why ‘it,’ thenon-Self or the self, becomes engrossed. This happens becauseof ignorance (agnanta). The original Soul, the Self, is not likethat; the Self has infinite energy and infinite knowledge. But theinterfering is due to the self with the belief, ‘I am Chandulal’(pratishthit atma). Hence when one becomes the body and themind (tanmayakar), new karma is charged.Those who are Self-realized will not become tanmayakarwhen thoughts arise. So when the time comes, the mind willdischarge but a new karma will not charge.Questioner: But here, the engrossment occursautomatically.Dadashri: Yes, it happens automatically, and that is theillusion (bhranti)! There is no true spiritual effort (purusharth)of the self here. Until one becomes a purush, the Self, there isno true spiritual effort (purusharth) whatsoever. It is yourAptavani-6103104Aptavani-6(prakruti) inherent nature of the non-Self that is making you‘dance’ against your will.Questioner: What is the relation between the mind andthe body?Dadashri: Everything of the body, these five senses andeverything else, is under the control of the mind. If the mind tellsthe eyes, ‘This is worth seeing,’ the eyes will immediately look,and if the mind says, ‘No,’ even if the eyes are looking, they willimmediately look away. Therefore, the whole body is under thecontrol of the mind.Questioner: Many times the mind says that it does notwant to see something and yet one sees it anyway. What is that?Dadashri: Seeing is its nature so it will go ahead and seeit, but if you decide that you do not want to look, it will not lookthere again. The sense organs (indriyas), due to their innateproperties, will probe and taste. But when the mind says no,they will not do it again. Now You have to see who has thecontrol over the mind. Who has the control over your mind?Questioner: The intellect (buddhi).Dadashri: What does the buddhi do?Questioner: It shows us the differences between goodand bad.Dadashri: Do things happen according to the decision ofthe intellect (buddhi)?Questioner: No, they do not.Dadashri: Who has control over buddhi?Questioner: I do not know that.Dadashri: The ego! Who else!Mind, intellect, chit and ego are the four components ofthe antahkaran. All these four have control over the body andthat is why this illusion exists. Once the control comes into ‘Your’hands, then this problem will not remain; then Your subtleindependent effort (purusharth) will begin.Questioner: What should one do to get control of that?Dadashri: The Gnani Purush will do all that for you. Hewho is liberated from all bondage can also free you. How canthe one who is bound, free others? And the human beings of thisKaliyug (the current era of the time cycle characterized by lackof unity in thought, speech and acts) do not have enough energyto become free on their own. What are the humans of thisKaliyug like? They have all slipped spiritually and have comehere in the current time cycle. And for those who have slipped,it is not possible for them to go up again on their own. Therefore,they have to have the help from a Gnani Purush.Concentration Comes with InterestQuestioner: Dada, I cannot maintain concentration(ekagrata) on God.Dadashri: When you go to buy vegetables or a sari, doyou concentrate on that?Questioner: Yes, I can. That is because of infatuationdue to illusion (moha).Dadashri: And you do not have interest in liberation(moksha) and God. That is why you cannot maintainconcentration (ekagrata) there.There was a very beautiful lady whose husband was veryunattractive. One day I asked her in confidence, ‘Your husbandis very unattractive; does he keep your attention completely?’She said to me, ‘My husband is very dear to me.’ Now anunattractive husband can become dear to her but God does notbecome dear to her. Is that not a wonder?Aptavani-6103104Aptavani-6(prakruti) inherent nature of the non-Self that is making you‘dance’ against your will.Questioner: What is the relation between the mind andthe body?Dadashri: Everything of the body, these five senses andeverything else, is under the control of the mind. If the mind tellsthe eyes, ‘This is worth seeing,’ the eyes will immediately look,and if the mind says, ‘No,’ even if the eyes are looking, they willimmediately look away. Therefore, the whole body is under thecontrol of the mind.Questioner: Many times the mind says that it does notwant to see something and yet one sees it anyway. What is that?Dadashri: Seeing is its nature so it will go ahead and seeit, but if you decide that you do not want to look, it will not lookthere again. The sense organs (indriyas), due to their innateproperties, will probe and taste. But when the mind says no,they will not do it again. Now You have to see who has thecontrol over the mind. Who has the control over your mind?Questioner: The intellect (buddhi).Dadashri: What does the buddhi do?Questioner: It shows us the differences between goodand bad.Dadashri: Do things happen according to the decision ofthe intellect (buddhi)?Questioner: No, they do not.Dadashri: Who has control over buddhi?Questioner: I do not know that.Dadashri: The ego! Who else!Mind, intellect, chit and ego are the four components ofthe antahkaran. All these four have control over the body andthat is why this illusion exists. Once the control comes into ‘Your’hands, then this problem will not remain; then Your subtleindependent effort (purusharth) will begin.Questioner: What should one do to get control of that?Dadashri: The Gnani Purush will do all that for you. Hewho is liberated from all bondage can also free you. How canthe one who is bound, free others? And the human beings of thisKaliyug (the current era of the time cycle characterized by lackof unity in thought, speech and acts) do not have enough energyto become free on their own. What are the humans of thisKaliyug like? They have all slipped spiritually and have comehere in the current time cycle. And for those who have slipped,it is not possible for them to go up again on their own. Therefore,they have to have the help from a Gnani Purush.Concentration Comes with InterestQuestioner: Dada, I cannot maintain concentration(ekagrata) on God.Dadashri: When you go to buy vegetables or a sari, doyou concentrate on that?Questioner: Yes, I can. That is because of infatuationdue to illusion (moha).Dadashri: And you do not have interest in liberation(moksha) and God. That is why you cannot maintainconcentration (ekagrata) there.There was a very beautiful lady whose husband was veryunattractive. One day I asked her in confidence, ‘Your husbandis very unattractive; does he keep your attention completely?’She said to me, ‘My husband is very dear to me.’ Now anunattractive husband can become dear to her but God does notbecome dear to her. Is that not a wonder?Aptavani-6105106Aptavani-6Then this lady asks me why her mind will not remainconcentrated and attentive. How does the concentration withpurpose (ekagrata) remain when she is buying vegetables? Thisis about experience. This is not baseless; there is no interest inGod and that is why the ekagrata does not remain. When lovefor God occurs, that is when concentration will come.As long as there is interest in money, one will be attractedand caught up with money, and when he gets interested in God,then interest in money will leave. Therefore, the interest shouldchange.Now, it is not your mistake that you do not have interestin God. How can you develop interest in something you havenever seen? You have seen this sari and its beautiful colors, sointerest will naturally develop in it. But God cannot be seen, canHe? That is why it is said that you should form an interest in arepresentative of God, such as a Gnani Purush. Interest will beformed there and when you form an interest in the Gnani Purush,recognize that it will reach God.If interest is formed wherever there is anger, pride, deceitand greed (kashays), then that interest is kashayik – it, too, isladen with anger, pride, deceit and greed. That conviction(kashayik pratiti) is such that it will break. The interest formedthrough attachment (raag) is broken through abhorrence (dwesh),whereas interest on the representative of the Lord is not formedthrough raag. There is nothing in Him for which you can haveraag.* * * * *[12]Attributes of the Non-self are UnreliableWhoever’s shadow of influence falls upon us, we inevitablybecome infected by that person’s ‘disease.’ No matter howgood this mango looks on the outside, what are we going to dowith it? No matter how many good qualities it has, of what goodis it to us? Someone may tell us, ‘This person has so many goodqualities. He is the abode of good qualities.’But what have the Vitarag Lords (the fully enlightenedones) said?They may be all first class qualities, but what are thosequalities dependent upon? They are not dependent on the person;they are dependent on the equilibrium of the three humors thatgovern the biological, psychological and physiological functionsof the body (pita, vayu and kapha) and constitute everything ofa being except the Self (prakruti). When all three become excess,one will become delirious and people will curse him. Whathappens when a man who never curses or has a bad word foranyone becomes delirious? That is why Lord Mahavir has saidthat all these non-Self qualities (paudgalik) are such that theycan be destroyed in only forty-eight minutes (one gunthana);such is their temporary nature. How long will you continue toaccumulate such qualities? It will be all over the moment youhave a disorder of the three humors (tridosh) body, the effectsof imbalance and excess of biological, psychological andphysiological functions of the body.When a person cannot bear any suffering, a ‘crack’ willoccur in his mind, i.e., he will have a nervous breakdown. ThatAptavani-6105106Aptavani-6Then this lady asks me why her mind will not remainconcentrated and attentive. How does the concentration withpurpose (ekagrata) remain when she is buying vegetables? Thisis about experience. This is not baseless; there is no interest inGod and that is why the ekagrata does not remain. When lovefor God occurs, that is when concentration will come.As long as there is interest in money, one will be attractedand caught up with money, and when he gets interested in God,then interest in money will leave. Therefore, the interest shouldchange.Now, it is not your mistake that you do not have interestin God. How can you develop interest in something you havenever seen? You have seen this sari and its beautiful colors, sointerest will naturally develop in it. But God cannot be seen, canHe? That is why it is said that you should form an interest in arepresentative of God, such as a Gnani Purush. Interest will beformed there and when you form an interest in the Gnani Purush,recognize that it will reach God.If interest is formed wherever there is anger, pride, deceitand greed (kashays), then that interest is kashayik – it, too, isladen with anger, pride, deceit and greed. That conviction(kashayik pratiti) is such that it will break. The interest formedthrough attachment (raag) is broken through abhorrence (dwesh),whereas interest on the representative of the Lord is not formedthrough raag. There is nothing in Him for which you can haveraag.* * * * *[12]Attributes of the Non-self are UnreliableWhoever’s shadow of influence falls upon us, we inevitablybecome infected by that person’s ‘disease.’ No matter howgood this mango looks on the outside, what are we going to dowith it? No matter how many good qualities it has, of what goodis it to us? Someone may tell us, ‘This person has so many goodqualities. He is the abode of good qualities.’But what have the Vitarag Lords (the fully enlightenedones) said?They may be all first class qualities, but what are thosequalities dependent upon? They are not dependent on the person;they are dependent on the equilibrium of the three humors thatgovern the biological, psychological and physiological functionsof the body (pita, vayu and kapha) and constitute everything ofa being except the Self (prakruti). When all three become excess,one will become delirious and people will curse him. Whathappens when a man who never curses or has a bad word foranyone becomes delirious? That is why Lord Mahavir has saidthat all these non-Self qualities (paudgalik) are such that theycan be destroyed in only forty-eight minutes (one gunthana);such is their temporary nature. How long will you continue toaccumulate such qualities? It will be all over the moment youhave a disorder of the three humors (tridosh) body, the effectsof imbalance and excess of biological, psychological andphysiological functions of the body.When a person cannot bear any suffering, a ‘crack’ willoccur in his mind, i.e., he will have a nervous breakdown. ThatAptavani-6107108Aptavani-6Questioner: I continue to repent for my actions ofdisrespecting and speaking ill (viradhana).Dadashri: One will have severe regrets, experience misery,suffer and be restless; there will be no end to that. It will not letone off, will it?Questioner: It will never come to an end; is that so,Dada?Dadashri: ‘No end’ means it is not something that willcome to an end within two or four days. Someone’s ‘tank’ maybe the size of this room and another person’s ‘tank’ may be aslarge as the entire building. Will there not be a difference betweenthe two?Questioner: But, Dada, it will empty one day, will it not?Dadashri: It will empty. You go about your businessbelieving that it will empty, but you should not make the samemistake again. Otherwise, that pipe will close. If that mistakewas going to occur again, then it is better to fast three times, butdo let not allow disrespecting and speaking ill (viradhana) tohappen.Key to Pleasing the GnaniQuestioner: Dada Bhagwan, what should we do in orderto understand and know who you truly are? Also, what spiritualdevelopment must we attain in order to please you (Dada’srajipo – to please Dada)?Dadashri: You only need absolute humility (param vinaya)in order to win ‘our’ rajipo (we are pleased with you); nothingelse. Rajipo comes only from absolute humility. There is no suchthing as winning our rajipo by massaging ‘our’ legs and feet.One will not win my rajipo even if he drives me around in hiscar. One attains it from maintaining absolute humility (paramvinaya).is not called delirium, but it is called a crack. If you wonder whysomeone is talking a certain way, you can say that that the‘engine has a crack in it’ and that he should take it to Dada tohave it ‘welded.’ Even a new engine can develop a crack!When a person cannot cope with suffering, and if he is a goodman, he will develop a crack. Otherwise, he will become ashameless rogue. It is better to have a crack than become ashameless rogue. At least we can weld the crack and the enginewill start working again. All these new engines came fromLancashire, England, but how can they run when the heads arecracked? Even the heads of human beings crack; they will sayodd things. You ask them something and they will tell yousomething completely odd.Therefore, there is no value to these virtues and attributesof the relative-self (prakrutik gunas) at all. What happens to adish of delicious Basmati rice the next day? It will start smelling!That is how these attributes or virtues of the non-self (paudgalikgunas) will start smelling. A businessman may appear very kindbut when he gets aggravated with his employees, that is when hisunkindness will come out. You will not want to witness it.Therefore, all this is worth understanding!The Consequences of Viradhana of the GnaniPurushQuestioner: What are the consequences of talking orbehaving negatively (doing viradhana) against a Gnani Purush inthe past life? I have all such traits in me; can they be pardonedor will the consequences of past actions have to be suffered?Dadashri: The Gnani will make use of all the medicineshe has in his armamentarium. The Gnani is compassionate and,therefore, He will help cure whatever is in His hands. One hasto suffer the consequences of that which the Gnani has no controlover because the dissolution of karmic effects and consequences(visarjan) is in the hands of nature.Aptavani-6107108Aptavani-6Questioner: I continue to repent for my actions ofdisrespecting and speaking ill (viradhana).Dadashri: One will have severe regrets, experience misery,suffer and be restless; there will be no end to that. It will not letone off, will it?Questioner: It will never come to an end; is that so,Dada?Dadashri: ‘No end’ means it is not something that willcome to an end within two or four days. Someone’s ‘tank’ maybe the size of this room and another person’s ‘tank’ may be aslarge as the entire building. Will there not be a difference betweenthe two?Questioner: But, Dada, it will empty one day, will it not?Dadashri: It will empty. You go about your businessbelieving that it will empty, but you should not make the samemistake again. Otherwise, that pipe will close. If that mistakewas going to occur again, then it is better to fast three times, butdo let not allow disrespecting and speaking ill (viradhana) tohappen.Key to Pleasing the GnaniQuestioner: Dada Bhagwan, what should we do in orderto understand and know who you truly are? Also, what spiritualdevelopment must we attain in order to please you (Dada’srajipo – to please Dada)?Dadashri: You only need absolute humility (param vinaya)in order to win ‘our’ rajipo (we are pleased with you); nothingelse. Rajipo comes only from absolute humility. There is no suchthing as winning our rajipo by massaging ‘our’ legs and feet.One will not win my rajipo even if he drives me around in hiscar. One attains it from maintaining absolute humility (paramvinaya).is not called delirium, but it is called a crack. If you wonder whysomeone is talking a certain way, you can say that that the‘engine has a crack in it’ and that he should take it to Dada tohave it ‘welded.’ Even a new engine can develop a crack!When a person cannot cope with suffering, and if he is a goodman, he will develop a crack. Otherwise, he will become ashameless rogue. It is better to have a crack than become ashameless rogue. At least we can weld the crack and the enginewill start working again. All these new engines came fromLancashire, England, but how can they run when the heads arecracked? Even the heads of human beings crack; they will sayodd things. You ask them something and they will tell yousomething completely odd.Therefore, there is no value to these virtues and attributesof the relative-self (prakrutik gunas) at all. What happens to adish of delicious Basmati rice the next day? It will start smelling!That is how these attributes or virtues of the non-self (paudgalikgunas) will start smelling. A businessman may appear very kindbut when he gets aggravated with his employees, that is when hisunkindness will come out. You will not want to witness it.Therefore, all this is worth understanding!The Consequences of Viradhana of the GnaniPurushQuestioner: What are the consequences of talking orbehaving negatively (doing viradhana) against a Gnani Purush inthe past life? I have all such traits in me; can they be pardonedor will the consequences of past actions have to be suffered?Dadashri: The Gnani will make use of all the medicineshe has in his armamentarium. The Gnani is compassionate and,therefore, He will help cure whatever is in His hands. One hasto suffer the consequences of that which the Gnani has no controlover because the dissolution of karmic effects and consequences(visarjan) is in the hands of nature.Aptavani-6109110Aptavani-6Questioner: Please explain ‘param vinaya.’Dadashri: It is wherein there is sincerity and morality ata special, extra level, and there is oneness with ‘us’; where noseparation is perceived with ‘us,’ that is param vinaya. Whereone continues to feel, ‘Dada and I are one,’ all the energies willmanifest. The meaning of param vinaya is very lofty. So manypeople come here to satsang, but it is because of param vinayathat everything works smoothly without any rules or laws. Becausethere is absolute humility, there is no need for any laws here.The more you stay in ‘our’ Agnas, the greater the result.Such a one can attain our rajipo. Show me such a result, thatI feel like making you sit next to me.* * * * *[13]Spiritual Development through Conflicts: NotReacting toConflict Increases the Energies WithinYou are the owner of the entire universe. So do not harassor interfere with any living being (jiva). Help them if you can,and there is no problem if you cannot, but there should not beany interference with them or harassment towards them.Questioner: Does that mean that we should consider theother soul as the supreme Soul (parmatma)?Dadashri: No, do not consider him so, this would bewrong; he really is a parmatma, the supreme Soul-Self! Thatwhich is false, you may remember or you may not, whereas hereone really is the supreme Soul. But these supreme souls(parmatmas) have come in the form of a vibhuti (vibhuti asthe manifestation of the magnificence, splendor, energies andglory of the absolute pure Soul in a human body); they arenothing else. Then, even if a person is begging, he too is avibhuti. People generally refer to a king as a vibhuti and nota beggar. From the original supreme Soul, extra (vishesh) qualitiesand attributes have arisen, giving result to an extra form (visheshroop). That is called vibhuti and that verily is God; is it not?Therefore, you must not interfere with or harass anyone. If theother person interferes, then you should tolerate it because whenGod interferes, then we must accept it.We, the Self, are truly not this worldly form (vyavaharswaroop). This, the worldly life, is all a temporary adjustment.Aptavani-6109110Aptavani-6Questioner: Please explain ‘param vinaya.’Dadashri: It is wherein there is sincerity and morality ata special, extra level, and there is oneness with ‘us’; where noseparation is perceived with ‘us,’ that is param vinaya. Whereone continues to feel, ‘Dada and I are one,’ all the energies willmanifest. The meaning of param vinaya is very lofty. So manypeople come here to satsang, but it is because of param vinayathat everything works smoothly without any rules or laws. Becausethere is absolute humility, there is no need for any laws here.The more you stay in ‘our’ Agnas, the greater the result.Such a one can attain our rajipo. Show me such a result, thatI feel like making you sit next to me.* * * * *[13]Spiritual Development through Conflicts: NotReacting toConflict Increases the Energies WithinYou are the owner of the entire universe. So do not harassor interfere with any living being (jiva). Help them if you can,and there is no problem if you cannot, but there should not beany interference with them or harassment towards them.Questioner: Does that mean that we should consider theother soul as the supreme Soul (parmatma)?Dadashri: No, do not consider him so, this would bewrong; he really is a parmatma, the supreme Soul-Self! Thatwhich is false, you may remember or you may not, whereas hereone really is the supreme Soul. But these supreme souls(parmatmas) have come in the form of a vibhuti (vibhuti asthe manifestation of the magnificence, splendor, energies andglory of the absolute pure Soul in a human body); they arenothing else. Then, even if a person is begging, he too is avibhuti. People generally refer to a king as a vibhuti and nota beggar. From the original supreme Soul, extra (vishesh) qualitiesand attributes have arisen, giving result to an extra form (visheshroop). That is called vibhuti and that verily is God; is it not?Therefore, you must not interfere with or harass anyone. If theother person interferes, then you should tolerate it because whenGod interferes, then we must accept it.We, the Self, are truly not this worldly form (vyavaharswaroop). This, the worldly life, is all a temporary adjustment.Aptavani-6111112Aptavani-6once it gives you the solution, that knowledge will never leave.In this way, common sense will gradually increase.A person can remain in this state after he attains theknowledge of ‘our’ science – Akram Vignan. There are certainother rare persons amongst the general public who are withmerit karma (punyashadi), who can also remain in that state;however, they can maintain this equanimity only in certainsituations, not in all situations.If ever the energy of the Self is used up, it is because ofconflict (gharshan). If you react to conflicts (sangharshan) atall, that is the end of it. You should maintain equanimity whenanother person gets into conflict with you. Reaction to a conflictas clash (takaraman) must not occur. You should never get intoconflict with anyone at all, even if it comes at the cost of youlosing your physical self. This body is not going to go away justbecause someone wants it to. It is under the control of vyavasthit(scientific circumstantial evidences).Conflicts occur in life because of life after life enmity (veyr).Enmity and vengeance are the main seed of the worldly life. Theone in whom enmity (veyr) and conflicts (gharshan) stop is inmoksha – liberation. Love (prem) is not the hindrance; lovearises when enmity leaves.Usually, I do not have any friction/conflict (gharshan). Ihave tremendous common sense and so I will immediatelyunderstand what you are trying to say. People may feel thatothers are doing harm to Dada, but I will immediately understandthat this harm is not actually harm. It is neither a worldly harmnor a religious one. And there is no spiritual harm at all. Peoplemay think that spiritual harm is being done, but ‘we’ see only abenefit in that. That is the beauty of common sense! That is why‘we’ have defined common sense as ‘everywhere applicable.’There is no such thing as common sense in today’sgeneration. It has decreased from one generation to the other.Just as children play with toys, the whole world too is playingwith ‘toys.’ One does not do anything for the benefit of the Self;one continues to live in pain (dukh) of dependency and continuesto clash and stumble. Infinite energies of the Self are fracturedbecause of inner conflict (gharshan) and reactive clash(sangharshan).When the servant breaks the tea cups and saucers, thenclash (sangharshan) will arise in his boss. Why is that? It isbecause there is no awareness of ‘what is mine, the Self,’ and‘what is of the non-Self.’ There is no awareness of who controlsand runs everything that is related to the non-Self.Wherever you feel, ‘I am doing this and running this,’nothing related to that is done by You. You, the worldly self‘Chandulal,’ simply believe that you do. What you are supposedto run, you have no knowledge of. Self effort (purusharth)begins after You become a purush, the Self. So, then, how cananyone ‘do’ purusharth when he has not even become a purush?What does one need for worldly interactions in order tobecome pure (shuddha)? Complete common sense is needed.Patience and depth of understanding is needed. Common sensein worldly interactions is needed. Common sense means‘everywhere applicable.’ If there is common sense along withSelf-realization, everything will become beautiful.Questioner: How does common sense arise?Dadashri: Common sense will arise when one does notget into conflicts with anyone, even if the other person is seekingto clash and cause conflicts. And he lives his life in this way. Andhe should not clash with anyone; otherwise, common sense willgo away. There should be no friction from his side.Common sense will arise when another person begins aclash-conflict with you. The energy (shakti) of the Self is suchthat it will show you all the solutions when friction arises, andAptavani-6111112Aptavani-6once it gives you the solution, that knowledge will never leave.In this way, common sense will gradually increase.A person can remain in this state after he attains theknowledge of ‘our’ science – Akram Vignan. There are certainother rare persons amongst the general public who are withmerit karma (punyashadi), who can also remain in that state;however, they can maintain this equanimity only in certainsituations, not in all situations.If ever the energy of the Self is used up, it is because ofconflict (gharshan). If you react to conflicts (sangharshan) atall, that is the end of it. You should maintain equanimity whenanother person gets into conflict with you. Reaction to a conflictas clash (takaraman) must not occur. You should never get intoconflict with anyone at all, even if it comes at the cost of youlosing your physical self. This body is not going to go away justbecause someone wants it to. It is under the control of vyavasthit(scientific circumstantial evidences).Conflicts occur in life because of life after life enmity (veyr).Enmity and vengeance are the main seed of the worldly life. Theone in whom enmity (veyr) and conflicts (gharshan) stop is inmoksha – liberation. Love (prem) is not the hindrance; lovearises when enmity leaves.Usually, I do not have any friction/conflict (gharshan). Ihave tremendous common sense and so I will immediatelyunderstand what you are trying to say. People may feel thatothers are doing harm to Dada, but I will immediately understandthat this harm is not actually harm. It is neither a worldly harmnor a religious one. And there is no spiritual harm at all. Peoplemay think that spiritual harm is being done, but ‘we’ see only abenefit in that. That is the beauty of common sense! That is why‘we’ have defined common sense as ‘everywhere applicable.’There is no such thing as common sense in today’sgeneration. It has decreased from one generation to the other.Just as children play with toys, the whole world too is playingwith ‘toys.’ One does not do anything for the benefit of the Self;one continues to live in pain (dukh) of dependency and continuesto clash and stumble. Infinite energies of the Self are fracturedbecause of inner conflict (gharshan) and reactive clash(sangharshan).When the servant breaks the tea cups and saucers, thenclash (sangharshan) will arise in his boss. Why is that? It isbecause there is no awareness of ‘what is mine, the Self,’ and‘what is of the non-Self.’ There is no awareness of who controlsand runs everything that is related to the non-Self.Wherever you feel, ‘I am doing this and running this,’nothing related to that is done by You. You, the worldly self‘Chandulal,’ simply believe that you do. What you are supposedto run, you have no knowledge of. Self effort (purusharth)begins after You become a purush, the Self. So, then, how cananyone ‘do’ purusharth when he has not even become a purush?What does one need for worldly interactions in order tobecome pure (shuddha)? Complete common sense is needed.Patience and depth of understanding is needed. Common sensein worldly interactions is needed. Common sense means‘everywhere applicable.’ If there is common sense along withSelf-realization, everything will become beautiful.Questioner: How does common sense arise?Dadashri: Common sense will arise when one does notget into conflicts with anyone, even if the other person is seekingto clash and cause conflicts. And he lives his life in this way. Andhe should not clash with anyone; otherwise, common sense willgo away. There should be no friction from his side.Common sense will arise when another person begins aclash-conflict with you. The energy (shakti) of the Self is suchthat it will show you all the solutions when friction arises, andAptavani-6113114Aptavani-6The whole world is immersed in conflict (gharshan) andreaction to conflict (sangharshan). On the day of Diwali, thefestival of lights, everyone decides they do not want any conflictfor that day. Everyone wears good clothes and gets wonderfulfood to eat; everything is good that day. Wherever you go,people welcome you in their homes; such is the love they show.Love will be present if there is no sangharshan. There is noneed to look at right or wrong. Worldly intellect (buddhi) willdefinitely be useful in worldly interactions, and it is already adjustedto be that way; it is the extra and excessive buddhi that causesa reaction to conflicts (sangharshan).Questioner: Is the cause of all conflicts the vast differencebetween one karmic layer and another layer?Dadashri: Conflict is really a progression! The moretrouble one goes through, the more conflict he experiences, andthe more he finds a way to go higher. Without conflict, he willremain where he is. People are looking for conflict.Questioner: Can one progress if he goes around lookingfor conflict, believing conflict is necessary for progress?Dadashri: But one does not look for it with such anunderstanding. God is not the one taking you higher; conflict is.Conflict can take one higher to a certain level; thereafter, hiswork will only be completed when he meets a Gnani. Conflictoccurs naturally, just like the riverbed stones that become smooththrough collision in the river.Questioner: What is the difference between conflict(gharshan) and reaction to conflict (sangharshan)?Dadashri: When non-living things, inanimate objects,collide, it is called gharshan and when living beings collide, it iscalled sangharshan.Questioner: Does sangharshan obstruct and suffocatethe energy of the Self?Dadashri: Yes, that is true. There is nothing wrong whensangharshan occurs, but I am telling you to get rid of the innerintent (bhaav) of, ‘I want to enter into a conflict.’ When You donot have inner intent of getting into conflict, even if ‘Chandulal’(the relative-self) gets into conflict, so be it. Our vision shouldnot be obstructed.If the body gets hurt from colliding with someone, it willheal with treatment, but who will remove the wounds in the mindand the buddhi that gharshan and sangharshan creates? Theywill not go away for thousands of lifetimes!Questioner: Does one become heartless and callous(jadataa) because of excessive conflict?Dadashri: One will become insensitive and callous andthe energies will also drain away. It is because of this that onedoes not see the infinite energy within. There is infinite energybut it leaves due to conflict. Lord Mahavir did not experienceeven a single conflict from the time he was born right up until thevery end. And as far as we are concerned, about fifty thousandto a hundred thousand conflicts would be acceptable but whatabout the millions that have occurred? At least twenty to twenty-five conflicts occur in a day. Even when you simply open youreyes to look at someone, if you experience negative feelingswithin, that is gharshan/conflict. What would happen if youhave conflict with this wall?Questioner: Our head will break!Dadashri: But that is non-living (jada)! What happenswhen you have conflict with that which is the living (chetan)? Aman can go to liberation (moksha) only if there is absence ofconflict (absence of gharshan) in his life. If one learns not tohave any conflict with anyone, then he does not need a guru formoksha. He will go straight to moksha within one or twolifetimes. ‘I do not want any conflict!’; if this intent becomesAptavani-6113114Aptavani-6The whole world is immersed in conflict (gharshan) andreaction to conflict (sangharshan). On the day of Diwali, thefestival of lights, everyone decides they do not want any conflictfor that day. Everyone wears good clothes and gets wonderfulfood to eat; everything is good that day. Wherever you go,people welcome you in their homes; such is the love they show.Love will be present if there is no sangharshan. There is noneed to look at right or wrong. Worldly intellect (buddhi) willdefinitely be useful in worldly interactions, and it is already adjustedto be that way; it is the extra and excessive buddhi that causesa reaction to conflicts (sangharshan).Questioner: Is the cause of all conflicts the vast differencebetween one karmic layer and another layer?Dadashri: Conflict is really a progression! The moretrouble one goes through, the more conflict he experiences, andthe more he finds a way to go higher. Without conflict, he willremain where he is. People are looking for conflict.Questioner: Can one progress if he goes around lookingfor conflict, believing conflict is necessary for progress?Dadashri: But one does not look for it with such anunderstanding. God is not the one taking you higher; conflict is.Conflict can take one higher to a certain level; thereafter, hiswork will only be completed when he meets a Gnani. Conflictoccurs naturally, just like the riverbed stones that become smooththrough collision in the river.Questioner: What is the difference between conflict(gharshan) and reaction to conflict (sangharshan)?Dadashri: When non-living things, inanimate objects,collide, it is called gharshan and when living beings collide, it iscalled sangharshan.Questioner: Does sangharshan obstruct and suffocatethe energy of the Self?Dadashri: Yes, that is true. There is nothing wrong whensangharshan occurs, but I am telling you to get rid of the innerintent (bhaav) of, ‘I want to enter into a conflict.’ When You donot have inner intent of getting into conflict, even if ‘Chandulal’(the relative-self) gets into conflict, so be it. Our vision shouldnot be obstructed.If the body gets hurt from colliding with someone, it willheal with treatment, but who will remove the wounds in the mindand the buddhi that gharshan and sangharshan creates? Theywill not go away for thousands of lifetimes!Questioner: Does one become heartless and callous(jadataa) because of excessive conflict?Dadashri: One will become insensitive and callous andthe energies will also drain away. It is because of this that onedoes not see the infinite energy within. There is infinite energybut it leaves due to conflict. Lord Mahavir did not experienceeven a single conflict from the time he was born right up until thevery end. And as far as we are concerned, about fifty thousandto a hundred thousand conflicts would be acceptable but whatabout the millions that have occurred? At least twenty to twenty-five conflicts occur in a day. Even when you simply open youreyes to look at someone, if you experience negative feelingswithin, that is gharshan/conflict. What would happen if youhave conflict with this wall?Questioner: Our head will break!Dadashri: But that is non-living (jada)! What happenswhen you have conflict with that which is the living (chetan)? Aman can go to liberation (moksha) only if there is absence ofconflict (absence of gharshan) in his life. If one learns not tohave any conflict with anyone, then he does not need a guru formoksha. He will go straight to moksha within one or twolifetimes. ‘I do not want any conflict!’; if this intent becomesAptavani-6115116Aptavani-6established in his faith (shraddha) and he decides on that, thenthat is the very moment he attains the right vision (samkit). Soif anyone wants to attain samkit, I tell him if he makes a decisionto not get into conflict with anyone, then I guarantee that he willattain samkit upon making that decision.Questioner: Do conflict (gharshan) and collision(sangharshan) between people wound the mind and the intellect?Dadashri: You know! It’s not just the mind and theintellect, but they continue to wound the whole inner mechanismof mind-intellect-chit-ego (antahkaran) which, in turn, affectsthe body too. Therefore, gharshan causes so many difficulties.Questioner: Can we say that a true non-violent innerintent (ahimsak bhaav) has arisen if we decide not to get intoconflict with anyone?Dadashri: No, it is not like that. Once you know fromDada what ‘benefits’ there are in running into a wall, then howmuch will you ‘gain’ from having gharshan with God? In knowingjust this much, there will continue to be changes.It is not possible to completely understand non-violence(ahimsa), and to understand it completely is a serious and aweighty matter. Instead, if you just hold on to, ‘I will never getinvolved in conflict (gharshan),’ then all the energy will remainintact and it will begin to increase day by day. Then you will notincur the losses caused by gharshan.However, if ever gharshan does occur, and you dopratikraman (ask for forgiveness from the pure Soul of the oneyou have ‘hurt,’ coupled with remorse of the wrongdoing) for it,then everything will be erased. Therefore, you should have theunderstanding that if gharshan occurs then pratikraman shouldbe done for it. Otherwise, it carries a great liability. With thisGnan, liberation (moksha) will occur, but gharshan will createmany problems and it will considerably delay your liberation.There is not much problem if you have negative thoughtstowards this wall because it is a one-sided loss since there is noreaction, whereas having even a single negative thought towardsany living being creates a liability for you because here the lossis two-sided. However, all those mistakes get erased if you dopratikraman for them. Therefore, wherever gharshan occurs,if you do pratikraman, it leaves.Questioner: Who causes conflict; jada (inanimate; non-Self) or chetan (the Self, the soul)?Dadashri: Conflicts (gharshan) of the past life causenew conflicts. There is no question of jada or chetan here. TheSelf does not get involved in this at all. The non-Self complex(pudgal) causes all the conflicts. Conflicts of the past life causeconflicts again. Those who do not have conflicts of the past lifeunfolding anymore do not have any more conflicts in this life;otherwise, conflicts keep on increasing, one after another.The pudgal is not completely inanimate. It is a mixture ofthe Self and the non-Self (mishra chetan). It is called vibhaavikpudgal. Vibhaavik means that it is a non-Self complex (pudgal)resulting from extra inner intent (bhaav). The extra bhaav arisesas a third phenomenon when the Self and the non-Self cometogether. This is the ego, the intent (bhaav), which is, ‘I amChandulal’; and that is what makes you do everything. Purepudgal, or pure matter, will not make one do this. This pudgalhas become mishra chetan. The coming together(samipyabhaav) of the extra intent (vishesh bhaav) of the Selfas well as the extra intent (vishesh bhaav) of the non-Self, thematter, is the reason for the third entity in the form of the ego;the new, extra entity is called prakruti. That is what is involvedin all the conflicts!Questioner: You say that all energies come to end throughconflict. Can that energy be pulled back through awareness(jagruti)?Aptavani-6115116Aptavani-6established in his faith (shraddha) and he decides on that, thenthat is the very moment he attains the right vision (samkit). Soif anyone wants to attain samkit, I tell him if he makes a decisionto not get into conflict with anyone, then I guarantee that he willattain samkit upon making that decision.Questioner: Do conflict (gharshan) and collision(sangharshan) between people wound the mind and the intellect?Dadashri: You know! It’s not just the mind and theintellect, but they continue to wound the whole inner mechanismof mind-intellect-chit-ego (antahkaran) which, in turn, affectsthe body too. Therefore, gharshan causes so many difficulties.Questioner: Can we say that a true non-violent innerintent (ahimsak bhaav) has arisen if we decide not to get intoconflict with anyone?Dadashri: No, it is not like that. Once you know fromDada what ‘benefits’ there are in running into a wall, then howmuch will you ‘gain’ from having gharshan with God? In knowingjust this much, there will continue to be changes.It is not possible to completely understand non-violence(ahimsa), and to understand it completely is a serious and aweighty matter. Instead, if you just hold on to, ‘I will never getinvolved in conflict (gharshan),’ then all the energy will remainintact and it will begin to increase day by day. Then you will notincur the losses caused by gharshan.However, if ever gharshan does occur, and you dopratikraman (ask for forgiveness from the pure Soul of the oneyou have ‘hurt,’ coupled with remorse of the wrongdoing) for it,then everything will be erased. Therefore, you should have theunderstanding that if gharshan occurs then pratikraman shouldbe done for it. Otherwise, it carries a great liability. With thisGnan, liberation (moksha) will occur, but gharshan will createmany problems and it will considerably delay your liberation.There is not much problem if you have negative thoughtstowards this wall because it is a one-sided loss since there is noreaction, whereas having even a single negative thought towardsany living being creates a liability for you because here the lossis two-sided. However, all those mistakes get erased if you dopratikraman for them. Therefore, wherever gharshan occurs,if you do pratikraman, it leaves.Questioner: Who causes conflict; jada (inanimate; non-Self) or chetan (the Self, the soul)?Dadashri: Conflicts (gharshan) of the past life causenew conflicts. There is no question of jada or chetan here. TheSelf does not get involved in this at all. The non-Self complex(pudgal) causes all the conflicts. Conflicts of the past life causeconflicts again. Those who do not have conflicts of the past lifeunfolding anymore do not have any more conflicts in this life;otherwise, conflicts keep on increasing, one after another.The pudgal is not completely inanimate. It is a mixture ofthe Self and the non-Self (mishra chetan). It is called vibhaavikpudgal. Vibhaavik means that it is a non-Self complex (pudgal)resulting from extra inner intent (bhaav). The extra bhaav arisesas a third phenomenon when the Self and the non-Self cometogether. This is the ego, the intent (bhaav), which is, ‘I amChandulal’; and that is what makes you do everything. Purepudgal, or pure matter, will not make one do this. This pudgalhas become mishra chetan. The coming together(samipyabhaav) of the extra intent (vishesh bhaav) of the Selfas well as the extra intent (vishesh bhaav) of the non-Self, thematter, is the reason for the third entity in the form of the ego;the new, extra entity is called prakruti. That is what is involvedin all the conflicts!Questioner: You say that all energies come to end throughconflict. Can that energy be pulled back through awareness(jagruti)?Aptavani-6117118Aptavani-6Dadashri: There is no need to pull back the energy.Energies are already there. They arise now. The conflicts thathad occurred in the past caused a loss of energy, and that lossis presenting now as conflicts. From here onwards, if you reactto the conflict, then the energy that has arisen will leave again.If one does not enter into the conflict, no matter what, theenergies will keep increasing.* * * * *[14]Seeing the Circumstances as They AreQuestioner: Why is it that everyone wants favorablecircumstances?Dadashri: Favorable circumstances (anukud) meanspleasure (sukh); favorable is that in which one experiences comfortand pleasure (shata). When it becomes uncomfortable and painful(dukh, ashata), that is unfavorable circumstances (pratikud).The Self is blissful by nature; therefore, it does not wantunfavorable circumstances. That is why even the smallest livingorganism will move away from unfavorable circumstances(pratikud).Therefore, understand the ultimate point: make favorableand unfavorable as one and the same. As such, there is no worthin anything. Everything is like those old coins with a picture ofthe Queen on one side and writing on the other. Similarly, thereis nothing to this; favorable and unfavorable are nothing but afigment of the imagination.Now that You are pure Soul (Shuddhatma), there is nosuch thing as favorable and unfavorable. This worldly life is hereas long as there is false attribution (aropit bhaav) of the belief‘I am Chandulal,’ and until then, there is interference of favorableand unfavorable circumstances. Now whatever appears asunfavorable to the world is favorable to ‘us.’ It is only duringunfavorable circumstances that we can tell whether the inner‘temperature’ of the thermometer has decreased or increased;unfavorable circumstances gives us an opportunity to check howwe have advanced in Gnan.Aptavani-6117118Aptavani-6Dadashri: There is no need to pull back the energy.Energies are already there. They arise now. The conflicts thathad occurred in the past caused a loss of energy, and that lossis presenting now as conflicts. From here onwards, if you reactto the conflict, then the energy that has arisen will leave again.If one does not enter into the conflict, no matter what, theenergies will keep increasing.* * * * *[14]Seeing the Circumstances as They AreQuestioner: Why is it that everyone wants favorablecircumstances?Dadashri: Favorable circumstances (anukud) meanspleasure (sukh); favorable is that in which one experiences comfortand pleasure (shata). When it becomes uncomfortable and painful(dukh, ashata), that is unfavorable circumstances (pratikud).The Self is blissful by nature; therefore, it does not wantunfavorable circumstances. That is why even the smallest livingorganism will move away from unfavorable circumstances(pratikud).Therefore, understand the ultimate point: make favorableand unfavorable as one and the same. As such, there is no worthin anything. Everything is like those old coins with a picture ofthe Queen on one side and writing on the other. Similarly, thereis nothing to this; favorable and unfavorable are nothing but afigment of the imagination.Now that You are pure Soul (Shuddhatma), there is nosuch thing as favorable and unfavorable. This worldly life is hereas long as there is false attribution (aropit bhaav) of the belief‘I am Chandulal,’ and until then, there is interference of favorableand unfavorable circumstances. Now whatever appears asunfavorable to the world is favorable to ‘us.’ It is only duringunfavorable circumstances that we can tell whether the inner‘temperature’ of the thermometer has decreased or increased;unfavorable circumstances gives us an opportunity to check howwe have advanced in Gnan.Aptavani-6119120Aptavani-6Now for You, only circumstances (sainyog) remain. Youdo not know how to ‘use’ the pleasant circumstances. It isbecause you endure (vedavoon) the pleasant circumstancesthrough, ‘I am enjoying,’ that you have to suffer the bitter andpainful ones. But if you simply remain the ‘knower’ of pleasantcircumstances, then the ‘knowing’ will remain during the painfulones too. But you cannot get rid of old habits and that is whyyou become the enjoyer. The Self does not enjoy anything at all.It just continues to ‘know’ everything. The one that enjoys is theillusionary soul; it is the relative-self (pratishthit atma) that wascharged in the past life. You have to ‘know’ too that, ‘Oh ho ho!This pratishthit atma has become engrossed in the pleasantcircumstances!’Lord Mahavir taught His disciples that when they wentout, if people hit them with a stick, they were to take it as, ‘Atleast it is only a stick; the hand is not broken. The hand isspared.’ They were to consider that much of a benefit. If someonebreaks one arm, he has to be grateful that at least he did notbreak the other one also. If both hands get cut off, they shouldsay that at least they have their legs. If both the arms and boththe legs are cut off, they should say at least they are alive andat least able to see. The Lord has shown you the way to lookat benefit-loss (benefit – laabha and loss – alaabha). Do notcry; be happy. There is nothing wrong with that; is there?The Lord Mahavir saw with an enlightened view (samyakdrashti) through which one ‘sees’ benefits even in adversecircumstances.Take the Beating and Be FreeWhat is the rule of this world? The strong take advantageof the weak. Whom does nature make strong? It makes strongthose who have committed fewer demerit karma (paap); and forthose who have committed greater paap, it makes them weak.If you want to be free and liberated, then take the beatingWhen you come home and hear of some problems theminute you step inside the door, you will know whether you getaffected by the ups and downs or whether inner peace prevails;you will be able to tell. You need that gauge, do you not? Youcannot buy such a gauge from the market; it would be nice if youhad one at home.Currently, we are in the time cycle of Kaliyug; it is a timeof discomfort so you will have several such ‘gauges’ at home,not just one! Otherwise, who else will test you? Even if you‘hire’ someone to do so, he will not. Even if you do find someoneand you pay him to insult you, he would not go around with asulking face and you will know that the insult was fake. But theother insult that comes from your ‘files’ at home is exact! Theirfaces are pouty and they sulk, their eyes get red from anger; youcouldn’t get that even if you paid someone to do it. And hereyou even get your insults free of charge!This worldly life is such that it appears wonderful to youreyes, so how can you ever become free from it? Even when youtake a beating from it, you forget about it. People say that dispassiontowards the worldly life (vairagya) does not stay; how can it?In reality, there is nothing except pure Soul (Shuddhatma)and circumstance (sainyog). There are two kinds ofcircumstances: unfavorable (pratikud) ones and favorable(anukud) ones. There is no problem with the favorable ones; itis the unfavorable ones that cause problems. You have to takecare of only the unfavorable circumstances. And all circumstancesare temporary by nature. Therefore, they will leave when theirtime is due. They will not stay even if you insist that they do.Difficult circumstances do not remain for long. Why arepeople miserable? They are miserable because they rememberand recall the bad circumstances long after they are gone. Whyfret over them when they are gone? It is a different matter if onecries when he gets burned, but now, when it is healing, the foolkeeps on complaining, ‘I got burned, I got burned!’Aptavani-6119120Aptavani-6Now for You, only circumstances (sainyog) remain. Youdo not know how to ‘use’ the pleasant circumstances. It isbecause you endure (vedavoon) the pleasant circumstancesthrough, ‘I am enjoying,’ that you have to suffer the bitter andpainful ones. But if you simply remain the ‘knower’ of pleasantcircumstances, then the ‘knowing’ will remain during the painfulones too. But you cannot get rid of old habits and that is whyyou become the enjoyer. The Self does not enjoy anything at all.It just continues to ‘know’ everything. The one that enjoys is theillusionary soul; it is the relative-self (pratishthit atma) that wascharged in the past life. You have to ‘know’ too that, ‘Oh ho ho!This pratishthit atma has become engrossed in the pleasantcircumstances!’Lord Mahavir taught His disciples that when they wentout, if people hit them with a stick, they were to take it as, ‘Atleast it is only a stick; the hand is not broken. The hand isspared.’ They were to consider that much of a benefit. If someonebreaks one arm, he has to be grateful that at least he did notbreak the other one also. If both hands get cut off, they shouldsay that at least they have their legs. If both the arms and boththe legs are cut off, they should say at least they are alive andat least able to see. The Lord has shown you the way to lookat benefit-loss (benefit – laabha and loss – alaabha). Do notcry; be happy. There is nothing wrong with that; is there?The Lord Mahavir saw with an enlightened view (samyakdrashti) through which one ‘sees’ benefits even in adversecircumstances.Take the Beating and Be FreeWhat is the rule of this world? The strong take advantageof the weak. Whom does nature make strong? It makes strongthose who have committed fewer demerit karma (paap); and forthose who have committed greater paap, it makes them weak.If you want to be free and liberated, then take the beatingWhen you come home and hear of some problems theminute you step inside the door, you will know whether you getaffected by the ups and downs or whether inner peace prevails;you will be able to tell. You need that gauge, do you not? Youcannot buy such a gauge from the market; it would be nice if youhad one at home.Currently, we are in the time cycle of Kaliyug; it is a timeof discomfort so you will have several such ‘gauges’ at home,not just one! Otherwise, who else will test you? Even if you‘hire’ someone to do so, he will not. Even if you do find someoneand you pay him to insult you, he would not go around with asulking face and you will know that the insult was fake. But theother insult that comes from your ‘files’ at home is exact! Theirfaces are pouty and they sulk, their eyes get red from anger; youcouldn’t get that even if you paid someone to do it. And hereyou even get your insults free of charge!This worldly life is such that it appears wonderful to youreyes, so how can you ever become free from it? Even when youtake a beating from it, you forget about it. People say that dispassiontowards the worldly life (vairagya) does not stay; how can it?In reality, there is nothing except pure Soul (Shuddhatma)and circumstance (sainyog). There are two kinds ofcircumstances: unfavorable (pratikud) ones and favorable(anukud) ones. There is no problem with the favorable ones; itis the unfavorable ones that cause problems. You have to takecare of only the unfavorable circumstances. And all circumstancesare temporary by nature. Therefore, they will leave when theirtime is due. They will not stay even if you insist that they do.Difficult circumstances do not remain for long. Why arepeople miserable? They are miserable because they rememberand recall the bad circumstances long after they are gone. Whyfret over them when they are gone? It is a different matter if onecries when he gets burned, but now, when it is healing, the foolkeeps on complaining, ‘I got burned, I got burned!’Aptavani-6121122Aptavani-6in this life. That is what I have done all along in life – this oneand previous ones. Thereafter, I came to the final conclusion thatI have no beating of any kind left to take and, therefore, I haveno fear about anything. I have deduced what the whole worldis all about. I have the answers and I also help others come tothat conclusion.Sooner or later, will you not have to come onto this line?The law of nature does not spare anyone. The slightest mistakecould bring a life form with four legs and a tail (one takes birthin the animal kingdom). Is there any happiness in a life whereone has four legs and a tail?Just stop all mistakes that hurt others. By practicingnonviolence (ahimsa) through thoughts, speech and acts, you willnot have to fear any hurt. Do not have any fear of someone hittingyou or something biting you. Even if the room is full of snakes,when a non-violent (ahimsak) person walks in, the snakes willscurry away and climb on each other and not even touch him.Therefore, proceed with caution. This world is verydifferent. It is absolutely just. Only when you come to the exactconclusion (taaran) of what the world is all about, and you takeit to the stage of experience, will everything work. The research,‘What will be the consequence of this?’ will have to be done,will it not?Questioner: One embarks upon the research after takinga beating, does he not?Dadashri: Yes, true research is done after taking a beating,not after giving it.The Flawless WorldDadashri: People are not able to see their own mistakes,are they?Questioner: No they cannot.Dadashri: Why is that? They are intelligent, so why not?Questioner: They see everyone else’s mistakes.Dadashri: That, too – they do not see the true mistakes.They measure other people through their intellect and then theypick out their mistakes. ‘We’ do not see mistakes in anyone inthis world.Questioner: Dada, the whole world is flawless (nirdosh)and that is true from the ‘real’ perspective, but by the ‘relative’view, everything is bound to have mistakes (dosh), is it not?Dadashri: Yes, but now we no longer intend to live in therelative, the non-Self, do we? We want to live only in the realSelf. Relative means the worldly life. Do you like to live in thereal or in the relative?Questioner: We like only the real, Dada. But we have tolive in both, do we not? As the Self (nischay), we understandthat everyone is flawless, without mistakes, but often we have tosee people from the worldly life view, do we not?Dadashri: No, interaction in the worldly life (vyavahar)does not tell you that you have to look for mistakes in others.‘We,’ too, live in the worldly life, do we not? And yet I canconstantly see the world as flawless.There is no one with a mistake (dosh) in this world. Ifothers appear at fault, it is our own mistake. And yet all thesecourts, lawyers, government, everybody considers them guilty,do they not?Questioner: How should we look at it? Are they notguilty as far as the worldly life is concerned?Dadashri: There is no one at fault in the worldly life.No one is at fault from the perspective of pure worldlyinteraction (shuddha vyavahar). Everyone is a Shuddhatma –Aptavani-6121122Aptavani-6in this life. That is what I have done all along in life – this oneand previous ones. Thereafter, I came to the final conclusion thatI have no beating of any kind left to take and, therefore, I haveno fear about anything. I have deduced what the whole worldis all about. I have the answers and I also help others come tothat conclusion.Sooner or later, will you not have to come onto this line?The law of nature does not spare anyone. The slightest mistakecould bring a life form with four legs and a tail (one takes birthin the animal kingdom). Is there any happiness in a life whereone has four legs and a tail?Just stop all mistakes that hurt others. By practicingnonviolence (ahimsa) through thoughts, speech and acts, you willnot have to fear any hurt. Do not have any fear of someone hittingyou or something biting you. Even if the room is full of snakes,when a non-violent (ahimsak) person walks in, the snakes willscurry away and climb on each other and not even touch him.Therefore, proceed with caution. This world is verydifferent. It is absolutely just. Only when you come to the exactconclusion (taaran) of what the world is all about, and you takeit to the stage of experience, will everything work. The research,‘What will be the consequence of this?’ will have to be done,will it not?Questioner: One embarks upon the research after takinga beating, does he not?Dadashri: Yes, true research is done after taking a beating,not after giving it.The Flawless WorldDadashri: People are not able to see their own mistakes,are they?Questioner: No they cannot.Dadashri: Why is that? They are intelligent, so why not?Questioner: They see everyone else’s mistakes.Dadashri: That, too – they do not see the true mistakes.They measure other people through their intellect and then theypick out their mistakes. ‘We’ do not see mistakes in anyone inthis world.Questioner: Dada, the whole world is flawless (nirdosh)and that is true from the ‘real’ perspective, but by the ‘relative’view, everything is bound to have mistakes (dosh), is it not?Dadashri: Yes, but now we no longer intend to live in therelative, the non-Self, do we? We want to live only in the realSelf. Relative means the worldly life. Do you like to live in thereal or in the relative?Questioner: We like only the real, Dada. But we have tolive in both, do we not? As the Self (nischay), we understandthat everyone is flawless, without mistakes, but often we have tosee people from the worldly life view, do we not?Dadashri: No, interaction in the worldly life (vyavahar)does not tell you that you have to look for mistakes in others.‘We,’ too, live in the worldly life, do we not? And yet I canconstantly see the world as flawless.There is no one with a mistake (dosh) in this world. Ifothers appear at fault, it is our own mistake. And yet all thesecourts, lawyers, government, everybody considers them guilty,do they not?Questioner: How should we look at it? Are they notguilty as far as the worldly life is concerned?Dadashri: There is no one at fault in the worldly life.No one is at fault from the perspective of pure worldlyinteraction (shuddha vyavahar). Everyone is a Shuddhatma –Aptavani-6123124Aptavani-6the pure Soul – from the perspective of the Self (nischay) andfrom this viewpoint; they cannot have any mistakes, can they?If anyone had made a mistake, Lord Mahavir would haveseen that, but the Lord did not see anyone at fault. Even whenlarge bedbugs were biting him, the Lord did not see them at fault.Viewing the Mistakes through UpayogQuestioner: Can we see past mistakes by rememberingthem?Dadashri: Past mistakes can be seen only through focusedawareness (upayog), but not through memory. You have toscratch your head in order to recollect. You have to recollect ifa veil comes over it, do you not? If you had a disagreement withanother person, then if you do pratikraman (ask for forgivenessfrom the pure Soul of the one you have ‘hurt,’ coupled withremorse of the wrongdoing) to him, he will be present beforeyou. You simply have to resort to this focused awareness (upayog)and do pratikraman. There is nothing to remember in our path.Recalling is dependant on memory.Questioner: What is memory? Can that be consideredas being dependent on the intellect?Dadashri: Memory is the recall that takes a long timecoming if there is a huge veil, like a large cloud, though sometimesthe recall comes in two minutes, sometimes in five. Do you havesuch an experience about memory?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Many times you will not be able to recollectfor hours. Now the rule is that you can destroy the veil throughconcentration (ekagrata). A veil that is half an hour long can bebrought to an end within five minutes through concentration.* * * * *[15]Upayog: Levels of AwarenessQuestioner: Please explain the difference between thatwhich is mechanical and that which is with awareness (jagruti).Dadashri: The whole world functions while still asleep.That is considered ‘mechanical.’ It is called ‘asleep to the Self’(bhaavnindra), or unaware of the Self. We can say that everyonein bhaavnindra is mechanical. Is every man not aware of profitand loss in his business? So, he can maintain awareness in hisbusiness, and when he sits in a bus, is he not aware? He is notmechanical there; he is awake and aware. Now the worldconsiders that as being ‘with awareness’ (jagruti-purvak);actually, that, too, is mechanical. Most of the people in foreigncountries can be considered mechanical, not aware of the Self.These animals and trees are all also considered mechanical, arethey not?Questioner: Can the celestial beings (devas and devis)be considered mechanical also, or not?Dadashri: The celestial beings cannot be consideredmechanical. They do have awareness. There are some devaswho are aware that they are ‘mechanical.’ So they get tired ofthis state and feel it should not be that way. Not all devas arelike that. Some move about absolutely carefree in a state ofintoxication of the mind. That is called ‘mechanical.’Questioner: While singing a spiritual song (pad), onemay be reciting the words but his attention is elsewhere; what dowe call that?Aptavani-6123124Aptavani-6the pure Soul – from the perspective of the Self (nischay) andfrom this viewpoint; they cannot have any mistakes, can they?If anyone had made a mistake, Lord Mahavir would haveseen that, but the Lord did not see anyone at fault. Even whenlarge bedbugs were biting him, the Lord did not see them at fault.Viewing the Mistakes through UpayogQuestioner: Can we see past mistakes by rememberingthem?Dadashri: Past mistakes can be seen only through focusedawareness (upayog), but not through memory. You have toscratch your head in order to recollect. You have to recollect ifa veil comes over it, do you not? If you had a disagreement withanother person, then if you do pratikraman (ask for forgivenessfrom the pure Soul of the one you have ‘hurt,’ coupled withremorse of the wrongdoing) to him, he will be present beforeyou. You simply have to resort to this focused awareness (upayog)and do pratikraman. There is nothing to remember in our path.Recalling is dependant on memory.Questioner: What is memory? Can that be consideredas being dependent on the intellect?Dadashri: Memory is the recall that takes a long timecoming if there is a huge veil, like a large cloud, though sometimesthe recall comes in two minutes, sometimes in five. Do you havesuch an experience about memory?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Many times you will not be able to recollectfor hours. Now the rule is that you can destroy the veil throughconcentration (ekagrata). A veil that is half an hour long can bebrought to an end within five minutes through concentration.* * * * *[15]Upayog: Levels of AwarenessQuestioner: Please explain the difference between thatwhich is mechanical and that which is with awareness (jagruti).Dadashri: The whole world functions while still asleep.That is considered ‘mechanical.’ It is called ‘asleep to the Self’(bhaavnindra), or unaware of the Self. We can say that everyonein bhaavnindra is mechanical. Is every man not aware of profitand loss in his business? So, he can maintain awareness in hisbusiness, and when he sits in a bus, is he not aware? He is notmechanical there; he is awake and aware. Now the worldconsiders that as being ‘with awareness’ (jagruti-purvak);actually, that, too, is mechanical. Most of the people in foreigncountries can be considered mechanical, not aware of the Self.These animals and trees are all also considered mechanical, arethey not?Questioner: Can the celestial beings (devas and devis)be considered mechanical also, or not?Dadashri: The celestial beings cannot be consideredmechanical. They do have awareness. There are some devaswho are aware that they are ‘mechanical.’ So they get tired ofthis state and feel it should not be that way. Not all devas arelike that. Some move about absolutely carefree in a state ofintoxication of the mind. That is called ‘mechanical.’Questioner: While singing a spiritual song (pad), onemay be reciting the words but his attention is elsewhere; what dowe call that?Aptavani-6125126Aptavani-6Dadashri: That is all mechanical. Mechanical meanswithout active and alert attentiveness of the real Self (upayog)and a task which occurs with upayog is called awareness.There are two levels of awareness (upayog). One isauspicious, good (shubha upayog) and the other is pure (shuddhaupayog), which is the awareness as the Self. Pure upayog is notto be found anywhere in the world. There is auspicious (good)– inauspicious (bad) level of awareness (shubha-ashubhaupayog). Some people have impure awareness (ashuddhaupayog). Ashuddha and ashubha, that is, impure andinauspicious awareness, respectively, are not considered upayog.Only the pure and auspicious awareness (shuddha and shubhaupayog) are considered upayog. Ashuddha and ashubha areall mechanical and not really considered awareness (upayog).Shubha upayog is only fractional awareness in which a personhas awareness of what is beneficial in this life and the cominglife.People generally have some awareness in matters of theirown home, business and some other matters, but their awarenessis limited to this much. In all other matters they are ‘asleep,’however, in reality this awareness is still ‘mechanical.’When can a person become free from being ‘mechanical,’being unaware? When he becomes constantly aware of bothwhat is beneficial (hita) and what is harmful (ahita) for his self.Questioner: But, Dada, this benefit-harm is a worldlything, is it not?Dadashri: It is not like that. There is some awarenesswhen one is on a path where one does everything good andpositive for others (shubha marg). But when is that so? It isonly if that leads to that which is auspicious and beneficial in thisas well as the next life; only then is it called awareness. Otherwise,a person may be making a donation or giving his service toothers, but his awareness does not go beyond the current event.If every activity is carried out with awareness, then it will benefitthe next life. Otherwise, all he does goes into ‘sleep state,’ thatis to say it goes to waste because of unawareness. All donationshe gives go into sleep, unawareness. Otherwise, even a donationof four pennies given with awareness is more than enough! Whena person gives a donation with the desire of wanting fame andrecognition in return, it all goes into ‘sleep’ – unawareness. Theone who gives a donation for the benefit of his future life isconsidered to be relatively ‘awake.’ One should have awarenessof benefit-harm (hita-ahita) to the self. How is it awarenesswhen he gives donations but has no clue about his next life?If one only understands every word, its meaning, its precisedefinition, then his work will be done; such are the words of theenlightened beings called Vitarag Lords.Pure Awareness in Worldly LifeWhat do you have to do after you attain Self-realization,knowledge of the Self?You now have to maintain awareness (upayog). Until nowyou never had the direct, pure awareness of the Self. You were‘dancing’ according to your relative-self (prakruti) and then youclaimed, ‘I danced! I made the donation! I did this…I did that.I did so much service!’ Now You have attained the Self, so Youhave to be in that direct, pure awareness of the Self. You havebecome the Self (a purush) and the relative-self (prakruti) hasbeen separated and disconnected. However, the prakruti is notgoing to refrain from doing its part; it is not going to let go. AndYou, the purush, have to remain in purusharth; be the Self. Itmeans You have to ‘do’ the purusharth. You have to remainwithin the Agnas, the special directives that the Gnani Purush hasgiven you; remain in Your upayog, in the awareness as the Self.What does upayog mean? When you are out walking andthere are dogs, cats and donkeys passing by but you see themAptavani-6125126Aptavani-6Dadashri: That is all mechanical. Mechanical meanswithout active and alert attentiveness of the real Self (upayog)and a task which occurs with upayog is called awareness.There are two levels of awareness (upayog). One isauspicious, good (shubha upayog) and the other is pure (shuddhaupayog), which is the awareness as the Self. Pure upayog is notto be found anywhere in the world. There is auspicious (good)– inauspicious (bad) level of awareness (shubha-ashubhaupayog). Some people have impure awareness (ashuddhaupayog). Ashuddha and ashubha, that is, impure andinauspicious awareness, respectively, are not considered upayog.Only the pure and auspicious awareness (shuddha and shubhaupayog) are considered upayog. Ashuddha and ashubha areall mechanical and not really considered awareness (upayog).Shubha upayog is only fractional awareness in which a personhas awareness of what is beneficial in this life and the cominglife.People generally have some awareness in matters of theirown home, business and some other matters, but their awarenessis limited to this much. In all other matters they are ‘asleep,’however, in reality this awareness is still ‘mechanical.’When can a person become free from being ‘mechanical,’being unaware? When he becomes constantly aware of bothwhat is beneficial (hita) and what is harmful (ahita) for his self.Questioner: But, Dada, this benefit-harm is a worldlything, is it not?Dadashri: It is not like that. There is some awarenesswhen one is on a path where one does everything good andpositive for others (shubha marg). But when is that so? It isonly if that leads to that which is auspicious and beneficial in thisas well as the next life; only then is it called awareness. Otherwise,a person may be making a donation or giving his service toothers, but his awareness does not go beyond the current event.If every activity is carried out with awareness, then it will benefitthe next life. Otherwise, all he does goes into ‘sleep state,’ thatis to say it goes to waste because of unawareness. All donationshe gives go into sleep, unawareness. Otherwise, even a donationof four pennies given with awareness is more than enough! Whena person gives a donation with the desire of wanting fame andrecognition in return, it all goes into ‘sleep’ – unawareness. Theone who gives a donation for the benefit of his future life isconsidered to be relatively ‘awake.’ One should have awarenessof benefit-harm (hita-ahita) to the self. How is it awarenesswhen he gives donations but has no clue about his next life?If one only understands every word, its meaning, its precisedefinition, then his work will be done; such are the words of theenlightened beings called Vitarag Lords.Pure Awareness in Worldly LifeWhat do you have to do after you attain Self-realization,knowledge of the Self?You now have to maintain awareness (upayog). Until nowyou never had the direct, pure awareness of the Self. You were‘dancing’ according to your relative-self (prakruti) and then youclaimed, ‘I danced! I made the donation! I did this…I did that.I did so much service!’ Now You have attained the Self, so Youhave to be in that direct, pure awareness of the Self. You havebecome the Self (a purush) and the relative-self (prakruti) hasbeen separated and disconnected. However, the prakruti is notgoing to refrain from doing its part; it is not going to let go. AndYou, the purush, have to remain in purusharth; be the Self. Itmeans You have to ‘do’ the purusharth. You have to remainwithin the Agnas, the special directives that the Gnani Purush hasgiven you; remain in Your upayog, in the awareness as the Self.What does upayog mean? When you are out walking andthere are dogs, cats and donkeys passing by but you see themAptavani-6127128Aptavani-6Questioner: What about the pain (peeda, dukh)experienced by the ‘packaging,’ the relative-self?Dadashri: No one experiences pain. The donkey doesnot experience pain whether you put a sack on its back or not.I know donkeys very well. In our cement and constructionbusiness, we have two hundred or so donkeys that come towork for us. They droop their ears like this and so ‘we’understand that, despite carrying a lot of weight, they are in theirown enjoyment (masti)! They know their own masti; how wouldyou know about that!Focused Awareness is UpayogQuestioner: The silk worm works hard to produce acocoon and then it traps itself in it. Then in order to come out,it has to shed its attachment to the cocoon; so how many ‘layers’are there? All these…Dadashri: There are no layers or anything like that; thereis just the false fear! Now that I have given you this Gnan, Youhave become a pure Soul (Shuddhatma). Therefore, this mind,speech, body of ‘Chandubhai’ and all illusion (maya) associatedwith that name, fall under the control of the energy of scientificcircumstantial evidences (vyavasthit shakti). Vyavasthit willgive the inspiration from within. Therefore, You have to remainas, ‘I am Shuddhatma,’ and just ‘continue seeing’ (joyaa karo)whatever is happening to ‘Chandubhai’ and whatever‘Chandubhai’ is doing. That is all; and if You ‘do’ just this, then‘You’ become absolute (purna). Each entity does its own work;‘Chandubhai’ does ‘Chandubhai’s’ work. Now, if You do notinterfere in that, then you are out of the cocoon, the web of lifeafter life. Even if ‘You’ do not interfere for just one day, thenYou will realize, ‘Wow! I have come out of the cocoon!’At least, try this one Sunday. Let go of the ‘reins of thefive horses,’ the five senses that you are holding on to, and let‘Me-the Self’ (Dada, in the form of knowledge within us) takecasually, you have wasted the upayog (awareness). If you seethe pure Soul (Shuddhatma, the Self) in them as you are walking,that is called pure awareness (shuddha upayog). Shuddhaupayog is so precious that if one remains in it continuously foran hour, he will attain the life of Indra - the king of all heavenlybeings!Questioner: Can pure awareness be maintained in worldlybusiness or in daily interactions of the worldly life?Dadashri: Interaction in the worldly life (vyavahar) andpure awareness (shuddha upayog) have nothing to do witheach other. One may be involved in his business or somethingelse. Pure awareness (shuddha upayog) arises only after attainingSelf-realization; it arises after he becomes the Self, a purush.No one can attain pure awareness before attaining Gnan. Now,You can have pure awareness.Questioner: So if we see the donkey as pure Soul(parmatma – supreme Self), we believe it to be a parmatma,then…Dadashri: No, no. You do not have to believe it to bea parmatma. The supreme Self is the one within, and the onethat you see on the outside is a donkey. You have to put yoursacks on the donkey’s back and you have to see the parmatmawithin him and get your work done.You should interact with your wife after seeing the supremeSelf within her. Otherwise, is a married man going to become anascetic (bavo)? Should these young married men who havetaken Gnan become ascetics? No, no, they do not have tobecome ascetics. All they have to do is ‘see’ God within theirwives. What does the God within, the Self, say? ‘Do mydarshan; acknowledge Me, the Self. I do not have any othercomplaints or needs. The worldly dealings are verily worldly innature, but in Your worldly dealings, ‘see’ Me, be mindful ofMe, maintain pure awareness (shuddha upayog).’Aptavani-6127128Aptavani-6Questioner: What about the pain (peeda, dukh)experienced by the ‘packaging,’ the relative-self?Dadashri: No one experiences pain. The donkey doesnot experience pain whether you put a sack on its back or not.I know donkeys very well. In our cement and constructionbusiness, we have two hundred or so donkeys that come towork for us. They droop their ears like this and so ‘we’understand that, despite carrying a lot of weight, they are in theirown enjoyment (masti)! They know their own masti; how wouldyou know about that!Focused Awareness is UpayogQuestioner: The silk worm works hard to produce acocoon and then it traps itself in it. Then in order to come out,it has to shed its attachment to the cocoon; so how many ‘layers’are there? All these…Dadashri: There are no layers or anything like that; thereis just the false fear! Now that I have given you this Gnan, Youhave become a pure Soul (Shuddhatma). Therefore, this mind,speech, body of ‘Chandubhai’ and all illusion (maya) associatedwith that name, fall under the control of the energy of scientificcircumstantial evidences (vyavasthit shakti). Vyavasthit willgive the inspiration from within. Therefore, You have to remainas, ‘I am Shuddhatma,’ and just ‘continue seeing’ (joyaa karo)whatever is happening to ‘Chandubhai’ and whatever‘Chandubhai’ is doing. That is all; and if You ‘do’ just this, then‘You’ become absolute (purna). Each entity does its own work;‘Chandubhai’ does ‘Chandubhai’s’ work. Now, if You do notinterfere in that, then you are out of the cocoon, the web of lifeafter life. Even if ‘You’ do not interfere for just one day, thenYou will realize, ‘Wow! I have come out of the cocoon!’At least, try this one Sunday. Let go of the ‘reins of thefive horses,’ the five senses that you are holding on to, and let‘Me-the Self’ (Dada, in the form of knowledge within us) takecasually, you have wasted the upayog (awareness). If you seethe pure Soul (Shuddhatma, the Self) in them as you are walking,that is called pure awareness (shuddha upayog). Shuddhaupayog is so precious that if one remains in it continuously foran hour, he will attain the life of Indra - the king of all heavenlybeings!Questioner: Can pure awareness be maintained in worldlybusiness or in daily interactions of the worldly life?Dadashri: Interaction in the worldly life (vyavahar) andpure awareness (shuddha upayog) have nothing to do witheach other. One may be involved in his business or somethingelse. Pure awareness (shuddha upayog) arises only after attainingSelf-realization; it arises after he becomes the Self, a purush.No one can attain pure awareness before attaining Gnan. Now,You can have pure awareness.Questioner: So if we see the donkey as pure Soul(parmatma – supreme Self), we believe it to be a parmatma,then…Dadashri: No, no. You do not have to believe it to bea parmatma. The supreme Self is the one within, and the onethat you see on the outside is a donkey. You have to put yoursacks on the donkey’s back and you have to see the parmatmawithin him and get your work done.You should interact with your wife after seeing the supremeSelf within her. Otherwise, is a married man going to become anascetic (bavo)? Should these young married men who havetaken Gnan become ascetics? No, no, they do not have tobecome ascetics. All they have to do is ‘see’ God within theirwives. What does the God within, the Self, say? ‘Do mydarshan; acknowledge Me, the Self. I do not have any othercomplaints or needs. The worldly dealings are verily worldly innature, but in Your worldly dealings, ‘see’ Me, be mindful ofMe, maintain pure awareness (shuddha upayog).’Aptavani-6129130Aptavani-6‘Your awareness slips, and do you know what will happen becauseof that? When you eat without the presence of your chit, yougive rise to all the conditions for a heart attack. One shouldnever have the chit absent while eating. The mill owner then toldme, ‘My chit is always absent. Show me a way to improvethis.’ So then I showed him the way as to how his chit canremain present in whatever he is doing. What would happen ifI were to give that man some money to count?Questioner: He would even forget to eat.Dadashri: In that case, his upayog would remain only incounting the money.There was a young baniya (business community) manwhose salary was six hundred rupees. I asked him, ‘What wouldyou do if they paid your wages in one rupee notes?’ and he toldme, ‘I would count them!’ I told him, ‘Hey! When would youfinish counting six hundred notes? It would take so long! In thattime if someone is looking to make a quick buck, he can quicklygrab the goods and be on his way while you are busy counting.How much time you would waste in counting the money! At themost you may be short by five rupees, what else can you lose?Besides, these people will not give you less money; they knowthat everyone will count their wages.’ Rare are those with meritkarma (punyashadi) like ‘us’ who will take the money withoutcounting. So our task is easy. Who would waste time in suchmatters? Then the young man tells me, ‘If they paid me in fivepaisa (penny) coins, even then I would count before acceptingthe salary!’ Blessed is this man! This is how upayog is wastedaway; it slips away.If there is focus of awareness of the pure Self (upayog),then it will help you everywhere. It will help you while you areeating and drinking, in your business, etc., because the worldlyself (atma), does not do anything except interfere (dakhal) in allthis.charge of them. Then, sit comfortably in the chariot and say,‘Dada (anything you tell Dada, bounces back to the Soul within),make them run the way you desire. I am going to sit here inpeace!’ Then you will see that your chariot will not go into aditch. The problem is that you do not know how to guide it,yet you try to steer it. When it is going down the slope, yourelax the reins, and when you have to go uphill, you keeppulling on them. So all this is contradictory. However, in theSelf that I have given You, you have definitely come out of thecocoon!But now you will have to set the upayog – focus theawareness. You have been given the Self, but the awareness ofthe self (old upayog of ‘I am Chandubhai’) is such a thing thatby nature it slips in and you automatically become the self.Therefore, You have to set this upayog, the focus of theawareness, as the Self. You have to maintain the awareness; Youhave to ‘do’ the purusharth, being the Self, because now Youhave become the Soul, or the Self (purush).Now what is the ‘slipping’ of the upayog? There was awealthy mill owner. He sat down with me to have a meal. Hiswife came and sat across from us. I asked her, ‘Why are yousitting in front of us?’ So the lady says, ‘He never eats in peace,only today he is eating peacefully just because you are here.That is why I am sitting here.’So the man told his wife, ‘Get up from here, you have nosense at all.’ I understood what the mill owner was like. I toldhim, ‘Your wife is saying that for your own good. Your healthwill be much better if you ate your meals peacefully. Instead,why are you scolding her by calling her senseless?’ He admittedthat she was right and said, ‘Whenever I sit down to eat; mychit would be at the office. I would talk on the phone with mysecretary while this physical bundle would be eating here.’This is called slipping of upayog. I then told the mill owner,Aptavani-6129130Aptavani-6‘Your awareness slips, and do you know what will happen becauseof that? When you eat without the presence of your chit, yougive rise to all the conditions for a heart attack. One shouldnever have the chit absent while eating. The mill owner then toldme, ‘My chit is always absent. Show me a way to improvethis.’ So then I showed him the way as to how his chit canremain present in whatever he is doing. What would happen ifI were to give that man some money to count?Questioner: He would even forget to eat.Dadashri: In that case, his upayog would remain only incounting the money.There was a young baniya (business community) manwhose salary was six hundred rupees. I asked him, ‘What wouldyou do if they paid your wages in one rupee notes?’ and he toldme, ‘I would count them!’ I told him, ‘Hey! When would youfinish counting six hundred notes? It would take so long! In thattime if someone is looking to make a quick buck, he can quicklygrab the goods and be on his way while you are busy counting.How much time you would waste in counting the money! At themost you may be short by five rupees, what else can you lose?Besides, these people will not give you less money; they knowthat everyone will count their wages.’ Rare are those with meritkarma (punyashadi) like ‘us’ who will take the money withoutcounting. So our task is easy. Who would waste time in suchmatters? Then the young man tells me, ‘If they paid me in fivepaisa (penny) coins, even then I would count before acceptingthe salary!’ Blessed is this man! This is how upayog is wastedaway; it slips away.If there is focus of awareness of the pure Self (upayog),then it will help you everywhere. It will help you while you areeating and drinking, in your business, etc., because the worldlyself (atma), does not do anything except interfere (dakhal) in allthis.charge of them. Then, sit comfortably in the chariot and say,‘Dada (anything you tell Dada, bounces back to the Soul within),make them run the way you desire. I am going to sit here inpeace!’ Then you will see that your chariot will not go into aditch. The problem is that you do not know how to guide it,yet you try to steer it. When it is going down the slope, yourelax the reins, and when you have to go uphill, you keeppulling on them. So all this is contradictory. However, in theSelf that I have given You, you have definitely come out of thecocoon!But now you will have to set the upayog – focus theawareness. You have been given the Self, but the awareness ofthe self (old upayog of ‘I am Chandubhai’) is such a thing thatby nature it slips in and you automatically become the self.Therefore, You have to set this upayog, the focus of theawareness, as the Self. You have to maintain the awareness; Youhave to ‘do’ the purusharth, being the Self, because now Youhave become the Soul, or the Self (purush).Now what is the ‘slipping’ of the upayog? There was awealthy mill owner. He sat down with me to have a meal. Hiswife came and sat across from us. I asked her, ‘Why are yousitting in front of us?’ So the lady says, ‘He never eats in peace,only today he is eating peacefully just because you are here.That is why I am sitting here.’So the man told his wife, ‘Get up from here, you have nosense at all.’ I understood what the mill owner was like. I toldhim, ‘Your wife is saying that for your own good. Your healthwill be much better if you ate your meals peacefully. Instead,why are you scolding her by calling her senseless?’ He admittedthat she was right and said, ‘Whenever I sit down to eat; mychit would be at the office. I would talk on the phone with mysecretary while this physical bundle would be eating here.’This is called slipping of upayog. I then told the mill owner,Aptavani-6131132Aptavani-6What does interference (dakhal) mean? If someone tellsme to teach him to make yogurt, I would show him how to heatthe milk, let it cool down, then add a spoonful of yogurt in it andstir it, then cover up the pot and just leave it alone. He can goto sleep. Now if he gets up at two in the morning to go to thebathroom, and he goes to the kitchen and sticks his finger in thepot to check if the yogurt has formed; that is called interference(dakhal). And so in the morning you will see the ‘muddle ofmush’ (dakho) which is the result of the interference. The yogurtwill not have jelled properly. This is how people make a mess(dakho) of their worldly life and that is how they live. Therefore,do not let the upayog, awareness as the Self, slip astray; that iscalled focused awareness (upayog jagruti).What do ‘we’ (the Gnani and the fully enlightened Lordwithin) refer to as focusing the awareness (upayog)? Say thereis a narrow bridge a mile and a half long. Only one person canwalk on it at a time. This bridge goes through the sea with wateron both sides. And you are told to walk on that bridge. Thefocused awareness, the undivided attention that you keep at thattime, is called upayog. Now if while walking you happen to geta thought about your bank and how much you have paid andhow much is still pending, you will immediately push it away andfocus and concentrate on walking on the bridge.Scripture writers have said to maintain focused awareness(upayog) while eating, drinking and in doing any kind of work.Upayog means that there is nothing else going on while eating.Having the chit present in all you do is called upayog. Does onekeep his chit present when there is sea on either side? Evenchildren will stop playing and become aware. Even they aresmart.There is no living being that cannot have focused awareness(upayog). Go and see anyone counting money. If his wife ordaughter comes in while he is counting, he will look up but notsee them. His wife will tell him, ‘We came in while you werecounting money but you did not see us?’ He will tell her, ‘No,I wasn’t aware (laksha).’ The eyes will look but not see; thatis called upayog.Even at this moment, ‘our’ upayog is in Shuddhatma–theSelf. I may be talking to you or doing something else, but ‘our’upayog remains in the upayog, ‘our’ awareness remains in theawareness. It is possible to have focused awareness on thefocused awareness (upayog on the upayog) even while thismind-speech-body carry out their activities.However much You can remain in upayog, it is good. IfYou cannot, does that mean you have to drown yourself? Thispath of ours is not one for suicide.Atma, the Self, and prakruti, the non-Self, are bothseparate; separate by their intrinsic nature (swabhav). They aredifferent in every way. The Self is not used in the worldly life atall; only the light of the Self is used. If that light were not there,the non-Self (prakruti) would not function at all. Because thatlight is there, everything in the prakruti works, otherwise theSelf does not do anything in all this.* * * * *Aptavani-6131132Aptavani-6What does interference (dakhal) mean? If someone tellsme to teach him to make yogurt, I would show him how to heatthe milk, let it cool down, then add a spoonful of yogurt in it andstir it, then cover up the pot and just leave it alone. He can goto sleep. Now if he gets up at two in the morning to go to thebathroom, and he goes to the kitchen and sticks his finger in thepot to check if the yogurt has formed; that is called interference(dakhal). And so in the morning you will see the ‘muddle ofmush’ (dakho) which is the result of the interference. The yogurtwill not have jelled properly. This is how people make a mess(dakho) of their worldly life and that is how they live. Therefore,do not let the upayog, awareness as the Self, slip astray; that iscalled focused awareness (upayog jagruti).What do ‘we’ (the Gnani and the fully enlightened Lordwithin) refer to as focusing the awareness (upayog)? Say thereis a narrow bridge a mile and a half long. Only one person canwalk on it at a time. This bridge goes through the sea with wateron both sides. And you are told to walk on that bridge. Thefocused awareness, the undivided attention that you keep at thattime, is called upayog. Now if while walking you happen to geta thought about your bank and how much you have paid andhow much is still pending, you will immediately push it away andfocus and concentrate on walking on the bridge.Scripture writers have said to maintain focused awareness(upayog) while eating, drinking and in doing any kind of work.Upayog means that there is nothing else going on while eating.Having the chit present in all you do is called upayog. Does onekeep his chit present when there is sea on either side? Evenchildren will stop playing and become aware. Even they aresmart.There is no living being that cannot have focused awareness(upayog). Go and see anyone counting money. If his wife ordaughter comes in while he is counting, he will look up but notsee them. His wife will tell him, ‘We came in while you werecounting money but you did not see us?’ He will tell her, ‘No,I wasn’t aware (laksha).’ The eyes will look but not see; thatis called upayog.Even at this moment, ‘our’ upayog is in Shuddhatma–theSelf. I may be talking to you or doing something else, but ‘our’upayog remains in the upayog, ‘our’ awareness remains in theawareness. It is possible to have focused awareness on thefocused awareness (upayog on the upayog) even while thismind-speech-body carry out their activities.However much You can remain in upayog, it is good. IfYou cannot, does that mean you have to drown yourself? Thispath of ours is not one for suicide.Atma, the Self, and prakruti, the non-Self, are bothseparate; separate by their intrinsic nature (swabhav). They aredifferent in every way. The Self is not used in the worldly life atall; only the light of the Self is used. If that light were not there,the non-Self (prakruti) would not function at all. Because thatlight is there, everything in the prakruti works, otherwise theSelf does not do anything in all this.* * * * *Aptavani-6133134Aptavani-6the awareness, ‘I am pure Soul (Shuddhatma),’ remains andthat is called vitarag (a state of non-attachment to any worldlythings, including one’s own body). Despite this, the raag-dweshwill be apparent, and they will continue to occur. Lord Mahavirhas called that discharging, ‘illusionary conduct (charitra moha).’(Lord Mahavir was a fully awakened, enlightened being in India,2500 years ago).The main illusion (moha, darshan moha or drashti-moha;that which is the illusion of ‘I am Chandulal’) is gone. The onewho was going in the wrong direction is now going in the rightdirection. He has attained the right vision, enlightened vision, butthe results of previous causes which were due to illusion (moha)in the past life, will bring forth effect illusion (effect moha); thatwill still manifest in this life. That is called ‘conduct under theeffect of illusion’ (vartan moha). People will even point outyour illusion (moha) to you, telling you that you have a lot ofmoha, and you have to say, ‘Yes I do.’If Lord Mahavir was to personally come here and someonewas to ask Him, ‘Why do these mahatmas (Self-realizedfollowers of Dadashri) keep eating potatoes over and over again?Has their moha for it not gone yet?’ – do you know what theLord would say to him? The Lord will tell him, ‘It is a moha,but it is charitra moha (character-deluding; deludes the rightconduct); it is a discharge moha.’ They do not have a specificdesire for potatoes, but it is that they (potatoes) have come infront of them, and so the moha arises. And once the meal isdone, they have nothing internally, no desire anymore. The extrainterest (visheshata) in food is also charitra moha. Eating justenough to satisfy hunger is not considered charitra moha,whereas when one starts asking, ‘Bring me the vegetables, bringme some chutney,’ even before he sits down to settle his hunger,then it is evident to us that he has moha for that. And whileeating, if he leaves a little lentil soup behind, that too is hischaritra moha. If you ask him why he did not finish the soup,[16]Understanding Moha, the IllusionQuestioner: What is considered conduct (charitra) ofbeing and remaining the Self (atma charitra)?Dadashri: Remaining as the knower (gnata) and the seer(drashta) is the only part that is called conduct (charitra). Youhave to continue seeing ‘Chandulal,’ You have to ‘see’ what themind is thinking, ‘see’ what he is saying. ‘You’ keep seeing allthat. What are all these things that come together on the outside?These are all gross circumstances (sthool sainyog). Then thereare subtle circumstances (sookshma sainyog) of the mind andthe circumstances of speech. To continue ‘seeing’ them is thenature of the Self (swabhav), and that verily is charitra! In that,You have to ‘know,’ ‘see’ and remain in absolute bliss(parmanand). But in the worldly life’s illusionary nature, onehas to know and see and remain in a state of pain and pleasure(dukh-anand). Pain and pleasure, pain and pleasure; the mixturecontinues.Questioner: How do attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh) leave?Dadashri: There is attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh)as long as there is the false belief of, ‘I am the body’ (dehadhyas).There will be no attachment-abhorrence once the false beliefgoes away.Dehadhyas means ‘I am this body,’ ‘I am speaking,’‘This speech is mine,’ ‘This mind is mine’; all that is dehadhyas.For You, all these beliefs are gone; the dehadhyas is gone andAptavani-6133134Aptavani-6the awareness, ‘I am pure Soul (Shuddhatma),’ remains andthat is called vitarag (a state of non-attachment to any worldlythings, including one’s own body). Despite this, the raag-dweshwill be apparent, and they will continue to occur. Lord Mahavirhas called that discharging, ‘illusionary conduct (charitra moha).’(Lord Mahavir was a fully awakened, enlightened being in India,2500 years ago).The main illusion (moha, darshan moha or drashti-moha;that which is the illusion of ‘I am Chandulal’) is gone. The onewho was going in the wrong direction is now going in the rightdirection. He has attained the right vision, enlightened vision, butthe results of previous causes which were due to illusion (moha)in the past life, will bring forth effect illusion (effect moha); thatwill still manifest in this life. That is called ‘conduct under theeffect of illusion’ (vartan moha). People will even point outyour illusion (moha) to you, telling you that you have a lot ofmoha, and you have to say, ‘Yes I do.’If Lord Mahavir was to personally come here and someonewas to ask Him, ‘Why do these mahatmas (Self-realizedfollowers of Dadashri) keep eating potatoes over and over again?Has their moha for it not gone yet?’ – do you know what theLord would say to him? The Lord will tell him, ‘It is a moha,but it is charitra moha (character-deluding; deludes the rightconduct); it is a discharge moha.’ They do not have a specificdesire for potatoes, but it is that they (potatoes) have come infront of them, and so the moha arises. And once the meal isdone, they have nothing internally, no desire anymore. The extrainterest (visheshata) in food is also charitra moha. Eating justenough to satisfy hunger is not considered charitra moha,whereas when one starts asking, ‘Bring me the vegetables, bringme some chutney,’ even before he sits down to settle his hunger,then it is evident to us that he has moha for that. And whileeating, if he leaves a little lentil soup behind, that too is hischaritra moha. If you ask him why he did not finish the soup,[16]Understanding Moha, the IllusionQuestioner: What is considered conduct (charitra) ofbeing and remaining the Self (atma charitra)?Dadashri: Remaining as the knower (gnata) and the seer(drashta) is the only part that is called conduct (charitra). Youhave to continue seeing ‘Chandulal,’ You have to ‘see’ what themind is thinking, ‘see’ what he is saying. ‘You’ keep seeing allthat. What are all these things that come together on the outside?These are all gross circumstances (sthool sainyog). Then thereare subtle circumstances (sookshma sainyog) of the mind andthe circumstances of speech. To continue ‘seeing’ them is thenature of the Self (swabhav), and that verily is charitra! In that,You have to ‘know,’ ‘see’ and remain in absolute bliss(parmanand). But in the worldly life’s illusionary nature, onehas to know and see and remain in a state of pain and pleasure(dukh-anand). Pain and pleasure, pain and pleasure; the mixturecontinues.Questioner: How do attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh) leave?Dadashri: There is attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh)as long as there is the false belief of, ‘I am the body’ (dehadhyas).There will be no attachment-abhorrence once the false beliefgoes away.Dehadhyas means ‘I am this body,’ ‘I am speaking,’‘This speech is mine,’ ‘This mind is mine’; all that is dehadhyas.For You, all these beliefs are gone; the dehadhyas is gone andAptavani-6135136Aptavani-6now.Questioner: People will not accept that.Dadashri: People do not understand that; they look at itas being a moha. Lord Mahavir used to focus only on theillusion (moha). Wearing clothes is moha and to walk aroundnaked is also moha. They are both simply moha, but it isdischarge moha. Before Gnan, one moved about in the wrongdirection believing, ‘I am Chandulal,’ and now he has turnedaround. His total vision (drashti) has improved. His darshanmoha is gone. Therefore, new moha will not accumulate within.But there is still the old illusion (moha) within; its result willunfold in this life, and he has no choice but to endure it.Questioner: So did the charge moha (drashti moha,darshan moha) give rise to the discharge moha (charitramoha)?Dadashri: When drashti moha and charitra moha cometogether, it is called attachment arising due to illusion arising fromthe ignorance of the real Self (agnan moha). The whole worldis trapped because of this moha, is it not? It is said that if oneof the two were to ‘go to sleep,’ then the problem of the othercan be solved. If darshan moha (drashti moha, charge moha)goes away, it is more than enough. Then charitra moha is notworth even a dime.Questioner: In the traditional step-by-step path to Self-realization (Kramic path), do they not remove the charitra mohathrough their ego by taking some vows or such?Dadashri: Charge moha (drashti moha) has to go; onlythen can the remaining moha be considered discharge moha(charitra moha). When darshan moha is destroyed, only thendoes the moha become divided. In this, one part of the moha,specifically darshan moha, is done away with and the otherremaining part is charitra moha. When one attains Self-he will say, ‘It was not to my liking.’ Is that not also a kind ofmoha? Leaving some food behind on the plate is moha andeating more is also a moha.And the one who does not have any attachment-abhorrence(raag-dwesh) has no effect illusion (moha) in him; he will takewhatever comes in front of him. He will not have any otherproblems in the process; he has no moha of any kind.But discharge moha (charitra moha) has no value initself. One can have a ton of moha, but because it is dischargemoha; it has no value at all. Charitra moha is the moha thatremains after the illusion of ‘I am Chandulal’ (darshan moha)goes away. It has no value. For the one whose darshan mohahas not gone, even if he is a great ascetic/renouncer (tyagi), andif he were to ask for even a little extra helping of vegetables,then that moha has a tremendous load in terms of karmic liability.Hey! Here we (mahatmas) ask for extra vegetables every daybut we do not get anything (charging new karma), whereas theascetic asks only once and he gets so much liability of karma?The answer is, ‘Yes, in just one day one can bind atremendous liability of karma’ because that is real moha,specifically moha that charges karma and, therefore, the entirereward of his (karmic) earnings from renouncing is lost. But nomatter how much moha the mahatmas ‘have,’ there is no lossfor them at all. One has to understand just this. Discharge moha(charitra moha) is a very subtle thing.Eat to sustain the body. People will not call that moha,but when you take extra items, like all kinds of chutneys andpickles, mango pulp, etc., people will say that you have mohain you. You know what? They tell me that too, do they not?When I eat mango, chutney or pickle, they even tell me. But thatis conduct-discharge moha (vartan moha). We are dealingwith it (doing a nikaal). It will not arise if you are done with it(nikaal). Whatever was of the past life is discharging and leavingAptavani-6135136Aptavani-6now.Questioner: People will not accept that.Dadashri: People do not understand that; they look at itas being a moha. Lord Mahavir used to focus only on theillusion (moha). Wearing clothes is moha and to walk aroundnaked is also moha. They are both simply moha, but it isdischarge moha. Before Gnan, one moved about in the wrongdirection believing, ‘I am Chandulal,’ and now he has turnedaround. His total vision (drashti) has improved. His darshanmoha is gone. Therefore, new moha will not accumulate within.But there is still the old illusion (moha) within; its result willunfold in this life, and he has no choice but to endure it.Questioner: So did the charge moha (drashti moha,darshan moha) give rise to the discharge moha (charitramoha)?Dadashri: When drashti moha and charitra moha cometogether, it is called attachment arising due to illusion arising fromthe ignorance of the real Self (agnan moha). The whole worldis trapped because of this moha, is it not? It is said that if oneof the two were to ‘go to sleep,’ then the problem of the othercan be solved. If darshan moha (drashti moha, charge moha)goes away, it is more than enough. Then charitra moha is notworth even a dime.Questioner: In the traditional step-by-step path to Self-realization (Kramic path), do they not remove the charitra mohathrough their ego by taking some vows or such?Dadashri: Charge moha (drashti moha) has to go; onlythen can the remaining moha be considered discharge moha(charitra moha). When darshan moha is destroyed, only thendoes the moha become divided. In this, one part of the moha,specifically darshan moha, is done away with and the otherremaining part is charitra moha. When one attains Self-he will say, ‘It was not to my liking.’ Is that not also a kind ofmoha? Leaving some food behind on the plate is moha andeating more is also a moha.And the one who does not have any attachment-abhorrence(raag-dwesh) has no effect illusion (moha) in him; he will takewhatever comes in front of him. He will not have any otherproblems in the process; he has no moha of any kind.But discharge moha (charitra moha) has no value initself. One can have a ton of moha, but because it is dischargemoha; it has no value at all. Charitra moha is the moha thatremains after the illusion of ‘I am Chandulal’ (darshan moha)goes away. It has no value. For the one whose darshan mohahas not gone, even if he is a great ascetic/renouncer (tyagi), andif he were to ask for even a little extra helping of vegetables,then that moha has a tremendous load in terms of karmic liability.Hey! Here we (mahatmas) ask for extra vegetables every daybut we do not get anything (charging new karma), whereas theascetic asks only once and he gets so much liability of karma?The answer is, ‘Yes, in just one day one can bind atremendous liability of karma’ because that is real moha,specifically moha that charges karma and, therefore, the entirereward of his (karmic) earnings from renouncing is lost. But nomatter how much moha the mahatmas ‘have,’ there is no lossfor them at all. One has to understand just this. Discharge moha(charitra moha) is a very subtle thing.Eat to sustain the body. People will not call that moha,but when you take extra items, like all kinds of chutneys andpickles, mango pulp, etc., people will say that you have mohain you. You know what? They tell me that too, do they not?When I eat mango, chutney or pickle, they even tell me. But thatis conduct-discharge moha (vartan moha). We are dealingwith it (doing a nikaal). It will not arise if you are done with it(nikaal). Whatever was of the past life is discharging and leavingAptavani-6137138Aptavani-6realization, the charge moha goes away. That charge moha isthe one that does damage. Charge moha is darshan moha.Questioner: But people try so hard to remove theirdischarge moha, do they not?Dadashri: No. They have no understanding of whatdischarge moha is. The world considers that (discharge moha)as moha. Hence they have raised another moha in order to getrid of their discharge moha, and that is called the Kramic path.That is why ‘we’ are telling people in the Akram Path, whydelve into so much botheration? Why not understand the rightway? Only if you understand the right way will you be able tosolve this problem. Then people say they can only understandwhat is right if someone is there to make them understand. Whatcan anyone do when there is never anyone around to give theright understanding? Otherwise, the Gnan has always been there,but what can anyone do when there is no Gnani Purush around?Do I ever scold anyone when you are all eating ladva andpuri (rich foods)? I realize that You are doing nikaal (goingthrough karma effect) with moha.Questioner: As it is, Dada, when have you ever scoldedanyone?Dadashri: It is not worth scolding anyone. Where is thereason to scold when each person is going through and settling(nikaal) his karma? If he is covered with the illusion that chargeskarma (darshan moha), and he is doing something wrong, thenI have to scold him.Questioner: Seeing someone else’s discharge moha, Iget the inspiration to do better than him. I slip into this moha.What kind of moha is that?Dadashri: That is all discharge moha. You may feel thathe has added something new, but he is not adding; whatever heis ‘adding’ is also effect (discharge moha). This is ‘our’ scientificdiscovery. It can bring a liberating solution (ukel) if oneunderstands it. It is possible to destroy the effects of millions oflifetimes within one lifetime!Questioner: But when will this discharge moha end?Dadashri: Discharge moha will remain as long as thisbody exists; and being in My Agnas has given rise to anothermoha, but that moha will help you for one more lifetime.* * * * *Aptavani-6137138Aptavani-6realization, the charge moha goes away. That charge moha isthe one that does damage. Charge moha is darshan moha.Questioner: But people try so hard to remove theirdischarge moha, do they not?Dadashri: No. They have no understanding of whatdischarge moha is. The world considers that (discharge moha)as moha. Hence they have raised another moha in order to getrid of their discharge moha, and that is called the Kramic path.That is why ‘we’ are telling people in the Akram Path, whydelve into so much botheration? Why not understand the rightway? Only if you understand the right way will you be able tosolve this problem. Then people say they can only understandwhat is right if someone is there to make them understand. Whatcan anyone do when there is never anyone around to give theright understanding? Otherwise, the Gnan has always been there,but what can anyone do when there is no Gnani Purush around?Do I ever scold anyone when you are all eating ladva andpuri (rich foods)? I realize that You are doing nikaal (goingthrough karma effect) with moha.Questioner: As it is, Dada, when have you ever scoldedanyone?Dadashri: It is not worth scolding anyone. Where is thereason to scold when each person is going through and settling(nikaal) his karma? If he is covered with the illusion that chargeskarma (darshan moha), and he is doing something wrong, thenI have to scold him.Questioner: Seeing someone else’s discharge moha, Iget the inspiration to do better than him. I slip into this moha.What kind of moha is that?Dadashri: That is all discharge moha. You may feel thathe has added something new, but he is not adding; whatever heis ‘adding’ is also effect (discharge moha). This is ‘our’ scientificdiscovery. It can bring a liberating solution (ukel) if oneunderstands it. It is possible to destroy the effects of millions oflifetimes within one lifetime!Questioner: But when will this discharge moha end?Dadashri: Discharge moha will remain as long as thisbody exists; and being in My Agnas has given rise to anothermoha, but that moha will help you for one more lifetime.* * * * *Aptavani-6139140Aptavani-6will be humble (nirmaani).The theory of karma is like this: While doing somethingwrong, if the inner intent (bhaav) reverses and changes to thecontrary, then such will be the karma that will be bound for nextlife. And if while ‘doing’ something wrong, one is pleased withwhat he is doing and has the intent and decision, ‘This is verilyworth doing,’ then he binds even a heavier new karma. Thiskarma will become heavy and ‘sticky’ (nikachit), which he willhave no choice but to suffer.This whole science is worth understanding. This science ofthe Vitarag Lords is very profound.Equanimity is Not Reacting to the UnfoldingKarma EffectThe principle of Akram Vignan is such that if a person isdropping his money, first we stop the money from falling (westop the causes) and then we pick up the money he has dropped(then we tackle the effects). The world keeps picking up thefallen money. Hey you! Why don’t you first stop the moneyfrom falling, otherwise there will be no end to it (nikaal).Aside from the Self (the Soul), what else is there? It is theinteraction of the non-Self (vyavahar). This vyavahar isdependent on other factors and evidences (par-aashrit). ‘You’do not have even the slightest of control over it. People believethey have control over (swa-aashrit) that which is not undertheir control (par-aashrit). One person will believe this, thenanother one will, and thus you will believe it too. Then you willnever think about it again. Once the disease takes hold, how cananyone get rid of it? Thus the worldly disease kept on increasinguntil it became chronic. When you could not get rid of thisdisease before it became chronic, then how are you going to getrid of it now that it has become chronic? It will go away if oneattains the knowledge of this science of Akram Vignan.[17]The Science of KarmaQuestioner: It is said that whatever has to be sufferedwill have to be suffered here, in this life only. What is that?Dadashri: Yes, it has to be suffered here and here only,but that is according to the worldly language (worldlyunderstanding). What does it mean in the non-worldly (alaukik)language?In the past life, one bound karma through the ego forpride (maan). In this life, many buildings are being built underhis name and ownership and so he becomes a maani, meaningthat he takes and exhibits pride in that. Why does he becomea maani with so much pride in this life? It is because of thekarmic account of past life. Now people would say, ‘He isbinding karmas. He is creating karma because he is walkingaround with a lot of pride; it is evident.’ People call this ‘karma,’whereas in Lord Mahavir’s language, this is the fruit, effect ofkarma of past life (karma-fada). By ‘fruit’ ‘we’ mean that eventhough he does not want to display pride (‘do’ maan), he hasto (undergo the effect); it happens automatically. And whenpeople say ‘He gets angry,’ or ‘He has a lot of pride,’ or ‘Hehas a lot of ego,’ he will have to suffer the consequences of allthis, right here in this life. The result of his pride will be that hewill lose his reputation and fame. He will have to suffer this righthere. If, on the other hand, when he exhibits pride he feels it iswrong to do so and that he needs to be humble and withoutpride (nirmaani), then he is binding new karma of humility. Theeffect of such intent will be realized in the next life wherein heAptavani-6139140Aptavani-6will be humble (nirmaani).The theory of karma is like this: While doing somethingwrong, if the inner intent (bhaav) reverses and changes to thecontrary, then such will be the karma that will be bound for nextlife. And if while ‘doing’ something wrong, one is pleased withwhat he is doing and has the intent and decision, ‘This is verilyworth doing,’ then he binds even a heavier new karma. Thiskarma will become heavy and ‘sticky’ (nikachit), which he willhave no choice but to suffer.This whole science is worth understanding. This science ofthe Vitarag Lords is very profound.Equanimity is Not Reacting to the UnfoldingKarma EffectThe principle of Akram Vignan is such that if a person isdropping his money, first we stop the money from falling (westop the causes) and then we pick up the money he has dropped(then we tackle the effects). The world keeps picking up thefallen money. Hey you! Why don’t you first stop the moneyfrom falling, otherwise there will be no end to it (nikaal).Aside from the Self (the Soul), what else is there? It is theinteraction of the non-Self (vyavahar). This vyavahar isdependent on other factors and evidences (par-aashrit). ‘You’do not have even the slightest of control over it. People believethey have control over (swa-aashrit) that which is not undertheir control (par-aashrit). One person will believe this, thenanother one will, and thus you will believe it too. Then you willnever think about it again. Once the disease takes hold, how cananyone get rid of it? Thus the worldly disease kept on increasinguntil it became chronic. When you could not get rid of thisdisease before it became chronic, then how are you going to getrid of it now that it has become chronic? It will go away if oneattains the knowledge of this science of Akram Vignan.[17]The Science of KarmaQuestioner: It is said that whatever has to be sufferedwill have to be suffered here, in this life only. What is that?Dadashri: Yes, it has to be suffered here and here only,but that is according to the worldly language (worldlyunderstanding). What does it mean in the non-worldly (alaukik)language?In the past life, one bound karma through the ego forpride (maan). In this life, many buildings are being built underhis name and ownership and so he becomes a maani, meaningthat he takes and exhibits pride in that. Why does he becomea maani with so much pride in this life? It is because of thekarmic account of past life. Now people would say, ‘He isbinding karmas. He is creating karma because he is walkingaround with a lot of pride; it is evident.’ People call this ‘karma,’whereas in Lord Mahavir’s language, this is the fruit, effect ofkarma of past life (karma-fada). By ‘fruit’ ‘we’ mean that eventhough he does not want to display pride (‘do’ maan), he hasto (undergo the effect); it happens automatically. And whenpeople say ‘He gets angry,’ or ‘He has a lot of pride,’ or ‘Hehas a lot of ego,’ he will have to suffer the consequences of allthis, right here in this life. The result of his pride will be that hewill lose his reputation and fame. He will have to suffer this righthere. If, on the other hand, when he exhibits pride he feels it iswrong to do so and that he needs to be humble and withoutpride (nirmaani), then he is binding new karma of humility. Theeffect of such intent will be realized in the next life wherein heAptavani-6141142Aptavani-6The Internal Evidences Create the ResultQuestioner: Does that mean we are the ones who ruineverything?Dadashri: We are verily the ones who ruin that which isours. Whatever obstacles we encounter, we have created themfor sure. What is the way to improve a person who is obstinateand objectionable? No matter how much pain (dukh) a personcauses you, if you do not harbor any negative feelings for him,then that is the best way to improve him. In that way he willimprove and things will improve for you too. But worldly peoplewill not refrain from having negative thoughts about such a person.We the mahatmas are told to ‘deal with equanimity’; ‘withequanimity’ means we should not have any kind of thoughtsabout him.If pratikraman (ask for forgiveness from the pure Soul ofthe one you have ‘hurt,’ coupled with remorse of the wrongdoing)is done for a tiger, even the tiger will do what you tell him. Thereis no difference between a tiger and a human. The difference liesin your vibrations (spandan); that has an affect. As long as youhave in your mind the awareness that the ‘tiger is a violentanimal,’ then it will be violent. And if you have the awarenessthat the tiger is a Shuddhatma (pure Soul), then it is Shuddhatmafor sure. Everything is possible.When you throw a ball, by its intrinsic nature (swabhav)it will stop bouncing. That is its natural (sahaj) attribute. This iswhere the whole world’s efforts are wasted; people try to stopor change the effects, while the causes continue. Thus the cycleof a seed from the tree, and a tree from the seed, continues.Nothing is attained by cutting off the leaves or the branches ofthe tree. The work is done only if the tree is removed along withits roots. Here, in Akram Vignan, we place a ‘medicine’ in thetaproot, the main root system; thereafter, the entire tree dries upand dies.Worldly interactions (vyavahar) for You will not presentmuch difficulty, once You deal with the vyavahar that unfoldsfor You. Then whatever discharging intent is presenting as desire(bhavna), it will be there, ready and waiting for you ahead oftime. ‘We’ (the Gnani and the fully enlightened Lord within) hadgone to Lake Vihar for a visit. There I had a new kind ofthought, ‘There are one hundred mahatmas here – fifty womenand fifty men. It would be so nice if they did Mataji’s garba(devotional folk dance dedicated to the Goddess Amba).’ Withthis thought, the moment I turned around they all stood up andstarted doing garba! Now I had not asked anyone and yet ithappened. So this is what happens. Your thoughts will not go towaste, your words will not be wasted. What is happening topeople nowadays? Nothing ‘grows or blossoms’ for them. Theirspeech does not grow, their thoughts do not grow and neitherdoes their conduct. One will make three trips to collect on aloan he made, but his debtor will never be there. Finally, whenhe does meet the debtor, the debtor will become aggravated athim.This path is such that your debtor will come to your hometo return your money! If you make seven or so trips to collectyour money without success, and then, when you finally meethim, he tells you to come back in a month’s time; if at that timethere is no change within you (i.e., you do not get aggravated),then the money will come to your home!Internal changes and reactions (effects - parinaam) dooccur within you, do they not? Changes and reactions like,‘He is a useless person. He has no sense. He wasted my trip.’Such are the changes that occur within you. Therefore, whenyou go to him again to collect your money, he will curse you.No changes take place within ‘us,’ so then where is theproblem? When changes occur within, then initially, even if theother person was not going to get upset and become obstinate,he will!Aptavani-6141142Aptavani-6The Internal Evidences Create the ResultQuestioner: Does that mean we are the ones who ruineverything?Dadashri: We are verily the ones who ruin that which isours. Whatever obstacles we encounter, we have created themfor sure. What is the way to improve a person who is obstinateand objectionable? No matter how much pain (dukh) a personcauses you, if you do not harbor any negative feelings for him,then that is the best way to improve him. In that way he willimprove and things will improve for you too. But worldly peoplewill not refrain from having negative thoughts about such a person.We the mahatmas are told to ‘deal with equanimity’; ‘withequanimity’ means we should not have any kind of thoughtsabout him.If pratikraman (ask for forgiveness from the pure Soul ofthe one you have ‘hurt,’ coupled with remorse of the wrongdoing)is done for a tiger, even the tiger will do what you tell him. Thereis no difference between a tiger and a human. The difference liesin your vibrations (spandan); that has an affect. As long as youhave in your mind the awareness that the ‘tiger is a violentanimal,’ then it will be violent. And if you have the awarenessthat the tiger is a Shuddhatma (pure Soul), then it is Shuddhatmafor sure. Everything is possible.When you throw a ball, by its intrinsic nature (swabhav)it will stop bouncing. That is its natural (sahaj) attribute. This iswhere the whole world’s efforts are wasted; people try to stopor change the effects, while the causes continue. Thus the cycleof a seed from the tree, and a tree from the seed, continues.Nothing is attained by cutting off the leaves or the branches ofthe tree. The work is done only if the tree is removed along withits roots. Here, in Akram Vignan, we place a ‘medicine’ in thetaproot, the main root system; thereafter, the entire tree dries upand dies.Worldly interactions (vyavahar) for You will not presentmuch difficulty, once You deal with the vyavahar that unfoldsfor You. Then whatever discharging intent is presenting as desire(bhavna), it will be there, ready and waiting for you ahead oftime. ‘We’ (the Gnani and the fully enlightened Lord within) hadgone to Lake Vihar for a visit. There I had a new kind ofthought, ‘There are one hundred mahatmas here – fifty womenand fifty men. It would be so nice if they did Mataji’s garba(devotional folk dance dedicated to the Goddess Amba).’ Withthis thought, the moment I turned around they all stood up andstarted doing garba! Now I had not asked anyone and yet ithappened. So this is what happens. Your thoughts will not go towaste, your words will not be wasted. What is happening topeople nowadays? Nothing ‘grows or blossoms’ for them. Theirspeech does not grow, their thoughts do not grow and neitherdoes their conduct. One will make three trips to collect on aloan he made, but his debtor will never be there. Finally, whenhe does meet the debtor, the debtor will become aggravated athim.This path is such that your debtor will come to your hometo return your money! If you make seven or so trips to collectyour money without success, and then, when you finally meethim, he tells you to come back in a month’s time; if at that timethere is no change within you (i.e., you do not get aggravated),then the money will come to your home!Internal changes and reactions (effects - parinaam) dooccur within you, do they not? Changes and reactions like,‘He is a useless person. He has no sense. He wasted my trip.’Such are the changes that occur within you. Therefore, whenyou go to him again to collect your money, he will curse you.No changes take place within ‘us,’ so then where is theproblem? When changes occur within, then initially, even if theother person was not going to get upset and become obstinate,he will!Aptavani-6143144Aptavani-6This life is a tree that grows and grows life after life (sansar-vruksha). It produces sweet fruits as well as bitter ones. Andyou are the one who has to eat them.When monkeys come and destroy all the mangoes on thetree, how far will the owner’s reactions (parinaam) spoil within?He will be so disturbed that without even thinking about thefuture he will say, ‘This problem will be solved only if I cut thistree down.’ Now, will such words that come out in the presenceof God within go to waste?There is no problem if there are no resulting changes(parinaam) within. Everything will be calm. Everything will cometo an end.The Difference between Bhaav and DesireQuestioner: What is the difference between inner intent(bhaav) and desire (ichchha)?Dadashri: In this world, that which is visible and can beexperienced, people call bhaav. In reality, bhaav is not visibleto anyone including the self.Questioner: After attaining this Gnan, many bhaavs occurto us; do these bhaav not charge karma?Dadashri: How can you have inner intent (bhaav)? If‘You’ become ‘Chandubhai’ again, then you will have bhaav.When you are ‘Chandubhai,’ there is ego there; thereafter thebhaav occurs. The awareness, ‘I am the doer,’ is the bhaav.Bhaav only arises if you have the awareness of, ‘I am thedoer.’Questioner: And the desire (ichchha) that occurs; is itnot a ‘doer-ship’?Dadashri: No, from now onwards all desires that youhave are ‘waning desires’; they are setting, going down,disappearing. I too have desires! If it is noon and I go to thekitchen, would you not realize that Dada has a desire to eatsomething? That is also a ‘setting’ desire; they are discharging,dying desires. They will all leave after a while. They are notconsidered ‘rising desires’; they are all going to end.Questioner: When we have desires while we are working,what kind of a ‘test’ should we ‘apply’ so that we can knowwhether it is a ‘discharge desire’ or a ‘charge desire’?Dadashri: It will be a charge desire only if You become‘Chandulal.’ There is no need to be confused here. This is ascience! Our Akram Vignan science says, speak that which issaidhantic, meaning speak that which has been proven andestablished so that you will not have to tease and un-tease itagain. What is the use of repeated teasing and un-teasing?Some people believe that the soul has desires. Then laterthey say, ‘My desires have stopped!’ If desire is an attribute ofthe Soul, then no one will be able to stop desires. This is anextra result (vishesh parinaam) – it is an effect that came aboutas a result of the ‘I’ having deviated from the original location,from the Self to ‘I am Chandulal, the non-Self.’ In all this, theSelf is Vitarag – absolutely free of attachment. People are noteven aware of this and they say, ‘My soul has become bad, mysoul is a sinner (paapi); it does attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh).’Then there are some who say that the soul is pure. Thesepeople take a beating in another way. They believe that the soulis pure and, therefore, nothing needs to be done. So then, whydo they go to the temple? Why do they read scriptures? Sopeople holding both these views have lost the way andconsequently keep on wandering. The Soul is not like that. Thispoint is very profound. That is why the scriptures say, ‘Have theknowledge of the Self.’ The Self verily is the parmatma, thesupreme Self!Aptavani-6143144Aptavani-6This life is a tree that grows and grows life after life (sansar-vruksha). It produces sweet fruits as well as bitter ones. Andyou are the one who has to eat them.When monkeys come and destroy all the mangoes on thetree, how far will the owner’s reactions (parinaam) spoil within?He will be so disturbed that without even thinking about thefuture he will say, ‘This problem will be solved only if I cut thistree down.’ Now, will such words that come out in the presenceof God within go to waste?There is no problem if there are no resulting changes(parinaam) within. Everything will be calm. Everything will cometo an end.The Difference between Bhaav and DesireQuestioner: What is the difference between inner intent(bhaav) and desire (ichchha)?Dadashri: In this world, that which is visible and can beexperienced, people call bhaav. In reality, bhaav is not visibleto anyone including the self.Questioner: After attaining this Gnan, many bhaavs occurto us; do these bhaav not charge karma?Dadashri: How can you have inner intent (bhaav)? If‘You’ become ‘Chandubhai’ again, then you will have bhaav.When you are ‘Chandubhai,’ there is ego there; thereafter thebhaav occurs. The awareness, ‘I am the doer,’ is the bhaav.Bhaav only arises if you have the awareness of, ‘I am thedoer.’Questioner: And the desire (ichchha) that occurs; is itnot a ‘doer-ship’?Dadashri: No, from now onwards all desires that youhave are ‘waning desires’; they are setting, going down,disappearing. I too have desires! If it is noon and I go to thekitchen, would you not realize that Dada has a desire to eatsomething? That is also a ‘setting’ desire; they are discharging,dying desires. They will all leave after a while. They are notconsidered ‘rising desires’; they are all going to end.Questioner: When we have desires while we are working,what kind of a ‘test’ should we ‘apply’ so that we can knowwhether it is a ‘discharge desire’ or a ‘charge desire’?Dadashri: It will be a charge desire only if You become‘Chandulal.’ There is no need to be confused here. This is ascience! Our Akram Vignan science says, speak that which issaidhantic, meaning speak that which has been proven andestablished so that you will not have to tease and un-tease itagain. What is the use of repeated teasing and un-teasing?Some people believe that the soul has desires. Then laterthey say, ‘My desires have stopped!’ If desire is an attribute ofthe Soul, then no one will be able to stop desires. This is anextra result (vishesh parinaam) – it is an effect that came aboutas a result of the ‘I’ having deviated from the original location,from the Self to ‘I am Chandulal, the non-Self.’ In all this, theSelf is Vitarag – absolutely free of attachment. People are noteven aware of this and they say, ‘My soul has become bad, mysoul is a sinner (paapi); it does attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh).’Then there are some who say that the soul is pure. Thesepeople take a beating in another way. They believe that the soulis pure and, therefore, nothing needs to be done. So then, whydo they go to the temple? Why do they read scriptures? Sopeople holding both these views have lost the way andconsequently keep on wandering. The Soul is not like that. Thispoint is very profound. That is why the scriptures say, ‘Have theknowledge of the Self.’ The Self verily is the parmatma, thesupreme Self!Aptavani-6145146Aptavani-6Do You Get Upset if You Hear InsultsRecorded on a Tape?Questioner: This mind-speech-body is the non-Self andunder the control of another entity (Mun-vachan-kaaya parchhe ne paradhin chhe). That means it is dependent onvyavasthit, does it not?Dadashri: Yes, it is dependent on scientific circumstantialevidences – vyavasthit. It is not dependent on the Self; that iswhat ‘we’ are saying. Par means that it is not Yours and paradhinmeans that You do not have any control over it. It will nothappen according to your subtle plans.If someone curses you, it is dependant on something else(paradhin). ‘We’ say that it is a ‘record’ (gramophone or taperecord). What is the reason for saying that? It is because ‘he’simply does not have the energy (shakti) to curse and insult; itis under the control of vyavasthit. Therefore, it is truly a ‘record.’Once You know (jaano) this, then where is the reason for anyirritation to affect You? If a record were playing, ‘Chandulal isbad, Chandulal is bad, Chandulal is bad,’ are you likely to getangry? You get upset because you believe, ‘He spoke. He insultedme.’ In reality he is not the one speaking; it is a record thatspeaks. He is returning, what was yours to begin with.How wonderful is the arrangement of nature! This is avery important point to understand. Akram Vignan has clarifiedmany things in details. In the topic of vyavasthit, this is a newtalk!No Binding of Karma while Doing KarmaQuestioner: I believe that karma is bound for sure,whenever any wrong action is done.Dadashri: So is there no karma bondage in good actions?Questioner: Good and bad; they both bind karma, dothey not?Dadashri: You know what? Even now you are bindingkarma. At this moment, you are binding very high merit karma(punya). But the day when you will not bind any karma nevercomes, does it? Why is that?Questioner: We must be doing some kind of activity,good or bad, must we not?Dadashri: Yes, but shouldn’t there be a way where onedoes not bind any karma? How did Lord Mahavir attainliberation? He did not bind any karma. Karma is bound to occuras long as the body exists! One has to eat, drink, go to the toilet,does he not?Questioner: Yes, but one has to suffer the fruits of karmahe has already bound, does he not?Dadashri: If one binds karma, then he is bound to haveanother life. But Lord Mahavir did not have another life! Shouldn’tthere be a way to not bind karma, in spite of doing karmaactivity?Questioner: There must be.Dadashri: Do you ever wish to not bind karma? Thereis a science through which one does not bind any karma evenwhen he is ‘doing’ karma! You will find liberation when youknow that science.Karma is Not the Obstacle to LiberationQuestioner: This current life is due to the effect of ourpast life karma, is it not?Dadashri: Yes, this whole life one will have to suffer theeffects of karma of his past life, and in doing so, if he doesattachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh), then new karma will becreated and bound. Nothing is bound if you do not do raag-Aptavani-6145146Aptavani-6Do You Get Upset if You Hear InsultsRecorded on a Tape?Questioner: This mind-speech-body is the non-Self andunder the control of another entity (Mun-vachan-kaaya parchhe ne paradhin chhe). That means it is dependent onvyavasthit, does it not?Dadashri: Yes, it is dependent on scientific circumstantialevidences – vyavasthit. It is not dependent on the Self; that iswhat ‘we’ are saying. Par means that it is not Yours and paradhinmeans that You do not have any control over it. It will nothappen according to your subtle plans.If someone curses you, it is dependant on something else(paradhin). ‘We’ say that it is a ‘record’ (gramophone or taperecord). What is the reason for saying that? It is because ‘he’simply does not have the energy (shakti) to curse and insult; itis under the control of vyavasthit. Therefore, it is truly a ‘record.’Once You know (jaano) this, then where is the reason for anyirritation to affect You? If a record were playing, ‘Chandulal isbad, Chandulal is bad, Chandulal is bad,’ are you likely to getangry? You get upset because you believe, ‘He spoke. He insultedme.’ In reality he is not the one speaking; it is a record thatspeaks. He is returning, what was yours to begin with.How wonderful is the arrangement of nature! This is avery important point to understand. Akram Vignan has clarifiedmany things in details. In the topic of vyavasthit, this is a newtalk!No Binding of Karma while Doing KarmaQuestioner: I believe that karma is bound for sure,whenever any wrong action is done.Dadashri: So is there no karma bondage in good actions?Questioner: Good and bad; they both bind karma, dothey not?Dadashri: You know what? Even now you are bindingkarma. At this moment, you are binding very high merit karma(punya). But the day when you will not bind any karma nevercomes, does it? Why is that?Questioner: We must be doing some kind of activity,good or bad, must we not?Dadashri: Yes, but shouldn’t there be a way where onedoes not bind any karma? How did Lord Mahavir attainliberation? He did not bind any karma. Karma is bound to occuras long as the body exists! One has to eat, drink, go to the toilet,does he not?Questioner: Yes, but one has to suffer the fruits of karmahe has already bound, does he not?Dadashri: If one binds karma, then he is bound to haveanother life. But Lord Mahavir did not have another life! Shouldn’tthere be a way to not bind karma, in spite of doing karmaactivity?Questioner: There must be.Dadashri: Do you ever wish to not bind karma? Thereis a science through which one does not bind any karma evenwhen he is ‘doing’ karma! You will find liberation when youknow that science.Karma is Not the Obstacle to LiberationQuestioner: This current life is due to the effect of ourpast life karma, is it not?Dadashri: Yes, this whole life one will have to suffer theeffects of karma of his past life, and in doing so, if he doesattachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh), then new karma will becreated and bound. Nothing is bound if you do not do raag-Aptavani-6147148Aptavani-6dwesh. The karma is not the problem; they will occur as longas this body is there. The problem lies in the raag-dwesh thatone does. What do the Vitarags say? They tell all to becomevitarag, free from attachment and abhorrence. The importanceis not in what you do in this world. But if there is raag-dweshwhen you are doing it, you create a new karmic account foryour next life. There is no consequence if you do not do raag-dwesh. Your whole body, from birth to death, is mandatory(farajiyat). You have no choice but to deal with the effect ofevery karma. Only the raag-dwesh that arises from doing sowill create a new binding account. That is why the Vitarags say,‘Become vitarag and go through life, and be done with it.’If someone throws insults at ‘us,’ ‘we’ realize that theinsults are aimed at ‘Ambalal’ – at the pudgal, the non-Self. Hedoes not know the Self, does he? So ‘we’ do not accept thoseinsults. ‘We’ are not affected by the insult; ‘we’ remain freefrom all attachment (vitarag). ‘We’ do not experience any raag-dwesh towards that person. And, therefore, after one or twolifetimes ‘we’ will attain liberation.The Vitarags are simply saying that karma is not theobstacle to liberation. It is the ignorance of the Self (agnanta)that is the obstacle. Karma is going to happen as long as thereis the body, but karma ceases to bind when the ignorance goesaway.* * * * *[18]Sahaj PrakrutiQuestioner: What is the natural and spontaneous (sahaj)relative-self (prakruti) of the Gnanis?Dadashri: Prakruti is considered sahaj when you havea thought and it does not cause an effect within.Questioner: How and when does the prakruti becomesahaj?Dadashri: If one does not interfere in charitra moha(discharging karma effects, discharge moha), then the prakrutibegins to become natural. The Soul is verily natural. But whenprakruti becomes natural then moksha occurs. Women aremore natural and spontaneous than the men here. Foreigners aremore natural than women from this place (India) and these animalsand birds are even more natural than the foreigners.Questioner: Is the naturalness of all these categoriesassociated with the Self-knowledge (Gnan) or with the ignoranceof the Self (agnan)?Dadashri: Their naturalness is associated with agnan. Itis like the naturalness of these cows and buffaloes. The cow maybe jumpy and wild and may even charge you to strike with herhorns, and yet it is natural. ‘Natural’ means to become absorbedin (tanmayakar). ‘Natural’ means to become one with the natureof the prakruti and not interfere in it. Such naturalness is withignorance of the Self.If we ever try to catch this cow’s calf, you will see painfulAptavani-6147148Aptavani-6dwesh. The karma is not the problem; they will occur as longas this body is there. The problem lies in the raag-dwesh thatone does. What do the Vitarags say? They tell all to becomevitarag, free from attachment and abhorrence. The importanceis not in what you do in this world. But if there is raag-dweshwhen you are doing it, you create a new karmic account foryour next life. There is no consequence if you do not do raag-dwesh. Your whole body, from birth to death, is mandatory(farajiyat). You have no choice but to deal with the effect ofevery karma. Only the raag-dwesh that arises from doing sowill create a new binding account. That is why the Vitarags say,‘Become vitarag and go through life, and be done with it.’If someone throws insults at ‘us,’ ‘we’ realize that theinsults are aimed at ‘Ambalal’ – at the pudgal, the non-Self. Hedoes not know the Self, does he? So ‘we’ do not accept thoseinsults. ‘We’ are not affected by the insult; ‘we’ remain freefrom all attachment (vitarag). ‘We’ do not experience any raag-dwesh towards that person. And, therefore, after one or twolifetimes ‘we’ will attain liberation.The Vitarags are simply saying that karma is not theobstacle to liberation. It is the ignorance of the Self (agnanta)that is the obstacle. Karma is going to happen as long as thereis the body, but karma ceases to bind when the ignorance goesaway.* * * * *[18]Sahaj PrakrutiQuestioner: What is the natural and spontaneous (sahaj)relative-self (prakruti) of the Gnanis?Dadashri: Prakruti is considered sahaj when you havea thought and it does not cause an effect within.Questioner: How and when does the prakruti becomesahaj?Dadashri: If one does not interfere in charitra moha(discharging karma effects, discharge moha), then the prakrutibegins to become natural. The Soul is verily natural. But whenprakruti becomes natural then moksha occurs. Women aremore natural and spontaneous than the men here. Foreigners aremore natural than women from this place (India) and these animalsand birds are even more natural than the foreigners.Questioner: Is the naturalness of all these categoriesassociated with the Self-knowledge (Gnan) or with the ignoranceof the Self (agnan)?Dadashri: Their naturalness is associated with agnan. Itis like the naturalness of these cows and buffaloes. The cow maybe jumpy and wild and may even charge you to strike with herhorns, and yet it is natural. ‘Natural’ means to become absorbedin (tanmayakar). ‘Natural’ means to become one with the natureof the prakruti and not interfere in it. Such naturalness is withignorance of the Self.If we ever try to catch this cow’s calf, you will see painfulAptavani-6149150Aptavani-6misery in its eyes, yet that is natural! Just as a ‘machine’ runs onthe inside, the natural and spontaneous relative-self (sahajprakruti) too will be going on like the machine, without anyawareness of what is beneficial or harmful in life. If the inner‘machine’ (antahkaran) shows something that is beneficial, itwill proceed along that, and if it shows something that is harmful,it will do harm. If it sees a farm without a fence, it will go in itand graze there.Questioner: They do not have any intent (bhaav) in that,do they?Dadashri: They do not have to ‘settle’ (do nikaal) at all,do they? That is verily their nature, their natural state! They donot have any problem if their calves leave them after they growfour to six months old. They take care of their calves up to fourto six months only. And our people would…Questioner: They take care of them until they die!Dadashri: No, they do so for seven generations! A cowtakes care of her calves up to six months. These foreigners takecare of their children until they grow up to be eighteen and ourpeople of Hindustan take care of theirs for seven generations!So in naturalness (here) there is no awareness (jagruti) atall. Wandering around according to whatever unfolds within (toact according to inner impulses) is called natural. This ‘top’*which is spinning will spin high and tall vertically, then tilt low onits side as it spins, sometimes appearing as if it is going to falldown, and at other times lifting up an inch off the around whilespinning. We may think ‘Hey, it is falling, it is falling.’ On thecontrary, mooah! (special exclamation used by Dadashri to shakeup the listener), it will sit straight again; that is called natural!*(Dadashri uses the analogy of the spinning top for all humanbeings who ‘spin’ life after life. The spinning commences at birthand concludes at death; the spin force is established by karmiccauses of past life and the spin effect unfolds in the current life).More Details on Naturalness, SahajataNatural (sahaj prakruti) means it will unwind as it waswound; there is no other destruction-creation (bhanjghad).With reference to the naturalness, after Gnan (receivingthe knowledge of Self from the Gnani Purush), if the Self (thereal You) remains the knower-seer then ‘it’ (the prakruti) willbecome sahaj. Once You interfere in ‘it,’ it gets ruined again.The interference is, ‘It would be better if it is like this and itwould be better if it is not like that,’ and this makes the selfbecome unnatural (asahaj).A businessman is about to file for bankruptcy and even inthis predicament, his wife would give a beggar a sari and otherthings. And yet, the businessman will not give even a penny. Theman is preoccupied about the future of his business whereas thewife is calmly helping the poor. The wife’s prakruti is calledsahaj. As the thought arises within her, she will follow throughaccordingly. The man, on the other hand, will even have a thoughtof donating two thousand rupees, but then right away he willthink, ‘What can I give now when I am bankrupt?’ So then hewill drop the idea of giving.The one who is natural and spontaneous (sahaj) will doexactly what comes into his mind, and even if he does not, thereis no interference from the Self. This is spontaneity and naturalness(sahajata).The one who has received this Gnan will have a thoughtwhen he boards a train about where a seat is available andwhere not and, at that time, he may not be able to remain non-interfering (sahaj). But despite this, if he remains in the Gnanand in the Agnas, then the prakruti will become sahaj. Thus,whatever it may be, even if he were to abuse others a hundredtimes, his prakruti is natural because he followed ‘our’ (theAptavani-6149150Aptavani-6misery in its eyes, yet that is natural! Just as a ‘machine’ runs onthe inside, the natural and spontaneous relative-self (sahajprakruti) too will be going on like the machine, without anyawareness of what is beneficial or harmful in life. If the inner‘machine’ (antahkaran) shows something that is beneficial, itwill proceed along that, and if it shows something that is harmful,it will do harm. If it sees a farm without a fence, it will go in itand graze there.Questioner: They do not have any intent (bhaav) in that,do they?Dadashri: They do not have to ‘settle’ (do nikaal) at all,do they? That is verily their nature, their natural state! They donot have any problem if their calves leave them after they growfour to six months old. They take care of their calves up to fourto six months only. And our people would…Questioner: They take care of them until they die!Dadashri: No, they do so for seven generations! A cowtakes care of her calves up to six months. These foreigners takecare of their children until they grow up to be eighteen and ourpeople of Hindustan take care of theirs for seven generations!So in naturalness (here) there is no awareness (jagruti) atall. Wandering around according to whatever unfolds within (toact according to inner impulses) is called natural. This ‘top’*which is spinning will spin high and tall vertically, then tilt low onits side as it spins, sometimes appearing as if it is going to falldown, and at other times lifting up an inch off the around whilespinning. We may think ‘Hey, it is falling, it is falling.’ On thecontrary, mooah! (special exclamation used by Dadashri to shakeup the listener), it will sit straight again; that is called natural!*(Dadashri uses the analogy of the spinning top for all humanbeings who ‘spin’ life after life. The spinning commences at birthand concludes at death; the spin force is established by karmiccauses of past life and the spin effect unfolds in the current life).More Details on Naturalness, SahajataNatural (sahaj prakruti) means it will unwind as it waswound; there is no other destruction-creation (bhanjghad).With reference to the naturalness, after Gnan (receivingthe knowledge of Self from the Gnani Purush), if the Self (thereal You) remains the knower-seer then ‘it’ (the prakruti) willbecome sahaj. Once You interfere in ‘it,’ it gets ruined again.The interference is, ‘It would be better if it is like this and itwould be better if it is not like that,’ and this makes the selfbecome unnatural (asahaj).A businessman is about to file for bankruptcy and even inthis predicament, his wife would give a beggar a sari and otherthings. And yet, the businessman will not give even a penny. Theman is preoccupied about the future of his business whereas thewife is calmly helping the poor. The wife’s prakruti is calledsahaj. As the thought arises within her, she will follow throughaccordingly. The man, on the other hand, will even have a thoughtof donating two thousand rupees, but then right away he willthink, ‘What can I give now when I am bankrupt?’ So then hewill drop the idea of giving.The one who is natural and spontaneous (sahaj) will doexactly what comes into his mind, and even if he does not, thereis no interference from the Self. This is spontaneity and naturalness(sahajata).The one who has received this Gnan will have a thoughtwhen he boards a train about where a seat is available andwhere not and, at that time, he may not be able to remain non-interfering (sahaj). But despite this, if he remains in the Gnanand in the Agnas, then the prakruti will become sahaj. Thus,whatever it may be, even if he were to abuse others a hundredtimes, his prakruti is natural because he followed ‘our’ (theAptavani-6151152Aptavani-6Gnani and the fully enlightened Lord within) Agnas, so hisinterference has ceased. And from then onward, the prakrutistarts to become sahaj. At the time of this samayik (specifictime when one remains the Self and sees the non-Self evidences),the prakruti is absolutely natural and spontaneous (sahaj)!In the Kramic path (traditional step-by-step path to Self-realization), one cannot attain the state of spontaneity andnaturalness until the very end. In that path the turmoil of,‘Renounce this, renounce that, you can do this but you cannotdo this,’ remains until the end.From Sahaj to Asahaj to SahajPeople of India are lacking spontaneity and naturalness(asahaj). They lack sahajata, spontaneity and naturalness, andthat is why they have more worries. Their worries have increasedbecause their anger-pride-deceit-greed has increased and,therefore, they seek liberation (moksha). Otherwise they wouldsay, ‘We do not want to go to moksha, we are very happyhere.’ If you tell the foreign people, ‘Let us go to moksha,’ theywill say, ‘No, no we do not need moksha!’Questioner: So that means that they go from being sahajto asahaj – from a natural state to a state without naturalness.When that asahajata goes to the extreme, is that when theyseek moksha?Dadashri: They go to the top in asahajata; they see andexperience the suffering and then they seek moksha. Their innerintellect (antarik buddhi) has increased too much. Foreign peoplehave external intellect (bahya buddhi), which shows worldlycomforts. The rule is that as the inner buddhi increases, so doesthe inner suffering.Questioner: What does one do to come back tospontaneity and naturalness (sahajata), having gone to the topof being in a state without naturalness (asahajata)?Dadashri: Then they find a way because they see thatthere is no happiness in that. They come to know that happinessdoes not lie in a woman or children. There is no happiness inmoney either. That is how their inner intent changes. Those inforeign cultures will never say that happiness does not lie in awoman or in children, will they? It is only when one experiencesinner suffering and burning that he will say, ‘Let me run to wherethere is liberation. I cannot afford this; let me go to where theTirthankars have attained liberation.’ (Tirthankars are totallyenlightened beings.)Questioner: So their inner intent (bhaav) should changeat that time, is that so?Dadashri: If the inner intent does not change, then nothingcan be accomplished or solved. A person would not go to atemple or his guru without a change in his inner intent, would he?Today, there is less asahajata (being in a state withoutnaturalness) in people but their illusionary attachment (moha)has increased. So they do not care about anything.Restlessness verily is asahajata. When the foreign peopleare sitting in a garden, they sit in one place for hours, whereasour people cannot sit still even in a place of worship! This isbecause they have inner restlessness.Foreign people’s restlessness lies in their “bread and butter”sustenance, whereas our people’s restlessness lies in worryingthat extends all the way down to their seventh generation!First, the self (pratishthit atma) becomes sahaj (natural,spontaneous and non-interfering) and then the body becomessahaj. Then one will attain a smile that radiates with liberation(mukta hasya) like ‘ours.’An Effortless StateWhen one ‘makes’ an effort (prayaas), then things goAptavani-6151152Aptavani-6Gnani and the fully enlightened Lord within) Agnas, so hisinterference has ceased. And from then onward, the prakrutistarts to become sahaj. At the time of this samayik (specifictime when one remains the Self and sees the non-Self evidences),the prakruti is absolutely natural and spontaneous (sahaj)!In the Kramic path (traditional step-by-step path to Self-realization), one cannot attain the state of spontaneity andnaturalness until the very end. In that path the turmoil of,‘Renounce this, renounce that, you can do this but you cannotdo this,’ remains until the end.From Sahaj to Asahaj to SahajPeople of India are lacking spontaneity and naturalness(asahaj). They lack sahajata, spontaneity and naturalness, andthat is why they have more worries. Their worries have increasedbecause their anger-pride-deceit-greed has increased and,therefore, they seek liberation (moksha). Otherwise they wouldsay, ‘We do not want to go to moksha, we are very happyhere.’ If you tell the foreign people, ‘Let us go to moksha,’ theywill say, ‘No, no we do not need moksha!’Questioner: So that means that they go from being sahajto asahaj – from a natural state to a state without naturalness.When that asahajata goes to the extreme, is that when theyseek moksha?Dadashri: They go to the top in asahajata; they see andexperience the suffering and then they seek moksha. Their innerintellect (antarik buddhi) has increased too much. Foreign peoplehave external intellect (bahya buddhi), which shows worldlycomforts. The rule is that as the inner buddhi increases, so doesthe inner suffering.Questioner: What does one do to come back tospontaneity and naturalness (sahajata), having gone to the topof being in a state without naturalness (asahajata)?Dadashri: Then they find a way because they see thatthere is no happiness in that. They come to know that happinessdoes not lie in a woman or children. There is no happiness inmoney either. That is how their inner intent changes. Those inforeign cultures will never say that happiness does not lie in awoman or in children, will they? It is only when one experiencesinner suffering and burning that he will say, ‘Let me run to wherethere is liberation. I cannot afford this; let me go to where theTirthankars have attained liberation.’ (Tirthankars are totallyenlightened beings.)Questioner: So their inner intent (bhaav) should changeat that time, is that so?Dadashri: If the inner intent does not change, then nothingcan be accomplished or solved. A person would not go to atemple or his guru without a change in his inner intent, would he?Today, there is less asahajata (being in a state withoutnaturalness) in people but their illusionary attachment (moha)has increased. So they do not care about anything.Restlessness verily is asahajata. When the foreign peopleare sitting in a garden, they sit in one place for hours, whereasour people cannot sit still even in a place of worship! This isbecause they have inner restlessness.Foreign people’s restlessness lies in their “bread and butter”sustenance, whereas our people’s restlessness lies in worryingthat extends all the way down to their seventh generation!First, the self (pratishthit atma) becomes sahaj (natural,spontaneous and non-interfering) and then the body becomessahaj. Then one will attain a smile that radiates with liberation(mukta hasya) like ‘ours.’An Effortless StateWhen one ‘makes’ an effort (prayaas), then things goAptavani-6153154Aptavani-6Dadashri: ‘What is this happening?’ ‘See’ and ‘know’ it.You have to ‘see’ and ‘know’ ‘what is taking place.’Analysis of the PrakrutiQuestioner: Please explain how to analyze the relative-self (prakruti).Dadashri: When you wake up in the morning and thereis an inner calling out for a cup of tea or something else, can Younot tell? That is prakruti. Then what else does it ask for? Then‘it’ will say, ‘Bring me some snack and breakfast.’ Would Younot know that too? If You ‘see’ the relative-self (prakruti) thisway all day, then the analysis of the prakruti will occur. Youhave to ‘see’ (jovoo) all that by remaining separate from it.Nothing is done with our free will. The prakruti makes us doit.Questioner: This is at the gross (sthool) level, but howcan we ‘see’ what goes on, inside?Dadashri: You should see who is having the desire: ‘Isthis desire ‘mine’ (of the Self) or the prakruti’s (relative-self)?’That is all You have to ‘see’ because there are only two thingswithin.Questioner: Are we to remain separate and then ‘see’?Is that what we have to practice?Dadashri: If You do this for just one day, then You willknow how to do it. You need to do all this for just one day.Then it is just a matter of repetition for the rest of the days.That is why ‘we’ tell you to try this experiment of ‘lettinggo of the reins’ for one day, on a Sunday. With this processyour belief of, ‘It happens only because I have the control of it,’will go away.Questioner: When one says that he has taken hold of thereins, is that not the ego?wrong. Everything should be without the ‘effort’ (aprayaas); itshould be sahaj, natural and spontaneous. Whenever there is anattempt at an effort (a prayaas), then it is no longer natural,sahaj. The state of naturalness (sahajata) goes away.The intellect is not being used in the natural and spontaneousstate (sahaj bhaav). When one gets up in the morning, hebrushes his teeth, drinks tea and has breakfast; it all occursnaturally and spontaneously (sahaj bhave). The mind, intellect,chit and ego are not involved; they are used in that action.Whenever they are used, then it is considered asahaj.If you want something and someone comes along andgives it to you saying, ‘Here, take this,’ then it has been receivednaturally and spontaneously (sahaj bhave).Sahaj Means the Effortless StateQuestioner: If even liberation (moksha) comes naturallyand spontaneously, why then is it necessary for one to make aneffort for it? Dadashri: No one makes an effort at all. One simplyaffirms the ego saying, ‘I made the effort.’Questioner: I came here to this satsang; was it notmaking the effort that brought me here?Dadashri: That is what you believe, that you are makingthe effort. But you came here naturally. I know that, but you donot. Your egoism shows you that, ‘It happened because I wasthere.’ In reality, all activities are occurring naturally, accordingto their own nature (swabhavik).Questioner: Then there is nothing worth doing, is there?Dadashri: There is no such thing as ‘worth doing,’ andthere is no such thing as ‘not worth doing.’ This world is worth‘knowing.’Questioner: ‘Knowing,’ in what way?Aptavani-6153154Aptavani-6Dadashri: ‘What is this happening?’ ‘See’ and ‘know’ it.You have to ‘see’ and ‘know’ ‘what is taking place.’Analysis of the PrakrutiQuestioner: Please explain how to analyze the relative-self (prakruti).Dadashri: When you wake up in the morning and thereis an inner calling out for a cup of tea or something else, can Younot tell? That is prakruti. Then what else does it ask for? Then‘it’ will say, ‘Bring me some snack and breakfast.’ Would Younot know that too? If You ‘see’ the relative-self (prakruti) thisway all day, then the analysis of the prakruti will occur. Youhave to ‘see’ (jovoo) all that by remaining separate from it.Nothing is done with our free will. The prakruti makes us doit.Questioner: This is at the gross (sthool) level, but howcan we ‘see’ what goes on, inside?Dadashri: You should see who is having the desire: ‘Isthis desire ‘mine’ (of the Self) or the prakruti’s (relative-self)?’That is all You have to ‘see’ because there are only two thingswithin.Questioner: Are we to remain separate and then ‘see’?Is that what we have to practice?Dadashri: If You do this for just one day, then You willknow how to do it. You need to do all this for just one day.Then it is just a matter of repetition for the rest of the days.That is why ‘we’ tell you to try this experiment of ‘lettinggo of the reins’ for one day, on a Sunday. With this processyour belief of, ‘It happens only because I have the control of it,’will go away.Questioner: When one says that he has taken hold of thereins, is that not the ego?wrong. Everything should be without the ‘effort’ (aprayaas); itshould be sahaj, natural and spontaneous. Whenever there is anattempt at an effort (a prayaas), then it is no longer natural,sahaj. The state of naturalness (sahajata) goes away.The intellect is not being used in the natural and spontaneousstate (sahaj bhaav). When one gets up in the morning, hebrushes his teeth, drinks tea and has breakfast; it all occursnaturally and spontaneously (sahaj bhave). The mind, intellect,chit and ego are not involved; they are used in that action.Whenever they are used, then it is considered asahaj.If you want something and someone comes along andgives it to you saying, ‘Here, take this,’ then it has been receivednaturally and spontaneously (sahaj bhave).Sahaj Means the Effortless StateQuestioner: If even liberation (moksha) comes naturallyand spontaneously, why then is it necessary for one to make aneffort for it? Dadashri: No one makes an effort at all. One simplyaffirms the ego saying, ‘I made the effort.’Questioner: I came here to this satsang; was it notmaking the effort that brought me here?Dadashri: That is what you believe, that you are makingthe effort. But you came here naturally. I know that, but you donot. Your egoism shows you that, ‘It happened because I wasthere.’ In reality, all activities are occurring naturally, accordingto their own nature (swabhavik).Questioner: Then there is nothing worth doing, is there?Dadashri: There is no such thing as ‘worth doing,’ andthere is no such thing as ‘not worth doing.’ This world is worth‘knowing.’Questioner: ‘Knowing,’ in what way?Aptavani-6155156Aptavani-6Dadashri: Yes, but that is discharge ego. You shouldrecognize the ego and You should also know on what basis doeseverything happen. Despite this, ‘it’ (the relative-self) ends uphaving the wrong inner intent (bhaav) that, ‘It happens becauseof me.’ Therefore, when you do this experiment, then all thewrong bhaav will go away.If your son says, ‘I am your father,’ you will get upsetwith him if you feel ‘he is the one speaking.’ There is no tellingwhat will come out of your son’s mouth. Therefore, there shouldbe the awareness (jagruti) of, ‘Speech is a record, the speakerdoes not have this energy (here, shakti is the power to speak),neither is it ‘my’ energy. This is an alien, non-Self (parki) thingthat is being thrown out.’Then as You go further, when you say something aboutsome fellow, Rameshbhai, You should have the awareness atthat time that he is a Shuddhatma, a pure Soul. When you arereading a book, and you read that, ‘Mangladevi did this and shedid that,’ at that time You should be able to ‘see’ Mangladevi’sShuddhatma.Do whatever you can in this manner. You do not have todo it all in just one day. There are no grades that you have toattain here, but make it possible without fail; make it happen.Gradually, You have to become an embodiment of pure lovewith everyone (shuddha prem swaroop).Questioner: Shuddha prem swaroop; how does onebecome that?Dadashri: If someone leaves after cursing and insultingyou, then when he comes back to you and Your love towardshim remains the same, then that is a form of pure love (shuddhaprem). It does not increase even when he showers you withflowers. That which increases and decreases is attraction(aasakti). When it does not increase or decrease, it is calledshuddha prem, pure love.Control of Prakruti is with VyavasthitQuestioner: I cannot achieve control over the relative-self (prakruti), but my pure Soul (Shuddhatma) state remainsvery well.Dadashri: You have to hand the control part over to the‘police’! You are not to control the prakruti. Control is neededin the relative path; the worldly path of good and bad, wherethey make you do good deeds and stop doing bad ones. Whocan control your prakruti now? You are not the owner of itanymore. You are not ‘Chandulal’ anymore and whateverhappens, vyavasthit is the doer in that. Now how are you goingto control that?Questioner: Will the mistakes leave if I ‘see’ them?Dadashri: The ones that are ‘seen’ are gone. Other peoplecannot see their own mistakes. They see mistakes of others. Youcan see your own mistakes, can You not?Questioner: I can see my own mistakes but I cannot berid of them.Dadashri: No, do not do anything like that. You do nothave to do that. This is a science. You just have to ‘see’ what‘Chandulal’ is doing; that is all You have to ‘do.’ You are theboss of ‘Chandulal.’ ‘Chandulal’ is under the control ofvyavasthit. Vyavasthit inspires him and ‘Chandulal’ spins likea top as dictated by vyavasthit. And when Chandulal makes abig mistake, You have to tell him, ‘Chandulal! Doing this isunacceptable.’ That is all You have to say.The Hassle and Difficulties from the PrakrutiQuestioner: I experience liberation (moksha), but therelative-self (prakruti) does not let go of its nature. I get tiredof that.Dadashri: Prakruti will never let go of its natureAptavani-6155156Aptavani-6Dadashri: Yes, but that is discharge ego. You shouldrecognize the ego and You should also know on what basis doeseverything happen. Despite this, ‘it’ (the relative-self) ends uphaving the wrong inner intent (bhaav) that, ‘It happens becauseof me.’ Therefore, when you do this experiment, then all thewrong bhaav will go away.If your son says, ‘I am your father,’ you will get upsetwith him if you feel ‘he is the one speaking.’ There is no tellingwhat will come out of your son’s mouth. Therefore, there shouldbe the awareness (jagruti) of, ‘Speech is a record, the speakerdoes not have this energy (here, shakti is the power to speak),neither is it ‘my’ energy. This is an alien, non-Self (parki) thingthat is being thrown out.’Then as You go further, when you say something aboutsome fellow, Rameshbhai, You should have the awareness atthat time that he is a Shuddhatma, a pure Soul. When you arereading a book, and you read that, ‘Mangladevi did this and shedid that,’ at that time You should be able to ‘see’ Mangladevi’sShuddhatma.Do whatever you can in this manner. You do not have todo it all in just one day. There are no grades that you have toattain here, but make it possible without fail; make it happen.Gradually, You have to become an embodiment of pure lovewith everyone (shuddha prem swaroop).Questioner: Shuddha prem swaroop; how does onebecome that?Dadashri: If someone leaves after cursing and insultingyou, then when he comes back to you and Your love towardshim remains the same, then that is a form of pure love (shuddhaprem). It does not increase even when he showers you withflowers. That which increases and decreases is attraction(aasakti). When it does not increase or decrease, it is calledshuddha prem, pure love.Control of Prakruti is with VyavasthitQuestioner: I cannot achieve control over the relative-self (prakruti), but my pure Soul (Shuddhatma) state remainsvery well.Dadashri: You have to hand the control part over to the‘police’! You are not to control the prakruti. Control is neededin the relative path; the worldly path of good and bad, wherethey make you do good deeds and stop doing bad ones. Whocan control your prakruti now? You are not the owner of itanymore. You are not ‘Chandulal’ anymore and whateverhappens, vyavasthit is the doer in that. Now how are you goingto control that?Questioner: Will the mistakes leave if I ‘see’ them?Dadashri: The ones that are ‘seen’ are gone. Other peoplecannot see their own mistakes. They see mistakes of others. Youcan see your own mistakes, can You not?Questioner: I can see my own mistakes but I cannot berid of them.Dadashri: No, do not do anything like that. You do nothave to do that. This is a science. You just have to ‘see’ what‘Chandulal’ is doing; that is all You have to ‘do.’ You are theboss of ‘Chandulal.’ ‘Chandulal’ is under the control ofvyavasthit. Vyavasthit inspires him and ‘Chandulal’ spins likea top as dictated by vyavasthit. And when Chandulal makes abig mistake, You have to tell him, ‘Chandulal! Doing this isunacceptable.’ That is all You have to say.The Hassle and Difficulties from the PrakrutiQuestioner: I experience liberation (moksha), but therelative-self (prakruti) does not let go of its nature. I get tiredof that.Dadashri: Prakruti will never let go of its natureAptavani-6157158Aptavani-6(swabhav). If the local authorities come and open up the gutteraround your home, will the gutter not show its nature (stink)?Questioner: It will.Dadashri: How do You view that?Questioner: Remain as knower-seer (gnata-drashta).Dadashri: When you are relaxing, you happen to get thestench of it, so you have to remain gnata-drashta. Similarlywhen ‘gutters’ show up in the prakruti, you have to maintainawareness (jagruti) at that time.Questioner: If ‘I—the Self’ keep seeing the ‘neighbor’sprakruti and do not guide and correct it, how can that beacceptable? Is that not considered hypocrisy?Dadashri: What authority do You have to guide it? Youare not to interfere (dakhal) in it. Do you know who runs allthis? We do not run it and neither do we correct it. It is all underthe control of vyavasthit. So what is the point of interfering withit? If we try to do something that is not our dharma (inherentin our nature, swabhav), we will give rise to something else(pardharma).Questioner: Will the wrong, hurtful conduct stop in thislife through Gnan or not?Dadashri: It might. If you do what the Gnani Purush tellsyou, then it can happen within five to ten years! You know, itcan also happen within a year or so! The Gnani Purush isconsidered the Lord of three worlds (celestial – devlok; human– madhyalok; and underworlds – paatadlok). What is notpossible in his presence? Can anything be left behind, unfinished?You have to sit with Dada and understand everything. Youhave to make time for satsang.‘We are thirsty for Keval Gnan, we will give this life for ‘Dada’ ‘Amey keval gnan pyaasi, Dadaney kaaje aa bhuv,deshoo amey gaadi’What is his thirst for?His thirst, the yearning, is only for absolute knowledge(keval gnan). Now his thirst is for nothing else. So ‘we’ askhim, ‘There is thirst within; look for it deep within you.’ So hewill say, ‘The thirst is in the relative-self (prakruti), I do nothave any thirst.’ Some have a quarter’s worth of prakruti left,some have fifty cents worth left and some have seventy-fivecents worth left of the prakruti. So does God punish the onewith the seventy-five cents of prakruti? The answer is ‘No, Youhave to take care of whatever deficiency you, the prakruti,have.’ The deficiency in the prakruti leaves by ‘seeing’ and‘knowing’ it.Now as long as there is prakruti, all its shortcomings willeventually come to end if You do not interfere (dakhal) in it.Prakruti takes care of its own shortcomings. Interfering occurswhen one says, ‘I am doing it.’If one has not taken Gnan, then the prakruti continues inthe wrong the whole day long. And now, it walks on the rightpath. You may tell someone off, but from within you feel, ‘No,I cannot do this. I have to do pratikraman for telling him off.’Whereas, before you attained Gnan, you felt that he deservedeven more telling off, and you would even do it.Therefore, whatever goes on within you now is energy ofthe Self (samkit-bud). It is a tremendous energy which continuesworking day and night.Questioner: Does pragnya (energy of the Self that isawakened within upon Self-realization and leads one to ultimateliberation) do all the work?Dadashri: Yes, pragnya is doing all that work. PragnyaAptavani-6157158Aptavani-6(swabhav). If the local authorities come and open up the gutteraround your home, will the gutter not show its nature (stink)?Questioner: It will.Dadashri: How do You view that?Questioner: Remain as knower-seer (gnata-drashta).Dadashri: When you are relaxing, you happen to get thestench of it, so you have to remain gnata-drashta. Similarlywhen ‘gutters’ show up in the prakruti, you have to maintainawareness (jagruti) at that time.Questioner: If ‘I—the Self’ keep seeing the ‘neighbor’sprakruti and do not guide and correct it, how can that beacceptable? Is that not considered hypocrisy?Dadashri: What authority do You have to guide it? Youare not to interfere (dakhal) in it. Do you know who runs allthis? We do not run it and neither do we correct it. It is all underthe control of vyavasthit. So what is the point of interfering withit? If we try to do something that is not our dharma (inherentin our nature, swabhav), we will give rise to something else(pardharma).Questioner: Will the wrong, hurtful conduct stop in thislife through Gnan or not?Dadashri: It might. If you do what the Gnani Purush tellsyou, then it can happen within five to ten years! You know, itcan also happen within a year or so! The Gnani Purush isconsidered the Lord of three worlds (celestial – devlok; human– madhyalok; and underworlds – paatadlok). What is notpossible in his presence? Can anything be left behind, unfinished?You have to sit with Dada and understand everything. Youhave to make time for satsang.‘We are thirsty for Keval Gnan, we will give this life for ‘Dada’ ‘Amey keval gnan pyaasi, Dadaney kaaje aa bhuv,deshoo amey gaadi’What is his thirst for?His thirst, the yearning, is only for absolute knowledge(keval gnan). Now his thirst is for nothing else. So ‘we’ askhim, ‘There is thirst within; look for it deep within you.’ So hewill say, ‘The thirst is in the relative-self (prakruti), I do nothave any thirst.’ Some have a quarter’s worth of prakruti left,some have fifty cents worth left and some have seventy-fivecents worth left of the prakruti. So does God punish the onewith the seventy-five cents of prakruti? The answer is ‘No, Youhave to take care of whatever deficiency you, the prakruti,have.’ The deficiency in the prakruti leaves by ‘seeing’ and‘knowing’ it.Now as long as there is prakruti, all its shortcomings willeventually come to end if You do not interfere (dakhal) in it.Prakruti takes care of its own shortcomings. Interfering occurswhen one says, ‘I am doing it.’If one has not taken Gnan, then the prakruti continues inthe wrong the whole day long. And now, it walks on the rightpath. You may tell someone off, but from within you feel, ‘No,I cannot do this. I have to do pratikraman for telling him off.’Whereas, before you attained Gnan, you felt that he deservedeven more telling off, and you would even do it.Therefore, whatever goes on within you now is energy ofthe Self (samkit-bud). It is a tremendous energy which continuesworking day and night.Questioner: Does pragnya (energy of the Self that isawakened within upon Self-realization and leads one to ultimateliberation) do all the work?Dadashri: Yes, pragnya is doing all that work. PragnyaAptavani-6159160Aptavani-6will take you to liberation (moksha), even if it has to drag Youthere!Questioner: But, Dada, sometimes there is a heavy forcecoming from the prakruti.Dadashri: The stronger the prakruti, the greater will bethe force.Questioner: But, at the same time, Gnan also works withequal force.Dadashri: Yes, even Gnan will work powerfully. This isAkram science so it will bring about the correct solution – througha struggle and a fight, if needed.Free Yourself from All Your Past LifeAgreementsDo you still feel ‘I am the doer’ anymore?Questioner: Not even in my dreams.Dadashri: What are you saying? My-ness (mamata) goesaway when doer-ship goes away. Your mamata has gone butthe mamata of those with whom you made ‘agreements,’ forexample, bound karma from the past life, still remains. Will younot have to fulfill those agreements? There is no problem if theylet you off, but is anyone likely to let you off without you fulfillingthe agreement?Very rarely do you find such a ‘real path’ where you canattain the absolute state. You will find true independence, trueliberation here. You will not have even God above you (as asuperior). Such is the freedom you attain! You can afford tohave the wife as your boss – there is no problem there. But youshould not have God as your boss! The wife will remain yourboss as long as she is alive, but God would become your bossforever, will he not?Questioner: If ultimate liberation (moksha) does notoccur, then does one have to come back?Dadashri: If you do have to return, it will be only for oneor two more lives. But what is the main thing? The main thingis that all the claims, the agreements that bind you, should cometo end. But will you not have to settle your karmic account withyour wife and the children? Let her claims that bind her, betaken care of by her.Your pure awareness (shuddha upayog) does not diminishbecause of all the stock of karmic account. As that account getssettled with equanimity, Your state devoid of raag–dwesh(saiyam) will increase. This is called purusharth. As the saiyamincreases, the karmic accounts also get settled (discharged,nikaal) fast. As it gets settled automatically, it ends up at theabsolute knowledge, keval gnan level.‘You’ do not have to do anything. You just have to decide,‘I want to remain firmly in Dada’s Agnas.’ And do not worryif You are not able to follow them. You have to make a strongfirm and unwavering decision (nischay). Make a decision that‘my mother-in-law scolds me, so with her I want to practiceDada’s Agnas, and I want to deal with her with equanimity,without fail.’ Before you even see her, You have to make thisdecision. Then if you cannot settle with her, with equanimity, youare not liable for that. You are responsible for remaining in theAgnas and for your determination (your nischay), but you arenot responsible for the result. Your nischay should be that Youwant to remain in the Agnas, and then do not worry if you arenot able to do so. But do pratikraman for it, the way I haveshown you. You committed aggression through thoughts, speechor action (atikraman), hence, do pratikraman. This is an easy,simple and straightforward path that needs to be understood.* * * * *Aptavani-6159160Aptavani-6will take you to liberation (moksha), even if it has to drag Youthere!Questioner: But, Dada, sometimes there is a heavy forcecoming from the prakruti.Dadashri: The stronger the prakruti, the greater will bethe force.Questioner: But, at the same time, Gnan also works withequal force.Dadashri: Yes, even Gnan will work powerfully. This isAkram science so it will bring about the correct solution – througha struggle and a fight, if needed.Free Yourself from All Your Past LifeAgreementsDo you still feel ‘I am the doer’ anymore?Questioner: Not even in my dreams.Dadashri: What are you saying? My-ness (mamata) goesaway when doer-ship goes away. Your mamata has gone butthe mamata of those with whom you made ‘agreements,’ forexample, bound karma from the past life, still remains. Will younot have to fulfill those agreements? There is no problem if theylet you off, but is anyone likely to let you off without you fulfillingthe agreement?Very rarely do you find such a ‘real path’ where you canattain the absolute state. You will find true independence, trueliberation here. You will not have even God above you (as asuperior). Such is the freedom you attain! You can afford tohave the wife as your boss – there is no problem there. But youshould not have God as your boss! The wife will remain yourboss as long as she is alive, but God would become your bossforever, will he not?Questioner: If ultimate liberation (moksha) does notoccur, then does one have to come back?Dadashri: If you do have to return, it will be only for oneor two more lives. But what is the main thing? The main thingis that all the claims, the agreements that bind you, should cometo end. But will you not have to settle your karmic account withyour wife and the children? Let her claims that bind her, betaken care of by her.Your pure awareness (shuddha upayog) does not diminishbecause of all the stock of karmic account. As that account getssettled with equanimity, Your state devoid of raag–dwesh(saiyam) will increase. This is called purusharth. As the saiyamincreases, the karmic accounts also get settled (discharged,nikaal) fast. As it gets settled automatically, it ends up at theabsolute knowledge, keval gnan level.‘You’ do not have to do anything. You just have to decide,‘I want to remain firmly in Dada’s Agnas.’ And do not worryif You are not able to follow them. You have to make a strongfirm and unwavering decision (nischay). Make a decision that‘my mother-in-law scolds me, so with her I want to practiceDada’s Agnas, and I want to deal with her with equanimity,without fail.’ Before you even see her, You have to make thisdecision. Then if you cannot settle with her, with equanimity, youare not liable for that. You are responsible for remaining in theAgnas and for your determination (your nischay), but you arenot responsible for the result. Your nischay should be that Youwant to remain in the Agnas, and then do not worry if you arenot able to do so. But do pratikraman for it, the way I haveshown you. You committed aggression through thoughts, speechor action (atikraman), hence, do pratikraman. This is an easy,simple and straightforward path that needs to be understood.* * * * *Aptavani-6161162Aptavani-6his rope and catch you and impede your flow, and if you givehappiness to everyone, they will let you go. They will let you goeven if you give them just beetle nuts as mouth freshener (paan),a homemade cigarette or even a piece of clove as a mouthrefresher. People harbor expectations of getting something fromyou. How can you claim to be a benevolent person if people didnot have expectations from you? All those headed for mokshaare kind people. Therefore, you have to show kindness on yourway to moksha.Questioner: People have expectations, but why shouldwe have expectations?Dadashri: You should not have any expectation(apeksha). It is just that you give them something small, a tokenlike paan-sopari (beetle nut and beetle leaf people use as mouthfresheners in India) and move on. Otherwise, he will hinder youby speaking untruths and ill of you. Therefore, deal with themone way or another and get your work done. People will not letyou go to moksha that easily. They will say, ‘What is wronghere that you want to go over there! Why don’t you have funwith us here?’Questioner: But that is if we listen to them, is that notso?Dadashri: They will hurt you and hinder you even if youdo not listen to them or ignore them. For them, all the fourdirections are open, and for you only one direction is open.Their directions are a life as a human, celestial, hell or as ananimal, whereas you have only one – the path of liberation. Sowhat do they care? They can afford to do hurtful things but youcannot.Keep everyone pleased. Please them and move on. Ifsomeone is staring at you and you tell him, ‘How are you Sir?’then he will let you go, but if you do not say anything, he willthink that you are very arrogant and start causing problems.[19]Settling a File with EquanimityQuestioner: What is our duty, role (dharma) as humanbeings?Dadashri: Our dharma is to see how our mind, speechand body can help people of the world. Run errands for others;give others right understanding through your words, hurt no onethrough mistakes; that is dharma. Do not hurt any living beings(jiva). Take a vow to abstain from hurting all living beings; if thisis not possible, then take a vow to abstain from hurting humanbeings. And if you have taken a vow to abstain from hurtinghuman beings, then take a vow, ‘Let no living being be hurtthrough my mind, speech and body.’ This is all the dharma youhave to understand.Otherwise, when one gets married, the mother-in-law givespain and misery (dukh) to the daughter-in-law and vice versa.Thus they bind karma for a life in hell. If a woman is to becomea mother-in-law, she must first understand that she should gether son married only if she is willing to lose her son, only if sheis willing to let go of him.Has your ‘wishing well’ given results? Have yourexpectations been fulfilled?Questioner: After taking your Gnan, we feel that we tooshould flow away just like the holy River Ganges.Dadashri: Yes, You should flow without affecting (asar)or hurting anyone. It is not possible to hurt anyone and attain theultimate liberation (moksha). If you hurt anyone, he will throwAptavani-6161162Aptavani-6his rope and catch you and impede your flow, and if you givehappiness to everyone, they will let you go. They will let you goeven if you give them just beetle nuts as mouth freshener (paan),a homemade cigarette or even a piece of clove as a mouthrefresher. People harbor expectations of getting something fromyou. How can you claim to be a benevolent person if people didnot have expectations from you? All those headed for mokshaare kind people. Therefore, you have to show kindness on yourway to moksha.Questioner: People have expectations, but why shouldwe have expectations?Dadashri: You should not have any expectation(apeksha). It is just that you give them something small, a tokenlike paan-sopari (beetle nut and beetle leaf people use as mouthfresheners in India) and move on. Otherwise, he will hinder youby speaking untruths and ill of you. Therefore, deal with themone way or another and get your work done. People will not letyou go to moksha that easily. They will say, ‘What is wronghere that you want to go over there! Why don’t you have funwith us here?’Questioner: But that is if we listen to them, is that notso?Dadashri: They will hurt you and hinder you even if youdo not listen to them or ignore them. For them, all the fourdirections are open, and for you only one direction is open.Their directions are a life as a human, celestial, hell or as ananimal, whereas you have only one – the path of liberation. Sowhat do they care? They can afford to do hurtful things but youcannot.Keep everyone pleased. Please them and move on. Ifsomeone is staring at you and you tell him, ‘How are you Sir?’then he will let you go, but if you do not say anything, he willthink that you are very arrogant and start causing problems.[19]Settling a File with EquanimityQuestioner: What is our duty, role (dharma) as humanbeings?Dadashri: Our dharma is to see how our mind, speechand body can help people of the world. Run errands for others;give others right understanding through your words, hurt no onethrough mistakes; that is dharma. Do not hurt any living beings(jiva). Take a vow to abstain from hurting all living beings; if thisis not possible, then take a vow to abstain from hurting humanbeings. And if you have taken a vow to abstain from hurtinghuman beings, then take a vow, ‘Let no living being be hurtthrough my mind, speech and body.’ This is all the dharma youhave to understand.Otherwise, when one gets married, the mother-in-law givespain and misery (dukh) to the daughter-in-law and vice versa.Thus they bind karma for a life in hell. If a woman is to becomea mother-in-law, she must first understand that she should gether son married only if she is willing to lose her son, only if sheis willing to let go of him.Has your ‘wishing well’ given results? Have yourexpectations been fulfilled?Questioner: After taking your Gnan, we feel that we tooshould flow away just like the holy River Ganges.Dadashri: Yes, You should flow without affecting (asar)or hurting anyone. It is not possible to hurt anyone and attain theultimate liberation (moksha). If you hurt anyone, he will throwAptavani-6163164Aptavani-6Questioner: If we try to appease the other person, willit not create attachment (raag) in us?Dadashri: You do not have to appease them like that.How do you appease a policeman? Does that cause you to haveraag towards the policeman?Questioner: No.Dadashri: And also there is no need to appease everyone.When someone obstructs your path, then one way or another,appease him and get your work done. It does not take much forthem to obstruct your way. Do not complain or make waves ifsomeone’s actions hurt you, but instead it is worth settling thesituation somehow, and moving on.Do Your Duties without the Intent to HurtQuestioner: If I have to do kashays (anger, pride, deceitand greed) because of my job, or I end up doing kashaysbecause of it; does the Self have any consequence?Dadashri: No, but you do regret your actions afterwards,don’t you?Questioner: What should I do if I have to do kashaysin carrying out my duties?Dadashri: Your point is valid. If complete, saiyam (statewithout attachment-abhorrence, without raag-dwesh) does notremain while carrying out your duty, and if someone gets hurt,then in the mind you should have the intent, ‘Why does this haveto happen through me? It must not happen.’ This is the innerintent (bhaav) you should have.Questioner: But do I not have to carry out my duty?What do the policemen do; do they not fulfill their duties?Dadashri: You have to carry out your duty; you have nochoice. Even a policeman has to go and catch two or threerobbers that are roaming around; he has no choice. That isinteractions of worldly life (vyavahar). Now, there are twokinds of inner intents (bhaav) involved here. The intent of crueltyand hurt should not be there anymore while carrying out yourduties. The hurtful intent that used to be there before should notbe there now. Secondly, the relative-self (pratishthit atma)should not be ‘spoiled,’ meaning it should not harbor any ‘intentto hurt.’ But otherwise, you have no choice but carry out yourworldly duty. The policeman too has to perform his duty.Furthermore, repentance and remorse (prashchyataap) shouldremain in the mind that it would be better if such duties were notto come your way.* * * * *Aptavani-6163164Aptavani-6Questioner: If we try to appease the other person, willit not create attachment (raag) in us?Dadashri: You do not have to appease them like that.How do you appease a policeman? Does that cause you to haveraag towards the policeman?Questioner: No.Dadashri: And also there is no need to appease everyone.When someone obstructs your path, then one way or another,appease him and get your work done. It does not take much forthem to obstruct your way. Do not complain or make waves ifsomeone’s actions hurt you, but instead it is worth settling thesituation somehow, and moving on.Do Your Duties without the Intent to HurtQuestioner: If I have to do kashays (anger, pride, deceitand greed) because of my job, or I end up doing kashaysbecause of it; does the Self have any consequence?Dadashri: No, but you do regret your actions afterwards,don’t you?Questioner: What should I do if I have to do kashaysin carrying out my duties?Dadashri: Your point is valid. If complete, saiyam (statewithout attachment-abhorrence, without raag-dwesh) does notremain while carrying out your duty, and if someone gets hurt,then in the mind you should have the intent, ‘Why does this haveto happen through me? It must not happen.’ This is the innerintent (bhaav) you should have.Questioner: But do I not have to carry out my duty?What do the policemen do; do they not fulfill their duties?Dadashri: You have to carry out your duty; you have nochoice. Even a policeman has to go and catch two or threerobbers that are roaming around; he has no choice. That isinteractions of worldly life (vyavahar). Now, there are twokinds of inner intents (bhaav) involved here. The intent of crueltyand hurt should not be there anymore while carrying out yourduties. The hurtful intent that used to be there before should notbe there now. Secondly, the relative-self (pratishthit atma)should not be ‘spoiled,’ meaning it should not harbor any ‘intentto hurt.’ But otherwise, you have no choice but carry out yourworldly duty. The policeman too has to perform his duty.Furthermore, repentance and remorse (prashchyataap) shouldremain in the mind that it would be better if such duties were notto come your way.* * * * *Aptavani-6165166Aptavani-6deal with those large numbers with equanimity, then graduallythe force will weaken. This is all pudgal. Pudgal means thatwhich was filled (puran) is now coming out (galan is thedischarge, the effect). Settle this with equanimity, with a calmand composed mind, free of any hindrance or conflicts (dosambhave nikaal).So by a certain expectation (apeksha) you are Chandulal,by another expectation you are a boss, by another you are herfather-in-law. But would you not know by what apeksha youare a father-in-law? Would you not know your limitations? Ifsomeone insists that you are her father-in-law forever, then youwill say, ‘No sir, no one can be a father-in-law forever!’‘You’ are a Shuddhatma – the pure Soul, and ‘Chandulal’is something that has possessed (vadgan) You. The reason youget pulled in only the direction of ‘Chandulal’ is because it hasbeen the practice (adhyas) of countless past lives. If the doctorgives you instructions not to use your right hand, you willinadvertently end up using it. But ‘this’ awareness of the Self issuch that you will know right away that a mistake has occurred.The Self verily is awareness (jagruti). The Self is the Gnan, butthe unawareness (ajagruti) of the past old habit of ‘I am Chandulal’unfolds and therefore, you end up taking a little beating in it.Questioner: Sometimes, ‘This is my son,’ ‘This is mydaughter,’ happens and then, ‘I am the pure Soul and all this isnot mine, not mine,’ also happens.Dadashri: There is multiplication going on within of, ‘Heis my son,’ and so you have to divide it with, ‘Not mine, notmine.’ Within, there are all kinds of multipliers and dividers.There is not just one or two. This is all illusionary attachment(maya). Maya will show you all kinds of things. You will haveto recognize and know all that. You will have to recognize themultiplier, ‘This is my enemy,’ and the divider, ‘This is my well-wisher.’[20]The Flawless VisionQuestioner: Whenever I am interacting and conductingmyself in the worldly life, I have no understanding of whether ‘Iam Shuddhatma’ or ‘I am Chandulal.’Dadashri: It is necessary for you to understand this; youare ‘Chandulal’ and ‘You’ are also the pure Soul, Shuddhatma.By the relative viewpoint, you are ‘Chandulal’ and by the realviewpoint ‘You’ are ‘Shuddhatma.’ All that is relative istemporary (vinashi) and prone to destruction. In the temporaryrealm, you are Chandulal. All temporary interaction (vyavahar)is Chandulal’s and the indestructible and eternal (avinashi)interaction is Yours – the Self’s. Now, after attaining this Gnan,Your awareness (jagruti) lies in the eternal.If there is a lack of understanding, then sometimes onecan make mistakes like this; not everyone makes such mistakes.You are not just Chandulal. When you are working forsomeone, you are an employee there. Therefore, you have tofulfill all your duties as an employee. No one is an employeeforever.Questioner: There are so many transgressions towardsother living beings (atikraman) through thoughts, speech andacts going on that I barely finish one task and another one isready and waiting. When trying to do pratikraman for one, theforce of the other is so strong that I have to keep the pratikramanfor the previous one pending.Dadashri: They will unfold in huge numbers. When youAptavani-6165166Aptavani-6deal with those large numbers with equanimity, then graduallythe force will weaken. This is all pudgal. Pudgal means thatwhich was filled (puran) is now coming out (galan is thedischarge, the effect). Settle this with equanimity, with a calmand composed mind, free of any hindrance or conflicts (dosambhave nikaal).So by a certain expectation (apeksha) you are Chandulal,by another expectation you are a boss, by another you are herfather-in-law. But would you not know by what apeksha youare a father-in-law? Would you not know your limitations? Ifsomeone insists that you are her father-in-law forever, then youwill say, ‘No sir, no one can be a father-in-law forever!’‘You’ are a Shuddhatma – the pure Soul, and ‘Chandulal’is something that has possessed (vadgan) You. The reason youget pulled in only the direction of ‘Chandulal’ is because it hasbeen the practice (adhyas) of countless past lives. If the doctorgives you instructions not to use your right hand, you willinadvertently end up using it. But ‘this’ awareness of the Self issuch that you will know right away that a mistake has occurred.The Self verily is awareness (jagruti). The Self is the Gnan, butthe unawareness (ajagruti) of the past old habit of ‘I am Chandulal’unfolds and therefore, you end up taking a little beating in it.Questioner: Sometimes, ‘This is my son,’ ‘This is mydaughter,’ happens and then, ‘I am the pure Soul and all this isnot mine, not mine,’ also happens.Dadashri: There is multiplication going on within of, ‘Heis my son,’ and so you have to divide it with, ‘Not mine, notmine.’ Within, there are all kinds of multipliers and dividers.There is not just one or two. This is all illusionary attachment(maya). Maya will show you all kinds of things. You will haveto recognize and know all that. You will have to recognize themultiplier, ‘This is my enemy,’ and the divider, ‘This is my well-wisher.’[20]The Flawless VisionQuestioner: Whenever I am interacting and conductingmyself in the worldly life, I have no understanding of whether ‘Iam Shuddhatma’ or ‘I am Chandulal.’Dadashri: It is necessary for you to understand this; youare ‘Chandulal’ and ‘You’ are also the pure Soul, Shuddhatma.By the relative viewpoint, you are ‘Chandulal’ and by the realviewpoint ‘You’ are ‘Shuddhatma.’ All that is relative istemporary (vinashi) and prone to destruction. In the temporaryrealm, you are Chandulal. All temporary interaction (vyavahar)is Chandulal’s and the indestructible and eternal (avinashi)interaction is Yours – the Self’s. Now, after attaining this Gnan,Your awareness (jagruti) lies in the eternal.If there is a lack of understanding, then sometimes onecan make mistakes like this; not everyone makes such mistakes.You are not just Chandulal. When you are working forsomeone, you are an employee there. Therefore, you have tofulfill all your duties as an employee. No one is an employeeforever.Questioner: There are so many transgressions towardsother living beings (atikraman) through thoughts, speech andacts going on that I barely finish one task and another one isready and waiting. When trying to do pratikraman for one, theforce of the other is so strong that I have to keep the pratikramanfor the previous one pending.Dadashri: They will unfold in huge numbers. When youAptavani-6167168Aptavani-6Questioner: There is a community of the ‘right-doersand wrong-doers’ within me. This is an everyday thing.Dadashri: Whatever inner intent (bhaav) arises within, ifit affects you internally (asar) leading to ego-based reaction(Amado chaddhe), then leave it alone and retract. When thishappens, you will immediately know that you are on the wrongpath. In such a situation just say, ‘I am Shuddhatma,’ and ‘run’away from there. The moment the slightest uneasiness(vyakudata) arises amidst the state of bliss (nirakudata), thisshould make You ‘say,’ ‘This is not My place,’ and take offfrom there.Questioner: This is where I go wrong. I do not run awaywhen easiness-uneasiness (akudata- vyakudata) arises. I justremain there in it.Dadashri: This is not the time to sit. You may sit later. Ifyou sit now without the proper shakti (enough energy arisingwithin), you will get hurt. Ours, the Self’s, territory is of eternalbliss (nirakudata)! Karma will be bound wherever there is theslightest akudata-vyakudata (vacillation between easiness anduneasiness). Karma is not bound with a state of bliss (nirakudatastate). You are not going to gain from the worldly life by becominguneasy (vyakudata). Whatever happens is vyavasthit, so remainin bliss (nirakudata). As long as there is pure awareness(shuddha upayog), there will be bliss (nirakudata).In my youth, the intellect (buddhi) was like this: It wouldquickly form opinions about the other person. It would form avery quick opinion about others. Therefore, I can understandwhat must be going on within you.Actually, it is not worth forming an opinion about anyonein this world. To form an opinion about someone is our bondageand the absence of any opinion is liberation (moksha). What isthe relationship between you and anyone else? The other personhas to deal with his karma and you have to deal with yours.There is absolutely no need to form any opinion about anyone.Questioner: Our opinions are formed in the worldly life.For example, Rameshbhai takes some money from Nagindas.He then tells Nagindas, ‘I had told Chandubhai to give you themoney. Has he given you 5000 rupees like I told him to?’ Now,I, Chandubhai do not know anything about this and I come toknow of it when Nagindas asks me for the money. I tell Nagindasthat I was not even aware of this. Consequently I end up formingan opinion that Rameshbhai is a liar.Dadashri: Lord Mahavir goes as far to say that if someonetook a hundred rupees from your pocket yesterday and youcome to know about this through some evidence, then when hecomes back the next day, it is wrong to have suspicion abouthim as soon as you see him.Questioner: And the opinion that he is a liar, is that amistake?Dadashri: It is a mistake (dosh) to harbor suspiciontowards anybody. The Lord says that he was a thief yesterdaydue to unfolding of his karma (udayakarma), whereas he maynot be a thief today. This is all according to fruition of one’skarma (udayakarma).Questioner: So how then should I behave? If I do notharbor an opinion about him, then he will get accustomed to itand feel it is okay to continue the cheating because I am notgoing to say anything.Dadashri: No, you have to proceed with caution butwithout maintaining an opinion. If you keep money in your pocket,and you know that this man had taken your money, you stillshould not form the opinion that he is a thief. In this situation, putyour money someplace else.Questioner: This is not like that. Here Rameshbhai whoAptavani-6167168Aptavani-6Questioner: There is a community of the ‘right-doersand wrong-doers’ within me. This is an everyday thing.Dadashri: Whatever inner intent (bhaav) arises within, ifit affects you internally (asar) leading to ego-based reaction(Amado chaddhe), then leave it alone and retract. When thishappens, you will immediately know that you are on the wrongpath. In such a situation just say, ‘I am Shuddhatma,’ and ‘run’away from there. The moment the slightest uneasiness(vyakudata) arises amidst the state of bliss (nirakudata), thisshould make You ‘say,’ ‘This is not My place,’ and take offfrom there.Questioner: This is where I go wrong. I do not run awaywhen easiness-uneasiness (akudata- vyakudata) arises. I justremain there in it.Dadashri: This is not the time to sit. You may sit later. Ifyou sit now without the proper shakti (enough energy arisingwithin), you will get hurt. Ours, the Self’s, territory is of eternalbliss (nirakudata)! Karma will be bound wherever there is theslightest akudata-vyakudata (vacillation between easiness anduneasiness). Karma is not bound with a state of bliss (nirakudatastate). You are not going to gain from the worldly life by becominguneasy (vyakudata). Whatever happens is vyavasthit, so remainin bliss (nirakudata). As long as there is pure awareness(shuddha upayog), there will be bliss (nirakudata).In my youth, the intellect (buddhi) was like this: It wouldquickly form opinions about the other person. It would form avery quick opinion about others. Therefore, I can understandwhat must be going on within you.Actually, it is not worth forming an opinion about anyonein this world. To form an opinion about someone is our bondageand the absence of any opinion is liberation (moksha). What isthe relationship between you and anyone else? The other personhas to deal with his karma and you have to deal with yours.There is absolutely no need to form any opinion about anyone.Questioner: Our opinions are formed in the worldly life.For example, Rameshbhai takes some money from Nagindas.He then tells Nagindas, ‘I had told Chandubhai to give you themoney. Has he given you 5000 rupees like I told him to?’ Now,I, Chandubhai do not know anything about this and I come toknow of it when Nagindas asks me for the money. I tell Nagindasthat I was not even aware of this. Consequently I end up formingan opinion that Rameshbhai is a liar.Dadashri: Lord Mahavir goes as far to say that if someonetook a hundred rupees from your pocket yesterday and youcome to know about this through some evidence, then when hecomes back the next day, it is wrong to have suspicion abouthim as soon as you see him.Questioner: And the opinion that he is a liar, is that amistake?Dadashri: It is a mistake (dosh) to harbor suspiciontowards anybody. The Lord says that he was a thief yesterdaydue to unfolding of his karma (udayakarma), whereas he maynot be a thief today. This is all according to fruition of one’skarma (udayakarma).Questioner: So how then should I behave? If I do notharbor an opinion about him, then he will get accustomed to itand feel it is okay to continue the cheating because I am notgoing to say anything.Dadashri: No, you have to proceed with caution butwithout maintaining an opinion. If you keep money in your pocket,and you know that this man had taken your money, you stillshould not form the opinion that he is a thief. In this situation, putyour money someplace else.Questioner: This is not like that. Here Rameshbhai whoAptavani-6169170Aptavani-6owes the money to Nagindas tells him, ‘I have told Chandubhaiand he has sent you the money.’ That is when I feel, ‘I havenever had this discussion with Rameshbhai. He has not calledme, and he is lying in this manner!’ How should I act when thishappens to me?Dadashri: Yes, a person will tell lies, but why did he saysuch things? Why did he tell you a lie and not anyone else?Therefore, you must be guilty; you must have made a mistakesometime in the past life. The fruition of our karma is verily themistake.Questioner: But how should I behave here?Dadashri: This world exists on attachment-abhorrence(raag-dwesh). The main cause of all this is raag-dwesh. Whydo raag-dwesh occur? They occur because one interferes(dakhal) with others. Even if he steals from your home, if youbelieve that he is a thief then your raag-dwesh will arise. Thisis because you believe that he is a thief, and that is worldlyknowledge. Real knowledge (alaukik) is not like that. Realknowledge says just one thing and that is, ‘It is fruition of yourown karma.’ He took the money due to the fruition of his karma,and the fruition of your karma came together with his. In all that,why are you binding the opinion that he is a thief?If there is a rabid dog running loose, ‘we’ tell you to becareful and you should immediately close your doors. But if yougo around saying this dog has rabies, then you are consideredto have formed an opinion.Questioner: You know, Dada, instead of closing the doorbecause the dog may get into the house, I am likely to react soangrily that I will bang the door and hurt the dog!Dadashri: This is all worldly (laukik) knowledge. LordMahavir’s real (alaukik) knowledge says, ‘Do not blame anyone.Do not form opinions about anyone. Do not have any kind ofinner intent (bhaav) towards anyone. The world is flawless(nirdosh).’ When You know and experience this, You will beliberated. You will attain liberation when you have the vision(drashti) and ‘see,’ ‘Every living being in this world is nirdosh—flawless, and I alone am the one with mistakes (doshit). I ambound by my own mistakes.’Lord Mahavir has seen the world as flawless (nirdosh).I too do not see anyone as doshit - with mistakes. Whether oneputs a garland around my neck or curses me, no one is doshit.“The world is flawless.” It is because of illusionary vision (mayavidrashti) that one sees faults in others. The mistake lies only inthis viewpoint.When a philanthropist makes a donation, people will say,‘He is so generous and nice; he is giving donations!’ Whereasthe Lord says, ‘Why do you feel so happy in this? He is enjoyingthe fruition of his karma. Even the recipient of that donation isenjoying the fruition of his own karma. Why are you needlesslygetting in the middle? A thief steals; he too is suffering the fruitionof his karma. The entire world is suffering (vedey) its own karmaonly.From the moment ‘we’ have seen you and known you,‘our’ opinion about you will never change. Then whatever youdo; it is all dependent upon the fruition of your own karma.The worldly life will remain as long as one cannot see hisown mistakes and sees mistakes in others. As long as this visioncontinues, so will the worldly life. When one does not see asingle mistake in others and sees all his own mistakes, thenknow that his time has come for moksha. That is it! This is theonly difference in the vision (drashti)!That you see mistakes in others is really the mistake ofyour vision (drashti). This is because all living beings are underthe authority and realm of some other entity; they do not haveAptavani-6169170Aptavani-6owes the money to Nagindas tells him, ‘I have told Chandubhaiand he has sent you the money.’ That is when I feel, ‘I havenever had this discussion with Rameshbhai. He has not calledme, and he is lying in this manner!’ How should I act when thishappens to me?Dadashri: Yes, a person will tell lies, but why did he saysuch things? Why did he tell you a lie and not anyone else?Therefore, you must be guilty; you must have made a mistakesometime in the past life. The fruition of our karma is verily themistake.Questioner: But how should I behave here?Dadashri: This world exists on attachment-abhorrence(raag-dwesh). The main cause of all this is raag-dwesh. Whydo raag-dwesh occur? They occur because one interferes(dakhal) with others. Even if he steals from your home, if youbelieve that he is a thief then your raag-dwesh will arise. Thisis because you believe that he is a thief, and that is worldlyknowledge. Real knowledge (alaukik) is not like that. Realknowledge says just one thing and that is, ‘It is fruition of yourown karma.’ He took the money due to the fruition of his karma,and the fruition of your karma came together with his. In all that,why are you binding the opinion that he is a thief?If there is a rabid dog running loose, ‘we’ tell you to becareful and you should immediately close your doors. But if yougo around saying this dog has rabies, then you are consideredto have formed an opinion.Questioner: You know, Dada, instead of closing the doorbecause the dog may get into the house, I am likely to react soangrily that I will bang the door and hurt the dog!Dadashri: This is all worldly (laukik) knowledge. LordMahavir’s real (alaukik) knowledge says, ‘Do not blame anyone.Do not form opinions about anyone. Do not have any kind ofinner intent (bhaav) towards anyone. The world is flawless(nirdosh).’ When You know and experience this, You will beliberated. You will attain liberation when you have the vision(drashti) and ‘see,’ ‘Every living being in this world is nirdosh—flawless, and I alone am the one with mistakes (doshit). I ambound by my own mistakes.’Lord Mahavir has seen the world as flawless (nirdosh).I too do not see anyone as doshit - with mistakes. Whether oneputs a garland around my neck or curses me, no one is doshit.“The world is flawless.” It is because of illusionary vision (mayavidrashti) that one sees faults in others. The mistake lies only inthis viewpoint.When a philanthropist makes a donation, people will say,‘He is so generous and nice; he is giving donations!’ Whereasthe Lord says, ‘Why do you feel so happy in this? He is enjoyingthe fruition of his karma. Even the recipient of that donation isenjoying the fruition of his own karma. Why are you needlesslygetting in the middle? A thief steals; he too is suffering the fruitionof his karma. The entire world is suffering (vedey) its own karmaonly.From the moment ‘we’ have seen you and known you,‘our’ opinion about you will never change. Then whatever youdo; it is all dependent upon the fruition of your own karma.The worldly life will remain as long as one cannot see hisown mistakes and sees mistakes in others. As long as this visioncontinues, so will the worldly life. When one does not see asingle mistake in others and sees all his own mistakes, thenknow that his time has come for moksha. That is it! This is theonly difference in the vision (drashti)!That you see mistakes in others is really the mistake ofyour vision (drashti). This is because all living beings are underthe authority and realm of some other entity; they do not haveAptavani-6171172Aptavani-6any independent authority. They are all dependant on their ownkarma. They are constantly suffering their own karma. In all that,no one is at fault. The one who understands this will go tomoksha. But if one begins to justify things with his intellect, hewill remain entrenched here. If he tries to weigh things accordingto worldly justice, he will remain entrenched in the worldly life.* * * * *[21]Equanimity with Sticky FilesQuestioner: Is ‘settling all files with equanimity’ the greatestthing to do in the worldly life?Dadashri: Yes, the problem is only with the files. Youhave become stuck by these files only. The files are what obstructyou, nothing else. Everywhere else you are free from attachmentand abhorrence (vitarag).Questioner: What should I do if despite the intent ofwanting very much to settle with equanimity, I am not able to?Dadashri: Yes, that can happen but you are not liable forthat. You have to make a decision that, ‘Even if things are notsettled with equanimity, I will never change my intent of wantingto do so.’ You should never feel, ‘The Heck with it, I do notwant to bother settling with equanimity.’ Do not let go of Yourintent of, ‘I want to settle with equanimity, without fail.’ Whetherthe settlement occurs with equanimity or not, is under the controlof vyavasthit.Questioner: It may not be settled today but will it settlefor sure in two or three days?Dadashri: Eighty percent of the time it gets settled on itsown. Only ten to fifteen percent do not get settled, and that isbecause they (the files) are very sticky. But even then, You arenot liable for that; ‘vyavasthit’ is. You have decided that Youdefinitely want to settle with equanimity. All your efforts shouldbe towards settling files with equanimity.Aptavani-6171172Aptavani-6any independent authority. They are all dependant on their ownkarma. They are constantly suffering their own karma. In all that,no one is at fault. The one who understands this will go tomoksha. But if one begins to justify things with his intellect, hewill remain entrenched here. If he tries to weigh things accordingto worldly justice, he will remain entrenched in the worldly life.* * * * *[21]Equanimity with Sticky FilesQuestioner: Is ‘settling all files with equanimity’ the greatestthing to do in the worldly life?Dadashri: Yes, the problem is only with the files. Youhave become stuck by these files only. The files are what obstructyou, nothing else. Everywhere else you are free from attachmentand abhorrence (vitarag).Questioner: What should I do if despite the intent ofwanting very much to settle with equanimity, I am not able to?Dadashri: Yes, that can happen but you are not liable forthat. You have to make a decision that, ‘Even if things are notsettled with equanimity, I will never change my intent of wantingto do so.’ You should never feel, ‘The Heck with it, I do notwant to bother settling with equanimity.’ Do not let go of Yourintent of, ‘I want to settle with equanimity, without fail.’ Whetherthe settlement occurs with equanimity or not, is under the controlof vyavasthit.Questioner: It may not be settled today but will it settlefor sure in two or three days?Dadashri: Eighty percent of the time it gets settled on itsown. Only ten to fifteen percent do not get settled, and that isbecause they (the files) are very sticky. But even then, You arenot liable for that; ‘vyavasthit’ is. You have decided that Youdefinitely want to settle with equanimity. All your efforts shouldbe towards settling files with equanimity.Aptavani-6173174Aptavani-6Everyone has ‘sticky’ files (heavy accounts of karma)nowadays. If you had no sticky files, there would be no need foryou to sit with the Gnani Purush for years.Questioner: Dada, do something so that our files willdisappear, just like that.Dadashri: It is like this: Until the energies of the Selfmanifest (within you), your work cannot be accomplished. Now,if I do it for you, then that energy will remain dormant. You haveto let them express, do you not? Do you not have to destroy theveils of ignorance over the Self? Those veils will begin to bedestroyed from the moment you decide to settle the files. Youdo not have to do anything in it. All You have to do is have theinner intent (bhaav) to settle with equanimity, even if the file isvery difficult.You have to make the Self independent (niralumb). Untilit becomes niralumb, dependency (avalumban) will remain,and it will not become absolute as long as there is dependency.Niralumb Self is the absolute Atma. So that is what You haveto attain. Do not worry if You do not attain it in this life. It willhappen in the next life for sure. All You have to do is remain inthe Agnas and settle the files with equanimity, in this life. That isthe greatest Agna, and how many sticky files can there be? It isnot as if there are two hundred to five hundred sticky files, arethere? There are only two to four, and really the fun lies indealing with the sticky ones!Questioner: Many times, it becomes very difficult to settlethe sticky file; in doing so, I become ill and upset.Dadashri: All that weakness will go away. However muchof that weakness goes away; that much power (shakti) will arisewithin you. You will feel you have more power than before.In 1939, when I was about 30-31 years old, I had goneto a village for business on a contract to build a bridge. A localvaniyo (baniya cast businessman) would do business during theday and at night he would gamble away his money. When hecame home, his wife would give him a good thrashing! One daythe villagers came to get me, ‘Come on Sir, this is somethingworth seeing!’ I asked them what was worth seeing. They toldme, ‘Why don’t you at least come?’ So we went there. Thedoor was locked from the inside. The vaniya’s wife must havebeen beating him with a stick but you could hear him saying outloud, pretending as if he is beating her, ‘Here! Take one… heretake another!’ I said to my self, ‘This is interesting! We learneda new scripture today!’ The villagers told me that his wife beatshim every day and the baniya says, ‘Take that!’ Is this baniyanot smart? This is what the world is like. You will find all kindsof things. The baniya preserved his reputation, did he not? Wedo not have to preserve ‘our, the Self’s’ reputation in this way;‘our’ reputation is already secure. All You have to do is ‘Settlewith equanimity.’One lawyer tells his client, ‘Will you get lost from here ornot? Or else I will make the dog bite you!’ This is called alawyer! Even the clients are like that!This world is without order, and there is no telling whereone will be or what will be his state. ‘We’ call it (the world)hollow, without substance (polumpol). The guilty one escapesand the innocent gets caught. If this is not called polumpol, thenwhat is it? From the perspective of worldly interaction, this worldis hollow and haphazard and from the perspective of naturalorder, it is absolutely just and in compliance with the naturallaws. People do not know how to tally this calculation. Iswhatever you see the account? No, no! Nature says that whateveryou see before you is a settlement of a karmic account fromthe past life, and the settlement of the current account willcome in the next life. Therefore, you have to suffer theconsequences of your past mistakes. The fault is of the sufferer.Therefore, whoever is suffering now is verily at fault due to hisAptavani-6173174Aptavani-6Everyone has ‘sticky’ files (heavy accounts of karma)nowadays. If you had no sticky files, there would be no need foryou to sit with the Gnani Purush for years.Questioner: Dada, do something so that our files willdisappear, just like that.Dadashri: It is like this: Until the energies of the Selfmanifest (within you), your work cannot be accomplished. Now,if I do it for you, then that energy will remain dormant. You haveto let them express, do you not? Do you not have to destroy theveils of ignorance over the Self? Those veils will begin to bedestroyed from the moment you decide to settle the files. Youdo not have to do anything in it. All You have to do is have theinner intent (bhaav) to settle with equanimity, even if the file isvery difficult.You have to make the Self independent (niralumb). Untilit becomes niralumb, dependency (avalumban) will remain,and it will not become absolute as long as there is dependency.Niralumb Self is the absolute Atma. So that is what You haveto attain. Do not worry if You do not attain it in this life. It willhappen in the next life for sure. All You have to do is remain inthe Agnas and settle the files with equanimity, in this life. That isthe greatest Agna, and how many sticky files can there be? It isnot as if there are two hundred to five hundred sticky files, arethere? There are only two to four, and really the fun lies indealing with the sticky ones!Questioner: Many times, it becomes very difficult to settlethe sticky file; in doing so, I become ill and upset.Dadashri: All that weakness will go away. However muchof that weakness goes away; that much power (shakti) will arisewithin you. You will feel you have more power than before.In 1939, when I was about 30-31 years old, I had goneto a village for business on a contract to build a bridge. A localvaniyo (baniya cast businessman) would do business during theday and at night he would gamble away his money. When hecame home, his wife would give him a good thrashing! One daythe villagers came to get me, ‘Come on Sir, this is somethingworth seeing!’ I asked them what was worth seeing. They toldme, ‘Why don’t you at least come?’ So we went there. Thedoor was locked from the inside. The vaniya’s wife must havebeen beating him with a stick but you could hear him saying outloud, pretending as if he is beating her, ‘Here! Take one… heretake another!’ I said to my self, ‘This is interesting! We learneda new scripture today!’ The villagers told me that his wife beatshim every day and the baniya says, ‘Take that!’ Is this baniyanot smart? This is what the world is like. You will find all kindsof things. The baniya preserved his reputation, did he not? Wedo not have to preserve ‘our, the Self’s’ reputation in this way;‘our’ reputation is already secure. All You have to do is ‘Settlewith equanimity.’One lawyer tells his client, ‘Will you get lost from here ornot? Or else I will make the dog bite you!’ This is called alawyer! Even the clients are like that!This world is without order, and there is no telling whereone will be or what will be his state. ‘We’ call it (the world)hollow, without substance (polumpol). The guilty one escapesand the innocent gets caught. If this is not called polumpol, thenwhat is it? From the perspective of worldly interaction, this worldis hollow and haphazard and from the perspective of naturalorder, it is absolutely just and in compliance with the naturallaws. People do not know how to tally this calculation. Iswhatever you see the account? No, no! Nature says that whateveryou see before you is a settlement of a karmic account fromthe past life, and the settlement of the current account willcome in the next life. Therefore, you have to suffer theconsequences of your past mistakes. The fault is of the sufferer.Therefore, whoever is suffering now is verily at fault due to hisAptavani-6175176Aptavani-6is attained by simply asking for it. One has to nurture the causesthat lead to the attainment of such speech. Then the fruits thatcome will be in accordance with that.Speech is an effect. Speech that makes others happy willcontinue to become sweeter and speech that hurts people willcontinue to become bitter. Then, whether he groans or the buffalo;it all sounds the same!Speech Energy: Use and AbuseQuestioner: How does energy or power (vachanbud)of speech arise?Dadashri: Vachanbud will arise when not even a singleword is used in making fun of others, when it is not used forone’s self-serving interest, when it is not used to feed one’spride (maan), when it is not misused in anyway.Questioner: I can understand the part about not using itfor self-interest and to feed the pride, but what is wrong withmaking fun of people?Dadashri: Making fun of others is very wrong. Instead itis better to use the speech to feed the pride (maan) within.Making fun of someone is making fun of the God within. Youmay think, ‘This man is like a donkey, but he is God!’ Checkto see who he is after all! After all, is he not God?I used to have the habit of poking fun at others. Not thekind of fun that would cause harm to anyone, but it is bound toaffect and hurt the person on the inside, is it not? If the intellectincreases, where is it likely to be abused? It will be abused inmaking fun of those with lesser intellect. When I understood thedanger in this, I stopped making fun of people. Is making fun ofothers a worthy thing to do? It is very dangerous; it is a gravemistake. You must never make fun of anyone.Questioner: But what is wrong in making fun of peopleown mistake; no one else is at fault.Questioner: These sticky files I have, is that also becauseof my own mistake?Dadashri: Yes, you have made it sticky, so you have toget rid of your stickiness. A simple and straightforward (bhodu)person will have simple and straightforward files.Questioner: Are people with sticky files deceitful?Dadashri: No, we cannot call them deceitful. They keepmaking everything stickier through the ego, whereas astraightforward person will say, ‘Okay! That is fine!’ and will letgo. He does not care about the ego.Speech, Pleasant or Unpleasant, is an Effect Mistakes (dosh) are mainly of the speech. If speech doesnot improve, if it does not become pleasant, then it will not bringbeneficial results. The Lord within pardons mistakes of the body(deha), but speech hurts people, does it not? Meaningful progress occurs once speech becomespleasant. Progressively, it becomes so pleasant that in the finallife, in the life before ultimate liberation, there is nothing that canbe compared to its sweetness, whereas some people, wheneverthey speak sound like a groaning buffalo! This is a speech andso is the speech of the Tirthankars (Totally enlightened beings)!Questioner: If one has made the intent (bhaav) forattaining such speech that does not hurt the ego of any livingbeing (syadvaad speech); if I made the bhaav that my speechtoo should be so pleasant; will that bhaav not result in such aspeech?Dadashri: No, it is not like that. To acquire such speech,every day you have to ask for the energy to have speech thathurts no one and that it gives pleasure to everyone. But nothingAptavani-6175176Aptavani-6is attained by simply asking for it. One has to nurture the causesthat lead to the attainment of such speech. Then the fruits thatcome will be in accordance with that.Speech is an effect. Speech that makes others happy willcontinue to become sweeter and speech that hurts people willcontinue to become bitter. Then, whether he groans or the buffalo;it all sounds the same!Speech Energy: Use and AbuseQuestioner: How does energy or power (vachanbud)of speech arise?Dadashri: Vachanbud will arise when not even a singleword is used in making fun of others, when it is not used forone’s self-serving interest, when it is not used to feed one’spride (maan), when it is not misused in anyway.Questioner: I can understand the part about not using itfor self-interest and to feed the pride, but what is wrong withmaking fun of people?Dadashri: Making fun of others is very wrong. Instead itis better to use the speech to feed the pride (maan) within.Making fun of someone is making fun of the God within. Youmay think, ‘This man is like a donkey, but he is God!’ Checkto see who he is after all! After all, is he not God?I used to have the habit of poking fun at others. Not thekind of fun that would cause harm to anyone, but it is bound toaffect and hurt the person on the inside, is it not? If the intellectincreases, where is it likely to be abused? It will be abused inmaking fun of those with lesser intellect. When I understood thedanger in this, I stopped making fun of people. Is making fun ofothers a worthy thing to do? It is very dangerous; it is a gravemistake. You must never make fun of anyone.Questioner: But what is wrong in making fun of peopleown mistake; no one else is at fault.Questioner: These sticky files I have, is that also becauseof my own mistake?Dadashri: Yes, you have made it sticky, so you have toget rid of your stickiness. A simple and straightforward (bhodu)person will have simple and straightforward files.Questioner: Are people with sticky files deceitful?Dadashri: No, we cannot call them deceitful. They keepmaking everything stickier through the ego, whereas astraightforward person will say, ‘Okay! That is fine!’ and will letgo. He does not care about the ego.Speech, Pleasant or Unpleasant, is an Effect Mistakes (dosh) are mainly of the speech. If speech doesnot improve, if it does not become pleasant, then it will not bringbeneficial results. The Lord within pardons mistakes of the body(deha), but speech hurts people, does it not? Meaningful progress occurs once speech becomespleasant. Progressively, it becomes so pleasant that in the finallife, in the life before ultimate liberation, there is nothing that canbe compared to its sweetness, whereas some people, wheneverthey speak sound like a groaning buffalo! This is a speech andso is the speech of the Tirthankars (Totally enlightened beings)!Questioner: If one has made the intent (bhaav) forattaining such speech that does not hurt the ego of any livingbeing (syadvaad speech); if I made the bhaav that my speechtoo should be so pleasant; will that bhaav not result in such aspeech?Dadashri: No, it is not like that. To acquire such speech,every day you have to ask for the energy to have speech thathurts no one and that it gives pleasure to everyone. But nothingAptavani-6177178Aptavani-6with greater intellect (buddhi)?Dadashri: No, but the one with the lesser intellect willnaturally not make fun of others, will he?Someone may have a very funny walk and you laugh athim. Hey you! Why are you making fun of him? God within himhas understood and taken note of everything. He has taken notethat You have just laughed at Him. You laughed at God mockingly.Your condition will become like that too. That is the law ofnature. So avoid such results.Questioner: I end up making fun of important people.Dadashri: You just found out that it is wrong to make funof others, whereas I knew it when I was young, but even thenthe fun-making continued for almost eight to ten years. You willbe able to get rid of it very quickly.Still, there is nothing wrong in making fun where no onegets hurt and everyone gets joy out of it. That is called innocentfun. ‘We’ still continue making that kind of fun because the rootof it (the habit of making fun) does not go away, does it? Butthere is only innocence in it.The Gnani Purush Becomes a DiscipleQuestioner: How is it that you get along well with suchlittle children?Dadashri: ‘We’ keep at hand a set of ‘counter-pulleys.’‘We’ have so many such sets that whatever kind of personcomes here, ‘we’ immediately apply an appropriate counter-pulley. So if a small toddler comes along and does ‘Jai, Jai’ to‘us,’ then I have to communicate with him, do I not? No childever has any fear when he sees me.Questioner: What do you do when someone of the samestatus as You comes here?Dadashri: There is no equivalent status as ‘this’ one. Thisstatus is considered a unique and unparalleled state (ajod). Thescripture writers have called this an unparalleled state.If ‘we’ meet someone in the train, and he does not knowthat I am a Gnani, even then I will ‘set a pulley’ of ‘I am apassenger.’If someone with ‘our’ status were to come here, I wouldbecome his disciple. I have decided from the beginning to becomea disciple of everyone. So he will not have any difficulty. Hewho becomes a disciple may become a guru in the next life, sotread carefully with awareness in such situations. Therefore, donot become a guru. And what do I gain from becoming thatperson’s disciple? I may become his guru! If he has any problems,he will have to come and ask.Questioner: I did not quite get that, Dada!Dadashri: A relationship is established when ‘I’ becomehis disciple. So then he will come back to ‘me’ as a disciple.Had ‘I’ not become his disciple, he would not have come to‘me’ and taken advantage of My presence.The Worldly Life is a DramaWorldly relations by nature are prone to fall and end(chyuta), and You are not subject to fall (achyuta) from yourreal status and come to an end. There is no telling when worldlyrelationships will come to an end or break.Questioner: They are like that. I have experienced that.Dadashri: You too have experienced that? The nature ofyour relationship with your mother too is prone to end?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: All relationships are prone to end by their verynature (chyuta) but you have to keep this to yourself. As far asAptavani-6177178Aptavani-6with greater intellect (buddhi)?Dadashri: No, but the one with the lesser intellect willnaturally not make fun of others, will he?Someone may have a very funny walk and you laugh athim. Hey you! Why are you making fun of him? God within himhas understood and taken note of everything. He has taken notethat You have just laughed at Him. You laughed at God mockingly.Your condition will become like that too. That is the law ofnature. So avoid such results.Questioner: I end up making fun of important people.Dadashri: You just found out that it is wrong to make funof others, whereas I knew it when I was young, but even thenthe fun-making continued for almost eight to ten years. You willbe able to get rid of it very quickly.Still, there is nothing wrong in making fun where no onegets hurt and everyone gets joy out of it. That is called innocentfun. ‘We’ still continue making that kind of fun because the rootof it (the habit of making fun) does not go away, does it? Butthere is only innocence in it.The Gnani Purush Becomes a DiscipleQuestioner: How is it that you get along well with suchlittle children?Dadashri: ‘We’ keep at hand a set of ‘counter-pulleys.’‘We’ have so many such sets that whatever kind of personcomes here, ‘we’ immediately apply an appropriate counter-pulley. So if a small toddler comes along and does ‘Jai, Jai’ to‘us,’ then I have to communicate with him, do I not? No childever has any fear when he sees me.Questioner: What do you do when someone of the samestatus as You comes here?Dadashri: There is no equivalent status as ‘this’ one. Thisstatus is considered a unique and unparalleled state (ajod). Thescripture writers have called this an unparalleled state.If ‘we’ meet someone in the train, and he does not knowthat I am a Gnani, even then I will ‘set a pulley’ of ‘I am apassenger.’If someone with ‘our’ status were to come here, I wouldbecome his disciple. I have decided from the beginning to becomea disciple of everyone. So he will not have any difficulty. Hewho becomes a disciple may become a guru in the next life, sotread carefully with awareness in such situations. Therefore, donot become a guru. And what do I gain from becoming thatperson’s disciple? I may become his guru! If he has any problems,he will have to come and ask.Questioner: I did not quite get that, Dada!Dadashri: A relationship is established when ‘I’ becomehis disciple. So then he will come back to ‘me’ as a disciple.Had ‘I’ not become his disciple, he would not have come to‘me’ and taken advantage of My presence.The Worldly Life is a DramaWorldly relations by nature are prone to fall and end(chyuta), and You are not subject to fall (achyuta) from yourreal status and come to an end. There is no telling when worldlyrelationships will come to an end or break.Questioner: They are like that. I have experienced that.Dadashri: You too have experienced that? The nature ofyour relationship with your mother too is prone to end?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: All relationships are prone to end by their verynature (chyuta) but you have to keep this to yourself. As far asAptavani-6179180Aptavani-6your worldly interactions are concerned, you will even have totell your mother, ‘Mom, I do not like being away from you.’Even your mother will say, ‘Son, I do not like it withoutyou,’ and the one within (You) know that it is a relation that willend or is prone to end (chyuta). This entire worldly life is likea drama. From within You know that, ‘I am pure Soul—Shuddhatma, and this drama of the worldly life has to be playedout in the name of ‘Chandulal.’ There is no attachment-abhorrence(raag-dwesh) in this drama. In a drama, people quarrel andfight but there is no raag-dwesh in it. This drama that is currentlytaking place has already been previously rehearsed in the pastlife. That is why ‘we’ say everything is vyavasthit; otherwise,would a person not have changed everything around?In this world, instead of playing his part like he is in adrama, if a man has an important position at his job, at his workhe will be obstinate (aadayee) but at home he will behave infront of his wife. When you visit him at home he will say, ‘Comeon in and sit down,’ but when he is at work, he will not evenlook at you. ‘Hey, you! What is it about the chair you sit on atwork that bothers you?’ Does it make you arrogant? He will goaround thinking, ‘I am this… I am that.’ Hey, man! What is somighty about you? At home, your wife bullies you!Should you not understand something at least? There is amutual relationship with everyone that you interact with. What isthe world? It is mutual existence. Regardless of whom you areinteracting with, whether it is a collector or a servant, you shouldmaintain a helping and obliging nature; there should be an intentmutuality.* * * * *[22]Where is the Pain in this Life for You?There is no pain (dukh) or misery in your worldly life.Pain and misery are endured by patients in the hospitals whenthey have to sleep with their legs suspended. Pain and miseryare in the severely burned patients. What pain (dukh) do youhave that you complain unnecessarily? You deserve to be thrownin jail for six months! When you call good things bad, what willyou call ‘bad’? In the hospitals, where there is pain and misery,call that pain and misery, but why do you claim pain where thereis none? In my whole life, I have never said that I have pain andmisery (dukh). How can you say that? Are you a fool to speakthis way? Pain worth two pennies, four pennies, eight pennies,twelve pennies; can it all be called the same?People sick in the hospitals have true pain, not you! Peoplehave their legs in traction; people are suffering from burns; goand see them. Then you will realize that your pain is nothing.People have no awareness of how wonderful a place nature hasgiven them to live in. They criticize good things as well as thosewhich are not so good. Complaining and criticizing is their business.How can you call this humanity? Should there not be some kindof a limit as to what one can regard as difficulty? ‘Today I didnot have an appetite so I could not eat; today I have this difficulty.’What kind of madness is this?When my hip was fractured and it was suspended withweights, some people said, ‘Why does God have to give youthis kind of pain and misery? For sure, now there is no God!’Hey, you! Where has God hurt me? It seems that way toAptavani-6179180Aptavani-6your worldly interactions are concerned, you will even have totell your mother, ‘Mom, I do not like being away from you.’Even your mother will say, ‘Son, I do not like it withoutyou,’ and the one within (You) know that it is a relation that willend or is prone to end (chyuta). This entire worldly life is likea drama. From within You know that, ‘I am pure Soul—Shuddhatma, and this drama of the worldly life has to be playedout in the name of ‘Chandulal.’ There is no attachment-abhorrence(raag-dwesh) in this drama. In a drama, people quarrel andfight but there is no raag-dwesh in it. This drama that is currentlytaking place has already been previously rehearsed in the pastlife. That is why ‘we’ say everything is vyavasthit; otherwise,would a person not have changed everything around?In this world, instead of playing his part like he is in adrama, if a man has an important position at his job, at his workhe will be obstinate (aadayee) but at home he will behave infront of his wife. When you visit him at home he will say, ‘Comeon in and sit down,’ but when he is at work, he will not evenlook at you. ‘Hey, you! What is it about the chair you sit on atwork that bothers you?’ Does it make you arrogant? He will goaround thinking, ‘I am this… I am that.’ Hey, man! What is somighty about you? At home, your wife bullies you!Should you not understand something at least? There is amutual relationship with everyone that you interact with. What isthe world? It is mutual existence. Regardless of whom you areinteracting with, whether it is a collector or a servant, you shouldmaintain a helping and obliging nature; there should be an intentmutuality.* * * * *[22]Where is the Pain in this Life for You?There is no pain (dukh) or misery in your worldly life.Pain and misery are endured by patients in the hospitals whenthey have to sleep with their legs suspended. Pain and miseryare in the severely burned patients. What pain (dukh) do youhave that you complain unnecessarily? You deserve to be thrownin jail for six months! When you call good things bad, what willyou call ‘bad’? In the hospitals, where there is pain and misery,call that pain and misery, but why do you claim pain where thereis none? In my whole life, I have never said that I have pain andmisery (dukh). How can you say that? Are you a fool to speakthis way? Pain worth two pennies, four pennies, eight pennies,twelve pennies; can it all be called the same?People sick in the hospitals have true pain, not you! Peoplehave their legs in traction; people are suffering from burns; goand see them. Then you will realize that your pain is nothing.People have no awareness of how wonderful a place nature hasgiven them to live in. They criticize good things as well as thosewhich are not so good. Complaining and criticizing is their business.How can you call this humanity? Should there not be some kindof a limit as to what one can regard as difficulty? ‘Today I didnot have an appetite so I could not eat; today I have this difficulty.’What kind of madness is this?When my hip was fractured and it was suspended withweights, some people said, ‘Why does God have to give youthis kind of pain and misery? For sure, now there is no God!’Hey, you! Where has God hurt me? It seems that way toAptavani-6181182Aptavani-6you. This is not considered pain (dukh). Pain is when they makea hole here (abdomen) to feed you or a hole here (lower abdomen)so you can pass urine; that is pain. These poor little babies havea lot of misery. They cry when they are hurting but they cannottell anyone, whereas these fools, they eat nine chapattis (thintortilla-like wheat bread) when they sit down to eat and thenthey say they are in pain! What can you say to such people?Should there not be a definition of pain? Should there not be adefinition of happiness? What is happiness?There is endless happiness in the world but people cannotexperience it. What kind of happiness is there? They get to eatdoodhpaak and maalpuda (Indian delicacies) made with pureghee – clarified butter! They get to eat all kinds of things andyet they are miserable! Go ask the animals what pain and miseryis! Even in humans, go ask people in the lower socioeconomicstatus what pain and misery is!Questioner: But Dada, You tell us that we can eat ghaaris(very rich, sweet delicacy) but not to become absorbed in itsenjoyment (tanmayakar).Dadashri: That discussion is a different matter. You can‘rule your kingdom’ as you see fit. Look at all the happiness thatstands before you and yet you keep complaining about pain!There is never a reason to clash and mourn (kaan)needlessly about anything in this world. If a young woman withoutchildren, twenty years old or so, becomes a widow withoutanyone to look after her, one may cry and mourn about her. Bykaan I mean there is nothing in this world worth getting intoclash over. And yet there is nothing but clash and clash andclash, the whole day long. Hey you! What have you learned?This is not called learning, is it? Should you not learn the theoryof relativity; should you not learn that all this is temporary andrelative (chyuta)?If you ask any mother-in-law she will tell you, ‘Mydaughter-in-law is not a good woman.’ Similarly, if you askedall the daughters-in-law they will tell you, ‘My mother-in-law isa bad woman.’ Now how can that be so? Are all daughters-in-law and mothers-in-law bad?Even the animals do not respond to certain levels of painbut the humans readily respond to any pain; this is how muchfoolishness there is.These people’s vision is one hundred percent wrong.Questioner: How can we say that everyone’s vision isone hundred percent wrong?Dadashri: ‘They are blind even with their eyes open’;they are blind, meaning they have no awareness of what is goodand beneficial and what is bad and harmful to the self. They arenot even aware whether what they say, do or know is beneficialor not. Wherever they can, they have become so bold in imitatingothers. Everything has changed. It used to be that an Indianwould not imitate others. In fact, the world used to imitate Indians.I do not have a problem with this modern time that is upon ustoday. I realize that the time cycle is such, and that the time cyclecontinues in this manner. I do not remain separate from the time.But I know whether good has been done or bad has been done.These people have caused complete harm.No matter how much fever I have, people in the homenever come to know about it. What is there to tell? Do they nothave fever too? Why do they have to know? They will forgetsoon. ‘I am full of infinite energy – Hoon anant shakti vaadochhoo,’ so why do I need to tell them?People run around saying, ‘I have a fever…I have a fever,’and then they get a thermometer and stick it in their mouths!Then they count 100Ú…101Ú…102Ú! Hey, you! It is just agauge to indicate if you have a fever or not; it is not a tool tohelp you get better!Aptavani-6181182Aptavani-6you. This is not considered pain (dukh). Pain is when they makea hole here (abdomen) to feed you or a hole here (lower abdomen)so you can pass urine; that is pain. These poor little babies havea lot of misery. They cry when they are hurting but they cannottell anyone, whereas these fools, they eat nine chapattis (thintortilla-like wheat bread) when they sit down to eat and thenthey say they are in pain! What can you say to such people?Should there not be a definition of pain? Should there not be adefinition of happiness? What is happiness?There is endless happiness in the world but people cannotexperience it. What kind of happiness is there? They get to eatdoodhpaak and maalpuda (Indian delicacies) made with pureghee – clarified butter! They get to eat all kinds of things andyet they are miserable! Go ask the animals what pain and miseryis! Even in humans, go ask people in the lower socioeconomicstatus what pain and misery is!Questioner: But Dada, You tell us that we can eat ghaaris(very rich, sweet delicacy) but not to become absorbed in itsenjoyment (tanmayakar).Dadashri: That discussion is a different matter. You can‘rule your kingdom’ as you see fit. Look at all the happiness thatstands before you and yet you keep complaining about pain!There is never a reason to clash and mourn (kaan)needlessly about anything in this world. If a young woman withoutchildren, twenty years old or so, becomes a widow withoutanyone to look after her, one may cry and mourn about her. Bykaan I mean there is nothing in this world worth getting intoclash over. And yet there is nothing but clash and clash andclash, the whole day long. Hey you! What have you learned?This is not called learning, is it? Should you not learn the theoryof relativity; should you not learn that all this is temporary andrelative (chyuta)?If you ask any mother-in-law she will tell you, ‘Mydaughter-in-law is not a good woman.’ Similarly, if you askedall the daughters-in-law they will tell you, ‘My mother-in-law isa bad woman.’ Now how can that be so? Are all daughters-in-law and mothers-in-law bad?Even the animals do not respond to certain levels of painbut the humans readily respond to any pain; this is how muchfoolishness there is.These people’s vision is one hundred percent wrong.Questioner: How can we say that everyone’s vision isone hundred percent wrong?Dadashri: ‘They are blind even with their eyes open’;they are blind, meaning they have no awareness of what is goodand beneficial and what is bad and harmful to the self. They arenot even aware whether what they say, do or know is beneficialor not. Wherever they can, they have become so bold in imitatingothers. Everything has changed. It used to be that an Indianwould not imitate others. In fact, the world used to imitate Indians.I do not have a problem with this modern time that is upon ustoday. I realize that the time cycle is such, and that the time cyclecontinues in this manner. I do not remain separate from the time.But I know whether good has been done or bad has been done.These people have caused complete harm.No matter how much fever I have, people in the homenever come to know about it. What is there to tell? Do they nothave fever too? Why do they have to know? They will forgetsoon. ‘I am full of infinite energy – Hoon anant shakti vaadochhoo,’ so why do I need to tell them?People run around saying, ‘I have a fever…I have a fever,’and then they get a thermometer and stick it in their mouths!Then they count 100Ú…101Ú…102Ú! Hey, you! It is just agauge to indicate if you have a fever or not; it is not a tool tohelp you get better!Aptavani-6183184Aptavani-6before.Dadashri: How is there going to be happiness in thisworld if it is not used in this way? Humans and animals do havehappiness in the world. How can humans have pain and misery(dukh)? They just do not know how to enjoy the happiness thatabounds, that is all.It is worth giving all this information to all the psychologists.There are facts even beyond this point. As long as this ‘bubble’(Dada referring to the physical body of the Gnani Purush), theliving body, exists, information will come out and the work willbe accomplished. Once it bursts, that will be the end!Death and Eternal LifeWhen we were going for a pilgrimage, everyone knewfour months ahead of time. Did everyone not know that they hadto take the 4:00 a.m. train? But why do people not say, ‘I wantto go,’ when it comes to dying? Here, no one will say anythinguntil the last moment. In fact, one keeps wishing for some kindof a miracle cure and yet when the pain becomes unbearable, hewill say he would be better off dead. Even death will not cometo a person until he endorses it. The income tax officers makeyou sign every document first. Similarly, one cannot die until onesigns off on it.Questioner: Death will not come to the one who will not‘sign’ for it, will it?Dadashri: It will not, if one does not sign. Do peoplegive their ‘signatures’ or not?Questioner: How can those who die in an accident, sign?Dadashri: They too have already endorsed their death.A person can never die without signing for it. Without thesignature, you have no right to die. Your death is of yourownership; no one can interfere in it. But once you endorse it,you cannot do anything about it.Are you saying, ‘I am in pain’? Pain is in the ‘relative,’ notin the ‘real.’ It is falsely projected (aropit) upon the relative asbeing real. Through a wrong belief, you have believed pain to bewhere it is not. When you say, ‘I am hurting,’ then the pain,which is only twenty-five percent in intensity, becomes onehundred percent.Questioner: I became one with the body, the self. So,instead of twenty-five percent, I feel a hundred percent pain.Dadashri: The whole world believes and knows, ‘I amChandulal,’ that is, they believe their relative-self to be their realSelf. But you have now learned the interaction (vyavahar) ofseparation.Questioner: But now if I say, ‘Chandulal has pain,’ willthat twenty-five percent pain remain as twenty-five percent?Dadashri: Yes, it will not increase. Otherwise, it willbecome one hundred percent. People are not aware and,therefore, they increase their pain by describing and discussingtheir pain with others.Do people not worry constantly? There is a limit toworrying. Not everyone is a Gnani, that they have no worries atall. But should there not be some rules or principles about this?How long can you go on worrying? Worry means to keepcontemplating (chintavan), ‘What will I do now…what’s goingto happen now…?’Here, God is being disgraced; nature is being disgraced.Then where is such a thing as justice?One cries when a two year old child dies, he cries whenthe twenty-two year married son dies and he cries when aseventy-five year old man dies. Hey, you! What understandingdo you get from all this? You have no understanding at all ofwhen to cry and when not to!Questioner: I have never used the intellect in this mannerAptavani-6183184Aptavani-6before.Dadashri: How is there going to be happiness in thisworld if it is not used in this way? Humans and animals do havehappiness in the world. How can humans have pain and misery(dukh)? They just do not know how to enjoy the happiness thatabounds, that is all.It is worth giving all this information to all the psychologists.There are facts even beyond this point. As long as this ‘bubble’(Dada referring to the physical body of the Gnani Purush), theliving body, exists, information will come out and the work willbe accomplished. Once it bursts, that will be the end!Death and Eternal LifeWhen we were going for a pilgrimage, everyone knewfour months ahead of time. Did everyone not know that they hadto take the 4:00 a.m. train? But why do people not say, ‘I wantto go,’ when it comes to dying? Here, no one will say anythinguntil the last moment. In fact, one keeps wishing for some kindof a miracle cure and yet when the pain becomes unbearable, hewill say he would be better off dead. Even death will not cometo a person until he endorses it. The income tax officers makeyou sign every document first. Similarly, one cannot die until onesigns off on it.Questioner: Death will not come to the one who will not‘sign’ for it, will it?Dadashri: It will not, if one does not sign. Do peoplegive their ‘signatures’ or not?Questioner: How can those who die in an accident, sign?Dadashri: They too have already endorsed their death.A person can never die without signing for it. Without thesignature, you have no right to die. Your death is of yourownership; no one can interfere in it. But once you endorse it,you cannot do anything about it.Are you saying, ‘I am in pain’? Pain is in the ‘relative,’ notin the ‘real.’ It is falsely projected (aropit) upon the relative asbeing real. Through a wrong belief, you have believed pain to bewhere it is not. When you say, ‘I am hurting,’ then the pain,which is only twenty-five percent in intensity, becomes onehundred percent.Questioner: I became one with the body, the self. So,instead of twenty-five percent, I feel a hundred percent pain.Dadashri: The whole world believes and knows, ‘I amChandulal,’ that is, they believe their relative-self to be their realSelf. But you have now learned the interaction (vyavahar) ofseparation.Questioner: But now if I say, ‘Chandulal has pain,’ willthat twenty-five percent pain remain as twenty-five percent?Dadashri: Yes, it will not increase. Otherwise, it willbecome one hundred percent. People are not aware and,therefore, they increase their pain by describing and discussingtheir pain with others.Do people not worry constantly? There is a limit toworrying. Not everyone is a Gnani, that they have no worries atall. But should there not be some rules or principles about this?How long can you go on worrying? Worry means to keepcontemplating (chintavan), ‘What will I do now…what’s goingto happen now…?’Here, God is being disgraced; nature is being disgraced.Then where is such a thing as justice?One cries when a two year old child dies, he cries whenthe twenty-two year married son dies and he cries when aseventy-five year old man dies. Hey, you! What understandingdo you get from all this? You have no understanding at all ofwhen to cry and when not to!Questioner: I have never used the intellect in this mannerAptavani-6185186Aptavani-6Questioner: Does a person sign in this life or does he doit in his past life?Dadashri: He signs for it in this life. It was planned forin the past life, but it materializes only in this life.One day my mama’s (maternal uncle) son, Raojibhai, andI were taking a nap outside our home when I heard my mother,Zaverba, say from inside the house, ‘Dear Lord! It will be niceif I could die.’ I told my uncle, ‘Look, Mother signed off on herlife!’ Because when one cannot tolerate the pain within, he doesthe intent (bhaav) that he would be better off dead. He puts his‘signature’ to it.Questioner: He signs off without awareness.Dadashri: Not without awareness; he does so inawareness (bhaan). Then if you ask him the next morning, ‘So,you are thinking of leaving or what?’ To that he will say, ‘No,my health is good.’Questioner: When someone dies as soon as he is born,what is that?Dadashri: Everyone ends up doing the intent (bhaav)within for sure; the account gets formed from within. Death cannever come without an account. Death never comes all of asudden. Everything is an incident; no event is an accident.When one gets a heart attack and he is in a lot of pain,there is a spontaneous bhaav of, ‘It would be nice if I canbecome free from this,’ and then when he feels a little better hewill say, ‘Doctor make me well, make me well!’ Hey, you! Butwhat about the fact that you wanted to die and had signed offon it earlier? Why don’t you think before making such a signature?A person will decide, ‘Tomorrow I will go to Ahmedabad,’or he will decide, ‘I want to go to a pilgrimage’; he will makeplans four months ahead of time. But when it comes to dying,no one makes a decision for it. On the contrary, he will pushaway thoughts about death saying, ‘No, no, it is nothing likethat. This is just a thought; I am still in good health. The bodyis good enough for another fifty years!’But the one who is impartial (nishpakshpati) will recognizeeverything. Can you not tell when a person is packing his bagsthat he is ready to leave? So when the bags are being packedwithin, and when we are also able see it and yet we do notbother looking; then is that not a mistake on our part? In the olddays, many people were straight-forward and with simple karmaeffects. They used to say, ‘After five days, on the day of agiyaras(eleventh day of lunar fortnight), I am going to leave this world,’and that is exactly what would happen. So do you think thereare different rules for other people? The rules are the same. Thisis just one’s illusion (moha) that creates attachment to the worldlylife. At the time of his dying, if the family tells him, ‘Uncle, nowrecite the Trimantra (three mantras that destroy all obstaclesin life),’ he will not do it and, on the contrary, he will think,‘They don’t have any sense!’ Just look at him! What a sack ofintelligence! No one will give him even a dime for his intelligenceif he were to try and sell it. The uncle’s mind is preoccupied withhis daughter’s marriage and he keeps thinking, ‘My daughter isnot married; she is getting left behind.’ Why would one notknow about his death when he has become impartial(nishpakshpati)? He is afraid of death. He is not afraid of goingout of town or to a pilgrimage because he feels that he willreturn. Hey, you! What is the guarantee that you will return fromthere either?I would whisper to a ship, ‘Sink if you want to, but thatis not ‘our’ wish.’ A ship has been launched in the water tomake profit, but because of the ocean it may even sink one day.That is how you speak to your body, ‘Leave when you have to,but that is not my wish.’ This is because the law of nature is sowonderful that it is not going to let anyone go. No one is goingAptavani-6185186Aptavani-6Questioner: Does a person sign in this life or does he doit in his past life?Dadashri: He signs for it in this life. It was planned forin the past life, but it materializes only in this life.One day my mama’s (maternal uncle) son, Raojibhai, andI were taking a nap outside our home when I heard my mother,Zaverba, say from inside the house, ‘Dear Lord! It will be niceif I could die.’ I told my uncle, ‘Look, Mother signed off on herlife!’ Because when one cannot tolerate the pain within, he doesthe intent (bhaav) that he would be better off dead. He puts his‘signature’ to it.Questioner: He signs off without awareness.Dadashri: Not without awareness; he does so inawareness (bhaan). Then if you ask him the next morning, ‘So,you are thinking of leaving or what?’ To that he will say, ‘No,my health is good.’Questioner: When someone dies as soon as he is born,what is that?Dadashri: Everyone ends up doing the intent (bhaav)within for sure; the account gets formed from within. Death cannever come without an account. Death never comes all of asudden. Everything is an incident; no event is an accident.When one gets a heart attack and he is in a lot of pain,there is a spontaneous bhaav of, ‘It would be nice if I canbecome free from this,’ and then when he feels a little better hewill say, ‘Doctor make me well, make me well!’ Hey, you! Butwhat about the fact that you wanted to die and had signed offon it earlier? Why don’t you think before making such a signature?A person will decide, ‘Tomorrow I will go to Ahmedabad,’or he will decide, ‘I want to go to a pilgrimage’; he will makeplans four months ahead of time. But when it comes to dying,no one makes a decision for it. On the contrary, he will pushaway thoughts about death saying, ‘No, no, it is nothing likethat. This is just a thought; I am still in good health. The bodyis good enough for another fifty years!’But the one who is impartial (nishpakshpati) will recognizeeverything. Can you not tell when a person is packing his bagsthat he is ready to leave? So when the bags are being packedwithin, and when we are also able see it and yet we do notbother looking; then is that not a mistake on our part? In the olddays, many people were straight-forward and with simple karmaeffects. They used to say, ‘After five days, on the day of agiyaras(eleventh day of lunar fortnight), I am going to leave this world,’and that is exactly what would happen. So do you think thereare different rules for other people? The rules are the same. Thisis just one’s illusion (moha) that creates attachment to the worldlylife. At the time of his dying, if the family tells him, ‘Uncle, nowrecite the Trimantra (three mantras that destroy all obstaclesin life),’ he will not do it and, on the contrary, he will think,‘They don’t have any sense!’ Just look at him! What a sack ofintelligence! No one will give him even a dime for his intelligenceif he were to try and sell it. The uncle’s mind is preoccupied withhis daughter’s marriage and he keeps thinking, ‘My daughter isnot married; she is getting left behind.’ Why would one notknow about his death when he has become impartial(nishpakshpati)? He is afraid of death. He is not afraid of goingout of town or to a pilgrimage because he feels that he willreturn. Hey, you! What is the guarantee that you will return fromthere either?I would whisper to a ship, ‘Sink if you want to, but thatis not ‘our’ wish.’ A ship has been launched in the water tomake profit, but because of the ocean it may even sink one day.That is how you speak to your body, ‘Leave when you have to,but that is not my wish.’ This is because the law of nature is sowonderful that it is not going to let anyone go. No one is goingAptavani-6187188Aptavani-6(sthitapragnya), but only a rare human being will have such athought, not everyone.Vyavasthit and Life after Life AccountYou are in a hurry for an appointment and you say to yourwife, ‘Hurry up and give me some food.’ In trying to hurry, thesoup pot tumbles over and all the soup spills out. What thenwould be the state within you? You have to become aware(jagrut) at such a time. The one who prepares your food isdoing it so that you may eat. It is not the mistake of the onecooking. And yet what do you say? ‘You spilled the soup?’Hey, you! She would not spill it. She is the one who preparedit for you. The one that spilled the soup is some other energy(shakti), but it happened through your wife!Therefore, there is no one out there to ruin anything foryou. There is no one in the world out there that has the energy(shakti; power) to do so. As yet, no one is born in this worldthat can spoil things for you.These are natural energies that are working here. Peopleask me why we have thieves. What is the need for all thesepick-pockets? Why did God give them life? Hey, you! Who willempty your pockets for you if they were not around? Do youwant God to personally come here? Who will come andconfiscate your wealth which you have accumulated throughstealing? Who will come and take away your undeserved wealthfrom you? You need such people; they are just the instrumentalevidences (nimits) in carrying out natural justice! There is aneed for all such people.Questioner: Such people take away a man’s hard earnedmoney.Dadashri: There is a reason behind why all that ‘hardearned money’ goes away. It appears to be hard earned in thislife but it is a karmic account (hisaab) from the past life. Itto feel sorry for anyone here. So why are you unnecessarilyfeeling sorry and saying, ‘Dear Lord, save him!’ How can Godsave him when God could not save himself? All the Gods bornhere did not survive, did they? Lord Krishna was sleeping withhis leg up like this. A hunter mistook Him for a deer and shothim with an arrow. Death does not spare anyone because thebody is not our real state, the Self. No one will interfere in ourstate of the Self. No one is there to touch You if you are a pureSoul (Shuddhatma). You are an absolute Soul (parmatma).But if you want to be someone’s father-in-law, if you want toremain as the self, then there is a problem.Questioner: What is the intention behind saying to thebody, ‘Leave when you want to, but that is not my wish’?Dadashri: We say, ‘That is not our wish,’ so that contempt(tiraskar) towards it does not arise.Questioner: Who is the one saying these sentences?Dadashri: They belong to the one who is separate fromdeath.Questioner: Is that called the self, the relative-self(pratishthit atma), the one who believes ‘I am Chandulal’?Dadashri: No, pratishthit atma is the one that is goingto die. This is the work of the energy of the Self (pragnya) thatleads to total liberation. Pratishthit atma is going to die, so itwill not speak this way, will it?Questioner: For the person in whom pragnya has notbeen awakened, and not everyone has pragnya, when such aperson speaks, then who is the one speaking?Dadashri: The one who is going to die is separate. Theone that is going to die will not say, ‘I will die.’ There is somepart of the intellect (buddhi) with such an intent (bhaav) and thispart belongs to the state of intellect which has become stillAptavani-6187188Aptavani-6(sthitapragnya), but only a rare human being will have such athought, not everyone.Vyavasthit and Life after Life AccountYou are in a hurry for an appointment and you say to yourwife, ‘Hurry up and give me some food.’ In trying to hurry, thesoup pot tumbles over and all the soup spills out. What thenwould be the state within you? You have to become aware(jagrut) at such a time. The one who prepares your food isdoing it so that you may eat. It is not the mistake of the onecooking. And yet what do you say? ‘You spilled the soup?’Hey, you! She would not spill it. She is the one who preparedit for you. The one that spilled the soup is some other energy(shakti), but it happened through your wife!Therefore, there is no one out there to ruin anything foryou. There is no one in the world out there that has the energy(shakti; power) to do so. As yet, no one is born in this worldthat can spoil things for you.These are natural energies that are working here. Peopleask me why we have thieves. What is the need for all thesepick-pockets? Why did God give them life? Hey, you! Who willempty your pockets for you if they were not around? Do youwant God to personally come here? Who will come andconfiscate your wealth which you have accumulated throughstealing? Who will come and take away your undeserved wealthfrom you? You need such people; they are just the instrumentalevidences (nimits) in carrying out natural justice! There is aneed for all such people.Questioner: Such people take away a man’s hard earnedmoney.Dadashri: There is a reason behind why all that ‘hardearned money’ goes away. It appears to be hard earned in thislife but it is a karmic account (hisaab) from the past life. Itto feel sorry for anyone here. So why are you unnecessarilyfeeling sorry and saying, ‘Dear Lord, save him!’ How can Godsave him when God could not save himself? All the Gods bornhere did not survive, did they? Lord Krishna was sleeping withhis leg up like this. A hunter mistook Him for a deer and shothim with an arrow. Death does not spare anyone because thebody is not our real state, the Self. No one will interfere in ourstate of the Self. No one is there to touch You if you are a pureSoul (Shuddhatma). You are an absolute Soul (parmatma).But if you want to be someone’s father-in-law, if you want toremain as the self, then there is a problem.Questioner: What is the intention behind saying to thebody, ‘Leave when you want to, but that is not my wish’?Dadashri: We say, ‘That is not our wish,’ so that contempt(tiraskar) towards it does not arise.Questioner: Who is the one saying these sentences?Dadashri: They belong to the one who is separate fromdeath.Questioner: Is that called the self, the relative-self(pratishthit atma), the one who believes ‘I am Chandulal’?Dadashri: No, pratishthit atma is the one that is goingto die. This is the work of the energy of the Self (pragnya) thatleads to total liberation. Pratishthit atma is going to die, so itwill not speak this way, will it?Questioner: For the person in whom pragnya has notbeen awakened, and not everyone has pragnya, when such aperson speaks, then who is the one speaking?Dadashri: The one who is going to die is separate. Theone that is going to die will not say, ‘I will die.’ There is somepart of the intellect (buddhi) with such an intent (bhaav) and thispart belongs to the state of intellect which has become stillAptavani-6189190Aptavani-6happens because an account is still pending; otherwise, no onecan ever take anything away from anyone. No one has suchenergy or power (shakti), and if they do take anything away,then realize that there is a pending account that is being settled.This world is very just. Not even a snake will touch you. Thiswhole compound can be full of snakes, and yet none of themcan touch you. That is how just and wonderful this world is. Sowhat happens when a person does not understand these factsand speaks in his own language or has his own understanding?Does One Take Precautions or Are They JustHappening?Questioner: Is it considered confusion (vikalp) in thoughtprocesses if we keep thinking, ‘If it rains, then we will do it thisway’? Surely we should naturally think things through in this manner!Having thought everything through, whatever happens afterwardsis correct. But is thinking in this way considered a vikalp?Dadashri: For the one who has not taken Gnan, it is alla vikalp (‘I am Chandulal’). The one who has taken Gnan hasan understanding and, therefore, no vikalp remains for him. Asa pure Soul (Shuddhatma), ‘You’ do not have to think at all.Whatever thought arises has to be known.Questioner: Does that mean that there is no need to takeany precaution?Dadashri: How can there be anything as precautions?Precautions also occur automatically. So now where is theexistence of the one who is taking precautions?Who are you to take precautions when you stumble overand fall in complete daylight? Can man really take precautions?He does not have even the independent energy or power (shakti)to relieve his bowels!The whole world takes ‘precautions’ and yet do peoplenot have accidents? Where ‘precautions,’ or intellectualinterferences, do not exist, there are no ‘accidents’! Precautionis a kind of intellectual interference and restlessness. There isexcessive restlessness. There is no need for it at all. The worldruns naturally and spontaneously (sahaj) on its own.Questioner: But taking precaution does not happen withthe intent of doer-ship; it happens automatically.Dadashri: That will happen automatically, for sure.Questioner: There is no doer (karta), but if a thoughtarises naturally, then should one not use the intellectualdiscrimination (vivek buddhi) and do it?Dadashri: No, everything happens automatically. ‘You’have to keep ‘seeing’ what happens. Now, You tell me, who areyou in the middle of all this? Are You ‘Shuddhatma’ or are you‘Chandulal’?Questioner: You are asking who I am in the middle of allthat? Is the mind (mun) not in the middle?Dadashri: When have I ever disregarded the mind?Thoughts will naturally continue to arise in the mind. And sometimesthoughts may not even arise.It is like this: even in the last life before liberation, the mindworked every second. The only difference is that now the mindno longer has any tubers (granthi). It simply unfolds accordingto the unfolding karma (udaya).You are Shuddhatma after Gnan and from the worldlyview (vyavahar) you are ‘Chandulal.’ Now, in the worldly lifeinteractions, ‘I am Chandulal,’ ‘I am his uncle,’ ‘I am her nephew,’is called vikalp, but in reality, after Gnan (nischay) it is notvikalp. It is discharge. When you truly believe, ‘I truly amChandulal,’ then it is vikalp. After Gnan, the belief of, ‘I amShuddhatma,’ puts you in a state free from vikalp (nirvikalp).* * * * *Aptavani-6189190Aptavani-6happens because an account is still pending; otherwise, no onecan ever take anything away from anyone. No one has suchenergy or power (shakti), and if they do take anything away,then realize that there is a pending account that is being settled.This world is very just. Not even a snake will touch you. Thiswhole compound can be full of snakes, and yet none of themcan touch you. That is how just and wonderful this world is. Sowhat happens when a person does not understand these factsand speaks in his own language or has his own understanding?Does One Take Precautions or Are They JustHappening?Questioner: Is it considered confusion (vikalp) in thoughtprocesses if we keep thinking, ‘If it rains, then we will do it thisway’? Surely we should naturally think things through in this manner!Having thought everything through, whatever happens afterwardsis correct. But is thinking in this way considered a vikalp?Dadashri: For the one who has not taken Gnan, it is alla vikalp (‘I am Chandulal’). The one who has taken Gnan hasan understanding and, therefore, no vikalp remains for him. Asa pure Soul (Shuddhatma), ‘You’ do not have to think at all.Whatever thought arises has to be known.Questioner: Does that mean that there is no need to takeany precaution?Dadashri: How can there be anything as precautions?Precautions also occur automatically. So now where is theexistence of the one who is taking precautions?Who are you to take precautions when you stumble overand fall in complete daylight? Can man really take precautions?He does not have even the independent energy or power (shakti)to relieve his bowels!The whole world takes ‘precautions’ and yet do peoplenot have accidents? Where ‘precautions,’ or intellectualinterferences, do not exist, there are no ‘accidents’! Precautionis a kind of intellectual interference and restlessness. There isexcessive restlessness. There is no need for it at all. The worldruns naturally and spontaneously (sahaj) on its own.Questioner: But taking precaution does not happen withthe intent of doer-ship; it happens automatically.Dadashri: That will happen automatically, for sure.Questioner: There is no doer (karta), but if a thoughtarises naturally, then should one not use the intellectualdiscrimination (vivek buddhi) and do it?Dadashri: No, everything happens automatically. ‘You’have to keep ‘seeing’ what happens. Now, You tell me, who areyou in the middle of all this? Are You ‘Shuddhatma’ or are you‘Chandulal’?Questioner: You are asking who I am in the middle of allthat? Is the mind (mun) not in the middle?Dadashri: When have I ever disregarded the mind?Thoughts will naturally continue to arise in the mind. And sometimesthoughts may not even arise.It is like this: even in the last life before liberation, the mindworked every second. The only difference is that now the mindno longer has any tubers (granthi). It simply unfolds accordingto the unfolding karma (udaya).You are Shuddhatma after Gnan and from the worldlyview (vyavahar) you are ‘Chandulal.’ Now, in the worldly lifeinteractions, ‘I am Chandulal,’ ‘I am his uncle,’ ‘I am her nephew,’is called vikalp, but in reality, after Gnan (nischay) it is notvikalp. It is discharge. When you truly believe, ‘I truly amChandulal,’ then it is vikalp. After Gnan, the belief of, ‘I amShuddhatma,’ puts you in a state free from vikalp (nirvikalp).* * * * *Aptavani-6191192Aptavani-6the business. What do you think?Questioner: That is right.Dadashri: ‘We’ are here to clarify things and not tomake you agree with us.Questioner: If deceit (kapat) is being employed at home,or outside, then language that scares and petrifies has to beused, is that not so?Dadashri: If your threats stop others from being deceitful,then go ahead and do so. But what is the point in scaring themif deceit remains forever? You should be thrown in jail for scaringthem when you do not know how to scare them. Why do youdo it?Questioner: What should I do if I am not to threatenthem?Dadashri: You have to see how they can improve.Questioner: It is natural to get angry with someone whois being deceitful towards us, is it not?Dadashri: If the other person’s deceit leaves by yougetting angry at him five times, then it is all right; and if it doesnot, then you are to be thrown in jail. He is not getting curedwith this medicine and, on the contrary, you are killing him bymaking him drink such medicine!Questioner: What should we do if that person continuesto do the same thing?Dadashri: Your approach is harmful. This is not the wayto do it. It is one kind of egoism. To believe, ‘I can improve himthis way or that way,’ is egoism. What ‘we’ are trying to conveyis that you should be the one to improve first. You are the onlyone who is spoiled. He is already improved. The way you areharassing all these people by frightening them is not becoming ofyou.[23]What is an Intelligent Person Like?Questioner: Who can be called intelligent?Dadashri: The one who conducts his affairs in a mannerwith the least clash in the home, in business or anywhere else iscalled an intelligent person.Otherwise, doing ‘panditai’ (the application of theintellectual approach of scholars) to make the other person happyis a form of ‘over-wiseness,’ meaning it is excessive use of theintellect. Intellect should be used to help the other person.If one drinks tea after eating a sweet desert and thencomplains that there is no sugar in the tea, how can such a onebe called intelligent? And even if there is really no sugar in thetea, there is no reason to fuss and make a scene. Why wouldone want to yell and scare everyone at home over just a cup oftea worth a quarter?The one with intellect is the one who uses his intellect insuch a way that no one will experience any stress on his account.If anyone ever experiences any stress and fear on his account,then that intellect is wicked. Such wicked intellect binds terribledemerit karma (paap). Therefore, one needs to understand therole of intellect, does one not?What good is the intellect that does not help anyone athome and causes differences of opinion?And a loss that occurs in business is the nature of doingbusiness, but a mistake must not occur in the process of mendingAptavani-6191192Aptavani-6the business. What do you think?Questioner: That is right.Dadashri: ‘We’ are here to clarify things and not tomake you agree with us.Questioner: If deceit (kapat) is being employed at home,or outside, then language that scares and petrifies has to beused, is that not so?Dadashri: If your threats stop others from being deceitful,then go ahead and do so. But what is the point in scaring themif deceit remains forever? You should be thrown in jail for scaringthem when you do not know how to scare them. Why do youdo it?Questioner: What should I do if I am not to threatenthem?Dadashri: You have to see how they can improve.Questioner: It is natural to get angry with someone whois being deceitful towards us, is it not?Dadashri: If the other person’s deceit leaves by yougetting angry at him five times, then it is all right; and if it doesnot, then you are to be thrown in jail. He is not getting curedwith this medicine and, on the contrary, you are killing him bymaking him drink such medicine!Questioner: What should we do if that person continuesto do the same thing?Dadashri: Your approach is harmful. This is not the wayto do it. It is one kind of egoism. To believe, ‘I can improve himthis way or that way,’ is egoism. What ‘we’ are trying to conveyis that you should be the one to improve first. You are the onlyone who is spoiled. He is already improved. The way you areharassing all these people by frightening them is not becoming ofyou.[23]What is an Intelligent Person Like?Questioner: Who can be called intelligent?Dadashri: The one who conducts his affairs in a mannerwith the least clash in the home, in business or anywhere else iscalled an intelligent person.Otherwise, doing ‘panditai’ (the application of theintellectual approach of scholars) to make the other person happyis a form of ‘over-wiseness,’ meaning it is excessive use of theintellect. Intellect should be used to help the other person.If one drinks tea after eating a sweet desert and thencomplains that there is no sugar in the tea, how can such a onebe called intelligent? And even if there is really no sugar in thetea, there is no reason to fuss and make a scene. Why wouldone want to yell and scare everyone at home over just a cup oftea worth a quarter?The one with intellect is the one who uses his intellect insuch a way that no one will experience any stress on his account.If anyone ever experiences any stress and fear on his account,then that intellect is wicked. Such wicked intellect binds terribledemerit karma (paap). Therefore, one needs to understand therole of intellect, does one not?What good is the intellect that does not help anyone athome and causes differences of opinion?And a loss that occurs in business is the nature of doingbusiness, but a mistake must not occur in the process of mendingAptavani-6193194Aptavani-6Questioner: Then what should I do?Dadashri: You have to improve yourself first. You haveto become such that no one has to use deceit towards you. Noone uses deceit towards me. Others will be deceitful towardsyou only if there is deceit in you, otherwise they will never doso. All they present to you is your own photograph. It is all yourown reflection.Questioner: We might have some karmic account withhim; is that why the other person employs deceit towards us?Dadashri: You have to let go the issue of karmic account.It is not possible to avoid the account. Even I cannot avoid theaccount that unfolds in front of me.It is not possible for you to change anything. So what isthe point of all the fuss? The other person’s deception remainsthe same; on the contrary, it increases. When you holler andrant, he will think you are worthless and shouting for nothing.This only leads to the other person making more mistakes andto continue ignoring you as being worthless.Questioner: What is the solution for this?Dadashri: He should be so impressed by you that he willnot employ any deception towards you at all. There is no needfor you to use all these other methods. Remain silent instead ofbecoming angry. Anger is not a meaningful weapon.Questioner: Do we have to keep seeing and not doanything if someone is stealing goods through deception?Dadashri: Anger is not a weapon to use for that. Sit himdown and explain things to him. Ask him to think things through.Then everything can be resolved.Questioner: The doctor has told him he has high bloodpressure and that he should not eat certain things. However, hedoes not listen and he eats whatever he wants, and so I end uprunning to the doctor on his account.Dadashri: What am I saying is that the doctor, too, hashigh blood pressure, does he not?You do not know on what basis one eats. You are to tellhim once that the doctor has told him not to eat chili peppers.If you impress him, then it is all right and if he is not impressed,that is all right too. You do not impress him and neither does thedoctor.Questioner: If I continue eating chili peppers and ask theother person to stop eating them; that is no way to impress him,is it?Dadashri: I do not make anyone do that. I only ask youto renounce to the extent of my own experiential renunciation,and that too, if you wish it, otherwise I would say, ‘Go aheadand get married if you want to.’If you irritate him by nagging him, ‘Don’t eat the pickle,don’t eat pepper,’ then he will get irritated and wish you had notcome in.Do you ever wonder what will happen if you are notaround? So then just think as if you do not exist, rather thendoing egoism for no reason.You should just present the doctor’s instruction of, ‘Don’teat peppers.’ Then, to accept it or not to accept, is up to him.If I had told someone, ‘Do it this way,’ he would end updoing something completely different. So then I would say, ‘Whatwill you gain by doing it that way?’ Then he will say that he willnot do it from now on.Instead, if I tell him, ‘Why are you doing such thing? Youare like this and you are like that,’ then he will conceal thingsAptavani-6193194Aptavani-6Questioner: Then what should I do?Dadashri: You have to improve yourself first. You haveto become such that no one has to use deceit towards you. Noone uses deceit towards me. Others will be deceitful towardsyou only if there is deceit in you, otherwise they will never doso. All they present to you is your own photograph. It is all yourown reflection.Questioner: We might have some karmic account withhim; is that why the other person employs deceit towards us?Dadashri: You have to let go the issue of karmic account.It is not possible to avoid the account. Even I cannot avoid theaccount that unfolds in front of me.It is not possible for you to change anything. So what isthe point of all the fuss? The other person’s deception remainsthe same; on the contrary, it increases. When you holler andrant, he will think you are worthless and shouting for nothing.This only leads to the other person making more mistakes andto continue ignoring you as being worthless.Questioner: What is the solution for this?Dadashri: He should be so impressed by you that he willnot employ any deception towards you at all. There is no needfor you to use all these other methods. Remain silent instead ofbecoming angry. Anger is not a meaningful weapon.Questioner: Do we have to keep seeing and not doanything if someone is stealing goods through deception?Dadashri: Anger is not a weapon to use for that. Sit himdown and explain things to him. Ask him to think things through.Then everything can be resolved.Questioner: The doctor has told him he has high bloodpressure and that he should not eat certain things. However, hedoes not listen and he eats whatever he wants, and so I end uprunning to the doctor on his account.Dadashri: What am I saying is that the doctor, too, hashigh blood pressure, does he not?You do not know on what basis one eats. You are to tellhim once that the doctor has told him not to eat chili peppers.If you impress him, then it is all right and if he is not impressed,that is all right too. You do not impress him and neither does thedoctor.Questioner: If I continue eating chili peppers and ask theother person to stop eating them; that is no way to impress him,is it?Dadashri: I do not make anyone do that. I only ask youto renounce to the extent of my own experiential renunciation,and that too, if you wish it, otherwise I would say, ‘Go aheadand get married if you want to.’If you irritate him by nagging him, ‘Don’t eat the pickle,don’t eat pepper,’ then he will get irritated and wish you had notcome in.Do you ever wonder what will happen if you are notaround? So then just think as if you do not exist, rather thendoing egoism for no reason.You should just present the doctor’s instruction of, ‘Don’teat peppers.’ Then, to accept it or not to accept, is up to him.If I had told someone, ‘Do it this way,’ he would end updoing something completely different. So then I would say, ‘Whatwill you gain by doing it that way?’ Then he will say that he willnot do it from now on.Instead, if I tell him, ‘Why are you doing such thing? Youare like this and you are like that,’ then he will conceal thingsAptavani-6195196Aptavani-6then you should make him understand; otherwise, remain silent.Questioner: But what if injustice is being done to us?Dadashri: If injustice occurs, then suffer it happily! Wherewill you go otherwise? Go to the court and get yourself a lawyer.A lawyer will be available, will he not?Questioner: Is hiring a lawyer not considered an interferingmess (dakho-dakhal)?Dadashri: Then the lawyer will scold you, ‘You stupidpeople, you have no sense. You show up at 10:30. Why did younot come early?’ He will insult you. So smarten up and quicklyfinish your work.It is not worth creating an interfering mess (dakho-dakhal).This current time is strange. I have not heard anyone sayinganything good at all. They will say things that will give you aheadache. Can we call that speech?Questioner: So according to this, to say a good thing ora bad thing; that is also considered creating a mess, right?Dadashri: You should not say anything at all. Just answerthe question you are asked. Do not get into long discussion.What concern do we have? There is no end to this.* * * * *from me; he will not reveal them.Questioner: Can one learn such skill at once?Dadashri: No, you will learn if you have heard it beforein this way. If you have knowledge about this, then it can help.This is my way; I am just letting you know how I have won theworld. After all, one will have to definitely win over the world,will he not?Do Not Interfere, Just ‘See’Do not interfere (dakhal) with the train that is running. Itwill run on its own. Nothing is going to stop it from running.Questioner: Is dakhal the same thing as when one talksabout interfering? Dadashri: One should not interfere at all. That is calleddakhal. Once there is interference (dakhal), it leads to a mess(dakho). Whatever is going on, you have to let it go on. If thetrain you are in is running and is making some rattling noise, doesthat mean you have to pull the emergency chain and startscreaming? No, let it continue to run.Questioner: If someone hears a minor squeaking noise,he would go down looking for a place to put some oil.Dadashri: Yes, he would. There is no need to interfere.One needs to keep ‘seeing’ what happens. What if ‘we—TheGnani’ were to interfere; what can be our condition? Whateverhappens; let it happen.Questioner: Do we have to let it go even if it is wrong?Dadashri: Who are you to let the right or the wrong goon? People do not have the energy or power to run anything atall. It is nothing but ego when one says that he will not allowanything wrong to happen at all. On the contrary, it createsdisputes and mess. If someone happens to do the wrong thing,Aptavani-6195196Aptavani-6then you should make him understand; otherwise, remain silent.Questioner: But what if injustice is being done to us?Dadashri: If injustice occurs, then suffer it happily! Wherewill you go otherwise? Go to the court and get yourself a lawyer.A lawyer will be available, will he not?Questioner: Is hiring a lawyer not considered an interferingmess (dakho-dakhal)?Dadashri: Then the lawyer will scold you, ‘You stupidpeople, you have no sense. You show up at 10:30. Why did younot come early?’ He will insult you. So smarten up and quicklyfinish your work.It is not worth creating an interfering mess (dakho-dakhal).This current time is strange. I have not heard anyone sayinganything good at all. They will say things that will give you aheadache. Can we call that speech?Questioner: So according to this, to say a good thing ora bad thing; that is also considered creating a mess, right?Dadashri: You should not say anything at all. Just answerthe question you are asked. Do not get into long discussion.What concern do we have? There is no end to this.* * * * *from me; he will not reveal them.Questioner: Can one learn such skill at once?Dadashri: No, you will learn if you have heard it beforein this way. If you have knowledge about this, then it can help.This is my way; I am just letting you know how I have won theworld. After all, one will have to definitely win over the world,will he not?Do Not Interfere, Just ‘See’Do not interfere (dakhal) with the train that is running. Itwill run on its own. Nothing is going to stop it from running.Questioner: Is dakhal the same thing as when one talksabout interfering? Dadashri: One should not interfere at all. That is calleddakhal. Once there is interference (dakhal), it leads to a mess(dakho). Whatever is going on, you have to let it go on. If thetrain you are in is running and is making some rattling noise, doesthat mean you have to pull the emergency chain and startscreaming? No, let it continue to run.Questioner: If someone hears a minor squeaking noise,he would go down looking for a place to put some oil.Dadashri: Yes, he would. There is no need to interfere.One needs to keep ‘seeing’ what happens. What if ‘we—TheGnani’ were to interfere; what can be our condition? Whateverhappens; let it happen.Questioner: Do we have to let it go even if it is wrong?Dadashri: Who are you to let the right or the wrong goon? People do not have the energy or power to run anything atall. It is nothing but ego when one says that he will not allowanything wrong to happen at all. On the contrary, it createsdisputes and mess. If someone happens to do the wrong thing,Aptavani-6197198Aptavani-6deceit-greed on your own, they will not go away. On the contrary,two more will sneak in. Therefore, if you go to the One whoseown weaknesses have gone away, the Gnani Purush, then youwill find the solution. There is no solution for the worldly life. Thewhole world keeps on wandering; it is caught up in the cycle ofbirth and death because one has yet to meet a person who hasswam across the ocean of worldly life and can help others swimacross it too. You have decided you want to swim to the othershore, have you not?A Life without Conflict is the Path to MokshaDadashri: Now what do those weaknesses of anger-pride-illusion-greed and attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh)do? What role do they play?Questioner: They create give-and-take. Anger withoutego base and violent intent (gusso) occurs, and then the awareness(jagruti) comes that he (the relative-self) has done somethingwrong. Then, is it necessary to do pratikraman for it?Dadashri: If the other person feels hurt because of yourgusso or if it causes him harm in any way, then tell ‘Chandulal,’‘Hey, Chandulal, do pratikraman. Ask for forgiveness.’If the other person is egoistic, and if you ask for hisforgiveness by bowing before him, he will tap you on the headand tell you, ‘Now you have finally come around!’ The heckwith such ‘big’ men! You should cut down your interactions(vyavahar) with such people. But you must forgive his mistake(guno). Regardless of whatever intent (bhaav), good or bad, hehas come to you with, you have to decide in advance how youdeal with him. You should not bother with the other person if hehas an awkward and difficult relative-self (prakruti). If you have seen someone stealing for the last ten years,if his prakruti is that of stealing, just because he comes andbows down to you and asks for forgiveness, do you have to[24]The Weakness of AngerQuestioner: Should one suppress the anger that arises orlet it out?Dadashri: Anger is not something that can be suppressedeven if one wants to. You can suppress it today, then tomorrow,but what happens if you suppress a spring too much? One day,it will recoil. For now, it is fine to suppress anger temporarily butin the long run, it is harmful. Lord Mahavir has said to thoughtfullyanalyze the anger. Mind you, it may take you many lifetimes tothink it through. One becomes angry even before he has time tothink about it. You can prevent anger only when you have theawareness of your real Self. Such awareness arises only after‘we’ give you this Gnan. Then anger-pride-deceit-greed willcome within a boundary. Awareness (jagruti) arises. Beforebecoming angry, the awareness arises and shows you ‘who is atfault’ and ‘what is the reality.’ You will understand all this andso you will not become angry, will you?Getting angry is tantamount to banging your head on awall. There is no difference between the two. These anger, pride,deceit and greed are all considered weaknesses. The supremeSoul (parmatma) manifests when these weaknesses go away.These are veils of ignorance in the form of anger-pride-deceit-greed. There are many prejudices. If you believe a person to bea certain way, then you will see him that way all the time. Oneis never the same forever. There is a change occurring everysecond. The whole world is constantly changing.If you try to get rid of these weaknesses of anger-pride-Aptavani-6197198Aptavani-6deceit-greed on your own, they will not go away. On the contrary,two more will sneak in. Therefore, if you go to the One whoseown weaknesses have gone away, the Gnani Purush, then youwill find the solution. There is no solution for the worldly life. Thewhole world keeps on wandering; it is caught up in the cycle ofbirth and death because one has yet to meet a person who hasswam across the ocean of worldly life and can help others swimacross it too. You have decided you want to swim to the othershore, have you not?A Life without Conflict is the Path to MokshaDadashri: Now what do those weaknesses of anger-pride-illusion-greed and attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh)do? What role do they play?Questioner: They create give-and-take. Anger withoutego base and violent intent (gusso) occurs, and then the awareness(jagruti) comes that he (the relative-self) has done somethingwrong. Then, is it necessary to do pratikraman for it?Dadashri: If the other person feels hurt because of yourgusso or if it causes him harm in any way, then tell ‘Chandulal,’‘Hey, Chandulal, do pratikraman. Ask for forgiveness.’If the other person is egoistic, and if you ask for hisforgiveness by bowing before him, he will tap you on the headand tell you, ‘Now you have finally come around!’ The heckwith such ‘big’ men! You should cut down your interactions(vyavahar) with such people. But you must forgive his mistake(guno). Regardless of whatever intent (bhaav), good or bad, hehas come to you with, you have to decide in advance how youdeal with him. You should not bother with the other person if hehas an awkward and difficult relative-self (prakruti). If you have seen someone stealing for the last ten years,if his prakruti is that of stealing, just because he comes andbows down to you and asks for forgiveness, do you have to[24]The Weakness of AngerQuestioner: Should one suppress the anger that arises orlet it out?Dadashri: Anger is not something that can be suppressedeven if one wants to. You can suppress it today, then tomorrow,but what happens if you suppress a spring too much? One day,it will recoil. For now, it is fine to suppress anger temporarily butin the long run, it is harmful. Lord Mahavir has said to thoughtfullyanalyze the anger. Mind you, it may take you many lifetimes tothink it through. One becomes angry even before he has time tothink about it. You can prevent anger only when you have theawareness of your real Self. Such awareness arises only after‘we’ give you this Gnan. Then anger-pride-deceit-greed willcome within a boundary. Awareness (jagruti) arises. Beforebecoming angry, the awareness arises and shows you ‘who is atfault’ and ‘what is the reality.’ You will understand all this andso you will not become angry, will you?Getting angry is tantamount to banging your head on awall. There is no difference between the two. These anger, pride,deceit and greed are all considered weaknesses. The supremeSoul (parmatma) manifests when these weaknesses go away.These are veils of ignorance in the form of anger-pride-deceit-greed. There are many prejudices. If you believe a person to bea certain way, then you will see him that way all the time. Oneis never the same forever. There is a change occurring everysecond. The whole world is constantly changing.If you try to get rid of these weaknesses of anger-pride-Aptavani-6199200Aptavani-6gali.” You are finished (doomed) if you enter such a street!Now if you ask the one walking that same wrong path, he willtell you, ‘No, we are on the path to moksha.’ If the Lord comesand you ask Him, ‘Sir, what is this? They are both saying differentthings. Who of two is right?’ The Lord will tell you, ‘They areboth wrong. The one who says it is a ‘crooked lane’ is wrongand so is the one saying he is on the ‘right path’ to moksha.’The Lord Mahavir says, ‘What is it to you if he is on thewrong path? Why don’t you just go do your darshan (to lookupon with reverence) of God?’ The Lord was very wise. Thereis tremendous wisdom in Him.Kashays Bind Karma for Next LifeQuestioner: Why do we have illusionary attachment(moha) to our own name?Dadashri: To feed the pride of fame and glory (maanand kirti)! That is why one has taken so much beating untilnow. Moha for the name means hunger for fame and glory. Onehas suffered so much, just for fame. Then when his fame andrecognition (maan) is followed by defamation and disgrace(upmaan), he will experience tremendous suffering. That is whywe have to go beyond fame and disgrace; we have to go beyondmaan-upmaan. You should not have moha even for the name.Infinite bliss lies within You. Pride and anger (maan and krodh) are both abhorrence(dwesh), and deceit and greed (maya-kapat and lobh) areboth attachment (raag). Deceit (kapat) goes into attachment(raag).Questioner: What if one is forced to be deceitful (dokapat) out of fear?Dadashri: There is no problem with that because it doesnot harm anyone much, does it? It all depends on how much thattrust him? You cannot trust him. You can pardon him for hisstealing and tell him that as far as you are concerned he is freeand you will not hold it against him, in your mind. But you shouldnot trust him and you should not associate with him. It is also amistake if you associate with him and then do not trust him. Thebest thing is not to associate with him, but if you do, then do nothave any prejudice against him. The approach you have to take here is, ‘Whateverhappens is correct.’This is a very subtle science. Such science has never comeforth before. Every talk has a new look and it can benefit thewhole world.Questioner: The entire worldly life can improve with thisscience.Dadashri: Yes, yes, people’s worldly life will improveand their path to ultimate liberation (moksha) will become easyand straightforward. To improve the worldly life interaction(vyavahar) is verily a straight path to moksha, whereas in theirsearch for the path to moksha, people keep ruining their worldlylife and making it more complex every day.If you ask someone to go eighty miles north from Barodato Ahmedabad, but he starts going south, how many miles willbe added for his destination to go north? How many miles willbe increased if he ends up in Kanyakumari (southern tip ofIndia)? No matter how much he increases his speed, will he getfurther away from Ahmedabad or closer?Questioner: He will go further away.Dadashri: This is how people complicate their worldlylife. What are all these chanting (japa) and penance (tapa) for?That is why Saint Akha Bhagat had said, “Renunciation andpenance is a crooked lane for moksha – Tyaag tapa ey aadiAptavani-6199200Aptavani-6gali.” You are finished (doomed) if you enter such a street!Now if you ask the one walking that same wrong path, he willtell you, ‘No, we are on the path to moksha.’ If the Lord comesand you ask Him, ‘Sir, what is this? They are both saying differentthings. Who of two is right?’ The Lord will tell you, ‘They areboth wrong. The one who says it is a ‘crooked lane’ is wrongand so is the one saying he is on the ‘right path’ to moksha.’The Lord Mahavir says, ‘What is it to you if he is on thewrong path? Why don’t you just go do your darshan (to lookupon with reverence) of God?’ The Lord was very wise. Thereis tremendous wisdom in Him.Kashays Bind Karma for Next LifeQuestioner: Why do we have illusionary attachment(moha) to our own name?Dadashri: To feed the pride of fame and glory (maanand kirti)! That is why one has taken so much beating untilnow. Moha for the name means hunger for fame and glory. Onehas suffered so much, just for fame. Then when his fame andrecognition (maan) is followed by defamation and disgrace(upmaan), he will experience tremendous suffering. That is whywe have to go beyond fame and disgrace; we have to go beyondmaan-upmaan. You should not have moha even for the name.Infinite bliss lies within You. Pride and anger (maan and krodh) are both abhorrence(dwesh), and deceit and greed (maya-kapat and lobh) areboth attachment (raag). Deceit (kapat) goes into attachment(raag).Questioner: What if one is forced to be deceitful (dokapat) out of fear?Dadashri: There is no problem with that because it doesnot harm anyone much, does it? It all depends on how much thattrust him? You cannot trust him. You can pardon him for hisstealing and tell him that as far as you are concerned he is freeand you will not hold it against him, in your mind. But you shouldnot trust him and you should not associate with him. It is also amistake if you associate with him and then do not trust him. Thebest thing is not to associate with him, but if you do, then do nothave any prejudice against him. The approach you have to take here is, ‘Whateverhappens is correct.’This is a very subtle science. Such science has never comeforth before. Every talk has a new look and it can benefit thewhole world.Questioner: The entire worldly life can improve with thisscience.Dadashri: Yes, yes, people’s worldly life will improveand their path to ultimate liberation (moksha) will become easyand straightforward. To improve the worldly life interaction(vyavahar) is verily a straight path to moksha, whereas in theirsearch for the path to moksha, people keep ruining their worldlylife and making it more complex every day.If you ask someone to go eighty miles north from Barodato Ahmedabad, but he starts going south, how many miles willbe added for his destination to go north? How many miles willbe increased if he ends up in Kanyakumari (southern tip ofIndia)? No matter how much he increases his speed, will he getfurther away from Ahmedabad or closer?Questioner: He will go further away.Dadashri: This is how people complicate their worldlylife. What are all these chanting (japa) and penance (tapa) for?That is why Saint Akha Bhagat had said, “Renunciation andpenance is a crooked lane for moksha – Tyaag tapa ey aadiAptavani-6201202Aptavani-6will work after he attains the right vision. Until the right vision(samyak darshan) is attained, there is no saiyam (absence ofraag-dwesh) either. The saiyam referred to by the VitaragLords can never be found anywhere. The saiyam that peoplegenerally refer to is ego-based control of passions.Questioner: Is that conduct saraag charitra (conductwith attachment)?Dadashri: Saraag charitra is a very elevated thing.Gnanis are considered to be in saraag charitra. (Despite beinga vitarag, Dadashri had subtle attachment of Jagat Kalyan,salvation of the world.) After the Gnanis become completelydetached (vitarag), they are said to be in the state of completenon-attachment (vitarag charitra).What is considered control (saiyam)? Control ofgratification through senses is renunciation (tyaag). The Lordhas called control of the kashays (anger, pride, deceit and greed)as true saiyam. One attains liberation because of saiyam ofkashays; karma bondage is due to lack of saiyam. Sexual andother passions (vishays) may be present even when one attainsthe right vision (samkit). Yes, these vishays will not allow oneto progress to higher spiritual stages (gunasthanak).Nevertheless, they have not been objectionable because one willnot lose the right vision due to their presence.When the Illusion that Deludes (DekhatBhooli) Ends, Suffering EndsWhat does Akram Vignan say?There is nothing wrong in looking at the Alphanso mangoes.There is nothing wrong even in smelling their aroma, but do notthink of enjoying them. Even Gnanis look and smell the mangoes.The sexual pleasures (vishays) that are being enjoyed arevyavasthit; it is only vyavasthit. What is the meaning ofharboring useless attraction to that which is external and notdeceit hurts others. Now if you use deceit in order to go tosatsang (company of the Self-realized beings; the company ofthe Self), it is not considered deceit because otherwise kusangis in abundance all around. That which takes one away from theeternal Self is all kusang.Questioner: Does deceit arise as a result of meetingsomeone who is instrumental (a nimit) in the expression of deceit?Dadashri: No, it is not like that.Questioner: Does the nimit (a living or non-livinginstrumental evidence in unfolding karma effect) come for thepurpose of binding karma (bhaav-karma)?Dadashri: No, there is not just deceit only. Anger-pride-deceit-greed, all four join in. That causes the veil, the blindvision, the illusion (darshan moha). Then all the work is donebased on this vision. ‘We’ destroy that vision; we destroy yourdarshan moha when ‘we’ give you Gnan. Such illusionary visionis destroyed only after many demerit karmas (paap) aredestroyed. Once that illusionary vision (darshan) is destroyed,Your work is accomplished.This worldly life remains because of anger-pride-deceit-greed, not because of vishay* that one is engaged in. The rootcause of the worldly life is anger-pride-deceit-greed. *(Vishay– any worldly thing or subject one finds pleasure in. It can alsomean sex.)Questioner: When anger-pride-deceit-greed occur andat that time, if one remains in the awareness (jagruti) of the Self,then he will not bind any new causes, will he?Dadashri: How can awareness (jagruti) prevail? He isblind himself and he has blinded others too. Until the lightmanifests, until he attains the right belief of ‘I am pure Soul’(samkit), he is not considered to have awareness, is he? ThingsAptavani-6201202Aptavani-6will work after he attains the right vision. Until the right vision(samyak darshan) is attained, there is no saiyam (absence ofraag-dwesh) either. The saiyam referred to by the VitaragLords can never be found anywhere. The saiyam that peoplegenerally refer to is ego-based control of passions.Questioner: Is that conduct saraag charitra (conductwith attachment)?Dadashri: Saraag charitra is a very elevated thing.Gnanis are considered to be in saraag charitra. (Despite beinga vitarag, Dadashri had subtle attachment of Jagat Kalyan,salvation of the world.) After the Gnanis become completelydetached (vitarag), they are said to be in the state of completenon-attachment (vitarag charitra).What is considered control (saiyam)? Control ofgratification through senses is renunciation (tyaag). The Lordhas called control of the kashays (anger, pride, deceit and greed)as true saiyam. One attains liberation because of saiyam ofkashays; karma bondage is due to lack of saiyam. Sexual andother passions (vishays) may be present even when one attainsthe right vision (samkit). Yes, these vishays will not allow oneto progress to higher spiritual stages (gunasthanak).Nevertheless, they have not been objectionable because one willnot lose the right vision due to their presence.When the Illusion that Deludes (DekhatBhooli) Ends, Suffering EndsWhat does Akram Vignan say?There is nothing wrong in looking at the Alphanso mangoes.There is nothing wrong even in smelling their aroma, but do notthink of enjoying them. Even Gnanis look and smell the mangoes.The sexual pleasures (vishays) that are being enjoyed arevyavasthit; it is only vyavasthit. What is the meaning ofharboring useless attraction to that which is external and notdeceit hurts others. Now if you use deceit in order to go tosatsang (company of the Self-realized beings; the company ofthe Self), it is not considered deceit because otherwise kusangis in abundance all around. That which takes one away from theeternal Self is all kusang.Questioner: Does deceit arise as a result of meetingsomeone who is instrumental (a nimit) in the expression of deceit?Dadashri: No, it is not like that.Questioner: Does the nimit (a living or non-livinginstrumental evidence in unfolding karma effect) come for thepurpose of binding karma (bhaav-karma)?Dadashri: No, there is not just deceit only. Anger-pride-deceit-greed, all four join in. That causes the veil, the blindvision, the illusion (darshan moha). Then all the work is donebased on this vision. ‘We’ destroy that vision; we destroy yourdarshan moha when ‘we’ give you Gnan. Such illusionary visionis destroyed only after many demerit karmas (paap) aredestroyed. Once that illusionary vision (darshan) is destroyed,Your work is accomplished.This worldly life remains because of anger-pride-deceit-greed, not because of vishay* that one is engaged in. The rootcause of the worldly life is anger-pride-deceit-greed. *(Vishay– any worldly thing or subject one finds pleasure in. It can alsomean sex.)Questioner: When anger-pride-deceit-greed occur andat that time, if one remains in the awareness (jagruti) of the Self,then he will not bind any new causes, will he?Dadashri: How can awareness (jagruti) prevail? He isblind himself and he has blinded others too. Until the lightmanifests, until he attains the right belief of ‘I am pure Soul’(samkit), he is not considered to have awareness, is he? ThingsAptavani-6203204Aptavani-6rightfully yours? One is attracted to the mangoes, the objects ofpleasure that are not going to come home. Such external attractionis dangerous because it binds karma!There is nothing wrong in looking, but the problem lies inthe bhaav – the inner intent of wanting to enjoy it. The problemarises the moment the ‘bhaav of enjoying’ (bhogavavoo) ariseswithin. There is no problem in looking at or smelling the mango.You may eat, drink and do everything in the worldly life, but thebhaav for it should not arise.That is why Krupadudev, the Gnani Purush ShrimadRajchandra, had said, ‘If the illusion that arises the moment onelooks, ends, then all suffering ends – Dekhat bhooli tadey tosarva dukhono kshay thaaya.’ This Gnan that ‘we’ have givenyou will bring an end to ‘dekhat bhooli,’ the illusion that deludes.We see only the Shuddhatma (the pure Self) in the other person,so how can any other inner intent arise? Otherwise, one will beattracted (raag) towards even a dog if it is beautiful. But wouldattraction occur if you see the Shuddhatma? Therefore, youshould see only the Shuddhatma. This illusion that deludes(dekhat bhooli) is not likely to go away. If it did, then allsuffering would come to an end. If you have the divine vision(divya chakshu) that enables You to see the Self in all, then theillusion will end. Otherwise, how can it?Questioner: If the illusion that deludes upon seeing(dekhat bhooli) were to end, what would happen?Dadashri: All one’s sufferings will end. One will attainmoksha, if that happens.Questioner: Does that mean we should not have evenattachment (raag) and that we should forget?Dadashri: Our Gnan is such that it is not possible forraag to occur at all, but if attraction (aakarshan) occurs andYou ‘see’ the Shuddhatma in that person, the attraction willstop. Dekhat bhooli means that the mistake, the delusion, makesone see that which is not. The mistake will not be made until onesees. Nothing will happen as long as you remain in your room.But mistakes occur when you go to a wedding and see others.If you keep seeing the Shuddhatma in everyone when you gothere, then no other inner intent (bhaav) will arise. If an innerintent does arise due to the force of past life karma, then dopratikraman for that person; this is the solution. No wrong orbad thoughts were coming to your mind as long as you weresitting alone, but when you went to the wedding then thoughtsof sexuality arose. Circumstances come together and give rise tosuch thoughts. Now it is only possible to stop this mistake of theillusion with the divine vision (divya chakshu), the vision of theSelf. It will not happen without the divine vision.Questioner: This is the talk of avoiding circumstances, isit not? Does that mean that one should remain in lonely places?Dadashri: No, our science is completely different. Forus, whatever is in vyavasthit, let it be. But you have to remainin the Gnani’s Agnas there. When one approaches a fire, doeshe not follow the rules? He would not touch the fire, even bymistake, would he? That is how one has to be careful in sexualmatters, just as he would in the case of fire. Sex is a real burningfire. Anything that is attractive in this world is like a burning fire.Be aware and stay away from that.Questioner: Does that mean whatever we see, if it is notrightfully ours, if the intent (bhaav) that arises there, should nothappen?Dadashri: It is not yours at all; the pudgal (the non-Selfcomplex of mind, speech and body), cannot be yours. If yourown pudgal is not really yours, how can another person’s pudgalbe yours?Attraction is like a burning fire. The Lord has calledAptavani-6203204Aptavani-6rightfully yours? One is attracted to the mangoes, the objects ofpleasure that are not going to come home. Such external attractionis dangerous because it binds karma!There is nothing wrong in looking, but the problem lies inthe bhaav – the inner intent of wanting to enjoy it. The problemarises the moment the ‘bhaav of enjoying’ (bhogavavoo) ariseswithin. There is no problem in looking at or smelling the mango.You may eat, drink and do everything in the worldly life, but thebhaav for it should not arise.That is why Krupadudev, the Gnani Purush ShrimadRajchandra, had said, ‘If the illusion that arises the moment onelooks, ends, then all suffering ends – Dekhat bhooli tadey tosarva dukhono kshay thaaya.’ This Gnan that ‘we’ have givenyou will bring an end to ‘dekhat bhooli,’ the illusion that deludes.We see only the Shuddhatma (the pure Self) in the other person,so how can any other inner intent arise? Otherwise, one will beattracted (raag) towards even a dog if it is beautiful. But wouldattraction occur if you see the Shuddhatma? Therefore, youshould see only the Shuddhatma. This illusion that deludes(dekhat bhooli) is not likely to go away. If it did, then allsuffering would come to an end. If you have the divine vision(divya chakshu) that enables You to see the Self in all, then theillusion will end. Otherwise, how can it?Questioner: If the illusion that deludes upon seeing(dekhat bhooli) were to end, what would happen?Dadashri: All one’s sufferings will end. One will attainmoksha, if that happens.Questioner: Does that mean we should not have evenattachment (raag) and that we should forget?Dadashri: Our Gnan is such that it is not possible forraag to occur at all, but if attraction (aakarshan) occurs andYou ‘see’ the Shuddhatma in that person, the attraction willstop. Dekhat bhooli means that the mistake, the delusion, makesone see that which is not. The mistake will not be made until onesees. Nothing will happen as long as you remain in your room.But mistakes occur when you go to a wedding and see others.If you keep seeing the Shuddhatma in everyone when you gothere, then no other inner intent (bhaav) will arise. If an innerintent does arise due to the force of past life karma, then dopratikraman for that person; this is the solution. No wrong orbad thoughts were coming to your mind as long as you weresitting alone, but when you went to the wedding then thoughtsof sexuality arose. Circumstances come together and give rise tosuch thoughts. Now it is only possible to stop this mistake of theillusion with the divine vision (divya chakshu), the vision of theSelf. It will not happen without the divine vision.Questioner: This is the talk of avoiding circumstances, isit not? Does that mean that one should remain in lonely places?Dadashri: No, our science is completely different. Forus, whatever is in vyavasthit, let it be. But you have to remainin the Gnani’s Agnas there. When one approaches a fire, doeshe not follow the rules? He would not touch the fire, even bymistake, would he? That is how one has to be careful in sexualmatters, just as he would in the case of fire. Sex is a real burningfire. Anything that is attractive in this world is like a burning fire.Be aware and stay away from that.Questioner: Does that mean whatever we see, if it is notrightfully ours, if the intent (bhaav) that arises there, should nothappen?Dadashri: It is not yours at all; the pudgal (the non-Selfcomplex of mind, speech and body), cannot be yours. If yourown pudgal is not really yours, how can another person’s pudgalbe yours?Attraction is like a burning fire. The Lord has calledAptavani-6205206Aptavani-6attraction an illusion (moha). Attraction is the very root of moha.You are to ‘see’ Shuddhatma in the other person, but then if thebhaav of attraction arises again and gets attached to you, if youdo pratikraman it will go away. Having knowledge of all this,you should keep it in your awareness (laksha). Should you notknow that this medicine is for sexual attraction?This is a science. It is a complete science. It is a completescience from all aspects. Why does one not touch a burning fire?Why does one remain so alert there? It is because theconsequences of touching are instant. But in sex, first there isgluttonous greed (lalacha) for pleasure, and one gets trappedby the temptation. It is better to touch the hot fire; at least thereis a solution. You can rub all kinds of ointments and it will cooldown the burning sensation. But in the case of sexual attraction,it will trap you in the lalacha now and then create another lifeahead. It, the lalacha, will even push aside ‘our’ Gnan. Thistremendous science that we have; it will push it aside too, so bevery cautious. Be aware!There is nothing wrong in being attracted to good food.Eat a mango if you wish. Eat whatever you wish because it isnot going to have any ‘claims’ against you. There is no problemin one-sided claims. The liability arises when it is two-sided.When you say you do not want it, the other person will say hewants it. If you say you do not want to go to New York, theother person will say she wants to go. This causes problems.You will lose your independence. Therefore, be very careful.This is a very important fact to understand. If a personunderstands this very minutely, then his work will be done.Questioner: One has an illusionary attraction (moha) formovies, plays, saris, houses and furniture. There is nothing wrongwith all this, is there?Dadashri: No, nothing. The most you incur is somesuffering. It will not allow you to experience ‘this’ bliss. However,there is no claim against you from them, is there? Whereas withthe other – with another human being, it (sex) will start a claimagainst you. Therefore, be aware.Charity without Inner Beggary for FameQuestioner: When I give donations, it is for religious andhumanitarian work. But when people praise me, does it all geterased?Dadashri: When a person gives big donations, it becomescommon knowledge and everyone will sing his praise. And thereare other donations that no one knows about and so no onepraises the donors. In this case, the karmic fruit will remain intactfor the donor. It is not worth it for you to get into all this. Yourintent should not be for people to feed your pride (maan). Thatis all the intent you should have. People sang praises of evenLord Mahavir, but He would not accept them, would He? Theysing praises even of this Dada; ‘We’ do not accept their praises,whereas these people who are hungry and want to feed theirpride (maan), accept it readily. If you do not accept them, thenwhere is the problem? The ‘disease’ enters only when you acceptthe praise. Nothing happens to the one who does not accept it.He will not incur any loss. The one who appreciates andencourages benevolent work will bind merit karma (punya). Sothis is how it is behind the scene. These are all natural laws.The one who sings praise of the good work done is doinga good deed. A seed of good intent is planted in those who hearthe praise. They will feel, ‘This is worth doing, we did not evenknow about this.’Questioner: What should we do when we dedicate ourmind, body and wealth in doing good, but some people sayhurtful things about us and insult us?Dadashri: The one who hurts and insults you is bindingtremendous demerit karma (paap). Now, your karma getsAptavani-6205206Aptavani-6attraction an illusion (moha). Attraction is the very root of moha.You are to ‘see’ Shuddhatma in the other person, but then if thebhaav of attraction arises again and gets attached to you, if youdo pratikraman it will go away. Having knowledge of all this,you should keep it in your awareness (laksha). Should you notknow that this medicine is for sexual attraction?This is a science. It is a complete science. It is a completescience from all aspects. Why does one not touch a burning fire?Why does one remain so alert there? It is because theconsequences of touching are instant. But in sex, first there isgluttonous greed (lalacha) for pleasure, and one gets trappedby the temptation. It is better to touch the hot fire; at least thereis a solution. You can rub all kinds of ointments and it will cooldown the burning sensation. But in the case of sexual attraction,it will trap you in the lalacha now and then create another lifeahead. It, the lalacha, will even push aside ‘our’ Gnan. Thistremendous science that we have; it will push it aside too, so bevery cautious. Be aware!There is nothing wrong in being attracted to good food.Eat a mango if you wish. Eat whatever you wish because it isnot going to have any ‘claims’ against you. There is no problemin one-sided claims. The liability arises when it is two-sided.When you say you do not want it, the other person will say hewants it. If you say you do not want to go to New York, theother person will say she wants to go. This causes problems.You will lose your independence. Therefore, be very careful.This is a very important fact to understand. If a personunderstands this very minutely, then his work will be done.Questioner: One has an illusionary attraction (moha) formovies, plays, saris, houses and furniture. There is nothing wrongwith all this, is there?Dadashri: No, nothing. The most you incur is somesuffering. It will not allow you to experience ‘this’ bliss. However,there is no claim against you from them, is there? Whereas withthe other – with another human being, it (sex) will start a claimagainst you. Therefore, be aware.Charity without Inner Beggary for FameQuestioner: When I give donations, it is for religious andhumanitarian work. But when people praise me, does it all geterased?Dadashri: When a person gives big donations, it becomescommon knowledge and everyone will sing his praise. And thereare other donations that no one knows about and so no onepraises the donors. In this case, the karmic fruit will remain intactfor the donor. It is not worth it for you to get into all this. Yourintent should not be for people to feed your pride (maan). Thatis all the intent you should have. People sang praises of evenLord Mahavir, but He would not accept them, would He? Theysing praises even of this Dada; ‘We’ do not accept their praises,whereas these people who are hungry and want to feed theirpride (maan), accept it readily. If you do not accept them, thenwhere is the problem? The ‘disease’ enters only when you acceptthe praise. Nothing happens to the one who does not accept it.He will not incur any loss. The one who appreciates andencourages benevolent work will bind merit karma (punya). Sothis is how it is behind the scene. These are all natural laws.The one who sings praise of the good work done is doinga good deed. A seed of good intent is planted in those who hearthe praise. They will feel, ‘This is worth doing, we did not evenknow about this.’Questioner: What should we do when we dedicate ourmind, body and wealth in doing good, but some people sayhurtful things about us and insult us?Dadashri: The one who hurts and insults you is bindingtremendous demerit karma (paap). Now, your karma getsAptavani-6207208Aptavani-6This world will not let anyone go to moksha. The worldis full of interfering intellect. Amidst it all, if one passes throughwith awareness and closes all accounts of karma, then he willattain moksha.Getting the Work Done Through the PrakrutiAfter attaining Self-realization, when one says, ‘I amShuddhatma,’ from that moment on, he is nirvikalp; he iswithout the vikalp – the false imagination of, ‘I am Chandulal.’But if he says anything other than that such as, ‘I am like this,’or ‘I am like that,’ then that is all vikalp. Vikalp is the cause ofthe worldly life. I am Shuddhatma is the nirvikalp state, thestate of bliss. Nevertheless, Chandulal will continue doing gooddeeds as well as bad ones. He will do right deeds that arehelpful to others, and he will also do wrong deeds that hurtothers. No one can do only helpful or only hurtful deeds. Somedo more hurtful ones and some do less.Questioner: Is that going to happen even when we donot wish it?Dadashri: Yes, it will; so once you decide, ‘I amShuddhatma,’ then you simply have to ‘see’ all these helpful orhurtful, right or wrong actions that unfold. If any good or badresults occur within, then you should not think, ‘Something badhappened. My Shuddhatma has become ruined.’ Shuddhatmais your real Self. This so-called helpful-hurtful, good-bad is theresult of mistakes of past life (karma). You just have to keep‘seeing’ those results. And this ‘good-bad’ ‘helpful-hurtful’ isthe worldly, relative language. There is no such thing as helpful-hurtful in the Lord’s language. (‘Lord’ refers to Lord Mahavir).Questioner: Why should one even bother with it if helpful-hurtful is not in the Lord’s language?Dadashri: There is nothing to do or bother about. Thatis why I say ‘see’ (juvo) and do not hurt anyone. However, ifwashed and the one insulting you becomes the nimit (a living ornon-living instrumental evidence in unfolding karma effect) in theprocess.The Phenomenal Value of PratikramanQuestioner: Sometimes I feel offended and hurt that I doso much and yet he insults me.Dadashri: You will have to do pratikraman for him.This is simply an interaction in worldly life (vyavahar). Thereare all kinds of people in it. They will not let you go to moksha.Questioner: Why should I do pratikraman?Dadashri: The reason you do pratikraman is this: ‘Himinsulting me is the fruition of my karma (udaya) in which he endsup binding demerit karma for himself. So I am doing pratikramanfor him. I will never do anything again for which I become animit in someone else binding karma.’The world is not likely to let anyone go to moksha.They will find a way of holding you back. If you dopratikraman, you will be able to break away from that grip.That is why Lord Mahavir has given all these three inpratikraman: alochana, which is to recall and confess themistake; pratikraman, repentance and asking for forgiveness;and pratyakhyan, vowing never to repeat the mistake. He hasgiven us all three in just one word. There is no other solutionfor this. Now when can a person do pratikraman? It is whenhe has awareness. Such awareness arises when he attains Gnanfrom a Gnani Purush.You should do pratikraman so that you become freefrom karmic liability.In the beginning, people used to attack me too. But thenthey got tired of doing so. If we respond by retaliating, peoplewill not get tired of attacking us.Aptavani-6207208Aptavani-6This world will not let anyone go to moksha. The worldis full of interfering intellect. Amidst it all, if one passes throughwith awareness and closes all accounts of karma, then he willattain moksha.Getting the Work Done Through the PrakrutiAfter attaining Self-realization, when one says, ‘I amShuddhatma,’ from that moment on, he is nirvikalp; he iswithout the vikalp – the false imagination of, ‘I am Chandulal.’But if he says anything other than that such as, ‘I am like this,’or ‘I am like that,’ then that is all vikalp. Vikalp is the cause ofthe worldly life. I am Shuddhatma is the nirvikalp state, thestate of bliss. Nevertheless, Chandulal will continue doing gooddeeds as well as bad ones. He will do right deeds that arehelpful to others, and he will also do wrong deeds that hurtothers. No one can do only helpful or only hurtful deeds. Somedo more hurtful ones and some do less.Questioner: Is that going to happen even when we donot wish it?Dadashri: Yes, it will; so once you decide, ‘I amShuddhatma,’ then you simply have to ‘see’ all these helpful orhurtful, right or wrong actions that unfold. If any good or badresults occur within, then you should not think, ‘Something badhappened. My Shuddhatma has become ruined.’ Shuddhatmais your real Self. This so-called helpful-hurtful, good-bad is theresult of mistakes of past life (karma). You just have to keep‘seeing’ those results. And this ‘good-bad’ ‘helpful-hurtful’ isthe worldly, relative language. There is no such thing as helpful-hurtful in the Lord’s language. (‘Lord’ refers to Lord Mahavir).Questioner: Why should one even bother with it if helpful-hurtful is not in the Lord’s language?Dadashri: There is nothing to do or bother about. Thatis why I say ‘see’ (juvo) and do not hurt anyone. However, ifwashed and the one insulting you becomes the nimit (a living ornon-living instrumental evidence in unfolding karma effect) in theprocess.The Phenomenal Value of PratikramanQuestioner: Sometimes I feel offended and hurt that I doso much and yet he insults me.Dadashri: You will have to do pratikraman for him.This is simply an interaction in worldly life (vyavahar). Thereare all kinds of people in it. They will not let you go to moksha.Questioner: Why should I do pratikraman?Dadashri: The reason you do pratikraman is this: ‘Himinsulting me is the fruition of my karma (udaya) in which he endsup binding demerit karma for himself. So I am doing pratikramanfor him. I will never do anything again for which I become animit in someone else binding karma.’The world is not likely to let anyone go to moksha.They will find a way of holding you back. If you dopratikraman, you will be able to break away from that grip.That is why Lord Mahavir has given all these three inpratikraman: alochana, which is to recall and confess themistake; pratikraman, repentance and asking for forgiveness;and pratyakhyan, vowing never to repeat the mistake. He hasgiven us all three in just one word. There is no other solutionfor this. Now when can a person do pratikraman? It is whenhe has awareness. Such awareness arises when he attains Gnanfrom a Gnani Purush.You should do pratikraman so that you become freefrom karmic liability.In the beginning, people used to attack me too. But thenthey got tired of doing so. If we respond by retaliating, peoplewill not get tired of attacking us.Aptavani-6209210Aptavani-6you do happen to hurt anyone, then the Lord has said to dopratikraman for it.Questioner: Where is the need to do pratikraman whenhelpful-hurtful is not in the language of Lord Mahavir?Dadashri: Because the other person gets hurt. The otherperson should not get hurt; is that not the language of the Lord?Questioner: But what if our intention is good and he stillgets hurt?Dadashri: Your intention may be good; regardless of whatyour intentions may be, no one should be hurt. If anyone getshurt, you will be stuck with the karma. Therefore, get your workdone without hurting anyone.Questioner: People do not like hearing the truth, so whatremains to be said anyway?Dadashri: No, it is not that they do not like to hear thetruth. But when is truth considered as the truth? You do not haveto look at just the truth. There should be three other parts alongwith it also. It should be beneficial; it should be pleasant to theother person. Whether you are telling the truth or not, it shouldplease the other person and you should not have ill intention orself-gain in what you are saying. If, in speaking the truth, it hurtsthe other person, then it means that you do not know how tospeak at all. The truth you speak should have the following threequalities: it should be pleasing and agreeable (priya), it is beneficialto the other person (hitkari) and it is short and simple (mita).Mita means that the other person should not feel, ‘This mankeeps talking continuously like a radio!’ Words that please theother person are the truth. Those who have insisted on the truthhave suffered invariably and consistently.Questioner: Is flattering someone, or unnecessarilyagreeing with them, considered truth?Dadashri: That is not called truth. There is no reason toflatter anyone. It is something one has discovered; one flattersthe other person because of his own mistake. Speech that comesforth should be such that it fits, is acceptable, to the other person.Questioner: If one thinks about how the other personwill take it, then there is no end to it.Dadashri: You should not think about all that. You haveto tell ‘Chandubhai’ to do the pratikraman. That is all you haveto say. This is the science of Akram. Nothing will touch you ifyou understand this much. And whenever ‘we’ ask ‘Chandubhai,’‘Are you ‘Chandubhai’ or ‘pure Soul (Shuddhatma)?’ he willsay, ‘I am Shuddhatma.’ That is it. What else is there to ask?Then if ‘Chandulal’ does something wrong, the only thing thathappens is that his happiness will be obstructed, that is all.It will be useful if everyone in the world likes us. If theworld does not like us, then it is our own mistake. That is all youhave to understand. Therefore, adjust everywhere. Otherwise,there is no end to this problem. I will say something, he will saysomething else; people are not likely to listen, are they? Peoplelook for something that is acceptable to them.Many people tell me, ‘Dada, you must know this,’ or‘Dada, you must know that,’ I tell them, ‘I do not know anything.That is why I learned about the Atma.’Why should we needlessly engage in discussionseverywhere which have no value? Being such a busybody getsone involved for no reason at all. Being within limits is good.Excessive involvement is not good.You should adjust to whatever is acceptable to everyone.I do not have any separation due to differences in opinion(matbhed) with anyone. The moment a matbhed occurs, I realizethat it is my mistake and I immediately become aware. Nomatter how inappropriate and at odds your talk with me is, it isAptavani-6209210Aptavani-6you do happen to hurt anyone, then the Lord has said to dopratikraman for it.Questioner: Where is the need to do pratikraman whenhelpful-hurtful is not in the language of Lord Mahavir?Dadashri: Because the other person gets hurt. The otherperson should not get hurt; is that not the language of the Lord?Questioner: But what if our intention is good and he stillgets hurt?Dadashri: Your intention may be good; regardless of whatyour intentions may be, no one should be hurt. If anyone getshurt, you will be stuck with the karma. Therefore, get your workdone without hurting anyone.Questioner: People do not like hearing the truth, so whatremains to be said anyway?Dadashri: No, it is not that they do not like to hear thetruth. But when is truth considered as the truth? You do not haveto look at just the truth. There should be three other parts alongwith it also. It should be beneficial; it should be pleasant to theother person. Whether you are telling the truth or not, it shouldplease the other person and you should not have ill intention orself-gain in what you are saying. If, in speaking the truth, it hurtsthe other person, then it means that you do not know how tospeak at all. The truth you speak should have the following threequalities: it should be pleasing and agreeable (priya), it is beneficialto the other person (hitkari) and it is short and simple (mita).Mita means that the other person should not feel, ‘This mankeeps talking continuously like a radio!’ Words that please theother person are the truth. Those who have insisted on the truthhave suffered invariably and consistently.Questioner: Is flattering someone, or unnecessarilyagreeing with them, considered truth?Dadashri: That is not called truth. There is no reason toflatter anyone. It is something one has discovered; one flattersthe other person because of his own mistake. Speech that comesforth should be such that it fits, is acceptable, to the other person.Questioner: If one thinks about how the other personwill take it, then there is no end to it.Dadashri: You should not think about all that. You haveto tell ‘Chandubhai’ to do the pratikraman. That is all you haveto say. This is the science of Akram. Nothing will touch you ifyou understand this much. And whenever ‘we’ ask ‘Chandubhai,’‘Are you ‘Chandubhai’ or ‘pure Soul (Shuddhatma)?’ he willsay, ‘I am Shuddhatma.’ That is it. What else is there to ask?Then if ‘Chandulal’ does something wrong, the only thing thathappens is that his happiness will be obstructed, that is all.It will be useful if everyone in the world likes us. If theworld does not like us, then it is our own mistake. That is all youhave to understand. Therefore, adjust everywhere. Otherwise,there is no end to this problem. I will say something, he will saysomething else; people are not likely to listen, are they? Peoplelook for something that is acceptable to them.Many people tell me, ‘Dada, you must know this,’ or‘Dada, you must know that,’ I tell them, ‘I do not know anything.That is why I learned about the Atma.’Why should we needlessly engage in discussionseverywhere which have no value? Being such a busybody getsone involved for no reason at all. Being within limits is good.Excessive involvement is not good.You should adjust to whatever is acceptable to everyone.I do not have any separation due to differences in opinion(matbhed) with anyone. The moment a matbhed occurs, I realizethat it is my mistake and I immediately become aware. Nomatter how inappropriate and at odds your talk with me is, it isAptavani-6211212Aptavani-6not your mistake; the mistake is mine because why did I speakin a way as to cause a matbhed? So one has to see how he canadjust to the world. You may be looking out for the good of theother person, for example, in the hospital you are there only forthe good of the patient and so you continue to pester him, ‘Dothis, don’t do that.’ But the patient gets tired of it and thinks,‘What is all this hassle about?’So support that which gets the task accomplished. If onething does not work, then try something else. And if that doesnot work either, try something else. The aim is to get thingsaccomplished.The Root Cause of Separation Due toDifferences in Opinion (Matbhed)We all have to learn to live in a way that does not causeany separation due to differences in opinion (matbhed). If anymatbhed occurs, it is verily your own mistake; it is your ownweakness for sure. The other person must find closure and innersatisfaction (samadhan) from you. The responsibility for theother person’s samadhan lies with you.What would you think if the other person does not attainsamadhan through you? Would you not think that he lacksunderstanding?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: If you run into a problem, change your approachso that he has no problem accepting, and that is how you getyour work done. If you are an understanding person, then youwill change your approach and find closure and inner satisfaction(samadhan) for him. You are not an understanding person if youdo not change. The other person will not change. That is whyI never change anyone. I tell him, ‘I will change, my friend’. Youhave to maintain an amicable environment.At 11 o’clock, you come and tell me, ‘You will have toeat your lunch.’ I ask you whether it would be acceptable forme to eat a little later and you tell me, ‘No! Eat now so that wecan clean up and wind up everything,’ so I will immediately sitdown to eat. I will adjust with you. Now those who do notadjust, the world considers as fools. If you do not adjust ineverything, what opinion will the other person have about you?What is the definition of understanding (samjan)? Thatwhich ‘fits,’ or that which is accepted, is called understanding.And misunderstanding is that which ‘does not fit’; that which isunacceptable. This is all you have to understand. Then you donot have to see whether it is right or wrong, lawful or unlawful.Questioner: Being the Self (chetanta) is far ahead ofunderstanding through the senses, is it not? Conflict will neveroccur if chetanta or the Self is present, will it?Dadashri: No, conflict (athadaman) must never occur.Where there is conflict, there lies a lack of understanding onyour part. There is no question about chetanta in this; the Selfis verily the Self. It happens because there is misunderstandingwithin. How did this misunderstanding (unsamajan) occur? It isbecause deep within, there is the root of egoism. As long as theroot of the ego is there, it will keep on rising. It will harass youand cause problems for you and it will not let you rest. Therefore,you have to slowly remove the root out of there. As soon assomeone says something, that root of the ego within pops up,and it does not let you be at peace. No matter how much youtry to suppress it, it will not let you rest.Instead, if you maintain, ‘I do not know anything,’ then asa Shuddhatma you are a Gnani and ‘Chandubhai’ is the onedealing with the worldly life.Do You Take Adjustment or do PratikramanWhen there is No Acceptable Solution?Questioner: If someone tells me to do something andAptavani-6211212Aptavani-6not your mistake; the mistake is mine because why did I speakin a way as to cause a matbhed? So one has to see how he canadjust to the world. You may be looking out for the good of theother person, for example, in the hospital you are there only forthe good of the patient and so you continue to pester him, ‘Dothis, don’t do that.’ But the patient gets tired of it and thinks,‘What is all this hassle about?’So support that which gets the task accomplished. If onething does not work, then try something else. And if that doesnot work either, try something else. The aim is to get thingsaccomplished.The Root Cause of Separation Due toDifferences in Opinion (Matbhed)We all have to learn to live in a way that does not causeany separation due to differences in opinion (matbhed). If anymatbhed occurs, it is verily your own mistake; it is your ownweakness for sure. The other person must find closure and innersatisfaction (samadhan) from you. The responsibility for theother person’s samadhan lies with you.What would you think if the other person does not attainsamadhan through you? Would you not think that he lacksunderstanding?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: If you run into a problem, change your approachso that he has no problem accepting, and that is how you getyour work done. If you are an understanding person, then youwill change your approach and find closure and inner satisfaction(samadhan) for him. You are not an understanding person if youdo not change. The other person will not change. That is whyI never change anyone. I tell him, ‘I will change, my friend’. Youhave to maintain an amicable environment.At 11 o’clock, you come and tell me, ‘You will have toeat your lunch.’ I ask you whether it would be acceptable forme to eat a little later and you tell me, ‘No! Eat now so that wecan clean up and wind up everything,’ so I will immediately sitdown to eat. I will adjust with you. Now those who do notadjust, the world considers as fools. If you do not adjust ineverything, what opinion will the other person have about you?What is the definition of understanding (samjan)? Thatwhich ‘fits,’ or that which is accepted, is called understanding.And misunderstanding is that which ‘does not fit’; that which isunacceptable. This is all you have to understand. Then you donot have to see whether it is right or wrong, lawful or unlawful.Questioner: Being the Self (chetanta) is far ahead ofunderstanding through the senses, is it not? Conflict will neveroccur if chetanta or the Self is present, will it?Dadashri: No, conflict (athadaman) must never occur.Where there is conflict, there lies a lack of understanding onyour part. There is no question about chetanta in this; the Selfis verily the Self. It happens because there is misunderstandingwithin. How did this misunderstanding (unsamajan) occur? It isbecause deep within, there is the root of egoism. As long as theroot of the ego is there, it will keep on rising. It will harass youand cause problems for you and it will not let you rest. Therefore,you have to slowly remove the root out of there. As soon assomeone says something, that root of the ego within pops up,and it does not let you be at peace. No matter how much youtry to suppress it, it will not let you rest.Instead, if you maintain, ‘I do not know anything,’ then asa Shuddhatma you are a Gnani and ‘Chandubhai’ is the onedealing with the worldly life.Do You Take Adjustment or do PratikramanWhen there is No Acceptable Solution?Questioner: If someone tells me to do something andAptavani-6213214Aptavani-6gives me instructions on how to do it, but I have no faith in him,then what should I do when the relative-self (prakruti) does notadjust?Dadashri: Without faith, you cannot even put your twofeet on the ground. If people know that a certain area of theground is hollow, then no one will set foot on it. Will anyone sitin a ship if they know there is a hole in it?Questioner: After this Gnan there should be spontaneityand naturalness (sahajpanu), and if the need arises to adjust tothe other person, what should we do if we cannot adjust?Dadashri: If that happens, ‘see’ it. ‘You’ just have to‘see’ what ‘Chandubhai’ is doing. That is what our Gnan says.Questioner: If we do not adjust to the other person, isthat our obstinacy (aadayee)?Dadashri: No, there is nothing like that. Everythinghappens according to the unfolding karmic account (hisaab) ofthe other person with you.Questioner: But the other person will feel hurt that he isnot being respected.Dadashri: Then you have to make ‘Chandubhai’ dopratikraman for that. There is no other problem with that.How many varieties of vegetable are there?Questioner: Many.Dadashri: That is how this is. It is just like all the differentvarieties of vegetables. Pratikraman is the only solution for allthis.Questioner: So in such situations, should we let go orshould we hang on to it?Dadashri: Just ‘see’ what happens.Questioner: Sometimes my unyielding obstinacy (pakkad)lasts for two to three days. The prakruti does not adjust at thattime and I am filled with remorse about that.Dadashri: If your relative-self (prakruti) is hurting orobstructing anyone, then you should make it do pratikraman.The prakruti will show You all kinds of things.Questioner: Suppose I do not adjust at that time and theother person keeps hurting, then what should I do? Should Iadjust?Dadashri: All you have to do is pratikraman only. Donot adjust, and adjustment does not occur anyway. You cannotadjust even if you want to. The ‘ticket (stamp) of adjustment’will not stick. It will come off no matter how many times you trysticking it. Therefore, whenever the other person is hurt or derivespleasure from you, do pratikraman.It is not written anywhere that you have to adjust if someonecontinues to feel hurt. And one is not able to adjust that wayeither. You should not have such intent (bhaav) or even anopinion that you want to adjust.Questioner: I did not understand this. Please explain itagain.Dadashri: The opinion to adjust should not be there.Why should you have an opinion of adjusting when there is nopossibility of adjusting? Instead, do pratikraman. That is thebest thing to do. It is not good to have the intent to adjust either.That is all a worldly life. Whether it is in this form or that form,it is all simply only worldly interaction (sansar). There is no dutyor religion (dharma) or the Self (Atma) in it.Questioner: When the file has not been settled withequanimity sambhave nikaal, the other person feels hurt.(Sambhave nikaal is to settle all karmic accounts withequanimity).Aptavani-6213214Aptavani-6gives me instructions on how to do it, but I have no faith in him,then what should I do when the relative-self (prakruti) does notadjust?Dadashri: Without faith, you cannot even put your twofeet on the ground. If people know that a certain area of theground is hollow, then no one will set foot on it. Will anyone sitin a ship if they know there is a hole in it?Questioner: After this Gnan there should be spontaneityand naturalness (sahajpanu), and if the need arises to adjust tothe other person, what should we do if we cannot adjust?Dadashri: If that happens, ‘see’ it. ‘You’ just have to‘see’ what ‘Chandubhai’ is doing. That is what our Gnan says.Questioner: If we do not adjust to the other person, isthat our obstinacy (aadayee)?Dadashri: No, there is nothing like that. Everythinghappens according to the unfolding karmic account (hisaab) ofthe other person with you.Questioner: But the other person will feel hurt that he isnot being respected.Dadashri: Then you have to make ‘Chandubhai’ dopratikraman for that. There is no other problem with that.How many varieties of vegetable are there?Questioner: Many.Dadashri: That is how this is. It is just like all the differentvarieties of vegetables. Pratikraman is the only solution for allthis.Questioner: So in such situations, should we let go orshould we hang on to it?Dadashri: Just ‘see’ what happens.Questioner: Sometimes my unyielding obstinacy (pakkad)lasts for two to three days. The prakruti does not adjust at thattime and I am filled with remorse about that.Dadashri: If your relative-self (prakruti) is hurting orobstructing anyone, then you should make it do pratikraman.The prakruti will show You all kinds of things.Questioner: Suppose I do not adjust at that time and theother person keeps hurting, then what should I do? Should Iadjust?Dadashri: All you have to do is pratikraman only. Donot adjust, and adjustment does not occur anyway. You cannotadjust even if you want to. The ‘ticket (stamp) of adjustment’will not stick. It will come off no matter how many times you trysticking it. Therefore, whenever the other person is hurt or derivespleasure from you, do pratikraman.It is not written anywhere that you have to adjust if someonecontinues to feel hurt. And one is not able to adjust that wayeither. You should not have such intent (bhaav) or even anopinion that you want to adjust.Questioner: I did not understand this. Please explain itagain.Dadashri: The opinion to adjust should not be there.Why should you have an opinion of adjusting when there is nopossibility of adjusting? Instead, do pratikraman. That is thebest thing to do. It is not good to have the intent to adjust either.That is all a worldly life. Whether it is in this form or that form,it is all simply only worldly interaction (sansar). There is no dutyor religion (dharma) or the Self (Atma) in it.Questioner: When the file has not been settled withequanimity sambhave nikaal, the other person feels hurt.(Sambhave nikaal is to settle all karmic accounts withequanimity).Aptavani-6215216Aptavani-6Dadashri: It will settle after ten days. It may not happentoday due to the heavy force of the unfolding karma, but it willhappen when there is less force. You don’t have to lose yoursleep over it. We are Shuddhatma; we have to deal with our‘own’ affairs and welfare first, and then if someone is hurt byyou, do pratikraman for it. You cannot afford to get involvedwith anything else. If the Gnani Purush were to do what you areproposing, when would everything be settled? How many suchproblems are there!Questioner: You just said that we should not even havethe intent (bhaav) to adjust with the other person. Does thatmean that it is not necessary to become preoccupied(tanmayakar) with the intent of adjusting with the other person?Are you telling us that we should remain superfluous in the matter?Dadashri: There are many kinds of adjustments. Someadjustments are not worth taking at all. Some adjustments areworth taking but there is no need to maintain even the intent forit. You simply have to ‘see’ what is happening. In doing thismuch, you will become free in just one lifetime. If you are lefta little debt, it will be paid off in the next life.In this you have to make sure that your mind does not goon turning and twisting (amde chaddhe). If there is any matterthat causes your mind to turn and twist, then put a stop to it. Ifthe mind turns and twists, first there will be the hurt (dukh)within, then there will be suffocation (ghabharaman), and thenif it continues to twist further, worries (chinta) will arise. Therefore,before the mind takes off turning and twisting, You should put astop to it. This is the level (of how you should approach it).Questioner: This is what happens. When the other personis hurt, his mind does not attain closure (samadhan); it remainsrestless!Dadashri: Samadhan or closure for both parties involvedmay not occur for ten years; what can you do about that? Youshould maintain an inner intent that ‘may the other person find anacceptable solution through my speech.’ Do pratikraman forany hurtful speech that has come out. Otherwise, there is no endto the worldly life. On the contrary, it will drag you down. If hehas fallen in the middle of the lake, he will also pull you down.Maintain your safe side first and then ‘do’ everything. It is notworth going deep into this worldly life. This is a worldly life.Whichever way you slice it, you will find nothing but darkness.When you slice an onion, will you not find onion in every slice?If pratikraman for someone does not bring forth asamadhan or a satisfactory closure, then it will happen in thenext life. But for now you should take care of your own self, andget your work done. The foremost thing you should make sureof is that you do not spoil things for yourself in trying to improvethe other person. Each for his own self!Questioner: While interacting with others in the world,how can I ensure and preserve that which is for and of the Self?Dadashri: It is being preserved. You do not need tomake effort to preserve it. ‘You’ just take care of ‘your Self.’‘Chandubhai’ will take care of himself.Questioner: Having attained such awareness once, it willnot go away, will it?Dadashri: No, it will not. But this current time cycle ispeculiar and unpredictable. It is possible for the awareness to godown even when someone merely blows dust. And alongsidewith it we have this science of Akram, meaning it is the sciencewhere karma still remains pending. The dirt will fly when one isin the process of dealing with these karmas. I do not have anyproblems because I do not have much karma left. This Akramscience of ours is such that it can get rid of all the karma, butYou should be ready. All the problems of the world can bedestroyed; that is how powerful and energy-filled this science is.Aptavani-6215216Aptavani-6Dadashri: It will settle after ten days. It may not happentoday due to the heavy force of the unfolding karma, but it willhappen when there is less force. You don’t have to lose yoursleep over it. We are Shuddhatma; we have to deal with our‘own’ affairs and welfare first, and then if someone is hurt byyou, do pratikraman for it. You cannot afford to get involvedwith anything else. If the Gnani Purush were to do what you areproposing, when would everything be settled? How many suchproblems are there!Questioner: You just said that we should not even havethe intent (bhaav) to adjust with the other person. Does thatmean that it is not necessary to become preoccupied(tanmayakar) with the intent of adjusting with the other person?Are you telling us that we should remain superfluous in the matter?Dadashri: There are many kinds of adjustments. Someadjustments are not worth taking at all. Some adjustments areworth taking but there is no need to maintain even the intent forit. You simply have to ‘see’ what is happening. In doing thismuch, you will become free in just one lifetime. If you are lefta little debt, it will be paid off in the next life.In this you have to make sure that your mind does not goon turning and twisting (amde chaddhe). If there is any matterthat causes your mind to turn and twist, then put a stop to it. Ifthe mind turns and twists, first there will be the hurt (dukh)within, then there will be suffocation (ghabharaman), and thenif it continues to twist further, worries (chinta) will arise. Therefore,before the mind takes off turning and twisting, You should put astop to it. This is the level (of how you should approach it).Questioner: This is what happens. When the other personis hurt, his mind does not attain closure (samadhan); it remainsrestless!Dadashri: Samadhan or closure for both parties involvedmay not occur for ten years; what can you do about that? Youshould maintain an inner intent that ‘may the other person find anacceptable solution through my speech.’ Do pratikraman forany hurtful speech that has come out. Otherwise, there is no endto the worldly life. On the contrary, it will drag you down. If hehas fallen in the middle of the lake, he will also pull you down.Maintain your safe side first and then ‘do’ everything. It is notworth going deep into this worldly life. This is a worldly life.Whichever way you slice it, you will find nothing but darkness.When you slice an onion, will you not find onion in every slice?If pratikraman for someone does not bring forth asamadhan or a satisfactory closure, then it will happen in thenext life. But for now you should take care of your own self, andget your work done. The foremost thing you should make sureof is that you do not spoil things for yourself in trying to improvethe other person. Each for his own self!Questioner: While interacting with others in the world,how can I ensure and preserve that which is for and of the Self?Dadashri: It is being preserved. You do not need tomake effort to preserve it. ‘You’ just take care of ‘your Self.’‘Chandubhai’ will take care of himself.Questioner: Having attained such awareness once, it willnot go away, will it?Dadashri: No, it will not. But this current time cycle ispeculiar and unpredictable. It is possible for the awareness to godown even when someone merely blows dust. And alongsidewith it we have this science of Akram, meaning it is the sciencewhere karma still remains pending. The dirt will fly when one isin the process of dealing with these karmas. I do not have anyproblems because I do not have much karma left. This Akramscience of ours is such that it can get rid of all the karma, butYou should be ready. All the problems of the world can bedestroyed; that is how powerful and energy-filled this science is.Aptavani-6217218Aptavani-6That is so, if You remain still with it. No one can touch you ifyou maintain stillness (sthirata) of this Gnan.This is the path of awareness (jagruti) and You shouldremain aware. If someone gets hurt, You have the solution ofpratikraman. What else can You do? Everything else, the body,the mind and the speech, is dependent on vyavasthit.The Intent to Settle with Equanimity andPratikramanQuestioner: If we cannot do pratikraman (ask forforgiveness from the pure Soul of the one you have ‘hurt,’ coupledwith remorse of the wrongdoing), is it the mistake of the prakruti,the non-Self, or is it due to obstructing karma (antaray karma)?Dadashri: That is a mistake of the non-Self (prakruti).And the mistake of prakruti does not occur in all situations.This mistake occurs in some places and not in other places.There is no problem if pratikraman does not occur due toprakruti mistakes. All You have to ‘know’ is what Your innerintent is and nothing else. Your desire (intent) is to dopratikraman, is it not?Questioner: Yes, absolutely.Dadashri: Despite this, pratikraman may not happen;then it is a mistake of the prakruti. You are not liable for that.Sometimes the prakruti will speak and sometimes it will not. Itis considered a record player. If it plays, then it will play.Otherwise it may not even play. That is not considered anobstruction (antaray).Many people tell me, ‘I try to settle with equanimity (dosambhave nikaal) but it does not happen.’ So I tell them,‘Arey! Settling with equanimity is not something You have to do.You simply have to harbor the intent to settle with equanimity.Whether it can settle with equanimity or not, it is not dependenton you. You just have to remain in my Agnas. Through them, alot of Your work will be accomplished and if not, then it isdependant on nature.’ ‘We’ only look at this much: that You have the intent of,‘I want to settle with equanimity.’ Decide this much. Then,whether it happens or not, You should not concern yourself withit anymore. How long can You sit and see this drama? When willit ever end? You should just move on. Sambhave nikaal (settlingwith equanimity) may not even happen. If our ‘bonfire’ did notlight, we will light another one ahead. We cannot expect the fireto catch on right away. And how long can we afford to sitwaiting? You have to light the matches and try to get the firegoing, but what more can You do? Just let go and move on.Questioner: If pratikraman occurs, does it go intodharma-dhyan (absence of adverse internal meditation), or doesit mean there is shukla-dhyan (meditation as the Self)?Dadashri: No, it is neither dharma-dhyan nor shukla-dhyan. This pratikraman is not a meditation (dhyan).Pratikraman cleanses you. Actually, there is no need to dopratikraman at all after attaining the Self, but this is AkramVignan. You have attained the Self without having to work forit and so you need pratikraman to cleanse your past mistakes.With so many mistakes within, if they are not washed off throughpratikraman, then they will make you restless. If your clothesget dirty, will you not have to wash them? And in the Kramicstep-by-step path, the Self is attained only after the ‘clothes’ areclean, or after the non-Self has been purified. In that path, oneis not likely to get any stains, is he?One More Life to Complete Liberation(Ekavtari) in the Akram PathQuestioner: If I do pratikraman, will new karma not becharged?Dadashri: Karma is bound only if the Self becomes theAptavani-6217218Aptavani-6That is so, if You remain still with it. No one can touch you ifyou maintain stillness (sthirata) of this Gnan.This is the path of awareness (jagruti) and You shouldremain aware. If someone gets hurt, You have the solution ofpratikraman. What else can You do? Everything else, the body,the mind and the speech, is dependent on vyavasthit.The Intent to Settle with Equanimity andPratikramanQuestioner: If we cannot do pratikraman (ask forforgiveness from the pure Soul of the one you have ‘hurt,’ coupledwith remorse of the wrongdoing), is it the mistake of the prakruti,the non-Self, or is it due to obstructing karma (antaray karma)?Dadashri: That is a mistake of the non-Self (prakruti).And the mistake of prakruti does not occur in all situations.This mistake occurs in some places and not in other places.There is no problem if pratikraman does not occur due toprakruti mistakes. All You have to ‘know’ is what Your innerintent is and nothing else. Your desire (intent) is to dopratikraman, is it not?Questioner: Yes, absolutely.Dadashri: Despite this, pratikraman may not happen;then it is a mistake of the prakruti. You are not liable for that.Sometimes the prakruti will speak and sometimes it will not. Itis considered a record player. If it plays, then it will play.Otherwise it may not even play. That is not considered anobstruction (antaray).Many people tell me, ‘I try to settle with equanimity (dosambhave nikaal) but it does not happen.’ So I tell them,‘Arey! Settling with equanimity is not something You have to do.You simply have to harbor the intent to settle with equanimity.Whether it can settle with equanimity or not, it is not dependenton you. You just have to remain in my Agnas. Through them, alot of Your work will be accomplished and if not, then it isdependant on nature.’ ‘We’ only look at this much: that You have the intent of,‘I want to settle with equanimity.’ Decide this much. Then,whether it happens or not, You should not concern yourself withit anymore. How long can You sit and see this drama? When willit ever end? You should just move on. Sambhave nikaal (settlingwith equanimity) may not even happen. If our ‘bonfire’ did notlight, we will light another one ahead. We cannot expect the fireto catch on right away. And how long can we afford to sitwaiting? You have to light the matches and try to get the firegoing, but what more can You do? Just let go and move on.Questioner: If pratikraman occurs, does it go intodharma-dhyan (absence of adverse internal meditation), or doesit mean there is shukla-dhyan (meditation as the Self)?Dadashri: No, it is neither dharma-dhyan nor shukla-dhyan. This pratikraman is not a meditation (dhyan).Pratikraman cleanses you. Actually, there is no need to dopratikraman at all after attaining the Self, but this is AkramVignan. You have attained the Self without having to work forit and so you need pratikraman to cleanse your past mistakes.With so many mistakes within, if they are not washed off throughpratikraman, then they will make you restless. If your clothesget dirty, will you not have to wash them? And in the Kramicstep-by-step path, the Self is attained only after the ‘clothes’ areclean, or after the non-Self has been purified. In that path, oneis not likely to get any stains, is he?One More Life to Complete Liberation(Ekavtari) in the Akram PathQuestioner: If I do pratikraman, will new karma not becharged?Dadashri: Karma is bound only if the Self becomes theAptavani-6219220Aptavani-6doer. In this Gnan of Akram Vignan, there is no place forpratikraman. But what happens if you take a student of thirdgrade and give him a degree of a university graduate? Whatwould become of the grades that he has skipped? That is whywe have placed pratikraman in the middle.It is possible to attain moksha within one or two lifetimesafter attaining Akram Gnan. Now the number of lifetimes thatwill remain will depend upon what kind of meditation (dhyan)there is; if continuous awareness as the Self (shukla-dhyan)remains, then there will not be another life. But in the Akrampath, both shukla-dhyan and dharma-dhyan (virtuous orrighteous contemplation; absence of adverse meditation state)occur. The internal state is shukla-dhyan and dharma- dhyanoccurs externally. Why does dharma-dhyan occur?It occurs because You are following the Agnas asprescribed by Dada. To be in and to remain in these Agnas isnot the work of the inner state (shukla-dhyan); it is the workof dharma-dhyan. Therefore, because of the work of dharma-dhyan, you charge karma of one or two more lives.* * * * *[25]This is Worth Knowing and WorshippingQuestioner: Now, when I ‘see’ the real, the kind of lovethat should arise towards it does not arise, and the relative hasbecome a form of a cure. What is that called?Dadashri: If love (here it means attachment/raag) arises,then abhorrence (dwesh) will be there on the other side. Thereis no need to ‘do’ raag. The Self is the only thing worth goingfor with total devotion (aradhana), and that is the place to dwell(ramanata). Dwelling in the pure Soul (Shuddhatma) means aconstant awareness, constant dhyan of Shuddhatma as the Self.From now on, you have to dwell in the Self, be the Self (swais Self, ramanata is to dwell in). There is nothing else to bedone.Questioner: We have to ‘know’ the ‘relative,’ the non-Self, and we also have to ‘know’ the real, the Self?Dadashri: No. You have to have total devotion(aradhana) for the real, and You have to ‘know’ the relative.Only the relative is worth ‘knowing.’ This ‘real,’ I have alreadymade you realize.The whole world is that which is to be known (gneya),and You are the knower (gnata). Your ‘knower-ship’ (gnayakswabhav) has arisen. So what more remains now? Havingattained knower-ship, all You have to do is keep ‘seeing’ thegneya.There is no need for You to maintain love for Shuddhatmabecause you have become that. Now who will you love? Gnan,Aptavani-6219220Aptavani-6doer. In this Gnan of Akram Vignan, there is no place forpratikraman. But what happens if you take a student of thirdgrade and give him a degree of a university graduate? Whatwould become of the grades that he has skipped? That is whywe have placed pratikraman in the middle.It is possible to attain moksha within one or two lifetimesafter attaining Akram Gnan. Now the number of lifetimes thatwill remain will depend upon what kind of meditation (dhyan)there is; if continuous awareness as the Self (shukla-dhyan)remains, then there will not be another life. But in the Akrampath, both shukla-dhyan and dharma-dhyan (virtuous orrighteous contemplation; absence of adverse meditation state)occur. The internal state is shukla-dhyan and dharma- dhyanoccurs externally. Why does dharma-dhyan occur?It occurs because You are following the Agnas asprescribed by Dada. To be in and to remain in these Agnas isnot the work of the inner state (shukla-dhyan); it is the workof dharma-dhyan. Therefore, because of the work of dharma-dhyan, you charge karma of one or two more lives.* * * * *[25]This is Worth Knowing and WorshippingQuestioner: Now, when I ‘see’ the real, the kind of lovethat should arise towards it does not arise, and the relative hasbecome a form of a cure. What is that called?Dadashri: If love (here it means attachment/raag) arises,then abhorrence (dwesh) will be there on the other side. Thereis no need to ‘do’ raag. The Self is the only thing worth goingfor with total devotion (aradhana), and that is the place to dwell(ramanata). Dwelling in the pure Soul (Shuddhatma) means aconstant awareness, constant dhyan of Shuddhatma as the Self.From now on, you have to dwell in the Self, be the Self (swais Self, ramanata is to dwell in). There is nothing else to bedone.Questioner: We have to ‘know’ the ‘relative,’ the non-Self, and we also have to ‘know’ the real, the Self?Dadashri: No. You have to have total devotion(aradhana) for the real, and You have to ‘know’ the relative.Only the relative is worth ‘knowing.’ This ‘real,’ I have alreadymade you realize.The whole world is that which is to be known (gneya),and You are the knower (gnata). Your ‘knower-ship’ (gnayakswabhav) has arisen. So what more remains now? Havingattained knower-ship, all You have to do is keep ‘seeing’ thegneya.There is no need for You to maintain love for Shuddhatmabecause you have become that. Now who will you love? Gnan,Aptavani-6221222Aptavani-6darshan and charitra, or knowledge, vision and conductrespectively, as the Self, have already begun for You. Otherwise,attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh) will occur towards thatwhich you see and know (this happens in the ignorant state). Ifraag-dwesh does not occur for that which one ‘sees and knows,’it is called vitarag charitra or conduct free from attachmentand abhorrence.Now, even Your conduct (charitra) has become veryhigh. This is a wonder that has happened. But it will be good ifYou preserve and nurture it. It will be good if you do not tradeit away for something which is of much inferior value. It will begood if someone does not tempt you with a chocolate and walkaway with your jewelry, meaning it will be good if you do notget tempted by worldly pleasures at the cost of this pricelessGnan. Now Gnan (the knowledge as the Self), darshan (visionas the Self), charitra (being the Self), and tapa (internal penancethat leads to liberation), will continue to operate within You. Asfar as penance is concerned, you will not know where it isoccurring. ‘Our’ Agnas are such that penance (tapa) is inevitable. When ‘we’ travel by car, ‘we’ do not talk to anyonebecause ‘we’ remain in our active and alert attentiveness of thereal Self (upayog), in the awareness as the Self. ‘We’ do notmiss our upayog even for a moment.Who would let go of such a wonderful spiritual science(vignan) once it has been placed in one’s hands? Before Gnan,one could not remain in any focused awareness (upayog) evenfor five minutes. Even to remain in forty-eight minutes (onegunthanu) of meditation was a major task, whereas for You,this awareness prevails naturally and spontaneously, whereveryou go.Questioner: I understand that, Dada.Dadashri: Now stop your mistakes, meaning dopratikraman. Decide before you leave home that this is the onlyway you want to proceed; You want to remain in pure awareness(shuddha upayog). If You do not decide in this way, You willlose the awareness (upayog). And our science is great. Thereare no other problems or strife (bhanjghad).To Dwell as the SelfQuestioner: How can dwelling in the Self (nijavasturamanata) arise?Dadashri: There are two to four ways for such dwelling(ramanata) to occur. If you do not know any way, then if yousay, ‘I am Shuddhatma, I am Shuddhatma,’ for an hour ortwo, it will happen. Thus it progresses further.Questioner: All ramanata (place to dwell in) is of varyingtypes, is it not?Dadashri: One does whatever he knows. If it is at agross level, one will continue saying, ‘I am Shuddhatma, I amShuddhatma’ or he takes a notebook and keeps writing, ‘I amShuddhatma,’ in it. In doing this, even the body, speech andmind do the ramanata.When one does it by saying, ‘I am pure Soul,’ at thegross level, dwelling in the non-Self complex (pudgal ramanata)will begin to leave. This is the beginning. Then one advancesfurther within at more subtle levels, and when he asserts whatHe is with reference to the attributes of the Self, then that is truedwelling (ramanata). This gives instant reward. The bliss of theSelf is experienced.Questioner: Just as there is the ‘delight’ and the pleasureof the non-Self, likewise, should ‘delight’ and pleasure of theSelf (anand) not express?Dadashri: On what grounds are You non-acquisitive(aparigrahi)? On the grounds of this Akram Vignan! But youare not aparigrahi in your worldly interactions (vyavahar).Aptavani-6221222Aptavani-6darshan and charitra, or knowledge, vision and conductrespectively, as the Self, have already begun for You. Otherwise,attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh) will occur towards thatwhich you see and know (this happens in the ignorant state). Ifraag-dwesh does not occur for that which one ‘sees and knows,’it is called vitarag charitra or conduct free from attachmentand abhorrence.Now, even Your conduct (charitra) has become veryhigh. This is a wonder that has happened. But it will be good ifYou preserve and nurture it. It will be good if you do not tradeit away for something which is of much inferior value. It will begood if someone does not tempt you with a chocolate and walkaway with your jewelry, meaning it will be good if you do notget tempted by worldly pleasures at the cost of this pricelessGnan. Now Gnan (the knowledge as the Self), darshan (visionas the Self), charitra (being the Self), and tapa (internal penancethat leads to liberation), will continue to operate within You. Asfar as penance is concerned, you will not know where it isoccurring. ‘Our’ Agnas are such that penance (tapa) is inevitable. When ‘we’ travel by car, ‘we’ do not talk to anyonebecause ‘we’ remain in our active and alert attentiveness of thereal Self (upayog), in the awareness as the Self. ‘We’ do notmiss our upayog even for a moment.Who would let go of such a wonderful spiritual science(vignan) once it has been placed in one’s hands? Before Gnan,one could not remain in any focused awareness (upayog) evenfor five minutes. Even to remain in forty-eight minutes (onegunthanu) of meditation was a major task, whereas for You,this awareness prevails naturally and spontaneously, whereveryou go.Questioner: I understand that, Dada.Dadashri: Now stop your mistakes, meaning dopratikraman. Decide before you leave home that this is the onlyway you want to proceed; You want to remain in pure awareness(shuddha upayog). If You do not decide in this way, You willlose the awareness (upayog). And our science is great. Thereare no other problems or strife (bhanjghad).To Dwell as the SelfQuestioner: How can dwelling in the Self (nijavasturamanata) arise?Dadashri: There are two to four ways for such dwelling(ramanata) to occur. If you do not know any way, then if yousay, ‘I am Shuddhatma, I am Shuddhatma,’ for an hour ortwo, it will happen. Thus it progresses further.Questioner: All ramanata (place to dwell in) is of varyingtypes, is it not?Dadashri: One does whatever he knows. If it is at agross level, one will continue saying, ‘I am Shuddhatma, I amShuddhatma’ or he takes a notebook and keeps writing, ‘I amShuddhatma,’ in it. In doing this, even the body, speech andmind do the ramanata.When one does it by saying, ‘I am pure Soul,’ at thegross level, dwelling in the non-Self complex (pudgal ramanata)will begin to leave. This is the beginning. Then one advancesfurther within at more subtle levels, and when he asserts whatHe is with reference to the attributes of the Self, then that is truedwelling (ramanata). This gives instant reward. The bliss of theSelf is experienced.Questioner: Just as there is the ‘delight’ and the pleasureof the non-Self, likewise, should ‘delight’ and pleasure of theSelf (anand) not express?Dadashri: On what grounds are You non-acquisitive(aparigrahi)? On the grounds of this Akram Vignan! But youare not aparigrahi in your worldly interactions (vyavahar).Aptavani-6223224Aptavani-6Therefore, until You become completely aparigrahi, you willnot attain the ultimate ‘thing,’ the absolute Self. (The state of theGnani Purush is complete aparigrahi).Questioner: Until then, what should we do to attain thetrue bliss (anand) of the Self?Dadashri: True bliss of the Self will arise when you recite,‘I am full of infinite knowledge (hoon anant gnan vaadochhoo),’ ‘I am full of infinite vision (hoon anant darshan vaadochhoo),’ ‘I am full of infinite bliss (hoon anant sukh nu dhamchhoo) and ‘I am full of infinite energy (hoon anant shaktivaado chhoo).’ The Self is the ocean of bliss (anandmaya); itencompasses all the bliss of the universe. This bliss is verilywithin everyone. But because of one’s weakness of this awareness(jagruti), one does not know where it is coming from.Questioner: Will the bliss of the Soul arise if I suppressthe pleasures of the self (pudgal)?Dadashri: No, there is no point in suppressing it. Thosepleasures become insipid on their own. If You recite the attributesof the Self for an hour, then bliss arises immediately. This issomething that gives you instant reward. Otherwise, it is alsopossible to be in this blissful state by ‘seeing’ the Shuddhatma,the pure Self, in everyone.Questioner: If I see Shuddhatma in the other person,then will that person experience bliss too?Dadashri: No, he will not, because there is no tellingwhere his inner tendencies (vruttis) are at that moment. Whoknows what he is thinking at that time? Yes, You benefit a lotfrom seeing the Shuddhatma in him. Only the Gnani Purush can‘give’ benefit to the other person.Questioner: Dada, you have talked about four kinds ofatma-ramanata; will you please tell us those again?Dadashri: Many people recite, ‘I am pure Soul…I ampure Soul (I am Shuddhatma…I am Shuddhatma).’ Some doit by repeatedly writing, ‘I am Shuddhatma…I amShuddhatma,’ and when they do that, even their body is engagedin that ramanata (absorbed or devotional involvement with bodymind and speech in the Self—Atma)The body, the speech and the mind, all three are presentwhile one is writing. And some people, even while conducting their worldlyaffairs with a devoted mind, dwell in the attributes of the Self(Shuddhatma). This along with the direct affirmation of, ‘I amfull of infinite knowledge…I am full of infinite energy,’ is theconsummate recitation (siddha stuti). It will give tremendousrewards.Questioner: Dada, the effort You make for other people’shappiness is beyond words. Those who suffer from the horribleagony of their misery, you make them absolutely happy; is itpossible for us to become like that?Dadashri: Yes, it is possible. But you should have thatmuch capacity. Now, You can become one of the evidences (animit). That is why I am preparing You. Otherwise, it is notpossible if you try to do it or make it happen by yourself.Questioner: So what should we do in order to becomesuch a nimit?Dadashri: All this; everything that I am telling you to do.Before becoming a nimit for salvation of the world, you have toget rid of certain types of ‘rust’ (inner kashays).In that, you should not have any intent of any violence(himsak bhaav), like getting angry, getting irritated, etc., withanyone. Actually, You do not have the real violent intent (himsakbhaav). These are all discharge violent intents, but when thesedischarge intents come to an end, that is when all these energiesAptavani-6223224Aptavani-6Therefore, until You become completely aparigrahi, you willnot attain the ultimate ‘thing,’ the absolute Self. (The state of theGnani Purush is complete aparigrahi).Questioner: Until then, what should we do to attain thetrue bliss (anand) of the Self?Dadashri: True bliss of the Self will arise when you recite,‘I am full of infinite knowledge (hoon anant gnan vaadochhoo),’ ‘I am full of infinite vision (hoon anant darshan vaadochhoo),’ ‘I am full of infinite bliss (hoon anant sukh nu dhamchhoo) and ‘I am full of infinite energy (hoon anant shaktivaado chhoo).’ The Self is the ocean of bliss (anandmaya); itencompasses all the bliss of the universe. This bliss is verilywithin everyone. But because of one’s weakness of this awareness(jagruti), one does not know where it is coming from.Questioner: Will the bliss of the Soul arise if I suppressthe pleasures of the self (pudgal)?Dadashri: No, there is no point in suppressing it. Thosepleasures become insipid on their own. If You recite the attributesof the Self for an hour, then bliss arises immediately. This issomething that gives you instant reward. Otherwise, it is alsopossible to be in this blissful state by ‘seeing’ the Shuddhatma,the pure Self, in everyone.Questioner: If I see Shuddhatma in the other person,then will that person experience bliss too?Dadashri: No, he will not, because there is no tellingwhere his inner tendencies (vruttis) are at that moment. Whoknows what he is thinking at that time? Yes, You benefit a lotfrom seeing the Shuddhatma in him. Only the Gnani Purush can‘give’ benefit to the other person.Questioner: Dada, you have talked about four kinds ofatma-ramanata; will you please tell us those again?Dadashri: Many people recite, ‘I am pure Soul…I ampure Soul (I am Shuddhatma…I am Shuddhatma).’ Some doit by repeatedly writing, ‘I am Shuddhatma…I amShuddhatma,’ and when they do that, even their body is engagedin that ramanata (absorbed or devotional involvement with bodymind and speech in the Self—Atma)The body, the speech and the mind, all three are presentwhile one is writing. And some people, even while conducting their worldlyaffairs with a devoted mind, dwell in the attributes of the Self(Shuddhatma). This along with the direct affirmation of, ‘I amfull of infinite knowledge…I am full of infinite energy,’ is theconsummate recitation (siddha stuti). It will give tremendousrewards.Questioner: Dada, the effort You make for other people’shappiness is beyond words. Those who suffer from the horribleagony of their misery, you make them absolutely happy; is itpossible for us to become like that?Dadashri: Yes, it is possible. But you should have thatmuch capacity. Now, You can become one of the evidences (animit). That is why I am preparing You. Otherwise, it is notpossible if you try to do it or make it happen by yourself.Questioner: So what should we do in order to becomesuch a nimit?Dadashri: All this; everything that I am telling you to do.Before becoming a nimit for salvation of the world, you have toget rid of certain types of ‘rust’ (inner kashays).In that, you should not have any intent of any violence(himsak bhaav), like getting angry, getting irritated, etc., withanyone. Actually, You do not have the real violent intent (himsakbhaav). These are all discharge violent intents, but when thesedischarge intents come to an end, that is when all these energiesAptavani-6225226Aptavani-6will open up for You. Discharge stealing, discharge sexuality,etc.; when all these discharge intents come to an end, the energyto become a nimit for others will arise. When all these end, Youbecome the supreme Self (parmatma). These discharge kashaysare all gone from ‘us’ and that is why ‘we’ have become animit.Questioner: So we have to talk about getting rid of our‘rust’ first.Dadashri: Everything can happen with being the Self(purusharth) first. Having become the purush (the Self), onecan come into purusharth. That is what I have done for you.From now on, whatever purusharth You make, is all Yours!Questioner: I remain in my Shuddhatma, but at the sametime, a connection with the other person’s Shuddhatma shouldalso be there, should it not?Dadashri: The benefit of seeing Shuddhatma in others isto increase your own purity (shuddhi), not to benefit the otherperson. You become pure (shuddha) by ‘seeing’ the shuddhain others, and this is the way Your state rises higher.Questioner: Can a connection between one Shuddhatmaand another Shuddhatma occur?Dadashri: No connection; this is a natural attribute(swabhav). If we take this light, then this light and then this one– if we combine all the three lights, each light’s individuality willremain the same. In all this, one does not benefit the other.Questioner: So the hurtful inner intent we have for others,does that decrease by doing pratikraman?Dadashri: Our hurtful intents will get destroyed. All thisis only for our own sake. Others have nothing to do with that.* * * * *[26]The Effect of Karma Dissipated by Talkingwith ChandulalWhat remains after You attain the knowledge of the Self?You are able to see the pure Self in everyone; you can also ‘see’the pure Self within you. So then what else remains? The ‘wedgeof karma effect,’ that is, the impediment of karma effect remains.You have become the supreme Self (parmatma) who ‘knows’everything, but then what happens? The answer is that the ‘wedge’of karma is the hindrance. How can this wedge be removed? Itcan be removed by settling all files with equanimity.The only solution to removing this wedge of karma effectis to deal with all the files that present themselves before Youwith equanimity, that is, without attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh). The action of the karma is all being carried out by thenon-Self. You know, you might even end up slapping someone,but there is no raag-dwesh there. Even before the file arrives,You have made a decision that You want to deal with that filewith equanimity. The wedge of karma effect is due to your ownplan and design of past life. When that effect of karma comesalong, people become needlessly perplexed. Now You havecome to ‘know’ that ‘Chandubhai’ is the one getting perplexed.Do You not become aware of that?Is this wedge of karma the same for all or is it different?It is different because everyone is different. Now if this old ladytries to teach something to this young girl, how will she understandher? ‘Dada’ will recognize the ‘wedge’ in the old lady and the‘wedge’ in the young girl. ‘We’ can also tell how theseAptavani-6225226Aptavani-6will open up for You. Discharge stealing, discharge sexuality,etc.; when all these discharge intents come to an end, the energyto become a nimit for others will arise. When all these end, Youbecome the supreme Self (parmatma). These discharge kashaysare all gone from ‘us’ and that is why ‘we’ have become animit.Questioner: So we have to talk about getting rid of our‘rust’ first.Dadashri: Everything can happen with being the Self(purusharth) first. Having become the purush (the Self), onecan come into purusharth. That is what I have done for you.From now on, whatever purusharth You make, is all Yours!Questioner: I remain in my Shuddhatma, but at the sametime, a connection with the other person’s Shuddhatma shouldalso be there, should it not?Dadashri: The benefit of seeing Shuddhatma in others isto increase your own purity (shuddhi), not to benefit the otherperson. You become pure (shuddha) by ‘seeing’ the shuddhain others, and this is the way Your state rises higher.Questioner: Can a connection between one Shuddhatmaand another Shuddhatma occur?Dadashri: No connection; this is a natural attribute(swabhav). If we take this light, then this light and then this one– if we combine all the three lights, each light’s individuality willremain the same. In all this, one does not benefit the other.Questioner: So the hurtful inner intent we have for others,does that decrease by doing pratikraman?Dadashri: Our hurtful intents will get destroyed. All thisis only for our own sake. Others have nothing to do with that.* * * * *[26]The Effect of Karma Dissipated by Talkingwith ChandulalWhat remains after You attain the knowledge of the Self?You are able to see the pure Self in everyone; you can also ‘see’the pure Self within you. So then what else remains? The ‘wedgeof karma effect,’ that is, the impediment of karma effect remains.You have become the supreme Self (parmatma) who ‘knows’everything, but then what happens? The answer is that the ‘wedge’of karma is the hindrance. How can this wedge be removed? Itcan be removed by settling all files with equanimity.The only solution to removing this wedge of karma effectis to deal with all the files that present themselves before Youwith equanimity, that is, without attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh). The action of the karma is all being carried out by thenon-Self. You know, you might even end up slapping someone,but there is no raag-dwesh there. Even before the file arrives,You have made a decision that You want to deal with that filewith equanimity. The wedge of karma effect is due to your ownplan and design of past life. When that effect of karma comesalong, people become needlessly perplexed. Now You havecome to ‘know’ that ‘Chandubhai’ is the one getting perplexed.Do You not become aware of that?Is this wedge of karma the same for all or is it different?It is different because everyone is different. Now if this old ladytries to teach something to this young girl, how will she understandher? ‘Dada’ will recognize the ‘wedge’ in the old lady and the‘wedge’ in the young girl. ‘We’ can also tell how theseAptavani-6227228Aptavani-6to be told. Only then will he shape up. Samayik in Front of the MirrorHave you ever scolded Chandubhai in the mirror? HaveChandubhai sit in front of a mirror and tell him, ‘You have donea good job of printing books, giving donations to propagate thisGnan; but you also do other things such as this and that. Whydo you do this?’ Should You not talk to yourself this way?Instead of just Dada telling Chandubhai, if You too were to talkto him, he will listen. He will accept it more if it comes from You!What goes through your mind when Dada tells you things? ‘Whydoes Dada tell me things when ‘the one within’ who is close tome does not say anything?’ Therefore, You should scold‘Chandubhai’ yourself.You know how to see mistakes in others but you do notknow how to see even a single mistake of yours. However, Youdo not have to get rid of the mistakes; You just need to scold‘Chandubhai’ a little. You already know your, Chandulal’s,mistakes so now You need to scold ‘Chandubhai’ gently. He ismeek and humble, but at the same time he is also very proud.He is pride-filled (a maani) in every way. Therefore, if Youcoax him and appease him a little, Your work will get done.Now when will You practice such a scolding? You mayhire one or two people at home to do the scolding, but they willnot scold you genuinely, will they? Only genuine scolding willbring forth a positive outcome. Fake scolding will not bring forthresults that will work. When anyone scolds you, should You nottake advantage of that? But you do not know how to arrangefor something like this!Questioner: I would not like it if there were someonearound to scold me.Dadashri: You do not like that. But if there were someoneto scold you all day long, then You would know how to dealimpediments arose in them. In studying people, ‘we’ can easilytell what kind of past impediments people have. The currentknowledge tells You that all this is wrong; this cannot be ‘Yours.’But what can You do when those ‘wedges’ of karma effectsexpress? You have no choice but suffer-experience them. Theywill give bitter and sweet experiences. They could be sweet attimes and bitter at other times. Do you like to experiencepleasure?As long as you find sweetness in your likes (gamo), thebitterness in the dislikes (ungamo) will remain. The moment theliking (gamo) for pleasure ceases, the dislike (ungamo) towardspain, will come to an end. How long will there be a liking forpleasure? It will last as long as the opinion that ‘true happiness,bliss, lies only in moksha,’ has not become strong enough. Thisopinion still remains weak. Hence, you need to keep remindingyourself that, ‘real pleasure, bliss, lies in moksha, and everythingelse is false.’ Every other moment, ‘You’ should keep reminding‘Chandubhai’ and make him understand this. If you are all alonein a room and no one is around, You should tell ‘Chandubhai,’you should talk to him, ‘Chandubhai! Have a seat, understandthese facts!’ When there is no one around, who is going toknow what kind of a drama you are doing? If there is someoneelse in the room, he will wonder whether you are crazy. Hey,you! I have not gone crazy; in fact, I am removing the crazinessthat is there.Another person may still comment, ‘You are talking toChandubhai; what kind of a person are you? Are you notChandubhai yourself?’ Therefore, when you are alone in yourroom, all by yourself, close the door and speak to Chandubhai,‘Have a seat Chandubhai, let us have a talk; what do you gainfrom doing this, and that? Why don’t you become one with Me?There is endless bliss with Me!’ Chandubhai is separate fromYou and hence You have to say all this. Just like we have tomake young children understand, similarly ‘Chandubhai’ needsAptavani-6227228Aptavani-6to be told. Only then will he shape up. Samayik in Front of the MirrorHave you ever scolded Chandubhai in the mirror? HaveChandubhai sit in front of a mirror and tell him, ‘You have donea good job of printing books, giving donations to propagate thisGnan; but you also do other things such as this and that. Whydo you do this?’ Should You not talk to yourself this way?Instead of just Dada telling Chandubhai, if You too were to talkto him, he will listen. He will accept it more if it comes from You!What goes through your mind when Dada tells you things? ‘Whydoes Dada tell me things when ‘the one within’ who is close tome does not say anything?’ Therefore, You should scold‘Chandubhai’ yourself.You know how to see mistakes in others but you do notknow how to see even a single mistake of yours. However, Youdo not have to get rid of the mistakes; You just need to scold‘Chandubhai’ a little. You already know your, Chandulal’s,mistakes so now You need to scold ‘Chandubhai’ gently. He ismeek and humble, but at the same time he is also very proud.He is pride-filled (a maani) in every way. Therefore, if Youcoax him and appease him a little, Your work will get done.Now when will You practice such a scolding? You mayhire one or two people at home to do the scolding, but they willnot scold you genuinely, will they? Only genuine scolding willbring forth a positive outcome. Fake scolding will not bring forthresults that will work. When anyone scolds you, should You nottake advantage of that? But you do not know how to arrangefor something like this!Questioner: I would not like it if there were someonearound to scold me.Dadashri: You do not like that. But if there were someoneto scold you all day long, then You would know how to dealimpediments arose in them. In studying people, ‘we’ can easilytell what kind of past impediments people have. The currentknowledge tells You that all this is wrong; this cannot be ‘Yours.’But what can You do when those ‘wedges’ of karma effectsexpress? You have no choice but suffer-experience them. Theywill give bitter and sweet experiences. They could be sweet attimes and bitter at other times. Do you like to experiencepleasure?As long as you find sweetness in your likes (gamo), thebitterness in the dislikes (ungamo) will remain. The moment theliking (gamo) for pleasure ceases, the dislike (ungamo) towardspain, will come to an end. How long will there be a liking forpleasure? It will last as long as the opinion that ‘true happiness,bliss, lies only in moksha,’ has not become strong enough. Thisopinion still remains weak. Hence, you need to keep remindingyourself that, ‘real pleasure, bliss, lies in moksha, and everythingelse is false.’ Every other moment, ‘You’ should keep reminding‘Chandubhai’ and make him understand this. If you are all alonein a room and no one is around, You should tell ‘Chandubhai,’you should talk to him, ‘Chandubhai! Have a seat, understandthese facts!’ When there is no one around, who is going toknow what kind of a drama you are doing? If there is someoneelse in the room, he will wonder whether you are crazy. Hey,you! I have not gone crazy; in fact, I am removing the crazinessthat is there.Another person may still comment, ‘You are talking toChandubhai; what kind of a person are you? Are you notChandubhai yourself?’ Therefore, when you are alone in yourroom, all by yourself, close the door and speak to Chandubhai,‘Have a seat Chandubhai, let us have a talk; what do you gainfrom doing this, and that? Why don’t you become one with Me?There is endless bliss with Me!’ Chandubhai is separate fromYou and hence You have to say all this. Just like we have tomake young children understand, similarly ‘Chandubhai’ needsAptavani-6229230Aptavani-6with him. You will feel that since it is an everyday event, therewill be no end to it. Instead, it would be better if you were towithdraw into your ‘cave,’ the Self.Talking with and Correcting the Self in theMirrorQuestioner: You have said, ‘I am not a worldly being(jiva), but I am a liberated being (Shiva)’. But such a separationdoes not exist.Dadashri: It does not let go of its nature (bhaav); it willnot give up its right, will it? Therefore, you have to coax andpersuade it in order for him (the relative-self) to understand andget Your work done. That is because the relative-self (pudgal)is naïve (bhodu) and straightforward. What is the nature of thepudgal? It is naïve and straightforward. Therefore, You cantrick it into the right way. Both the worldly being (jiva) and theliberated being (shiva) are separate, are they not? When it comesinto jiva bhaav, ‘I am Chandulal,’ it will eat potato chips andeverything else, and when it comes into shiva bhaav, ‘I am pureSoul,’ He will do darshan (be one with the Self within; state ofOneness of the perceiver and the perceived; right belief; rightvision of the Self)!Questioner: But is the mind of the jiva independent?Dadashri: It is absolutely independent. Have you seenyour mind when it becomes confrontational? Hey! If the mind istruly ‘my’ mind, then how can my mind fight with me? Can younot tell whether or not it is independent when it becomesconfrontational?Questioner: There is no control over speech and hencethere is no control over the mind.Dadashri: You have no control over that which confrontsyou.Before you believed, ‘I am a jiva.’ That belief is nowfractured and now you know that, ‘I am shiva.’ Jiva will not letgo any of its nature and rights. But it may let go of everythingif you persuade it. Just as it is affected by bad company (kusang),it will be affected by good company (satsang) too. Therefore,it is so good that it will give up everything if persuaded! Nowwhat You have to do is sit Chandubhai down and talk to him.Tell him, ‘At age of sixty-seven you have been attending satsangand everything. You pay good attention to it. You are doing agood job!’ Along with that, You also need to make himunderstand and advise him, ‘Why do you care so much aboutthe physical body? Whatever happens in the body; let it. Whydon’t you come over on this side of the table with Me! You willhave endless bliss with Me.’ You need to say this to Chandubhai.When you seat Chandubhai in front of a mirror, will You or willYou not see him exactly as he is?Questioner: My internal conversation with him continuesfor hours.Dadashri: But while you are conversing with others, healso has the other ‘phone, the k’s,’ the kashays within, that takeover. Hence you need to have him sit before a mirror and talkto him loudly, so that he does not answer any other ‘lines.’Questioner: How can ‘I’ make myself sit in front of themirror?Dadashri: If you seat ‘Chandubhai’ in front of You andkeep scolding him, he will become wise. When you scold himYourself by saying, ‘Chandubhai, how can you do this? Whatnonsense is this? Do something good now that you have startedto.’ What is wrong in saying this? Does it feel good having tolisten to someone else telling you off? That is why ‘we’ ask Youto scold Chandubhai, otherwise everything continues in ignorance.What this pudgal is saying is ‘you became a Shuddhatma butwhat about me?’ It is staking its claim; it has a right too. It alsoAptavani-6229230Aptavani-6with him. You will feel that since it is an everyday event, therewill be no end to it. Instead, it would be better if you were towithdraw into your ‘cave,’ the Self.Talking with and Correcting the Self in theMirrorQuestioner: You have said, ‘I am not a worldly being(jiva), but I am a liberated being (Shiva)’. But such a separationdoes not exist.Dadashri: It does not let go of its nature (bhaav); it willnot give up its right, will it? Therefore, you have to coax andpersuade it in order for him (the relative-self) to understand andget Your work done. That is because the relative-self (pudgal)is naïve (bhodu) and straightforward. What is the nature of thepudgal? It is naïve and straightforward. Therefore, You cantrick it into the right way. Both the worldly being (jiva) and theliberated being (shiva) are separate, are they not? When it comesinto jiva bhaav, ‘I am Chandulal,’ it will eat potato chips andeverything else, and when it comes into shiva bhaav, ‘I am pureSoul,’ He will do darshan (be one with the Self within; state ofOneness of the perceiver and the perceived; right belief; rightvision of the Self)!Questioner: But is the mind of the jiva independent?Dadashri: It is absolutely independent. Have you seenyour mind when it becomes confrontational? Hey! If the mind istruly ‘my’ mind, then how can my mind fight with me? Can younot tell whether or not it is independent when it becomesconfrontational?Questioner: There is no control over speech and hencethere is no control over the mind.Dadashri: You have no control over that which confrontsyou.Before you believed, ‘I am a jiva.’ That belief is nowfractured and now you know that, ‘I am shiva.’ Jiva will not letgo any of its nature and rights. But it may let go of everythingif you persuade it. Just as it is affected by bad company (kusang),it will be affected by good company (satsang) too. Therefore,it is so good that it will give up everything if persuaded! Nowwhat You have to do is sit Chandubhai down and talk to him.Tell him, ‘At age of sixty-seven you have been attending satsangand everything. You pay good attention to it. You are doing agood job!’ Along with that, You also need to make himunderstand and advise him, ‘Why do you care so much aboutthe physical body? Whatever happens in the body; let it. Whydon’t you come over on this side of the table with Me! You willhave endless bliss with Me.’ You need to say this to Chandubhai.When you seat Chandubhai in front of a mirror, will You or willYou not see him exactly as he is?Questioner: My internal conversation with him continuesfor hours.Dadashri: But while you are conversing with others, healso has the other ‘phone, the k’s,’ the kashays within, that takeover. Hence you need to have him sit before a mirror and talkto him loudly, so that he does not answer any other ‘lines.’Questioner: How can ‘I’ make myself sit in front of themirror?Dadashri: If you seat ‘Chandubhai’ in front of You andkeep scolding him, he will become wise. When you scold himYourself by saying, ‘Chandubhai, how can you do this? Whatnonsense is this? Do something good now that you have startedto.’ What is wrong in saying this? Does it feel good having tolisten to someone else telling you off? That is why ‘we’ ask Youto scold Chandubhai, otherwise everything continues in ignorance.What this pudgal is saying is ‘you became a Shuddhatma butwhat about me?’ It is staking its claim; it has a right too. It alsoAptavani-6231232Aptavani-6wants something. So, persuade and coax it. It is simple andnaïve (bhodu); naïve because in the company of fools he willbecome a fool, and in the company of the wise, he will becomewise. With thieves, he will turn into a thief! As is the company,so is what he becomes! But he will never give up his right.You need to seat ‘Chandubhai’ before the mirror andcarry out this process. In the mirror, You can see his face andeverything else. Thereafter, you need to tell ‘Chandubhai, ‘Whydid you do that? You shouldn’t be doing this. Why do youcreate separation due to difference of opinion (matbhed) withyour wife? Why did you marry her if you wanted to do this?Why are you doing all this after marrying her?’ You need to tellhim all this. Scolding and persuading him in this way in front ofthe mirror for an hour would greatly increase the energy. This isconsidered the greatest introspection, ‘seeing within’ (samayik).Would You not know ‘Chandubhai’s’ every mistake? Whatevermistakes You see, seat Chandubhai in front of the mirror for anhour and tell him about all those mistakes. That is the greatestsamayik.Questioner: Would it not work if I spoke to the mindwithin for an hour, instead of talking to him in the mirror?Dadashri: No, it does not work. You should be able tosee Chandubhai in the mirror. You will not learn to do it if youdo it in your mind. Only a Gnani Purush can do it all by himself.But you will need to be taught in a child’s language (basicapproach). And it is good that you have this mirror, otherwiseyou would have to spend hundreds of thousands of rupees tobuy one. It is good that mirrors are inexpensive nowadays! Inthe time of Lord Rushabhdev, only emperor Bharat had a hallof mirrors constructed! And these days you can see huge mirrorseverywhere!This is all a theory of subatomic particles (parmanus)which are indivisible. But much more work will get done ifsamayik is done sitting in front of a mirror. But no one doesthat, do they? When ‘we’ tell you, you remember this once ortwice, but in due time you will forget!After Self-realization, One is Neither aFemale nor a MaleLord Rushabhdev (the first of the 24 Tirthankars, fullyenlightened beings who were born on this earth; he is also knownas Aadinath Bhagwan, or Aadam) gave Akram Vignan (theshortcut ‘elevator’ path to Self-realization) to emperor Bharat,but it wasn’t until he took the help of the Hall of Mirrors that itworked out for him. In the Hall of Mirrors, his ring came off hisfinger, and when he saw his fingers in the mirror, they lookeddifferent to him. He wondered why only this finger was differentas compared to the rest. He then realized that a ring was missingon that finger. Thus began a thought process of whether thefinger appeared beautiful because of the ring! This went on untilhe attained absolute knowledge (keval gnan)!He started thinking whether the finger appeared beautifulbecause of the ring or because of him. Thus he realized the truenature of the Self. Then he started realizing, ‘This is not mine…this is not mine …this is not mine,’ and in doing this, heattained keval gnan in the end. Therefore, You should take fullbenefit of the mirror in a room. Ours is the Akram Vignan.Anyone who takes advantage of it will indeed accomplish hiswork. But no one knows about this, do they? It does not matterwhether one does not know the Self, but the enquiry in front ofa mirror will be a great help.Questioner: You give this Gnan to many people. Itinstantly fits few people while for the rest, no matter how hardthey try, it does not fit them. So what energy are they lacking?Dadashri: It is not a lack of energy. The wedge(impediment) of karma he has brought with him is crooked,Aptavani-6231232Aptavani-6wants something. So, persuade and coax it. It is simple andnaïve (bhodu); naïve because in the company of fools he willbecome a fool, and in the company of the wise, he will becomewise. With thieves, he will turn into a thief! As is the company,so is what he becomes! But he will never give up his right.You need to seat ‘Chandubhai’ before the mirror andcarry out this process. In the mirror, You can see his face andeverything else. Thereafter, you need to tell ‘Chandubhai, ‘Whydid you do that? You shouldn’t be doing this. Why do youcreate separation due to difference of opinion (matbhed) withyour wife? Why did you marry her if you wanted to do this?Why are you doing all this after marrying her?’ You need to tellhim all this. Scolding and persuading him in this way in front ofthe mirror for an hour would greatly increase the energy. This isconsidered the greatest introspection, ‘seeing within’ (samayik).Would You not know ‘Chandubhai’s’ every mistake? Whatevermistakes You see, seat Chandubhai in front of the mirror for anhour and tell him about all those mistakes. That is the greatestsamayik.Questioner: Would it not work if I spoke to the mindwithin for an hour, instead of talking to him in the mirror?Dadashri: No, it does not work. You should be able tosee Chandubhai in the mirror. You will not learn to do it if youdo it in your mind. Only a Gnani Purush can do it all by himself.But you will need to be taught in a child’s language (basicapproach). And it is good that you have this mirror, otherwiseyou would have to spend hundreds of thousands of rupees tobuy one. It is good that mirrors are inexpensive nowadays! Inthe time of Lord Rushabhdev, only emperor Bharat had a hallof mirrors constructed! And these days you can see huge mirrorseverywhere!This is all a theory of subatomic particles (parmanus)which are indivisible. But much more work will get done ifsamayik is done sitting in front of a mirror. But no one doesthat, do they? When ‘we’ tell you, you remember this once ortwice, but in due time you will forget!After Self-realization, One is Neither aFemale nor a MaleLord Rushabhdev (the first of the 24 Tirthankars, fullyenlightened beings who were born on this earth; he is also knownas Aadinath Bhagwan, or Aadam) gave Akram Vignan (theshortcut ‘elevator’ path to Self-realization) to emperor Bharat,but it wasn’t until he took the help of the Hall of Mirrors that itworked out for him. In the Hall of Mirrors, his ring came off hisfinger, and when he saw his fingers in the mirror, they lookeddifferent to him. He wondered why only this finger was differentas compared to the rest. He then realized that a ring was missingon that finger. Thus began a thought process of whether thefinger appeared beautiful because of the ring! This went on untilhe attained absolute knowledge (keval gnan)!He started thinking whether the finger appeared beautifulbecause of the ring or because of him. Thus he realized the truenature of the Self. Then he started realizing, ‘This is not mine…this is not mine …this is not mine,’ and in doing this, heattained keval gnan in the end. Therefore, You should take fullbenefit of the mirror in a room. Ours is the Akram Vignan.Anyone who takes advantage of it will indeed accomplish hiswork. But no one knows about this, do they? It does not matterwhether one does not know the Self, but the enquiry in front ofa mirror will be a great help.Questioner: You give this Gnan to many people. Itinstantly fits few people while for the rest, no matter how hardthey try, it does not fit them. So what energy are they lacking?Dadashri: It is not a lack of energy. The wedge(impediment) of karma he has brought with him is crooked,Aptavani-6233234Aptavani-6In fact, the pratiti, the conviction of the pure Self, hasreally occurred within you, but bad company (kusang) and itseffects prevents the taste of true experience (anubhav) fromcoming through.The real test comes when someone at home becomesangry and you react in anger too; then you should realize thatyou still have weakness.* * * * *whereas the ‘wedge’ in others is straight. The one with a straight‘wedge’ will be able to remove it easily himself, whereas the onewith a crooked one, no matter which way he pulls, it will notcome out. Our ‘wedge’ was straight and it dislodged instantly.‘We’ know no crooked ways or deceit. ‘Ours’ was absolutelyopen and clear! Whereas you, you might have learned somecrookedness and deceit. Although you come from a good family,what can you do when some of the crookedness set in duringyour childhood? If a nail is crooked, then it will take strengthand time to remove.Women by nature have some deceit (kapat) within. Theyare not straightforward within, which is the reason why theyhave become female in this life. Now, after attaining the Self,there is no such thing as the female gender, is there? But becausethe ‘nails’ are crooked, removing them takes time, does it not?It wouldn’t take much time if they were in straight! The men arenaïve and straightforward (bhoda). A woman can easily convincea man, and she will know it too. She will know that she hasconvinced him so now he will go out. A slight deceit (kapat)resulted in Tirthankara Mallinath to be born as a woman in thefinal life! This happened even though deception occurred naturallyand spontaneously! Deceit (kapat) will not spare anyone! Afterattaining Self-realization, one is no longer a male or a female.One has become Shuddhatma!The Influence of Wrong CompanyDespite not having the desire, a man goes out and inevitablyfalls into bad company (kusang); one is never immune from theinfluence of bad company. Many people claim that in spite ofbeing in the company of people who drink alcohol, they willnever drink. But from the very start of moving in such company,they begin to drink. The nature of any interaction or associationcannot refrain from painting its true colors on you. So abandonsuch company.Aptavani-6233234Aptavani-6In fact, the pratiti, the conviction of the pure Self, hasreally occurred within you, but bad company (kusang) and itseffects prevents the taste of true experience (anubhav) fromcoming through.The real test comes when someone at home becomesangry and you react in anger too; then you should realize thatyou still have weakness.* * * * *whereas the ‘wedge’ in others is straight. The one with a straight‘wedge’ will be able to remove it easily himself, whereas the onewith a crooked one, no matter which way he pulls, it will notcome out. Our ‘wedge’ was straight and it dislodged instantly.‘We’ know no crooked ways or deceit. ‘Ours’ was absolutelyopen and clear! Whereas you, you might have learned somecrookedness and deceit. Although you come from a good family,what can you do when some of the crookedness set in duringyour childhood? If a nail is crooked, then it will take strengthand time to remove.Women by nature have some deceit (kapat) within. Theyare not straightforward within, which is the reason why theyhave become female in this life. Now, after attaining the Self,there is no such thing as the female gender, is there? But becausethe ‘nails’ are crooked, removing them takes time, does it not?It wouldn’t take much time if they were in straight! The men arenaïve and straightforward (bhoda). A woman can easily convincea man, and she will know it too. She will know that she hasconvinced him so now he will go out. A slight deceit (kapat)resulted in Tirthankara Mallinath to be born as a woman in thefinal life! This happened even though deception occurred naturallyand spontaneously! Deceit (kapat) will not spare anyone! Afterattaining Self-realization, one is no longer a male or a female.One has become Shuddhatma!The Influence of Wrong CompanyDespite not having the desire, a man goes out and inevitablyfalls into bad company (kusang); one is never immune from theinfluence of bad company. Many people claim that in spite ofbeing in the company of people who drink alcohol, they willnever drink. But from the very start of moving in such company,they begin to drink. The nature of any interaction or associationcannot refrain from painting its true colors on you. So abandonsuch company.Aptavani-6235236Aptavani-6owner hits the horse, it will even roll the carriage over.Likewise, if a human being becomes deluded (murchhit)with what he sees, an atkan (major blockade of inner obstruction)is formed there. That atkan will not go away; he may be someonewho is not likely to become deluded anywhere else, but whenhe comes to that particular ‘place’ of his inner blockade (atkan),he will become deluded again. He will forget the Gnan, hisawareness and everything, and he will make mistakes. That iswhy Kaviraj says:‘One dangles because of the inner blockade, the danglingleads to wandering.On the problem of wandering, spray the liberating medicinefrom the feet-grace of the Gnani Purush’‘Atkan thi latkan, latkan thi bhatkan.Bhatkan ni khatkan par, chhaton charan-rajkan’Now if one wants to escape from the life after lifewanderings, then surrender at the feet of the Gnani and bringabout a solution so that the fear of atkan no longer remains.The Gnani Purush Removes AtkanSo there is a major blockade of inner obstruction (atkan)in everyone and that is why he is stuck here. One has to lookfor that atkan and find out its nature. It causes wandering forendless lifetimes. That is the only thing, nothing else. Atkanmeans to become deluded (murchhit). It means to lose theawareness of the Self. Atkan does not apply to every situationin life. When one leaves home, he does not get into quarrelseverywhere; he does not do attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh)everywhere. I give this analogy of the horse for your understanding.One can find one’s atkan if one looks for it; he will discoverwhere he becomes deluded, he will discover in which instancesor places he loses the awareness of who he is.[27]Atkan: Major Blockade in the Path of LiberationDadashri: Do you ever experience excitement with thetemptation of pleasure (galgalia)?Questioner: When Sunday comes and it is time for bettingon the horses, galgalia occur inside me.Dadashri: Yes, why does that happen on a Sunday andnot on a Saturday? Only when matter (dravya), place (kshetra),time (kaad) and intent (bhaav) come together do you experiencethis excitement (galgalia).Each person has been left dangling and stranded frominfinite past lives; each has been stranded in his own major innerobstruction (atkan) which inevitably blocks spiritual progress.One gets stuck in it. Why has one been stranded since timeimmemorial? Why is there still no solution for it? It is becauseone has some kind of atkan. Everyone has a different atkan.Do you understand this atkan? A smart, care-free horsepulling a carriage comes across a grave of a Muslim personcovered with a green cloth. The horse will stop as soon as itsees the green cloth. Why is that? It sees the green cloth on thegrave and sees it as something new and gets startled. Then, nomatter how much the owner strikes it, it will not move forward.Then he may have to strike, coax or put blinders on him andtake him across. But the next day, the horse will get stuck at thesame place. That is because there is an atkan (major blockadeof inner obstruction) within him. At that time he forgets everything;he forgets who he is; he forgets his knowledge (gnan). If theAptavani-6235236Aptavani-6owner hits the horse, it will even roll the carriage over.Likewise, if a human being becomes deluded (murchhit)with what he sees, an atkan (major blockade of inner obstruction)is formed there. That atkan will not go away; he may be someonewho is not likely to become deluded anywhere else, but whenhe comes to that particular ‘place’ of his inner blockade (atkan),he will become deluded again. He will forget the Gnan, hisawareness and everything, and he will make mistakes. That iswhy Kaviraj says:‘One dangles because of the inner blockade, the danglingleads to wandering.On the problem of wandering, spray the liberating medicinefrom the feet-grace of the Gnani Purush’‘Atkan thi latkan, latkan thi bhatkan.Bhatkan ni khatkan par, chhaton charan-rajkan’Now if one wants to escape from the life after lifewanderings, then surrender at the feet of the Gnani and bringabout a solution so that the fear of atkan no longer remains.The Gnani Purush Removes AtkanSo there is a major blockade of inner obstruction (atkan)in everyone and that is why he is stuck here. One has to lookfor that atkan and find out its nature. It causes wandering forendless lifetimes. That is the only thing, nothing else. Atkanmeans to become deluded (murchhit). It means to lose theawareness of the Self. Atkan does not apply to every situationin life. When one leaves home, he does not get into quarrelseverywhere; he does not do attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh)everywhere. I give this analogy of the horse for your understanding.One can find one’s atkan if one looks for it; he will discoverwhere he becomes deluded, he will discover in which instancesor places he loses the awareness of who he is.[27]Atkan: Major Blockade in the Path of LiberationDadashri: Do you ever experience excitement with thetemptation of pleasure (galgalia)?Questioner: When Sunday comes and it is time for bettingon the horses, galgalia occur inside me.Dadashri: Yes, why does that happen on a Sunday andnot on a Saturday? Only when matter (dravya), place (kshetra),time (kaad) and intent (bhaav) come together do you experiencethis excitement (galgalia).Each person has been left dangling and stranded frominfinite past lives; each has been stranded in his own major innerobstruction (atkan) which inevitably blocks spiritual progress.One gets stuck in it. Why has one been stranded since timeimmemorial? Why is there still no solution for it? It is becauseone has some kind of atkan. Everyone has a different atkan.Do you understand this atkan? A smart, care-free horsepulling a carriage comes across a grave of a Muslim personcovered with a green cloth. The horse will stop as soon as itsees the green cloth. Why is that? It sees the green cloth on thegrave and sees it as something new and gets startled. Then, nomatter how much the owner strikes it, it will not move forward.Then he may have to strike, coax or put blinders on him andtake him across. But the next day, the horse will get stuck at thesame place. That is because there is an atkan (major blockadeof inner obstruction) within him. At that time he forgets everything;he forgets who he is; he forgets his knowledge (gnan). If theAptavani-6237238Aptavani-6Self-realization through the Akram Gnan Vidhi) search for theinner blockade (atkan); others do not. Naïve and guileless(bhoda) people have simple atkan which can be easily removed,and a deceitful person will have a deceitful atkan, which is verydifficult to remove.Atkan is so Deluding that it Blocks Bliss andLiberationNow everything should be clear within. This Akram Gnanthat we have is such that You can remain in constant bliss, if Youwant to. Therefore, You have to look for ways to see how youcan be free of the atkan. You should even do alochana (recallmistakes), pratikraman (ask for forgiveness for the mistakes)and pratyakhyan (decide never to repeat them), in order to getrid of them. (These three together are also called ‘pratikraman’).Before, when there was no happiness, one was bound to remainin atkan, isn’t that so? But what is the need for it once this blissarises? Why does real happiness not arise? It is because of theatkan.Questioner: But, Dada, when one has the experience(anubhav), awareness (laksha) and conviction of the Self(pratiti) twenty-four hours a day, is atkan even an issue?Dadashri: No, everyone experiences that, but there isblockade (atkan) within, is there not? Should one not search forit to see where it lies?The whole world will be attracted to you and appreciateyou after atkan leaves. The mere sight of you will make themhappy. It is because of this atkan that bliss (anand) is notexperienced.Does a mirror show only one person’s face or does itshow everyone’s face? It will show the face of anyone whocomes before it. Therefore, if the inner state clears up just likea mirror, then it is worth it.Questioner: Does this atkan mean obstinate insistence(pakkad)?Dadashri: No, not obstinacy or insistence. Obstinacy goesinto insistence. In atkan one becomes deluded (murchhit)whereby he loses Gnan and awareness of who he is; while inobstinacy, Gnan and awareness are still there.Every human being has a weakness, does he not? Due tothis attribute of weakness, one continues to suffer. Once hisweakness goes away, he is liberated (mukta). But it is not easyto get rid of this weakness of blockade (atkan). Who can removeit? No one can remove it except the Gnani Purush, One who hasrealized the Self and is able to do the same for others. TheGnani Purush exposes the weakness and removes it for us. Nomatter what kind of a ‘horse’ gets stuck, the Gnani will take itforward. He will do whatever it takes to make it go forward.Otherwise, the horse will not budge even if you were to ‘kill’ it.And it is not just the horses, but the elephants too; if theyencounter an atkan, they will not budge either.Questioner: But, Bhagwan (Lord), is it because of somestrong effects of karma (samskar) that have brought us here atyour feet?Dadashri: It is because of the karma effect (samskar)that all these things have come together. Who will help you getrid of them? Who liberates you from the inner blockade(atkan)? Who sets you apart? Therefore, recognize the natureof atkan and where it lies. Then remain very alert and awarethere. Have you recognized your atkan? Have you recognizedit from all the sides, all around? You should be able to recognizeit right away; even when it moves from behind you, you shouldbe able to say, ‘There goes the atkan!’ Yes, that is how alertyou must remain!Only the Gnani’s mahatmas (those who have receivedAptavani-6237238Aptavani-6Self-realization through the Akram Gnan Vidhi) search for theinner blockade (atkan); others do not. Naïve and guileless(bhoda) people have simple atkan which can be easily removed,and a deceitful person will have a deceitful atkan, which is verydifficult to remove.Atkan is so Deluding that it Blocks Bliss andLiberationNow everything should be clear within. This Akram Gnanthat we have is such that You can remain in constant bliss, if Youwant to. Therefore, You have to look for ways to see how youcan be free of the atkan. You should even do alochana (recallmistakes), pratikraman (ask for forgiveness for the mistakes)and pratyakhyan (decide never to repeat them), in order to getrid of them. (These three together are also called ‘pratikraman’).Before, when there was no happiness, one was bound to remainin atkan, isn’t that so? But what is the need for it once this blissarises? Why does real happiness not arise? It is because of theatkan.Questioner: But, Dada, when one has the experience(anubhav), awareness (laksha) and conviction of the Self(pratiti) twenty-four hours a day, is atkan even an issue?Dadashri: No, everyone experiences that, but there isblockade (atkan) within, is there not? Should one not search forit to see where it lies?The whole world will be attracted to you and appreciateyou after atkan leaves. The mere sight of you will make themhappy. It is because of this atkan that bliss (anand) is notexperienced.Does a mirror show only one person’s face or does itshow everyone’s face? It will show the face of anyone whocomes before it. Therefore, if the inner state clears up just likea mirror, then it is worth it.Questioner: Does this atkan mean obstinate insistence(pakkad)?Dadashri: No, not obstinacy or insistence. Obstinacy goesinto insistence. In atkan one becomes deluded (murchhit)whereby he loses Gnan and awareness of who he is; while inobstinacy, Gnan and awareness are still there.Every human being has a weakness, does he not? Due tothis attribute of weakness, one continues to suffer. Once hisweakness goes away, he is liberated (mukta). But it is not easyto get rid of this weakness of blockade (atkan). Who can removeit? No one can remove it except the Gnani Purush, One who hasrealized the Self and is able to do the same for others. TheGnani Purush exposes the weakness and removes it for us. Nomatter what kind of a ‘horse’ gets stuck, the Gnani will take itforward. He will do whatever it takes to make it go forward.Otherwise, the horse will not budge even if you were to ‘kill’ it.And it is not just the horses, but the elephants too; if theyencounter an atkan, they will not budge either.Questioner: But, Bhagwan (Lord), is it because of somestrong effects of karma (samskar) that have brought us here atyour feet?Dadashri: It is because of the karma effect (samskar)that all these things have come together. Who will help you getrid of them? Who liberates you from the inner blockade(atkan)? Who sets you apart? Therefore, recognize the natureof atkan and where it lies. Then remain very alert and awarethere. Have you recognized your atkan? Have you recognizedit from all the sides, all around? You should be able to recognizeit right away; even when it moves from behind you, you shouldbe able to say, ‘There goes the atkan!’ Yes, that is how alertyou must remain!Only the Gnani’s mahatmas (those who have receivedAptavani-6239240Aptavani-6Dadashri: Atkan is much heavier than nikachit karma.Nikachit is of a lower level. Nikachit karma means that youhave no choice but suffer its effects, whereas with atkan, notonly do you have to suffer it, but in the process it will createanother mess for you to suffer. In nikachit karma, with Gnanyou can only become free after suffering through its effect. Eventhough you do not want to, you will still have to suffer it.Therefore, there is no problem with nikachit karma. Nikachitkarma is a kind of a punishment for you. Once you serve yourpunishment, you are done with it, but there is a big problem withatkan.Questioner: Is that which is known as ‘current karma’which will give effect in the future (kriyamaan), in Vedanta(Hindu scriptures)?Dadashri: Not kriyamaan. There are some karmas thatcan be removed just by thinking, some are removed withmeditation (dhyan), and there some that you have no choice butsuffer them, even if you do not wish to. Those are nikachitkarma. They are sticky karma whereas this atkan is such thatit creates another problem. So for atkan, one has to keep‘seeing,’ with much awareness, to bring it to an end. That is whythese boys, at a very young age, have started spiritual effort(purusharth) of getting rid of their atkan.Purusharth and ParakramQuestioner: If we make the effort to destroy the atkan,will it give rise to extraordinary spiritual effort (parakram)?Dadashri: You can only make an effort to get rid of youratkan if you put in extraordinary inner energy (parakram). Goingafter the atkan is itself a parakram. One cannot get rid of theatkan without parakram. That is the job of a ‘parakramipurush,’ one who is able to come into parakram. With theGnan I have given you, you can do parakram.People are not attracted to you because of the atkanwithin. Attraction should occur, and then the words that comeout will be considered the eternal words (brahmavakya).Therefore, find out where the atkan lies. Others too have theexperience, awareness and conviction (anubhav, laksha andpratiti) of the Self, but why does the attraction not increase?Should one not become attractive to others in this world? Instantattraction means instant; it should not appear to be ‘on credit,’should it? So you should look for all the reasons within. Atkanis such that if one does not see a ‘hotel’ (that which tempts him)for ten days, then there is no problem, but the minute he seesone, he will run into it. Circumstances come together and he istempted and tickled! If you have helped someone stop drinking alcohol, thenwhen he sits in satsang he will feel at peace. He will forgetalcohol for several days, then one day he goes out with you fora walk and he reads a sign, ‘Liquor Bar,’ and immediately achange will come about within him. He feels that temptation ofexciting pleasure (galgalia) within. He will somehow deceiveyou; he will tell you he has to use the restroom and that he willbe back in a little while. Hey, you! You are talking about usingthe restroom now? You will understand that he has been aroused.He will somehow manage to find an excuse to slip in through theback door and take a shot or two of alcohol. Only then will theatkan leave him.Do you understand this atkan (inner blockade)? Atkanwill make you deluded (murchhit); make you lose awareness.For the duration of that period, five to ten minutes, one loses allawareness of Gnan and vision (darshan) of the Self; it rendersone completely deluded.Atkan versus Heavy KarmaQuestioner: Is nikachit karma (karma that is so heavythat it has to be suffered) the same as atkan?Aptavani-6239240Aptavani-6Dadashri: Atkan is much heavier than nikachit karma.Nikachit is of a lower level. Nikachit karma means that youhave no choice but suffer its effects, whereas with atkan, notonly do you have to suffer it, but in the process it will createanother mess for you to suffer. In nikachit karma, with Gnanyou can only become free after suffering through its effect. Eventhough you do not want to, you will still have to suffer it.Therefore, there is no problem with nikachit karma. Nikachitkarma is a kind of a punishment for you. Once you serve yourpunishment, you are done with it, but there is a big problem withatkan.Questioner: Is that which is known as ‘current karma’which will give effect in the future (kriyamaan), in Vedanta(Hindu scriptures)?Dadashri: Not kriyamaan. There are some karmas thatcan be removed just by thinking, some are removed withmeditation (dhyan), and there some that you have no choice butsuffer them, even if you do not wish to. Those are nikachitkarma. They are sticky karma whereas this atkan is such thatit creates another problem. So for atkan, one has to keep‘seeing,’ with much awareness, to bring it to an end. That is whythese boys, at a very young age, have started spiritual effort(purusharth) of getting rid of their atkan.Purusharth and ParakramQuestioner: If we make the effort to destroy the atkan,will it give rise to extraordinary spiritual effort (parakram)?Dadashri: You can only make an effort to get rid of youratkan if you put in extraordinary inner energy (parakram). Goingafter the atkan is itself a parakram. One cannot get rid of theatkan without parakram. That is the job of a ‘parakramipurush,’ one who is able to come into parakram. With theGnan I have given you, you can do parakram.People are not attracted to you because of the atkanwithin. Attraction should occur, and then the words that comeout will be considered the eternal words (brahmavakya).Therefore, find out where the atkan lies. Others too have theexperience, awareness and conviction (anubhav, laksha andpratiti) of the Self, but why does the attraction not increase?Should one not become attractive to others in this world? Instantattraction means instant; it should not appear to be ‘on credit,’should it? So you should look for all the reasons within. Atkanis such that if one does not see a ‘hotel’ (that which tempts him)for ten days, then there is no problem, but the minute he seesone, he will run into it. Circumstances come together and he istempted and tickled! If you have helped someone stop drinking alcohol, thenwhen he sits in satsang he will feel at peace. He will forgetalcohol for several days, then one day he goes out with you fora walk and he reads a sign, ‘Liquor Bar,’ and immediately achange will come about within him. He feels that temptation ofexciting pleasure (galgalia) within. He will somehow deceiveyou; he will tell you he has to use the restroom and that he willbe back in a little while. Hey, you! You are talking about usingthe restroom now? You will understand that he has been aroused.He will somehow manage to find an excuse to slip in through theback door and take a shot or two of alcohol. Only then will theatkan leave him.Do you understand this atkan (inner blockade)? Atkanwill make you deluded (murchhit); make you lose awareness.For the duration of that period, five to ten minutes, one loses allawareness of Gnan and vision (darshan) of the Self; it rendersone completely deluded.Atkan versus Heavy KarmaQuestioner: Is nikachit karma (karma that is so heavythat it has to be suffered) the same as atkan?Aptavani-6241242Aptavani-6Nikachit karma has to be suffered; nothing will deter it,but at least no new or additional problems arise after or duringthe suffering because one does not have a desire to enjoy orendure effects. If one gets to eat a mango, he will eat it, and ifhe does not get to eat one, then that is fine too. One will haveto taste the mango; he will have to eat it, even though he doesnot want to. He has to do this because of pudgal sparshna,pending account of the non-Self. No one can do anything aboutit.In atkan (inner blockade), there remain hidden desireswithin. Therefore, in this era of the current time cycle, in thepresence of the Gnani Purush one should eradicate all one’satkan from its roots. And it is possible to do so. Everything canbe cured in the presence of the Gnani Purush. The presence ofthe Gnani Purush is defined by the eradication of all disease! Doyou like atkan?Questioner: No, having learned about what atkan isnow, it pricks like a thorn; how could I like it?Dadashri: Yes, it is bothersome like a thorn. It is calledthe mightiest thorn of illusion (mayashalya)!Questioner: On the one hand the blockade/atkancontinues within and I am aware of it, and on the other hand, themind likes one thing and it does not like another. It all takesplace simultaneously.Dadashri: Yes, but atkan is atkan. One should uprootit and eradicate it forever. You should remove it from its mainroot so that there is no chance for it to sprout again. And it ispossible to do so through extraordinary spiritual effort(parakram)!Questioner: When this blockade/atkan comes, is ‘Dada’also present at that time? Then what if I say, ‘Look, Dada, whatis going on’?Dadashri: Atkan makes one deluded (murchhit) andunaware. At that time, ‘Dada’ does not remain as your awareness.Atkan will make you forget Dada. It will make you forget theSelf and make you lose awareness (laksha). Awareness will notremain. If ‘Dada’ remains present, it is not called atkan but itis nikachit (karmas that will give their effects; you will have toexperience them).Questioner: What should we do if we come to knowlater that it was atkan?Dadashri: You have to recognize that; that is a delusion(murchha). You will have to do samayik for that. Just likeeveryone here, in the samayik you will have to put atkan andits phases on the ‘stage.’Questioner: When a young boy does not get a bat anda ball to play with, it will play on his mind; he will throw atantrum. Is that considered an atkan?Dadashri: No, that is not atkan. Atkan is what hascaused one to wander for endless lifetimes. This bat and ball isonly for a short while. It will last until he is five to seven yearsold, only as long as he is a child. Once he gets involved inbusiness, there will be no trace of it, whereas atkan will remainforever. It will remain from age fifteen until he is an old man!Questioner: It is possible to remove atkan through spiritualeffort (purusharth) and extraordinary spiritual effort (parakram),is it not?Dadashri: Yes, it is all possible. That is why ‘we’ alertyou that one can do parakram where he has attained the Selfand has become a purush (the Self); there is purusharth there.One is able to do parakram, therefore, now get Your workdone. It is dangerous to get stuck again, so find the ultimatesolution (ukel) here.Any kind of atkan (internal blockade) can take hold asAptavani-6241242Aptavani-6Nikachit karma has to be suffered; nothing will deter it,but at least no new or additional problems arise after or duringthe suffering because one does not have a desire to enjoy orendure effects. If one gets to eat a mango, he will eat it, and ifhe does not get to eat one, then that is fine too. One will haveto taste the mango; he will have to eat it, even though he doesnot want to. He has to do this because of pudgal sparshna,pending account of the non-Self. No one can do anything aboutit.In atkan (inner blockade), there remain hidden desireswithin. Therefore, in this era of the current time cycle, in thepresence of the Gnani Purush one should eradicate all one’satkan from its roots. And it is possible to do so. Everything canbe cured in the presence of the Gnani Purush. The presence ofthe Gnani Purush is defined by the eradication of all disease! Doyou like atkan?Questioner: No, having learned about what atkan isnow, it pricks like a thorn; how could I like it?Dadashri: Yes, it is bothersome like a thorn. It is calledthe mightiest thorn of illusion (mayashalya)!Questioner: On the one hand the blockade/atkancontinues within and I am aware of it, and on the other hand, themind likes one thing and it does not like another. It all takesplace simultaneously.Dadashri: Yes, but atkan is atkan. One should uprootit and eradicate it forever. You should remove it from its mainroot so that there is no chance for it to sprout again. And it ispossible to do so through extraordinary spiritual effort(parakram)!Questioner: When this blockade/atkan comes, is ‘Dada’also present at that time? Then what if I say, ‘Look, Dada, whatis going on’?Dadashri: Atkan makes one deluded (murchhit) andunaware. At that time, ‘Dada’ does not remain as your awareness.Atkan will make you forget Dada. It will make you forget theSelf and make you lose awareness (laksha). Awareness will notremain. If ‘Dada’ remains present, it is not called atkan but itis nikachit (karmas that will give their effects; you will have toexperience them).Questioner: What should we do if we come to knowlater that it was atkan?Dadashri: You have to recognize that; that is a delusion(murchha). You will have to do samayik for that. Just likeeveryone here, in the samayik you will have to put atkan andits phases on the ‘stage.’Questioner: When a young boy does not get a bat anda ball to play with, it will play on his mind; he will throw atantrum. Is that considered an atkan?Dadashri: No, that is not atkan. Atkan is what hascaused one to wander for endless lifetimes. This bat and ball isonly for a short while. It will last until he is five to seven yearsold, only as long as he is a child. Once he gets involved inbusiness, there will be no trace of it, whereas atkan will remainforever. It will remain from age fifteen until he is an old man!Questioner: It is possible to remove atkan through spiritualeffort (purusharth) and extraordinary spiritual effort (parakram),is it not?Dadashri: Yes, it is all possible. That is why ‘we’ alertyou that one can do parakram where he has attained the Selfand has become a purush (the Self); there is purusharth there.One is able to do parakram, therefore, now get Your workdone. It is dangerous to get stuck again, so find the ultimatesolution (ukel) here.Any kind of atkan (internal blockade) can take hold asAptavani-6243244Aptavani-6long as one has not realized one’s bliss of the Self. Now thatYou have attained the bliss of the Self, you do not need thesupport of external pleasures and happiness. Therefore, put asideall other forms of pleasure. Bliss of the Self and external pleasurecan not arise together. Therefore, find the atkan.Experience (anubhav), awareness (laksha) and conviction(pratiti) prevail for everyone; that is not the fruit of purusharth.They are the fruit of ‘Dada’s’ grace. Now when can you callsomething a purusharth and a parakram? It is when the ‘rope’you are hanging from, the rope that makes you wander life afterlife, breaks. To break this, You have to do parakram. Whatyou have attained is the result of your merit karma (punya) ofthe highest order. Through these merit karmas, you attained theGnani’s grace and through the Gnani’s grace, you have attainedthe Self.Your speech will be liked by everyone when the atkanleaves. There is nothing wrong with what you say, but becauseof the atkan, it does not come out as it should. Speech ishampered and unnatural due to the atkan within. It will not evenproduce a liberating smile (mukta-hasya) on your face. Oncethe atkan is gone, your speech will be good and your smile willradiate with liberation. Therefore, get rid of the atkan and dosalvation of the world (jagat kalyan).The speech (vani), the conduct (vartan) and the humility(vinaya); these three should become such that they win over themind and the hearts of others. When that happens, then realizethat You have begun to become like ‘Dada.’ Thereafter, thereis no problem. Then You are safe; You have a safe side.Therefore, these three – speech, conduct and humility – mustbecome directly visible to others. Without these attributes, onecannot verify whether something is authentic, can one?Extraordinary Inner War against AtkanHave snacks, eat whatever you want; you have to do thatanyway. ‘Dada’ has not objected to you having snacks. Butwhat has left you stranded and dangling? Look for that atkan.And if that connection is still there, tell me about it. If it issomething you cannot tell me, then find out what it is, and if yougo after it and do extraordinary spiritual effort (parakram), thenit will be fine. For that, get Gnani’s blessings (do Vidhi) here,and in your mind ask for the energy to do so; then the energywill manifest within. There is nothing else.Nikachit (karma that has to be suffered) will not let youoff. Nikachit means that you have no choice but suffer throughthe effects (fruit of the karma) no matter how desperately youdo not wish for it. Even when you feel, ‘I do not want anythingnow,’ the karma that will drag you into it is called nikachit.With whatever inner intent (bhaav) it was bound, it will dissipatewith the same bhaav. Therefore, there is no problem even withnikachit karma. This whole worldly life (sansar) is nothing butnikachit. Now a man may not have any interest in sex or awoman may not have any interest in sex, but they have nochoice but suffer through the act. That verily is called nikachitkarma. The problem, however, is with atkan. One needs to‘see’ where he still gets excited with temptation of pleasure(galgalia). That is where one loses awareness and becomesdeluded (murchhit). Do you understand the word galgalia?Questioner: I have heard the word, but I haven’tunderstood it exactly.Dadashri: If a boy from a very respectable family getsinto a habit of dancing in plays and theatre, and someone switcheshis interest and takes him away from the dancing, he may nothave a problem for a year or two. But if he happens to pass bya theatre and reads the billboard, he will have galgalia. The oldhabit and delusion will overcome him. It will make him loseawareness and he will lie to you and somehow get in. He willnot even have awareness of what lies to tell.Aptavani-6243244Aptavani-6long as one has not realized one’s bliss of the Self. Now thatYou have attained the bliss of the Self, you do not need thesupport of external pleasures and happiness. Therefore, put asideall other forms of pleasure. Bliss of the Self and external pleasurecan not arise together. Therefore, find the atkan.Experience (anubhav), awareness (laksha) and conviction(pratiti) prevail for everyone; that is not the fruit of purusharth.They are the fruit of ‘Dada’s’ grace. Now when can you callsomething a purusharth and a parakram? It is when the ‘rope’you are hanging from, the rope that makes you wander life afterlife, breaks. To break this, You have to do parakram. Whatyou have attained is the result of your merit karma (punya) ofthe highest order. Through these merit karmas, you attained theGnani’s grace and through the Gnani’s grace, you have attainedthe Self.Your speech will be liked by everyone when the atkanleaves. There is nothing wrong with what you say, but becauseof the atkan, it does not come out as it should. Speech ishampered and unnatural due to the atkan within. It will not evenproduce a liberating smile (mukta-hasya) on your face. Oncethe atkan is gone, your speech will be good and your smile willradiate with liberation. Therefore, get rid of the atkan and dosalvation of the world (jagat kalyan).The speech (vani), the conduct (vartan) and the humility(vinaya); these three should become such that they win over themind and the hearts of others. When that happens, then realizethat You have begun to become like ‘Dada.’ Thereafter, thereis no problem. Then You are safe; You have a safe side.Therefore, these three – speech, conduct and humility – mustbecome directly visible to others. Without these attributes, onecannot verify whether something is authentic, can one?Extraordinary Inner War against AtkanHave snacks, eat whatever you want; you have to do thatanyway. ‘Dada’ has not objected to you having snacks. Butwhat has left you stranded and dangling? Look for that atkan.And if that connection is still there, tell me about it. If it issomething you cannot tell me, then find out what it is, and if yougo after it and do extraordinary spiritual effort (parakram), thenit will be fine. For that, get Gnani’s blessings (do Vidhi) here,and in your mind ask for the energy to do so; then the energywill manifest within. There is nothing else.Nikachit (karma that has to be suffered) will not let youoff. Nikachit means that you have no choice but suffer throughthe effects (fruit of the karma) no matter how desperately youdo not wish for it. Even when you feel, ‘I do not want anythingnow,’ the karma that will drag you into it is called nikachit.With whatever inner intent (bhaav) it was bound, it will dissipatewith the same bhaav. Therefore, there is no problem even withnikachit karma. This whole worldly life (sansar) is nothing butnikachit. Now a man may not have any interest in sex or awoman may not have any interest in sex, but they have nochoice but suffer through the act. That verily is called nikachitkarma. The problem, however, is with atkan. One needs to‘see’ where he still gets excited with temptation of pleasure(galgalia). That is where one loses awareness and becomesdeluded (murchhit). Do you understand the word galgalia?Questioner: I have heard the word, but I haven’tunderstood it exactly.Dadashri: If a boy from a very respectable family getsinto a habit of dancing in plays and theatre, and someone switcheshis interest and takes him away from the dancing, he may nothave a problem for a year or two. But if he happens to pass bya theatre and reads the billboard, he will have galgalia. The oldhabit and delusion will overcome him. It will make him loseawareness and he will lie to you and somehow get in. He willnot even have awareness of what lies to tell.Aptavani-6245246Aptavani-6easy to remove the atkan and do purusharth through your ownenergy. Parakram can be done only when you take the energyfrom here.First of all, you cannot recognize an atkan, or what formit is in or what its characteristics are. Therefore, you have to findthe atkan by looking at the galgalia, where and under whatcircumstances they occur. Where does it make him, Chandulal,lose his sense (saan) and awareness (bhaan)? That is all youhave to ‘see.’ How do you have to take care of this Chandubhainow? Tell him, ‘You may eat and drink whatever you want.Follow Dada’s Agnas. If there is any weakness in that, we willsee about that.’ But ‘You’ have to see where Chandulal hasexcitement with the temptation of pleasure (galgalia)! Keep aneye on him like a private detective because he has been strandedand left hanging, life after life, in the world due to his blockadeimpediment (atkan). And that atkan does not leave. Right now,because the Gnani Purush is here, he can free you from theatkan.The Biggest Atkan is that of SexLaghuraj Maharaj, disciple of the Gnani Purush ShrimadRajchandra, also known as Krupadudev, wrote to Krupadudevfrom Surat stating that he wanted to come to Bombay to do hisdarshan. So Krupadudev wrote back, ‘Bombay is a city ofillusionary attractions (mohamayi). It is not suited for saints/religious teachers (sadhus/acharyas). Here, illusion (moha) willpossess you from wherever you look. If it does not get to youthrough the mouth, it will get to you through your eyes or ears.If not, then it will get you even from the holes in the body whereair comes in and goes out! Therefore, it is not worth cominghere.’ What did Krupadudev name this place? He called it amohamayi (illusionary attractions) city. I have given you Gnanin such a city, but does that mean that all the illusion (moha) hasgone away? No, it is still a ‘mohamayi’ city that will deludeTherefore, as long as one does not have bliss of the Self,he will remain absorbed in some ‘happiness’ or other. But afterone receives Atma Gnan, the knowledge of the Self, howwonderful is the bliss! You can keep that ‘bliss’ however youwant. It is possible to remain in samadhi (the state of beingunaffected despite all external turmoil and maintaining onenesswith the pure Self). Therefore, it is possible to get rid of thoseother things. Our Gnan is such that if one remains constantly inthe five Agnas, he can experience the same state as that of LordMahavir. Why does one not experience that? It is because ofthe force of his past life’s karma. You may want to go north butthe boat will take you south. Even then, You will be aware thatthat You want to go north but it is taking you south. You shouldnever lose that awareness (laksha), and if on your way anotherboat owner shows you a few bottles of alcohol, and galgaliawill arise within, then there is a problem. Then you will forgetnorth and make a home right there. That is called atkan.That is why ‘we’ are telling You to become free fromevery aspect of the worldly life. You have now become a purush(the Self) and, therefore, You will be able to do parakram(extraordinary spiritual effort) to remove a major blockade(atkan). Otherwise, man is entirely dependent on his prakruti(the non-Self), which is like a ‘top,’ a spinning toy. You havenow become free from that state as a ‘top’ and have attainedthe energy to do parakram. You are now able to do self-purusharth and self-parakram. Furthermore, the Gnani Purushis with You, so where is the fear?Questioner: Do we have to stay with you for that?Dadashri: No, it is not a question of staying with me. Butyou should remain in touch increasingly, should you not? Bystaying in touch, will You not know that it went away? But howwould you know if you stay away? And when you remain intouch, the energy to cure that disease will also arise. It is notAptavani-6245246Aptavani-6easy to remove the atkan and do purusharth through your ownenergy. Parakram can be done only when you take the energyfrom here.First of all, you cannot recognize an atkan, or what formit is in or what its characteristics are. Therefore, you have to findthe atkan by looking at the galgalia, where and under whatcircumstances they occur. Where does it make him, Chandulal,lose his sense (saan) and awareness (bhaan)? That is all youhave to ‘see.’ How do you have to take care of this Chandubhainow? Tell him, ‘You may eat and drink whatever you want.Follow Dada’s Agnas. If there is any weakness in that, we willsee about that.’ But ‘You’ have to see where Chandulal hasexcitement with the temptation of pleasure (galgalia)! Keep aneye on him like a private detective because he has been strandedand left hanging, life after life, in the world due to his blockadeimpediment (atkan). And that atkan does not leave. Right now,because the Gnani Purush is here, he can free you from theatkan.The Biggest Atkan is that of SexLaghuraj Maharaj, disciple of the Gnani Purush ShrimadRajchandra, also known as Krupadudev, wrote to Krupadudevfrom Surat stating that he wanted to come to Bombay to do hisdarshan. So Krupadudev wrote back, ‘Bombay is a city ofillusionary attractions (mohamayi). It is not suited for saints/religious teachers (sadhus/acharyas). Here, illusion (moha) willpossess you from wherever you look. If it does not get to youthrough the mouth, it will get to you through your eyes or ears.If not, then it will get you even from the holes in the body whereair comes in and goes out! Therefore, it is not worth cominghere.’ What did Krupadudev name this place? He called it amohamayi (illusionary attractions) city. I have given you Gnanin such a city, but does that mean that all the illusion (moha) hasgone away? No, it is still a ‘mohamayi’ city that will deludeTherefore, as long as one does not have bliss of the Self,he will remain absorbed in some ‘happiness’ or other. But afterone receives Atma Gnan, the knowledge of the Self, howwonderful is the bliss! You can keep that ‘bliss’ however youwant. It is possible to remain in samadhi (the state of beingunaffected despite all external turmoil and maintaining onenesswith the pure Self). Therefore, it is possible to get rid of thoseother things. Our Gnan is such that if one remains constantly inthe five Agnas, he can experience the same state as that of LordMahavir. Why does one not experience that? It is because ofthe force of his past life’s karma. You may want to go north butthe boat will take you south. Even then, You will be aware thatthat You want to go north but it is taking you south. You shouldnever lose that awareness (laksha), and if on your way anotherboat owner shows you a few bottles of alcohol, and galgaliawill arise within, then there is a problem. Then you will forgetnorth and make a home right there. That is called atkan.That is why ‘we’ are telling You to become free fromevery aspect of the worldly life. You have now become a purush(the Self) and, therefore, You will be able to do parakram(extraordinary spiritual effort) to remove a major blockade(atkan). Otherwise, man is entirely dependent on his prakruti(the non-Self), which is like a ‘top,’ a spinning toy. You havenow become free from that state as a ‘top’ and have attainedthe energy to do parakram. You are now able to do self-purusharth and self-parakram. Furthermore, the Gnani Purushis with You, so where is the fear?Questioner: Do we have to stay with you for that?Dadashri: No, it is not a question of staying with me. Butyou should remain in touch increasingly, should you not? Bystaying in touch, will You not know that it went away? But howwould you know if you stay away? And when you remain intouch, the energy to cure that disease will also arise. It is notAptavani-6247248Aptavani-6you. That is why ‘we’ tell you that the five senses are not aproblem. But if you even think about sex, then do pratikramanimmediately, on the spot. And then later, do a hundred, twohundred pratikramans for it.However, if you happened to go to a hotel for food(indulged your taste buds) and failed to do pratikraman for it,then it is fine. I will make you do that pratikraman. But makesure you do not get infected by this disease of sexual pleasure.This is a dangerous disease. What is the cure for this disease?The answer is that wherever a man has an atkan (blockade),there lies the disease for sure. For some men, when they see acertain kind of a woman passing by, changes (galgalia) occurwithin them. In reality, everyone is made up of flesh and bones,but one has an attraction for certain kind of a woman whichoccurs from within (a karma effect). Therefore, he will beattracted. Does he feel attracted to all women? No. But as ahuman, he has the old habit of being attracted to a certain shapeand form (roop). ‘How beautiful are these eyes! They are big,beautiful eyes!’ Hey, you! Even the bulls have big and beautifuleyes! Why are you not attracted to a bull? And he will say, ‘Butthat is a bull whereas this is a human being.’ Hey! These areplaces of entrapment!Being Free from the Major Blockade (Atkan)of SexualityTherefore, whichever ‘shop’ (sexually attractive person)you get entangled with, the pure Soul (Shuddhatma) within that‘shop’ is verily the one who will liberate you. So, do pratikramanand ask the Shuddhatma within ‘that’ person to free you fromthis topic of non-celibacy (vishay of abrahmacharya); to freeyou from sexuality and sexual impulses. If you try to becomefree from this problem of sexuality by other non-specificapproaches, it will not work. Only the Shuddhatma within that‘shop’ is the one that will liberate you, and this is the precisemethod (Vidhi).Now there are not many such ‘shops’ that attract you.There are only a few such ‘shops,’ but the one who is facedwith many such ‘shops’ must make an increased and greaterintense spiritual effort (purusharth). But whoever has only a fewsuch shops should clear the account and make it exact – ‘see’it, as it is, the relative and the real. There is nothing wrong ineating and drinking, but the problem is with sexual interactionthrough thoughts, speech and acts (vishay). Male vishay andfemale vishay (male and female sexual interactions) are bothfactories that give rise to enmity and revenge (veyr), life afterlife. Therefore, bring an end to it in whichever way You can.Questioner: Is that what you mean when you tell us,‘Get your work done’?Dadashri: What else? Get rid of all these diseases thatare within! I am not telling you to do anything. I am just tellingyou to know (janavoo) it. This gnan (knowledge) is worthknowing, it is not worth doing. (Dadashri uses the word gnanfor three types of knowledge: Gnan with capitalized ‘G’ is theknowledge of the Self. The second gnan is the knowledge ofcause and effects, life after life, and the third gnan is the worldlyknowledge of human beings). The gnan that one knows (jaanyu)as an experience cannot refrain from producing the desired results,for sure. Therefore, You do not have to do anything. LordMahavir had said that in the ‘religion’ of the ones who are onthe path of liberation (vitarag dharma), there is no ‘I am doing,he is doing and they are doing (karomi, karosi and karoti),’respectively.Can you or can you not know what your atkan is?Questioner: I will know it immediately.Dadashri: When you come to ‘know’ a lafru as a lafru,then it will fall away (lafru – a file or an event related to a file;Aptavani-6247248Aptavani-6you. That is why ‘we’ tell you that the five senses are not aproblem. But if you even think about sex, then do pratikramanimmediately, on the spot. And then later, do a hundred, twohundred pratikramans for it.However, if you happened to go to a hotel for food(indulged your taste buds) and failed to do pratikraman for it,then it is fine. I will make you do that pratikraman. But makesure you do not get infected by this disease of sexual pleasure.This is a dangerous disease. What is the cure for this disease?The answer is that wherever a man has an atkan (blockade),there lies the disease for sure. For some men, when they see acertain kind of a woman passing by, changes (galgalia) occurwithin them. In reality, everyone is made up of flesh and bones,but one has an attraction for certain kind of a woman whichoccurs from within (a karma effect). Therefore, he will beattracted. Does he feel attracted to all women? No. But as ahuman, he has the old habit of being attracted to a certain shapeand form (roop). ‘How beautiful are these eyes! They are big,beautiful eyes!’ Hey, you! Even the bulls have big and beautifuleyes! Why are you not attracted to a bull? And he will say, ‘Butthat is a bull whereas this is a human being.’ Hey! These areplaces of entrapment!Being Free from the Major Blockade (Atkan)of SexualityTherefore, whichever ‘shop’ (sexually attractive person)you get entangled with, the pure Soul (Shuddhatma) within that‘shop’ is verily the one who will liberate you. So, do pratikramanand ask the Shuddhatma within ‘that’ person to free you fromthis topic of non-celibacy (vishay of abrahmacharya); to freeyou from sexuality and sexual impulses. If you try to becomefree from this problem of sexuality by other non-specificapproaches, it will not work. Only the Shuddhatma within that‘shop’ is the one that will liberate you, and this is the precisemethod (Vidhi).Now there are not many such ‘shops’ that attract you.There are only a few such ‘shops,’ but the one who is facedwith many such ‘shops’ must make an increased and greaterintense spiritual effort (purusharth). But whoever has only a fewsuch shops should clear the account and make it exact – ‘see’it, as it is, the relative and the real. There is nothing wrong ineating and drinking, but the problem is with sexual interactionthrough thoughts, speech and acts (vishay). Male vishay andfemale vishay (male and female sexual interactions) are bothfactories that give rise to enmity and revenge (veyr), life afterlife. Therefore, bring an end to it in whichever way You can.Questioner: Is that what you mean when you tell us,‘Get your work done’?Dadashri: What else? Get rid of all these diseases thatare within! I am not telling you to do anything. I am just tellingyou to know (janavoo) it. This gnan (knowledge) is worthknowing, it is not worth doing. (Dadashri uses the word gnanfor three types of knowledge: Gnan with capitalized ‘G’ is theknowledge of the Self. The second gnan is the knowledge ofcause and effects, life after life, and the third gnan is the worldlyknowledge of human beings). The gnan that one knows (jaanyu)as an experience cannot refrain from producing the desired results,for sure. Therefore, You do not have to do anything. LordMahavir had said that in the ‘religion’ of the ones who are onthe path of liberation (vitarag dharma), there is no ‘I am doing,he is doing and they are doing (karomi, karosi and karoti),’respectively.Can you or can you not know what your atkan is?Questioner: I will know it immediately.Dadashri: When you come to ‘know’ a lafru as a lafru,then it will fall away (lafru – a file or an event related to a file;Aptavani-6249250Aptavani-6a file is a karmic event or person, which is very difficult to befree from as it possesses you). Similarly, when you know atkanas atkan, it will fall away. Lord Mahavir asks, ‘Did you ‘know’the atkan?’ One will reply, ‘Yes.’ So the Lord says, ‘Then youare free.’ So it is up to You to see which ‘room,’ the Self or thenon-Self, you want to sit in. If there are pebbles and stonesflying outside, you have to sit in your own ‘room’ until the bellrings to inform you that it is clear for you to come out; then Youshould come out.Questioner: When we talk about spiritual effort(purusharth), is the part of subtle understanding consideredpurusharth and does ‘letting go of the reins of the senses(indriyas)’ fall under this?Dadashri: At the start of the morning, say five times witha pure inner intent that You are ‘letting go of the reins of thesenses.’ Then simply see the free reins for one whole Sunday!But, instead, one worries, ‘What will happen, what will happen?’Hey! Nothing is going to happen; you are a God. What canpossibly happen to God? Should you not have enough couragefrom being a God? (Tell yourself) ‘Dada has given me the stateof Godhood.’ Such is this Gnan that you have become a God.As yet, you are not getting the full benefit of it. What is thereason for this? It is because You are not even testing that state,are You? You do not use that state… but what if You try toremain that way a little?Questioner: So to remain desire-less and uninterested inthe pleasures of the five senses; is it the same as living withoutopinion (abhipraay)?Dadashri: You should be completely free of opinions.There should not be any opinion whatsoever. If you have theslightest opinion, if it is hiding somewhere, then You should removeit. The opinion, ‘There is pleasure in the worldly life, there ispleasure in these five senses,’ should not remain at all.And those opinions cannot be ‘Ours,’ they are all of‘Chandubhai.’ ‘I’ am the pure Soul (Shuddhatma) that ‘Dada’gave me’ and Shuddhatma is parmatma – the supreme Self.It is important to understand this much. These five Agnas thathave been given to You – they are for the protection of theShuddhatma, the state of the Self.Factory of VengeanceThe law of settling with equanimity (sambhave nikaal)says that whatever it takes, You should settle with the otherperson without binding/causing a new karma of vengeance (veyr).Become free from the karma of vengeance. There is only onething worth doing here, and that is to ensure that vengeancedoes not increase and multiply. And what is the main factory forproducing vengeance (veyr)? It is male and female sexualinteraction.Questioner: How does that bind vengeance? How is aseed of vengeance for infinite lifetimes planted?Dadashri: It is like this: If we can put some kind ofmedicines in a dead man or a dead woman and make them lookas if they are alive, then having a sexual interaction with them isnot a problem. With them, you will not bind vengeance becausethey are not living. However, these are living beings and so youwill bind vengeance.Questioner: Why is vengeance bound there?Dadashri: It is because the opinions (abhipraay) of thetwo are different, that is why! If you say, ‘I want to go see amovie,’ she will say, ‘No I want to go to see a play.’ Therefore,the timings (opinions) do not match. If the timings match exactlythen go ahead and get married!Questioner: Nevertheless, there are some people forwhom whatever they say they want, it does happen.Aptavani-6249250Aptavani-6a file is a karmic event or person, which is very difficult to befree from as it possesses you). Similarly, when you know atkanas atkan, it will fall away. Lord Mahavir asks, ‘Did you ‘know’the atkan?’ One will reply, ‘Yes.’ So the Lord says, ‘Then youare free.’ So it is up to You to see which ‘room,’ the Self or thenon-Self, you want to sit in. If there are pebbles and stonesflying outside, you have to sit in your own ‘room’ until the bellrings to inform you that it is clear for you to come out; then Youshould come out.Questioner: When we talk about spiritual effort(purusharth), is the part of subtle understanding consideredpurusharth and does ‘letting go of the reins of the senses(indriyas)’ fall under this?Dadashri: At the start of the morning, say five times witha pure inner intent that You are ‘letting go of the reins of thesenses.’ Then simply see the free reins for one whole Sunday!But, instead, one worries, ‘What will happen, what will happen?’Hey! Nothing is going to happen; you are a God. What canpossibly happen to God? Should you not have enough couragefrom being a God? (Tell yourself) ‘Dada has given me the stateof Godhood.’ Such is this Gnan that you have become a God.As yet, you are not getting the full benefit of it. What is thereason for this? It is because You are not even testing that state,are You? You do not use that state… but what if You try toremain that way a little?Questioner: So to remain desire-less and uninterested inthe pleasures of the five senses; is it the same as living withoutopinion (abhipraay)?Dadashri: You should be completely free of opinions.There should not be any opinion whatsoever. If you have theslightest opinion, if it is hiding somewhere, then You should removeit. The opinion, ‘There is pleasure in the worldly life, there ispleasure in these five senses,’ should not remain at all.And those opinions cannot be ‘Ours,’ they are all of‘Chandubhai.’ ‘I’ am the pure Soul (Shuddhatma) that ‘Dada’gave me’ and Shuddhatma is parmatma – the supreme Self.It is important to understand this much. These five Agnas thathave been given to You – they are for the protection of theShuddhatma, the state of the Self.Factory of VengeanceThe law of settling with equanimity (sambhave nikaal)says that whatever it takes, You should settle with the otherperson without binding/causing a new karma of vengeance (veyr).Become free from the karma of vengeance. There is only onething worth doing here, and that is to ensure that vengeancedoes not increase and multiply. And what is the main factory forproducing vengeance (veyr)? It is male and female sexualinteraction.Questioner: How does that bind vengeance? How is aseed of vengeance for infinite lifetimes planted?Dadashri: It is like this: If we can put some kind ofmedicines in a dead man or a dead woman and make them lookas if they are alive, then having a sexual interaction with them isnot a problem. With them, you will not bind vengeance becausethey are not living. However, these are living beings and so youwill bind vengeance.Questioner: Why is vengeance bound there?Dadashri: It is because the opinions (abhipraay) of thetwo are different, that is why! If you say, ‘I want to go see amovie,’ she will say, ‘No I want to go to see a play.’ Therefore,the timings (opinions) do not match. If the timings match exactlythen go ahead and get married!Questioner: Nevertheless, there are some people forwhom whatever they say they want, it does happen.Aptavani-6251252Aptavani-6deliberately do something wrong, then things will become ruined.But even then, the Gnan will bring about a solution at some pointin time. Therefore, now that You have attained it once, it is notsomething You want to let go of.Opinions Obstruct the Bliss WithinThis whole world runs because of opinions. Opinion issuch that if we get some mangoes and other nice things,depending on the prakruti (the non-Self complex of karmaeffect), the senses will become attracted to those things. Thesenses and the signals from the senses result in the eating orovereating, but the senses do not have or bind an opinion aboutit. It is the buddhi, the intellect within, that decides, ‘This mangois very good,’ so that is how one will form an opinion aboutmangoes. He will then tell others that there is nothing better thana mango in the world. He will also keep thinking about themango and it will keep bothering him that he does not get to eatone. There is no problem as far as the senses are concerned; ifa mango is there, the senses become engaged in eating; andthere is no problem if there are no mangoes either. It is theopinion that causes the problem. Now, the intellect alone is notthe only factor. The knowledge arising from association with theworldly people (loksangnya) works a lot in this too. First, abelief is formed based on what others tell him such as, ‘This isgood and that is bad.’ And if it is someone whom he respectsand appreciates that says so, then his belief becomes even stronger.So one does not form an opinion himself; his opinions areformed by the influence of the beliefs of others (loksangnya).The beliefs of, ‘How can it happen without us? How will it workif I don’t do it this way?’ …this is the kind of association(sangnya) that has set in. Then ‘we’ gave you the knowledgeof scientific circumstantial evidences as the ‘doer’ (vyavasthit)and so your opinion is now changed to, ‘We are not really thedoers; vyavasthit is.’Dadashri: That happens to one with lot of merit karma(punyashadi); his wife will always remain obedient to him! Shewill not have anything of her own, she will not have any opinionsof her own; she will always remain surrendered.What it is, is that I have given this Gnan to worldly people;to married couples. I have not told anyone to become asceticsand renounce everything. But I have asked them to settle whatever‘files’ they have, with equanimity. I have told them to dopratikraman. I have shown them these two ultimate solutions.If You ‘do’ these two things, then no one can create anyentanglement in your life. You could never stand on the shorelineif ‘we’ had not shown you these two solutions, could you?Danger lies at the shore because the ocean of the world candrown you easily.When you had inner separation due to differences of opinionwith your wife (matbhed), did attachment or abhorrence (raagor dwesh) occur at that time?Questioner: They both occur one after another. Raagoccurs when everything is suitable with us, and if we are at oddswith each other, then dwesh occurs.Dadashri: Therefore, all this is dependent on raag-dwesh.Opinions do not become one, do they? Only rare is the one whois fortunate with merit karma (punyashadi) whose wife will tellhim, ‘I will remain subservient to you. Wherever you go, evento your funeral pyre, I will remain subservient to you.’ But thatis rare. Therefore, there is no fun in this worldly life. You do notwant to start a new worldly life all over again. You want to goto moksha now. Somehow or other, You need to settle all theprofit-loss accounts of karma, wind everything up and bringabout a final solution (ukel) to this.This truly is the path of moksha. This Gnan is such thatno one, at any given time, can ever touch You. But if YouAptavani-6251252Aptavani-6deliberately do something wrong, then things will become ruined.But even then, the Gnan will bring about a solution at some pointin time. Therefore, now that You have attained it once, it is notsomething You want to let go of.Opinions Obstruct the Bliss WithinThis whole world runs because of opinions. Opinion issuch that if we get some mangoes and other nice things,depending on the prakruti (the non-Self complex of karmaeffect), the senses will become attracted to those things. Thesenses and the signals from the senses result in the eating orovereating, but the senses do not have or bind an opinion aboutit. It is the buddhi, the intellect within, that decides, ‘This mangois very good,’ so that is how one will form an opinion aboutmangoes. He will then tell others that there is nothing better thana mango in the world. He will also keep thinking about themango and it will keep bothering him that he does not get to eatone. There is no problem as far as the senses are concerned; ifa mango is there, the senses become engaged in eating; andthere is no problem if there are no mangoes either. It is theopinion that causes the problem. Now, the intellect alone is notthe only factor. The knowledge arising from association with theworldly people (loksangnya) works a lot in this too. First, abelief is formed based on what others tell him such as, ‘This isgood and that is bad.’ And if it is someone whom he respectsand appreciates that says so, then his belief becomes even stronger.So one does not form an opinion himself; his opinions areformed by the influence of the beliefs of others (loksangnya).The beliefs of, ‘How can it happen without us? How will it workif I don’t do it this way?’ …this is the kind of association(sangnya) that has set in. Then ‘we’ gave you the knowledgeof scientific circumstantial evidences as the ‘doer’ (vyavasthit)and so your opinion is now changed to, ‘We are not really thedoers; vyavasthit is.’Dadashri: That happens to one with lot of merit karma(punyashadi); his wife will always remain obedient to him! Shewill not have anything of her own, she will not have any opinionsof her own; she will always remain surrendered.What it is, is that I have given this Gnan to worldly people;to married couples. I have not told anyone to become asceticsand renounce everything. But I have asked them to settle whatever‘files’ they have, with equanimity. I have told them to dopratikraman. I have shown them these two ultimate solutions.If You ‘do’ these two things, then no one can create anyentanglement in your life. You could never stand on the shorelineif ‘we’ had not shown you these two solutions, could you?Danger lies at the shore because the ocean of the world candrown you easily.When you had inner separation due to differences of opinionwith your wife (matbhed), did attachment or abhorrence (raagor dwesh) occur at that time?Questioner: They both occur one after another. Raagoccurs when everything is suitable with us, and if we are at oddswith each other, then dwesh occurs.Dadashri: Therefore, all this is dependent on raag-dwesh.Opinions do not become one, do they? Only rare is the one whois fortunate with merit karma (punyashadi) whose wife will tellhim, ‘I will remain subservient to you. Wherever you go, evento your funeral pyre, I will remain subservient to you.’ But thatis rare. Therefore, there is no fun in this worldly life. You do notwant to start a new worldly life all over again. You want to goto moksha now. Somehow or other, You need to settle all theprofit-loss accounts of karma, wind everything up and bringabout a final solution (ukel) to this.This truly is the path of moksha. This Gnan is such thatno one, at any given time, can ever touch You. But if YouAptavani-6253254Aptavani-6Opinions have been formed through association with theworldly people (loksangnya) which have to be destroyed throughthe Gnani’s association (sangnya), through the knowledge andassociation with the Gnani. The biggest of all opinions, ‘I am thedoer,’ is destroyed by the Gnani Purush the day he gives youGnan. All other smaller and many other opinions are formedaccording to each individual’s relative-self (prakruti). Some ofthese have very strong opinions and that is called atkan(blockade). Opinions like, ‘One has to do it this way!’ aredense opinions and if they remain, they need to be eradicatedfor the total clearance of the path of the vitarag (without falsebelief; without attachment-abhorrence; without raag-dwesh).When Nagindas enters the room, one may immediatelyfeel a dislike (abhaav) towards him. Why is that? It is becausehe has formed an opinion that ‘Nagindas is a useless man.’ Evenif Nagindas has come to tell him something beneficial, he willignore him. Will we not have to remove all such opinions thathave been formed for anyone?Therefore, you should not have any kind of opinions. Youshould get rid of all the negative opinions you have formedtowards others. These are all unnecessary opinions formed outof misunderstanding.If someone were to ask, ‘Is his relative-self (prakruti)going to change if we remove our opinion about him?’ I wouldtell him, ‘It does not matter if his prakruti does not change;what do You have to do with it?’ He will then say, ‘But we willstill have clashes with him, will we not?’ and I would tell him,‘No, whatever specific parinaam (internal result and state)towards that person there is within you, such will be the parinaamwithin him.’ Yes, when you get rid of your opinion about him andtalk to him courteously, then he will respond to you in the sameway too. Then, at that time, you will not see his prakruti.Therefore, your mind will cast a shadow (chhaya) overhim. What kind of shadow does ‘our’ (Dadashri’s) mind haveon others? Even if a person is completely stupid, he will becomewise! If you feel, ‘I do not like Ramesh,’ in your mind, thendislike will arise within you as soon as Ramesh walks into theroom. A shadow (chhaya) of your feeling, its image, falls on hismind. He will immediately get a ‘picture’ within about what isgoing on within you. This result (parinaam) within you will confuseand entangle him! He may not know what is happening, yet heis bothered from within. Therefore, you should get rid of theopinions. When you wash off all your opinions, then you arefree.However, we do not have opinions about everyone. Ifsomeone steals every day, why do you have to form an opinion,‘He is a thief’? He steals due to the effect of his karma, and theperson he steals from is also because of the effect of that person’skarma. How does that have anything to do with you? But whenyou call him a thief, is that not an opinion? And really speaking,is he not the Self?The Lord Mahavir saw everyone as without mistakes(nirdosh). He never saw anyone at fault. And when your visionbecomes so pure, you too will have an environment which isclean and clear. Then this world will appear like a garden. Inreality, people do not have bad attributes. One forms an opinionabout others within, and thus gets bound. ‘We’ may talk aboutanyone but ‘we’ do not have any opinions of, ‘He is like this orlike that,’ at all!You will also experience (anubhav) that since you got ridof your opinion about this man, this change has occurred withinhim. What do you have to do in order to change your opinion?For the opinion, ‘This man is a thief,’ you have to say, ‘This manis honest.’ You have to say, ‘I had formed a wrong opinionabout him. I am now letting go of that opinion. It is a wrongopinion…it is wrong.’ Keep repeating that your opinion is wrong,Aptavani-6253254Aptavani-6Opinions have been formed through association with theworldly people (loksangnya) which have to be destroyed throughthe Gnani’s association (sangnya), through the knowledge andassociation with the Gnani. The biggest of all opinions, ‘I am thedoer,’ is destroyed by the Gnani Purush the day he gives youGnan. All other smaller and many other opinions are formedaccording to each individual’s relative-self (prakruti). Some ofthese have very strong opinions and that is called atkan(blockade). Opinions like, ‘One has to do it this way!’ aredense opinions and if they remain, they need to be eradicatedfor the total clearance of the path of the vitarag (without falsebelief; without attachment-abhorrence; without raag-dwesh).When Nagindas enters the room, one may immediatelyfeel a dislike (abhaav) towards him. Why is that? It is becausehe has formed an opinion that ‘Nagindas is a useless man.’ Evenif Nagindas has come to tell him something beneficial, he willignore him. Will we not have to remove all such opinions thathave been formed for anyone?Therefore, you should not have any kind of opinions. Youshould get rid of all the negative opinions you have formedtowards others. These are all unnecessary opinions formed outof misunderstanding.If someone were to ask, ‘Is his relative-self (prakruti)going to change if we remove our opinion about him?’ I wouldtell him, ‘It does not matter if his prakruti does not change;what do You have to do with it?’ He will then say, ‘But we willstill have clashes with him, will we not?’ and I would tell him,‘No, whatever specific parinaam (internal result and state)towards that person there is within you, such will be the parinaamwithin him.’ Yes, when you get rid of your opinion about him andtalk to him courteously, then he will respond to you in the sameway too. Then, at that time, you will not see his prakruti.Therefore, your mind will cast a shadow (chhaya) overhim. What kind of shadow does ‘our’ (Dadashri’s) mind haveon others? Even if a person is completely stupid, he will becomewise! If you feel, ‘I do not like Ramesh,’ in your mind, thendislike will arise within you as soon as Ramesh walks into theroom. A shadow (chhaya) of your feeling, its image, falls on hismind. He will immediately get a ‘picture’ within about what isgoing on within you. This result (parinaam) within you will confuseand entangle him! He may not know what is happening, yet heis bothered from within. Therefore, you should get rid of theopinions. When you wash off all your opinions, then you arefree.However, we do not have opinions about everyone. Ifsomeone steals every day, why do you have to form an opinion,‘He is a thief’? He steals due to the effect of his karma, and theperson he steals from is also because of the effect of that person’skarma. How does that have anything to do with you? But whenyou call him a thief, is that not an opinion? And really speaking,is he not the Self?The Lord Mahavir saw everyone as without mistakes(nirdosh). He never saw anyone at fault. And when your visionbecomes so pure, you too will have an environment which isclean and clear. Then this world will appear like a garden. Inreality, people do not have bad attributes. One forms an opinionabout others within, and thus gets bound. ‘We’ may talk aboutanyone but ‘we’ do not have any opinions of, ‘He is like this orlike that,’ at all!You will also experience (anubhav) that since you got ridof your opinion about this man, this change has occurred withinhim. What do you have to do in order to change your opinion?For the opinion, ‘This man is a thief,’ you have to say, ‘This manis honest.’ You have to say, ‘I had formed a wrong opinionabout him. I am now letting go of that opinion. It is a wrongopinion…it is wrong.’ Keep repeating that your opinion is wrong,Aptavani-6255256Aptavani-6and in doing so, your mind will change. Otherwise, the mind willnot change.Many people have speech which is completely ruined;that too is because of opinions (abhipraay). The speech willcome out harsh and tantili (associated with a link of dweshkashay). He speaks with such tantili speech that even the otherperson will add fuel to the fire and will not let go.This cause of the karmic stock is a consequence of havingdone everything according to others (loksangnya), for infinitepast lives. And, therefore, the whole problem lies with havingfilled this stock of opinions. There is no problem with the opinionsyou have not kept.Do Penance without Paying a CommissionYou have to do penance (tapa) but only the penance thatpresents itself to you naturally. You don’t have to go looking forit. People with great merit karma (punyashadis) will receiveeverything just sitting at home. Sometimes, when you are travelingin the train and someone comes to you and fights with you,realize that it is penance (tapa) that has come to you, on itsown. You have to say, ‘Great! It came looking for me,’ so then‘do’ that penance. Lord Mahavir only did the penance thatcame directly to Him. He did not ‘do’ any other penance. Thepenance that comes directly in front of you, you must not pushaside.But, instead, what people do is they invite penance bydeciding to fast for three days and yet they push aside thepenance which comes in front of them naturally. One will say,‘How can I do samayik (introspection process when one remainsthe Self and sees the non-Self evidences) when my leg hurts?My leg hurts so much…it feels like this or like that.’ He will evencurse his leg. He will want to tell everyone around him about thepain in his leg. Whenever you tell others about your problems,then it is not considered penance (tapa). When the other personlearns about your problems, he will sympathize with you andthus take away part of your penance. You have to do the penance.What good is it when someone else takes away part of yourprofit as a commission? Just by listening to your complaints, heshares in your profit. Who would want to give up his profit byaccepting sympathy from others?On the way back to Baroda from Bombay, the moment‘we’ sat in the car ‘we’ told Ambalal Patel (Dadashri’s worldlyname), ‘You will have to sit in the same place for seven hours.Penance has come to you.’ While ‘we’ are talking to you, ‘we’also have our own inner conversation with our relative-self. Wetell him, ‘Today, penance has come directly in front of you, sodo not say a word.’ People try to console or comfort ‘us’ with,‘Dada, are you comfortable or not?’ so I tell them, ‘I am verycomfortable.’ But I will not give anyone any commission becauseI go through the penance completely. That is considered doingpenance.Premature Fruition of Karmas – UdiranaQuestioner: Is this udirana not considered penance?Dadashri: Udirana (energy that makes possible thepremature fruition of karmas) is considered a spiritual effort(purusharth). But it is a purusharth after one becomes the Self(purush). Actually, it falls into parakram (extraordinary spiritualeffort). Anyone below the seventh spiritual level (gunasthanak)of the attributes of the pure Self cannot ‘do’ that. Now that Youhave attained this Gnan, You can ‘do’ all the udirana. If somekarmas are due to unfold after twenty years, then You can destroythem today.Questioner: But how does one know that a particularkarma is due to unfold after twenty years?Dadashri: Why not? Once that tuber (gaanth) dissolves,Aptavani-6255256Aptavani-6and in doing so, your mind will change. Otherwise, the mind willnot change.Many people have speech which is completely ruined;that too is because of opinions (abhipraay). The speech willcome out harsh and tantili (associated with a link of dweshkashay). He speaks with such tantili speech that even the otherperson will add fuel to the fire and will not let go.This cause of the karmic stock is a consequence of havingdone everything according to others (loksangnya), for infinitepast lives. And, therefore, the whole problem lies with havingfilled this stock of opinions. There is no problem with the opinionsyou have not kept.Do Penance without Paying a CommissionYou have to do penance (tapa) but only the penance thatpresents itself to you naturally. You don’t have to go looking forit. People with great merit karma (punyashadis) will receiveeverything just sitting at home. Sometimes, when you are travelingin the train and someone comes to you and fights with you,realize that it is penance (tapa) that has come to you, on itsown. You have to say, ‘Great! It came looking for me,’ so then‘do’ that penance. Lord Mahavir only did the penance thatcame directly to Him. He did not ‘do’ any other penance. Thepenance that comes directly in front of you, you must not pushaside.But, instead, what people do is they invite penance bydeciding to fast for three days and yet they push aside thepenance which comes in front of them naturally. One will say,‘How can I do samayik (introspection process when one remainsthe Self and sees the non-Self evidences) when my leg hurts?My leg hurts so much…it feels like this or like that.’ He will evencurse his leg. He will want to tell everyone around him about thepain in his leg. Whenever you tell others about your problems,then it is not considered penance (tapa). When the other personlearns about your problems, he will sympathize with you andthus take away part of your penance. You have to do the penance.What good is it when someone else takes away part of yourprofit as a commission? Just by listening to your complaints, heshares in your profit. Who would want to give up his profit byaccepting sympathy from others?On the way back to Baroda from Bombay, the moment‘we’ sat in the car ‘we’ told Ambalal Patel (Dadashri’s worldlyname), ‘You will have to sit in the same place for seven hours.Penance has come to you.’ While ‘we’ are talking to you, ‘we’also have our own inner conversation with our relative-self. Wetell him, ‘Today, penance has come directly in front of you, sodo not say a word.’ People try to console or comfort ‘us’ with,‘Dada, are you comfortable or not?’ so I tell them, ‘I am verycomfortable.’ But I will not give anyone any commission becauseI go through the penance completely. That is considered doingpenance.Premature Fruition of Karmas – UdiranaQuestioner: Is this udirana not considered penance?Dadashri: Udirana (energy that makes possible thepremature fruition of karmas) is considered a spiritual effort(purusharth). But it is a purusharth after one becomes the Self(purush). Actually, it falls into parakram (extraordinary spiritualeffort). Anyone below the seventh spiritual level (gunasthanak)of the attributes of the pure Self cannot ‘do’ that. Now that Youhave attained this Gnan, You can ‘do’ all the udirana. If somekarmas are due to unfold after twenty years, then You can destroythem today.Questioner: But how does one know that a particularkarma is due to unfold after twenty years?Dadashri: Why not? Once that tuber (gaanth) dissolves,Aptavani-6257258Aptavani-6that will be the end of it. Then when the evidence for that karmaunfolds, there will be no suffering.Questioner: Is there udirana (premature fruition ofkarmas) occurring when we do pratikraman?Dadashri: Udirana does take place in that because youare doing pratikraman even though the difficulty is not here yet,not because it is enjoyable and fun. The bliss You experiencefrom doing pratikraman is an extra benefit.In the samayik of the Akram path it is possible that udiranaof all karmas occur.We are not charam shariri (last life in human form –those who have the final physical body before moksha/liberation)and so, whoever wants to keep the karma may do so. But(premature fruition of karmas) has to be done by the charamshariri because such a one will feel that his life span is comingto an end and he can see that there still remains a big pile of‘stock in his shop.’ Now how can he go to moksha withoutgetting rid of this stock? He is running out of time and so hesays, ‘Dear Lord, do something about this.’ Then the Lord says,‘First, ripen your karma.’ Just as we ripen a mango in a strawpaddy, ripen your karma in such a way so that it will come intofruition. Traditionally, udirana means to invite fruition of karmaearlier than its due time and bring an end to it.Questioner: That is called parakram, is it not?Dadashri: That is called a big parakram (extraordinaryspiritual effort). One is already in spiritual effort (purusharth),but this is considered parakram. This is extra.Questioner: You just said that we destroy our karma;then what should one do about the effect karma (sanchit karma)that we have?Dadashri: Sanchit karma will come in front of you on itsown when the time is right for it to ripen. There is no need foryou to go looking for it. Sanchit karma will give its effect andthen leave. And if you have become a purush, the Self, then itis possible for you to get rid of certain karmas through certainAkram samayik yog. However, that is possible only after onebecomes a purush.It cannot happen through the current state You are in. Youwill not be able to make the connection; you will not have thetiming. At the moment, You dance to the tune of the relative-self(prakruti), even though You have received the knowledge ofthe Self. After becoming a purush, the karma that is destroyedthrough yog of Akram samayik is called udirana (karma invitedearlier than its due time of fruition and brought to an end).What is udirana? It is to ripen what is raw and thenshake it off. Without ripening of karma, what can you do? Whatcan you do when the rice and lentils (khichadee) are not fullycooked? That is how it is when karmas are not ripe and one hasto leave this world. So he ripens that karma, then that karmaundergoes dissipation (udirana). But this purusharth can occuronly when one becomes a purush, separate from the non-Self,separate from the prakruti. He has this much right when hebecomes a purush.There are two benefits with udirana (to invite karma earlierthan its due time of fruition and bring an end to it). One is thatyou have to become the Self in order to ‘do’ udirana, and thesecond is that karma’s udirana will occur.When does one become the Self (atmaswaroop)? It iswhen samayik and a negation of the body complex of ‘I amnot this body, not this mind,’ occurs (kayotsarga). Here, forus, we become the Self with just the samayik of AkramVignan, and that is why udirana occurs. This is Akram Vignanand that is why you can become the Self, and only then canpurusharth (spiritual effort) and parakram (extraordinaryAptavani-6257258Aptavani-6that will be the end of it. Then when the evidence for that karmaunfolds, there will be no suffering.Questioner: Is there udirana (premature fruition ofkarmas) occurring when we do pratikraman?Dadashri: Udirana does take place in that because youare doing pratikraman even though the difficulty is not here yet,not because it is enjoyable and fun. The bliss You experiencefrom doing pratikraman is an extra benefit.In the samayik of the Akram path it is possible that udiranaof all karmas occur.We are not charam shariri (last life in human form –those who have the final physical body before moksha/liberation)and so, whoever wants to keep the karma may do so. But(premature fruition of karmas) has to be done by the charamshariri because such a one will feel that his life span is comingto an end and he can see that there still remains a big pile of‘stock in his shop.’ Now how can he go to moksha withoutgetting rid of this stock? He is running out of time and so hesays, ‘Dear Lord, do something about this.’ Then the Lord says,‘First, ripen your karma.’ Just as we ripen a mango in a strawpaddy, ripen your karma in such a way so that it will come intofruition. Traditionally, udirana means to invite fruition of karmaearlier than its due time and bring an end to it.Questioner: That is called parakram, is it not?Dadashri: That is called a big parakram (extraordinaryspiritual effort). One is already in spiritual effort (purusharth),but this is considered parakram. This is extra.Questioner: You just said that we destroy our karma;then what should one do about the effect karma (sanchit karma)that we have?Dadashri: Sanchit karma will come in front of you on itsown when the time is right for it to ripen. There is no need foryou to go looking for it. Sanchit karma will give its effect andthen leave. And if you have become a purush, the Self, then itis possible for you to get rid of certain karmas through certainAkram samayik yog. However, that is possible only after onebecomes a purush.It cannot happen through the current state You are in. Youwill not be able to make the connection; you will not have thetiming. At the moment, You dance to the tune of the relative-self(prakruti), even though You have received the knowledge ofthe Self. After becoming a purush, the karma that is destroyedthrough yog of Akram samayik is called udirana (karma invitedearlier than its due time of fruition and brought to an end).What is udirana? It is to ripen what is raw and thenshake it off. Without ripening of karma, what can you do? Whatcan you do when the rice and lentils (khichadee) are not fullycooked? That is how it is when karmas are not ripe and one hasto leave this world. So he ripens that karma, then that karmaundergoes dissipation (udirana). But this purusharth can occuronly when one becomes a purush, separate from the non-Self,separate from the prakruti. He has this much right when hebecomes a purush.There are two benefits with udirana (to invite karma earlierthan its due time of fruition and bring an end to it). One is thatyou have to become the Self in order to ‘do’ udirana, and thesecond is that karma’s udirana will occur.When does one become the Self (atmaswaroop)? It iswhen samayik and a negation of the body complex of ‘I amnot this body, not this mind,’ occurs (kayotsarga). Here, forus, we become the Self with just the samayik of AkramVignan, and that is why udirana occurs. This is Akram Vignanand that is why you can become the Self, and only then canpurusharth (spiritual effort) and parakram (extraordinaryAptavani-6259260Aptavani-6spiritual effort) be done.Dada tells us all to think a little about what the world callspurusharth. This Neem tree is bitter in every leaf and in everybranch. What is the purusharth of the Neem tree in that?Similarly, where is one’s purusharth when one does all thisrelative penance (tapa) and when he renounces (tyaag)?One is a spinning ‘top’ (bhammardo; Dadashri calls allhumans ‘tops’), so how is he going to do udirana? The ‘top’is dictated by his prakruti, and he spins according to the karmaeffect, so how is he going to do udirana? He has not becomea purush, the Self, and that is why he is called a ‘top.’ So howcan a ‘top’ and udirana go together?Nikachit karma (karma effect one has to suffer) will alwaysbe bitter. There is sweet nikachit karma, but eventually whenone gets tired of it, it will taste bitter and he will begin to feel thatit would be nice if it were to go away.There are two kinds of nikachit karma: one is bitter andthe other is sweet. Even too much of a sweet karma becomesan entrapment. If they give you a lot of ice-cream, how muchwill you eat? Would you not get tired of it too? And during bitterkarma, you will get even more tired. You have no choice butsuffer it.Nikachit karma means a karma you have no choice butsuffer. The other karmas are such that they are easily gotten ridof. It is acceptable to call udirana as penance (tapa). However,that penance is naimittic penance; it is dependant on a nimit(an evidence; apparent doer). Indeed, if one were doing thatpenance himself, then he is considered to be the doer. That iswhy it is a naimittic penance. That means that if penance comesto him as part of the fruition of his karma (penance is theevidence), then the karma will go away, but not otherwise. If hetries to do penance, he will say, ‘I will do the penance tomorrow,’and that will never happen; and the time will pass by in this wayand then he will die. He will have to be carried off on someoneelse’s shoulders. If udirana (premature fruition of karmas) doesnot occur, then he will have to come back to settle all theremaining karmas.Udirana means to ripen karmas that are not yet ready togive effect so that they come into fruition sooner than theyotherwise would. Those who have the final physical body (finalphysical body is charam sharir) can do this. If the charamshariri (the one who has the final physical body) has manykarmas, then he can do udirana. But what should he be like?He should be one with energy of the Self and its authority(sattadhish). He should be one with purusharth. Without beingthe Self, a purush, everyone is considered a ‘top.’ Anyone witha name is a ‘top.’ As the air goes in (the moment he takes hisfirst breath), the ‘top’ starts spinning and its string starts tounwind. You can even see the string unwinding. That is why ‘we’call everyone in the world a ‘top.’ If you want an explanation forthis, ‘we’ can provide you with one. Whatever words ‘we’ use,‘we’ do so in order to give clarity. In the Gnan this ‘Dada’ has‘seen,’ He has seen that Gnan (knowledge) and agnan(ignorance) are absolutely separate.Extraordinary spiritual effort (parakram) is independentof the unfolding of karma (udaya). Whatever purusharth Youdo, it is Your own. Our mahatmas (Self-realized persons whohave received the Akram Gnan from Dadashri) have becomethe Self (purush); purusharth is constantly going on within them.The Self has come into the religion of the Self (purush has comeinto purush dharma), and that is why pragnya (the light energyof the awakened Self) keeps Him aware (jagrut). ‘We’ calleveryone in the world ‘a top.’ What purusharth can a ‘top’do? As the first breath is taken, the ‘top’ spins and will continuespinning until the last breath, and then the ‘top’ will fall down!‘Our’ mahatmas have become purush; when the breath doesAptavani-6259260Aptavani-6spiritual effort) be done.Dada tells us all to think a little about what the world callspurusharth. This Neem tree is bitter in every leaf and in everybranch. What is the purusharth of the Neem tree in that?Similarly, where is one’s purusharth when one does all thisrelative penance (tapa) and when he renounces (tyaag)?One is a spinning ‘top’ (bhammardo; Dadashri calls allhumans ‘tops’), so how is he going to do udirana? The ‘top’is dictated by his prakruti, and he spins according to the karmaeffect, so how is he going to do udirana? He has not becomea purush, the Self, and that is why he is called a ‘top.’ So howcan a ‘top’ and udirana go together?Nikachit karma (karma effect one has to suffer) will alwaysbe bitter. There is sweet nikachit karma, but eventually whenone gets tired of it, it will taste bitter and he will begin to feel thatit would be nice if it were to go away.There are two kinds of nikachit karma: one is bitter andthe other is sweet. Even too much of a sweet karma becomesan entrapment. If they give you a lot of ice-cream, how muchwill you eat? Would you not get tired of it too? And during bitterkarma, you will get even more tired. You have no choice butsuffer it.Nikachit karma means a karma you have no choice butsuffer. The other karmas are such that they are easily gotten ridof. It is acceptable to call udirana as penance (tapa). However,that penance is naimittic penance; it is dependant on a nimit(an evidence; apparent doer). Indeed, if one were doing thatpenance himself, then he is considered to be the doer. That iswhy it is a naimittic penance. That means that if penance comesto him as part of the fruition of his karma (penance is theevidence), then the karma will go away, but not otherwise. If hetries to do penance, he will say, ‘I will do the penance tomorrow,’and that will never happen; and the time will pass by in this wayand then he will die. He will have to be carried off on someoneelse’s shoulders. If udirana (premature fruition of karmas) doesnot occur, then he will have to come back to settle all theremaining karmas.Udirana means to ripen karmas that are not yet ready togive effect so that they come into fruition sooner than theyotherwise would. Those who have the final physical body (finalphysical body is charam sharir) can do this. If the charamshariri (the one who has the final physical body) has manykarmas, then he can do udirana. But what should he be like?He should be one with energy of the Self and its authority(sattadhish). He should be one with purusharth. Without beingthe Self, a purush, everyone is considered a ‘top.’ Anyone witha name is a ‘top.’ As the air goes in (the moment he takes hisfirst breath), the ‘top’ starts spinning and its string starts tounwind. You can even see the string unwinding. That is why ‘we’call everyone in the world a ‘top.’ If you want an explanation forthis, ‘we’ can provide you with one. Whatever words ‘we’ use,‘we’ do so in order to give clarity. In the Gnan this ‘Dada’ has‘seen,’ He has seen that Gnan (knowledge) and agnan(ignorance) are absolutely separate.Extraordinary spiritual effort (parakram) is independentof the unfolding of karma (udaya). Whatever purusharth Youdo, it is Your own. Our mahatmas (Self-realized persons whohave received the Akram Gnan from Dadashri) have becomethe Self (purush); purusharth is constantly going on within them.The Self has come into the religion of the Self (purush has comeinto purush dharma), and that is why pragnya (the light energyof the awakened Self) keeps Him aware (jagrut). ‘We’ calleveryone in the world ‘a top.’ What purusharth can a ‘top’do? As the first breath is taken, the ‘top’ spins and will continuespinning until the last breath, and then the ‘top’ will fall down!‘Our’ mahatmas have become purush; when the breath doesAptavani-6261262Aptavani-6not go in, there is suffocation within and so he (the enlightenedone) moves over into the domain of the Self, his Home. Therefore,He has the awareness of the immortal state.Parakram – Extraordinary Spiritual EffortQuestioner: The creative energy (sarjak shakti) that isother than the ‘charge point’; what is that? Is that purusharth?Dadashri: What do ‘we’ mean when ‘we’ say ‘creativeenergy’? ‘We’ ask, ‘when does sunrise occur?’ It occurs whenthe scientific circumstantial evidences arise. When it is four o’clockon this watch, and four o’clock on the big clock in Bombay, itdoes not mean that the sun will rise. Even if the sun is in a hurry,it cannot rise. When will sunrise occur? It will occur when all theevidences come together. Therefore, unfolding of karma(udayakarma) is dependent on creative energy (sarjak shakti).‘We’ call that energy ‘relative’; it is of the relative-self (prakruti),it is not purusharth.Questioner: Inner intent (bhaav) itself is a purusharth,is it not? To know our true inner intent, to know the Self by itsattributes, is that not purusharth?Dadashri: Bhaava-bhaav is like-attraction (bhaav) anddislike/repulsion (abhaav); all belong to the ‘top’ (the non-Self)and ‘we’ (the Gnani and mahatmas) have our own state of theSelf (swabhav-bhaav). Bhaava-bhaav is karma. Swabhav-bhaav is the knower-seer (gnata-drashta) and eternal bliss(parmanand). Our mahatmas are in swabhav-bhaav, and thatis why there is constant bliss within. But they do not take moreexperience of this bliss. When it is time to taste and experienceit, they may have gone somewhere to a ‘hotel’ (enjoying worldlypleasure). That is why they do not know it.Questioner: How do the mahatmas taste and experiencethat? When they experience it unknowingly, is it due to theirpurusharth or the unfolding of karma (udayakarma)?Dadashri: Their purusharth continues, but they taste itfrom their parakram.Questioner: Parakram has not arisen within mahatmas.Does that mean that they do not have exact purusharth?Dadashri: All the mahatmas have purusharth for surebut they have not come into parakram yet. Some come intoparakram by doing samayik. There is always purusharth afterYou become a purush. That is a natural thing.Questioner: There are no rules in this, are there? Manytimes when I am sitting in a samayik, I simply cannot becomeone with the Self. But while I am out on the road, I suddenlybecome one with the Self and feel nothing but bliss. So how didthat happen? Did it happen as a karma unfolding (udaya)?Dadashri: It comes as karma effect (udaya), and sodoes the other. Both come due to fruition of karma.Questioner: Does that mean the intent of parakram(parakram bhaav) is a different thing?Dadashri: Yes, parakram bhaav is different. You do nothave to do anything in parakram. The bhaav which is in thestate of the Self gives rise to parakram. Then the energy lightof the awakened Self (pragnya) does everything according tothat parakram bhaav.Questioner: Does parakram bhaav mean gnata-drashta(knower-seer)?Dadashri: What is parakram bhaav? One does not havethe intent, ‘I want to come into parakram bhaav’; that is notit. This parakram bhaav is different from the original bhaav.Original bhaav is that which is in front as, ‘I am Chandulal.’Parakram bhaav is alertness. For the one who has made thedecision of ‘I want to remain alert’, for the one who has becomefirmly established in this decision, the energy of pragnya willAptavani-6261262Aptavani-6not go in, there is suffocation within and so he (the enlightenedone) moves over into the domain of the Self, his Home. Therefore,He has the awareness of the immortal state.Parakram – Extraordinary Spiritual EffortQuestioner: The creative energy (sarjak shakti) that isother than the ‘charge point’; what is that? Is that purusharth?Dadashri: What do ‘we’ mean when ‘we’ say ‘creativeenergy’? ‘We’ ask, ‘when does sunrise occur?’ It occurs whenthe scientific circumstantial evidences arise. When it is four o’clockon this watch, and four o’clock on the big clock in Bombay, itdoes not mean that the sun will rise. Even if the sun is in a hurry,it cannot rise. When will sunrise occur? It will occur when all theevidences come together. Therefore, unfolding of karma(udayakarma) is dependent on creative energy (sarjak shakti).‘We’ call that energy ‘relative’; it is of the relative-self (prakruti),it is not purusharth.Questioner: Inner intent (bhaav) itself is a purusharth,is it not? To know our true inner intent, to know the Self by itsattributes, is that not purusharth?Dadashri: Bhaava-bhaav is like-attraction (bhaav) anddislike/repulsion (abhaav); all belong to the ‘top’ (the non-Self)and ‘we’ (the Gnani and mahatmas) have our own state of theSelf (swabhav-bhaav). Bhaava-bhaav is karma. Swabhav-bhaav is the knower-seer (gnata-drashta) and eternal bliss(parmanand). Our mahatmas are in swabhav-bhaav, and thatis why there is constant bliss within. But they do not take moreexperience of this bliss. When it is time to taste and experienceit, they may have gone somewhere to a ‘hotel’ (enjoying worldlypleasure). That is why they do not know it.Questioner: How do the mahatmas taste and experiencethat? When they experience it unknowingly, is it due to theirpurusharth or the unfolding of karma (udayakarma)?Dadashri: Their purusharth continues, but they taste itfrom their parakram.Questioner: Parakram has not arisen within mahatmas.Does that mean that they do not have exact purusharth?Dadashri: All the mahatmas have purusharth for surebut they have not come into parakram yet. Some come intoparakram by doing samayik. There is always purusharth afterYou become a purush. That is a natural thing.Questioner: There are no rules in this, are there? Manytimes when I am sitting in a samayik, I simply cannot becomeone with the Self. But while I am out on the road, I suddenlybecome one with the Self and feel nothing but bliss. So how didthat happen? Did it happen as a karma unfolding (udaya)?Dadashri: It comes as karma effect (udaya), and sodoes the other. Both come due to fruition of karma.Questioner: Does that mean the intent of parakram(parakram bhaav) is a different thing?Dadashri: Yes, parakram bhaav is different. You do nothave to do anything in parakram. The bhaav which is in thestate of the Self gives rise to parakram. Then the energy lightof the awakened Self (pragnya) does everything according tothat parakram bhaav.Questioner: Does parakram bhaav mean gnata-drashta(knower-seer)?Dadashri: What is parakram bhaav? One does not havethe intent, ‘I want to come into parakram bhaav’; that is notit. This parakram bhaav is different from the original bhaav.Original bhaav is that which is in front as, ‘I am Chandulal.’Parakram bhaav is alertness. For the one who has made thedecision of ‘I want to remain alert’, for the one who has becomefirmly established in this decision, the energy of pragnya willAptavani-6263264Aptavani-6make all the arrangements.Questioner: Does parakram bhaav come under a strongdecision (nischay)?Dadashri: Yes, of course, You should have Your nischay,should you not? The nischay is, ‘I want to remain as the Self.’Then, whatever happens, who can stop You? Then the energyof pragnya (pragnyashakti – the direct light and energy of theSelf) will express its force. And energy of ignorance (agnyashakti)will use its force. But ultimately, agnyashakti will lose becauseGod dwells with pragnyashakti.* * * * *[28]The Secret of the Bliss of the SelfQuestioner: There is constant awareness of Shuddhatma,yet many times the mind becomes depressed. Why is that?Dadashri: Our Gnan says just keep ‘seeing’ what ishappening to ‘Chandubhai.’ There is no other solution. Wouldyou not recognize that he has brought more garbage with himfrom the past life?Questioner: At that time, the relationship of that which isto be known and the knower (gneya-gnata) does not remain.The awareness, ‘I am separate from this mind, speech and body,’does not remain.Dadashri: If that gneya-gnata relationship did not prevail,then You would not be able to know that this is happening toChandubhai. Who comes to know about this? Therefore, thegneya-gnata relationship remains completely for You. Theknower knows that which is to be known every minute.Questioner: But it should stop after the knowing takesplace, should it not? Should it, the non-Self, not turn towards theSelf again?Dadashri: It will not turn even if you try. How are yougoing to turn it around?Questioner: So, Dada, when the machinery is going onthe wrong path, am ‘I’ to just keep ‘seeing’ it?Dadashri: What else are You going to do? The wrongAptavani-6263264Aptavani-6make all the arrangements.Questioner: Does parakram bhaav come under a strongdecision (nischay)?Dadashri: Yes, of course, You should have Your nischay,should you not? The nischay is, ‘I want to remain as the Self.’Then, whatever happens, who can stop You? Then the energyof pragnya (pragnyashakti – the direct light and energy of theSelf) will express its force. And energy of ignorance (agnyashakti)will use its force. But ultimately, agnyashakti will lose becauseGod dwells with pragnyashakti.* * * * *[28]The Secret of the Bliss of the SelfQuestioner: There is constant awareness of Shuddhatma,yet many times the mind becomes depressed. Why is that?Dadashri: Our Gnan says just keep ‘seeing’ what ishappening to ‘Chandubhai.’ There is no other solution. Wouldyou not recognize that he has brought more garbage with himfrom the past life?Questioner: At that time, the relationship of that which isto be known and the knower (gneya-gnata) does not remain.The awareness, ‘I am separate from this mind, speech and body,’does not remain.Dadashri: If that gneya-gnata relationship did not prevail,then You would not be able to know that this is happening toChandubhai. Who comes to know about this? Therefore, thegneya-gnata relationship remains completely for You. Theknower knows that which is to be known every minute.Questioner: But it should stop after the knowing takesplace, should it not? Should it, the non-Self, not turn towards theSelf again?Dadashri: It will not turn even if you try. How are yougoing to turn it around?Questioner: So, Dada, when the machinery is going onthe wrong path, am ‘I’ to just keep ‘seeing’ it?Dadashri: What else are You going to do? The wrongAptavani-6265266Aptavani-6path and the right path; both are paths, so ‘see’ them as such.Questioner: But the whole life will be wasted on thewrong path, will it not?Dadashri: But what will happen when You start quarrellingthere? To ‘keep seeing’ is purusharth. You get entangled becauseyou do not understand what purusharth is. What you are goingthrough is some simple suffocation.Questioner: In the end I get tired of wondering what isgoing on.Dadashri: If anyone gets tired, it is ‘Chandubhai’ and not‘You.’ ‘You’ have to scold ‘Chandubhai’ and make him dopratikraman in the evening.The nature of the Self is such that it will not miss knowingeven the smallest thing. It knows everything that goes on. Whydo others not come and complain saying, ‘This or that happenedto me today’?Questioner: They must be experiencing peace (samadhi)?Dadashri: How can samadhi exist when the Self has notbeen realized by them yet? The Self has not manifested wherethe ego is still at work, whereas in You, the Self has manifested.That is why You ‘know’ about all this. Otherwise, why do othersnot say the same thing?Questioner: Then one’s bliss, one’s eternal happiness,should not go away, should it?Dadashri: But that bliss goes away when these obstaclesarise.Questioner: Which obstacles, Dada?Dadashri: When you go to work, and ‘You’ do not ‘see(jovoo)’ properly what Chandubhai is doing, then everythingfalls apart. Nothing will happen if everything runs systematically.Questioner: What do you mean by not ‘seeing (jovoo)’?Dadashri: You do indeed ‘know (jaaney)’ but you donot ‘see’ it, do you?Questioner: What happens when ‘I’ ‘see’ and ‘know’?Dadashri: You experience absolute bliss (parmanand)when ‘knowing’ and ‘seeing’ come together.Questioner: How does one do the ‘knowing’ and‘seeing’?Dadashri: You will ‘see’ all of Chandubhai, external andinternal. You will ‘see’ ‘what Chandubhai is doing.’ If Chandubhaiis drinking tea, You will ‘see’ that. You will ‘see’ him drinkingmilk. If he is crying, You will ‘see’ that too. If he is angry orirritated, You will ‘see’ that too, will You not? The Self can ‘see’everything. You do not experience the eternal bliss (parmanand)because the ‘knowing’ and ‘seeing’ do not occur together.Questioner: How can we ‘know’ and ‘see’ both together?Dadashri: It will happen when that practice is encouraged.Keep awareness (upayog) of ‘seeing’ in everything. If you donot rush or cause confusion, the ‘seeing’ is possible. If you makea mistake while boarding a crowded train, and you forget to‘see,’ ‘we’ can let go of that. But You can ‘see’ in all othersituations, can You not?Sit on the Everest of Awareness and ‘See’Questioner: Dada, after attaining Your Gnan, illusionaryattachment (maya) troubles me. Please get rid of it?Dadashri: Maya can never arise after one attains theSelf. Maya will not remain after that. But You are the one whoinvites her back by saying, ‘Auntie! Come here! Auntie, comehere!’Questioner: Why don’t you kill maya?Aptavani-6265266Aptavani-6path and the right path; both are paths, so ‘see’ them as such.Questioner: But the whole life will be wasted on thewrong path, will it not?Dadashri: But what will happen when You start quarrellingthere? To ‘keep seeing’ is purusharth. You get entangled becauseyou do not understand what purusharth is. What you are goingthrough is some simple suffocation.Questioner: In the end I get tired of wondering what isgoing on.Dadashri: If anyone gets tired, it is ‘Chandubhai’ and not‘You.’ ‘You’ have to scold ‘Chandubhai’ and make him dopratikraman in the evening.The nature of the Self is such that it will not miss knowingeven the smallest thing. It knows everything that goes on. Whydo others not come and complain saying, ‘This or that happenedto me today’?Questioner: They must be experiencing peace (samadhi)?Dadashri: How can samadhi exist when the Self has notbeen realized by them yet? The Self has not manifested wherethe ego is still at work, whereas in You, the Self has manifested.That is why You ‘know’ about all this. Otherwise, why do othersnot say the same thing?Questioner: Then one’s bliss, one’s eternal happiness,should not go away, should it?Dadashri: But that bliss goes away when these obstaclesarise.Questioner: Which obstacles, Dada?Dadashri: When you go to work, and ‘You’ do not ‘see(jovoo)’ properly what Chandubhai is doing, then everythingfalls apart. Nothing will happen if everything runs systematically.Questioner: What do you mean by not ‘seeing (jovoo)’?Dadashri: You do indeed ‘know (jaaney)’ but you donot ‘see’ it, do you?Questioner: What happens when ‘I’ ‘see’ and ‘know’?Dadashri: You experience absolute bliss (parmanand)when ‘knowing’ and ‘seeing’ come together.Questioner: How does one do the ‘knowing’ and‘seeing’?Dadashri: You will ‘see’ all of Chandubhai, external andinternal. You will ‘see’ ‘what Chandubhai is doing.’ If Chandubhaiis drinking tea, You will ‘see’ that. You will ‘see’ him drinkingmilk. If he is crying, You will ‘see’ that too. If he is angry orirritated, You will ‘see’ that too, will You not? The Self can ‘see’everything. You do not experience the eternal bliss (parmanand)because the ‘knowing’ and ‘seeing’ do not occur together.Questioner: How can we ‘know’ and ‘see’ both together?Dadashri: It will happen when that practice is encouraged.Keep awareness (upayog) of ‘seeing’ in everything. If you donot rush or cause confusion, the ‘seeing’ is possible. If you makea mistake while boarding a crowded train, and you forget to‘see,’ ‘we’ can let go of that. But You can ‘see’ in all othersituations, can You not?Sit on the Everest of Awareness and ‘See’Questioner: Dada, after attaining Your Gnan, illusionaryattachment (maya) troubles me. Please get rid of it?Dadashri: Maya can never arise after one attains theSelf. Maya will not remain after that. But You are the one whoinvites her back by saying, ‘Auntie! Come here! Auntie, comehere!’Questioner: Why don’t you kill maya?Aptavani-6267268Aptavani-6Dadashri: Do I have to come to kill maya or do Youhave to do it? I have to take care of certain things for You; therest You have to do yourself. Now you have become a purush(the Self) and so you have come into purusharth; you have touse the energy of the Self. How can maya come after you havebecome a purush? If you begin yog (union) for one hour withthe supreme Self, it will turn the worldly life upside down; suchis the union (yog) with parmatma that I have given you. Thewhole universe is transcended; such is the union with the Self(yog) that I have given you! But what can anyone do if You donot make use of such a yog?Questioner: The universe does not turn upside down,but I do.Dadashri: No one will let go of this union with the soul(Atmayog) once they have it in their hand. It can get rid ofanything within an hour.Questioner: Up until today, I thought Dada himself willguide me one day, therefore, I never said anything.Dadashri: Dada will do everything, but only if somemahatma becomes lost or goes astray, then ‘we’ have to placeprotection for him; otherwise, there would be no end to it, willthere? Dada has a lot of work to do. Dada has to do yog (unionwith the Self) all day long. He has to go to America, He has togo to England; He travels (in subtle body) day and night. He isgracing the whole world. Peace and happiness must prevailthroughout the world. Forget about religion, but peace mustprevail.Questioner: With us, we do things where we are notsupposed to be doing anything, and where we should be, we donothing.Dadashri: That is where spiritual effort (purusharth) isrequired. Why are you not doing purusharth now that you havebecome a purush (the Self)? You cannot afford to lose sight ofthe direction you are headed. Now there is only one direction:one of purusharth, purusharth, and purusharth!This union with the Self (yog) that we have given You issuch that it will express Your infinite energies. Therefore, gohome and start a forceful purusharth. Tell the rest of themosquitoes (kashays), ‘Get out! You are not allowed here!’You have enough energy within You to shake the wholeuniverse. I have personally ‘seen’ it and that is why I havedisclosed everything. So then what pleasure-seeking temptations(lalacha) have you become stuck in? And for what? Why shouldYou become tempted, even if the whole universe comes in frontof You? So get busy with your purusharth day and night. Howcan you sleep now? Now make your yog (union with the Self)complete. This yog has arisen after one million years and youhave attained it with ease, in spite of having a spouse and childrenand all the worldly possessions. This yog is not something thatwill come again and again. This is a yog with the supreme Self(parmatma). This is no ordinary union.Great awareness (jagruti) is required, complete awareness!Awareness over awareness, which is the ultimate awareness –and that is what we have here. We should remain ‘asleep’where the rest of the world is ‘awake.’ Where we are awake,the world is asleep. keval gnan (absolute knowledge) meanscomplete awareness. This awareness should be such that it hasno shortcomings. Only the awareness (jagruti) is needed, thatis all! By however much the awareness increases, You are thatmuch closer to absolute enlightenment (keval gnan). In awareness(jagruti), one can see all his mistakes, provided he becomesimpartial. You became impartial when You became aShuddhatma. Where there is the belief, ‘I am Chandubhai,’there is partiality there. What kind of judgment can be givenwhen one is the lawyer, the judge and the defendant himself?Aptavani-6267268Aptavani-6Dadashri: Do I have to come to kill maya or do Youhave to do it? I have to take care of certain things for You; therest You have to do yourself. Now you have become a purush(the Self) and so you have come into purusharth; you have touse the energy of the Self. How can maya come after you havebecome a purush? If you begin yog (union) for one hour withthe supreme Self, it will turn the worldly life upside down; suchis the union (yog) with parmatma that I have given you. Thewhole universe is transcended; such is the union with the Self(yog) that I have given you! But what can anyone do if You donot make use of such a yog?Questioner: The universe does not turn upside down,but I do.Dadashri: No one will let go of this union with the soul(Atmayog) once they have it in their hand. It can get rid ofanything within an hour.Questioner: Up until today, I thought Dada himself willguide me one day, therefore, I never said anything.Dadashri: Dada will do everything, but only if somemahatma becomes lost or goes astray, then ‘we’ have to placeprotection for him; otherwise, there would be no end to it, willthere? Dada has a lot of work to do. Dada has to do yog (unionwith the Self) all day long. He has to go to America, He has togo to England; He travels (in subtle body) day and night. He isgracing the whole world. Peace and happiness must prevailthroughout the world. Forget about religion, but peace mustprevail.Questioner: With us, we do things where we are notsupposed to be doing anything, and where we should be, we donothing.Dadashri: That is where spiritual effort (purusharth) isrequired. Why are you not doing purusharth now that you havebecome a purush (the Self)? You cannot afford to lose sight ofthe direction you are headed. Now there is only one direction:one of purusharth, purusharth, and purusharth!This union with the Self (yog) that we have given You issuch that it will express Your infinite energies. Therefore, gohome and start a forceful purusharth. Tell the rest of themosquitoes (kashays), ‘Get out! You are not allowed here!’You have enough energy within You to shake the wholeuniverse. I have personally ‘seen’ it and that is why I havedisclosed everything. So then what pleasure-seeking temptations(lalacha) have you become stuck in? And for what? Why shouldYou become tempted, even if the whole universe comes in frontof You? So get busy with your purusharth day and night. Howcan you sleep now? Now make your yog (union with the Self)complete. This yog has arisen after one million years and youhave attained it with ease, in spite of having a spouse and childrenand all the worldly possessions. This yog is not something thatwill come again and again. This is a yog with the supreme Self(parmatma). This is no ordinary union.Great awareness (jagruti) is required, complete awareness!Awareness over awareness, which is the ultimate awareness –and that is what we have here. We should remain ‘asleep’where the rest of the world is ‘awake.’ Where we are awake,the world is asleep. keval gnan (absolute knowledge) meanscomplete awareness. This awareness should be such that it hasno shortcomings. Only the awareness (jagruti) is needed, thatis all! By however much the awareness increases, You are thatmuch closer to absolute enlightenment (keval gnan). In awareness(jagruti), one can see all his mistakes, provided he becomesimpartial. You became impartial when You became aShuddhatma. Where there is the belief, ‘I am Chandubhai,’there is partiality there. What kind of judgment can be givenwhen one is the lawyer, the judge and the defendant himself?Aptavani-6269270Aptavani-6Questioner: I have decided that as long as Dada is thereabove me, I don’t have to worry about anything.Dadashri: Those kashays will sneak in. They will know,‘It is hollow here.’ Now you have been made a purush. Youhave Dada until you attain the Self. Now I have placed thepurusharth (spiritual effort) in Your hands. Dada will be presentfor you when you have difficulty, but he will not come every day.You have been graced with parmatma yog, the unionwith the supreme Self. So now do not let go again. This cannotbe attained in any lifetime. It has happened to You only in thislifetime. This is the eleventh wonder of this era of the currenttime cycle. The union with the Self (yog) has occurred. Thisunion has occurred for You because of your merit karma. Youhave seen everything from the top. You have seen everything upto a certain limit. You have it in Your awareness of what youhave seen, don’t you?Questioner: Yes I do.Dadashri: And this ‘furnace’ (the suffering of the worldlylife) has always been there, has it not? When has it not beenthere? All these ‘leftovers’ have always been there, have theynot?Questioner: Why do worldly pressures cling to the onewho has become a Shuddhatma?Dadashri: If this Shuddhatma that you have attainedwas attained after all your karmas are settled, then nothing willget in. But You have attained this state with karma still pending.What I am saying is that now You have to quickly settle all thosekarmas which are pending. Clear up all your debts. Otherwise,there was no way to clear up all your karmic debts withoutattaining the Shuddhatma. Therefore, you have to find a way ofbecoming rich from the state of bankruptcy. This debt is endless.And now, whoever is left wandering will wander another 81,000years. That is why ‘we’ are picking people up, so whoever hasattained this union with the Self, get your work done. Otherwise,this is a slippery era. It is a time of slipping. ‘We’ have given youthis awareness in the midst of your heavy karmic debt. Are Youaware or not?Questioner: I am.Dadashri: You need to sit at the very top level ofawareness (jagruti) and ‘see.’ If something within moves asmuch as a fraction, You should ‘see’ that. You should immediatelyknow whether it is for Your benefit or to your detriment.Everyone in the world is asleep even though their eyes areopen. What are they awake to? They are awake to money andsex. People have become tired of trying to figure out everything.That is why I am telling you that everything is scientificcircumstantial evidences (vyavasthit). It means that it is all yourown karmic account (hisaab). There is no one who can changethat. So do not even try to analyze and understand your life. Youjust continue doing Your work and vyavasthit will continue tobe your friend.Now maya (illusionary worldly conduct) should remain ata distance. It should not sneak in. It gradually swallows you uplike a python by enticing you with little trinkets, and You comeinto Your Shuddhatma state only during major predicaments.So You should remain aware (jagrut) in everything. Mistakesare no longer acceptable here.Questioner: But, Dada, one should not lose his wayagain, should he?Dadashri: He should not get lost, but illusionary worldlyconduct (maya) will still confuse and entangle him. For how longwill maya do that? Up to three years. Now, it is possible for thismaya of anger-pride-deceit-greed to remain underground andhungry for up to three years. ‘We’ have taken the authority fromAptavani-6269270Aptavani-6Questioner: I have decided that as long as Dada is thereabove me, I don’t have to worry about anything.Dadashri: Those kashays will sneak in. They will know,‘It is hollow here.’ Now you have been made a purush. Youhave Dada until you attain the Self. Now I have placed thepurusharth (spiritual effort) in Your hands. Dada will be presentfor you when you have difficulty, but he will not come every day.You have been graced with parmatma yog, the unionwith the supreme Self. So now do not let go again. This cannotbe attained in any lifetime. It has happened to You only in thislifetime. This is the eleventh wonder of this era of the currenttime cycle. The union with the Self (yog) has occurred. Thisunion has occurred for You because of your merit karma. Youhave seen everything from the top. You have seen everything upto a certain limit. You have it in Your awareness of what youhave seen, don’t you?Questioner: Yes I do.Dadashri: And this ‘furnace’ (the suffering of the worldlylife) has always been there, has it not? When has it not beenthere? All these ‘leftovers’ have always been there, have theynot?Questioner: Why do worldly pressures cling to the onewho has become a Shuddhatma?Dadashri: If this Shuddhatma that you have attainedwas attained after all your karmas are settled, then nothing willget in. But You have attained this state with karma still pending.What I am saying is that now You have to quickly settle all thosekarmas which are pending. Clear up all your debts. Otherwise,there was no way to clear up all your karmic debts withoutattaining the Shuddhatma. Therefore, you have to find a way ofbecoming rich from the state of bankruptcy. This debt is endless.And now, whoever is left wandering will wander another 81,000years. That is why ‘we’ are picking people up, so whoever hasattained this union with the Self, get your work done. Otherwise,this is a slippery era. It is a time of slipping. ‘We’ have given youthis awareness in the midst of your heavy karmic debt. Are Youaware or not?Questioner: I am.Dadashri: You need to sit at the very top level ofawareness (jagruti) and ‘see.’ If something within moves asmuch as a fraction, You should ‘see’ that. You should immediatelyknow whether it is for Your benefit or to your detriment.Everyone in the world is asleep even though their eyes areopen. What are they awake to? They are awake to money andsex. People have become tired of trying to figure out everything.That is why I am telling you that everything is scientificcircumstantial evidences (vyavasthit). It means that it is all yourown karmic account (hisaab). There is no one who can changethat. So do not even try to analyze and understand your life. Youjust continue doing Your work and vyavasthit will continue tobe your friend.Now maya (illusionary worldly conduct) should remain ata distance. It should not sneak in. It gradually swallows you uplike a python by enticing you with little trinkets, and You comeinto Your Shuddhatma state only during major predicaments.So You should remain aware (jagrut) in everything. Mistakesare no longer acceptable here.Questioner: But, Dada, one should not lose his wayagain, should he?Dadashri: He should not get lost, but illusionary worldlyconduct (maya) will still confuse and entangle him. For how longwill maya do that? Up to three years. Now, it is possible for thismaya of anger-pride-deceit-greed to remain underground andhungry for up to three years. ‘We’ have taken the authority fromAptavani-6271272Aptavani-6its hands and placed it in Your hands, so all of them (kashays)went underground. Now they will keep making arrangements tosurface. So this union with the Self will remain for three years.If You do not move away from ‘Dada’ (the Self), then they willnot sneak in. Then there will be a safe side for You. Then Youwill be able to remain in our Agnas naturally. ‘We’ know whythis happens, and that is why ‘we’ tell You to be very cautious,ahead of time.Questioner: Is the fight between the divine energy anddemonic energy constantly going on?Dadashri: Yes, they fight, but You should be the Krishnaand join hands with divine energy.Questioner: Please give us the sudarshan (right visionsymbolized by the circular weapon on the right ring finger ofLord Krishna, capable of destroying any enemy).Dadashri: I have already given you the sudarshan. Notjust for just one finger, but for all ten! It can cut everything withinan hour and destroy the entire army of the devil.The Great Importance of the Original PurushQuestioner: You will give your energies to some deservingperson before You leave, will you not?Dadashri: So does that mean you have to sit waiting forthat to happen? Instead of them giving it to you, why don’t youget your work done while ‘I’ am still around? There will alwaysbe inheritors – the ‘intelligentsia.’ These intelligent ones will alterthe main principle of this Science somewhat. Therefore, whenthe original Purush is around, get your work done and in orderto do that, you have to set aside your worldly life!When such a ‘real’ One, the Gnani Purush is around,one can attain the absolute Self. That is where true freedomlies. Not even God can be your superior; such is the freedomYou will attain.The purusharth after one becomes a purush is such thatwhen one roars, even the lions and lionesses scamper away. Buthere, even the puppies come and lick your face!When we give the Gnan, reality opens up and then onebecomes a purush. Then later, one becomes aware of, ‘I amsupreme Self (parmatma).’ ‘We’ help destroy karma and giveYou the divine vision (divya-chakshu) so that You can ‘see’ theSelf (Shuddhatma) in everyone. After giving You such a state,after ‘we’ give You the union with the supreme Self (parmatmayog), ‘we’ give you the five Agnas.Therefore, you have ‘seen’ the supreme state of the Self(parmatma pad) and the bliss of the absolute Self (parmatmasukh). As long as You are aware (laksha) of this, You willalways return to this original state. Therefore, attain such a unionwith the Self (yog) again. Whatever happens to the worldly life,let it. Just leave everything to vyavasthit and remain in the unionof the present (vartaman yog). The future is in the hands ofvyavasthit.Go Higher Within to Become the Supreme SelfQuestioner: In your absence, if the concentratedawareness (ekagrata) gets disturbed, what should I do?Dadashri: As long as Dada himself is present, he is gross(sthool). You should go from the gross (sthool) to subtle(sookshma). You have found the sthool, but you should now gointo sookshma. And when Dada is not around, you shouldbegin the process of the subtle (sookshma) and move towardsthe subtler (sookshmatar) and the subtlest (sookshmatam) state.Now, with regards to the topic of shifting awareness, knowonce and for all that it does not shift. Is it good to keep playingthis record every day to make Dada affirm this? However you can, remain in this union of the self with theAptavani-6271272Aptavani-6its hands and placed it in Your hands, so all of them (kashays)went underground. Now they will keep making arrangements tosurface. So this union with the Self will remain for three years.If You do not move away from ‘Dada’ (the Self), then they willnot sneak in. Then there will be a safe side for You. Then Youwill be able to remain in our Agnas naturally. ‘We’ know whythis happens, and that is why ‘we’ tell You to be very cautious,ahead of time.Questioner: Is the fight between the divine energy anddemonic energy constantly going on?Dadashri: Yes, they fight, but You should be the Krishnaand join hands with divine energy.Questioner: Please give us the sudarshan (right visionsymbolized by the circular weapon on the right ring finger ofLord Krishna, capable of destroying any enemy).Dadashri: I have already given you the sudarshan. Notjust for just one finger, but for all ten! It can cut everything withinan hour and destroy the entire army of the devil.The Great Importance of the Original PurushQuestioner: You will give your energies to some deservingperson before You leave, will you not?Dadashri: So does that mean you have to sit waiting forthat to happen? Instead of them giving it to you, why don’t youget your work done while ‘I’ am still around? There will alwaysbe inheritors – the ‘intelligentsia.’ These intelligent ones will alterthe main principle of this Science somewhat. Therefore, whenthe original Purush is around, get your work done and in orderto do that, you have to set aside your worldly life!When such a ‘real’ One, the Gnani Purush is around,one can attain the absolute Self. That is where true freedomlies. Not even God can be your superior; such is the freedomYou will attain.The purusharth after one becomes a purush is such thatwhen one roars, even the lions and lionesses scamper away. Buthere, even the puppies come and lick your face!When we give the Gnan, reality opens up and then onebecomes a purush. Then later, one becomes aware of, ‘I amsupreme Self (parmatma).’ ‘We’ help destroy karma and giveYou the divine vision (divya-chakshu) so that You can ‘see’ theSelf (Shuddhatma) in everyone. After giving You such a state,after ‘we’ give You the union with the supreme Self (parmatmayog), ‘we’ give you the five Agnas.Therefore, you have ‘seen’ the supreme state of the Self(parmatma pad) and the bliss of the absolute Self (parmatmasukh). As long as You are aware (laksha) of this, You willalways return to this original state. Therefore, attain such a unionwith the Self (yog) again. Whatever happens to the worldly life,let it. Just leave everything to vyavasthit and remain in the unionof the present (vartaman yog). The future is in the hands ofvyavasthit.Go Higher Within to Become the Supreme SelfQuestioner: In your absence, if the concentratedawareness (ekagrata) gets disturbed, what should I do?Dadashri: As long as Dada himself is present, he is gross(sthool). You should go from the gross (sthool) to subtle(sookshma). You have found the sthool, but you should now gointo sookshma. And when Dada is not around, you shouldbegin the process of the subtle (sookshma) and move towardsthe subtler (sookshmatar) and the subtlest (sookshmatam) state.Now, with regards to the topic of shifting awareness, knowonce and for all that it does not shift. Is it good to keep playingthis record every day to make Dada affirm this? However you can, remain in this union of the self with theAptavani-6273supreme Self (parmatma yog) that ‘I’ have given you. It is sucha yog that You can become parmatma. No one can obstructit and all problems of the worldly life come to an end. You canwin even the most difficult of all wars because the Shuddhatmais Krishna and He will take You to victory!‘Our’ Agnas are verily who ‘we’ are. Make the effort toremain within ‘our’ five Agnas.Moksha Swaroop has Come in Front of YouEven in a million lifetimes you would not find such anexpert, and now You have found Him! Therefore, it is possibleto get Your work done here. ‘I’ failed in attaining keval gnanand that is why I have become useful to You as a supervisor!I am giving you that which is Your own. The Gnan is‘Your’ own; it is not mine. I am just a nimit (instrumentalevidence) in the process. This is ‘Your’ own Gnan. The blissYou experience is Yours too. The awareness that will increase,that too is Yours. This awareness cannot be something I gaveyou. This is all Your own.This is the foundation of Absolutism. Do you understandthis? Say no if you do not. We are not in any hurry. We aresitting here in order to understand and not to merely make you“adopt the theory.” This “theory” is not such that we have tomake you “adopt” it. When the real fact is attained inunderstanding; that verily is our “theory” (knowledge)!Jai Sat Chit AnandGlossaryAakarshanAttractionAmado chaddheEgo based reactionAasaktiAttractionAbhaavDislike AbhipraayOpinionAchyutaNot subject to fallAadayeeObstinacyAdhyasPracticeAgiyarasEleventh day of lunar fortnightAgnan mohaAttachment arising due to illusionarising from the ignorance of thereal SelfAgnantaIgnorance (of the Self )AhamkariEgotisticAhimsaThe practice of no transgressionagainst any living being throughmind, speech and actionAhimsak bhaavNon-violent inner intentAhitaHarmfulAjagrutiUnawareness of the SelfAjodUnique and unparalleled stateAkudataEasinessAkudata-vyakudataVacillation between easiness anduneasiness; state of easiness-uneasinessAlaabhaLossAlochanaRecalling and confession of a mistakeAnandBlissAntahkaranInner functioning instrument ofcollective components of the mind,intellect, chit and ego in all humanbeingsAntaray karmaObstructing karmaAntardahInner sufferingAntarik buddhiInner intellectAptavani-6273supreme Self (parmatma yog) that ‘I’ have given you. It is sucha yog that You can become parmatma. No one can obstructit and all problems of the worldly life come to an end. You canwin even the most difficult of all wars because the Shuddhatmais Krishna and He will take You to victory!‘Our’ Agnas are verily who ‘we’ are. Make the effort toremain within ‘our’ five Agnas.Moksha Swaroop has Come in Front of YouEven in a million lifetimes you would not find such anexpert, and now You have found Him! Therefore, it is possibleto get Your work done here. ‘I’ failed in attaining keval gnanand that is why I have become useful to You as a supervisor!I am giving you that which is Your own. The Gnan is‘Your’ own; it is not mine. I am just a nimit (instrumentalevidence) in the process. This is ‘Your’ own Gnan. The blissYou experience is Yours too. The awareness that will increase,that too is Yours. This awareness cannot be something I gaveyou. This is all Your own.This is the foundation of Absolutism. Do you understandthis? Say no if you do not. We are not in any hurry. We aresitting here in order to understand and not to merely make you“adopt the theory.” This “theory” is not such that we have tomake you “adopt” it. When the real fact is attained inunderstanding; that verily is our “theory” (knowledge)!Jai Sat Chit AnandGlossaryAakarshanAttractionAmado chaddheEgo based reactionAasaktiAttractionAbhaavDislike AbhipraayOpinionAchyutaNot subject to fallAadayeeObstinacyAdhyasPracticeAgiyarasEleventh day of lunar fortnightAgnan mohaAttachment arising due to illusionarising from the ignorance of thereal SelfAgnantaIgnorance (of the Self )AhamkariEgotisticAhimsaThe practice of no transgressionagainst any living being throughmind, speech and actionAhimsak bhaavNon-violent inner intentAhitaHarmfulAjagrutiUnawareness of the SelfAjodUnique and unparalleled stateAkudataEasinessAkudata-vyakudataVacillation between easiness anduneasiness; state of easiness-uneasinessAlaabhaLossAlochanaRecalling and confession of a mistakeAnandBlissAntahkaranInner functioning instrument ofcollective components of the mind,intellect, chit and ego in all humanbeingsAntaray karmaObstructing karmaAntardahInner sufferingAntarik buddhiInner intellectAnubhav gnanExperiential knowledgeAnubhavExperienceAnukudFavorable circumstancesAparigrahiNon-acquisitiveApekshaExpectationApurnataIncompletenessAradhanaTotal devotionAropit bhaavFalse attribution  of  the belief‘I am Chandulal’ArtadhyanAdverse internal meditation thathurts the selfAsahajLacking spontaneity and naturalnessAsarEffectAshantiRestlessnessAshataUncomfortable and painfulAshayaReceptacleAshubhaInauspicious; badAshuddhaImpureAtikramanAggressionAtkanMajor blockade or impediment inthe path of LiberationAtmaThe real Self or pure SoulAtma charitraBeing and remaining the Self ;conduct as the SelfAtma GnanKnowledge of the Soul or SelfAtma swabhavNature of your SelfAtma-drashtiVision of the SelfAvalumbanDependencyAvinashiIndestructible and eternalAvyavahar rashiWhich have no names – embodiedsouls in an unnamed stateBahya buddhiExternal intellectBandhanBondageBhaanAwarenessBhaavInner intentBhaav karmaCause karmaBhaav pratikramanReversal of aggression in thoughts,speech and actions by changingthe inner intentBhaavakoThe doer of the bhaavBhavnaExpressed intentBhaavnindraAsleep to the Self; unaware of theSelfBhaktiDevotionBhoduSimple and straightforward ; NaïveBhogavavooTo enjoyBhrantiIllusionBrahmavakyaEternal wordsBuddhiWorldly intellect;  Indirect light ofthe Self’; it flows through the mediumof the egoBuddhi’s  ashayaReceptacle of intellectCharam shaririLast life in human form – thosewho have the final physical bodybefore moksha-liberationCharitraConductCharitra mohaDischarging illusionary conduct ;Discharging effectChetakMakes you cautiousChetanLife energy;  the Self; LivingChetan bhaavEnergy of lifeChintaWorriesChitSubtle component of vision andknowledge in the inner functioninginstrument called antahkaranChyutaProne to fall and endDakhalInterferenceDakhoMessDarshanVision as the SelfDarshan mohaIllusion of ‘I am Chandulal’Anubhav gnanExperiential knowledgeAnubhavExperienceAnukudFavorable circumstancesAparigrahiNon-acquisitiveApekshaExpectationApurnataIncompletenessAradhanaTotal devotionAropit bhaavFalse attribution  of  the belief‘I am Chandulal’ArtadhyanAdverse internal meditation thathurts the selfAsahajLacking spontaneity and naturalnessAsarEffectAshantiRestlessnessAshataUncomfortable and painfulAshayaReceptacleAshubhaInauspicious; badAshuddhaImpureAtikramanAggressionAtkanMajor blockade or impediment inthe path of LiberationAtmaThe real Self or pure SoulAtma charitraBeing and remaining the Self ;conduct as the SelfAtma GnanKnowledge of the Soul or SelfAtma swabhavNature of your SelfAtma-drashtiVision of the SelfAvalumbanDependencyAvinashiIndestructible and eternalAvyavahar rashiWhich have no names – embodiedsouls in an unnamed stateBahya buddhiExternal intellectBandhanBondageBhaanAwarenessBhaavInner intentBhaav karmaCause karmaBhaav pratikramanReversal of aggression in thoughts,speech and actions by changingthe inner intentBhaavakoThe doer of the bhaavBhavnaExpressed intentBhaavnindraAsleep to the Self; unaware of theSelfBhaktiDevotionBhoduSimple and straightforward ; NaïveBhogavavooTo enjoyBhrantiIllusionBrahmavakyaEternal wordsBuddhiWorldly intellect;  Indirect light ofthe Self’; it flows through the mediumof the egoBuddhi’s  ashayaReceptacle of intellectCharam shaririLast life in human form – thosewho have the final physical bodybefore moksha-liberationCharitraConductCharitra mohaDischarging illusionary conduct ;Discharging effectChetakMakes you cautiousChetanLife energy;  the Self; LivingChetan bhaavEnergy of lifeChintaWorriesChitSubtle component of vision andknowledge in the inner functioninginstrument called antahkaranChyutaProne to fall and endDakhalInterferenceDakhoMessDarshanVision as the SelfDarshan mohaIllusion of ‘I am Chandulal’DehadhyasFalse belief of ‘I am the body’Dekhat BhooliIllusion that deludesDevas and devisCelestial beingsDevshi (pratikraman)Pratikraman done in the morningDharmaDuty, roleDharma-dhyanAbsence of adverse internalmeditationDivya-chakshuDivine visionDoshMistake; faultDrashta-GnataSeer-KnowerDrashtiVisionDravyaEffect; Physical matterDravya pratikramanEffect-discharge pratikramanDravya-karmaEffect of previously caused karmaDukh buddhiRepel from painDukh-anandPain and pleasureDukhPain; miseryDwandvaDualitiesEkagrataConcentrated awarenessFariyaadComplaintFarajiyatMandatoryFileAll interactions of the worldly lifeare due to karmic accounts andare considered ‘files’ – ‘sticky’refers to the tenacity and theintensity of the fileGaanthTuberGalgaliaExcitement with the temptation ofpleasureGamoLikesGharshanConflictGnayak swabhavKnower-shipGhabharamanSuffocationGnanDadashri uses the word gnan forthree types of knowledge: Gnanwith capitalized ‘G’ is the knowledgeof the Self. The second gnan is theknowledge of cause and effects, lifeafter life, and the third gnan is theworldly knowledge of human beingsGnataKnowerGnatapanuKnowingGneyaThat which is to be knownGranthiTuberGuhyaMysteriousGuna-dharmaOriginal quality and intrinsicproperty and functionGunasthanakSpiritual stagesHitkariBeneficial to the other personHimsaViolenceHisaabKarmic accountHitaBeneficialIchchhaDesireIndriyasSensesJanavooTo knowJadaInert matterJadataaHeartless and callousJagat kalyanSalvation of the worldJagrutiAwarenessJapaChantingJivaWorldly beingKaadTimeKaliyugCurrent era of the time cyclecharacterized by lack of unity inthought, speech and actsKalpanaImaginationKapatDeceitKaravnaraOne that makes you doKarma-fadaEffect of karma of past lifeKartaDoerKashaysInner hidden enemies of anger,pride, deceit and greed. Deludedbehaviors that obstruct rightknowledge and behavior and thatDehadhyasFalse belief of ‘I am the body’Dekhat BhooliIllusion that deludesDevas and devisCelestial beingsDevshi (pratikraman)Pratikraman done in the morningDharmaDuty, roleDharma-dhyanAbsence of adverse internalmeditationDivya-chakshuDivine visionDoshMistake; faultDrashta-GnataSeer-KnowerDrashtiVisionDravyaEffect; Physical matterDravya pratikramanEffect-discharge pratikramanDravya-karmaEffect of previously caused karmaDukh buddhiRepel from painDukh-anandPain and pleasureDukhPain; miseryDwandvaDualitiesEkagrataConcentrated awarenessFariyaadComplaintFarajiyatMandatoryFileAll interactions of the worldly lifeare due to karmic accounts andare considered ‘files’ – ‘sticky’refers to the tenacity and theintensity of the fileGaanthTuberGalgaliaExcitement with the temptation ofpleasureGamoLikesGharshanConflictGnayak swabhavKnower-shipGhabharamanSuffocationGnanDadashri uses the word gnan forthree types of knowledge: Gnanwith capitalized ‘G’ is the knowledgeof the Self. The second gnan is theknowledge of cause and effects, lifeafter life, and the third gnan is theworldly knowledge of human beingsGnataKnowerGnatapanuKnowingGneyaThat which is to be knownGranthiTuberGuhyaMysteriousGuna-dharmaOriginal quality and intrinsicproperty and functionGunasthanakSpiritual stagesHitkariBeneficial to the other personHimsaViolenceHisaabKarmic accountHitaBeneficialIchchhaDesireIndriyasSensesJanavooTo knowJadaInert matterJadataaHeartless and callousJagat kalyanSalvation of the worldJagrutiAwarenessJapaChantingJivaWorldly beingKaadTimeKaliyugCurrent era of the time cyclecharacterized by lack of unity inthought, speech and actsKalpanaImaginationKapatDeceitKaravnaraOne that makes you doKarma-fadaEffect of karma of past lifeKartaDoerKashaysInner hidden enemies of anger,pride, deceit and greed. Deludedbehaviors that obstruct rightknowledge and behavior and thatperpetuate karma and involvementin the worldKeval GnanAbsolute knowledge state; AbsoluteenlightenmentKhokhuEmpty containerKriya pratikramanRitual of pratikraman traditionallypracticed by the Jains with verbalrecitationsKrodhakMakes you angryKshetraLocationKusangThat which takes one away fromthe eternal Self; Bad companyLaabhaBenefitLakshaAwarenessLalachaGluttonous greedLobhakMakes you greedyLoksangnyaKnowledge arising from mistakeassociation with the worldly peopleLord MahavirA fully awakened, enlightenedbeing in India, 2500 years agoMaanRecognition and self-validationMaanav swabhavHuman natureMaaniPride-filledMayavi drashtiIllusionary visionMatbhedSeparation due to differences inopinionMayaIllusionary attachmentMayashalyaMightiest thorn of illusionMishra chetanMixture of the Self and the non-SelfMitaShort and simpleMohaInfatuation due to illusionMohakCauses you to have moha -illusionaryattachmentMohamayiIllusionary attractionsMoodhatmaUnaware of realityMukta hasyaA smile that radiates with liberation;Liberating laughterMunMindMurchhitDeludedMurtiIdolNikachitHeavy and ‘sticky’Nikachit karmaKarma effect one has to sufferNimitA living or non-living instrumentalevidence in unfolding karma effectNiraagiDisinterestedNirahamkarEgolessNirakud anandBliss of a state beyond easinessand uneasinessNirakudataBlissful stateNiralumbIndependentNirdoshWithout mistakes;  without faults;flawlessNirjaraDischarge of karmaNirjiv ahamkarLifeless egoNirmaaniWithout prideNirvikalpThe state of blissNischayThe Self and its realmNishpakshpatiOne who is impartialNispruhaAbhorrent towards worldly lifePaapDemerit karmaPaapiSinnerPakkadUnyielding obstinacyPanchatIntellectual interferenceParOf the non-SelfParadhinUnder the influence of the non-SelfParakramTremendous spiritual effort;extraordinary purusharthParam anandAbsolute blissParam vinayaAbsolute humilityParmanandEternal blissParmatmaSupreme SoulPar-aashritDependent on other factors andevidencesperpetuate karma and involvementin the worldKeval GnanAbsolute knowledge state; AbsoluteenlightenmentKhokhuEmpty containerKriya pratikramanRitual of pratikraman traditionallypracticed by the Jains with verbalrecitationsKrodhakMakes you angryKshetraLocationKusangThat which takes one away fromthe eternal Self; Bad companyLaabhaBenefitLakshaAwarenessLalachaGluttonous greedLobhakMakes you greedyLoksangnyaKnowledge arising from mistakeassociation with the worldly peopleLord MahavirA fully awakened, enlightenedbeing in India, 2500 years agoMaanRecognition and self-validationMaanav swabhavHuman natureMaaniPride-filledMayavi drashtiIllusionary visionMatbhedSeparation due to differences inopinionMayaIllusionary attachmentMayashalyaMightiest thorn of illusionMishra chetanMixture of the Self and the non-SelfMitaShort and simpleMohaInfatuation due to illusionMohakCauses you to have moha -illusionaryattachmentMohamayiIllusionary attractionsMoodhatmaUnaware of realityMukta hasyaA smile that radiates with liberation;Liberating laughterMunMindMurchhitDeludedMurtiIdolNikachitHeavy and ‘sticky’Nikachit karmaKarma effect one has to sufferNimitA living or non-living instrumentalevidence in unfolding karma effectNiraagiDisinterestedNirahamkarEgolessNirakud anandBliss of a state beyond easinessand uneasinessNirakudataBlissful stateNiralumbIndependentNirdoshWithout mistakes;  without faults;flawlessNirjaraDischarge of karmaNirjiv ahamkarLifeless egoNirmaaniWithout prideNirvikalpThe state of blissNischayThe Self and its realmNishpakshpatiOne who is impartialNispruhaAbhorrent towards worldly lifePaapDemerit karmaPaapiSinnerPakkadUnyielding obstinacyPanchatIntellectual interferenceParOf the non-SelfParadhinUnder the influence of the non-SelfParakramTremendous spiritual effort;extraordinary purusharthParam anandAbsolute blissParam vinayaAbsolute humilityParmanandEternal blissParmatmaSupreme SoulPar-aashritDependent on other factors andevidencesParinaamInternal result and state; Effect;ConsequenceParmatma sukhBliss of the absolute SelfParmatma-padSupreme state of the SelfParmatma-yogUnion with the supreme SelfPolumpolHollow; without substancePraanLife forcePradeshRegionPragnyaEnergy of the Self that is awakenedwithin upon Self-realization and leadsone to ultimate liberationPrakrutiRelative-self; the non-Self; Non-Self complexPrakrutik gunasVirtues and attributes of therelative-selfPramaadSpiritual laziness; lack of awarenessPrarabdhaFate; destinyPrashchyataapRemorsePratikramanThe process of recalling, repentingand asking for forgiveness with theavowal to not repeat the act ofaggression through thoughts, speechor action, as shown by theGnaniPurush Dadashri; ask for forgivenessfrom the pure Soul of the one youhave ‘hurt,’ coupled with remorseof the wrongdoingPratikudUnfavorablePratishthaInstillation of lifePratishthit atmaRelative or charged self; energizednon-Self complex of thoughts,speech and acts.PratitiConvictionPratyakhyanVow never to repeat the mistakePreranaInspirationPriyaPleasing and agreeablePudgalNon-Self complex of input andoutputPunyaMerit karmaPunyashadiOne with lot of merit karmaPuran-galanInput-output; charge-dischargePurnaAbsolutePurushSelf (the Atma); enlightenedPurusharthSpiritual effortRaag-dweshAttachment-abhorrenceRaishi (pratikraman)Pratikraman done at nightRajipoTo pleaseRaudradhyanAdverse internal meditation thathurts the self and othersRamanataDwellSaanSenseSahajSpontaneous and naturalSahajikataSpontaneity and naturalnessSaiyamControl of the kashay (anger, pride,deceit and greed) ; absenceof raag-dwesh; control and calmSainyogCircumstanceSamadhanClosure and inner satisfactionSamadhiState of being unaffected despite allexternal turmoil and maintainingoneness with the pure Self; BlissfulstateSamjanUnderstandingSamayikIntrospection process for a specifictime when one remains the Self andin introspection sees the non-SelfevidencesSamipyabhaavClose proximitySamkitRight visionSamyak darshanEnlightened view;  right visionSanchit karmaEffect karmaSangharshanReactive clashParinaamInternal result and state; Effect;ConsequenceParmatma sukhBliss of the absolute SelfParmatma-padSupreme state of the SelfParmatma-yogUnion with the supreme SelfPolumpolHollow; without substancePraanLife forcePradeshRegionPragnyaEnergy of the Self that is awakenedwithin upon Self-realization and leadsone to ultimate liberationPrakrutiRelative-self; the non-Self; Non-Self complexPrakrutik gunasVirtues and attributes of therelative-selfPramaadSpiritual laziness; lack of awarenessPrarabdhaFate; destinyPrashchyataapRemorsePratikramanThe process of recalling, repentingand asking for forgiveness with theavowal to not repeat the act ofaggression through thoughts, speechor action, as shown by theGnaniPurush Dadashri; ask for forgivenessfrom the pure Soul of the one youhave ‘hurt,’ coupled with remorseof the wrongdoingPratikudUnfavorablePratishthaInstillation of lifePratishthit atmaRelative or charged self; energizednon-Self complex of thoughts,speech and acts.PratitiConvictionPratyakhyanVow never to repeat the mistakePreranaInspirationPriyaPleasing and agreeablePudgalNon-Self complex of input andoutputPunyaMerit karmaPunyashadiOne with lot of merit karmaPuran-galanInput-output; charge-dischargePurnaAbsolutePurushSelf (the Atma); enlightenedPurusharthSpiritual effortRaag-dweshAttachment-abhorrenceRaishi (pratikraman)Pratikraman done at nightRajipoTo pleaseRaudradhyanAdverse internal meditation thathurts the self and othersRamanataDwellSaanSenseSahajSpontaneous and naturalSahajikataSpontaneity and naturalnessSaiyamControl of the kashay (anger, pride,deceit and greed) ; absenceof raag-dwesh; control and calmSainyogCircumstanceSamadhanClosure and inner satisfactionSamadhiState of being unaffected despite allexternal turmoil and maintainingoneness with the pure Self; BlissfulstateSamjanUnderstandingSamayikIntrospection process for a specifictime when one remains the Self andin introspection sees the non-SelfevidencesSamipyabhaavClose proximitySamkitRight visionSamyak darshanEnlightened view;  right visionSanchit karmaEffect karmaSangharshanReactive clashSangnyaAssociationSansarWorldly lifeSaradataStraight-forwardnessSarjak shaktiCreative energySatsangGathering of Self-realized beingsShataComfortable and pleasantShankaDoubts; SuspicionShivaLiberated beingSookshmatarSubtlerShraddhaFaithShubhaAuspicious; goodShubha upayogAuspicious awarenessShuddhaPureShuddha gnanPure knowledgeShuddha prem swaroopEmbodiment of pure loveShuddha upayogPure awareness of the SelfShuddha vyavaharPure interactionSookshmatamSubtlestShukla-dhyanMeditation as the SelfSookshmaSubtleSiddhasAre accomplished Lords, fullyenlightened and in the bodiless stateSpandanVibrationsSthirStillSthirataStillnessSthoolGrossSthool sainyogGross circumstancesSudarshanRight visionSukh buddhiIntellectual belief that happiness andpleasure reside in that which isgained through the five sensesSookshma sainyogSubtle circumstancesSwabhavNatural stateSwa-aashritHave control overSwabhav-bhaavOwn state of the SelfSwabhavNature of the SelfSwabhavik sahaj sukhSwabhavik – of the Self; sahaj –natural; sukh – blissSwayam sanchalitEverything happening by itselfSyadvaad (speech)Speech that does not hurt the egoof any living beingTaaranexact conclusionTakaramanReaction to a conflict as clashTanmayakarAbsorbed in its enjoyment; Becomeone with or engrossedTantiliAssociated with a link of dweshkashayTapaPenanceTiraskarContemptTirthankaraFully enlightened beingTrilokThree worlds (celestial – devlok,human – madhyalok andunderworlds – paatadlok)TyaagRenounceUdayakarmaUnfolding of karmaUkelSolutionUngamoDislikesUnsamajanMisunderstandingUpadhiExternally-induced problems andresultant sufferingUpayaSolutionUpmaanDefamation and disgraceUpayogActive and alert attentiveness of thereal Self; Maintain awareness; focusthe awarenessUpayog jagrutiFocused awarenessVadganPossessedVairagyaDispassion towards the worldly lifeVaniSpeechVartaman yogUnion of the presentVartanConductVartan mohaConduct under the effect of illusionVedanaSufferingSangnyaAssociationSansarWorldly lifeSaradataStraight-forwardnessSarjak shaktiCreative energySatsangGathering of Self-realized beingsShataComfortable and pleasantShankaDoubts; SuspicionShivaLiberated beingSookshmatarSubtlerShraddhaFaithShubhaAuspicious; goodShubha upayogAuspicious awarenessShuddhaPureShuddha gnanPure knowledgeShuddha prem swaroopEmbodiment of pure loveShuddha upayogPure awareness of the SelfShuddha vyavaharPure interactionSookshmatamSubtlestShukla-dhyanMeditation as the SelfSookshmaSubtleSiddhasAre accomplished Lords, fullyenlightened and in the bodiless stateSpandanVibrationsSthirStillSthirataStillnessSthoolGrossSthool sainyogGross circumstancesSudarshanRight visionSukh buddhiIntellectual belief that happiness andpleasure reside in that which isgained through the five sensesSookshma sainyogSubtle circumstancesSwabhavNatural stateSwa-aashritHave control overSwabhav-bhaavOwn state of the SelfSwabhavNature of the SelfSwabhavik sahaj sukhSwabhavik – of the Self; sahaj –natural; sukh – blissSwayam sanchalitEverything happening by itselfSyadvaad (speech)Speech that does not hurt the egoof any living beingTaaranexact conclusionTakaramanReaction to a conflict as clashTanmayakarAbsorbed in its enjoyment; Becomeone with or engrossedTantiliAssociated with a link of dweshkashayTapaPenanceTiraskarContemptTirthankaraFully enlightened beingTrilokThree worlds (celestial – devlok,human – madhyalok andunderworlds – paatadlok)TyaagRenounceUdayakarmaUnfolding of karmaUkelSolutionUngamoDislikesUnsamajanMisunderstandingUpadhiExternally-induced problems andresultant sufferingUpayaSolutionUpmaanDefamation and disgraceUpayogActive and alert attentiveness of thereal Self; Maintain awareness; focusthe awarenessUpayog jagrutiFocused awarenessVadganPossessedVairagyaDispassion towards the worldly lifeVaniSpeechVartaman yogUnion of the presentVartanConductVartan mohaConduct under the effect of illusionVedanaSufferingVedavoonEndureVedeySufferingVeyrEnmityVibhaavBhaav that is external and not of theSelfVibhaavik  pudgalVibhaavik means that it is a non-Self complex (pudgal) resultingfrom extra inner intent (bhaav)VicarPassionsVignanScientific spiritual knowledgeVikalpIntellectual interferenceVinashiTemporaryVinayaHumilityViparit buddhiDeluded intellectVishayAny worldly thing or subject onefinds pleasure in. It also means sexVishayTopicVisheshExtraVishesh parinaamExtra resultsVishesh roopExtra formVismrutForgottenVitaragA state of non-attachment to anyworldly things, including one’s ownbodyVitarag PurushOne free from all worldly attachmentsVivekDiscriminationVivek  buddhiIntellectual discriminationViyogDissipationVruttisInner tendenciesVyabhicharini buddhiContradictory intellectVyakudataUneasinessVyavaharWorldly dutiesVyavahar charitraWorldly conductVyavahar swaroopWorldly formVyavasthitScientific circumstantial evidencesYaadgiriMemoryYogUnionPersons to ContactDada Bhagwan ParivarAdalaj:Trimandir, Simandhar City,Ahmedabad-Kalol Highway, Adalaj,Dist.: Gandhinagar - 382421, Gujarat, India.Tel : (079) 39830100, Email : info@dadabhagwan.orgAhmedabad:"Dada Darshan", 5, Mamtapark Society,Behind Navgujarat College, Usmanpura,Ahmedabad- 380 014. Tel. : (079) 27540408Rajkot:Trimandir, Ahmedabad-Rajkot Highway, Nr. TarghadiyaChokdi, Maliyasan Village, Rajkot. Tel.: 9274111393Vadodara:"Dada Mandir", 17, Mama ni pol, Opp. Raopura Police Station, Salatvada, Vadodara.Tel. : (0265) 2414142, 9825032901Bhuj:"Trimandir",  B/h Hill garden, Airport Road,Near SahyogNagar, Bhuj (Kutch) Tel. : (02832) 290123Godhra:"Trimandir", Village Bhamaiya, Opp. FCI Godown,Godhra, Dist - Pachmahal Tel. : (02672) 262300Mumbai:Mobile : 9323528901Kolkata:Mobile : 9330133885Bangalore : Mobile : 9341948509U.S.A.:Dada Bhagwan Parivar (USA) +1 877-505-(DADA)3232Dada Bhagwan Vignan Institute : Dr. Bachu Amin,100, SW Redbud Lane, Topeka, Kansas 66606Tel : +1 785 271 0869, Email : bamin@cox.netU.K.:Satsang Activity Centre,College House, 15 CollegeRoad, Harrow, HA1 1BA,Tel. : +44  7956 476 253Email : dadabhagwan_uk@yahoo.comWebsite : www.dadabhagwan.orgKenya:+254  722 722 063Australia:+61 421127947UAE: +971  557316937Singapore: +65  81129229New Zealand: +64 21 0376434Germany:+49 700 32327474VedavoonEndureVedeySufferingVeyrEnmityVibhaavBhaav that is external and not of theSelfVibhaavik  pudgalVibhaavik means that it is a non-Self complex (pudgal) resultingfrom extra inner intent (bhaav)VicarPassionsVignanScientific spiritual knowledgeVikalpIntellectual interferenceVinashiTemporaryVinayaHumilityViparit buddhiDeluded intellectVishayAny worldly thing or subject onefinds pleasure in. It also means sexVishayTopicVisheshExtraVishesh parinaamExtra resultsVishesh roopExtra formVismrutForgottenVitaragA state of non-attachment to anyworldly things, including one’s ownbodyVitarag PurushOne free from all worldly attachmentsVivekDiscriminationVivek  buddhiIntellectual discriminationViyogDissipationVruttisInner tendenciesVyabhicharini buddhiContradictory intellectVyakudataUneasinessVyavaharWorldly dutiesVyavahar charitraWorldly conductVyavahar swaroopWorldly formVyavasthitScientific circumstantial evidencesYaadgiriMemoryYogUnionPersons to ContactDada Bhagwan ParivarAdalaj:Trimandir, Simandhar City,Ahmedabad-Kalol Highway, Adalaj,Dist.: Gandhinagar - 382421, Gujarat, India.Tel : (079) 39830100, Email : info@dadabhagwan.orgAhmedabad:"Dada Darshan", 5, Mamtapark Society,Behind Navgujarat College, Usmanpura,Ahmedabad- 380 014. Tel. : (079) 27540408Rajkot:Trimandir, Ahmedabad-Rajkot Highway, Nr. TarghadiyaChokdi, Maliyasan Village, Rajkot. Tel.: 9274111393Vadodara:"Dada Mandir", 17, Mama ni pol, Opp. Raopura Police Station, Salatvada, Vadodara.Tel. : (0265) 2414142, 9825032901Bhuj:"Trimandir",  B/h Hill garden, Airport Road,Near SahyogNagar, Bhuj (Kutch) Tel. : (02832) 290123Godhra:"Trimandir", Village Bhamaiya, Opp. FCI Godown,Godhra, Dist - Pachmahal Tel. : (02672) 262300Mumbai:Mobile : 9323528901Kolkata:Mobile : 9330133885Bangalore : Mobile : 9341948509U.S.A.:Dada Bhagwan Parivar (USA) +1 877-505-(DADA)3232Dada Bhagwan Vignan Institute : Dr. Bachu Amin,100, SW Redbud Lane, Topeka, Kansas 66606Tel : +1 785 271 0869, Email : bamin@cox.netU.K.:Satsang Activity Centre,College House, 15 CollegeRoad, Harrow, HA1 1BA,Tel. : +44  7956 476 253Email : dadabhagwan_uk@yahoo.comWebsite : www.dadabhagwan.orgKenya:+254  722 722 063Australia:+61 421127947UAE: +971  557316937Singapore: +65  81129229New Zealand: +64 21 0376434Germany:+49 700 32327474