OOOOOOOOOOLMMMMMMNOOOOOOOOOOQRRRRRRSAptavani 1- Dada BhagwanOriginally Compiled in Gujarati by :Dr. Niruben AminPublisher:Mr. Ajit C. Patel on behalf ofDada Bhagwan Foundation5, Mamatapark Society,B/h. Navgujarat College,Usmanpura, Ahmedabad-380014Tel. : (079) 27540408©:All Rights Reserved - Dr. Niruben AminTrimandir, Simandhar City, P.O.-Adalaj-382421,Dist.:Gandhinagar, Gujarat, IndiaFirst Edition: 2000 copies,   Year 2004Second Edition : 2000 copies,   Year 2007Price:Ultimate Humility &"I Don't Know Anything"Rs. 50.00Printer:Mahavideh Foundation Basement, Parshwanath Chambers,Nr. RBI, Income Tax Area,Ahmedabad, Gujrat, India. Tel. : (079) 27542964, 27540216OOOOOOOOOOLMMMMMMNOOOOOOOOOOQRRRRRRSAptavani 1- Dada BhagwanOriginally Compiled in Gujarati by :Dr. Niruben AminPublisher:Mr. Ajit C. Patel on behalf ofDada Bhagwan Foundation5, Mamatapark Society,B/h. Navgujarat College,Usmanpura, Ahmedabad-380014Tel. : (079) 27540408©:All Rights Reserved - Dr. Niruben AminTrimandir, Simandhar City, P.O.-Adalaj-382421,Dist.:Gandhinagar, Gujarat, IndiaFirst Edition: 2000 copies,   Year 2004Second Edition : 2000 copies,   Year 2007Price:Ultimate Humility &"I Don't Know Anything"Rs. 50.00Printer:Mahavideh Foundation Basement, Parshwanath Chambers,Nr. RBI, Income Tax Area,Ahmedabad, Gujrat, India. Tel. : (079) 27542964, 27540216Introduction to The GnaniOne June evening, in 1958 at around six o’clock,Ambalal Muljibhai Patel, a family man, and a contractor byprofession, was sitting on a bench on the busy platform numberthree at Surat’s train station. Surat is a city in south Gujarat, awestern state in India. What happened within the next forty-eight minutes was phenomenal. Spontaneous Self-realizationoccurred within Ambalal M. Patel. During this event, his egocompletely melted and from that moment onwards, he becamecompletely detached from all of Ambalal’s thoughts, speech,and actions.  He became the Lord’s living instrument for thesalvation of humankind, through the path of knowledge. Hecalled this Lord, ‘Dada Bhagwan.’ To everyone he met, hewould say, “This Lord, Dada Bhagwan is fully manifested withinme.  He also resides within all living beings.  The difference isthat within me He is completely expressed and in you, he hasyet to manifest.”Who are we? What is God? Who runs this world? Whatis karma? What is liberation? Etc. All the world’s spiritualquestions were answered during this event. Thus, nature offeredabsolute vision to the world through the medium of ShreeAmbalal Muljibhai Patel.Ambalal was born in Tarasali, a suburb of Baroda andwas later raised in Bhadran, Gujarat. His wife’s name wasHiraba. Although he was a contractor by profession, his life athome and his interactions with everyone around him wereexemplary, even prior to his Self-realization. After becomingSelf-realized and attaining the state of a Gnani, (The AwakenedOne), his body became a ‘public charitable trust.’Throughout his entire life, he lived by the principle thatthere should not be any commerce in religion, and in all34Trimantra(The Three Mantras)Namo ArihantanamI bow to the Lord who has annihilated all the innerenemies of anger, pride, attachment and greed.Namo SiddhanamI bow to all the Lord who have attained final liberation.Namo AayariyanamI bow to all the Self-realized masters who unfold thepath of liberation.Namo UvazzayanamI bow to the Self-realized teachers of the path ofliberation.Namo Loye Savva SaahunamI bow to all who have  attained the Self and areprogressing in this path in the universe.Eso Pancha NamukkaroThese five salutations.Saava PaavappanasanoDestroy all the sins.Mangalanam cha SaavesimOf all that is auspicious mantras.Padhamam Havai MangalamThis is the highest.(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67) Namo Bhagavate VasudevayaI bow to the One who has become the Supreme Lordfrom a human being.(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67) Namah ShivaayaI bow to all auspicious beings of this universe who arethe instruments of salvation of the world. Jai Sat Chit AnandThe Awareness Of The Eternal Is Bliss(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Introduction to The GnaniOne June evening, in 1958 at around six o’clock,Ambalal Muljibhai Patel, a family man, and a contractor byprofession, was sitting on a bench on the busy platform numberthree at Surat’s train station. Surat is a city in south Gujarat, awestern state in India. What happened within the next forty-eight minutes was phenomenal. Spontaneous Self-realizationoccurred within Ambalal M. Patel. During this event, his egocompletely melted and from that moment onwards, he becamecompletely detached from all of Ambalal’s thoughts, speech,and actions.  He became the Lord’s living instrument for thesalvation of humankind, through the path of knowledge. Hecalled this Lord, ‘Dada Bhagwan.’ To everyone he met, hewould say, “This Lord, Dada Bhagwan is fully manifested withinme.  He also resides within all living beings.  The difference isthat within me He is completely expressed and in you, he hasyet to manifest.”Who are we? What is God? Who runs this world? Whatis karma? What is liberation? Etc. All the world’s spiritualquestions were answered during this event. Thus, nature offeredabsolute vision to the world through the medium of ShreeAmbalal Muljibhai Patel.Ambalal was born in Tarasali, a suburb of Baroda andwas later raised in Bhadran, Gujarat. His wife’s name wasHiraba. Although he was a contractor by profession, his life athome and his interactions with everyone around him wereexemplary, even prior to his Self-realization. After becomingSelf-realized and attaining the state of a Gnani, (The AwakenedOne), his body became a ‘public charitable trust.’Throughout his entire life, he lived by the principle thatthere should not be any commerce in religion, and in all34Trimantra(The Three Mantras)Namo ArihantanamI bow to the Lord who has annihilated all the innerenemies of anger, pride, attachment and greed.Namo SiddhanamI bow to all the Lord who have attained final liberation.Namo AayariyanamI bow to all the Self-realized masters who unfold thepath of liberation.Namo UvazzayanamI bow to the Self-realized teachers of the path ofliberation.Namo Loye Savva SaahunamI bow to all who have  attained the Self and areprogressing in this path in the universe.Eso Pancha NamukkaroThese five salutations.Saava PaavappanasanoDestroy all the sins.Mangalanam cha SaavesimOf all that is auspicious mantras.Padhamam Havai MangalamThis is the highest.(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67) Namo Bhagavate VasudevayaI bow to the One who has become the Supreme Lordfrom a human being.(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67) Namah ShivaayaI bow to all auspicious beings of this universe who arethe instruments of salvation of the world. Jai Sat Chit AnandThe Awareness Of The Eternal Is Bliss(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)commerce, there must be religion. He also never took moneyfrom anyone for his own use. He used the profits from hisbusiness to take his devotees for pilgrimages to various parts ofIndia.His words became the foundation for the new, direct,and step-less path to Self-realization called Akram Vignan.Through his divine original scientific experiment (The GnanVidhi), he imparted this knowledge to others within two hours.Thousands have received his grace through this process andthousands continue to do so even now. ‘Akram’ means withoutsteps; an elevator path or a shortcut, whereas ‘Kram’ meansan orderly, step-by-step spiritual path. Akram is now recognizedas a direct shortcut to the bliss of the Self.Who is Dada Bhagwan ?When he explained to others who ‘Dada Bhagwan’ is, hewould say:“What you see here is not ‘Dada Bhagwan.’ What yousee is ‘A. M. Patel.’ I am a Gnani Purush and ‘He’ that ismanifested within me, is ‘Dada Bhagwan’. He is the Lordwithin.  He is within you and everyone else. He has not yetmanifested within you, whereas within me he is fully manifested.I myself am not a Bhagwan. I too bow down to Dada Bhagwanwithin me.”Current link for attaining the knowledge of Self-realization (Atma Gnan)“I am personally going to impart siddhis (special spiritualpowers) to a few people. After I leave, will there not be a needfor them? People of future generations will need this path, willthey not?”  ~ DadashriParam Pujya Dadashri used to go from town to town,and country to country, to give satsang and impart theknowledge of the Self as well as knowledge of harmoniousworldly interaction to all who came to see him. During his finaldays, in the fall of 1987, he gave his blessing to Dr. NirubenAmin and bestowed his special siddhis upon her, to continuehis work.  “You will have to become a mother to this wholeworld, Niruben” He told her as he blessed her.  There was nodoubt in Dadashri’s mind that Niruben was destined to be justthat.  She had served him with utmost devotion day and nightfor over twenty years. Dadashri in turn had molded her andprepared her to take on this monumental task.From the time of Pujya Dadashri’s mortal departure onJanuary 2nd 1988 to her own mortal departure on March 19th2006, Pujya Niruma as she lovingly came to be called bythousands remained true to her promise to Dadashri to carry onhis mission of the world’s salvation. She became Dadashri’srepresentative of Akram Vignan and became instrumental inspreading the knowledge of Akram Vignan throughout theworld.  She also became an exemplary of pure and unconditionallove. Thousands of people from all walks of life and from allover the world have attained Self-realization through her andare established in the experience of the pure Soul, whilecarrying out their worldly duties and obligations. They experiencefreedom here and now, while living their daily life.The link of Akram Gnanis now continues with the currentspiritual master Pujya Deepakbhai Desai whom Pujya Dadashrihad also graced with special siddhis to continue to teach theworld about Atmagnan and Akram Vignan. He was furthermolded and trained by Pujya Niruma who blessed him toconduct Gnan Vidhi in 2003. Dadashri had said that Deepakbhaiwill become the decorum that will add splendor to the Lord’s56commerce, there must be religion. He also never took moneyfrom anyone for his own use. He used the profits from hisbusiness to take his devotees for pilgrimages to various parts ofIndia.His words became the foundation for the new, direct,and step-less path to Self-realization called Akram Vignan.Through his divine original scientific experiment (The GnanVidhi), he imparted this knowledge to others within two hours.Thousands have received his grace through this process andthousands continue to do so even now. ‘Akram’ means withoutsteps; an elevator path or a shortcut, whereas ‘Kram’ meansan orderly, step-by-step spiritual path. Akram is now recognizedas a direct shortcut to the bliss of the Self.Who is Dada Bhagwan ?When he explained to others who ‘Dada Bhagwan’ is, hewould say:“What you see here is not ‘Dada Bhagwan.’ What yousee is ‘A. M. Patel.’ I am a Gnani Purush and ‘He’ that ismanifested within me, is ‘Dada Bhagwan’. He is the Lordwithin.  He is within you and everyone else. He has not yetmanifested within you, whereas within me he is fully manifested.I myself am not a Bhagwan. I too bow down to Dada Bhagwanwithin me.”Current link for attaining the knowledge of Self-realization (Atma Gnan)“I am personally going to impart siddhis (special spiritualpowers) to a few people. After I leave, will there not be a needfor them? People of future generations will need this path, willthey not?”  ~ DadashriParam Pujya Dadashri used to go from town to town,and country to country, to give satsang and impart theknowledge of the Self as well as knowledge of harmoniousworldly interaction to all who came to see him. During his finaldays, in the fall of 1987, he gave his blessing to Dr. NirubenAmin and bestowed his special siddhis upon her, to continuehis work.  “You will have to become a mother to this wholeworld, Niruben” He told her as he blessed her.  There was nodoubt in Dadashri’s mind that Niruben was destined to be justthat.  She had served him with utmost devotion day and nightfor over twenty years. Dadashri in turn had molded her andprepared her to take on this monumental task.From the time of Pujya Dadashri’s mortal departure onJanuary 2nd 1988 to her own mortal departure on March 19th2006, Pujya Niruma as she lovingly came to be called bythousands remained true to her promise to Dadashri to carry onhis mission of the world’s salvation. She became Dadashri’srepresentative of Akram Vignan and became instrumental inspreading the knowledge of Akram Vignan throughout theworld.  She also became an exemplary of pure and unconditionallove. Thousands of people from all walks of life and from allover the world have attained Self-realization through her andare established in the experience of the pure Soul, whilecarrying out their worldly duties and obligations. They experiencefreedom here and now, while living their daily life.The link of Akram Gnanis now continues with the currentspiritual master Pujya Deepakbhai Desai whom Pujya Dadashrihad also graced with special siddhis to continue to teach theworld about Atmagnan and Akram Vignan. He was furthermolded and trained by Pujya Niruma who blessed him toconduct Gnan Vidhi in 2003. Dadashri had said that Deepakbhaiwill become the decorum that will add splendor to the Lord’s56PREFACEThis book is a compilation of the manifest form ofGoddess Saraswati (Goddess of speech) flowing through thelips of the Omniscient – Dada Bhagwan. In His divine presence,time, karma and illusionary grip of the world, ceases. It is nowonder that his purest and penetrating utterances have establishedthe divine vision and right perception in countless aspirants.Further more, this divine vision and perception will undoubtedlybe established in the aspirant who reads this book with anardent desire for acquiring the knowledge of the Absolute Truth– ‘I seek the Truth … the Ultimate Truth’ – this prompting spiritmust be an integral part of his being. In fact this is the foremostrequirement and if he reserves some secret, discordant desire,it would only be his meddlesome mental bias or insistence ofsome preconceived notion. An ardent desire to know theAbsolute Truth and preconceived notions or insistence ofopinion is contradictory. Liberation can never be attainedthrough insistence of opinion; it is only when one becomes freefrom all prejudices, partialities and non-insistence that onebecomes successful in his endeavors.Liberation is only at the feet of the Gnani. If ever anopportunity arises of meeting the Gnani and a connection beestablished with Him, then Liberation is in the palm of yourhands. Many have been blessed with this ‘step-less’ path toliberation – Akram Vignan – and that too, in just one hour!Unprecedented, unique, unheard of before, and beyond credulityis this fact and yet a proven verity through experience.Liberation calls for no efforts if one is fortunate enough tocome in communion with a Gnani. However, extremely difficultand rare is such a communion. Even more difficult, a thousandtimes over, is one’s ability to recognize a Gnani.reign. Pujya Deepakbhai, in keeping with Dada’s and Niruma’stradition travels extensively within India and abroad, givingsatsangs and imparting the knowledge of the Self to all whocome seeking.Powerful words in scriptures help the seeker in increasinghis desire for liberation. The knowledge of the Self is the finalgoal of all one’s seeking. Without the knowledge of the Selfthere is no liberation. This knowledge of the Self (Atma Gnan)does not exist in books. It exists in the heart of a Gnani.Hence, the knowledge of the Self can only be acquired bymeeting a Gnani. Through the scientific approach of AkramVignan, even today one can attain Atma Gnan, but it can onlyoccur by meeting a living Atma Gnani and receiving the AtmaGnan. Only a lit candle can light another candle.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)78PREFACEThis book is a compilation of the manifest form ofGoddess Saraswati (Goddess of speech) flowing through thelips of the Omniscient – Dada Bhagwan. In His divine presence,time, karma and illusionary grip of the world, ceases. It is nowonder that his purest and penetrating utterances have establishedthe divine vision and right perception in countless aspirants.Further more, this divine vision and perception will undoubtedlybe established in the aspirant who reads this book with anardent desire for acquiring the knowledge of the Absolute Truth– ‘I seek the Truth … the Ultimate Truth’ – this prompting spiritmust be an integral part of his being. In fact this is the foremostrequirement and if he reserves some secret, discordant desire,it would only be his meddlesome mental bias or insistence ofsome preconceived notion. An ardent desire to know theAbsolute Truth and preconceived notions or insistence ofopinion is contradictory. Liberation can never be attainedthrough insistence of opinion; it is only when one becomes freefrom all prejudices, partialities and non-insistence that onebecomes successful in his endeavors.Liberation is only at the feet of the Gnani. If ever anopportunity arises of meeting the Gnani and a connection beestablished with Him, then Liberation is in the palm of yourhands. Many have been blessed with this ‘step-less’ path toliberation – Akram Vignan – and that too, in just one hour!Unprecedented, unique, unheard of before, and beyond credulityis this fact and yet a proven verity through experience.Liberation calls for no efforts if one is fortunate enough tocome in communion with a Gnani. However, extremely difficultand rare is such a communion. Even more difficult, a thousandtimes over, is one’s ability to recognize a Gnani.reign. Pujya Deepakbhai, in keeping with Dada’s and Niruma’stradition travels extensively within India and abroad, givingsatsangs and imparting the knowledge of the Self to all whocome seeking.Powerful words in scriptures help the seeker in increasinghis desire for liberation. The knowledge of the Self is the finalgoal of all one’s seeking. Without the knowledge of the Selfthere is no liberation. This knowledge of the Self (Atma Gnan)does not exist in books. It exists in the heart of a Gnani.Hence, the knowledge of the Self can only be acquired bymeeting a Gnani. Through the scientific approach of AkramVignan, even today one can attain Atma Gnan, but it can onlyoccur by meeting a living Atma Gnani and receiving the AtmaGnan. Only a lit candle can light another candle.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)78the Pure Self. But the Gnani has the splendor in one eye andcoolness in the other.3. The Gnani has the depth of serenity of the ocean. Heaccepts and absorbs anything offered to him, regardless of itsquality and contents and blesses the giver.4. His stillness and steadfastness is comparable to themountain of Meru. No external circumstances or events dareshake his inner poise or steadfastness. His steadfastness mustnot be mistaken for psychic or physical fortitude or stubbornness.Many will hold their palm over a burning candle withoutflinching - that is not steadfastness; it is stubbornness orobstinacy- the expression of ego. But the Gnani is completelyfree from ego. He is natural and spontaneous in his reflexes orroutine activities. Steadfastness has nothing to do with physicalfortitude or rigidity. The Gnani would not put his hand wherethere is a possibility of getting burnt and if by chance he does,he would immediately retract it. His physical being is quitenormal and natural but his omniscient inner poise is unparallel.No events or circumstances would upset or affect even a singleatom of His inner harmony; that is real steadfastness.Steadfastness is where the tranquility within is never perturbedor never is there a hint of inner turmoil.  The physical pain is anatural property of the body and has nothing to do with theequanimity or steadfastness of the inner Self.An abode of infinite compassion, the Gnani does nothave a grain of pity. Pity is an egocentric virtue – it is a virtuethat exists in duality with its corresponding counterpart.Presence of pity on one hand is balanced by cruelty on theother hand. Only when it manifests, does one see the reality ofthis duality. But the Gnani is above all duality. In the Gnani’seyes flows an endless stream of the elixir of love. Forever withinHim remains the spirit of comforting and saving, and liberating109For the aspirant of the Absolute Truth, a description ofthe Gnani can be invaluable in his cognition of Him. How arewe to recognize the Gnani? What attributes of his wouldcaptivate us in spirit?The first and foremost identifying mark of a Gnani is hisspeech: It is Absolute and free from all attachment. There existsno other mode or measure in our age. In the days gone by,there were people so highly developed in their spirituality, thatby just a mere look into the eyes of the Gnani, they couldrecognize his vitragta – his state void of any attachment towardsworldly thing, including his physical body. Not even for a split-second is the Gnani bereft of vitragta.The Gnani should be recognized through his outstandingqualities. But how can an ordinary individual understand suchqualities? There are 1008 qualities of the Gnani, of which fourare exclusive in the Gnani.1. The Gnani has the dazzling majesty of the Sun-God.He is the symbol of the infinite luster and strength of the PureSelf. This strength is visible in his eyes. Only on experiencedoes one feel the Divine energy behind it.2. The Gnani has ‘the coolness’ of the Moon in his un-surpassing love and compassion. Everyone in his presence feelsthe bracing tranquility of this ‘coolness.’ It is so soothing thatone would not wish to be away from the Gnani even for amoment. The power of His coolness is enough to ‘melt’ theradiant heat of the sun - a person may come to Him, tormentedwith rage and anger but with a mere glance into His eyes – thesplendor of serenity within will sooth and calm him.Radiant splendor and soothing ‘coolness’ of compassion- these two virtues exist simultaneously in the Gnani alone.Some have the splendor of strength without ‘the cool’ ofcompassion and some have ‘the cool’ without the ‘splendor’ ofthe Pure Self. But the Gnani has the splendor in one eye andcoolness in the other.3. The Gnani has the depth of serenity of the ocean. Heaccepts and absorbs anything offered to him, regardless of itsquality and contents and blesses the giver.4. His stillness and steadfastness is comparable to themountain of Meru. No external circumstances or events dareshake his inner poise or steadfastness. His steadfastness mustnot be mistaken for psychic or physical fortitude or stubbornness.Many will hold their palm over a burning candle withoutflinching - that is not steadfastness; it is stubbornness orobstinacy- the expression of ego. But the Gnani is completelyfree from ego. He is natural and spontaneous in his reflexes orroutine activities. Steadfastness has nothing to do with physicalfortitude or rigidity. The Gnani would not put his hand wherethere is a possibility of getting burnt and if by chance he does,he would immediately retract it. His physical being is quitenormal and natural but his omniscient inner poise is unparallel.No events or circumstances would upset or affect even a singleatom of His inner harmony; that is real steadfastness.Steadfastness is where the tranquility within is never perturbedor never is there a hint of inner turmoil.  The physical pain is anatural property of the body and has nothing to do with theequanimity or steadfastness of the inner Self.An abode of infinite compassion, the Gnani does nothave a grain of pity. Pity is an egocentric virtue – it is a virtuethat exists in duality with its corresponding counterpart.Presence of pity on one hand is balanced by cruelty on theother hand. Only when it manifests, does one see the reality ofthis duality. But the Gnani is above all duality. In the Gnani’seyes flows an endless stream of the elixir of love. Forever withinHim remains the spirit of comforting and saving, and liberating109For the aspirant of the Absolute Truth, a description ofthe Gnani can be invaluable in his cognition of Him. How arewe to recognize the Gnani? What attributes of his wouldcaptivate us in spirit?The first and foremost identifying mark of a Gnani is hisspeech: It is Absolute and free from all attachment. There existsno other mode or measure in our age. In the days gone by,there were people so highly developed in their spirituality, thatby just a mere look into the eyes of the Gnani, they couldrecognize his vitragta – his state void of any attachment towardsworldly thing, including his physical body. Not even for a split-second is the Gnani bereft of vitragta.The Gnani should be recognized through his outstandingqualities. But how can an ordinary individual understand suchqualities? There are 1008 qualities of the Gnani, of which fourare exclusive in the Gnani.1. The Gnani has the dazzling majesty of the Sun-God.He is the symbol of the infinite luster and strength of the PureSelf. This strength is visible in his eyes. Only on experiencedoes one feel the Divine energy behind it.2. The Gnani has ‘the coolness’ of the Moon in his un-surpassing love and compassion. Everyone in his presence feelsthe bracing tranquility of this ‘coolness.’ It is so soothing thatone would not wish to be away from the Gnani even for amoment. The power of His coolness is enough to ‘melt’ theradiant heat of the sun - a person may come to Him, tormentedwith rage and anger but with a mere glance into His eyes – thesplendor of serenity within will sooth and calm him.Radiant splendor and soothing ‘coolness’ of compassion- these two virtues exist simultaneously in the Gnani alone.Some have the splendor of strength without ‘the cool’ ofcompassion and some have ‘the cool’ without the ‘splendor’ ofall the creatures of the world, suffering in agony the afflictionsof the worldly life.There is a childlike innocence and guilelessness in theGnani.  In a child however, it is ignorance that breeds innocencebut the Gnani’s innocence springs from the highest degree ofwisdom and knowledge. A vision that sees no fault or flawsanywhere but finds and feels everything in order.  Havingbecome free of faults Himself, he views the whole world, as itstands, to be innocent and ‘in order’.Not a single trace of stubbornness or obstinacy would bethere in the Gnani.  Stubbornness is the expression of ego-sense. Narrow is the path to liberation and the stubborn cannotenter it. Only the simple and straightforward can get past itwithout any difficulty. Obstinacy or stubbornness is the greatestobstruction in the world. The Gnani remains unaffected orunruffled even in the face of some one’s untoward gesture,abasement or humiliation. He would pacify anyone’s tartnesswith unsurpassed politeness.  No instigation dare irritate him –his vitragta can be evident upon provocation. What a wondrousdetachment to external factors and forces. He is anything butthe Gnani who, when piqued, is provoked to rage or wrath.Not even a jot of stubborn insistence is to be found in aGnani.  He is entirely aloof from ‘insistence’ or ‘stickiness’-Insistence endangers dissent or conflict, and that comes in theway of liberation.God has asserted for one not to be a prey to any clinginginsistence except in seeking the Gnani, at whose lotus feet liesLiberation. The grace and blessings of the Gnani would placeyou right on the threshold of Liberation without any strain orpain on your part.The Gnani’s love is the purest love.  It is a fountain ofdivine love that puts out the fires of the worldly life. The Gnanihas an ardent wish for the liberation of all caught in thequagmire of the worldly life.The most salient feature of the Gnani is his non-partiality.He is neither dogmatic nor pragmatic. Partiality or prejudicialapproach implies blindness to other existing viewpoints. This isbeing fanatic. Confinement to some creed or to compartmentalizewould come in the way of the Real or Truth. In order to realizethe ultimate Truth, one must be free from partiality, fanaticismor bigotry.  The Gnani is open to all viewpoints.  He is non-partial even towards his own mind, speech, and physique.  Onaccount of this all comprehensive outlook and openness, heexalts to the highest status of the Omniscient Manifest. TheOmniscient will never rigidly cleave to one viewpoint orpartiality. Despite various religious beliefs of those who sit in thediscourse of the Gnani, all experience a spirit of oneness withinand with Him. Each of them finds in the Gnani the mosttrustworthy and authentic representative of his religion.It is the ignorant that has infinite diversity of opinions,whereas all Gnanis from all different sects come to a uniformconclusion amidst myriad viewpoints!The Gnani is omniscient as well as without intellect – nota drop of intellectualism prevails in the Gnani.  Where theintellect sinks eternally into oblivion, spontaneously arises thestate of Omniscience in all its splendor and glory.  This is thenatural law: Only the one who is free from the grips of intellectcan become the Omniscient.Captivating are the speech, conduct and humbleness ofthe Gnani.  Unparallel are they - nowhere else to be seen!  Inhis speech there is due deference to the diversity of allviewpoints and so it hurts no one nor does it offend.  His wordspenetrate right into the heart and the soul and would promptand point one to the right path at a crucial moment: The seed1112all the creatures of the world, suffering in agony the afflictionsof the worldly life.There is a childlike innocence and guilelessness in theGnani.  In a child however, it is ignorance that breeds innocencebut the Gnani’s innocence springs from the highest degree ofwisdom and knowledge. A vision that sees no fault or flawsanywhere but finds and feels everything in order.  Havingbecome free of faults Himself, he views the whole world, as itstands, to be innocent and ‘in order’.Not a single trace of stubbornness or obstinacy would bethere in the Gnani.  Stubbornness is the expression of ego-sense. Narrow is the path to liberation and the stubborn cannotenter it. Only the simple and straightforward can get past itwithout any difficulty. Obstinacy or stubbornness is the greatestobstruction in the world. The Gnani remains unaffected orunruffled even in the face of some one’s untoward gesture,abasement or humiliation. He would pacify anyone’s tartnesswith unsurpassed politeness.  No instigation dare irritate him –his vitragta can be evident upon provocation. What a wondrousdetachment to external factors and forces. He is anything butthe Gnani who, when piqued, is provoked to rage or wrath.Not even a jot of stubborn insistence is to be found in aGnani.  He is entirely aloof from ‘insistence’ or ‘stickiness’-Insistence endangers dissent or conflict, and that comes in theway of liberation.God has asserted for one not to be a prey to any clinginginsistence except in seeking the Gnani, at whose lotus feet liesLiberation. The grace and blessings of the Gnani would placeyou right on the threshold of Liberation without any strain orpain on your part.The Gnani’s love is the purest love.  It is a fountain ofdivine love that puts out the fires of the worldly life. The Gnanihas an ardent wish for the liberation of all caught in thequagmire of the worldly life.The most salient feature of the Gnani is his non-partiality.He is neither dogmatic nor pragmatic. Partiality or prejudicialapproach implies blindness to other existing viewpoints. This isbeing fanatic. Confinement to some creed or to compartmentalizewould come in the way of the Real or Truth. In order to realizethe ultimate Truth, one must be free from partiality, fanaticismor bigotry.  The Gnani is open to all viewpoints.  He is non-partial even towards his own mind, speech, and physique.  Onaccount of this all comprehensive outlook and openness, heexalts to the highest status of the Omniscient Manifest. TheOmniscient will never rigidly cleave to one viewpoint orpartiality. Despite various religious beliefs of those who sit in thediscourse of the Gnani, all experience a spirit of oneness withinand with Him. Each of them finds in the Gnani the mosttrustworthy and authentic representative of his religion.It is the ignorant that has infinite diversity of opinions,whereas all Gnanis from all different sects come to a uniformconclusion amidst myriad viewpoints!The Gnani is omniscient as well as without intellect – nota drop of intellectualism prevails in the Gnani.  Where theintellect sinks eternally into oblivion, spontaneously arises thestate of Omniscience in all its splendor and glory.  This is thenatural law: Only the one who is free from the grips of intellectcan become the Omniscient.Captivating are the speech, conduct and humbleness ofthe Gnani.  Unparallel are they - nowhere else to be seen!  Inhis speech there is due deference to the diversity of allviewpoints and so it hurts no one nor does it offend.  His wordspenetrate right into the heart and the soul and would promptand point one to the right path at a crucial moment: The seed1112of Gnan inculcated by the Gnani will fructify into Liberation –never will its fate be rendered futile. The spiritual prowess of hiswords is beyond one’s imagination!For the Gnani, the stage of ‘becoming’ is over.  He is inthe supreme sate of ‘being’.  Therefore he has nothing more toknow or perform in the world.  No need to read books!   Nostandard to pass!  No beads to count!  There is nothing theGnani has yet to know or do.  He is the Omniscient and hemoves about in complete liberation.The Gnani is so intricate and inscrutable that he is beyondthe comprehension of a layperson.  He has no need to establishashrams, no symbolic flags to fly!  No sect or creed!  No label!No special attire of white or saffron! He is clad in a quite andplain attire of a householder.  How is one to recognize Him?Even then, the Gnani can be identified through his descriptiongiven in the scriptures:‘The Gnani lives in a state of ‘samadhi’- the active andalert awareness of the Pure Self and the state of being the PureSelf. His speech delivers experience. He has no worldlydesires, no pride nor internal worldly stagnation within. He isnot allured by anything- veneration or self-worship, objects ofsenses, riches or disciples.  The eternal light of Knowledge onlymanifests within when all one’s needs and desires are completelydissolved.  ‘Being’ liberated, He is the liberator, the savior, andthe beacon light – living to lift and liberate others.The Gnani has in him, the concurrence of many divinecircumstantial evidences. Beatific is his name, richly rewardingthe one who recites it. Credit regales in crowning deedsperformed through his blessings.  His speech is spellbinding andsalutary.  His status of spiritual placement is a status revered bypeople. So many such evidences of this nature come togetherto make the Gnani manifest in the world.The Gnani does not need to read scriptures or performany religious rituals. Before Him all distinction between adevotee and God disappear.   He himself is God.  He is theOmniscient Manifest.  God is an adjective or attributeapplicable to the one who possesses divine virtues!  The Gnaniis an incarnation of Divinity.So long as one is prone to errors, there is God overheadand as soon as one becomes free from all one’s errors, thereremains no authority of God overhead.  The Gnani is beyondall flaws, faults and errors and that is why he has no one ofauthority over him nor does he exercise authority over others(no underhand).  He is completely free and independent.Every action of the Gnani is divine; it never binds him.The deeds of the relative world perpetuate bondage of life,whereas the deeds of the Gnani only serve to liberate.  He isthe Self-realized liberated Soul and so He is capable andcompetent to liberate countless others.The Gnani is free from all karmic knots or complexes andconditionings.  All the complexes dissolve and disappear in thecrucible of Self-Realization.  He is the Absolute.  For him,therefore, there is no question of renunciation or non-renunciation,abnegation or acceptance.  God Himself has propounded this.If renunciation were the yardstick of measure in the search forthe Gnani, how will one ever recognize the Gnani?   The Gnanidoes not require any novel ritualistic practices or penance to seta new path.  His ultimate state in which Self-Realizationmanifested is the state that prevails everlastingly.  His ‘being’ isbeyond the scanning of the laity.  His state of being defies allmental measures of the mortal beings.Were one to assimilate in living, three divine virtues of theGnani, he would surely find the puzzle of life perishing. Thesedivine traits are: compressibility, flexibility and tensibility.1314of Gnan inculcated by the Gnani will fructify into Liberation –never will its fate be rendered futile. The spiritual prowess of hiswords is beyond one’s imagination!For the Gnani, the stage of ‘becoming’ is over.  He is inthe supreme sate of ‘being’.  Therefore he has nothing more toknow or perform in the world.  No need to read books!   Nostandard to pass!  No beads to count!  There is nothing theGnani has yet to know or do.  He is the Omniscient and hemoves about in complete liberation.The Gnani is so intricate and inscrutable that he is beyondthe comprehension of a layperson.  He has no need to establishashrams, no symbolic flags to fly!  No sect or creed!  No label!No special attire of white or saffron! He is clad in a quite andplain attire of a householder.  How is one to recognize Him?Even then, the Gnani can be identified through his descriptiongiven in the scriptures:‘The Gnani lives in a state of ‘samadhi’- the active andalert awareness of the Pure Self and the state of being the PureSelf. His speech delivers experience. He has no worldlydesires, no pride nor internal worldly stagnation within. He isnot allured by anything- veneration or self-worship, objects ofsenses, riches or disciples.  The eternal light of Knowledge onlymanifests within when all one’s needs and desires are completelydissolved.  ‘Being’ liberated, He is the liberator, the savior, andthe beacon light – living to lift and liberate others.The Gnani has in him, the concurrence of many divinecircumstantial evidences. Beatific is his name, richly rewardingthe one who recites it. Credit regales in crowning deedsperformed through his blessings.  His speech is spellbinding andsalutary.  His status of spiritual placement is a status revered bypeople. So many such evidences of this nature come togetherto make the Gnani manifest in the world.The Gnani does not need to read scriptures or performany religious rituals. Before Him all distinction between adevotee and God disappear.   He himself is God.  He is theOmniscient Manifest.  God is an adjective or attributeapplicable to the one who possesses divine virtues!  The Gnaniis an incarnation of Divinity.So long as one is prone to errors, there is God overheadand as soon as one becomes free from all one’s errors, thereremains no authority of God overhead.  The Gnani is beyondall flaws, faults and errors and that is why he has no one ofauthority over him nor does he exercise authority over others(no underhand).  He is completely free and independent.Every action of the Gnani is divine; it never binds him.The deeds of the relative world perpetuate bondage of life,whereas the deeds of the Gnani only serve to liberate.  He isthe Self-realized liberated Soul and so He is capable andcompetent to liberate countless others.The Gnani is free from all karmic knots or complexes andconditionings.  All the complexes dissolve and disappear in thecrucible of Self-Realization.  He is the Absolute.  For him,therefore, there is no question of renunciation or non-renunciation,abnegation or acceptance.  God Himself has propounded this.If renunciation were the yardstick of measure in the search forthe Gnani, how will one ever recognize the Gnani?   The Gnanidoes not require any novel ritualistic practices or penance to seta new path.  His ultimate state in which Self-Realizationmanifested is the state that prevails everlastingly.  His ‘being’ isbeyond the scanning of the laity.  His state of being defies allmental measures of the mortal beings.Were one to assimilate in living, three divine virtues of theGnani, he would surely find the puzzle of life perishing. Thesedivine traits are: compressibility, flexibility and tensibility.1314Compressibility is His trait whereby no matter how greatthe pressure may be, the Gnani would adjust, bear the burdenblithely and resume the original state as soon as the pressure isgone.  His flexibility is where He will not break down at anytime, no matter how much force is exerted. And tensibility is Histrait whereby He remains steadfast amidst tension, torment ortribulations.  These three traits would remove all hurdles and setbacks in the worldly life and lead one to liberation without anyobstruction.The Gnani is both laghutam and gurutam. This means hecan be the lowest among the lowliest (laghutam) and he cansoar to the highest peak among those whose goal or ascent isthe highest (gurutam).  This is a simultaneous blending of thetwin state: the macrocosmic and microcosmic.  He is not onlythe infinite but also the infinitesimal.  If addressed to as adonkey he would say, “I am that and still lowlier than that. I amthe lowliest. My smallness will defy all your measures”.  Andadored as a preceptor, he would say, ‘Yes I am that.  But if youare desirous of knowing even more, then I am at an even higherstate than that.  I am God in the human form.”  What one gainsfrom the Gnani is in proportion to one’s openness andreceptivity.  The Pure Self is neither laghu nor guru – immutable,unchangeable, free from waxing or waning.Only the Gnani is trustworthy in this world. You can placeyour trust in the Gnani in all respect, not only in worldly mattersbut also in your path of liberation, until you reach the ultimatedestination.  So long as one has not realized or glimpsed thePure Self, the Gnani is his very manifest Soul; the guiding starof his self.  The Gnani is Liberation Incarnate. The Self withinwill manifest upon having seen the Gnani. The Gnani is the gemof parasmani – that which turns iron – a non-realized being intogold, Self-Realized, provided one has lifted his inner curtain ofdiscord or dissent before Him. The Gnani has innumerabledivine and dexterous devices for transmission of one’s awakening,communication with the Self and enlightened intuitive intellectfor inspiration.  One should take the utmost benefit of the Gnanifor the attainment of Liberation and make one’s existence onthis earth meaningful and fruitful.One will have to come to the Gnani in order to realize theSoul.  The cherished object cannot be attained from the onewho is not familiar with that which one desires. To know theSoul, you will have to approach the Gnani, who is perenniallyin a state of meditation of the Soul – Nirvikalpa Samadhi - Heis completely free from any sense of  ‘I-ness’ and ‘My-ness’.The Gnani alone can place the Real in your hand.   The Gnanihas the ability to do anything and yet he performs all tasks inthe spirit of being a mere instrument in the process.  The Gnaninever becomes a ‘doer’ of anything.All the scriptures proclaim unanimously, ‘If you desire torealize the Pure Self, go to a Gnani.’ The lighted can kindle lightin others.  The Gnani is the perfect Self-Realization in the humanform.  He is therefore, the Liberator and the Saviour.The Gnani lives in the present – not the past or the future.There is a permanent prevalence of the present within Him.  Abroken glass is the past and worries and anxieties about ‘Whatwill happen now?’ is the future.  The Gnani ‘lives’ in theminutest fraction of time, which is impossible to divide anyfurther.  Being Self-Realized, he has traversed and seen eachand every atom of the cosmogony of the universe. Yet heremains the Knower – Perceiver of all that is to be known.Only the Gnani can reach to the level of the smallest indivisiblefraction of time (samay) and sub-atomic matter, which can nolonger be divided (parmanu).There is no sorrow for that, which has past,No yearning for that which is to come,1516Compressibility is His trait whereby no matter how greatthe pressure may be, the Gnani would adjust, bear the burdenblithely and resume the original state as soon as the pressure isgone.  His flexibility is where He will not break down at anytime, no matter how much force is exerted. And tensibility is Histrait whereby He remains steadfast amidst tension, torment ortribulations.  These three traits would remove all hurdles and setbacks in the worldly life and lead one to liberation without anyobstruction.The Gnani is both laghutam and gurutam. This means hecan be the lowest among the lowliest (laghutam) and he cansoar to the highest peak among those whose goal or ascent isthe highest (gurutam).  This is a simultaneous blending of thetwin state: the macrocosmic and microcosmic.  He is not onlythe infinite but also the infinitesimal.  If addressed to as adonkey he would say, “I am that and still lowlier than that. I amthe lowliest. My smallness will defy all your measures”.  Andadored as a preceptor, he would say, ‘Yes I am that.  But if youare desirous of knowing even more, then I am at an even higherstate than that.  I am God in the human form.”  What one gainsfrom the Gnani is in proportion to one’s openness andreceptivity.  The Pure Self is neither laghu nor guru – immutable,unchangeable, free from waxing or waning.Only the Gnani is trustworthy in this world. You can placeyour trust in the Gnani in all respect, not only in worldly mattersbut also in your path of liberation, until you reach the ultimatedestination.  So long as one has not realized or glimpsed thePure Self, the Gnani is his very manifest Soul; the guiding starof his self.  The Gnani is Liberation Incarnate. The Self withinwill manifest upon having seen the Gnani. The Gnani is the gemof parasmani – that which turns iron – a non-realized being intogold, Self-Realized, provided one has lifted his inner curtain ofdiscord or dissent before Him. The Gnani has innumerabledivine and dexterous devices for transmission of one’s awakening,communication with the Self and enlightened intuitive intellectfor inspiration.  One should take the utmost benefit of the Gnanifor the attainment of Liberation and make one’s existence onthis earth meaningful and fruitful.One will have to come to the Gnani in order to realize theSoul.  The cherished object cannot be attained from the onewho is not familiar with that which one desires. To know theSoul, you will have to approach the Gnani, who is perenniallyin a state of meditation of the Soul – Nirvikalpa Samadhi - Heis completely free from any sense of  ‘I-ness’ and ‘My-ness’.The Gnani alone can place the Real in your hand.   The Gnanihas the ability to do anything and yet he performs all tasks inthe spirit of being a mere instrument in the process.  The Gnaninever becomes a ‘doer’ of anything.All the scriptures proclaim unanimously, ‘If you desire torealize the Pure Self, go to a Gnani.’ The lighted can kindle lightin others.  The Gnani is the perfect Self-Realization in the humanform.  He is therefore, the Liberator and the Saviour.The Gnani lives in the present – not the past or the future.There is a permanent prevalence of the present within Him.  Abroken glass is the past and worries and anxieties about ‘Whatwill happen now?’ is the future.  The Gnani ‘lives’ in theminutest fraction of time, which is impossible to divide anyfurther.  Being Self-Realized, he has traversed and seen eachand every atom of the cosmogony of the universe. Yet heremains the Knower – Perceiver of all that is to be known.Only the Gnani can reach to the level of the smallest indivisiblefraction of time (samay) and sub-atomic matter, which can nolonger be divided (parmanu).There is no sorrow for that, which has past,No yearning for that which is to come,15161718There is a saying in Gujarati: ‘Even a witch would leaveout one home’.  There must be at least one such a place whereone should not be awkward or stubborn – let that place be onlythe place of the Gnani.  Meddlesome interference elsewhere istolerable, but not at all before and with the Gnani.  If you do,you will create an indestructible obstacle in your path toliberation.  Never, ever be cross with Him if you wish to solvethe puzzle of your life.You may honestly disagree with the Gnani, but you mustnot disregard him. Candid difference of opinion is notobjectionable but beware of indifference or ineptitude. Thatwould entail the greatest obstacle or barrier on the path of self-realization.Being nonchalant towards or negating the Gnani is outrightdisregard.  The Gnani who awakens the Self within all, is areflection of that Self, thus disregard towards the Gnani is thesame as disregard towards one’s Self.  Those for whomstubbornness is an inherent trait need to be extremely cautious–a single humiliating gesture towards the Gnani will result in aneternal perdition in hell! If you do not relent your rigidity andstubbornness before the One who has won over the Lords of allthree universes, where else will you relent?  Only upon completesurrender before the Gnani can one accomplish his task.This divine book of Knowledge is primarily for elevatedthinkers, those with scientific minds and those seeking refuge inthe tranquility of the Soul from the fires of suffering of theworldly life.  It is my ardent prayer that the light of Knowledgewithin this divine book renders in the reader, the experience ofthe Soul’s tranquility – especially in this time cycle of immensesuffering – as was experienced by those who lived duringsatyug - the first of the four ages characterized by virtue,wisdom and morality.- Dr. Niruben AminGnani is He that is forever poised in the present.If one comes to the Gnani in perfect humility and a spiritof ‘I know nothing’, one is sure to be lifted and liberated.  Evenonce, if one surrenders his all, at the lotus feet of the Gnani,without any reservations, he will doubtlessly attain liberation –what an awe-inspiring mystery of the modern age!Never has ‘Dada Bhagwan’, inflicted any pain on anyliving being.  He has forever been in pursuit and presence of thePure Self.  So anything good, done sincerely in the name ofDada would certainly yield the right reward.No language or words are apt to describe the Gnani.The pen too is halted in its process.The Gnani defies all worldly measures of worldly scales.You should not gauge or judge him. The very effort ofattempting to gauge Him would proclaim your gross ignorance,intellect penury and stubborn stagnation and create an obstructionon the only available path to liberation. It is sheer impudence tomeasure the Gnani with one’s own sense of what is of worthand the one who does, does so in proving one’s impropriety bysuch a wayward gesture.  When one does not understand evena word of what the Gnani utters, how is it possible to measureHim?  Ask yourself if you are qualified to judge a Gnani.  TheGnani is not to be measured with the intellect – on the contrary,one should put aside all intellect before Him and go to Him withutmost humility.  The intellect will always flash distorted andperverted mental images.   Failure to understand the Gnani isthe echo of one’s egotistical and rigid stubbornness.  And if bychance that stubbornness is allowed to prevail before the Gnani,then lost forever is the only opportunity for liberation. Listenyou fool!  Liberation is only at the feet of the Gnani, and if evenhere you insist on being stubborn, where else will you go forliberation?1718There is a saying in Gujarati: ‘Even a witch would leaveout one home’.  There must be at least one such a place whereone should not be awkward or stubborn – let that place be onlythe place of the Gnani.  Meddlesome interference elsewhere istolerable, but not at all before and with the Gnani.  If you do,you will create an indestructible obstacle in your path toliberation.  Never, ever be cross with Him if you wish to solvethe puzzle of your life.You may honestly disagree with the Gnani, but you mustnot disregard him. Candid difference of opinion is notobjectionable but beware of indifference or ineptitude. Thatwould entail the greatest obstacle or barrier on the path of self-realization.Being nonchalant towards or negating the Gnani is outrightdisregard.  The Gnani who awakens the Self within all, is areflection of that Self, thus disregard towards the Gnani is thesame as disregard towards one’s Self.  Those for whomstubbornness is an inherent trait need to be extremely cautious–a single humiliating gesture towards the Gnani will result in aneternal perdition in hell! If you do not relent your rigidity andstubbornness before the One who has won over the Lords of allthree universes, where else will you relent?  Only upon completesurrender before the Gnani can one accomplish his task.This divine book of Knowledge is primarily for elevatedthinkers, those with scientific minds and those seeking refuge inthe tranquility of the Soul from the fires of suffering of theworldly life.  It is my ardent prayer that the light of Knowledgewithin this divine book renders in the reader, the experience ofthe Soul’s tranquility – especially in this time cycle of immensesuffering – as was experienced by those who lived duringsatyug - the first of the four ages characterized by virtue,wisdom and morality.- Dr. Niruben AminGnani is He that is forever poised in the present.If one comes to the Gnani in perfect humility and a spiritof ‘I know nothing’, one is sure to be lifted and liberated.  Evenonce, if one surrenders his all, at the lotus feet of the Gnani,without any reservations, he will doubtlessly attain liberation –what an awe-inspiring mystery of the modern age!Never has ‘Dada Bhagwan’, inflicted any pain on anyliving being.  He has forever been in pursuit and presence of thePure Self.  So anything good, done sincerely in the name ofDada would certainly yield the right reward.No language or words are apt to describe the Gnani.The pen too is halted in its process.The Gnani defies all worldly measures of worldly scales.You should not gauge or judge him. The very effort ofattempting to gauge Him would proclaim your gross ignorance,intellect penury and stubborn stagnation and create an obstructionon the only available path to liberation. It is sheer impudence tomeasure the Gnani with one’s own sense of what is of worthand the one who does, does so in proving one’s impropriety bysuch a wayward gesture.  When one does not understand evena word of what the Gnani utters, how is it possible to measureHim?  Ask yourself if you are qualified to judge a Gnani.  TheGnani is not to be measured with the intellect – on the contrary,one should put aside all intellect before Him and go to Him withutmost humility.  The intellect will always flash distorted andperverted mental images.   Failure to understand the Gnani isthe echo of one’s egotistical and rigid stubbornness.  And if bychance that stubbornness is allowed to prevail before the Gnani,then lost forever is the only opportunity for liberation. Listenyou fool!  Liberation is only at the feet of the Gnani, and if evenhere you insist on being stubborn, where else will you go forliberation?ContentsPage1.Dharma – Religion; One’s Duty12.Creation Of The World33.The World Is The Puzzle Itself…44.Vyavasthit Shakti65.God’s Address66.God As the Boss: Liberation?87.Relative Religion And Real Religion98.The Kramic And The Akram Path To Liberation119.Commonsense1210.Worldly Relationships1311.Happiness And Misery1412.Destiny Versus Effort1413.Non-contradictory Dependence1814.The Self And The Non-self1915.Liberation Through Divine Eyes2016.Reincarnation2117.Mind, Body and Speech are All Effective2218.Sufferings: Mental, Physical And Externally Induced2419.The World And The Self2520.Possession by the Mind, Body and Speech2621.The Gnani Understands Scriptures2722.Intake And Output2723.Trimantra Removes Obstacles In life2924.Worry and Ego3125.Enjoy What You Have3426.Meditation And Adverse Meditation3527.Transmigration According To Meditation and Intention3828.Acceptable Use Of Intellect4029.Universally Acceptable Speech4130.The Gnani And The Nature Of Dharma4231.Flawless Vision4432.Intoxicated Ego And Liberation4533.Possesed By The Mind, Speech and Body4534.Aspire For Only Liberation4635.The World Is Without Any Substance4936.Non-Dependency Of Humans5037.Natural Order And The Worldly Sciences5138.Material Development And Spiritual Development5339.Prakruti: Natural And Deviant5440.The State Of The Aspirant5641.Karma: Merit And Demerit5642.I-ness And My-ness6143.Charge And Discharge Cause And Effect6144.The Self And The Non-self6245.The Prakruti And Its Three Attributes6346.The Self: With And Without Attributes6547.Worshipping Prakruti : Worshipping Purush6648.Prakruti Dharma: Purush Dharma6749.The Garden Of Prakruti6850.Renunciation6951.Focused Awareness Of The self And Self6952.Layers Of Spiritual Development7253.Illusion And Liberation7254.Happiness: Bliss7355.Ignorance: Attachment-Abhorrence7456.The Science Of Speech7657.Silence:  Physical And For The Self7958.Antahkaran: Inner Psychic Organ8059.What Is The Mind Like? What Are Thoughts?8260.Inspiration Of Action Is Through Mind8461.Relationship Between The Knower And The Known8662.Ride Your Mind8763.Where Does Goddess Laxmi, Goddess Of Wealth, Reside?8964.Mind: Expansive Or Narrow9065.Evil Effects Of Mind9166.The Nature Of The Mind911920ContentsPage1.Dharma – Religion; One’s Duty12.Creation Of The World33.The World Is The Puzzle Itself…44.Vyavasthit Shakti65.God’s Address66.God As the Boss: Liberation?87.Relative Religion And Real Religion98.The Kramic And The Akram Path To Liberation119.Commonsense1210.Worldly Relationships1311.Happiness And Misery1412.Destiny Versus Effort1413.Non-contradictory Dependence1814.The Self And The Non-self1915.Liberation Through Divine Eyes2016.Reincarnation2117.Mind, Body and Speech are All Effective2218.Sufferings: Mental, Physical And Externally Induced2419.The World And The Self2520.Possession by the Mind, Body and Speech2621.The Gnani Understands Scriptures2722.Intake And Output2723.Trimantra Removes Obstacles In life2924.Worry and Ego3125.Enjoy What You Have3426.Meditation And Adverse Meditation3527.Transmigration According To Meditation and Intention3828.Acceptable Use Of Intellect4029.Universally Acceptable Speech4130.The Gnani And The Nature Of Dharma4231.Flawless Vision4432.Intoxicated Ego And Liberation4533.Possesed By The Mind, Speech and Body4534.Aspire For Only Liberation4635.The World Is Without Any Substance4936.Non-Dependency Of Humans5037.Natural Order And The Worldly Sciences5138.Material Development And Spiritual Development5339.Prakruti: Natural And Deviant5440.The State Of The Aspirant5641.Karma: Merit And Demerit5642.I-ness And My-ness6143.Charge And Discharge Cause And Effect6144.The Self And The Non-self6245.The Prakruti And Its Three Attributes6346.The Self: With And Without Attributes6547.Worshipping Prakruti : Worshipping Purush6648.Prakruti Dharma: Purush Dharma6749.The Garden Of Prakruti6850.Renunciation6951.Focused Awareness Of The self And Self6952.Layers Of Spiritual Development7253.Illusion And Liberation7254.Happiness: Bliss7355.Ignorance: Attachment-Abhorrence7456.The Science Of Speech7657.Silence:  Physical And For The Self7958.Antahkaran: Inner Psychic Organ8059.What Is The Mind Like? What Are Thoughts?8260.Inspiration Of Action Is Through Mind8461.Relationship Between The Knower And The Known8662.Ride Your Mind8763.Where Does Goddess Laxmi, Goddess Of Wealth, Reside?8964.Mind: Expansive Or Narrow9065.Evil Effects Of Mind9166.The Nature Of The Mind91192067.How Do The Tubers Of the Mind Dissolve?9368.The Mind Is Physical9569.Mind: Subtle And Gross9670.The Mind - The Known: The Self - The Knows9771.The Light Of The Intellect: The Light Of Gnan9872.Types Of Intellect9973.The Receptacle Of Intellect Life After Life10074.Lord Ganpati – The Deity of Intellect10175.Experience Through Intellect: Experience Through Gnan10276.Why Do We Have Difference Of Opinions?10577.Honesty In Business10978.Why Is There A Shortage Of Wealth?11079.Function Of The Intellect And Function Of Gnan11180.Difference In Intellect: Difference Of Opinions11381.The Power Of Concentration11582.Chit: The Third Component Of Antahkaran11783.Only the Gnani Can Bestow The Pure Self (Shuddhatma)11984.The Joy Of The Chit12185.Ego12386.The Most Important Thing To Renounce12487.Who Is The Enjoyer?12588.Squeeze The Juice Out Of The Ego12789.Drink Poison With A Smile12890.Penance: Invisible (Adeethha taap)13191.Account Of Respect-Insult13292.The Poison Of Ego13493.Satisfying The Ego13594.Sensitiveness And Atkan: Spiritual Roadblock13695.Antahkaran: How It Functions13796.Mandatory Versus Voluntary14197.The World’s Foundation14498.Nishchetan Chetan: Lifeless Life15199.Man’s Birthright To Liberation154100.Desire156101.What is Bhaav?159102.Nobility – Wickedness161103.The Three Forms Of Body162104.Release From Dehadhyas: ‘I Am This Body’167105.Three Stages Of The Body167106.Purpose Of Human Life171107.Thought, Speech and Action172108.Motion, Emotion, Extreme Emotion: Vega, Aavega, Udvega174109.Sleep178110.Dreams179111.Fear182112.Self- interest: Relative And Real184113.Life – Adjustments186114.Conflicts187115.Economy188116.Vishaya: Subject of Enjoyment190117.Remove The Above Linear Line191118.Vishaya : Sexual Indulgena.194119.Love and Infatuation199120.Fault Is Of The Sufferer202121.Seeing Your Own Faults206122.Mistakes211123.Swacchand: Follwing Your Own Intellect In Spiritual Matters218124.Obstinate Ego: Inflexible Ego: Aadai221125.Suspicion223126.Insistence Of View Point224127.Fanaticism (Drashti Raag, Exclusive attachment to aparticular viewpoint)225128.Animosity And Vengeance226129.Vibrations Of Worldly Life227130.Conflicts231131.Pleasure And Pain: Their True Nature235132.Fault-Finding Vision236133.Memory238212267.How Do The Tubers Of the Mind Dissolve?9368.The Mind Is Physical9569.Mind: Subtle And Gross9670.The Mind - The Known: The Self - The Knows9771.The Light Of The Intellect: The Light Of Gnan9872.Types Of Intellect9973.The Receptacle Of Intellect Life After Life10074.Lord Ganpati – The Deity of Intellect10175.Experience Through Intellect: Experience Through Gnan10276.Why Do We Have Difference Of Opinions?10577.Honesty In Business10978.Why Is There A Shortage Of Wealth?11079.Function Of The Intellect And Function Of Gnan11180.Difference In Intellect: Difference Of Opinions11381.The Power Of Concentration11582.Chit: The Third Component Of Antahkaran11783.Only the Gnani Can Bestow The Pure Self (Shuddhatma)11984.The Joy Of The Chit12185.Ego12386.The Most Important Thing To Renounce12487.Who Is The Enjoyer?12588.Squeeze The Juice Out Of The Ego12789.Drink Poison With A Smile12890.Penance: Invisible (Adeethha taap)13191.Account Of Respect-Insult13292.The Poison Of Ego13493.Satisfying The Ego13594.Sensitiveness And Atkan: Spiritual Roadblock13695.Antahkaran: How It Functions13796.Mandatory Versus Voluntary14197.The World’s Foundation14498.Nishchetan Chetan: Lifeless Life15199.Man’s Birthright To Liberation154100.Desire156101.What is Bhaav?159102.Nobility – Wickedness161103.The Three Forms Of Body162104.Release From Dehadhyas: ‘I Am This Body’167105.Three Stages Of The Body167106.Purpose Of Human Life171107.Thought, Speech and Action172108.Motion, Emotion, Extreme Emotion: Vega, Aavega, Udvega174109.Sleep178110.Dreams179111.Fear182112.Self- interest: Relative And Real184113.Life – Adjustments186114.Conflicts187115.Economy188116.Vishaya: Subject of Enjoyment190117.Remove The Above Linear Line191118.Vishaya : Sexual Indulgena.194119.Love and Infatuation199120.Fault Is Of The Sufferer202121.Seeing Your Own Faults206122.Mistakes211123.Swacchand: Follwing Your Own Intellect In Spiritual Matters218124.Obstinate Ego: Inflexible Ego: Aadai221125.Suspicion223126.Insistence Of View Point224127.Fanaticism (Drashti Raag, Exclusive attachment to aparticular viewpoint)225128.Animosity And Vengeance226129.Vibrations Of Worldly Life227130.Conflicts231131.Pleasure And Pain: Their True Nature235132.Fault-Finding Vision236133.Memory2382122134.Comfort In Discomfort239135.Charge And Discharge241136.Nature Of Moha248137.Maya250138.Anger253139.Greed254140.Deceit256141.The Food Of Kashayas: Anger, Pride, Attachment, Greed256142.Home Department: Foreign Department258143.Circumstances259144.The Circumstance Of The non-Self269145.Meditation Versus Concentration272146.Nirvikalp Samadhi: Bliss of Freedom From Ego273147.Meditation: The Link Between Object And Subject275148.Gurukilli: That Which Prevents The Master FromSinking279149.Worldly Interaction Of Akram Path And Kramic Path280150.The Wandering: Four Life Form Worlds281151.Pragna: The Direct Light Of The Self And TheForce That Liberates285Note to the readerThe words ‘You’ or ‘Self’ when they begin with an initialcapital ‘Y’ or ‘S’ respectively, refers to the Soul or the real Selfor the Atma. Otherwise, they are used for the non-self also referredto as the relative-self, ‘Chandulal’ or the prakruti.Whenever Dadashri uses the name ‘Chandulal’ or the nameof the person Dadashri is addressing, the reader should insert hisor her name for exact understanding.The words Self and Soul are interchangeable. The Soul isone’s real Self.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)2324Note About This TranslationThe Gnani Purush Ambalal M. Patel, also commonlyknown as Dadashri or Dada, had said that it would beimpossible to translate his satsangs and the knowledge aboutthe Science of Self-realization verbatim into English becausesome of the meanings would be lost in the process. Therefore,in order to understand precisely the science of Akram Vignanand Self-realization, He stressed the importance of learningGujarati.Dadashri did however grant his blessings to translate hiswords into English and other languages so that spiritual seekerscould benefit to a certain degree and later progress throughtheir own efforts.This is a humble attempt to present to the world, theessence of His Knowledge. This is not a literal translation butgreat care has been taken to preserve His original words andthe essence of His message. For certain Gujarati words, severalEnglish words or even sentences are needed to convey theexact meaning; hence, many Gujarati words have been retainedwithin the English text for better reading flow.A glossary of all the Gujarati words is provided at theback of the book. For additional glossary, visit our website at:www.dadabhagwan.orgMany people have worked diligently towards achievingthis goal and we thank them all. Please note that any errorsencountered in this translation are entirely those of thetranslators.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)134.Comfort In Discomfort239135.Charge And Discharge241136.Nature Of Moha248137.Maya250138.Anger253139.Greed254140.Deceit256141.The Food Of Kashayas: Anger, Pride, Attachment, Greed256142.Home Department: Foreign Department258143.Circumstances259144.The Circumstance Of The non-Self269145.Meditation Versus Concentration272146.Nirvikalp Samadhi: Bliss of Freedom From Ego273147.Meditation: The Link Between Object And Subject275148.Gurukilli: That Which Prevents The Master FromSinking279149.Worldly Interaction Of Akram Path And Kramic Path280150.The Wandering: Four Life Form Worlds281151.Pragna: The Direct Light Of The Self And TheForce That Liberates285Note to the readerThe words ‘You’ or ‘Self’ when they begin with an initialcapital ‘Y’ or ‘S’ respectively, refers to the Soul or the real Selfor the Atma. Otherwise, they are used for the non-self also referredto as the relative-self, ‘Chandulal’ or the prakruti.Whenever Dadashri uses the name ‘Chandulal’ or the nameof the person Dadashri is addressing, the reader should insert hisor her name for exact understanding.The words Self and Soul are interchangeable. The Soul isone’s real Self.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)2324Note About This TranslationThe Gnani Purush Ambalal M. Patel, also commonlyknown as Dadashri or Dada, had said that it would beimpossible to translate his satsangs and the knowledge aboutthe Science of Self-realization verbatim into English becausesome of the meanings would be lost in the process. Therefore,in order to understand precisely the science of Akram Vignanand Self-realization, He stressed the importance of learningGujarati.Dadashri did however grant his blessings to translate hiswords into English and other languages so that spiritual seekerscould benefit to a certain degree and later progress throughtheir own efforts.This is a humble attempt to present to the world, theessence of His Knowledge. This is not a literal translation butgreat care has been taken to preserve His original words andthe essence of His message. For certain Gujarati words, severalEnglish words or even sentences are needed to convey theexact meaning; hence, many Gujarati words have been retainedwithin the English text for better reading flow.A glossary of all the Gujarati words is provided at theback of the book. For additional glossary, visit our website at:www.dadabhagwan.orgMany people have worked diligently towards achievingthis goal and we thank them all. Please note that any errorsencountered in this translation are entirely those of thetranslators.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-12Aptavani-1goon dharma, if it exhibits its innate nature. The belief of ‘I amthe body’, or to believe the body, the non-self, to be your realidentity is par-dharma (dharma of another). To believe the Self(Soul) as the Self is sva-dharma (own dharma). That is atma-dharma, dharma of the Self.Dadashri : Who Are You?Questioner : I am Chandulal.Dadashri : What is your name?Questioner : My name is Chandulal.Dadashri : Do you see a contradiction in the statements‘I am Chandulal’ and ‘My name is Chandulal’? How can thename and the entity it belongs to, be one and the same? Whena person dies, his name is taken away from him during hisfuneral rites, is it not? It is even removed from the censusrecords.Who does this hand belong to? Who does this leg belongto?Questioner : They are mine.Dadashri : They are all parts of this body. What is yoursin all that? Who does the mind within you belong to?Questioner : It is mine.Dadashri : What about speech?Questioner : It is mine.Dadashri : Whose body is this?Questioner : That is mine too.Dadashri : When you say, ‘it is mine’, does it not occurto you that the owner of these body parts is separate from theAptavani 1Dharma – Religion; One’s Duty‘What is dharma?’It is anything that remains in and results in its own intrinsicproperties.Dharma means one’s intrinsic nature and properties.For example, when can you call gold, gold? It is onlywhen it exhibits the properties that are intrinsic to gold. Anotherexample is if these grapes are bitter, then you could say that itdoes not exhibit its intrinsic property. Brass can look and shinejust like gold if it is polished enough. But if a goldsmith were totest it, he would be able to tell that it is not gold from theintrinsic properties of that metal.There are two mangos in front of you. One mango has anaroma and given time it will become a little dry, the skin willshrivel and will eventually begin to rot. The other one looksexactly like a mango, only it is made out of wood. It does nothave the aroma; it will not shrivel or rot. They are both mangos,but one does not have the qualities of a real mango. The realmango will exhibit its natural properties. It can only be called amango if it has and remains within its natural attributes.Similarly you can say that a thing is in its innate nature,Aptavani-12Aptavani-1goon dharma, if it exhibits its innate nature. The belief of ‘I amthe body’, or to believe the body, the non-self, to be your realidentity is par-dharma (dharma of another). To believe the Self(Soul) as the Self is sva-dharma (own dharma). That is atma-dharma, dharma of the Self.Dadashri : Who Are You?Questioner : I am Chandulal.Dadashri : What is your name?Questioner : My name is Chandulal.Dadashri : Do you see a contradiction in the statements‘I am Chandulal’ and ‘My name is Chandulal’? How can thename and the entity it belongs to, be one and the same? Whena person dies, his name is taken away from him during hisfuneral rites, is it not? It is even removed from the censusrecords.Who does this hand belong to? Who does this leg belongto?Questioner : They are mine.Dadashri : They are all parts of this body. What is yoursin all that? Who does the mind within you belong to?Questioner : It is mine.Dadashri : What about speech?Questioner : It is mine.Dadashri : Whose body is this?Questioner : That is mine too.Dadashri : When you say, ‘it is mine’, does it not occurto you that the owner of these body parts is separate from theAptavani 1Dharma – Religion; One’s Duty‘What is dharma?’It is anything that remains in and results in its own intrinsicproperties.Dharma means one’s intrinsic nature and properties.For example, when can you call gold, gold? It is onlywhen it exhibits the properties that are intrinsic to gold. Anotherexample is if these grapes are bitter, then you could say that itdoes not exhibit its intrinsic property. Brass can look and shinejust like gold if it is polished enough. But if a goldsmith were totest it, he would be able to tell that it is not gold from theintrinsic properties of that metal.There are two mangos in front of you. One mango has anaroma and given time it will become a little dry, the skin willshrivel and will eventually begin to rot. The other one looksexactly like a mango, only it is made out of wood. It does nothave the aroma; it will not shrivel or rot. They are both mangos,but one does not have the qualities of a real mango. The realmango will exhibit its natural properties. It can only be called amango if it has and remains within its natural attributes.Similarly you can say that a thing is in its innate nature,Aptavani-134Aptavani-1body?Questioner : Yes.Dadashri : Then have you ever wondered who you reallyare?Questioner : No.Dadashri : Before you purchased this watch or even theclothes you are wearing, you checked to see if they were ofgood quality. Even when you were looking for a wife, youlooked very closely to see what she was like before you marriedher, did you not?Questioner : Yes Dada.Dadashri : So then have you ever inquired about yourown Self? Have you thought about what is temporary and whatis permanent? “All these are temporary adjustments.” WhenYou, the real Self who is permanent, mix it up with temporarythings, how can you find the answer? If your equation is wrongto begin with, how will you find the correct answer?Do you think it a trivial or a major error on your part thatyou have not realized your Real Self?Questioner : It is a huge mistake. It is a blunder Dada!Creation Of The WorldDadashri : Who do you think created this world?Questioner : ………Dadashri : Say whatever is in your imagination. We arenot here to pass or fail anyone.Questioner : God may have created it.Dadashri : Why did God have a need to create thisworld? Did he have any unmarried children he needed to marry?Where does God live? What is his address? Is there such athing as liberation, moksha?Questioner : Of course there is liberation.Dadashri : If God is the creator of this world and ifthere is such a thing as liberation, then there is an absolutecontradiction here.Questioner : Dada, how is that a contradiction?Dadashri : If God is the superior over you and he wasto grant you liberation, then you would have to do whatever hetells you. That means that he can dictate what you do. So howcan you call that liberation? Liberation means complete freedom;no superior over you and no subordinate under you.The World Is The Puzzle Itself…The Christians, the Muslims, the Hindus, say that Godcreated this world. They are correct by their viewpoints, butaccording to facts, they are incorrect. If you want to know thefacts, I can give them to you.Real knowledge (Gnan) accepts and incorporates the entire360° (of viewpoints). I too accept the 360° and that is why Iam a Gnani. Those who accept all points of views are consideredGnanis (the Enlightened ones, Self-realized beings). I am sittingin the center and that is why I am able to show you the facts.By fact God is not at all the creator of this world. This worldhas not been created by anyone. So how did it come intoexistence? “The world is the puzzle itself.” We call it a puzzlebecause it has become puzzlesome. The world has formed itself.I have seen this in my Gnan (absolute knowledge, absolutevision and absolute experience). There is not a single atom inthis world that I have not traversed through. I am telling you thisAptavani-134Aptavani-1body?Questioner : Yes.Dadashri : Then have you ever wondered who you reallyare?Questioner : No.Dadashri : Before you purchased this watch or even theclothes you are wearing, you checked to see if they were ofgood quality. Even when you were looking for a wife, youlooked very closely to see what she was like before you marriedher, did you not?Questioner : Yes Dada.Dadashri : So then have you ever inquired about yourown Self? Have you thought about what is temporary and whatis permanent? “All these are temporary adjustments.” WhenYou, the real Self who is permanent, mix it up with temporarythings, how can you find the answer? If your equation is wrongto begin with, how will you find the correct answer?Do you think it a trivial or a major error on your part thatyou have not realized your Real Self?Questioner : It is a huge mistake. It is a blunder Dada!Creation Of The WorldDadashri : Who do you think created this world?Questioner : ………Dadashri : Say whatever is in your imagination. We arenot here to pass or fail anyone.Questioner : God may have created it.Dadashri : Why did God have a need to create thisworld? Did he have any unmarried children he needed to marry?Where does God live? What is his address? Is there such athing as liberation, moksha?Questioner : Of course there is liberation.Dadashri : If God is the creator of this world and ifthere is such a thing as liberation, then there is an absolutecontradiction here.Questioner : Dada, how is that a contradiction?Dadashri : If God is the superior over you and he wasto grant you liberation, then you would have to do whatever hetells you. That means that he can dictate what you do. So howcan you call that liberation? Liberation means complete freedom;no superior over you and no subordinate under you.The World Is The Puzzle Itself…The Christians, the Muslims, the Hindus, say that Godcreated this world. They are correct by their viewpoints, butaccording to facts, they are incorrect. If you want to know thefacts, I can give them to you.Real knowledge (Gnan) accepts and incorporates the entire360° (of viewpoints). I too accept the 360° and that is why Iam a Gnani. Those who accept all points of views are consideredGnanis (the Enlightened ones, Self-realized beings). I am sittingin the center and that is why I am able to show you the facts.By fact God is not at all the creator of this world. This worldhas not been created by anyone. So how did it come intoexistence? “The world is the puzzle itself.” We call it a puzzlebecause it has become puzzlesome. The world has formed itself.I have seen this in my Gnan (absolute knowledge, absolutevision and absolute experience). There is not a single atom inthis world that I have not traversed through. I am telling you thisAptavani-156Aptavani-1by living in this world as well as living outside it.The ones who can solve this puzzle are granted the degreeof the Supreme Soul (parmatma). And those who cannot, havebecome dissolved within this puzzle. I have solved this puzzleand acquired the status of the Supreme Soul. I see both theanimate (chetan – soul) and the inanimate (achetan – matter) asseparate. Those who cannot see the two as separate aredissolved within the puzzle.God is not the creator, never was, and never will be.What does it mean to be a creator? Creator means a potter. Itmeans that God has to labor. Is God a laborer? When even thewealthy factory owners of Ahemedabad do not toil and yetenjoy the benefits of their factories in operation, then how canGod be toiling as a laborer? To toil is to be a laborer. God isnot like that. And if God were the creator, then everyone wouldlook the same. Just like the impressions from a mold. But it isnot so. Furthermore we say that God is impartial, then whydoes one person sleep on the pavement from the day he is bornand another in a palace?I can give you the answer in just one sentence as to howeverything works in this world. You can find the details yourself.This world is run solely by scientific circumstantial evidences.There is no one up there who has the time to run all this. I referto these scientific circumstantial evidences as vyavasthit shakti.It keeps everything and everyone organized. Do you wake upin the morning or are you awakened?Questioner : I am the one who wakes up.Dadashri : Are you sometimes unable to fall asleep evenwhen you want to? And when you have to get up at four in themorning, why do you set the alarm? If you decide, before yougo to sleep, that you want to wake up at four in the morning,then you should be able to wake up at that time. Does thathappen?Vyavasthit ShaktiWhen one is not the doer and yet claims to be one, howcan you call that a principle? It is a contradiction. So whowakes you up in the morning? It is a force called vyavasthitshakti that wakes you up. This same force keeps the sun, themoon, the stars and the entire universe in regulation. It is thesame force that clears away the pollution caused by theseindustrial mills in Ahemdabad, otherwise people of Ahmedabadwould have suffocated to death a long time ago. When it rains,who goes up there to make water for the rain? It is a naturaladjustment, when two atoms of hydrogen and one atom ofoxygen come together, along with some other evidences like air,etc. water is formed and the rain falls. A scientist may claim tocreate water but if you ask him whether he can do so with onlyone atom of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen, he will tell youthat it is not possible. People are foolish to think that they arethe doers, when in reality they are just one of the many evidencesin a process. How can anyone be the maker? There is nomaker in this world; everyone is simply an ‘instrument’ (nimit)in the process. Even God is not the maker or creator. If onebecomes the doer of anything then he also becomes the suffererof that action. God is just the knower and perceiver and ineternal bliss. He is always immersed in his own infinite bliss- thebliss of the Self.God’s AddressWhere does God live? What is his address? What if youwant to write to him some day, where would you address yourletter?Questioner : That I do not know but people say that heAptavani-156Aptavani-1by living in this world as well as living outside it.The ones who can solve this puzzle are granted the degreeof the Supreme Soul (parmatma). And those who cannot, havebecome dissolved within this puzzle. I have solved this puzzleand acquired the status of the Supreme Soul. I see both theanimate (chetan – soul) and the inanimate (achetan – matter) asseparate. Those who cannot see the two as separate aredissolved within the puzzle.God is not the creator, never was, and never will be.What does it mean to be a creator? Creator means a potter. Itmeans that God has to labor. Is God a laborer? When even thewealthy factory owners of Ahemedabad do not toil and yetenjoy the benefits of their factories in operation, then how canGod be toiling as a laborer? To toil is to be a laborer. God isnot like that. And if God were the creator, then everyone wouldlook the same. Just like the impressions from a mold. But it isnot so. Furthermore we say that God is impartial, then whydoes one person sleep on the pavement from the day he is bornand another in a palace?I can give you the answer in just one sentence as to howeverything works in this world. You can find the details yourself.This world is run solely by scientific circumstantial evidences.There is no one up there who has the time to run all this. I referto these scientific circumstantial evidences as vyavasthit shakti.It keeps everything and everyone organized. Do you wake upin the morning or are you awakened?Questioner : I am the one who wakes up.Dadashri : Are you sometimes unable to fall asleep evenwhen you want to? And when you have to get up at four in themorning, why do you set the alarm? If you decide, before yougo to sleep, that you want to wake up at four in the morning,then you should be able to wake up at that time. Does thathappen?Vyavasthit ShaktiWhen one is not the doer and yet claims to be one, howcan you call that a principle? It is a contradiction. So whowakes you up in the morning? It is a force called vyavasthitshakti that wakes you up. This same force keeps the sun, themoon, the stars and the entire universe in regulation. It is thesame force that clears away the pollution caused by theseindustrial mills in Ahemdabad, otherwise people of Ahmedabadwould have suffocated to death a long time ago. When it rains,who goes up there to make water for the rain? It is a naturaladjustment, when two atoms of hydrogen and one atom ofoxygen come together, along with some other evidences like air,etc. water is formed and the rain falls. A scientist may claim tocreate water but if you ask him whether he can do so with onlyone atom of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen, he will tell youthat it is not possible. People are foolish to think that they arethe doers, when in reality they are just one of the many evidencesin a process. How can anyone be the maker? There is nomaker in this world; everyone is simply an ‘instrument’ (nimit)in the process. Even God is not the maker or creator. If onebecomes the doer of anything then he also becomes the suffererof that action. God is just the knower and perceiver and ineternal bliss. He is always immersed in his own infinite bliss- thebliss of the Self.God’s AddressWhere does God live? What is his address? What if youwant to write to him some day, where would you address yourletter?Questioner : That I do not know but people say that heAptavani-178Aptavani-1lives up there, above us.Dadashri : So do you believe what others tell you?Should you not question this for yourself? I will tell you thecorrect address of God. God is in every creature, whethervisible or invisible. There are infinite life forms between you andme, which are not visible even through a microscope, and Godresides in them too. God resides as energy in all living beings,and within me, he is fully manifest. He is the effulgent light fullymanifest within me. He is the fully manifest Supreme Soul within.There is tremendous light within. The person you see beforeyou is Ambalal Muljibhai Patel of Bhadran (a town in Gujarat),who is a contractor by profession and that which has manifestwithin A. M. Patel is Dada Bhagwan. This is a tremendous andphenomenal surprise! But how are you to understand this? Thisbody is the outer packing and the One within is God. Similarlyyour packing belongs to Chandulal and within resides God. Theouter packing of that animal is a donkey and God is within.People are foolish when they curse a donkey if it crosses theirpath, but they don’t realize that the God within takes note oftheir condemnation, and consequently they will have to endureone birth as a donkey themselves. The outer packing can beanything. It can be that of a mango tree or anything else. Whatdo the merchants and shopkeepers pay importance to, the outerpackage or the goods within?Questioner : The goods within.Dadashri : Yes, of what use is the packing anyway?We are only concerned with the contents are we not? Somepacking may be rotten or torn but the content within is pure,is it not?From the time this Gnan manifested within me, I have notidentified myself with this body of Ambalal Muljibhai even fora moment. I look upon him as my first neighbor.God As the Boss : Liberation?When I was thirteen, it occurred to me that there shouldbe no one in a position of authority over me. I did not wanteven God to be my boss. I would not be able to tolerate that.Such was the spiritual development I had brought with me. Mywishes of countless past lives finally came into fruition in thislifetime. If God were in a position of power over us and if hewere to grant us liberation, then we would be obliged to obeyhis commands. If I were sitting down and he asked me to getup, I would have to follow his command. That would beunacceptable. How can one call that liberation? Liberation meanscomplete freedom, no superior over us or no subordinates underus either.You can experience the bliss of liberation through self-realization here while living. No worries or external problemswill affect you. Liberation is when your internal peace is notdisturbed even when you receive a letter of audit from theincome tax office. The final liberation will come later on, but firstyou must experience liberation here and now.I got married at the age of sixteen. During the weddingceremony, the turban on my head tipped slightly to one side. Atthat time it occurred to me that it was inevitable that one of uswould become widowed.Life after life man learns the same thing over and overagain and yet ignorance creates veils over it again. One neednot learn ignorance; ignorance comes naturally. It is Gnan (realknowledge) that one has to learn. The veil of ignorance wasrelatively less within me and that is why even at the young ageof thirteen I became (spiritually) aware. In my math class, theteacher had asked the students to find the smallest indivisiblenumber, which is common to all other numbers (LCM = lowestcommon multiple). From this search, I immediately discoveredAptavani-178Aptavani-1lives up there, above us.Dadashri : So do you believe what others tell you?Should you not question this for yourself? I will tell you thecorrect address of God. God is in every creature, whethervisible or invisible. There are infinite life forms between you andme, which are not visible even through a microscope, and Godresides in them too. God resides as energy in all living beings,and within me, he is fully manifest. He is the effulgent light fullymanifest within me. He is the fully manifest Supreme Soul within.There is tremendous light within. The person you see beforeyou is Ambalal Muljibhai Patel of Bhadran (a town in Gujarat),who is a contractor by profession and that which has manifestwithin A. M. Patel is Dada Bhagwan. This is a tremendous andphenomenal surprise! But how are you to understand this? Thisbody is the outer packing and the One within is God. Similarlyyour packing belongs to Chandulal and within resides God. Theouter packing of that animal is a donkey and God is within.People are foolish when they curse a donkey if it crosses theirpath, but they don’t realize that the God within takes note oftheir condemnation, and consequently they will have to endureone birth as a donkey themselves. The outer packing can beanything. It can be that of a mango tree or anything else. Whatdo the merchants and shopkeepers pay importance to, the outerpackage or the goods within?Questioner : The goods within.Dadashri : Yes, of what use is the packing anyway?We are only concerned with the contents are we not? Somepacking may be rotten or torn but the content within is pure,is it not?From the time this Gnan manifested within me, I have notidentified myself with this body of Ambalal Muljibhai even fora moment. I look upon him as my first neighbor.God As the Boss : Liberation?When I was thirteen, it occurred to me that there shouldbe no one in a position of authority over me. I did not wanteven God to be my boss. I would not be able to tolerate that.Such was the spiritual development I had brought with me. Mywishes of countless past lives finally came into fruition in thislifetime. If God were in a position of power over us and if hewere to grant us liberation, then we would be obliged to obeyhis commands. If I were sitting down and he asked me to getup, I would have to follow his command. That would beunacceptable. How can one call that liberation? Liberation meanscomplete freedom, no superior over us or no subordinates underus either.You can experience the bliss of liberation through self-realization here while living. No worries or external problemswill affect you. Liberation is when your internal peace is notdisturbed even when you receive a letter of audit from theincome tax office. The final liberation will come later on, but firstyou must experience liberation here and now.I got married at the age of sixteen. During the weddingceremony, the turban on my head tipped slightly to one side. Atthat time it occurred to me that it was inevitable that one of uswould become widowed.Life after life man learns the same thing over and overagain and yet ignorance creates veils over it again. One neednot learn ignorance; ignorance comes naturally. It is Gnan (realknowledge) that one has to learn. The veil of ignorance wasrelatively less within me and that is why even at the young ageof thirteen I became (spiritually) aware. In my math class, theteacher had asked the students to find the smallest indivisiblenumber, which is common to all other numbers (LCM = lowestcommon multiple). From this search, I immediately discoveredAptavani-1910Aptavani-1God. We are all ‘numbers’ and God is within each one of us,in an indivisible form.The speech that emanates from me shatters the veils ofignorance covering you and the enlightenment from within helpsyou understand what I am saying. Otherwise you do not havethe capability to understand even a word I utter. Your intellect(buddhi) will not work here. Some people are recognized asintellectuals, but this belief is wrong. I am without intellect(abuddha). I do not have any intellect. What is intellect? Whatis Gnan? The knowledge of all subjects of the world falls in thedomain of the intellect and the knowledge of ‘Who am I?’ isGnan. Intellect is knowledge through the medium of the ego andGnan is knowledge without the ego. Knowledge of the Self isreal knowledge.How can one remove conflicts and difference of opinion?How should one live life? Even when one has all the wealth andcomforts, one still has conflicts, which create endless miseries.Relative Religion And Real ReligionA circle has 360 degrees. Christians, Parsis, Muslims,Hindus etc., all have different viewpoints. One is sitting at 80degrees, one at 120 degrees, and one at 220 degrees. Everyonesees through his or her own perspective and viewpoint. I amsitting in the center, having completed 360 degrees, as a fullyenlightened being. A Gnani Purush, sitting in the center, can seeand know things exactly as they are and can impart thatknowledge to others exactly as it is. All religions are correct butthey are relative religions. They are religions of viewpoints. Butif one wants to know the facts, then he will have to come to thecenter. Only in the center will one find the Real religion (religionof the Soul). Only the one in the center that can see all pointsof view and therefore is without any prejudice or bias towardsany religion. That is why I say that I am Lord Mahavir of theJains, Lord Krishna of the Vaishnavas, Sahajanand of theSwaminarayans, Christ of the Christians, Zarthustra of the Parsisand Khuda of the Muslims. So anyone may come here andreceive whatever he wants. I am the God of all religions. So getyour work done here. I can bestow upon you the status of Godwithin an hour but you have to be ready for it. However, youwill not be able to digest all the Gnan that I give you, for evenI am stuck at 356 degrees. This is because of the current timecycle. But I do bestow upon you the absolute OmniscientKnowledge (Kevalgnan; 360 degrees).A potato baking in a charcoal pit bakes from all sides.Similarly the whole world is being roasted from all sides. I seein my Gnan the whole world is being tormented in a blazing fireof gasoline from all sides. My only concern is how people canbe liberated from all this. That is the very purpose for my birth.Half the world will achieve salvation through me and the otherhalf through my followers. However, I am not the doer at all.I am merely a nimit (an instrument) in all this.The Germans are in search of Absolutism. They haveresearched volumes and volumes of our scriptures for this. Butit is not that easy. Today I am manifest as the Absolute. Thewhole world is immersed in the theory of relativity. All of mymahatmas (those who have acquired Gnan of Self-Realizationfrom Dadashri) are in the theory of reality and I am in the theoryof Absolutism. Therefore when I go to Germany I will tell themthat I have come there personally and that they should takewhatever they want from me.This (Dada) is the “cash Bank” of the world. I will giveyou ‘cash’ (instant benefit) in just one hour. I will place you inthe Real state. Everywhere else they give you a ‘loan’ and youhave to make payments. Regrettably that is what you have donefor countless lives and yet there is no end in sight. You have notAptavani-1910Aptavani-1God. We are all ‘numbers’ and God is within each one of us,in an indivisible form.The speech that emanates from me shatters the veils ofignorance covering you and the enlightenment from within helpsyou understand what I am saying. Otherwise you do not havethe capability to understand even a word I utter. Your intellect(buddhi) will not work here. Some people are recognized asintellectuals, but this belief is wrong. I am without intellect(abuddha). I do not have any intellect. What is intellect? Whatis Gnan? The knowledge of all subjects of the world falls in thedomain of the intellect and the knowledge of ‘Who am I?’ isGnan. Intellect is knowledge through the medium of the ego andGnan is knowledge without the ego. Knowledge of the Self isreal knowledge.How can one remove conflicts and difference of opinion?How should one live life? Even when one has all the wealth andcomforts, one still has conflicts, which create endless miseries.Relative Religion And Real ReligionA circle has 360 degrees. Christians, Parsis, Muslims,Hindus etc., all have different viewpoints. One is sitting at 80degrees, one at 120 degrees, and one at 220 degrees. Everyonesees through his or her own perspective and viewpoint. I amsitting in the center, having completed 360 degrees, as a fullyenlightened being. A Gnani Purush, sitting in the center, can seeand know things exactly as they are and can impart thatknowledge to others exactly as it is. All religions are correct butthey are relative religions. They are religions of viewpoints. Butif one wants to know the facts, then he will have to come to thecenter. Only in the center will one find the Real religion (religionof the Soul). Only the one in the center that can see all pointsof view and therefore is without any prejudice or bias towardsany religion. That is why I say that I am Lord Mahavir of theJains, Lord Krishna of the Vaishnavas, Sahajanand of theSwaminarayans, Christ of the Christians, Zarthustra of the Parsisand Khuda of the Muslims. So anyone may come here andreceive whatever he wants. I am the God of all religions. So getyour work done here. I can bestow upon you the status of Godwithin an hour but you have to be ready for it. However, youwill not be able to digest all the Gnan that I give you, for evenI am stuck at 356 degrees. This is because of the current timecycle. But I do bestow upon you the absolute OmniscientKnowledge (Kevalgnan; 360 degrees).A potato baking in a charcoal pit bakes from all sides.Similarly the whole world is being roasted from all sides. I seein my Gnan the whole world is being tormented in a blazing fireof gasoline from all sides. My only concern is how people canbe liberated from all this. That is the very purpose for my birth.Half the world will achieve salvation through me and the otherhalf through my followers. However, I am not the doer at all.I am merely a nimit (an instrument) in all this.The Germans are in search of Absolutism. They haveresearched volumes and volumes of our scriptures for this. Butit is not that easy. Today I am manifest as the Absolute. Thewhole world is immersed in the theory of relativity. All of mymahatmas (those who have acquired Gnan of Self-Realizationfrom Dadashri) are in the theory of reality and I am in the theoryof Absolutism. Therefore when I go to Germany I will tell themthat I have come there personally and that they should takewhatever they want from me.This (Dada) is the “cash Bank” of the world. I will giveyou ‘cash’ (instant benefit) in just one hour. I will place you inthe Real state. Everywhere else they give you a ‘loan’ and youhave to make payments. Regrettably that is what you have donefor countless lives and yet there is no end in sight. You have notAptavani-11112Aptavani-1received ‘cash’ in any of your past lives.The Kramic And The Akram Path To LiberationThere are two paths of liberation : One is the commonand the main path, called the Kramik path, which is a step-by-step path where there is a gradual spiritual evolution. In thispath, if you are fortunate enough and find the company of spiritualpeople, you may climb up to five hundred steps. On the otherhand if you land amidst the company of non-spiritual people,you may go down five thousand steps. It is a very arduous anda grueling path. You have to do a lot of incantation of God’sname, penance and renunciation in order to progress and eventhen there is no telling when you will achieve liberation.The other path is the Akram path, where you are notrequired to climb any steps. It is a ‘lift’ (an elevator) path whereyou can continue with all your daily mundane activities, fulfill allyour worldly responsibilities towards your wife and children,and still achieve liberation! Nothing will hinder your progresstowards liberation. This is an exceptional path and one, whichcomes around once every million years.King Bharat was the only one who was given such Gnan.Of his hundred sons, Lord Rushabhadev bestowed this Gnanupon only King Bharat. Ninety-eight of his sons were initiatedinto monk hood leaving behind their kingdom to Bahubaliji andBharat. Shortly afterwards Bahubaliji also renounced everythingand left the kingdom. Consequently the responsibility of thewhole empire fell on King Bharat. King Bharat had thirteenhundred queens. Don’t men get tired of even one wife today?King Bharat had grown tired of the varying temperaments of hisqueens, fighting wars and the worries of ruling an empire. So heasked Lord Rushabhadev if he could relinquish the kingdom tosomeone else and be initiated into monk hood. He too wantedliberation. Lord Rushabdev told King Bharat that he was thenimit (instrument) for ruling the kingdom and if he were to foregohis duties, there would be utter chaos. He told King Bharat thathe would bestow upon him such a Gnan that none of his queensor his kingdom or the wars would hinder his spiritual progresstowards liberation. This Akram Gnan is the very same Gnan,which I give you now, in just one hour. King Bharat however,had servants who would warn him every fifteen minutes tomaintain awareness of the Gnan by saying, ‘Bharat beware,beware, beware! But in this kaliyug (current fifth era of the sixpart half time cycle), where one is barely able to make endsmeet, so how can one employ someone to do the same forhim? That is why I place such awareness within you that it willwarn you every moment of the day.Such an awe-inspiring Gnan has never been seen or heardof before in any era. It is the eleventh wonder of the currenttime cycle.CommonsenseWhat is commonsense and how do you define it?Commonsense means that which is applicable everywhere,theoretically as well as practically.Commonsense is very important. It becomes applicablewherever it is needed. I have one hundred percent commonsense.You do not have even one percent commonsense. Commonsenseis to disentangle a piece of thread which has become entangled,without breaking it. Common sense is when you can resolve aproblem without causing any harm or damage. People instead,in their attempt to solve one problem create five more. Howcan they claim to have commonsense? The greatest of scholarshave education but lack commonsense. The Gnani is withoutbuddhi (intellect). I have no intellect whatsoever. Actually myintellect is fully developed but in the presence of the light of myGnan, it is rendered powerless and remains in one corner. AsAptavani-11112Aptavani-1received ‘cash’ in any of your past lives.The Kramic And The Akram Path To LiberationThere are two paths of liberation : One is the commonand the main path, called the Kramik path, which is a step-by-step path where there is a gradual spiritual evolution. In thispath, if you are fortunate enough and find the company of spiritualpeople, you may climb up to five hundred steps. On the otherhand if you land amidst the company of non-spiritual people,you may go down five thousand steps. It is a very arduous anda grueling path. You have to do a lot of incantation of God’sname, penance and renunciation in order to progress and eventhen there is no telling when you will achieve liberation.The other path is the Akram path, where you are notrequired to climb any steps. It is a ‘lift’ (an elevator) path whereyou can continue with all your daily mundane activities, fulfill allyour worldly responsibilities towards your wife and children,and still achieve liberation! Nothing will hinder your progresstowards liberation. This is an exceptional path and one, whichcomes around once every million years.King Bharat was the only one who was given such Gnan.Of his hundred sons, Lord Rushabhadev bestowed this Gnanupon only King Bharat. Ninety-eight of his sons were initiatedinto monk hood leaving behind their kingdom to Bahubaliji andBharat. Shortly afterwards Bahubaliji also renounced everythingand left the kingdom. Consequently the responsibility of thewhole empire fell on King Bharat. King Bharat had thirteenhundred queens. Don’t men get tired of even one wife today?King Bharat had grown tired of the varying temperaments of hisqueens, fighting wars and the worries of ruling an empire. So heasked Lord Rushabhadev if he could relinquish the kingdom tosomeone else and be initiated into monk hood. He too wantedliberation. Lord Rushabdev told King Bharat that he was thenimit (instrument) for ruling the kingdom and if he were to foregohis duties, there would be utter chaos. He told King Bharat thathe would bestow upon him such a Gnan that none of his queensor his kingdom or the wars would hinder his spiritual progresstowards liberation. This Akram Gnan is the very same Gnan,which I give you now, in just one hour. King Bharat however,had servants who would warn him every fifteen minutes tomaintain awareness of the Gnan by saying, ‘Bharat beware,beware, beware! But in this kaliyug (current fifth era of the sixpart half time cycle), where one is barely able to make endsmeet, so how can one employ someone to do the same forhim? That is why I place such awareness within you that it willwarn you every moment of the day.Such an awe-inspiring Gnan has never been seen or heardof before in any era. It is the eleventh wonder of the currenttime cycle.CommonsenseWhat is commonsense and how do you define it?Commonsense means that which is applicable everywhere,theoretically as well as practically.Commonsense is very important. It becomes applicablewherever it is needed. I have one hundred percent commonsense.You do not have even one percent commonsense. Commonsenseis to disentangle a piece of thread which has become entangled,without breaking it. Common sense is when you can resolve aproblem without causing any harm or damage. People instead,in their attempt to solve one problem create five more. Howcan they claim to have commonsense? The greatest of scholarshave education but lack commonsense. The Gnani is withoutbuddhi (intellect). I have no intellect whatsoever. Actually myintellect is fully developed but in the presence of the light of myGnan, it is rendered powerless and remains in one corner. AsAptavani-11314Aptavani-1one acquires the state of abuddha (no intellect), there awaits thestate of Omniscience with open arms. I am without intellect andI am omniscient.Worldly RelationshipsIs your relationship with your father, mother and wifereal?Questioner : Of course it is real.Dadashri : Then as a rule, should your father die; youshould die along with him. Now how many people would dothat? There exists a relation between father-mother, brother-sister, wife-children, but it is not real. It is only a relativerelationship. If it were real, it could never be destroyed. If a sonwere to tell his father, ‘You are an idiot’, their relationship wouldend. His father would disown him and tell him that he does notwant to see his face for as long as he lives. You even believeyour wife to be yours, but what if she divorces you some day?This is what the world is like. All these are temporaryadjustments. Even your own body is not yours; it too will letyou down some day. If you decide to do samayik (introspection),your head may start aching or you may have a stomachacheand you will not be able to do the samayik. You (the real Self)are permanent and everything else is temporary so how canthere be a resolution between the two? That is why the worldis trapped in such a state of confusion. As far as relatives areconcerned, you should act according to your relationship withthem. You should not be rigid or adamant about right and wrongif you are to sustain that relationship. Rigidity will destroy therelationship. When the other person is trying to destroy therelation, you should mend it if you want to maintain thatrelationship. These are all temporary relations. For example ifyour wife says, ‘Tonight there is a full moon’ and you say, ‘No,it is a moonless night’, then the bickering will start and it will lastall night. In the morning she will be sulking and you will knowthat the argument is not over when she deliberately bangs thecup of tea while serving you. Instead it is better if you understandthe situation when she becomes adamant. Gently turn theargument around by pretending to consult a horoscope calendarand then telling her she is right that there will be a full moontonight. If you don’t do this, the argument will get out of controland then if you were to give in suddenly, she will fall harder andyou will have to bear the consequences. Instead it is better tobeware from the start and let go gently.Happiness And MiseryEveryone is in search of happiness but without havingdecided what happiness is. ‘Happiness should be such that it isnever followed by any misery.’ Go find one such happiness inthis world. Eternal happiness, bliss is within you. Your real Selfis an abode of bliss and yet you are looking for happiness intemporary things. What is this search for worldly happinesslike? Let me give you an analogy. A very tall man is sleeping onthe terrace on a cold winters night and he has a tiny blanket. Ifhe covers his feet, his head gets cold and if he covers his head,his feet get cold. He spends the entire night tossing and turning.That is what pursuit of worldly happiness is like. In reality thereis no such thing as misery in this world. It is merely a figmentof the imagination. If you believe that jalebi, (a sweetmeat)tastes terrible, you will not enjoy it and if you believe it tastesvery good, you will enjoy it. Therefore it is not real. Truehappiness should be the same for all. Everyone would acceptit. Truth must be universal. What you may believe gives youhappiness, others may find tremendously miserable. That is whatthis world is like.Destiny Versus EffortPeople talk about fate and destiny versus independentAptavani-11314Aptavani-1one acquires the state of abuddha (no intellect), there awaits thestate of Omniscience with open arms. I am without intellect andI am omniscient.Worldly RelationshipsIs your relationship with your father, mother and wifereal?Questioner : Of course it is real.Dadashri : Then as a rule, should your father die; youshould die along with him. Now how many people would dothat? There exists a relation between father-mother, brother-sister, wife-children, but it is not real. It is only a relativerelationship. If it were real, it could never be destroyed. If a sonwere to tell his father, ‘You are an idiot’, their relationship wouldend. His father would disown him and tell him that he does notwant to see his face for as long as he lives. You even believeyour wife to be yours, but what if she divorces you some day?This is what the world is like. All these are temporaryadjustments. Even your own body is not yours; it too will letyou down some day. If you decide to do samayik (introspection),your head may start aching or you may have a stomachacheand you will not be able to do the samayik. You (the real Self)are permanent and everything else is temporary so how canthere be a resolution between the two? That is why the worldis trapped in such a state of confusion. As far as relatives areconcerned, you should act according to your relationship withthem. You should not be rigid or adamant about right and wrongif you are to sustain that relationship. Rigidity will destroy therelationship. When the other person is trying to destroy therelation, you should mend it if you want to maintain thatrelationship. These are all temporary relations. For example ifyour wife says, ‘Tonight there is a full moon’ and you say, ‘No,it is a moonless night’, then the bickering will start and it will lastall night. In the morning she will be sulking and you will knowthat the argument is not over when she deliberately bangs thecup of tea while serving you. Instead it is better if you understandthe situation when she becomes adamant. Gently turn theargument around by pretending to consult a horoscope calendarand then telling her she is right that there will be a full moontonight. If you don’t do this, the argument will get out of controland then if you were to give in suddenly, she will fall harder andyou will have to bear the consequences. Instead it is better tobeware from the start and let go gently.Happiness And MiseryEveryone is in search of happiness but without havingdecided what happiness is. ‘Happiness should be such that it isnever followed by any misery.’ Go find one such happiness inthis world. Eternal happiness, bliss is within you. Your real Selfis an abode of bliss and yet you are looking for happiness intemporary things. What is this search for worldly happinesslike? Let me give you an analogy. A very tall man is sleeping onthe terrace on a cold winters night and he has a tiny blanket. Ifhe covers his feet, his head gets cold and if he covers his head,his feet get cold. He spends the entire night tossing and turning.That is what pursuit of worldly happiness is like. In reality thereis no such thing as misery in this world. It is merely a figmentof the imagination. If you believe that jalebi, (a sweetmeat)tastes terrible, you will not enjoy it and if you believe it tastesvery good, you will enjoy it. Therefore it is not real. Truehappiness should be the same for all. Everyone would acceptit. Truth must be universal. What you may believe gives youhappiness, others may find tremendously miserable. That is whatthis world is like.Destiny Versus EffortPeople talk about fate and destiny versus independentAptavani-11516Aptavani-1self-effort. They keep talking about the same thing over andover again and yet make no progress. Some rely on destinyalone whereas others rely on self-effort alone. But support ofboth concepts are crippled and lame. What do all the factoryworkers, who toil from morning to night, get for their efforts?Do they get anything more than a meal on their table? Whatwould happen if the fatalists were to sit idle?When people make a lot of money they take credit forit and claim it was through their effort and hard work. If theyincur a loss they will say ‘What can I do?’ and blame theirhoroscopes or bad luck or the God above. The fools! Theytake credit for good things and claim to be helpless when thingsgo wrong. And sometimes they even blame God for their failures.Their horoscopes or the stars do not hinder them in any way.What hinders them is their own internal negative ‘stars’ – theirobstinacy, excessive obstinacy, insistence on being right, insistenceon relative truth etc. I am without obstinacy. Where there isobstinacy there is conflict, so when I am not obstinate aboutanything how can there be any conflict? When everything runssystematically, success is the end result but when there is abreak in the systematic process, people blame God. The effortto convert that, which is disorderly, into order, is defined by theworld as independent effort (purusharth). If a person were trulycapable of doing purusharth, he would never incur a loss.Purusharth knows no failures. It is a contradiction. How canyou do purusharth, when you, yourself have not become aPurush (Self-realized)? True purusharth is the one that is donethrough the extraordinary effort of the self. People are foolish tobelieve that they are the doers when in fact it is their prakruti(the formed complex of thoughts, speech and acts which is aresult of past life karma) that makes them do things.Lord Krishna has said, ‘Odhavji, what can the weakattain?’ Even the most renowned Jain spiritual master,Ananddhanji Maharaj, admits his weaknesses. One can only becalled a Purush when he has conquered his anger, pride,attachment and greed. But here the weaknesses of anger, pride,attachment and greed have conquered man. He is weak.I have become a Purush. I am with my independent effort(purushartha) and its extraordinary energy. Astrology andpurusharth are contradictory. Astrology has some scientificfoundation. However, what people believe to be purusharth is anillusion. People foolishly go running to an astrologer when theysuffer a loss. Why not do your purusharth instead? This falsepurusharth is what sows the seeds of karma for your next life.The Alembic chemical factory here employs so manyworkers. It takes all these workers to manufacture just a fewchemicals. The human body is made up of hundreds of suchchemical factories and yet it runs on its own. When you go tosleep after a meal, do you ever check to see how much andhow many digestive juices and enzymes are released fordigestion? How attentive are you in these matters? By the morningwhen you wake up, the body has already assimilated the foodyou ate. All the nutrients are absorbed in the blood; the wasteproducts are transported for excretion and everything is to befound in its right place. Did you have to do anything in runningthis process? So don’t you think that just as the inner mechanismworks naturally, the outer mechanism does too? Why do youbelieve that you are the doer? Everything will continue to run onit’s own. During sleep, the body is in its natural state. It is youwho is not in your natural state. You claim that you are breathing.You say that you breathe shallow or deep. Who does thebreathing when you are in deep sleep? Respiration that takesplace at night is a natural process and that is what aids thedigestion.Every human being is nothing but a top (toy that spins).Aptavani-11516Aptavani-1self-effort. They keep talking about the same thing over andover again and yet make no progress. Some rely on destinyalone whereas others rely on self-effort alone. But support ofboth concepts are crippled and lame. What do all the factoryworkers, who toil from morning to night, get for their efforts?Do they get anything more than a meal on their table? Whatwould happen if the fatalists were to sit idle?When people make a lot of money they take credit forit and claim it was through their effort and hard work. If theyincur a loss they will say ‘What can I do?’ and blame theirhoroscopes or bad luck or the God above. The fools! Theytake credit for good things and claim to be helpless when thingsgo wrong. And sometimes they even blame God for their failures.Their horoscopes or the stars do not hinder them in any way.What hinders them is their own internal negative ‘stars’ – theirobstinacy, excessive obstinacy, insistence on being right, insistenceon relative truth etc. I am without obstinacy. Where there isobstinacy there is conflict, so when I am not obstinate aboutanything how can there be any conflict? When everything runssystematically, success is the end result but when there is abreak in the systematic process, people blame God. The effortto convert that, which is disorderly, into order, is defined by theworld as independent effort (purusharth). If a person were trulycapable of doing purusharth, he would never incur a loss.Purusharth knows no failures. It is a contradiction. How canyou do purusharth, when you, yourself have not become aPurush (Self-realized)? True purusharth is the one that is donethrough the extraordinary effort of the self. People are foolish tobelieve that they are the doers when in fact it is their prakruti(the formed complex of thoughts, speech and acts which is aresult of past life karma) that makes them do things.Lord Krishna has said, ‘Odhavji, what can the weakattain?’ Even the most renowned Jain spiritual master,Ananddhanji Maharaj, admits his weaknesses. One can only becalled a Purush when he has conquered his anger, pride,attachment and greed. But here the weaknesses of anger, pride,attachment and greed have conquered man. He is weak.I have become a Purush. I am with my independent effort(purushartha) and its extraordinary energy. Astrology andpurusharth are contradictory. Astrology has some scientificfoundation. However, what people believe to be purusharth is anillusion. People foolishly go running to an astrologer when theysuffer a loss. Why not do your purusharth instead? This falsepurusharth is what sows the seeds of karma for your next life.The Alembic chemical factory here employs so manyworkers. It takes all these workers to manufacture just a fewchemicals. The human body is made up of hundreds of suchchemical factories and yet it runs on its own. When you go tosleep after a meal, do you ever check to see how much andhow many digestive juices and enzymes are released fordigestion? How attentive are you in these matters? By the morningwhen you wake up, the body has already assimilated the foodyou ate. All the nutrients are absorbed in the blood; the wasteproducts are transported for excretion and everything is to befound in its right place. Did you have to do anything in runningthis process? So don’t you think that just as the inner mechanismworks naturally, the outer mechanism does too? Why do youbelieve that you are the doer? Everything will continue to run onit’s own. During sleep, the body is in its natural state. It is youwho is not in your natural state. You claim that you are breathing.You say that you breathe shallow or deep. Who does thebreathing when you are in deep sleep? Respiration that takesplace at night is a natural process and that is what aids thedigestion.Every human being is nothing but a top (toy that spins).Aptavani-11718Aptavani-1I am a Gnani but this body of mine is a top. These ‘tops’function because of respiration. The process of breathing is likewinding the string around the top, and as the breathing continues,the top begins to spin. It may even lean over on one side as itspins and it may seem like it will topple over, but then it comesback up again and continues to spin. That is how life is.Every leaf and branch of a Neem tree is bitter. It is bitterthrough and through. What effort (purusharth) does the treehave to make for that? Everything that is manifest in the tree hascome from its seed. Similarly human beings act according totheir innate nature (prakruti) but merely claim, ‘I am the doer’and thus exercise their ego. What exactly does one do in allthis?What people refer to, as purusharth in this world is reallya language of illusion. Things occur and materialize because ofyour past karmas coming into effect, and to claim ‘I did it’ issubtle pride (gaarva) and egoism. Real purusharth, true purusharthbegins only after one becomes the Purush (Self-realised). It isonly then your belief of ‘I am the doer’ is destroyed. It is thestate of absolute ‘non-doer ship’. All that is relative is prakrutiand the Purush (the Self) is real. What then is real purusharth?Real purusharth is when You (the Self) remain the knower (gnata)and the seer (drashta) when someone is cutting your hand.Gnankriya (knowing) and darshankriya (seeing) are the onlyactivities of the Self. The Soul does not have any other activities.True purusharth is when the Self remains in the state of theknower and the seer.Saint Kabir’s wife was expecting a baby. The mother’smilk was ready even before the baby was born. The milk beganto flow after the birth of the baby. On seeing this Kabir sang :‘Destiny (prarabdha) comes first, then forms the bodyKabir, it is a wonder, that the mind does not accept.’Non-contradictory DependenceYou cannot just sit around claiming that everything isdestined (prarabdha). If you do, then you become completelyidle. The mind will become restless with such a dependency. Ifthis dependency on destiny is correct, then you should not haveany worries, but in fact you are a factory of worries. Thereforeeven that dependency is lame. It is not real. It is not scientific.People in India are miserable and suffer because they havebeen given the support of such a dependency. That is why theirprogress is obstructed. My search, over a million life times, hasbrought me to the scientific fact that both destiny and independenteffort are lame supports. The only real support is vyavasthit.What is vyavasthit? It is that which happens only throughscientific circumstantial evidences. That is called vyavasthit. Theknowledge of vyavasthit renders total satisfaction in everysituation. I will give you a simple example. If this glass in yourhand begins to slip out of your hand and you make every effortto save it and it still breaks. Who broke the glass? You had nointention of breaking it; on the contrary you made all efforts tosave it. Then, did the glass wish to break? No, that cannot beso. No one else was present to break it either, so who brokeit? It was Vyavasthit; vyavasthit works under exact principles ofnatural laws. It is not haphazard. If the glass were not to breakaccording to the principles of vyavasthit, then how would theseglass factories remain in business? Vyavasthit has to look atyour interest and also the interest of the glass factory and thelivelihood of thousands of its workers. Therefore the glass willbreak according to this law and no one will be able to preventit from breaking. So many foolish people get agitated and restlesswhen things break. If a servant is serving tea to some guestsand breaks a cup, his master becomes furious from within. Allhe can think of is how he will slap the servant a few times assoon as his guests leave. And some people even do this. ButAptavani-11718Aptavani-1I am a Gnani but this body of mine is a top. These ‘tops’function because of respiration. The process of breathing is likewinding the string around the top, and as the breathing continues,the top begins to spin. It may even lean over on one side as itspins and it may seem like it will topple over, but then it comesback up again and continues to spin. That is how life is.Every leaf and branch of a Neem tree is bitter. It is bitterthrough and through. What effort (purusharth) does the treehave to make for that? Everything that is manifest in the tree hascome from its seed. Similarly human beings act according totheir innate nature (prakruti) but merely claim, ‘I am the doer’and thus exercise their ego. What exactly does one do in allthis?What people refer to, as purusharth in this world is reallya language of illusion. Things occur and materialize because ofyour past karmas coming into effect, and to claim ‘I did it’ issubtle pride (gaarva) and egoism. Real purusharth, true purusharthbegins only after one becomes the Purush (Self-realised). It isonly then your belief of ‘I am the doer’ is destroyed. It is thestate of absolute ‘non-doer ship’. All that is relative is prakrutiand the Purush (the Self) is real. What then is real purusharth?Real purusharth is when You (the Self) remain the knower (gnata)and the seer (drashta) when someone is cutting your hand.Gnankriya (knowing) and darshankriya (seeing) are the onlyactivities of the Self. The Soul does not have any other activities.True purusharth is when the Self remains in the state of theknower and the seer.Saint Kabir’s wife was expecting a baby. The mother’smilk was ready even before the baby was born. The milk beganto flow after the birth of the baby. On seeing this Kabir sang :‘Destiny (prarabdha) comes first, then forms the bodyKabir, it is a wonder, that the mind does not accept.’Non-contradictory DependenceYou cannot just sit around claiming that everything isdestined (prarabdha). If you do, then you become completelyidle. The mind will become restless with such a dependency. Ifthis dependency on destiny is correct, then you should not haveany worries, but in fact you are a factory of worries. Thereforeeven that dependency is lame. It is not real. It is not scientific.People in India are miserable and suffer because they havebeen given the support of such a dependency. That is why theirprogress is obstructed. My search, over a million life times, hasbrought me to the scientific fact that both destiny and independenteffort are lame supports. The only real support is vyavasthit.What is vyavasthit? It is that which happens only throughscientific circumstantial evidences. That is called vyavasthit. Theknowledge of vyavasthit renders total satisfaction in everysituation. I will give you a simple example. If this glass in yourhand begins to slip out of your hand and you make every effortto save it and it still breaks. Who broke the glass? You had nointention of breaking it; on the contrary you made all efforts tosave it. Then, did the glass wish to break? No, that cannot beso. No one else was present to break it either, so who brokeit? It was Vyavasthit; vyavasthit works under exact principles ofnatural laws. It is not haphazard. If the glass were not to breakaccording to the principles of vyavasthit, then how would theseglass factories remain in business? Vyavasthit has to look atyour interest and also the interest of the glass factory and thelivelihood of thousands of its workers. Therefore the glass willbreak according to this law and no one will be able to preventit from breaking. So many foolish people get agitated and restlesswhen things break. If a servant is serving tea to some guestsand breaks a cup, his master becomes furious from within. Allhe can think of is how he will slap the servant a few times assoon as his guests leave. And some people even do this. ButAptavani-11920Aptavani-1if he knows and understands that the servant did not break thecup and that it was vyavasthit, then would he do anything?Would he not remain absolutely unaffected? In reality the poorservant is merely a nimit (instrumental in the process), and yetthese wealthy people assault their servants. You should neverattack a nimit; if you do, you are extremely foolish because youdo great harm to yourself. Instead why not find the root causebehind it and then you will find your solution.When I was young, I used to play a lot of pranks onpeople. There was a wealthy businessman who used to playwith his puppy in his lap. I used to sneak in from behind andsqueeze the puppy’s tail. The dog could only see his own masterin front of him and so he would bite his owner. The ownerwould yell back at the dog. This is what I call attacking theinstrument (nimit).The Self And The Non-selfAre you convinced that there is a soul in your body?Questioner : Yes I am.Dadashri : In what form is this soul? Is it in the form ofa mixture or in the form of a compound?Questioner : A compound.Dadashri : If it were in a compound form, it would giverise to a third substance with completely new properties. Thenthe soul and the non-self would lose their innate properties andneither could be separated and reverted back to their intrinsicproperties. Let me explain this fact to you. The soul and thenon-self are in a mixture form, with each maintaining its ownintrinsic properties and that is why it is possible to separate thetwo. If copper, brass and silver were mixed with gold, a scientistwould be able to separate each metal based on its properties.He could easily do so. Similarly a Gnani, who has infinite powersand has thorough knowledge of the properties of the Soul andthe non-self, can analyze and separate the two. I am the greatestscientist of this world. I analyze every atom of the Soul andnon-self, separate the two, and give you your pure Soul in yourhand, within an hour! The soul referred to in the Gnani’senlightened speech is the real Soul. Everywhere else when theyrefer to the soul (atma), it is a soul in a mixed-form. It is notpure. They are merely words.The religions practiced everywhere are religions of thenon-self; they are not the religion of the pure Soul. How canyou adopt the religion of the Soul, (atmadharma) when you donot even know of any properties of the Soul? You cannot practicereal religion until a Gnani Purush brings you out of the theory ofrelativity and into reality. Our mahatmas (those who haveacquired Self-realization) can see and do darshan of the Godwithin you because I have given them divine eyes (divyachakshu).What you currently have is charmachakshu (physical eyes) throughwhich you can only see the temporary and transient things. Theeternal God can only be seen through divine eyes.Liberation Through Divine EyesDuring the war of Mahabharat, Lord Krishna blessedArjun with divine eyes. This lasted five minutes, so that he couldto get rid of his despondency towards worldly life and his duties.Lord Krishna then took them back. Whereas I give you thedivine eyes permanently, so that where ever you look, you willsee God. You will see God in me, in him, in the trees aroundyou and even in the animals. You will see God in every livingthing. After that, can there be any problems?Three hundred years ago, Anandghanji Maharaj, therenowned Jain master said that divine eyes are definitely notavailable in this era. This is why everyone has stopped makingAptavani-11920Aptavani-1if he knows and understands that the servant did not break thecup and that it was vyavasthit, then would he do anything?Would he not remain absolutely unaffected? In reality the poorservant is merely a nimit (instrumental in the process), and yetthese wealthy people assault their servants. You should neverattack a nimit; if you do, you are extremely foolish because youdo great harm to yourself. Instead why not find the root causebehind it and then you will find your solution.When I was young, I used to play a lot of pranks onpeople. There was a wealthy businessman who used to playwith his puppy in his lap. I used to sneak in from behind andsqueeze the puppy’s tail. The dog could only see his own masterin front of him and so he would bite his owner. The ownerwould yell back at the dog. This is what I call attacking theinstrument (nimit).The Self And The Non-selfAre you convinced that there is a soul in your body?Questioner : Yes I am.Dadashri : In what form is this soul? Is it in the form ofa mixture or in the form of a compound?Questioner : A compound.Dadashri : If it were in a compound form, it would giverise to a third substance with completely new properties. Thenthe soul and the non-self would lose their innate properties andneither could be separated and reverted back to their intrinsicproperties. Let me explain this fact to you. The soul and thenon-self are in a mixture form, with each maintaining its ownintrinsic properties and that is why it is possible to separate thetwo. If copper, brass and silver were mixed with gold, a scientistwould be able to separate each metal based on its properties.He could easily do so. Similarly a Gnani, who has infinite powersand has thorough knowledge of the properties of the Soul andthe non-self, can analyze and separate the two. I am the greatestscientist of this world. I analyze every atom of the Soul andnon-self, separate the two, and give you your pure Soul in yourhand, within an hour! The soul referred to in the Gnani’senlightened speech is the real Soul. Everywhere else when theyrefer to the soul (atma), it is a soul in a mixed-form. It is notpure. They are merely words.The religions practiced everywhere are religions of thenon-self; they are not the religion of the pure Soul. How canyou adopt the religion of the Soul, (atmadharma) when you donot even know of any properties of the Soul? You cannot practicereal religion until a Gnani Purush brings you out of the theory ofrelativity and into reality. Our mahatmas (those who haveacquired Self-realization) can see and do darshan of the Godwithin you because I have given them divine eyes (divyachakshu).What you currently have is charmachakshu (physical eyes) throughwhich you can only see the temporary and transient things. Theeternal God can only be seen through divine eyes.Liberation Through Divine EyesDuring the war of Mahabharat, Lord Krishna blessedArjun with divine eyes. This lasted five minutes, so that he couldto get rid of his despondency towards worldly life and his duties.Lord Krishna then took them back. Whereas I give you thedivine eyes permanently, so that where ever you look, you willsee God. You will see God in me, in him, in the trees aroundyou and even in the animals. You will see God in every livingthing. After that, can there be any problems?Three hundred years ago, Anandghanji Maharaj, therenowned Jain master said that divine eyes are definitely notavailable in this era. This is why everyone has stopped makingAptavani-12122Aptavani-1any effort, because they feel all doors are closed. This phenomenalGnan of Akram Vignan has manifest naturally and that is whyit is easy to acquire the divine eyes within just one hour!The Lord has said that it is extremely difficult to find thepath of liberation, but if one were to meet a Gnani Purush, thenit becomes even easier than making khichdee (dish made of riceand lentils).These words of mine will be accepted by your Soulbecause I reside within you, provided you are not inflexible. Ido not see any difference between you and me. People say,‘have faith, have faith’, but what is one to do when one simplycannot have any faith? People attend so many lectures on religionand spiritualism but they never leave with any lasting impression.The minute they walk out, all is forgotten. Here, with me youdo not have to keep faith. If there is a Soul within you andprovided you are not inflexible, you are bound to attain faith.This speech is the direct enlightened speech of a Gnani. It cutsthrough all your veils of ignorance and reaches your Soul directlyand that is why your Soul has to accept it. You will understandmy words without fail.There is a difference between talks of faith and talks thatbring understanding. A person would only believe the latter.ReincarnationI met a French microbiologist on my way fromAurangabad. He told me that in his part of the world they donot believe in reincarnation as Indians do. He asked me toexplain reincarnation. He even told me that he was prepared tostay in India with me for ten years if he had to. I told him I didnot have that much time, he then suggested staying with me forsix months. I told him I had a lot of work to do and that I reallydid not have any time. I am an instrument for the salvation ofthis whole world. However, I told him, that by the time we landat Santa Cruz Airport in one hour, he would become a believerof reincarnation. I explained reincarnation to him and heunderstood everything. By the time we landed he kept saying‘Jai Sacchidanand, Jai Sacchidanand’. He even forgot about hiswife. He took some photographs of me and went his way.Mind, Body and Speech are All EffectiveThe mind, body and speech are effective. They are effectiveat birth. They are even effective in the womb. How are theyeffective? If someone were to insult you in the morning, even atnighttime you will not be able to sleep because of the effect onyou. The effect of speech is obvious. If you were to cursesomeone, that person would react immediately. And lastly, thisbody too is effective. It feels cold when it gets cold and hotwhen it gets hot. It is effective from birth. A new born baby willcry if it is cold and when you wrap it up in a blanket, it will stop.If you put something sweet in its mouth, the baby will startlicking its lips and will grimace if you put something bitter in itsmouth. These are all simply effects. Even in the womb the babyis effective. I have personally witnessed this.This took place about fifty years ago (in the nineteentwenties) in my village of Bhadaran. A cow attacked a ladywho was eight-months pregnant, piercing her uterus with itshorn. One of the fingers of the baby came out through thewound. It became a challenge for even the missionary doctorsand the mother’s condition was getting serious. An eighty-year-old lady heard about this. She came and asked everyone tostep aside, sit and pray and give her room. She heated a needleand touched the baby’s finger with it; the baby immediatelypulled in the finger. The baby felt the effect.If there is an effect, there has to be a cause. And if thereis a cause, there will be an effect. This way the cycle of causeAptavani-12122Aptavani-1any effort, because they feel all doors are closed. This phenomenalGnan of Akram Vignan has manifest naturally and that is whyit is easy to acquire the divine eyes within just one hour!The Lord has said that it is extremely difficult to find thepath of liberation, but if one were to meet a Gnani Purush, thenit becomes even easier than making khichdee (dish made of riceand lentils).These words of mine will be accepted by your Soulbecause I reside within you, provided you are not inflexible. Ido not see any difference between you and me. People say,‘have faith, have faith’, but what is one to do when one simplycannot have any faith? People attend so many lectures on religionand spiritualism but they never leave with any lasting impression.The minute they walk out, all is forgotten. Here, with me youdo not have to keep faith. If there is a Soul within you andprovided you are not inflexible, you are bound to attain faith.This speech is the direct enlightened speech of a Gnani. It cutsthrough all your veils of ignorance and reaches your Soul directlyand that is why your Soul has to accept it. You will understandmy words without fail.There is a difference between talks of faith and talks thatbring understanding. A person would only believe the latter.ReincarnationI met a French microbiologist on my way fromAurangabad. He told me that in his part of the world they donot believe in reincarnation as Indians do. He asked me toexplain reincarnation. He even told me that he was prepared tostay in India with me for ten years if he had to. I told him I didnot have that much time, he then suggested staying with me forsix months. I told him I had a lot of work to do and that I reallydid not have any time. I am an instrument for the salvation ofthis whole world. However, I told him, that by the time we landat Santa Cruz Airport in one hour, he would become a believerof reincarnation. I explained reincarnation to him and heunderstood everything. By the time we landed he kept saying‘Jai Sacchidanand, Jai Sacchidanand’. He even forgot about hiswife. He took some photographs of me and went his way.Mind, Body and Speech are All EffectiveThe mind, body and speech are effective. They are effectiveat birth. They are even effective in the womb. How are theyeffective? If someone were to insult you in the morning, even atnighttime you will not be able to sleep because of the effect onyou. The effect of speech is obvious. If you were to cursesomeone, that person would react immediately. And lastly, thisbody too is effective. It feels cold when it gets cold and hotwhen it gets hot. It is effective from birth. A new born baby willcry if it is cold and when you wrap it up in a blanket, it will stop.If you put something sweet in its mouth, the baby will startlicking its lips and will grimace if you put something bitter in itsmouth. These are all simply effects. Even in the womb the babyis effective. I have personally witnessed this.This took place about fifty years ago (in the nineteentwenties) in my village of Bhadaran. A cow attacked a ladywho was eight-months pregnant, piercing her uterus with itshorn. One of the fingers of the baby came out through thewound. It became a challenge for even the missionary doctorsand the mother’s condition was getting serious. An eighty-year-old lady heard about this. She came and asked everyone tostep aside, sit and pray and give her room. She heated a needleand touched the baby’s finger with it; the baby immediatelypulled in the finger. The baby felt the effect.If there is an effect, there has to be a cause. And if thereis a cause, there will be an effect. This way the cycle of causeAptavani-12324Aptavani-1and effect, effect and cause continues.There cannot be an effect without a cause and wherethere is an effect there has to be a prior cause. Our presentbody is the effect of the causes of our past life. At birth one isborn with both the gross body and the subtle body. But then the‘effects’ of this body produces new causes through raag(attachment) and dwesh (abhorrence) and these are the seeds(of cause) for its next life. Upon death, the Atma (Soul) alongwith the causal body (karan sharira) and the subtle body(sookshama sharira) departs, leaving behind the physical body.At that same moment the causal body finds another effectivebody.If there were no such thing as rebirth and if God hadcreated every one, then we would all be of the same mould andidentical. We would not have short and tall, thin and fat, blackand white, rich and poor beings. The differences you see areresults of different effects of the causes from past life. Everyonehas different causes and hence different effects. If there is norebirth, then show me even single evidence that proves it. Whatdo English-speaking people mean when they say lucky andunlucky? Even the Muslims use words like takdir (good luck)and tadbir (bad luck). What does it signify? Their language iscomplete but their beliefs are not. These words are meaningfulonly in regards to rebirth.As are the causes, so are the effects. Good causes producegood effects and bad causes produce bad effects. One cannotbe free from these effects until the causes stop. Causes will notstop as long as long as ‘I am Chandubhai’ is engrained in yourbelief and your knowledge. They will only stop when a Gnaniawakens you and makes you realize your true Self. I destroyyour causal body leaving you to take care of ‘Chandulal’s’effects and while doing this, there will be no attachment orabhorrence and therefore no new seeds will be sown. Yes, youwill have to experience the effects. Effects cannot be changedby anyone. This is scientific. Any of the scientists will have toaccept what I am saying.This extra ordinary Gnan has manifest in this kaliyug (thefifth era of the time cycle). I am the Akram Gnani of this strangeera and that is why I have to personally declare and reveal thevalue of this precious Gnan.Sufferings : Mental, Physical And Externally Induced(Aadhi = mental suffering. Vyadhi = physical suffering.Upadhi= affliction from external source)The world is suffering from three afflictions : mental,physical and externally induced. Examples of physical sufferingare stomachache, eye pain, hunger pangs etc. Examples of mentalsuffering are worries, doubts, fear etc. Externally induced afflictionis if someone throws a stone at us, while we are sitting here.When someone summons us, it is externally induced suffering.Whether one is a saint, a monk, a king or a beggar, thewhole world suffers from the fire of these three afflictions. Thosewho have received Gnan from me will constantly experiencesamadhi (one-ness with Pure Self, undisturbed by any non-selfreactions) in every situation, regardless of the type of affliction.This is because they are simply the knower and seer of theseafflictions.Let me give you an example. If you enter someone’shome without his permission, would you not be uneasy andnervous? You would be. You would be afraid that someonewould get upset with you and throw you out. But if you are inyour own home, would you have any worries or tension? Youwould feel very comfortable and at peace in your own home.Similarly ‘Chandulal’ is not ‘Your’ home. You are the knowerAptavani-12324Aptavani-1and effect, effect and cause continues.There cannot be an effect without a cause and wherethere is an effect there has to be a prior cause. Our presentbody is the effect of the causes of our past life. At birth one isborn with both the gross body and the subtle body. But then the‘effects’ of this body produces new causes through raag(attachment) and dwesh (abhorrence) and these are the seeds(of cause) for its next life. Upon death, the Atma (Soul) alongwith the causal body (karan sharira) and the subtle body(sookshama sharira) departs, leaving behind the physical body.At that same moment the causal body finds another effectivebody.If there were no such thing as rebirth and if God hadcreated every one, then we would all be of the same mould andidentical. We would not have short and tall, thin and fat, blackand white, rich and poor beings. The differences you see areresults of different effects of the causes from past life. Everyonehas different causes and hence different effects. If there is norebirth, then show me even single evidence that proves it. Whatdo English-speaking people mean when they say lucky andunlucky? Even the Muslims use words like takdir (good luck)and tadbir (bad luck). What does it signify? Their language iscomplete but their beliefs are not. These words are meaningfulonly in regards to rebirth.As are the causes, so are the effects. Good causes producegood effects and bad causes produce bad effects. One cannotbe free from these effects until the causes stop. Causes will notstop as long as long as ‘I am Chandubhai’ is engrained in yourbelief and your knowledge. They will only stop when a Gnaniawakens you and makes you realize your true Self. I destroyyour causal body leaving you to take care of ‘Chandulal’s’effects and while doing this, there will be no attachment orabhorrence and therefore no new seeds will be sown. Yes, youwill have to experience the effects. Effects cannot be changedby anyone. This is scientific. Any of the scientists will have toaccept what I am saying.This extra ordinary Gnan has manifest in this kaliyug (thefifth era of the time cycle). I am the Akram Gnani of this strangeera and that is why I have to personally declare and reveal thevalue of this precious Gnan.Sufferings : Mental, Physical And Externally Induced(Aadhi = mental suffering. Vyadhi = physical suffering.Upadhi= affliction from external source)The world is suffering from three afflictions : mental,physical and externally induced. Examples of physical sufferingare stomachache, eye pain, hunger pangs etc. Examples of mentalsuffering are worries, doubts, fear etc. Externally induced afflictionis if someone throws a stone at us, while we are sitting here.When someone summons us, it is externally induced suffering.Whether one is a saint, a monk, a king or a beggar, thewhole world suffers from the fire of these three afflictions. Thosewho have received Gnan from me will constantly experiencesamadhi (one-ness with Pure Self, undisturbed by any non-selfreactions) in every situation, regardless of the type of affliction.This is because they are simply the knower and seer of theseafflictions.Let me give you an example. If you enter someone’shome without his permission, would you not be uneasy andnervous? You would be. You would be afraid that someonewould get upset with you and throw you out. But if you are inyour own home, would you have any worries or tension? Youwould feel very comfortable and at peace in your own home.Similarly ‘Chandulal’ is not ‘Your’ home. You are the knowerAptavani-12526Aptavani-1and seer but instead with your wrong belief of ‘I am Chandulal’,you have become what you are not. You have become theowner of something that is not yours and you have been derivingpleasure and pain from it. That is why you are constantlyexperiencing worries, affliction and agitation. You continue tostruggle hopelessly like a fish out of water. The wealthy peoplehave all the material comforts but have sleepless nights becauseof worries.The World And The SelfDadashri : Is this world real or is it an illusion?Questioner : An illusion.Dadashri : No, it is not so. I will explain what an illusionis. It is an illusion when you pull your pants up believing you arestanding in water but nothing gets wet. It is an illusion if youtouch what looks like fire but it does not burn you. People saythat the Self (Atma) is real and the world is an illusion. If thatis the case, then put your hand in a fire and find out whether itis an illusion or not.One can tell whether it is an illusion or not by looking atthe effects. For example, if you throw a brick on a wall, you willnot see any effect on the brick or the wall if the world were anillusion. But it is not an illusion because you will see a red markon the wall and the brick too will be broken. Another exampleis that if someone tells you, ‘You have no sense’ and his or herstatement has no effect on you, then it would prove that theworld is an illusion. But instead what happens is that the effectof such a statement will be there even when you wake up in themiddle of the night and remember what was said to you. Thisproves that the world is not an illusion.I am saying that the world and the Soul (the Self) areboth true. The world is a relative truth and the Self is the realtruth. My words are eternal truth. There is no telling when therelative truth of this world would become untrue. All theserelatives are temporary adjustments and the Self is the realtruth, it is eternal, it is permanent.Possession by the Mind, Body and SpeechThree things possess every human being : mind, bodyand speech and that is why one claims, ‘I am Chandulal, I ama collector, I am her husband, I am his father.’ If you ask, ‘Areyou going to be a collector forever?’ No, he will reply, ‘I willretire one day.’ This is another form of possession. If a drunk,lying in the street claims to be a king, would we not know thatit is the intoxication of the alcohol saying so and not him. Similarlythe intoxication, the possessive influence of the mind, body andspeech makes people say ‘I am Chandubhai, I am a conductor,I am a father…’I will tell you a true story. There was a lady by the nameof Kashi who was a gossipmonger. She was gossiping withsome of the women when suddenly she began to shake herhead incessantly and roll her eyes round and round. This scaredall the women. One of the women felt that she was possessedand asked her husband to fetch an exorcist. When the exorcistcame, he took one look at Kashi and immediately confirmedthat she was indeed possessed. The exorcist started to whipKashi and she began to scream. The exorcist asked her whoshe was and why she had come. Kashi replied in English, “I amChanchal, and this Kashi has seduced my husband with herlooks.” The exorcist knew for a fact that Kashi did not knoweven a letter of the English alphabet and upon further investigationthey were able to confirm that Chanchal spoke fluent English.The exorcist continued with the exorcism and through coaxingand convincing, managed to release Kashi from being possessedby Chanchal’s ghost. This is how ghosts are. Chanchal left butAptavani-12526Aptavani-1and seer but instead with your wrong belief of ‘I am Chandulal’,you have become what you are not. You have become theowner of something that is not yours and you have been derivingpleasure and pain from it. That is why you are constantlyexperiencing worries, affliction and agitation. You continue tostruggle hopelessly like a fish out of water. The wealthy peoplehave all the material comforts but have sleepless nights becauseof worries.The World And The SelfDadashri : Is this world real or is it an illusion?Questioner : An illusion.Dadashri : No, it is not so. I will explain what an illusionis. It is an illusion when you pull your pants up believing you arestanding in water but nothing gets wet. It is an illusion if youtouch what looks like fire but it does not burn you. People saythat the Self (Atma) is real and the world is an illusion. If thatis the case, then put your hand in a fire and find out whether itis an illusion or not.One can tell whether it is an illusion or not by looking atthe effects. For example, if you throw a brick on a wall, you willnot see any effect on the brick or the wall if the world were anillusion. But it is not an illusion because you will see a red markon the wall and the brick too will be broken. Another exampleis that if someone tells you, ‘You have no sense’ and his or herstatement has no effect on you, then it would prove that theworld is an illusion. But instead what happens is that the effectof such a statement will be there even when you wake up in themiddle of the night and remember what was said to you. Thisproves that the world is not an illusion.I am saying that the world and the Soul (the Self) areboth true. The world is a relative truth and the Self is the realtruth. My words are eternal truth. There is no telling when therelative truth of this world would become untrue. All theserelatives are temporary adjustments and the Self is the realtruth, it is eternal, it is permanent.Possession by the Mind, Body and SpeechThree things possess every human being : mind, bodyand speech and that is why one claims, ‘I am Chandulal, I ama collector, I am her husband, I am his father.’ If you ask, ‘Areyou going to be a collector forever?’ No, he will reply, ‘I willretire one day.’ This is another form of possession. If a drunk,lying in the street claims to be a king, would we not know thatit is the intoxication of the alcohol saying so and not him. Similarlythe intoxication, the possessive influence of the mind, body andspeech makes people say ‘I am Chandubhai, I am a conductor,I am a father…’I will tell you a true story. There was a lady by the nameof Kashi who was a gossipmonger. She was gossiping withsome of the women when suddenly she began to shake herhead incessantly and roll her eyes round and round. This scaredall the women. One of the women felt that she was possessedand asked her husband to fetch an exorcist. When the exorcistcame, he took one look at Kashi and immediately confirmedthat she was indeed possessed. The exorcist started to whipKashi and she began to scream. The exorcist asked her whoshe was and why she had come. Kashi replied in English, “I amChanchal, and this Kashi has seduced my husband with herlooks.” The exorcist knew for a fact that Kashi did not knoweven a letter of the English alphabet and upon further investigationthey were able to confirm that Chanchal spoke fluent English.The exorcist continued with the exorcism and through coaxingand convincing, managed to release Kashi from being possessedby Chanchal’s ghost. This is how ghosts are. Chanchal left butAptavani-12728Aptavani-1Kashi remained to suffer the pain of the scars left behind fromthe beating.I am the ‘exorcist’ of the ghosts of the mind, body andspeech that have possessed you. I free you from their possessionand oppression. You will however continue to experience theireffects as long as the ‘scars’ remain but you will be permanentlyfree from them.If you simply understand that the mind, body and speechare like the ghosts that take possession over you, you will havelearnt twenty-five of the forty-five Holy Scriptures.There is no need for you to renounce your wife, childrenand clothes. All you have to do is free yourself from thepossession by these three.The Gnani Understands ScripturesScriptures cannot be read without the guidance of a GnaniPurush. Only the Gnani can truly understand the scriptures. Ihave the understanding of the scriptures. How is one that hasno understanding, understand the scriptures?Intake And OutputYou have to discover your real ‘I’. What do you refer toevery time you say ‘I’? Is it the body? Your body is just acomplex of intake (puran) and output (galan). The worldly lifegoes up and down, up and down, that is its nature. People thinkof accumulating wealth but that is nothing but intake and output.Are there not two parts to a bank account : credit and debit?Why don’t you just keep the part of credit on your account?You cannot. It is a law that for every input, there is an output.Eating is input and excretion is output. Drinking is input andurination is output. Even the coming and going of thoughts isintake and output.The Gnani does not look at anything except the PureSoul, enjoyment of fruits of past karma and dissipation of pastkarmas having enjoyed its fruits. Input and output and the PureSoul - these encompass everything.Some people eat all the time and then have diarrhea.What would happen if their intake were not allowed to beexcreted? They would become restless from distended bellies.People are not aware that the same (principle) applies to wealth.Show me one person who has not undergone output. The riverstoo have streams that flow into them and away. I have askedmany doctors why nails grow. They gave me all kinds ofexplanations such as too much calcium etc. That is not so. It isactually output of body’s waste. Food that is used by the bodyfor building bones is intake and output is taking place throughthe growth of nails. As a rule what ever is of no use, is discarded.Similarly there is a continuous inflow-outflow or charging-discharging of atoms that takes place in this body. The atomsthat were present in the body at age five would no longer bethere at age twenty-five. There is a constant inflow of newatoms and outflow of the old ones.People charge demerit (paap) karmas, but when thosekarmas come forth to give effect, they will be very sorry; theywill feel like they are on fire. And when they charge meritkarmas (punya), they will realize how sweet the rewards arewhen those karmas give their effect. So think very hard and bejudicious before creating any kind of karma and beware of thekind of effects your actions will render. Be very careful whenyou are charging demerit karma, such as when you try to increaseyour wealth by cheating others. Bear in mind that theconsequences of your actions are inevitable. Even if you putyour money in the bank, that money too will eventually go.Whatever demerit karmas you create while trying to be rich, theadverse negative meditation (raudra dhyan) that occurs in theAptavani-12728Aptavani-1Kashi remained to suffer the pain of the scars left behind fromthe beating.I am the ‘exorcist’ of the ghosts of the mind, body andspeech that have possessed you. I free you from their possessionand oppression. You will however continue to experience theireffects as long as the ‘scars’ remain but you will be permanentlyfree from them.If you simply understand that the mind, body and speechare like the ghosts that take possession over you, you will havelearnt twenty-five of the forty-five Holy Scriptures.There is no need for you to renounce your wife, childrenand clothes. All you have to do is free yourself from thepossession by these three.The Gnani Understands ScripturesScriptures cannot be read without the guidance of a GnaniPurush. Only the Gnani can truly understand the scriptures. Ihave the understanding of the scriptures. How is one that hasno understanding, understand the scriptures?Intake And OutputYou have to discover your real ‘I’. What do you refer toevery time you say ‘I’? Is it the body? Your body is just acomplex of intake (puran) and output (galan). The worldly lifegoes up and down, up and down, that is its nature. People thinkof accumulating wealth but that is nothing but intake and output.Are there not two parts to a bank account : credit and debit?Why don’t you just keep the part of credit on your account?You cannot. It is a law that for every input, there is an output.Eating is input and excretion is output. Drinking is input andurination is output. Even the coming and going of thoughts isintake and output.The Gnani does not look at anything except the PureSoul, enjoyment of fruits of past karma and dissipation of pastkarmas having enjoyed its fruits. Input and output and the PureSoul - these encompass everything.Some people eat all the time and then have diarrhea.What would happen if their intake were not allowed to beexcreted? They would become restless from distended bellies.People are not aware that the same (principle) applies to wealth.Show me one person who has not undergone output. The riverstoo have streams that flow into them and away. I have askedmany doctors why nails grow. They gave me all kinds ofexplanations such as too much calcium etc. That is not so. It isactually output of body’s waste. Food that is used by the bodyfor building bones is intake and output is taking place throughthe growth of nails. As a rule what ever is of no use, is discarded.Similarly there is a continuous inflow-outflow or charging-discharging of atoms that takes place in this body. The atomsthat were present in the body at age five would no longer bethere at age twenty-five. There is a constant inflow of newatoms and outflow of the old ones.People charge demerit (paap) karmas, but when thosekarmas come forth to give effect, they will be very sorry; theywill feel like they are on fire. And when they charge meritkarmas (punya), they will realize how sweet the rewards arewhen those karmas give their effect. So think very hard and bejudicious before creating any kind of karma and beware of thekind of effects your actions will render. Be very careful whenyou are charging demerit karma, such as when you try to increaseyour wealth by cheating others. Bear in mind that theconsequences of your actions are inevitable. Even if you putyour money in the bank, that money too will eventually go.Whatever demerit karmas you create while trying to be rich, theadverse negative meditation (raudra dhyan) that occurs in the30Aptavani-1Aptavani-129process, will also give its effect, and when it does, what willbecome of you? Laxmi (money) is not something that you canobstruct or prevent from leaving. Laxmi is the Lord’s consortand you are obstructing and preventing her from leaving! Whatbecomes of a newly wed bride who is confined to her husband’shouse and prevented from going home to her parents? And yetthat is exactly what people do to Laxmiji! She is now tired ofthese people. Whenever I come across Laxmiji at Baroda railwaystation, I pay obeisance to her and give her my address inMamanipod. I tell her that she is free to come and go as andwhen she pleases. She tells me that she is tired of all the wealthybusinessmen and that she will now visit the homes of all themahatmas (all Self-realized beings), because they garland herwhenever she goes to their homes and also garland her, evenwhen she leaves. She says that she will no longer go to thehomes that prevent her from leaving. She will not visit the homesfor lifetimes to come of those who have contempt towardsmoney. Money comes and goes. Money that is present todaywill not be there in ten years time; it is constantly circulating.Everyone in this entire world is caught up in turmoil.Whether a person is an ascetic or married, no living being hasinner peace. Inner peace only comes when a person acquiresthe knowledge of the Self. In the traditional kramic path, innerpeace is only acquired once the aspirant crosses the entireocean of the worldly life over to the other side. What an arduoustask! But in this Akram path, once I place my hand over yourhead, eternal peace occurs spontaneously.Trimantra Removes Obstacles In lifeWhat is the true meaning of a mantra? Mantra means thatwhich stills the mind. The Lord gave us the Trimantra to help usovercome obstacles in our devotional practices. The Trimantrasare :1. The Navkar Mantra2. Aum Namo Bhagavate Vasudevaya3. Aum Namah ShivayaBut the egotistical people, who have created new cultsand groups, have divided even this mantra. The Lord hadconceded that people could build separate temples and place ofworship for convenience but the three mantras should not beseparated. Nevertheless, people divided the Mantra. As if thatis not enough, they have even divided the ‘agiyaras’ (Observanceof the eleventh day of the moon cycle for fasting); the Shaiviteshave their own and the Vaishnavas have their own. How can theLord be pleased with this? God will not be found whereverthere is any quarrel or differences of opinion. The Trimantra thatI am giving you is very powerful indeed! It will bestow uponyou whatever you desire. It will remove your worldly obstaclesand will significantly lessen any major difficulties you have toface. This mantra pleases all the gods; it is a completely impartialmantra.Every morning if you recall my face and recite the Trimantrafive times, you will never fall spiritually and will gradually acquireliberation. I am taking full responsibility for this.I say that let all the misery of the world come to me. Ifyou are strong enough to surrender all your miseries at my feetwithout any reservation, then do so. Thereafter, if you experienceany misery, come tell me. But alas in the current time cycle Ihave even encountered people who claim that if they were tosurrender all their miseries to me, what would they be left with?These poor unfortunate people do not understand that theyhave within them an ocean of infinite bliss and by surrenderingtheir miseries, they would be left with nothing but bliss. But noone knows how to surrender even his or her suffering.30Aptavani-1Aptavani-129process, will also give its effect, and when it does, what willbecome of you? Laxmi (money) is not something that you canobstruct or prevent from leaving. Laxmi is the Lord’s consortand you are obstructing and preventing her from leaving! Whatbecomes of a newly wed bride who is confined to her husband’shouse and prevented from going home to her parents? And yetthat is exactly what people do to Laxmiji! She is now tired ofthese people. Whenever I come across Laxmiji at Baroda railwaystation, I pay obeisance to her and give her my address inMamanipod. I tell her that she is free to come and go as andwhen she pleases. She tells me that she is tired of all the wealthybusinessmen and that she will now visit the homes of all themahatmas (all Self-realized beings), because they garland herwhenever she goes to their homes and also garland her, evenwhen she leaves. She says that she will no longer go to thehomes that prevent her from leaving. She will not visit the homesfor lifetimes to come of those who have contempt towardsmoney. Money comes and goes. Money that is present todaywill not be there in ten years time; it is constantly circulating.Everyone in this entire world is caught up in turmoil.Whether a person is an ascetic or married, no living being hasinner peace. Inner peace only comes when a person acquiresthe knowledge of the Self. In the traditional kramic path, innerpeace is only acquired once the aspirant crosses the entireocean of the worldly life over to the other side. What an arduoustask! But in this Akram path, once I place my hand over yourhead, eternal peace occurs spontaneously.Trimantra Removes Obstacles In lifeWhat is the true meaning of a mantra? Mantra means thatwhich stills the mind. The Lord gave us the Trimantra to help usovercome obstacles in our devotional practices. The Trimantrasare :1. The Navkar Mantra2. Aum Namo Bhagavate Vasudevaya3. Aum Namah ShivayaBut the egotistical people, who have created new cultsand groups, have divided even this mantra. The Lord hadconceded that people could build separate temples and place ofworship for convenience but the three mantras should not beseparated. Nevertheless, people divided the Mantra. As if thatis not enough, they have even divided the ‘agiyaras’ (Observanceof the eleventh day of the moon cycle for fasting); the Shaiviteshave their own and the Vaishnavas have their own. How can theLord be pleased with this? God will not be found whereverthere is any quarrel or differences of opinion. The Trimantra thatI am giving you is very powerful indeed! It will bestow uponyou whatever you desire. It will remove your worldly obstaclesand will significantly lessen any major difficulties you have toface. This mantra pleases all the gods; it is a completely impartialmantra.Every morning if you recall my face and recite the Trimantrafive times, you will never fall spiritually and will gradually acquireliberation. I am taking full responsibility for this.I say that let all the misery of the world come to me. Ifyou are strong enough to surrender all your miseries at my feetwithout any reservation, then do so. Thereafter, if you experienceany misery, come tell me. But alas in the current time cycle Ihave even encountered people who claim that if they were tosurrender all their miseries to me, what would they be left with?These poor unfortunate people do not understand that theyhave within them an ocean of infinite bliss and by surrenderingtheir miseries, they would be left with nothing but bliss. But noone knows how to surrender even his or her suffering.Aptavani-13132Aptavani-1The expression ‘deers in the human form’ is writtensomewhere in the scriptures. The word ‘deer’ used here is aeuphemism. The one who merits a rank of thirty-two points isborn as a donkey, but just one additional point will merit him ahuman body but his intrinsic tendencies and traits are still thatof a donkey. He may be a human being but his internal qualitiesare animal-like and therefore he is an animal. I say it like it isbecause I covet nothing and have no expectations. Your welfareis my only concern. I speak the naked truth out of infinitecompassion for you. I am the only one in this world who speaksthe blatant truth.Worry and EgoLord Krishna says :“Oh mortal one, why do you worry ?Krishna will do what needs to be done”.In response to this do you know what some unfortunatepeople say? They say that Lord Krishna can say whatever hewants, but we are the ones who have to manage this worldlylife so how can we do so without worrying? People have createdfactories of worries and yet they can’t sell their goods. Howcan they? Wherever they go to sell their goods, they comeacross factories that produce the same goods! Find me just oneman in this world who has no worries.On the one hand they say ‘I take refuge at the lotus feetof Shri Krishna’ and on the other they say ‘Krishna surrenderto me’ (do what I ask). If you take refuge at the feet of lordKrishna, why should you have any worries? Lord Mahavir alsosaid that one should not worry. A single worry will result in alife in the animal kingdom. Worrying is the greatest ego. ‘I amrunning all this’; when you believe that you are the one runningeverything, then naturally worries will be your reward.A true devotee will even reprimand the Lord if he has anyworries, he would question the Lord why he has worries whenthe Lord says that he should not. He who does not reprimandthe Lord is not a true devotee. Scold or reprimand the Godwithin you if you have worries. True love is when you reprimandeven God. One cannot find a true devotee these days. Everyoneis caught up in his or her own worldly needs and selfish plans.When you go around believing, ‘I am the doer…I am thedoer’, worries will occur. Narsinh Mehta (a renowned spiritualpoet) says :‘I am the doer, I am the doer, itself is ignoranceLike the dog, walking under a (ox-drawn) cart believes‘I am pulling the oxcart’The world runs automatically,Rare is the One (yogi-yogeswar) who knows this.’When all the yogis (worldly saints) read this, they wereflattered. These lines refer to atmayogi and atmayogeshwars(those who have known the Soul). An atma yogeshwar is a rarephenomenon, which comes about once in a million years. Healone is the one who has traversed through every atom of theentire universe. He lives within and outside the universe andspeaks from experience. He alone knows who created the world,how it was created and how it functions. I am the atmayogeshwar of this age. Make the most of this opportunity thatpresents to you. I will take away all your worries in just onehour and what is more, I give you my guarantee that should youexperience any worries, you can file a lawsuit against me. I havegranted this worry-free state to some fourteen hundredmahatmas. Ask me for anything. Whatever you ask, I will grantyou, but ask for something worthwhile. Ask for something thatwill remain with you forever. Do not ask for any temporarythings. Ask for eternal bliss.Aptavani-13132Aptavani-1The expression ‘deers in the human form’ is writtensomewhere in the scriptures. The word ‘deer’ used here is aeuphemism. The one who merits a rank of thirty-two points isborn as a donkey, but just one additional point will merit him ahuman body but his intrinsic tendencies and traits are still thatof a donkey. He may be a human being but his internal qualitiesare animal-like and therefore he is an animal. I say it like it isbecause I covet nothing and have no expectations. Your welfareis my only concern. I speak the naked truth out of infinitecompassion for you. I am the only one in this world who speaksthe blatant truth.Worry and EgoLord Krishna says :“Oh mortal one, why do you worry ?Krishna will do what needs to be done”.In response to this do you know what some unfortunatepeople say? They say that Lord Krishna can say whatever hewants, but we are the ones who have to manage this worldlylife so how can we do so without worrying? People have createdfactories of worries and yet they can’t sell their goods. Howcan they? Wherever they go to sell their goods, they comeacross factories that produce the same goods! Find me just oneman in this world who has no worries.On the one hand they say ‘I take refuge at the lotus feetof Shri Krishna’ and on the other they say ‘Krishna surrenderto me’ (do what I ask). If you take refuge at the feet of lordKrishna, why should you have any worries? Lord Mahavir alsosaid that one should not worry. A single worry will result in alife in the animal kingdom. Worrying is the greatest ego. ‘I amrunning all this’; when you believe that you are the one runningeverything, then naturally worries will be your reward.A true devotee will even reprimand the Lord if he has anyworries, he would question the Lord why he has worries whenthe Lord says that he should not. He who does not reprimandthe Lord is not a true devotee. Scold or reprimand the Godwithin you if you have worries. True love is when you reprimandeven God. One cannot find a true devotee these days. Everyoneis caught up in his or her own worldly needs and selfish plans.When you go around believing, ‘I am the doer…I am thedoer’, worries will occur. Narsinh Mehta (a renowned spiritualpoet) says :‘I am the doer, I am the doer, itself is ignoranceLike the dog, walking under a (ox-drawn) cart believes‘I am pulling the oxcart’The world runs automatically,Rare is the One (yogi-yogeswar) who knows this.’When all the yogis (worldly saints) read this, they wereflattered. These lines refer to atmayogi and atmayogeshwars(those who have known the Soul). An atma yogeshwar is a rarephenomenon, which comes about once in a million years. Healone is the one who has traversed through every atom of theentire universe. He lives within and outside the universe andspeaks from experience. He alone knows who created the world,how it was created and how it functions. I am the atmayogeshwar of this age. Make the most of this opportunity thatpresents to you. I will take away all your worries in just onehour and what is more, I give you my guarantee that should youexperience any worries, you can file a lawsuit against me. I havegranted this worry-free state to some fourteen hundredmahatmas. Ask me for anything. Whatever you ask, I will grantyou, but ask for something worthwhile. Ask for something thatwill remain with you forever. Do not ask for any temporarythings. Ask for eternal bliss.34Aptavani-1Aptavani-133Use of the authority of the non-self leads to worries.What has been acquired in the foreign department (non-self)will remain in the foreign realm. You have acquired a wealth ofcars, bungalow, factories, wife and children, which will have tobe left behind when you leave. At the final station no power cansave you. You will be allowed to carry forward only your meritand de-merit karma. In other words whatever wrong you dohere will carry forward with you. The wealth you acquire throughyour wrong doings will be left behind but your liability for thoseactions will be carried forward. You will acquire a new bodybased on your actions and you will have to start all over againto repay your past life’s debts. So you unfortunate souls! Bettershape up from the start. There is so much bliss in your ownhomeland but you haven’t seen it!When, even the hair on your head does not remain loyalto you, what else will? People keep grooming their hair withtheir hands all day long. But would they still like to run theirfingers through the hair when it is cut off?Worrying is an ego. Why does this child not have anyworries? It is because he knows that he does not run everythingand neither is he bothered about who does. People worry bymerely comparing themselves with their neighbors. The neighborshave a car and we do not. The foolish man! How much doeshe need for his livelihood? Decide just once what yourrequirements are. For example, you need adequate food andwater, a house to live in and enough money to run that household.This much you are bound to get. But you become jealous anddisturbed if you come to know that your neighbor has a bankbalance of ten thousand. This is how suffering starts. Foolishpeople, they invite their miseries themselves.A landlord came to me and asked me how much a personneeds to live life. He told me that he had a thousand acres ofland, a bungalow, two cars and a significant bank balance. Heasked me how much he should keep. I told him that everyoneshould assess his or her needs based on what the circumstanceswere when he or she was born. They can come to a decisionabout how much they need for the rest of their life based onwhatever luxury they had at the time they were born. That is thestandard guideline. Everything that you have in excess is poisonand it will kill you.Enjoy What You HaveLord Krishna has said :“Enjoy what you have,do not worry about what you do not”.One day I was visiting a wealthy businessman inAhmedabad. His wife had prepared a delicious meal. As theman and I sat down to eat, his wife said to him ‘At least eatwell today’. I asked her why she made such a comment andshe replied that whenever her husband sat down to eat, it wasjust his physical body sitting at the table but his mind wasalways at his factory. He never enjoys his meals. Goodness youfoolish man! At the present moment you have a meal in front ofyou, not your factory, why not enjoy your meal in peace? Peoplehave become so foolish they worry about their daughter’smarriage even when the daughter is only four. Some wretchedsoul will be on his deathbed, gasping his last breath and all hisrelatives would have lit the lamps for the final farewell and yethe sobs worrying about his young daughter. His daughter triesto console him and tells him to be at peace and not worry abouther anymore. He tells her that she would not understand suchmatters and in his mind he believes that she is only saying thingsto console him because she is not as clever as he. The foolishman – his intellect is such that no one would pay even a nickelfor it!34Aptavani-1Aptavani-133Use of the authority of the non-self leads to worries.What has been acquired in the foreign department (non-self)will remain in the foreign realm. You have acquired a wealth ofcars, bungalow, factories, wife and children, which will have tobe left behind when you leave. At the final station no power cansave you. You will be allowed to carry forward only your meritand de-merit karma. In other words whatever wrong you dohere will carry forward with you. The wealth you acquire throughyour wrong doings will be left behind but your liability for thoseactions will be carried forward. You will acquire a new bodybased on your actions and you will have to start all over againto repay your past life’s debts. So you unfortunate souls! Bettershape up from the start. There is so much bliss in your ownhomeland but you haven’t seen it!When, even the hair on your head does not remain loyalto you, what else will? People keep grooming their hair withtheir hands all day long. But would they still like to run theirfingers through the hair when it is cut off?Worrying is an ego. Why does this child not have anyworries? It is because he knows that he does not run everythingand neither is he bothered about who does. People worry bymerely comparing themselves with their neighbors. The neighborshave a car and we do not. The foolish man! How much doeshe need for his livelihood? Decide just once what yourrequirements are. For example, you need adequate food andwater, a house to live in and enough money to run that household.This much you are bound to get. But you become jealous anddisturbed if you come to know that your neighbor has a bankbalance of ten thousand. This is how suffering starts. Foolishpeople, they invite their miseries themselves.A landlord came to me and asked me how much a personneeds to live life. He told me that he had a thousand acres ofland, a bungalow, two cars and a significant bank balance. Heasked me how much he should keep. I told him that everyoneshould assess his or her needs based on what the circumstanceswere when he or she was born. They can come to a decisionabout how much they need for the rest of their life based onwhatever luxury they had at the time they were born. That is thestandard guideline. Everything that you have in excess is poisonand it will kill you.Enjoy What You HaveLord Krishna has said :“Enjoy what you have,do not worry about what you do not”.One day I was visiting a wealthy businessman inAhmedabad. His wife had prepared a delicious meal. As theman and I sat down to eat, his wife said to him ‘At least eatwell today’. I asked her why she made such a comment andshe replied that whenever her husband sat down to eat, it wasjust his physical body sitting at the table but his mind wasalways at his factory. He never enjoys his meals. Goodness youfoolish man! At the present moment you have a meal in front ofyou, not your factory, why not enjoy your meal in peace? Peoplehave become so foolish they worry about their daughter’smarriage even when the daughter is only four. Some wretchedsoul will be on his deathbed, gasping his last breath and all hisrelatives would have lit the lamps for the final farewell and yethe sobs worrying about his young daughter. His daughter triesto console him and tells him to be at peace and not worry abouther anymore. He tells her that she would not understand suchmatters and in his mind he believes that she is only saying thingsto console him because she is not as clever as he. The foolishman – his intellect is such that no one would pay even a nickelfor it!36Aptavani-1Aptavani-135One of the properties of the Soul is that whatever aperson contemplates, he will become that. A person can createbondage of a new lifetime for each situation – this is howeverything is.Meditation And Adverse MeditationGod has said that every human being is engaged in oneof the four types of meditative states : Artadhyan, raudradhyan,dharmadhyan and shukladhyanArta-dhyana–internalized repressive or self-tormentingcontemplation or suffering. Raudra-dhhyana – evil contemplationof perverse pleasure in causing injury to others; wrathfulmeditation. Dharma-dhyana – Virtuous contemplation andShukla-dhyana – pure contemplation of the Self.Dhyan-apdhyan is meditation that cannot be included inthe above four. In the past some people used to have apdhyana,but nowadays even a peon has it. These people will tremble atmy words, if not today then after I leave. Apdhyan is evenworse than durdhyana (evil meditation). It exists only in this timecycle and is not included in raudra, arta or dharma. And thescriptures say that shukla-dhyana is nowhere to be found in thisday and age.Apdhyana is the meditation that you failed to domethodically in all activities related to your liberation. When aperson is doing samayik (introspective meditation), rather thanfocusing on the meditation itself, he is preoccupied with howmuch time he has left to complete his samayik. When a persondoes samayik, his attention is on his doership, he even claimsthat he did the samayik, but at the same time he is looking atthe hourglass. How can you call it meditation when his focus ison the hourglass?Raudra dhyan : What is raudra-dhyan? Say you are ina fabric store, you inquire about a certain fabric and the clothmerchant tells you it is terelene and that it is twenty rupees permeter. You decide to buy it. But what do the cloth sellers dowhen they measure the material? Have you seen them stretch itthis way and that way? Do you think they are exercising theirarms? That is raudra-dhyan. Raudra-dhyan is to sell the customershort and cheat them out of their fair share. Here the merchant’sintent is to hyper stretch the material while measuring it so thathe will end up giving you less than the amount you pay for.Raudra-dhyan is to take more than needed. It is to cheatcustomers when measuring or weighing their goods and sellingthem short. Adulteration of food and other goods is also raudra-dhyan. To covet other people’s belongings or to even thinkabout seizing other people’s happiness is raudra-dhyana. Decidein advance what your profit margin needs to be. It is acceptablefor you to make fifteen to twenty percent profit in your business.If in addition to this, you sell your customers short by stretchingthe material when you measure, that is an offence. It is a seriousand grave offence. A true Jain will not have raudra-dhyana, andshould it occur, it would occur only once in a while, just likeaccidents. Getting angry, cursing someone and quarrelling isalso raudra-dhyan. The fully enlightened Lords have said that aJain should utilize raudra-dhyan very sparingly and yet today itis used the most. The spiritual leaders are committing raudra-dhyan when they get angry with their less intelligent disciples.Even internal annoyance is considered raudra-dhyan. These dayswhat can be said about people who use foul language directlyand frequently?A life in hell is the consequence of raudra-dhyana.Aarta-dhyan : Aarta-dhyan is meditation that causessuffering to the soul (the person himself). A person who doesnot hurt any living being but worries about his future is aarta-dhyan. It is however, better than raudra-dhyan because he is36Aptavani-1Aptavani-135One of the properties of the Soul is that whatever aperson contemplates, he will become that. A person can createbondage of a new lifetime for each situation – this is howeverything is.Meditation And Adverse MeditationGod has said that every human being is engaged in oneof the four types of meditative states : Artadhyan, raudradhyan,dharmadhyan and shukladhyanArta-dhyana–internalized repressive or self-tormentingcontemplation or suffering. Raudra-dhhyana – evil contemplationof perverse pleasure in causing injury to others; wrathfulmeditation. Dharma-dhyana – Virtuous contemplation andShukla-dhyana – pure contemplation of the Self.Dhyan-apdhyan is meditation that cannot be included inthe above four. In the past some people used to have apdhyana,but nowadays even a peon has it. These people will tremble atmy words, if not today then after I leave. Apdhyan is evenworse than durdhyana (evil meditation). It exists only in this timecycle and is not included in raudra, arta or dharma. And thescriptures say that shukla-dhyana is nowhere to be found in thisday and age.Apdhyana is the meditation that you failed to domethodically in all activities related to your liberation. When aperson is doing samayik (introspective meditation), rather thanfocusing on the meditation itself, he is preoccupied with howmuch time he has left to complete his samayik. When a persondoes samayik, his attention is on his doership, he even claimsthat he did the samayik, but at the same time he is looking atthe hourglass. How can you call it meditation when his focus ison the hourglass?Raudra dhyan : What is raudra-dhyan? Say you are ina fabric store, you inquire about a certain fabric and the clothmerchant tells you it is terelene and that it is twenty rupees permeter. You decide to buy it. But what do the cloth sellers dowhen they measure the material? Have you seen them stretch itthis way and that way? Do you think they are exercising theirarms? That is raudra-dhyan. Raudra-dhyan is to sell the customershort and cheat them out of their fair share. Here the merchant’sintent is to hyper stretch the material while measuring it so thathe will end up giving you less than the amount you pay for.Raudra-dhyan is to take more than needed. It is to cheatcustomers when measuring or weighing their goods and sellingthem short. Adulteration of food and other goods is also raudra-dhyan. To covet other people’s belongings or to even thinkabout seizing other people’s happiness is raudra-dhyana. Decidein advance what your profit margin needs to be. It is acceptablefor you to make fifteen to twenty percent profit in your business.If in addition to this, you sell your customers short by stretchingthe material when you measure, that is an offence. It is a seriousand grave offence. A true Jain will not have raudra-dhyana, andshould it occur, it would occur only once in a while, just likeaccidents. Getting angry, cursing someone and quarrelling isalso raudra-dhyan. The fully enlightened Lords have said that aJain should utilize raudra-dhyan very sparingly and yet today itis used the most. The spiritual leaders are committing raudra-dhyan when they get angry with their less intelligent disciples.Even internal annoyance is considered raudra-dhyan. These dayswhat can be said about people who use foul language directlyand frequently?A life in hell is the consequence of raudra-dhyana.Aarta-dhyan : Aarta-dhyan is meditation that causessuffering to the soul (the person himself). A person who doesnot hurt any living being but worries about his future is aarta-dhyan. It is however, better than raudra-dhyan because he is38Aptavani-1Aptavani-137not hurting anyone. Aarta-dhyan does not hurt others. Anger,pride, attachment or greed does not occur in aarta-dhyan. Aarta-dhyan is not to be found in this day and age. Raudra-dhyan is byfar the most predominant meditation in this day and age whereasthere was very little of it in the satyug. It is aarta-dhyan whenparents worry about the marriage of their ten-year-old daughter.It is aarta-dhyan when you are anxious for your unwanted guestto leave. It is also aarta-dhyan to keep wishing that your guestswould not leave because you like them or you are attracted tothem. A guru, who is internally agitated with his disciple becausehe does not serve him well, is also in aarta-dhyan.What are the consequences of aarta-dhyan? It is a life inthe animal kingdom.Dharma-dhyan is absence of worries and all internalconflicts. Dharma-dhyan is the absence of any aarta-dhyan andraudra-dhyan; it is to remain in that which is good for all. Sucha person is fearless, has patience, is worry-free and remainssteadfast in his opinion. God does not have any objection toone being ignorant about one’s real Self, but one must alwaysremain free from both internal and external conflicts.In the current time cycle of kaliyug, only a few peoplehave dharma-dhyaan. Only about two to five percent havedharma-dhyan. In this kaliyug, it is not just the ordinary familyman who has to endure worries and externally induced miseriesbut also the sadhu (male ascetics), sadhvis (female ascetics),acharyas (spiritual preceptors) and mendicants. When there isnothing to worry about, one will be annoyed with his disciples.What are the consequences of dharma-dhyan? If there isonly dharma-dhyaan, then one will be born as a celestial being(devgati), but if there is dharma-dhyaan along with any aarta-dhyan, then one will be born as a human.Shukla-dhyan : There are four stages of shukla-dhyan :In the first stage, there is not a clear but a vague and indistinctexperience of the Soul. In the second stage there is a constant,clear and distinct experience of the Soul. My state is the secondstage of shukla-dhyaan. The fully enlightened beings are in thethird stage of shukla-dhyaan. And the fourth stage is the finalliberation.The clear and distinct experience of the Soul takes placewhen one comes to know the Supreme Lord completely, butdoes not have complete knowledge of all that is to be known.And absolute and complete knowledge (Keval Gnan) is whereall and everything knowable is known.An analogy of first stage with lack of clarity of the Selfis when you can sense the presence of ice in a dark room. Eventhough you cannot see it, you can feel the coolness of the airthat flows over the ice throughout the room. And the directexperience, the second stage of shukla-dhyan of the Soul, is theexperience of actually touching the ice itself.I have not kept much difference between you, KevliBhagwan (fully enlightened One) and myself. The current timecycle has obstructed absolute knowledge for me; I am stuck atthree hundred and fifty-six degrees, short of four degrees requiredto achieve Keval Gnan. But upon you I bestow AbsoluteKnowledge.What is the consequence of shukla-dhyan? Liberation.I am considered a meddlesome vitarag (one without anyattachment); I am not a complete vitarag. I am absolutelydetached in all aspects except one : I meddle by telling people.‘Come, I will grant you liberation’. I meddle all I can in orderto bestow liberation onto others.Transmigration According To Meditation and IntentionWhat does the Lord say? The Lord says that he does not38Aptavani-1Aptavani-137not hurting anyone. Aarta-dhyan does not hurt others. Anger,pride, attachment or greed does not occur in aarta-dhyan. Aarta-dhyan is not to be found in this day and age. Raudra-dhyan is byfar the most predominant meditation in this day and age whereasthere was very little of it in the satyug. It is aarta-dhyan whenparents worry about the marriage of their ten-year-old daughter.It is aarta-dhyan when you are anxious for your unwanted guestto leave. It is also aarta-dhyan to keep wishing that your guestswould not leave because you like them or you are attracted tothem. A guru, who is internally agitated with his disciple becausehe does not serve him well, is also in aarta-dhyan.What are the consequences of aarta-dhyan? It is a life inthe animal kingdom.Dharma-dhyan is absence of worries and all internalconflicts. Dharma-dhyan is the absence of any aarta-dhyan andraudra-dhyan; it is to remain in that which is good for all. Sucha person is fearless, has patience, is worry-free and remainssteadfast in his opinion. God does not have any objection toone being ignorant about one’s real Self, but one must alwaysremain free from both internal and external conflicts.In the current time cycle of kaliyug, only a few peoplehave dharma-dhyaan. Only about two to five percent havedharma-dhyan. In this kaliyug, it is not just the ordinary familyman who has to endure worries and externally induced miseriesbut also the sadhu (male ascetics), sadhvis (female ascetics),acharyas (spiritual preceptors) and mendicants. When there isnothing to worry about, one will be annoyed with his disciples.What are the consequences of dharma-dhyan? If there isonly dharma-dhyaan, then one will be born as a celestial being(devgati), but if there is dharma-dhyaan along with any aarta-dhyan, then one will be born as a human.Shukla-dhyan : There are four stages of shukla-dhyan :In the first stage, there is not a clear but a vague and indistinctexperience of the Soul. In the second stage there is a constant,clear and distinct experience of the Soul. My state is the secondstage of shukla-dhyaan. The fully enlightened beings are in thethird stage of shukla-dhyaan. And the fourth stage is the finalliberation.The clear and distinct experience of the Soul takes placewhen one comes to know the Supreme Lord completely, butdoes not have complete knowledge of all that is to be known.And absolute and complete knowledge (Keval Gnan) is whereall and everything knowable is known.An analogy of first stage with lack of clarity of the Selfis when you can sense the presence of ice in a dark room. Eventhough you cannot see it, you can feel the coolness of the airthat flows over the ice throughout the room. And the directexperience, the second stage of shukla-dhyan of the Soul, is theexperience of actually touching the ice itself.I have not kept much difference between you, KevliBhagwan (fully enlightened One) and myself. The current timecycle has obstructed absolute knowledge for me; I am stuck atthree hundred and fifty-six degrees, short of four degrees requiredto achieve Keval Gnan. But upon you I bestow AbsoluteKnowledge.What is the consequence of shukla-dhyan? Liberation.I am considered a meddlesome vitarag (one without anyattachment); I am not a complete vitarag. I am absolutelydetached in all aspects except one : I meddle by telling people.‘Come, I will grant you liberation’. I meddle all I can in orderto bestow liberation onto others.Transmigration According To Meditation and IntentionWhat does the Lord say? The Lord says that he does notAptavani-13940Aptavani-1look at your actions. Your actions are a result of your past life’skarma. But what is noted is your dhyan and what it is engagedin while you are doing a samayik or pratikraman (ritual of askingfor forgiveness). One may be doing samayik but his dhyan is onthe hourglass or he keeps getting irritated with his disciples andthen he claims that he did samayik.An acharya maharaj was sitting before Lord Mahavir insamayik. The acharya was given spiritual knowledge (Gnan) buthe did not have the knowledge of vyavasthit. Another enlightenedbeing asked the Lord about the acharya’s future life.The Lord replied, “At this moment he would go to acelestial life form.”A little later someone again asked the Lord about theacharyas’ future life and the Lord replied, “He is destined fora life in hell.” Fifteen minutes later someone else asked the Lordthe same question and the Lord replied that the acharya wouldattain liberation.‘Lord how can this be when the acharya is so deep inmeditation?’ they asked the Lord and the Lord said, ‘you cannotsee what I can see and what you see, I regard irrelevant. Althoughthe acharya is seated in mediation, only I can see where hisdhyan is. At first his dhyan was such that it would have takenhim towards a celestial life. Later his dhyan became divertedand it would have taken him to hell. Eventually his dhyan turnedpositive and was worthy of acquiring liberation for him. It isdhyan that determines the consequences for the next life. It isthe pudgal (the physical body – a complex of intake and output)that creates images but if you identify yourself with those imagesand become one with them by feeling, ‘this is happening to me’,then you are endorsing them. If on the other hand, you remaindetached and do not become one with them and simply remainthe observer of them, then you are free from the consequences.When a cloth merchant cheats his clients by stretching thematerial as he measures it with the dhyan of, ‘how proficient I amin my business, I am earning a lot of money’, he does not realizethat he is really binding karma for a life in hell. This is raudra-dhyan. Another merchant cheats his customers in the same waybut while doing so, his dhyan is, ‘this is a wrongful act on my part.A disciple of Lord Mahavir would never do such a thing’; if suchrepentance exists in his dhyan, he will be born in the animalkingdom. The actions of both the merchants are the same but thedifference in their dhyan binds different life form.No one in the era of this time cycle has the knowledgeof the Self. If people at least understood dharma (relative worldlyreligions), then dharma-dhyan would be possible or they wouldbe able to practice it. The religions of today are not based ontheir original foundation and that is why people do not havedharma-dhyan. They only have aarta-dhyan and raudra-dhyan.People will praise a person who makes a donation of fiftythousand rupees. The donor while making the donation feelsthat had the mayor not coerced him into making the donation,he would never have done so. Those who give against their willare in raudra-dhyan and will therefore bind a life in hell. Whilethe person who has no money feels that he would make a bigdonation if he had the money, binds for a higher life form withouteven giving a dime. The other person, who donated fifty thousandrupees, binds a life in hell.Acceptable Use Of IntellectPeople, who use their intellect to trick and deceive othersin order to make money, create grave liability for themselves.Every such use of intellect, every trick is severe raudra-dhyan.To use your higher intellect to take advantage of another withlesser intellect is a trick.Intellect binds one to the worldly life and will never allowAptavani-13940Aptavani-1look at your actions. Your actions are a result of your past life’skarma. But what is noted is your dhyan and what it is engagedin while you are doing a samayik or pratikraman (ritual of askingfor forgiveness). One may be doing samayik but his dhyan is onthe hourglass or he keeps getting irritated with his disciples andthen he claims that he did samayik.An acharya maharaj was sitting before Lord Mahavir insamayik. The acharya was given spiritual knowledge (Gnan) buthe did not have the knowledge of vyavasthit. Another enlightenedbeing asked the Lord about the acharya’s future life.The Lord replied, “At this moment he would go to acelestial life form.”A little later someone again asked the Lord about theacharyas’ future life and the Lord replied, “He is destined fora life in hell.” Fifteen minutes later someone else asked the Lordthe same question and the Lord replied that the acharya wouldattain liberation.‘Lord how can this be when the acharya is so deep inmeditation?’ they asked the Lord and the Lord said, ‘you cannotsee what I can see and what you see, I regard irrelevant. Althoughthe acharya is seated in mediation, only I can see where hisdhyan is. At first his dhyan was such that it would have takenhim towards a celestial life. Later his dhyan became divertedand it would have taken him to hell. Eventually his dhyan turnedpositive and was worthy of acquiring liberation for him. It isdhyan that determines the consequences for the next life. It isthe pudgal (the physical body – a complex of intake and output)that creates images but if you identify yourself with those imagesand become one with them by feeling, ‘this is happening to me’,then you are endorsing them. If on the other hand, you remaindetached and do not become one with them and simply remainthe observer of them, then you are free from the consequences.When a cloth merchant cheats his clients by stretching thematerial as he measures it with the dhyan of, ‘how proficient I amin my business, I am earning a lot of money’, he does not realizethat he is really binding karma for a life in hell. This is raudra-dhyan. Another merchant cheats his customers in the same waybut while doing so, his dhyan is, ‘this is a wrongful act on my part.A disciple of Lord Mahavir would never do such a thing’; if suchrepentance exists in his dhyan, he will be born in the animalkingdom. The actions of both the merchants are the same but thedifference in their dhyan binds different life form.No one in the era of this time cycle has the knowledgeof the Self. If people at least understood dharma (relative worldlyreligions), then dharma-dhyan would be possible or they wouldbe able to practice it. The religions of today are not based ontheir original foundation and that is why people do not havedharma-dhyan. They only have aarta-dhyan and raudra-dhyan.People will praise a person who makes a donation of fiftythousand rupees. The donor while making the donation feelsthat had the mayor not coerced him into making the donation,he would never have done so. Those who give against their willare in raudra-dhyan and will therefore bind a life in hell. Whilethe person who has no money feels that he would make a bigdonation if he had the money, binds for a higher life form withouteven giving a dime. The other person, who donated fifty thousandrupees, binds a life in hell.Acceptable Use Of IntellectPeople, who use their intellect to trick and deceive othersin order to make money, create grave liability for themselves.Every such use of intellect, every trick is severe raudra-dhyan.To use your higher intellect to take advantage of another withlesser intellect is a trick.Intellect binds one to the worldly life and will never allowAptavani-14142Aptavani-1one to achieve liberation. Lord Krishna too has referred tointellect as ‘vyabhicharani’ (licentious or seductive). The intellectdrowns one in the worldly life; it will never let a person comeout of it. It is totally detrimental to the self with reference toliberation. As the intellect increases, so does one’s internalsuffering. Why does a twenty-year-old sibling have greatersorrow than his two-year-old upon the death of their mother?It is because the twenty-year old has more intellect.The Lord has said that one does not need to use intellectat all in the worldly life, but if there is a need to do so, then Hehas set a limit. Just use enough intellect to free yourself from aprecarious situation and to ensure that you do not find yourselfin the same situation again. But these foolish people have startedto use their intellect to make money through devious means.Not only that but people have learned to swindle others bytricking them. A trick means to deceive the other person withouthim knowing that he has been deceived. That is grave raudra-dhyan and for that not even the seventh hell (the worst of theseven stratum of hell) will accommodate them.Universally Acceptable SpeechWhat is the definition of ‘syaadvaad’? Syaadvaad is to nothurt anyone’s feelings or to say that their viewpoint is wrong. Youmay find it wrong but it is the other person’s viewpoint. The onewho is syaadvaad will accept every viewpoint because he issitting in the center. I am syaadvaad. I am sitting in the center.The Lord has said to do samayik, pratikraman (apology)and pratyakhyan (inner resolve never to repeat the error), whichare the activities for the attainment of the Soul. These activitiesare to be performed properly and in accordance with hisinstructions.From the perspective of only absolute knowledge,everyone is innocent - no one is at fault; their circumstances areadverse. I speak frankly and sometimes sternly; I do so purelyout of compassion, in order to rid people of their disease.The Gnani And The Nature Of DharmaMany people claim their daily life interactions (vyavahaar)is their dharma (religion). But you cannot say that until you areSelf-realized (nischay dharma). How can you say that yourworldly life is your religion if you do not have the knowledge ofyour (real) Self? The Gnani uses his infinite powers to create aline of demarcation between the real (the Self) and the relative(non-self), and after that it will always keep them separate.Then they are eternally separate. Thereafter, your worldlyinteractions become your relative religion and the activity of theSelf is your real religion. It is only then that you understand thedifference between the two. The Gnani will separate the territoryof the Real from the relative and you will inherently come tounderstand what belongs to your real Self and what belongs toyour relative self. How can anyone claim vyavahaar dharma(the worldly life) until he acquires nischay dharma (the real)?Until then it is regarded as laukik dharma (worldly or relativereligion).Worldly religion means religion believed by the worldlypeople. Worldly religions teach people to get rid of bad habitsand develop good ones. They teach you to do merit karma andavoid demerit karma. Such religions teach people not to stealor lie and to conduct themselves in a way that will bring themhappiness and peace. According to the world, real religion isdoing good deeds, but I call that relative religion. With suchreligions you are bound for a birth in one of following four lifeforms : celestial, human, animal or hell.Relative religion is to move from bad towards the good.Real religion is to move from good to the absolutely pure. If youAptavani-14142Aptavani-1one to achieve liberation. Lord Krishna too has referred tointellect as ‘vyabhicharani’ (licentious or seductive). The intellectdrowns one in the worldly life; it will never let a person comeout of it. It is totally detrimental to the self with reference toliberation. As the intellect increases, so does one’s internalsuffering. Why does a twenty-year-old sibling have greatersorrow than his two-year-old upon the death of their mother?It is because the twenty-year old has more intellect.The Lord has said that one does not need to use intellectat all in the worldly life, but if there is a need to do so, then Hehas set a limit. Just use enough intellect to free yourself from aprecarious situation and to ensure that you do not find yourselfin the same situation again. But these foolish people have startedto use their intellect to make money through devious means.Not only that but people have learned to swindle others bytricking them. A trick means to deceive the other person withouthim knowing that he has been deceived. That is grave raudra-dhyan and for that not even the seventh hell (the worst of theseven stratum of hell) will accommodate them.Universally Acceptable SpeechWhat is the definition of ‘syaadvaad’? Syaadvaad is to nothurt anyone’s feelings or to say that their viewpoint is wrong. Youmay find it wrong but it is the other person’s viewpoint. The onewho is syaadvaad will accept every viewpoint because he issitting in the center. I am syaadvaad. I am sitting in the center.The Lord has said to do samayik, pratikraman (apology)and pratyakhyan (inner resolve never to repeat the error), whichare the activities for the attainment of the Soul. These activitiesare to be performed properly and in accordance with hisinstructions.From the perspective of only absolute knowledge,everyone is innocent - no one is at fault; their circumstances areadverse. I speak frankly and sometimes sternly; I do so purelyout of compassion, in order to rid people of their disease.The Gnani And The Nature Of DharmaMany people claim their daily life interactions (vyavahaar)is their dharma (religion). But you cannot say that until you areSelf-realized (nischay dharma). How can you say that yourworldly life is your religion if you do not have the knowledge ofyour (real) Self? The Gnani uses his infinite powers to create aline of demarcation between the real (the Self) and the relative(non-self), and after that it will always keep them separate.Then they are eternally separate. Thereafter, your worldlyinteractions become your relative religion and the activity of theSelf is your real religion. It is only then that you understand thedifference between the two. The Gnani will separate the territoryof the Real from the relative and you will inherently come tounderstand what belongs to your real Self and what belongs toyour relative self. How can anyone claim vyavahaar dharma(the worldly life) until he acquires nischay dharma (the real)?Until then it is regarded as laukik dharma (worldly or relativereligion).Worldly religion means religion believed by the worldlypeople. Worldly religions teach people to get rid of bad habitsand develop good ones. They teach you to do merit karma andavoid demerit karma. Such religions teach people not to stealor lie and to conduct themselves in a way that will bring themhappiness and peace. According to the world, real religion isdoing good deeds, but I call that relative religion. With suchreligions you are bound for a birth in one of following four lifeforms : celestial, human, animal or hell.Relative religion is to move from bad towards the good.Real religion is to move from good to the absolutely pure. If you44Aptavani-1Aptavani-143want liberation you will have to embrace the real religion. In realreligion you become free from the good and the bad, the pleasantand the unpleasant, the right and the wrong. The religion of theSelf is the only true religion. It is a non-worldly religion. Allother religions that focus on the physical body and its actionsare relative religions; they are the religions of the non-self, theyare worldly religions. There are no boundaries or sects in realreligion, no flags to fly, no conflicts of opinions, nothing torenounce or accumulate. In the real religion there is no partialitytowards anything; liberation is never attainable through partiality.People want liberation and yet they engage in conflictsand difference of opinions, and take sides. By claiming you areright, you automatically say that the other person is wrong. Youwill never achieve liberation by saying anyone is wrong. You willonly attain the abode of the supreme Self, which is void of anypartiality, when you get rid of your differences of opinions,discord, and sectarianism and come to the center. By takingsides you strengthen the foundation of partiality and in doing soyou bind yourself to infinite worldly lives. Look here! Do youwant liberation or do you want to remain in sects? How manyfactions and warring camps have been created from just onereligion? There is no liberation wherever there is any kashaya(anger, pride, attachment and greed), and there is no kashayain religion. People resort to kashaya to strengthen their sectsand have reduced religion to a racecourse. They compete fordisciples. A man renounces his wife and children but takes ondisciples in their place. Then he spends the entire day in discordand restlessness with his disciples. How can you call that a pathto liberation?A Vitarag would never speak the harsh words that I dobut what can I do? In order to rid these people of their disease,the speech that flows through this medium is full of compassionand absolute detachment. People are not at fault; they too desireliberation but because they lack understanding, they doeverything wrong. This era of the current time cycle is extremelystrange and everyone is caught up in its storm.I have infinite compassion. In my eyes, everyone is innocentbecause I do not see any faults in anyone. I have made myvision flawless and see the entire world as being flawless.).Flawless VisionA spiritual master was sitting in Lord Mahavir’s assemblywith other aspirants. He was overcome with a vain delusion thathe had a great deal of knowledge. He then asked Lord Mahavirhow much difference there was between the Lord and himself.He also asked the Lord how many more lives he had to gobefore liberation. He was under the impression that he wouldattain liberation within three births. The Lord who is absolutelydetached understood the master’s inner state. The Lord’s replywas that his question was a good one but since five otherbeings’ merit karma had also come into fruition, they too shouldbe called forth. The Lord called for the mayor of the town, achaste woman, a prostitute, a pickpocket and a donkey whohappened to be standing close by. The Lord then went on totell the master that there was no difference between him theLord himself, the master, the mayor, the chaste woman, theprostitute, the pickpocket and the donkey. ‘What are you sayingLord? Is there no difference between you and us? There is somuch visible difference!’ exclaimed the master. The Lordexplained that the difference was in his perception. The Lordwent on to say, ‘Three lifetimes ago, I met a Gnani whobestowed upon me a flawless vision, a vision that did not seefaults in anyone. I used that very vision for the two subsequentlives and in this life I am flawless and have a complete flawlessvision. Having acquired such a perfect vision, in this lifetime, Isee everyone as completely flawless. With this vision, I am44Aptavani-1Aptavani-143want liberation you will have to embrace the real religion. In realreligion you become free from the good and the bad, the pleasantand the unpleasant, the right and the wrong. The religion of theSelf is the only true religion. It is a non-worldly religion. Allother religions that focus on the physical body and its actionsare relative religions; they are the religions of the non-self, theyare worldly religions. There are no boundaries or sects in realreligion, no flags to fly, no conflicts of opinions, nothing torenounce or accumulate. In the real religion there is no partialitytowards anything; liberation is never attainable through partiality.People want liberation and yet they engage in conflictsand difference of opinions, and take sides. By claiming you areright, you automatically say that the other person is wrong. Youwill never achieve liberation by saying anyone is wrong. You willonly attain the abode of the supreme Self, which is void of anypartiality, when you get rid of your differences of opinions,discord, and sectarianism and come to the center. By takingsides you strengthen the foundation of partiality and in doing soyou bind yourself to infinite worldly lives. Look here! Do youwant liberation or do you want to remain in sects? How manyfactions and warring camps have been created from just onereligion? There is no liberation wherever there is any kashaya(anger, pride, attachment and greed), and there is no kashayain religion. People resort to kashaya to strengthen their sectsand have reduced religion to a racecourse. They compete fordisciples. A man renounces his wife and children but takes ondisciples in their place. Then he spends the entire day in discordand restlessness with his disciples. How can you call that a pathto liberation?A Vitarag would never speak the harsh words that I dobut what can I do? In order to rid these people of their disease,the speech that flows through this medium is full of compassionand absolute detachment. People are not at fault; they too desireliberation but because they lack understanding, they doeverything wrong. This era of the current time cycle is extremelystrange and everyone is caught up in its storm.I have infinite compassion. In my eyes, everyone is innocentbecause I do not see any faults in anyone. I have made myvision flawless and see the entire world as being flawless.).Flawless VisionA spiritual master was sitting in Lord Mahavir’s assemblywith other aspirants. He was overcome with a vain delusion thathe had a great deal of knowledge. He then asked Lord Mahavirhow much difference there was between the Lord and himself.He also asked the Lord how many more lives he had to gobefore liberation. He was under the impression that he wouldattain liberation within three births. The Lord who is absolutelydetached understood the master’s inner state. The Lord’s replywas that his question was a good one but since five otherbeings’ merit karma had also come into fruition, they too shouldbe called forth. The Lord called for the mayor of the town, achaste woman, a prostitute, a pickpocket and a donkey whohappened to be standing close by. The Lord then went on totell the master that there was no difference between him theLord himself, the master, the mayor, the chaste woman, theprostitute, the pickpocket and the donkey. ‘What are you sayingLord? Is there no difference between you and us? There is somuch visible difference!’ exclaimed the master. The Lordexplained that the difference was in his perception. The Lordwent on to say, ‘Three lifetimes ago, I met a Gnani whobestowed upon me a flawless vision, a vision that did not seefaults in anyone. I used that very vision for the two subsequentlives and in this life I am flawless and have a complete flawlessvision. Having acquired such a perfect vision, in this lifetime, Isee everyone as completely flawless. With this vision, I am46Aptavani-1Aptavani-145telling you that there is no difference between you, all theseothers and myself. The master still insisted that he could see alot of difference and that he could not understand and accepthow the Lord could consider a master, a mayor, a chaste woman,a prostitute, a pickpocket and a donkey and Himself as equal.The Lord went on ‘Look revered master! The inner content(the Soul) within you, the mayor, the chaste woman, theprostitute, the pickpocket, the donkey and me is the same. Theonly difference is that in me the Self is fully manifest and in you,it is veiled. I can see in my absolute knowledge that from all ofyou, the donkey has the least number of lives left before liberation.Because dear master, the mental load that you carry from havingstudied voluminous scriptures will take many lifetimes to unloadwhereas the donkey will meet a Gnani in his next life and beliberated!’Intoxicated Ego And LiberationMental burden is really intoxication of ego. The lesser theintoxication, the sooner liberation will come.Those who have intoxicated ego will never attain liberation.The attitude and feeling of ‘I know something’ is heavyintoxication; it is present even in sleep. Only those who do nothave such intoxication attain liberation. Do people read scripturesand assimilate them for the purpose of acquiring liberation or isit to increase their wandering for lifetimes to come, by increasingtheir intoxication? Intoxication of a drunkard is easily removedby splashing water over him but the intoxication one has ofhaving read the scriptures and ‘I know something’, can neverbe destroyed.Possesed By The Mind, Speech and BodyA person keeps looking in the mirror when he has a tinypimple on his face because he believes that he is indeed‘Chandulal’. He has an ingrained belief that he is also the bodyand that is why the poor fellow keeps gawking in the mirror.But this body does not belong to you; it has taken possessionover you. It is really an unnecessary baggage that has latchedon to you. If a boy is loafing around with a girl, his father willask him. ‘How come you found this baggage?’ The son willretort ‘what do you mean by baggage? She is not a baggage?What do you know about such matters?’ It is only after sometime when his girlfriend quarrels with him and jilts him for anotherboy that he will realize what his father meant by baggage. In thesame way this body has latched on to you. Once you know thatYou are not the body, it’s possession and attachment over youwill be broken. Such baggage can never be without betrayal.What kind of entrapment does this mind, speech and body haveover us and what do we mean by entrapment? It means thatyou cannot free yourself from it, even when you want to.Entrapment is the same thing as a baggage. A person will lookfor a way out when he realizes that he is trapped by such abaggage, but what if he happens to love it? Then it will cling tohim even more and trap him even deeper. Such entrapments arebased on attachment and abhorrence (raag-dwesh). I free youfrom your attachment and abhorrence and then this entrapment(of the body) will gradually disappear. Do you think you needto get rid of this baggage by hitting it or punishing it? No, youhave to get rid of it through vitaragata (non-attachment) andahimsa (non-violence). Your mind, speech and body are anentrapment. If you become the knower and observer of thisbaggage, it will loosen its grip and fall away on its own.Aspire For Only LiberationInsist only on liberation. In all other circumstances andsituations maintain complacency. Nothing is poisonous, only yourinsistence is poison. I am stating this very candidly : Any paththat requires you to make any effort is a worldly path and will46Aptavani-1Aptavani-145telling you that there is no difference between you, all theseothers and myself. The master still insisted that he could see alot of difference and that he could not understand and accepthow the Lord could consider a master, a mayor, a chaste woman,a prostitute, a pickpocket and a donkey and Himself as equal.The Lord went on ‘Look revered master! The inner content(the Soul) within you, the mayor, the chaste woman, theprostitute, the pickpocket, the donkey and me is the same. Theonly difference is that in me the Self is fully manifest and in you,it is veiled. I can see in my absolute knowledge that from all ofyou, the donkey has the least number of lives left before liberation.Because dear master, the mental load that you carry from havingstudied voluminous scriptures will take many lifetimes to unloadwhereas the donkey will meet a Gnani in his next life and beliberated!’Intoxicated Ego And LiberationMental burden is really intoxication of ego. The lesser theintoxication, the sooner liberation will come.Those who have intoxicated ego will never attain liberation.The attitude and feeling of ‘I know something’ is heavyintoxication; it is present even in sleep. Only those who do nothave such intoxication attain liberation. Do people read scripturesand assimilate them for the purpose of acquiring liberation or isit to increase their wandering for lifetimes to come, by increasingtheir intoxication? Intoxication of a drunkard is easily removedby splashing water over him but the intoxication one has ofhaving read the scriptures and ‘I know something’, can neverbe destroyed.Possesed By The Mind, Speech and BodyA person keeps looking in the mirror when he has a tinypimple on his face because he believes that he is indeed‘Chandulal’. He has an ingrained belief that he is also the bodyand that is why the poor fellow keeps gawking in the mirror.But this body does not belong to you; it has taken possessionover you. It is really an unnecessary baggage that has latchedon to you. If a boy is loafing around with a girl, his father willask him. ‘How come you found this baggage?’ The son willretort ‘what do you mean by baggage? She is not a baggage?What do you know about such matters?’ It is only after sometime when his girlfriend quarrels with him and jilts him for anotherboy that he will realize what his father meant by baggage. In thesame way this body has latched on to you. Once you know thatYou are not the body, it’s possession and attachment over youwill be broken. Such baggage can never be without betrayal.What kind of entrapment does this mind, speech and body haveover us and what do we mean by entrapment? It means thatyou cannot free yourself from it, even when you want to.Entrapment is the same thing as a baggage. A person will lookfor a way out when he realizes that he is trapped by such abaggage, but what if he happens to love it? Then it will cling tohim even more and trap him even deeper. Such entrapments arebased on attachment and abhorrence (raag-dwesh). I free youfrom your attachment and abhorrence and then this entrapment(of the body) will gradually disappear. Do you think you needto get rid of this baggage by hitting it or punishing it? No, youhave to get rid of it through vitaragata (non-attachment) andahimsa (non-violence). Your mind, speech and body are anentrapment. If you become the knower and observer of thisbaggage, it will loosen its grip and fall away on its own.Aspire For Only LiberationInsist only on liberation. In all other circumstances andsituations maintain complacency. Nothing is poisonous, only yourinsistence is poison. I am stating this very candidly : Any paththat requires you to make any effort is a worldly path and willAptavani-14748Aptavani-1not liberate you. Have desire for liberation only. If you were todesire liberation just once, then even after a hundred thousandlifetimes, you would encounter a Gnani and you would achieveliberation. Liberation means to be completely free, freedom fromall worldly miseries. Efforts are needed for the daily mundanelife but not for attaining liberation, because liberation is the verynature of the Self. Water by nature is cool and one has to makean effort to heat it but is any effort required to cool it? No, noeffort is required, it will cool on it’s own because that is itsnature. But how can you understand this? In reality you are freebut dense illusion and ignorance prevent you from knowing this.This illusion can never be destroyed until you meet a GnaniPurush. The Gnani Purush will destroy this illusion for you, solook for a Gnani Purush. Look for a living Gnani Purush.Look for the One who is liberated. Look for the Onewho has crossed the ocean of life and has the power to helpcountless others do the same. Find such a person and followhim fearlessly. Only I am such a liberated one in this presentera. I am the astounding incarnation of Knowledge. I can bestowliberation in just one hour. You do not have to do anything nordo you have to give anything in return. I have no need or desirefor anything. God only manifests in those who become absolutelydesire-less. You will come across many ascetics who have nodesire for wealth, you may come across some that have nosensual desires, but they will all have desire for respect, fameor disciples. There will always be some deep-rooted desire ofone kind or another within them. Where there is absolutedesirelessness, only there will the Supreme Lord manifest. Ihave no desire for wealth, sensual pleasures, disciples, fame oranything thing else. There is nothing that I want. But if you wantanything from me, come to me and take it. However ask wiselyso that you never have to ask again.All worldly happiness is a by-product and to realize theSelf is the main production. People have abandoned thefactory of main production and instead have started factoriesof by-production, so when will they ever realize the Self?The entire world wanders around in ignorance as a result ofnot knowing the path to liberation and as a consequence,they get lost wherever they go. If you want liberation,ultimately you will have to go to the Gnani. Even when youwant to go to the Dadar Railway Station, you have to asksomeone who knows the way there. But this path to liberationis narrow, complicated and like a labyrinth. If you attempt iton your own, you are bound to get lost so look for a Gnaniand follow his footsteps exactly. I am the giver of liberation.I am licensed to give liberation and can take you all the way.I am an incarnation of Akram Gnan. I can bestow upon youthe status of Godhood within just one hour. You should becompletely ready for it.When you come to me for liberation, come with onlythese two requirements : First : the belief of ‘I do not knowanything’ and second, ‘utter humility’. The belief of ‘I knowsomething’ is in fact intoxication. Real knowledge is enlightenment.It is a ‘light’ and where there is light, one does not stumble.How can you say that you know when you keep stumblingevery step of the way? Have any of your worries gone away?If you had real knowledge, you would not have any worries.How can I fill your pot when your pot is half filled with yourbelief of ‘I know something’? But if your pot were empty, thenI would fill it up with nectar. Then you can go wherever youwant, live your worldly life, get your children married but makesure that you abide by my Agnas (Dadashri’s five precepts allSelf-Realized beings should observe).This talk is unprecedented, never before has anyone reador heard it. I am not a doer in all this. I am merely an instrumentfor the salvation of the world.Aptavani-14748Aptavani-1not liberate you. Have desire for liberation only. If you were todesire liberation just once, then even after a hundred thousandlifetimes, you would encounter a Gnani and you would achieveliberation. Liberation means to be completely free, freedom fromall worldly miseries. Efforts are needed for the daily mundanelife but not for attaining liberation, because liberation is the verynature of the Self. Water by nature is cool and one has to makean effort to heat it but is any effort required to cool it? No, noeffort is required, it will cool on it’s own because that is itsnature. But how can you understand this? In reality you are freebut dense illusion and ignorance prevent you from knowing this.This illusion can never be destroyed until you meet a GnaniPurush. The Gnani Purush will destroy this illusion for you, solook for a Gnani Purush. Look for a living Gnani Purush.Look for the One who is liberated. Look for the Onewho has crossed the ocean of life and has the power to helpcountless others do the same. Find such a person and followhim fearlessly. Only I am such a liberated one in this presentera. I am the astounding incarnation of Knowledge. I can bestowliberation in just one hour. You do not have to do anything nordo you have to give anything in return. I have no need or desirefor anything. God only manifests in those who become absolutelydesire-less. You will come across many ascetics who have nodesire for wealth, you may come across some that have nosensual desires, but they will all have desire for respect, fameor disciples. There will always be some deep-rooted desire ofone kind or another within them. Where there is absolutedesirelessness, only there will the Supreme Lord manifest. Ihave no desire for wealth, sensual pleasures, disciples, fame oranything thing else. There is nothing that I want. But if you wantanything from me, come to me and take it. However ask wiselyso that you never have to ask again.All worldly happiness is a by-product and to realize theSelf is the main production. People have abandoned thefactory of main production and instead have started factoriesof by-production, so when will they ever realize the Self?The entire world wanders around in ignorance as a result ofnot knowing the path to liberation and as a consequence,they get lost wherever they go. If you want liberation,ultimately you will have to go to the Gnani. Even when youwant to go to the Dadar Railway Station, you have to asksomeone who knows the way there. But this path to liberationis narrow, complicated and like a labyrinth. If you attempt iton your own, you are bound to get lost so look for a Gnaniand follow his footsteps exactly. I am the giver of liberation.I am licensed to give liberation and can take you all the way.I am an incarnation of Akram Gnan. I can bestow upon youthe status of Godhood within just one hour. You should becompletely ready for it.When you come to me for liberation, come with onlythese two requirements : First : the belief of ‘I do not knowanything’ and second, ‘utter humility’. The belief of ‘I knowsomething’ is in fact intoxication. Real knowledge is enlightenment.It is a ‘light’ and where there is light, one does not stumble.How can you say that you know when you keep stumblingevery step of the way? Have any of your worries gone away?If you had real knowledge, you would not have any worries.How can I fill your pot when your pot is half filled with yourbelief of ‘I know something’? But if your pot were empty, thenI would fill it up with nectar. Then you can go wherever youwant, live your worldly life, get your children married but makesure that you abide by my Agnas (Dadashri’s five precepts allSelf-Realized beings should observe).This talk is unprecedented, never before has anyone reador heard it. I am not a doer in all this. I am merely an instrumentfor the salvation of the world.50Aptavani-1Aptavani-149The World Is Without Any SubstanceThis world is empty, without any substance. I am sayingthis as I see it in my knowledge. If you think that this world hasany substance or any worth, then you are mistaken.There was an ayurvedic doctor who prescribed a verygood medicine to his patient and instructed him not to eat anychilies because his disease was a result of eating an excessiveamount of chilies. The doctor worked very hard to get hispatient the best of medicine and treatment. For several monthshe tried various medicines and yet he could not see any progressin his patient. One day the doctor decided to pay his patient avisit at his home. On entering the house he saw the patienthaving his dinner and on his plate were two large green chilies.Upon seeing the chilies on the patient’s plate, the doctor wasovercome with such a rage that he suffered a heart attack anddied instantly. Now whom can you blame here? The poor unluckyfellow! The patient may drink poison but why did he drink ittoo? Everything is so empty and without any substance in thisworld, you cannot afford to get stuck anywhere otherwise youwill be trapped. Here the patient was the one eating the chiliesbut instead it was the doctor who was overcome with tensionand ruptured an artery. It is nothing but poison of knowledge.If a person sees nasal mucous fall in his tea, he will not drinkit but if he had no knowledge of it, he would drink the tea withpleasure. Ignorance is bliss. You only feel that something iswrong if you come to know about it; you get scared when youlearn the truth but up until then, you have no fear of it. This isthe very meaning of hollow and empty.A man used to visit me frequently. He had a daughter. Ihad explained to him from the very beginning that the currenttime of kaliyug has a negative influence even on the most wellmeaning people. I cautioned him about such an influence on hisdaughter. He understood what I meant and later when hisdaughter eloped, he remembered me and came to me. He toldme that I was right and that had I not said anything to him, hewould have committed suicide. This is how the world is. It isempty and without substance. You will have to accept whateverhappens. Is anything worth sacrificing your life for? Besides ifyou do, people will call you foolish. People keep their reputationintact by hiding everything and then claim to be noble andhonorable.A Gnani Purush is very wise. He acts before the damageis done. He cuts out the rot before it sets in. Do you think it iseasy to see this world as empty, shallow and superficial?What does a shepherd do? He gathers his sheep andlamb with his calls of ‘tihi, tihi’ and rounds them up in a fencedcompound so they cannot escape. The sheep think that he isprotecting them form the tigers and the shepherd even tells themso. But little do they know that he is exploiting them by milkingthem everyday, shearing off their wool which protects themfrom the cold and eventually serve them as a meal to his guests!This is called superficial and empty.Non-Dependency Of HumansAll human beings of this time cycle are considered ashaving no dependency or protection. The animals are regardedas having dependency but the humans have no one to dependon. Even if you find a person on whom you can depend, hehimself has no one to depend on, so how can he help you? Letme explain to you what I mean by non-dependency :A wealthy man, a priest and his dog set out on a journey.They come across a dense forest and in the forest they meetfour robbers carrying guns and daggers. What effect does thisevent have on each of them? The wealthy man has fear of what50Aptavani-1Aptavani-149The World Is Without Any SubstanceThis world is empty, without any substance. I am sayingthis as I see it in my knowledge. If you think that this world hasany substance or any worth, then you are mistaken.There was an ayurvedic doctor who prescribed a verygood medicine to his patient and instructed him not to eat anychilies because his disease was a result of eating an excessiveamount of chilies. The doctor worked very hard to get hispatient the best of medicine and treatment. For several monthshe tried various medicines and yet he could not see any progressin his patient. One day the doctor decided to pay his patient avisit at his home. On entering the house he saw the patienthaving his dinner and on his plate were two large green chilies.Upon seeing the chilies on the patient’s plate, the doctor wasovercome with such a rage that he suffered a heart attack anddied instantly. Now whom can you blame here? The poor unluckyfellow! The patient may drink poison but why did he drink ittoo? Everything is so empty and without any substance in thisworld, you cannot afford to get stuck anywhere otherwise youwill be trapped. Here the patient was the one eating the chiliesbut instead it was the doctor who was overcome with tensionand ruptured an artery. It is nothing but poison of knowledge.If a person sees nasal mucous fall in his tea, he will not drinkit but if he had no knowledge of it, he would drink the tea withpleasure. Ignorance is bliss. You only feel that something iswrong if you come to know about it; you get scared when youlearn the truth but up until then, you have no fear of it. This isthe very meaning of hollow and empty.A man used to visit me frequently. He had a daughter. Ihad explained to him from the very beginning that the currenttime of kaliyug has a negative influence even on the most wellmeaning people. I cautioned him about such an influence on hisdaughter. He understood what I meant and later when hisdaughter eloped, he remembered me and came to me. He toldme that I was right and that had I not said anything to him, hewould have committed suicide. This is how the world is. It isempty and without substance. You will have to accept whateverhappens. Is anything worth sacrificing your life for? Besides ifyou do, people will call you foolish. People keep their reputationintact by hiding everything and then claim to be noble andhonorable.A Gnani Purush is very wise. He acts before the damageis done. He cuts out the rot before it sets in. Do you think it iseasy to see this world as empty, shallow and superficial?What does a shepherd do? He gathers his sheep andlamb with his calls of ‘tihi, tihi’ and rounds them up in a fencedcompound so they cannot escape. The sheep think that he isprotecting them form the tigers and the shepherd even tells themso. But little do they know that he is exploiting them by milkingthem everyday, shearing off their wool which protects themfrom the cold and eventually serve them as a meal to his guests!This is called superficial and empty.Non-Dependency Of HumansAll human beings of this time cycle are considered ashaving no dependency or protection. The animals are regardedas having dependency but the humans have no one to dependon. Even if you find a person on whom you can depend, hehimself has no one to depend on, so how can he help you? Letme explain to you what I mean by non-dependency :A wealthy man, a priest and his dog set out on a journey.They come across a dense forest and in the forest they meetfour robbers carrying guns and daggers. What effect does thisevent have on each of them? The wealthy man has fear of what52Aptavani-1Aptavani-151will become of him if they take away his bundle of ten thousandrupees. He also has fear of what will happen to him if they killhim. The priest feels that he does not really have anything worthlosing except his drinking pot but he is worried about who willtake care of him if the robbers break his leg and if he becomeslame for life. The dog on the other hand will bark at the robbersand if one of them were to hit him, he will whine a few timesand then with wide eyes watch his master being beaten. Thedog does not worry about what is to become of him becausehe has dependency and the other two unfortunate ones do nothave any dependency. What does the Lord say? As long as youhave not done the darshan of the enlightened One, you are non-dependent. And darshan of an enlightened One will make youdependent. The enlightened One becomes the one you candepend on.Once you are blessed with the realization of the Self froma Gnani, you will never have to worry about what will becomeof you under any external or internal circumstances.The one who surrenders to me will have shelter andprotection after countless lifetimes of having no one to dependon.The one who has the Gnani as his shelter will never haveto worry about what is to become of him, regardless of the kindof situations he may encounter, because my presence along withmy Gnan will prevail and give him protection in all situations.Natural Order And The Worldly SciencesToday, there is an excess of worldly science in the foreigncountries, it has become ‘above normal’; It needs to regainnormality. People will only find happiness if this happens. 97°Fahrenheit is below normal fever and 99° Fahrenheit is abovenormal fever. 98° is the normality. America and other countriesare trapped in the fever of ‘above normal’ (everything being inexcess) and India is trapped in below normal fever. In theforeign countries, the discoveries they are making are abovenormal and yet they cannot find what they are looking for. Whatdoes this indicate? It shows that they are lost. Their technologyhas become so advanced that they can pin point the location ofa car in trouble. You foolish men! Why don’t you look forsomething that will be useful to the body? Men have to shaveeveryday, look for something that stops the hair on their facefrom growing altogether. The body has needs and those needshave to be fulfilled. But what happens when there is anoverabundance of anything? What would happen if it rains non-stop? It will create destruction everywhere. Destruction isinevitable with an overabundance of anything. People complaineven when there is an increase in heat. I had a friend who keptsaying ‘its very hot today, its very hot today’. So I asked himhow much heat would he allow if he were in charge of regulatingthe temperature. He said he would put out just the same amountof heat. I asked him why then was he complaining. This isnature and nature fulfills everyone’s needs whenever it arises.But these foolish people create hindrances by cursing nature. Awell-dressed man will curse nature if it rains on his well-ironedclothes. Many wish that it would not rain on their daughter’swedding day but the farmers anxiously wait for the rain. Whensuch contradictions arise, they obstruct nature. This cosmosfunctions according to the adjustment between different phasesof your feelings and nature. So do not disturb the working ofnature. You will encounter everything naturally and spontaneously.Do people ever worry about whether the sun is going to risetomorrow? And what would happen if they started to worryabout it? There is no end to interference. So do not interferewith nature.These scientists have become so advanced in their52Aptavani-1Aptavani-151will become of him if they take away his bundle of ten thousandrupees. He also has fear of what will happen to him if they killhim. The priest feels that he does not really have anything worthlosing except his drinking pot but he is worried about who willtake care of him if the robbers break his leg and if he becomeslame for life. The dog on the other hand will bark at the robbersand if one of them were to hit him, he will whine a few timesand then with wide eyes watch his master being beaten. Thedog does not worry about what is to become of him becausehe has dependency and the other two unfortunate ones do nothave any dependency. What does the Lord say? As long as youhave not done the darshan of the enlightened One, you are non-dependent. And darshan of an enlightened One will make youdependent. The enlightened One becomes the one you candepend on.Once you are blessed with the realization of the Self froma Gnani, you will never have to worry about what will becomeof you under any external or internal circumstances.The one who surrenders to me will have shelter andprotection after countless lifetimes of having no one to dependon.The one who has the Gnani as his shelter will never haveto worry about what is to become of him, regardless of the kindof situations he may encounter, because my presence along withmy Gnan will prevail and give him protection in all situations.Natural Order And The Worldly SciencesToday, there is an excess of worldly science in the foreigncountries, it has become ‘above normal’; It needs to regainnormality. People will only find happiness if this happens. 97°Fahrenheit is below normal fever and 99° Fahrenheit is abovenormal fever. 98° is the normality. America and other countriesare trapped in the fever of ‘above normal’ (everything being inexcess) and India is trapped in below normal fever. In theforeign countries, the discoveries they are making are abovenormal and yet they cannot find what they are looking for. Whatdoes this indicate? It shows that they are lost. Their technologyhas become so advanced that they can pin point the location ofa car in trouble. You foolish men! Why don’t you look forsomething that will be useful to the body? Men have to shaveeveryday, look for something that stops the hair on their facefrom growing altogether. The body has needs and those needshave to be fulfilled. But what happens when there is anoverabundance of anything? What would happen if it rains non-stop? It will create destruction everywhere. Destruction isinevitable with an overabundance of anything. People complaineven when there is an increase in heat. I had a friend who keptsaying ‘its very hot today, its very hot today’. So I asked himhow much heat would he allow if he were in charge of regulatingthe temperature. He said he would put out just the same amountof heat. I asked him why then was he complaining. This isnature and nature fulfills everyone’s needs whenever it arises.But these foolish people create hindrances by cursing nature. Awell-dressed man will curse nature if it rains on his well-ironedclothes. Many wish that it would not rain on their daughter’swedding day but the farmers anxiously wait for the rain. Whensuch contradictions arise, they obstruct nature. This cosmosfunctions according to the adjustment between different phasesof your feelings and nature. So do not disturb the working ofnature. You will encounter everything naturally and spontaneously.Do people ever worry about whether the sun is going to risetomorrow? And what would happen if they started to worryabout it? There is no end to interference. So do not interferewith nature.These scientists have become so advanced in theirdiscoveries that they have reached above normal proportion. Atime will come when people will say they do not want anyscientists. These are all preparations for a revolutionary change,a transformation.Whenever anything occurs in excess, it leads to itsexhaustion. You feel tired if you have to sit or sleep for too long.Happiness and misery is relative. If a wealthy man is walking inthe heat, he will seek relief from even the sparse shade of athorny tree. But if you tell him to sit under the same tree for fourhours, he will not because he will tire from sitting too long.A seven and a half feet tall person will be consideredvery tall in India, and if Indians were to go to a country wherepeople are generally seven feet tall, they would be consideredshort. Everything is relative in this way. A person appears tallor short in comparison to another. If a fifty-five year old person is still in school, people willask him when he will marry if he keeps going to school. Thatis above normal and it is below normal for a child of two to bemarried.Material Development And Spiritual DevelopmentForeign countries look upon India as an under-developedcountry. I say that they are the ones who are under-developed.They are fully developed in material things but spiritually theyare under developed. India is materially under developed butspiritually it is fully developed. I can transform even a pickpocketof India into god in one hour. But elsewhere where the peopleare spiritually under-developed, how can I make themunderstand spirituality?The anger, pride, attachment and greed of peopleelsewhere in the world are still in the process of developingwhereas anger, pride, attachment and greed of people in Indiaare fully developed. They have reached the top limit.People of foreign countries would be willing to drive yousomewhere, even if they had to drive fifty miles each way. Evena casual acquaintance will drive you there and back and notonly that he will also pay for your meal. Whereas here, in India,your own nephew will calculate how much it will cost him ingas, oil, and wear and tear on his car. Then he will even lie toyou and tell you that he cannot take you because his boss isgoing to be in town the next day.Now what does this all mean? It means that in theforeigners, greed is not as developed as it is in the Indians. InIndians it is so highly developed that it will last for up to sevengenerations. And what is the level of greed in foreigners? Theirgreed is limited to their own needs. When their children turneighteen they want them to move out and live on their own. Ifmarried couples have differences they will resort to a divorce,whereas in Indians their attachment is fully developed. Therewas a couple in their eighties who fought with each other theirentire married life. They would bicker with each other all daylong. When the old man died, the old lady was performing theritual of saravani, which is performed on the thirteenth day afterdeath. As she placed various items for offering in the rituals, shewould say, “This was your uncle’s favorite sweet, this is whathe liked…” When I asked her why she was doing all this whenshe fought with him every day, she replied, “Things are alwaysso. However, I will never find a husband like him again. I wanthim to be my husband in every life.” In Indians, attachment toohas reached to the top!Prakruti : Natural And DeviantForeigners are spontaneous, impulsive and natural. Naturaland spontaneous means that if there is a docile cow, she will nothurt anyone, even if a child were to grabs hold of her horns.Aptavani-15354Aptavani-1discoveries that they have reached above normal proportion. Atime will come when people will say they do not want anyscientists. These are all preparations for a revolutionary change,a transformation.Whenever anything occurs in excess, it leads to itsexhaustion. You feel tired if you have to sit or sleep for too long.Happiness and misery is relative. If a wealthy man is walking inthe heat, he will seek relief from even the sparse shade of athorny tree. But if you tell him to sit under the same tree for fourhours, he will not because he will tire from sitting too long.A seven and a half feet tall person will be consideredvery tall in India, and if Indians were to go to a country wherepeople are generally seven feet tall, they would be consideredshort. Everything is relative in this way. A person appears tallor short in comparison to another. If a fifty-five year old person is still in school, people willask him when he will marry if he keeps going to school. Thatis above normal and it is below normal for a child of two to bemarried.Material Development And Spiritual DevelopmentForeign countries look upon India as an under-developedcountry. I say that they are the ones who are under-developed.They are fully developed in material things but spiritually theyare under developed. India is materially under developed butspiritually it is fully developed. I can transform even a pickpocketof India into god in one hour. But elsewhere where the peopleare spiritually under-developed, how can I make themunderstand spirituality?The anger, pride, attachment and greed of peopleelsewhere in the world are still in the process of developingwhereas anger, pride, attachment and greed of people in Indiaare fully developed. They have reached the top limit.People of foreign countries would be willing to drive yousomewhere, even if they had to drive fifty miles each way. Evena casual acquaintance will drive you there and back and notonly that he will also pay for your meal. Whereas here, in India,your own nephew will calculate how much it will cost him ingas, oil, and wear and tear on his car. Then he will even lie toyou and tell you that he cannot take you because his boss isgoing to be in town the next day.Now what does this all mean? It means that in theforeigners, greed is not as developed as it is in the Indians. InIndians it is so highly developed that it will last for up to sevengenerations. And what is the level of greed in foreigners? Theirgreed is limited to their own needs. When their children turneighteen they want them to move out and live on their own. Ifmarried couples have differences they will resort to a divorce,whereas in Indians their attachment is fully developed. Therewas a couple in their eighties who fought with each other theirentire married life. They would bicker with each other all daylong. When the old man died, the old lady was performing theritual of saravani, which is performed on the thirteenth day afterdeath. As she placed various items for offering in the rituals, shewould say, “This was your uncle’s favorite sweet, this is whathe liked…” When I asked her why she was doing all this whenshe fought with him every day, she replied, “Things are alwaysso. However, I will never find a husband like him again. I wanthim to be my husband in every life.” In Indians, attachment toohas reached to the top!Prakruti : Natural And DeviantForeigners are spontaneous, impulsive and natural. Naturaland spontaneous means that if there is a docile cow, she will nothurt anyone, even if a child were to grabs hold of her horns.Aptavani-15354Aptavani-1And if there is a foul-tempered cow, she will readily hurt anyone,even if not provoked. These are natural traits. Foreigners arevery straightforward; they will say yes to you if they want tohelp you and no if they don’t want to, but they will not lie toyou. They have a propensity towards both reactions. If they arestraightforward, they are completely so and if they are crooked,they are completely crooked. People of India are not spontaneousor natural. They used to be natural during satyug (First of thefour phases of the time cycle characterized by virtue, wisdomand morality) to the point of ideality. In India there was aclassification of four major casts : the Brahmins - the priests,scholars and thinkers, Kshatriya - the warriors; Vaishya - thebusinessmen and Shudra - the working class, commonly referredto as the ‘untouchables’. This classification was indicative ofdifferent levels of development amongst people. Now thisdevelopment has reached its zenith. Even the sons of carpentersare extremely intelligent. Spontaneity and naturalness in peopleduring the satyug was absolute and complete and it peaked tosuch heights that it gradually started to decline. That is the lawof nature. People began to exploit the four classifications. Theybecame condescending and arrogant towards the untouchablesand insulted them. They misused their intellect to hurt others andgradually became hostile and rude. India began to loose itsluster. People became so obstinate and despicable that theirconduct became demon-like. Alas! If they came across atwenty-year-old widow, instead of consoling her they wouldlook upon her as a bad omen. The fools! A widow is consideredpersonification of the holy River Ganges, how can you call heran ill omen? Then came the British to rule India. Their naturaldisposition and spontaneity began to mingle with the unnatural,obstinate and rude tendencies of the Indians and this broughtthe Indians some relief.This was all a result of an excess of everything here. Nowa new dawn is rising for India. Elsewhere there is dusk but inIndia, this new dawn will lead to full light. Since 1942, I havebeen saying that by the year 2005, India will become the centerof the world. Currently it is in the process of becoming one.People from all over the world will come to India to learn theart of living. They will come to learn what is normal. At themoment everyone has become so above normal that they donot know how to live anymore. Despite having so many materialcomforts, they have to resort to taking sleeping pills. You aretaking poison! You have gone so far past the limits of what isnormal, that you have lost nature’s gift to mankind – the gift ofsleep. How can you call this living? Alas! You have gone all theway to the moon but how did it benefit you? Has going to themoon, eliminated the sleeping pills for you?The State Of The AspirantWho can be called a sadhu (ascetic)? Anyone who attainsthe Self is a sadhu. A sadhu’s conduct is always focused towardsliberation. However, the conduct of the sadhus of these times iscontradictory. It is focused on liberation but it also creates morebondage. They earn one hundred merit points for their rituals ofsamayik and pratikraman, but when they become aggravatedwith their disciples, they lose a hundred and fifty points. One isonly able to work continuously towards one’s liberation afterhaving acquired the Self. A true sadhu means to progresstowards the state of absolute liberation. Nevertheless no one isto be blamed; no one is at fault here. They are all trappedbecause of ignorance; it is not their wish to bind new karma.Karma : Merit And DemeritThere is only Soul and matter (parmanu - sub-atomicmatter) in this world. When you make someone happy or givepeace to them, atoms of merit karma (punya) are attracted andwhen you cause misery to others, atoms of demerit karma (paap)Aptavani-15556Aptavani-1And if there is a foul-tempered cow, she will readily hurt anyone,even if not provoked. These are natural traits. Foreigners arevery straightforward; they will say yes to you if they want tohelp you and no if they don’t want to, but they will not lie toyou. They have a propensity towards both reactions. If they arestraightforward, they are completely so and if they are crooked,they are completely crooked. People of India are not spontaneousor natural. They used to be natural during satyug (First of thefour phases of the time cycle characterized by virtue, wisdomand morality) to the point of ideality. In India there was aclassification of four major casts : the Brahmins - the priests,scholars and thinkers, Kshatriya - the warriors; Vaishya - thebusinessmen and Shudra - the working class, commonly referredto as the ‘untouchables’. This classification was indicative ofdifferent levels of development amongst people. Now thisdevelopment has reached its zenith. Even the sons of carpentersare extremely intelligent. Spontaneity and naturalness in peopleduring the satyug was absolute and complete and it peaked tosuch heights that it gradually started to decline. That is the lawof nature. People began to exploit the four classifications. Theybecame condescending and arrogant towards the untouchablesand insulted them. They misused their intellect to hurt others andgradually became hostile and rude. India began to loose itsluster. People became so obstinate and despicable that theirconduct became demon-like. Alas! If they came across atwenty-year-old widow, instead of consoling her they wouldlook upon her as a bad omen. The fools! A widow is consideredpersonification of the holy River Ganges, how can you call heran ill omen? Then came the British to rule India. Their naturaldisposition and spontaneity began to mingle with the unnatural,obstinate and rude tendencies of the Indians and this broughtthe Indians some relief.This was all a result of an excess of everything here. Nowa new dawn is rising for India. Elsewhere there is dusk but inIndia, this new dawn will lead to full light. Since 1942, I havebeen saying that by the year 2005, India will become the centerof the world. Currently it is in the process of becoming one.People from all over the world will come to India to learn theart of living. They will come to learn what is normal. At themoment everyone has become so above normal that they donot know how to live anymore. Despite having so many materialcomforts, they have to resort to taking sleeping pills. You aretaking poison! You have gone so far past the limits of what isnormal, that you have lost nature’s gift to mankind – the gift ofsleep. How can you call this living? Alas! You have gone all theway to the moon but how did it benefit you? Has going to themoon, eliminated the sleeping pills for you?The State Of The AspirantWho can be called a sadhu (ascetic)? Anyone who attainsthe Self is a sadhu. A sadhu’s conduct is always focused towardsliberation. However, the conduct of the sadhus of these times iscontradictory. It is focused on liberation but it also creates morebondage. They earn one hundred merit points for their rituals ofsamayik and pratikraman, but when they become aggravatedwith their disciples, they lose a hundred and fifty points. One isonly able to work continuously towards one’s liberation afterhaving acquired the Self. A true sadhu means to progresstowards the state of absolute liberation. Nevertheless no one isto be blamed; no one is at fault here. They are all trappedbecause of ignorance; it is not their wish to bind new karma.Karma : Merit And DemeritThere is only Soul and matter (parmanu - sub-atomicmatter) in this world. When you make someone happy or givepeace to them, atoms of merit karma (punya) are attracted andwhen you cause misery to others, atoms of demerit karma (paap)Aptavani-15556Aptavani-1are attracted. This is the very thing that brings you misery.When things go according to your wishes, it is because of yourmerit karma and when things go against your wishes, it is becauseof your demerit karma. There are two kinds of merit karma andtwo kinds of demerit karma :(1) Paapanubandhi paap (New demerit karma stemmingfrom past demerit karma) : A person binds new demerit karmawhile experiencing the effects of demerit karma from his pastlife. For example, when a person inflicts pain on somebody andenjoys doing so.(2) Punyanubandhi paap (New merit karma stemmingfrom past demerit karma) : A person is suffering as a result ofdemerit karma from his past life, but he binds new merit karmaby leading a moral and ethical life.(3) Paapanubandhi punya (New demerit karma stemmingfrom past merit karma) : A person enjoys happiness as a resultof merit karma from his past life but while doing so, he bindstremendous demerit karma. Today, this type of karma is rampanteverywhere. A wealthy man is not even able to enjoy thecomforts of his huge mansion. He is out the entire day makingmoney, his wife is out shopping and running around looking forbeautiful clothes and his daughter is driving around in her car.Only the servant is to be found at home and the entire bungalowis uselessly wasted. He has acquired all his material comforts asa result of his merit karma from his past life but despite thismerit karma he binds demerit karma as a result of his behavior.He is consumed with immense greed and attachment and he isnot able to enjoy his wealth. Such people with paapanubandhipunyas are always after sensual gratification.(4) Punyanubandhi punya (New merit karma stemmingfrom past merit karma) : A person performs rituals and workstowards attainment of Self-Realization while enjoying the fruitsof his past merit karma. He accumulates more merit karma andreaps the fruit of liberation.All activities of rituals and austerities carried out withobstinacy, inflexibility and staunchness bind papanubandhi punya,whereas austerities and rituals performed with the properunderstanding of what is beneficial for one’s Soul and liberationbinds punyanubandhi punya. With such karma, the person willone day meet a Gnani Purush and eventually achieve liberation.Wealth does not come to you without merit karma.Who in this world is considered one with the most meritkarma? It is the one who in a passing thought will desiresomething and having decided on it will have his wishes fulfilledfor years to come without any efforts on his part.Second come the ones who desire something and havingdecided on it over and over again, will acquire it easily at theend of the day.Third come the ones who desire something, will make aneffort to acquire it and their wish will be fulfilled.Fourth come those who work very hard towards fulfillingtheir desire and eventually get what they want. Fifth and final come those who desire something, workvery hard for it and still do not get what they want. Theselaborers work very hard, in addition to their hard work theyface abuse at the hands of others and still they do not get anymoney. And when they do get any money, there is no certaintythat they will have anything to eat at home. They work thehardest and yet they are not rewarded for their labor.Many people believe that demerit karma createdunknowingly or in ignorance bear no consequences. Why wouldthere be no consequences? Is there not a consequence to puttingAptavani-15758Aptavani-1are attracted. This is the very thing that brings you misery.When things go according to your wishes, it is because of yourmerit karma and when things go against your wishes, it is becauseof your demerit karma. There are two kinds of merit karma andtwo kinds of demerit karma :(1) Paapanubandhi paap (New demerit karma stemmingfrom past demerit karma) : A person binds new demerit karmawhile experiencing the effects of demerit karma from his pastlife. For example, when a person inflicts pain on somebody andenjoys doing so.(2) Punyanubandhi paap (New merit karma stemmingfrom past demerit karma) : A person is suffering as a result ofdemerit karma from his past life, but he binds new merit karmaby leading a moral and ethical life.(3) Paapanubandhi punya (New demerit karma stemmingfrom past merit karma) : A person enjoys happiness as a resultof merit karma from his past life but while doing so, he bindstremendous demerit karma. Today, this type of karma is rampanteverywhere. A wealthy man is not even able to enjoy thecomforts of his huge mansion. He is out the entire day makingmoney, his wife is out shopping and running around looking forbeautiful clothes and his daughter is driving around in her car.Only the servant is to be found at home and the entire bungalowis uselessly wasted. He has acquired all his material comforts asa result of his merit karma from his past life but despite thismerit karma he binds demerit karma as a result of his behavior.He is consumed with immense greed and attachment and he isnot able to enjoy his wealth. Such people with paapanubandhipunyas are always after sensual gratification.(4) Punyanubandhi punya (New merit karma stemmingfrom past merit karma) : A person performs rituals and workstowards attainment of Self-Realization while enjoying the fruitsof his past merit karma. He accumulates more merit karma andreaps the fruit of liberation.All activities of rituals and austerities carried out withobstinacy, inflexibility and staunchness bind papanubandhi punya,whereas austerities and rituals performed with the properunderstanding of what is beneficial for one’s Soul and liberationbinds punyanubandhi punya. With such karma, the person willone day meet a Gnani Purush and eventually achieve liberation.Wealth does not come to you without merit karma.Who in this world is considered one with the most meritkarma? It is the one who in a passing thought will desiresomething and having decided on it will have his wishes fulfilledfor years to come without any efforts on his part.Second come the ones who desire something and havingdecided on it over and over again, will acquire it easily at theend of the day.Third come the ones who desire something, will make aneffort to acquire it and their wish will be fulfilled.Fourth come those who work very hard towards fulfillingtheir desire and eventually get what they want. Fifth and final come those who desire something, workvery hard for it and still do not get what they want. Theselaborers work very hard, in addition to their hard work theyface abuse at the hands of others and still they do not get anymoney. And when they do get any money, there is no certaintythat they will have anything to eat at home. They work thehardest and yet they are not rewarded for their labor.Many people believe that demerit karma createdunknowingly or in ignorance bear no consequences. Why wouldthere be no consequences? Is there not a consequence to puttingAptavani-15758Aptavani-1your hand on a hot plate unknowingly? Demerit karma carriedout knowingly or unknowingly, carries the same weight. Theonly difference between the two is that the consequences of thedeed carried out in ignorance will have to be experienced in anunknowing state and the consequence of a deed carried outdeliberately will have to be experienced in a knowing state. Forexample, there are two brothers; one is sixteen and the other istwo years old. Their mother dies. Both have to suffer theconsequence of their past demerit karma. The older one has tosuffer consciously and the younger in a state of unawareness.Merit karma can also be carried out unknowingly. Forexample, you stand in a line for four hours to buy sugar, on yourway home the sugar slowly leaks out through a tiny hole in thebag. The ants reap the benefit from this and you created meritkarma without being aware of it, the consequence of which youwill enjoy without being aware of it.Every human being is trapped in a labyrinth of merit karma-demerit karma, demerit karma-merit karma and is subject toendless wandering; there is no liberation from it. The most aperson gets from earning a lot of merit karma is a life as acelestial being, but he never acquires liberation. Liberation isonly acquired upon meeting a Gnani Purush who will destroyyour demerit karma of endless lifetimes (through the fire ofspiritual knowledge) and gives you the Self (your Soul). Untilthen you have to keep on wandering within the four life forms.Every living being, starting from the single sensory lifeform to the five-sensory life form experiences endless suffering,just like a man confined to total darkness with only two mealsa day. Such are the dense layers, which cover the Soul. Ifhuman beings with their five senses have to suffer so much, canyou imagine what suffering the living beings with lesser senseshave to endure? There is no living entity with six senses. Thetrees and animals are life forms we refer to as ‘Tiryanch Gati’.They are subject to severe imprisonment. The human life iscomparatively an easier form of imprisonment. But life in hell isso excruciatingly painful that if I were to describe it exactly, ahuman being would die from fear by just listening to me. It isthousand times more painful than the pain of being boiled inwater. Those in hell are subject to the pain of near deathexperience over and over again and yet death will elude them.They are doomed to a life of suffering and that is why death willnot come to them. Their physical body is very much like liquidmercury; their body parts and limbs are subject to being severedand joined together again. They have no choice but endure painand suffering. Hell is life imprisonment.The celestial beings (Devaloka) enjoy life in the celestialworld but under surveillance, they too cannot achieve liberation.The atmosphere there is dazzling and intoxicating. Just like theatmosphere at weddings where you can become completelylost and absorbed with your surrounding. All your senses areindulged. The food tastes great and is pleasing to the palate.You hear music that is pleasing to the ears. Your eyes areadmiring the beauty of the bride and the groom. Your sense ofsmell is filled with fragrant incense. All your senses are completelyoccupied. Your mind is filled with different thoughts. You cannever remember your Soul at times like this; such is the happinessenjoyed by the celestial beings. There is an abundance ofhappiness there, which never ceases and that is why they are ina state of intoxication. They do not even think of the Soul.However, they too are subject to mental restlessness, jealousyand other emotions that torment. They too get tired of too muchhappiness. How can that be? Its like after feasting non-stop forfour days at a wedding, you will crave for something simple toeat. In the same way, the celestial beings too wish for a birthas a human being in this world, to a moral and a pious family,Aptavani-15960Aptavani-1your hand on a hot plate unknowingly? Demerit karma carriedout knowingly or unknowingly, carries the same weight. Theonly difference between the two is that the consequences of thedeed carried out in ignorance will have to be experienced in anunknowing state and the consequence of a deed carried outdeliberately will have to be experienced in a knowing state. Forexample, there are two brothers; one is sixteen and the other istwo years old. Their mother dies. Both have to suffer theconsequence of their past demerit karma. The older one has tosuffer consciously and the younger in a state of unawareness.Merit karma can also be carried out unknowingly. Forexample, you stand in a line for four hours to buy sugar, on yourway home the sugar slowly leaks out through a tiny hole in thebag. The ants reap the benefit from this and you created meritkarma without being aware of it, the consequence of which youwill enjoy without being aware of it.Every human being is trapped in a labyrinth of merit karma-demerit karma, demerit karma-merit karma and is subject toendless wandering; there is no liberation from it. The most aperson gets from earning a lot of merit karma is a life as acelestial being, but he never acquires liberation. Liberation isonly acquired upon meeting a Gnani Purush who will destroyyour demerit karma of endless lifetimes (through the fire ofspiritual knowledge) and gives you the Self (your Soul). Untilthen you have to keep on wandering within the four life forms.Every living being, starting from the single sensory lifeform to the five-sensory life form experiences endless suffering,just like a man confined to total darkness with only two mealsa day. Such are the dense layers, which cover the Soul. Ifhuman beings with their five senses have to suffer so much, canyou imagine what suffering the living beings with lesser senseshave to endure? There is no living entity with six senses. Thetrees and animals are life forms we refer to as ‘Tiryanch Gati’.They are subject to severe imprisonment. The human life iscomparatively an easier form of imprisonment. But life in hell isso excruciatingly painful that if I were to describe it exactly, ahuman being would die from fear by just listening to me. It isthousand times more painful than the pain of being boiled inwater. Those in hell are subject to the pain of near deathexperience over and over again and yet death will elude them.They are doomed to a life of suffering and that is why death willnot come to them. Their physical body is very much like liquidmercury; their body parts and limbs are subject to being severedand joined together again. They have no choice but endure painand suffering. Hell is life imprisonment.The celestial beings (Devaloka) enjoy life in the celestialworld but under surveillance, they too cannot achieve liberation.The atmosphere there is dazzling and intoxicating. Just like theatmosphere at weddings where you can become completelylost and absorbed with your surrounding. All your senses areindulged. The food tastes great and is pleasing to the palate.You hear music that is pleasing to the ears. Your eyes areadmiring the beauty of the bride and the groom. Your sense ofsmell is filled with fragrant incense. All your senses are completelyoccupied. Your mind is filled with different thoughts. You cannever remember your Soul at times like this; such is the happinessenjoyed by the celestial beings. There is an abundance ofhappiness there, which never ceases and that is why they are ina state of intoxication. They do not even think of the Soul.However, they too are subject to mental restlessness, jealousyand other emotions that torment. They too get tired of too muchhappiness. How can that be? Its like after feasting non-stop forfour days at a wedding, you will crave for something simple toeat. In the same way, the celestial beings too wish for a birthas a human being in this world, to a moral and a pious family,Aptavani-15960Aptavani-1so that they too can meet a Gnani Purush. Only after meetinga Gnani Purush can one break free, otherwise one is doomedto wander between the four different life forms.I-ness And My-nessVikalp is ‘I-ness’ and sankalp is ‘My-ness’. I amChandubhai is I-ness and it is the biggest vikalp of all. Sankalpis my-ness, the belief associated with the sense of ownership,for example this is my wife, these are my children, this is myhouse and my car etc.Charge And Discharge : Cause And EffectYou are Brahma – the creator, and yet you sleep tuckedunder the bed sheets. You make various plans (create newcauses). When you create new causes (charging new karma),you become Brahma, the creator, but the discharge of thesecauses (the effect) is not under your control. When these causesbegin to discharge (give effect), you are under illusion and becomeconfused and frustrated. When you create a cause, initially it isjust a fleeting thought but once you become completely engulfedwith it, a new cause is created, and when that cause materializesinto a tangible event, it is called an effect. No one, absolutelyno one, in this world can change the discharge (effect). If onecould, one would never allow unpleasant things to happen tothem, they would only let pleasant things occur. But dischargeis under the control of another entity. It is under the control ofvyavasthit (scientific circumstantial evidences). Vyavasthit rulesexclusively and no one has any control over it. So be cautiouswhen creating new causes. Once you acquire the Self, you willnever be deluded. Once you meet a Gnani Purush, he will takeyour faith in the world and place it in the Supreme Soul in justone hour, and once he does this, you will remain as the Self.Once this happens, you will no longer be creating any newcauses and your physical body that remains, will continue todischarge gradually.Birth in the human form is the only one that creates causes.The transmigration in to all the four life forms stems only fromthe human form and it is also only from the human form thatliberation is possible.The Self And The Non-selfThe entire world is trapped in trying to understand prakruti,the non-self. From time immemorial, people have been trying toexplore the Self and the non-self, but it is not something that iseasy to grasp. In the traditional kramic path, one is only able tounderstand the Self after completely knowing the non-self. Thepuzzle of the non-self and the Self is such that it cannot besolved even after countless cycles of birth and death. Whereasin the Akram path, when the Gnani Purush bestows his blessingupon you, you become the Self and thereafter you are able tocompletely know the non-self. What is more, the two will alwaysremain separate. Even the mightiest are trapped in the labyrinthof the non-self; what can they do? How can you find a solutionwhen you try to understand the non-self through being a non-self? The non-self is to be known after acquiring the Self. Onlythen can it’s every facet be known.What is non-self (prakruti)? Pra = excess and kruti=action done. An action, which is done through not being inone’s natural state but in having gone away from one’s naturalstate, is prakruti. Action done out of one’s natural state is prakruti.The non-self (prakruti) is female and the Self is male(purush). Lord Krishna told Arjun, “Become free from the threegunas of the prakruti”. The three gunas (inherent qualities) of thenon-self are sattwa, rajas and tamas. Become a liberated ‘purush’by rising above the three gunas of the prakruti. If you remain inthese qualities of the prakruti, you become subservient and weak.Aptavani-16162Aptavani-1so that they too can meet a Gnani Purush. Only after meetinga Gnani Purush can one break free, otherwise one is doomedto wander between the four different life forms.I-ness And My-nessVikalp is ‘I-ness’ and sankalp is ‘My-ness’. I amChandubhai is I-ness and it is the biggest vikalp of all. Sankalpis my-ness, the belief associated with the sense of ownership,for example this is my wife, these are my children, this is myhouse and my car etc.Charge And Discharge : Cause And EffectYou are Brahma – the creator, and yet you sleep tuckedunder the bed sheets. You make various plans (create newcauses). When you create new causes (charging new karma),you become Brahma, the creator, but the discharge of thesecauses (the effect) is not under your control. When these causesbegin to discharge (give effect), you are under illusion and becomeconfused and frustrated. When you create a cause, initially it isjust a fleeting thought but once you become completely engulfedwith it, a new cause is created, and when that cause materializesinto a tangible event, it is called an effect. No one, absolutelyno one, in this world can change the discharge (effect). If onecould, one would never allow unpleasant things to happen tothem, they would only let pleasant things occur. But dischargeis under the control of another entity. It is under the control ofvyavasthit (scientific circumstantial evidences). Vyavasthit rulesexclusively and no one has any control over it. So be cautiouswhen creating new causes. Once you acquire the Self, you willnever be deluded. Once you meet a Gnani Purush, he will takeyour faith in the world and place it in the Supreme Soul in justone hour, and once he does this, you will remain as the Self.Once this happens, you will no longer be creating any newcauses and your physical body that remains, will continue todischarge gradually.Birth in the human form is the only one that creates causes.The transmigration in to all the four life forms stems only fromthe human form and it is also only from the human form thatliberation is possible.The Self And The Non-selfThe entire world is trapped in trying to understand prakruti,the non-self. From time immemorial, people have been trying toexplore the Self and the non-self, but it is not something that iseasy to grasp. In the traditional kramic path, one is only able tounderstand the Self after completely knowing the non-self. Thepuzzle of the non-self and the Self is such that it cannot besolved even after countless cycles of birth and death. Whereasin the Akram path, when the Gnani Purush bestows his blessingupon you, you become the Self and thereafter you are able tocompletely know the non-self. What is more, the two will alwaysremain separate. Even the mightiest are trapped in the labyrinthof the non-self; what can they do? How can you find a solutionwhen you try to understand the non-self through being a non-self? The non-self is to be known after acquiring the Self. Onlythen can it’s every facet be known.What is non-self (prakruti)? Pra = excess and kruti=action done. An action, which is done through not being inone’s natural state but in having gone away from one’s naturalstate, is prakruti. Action done out of one’s natural state is prakruti.The non-self (prakruti) is female and the Self is male(purush). Lord Krishna told Arjun, “Become free from the threegunas of the prakruti”. The three gunas (inherent qualities) of thenon-self are sattwa, rajas and tamas. Become a liberated ‘purush’by rising above the three gunas of the prakruti. If you remain inthese qualities of the prakruti, you become subservient and weak.Aptavani-16162Aptavani-1If you remain in the attributes of the Self, then you are a ‘purush’(the Self – absolutely free).‘Prakruti is like a top’ (spinning toy). What does thatmean? The winding of the string around the top is the cause, asthe string is pulled away the spinning of the top is prakruti.There is skill and precision in the winding and there is also skilland precision in the unwinding. Everything occurs exactly as itwas caused. Even when a child eats, does he put the food inhis ear instead of his mouth? If a serpent dies before its eggshatch, the baby serpent when born will know how to strike.What is the reason behind this? That is the wonder of prakruti.The precision with which prakruti functions, is a wonder initself. How far can prakruti go? There is a limit from the verybeginning as to how far it can go. Even when a top is spinning,it spins within its boundary. For example, even the thoughts thatcome to you have a limit. When you are overcome with illusionaryattachment, there is a limit to that too. Every living being has its‘center’ in its navel. In the navel area the soul is completely freefrom covering by any karmic matter. The pure light of knowledgeis to be found here. If prakruti were to go beyond it’s limit, thenthis area would become obscured and that living being wouldbecome inert, but this can never happen. No matter how intensea person’s illusionary attachment becomes, it will reach its limitand then begin to subside. All this occurs according to the lawsand limits of nature. Nothing ever occurs outside the boundariesof nature.The Prakruti And Its Three AttributesThe deities of Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesh represent thethree attributes of prakruti. These are sattwa, rajas and tamasrespectively. Those with tamas attributes worship Lord Mahadev,those with sattwa attribute worship Brahma and those with Rajasattribute will worship Lord Vishnu. You acquire the attributes ofthose you worship. There is a predominance of rajas attributesin people of India whereas the rest of the world is inclinedtowards tamasic attributes. The three deities represent the threeattributes. They are not born but are symbolic representations.Even the Vedas state that one should become free from thesethree attributes and become the Self.It is the prakruti that makes a person dance or do thingsbut people claim ‘I am dancing’ or ‘I am doing it’. It isfoolishness to think this way. Every human being is like a top,what effort does he have to make when it is the prakruti thatis making him spin? When a man makes a lot of money, heclaims he is the one who earned it but does he acceptresponsibility when he makes a loss? At that time he will claimthat it is God’s doing.It is prakruti that dictates what you do, but you claim tobe the doer. Fasting, doing penance, meditating, giving alms,being kind, speaking the truth, practicing ahimsa (non-violence)are all attributes of the prakruti. Good habits or bad habits areall qualities of the prakruti. However charming and gracefulone’s prakruti may be, one never knows when it will deceivehim or disgrace him. You may have a king who is very benevolentand devout but if he were to get lost in the jungle and not eatfor days, would he be embarrassed to beg for food? Definitelynot! What happens to his imperial and monarchical qualities atthat time? Alas! His prakruti is crying out from within and he istrapped in circumstances that reduce even a king to becominga beggar. If this can happen to a king then what chance doesa commoner have? It is the prakruti that makes you give almsand it is the prakruti that makes you beg, so where is your effortin that? A thief steals twenty rupees, goes to a restaurant andorders a nice meal and enjoys himself. On his way out he givesthe remaining ten rupees to a leper, what is all that? This is alla play of prakruti. It is incomprehensible.Aptavani-16364Aptavani-1If you remain in the attributes of the Self, then you are a ‘purush’(the Self – absolutely free).‘Prakruti is like a top’ (spinning toy). What does thatmean? The winding of the string around the top is the cause, asthe string is pulled away the spinning of the top is prakruti.There is skill and precision in the winding and there is also skilland precision in the unwinding. Everything occurs exactly as itwas caused. Even when a child eats, does he put the food inhis ear instead of his mouth? If a serpent dies before its eggshatch, the baby serpent when born will know how to strike.What is the reason behind this? That is the wonder of prakruti.The precision with which prakruti functions, is a wonder initself. How far can prakruti go? There is a limit from the verybeginning as to how far it can go. Even when a top is spinning,it spins within its boundary. For example, even the thoughts thatcome to you have a limit. When you are overcome with illusionaryattachment, there is a limit to that too. Every living being has its‘center’ in its navel. In the navel area the soul is completely freefrom covering by any karmic matter. The pure light of knowledgeis to be found here. If prakruti were to go beyond it’s limit, thenthis area would become obscured and that living being wouldbecome inert, but this can never happen. No matter how intensea person’s illusionary attachment becomes, it will reach its limitand then begin to subside. All this occurs according to the lawsand limits of nature. Nothing ever occurs outside the boundariesof nature.The Prakruti And Its Three AttributesThe deities of Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesh represent thethree attributes of prakruti. These are sattwa, rajas and tamasrespectively. Those with tamas attributes worship Lord Mahadev,those with sattwa attribute worship Brahma and those with Rajasattribute will worship Lord Vishnu. You acquire the attributes ofthose you worship. There is a predominance of rajas attributesin people of India whereas the rest of the world is inclinedtowards tamasic attributes. The three deities represent the threeattributes. They are not born but are symbolic representations.Even the Vedas state that one should become free from thesethree attributes and become the Self.It is the prakruti that makes a person dance or do thingsbut people claim ‘I am dancing’ or ‘I am doing it’. It isfoolishness to think this way. Every human being is like a top,what effort does he have to make when it is the prakruti thatis making him spin? When a man makes a lot of money, heclaims he is the one who earned it but does he acceptresponsibility when he makes a loss? At that time he will claimthat it is God’s doing.It is prakruti that dictates what you do, but you claim tobe the doer. Fasting, doing penance, meditating, giving alms,being kind, speaking the truth, practicing ahimsa (non-violence)are all attributes of the prakruti. Good habits or bad habits areall qualities of the prakruti. However charming and gracefulone’s prakruti may be, one never knows when it will deceivehim or disgrace him. You may have a king who is very benevolentand devout but if he were to get lost in the jungle and not eatfor days, would he be embarrassed to beg for food? Definitelynot! What happens to his imperial and monarchical qualities atthat time? Alas! His prakruti is crying out from within and he istrapped in circumstances that reduce even a king to becominga beggar. If this can happen to a king then what chance doesa commoner have? It is the prakruti that makes you give almsand it is the prakruti that makes you beg, so where is your effortin that? A thief steals twenty rupees, goes to a restaurant andorders a nice meal and enjoys himself. On his way out he givesthe remaining ten rupees to a leper, what is all that? This is alla play of prakruti. It is incomprehensible.Aptavani-16364Aptavani-1A person will say, ‘today I did four samayiks andpratikraman and read the scripture for two hours.’ The fool!The prakruti makes him do it and he claims that he is doing it,and if he truly is the one doing the samayik, let him try doingit the next day. ‘I could not do samayik today’, he will say, ‘butI did it yesterday.’ What a great contradiction between thesetwo statements! If you really are the doer, then you can neversay that ‘I can’t do it’. The very meaning of ‘I can’t do it’proves that you are not the doer. The whole world is trappedin this wrong belief. Prakruti makes a person renounce and it isalso prakruti that makes him acquire. Even the practice ofbrahmacharya (celibacy) is forced upon one by one’s prakrutiand yet he claims he is practicing celibacy. What a contradiction.Dualities such as attachment and abhorrence, kindnessand cruelty, greed and benevolence, truth and false are all qualitiesof the prakruti, and the Self is beyond all duality.The Self : With And Without AttributesMany people say that God is without any attributes. Youfoolish people! Why do you slander God in this way? They saythat a mad person has no attributes. Madness is an attribute ofone kind so how can one say that a mad person is without anyattributes? It means that by saying the Soul is without attributes,is the same as saying the Soul is worse than a mad person; itis like saying that the Soul is inanimate. The Self is neitherinanimate nor is it void of any attributes. It too has its inherentqualities. By saying that God (Soul) has no qualities, peopleembark on the wrong path. Come to me and I will give you thecorrect understanding. ‘From the perspective of prakruti’sattributes, the Self is without any attributes, and from its ownperspective, the Self is full of attributes.’ These attributes areinfinite : infinite knowledge, infinite vision, infinite energy and itis also an abode of infinite bliss. How can it ever be referredto as having no attributes? If you call it so, you will neveracquire the Self because the Self is not separate from its ownattributes. A thing has within it, its own intrinsic qualities, so inorder to know the thing, by knowing its qualities; you will cometo understand it. For example, if you want to know gold, thenif you know the qualities of gold, you will come to know it; goldis never separate from its inherent qualities. A flower and itsfragrance can never be separate. You can recognize a flowerfrom its fragrance. In the same token, you can know the Selfonly through its attributes. That is the only thing you need toknow - the Soul. You have come to know the attributes of theprakruti for countless lifetimes but even then you have made noprogress and the puzzle remains unsolved. All the worldlyreligions are considered religions of the prakruti; they are religionsof the body. The Supreme religion is the religion of the Self; thatis the Real religion.Bathing the body, feeding it, pampering it, making it fastis all religion of the prakruti. This religion has no substance andyou cannot depend on it because it is not under your control.It is controlled by some other power. The prakruti is such thatone person will have diarrhea without taking a purgative andanother will have constipation without taking a medicine forconstipation. That is prakruti!Worshipping Prakruti : Worshipping PurushThe worship that goes on in this world is worship ofattributes of prakruti. These attributes do not have any permanentexistence; these attributes are illusionary. The prakrutic attributesare dependent on the three humors of the body : mucous, bileand air (kapha, pitta and vatta respectively). The qualities orattributes of the Self are independent whereas the attributes ofthe prakruti are governed by other factors, but this only becomesevident when one becomes delirious or demented. EverywhereAptavani-16566Aptavani-1A person will say, ‘today I did four samayiks andpratikraman and read the scripture for two hours.’ The fool!The prakruti makes him do it and he claims that he is doing it,and if he truly is the one doing the samayik, let him try doingit the next day. ‘I could not do samayik today’, he will say, ‘butI did it yesterday.’ What a great contradiction between thesetwo statements! If you really are the doer, then you can neversay that ‘I can’t do it’. The very meaning of ‘I can’t do it’proves that you are not the doer. The whole world is trappedin this wrong belief. Prakruti makes a person renounce and it isalso prakruti that makes him acquire. Even the practice ofbrahmacharya (celibacy) is forced upon one by one’s prakrutiand yet he claims he is practicing celibacy. What a contradiction.Dualities such as attachment and abhorrence, kindnessand cruelty, greed and benevolence, truth and false are all qualitiesof the prakruti, and the Self is beyond all duality.The Self : With And Without AttributesMany people say that God is without any attributes. Youfoolish people! Why do you slander God in this way? They saythat a mad person has no attributes. Madness is an attribute ofone kind so how can one say that a mad person is without anyattributes? It means that by saying the Soul is without attributes,is the same as saying the Soul is worse than a mad person; itis like saying that the Soul is inanimate. The Self is neitherinanimate nor is it void of any attributes. It too has its inherentqualities. By saying that God (Soul) has no qualities, peopleembark on the wrong path. Come to me and I will give you thecorrect understanding. ‘From the perspective of prakruti’sattributes, the Self is without any attributes, and from its ownperspective, the Self is full of attributes.’ These attributes areinfinite : infinite knowledge, infinite vision, infinite energy and itis also an abode of infinite bliss. How can it ever be referredto as having no attributes? If you call it so, you will neveracquire the Self because the Self is not separate from its ownattributes. A thing has within it, its own intrinsic qualities, so inorder to know the thing, by knowing its qualities; you will cometo understand it. For example, if you want to know gold, thenif you know the qualities of gold, you will come to know it; goldis never separate from its inherent qualities. A flower and itsfragrance can never be separate. You can recognize a flowerfrom its fragrance. In the same token, you can know the Selfonly through its attributes. That is the only thing you need toknow - the Soul. You have come to know the attributes of theprakruti for countless lifetimes but even then you have made noprogress and the puzzle remains unsolved. All the worldlyreligions are considered religions of the prakruti; they are religionsof the body. The Supreme religion is the religion of the Self; thatis the Real religion.Bathing the body, feeding it, pampering it, making it fastis all religion of the prakruti. This religion has no substance andyou cannot depend on it because it is not under your control.It is controlled by some other power. The prakruti is such thatone person will have diarrhea without taking a purgative andanother will have constipation without taking a medicine forconstipation. That is prakruti!Worshipping Prakruti : Worshipping PurushThe worship that goes on in this world is worship ofattributes of prakruti. These attributes do not have any permanentexistence; these attributes are illusionary. The prakrutic attributesare dependent on the three humors of the body : mucous, bileand air (kapha, pitta and vatta respectively). The qualities orattributes of the Self are independent whereas the attributes ofthe prakruti are governed by other factors, but this only becomesevident when one becomes delirious or demented. EverywhereAptavani-16566Aptavani-1in the world we find only worship of the prakruti, not the purush.I have not seen worship of the purush anywhere. The rewardof worshipping the prakruti is worldly wanderings and the rewardof worshipping the purush is liberation.We as the Purush, as the Pure Self are completelyindependent but we are in bondage because of the prakruti.The prakruti and the ‘regulator of this world’ (vyavasthit shakti)run this world. God does not meddle in it at all. Once youbecome the Purush, your relationship with the prakruti comes toan end. Whatever occurs is because of prakruti and the onewho has no attachment or abhorrence towards any event, is thePure Soul. This Gnan is so wonderful that even if you were toget into a fight, you will not experience any attachment orabhorrence.Prakruti Dharma : Purush DharmaEvery belief of ‘I am this’ or ‘I am that’ (vikalp) falls inthe domain of the prakruti. The beliefs that have not occurredwill not come in the prakruti.You can distinguish a Patel, a Vanik or a Muslim, throughtheir prakruti. The prakruti of the Vankik is thoughtful and prudentin nature. The Patels are considered bold and fearless; theirprakruti is such that they will take off their opponent’s head orsacrifice their own depending on the circumstances. The Muslimprakruti has a tendency towards insurrection. Actually prakrutidiffers form individual to individual. There is no limit to itsdifferences and variations.The mind, speech and body are three components of theprakruti. All three are effective. As they manifest effects of pastcauses, because of prevailing illusion, new causes are createdand this binds new causal prakruti, the effect of which is theeffective prakruti, (manifest prakruti).Aptavani-16768Aptavani-1As long as there are doubts about the Soul and the reality,the worship of prakruti will continue. When one becomes freefrom all doubts about the pure Soul, only then does one becomethe Pure Soul. Only after that does new causal prakruti ceasesto form.The Garden Of PrakrutiWhatever effect there is, whatever effective-prakruti thereis, it is irrevocable. It can never be changed. Every father wishesthat his son be exactly like him. Alas! Are you trying to turnyour home into a garden or a farm? Everyone has differentprakruti; they all bloom into different flowers. How is it possiblefor other plants to grow the same flowers as your own? If therewere only roses in your home, would it be considered a garden?No, it would be a rose farm! Just as you have a wheat farm,you would have a rose farm. But here you have a jasmine, arose, a frangipani and thorns too- you have a garden. Prakrutiis a garden. People want roses but they do not like thorns. Howcan you have a rose without thorns?When people plant a lemon tree, how is it nurtured?Through the elements of earth, air, light and sky. Do thesenourishing elements have a sour taste in them? Do they have tartjuices in them? No. But where did the tartness in the lemoncome from? And where did the bitterness in each and every leafand branch of the neem tree growing next to the lemon treecome from? Both the trees are nourished by the same elements,they both get equal amount of nourishment. Was the waterbitter? No, so where did the differences come from? Thebitterness and the tartness were inherent in the seed of each treeand thus in their corresponding fruits. The seed of the banyantree is even smaller than a mustard seed and yet how vast is thetree born from it. The entire banyan tree with its leaves, branchesand aerial roots exists as potential energy in a subtle form in itsin the world we find only worship of the prakruti, not the purush.I have not seen worship of the purush anywhere. The rewardof worshipping the prakruti is worldly wanderings and the rewardof worshipping the purush is liberation.We as the Purush, as the Pure Self are completelyindependent but we are in bondage because of the prakruti.The prakruti and the ‘regulator of this world’ (vyavasthit shakti)run this world. God does not meddle in it at all. Once youbecome the Purush, your relationship with the prakruti comes toan end. Whatever occurs is because of prakruti and the onewho has no attachment or abhorrence towards any event, is thePure Soul. This Gnan is so wonderful that even if you were toget into a fight, you will not experience any attachment orabhorrence.Prakruti Dharma : Purush DharmaEvery belief of ‘I am this’ or ‘I am that’ (vikalp) falls inthe domain of the prakruti. The beliefs that have not occurredwill not come in the prakruti.You can distinguish a Patel, a Vanik or a Muslim, throughtheir prakruti. The prakruti of the Vankik is thoughtful and prudentin nature. The Patels are considered bold and fearless; theirprakruti is such that they will take off their opponent’s head orsacrifice their own depending on the circumstances. The Muslimprakruti has a tendency towards insurrection. Actually prakrutidiffers form individual to individual. There is no limit to itsdifferences and variations.The mind, speech and body are three components of theprakruti. All three are effective. As they manifest effects of pastcauses, because of prevailing illusion, new causes are createdand this binds new causal prakruti, the effect of which is theeffective prakruti, (manifest prakruti).Aptavani-16768Aptavani-1As long as there are doubts about the Soul and the reality,the worship of prakruti will continue. When one becomes freefrom all doubts about the pure Soul, only then does one becomethe Pure Soul. Only after that does new causal prakruti ceasesto form.The Garden Of PrakrutiWhatever effect there is, whatever effective-prakruti thereis, it is irrevocable. It can never be changed. Every father wishesthat his son be exactly like him. Alas! Are you trying to turnyour home into a garden or a farm? Everyone has differentprakruti; they all bloom into different flowers. How is it possiblefor other plants to grow the same flowers as your own? If therewere only roses in your home, would it be considered a garden?No, it would be a rose farm! Just as you have a wheat farm,you would have a rose farm. But here you have a jasmine, arose, a frangipani and thorns too- you have a garden. Prakrutiis a garden. People want roses but they do not like thorns. Howcan you have a rose without thorns?When people plant a lemon tree, how is it nurtured?Through the elements of earth, air, light and sky. Do thesenourishing elements have a sour taste in them? Do they have tartjuices in them? No. But where did the tartness in the lemoncome from? And where did the bitterness in each and every leafand branch of the neem tree growing next to the lemon treecome from? Both the trees are nourished by the same elements,they both get equal amount of nourishment. Was the waterbitter? No, so where did the differences come from? Thebitterness and the tartness were inherent in the seed of each treeand thus in their corresponding fruits. The seed of the banyantree is even smaller than a mustard seed and yet how vast is thetree born from it. The entire banyan tree with its leaves, branchesand aerial roots exists as potential energy in a subtle form in itsof the self or the Self) :Ashuddha upayog : (Impure use). An example of thiswould be if a person, without any reason or cause hunts andkills a deer and then takes pleasure in it and proudly boastsabout his killing. Killing purely for pleasure, without any motiveor reason, is impure use of the soul. People who gloat andderive pleasure from hurting others or causing destruction toother people’s property, people with sadistic tendencies are allthird-class citizens and are headed for a life in hell.Ashoobh upayog : (Inauspicious use) A man is forcedto kill a deer because there is nothing to eat at home. His wifeand children are starving and he has no choice. From within,however, he is tormented by the killing and repents immenselyfor his actions. This is inauspicious use of the soul. The outwardaction for both impure and inauspicious use of the soul may bethe same. But the difference between the two is that in theformer the person takes pleasure in his actions and in the latterhe has tears of remorse. All beings that use their energies of thesoul in an impure way are considered second-class citizens andare headed for a birth in the animal kingdom.Shoobha upayog : (auspicious use) Even when everyoneat home is starving he feels he does not want to kill anything tosatisfy their hunger. This is auspicious awareness of the self.Wishing well for others, doing well to others and being benevolenttowards others, keeping the heart truly moral are all good useof the soul. Very rarely does a person remain solely in auspicioususe. Generally people vacillate between auspicious andinauspicious awareness of the self. Nevertheless these peopleare considered ‘first-class passengers’ and will be born as humansagain. Those with purely auspicious awareness are consideredas ‘luxury class passengers’ and will be born as celestial beings.Shuddha upayog : (Pure awareness of the Self). Aseed. Vyavasthit shakti brings together the appropriateenvironment and circumstances and the resulting banyan tree isdue to it’s own inherent prakrut attributes.The knowledge of prakruti is amazing and immense! It iseasy to cross a river but you cannot cross the river of theprakruti.RenunciationThere are three forms of renunciation :1) Renunciation precipitated through suffering :People renounce their worldly life because of the suffering theyhave to endure in it. A person will abandon his worldly life andcommitments at the expense of his family. He thinks that hisworldly problems can be solved by renunciation and that theonly suffering he will have to endure is to go around bare feetbegging for his meals, which he is willing to endure. What arethe consequences of such a renunciation? He will have to wanderfor countless lifetimes.2) Renunciation for the reward of worldly gains : Aperson who renounces his worldly life and commitments in thegreed of gaining disciples, respect, fame, praise and worship.He too will have to wander for countless lives.3) Renunciation for acquiring Gnan : This is the trueform of renunciation. Rare is the person who will takerenunciation for the purpose of knowing the Self. But it is verydifficult to acquire this Gnan.This knowledge can only be acquired through a Gnani,after which true renunciation will begin through the light of thatknowledge.Focused Awareness Of The self And SelfThere are four types of upayog (focusing of the awarenessAptavani-16970Aptavani-1of the self or the Self) :Ashuddha upayog : (Impure use). An example of thiswould be if a person, without any reason or cause hunts andkills a deer and then takes pleasure in it and proudly boastsabout his killing. Killing purely for pleasure, without any motiveor reason, is impure use of the soul. People who gloat andderive pleasure from hurting others or causing destruction toother people’s property, people with sadistic tendencies are allthird-class citizens and are headed for a life in hell.Ashoobh upayog : (Inauspicious use) A man is forcedto kill a deer because there is nothing to eat at home. His wifeand children are starving and he has no choice. From within,however, he is tormented by the killing and repents immenselyfor his actions. This is inauspicious use of the soul. The outwardaction for both impure and inauspicious use of the soul may bethe same. But the difference between the two is that in theformer the person takes pleasure in his actions and in the latterhe has tears of remorse. All beings that use their energies of thesoul in an impure way are considered second-class citizens andare headed for a birth in the animal kingdom.Shoobha upayog : (auspicious use) Even when everyoneat home is starving he feels he does not want to kill anything tosatisfy their hunger. This is auspicious awareness of the self.Wishing well for others, doing well to others and being benevolenttowards others, keeping the heart truly moral are all good useof the soul. Very rarely does a person remain solely in auspicioususe. Generally people vacillate between auspicious andinauspicious awareness of the self. Nevertheless these peopleare considered ‘first-class passengers’ and will be born as humansagain. Those with purely auspicious awareness are consideredas ‘luxury class passengers’ and will be born as celestial beings.Shuddha upayog : (Pure awareness of the Self). Aseed. Vyavasthit shakti brings together the appropriateenvironment and circumstances and the resulting banyan tree isdue to it’s own inherent prakrut attributes.The knowledge of prakruti is amazing and immense! It iseasy to cross a river but you cannot cross the river of theprakruti.RenunciationThere are three forms of renunciation :1) Renunciation precipitated through suffering :People renounce their worldly life because of the suffering theyhave to endure in it. A person will abandon his worldly life andcommitments at the expense of his family. He thinks that hisworldly problems can be solved by renunciation and that theonly suffering he will have to endure is to go around bare feetbegging for his meals, which he is willing to endure. What arethe consequences of such a renunciation? He will have to wanderfor countless lifetimes.2) Renunciation for the reward of worldly gains : Aperson who renounces his worldly life and commitments in thegreed of gaining disciples, respect, fame, praise and worship.He too will have to wander for countless lives.3) Renunciation for acquiring Gnan : This is the trueform of renunciation. Rare is the person who will takerenunciation for the purpose of knowing the Self. But it is verydifficult to acquire this Gnan.This knowledge can only be acquired through a Gnani,after which true renunciation will begin through the light of thatknowledge.Focused Awareness Of The self And SelfThere are four types of upayog (focusing of the awarenessAptavani-16970Aptavani-1the proof of sale of the land to Lallubhai. The police will acceptyour explanation and apologize for their mistake and will go toLallubhai.Such is my state. I am the Lord of this Universe and yetI have no ownership of any ‘plot’ anywhere. I (the Pure Soul)possess enough power to make this universe tremble, but AmbalalMuljibhai (the physical body) does not have the strength tobreak even a pappadum (lentil wafer)!Layers Of Spiritual DevelopmentA human being of this world has one million four hundredthousand different layers. Of these only those in the top fiftythousand layers are worthy of hearing this discourse. Spiritualdevelopment of every human being is at a different level. Thisresults in different standards and for each standard there is aGod and its relevant scriptures. These standards are of worldlyrelative religions.Illusion And Liberation‘Illusion (maaya) has long horns and reach,They strike you from the front and kick you from behind’.What does illusion (maaya - ignorance of one’s Real Self)say? It says, “Even if you kill all my ‘sons’, they will resurrectas long as my son, Maan (pride), is alive. Anger, Pride, Illusion,Greed, Attachment and Abhorrence are my six ‘sons’ and Imake up a family of seven, which will remain evergreen.This Maaya and her six ‘sons’ have created discord inthe world, so if anything needs to be destroyed, it is theseseven. (Translator’s comments : Maaya is the root cause ofthe ignorance of the Self. From this stems two divisions,attachment and abhorrence (raag and dwesh). Attachmenthas two components : deceit and greed. Abhorrence also,person with shuddha upayog sees only the pure. He will disregardthe packing (the body) and sees only the contents (the pureSoul within). To see with elemental vision (tattva drashti, to seethe Self as one of the six eternal elements) is shuddha upayog.Shuddha upayog only begins after Self-realization. When thisawareness is absolute and continuous, it is called Keval Gnan(the Absolute and Perfect State of Knowledge). The result ofshuddha upayog is liberation. I am in constant shuddha upayog.One priest asked me, “You travel by car and so manyinsects get crushed under your car, are you not responsible forthat sin?” I asked him “Dear Priest! What does your scripturessay?”‘The one with shuddha upayog, is poised in the SelfHis Knowledge and meditation captivates the mindAloof he remains from the binding of karma,Becomes he the Absolute (Shiv)’I am always in shuddha upayog. Does a shuddha-upayogiever commit himsa? The priest answered no. I told him that Ido not bind karma but he does because according to hisknowledge, he has a constant belief of ‘I am a priest. These aremy feet and the insects are being crushed under my feet’. Alas!This belief remains even as he sleeps and that is why he is liablefor his actions. I remain constantly aware of the Self. Not evenfor of a moment do I feel that this body is mine. I have no senseof ownership over this body and that is why I am not held liablefor the karma.For example, say you sold a piece of land a week agoto Mr. Lallubhai and you transfer the documents of ownershipto him. One day the police come to arrest you because theyfound smuggled gold buried on that land. The police tell youthat you are responsible because the gold was found on yourland. You immediately breathe a sigh of relief and show themAptavani-17172Aptavani-1the proof of sale of the land to Lallubhai. The police will acceptyour explanation and apologize for their mistake and will go toLallubhai.Such is my state. I am the Lord of this Universe and yetI have no ownership of any ‘plot’ anywhere. I (the Pure Soul)possess enough power to make this universe tremble, but AmbalalMuljibhai (the physical body) does not have the strength tobreak even a pappadum (lentil wafer)!Layers Of Spiritual DevelopmentA human being of this world has one million four hundredthousand different layers. Of these only those in the top fiftythousand layers are worthy of hearing this discourse. Spiritualdevelopment of every human being is at a different level. Thisresults in different standards and for each standard there is aGod and its relevant scriptures. These standards are of worldlyrelative religions.Illusion And Liberation‘Illusion (maaya) has long horns and reach,They strike you from the front and kick you from behind’.What does illusion (maaya - ignorance of one’s Real Self)say? It says, “Even if you kill all my ‘sons’, they will resurrectas long as my son, Maan (pride), is alive. Anger, Pride, Illusion,Greed, Attachment and Abhorrence are my six ‘sons’ and Imake up a family of seven, which will remain evergreen.This Maaya and her six ‘sons’ have created discord inthe world, so if anything needs to be destroyed, it is theseseven. (Translator’s comments : Maaya is the root cause ofthe ignorance of the Self. From this stems two divisions,attachment and abhorrence (raag and dwesh). Attachmenthas two components : deceit and greed. Abhorrence also,person with shuddha upayog sees only the pure. He will disregardthe packing (the body) and sees only the contents (the pureSoul within). To see with elemental vision (tattva drashti, to seethe Self as one of the six eternal elements) is shuddha upayog.Shuddha upayog only begins after Self-realization. When thisawareness is absolute and continuous, it is called Keval Gnan(the Absolute and Perfect State of Knowledge). The result ofshuddha upayog is liberation. I am in constant shuddha upayog.One priest asked me, “You travel by car and so manyinsects get crushed under your car, are you not responsible forthat sin?” I asked him “Dear Priest! What does your scripturessay?”‘The one with shuddha upayog, is poised in the SelfHis Knowledge and meditation captivates the mindAloof he remains from the binding of karma,Becomes he the Absolute (Shiv)’I am always in shuddha upayog. Does a shuddha-upayogiever commit himsa? The priest answered no. I told him that Ido not bind karma but he does because according to hisknowledge, he has a constant belief of ‘I am a priest. These aremy feet and the insects are being crushed under my feet’. Alas!This belief remains even as he sleeps and that is why he is liablefor his actions. I remain constantly aware of the Self. Not evenfor of a moment do I feel that this body is mine. I have no senseof ownership over this body and that is why I am not held liablefor the karma.For example, say you sold a piece of land a week agoto Mr. Lallubhai and you transfer the documents of ownershipto him. One day the police come to arrest you because theyfound smuggled gold buried on that land. The police tell youthat you are responsible because the gold was found on yourland. You immediately breathe a sigh of relief and show themAptavani-17172Aptavani-1who renounces sensorial pleasures but has not acquired thehappiness of Self is caught up in a bind; he is neither here northere. The happiness void of the senses is ego-inebriated; it ismerely donkey-pranks! The happiness that is beyond the sensesis the infinite bliss of the Self. This happiness cannot be acquiredwithout knowing the Self.There are three travelers, one enjoys the pleasure of thesenses (indriya sookh), the second is given to ego-pleasures(nirindriya sookh) and the third remains within the realms of hispure Self, beyond the senses (atiindriya sookh). All threehappened to spend a night at a village inn. During the night itsnows and turns very cold. None of them have any blankets.How do they spend the night? The first one keeps crying out,‘It’s very cold, I am going to die from this cold’, and by themorning, sure enough he is dead.The second traveler keeps saying, ‘Darn! It’s so cold.The heck with it, it does not affect me, it affects the body’. Thisis how he spends his night and by the morning his entire bodybecomes very cold but the fellow is still breathing very slowly.The third traveler just withdraws within the cave of theSelf, the moment it starts snowing. He remains completelydetached from his body the entire night. He lives in the infinitebliss of the Self and by the morning he is on his way.The person who is given to ego-pleasures remainsintoxicated by the ego. People fuss over him, calling him ‘Bapji(master)’ ‘Bapji’ and he remains intoxicated with pride.Ignorance : Attachment-AbhorrenceThe Vedanta says that liberation is acquired once impurity-obstructed view and ignorance are gone. The Jain scripturessay that liberation is acquired once attachment, abhorrence andignorance are gone.Aptavani-17374Aptavani-1has two components namely anger and pride). Drop an atombomb on them! Maaya is responsible for the discord and quarrelsin this world. It is also responsible for propagating andperpetuating the worldly life. Of her six sons, Anger is guileless.He frankly and unwittingly blurts out what is on his mind. Peoplecan easily identify him and will ask, ‘Why are you getting angry?’Pride (maan) is good too, although it is slightly inferior to Anger.People will recognize it and will ask you why you walk aroundarrogantly. Whereas Deceit and Attachment are very difficult todetect, even the person in whom these quality reside, is obliviousto them. Finally comes Greed and it is last on the list. Even Godgets tired of deceit, attachment and greed; these qualities willnot allow anyone to attain liberation. This family of Maaya isvery powerful indeed. In the traditional kramic path, Maayaremains unconquerable even till the end. When godhood comesfinally to grace the aspirant, Maaya intervenes. One can only befreed from this worldly life by meeting a Gnani Purush, only thenwill Maaya and its progeny be destroyed. The Gnani does notdo anything, except eradicate Maaya and her eldest son Ego(Anger and Pride), after which all five of Maaya’s remainingsons along with ‘old lady’ Maaya will perish. This is how onebecomes free from bondage and achieves liberation. When Igive you the Gnan, I emancipate you from all bondage of illusion.Happiness : BlissThere are three kinds of happiness in this world :1. Happiness related to the senses (indriya sookh)2. Happiness not related to the senses. (nirindriya sookh)3. Happiness beyond the senses (atiindriya sookh-of the Real   Self)The happiness that one experiences through the mediumof the five senses is the happiness of the first kind. The personwho renounces sensorial pleasures but has not acquired thehappiness of Self is caught up in a bind; he is neither here northere. The happiness void of the senses is ego-inebriated; it ismerely donkey-pranks! The happiness that is beyond the sensesis the infinite bliss of the Self. This happiness cannot be acquiredwithout knowing the Self.There are three travelers, one enjoys the pleasure of thesenses (indriya sookh), the second is given to ego-pleasures(nirindriya sookh) and the third remains within the realms of hispure Self, beyond the senses (atiindriya sookh). All threehappened to spend a night at a village inn. During the night itsnows and turns very cold. None of them have any blankets.How do they spend the night? The first one keeps crying out,‘It’s very cold, I am going to die from this cold’, and by themorning, sure enough he is dead.The second traveler keeps saying, ‘Darn! It’s so cold.The heck with it, it does not affect me, it affects the body’. Thisis how he spends his night and by the morning his entire bodybecomes very cold but the fellow is still breathing very slowly.The third traveler just withdraws within the cave of theSelf, the moment it starts snowing. He remains completelydetached from his body the entire night. He lives in the infinitebliss of the Self and by the morning he is on his way.The person who is given to ego-pleasures remainsintoxicated by the ego. People fuss over him, calling him ‘Bapji(master)’ ‘Bapji’ and he remains intoxicated with pride.Ignorance : Attachment-AbhorrenceThe Vedanta says that liberation is acquired once impurity-obstructed view and ignorance are gone. The Jain scripturessay that liberation is acquired once attachment, abhorrence andignorance are gone.Aptavani-17374Aptavani-1has two components namely anger and pride). Drop an atombomb on them! Maaya is responsible for the discord and quarrelsin this world. It is also responsible for propagating andperpetuating the worldly life. Of her six sons, Anger is guileless.He frankly and unwittingly blurts out what is on his mind. Peoplecan easily identify him and will ask, ‘Why are you getting angry?’Pride (maan) is good too, although it is slightly inferior to Anger.People will recognize it and will ask you why you walk aroundarrogantly. Whereas Deceit and Attachment are very difficult todetect, even the person in whom these quality reside, is obliviousto them. Finally comes Greed and it is last on the list. Even Godgets tired of deceit, attachment and greed; these qualities willnot allow anyone to attain liberation. This family of Maaya isvery powerful indeed. In the traditional kramic path, Maayaremains unconquerable even till the end. When godhood comesfinally to grace the aspirant, Maaya intervenes. One can only befreed from this worldly life by meeting a Gnani Purush, only thenwill Maaya and its progeny be destroyed. The Gnani does notdo anything, except eradicate Maaya and her eldest son Ego(Anger and Pride), after which all five of Maaya’s remainingsons along with ‘old lady’ Maaya will perish. This is how onebecomes free from bondage and achieves liberation. When Igive you the Gnan, I emancipate you from all bondage of illusion.Happiness : BlissThere are three kinds of happiness in this world :1. Happiness related to the senses (indriya sookh)2. Happiness not related to the senses. (nirindriya sookh)3. Happiness beyond the senses (atiindriya sookh-of the Real   Self)The happiness that one experiences through the mediumof the five senses is the happiness of the first kind. The personThe impurities of the body can be removed throughpurgation. But the impurities of the mind and the chit cannot beremoved by anything. As long as there is ignorance of one’s realSelf, all obstructions remain. People try to remove impurity andobstruction for peace of mind. Once you acquire Gnan(knowledge of the Real Self) what remains? Only impurity andobstruction, and these will dispel when you come to satsang.What causes bondage of the human soul? Ignorance. Sowhat will liberate it? The opposite of what binds it – knowledge.‘I am Chandulal’, is the false imposition of your identityand this results in attachment for Chandulal and therefore adislike for any other location. That means there is abhorrencefor the Self. If there is attachment on one side, then on the otherside there is definitely dislike or aversion. I awaken you to yourreal Self and at that very moment you cecome ‘vitadwesh’(void of abhorrence). As you progress from this level, yougradually become vitarag (void of attachment). Vitarag meansknowledge and vision (darshan) of the Self. I bestow upon youAbsolute Knowledge and Absolute Vision. This Absolute Visionremains intact but you are not able to digest the AbsoluteKnowledge of complete 360°. This is due to the effect of thecurrent time cycle. Alas! I too was unable to digest the final 4°!I give you the full Knowledge of 360° but you will not be ableto digest it and hence yours is a state of partial perfect-Knowledge. By whatever degree the manifestation of the Selfincreases, the degrees of your perfect-Knowledge will increasecorrespondingly. When the Self becomes fully manifested,concomitantly perfect-Knowledge will too.In the traditional kramic path delusion is destroyed withdelusion. For example, we need soap to wash a dirty cloth, butthe soap will leave behind its residue and stain and so we need‘Tinopal’ (bleaching soap) to remove that stain. Tinopal willremove the soap stains, but leave behind stains of its own. Inthis manner whatever tool is used, that tool will leave behind itsown stain and so one never becomes absolutely pure. Absolutepurity can be achieved only when one meets a Gnani Purush.The Gnani Purush who is absolutely pure Himself, is the onlyone who can separate each atom of the non-Self and destroyall your sins and give you your pure Self. Only then the puzzle(of life) will be solved and you will attain liberation. Otherwise,you will continue to ‘wash the stains from your clothes’ forendless life cycles, each time leaving behind the impurities of the‘soap’ you utilize.The Science Of SpeechA young woman named Chanchal silently suffers hermother-in-law’s nagging from dawn to dusk. If the mother-in-law uses abusive words non-stop for four hours and you askher to repeat the same words in the same manner, will she beable to do so? No. Why? This is because the mother-in-law’sspeech is a ‘record’ that is playing. What if this record (Dadapointing to a record on a record player) were to say, ‘Chanchalhas no sense, Chanchal has no sense?’ Will Chanchal retaliateby saying, ‘You have no sense’, back to the record? I am theonly one who has revealed that speech is a form of a record.Speech is inanimate; it is a record. When you play a tape, doesthe tape not have to be recorded first? In the same way, thetape of your entire life speech has already been recorded in thepast life and in this life it is playing. Just as a record startsplaying when the needle is placed on the record, so will therecord of your speech commence as soon as the appropriatecircumstances arise. But people claim that they are the onesspeaking. When a lawyer argues a case in the courts, he willboast that he won because of his pleading, but what happensto his ability to plead when he loses? He looks for excuses forhaving lost the case. But all along it was a record that wasAptavani-17576Aptavani-1The impurities of the body can be removed throughpurgation. But the impurities of the mind and the chit cannot beremoved by anything. As long as there is ignorance of one’s realSelf, all obstructions remain. People try to remove impurity andobstruction for peace of mind. Once you acquire Gnan(knowledge of the Real Self) what remains? Only impurity andobstruction, and these will dispel when you come to satsang.What causes bondage of the human soul? Ignorance. Sowhat will liberate it? The opposite of what binds it – knowledge.‘I am Chandulal’, is the false imposition of your identityand this results in attachment for Chandulal and therefore adislike for any other location. That means there is abhorrencefor the Self. If there is attachment on one side, then on the otherside there is definitely dislike or aversion. I awaken you to yourreal Self and at that very moment you cecome ‘vitadwesh’(void of abhorrence). As you progress from this level, yougradually become vitarag (void of attachment). Vitarag meansknowledge and vision (darshan) of the Self. I bestow upon youAbsolute Knowledge and Absolute Vision. This Absolute Visionremains intact but you are not able to digest the AbsoluteKnowledge of complete 360°. This is due to the effect of thecurrent time cycle. Alas! I too was unable to digest the final 4°!I give you the full Knowledge of 360° but you will not be ableto digest it and hence yours is a state of partial perfect-Knowledge. By whatever degree the manifestation of the Selfincreases, the degrees of your perfect-Knowledge will increasecorrespondingly. When the Self becomes fully manifested,concomitantly perfect-Knowledge will too.In the traditional kramic path delusion is destroyed withdelusion. For example, we need soap to wash a dirty cloth, butthe soap will leave behind its residue and stain and so we need‘Tinopal’ (bleaching soap) to remove that stain. Tinopal willremove the soap stains, but leave behind stains of its own. Inthis manner whatever tool is used, that tool will leave behind itsown stain and so one never becomes absolutely pure. Absolutepurity can be achieved only when one meets a Gnani Purush.The Gnani Purush who is absolutely pure Himself, is the onlyone who can separate each atom of the non-Self and destroyall your sins and give you your pure Self. Only then the puzzle(of life) will be solved and you will attain liberation. Otherwise,you will continue to ‘wash the stains from your clothes’ forendless life cycles, each time leaving behind the impurities of the‘soap’ you utilize.The Science Of SpeechA young woman named Chanchal silently suffers hermother-in-law’s nagging from dawn to dusk. If the mother-in-law uses abusive words non-stop for four hours and you askher to repeat the same words in the same manner, will she beable to do so? No. Why? This is because the mother-in-law’sspeech is a ‘record’ that is playing. What if this record (Dadapointing to a record on a record player) were to say, ‘Chanchalhas no sense, Chanchal has no sense?’ Will Chanchal retaliateby saying, ‘You have no sense’, back to the record? I am theonly one who has revealed that speech is a form of a record.Speech is inanimate; it is a record. When you play a tape, doesthe tape not have to be recorded first? In the same way, thetape of your entire life speech has already been recorded in thepast life and in this life it is playing. Just as a record startsplaying when the needle is placed on the record, so will therecord of your speech commence as soon as the appropriatecircumstances arise. But people claim that they are the onesspeaking. When a lawyer argues a case in the courts, he willboast that he won because of his pleading, but what happensto his ability to plead when he loses? He looks for excuses forhaving lost the case. But all along it was a record that wasAptavani-17576Aptavani-1playing. He would not be able to articulate even a word, if hewere to meticulously prearrange it. Only that which has beenrecorded will play.Does it not often occur that even though you firmly makeup your mind that you do not want to talk back to your mother-in-law or your husband, you end up doing so anyway? What isit that spills out in the form of words? You had no desire to talkback. Your husband had no desire to be verbally abused. Thenwhat makes you talk back? It is the prerecorded record that isplaying, and absolutely no one can change it once it has beenrecorded.There are times when you decide to confront and saycertain things to a person but when you see that person withfive other people, do you not return without uttering a word?Even if you want to say something you will be tongue-tied, doesthat not happen? If speech were under your control, you wouldbe able to say what you desire, but does that happen? How canthat happen? The speech of this Ambalal Muljibhai too is in theform of a record, despite having a body in which the SupremeLord has completely manifested. I have no power or controlover my speech. All I do is know and observe the kind ofspeech that is being uttered by Ambalal. Speech is completelyinanimate. But this speech first touches the Lord present withinbefore it flows outward and that is why it is spiritually alive. Itis Saraswati (Goddess of speech) herself. The GoddessSaraswati you see in the pictures is an indirect form of Saraswati,whereas my speech is direct Saraswati, and one which destroysyour sins of infinite lives.My speech is completely vitarag, completely syaad-vaad(does not hurt anyone). The easiest way to recognize a Vitaragis through his speech. The value you place on this speech isdependent upon the level of your expertise as a ‘jeweler’ (asan aspirant seeking the real ‘gem’). But where can one findsuch a jeweler in this day and age? The poor wretched soulsof today place a value of five rupees on a diamond worth fivebillion! And so the diamond itself has to disclose its own value.That is why today I myself have to say to you that I am God(The Enlightened One). Not even that but I am above God. Iam completely vitarag. God, himself, has given me this status ashis superior. He said, ‘I was looking for a qualified person andI see that in you. I am completely vitarag and liberated. I cannothelp anyone now. You are the omnipotent manifest form anddespite having a physical body you too are completely vitaragand that is why I give you my power and make you my superior.’Today, I am the superior of the Lord of the fourteen worlds.This is the incarnation of Gnan with all the special powers. Socome and ‘kindle your lamp’ and move on. Don’t try to scrutinizeeverything. How can you measure the worth of the Gnani Purushwho is immeasurable? How can you measure a Gnani Purushwhen at home your wife scolds you and calls you senseless?What qualifications do you have to assess a Gnani? Do youhave that expertise? If you try to assess me, your intellect willbecome assessed instead. Instead, why don’t you bundle yourobstinacy and dispose it in a sewer and come to your senses.Accept with humility that you do not know anything and ask tobe liberated from the wanderings of infinite lives. That is all youneed to ask for and I will solve your puzzle of life. A Gnani cando whatever he chooses because he has the power to grantliberation. How many Gnanis can you find in this world? Five,ten? Alas! Gnanis are very rare indeed and a Gnani of theAkram path comes about once every million years and that tooonly in the peculiar time like the current cycle of Kaliyug! Hewill directly take you up in an ‘elevator’ instead of you havingto climb steps and exhaust yourself. Thread your necklace withthis priceless pearl; since this flash of lightening (manifestation ofAkram Gnan) has occurred, thread this pearl in your necklace.Aptavani-17778Aptavani-1playing. He would not be able to articulate even a word, if hewere to meticulously prearrange it. Only that which has beenrecorded will play.Does it not often occur that even though you firmly makeup your mind that you do not want to talk back to your mother-in-law or your husband, you end up doing so anyway? What isit that spills out in the form of words? You had no desire to talkback. Your husband had no desire to be verbally abused. Thenwhat makes you talk back? It is the prerecorded record that isplaying, and absolutely no one can change it once it has beenrecorded.There are times when you decide to confront and saycertain things to a person but when you see that person withfive other people, do you not return without uttering a word?Even if you want to say something you will be tongue-tied, doesthat not happen? If speech were under your control, you wouldbe able to say what you desire, but does that happen? How canthat happen? The speech of this Ambalal Muljibhai too is in theform of a record, despite having a body in which the SupremeLord has completely manifested. I have no power or controlover my speech. All I do is know and observe the kind ofspeech that is being uttered by Ambalal. Speech is completelyinanimate. But this speech first touches the Lord present withinbefore it flows outward and that is why it is spiritually alive. Itis Saraswati (Goddess of speech) herself. The GoddessSaraswati you see in the pictures is an indirect form of Saraswati,whereas my speech is direct Saraswati, and one which destroysyour sins of infinite lives.My speech is completely vitarag, completely syaad-vaad(does not hurt anyone). The easiest way to recognize a Vitaragis through his speech. The value you place on this speech isdependent upon the level of your expertise as a ‘jeweler’ (asan aspirant seeking the real ‘gem’). But where can one findsuch a jeweler in this day and age? The poor wretched soulsof today place a value of five rupees on a diamond worth fivebillion! And so the diamond itself has to disclose its own value.That is why today I myself have to say to you that I am God(The Enlightened One). Not even that but I am above God. Iam completely vitarag. God, himself, has given me this status ashis superior. He said, ‘I was looking for a qualified person andI see that in you. I am completely vitarag and liberated. I cannothelp anyone now. You are the omnipotent manifest form anddespite having a physical body you too are completely vitaragand that is why I give you my power and make you my superior.’Today, I am the superior of the Lord of the fourteen worlds.This is the incarnation of Gnan with all the special powers. Socome and ‘kindle your lamp’ and move on. Don’t try to scrutinizeeverything. How can you measure the worth of the Gnani Purushwho is immeasurable? How can you measure a Gnani Purushwhen at home your wife scolds you and calls you senseless?What qualifications do you have to assess a Gnani? Do youhave that expertise? If you try to assess me, your intellect willbecome assessed instead. Instead, why don’t you bundle yourobstinacy and dispose it in a sewer and come to your senses.Accept with humility that you do not know anything and ask tobe liberated from the wanderings of infinite lives. That is all youneed to ask for and I will solve your puzzle of life. A Gnani cando whatever he chooses because he has the power to grantliberation. How many Gnanis can you find in this world? Five,ten? Alas! Gnanis are very rare indeed and a Gnani of theAkram path comes about once every million years and that tooonly in the peculiar time like the current cycle of Kaliyug! Hewill directly take you up in an ‘elevator’ instead of you havingto climb steps and exhaust yourself. Thread your necklace withthis priceless pearl; since this flash of lightening (manifestation ofAkram Gnan) has occurred, thread this pearl in your necklace.Aptavani-17778Aptavani-1But the foolish ones go in search of a thread at a time like this.Alas! What can one do? They fall short of merit karma.Only the speech that is free of any attachment, can leadyou to liberation. My speech is sweet, melodious and has neverbeen heard before. It is a direct speech, which has never beenheard before whereas the speech found in the scriptures isindirect. If you were to hear direct speech for just one hour, youwill become enlightened. My speech is syaadvad – speech thatdoes not hurt anyone’s feelings. It is one that accepts all doctrines.It is one that accepts all viewpoints. This is because I am sittingin the center. My speech is impartial. People of all religioussects, Hindus, Moslems, Parsis and Khojas, listen to my speechand they all accept me as an Aptapurush (absolutely trustworthyperson). I do not have any intellect that discriminates and divides.I reside in everyone: I am the speaker and the listener too.Vitarag speech is the only speech that is filled with theintent of total spiritual salvation of others. That speech itself willtake one all the way to liberation.Silence : Physical And For The SelfAlthough this ‘record’ of mine plays all day long, I amsilent. My speech is only used for that which is related to theSelf and nothing else. That is why I consider it silent. A muniis the one who takes a vow of silence however these munisobserve physical or external silence, but from within they arerestless, so how can they be called a muni? I am the suprememuni. I am completely silent. This silence is considered thesilence for the highest cause.Speech that is beneficial, short and sweet is true speech,all other speech is untrue. This rule is applicable for speech inthe worldly interactions.Look here Natubhai! You are recording my speech butyou will derive fifty-percent benefit from doing so and otherswho read it will not derive even two percent of the benefit. Aslong as this bubble (Dada’s body) has not burst, make the mostof this opportunity and make the connection with your RealSelf. Later on it will be of no use. I tell everyone not to displayany photographs or idols of me, after I am gone. Do you nothave pictures of Lord Mahavir and Lord Krishna? Display theirs,not mine. They will be of no use to you later. I will leave behinda ‘progeny’ of Gnanis. I will leave behind a Gnani who willcontinue the Work. Thereafter the link of Gnanis will continue.Therefore look for a living Gnani (sajeevan murti). There is nosalvation without one.Antahkaran : Inner Psychic OrganThe science, which the whole world is in search of, isbeing fully revealed here for the first time by me. It is verydifficult to understand the mind (mana). What is the mind? Whatis buddhi? What is chit and what is ahamkar? I will explain eachof them exactly as they are.The antahkaran has four components : mana (mind), buddhi(intellect), chit (that which sees scenes, previously registered)and ahamhkar (ego).All four have a form and can be read. They are notvisible to the eyes but can be comprehended through Gnan.They are completely physical. The Pure Soul (Shuddhatma) hasnothing to with the antahkaran; it is completely separate from it.I am completely separate from it and that is why I am able todescribe it to you exactly.Function : Each of the four components has its ownseparate function but every action is carried out with the co-operation of all four. The basis, on which the human bodyfunctions, has two parts : The sthoola (tangible, gross) – TheAptavani-17980Aptavani-1But the foolish ones go in search of a thread at a time like this.Alas! What can one do? They fall short of merit karma.Only the speech that is free of any attachment, can leadyou to liberation. My speech is sweet, melodious and has neverbeen heard before. It is a direct speech, which has never beenheard before whereas the speech found in the scriptures isindirect. If you were to hear direct speech for just one hour, youwill become enlightened. My speech is syaadvad – speech thatdoes not hurt anyone’s feelings. It is one that accepts all doctrines.It is one that accepts all viewpoints. This is because I am sittingin the center. My speech is impartial. People of all religioussects, Hindus, Moslems, Parsis and Khojas, listen to my speechand they all accept me as an Aptapurush (absolutely trustworthyperson). I do not have any intellect that discriminates and divides.I reside in everyone: I am the speaker and the listener too.Vitarag speech is the only speech that is filled with theintent of total spiritual salvation of others. That speech itself willtake one all the way to liberation.Silence : Physical And For The SelfAlthough this ‘record’ of mine plays all day long, I amsilent. My speech is only used for that which is related to theSelf and nothing else. That is why I consider it silent. A muniis the one who takes a vow of silence however these munisobserve physical or external silence, but from within they arerestless, so how can they be called a muni? I am the suprememuni. I am completely silent. This silence is considered thesilence for the highest cause.Speech that is beneficial, short and sweet is true speech,all other speech is untrue. This rule is applicable for speech inthe worldly interactions.Look here Natubhai! You are recording my speech butyou will derive fifty-percent benefit from doing so and otherswho read it will not derive even two percent of the benefit. Aslong as this bubble (Dada’s body) has not burst, make the mostof this opportunity and make the connection with your RealSelf. Later on it will be of no use. I tell everyone not to displayany photographs or idols of me, after I am gone. Do you nothave pictures of Lord Mahavir and Lord Krishna? Display theirs,not mine. They will be of no use to you later. I will leave behinda ‘progeny’ of Gnanis. I will leave behind a Gnani who willcontinue the Work. Thereafter the link of Gnanis will continue.Therefore look for a living Gnani (sajeevan murti). There is nosalvation without one.Antahkaran : Inner Psychic OrganThe science, which the whole world is in search of, isbeing fully revealed here for the first time by me. It is verydifficult to understand the mind (mana). What is the mind? Whatis buddhi? What is chit and what is ahamkar? I will explain eachof them exactly as they are.The antahkaran has four components : mana (mind), buddhi(intellect), chit (that which sees scenes, previously registered)and ahamhkar (ego).All four have a form and can be read. They are notvisible to the eyes but can be comprehended through Gnan.They are completely physical. The Pure Soul (Shuddhatma) hasnothing to with the antahkaran; it is completely separate from it.I am completely separate from it and that is why I am able todescribe it to you exactly.Function : Each of the four components has its ownseparate function but every action is carried out with the co-operation of all four. The basis, on which the human bodyfunctions, has two parts : The sthoola (tangible, gross) – TheAptavani-17980Aptavani-1external division called baahyakaran (the external organ) andsookshma (subtle body) – The internal division called antahkaran(internal organ).For any action that takes place, first a photograph iscreated in the antahkaran (internal organ) and then it manifestsas physical action in the external organ and in the world.The mind never leaves the body; it jumps around insideonly and shows you different cues and pamphlets. Wandering isnot an attribute of the mind. It is wrong when people say theirmind wanders. It is the chit that wanders. Only the chit canleave the body and wander outside. It takes pictures of thingsexactly as they are and one can see those images. The intellectgives advice and makes decisions and the ego endorses them.There is interplay between the mind, the intellect, and the chitand the ego endorses whomever the intellect sides with, themind or the chit.For example, you are sitting in Santa Cruz and your mindshows you a ‘pamphlet’ that you want to go to Dadar. Your chitwill immediately go to Dadar and you will see exact images ofDadar, while sitting in Santa Cruz. Then the mind will show youanother pamphlet that you want to travel by bus, and the chitwill show you the bus. Then the mind will show you a thirdpamphlet of going by taxi and the fourth one of going by train.Then the chit will keep showing you the image of a taxi. Finallythe intellect will then make a decision to go by taxi and the ego,like the President of India, will endorse it. The work will thenbe executed and you will find yourself waiting for a taxi. Assoon as the intellect makes a decision, the mind will cease toshow you any more pamphlets of that subject. It will then beginto show you pamphlets about another topic. The ego willendorse either the intellect and the chit or the intellect and themind. Intellect is the common factor in the two. Without it nodecision regarding any work is arrived at and when the decisionis made, the ego endorses it and the work is executed. Nowork can be executed without the ego; without the ego youcannot even get up for a glass of water.Thus the antahkaran is like a parliamentary system.What Is The Mind Like? What Are Thoughts?Now I will explain what the mind is and its nature.The mind is like a rhizome. It is made up of many tubersand is very subtle. It is neither a subatomic particle (parmanoo)nor an atom but a stage between the two. When any situationarises, it expresses attachment or abhorrence towards thatsituation and it remains absorbed in that situation. Because ofthis, a new causal-mind is created, the effect of which is broughtinto fruition by vyavasthit (scientific circumstantial evidences),and this effect manifests as ‘effective-mind’. Everyone’s mind isdifferent because his or her causal-mind is different. The longerthe mind remains caught up in a situation, the greater the numberof parmanoos accumulate and come together and it is this verycollection of parmanoos that creates a tuber. The mind is acollection of tubers. When the circumstances and timing is rightin accordance to the principles of vyavasthit, the tuber sproutsand that is what we refer to as thoughts. The nature of the mindcan be understood from the thoughts and the kind of tubers thathave been created. Thoughts can be read. You have attachmenttowards pleasant thoughts and abhorrence towards unpleasantones and then you say you want to conquer the mind. The mindcan never be conquered, but it can be contained through Gnan,just like water is contained in a pot. Conquering the mind is thebiggest contradiction. The Real You are sentient (chetan, withlife principle) and the mind is insentient (achetan, non-self, withoutlife), so how can the two be compatible? Only when the Selfdoes the ‘work’ of the Self and the mind does the ‘work’ ofAptavani-18182Aptavani-1external division called baahyakaran (the external organ) andsookshma (subtle body) – The internal division called antahkaran(internal organ).For any action that takes place, first a photograph iscreated in the antahkaran (internal organ) and then it manifestsas physical action in the external organ and in the world.The mind never leaves the body; it jumps around insideonly and shows you different cues and pamphlets. Wandering isnot an attribute of the mind. It is wrong when people say theirmind wanders. It is the chit that wanders. Only the chit canleave the body and wander outside. It takes pictures of thingsexactly as they are and one can see those images. The intellectgives advice and makes decisions and the ego endorses them.There is interplay between the mind, the intellect, and the chitand the ego endorses whomever the intellect sides with, themind or the chit.For example, you are sitting in Santa Cruz and your mindshows you a ‘pamphlet’ that you want to go to Dadar. Your chitwill immediately go to Dadar and you will see exact images ofDadar, while sitting in Santa Cruz. Then the mind will show youanother pamphlet that you want to travel by bus, and the chitwill show you the bus. Then the mind will show you a thirdpamphlet of going by taxi and the fourth one of going by train.Then the chit will keep showing you the image of a taxi. Finallythe intellect will then make a decision to go by taxi and the ego,like the President of India, will endorse it. The work will thenbe executed and you will find yourself waiting for a taxi. Assoon as the intellect makes a decision, the mind will cease toshow you any more pamphlets of that subject. It will then beginto show you pamphlets about another topic. The ego willendorse either the intellect and the chit or the intellect and themind. Intellect is the common factor in the two. Without it nodecision regarding any work is arrived at and when the decisionis made, the ego endorses it and the work is executed. Nowork can be executed without the ego; without the ego youcannot even get up for a glass of water.Thus the antahkaran is like a parliamentary system.What Is The Mind Like? What Are Thoughts?Now I will explain what the mind is and its nature.The mind is like a rhizome. It is made up of many tubersand is very subtle. It is neither a subatomic particle (parmanoo)nor an atom but a stage between the two. When any situationarises, it expresses attachment or abhorrence towards thatsituation and it remains absorbed in that situation. Because ofthis, a new causal-mind is created, the effect of which is broughtinto fruition by vyavasthit (scientific circumstantial evidences),and this effect manifests as ‘effective-mind’. Everyone’s mind isdifferent because his or her causal-mind is different. The longerthe mind remains caught up in a situation, the greater the numberof parmanoos accumulate and come together and it is this verycollection of parmanoos that creates a tuber. The mind is acollection of tubers. When the circumstances and timing is rightin accordance to the principles of vyavasthit, the tuber sproutsand that is what we refer to as thoughts. The nature of the mindcan be understood from the thoughts and the kind of tubers thathave been created. Thoughts can be read. You have attachmenttowards pleasant thoughts and abhorrence towards unpleasantones and then you say you want to conquer the mind. The mindcan never be conquered, but it can be contained through Gnan,just like water is contained in a pot. Conquering the mind is thebiggest contradiction. The Real You are sentient (chetan, withlife principle) and the mind is insentient (achetan, non-self, withoutlife), so how can the two be compatible? Only when the Selfdoes the ‘work’ of the Self and the mind does the ‘work’ ofAptavani-18182Aptavani-1the mind, can the problem be solved. You should maintainawareness not to interfere with the functioning of the mind or tobecome absorbed or become one with the mind.Let me explain what these tubers of the mind are like.Say you visit your farm in the summer and find nothing growingin it. You will think that the farm is clean but I tell you to waitand see what happens after it rains. After a good rain youwill see all kinds of greenery on it, all kinds of creeperseverywhere. Where did these creepers come from? Eachcreeper had a rhizome under the ground, which sproutedwith the first shower of rain. Then if you uproot all thecreepers, you’ll feel happy that your farm is completely clean.I would tell you that you could only say it is clean, if itremains free from any creepers after three years of rain.Only then can you consider that your farm is free of anytubers (nirgrantha). Similarly this mind is made up of tubers,the bigger the tuber about a specific topic, the greater thenumber of thoughts about that topic and the smaller the tuber,the fewer the thoughts. For example, if you ask a youngVanik (vegetarian sect) boy how many times he thinks abouteating meat, he would tell you that in all his twenty years hehas thought about it only a few times. This means that histuber of eating meat is a small one, the size of a beetle nut.Now, if we were to ask a Muslim boy the same question, hewould tell you that he thinks about eating meat several timesa day. This means that his tuber of eating meat is very large,the size of a large sweet potato. If you ask a Jain child, hewill tell you that the thought of eating meat never crosses hismind, meaning he has no such tubers at all.If you were to plot a graph about your thoughts and whatthey are about, over a period of a month, a week and a day,you would come to know the kind and the size of tubers youhave. You will have only about five or ten large ones and theseare the ones, which create a problem. There is no problem withthe smaller ones. Do you think you can do this?I do not have any tubers within me, thus I am considerednirgranth (without tuber). Human beings are like a piece ofwood full of knots; one cannot even make any ‘furniture’ out ofthem! When these knots become excessive, they expressthemselves as tumors in or on the body.The mind is quite separate from the Self and can neverbecome one with it. When you have pleasant thoughts, you aredeluded to believe that it is you who is doing the thinking andyour thoughts are good. And when the thoughts are unpleasantyou say that you have these thoughts even when you do notwant them. What does that suggest? When the thoughts arepleasant you claim to be the thinker and when they are unpleasantyou say, “What can I do?” If you were the thinker and thethoughts were under your control then you would only thinkpleasant thoughts. Nobody would entertain unpleasant thoughts.But that does not happen, does it? Both, the pleasant andunpleasant thoughts will come.Inspiration Of Action Is Through MindThere are those who claim that the God within theminspires them to steal. The fools! Do they mean to say that Godis the guilty one, while they are innocent? Would God ever givesuch an inspiration? God neither inspires one to steal nor doeshe inspire one not to steal. Why would he inspire one to stealand become the thief Himself? The principle is that the one whoinspires to steal is the thief.Do you think God meddles in this way? He is the Knower,the Observer and is in permanent bliss. He sees and knowseverything. So then where does the inspiration come from? It iswhen a person’s tuber to steal, sprouts from within that he willAptavani-18384Aptavani-1the mind, can the problem be solved. You should maintainawareness not to interfere with the functioning of the mind or tobecome absorbed or become one with the mind.Let me explain what these tubers of the mind are like.Say you visit your farm in the summer and find nothing growingin it. You will think that the farm is clean but I tell you to waitand see what happens after it rains. After a good rain youwill see all kinds of greenery on it, all kinds of creeperseverywhere. Where did these creepers come from? Eachcreeper had a rhizome under the ground, which sproutedwith the first shower of rain. Then if you uproot all thecreepers, you’ll feel happy that your farm is completely clean.I would tell you that you could only say it is clean, if itremains free from any creepers after three years of rain.Only then can you consider that your farm is free of anytubers (nirgrantha). Similarly this mind is made up of tubers,the bigger the tuber about a specific topic, the greater thenumber of thoughts about that topic and the smaller the tuber,the fewer the thoughts. For example, if you ask a youngVanik (vegetarian sect) boy how many times he thinks abouteating meat, he would tell you that in all his twenty years hehas thought about it only a few times. This means that histuber of eating meat is a small one, the size of a beetle nut.Now, if we were to ask a Muslim boy the same question, hewould tell you that he thinks about eating meat several timesa day. This means that his tuber of eating meat is very large,the size of a large sweet potato. If you ask a Jain child, hewill tell you that the thought of eating meat never crosses hismind, meaning he has no such tubers at all.If you were to plot a graph about your thoughts and whatthey are about, over a period of a month, a week and a day,you would come to know the kind and the size of tubers youhave. You will have only about five or ten large ones and theseare the ones, which create a problem. There is no problem withthe smaller ones. Do you think you can do this?I do not have any tubers within me, thus I am considerednirgranth (without tuber). Human beings are like a piece ofwood full of knots; one cannot even make any ‘furniture’ out ofthem! When these knots become excessive, they expressthemselves as tumors in or on the body.The mind is quite separate from the Self and can neverbecome one with it. When you have pleasant thoughts, you aredeluded to believe that it is you who is doing the thinking andyour thoughts are good. And when the thoughts are unpleasantyou say that you have these thoughts even when you do notwant them. What does that suggest? When the thoughts arepleasant you claim to be the thinker and when they are unpleasantyou say, “What can I do?” If you were the thinker and thethoughts were under your control then you would only thinkpleasant thoughts. Nobody would entertain unpleasant thoughts.But that does not happen, does it? Both, the pleasant andunpleasant thoughts will come.Inspiration Of Action Is Through MindThere are those who claim that the God within theminspires them to steal. The fools! Do they mean to say that Godis the guilty one, while they are innocent? Would God ever givesuch an inspiration? God neither inspires one to steal nor doeshe inspire one not to steal. Why would he inspire one to stealand become the thief Himself? The principle is that the one whoinspires to steal is the thief.Do you think God meddles in this way? He is the Knower,the Observer and is in permanent bliss. He sees and knowseverything. So then where does the inspiration come from? It iswhen a person’s tuber to steal, sprouts from within that he willAptavani-18384Aptavani-1have thoughts about stealing. If this tuber is big, he will havemany thoughts and he may end up stealing. He will even boastabout his skills in stealing and by doing so he nourishes his tuberof stealing, which in turn will continue to sow new seeds ofstealing, and his tuber to steal will grow bigger. Now there isanother man, who also steals, but while stealing he feels remorsefor what he is doing but he has no other means to feed hisfamily. He continues to repent sincerely and therefore his tuberof stealing does not get any nourishment. By repenting he is alsosowing seeds of not stealing and so in his next life he will notsteal.The mind brings forth, different thoughts and because ofa person’s ignorance about his real Self, he becomes entangledwith the thoughts. He believes the thoughts to be his, therebycreating new images or ‘photographs’. These images arerecorded in the form of a negative and when they manifest intoa physical action, it is like watching a movie on the screen. Themovies you see in a theatre will last only a few hours, whereasthe movie of the mind is endless. Once it ends, a person willachieve liberation. That is what Kavi sang during the openingceremony of a movie theatre in Aurangabad.“A movie lasts three hours in the world,But the end of the movie of the mind is liberation.”People try to control their mind. When they see anunpleasant ‘movie’, they try to censure it or cut it out. How canthey censure it or cut it after the fact? They should have beenmore careful while making the movie. Mind is a movie. All youhave to do in a movie is to watch it and know it. You do nothave to become emotional in it. If someone is dying in a movie,people start crying sitting in the audience, as if their own lovedone is dying! How foolish! It is only a movie and there is noneed for anyone to cry.Relationship Between The Knower (Gnata) And TheKnown (Gneya)I merely observe and know the movie of the mind. Iobserve and know the kind of thoughts that come and go. Myfriendship with these thoughts extends only as far as a handshake.I do not marry them. Lord Mahavir did the same. He merelyobserved the thoughts that came and went. He too had thoughtstill the very end (nirvana, liberation). You exist as long as youhave thoughts. Thoughts are gneya (object to be known) andyou are gnata (the knower). The relationship is that of the knowerand the object to be known. How can you be the knower ifthere is nothing to be known? You will continue to see themovie of the mind till the final moment of your liberation. Whenit ends, there is perfect liberation – nirvana. If you are walkingalone in the dark and have thoughts about being robbed, youcan assume that if not on that day, some day you will be robbed.If you do not have such thoughts, then you will not be robbed.Thoughts are a forecast of things to come. The stock is alreadywithin you and that is why it manifests in the form of a thought.The kind of thoughts you have is one of the evidences. All‘You’ (the Self) have to do is just remain the knower and theobserver and maintain extra awareness there. It is very importantto know the science of the mind. Everyone tries to destroy themind. The mind is not to be destroyed. A person would becomemad if his mind were destroyed. You should not expect onlygood things to come to your mind; accept whatever comesalong. You should tell your mind that it could do whatever itwants. It can blow a horn or play a flute. Who are we to stopor change the ‘effect’ mind? No one can do that because it isan effect. Why should you be afraid of it? What would we listento if the mind did not play any music? You are the one thatneeds to make the adjustments. Tell your mind to play whateverit wants because now you like all kinds of music. Before GnanAptavani-18586Aptavani-1have thoughts about stealing. If this tuber is big, he will havemany thoughts and he may end up stealing. He will even boastabout his skills in stealing and by doing so he nourishes his tuberof stealing, which in turn will continue to sow new seeds ofstealing, and his tuber to steal will grow bigger. Now there isanother man, who also steals, but while stealing he feels remorsefor what he is doing but he has no other means to feed hisfamily. He continues to repent sincerely and therefore his tuberof stealing does not get any nourishment. By repenting he is alsosowing seeds of not stealing and so in his next life he will notsteal.The mind brings forth, different thoughts and because ofa person’s ignorance about his real Self, he becomes entangledwith the thoughts. He believes the thoughts to be his, therebycreating new images or ‘photographs’. These images arerecorded in the form of a negative and when they manifest intoa physical action, it is like watching a movie on the screen. Themovies you see in a theatre will last only a few hours, whereasthe movie of the mind is endless. Once it ends, a person willachieve liberation. That is what Kavi sang during the openingceremony of a movie theatre in Aurangabad.“A movie lasts three hours in the world,But the end of the movie of the mind is liberation.”People try to control their mind. When they see anunpleasant ‘movie’, they try to censure it or cut it out. How canthey censure it or cut it after the fact? They should have beenmore careful while making the movie. Mind is a movie. All youhave to do in a movie is to watch it and know it. You do nothave to become emotional in it. If someone is dying in a movie,people start crying sitting in the audience, as if their own lovedone is dying! How foolish! It is only a movie and there is noneed for anyone to cry.Relationship Between The Knower (Gnata) And TheKnown (Gneya)I merely observe and know the movie of the mind. Iobserve and know the kind of thoughts that come and go. Myfriendship with these thoughts extends only as far as a handshake.I do not marry them. Lord Mahavir did the same. He merelyobserved the thoughts that came and went. He too had thoughtstill the very end (nirvana, liberation). You exist as long as youhave thoughts. Thoughts are gneya (object to be known) andyou are gnata (the knower). The relationship is that of the knowerand the object to be known. How can you be the knower ifthere is nothing to be known? You will continue to see themovie of the mind till the final moment of your liberation. Whenit ends, there is perfect liberation – nirvana. If you are walkingalone in the dark and have thoughts about being robbed, youcan assume that if not on that day, some day you will be robbed.If you do not have such thoughts, then you will not be robbed.Thoughts are a forecast of things to come. The stock is alreadywithin you and that is why it manifests in the form of a thought.The kind of thoughts you have is one of the evidences. All‘You’ (the Self) have to do is just remain the knower and theobserver and maintain extra awareness there. It is very importantto know the science of the mind. Everyone tries to destroy themind. The mind is not to be destroyed. A person would becomemad if his mind were destroyed. You should not expect onlygood things to come to your mind; accept whatever comesalong. You should tell your mind that it could do whatever itwants. It can blow a horn or play a flute. Who are we to stopor change the ‘effect’ mind? No one can do that because it isan effect. Why should you be afraid of it? What would we listento if the mind did not play any music? You are the one thatneeds to make the adjustments. Tell your mind to play whateverit wants because now you like all kinds of music. Before GnanAptavani-18586Aptavani-1you only liked good music but now you have become adjustableand so now you have neither likes nor dislikes.Ride Your MindEven before Gnan I had the awareness of the thoughtsthat arose in the mind and would know that they would not letme sleep. So I would tell the mind, “Just keep on running. Youare the horse and I am the rider. You can run in whicheverdirection you want. It is just you and I.” This would go on untilthe morning. It is the law of the world that whatever you try tocontrol or restrict, will take control over you. When sugar isrationed in the market, the price of sugar goes up. It is the samewith the mind; if you try to restrict the mind, it will run twice asfast. So do not try to restrict it. There would be no problem inrestricting the mind if it were obedient. But if it does not listento you, then you should let it run till it gets exhausted. Whyshould you worry? You have the reins in your hands. But insteadwhat do people do? They try to control the mind; they try tosuppress it so they can sleep. You should forget about sleepingbecause such times present you with an opportunity to ride themind. When will you get such an opportunity again?It is only after riding the mind over and over again that Ihave acquired such perfect and non-contradictory Gnan.The mind is a boat in the ocean of worldly interactions.People try to destroy the mind to create a state of thoughtlessness(nirvichar), but such a state cannot be achieved. If a personwere to achieve such a state he would be considered a stone.What do people mean by a thoughtless state? If their mindbecomes restless in certain matters, they try to suppress it inthose matters but they don’t realize that it will become restlessin other matters. What is the real definition of a thoughtlessstate? ‘The one who remains as the Self, completely separateas the knower and the observer of thoughts that emerge withthe passing of time – he is the one who has acquired thethoughtless state in the Lord’s language.’Many foolish men renounce everything; their home, wifeand children and wearing only a loincloth go off to conquer themind. They run away from people and go off to the forest tolook at the animals and the trees. But they don’t realize that themind they take with them will continue to behave the same. Inthe forest, these men will keep a cow or a goat, grow plants,and build a hut. The nature of the mind is such that it will createa worldly life wherever it goes. It will create a worldly life evenin the Himalayas. Now how can you control such a mind?Control of the mind is the greatest paradox. It is impossible tocontrol the nature of the mind. But there are certain yogis whohave brought with them such tubers from their past life thatmakes them feel that their mind is under their control. But theywill realize it is not so once their mind starts to oppose them.Those who practice yoga too will realize that their mind is notunder their control when someone tries to provoke them. Theypractice yoga because of their tubers. Practicing yoga is inone’s prakruti and yet one believes that he or she is the onedoing it. They believe that they have conquered their mind!The mind surrenders to Gnan. The Gnani is able to dissolvethe tubers through Gnan thereby attaining a state free of tubers(nirgranth).Your mind is the image of your nobility. Understand themind and its nature completely.What is a Khashtriya’s mind like? It is very generous andnoble. If he is in a temple, he will donate whatever money hehas in his pocket, he will not hesitate or stop to think about howmuch he is giving. The mind of a person with Vanik intellect isvery narrow. Patidars, Patels are called Kashatriyas. They havea very generous mind but they do not have the wisdom and theAptavani-18788Aptavani-1you only liked good music but now you have become adjustableand so now you have neither likes nor dislikes.Ride Your MindEven before Gnan I had the awareness of the thoughtsthat arose in the mind and would know that they would not letme sleep. So I would tell the mind, “Just keep on running. Youare the horse and I am the rider. You can run in whicheverdirection you want. It is just you and I.” This would go on untilthe morning. It is the law of the world that whatever you try tocontrol or restrict, will take control over you. When sugar isrationed in the market, the price of sugar goes up. It is the samewith the mind; if you try to restrict the mind, it will run twice asfast. So do not try to restrict it. There would be no problem inrestricting the mind if it were obedient. But if it does not listento you, then you should let it run till it gets exhausted. Whyshould you worry? You have the reins in your hands. But insteadwhat do people do? They try to control the mind; they try tosuppress it so they can sleep. You should forget about sleepingbecause such times present you with an opportunity to ride themind. When will you get such an opportunity again?It is only after riding the mind over and over again that Ihave acquired such perfect and non-contradictory Gnan.The mind is a boat in the ocean of worldly interactions.People try to destroy the mind to create a state of thoughtlessness(nirvichar), but such a state cannot be achieved. If a personwere to achieve such a state he would be considered a stone.What do people mean by a thoughtless state? If their mindbecomes restless in certain matters, they try to suppress it inthose matters but they don’t realize that it will become restlessin other matters. What is the real definition of a thoughtlessstate? ‘The one who remains as the Self, completely separateas the knower and the observer of thoughts that emerge withthe passing of time – he is the one who has acquired thethoughtless state in the Lord’s language.’Many foolish men renounce everything; their home, wifeand children and wearing only a loincloth go off to conquer themind. They run away from people and go off to the forest tolook at the animals and the trees. But they don’t realize that themind they take with them will continue to behave the same. Inthe forest, these men will keep a cow or a goat, grow plants,and build a hut. The nature of the mind is such that it will createa worldly life wherever it goes. It will create a worldly life evenin the Himalayas. Now how can you control such a mind?Control of the mind is the greatest paradox. It is impossible tocontrol the nature of the mind. But there are certain yogis whohave brought with them such tubers from their past life thatmakes them feel that their mind is under their control. But theywill realize it is not so once their mind starts to oppose them.Those who practice yoga too will realize that their mind is notunder their control when someone tries to provoke them. Theypractice yoga because of their tubers. Practicing yoga is inone’s prakruti and yet one believes that he or she is the onedoing it. They believe that they have conquered their mind!The mind surrenders to Gnan. The Gnani is able to dissolvethe tubers through Gnan thereby attaining a state free of tubers(nirgranth).Your mind is the image of your nobility. Understand themind and its nature completely.What is a Khashtriya’s mind like? It is very generous andnoble. If he is in a temple, he will donate whatever money hehas in his pocket, he will not hesitate or stop to think about howmuch he is giving. The mind of a person with Vanik intellect isvery narrow. Patidars, Patels are called Kashatriyas. They havea very generous mind but they do not have the wisdom and theAptavani-18788Aptavani-1pragmatic approach to worldly interactions, as do the Vaniks.No one has all the attributes.Where Does Goddess Laxmi, Goddess Of Wealth,Reside?Goddess Laxmi, the Goddess of wealth says that she willreside in a home of a person who is sincere to one hundredpersons. This means that such a home will have an abundanceof wealth. The other homes will be rewarded only proportionatelyto their effort and hard work. What do we mean by sincerity?It means that one should know one’s mind, how noble it is andto what extent it is so?Money does not come through hard work. It comes onlyto those with open and generous minds. Do you think thesewealthy businessmen work? No, they all have a generous mind.The businessmen enjoy their wealth but it is their staffs that doall the work. Mind should be divine. Divine mind means to help eventhose who are ungrateful, to help even those who cheat you andcalls you a fool on top of that! When such people becomevictim of circumstances, only the divine-minded will help them.Those with divine minds bind a celestial life form in their cominglife.What does the intellect of a Vanik do? If there is only oneblanket between you and him, he will grab it first and coverhimself from head to toe and pretend to be asleep. He knowsthat you would ask for the blanket if he were awake. It is amind like this that causes one to suffer a lot. This whole worldis yours but you should know how to enjoy it with nobility.Kabir was a very wise man, he said :‘Eat, drink and be hospitable to others; thus do your duty,For upon leaving this world, nothing will accompany you.”To do your duty means to make preparation for liberation.It is the narrow mind that creates an obstacle to wealth. Whyelse would wealth be obstructed? The intellect of the Vanik iswise but it is very obstructive in the path of liberation.Mind : Expansive Or NarrowIf the mind were to calculate and balance accounts everyday, the next day you would not be able to cook. Suppose youdon’t earn even a dime in your business, does that mean youshould not eat the next day? What is this mind like? Let meexplain. Suppose there is path five feet wide, you will catchburs on your clothes from the bushes that grow in the path. Thesame thing will happen on a two feet wide path and the samewill happen if a path is so narrow that only one person can passthrough at a time. The burs will sick to his clothes, but he willstill manage to squeeze through. The mind knows which holesit has to escape through and it will squeeze its way through, nomatter what the situation. It can even pass through two wires.That is why we say Oh fool! Do not turn a royal mind into thatof a beggar. If you do not have a flower to give, give even apetal but do not let your mind become a beggar. Dependingupon circumstances, even a king may have to beg but does thatmean that his mind has become beggarly? It will still remainnoble and generous. The broader the mind, the greater is thefreedom. The narrower the mind, the greater is the confinement. It is like this, the direction the mind drags a person to,depends upon the kind of tubers his mind is made of. A miserhas a tuber of greed; a benevolent person will have a tuber ofbenevolence. An ascetic will have a tuber of asceticism. Aperson who renounces will have a tuber of renunciation; it is thistuber that makes him renounce and yet he says, ‘I renounced’.You unfortunate man! You just made your tuber larger! Whenwill this tuber ever dissolve? How will you get liberation? TheseAptavani-18990Aptavani-1pragmatic approach to worldly interactions, as do the Vaniks.No one has all the attributes.Where Does Goddess Laxmi, Goddess Of Wealth,Reside?Goddess Laxmi, the Goddess of wealth says that she willreside in a home of a person who is sincere to one hundredpersons. This means that such a home will have an abundanceof wealth. The other homes will be rewarded only proportionatelyto their effort and hard work. What do we mean by sincerity?It means that one should know one’s mind, how noble it is andto what extent it is so?Money does not come through hard work. It comes onlyto those with open and generous minds. Do you think thesewealthy businessmen work? No, they all have a generous mind.The businessmen enjoy their wealth but it is their staffs that doall the work. Mind should be divine. Divine mind means to help eventhose who are ungrateful, to help even those who cheat you andcalls you a fool on top of that! When such people becomevictim of circumstances, only the divine-minded will help them.Those with divine minds bind a celestial life form in their cominglife.What does the intellect of a Vanik do? If there is only oneblanket between you and him, he will grab it first and coverhimself from head to toe and pretend to be asleep. He knowsthat you would ask for the blanket if he were awake. It is amind like this that causes one to suffer a lot. This whole worldis yours but you should know how to enjoy it with nobility.Kabir was a very wise man, he said :‘Eat, drink and be hospitable to others; thus do your duty,For upon leaving this world, nothing will accompany you.”To do your duty means to make preparation for liberation.It is the narrow mind that creates an obstacle to wealth. Whyelse would wealth be obstructed? The intellect of the Vanik iswise but it is very obstructive in the path of liberation.Mind : Expansive Or NarrowIf the mind were to calculate and balance accounts everyday, the next day you would not be able to cook. Suppose youdon’t earn even a dime in your business, does that mean youshould not eat the next day? What is this mind like? Let meexplain. Suppose there is path five feet wide, you will catchburs on your clothes from the bushes that grow in the path. Thesame thing will happen on a two feet wide path and the samewill happen if a path is so narrow that only one person can passthrough at a time. The burs will sick to his clothes, but he willstill manage to squeeze through. The mind knows which holesit has to escape through and it will squeeze its way through, nomatter what the situation. It can even pass through two wires.That is why we say Oh fool! Do not turn a royal mind into thatof a beggar. If you do not have a flower to give, give even apetal but do not let your mind become a beggar. Dependingupon circumstances, even a king may have to beg but does thatmean that his mind has become beggarly? It will still remainnoble and generous. The broader the mind, the greater is thefreedom. The narrower the mind, the greater is the confinement. It is like this, the direction the mind drags a person to,depends upon the kind of tubers his mind is made of. A miserhas a tuber of greed; a benevolent person will have a tuber ofbenevolence. An ascetic will have a tuber of asceticism. Aperson who renounces will have a tuber of renunciation; it is thistuber that makes him renounce and yet he says, ‘I renounced’.You unfortunate man! You just made your tuber larger! Whenwill this tuber ever dissolve? How will you get liberation? TheseAptavani-18990Aptavani-1tubers are to be seen and known. You are separate and thetubers of your mind are separate. The fact that your mind isseparate from you is very evident because when you want tofall asleep the mind will start all kinds of pranks and will not letyou sleep. You may have all the comforts for sleeping and yetit will not let you sleep.Foreigners come to India in search of peace of mind, butis it that easy to find? The Jains too go for darshan of ShantinathBhagwan for shanti (peace) but Bhagwan says that while youare doing my darshan, you are also doing darshan of your shoesand your business. So how will you acquire peace?Evil Effects Of MindIn this age there is no harmony between a person’s mind,speech and actions. For example, Chandu and his friend goshopping. Chandu’s mind (what he thinks), speech and actionsare all different. In his mind he feels he wants to pay less moneyfor his purchases but he claims and his behaviour indicates thathe want to buy at a fair price. Whereas his friend maintains inhis mind, speech and behaviour that he will buy things at a fairprice. Chandu’s friend will attain a world of a higher life form,whereas Chandu is destined for a world of a lower life form.Why did he keep the mind separate from his speech and acts?This is the very evil effect of the mind, which binds him. Thisdiscord between the mind, speech and behaviour does notescape God. This age of kaliyug means evil effects and theseevil effects are inherent when one is born, some to a lesser andsome to a higher degreeThe Nature Of The MindWhat is the nature of the mind? If you show your mindsomeone who is unhappier than you, then it will be happy andwill make you feel that you have more happiness. If you areliving in a two-room apartment, your mind may become restlessfor a bigger apartment. That is when you should ask your mindhow people manage to live in just one room? Some don’t evenhave a chair to sit on, how do they manage? Then your mindwill become happy again. Sometimes when your mind becomesidle it will ask for nourishment, so you should nurture your mindin this way. This approach is for the one whose mind has becomeweak. However with the Gnan that I give you, you will not needanything else. The knowledge of vyavasthit is such that the mindwill not revolt and complain. Wherever the mind goes it willalways be at peace. Where the mind remains at peace in anysituation, there in lies true Gnan – that is true religion.The nature of the mind is very strange. It is such that itwill steal five dollars from someone and give away two dollarsto someone else. The mind is very unpredictable; in no time itcan create dislike for a person you have always revered. So becautious, do not act according to the dictates of your mind.What has Saint Kabir said?‘The person who is dictated by his mind loses everything.’The mind is very elusive; it will never let you becomeaware that it has deceived you. If the powers of the self enterthe mind and become one with the mind, it can sabotage you.It is like jumping into a lake then crying out for help. In this dayand age, people’s minds have become fractured. Such mindscan drive a person to jump into the ocean.The mind is like a dancer. People say that it is the kingwho makes the dancer dance. I say this is not so. It is thedancer who makes the king dance. Similarly, your mind makesyou dance.Two friends are out walking and one of them gets a whiffof some meat cooking in a restaurant close by. Within him histuber for eating meat starts to erupt and tickles him from within.He gets an intense desire to eat meat. He makes an excuse and92Aptavani-1Aptavani-191tubers are to be seen and known. You are separate and thetubers of your mind are separate. The fact that your mind isseparate from you is very evident because when you want tofall asleep the mind will start all kinds of pranks and will not letyou sleep. You may have all the comforts for sleeping and yetit will not let you sleep.Foreigners come to India in search of peace of mind, butis it that easy to find? The Jains too go for darshan of ShantinathBhagwan for shanti (peace) but Bhagwan says that while youare doing my darshan, you are also doing darshan of your shoesand your business. So how will you acquire peace?Evil Effects Of MindIn this age there is no harmony between a person’s mind,speech and actions. For example, Chandu and his friend goshopping. Chandu’s mind (what he thinks), speech and actionsare all different. In his mind he feels he wants to pay less moneyfor his purchases but he claims and his behaviour indicates thathe want to buy at a fair price. Whereas his friend maintains inhis mind, speech and behaviour that he will buy things at a fairprice. Chandu’s friend will attain a world of a higher life form,whereas Chandu is destined for a world of a lower life form.Why did he keep the mind separate from his speech and acts?This is the very evil effect of the mind, which binds him. Thisdiscord between the mind, speech and behaviour does notescape God. This age of kaliyug means evil effects and theseevil effects are inherent when one is born, some to a lesser andsome to a higher degreeThe Nature Of The MindWhat is the nature of the mind? If you show your mindsomeone who is unhappier than you, then it will be happy andwill make you feel that you have more happiness. If you areliving in a two-room apartment, your mind may become restlessfor a bigger apartment. That is when you should ask your mindhow people manage to live in just one room? Some don’t evenhave a chair to sit on, how do they manage? Then your mindwill become happy again. Sometimes when your mind becomesidle it will ask for nourishment, so you should nurture your mindin this way. This approach is for the one whose mind has becomeweak. However with the Gnan that I give you, you will not needanything else. The knowledge of vyavasthit is such that the mindwill not revolt and complain. Wherever the mind goes it willalways be at peace. Where the mind remains at peace in anysituation, there in lies true Gnan – that is true religion.The nature of the mind is very strange. It is such that itwill steal five dollars from someone and give away two dollarsto someone else. The mind is very unpredictable; in no time itcan create dislike for a person you have always revered. So becautious, do not act according to the dictates of your mind.What has Saint Kabir said?‘The person who is dictated by his mind loses everything.’The mind is very elusive; it will never let you becomeaware that it has deceived you. If the powers of the self enterthe mind and become one with the mind, it can sabotage you.It is like jumping into a lake then crying out for help. In this dayand age, people’s minds have become fractured. Such mindscan drive a person to jump into the ocean.The mind is like a dancer. People say that it is the kingwho makes the dancer dance. I say this is not so. It is thedancer who makes the king dance. Similarly, your mind makesyou dance.Two friends are out walking and one of them gets a whiffof some meat cooking in a restaurant close by. Within him histuber for eating meat starts to erupt and tickles him from within.He gets an intense desire to eat meat. He makes an excuse and92Aptavani-1Aptavani-191tells his friend he has to meet someone and asks him to wait forhim. He lies to his friend in this way and goes and eats in therestaurant. Alas! People even take a false oath in the name ofGod. When the tubers erupt, they will start lying. This is whatGod calls kashaya. The wretched man binds a tuber of deceitand a tuber of lying and strengthens his tuber of eating meat.When a tuber erupts in an ignorant person (person without Self-realization), he will bind five more new ones. Instead if he wereto become flexible and straightforward when his tuber for eatingmeat erupts, he will one day solve his problems. In his ignorantstate he will never become free from his tubers of eating meat butby telling the truth that he is going to the restaurant to eat meat,he can benefit greatly. If his friend comes form a virtuous family,he may even try to free him from his meat-eating habit or mayshow him a way out. His friend may help him understand and ifhe continues to repent, he may break his habit in the end. But ifhe does not soften and relent and goes away by lying and deceit,then he will never become free because he will bind new tubersof deceit and lies. That is why God has said for us to adopt aprinciple of not stealing through the medium of the mind, speechand acts. That way some day the tubers will dissolve.There are all kinds of tubers in the mind : tubers of greed,pride, deceit, and anger. There may be tubers of all of thesewithin. The tuber of pride is better than that of greed. The tuberof greed is very bad; even the one who has it is not aware ofit. Whereas others can see the tuber of pride sprouting andwhen someone asks him why he walks around being boastfuland arrogant, his tuber of pride will dissolve. The tuber of greedmay become evident some day but the tuber of deceit willalways remain hidden.How Do The Tubers Of the Mind Dissolve?The tubers of greed and anger will cause a lot of sufferingto you as well as others. The Lord has said for the one withgreed to be charitable. Such people should gather some loosechange worth about twenty-five dollars and walk along scatteringthe money and when their mind begins to fight back, they shouldscatter more money. This way the mind will become quiet. Butthe best way to dissolve the tuber of greed is through thinkingthings through. Think about why and for whom you have gatheredyour wealth and what kinds of happiness do you want from it.You don’t achieve any happiness for yourself, you loose yourown happiness working for others and in addition, you incur theliability of all the kashays committed in the process.When a tuber erupts in the Gnani, He simply remains theseer and the observer of that tuber. In accordance with theGnani’s instructions, if you look at the tubers of the mind froma vantage point of the pure Self, then those tubers will graduallydissolve. I have infinite powers within and that is why I am ableto dissolve your tubers; but as far as possible, I avoid usingthese powers unnecessarily. I show you the way to do it. Youacquire experience when these tubers erupt and you get theopportunity to watch the film of the mind. What will the ‘seer’do if there is nothing to see? To the extent the mind unfolds, theSelf too will blossom. The knowing power of the Self willincrease in proportion with the increase in the number of objectsseen. The more the number of objects you see, the greater theknowing power of the Self. Wherever the mind has becomedefiled with dirt, you can clean it by using the soap of Gnan.If the mind craves for some french fries, you shouldinstantly become aware whether it is vyavasthit prodding you orwhether you are being enticed by the rogues within. Be assuredthat it is vyavasthit when it strikes three times. The mind and theintellect will remain subdued if the body gets only just enoughfor its nourishment. Nevertheless, in my Gnan, there is no needto renounce or acquire. Vyavasthit will guide you.Aptavani-19394Aptavani-1tells his friend he has to meet someone and asks him to wait forhim. He lies to his friend in this way and goes and eats in therestaurant. Alas! People even take a false oath in the name ofGod. When the tubers erupt, they will start lying. This is whatGod calls kashaya. The wretched man binds a tuber of deceitand a tuber of lying and strengthens his tuber of eating meat.When a tuber erupts in an ignorant person (person without Self-realization), he will bind five more new ones. Instead if he wereto become flexible and straightforward when his tuber for eatingmeat erupts, he will one day solve his problems. In his ignorantstate he will never become free from his tubers of eating meat butby telling the truth that he is going to the restaurant to eat meat,he can benefit greatly. If his friend comes form a virtuous family,he may even try to free him from his meat-eating habit or mayshow him a way out. His friend may help him understand and ifhe continues to repent, he may break his habit in the end. But ifhe does not soften and relent and goes away by lying and deceit,then he will never become free because he will bind new tubersof deceit and lies. That is why God has said for us to adopt aprinciple of not stealing through the medium of the mind, speechand acts. That way some day the tubers will dissolve.There are all kinds of tubers in the mind : tubers of greed,pride, deceit, and anger. There may be tubers of all of thesewithin. The tuber of pride is better than that of greed. The tuberof greed is very bad; even the one who has it is not aware ofit. Whereas others can see the tuber of pride sprouting andwhen someone asks him why he walks around being boastfuland arrogant, his tuber of pride will dissolve. The tuber of greedmay become evident some day but the tuber of deceit willalways remain hidden.How Do The Tubers Of the Mind Dissolve?The tubers of greed and anger will cause a lot of sufferingto you as well as others. The Lord has said for the one withgreed to be charitable. Such people should gather some loosechange worth about twenty-five dollars and walk along scatteringthe money and when their mind begins to fight back, they shouldscatter more money. This way the mind will become quiet. Butthe best way to dissolve the tuber of greed is through thinkingthings through. Think about why and for whom you have gatheredyour wealth and what kinds of happiness do you want from it.You don’t achieve any happiness for yourself, you loose yourown happiness working for others and in addition, you incur theliability of all the kashays committed in the process.When a tuber erupts in the Gnani, He simply remains theseer and the observer of that tuber. In accordance with theGnani’s instructions, if you look at the tubers of the mind froma vantage point of the pure Self, then those tubers will graduallydissolve. I have infinite powers within and that is why I am ableto dissolve your tubers; but as far as possible, I avoid usingthese powers unnecessarily. I show you the way to do it. Youacquire experience when these tubers erupt and you get theopportunity to watch the film of the mind. What will the ‘seer’do if there is nothing to see? To the extent the mind unfolds, theSelf too will blossom. The knowing power of the Self willincrease in proportion with the increase in the number of objectsseen. The more the number of objects you see, the greater theknowing power of the Self. Wherever the mind has becomedefiled with dirt, you can clean it by using the soap of Gnan.If the mind craves for some french fries, you shouldinstantly become aware whether it is vyavasthit prodding you orwhether you are being enticed by the rogues within. Be assuredthat it is vyavasthit when it strikes three times. The mind and theintellect will remain subdued if the body gets only just enoughfor its nourishment. Nevertheless, in my Gnan, there is no needto renounce or acquire. Vyavasthit will guide you.Aptavani-19394Aptavani-1The mind constantly needs nourishment. It needs pressure.It needs to remain busy. The mind will behave badly when youare alone. Mahatmas who have acquired my Gnan remaindetached and unaffected in worldly life and experience solitudeof the Self in extreme congestion. The mind gets its food incrowds and becomes engrossed in its own work and at thattime the Self is left alone to remain in bliss.If someone’s mind becomes weak, even a person withoutSelf-Realization will ask ‘Why are you so preoccupied withyour thoughts, snap out of it!’ The mind will express anything.Do you think people have thoughts about dying? Certainlythey do. Everyone thinks about dying but what do they do?They shove such thoughts aside the moment they erupt. Whynot get rid of all your thoughts? But no, people would not dothat. They cling on to thoughts that please them. This Gnan ofours is such that at the moment of death, the Self will manifestfully. At that moment one will withdraw completely in the domainof the Self. The mind, intellect, chit and ego will all become stilland at the moment of death, there will be absolute peace (samadhi– deep meditation). All my mahatmas have samadhi at the timeof their death.The Mind Is PhysicalThe mind is completely physical. It is mechanical. If aman manufactures machines, at the time of the manufacturing hebecomes one with the machinery. And when that machine runs,his ego will take credit for doing such a good job. And if hewere to accidentally stick his finger in the machine, will themachine have any hesitation in cutting his finger? No it will not.It will cut his finger in no time because the machine is physical: insentient – in that the maker of the machine has no power.The same is true of the mind.There are atoms that are lighter than the atoms of thebody. Speech is made of these atoms and the mind is made upof atoms even lighter than these.Mind : Subtle And GrossThere are two kinds of minds : gross and subtle. – Thesubtle mind is also known as bhaav mun, intent or causal mindor charge mind, and the gross mind is called dravya mun, theeffect mind. The causal mind is located at a depth of two anda half inches from the center of the forehead at the eyebrowlevel. The effect mind, also known as discharge mind, is in theheart. It has petals. Many people say, ‘My heart does notaccept.’ In situations of sudden shock, the heart becomes veryagitated, that is physical mind- it is in the form of discharge,whereas the causal mind creates new causes and therefore itcharges karma.The causal mind has a purpose and that is why the seedsof cause are sown. The causal mind can be recognized fromyour intents. But you do not have the ability to see your deepinner intents; you can only do so after you attain the Self.Thereafter You are absolutely impartial and are able to see themind completely separate like a movie. Only then can youunderstand what causal mind is. Only the omniscient canrecognize the causal mind. The Gnani, who is omniscient, sealsoff your causal mind and so there is no charging of a new mind,but only the discharging mind remains. Thereafter you only needto see and know the effect or discharge.What the foreigners refer to as conscious and subconsciousmind, is the physical or discharge mind. No one can grasp evena single atom of the subtle causal mind. That is the task for onlythe Gnani Purush because it can only be ascertained throughGnan.I have given you, the mahatmas, the knowledge of theAptavani-19596Aptavani-1The mind constantly needs nourishment. It needs pressure.It needs to remain busy. The mind will behave badly when youare alone. Mahatmas who have acquired my Gnan remaindetached and unaffected in worldly life and experience solitudeof the Self in extreme congestion. The mind gets its food incrowds and becomes engrossed in its own work and at thattime the Self is left alone to remain in bliss.If someone’s mind becomes weak, even a person withoutSelf-Realization will ask ‘Why are you so preoccupied withyour thoughts, snap out of it!’ The mind will express anything.Do you think people have thoughts about dying? Certainlythey do. Everyone thinks about dying but what do they do?They shove such thoughts aside the moment they erupt. Whynot get rid of all your thoughts? But no, people would not dothat. They cling on to thoughts that please them. This Gnan ofours is such that at the moment of death, the Self will manifestfully. At that moment one will withdraw completely in the domainof the Self. The mind, intellect, chit and ego will all become stilland at the moment of death, there will be absolute peace (samadhi– deep meditation). All my mahatmas have samadhi at the timeof their death.The Mind Is PhysicalThe mind is completely physical. It is mechanical. If aman manufactures machines, at the time of the manufacturing hebecomes one with the machinery. And when that machine runs,his ego will take credit for doing such a good job. And if hewere to accidentally stick his finger in the machine, will themachine have any hesitation in cutting his finger? No it will not.It will cut his finger in no time because the machine is physical: insentient – in that the maker of the machine has no power.The same is true of the mind.There are atoms that are lighter than the atoms of thebody. Speech is made of these atoms and the mind is made upof atoms even lighter than these.Mind : Subtle And GrossThere are two kinds of minds : gross and subtle. – Thesubtle mind is also known as bhaav mun, intent or causal mindor charge mind, and the gross mind is called dravya mun, theeffect mind. The causal mind is located at a depth of two anda half inches from the center of the forehead at the eyebrowlevel. The effect mind, also known as discharge mind, is in theheart. It has petals. Many people say, ‘My heart does notaccept.’ In situations of sudden shock, the heart becomes veryagitated, that is physical mind- it is in the form of discharge,whereas the causal mind creates new causes and therefore itcharges karma.The causal mind has a purpose and that is why the seedsof cause are sown. The causal mind can be recognized fromyour intents. But you do not have the ability to see your deepinner intents; you can only do so after you attain the Self.Thereafter You are absolutely impartial and are able to see themind completely separate like a movie. Only then can youunderstand what causal mind is. Only the omniscient canrecognize the causal mind. The Gnani, who is omniscient, sealsoff your causal mind and so there is no charging of a new mind,but only the discharging mind remains. Thereafter you only needto see and know the effect or discharge.What the foreigners refer to as conscious and subconsciousmind, is the physical or discharge mind. No one can grasp evena single atom of the subtle causal mind. That is the task for onlythe Gnani Purush because it can only be ascertained throughGnan.I have given you, the mahatmas, the knowledge of theAptavani-19596Aptavani-1Self and so you are completely separate from your mind. I haveput a stop to your charge mind and have made you the knowerand the observer of your discharge mind. Thus you can remainundisturbed when you are faced with the infinite states of themind. That is Gnan. And those who become affected andentangled in any state of the mind create new causes; the effectof which is then brought forth by vyavasthit. They again becomeaffected (as the effect unfolds) and this gives rise to new causesand thus the cycle of cause and effect continues. The Mind - The Known : The Self - The KnowerThe Self is steadfast and the thoughts fluctuate. Both areseparate. This is the only relationship between the Knower (Self)and the known (thoughts).That is why I tell everyone not to spoil his or her innerintent under any circumstances. An unexpected guest may cometo visit you at an untimely hour, but do not spoil your innerintent. Feed him or her a simple meal but do not spoil your innerfeelings. Do not let your mind become narrow and miserly.Anger breaks the other person’s mind beyondreconciliation. This will cause you to wander for many rebirths.There is a saying that a mind, a pearl and a glass, once brokencan never be mended again.‘Manahparyava gnan’ means to know thoughts takingplace in the mind of others before their echo is heard in yourown inner instrument (antahkaran). A person possessing‘manahparyaya gnan’ can read, see and know those thoughtsslowly but clearly. In the language of the Vitarag – to see andto know all the phases of your own mind is ‘manahparyayagnan’.I am the doctor of the mind in this world. You will finddoctors of the body everywhere but go and find me a doctorof the mind. The diseases in the body arise from the diseasesof the mind. I stop all the diseases of the mind and stop anynew ones from occurring and help you maintain the newlyacquired healthy state. I separate you from your mind and giveyou your pure Self. After that the mind will not disturb you.Such a mind will help you towards liberation. This mind willobey you completely.The Light Of The Intellect : The Light Of GnanKnowledge of all the topics in this world is containedwithin the intellect and ego less knowledge is in the Self.One can have the knowledge of all the topics of theworld. This knowledge is associated with the ego and thereforeit is under the domain of the intellect (buddhi). Such knowledgeis not reliable; it is egoistic knowledge. Many highly intellectualindividuals, under certain circumstances become stupid. A manwith intellect is liable to lose it and become stupid.Intellect (buddhi) is the indirect light of the Self. It comesthrough the medium of the ego. It is like the sunlight coming inthrough the window, which falls on the mirror, and that light isthen reflected in another room.Gnan is the direct light of the Self. It is the full light. Itshows everything exactly as it is. Intellect is reflected light. It isthe original light reflected through the ego. It is not the lightitself, whereas Gnan is the light itself. It is self-illuminating andalso has enough energy to illuminate the entire universe. Forexample, the sun is self-illuminating and also illuminates otherthings whereas the light of the moon is the sun’s reflected light.Comparing intellect (buddhi) with Gnan is like comparinga candle to the sun. I have the full light of Gnan and that is whyI have absolutely no intelligence. I am without intellect.Concomitant with the demise of the intellect, an omniscient stateAptavani-19798Aptavani-1Self and so you are completely separate from your mind. I haveput a stop to your charge mind and have made you the knowerand the observer of your discharge mind. Thus you can remainundisturbed when you are faced with the infinite states of themind. That is Gnan. And those who become affected andentangled in any state of the mind create new causes; the effectof which is then brought forth by vyavasthit. They again becomeaffected (as the effect unfolds) and this gives rise to new causesand thus the cycle of cause and effect continues. The Mind - The Known : The Self - The KnowerThe Self is steadfast and the thoughts fluctuate. Both areseparate. This is the only relationship between the Knower (Self)and the known (thoughts).That is why I tell everyone not to spoil his or her innerintent under any circumstances. An unexpected guest may cometo visit you at an untimely hour, but do not spoil your innerintent. Feed him or her a simple meal but do not spoil your innerfeelings. Do not let your mind become narrow and miserly.Anger breaks the other person’s mind beyondreconciliation. This will cause you to wander for many rebirths.There is a saying that a mind, a pearl and a glass, once brokencan never be mended again.‘Manahparyava gnan’ means to know thoughts takingplace in the mind of others before their echo is heard in yourown inner instrument (antahkaran). A person possessing‘manahparyaya gnan’ can read, see and know those thoughtsslowly but clearly. In the language of the Vitarag – to see andto know all the phases of your own mind is ‘manahparyayagnan’.I am the doctor of the mind in this world. You will finddoctors of the body everywhere but go and find me a doctorof the mind. The diseases in the body arise from the diseasesof the mind. I stop all the diseases of the mind and stop anynew ones from occurring and help you maintain the newlyacquired healthy state. I separate you from your mind and giveyou your pure Self. After that the mind will not disturb you.Such a mind will help you towards liberation. This mind willobey you completely.The Light Of The Intellect : The Light Of GnanKnowledge of all the topics in this world is containedwithin the intellect and ego less knowledge is in the Self.One can have the knowledge of all the topics of theworld. This knowledge is associated with the ego and thereforeit is under the domain of the intellect (buddhi). Such knowledgeis not reliable; it is egoistic knowledge. Many highly intellectualindividuals, under certain circumstances become stupid. A manwith intellect is liable to lose it and become stupid.Intellect (buddhi) is the indirect light of the Self. It comesthrough the medium of the ego. It is like the sunlight coming inthrough the window, which falls on the mirror, and that light isthen reflected in another room.Gnan is the direct light of the Self. It is the full light. Itshows everything exactly as it is. Intellect is reflected light. It isthe original light reflected through the ego. It is not the lightitself, whereas Gnan is the light itself. It is self-illuminating andalso has enough energy to illuminate the entire universe. Forexample, the sun is self-illuminating and also illuminates otherthings whereas the light of the moon is the sun’s reflected light.Comparing intellect (buddhi) with Gnan is like comparinga candle to the sun. I have the full light of Gnan and that is whyI have absolutely no intelligence. I am without intellect.Concomitant with the demise of the intellect, an omniscient stateAptavani-19798Aptavani-1expressed within me. One can only become omniscient whenone becomes completely free from intelligence.Types Of IntellectThere are two kinds of intellect : (1) Right intellect (samyakbuddhi). (2) Wrong intellect (viprit buddhi).The right intellect is the intellect which is on the right pathand this intellect can only be acquired when one becomes Self-realized. Thereafter this intellect will show what is right. It willshow things exactly as they are. Only rarely does one attain theright intellect.The wrong intellect is always to be found in the absenceof right intellect. Wrong intellect means it is wrong from theperspective of attaining liberation. It is the nature of wrongintellect to strengthen the foundation of worldly life and it willnever help one towards liberation. The intellect wanders aroundonly in the worldly life constantly assessing benefits and lossesfor the worldly life, never for liberation.As one’s intellect increases, so does one’s internal suffering.If a mother of a two-year-old toddler is on her deathbed, hewill not be affected. He will still be laughing and playing, whereasher twenty-year-old son will have so much internal suffering. Asthe intellect increases, so does the internal suffering. Theselaborers have no worries. They sleep soundly everyday, whereasthese wealthy businessmen worry constantly. They do not evensleep soundly as night. Why? This is because they have greaterintellect. Internal suffering is proportional to the amount of theintellect. The higher the intellect, the greater is the internal suffering.Where there is intellect, there will always be the ego of‘I am the doer’. That is precisely why one worries. It is theintellect that keeps us separate from the Self.Lord Krishna has referred to the intellect as vyabhicharini(perverted) and says that it makes one wander endlessly in theworldly life.Up to what point is the intellect necessary? The intellectis necessary up to the point one attains Self-Realization. Theuse of intellect should be limited to solving difficult life situationsand preventing such situations. The intellect should never beused to earn money or to deceive others. There is grave dangerin doing so.Wealth comes to you because of your merit karma andnot because of the use of your intelligence. The owners of thesebig factories and mills have no intelligence and yet abundantwealth comes their way. Their employees use a great deal ofintellect. They are the ones who deal with all the tax officers andhave to hear verbal insults of the tax officers, while the bosssleeps soundly and leisurely.The Receptacle Of Intellect Life After LifeEvery man is happy in his own home. A person that livesin a hut will not be happy in a bungalow and vice versa. Thereason behind this is the ‘receptacle’ of the intellect. A personwill only like whatever he has brought with him in the receptacleof intellect. Whatever one fills in the receptacle of his intellectin the past life, is divided into two categories : Fruits of meritkarma, and fruits of demerit karma. Everyone divides up thisreceptacle of intellect. Of the total contents of this receptacle,they use up most of the percentage to acquire material wealth,nice home, a car and a family. This way they use up most oftheir fruits of their merit karma, leaving behind only one or twopercent for spirituality and religion.There are two thieves who steal. One gets caught and theother escapes cleverly. What does that indicate? They havebrought with them intellect that prompts stealing, but for the onewho gets caught, his demerit karma has come into effect andAptavani-199100Aptavani-1expressed within me. One can only become omniscient whenone becomes completely free from intelligence.Types Of IntellectThere are two kinds of intellect : (1) Right intellect (samyakbuddhi). (2) Wrong intellect (viprit buddhi).The right intellect is the intellect which is on the right pathand this intellect can only be acquired when one becomes Self-realized. Thereafter this intellect will show what is right. It willshow things exactly as they are. Only rarely does one attain theright intellect.The wrong intellect is always to be found in the absenceof right intellect. Wrong intellect means it is wrong from theperspective of attaining liberation. It is the nature of wrongintellect to strengthen the foundation of worldly life and it willnever help one towards liberation. The intellect wanders aroundonly in the worldly life constantly assessing benefits and lossesfor the worldly life, never for liberation.As one’s intellect increases, so does one’s internal suffering.If a mother of a two-year-old toddler is on her deathbed, hewill not be affected. He will still be laughing and playing, whereasher twenty-year-old son will have so much internal suffering. Asthe intellect increases, so does the internal suffering. Theselaborers have no worries. They sleep soundly everyday, whereasthese wealthy businessmen worry constantly. They do not evensleep soundly as night. Why? This is because they have greaterintellect. Internal suffering is proportional to the amount of theintellect. The higher the intellect, the greater is the internal suffering.Where there is intellect, there will always be the ego of‘I am the doer’. That is precisely why one worries. It is theintellect that keeps us separate from the Self.Lord Krishna has referred to the intellect as vyabhicharini(perverted) and says that it makes one wander endlessly in theworldly life.Up to what point is the intellect necessary? The intellectis necessary up to the point one attains Self-Realization. Theuse of intellect should be limited to solving difficult life situationsand preventing such situations. The intellect should never beused to earn money or to deceive others. There is grave dangerin doing so.Wealth comes to you because of your merit karma andnot because of the use of your intelligence. The owners of thesebig factories and mills have no intelligence and yet abundantwealth comes their way. Their employees use a great deal ofintellect. They are the ones who deal with all the tax officers andhave to hear verbal insults of the tax officers, while the bosssleeps soundly and leisurely.The Receptacle Of Intellect Life After LifeEvery man is happy in his own home. A person that livesin a hut will not be happy in a bungalow and vice versa. Thereason behind this is the ‘receptacle’ of the intellect. A personwill only like whatever he has brought with him in the receptacleof intellect. Whatever one fills in the receptacle of his intellectin the past life, is divided into two categories : Fruits of meritkarma, and fruits of demerit karma. Everyone divides up thisreceptacle of intellect. Of the total contents of this receptacle,they use up most of the percentage to acquire material wealth,nice home, a car and a family. This way they use up most oftheir fruits of their merit karma, leaving behind only one or twopercent for spirituality and religion.There are two thieves who steal. One gets caught and theother escapes cleverly. What does that indicate? They havebrought with them intellect that prompts stealing, but for the onewho gets caught, his demerit karma has come into effect andAptavani-199100Aptavani-1therefore he is using up his demerit fruits while the other usesup his merit karma in escaping. In this way everyone uses uptheir merit and demerit karma according to what they havebrought in the receptacle of their intellect. If one comes into thisworld with the intellect for becoming extremely wealthy, then hismerit karma will be used up for that. Another person has broughtthe same kind of intellect in his receptacle, but for him insteadof fruits of merit karma he is faced with the fruit of his demeritkarma and so he never sees any money. So precise are people’saccounts, life after life, that no one has any power over them.And these fools believe, ‘I earned ten million rupees.’ Alas! Hehas used up the fruits of his merit karma and on the wrong pathat that. Instead change what you fill in the receptacle of yourintellect. Your intent should be only for true religion and not fortransient material wealth of cars, bungalows, radios etc. Keepthe receptacle of your intellect purely for the purpose of attainingthe knowledge of the Self. Whatever you have right now, let itbe. From now on fill the receptacle of your intellect with thatwhich will liberate you.My receptacle of intellect that I have brought forth forthis life is only for that which is for the real religion and for thesalvation of the world. I have not spent any of my merit karmaanywhere else - not for money, house, wife, children or anythingelse.Everyone who has come to me and taken this Gnan, havebeen able to do so because they had allocated two to fivepercent of their merit karma for liberation. Because I hadallocated a hundred percent for true religion, I have been givena certificate of ‘No objection’ as far as religion is concerned.Lord Ganpati – The Deity of IntellectLord Ganpati is the chief deity of all the deities representingwisdom and intellect. He possesses the sole right to writeAptavani-1101scriptures. There is not a single place where his intellect doesnot shine. There is no weakness in his intellect. That is exactlywhy he is placed first and foremost among all deities. Even inrituals of prayer worship, Lord Ganpati is placed first. Theintellect becomes humble and free from illusion by worshippinghim. If a person encounters a few difficulties in a month butconstantly lives in fear everyday, it is the result of wrong intellect.Worship of Lord Ganpati converts wrong intellect to right. Thatis why Lord Ganpati is always placed first in any worship, butbecause people perform their rituals without the correctunderstanding behind it, their worship does not prove fruitful. Ifworship is performed with the correct understanding, it willbring good results.Ganpati has successfully passed through all the intricaciesand perplexities of the intellect. By worshipping him with anunderstanding, the illusion of the intellect disappears and theright intellect is attained.Experience Through Intellect  : Experience ThroughGnanIf a person who has never before tasted cardamomflavored ice-cream were given the ice-cream in the dark, he willbegin to wonder whether the ice-cream is naturally cold; whetherthe nature of milk and all the ingredients in the ice cream, suchas sugar, cream and cardamom, is also cold. Intellect has theability to discern and analyze the inherent qualities of theingredients in the ice cream and why it is so cold. One is ableto know and experience all this through his intellect. If theintellect, the indirect light of the Self, can be so useful in mundaneworldly matters, imagine how powerful the direct light of theSelf can be.I tell everyone to put their intellect (buddhi) on pensionafter they acquire the light of the Self. The whole world needs102Aptavani-1therefore he is using up his demerit fruits while the other usesup his merit karma in escaping. In this way everyone uses uptheir merit and demerit karma according to what they havebrought in the receptacle of their intellect. If one comes into thisworld with the intellect for becoming extremely wealthy, then hismerit karma will be used up for that. Another person has broughtthe same kind of intellect in his receptacle, but for him insteadof fruits of merit karma he is faced with the fruit of his demeritkarma and so he never sees any money. So precise are people’saccounts, life after life, that no one has any power over them.And these fools believe, ‘I earned ten million rupees.’ Alas! Hehas used up the fruits of his merit karma and on the wrong pathat that. Instead change what you fill in the receptacle of yourintellect. Your intent should be only for true religion and not fortransient material wealth of cars, bungalows, radios etc. Keepthe receptacle of your intellect purely for the purpose of attainingthe knowledge of the Self. Whatever you have right now, let itbe. From now on fill the receptacle of your intellect with thatwhich will liberate you.My receptacle of intellect that I have brought forth forthis life is only for that which is for the real religion and for thesalvation of the world. I have not spent any of my merit karmaanywhere else - not for money, house, wife, children or anythingelse.Everyone who has come to me and taken this Gnan, havebeen able to do so because they had allocated two to fivepercent of their merit karma for liberation. Because I hadallocated a hundred percent for true religion, I have been givena certificate of ‘No objection’ as far as religion is concerned.Lord Ganpati – The Deity of IntellectLord Ganpati is the chief deity of all the deities representingwisdom and intellect. He possesses the sole right to writeAptavani-1101scriptures. There is not a single place where his intellect doesnot shine. There is no weakness in his intellect. That is exactlywhy he is placed first and foremost among all deities. Even inrituals of prayer worship, Lord Ganpati is placed first. Theintellect becomes humble and free from illusion by worshippinghim. If a person encounters a few difficulties in a month butconstantly lives in fear everyday, it is the result of wrong intellect.Worship of Lord Ganpati converts wrong intellect to right. Thatis why Lord Ganpati is always placed first in any worship, butbecause people perform their rituals without the correctunderstanding behind it, their worship does not prove fruitful. Ifworship is performed with the correct understanding, it willbring good results.Ganpati has successfully passed through all the intricaciesand perplexities of the intellect. By worshipping him with anunderstanding, the illusion of the intellect disappears and theright intellect is attained.Experience Through Intellect  : Experience ThroughGnanIf a person who has never before tasted cardamomflavored ice-cream were given the ice-cream in the dark, he willbegin to wonder whether the ice-cream is naturally cold; whetherthe nature of milk and all the ingredients in the ice cream, suchas sugar, cream and cardamom, is also cold. Intellect has theability to discern and analyze the inherent qualities of theingredients in the ice cream and why it is so cold. One is ableto know and experience all this through his intellect. If theintellect, the indirect light of the Self, can be so useful in mundaneworldly matters, imagine how powerful the direct light of theSelf can be.I tell everyone to put their intellect (buddhi) on pensionafter they acquire the light of the Self. The whole world needs102Aptavani-1intellect. They are dependent on it but the knowledge of the Selfis such that the intellect is not needed any more. I refer to theintellect as a lying rogue. Never give any credence to it. Youshould tell her, “Listen, Madam intellect, life after life you haveharassed me. Dear Madam now return to your own home. Goto the ones who need you. I have no need for you anymore.”Retire your intellect in this way. You do not have to insult it orbe contemptuous towards it, because as long as there is anycontempt or hatred within you, you will not attain liberation. Sotry to appease it anyway you can and send her home. Pensionmeans consolation.If you want liberation then you should not listen to yourintellect at all. The intellect is such that it will show you faultseven in a Gnani Purush. Oh unlucky one! You see faults evenin the one who can grant you liberation? Your liberation will goaway from you for infinite lives.It is intellect that makes you clash in the worldly life. Ifjust by listening to your wife you encounter so much clash andaggravation, just think what Madam Intellect will do to you! Ifyou listen to her, there is no telling where you will be thrown.Even at two in the morning she will awaken you and misleadyou. Your encounters with your wife are not so many but thisMadam Intellect is always with you. She is such that she candethrone you from your seat.There is a diamond worth five hundred million. If youwere to ask a hundred jewelers to appraise it, they will eachgive you a different value, because they each are guided by theirown intellect. It is the same diamond and yet so many differentvalues, because everyone’s intellect is different. Therefore donot try to measure the intellect of a Gnani Purush. It is not inyour capacity to do so.You should not use your intellect (buddhi) before a Gnani,even by mistake. Every part of the Gnani and his divine karmaare worthy of worship. The intellect can never be used here.This Gnani Purush has a physical body but within resides theone who is eternally aware. What is visible to you is the physicalform of the Gnani Purush, which is purely for play-acting forworldly interactions. It is completely dramatic (theatrical). Forthe sake of worldly interactions, the part the Gnani Purush playsis dramatic – outwardly he plays his role as Ambalal, but fromwithin he is completely detached. I have no intellect. Only throughthe association with the one who is without intellect, can youbecome the same.The work of the people in this world is done by theintellect and the work of the Gnani is done by vyavasthit, andso there is no need to interfere at all.What is intellect? It is your viewpoint from your past life.If you are traveling on a highway, you look at the landscapearound you for four miles and you decide that it would be goodto have everything this way. The intellect endorses this and theviewpoint of the four-mile becomes decided. In the next milethe landscape changes and so does your viewpoint and theintellect endorses this too, but the intellect does not disregardthe viewpoint of the past because of the new one. That is whyit presents itself to you, over and over again. If you were todisregard the viewpoint of the past then there is no problem butthis is not possible. Your opinions always present themselvesbefore you – this I refer to as your past vision and knowledgebecause the intellect has endorsed them and that is why thereis an on going conflict from within. Your intellect of today is theviewpoint of your past and your viewpoint of today becomesyour intellect for the next life and this is how everything carrieson.A thief steals because he has an opinion for stealing. It isAptavani-1103104Aptavani-1intellect. They are dependent on it but the knowledge of the Selfis such that the intellect is not needed any more. I refer to theintellect as a lying rogue. Never give any credence to it. Youshould tell her, “Listen, Madam intellect, life after life you haveharassed me. Dear Madam now return to your own home. Goto the ones who need you. I have no need for you anymore.”Retire your intellect in this way. You do not have to insult it orbe contemptuous towards it, because as long as there is anycontempt or hatred within you, you will not attain liberation. Sotry to appease it anyway you can and send her home. Pensionmeans consolation.If you want liberation then you should not listen to yourintellect at all. The intellect is such that it will show you faultseven in a Gnani Purush. Oh unlucky one! You see faults evenin the one who can grant you liberation? Your liberation will goaway from you for infinite lives.It is intellect that makes you clash in the worldly life. Ifjust by listening to your wife you encounter so much clash andaggravation, just think what Madam Intellect will do to you! Ifyou listen to her, there is no telling where you will be thrown.Even at two in the morning she will awaken you and misleadyou. Your encounters with your wife are not so many but thisMadam Intellect is always with you. She is such that she candethrone you from your seat.There is a diamond worth five hundred million. If youwere to ask a hundred jewelers to appraise it, they will eachgive you a different value, because they each are guided by theirown intellect. It is the same diamond and yet so many differentvalues, because everyone’s intellect is different. Therefore donot try to measure the intellect of a Gnani Purush. It is not inyour capacity to do so.You should not use your intellect (buddhi) before a Gnani,even by mistake. Every part of the Gnani and his divine karmaare worthy of worship. The intellect can never be used here.This Gnani Purush has a physical body but within resides theone who is eternally aware. What is visible to you is the physicalform of the Gnani Purush, which is purely for play-acting forworldly interactions. It is completely dramatic (theatrical). Forthe sake of worldly interactions, the part the Gnani Purush playsis dramatic – outwardly he plays his role as Ambalal, but fromwithin he is completely detached. I have no intellect. Only throughthe association with the one who is without intellect, can youbecome the same.The work of the people in this world is done by theintellect and the work of the Gnani is done by vyavasthit, andso there is no need to interfere at all.What is intellect? It is your viewpoint from your past life.If you are traveling on a highway, you look at the landscapearound you for four miles and you decide that it would be goodto have everything this way. The intellect endorses this and theviewpoint of the four-mile becomes decided. In the next milethe landscape changes and so does your viewpoint and theintellect endorses this too, but the intellect does not disregardthe viewpoint of the past because of the new one. That is whyit presents itself to you, over and over again. If you were todisregard the viewpoint of the past then there is no problem butthis is not possible. Your opinions always present themselvesbefore you – this I refer to as your past vision and knowledgebecause the intellect has endorsed them and that is why thereis an on going conflict from within. Your intellect of today is theviewpoint of your past and your viewpoint of today becomesyour intellect for the next life and this is how everything carrieson.A thief steals because he has an opinion for stealing. It isAptavani-1103104Aptavani-1the endorsement by his intellect from his past life and that is whyhe steals in this life but if he were to associate with someonenoble, he may change his viewpoint. He may even decide thatit is wrong to steal, and so although he steals in his current lifebecause of his viewpoint of the past, his current opinion ischanging to one of “I should not steal’ and so in his next life hewill acquire the intellect which will not allow him to steal.Why Do We Have Difference Of Opinions?Why do we have difference of opinion with others? Thisis because everyone has different viewpoints and that is whythey perceive things differently. To steal is a viewpoint of a thief;he is not a thief forever. To say that someone’s viewpoint iswrong is tantamount to calling his self wrong because that is hisbelief; he believes his body to be his real self. He is correct inhis viewpoint. As long as there is ignorance of his real Self, hisviewpoint is his only support. After Gnan he comes to thecenter and thereafter both ignorance and his viewpoint losesupport.I never tell anyone, ‘You are wrong.’ I do not even tella thief that he is wrong because he is correct from his point ofview. Of course I would explain to him the consequences of hisactions.Each and every human being is groping around in theterritory of good or evil intellect. Good intellect shows goodthings and evil intellect will show wicked things. Ultimately bothkind of intellect will make a person wander around in the worldlylife and that is why I call it wrong intellect (viprit buddhi). Wrongintellect hurts both the giver and the receiver. The right intellectwill help both the giver and the receiver.Wrong intellect causes tremendous suffering. If someoneis ill in your home and your intellect points out to you, ‘Whatif he dies?’ then it will keep you up crying all night.The Vaniks have a lot of intellect. But it also makes themsuffer a lot. The intellect of a Vanik can even become an obstaclefor liberation. Liberation is a feat for the brave; it is a feat forthe Kshatriyas (warrior class). The Self has nothing to do withsocial divisions but the attributes of the prakruti, confuses it anddeludes it (self) in the ignorant state. Kshatriyas are very powerfuland determined. All the twenty-four Tirthankars were Kshatriyas.When Kshatriyas desire liberation, they do not consider worldlythings of any value, whereas the Vaniks who desire liberationwill attach importance to the worldly things also. One has to becautious of the Vanik intellect. Beware of it, it causes a greatdeal of confusion on the path of liberation.The Vaniks have a very large tuber of greed. These tubersare not easily evident to them. Whereas Kshatriyas are restlessby nature and they exhibit their aggressiveness everywhere.Nevertheless they come to their senses quickly because theyalso suffer in the process. But it is very difficult to bring a Vanikto the level where he can see his weaknesses.When a Kshatriya goes to the temple, he will put his handin his pocket and put all that comes out in his hand into thedonation chest. Whereas a Vanik decides how much he willdonate before he leaves home. On the way he will get enoughloose change so that he can donate a little at every temple hevisits. A Vanik uses his intellect (buddhi) whenever an opportunitypresents to him to make a meaningful intent for his salvation.What is wealth? It is puran-galan (input-output). For everyinput, output is inevitable. That is the law of accounts. Peoplemake matters worse by interfering through their intellect. Theywaste their valuable energies in the natural process of input-output. Money is your bank balance, it is your account of merit106Aptavani-1Aptavani-1105the endorsement by his intellect from his past life and that is whyhe steals in this life but if he were to associate with someonenoble, he may change his viewpoint. He may even decide thatit is wrong to steal, and so although he steals in his current lifebecause of his viewpoint of the past, his current opinion ischanging to one of “I should not steal’ and so in his next life hewill acquire the intellect which will not allow him to steal.Why Do We Have Difference Of Opinions?Why do we have difference of opinion with others? Thisis because everyone has different viewpoints and that is whythey perceive things differently. To steal is a viewpoint of a thief;he is not a thief forever. To say that someone’s viewpoint iswrong is tantamount to calling his self wrong because that is hisbelief; he believes his body to be his real self. He is correct inhis viewpoint. As long as there is ignorance of his real Self, hisviewpoint is his only support. After Gnan he comes to thecenter and thereafter both ignorance and his viewpoint losesupport.I never tell anyone, ‘You are wrong.’ I do not even tella thief that he is wrong because he is correct from his point ofview. Of course I would explain to him the consequences of hisactions.Each and every human being is groping around in theterritory of good or evil intellect. Good intellect shows goodthings and evil intellect will show wicked things. Ultimately bothkind of intellect will make a person wander around in the worldlylife and that is why I call it wrong intellect (viprit buddhi). Wrongintellect hurts both the giver and the receiver. The right intellectwill help both the giver and the receiver.Wrong intellect causes tremendous suffering. If someoneis ill in your home and your intellect points out to you, ‘Whatif he dies?’ then it will keep you up crying all night.The Vaniks have a lot of intellect. But it also makes themsuffer a lot. The intellect of a Vanik can even become an obstaclefor liberation. Liberation is a feat for the brave; it is a feat forthe Kshatriyas (warrior class). The Self has nothing to do withsocial divisions but the attributes of the prakruti, confuses it anddeludes it (self) in the ignorant state. Kshatriyas are very powerfuland determined. All the twenty-four Tirthankars were Kshatriyas.When Kshatriyas desire liberation, they do not consider worldlythings of any value, whereas the Vaniks who desire liberationwill attach importance to the worldly things also. One has to becautious of the Vanik intellect. Beware of it, it causes a greatdeal of confusion on the path of liberation.The Vaniks have a very large tuber of greed. These tubersare not easily evident to them. Whereas Kshatriyas are restlessby nature and they exhibit their aggressiveness everywhere.Nevertheless they come to their senses quickly because theyalso suffer in the process. But it is very difficult to bring a Vanikto the level where he can see his weaknesses.When a Kshatriya goes to the temple, he will put his handin his pocket and put all that comes out in his hand into thedonation chest. Whereas a Vanik decides how much he willdonate before he leaves home. On the way he will get enoughloose change so that he can donate a little at every temple hevisits. A Vanik uses his intellect (buddhi) whenever an opportunitypresents to him to make a meaningful intent for his salvation.What is wealth? It is puran-galan (input-output). For everyinput, output is inevitable. That is the law of accounts. Peoplemake matters worse by interfering through their intellect. Theywaste their valuable energies in the natural process of input-output. Money is your bank balance, it is your account of merit106Aptavani-1Aptavani-1105karma and it is predetermined. When a person uses his intellectto make money, he ruins his dhyan. Instead of dharma dhyan heis in raudra or arta dhyan. This ruins his next life.And as if that is not enough, people have learned to usetricks and deception. By this I mean they exploit those withlesser intellect by using their own higher intellect. Thus theydeceive others of their wealth. Deceptive people are very smart,and so are thieves. People who use deception bind for a birthin the world of lower life forms (adhogati).Vaniks create boundaries of defense around themselveswith their intellect to protect their own self-interest. They do notcare for the welfare of others around them. Why do they lookgood in their worldly interactions? It is because of this ‘fence’of their intellect. Their focus is only on themselves and they areconstantly looking after their own self-interest. If a Vanik wereasked to render judgment, he will first consider whether theperson concerned will be happy or unhappy. He would renderjudgment, which will not hurt the other person. In order not tohurt the other person, he would rather lie and render a wrongjudgment. But the God within takes notice that he is keepingboth sides covered. Why not say it exactly as it is. Tell the truthin such a way that it is not hurtful. But instead they cover up thetruth with a wrong decision, and thereby take on a grave liability.By proving a guilty man innocent, one takes on a grave liability.One should say it as it is.How have all these problems arisen? It is because thesepeople keep others in the dark in order to maintain their ownself-interest. They will cover this up until the point of discovery.The shameless hoarding they do for their own worldly happinesswill make them suffer intensely on their path of liberation. It willtorture them and create a lot of misery for them. It will not allowthem to attain liberation easily.The Vanik’s intellect will not allow them to kill any insects,nor will they steal from any one. They have stopped committingovert, visible violence (i.e. practicing non-violence towards bugs,insects, animals etc) as well as overt stealing. But they continueto steal subtly on a large scale. Those who steal overtly willimprove some day but those who steal on a subtle level willnever improve. The people, who deceive others, work with somuch sophistication and shrewdness, that they reap profits whilesitting at home by working the farmers to death. The Lord callsthis subtle himsa. The Lord has said that there is a possibility ofsalvation for those who kill with a gun but there is no hope forthose who use deceit and tricks. Those who kill with a gun willgo to hell, turn around and come back and search for a way toliberation. But those who kill through deceit fall deeper anddeeper in the quagmire of the world. They will accumulate wealthand then turn around and donate some of it. This will sow newseeds and perpetuate their worldly life. This is consideredsophisticated deceit and trickery.There is no trace of deceit or trick in a Gnani Purush. TheVanik intellect functions on deceit. It would have been far betternot to know the art of deceit. Before acquiring this Gnan I usedto teach people how to use deception, but only out ofcompassion for the person who became trapped in a situation.Eventually I stopped that too. For me, there is no deceitanymore. Everything is exactly as it should be. There should beone-ness of mind, body and speech, there should be no divisionbetween them.If you paid ninety dollars for a watch and sell it for onehundred and ten dollars, do not lie to the buyer that you paidone hundred and ten dollars for it. Instead tell him you paidninety dollars for it but you are selling it for one hundred andten dollars. If the buyer wants it, he will buy it for that amount.Vyavasthit is such that if you were to receive a hundred and tenAptavani-1107108Aptavani-1karma and it is predetermined. When a person uses his intellectto make money, he ruins his dhyan. Instead of dharma dhyan heis in raudra or arta dhyan. This ruins his next life.And as if that is not enough, people have learned to usetricks and deception. By this I mean they exploit those withlesser intellect by using their own higher intellect. Thus theydeceive others of their wealth. Deceptive people are very smart,and so are thieves. People who use deception bind for a birthin the world of lower life forms (adhogati).Vaniks create boundaries of defense around themselveswith their intellect to protect their own self-interest. They do notcare for the welfare of others around them. Why do they lookgood in their worldly interactions? It is because of this ‘fence’of their intellect. Their focus is only on themselves and they areconstantly looking after their own self-interest. If a Vanik wereasked to render judgment, he will first consider whether theperson concerned will be happy or unhappy. He would renderjudgment, which will not hurt the other person. In order not tohurt the other person, he would rather lie and render a wrongjudgment. But the God within takes notice that he is keepingboth sides covered. Why not say it exactly as it is. Tell the truthin such a way that it is not hurtful. But instead they cover up thetruth with a wrong decision, and thereby take on a grave liability.By proving a guilty man innocent, one takes on a grave liability.One should say it as it is.How have all these problems arisen? It is because thesepeople keep others in the dark in order to maintain their ownself-interest. They will cover this up until the point of discovery.The shameless hoarding they do for their own worldly happinesswill make them suffer intensely on their path of liberation. It willtorture them and create a lot of misery for them. It will not allowthem to attain liberation easily.The Vanik’s intellect will not allow them to kill any insects,nor will they steal from any one. They have stopped committingovert, visible violence (i.e. practicing non-violence towards bugs,insects, animals etc) as well as overt stealing. But they continueto steal subtly on a large scale. Those who steal overtly willimprove some day but those who steal on a subtle level willnever improve. The people, who deceive others, work with somuch sophistication and shrewdness, that they reap profits whilesitting at home by working the farmers to death. The Lord callsthis subtle himsa. The Lord has said that there is a possibility ofsalvation for those who kill with a gun but there is no hope forthose who use deceit and tricks. Those who kill with a gun willgo to hell, turn around and come back and search for a way toliberation. But those who kill through deceit fall deeper anddeeper in the quagmire of the world. They will accumulate wealthand then turn around and donate some of it. This will sow newseeds and perpetuate their worldly life. This is consideredsophisticated deceit and trickery.There is no trace of deceit or trick in a Gnani Purush. TheVanik intellect functions on deceit. It would have been far betternot to know the art of deceit. Before acquiring this Gnan I usedto teach people how to use deception, but only out ofcompassion for the person who became trapped in a situation.Eventually I stopped that too. For me, there is no deceitanymore. Everything is exactly as it should be. There should beone-ness of mind, body and speech, there should be no divisionbetween them.If you paid ninety dollars for a watch and sell it for onehundred and ten dollars, do not lie to the buyer that you paidone hundred and ten dollars for it. Instead tell him you paidninety dollars for it but you are selling it for one hundred andten dollars. If the buyer wants it, he will buy it for that amount.Vyavasthit is such that if you were to receive a hundred and tenAptavani-1107108Aptavani-1for it, you will do so regardless of whether you deceive him ortell the truth. When everything is so precise, why take onunnecessary liability by using deceit? You take on tremendousliability by using deceit, the consequence for which is a birth inthe world of lower life form.What creates obstruction to the inflow of wealth? It iscontinuous use of deceit and tricks. People have made a habitof tricking others. Otherwise a Vanik is a trader and he conductshis trade with honesty. He does not have to earn a living workingunder others.Honesty In BusinessThis is why I tell you what is for your absolute good.Do not resort to deceit. Deal honestly. Be honest with yourcustomers and tell them that in your business, your profit marginis fifteen percent. They can buy from you if they want to.What has the Lord said? If you are destined to receive threehundred dollars, you will get that amount whether you steal,use deceit or deal honestly. You will not receive a penny moreor less. So then why are you being foolish and taking on theliability of stealing and deceit? Try to do your business honestlyand legally for a few days and see what happens. At first youwill experience some difficulty for about six months to a yearbut it will then run very smoothly. Even your clients will realizethat your business is honest and unadulterated. They will cometo you without you having to advertise. The vyavasthit thatbrings customers to your shop is vyavasthit but the foolishones sit in their shops worrying and waiting for the customersto show. They spoil their dhyan and enter into adversemeditation.If you decide that you want to conduct an honest business,then it will happen for you. The Lord has said that there is graveliability in adulterating food and gold.Kacchis (people of a special sect from western Gujarat)too are infected with the dangerous disease of deceit. They areworse than the Vaniks in the art of deceit.The times are such that you have to live amidst deceitfulpeople. But still your intent and awareness should always be onhow to escape from all deceit. With this intent, you will be ableto escape from the greatest liability. If such intent exists thenwith repentance you will encounter circumstances where youwill not have to be deceitful and your business will run well. Onthe contrary people will commend your business.If you want to attain liberation you must follow the wordsof a Gnani and if you do not want liberation then follow thetimes but in your mind you must feel that you do not want adeceitful business. You will then find such a business. Yourbusiness practices should be such that even when a child comesto you, his parents will not have any fear of their child beingcheated.Why Is There A Shortage Of Wealth?Why is there a shortage of wealth? It is because of thepractice of stealing. Goddess of wealth graces her presencewhere there is no deceit or stealing through the mind, the bodyand speech. Wealth is obstructed by the practice of deceit.Intellect is not to be used to make money. It is to be usedfor the good of others.With Gnan you can see clearly which of your actionsbring you happiness and which make you miserable. Peoplewith intellect ruin things by tricking and deceiving others.The word ‘trick’ should not even be in our dictionary.Why have you been given the knowledge of vyavasthit?Whatever is meant to be in vyavasthit, so let it be. If there isAptavani-1109110Aptavani-1for it, you will do so regardless of whether you deceive him ortell the truth. When everything is so precise, why take onunnecessary liability by using deceit? You take on tremendousliability by using deceit, the consequence for which is a birth inthe world of lower life form.What creates obstruction to the inflow of wealth? It iscontinuous use of deceit and tricks. People have made a habitof tricking others. Otherwise a Vanik is a trader and he conductshis trade with honesty. He does not have to earn a living workingunder others.Honesty In BusinessThis is why I tell you what is for your absolute good.Do not resort to deceit. Deal honestly. Be honest with yourcustomers and tell them that in your business, your profit marginis fifteen percent. They can buy from you if they want to.What has the Lord said? If you are destined to receive threehundred dollars, you will get that amount whether you steal,use deceit or deal honestly. You will not receive a penny moreor less. So then why are you being foolish and taking on theliability of stealing and deceit? Try to do your business honestlyand legally for a few days and see what happens. At first youwill experience some difficulty for about six months to a yearbut it will then run very smoothly. Even your clients will realizethat your business is honest and unadulterated. They will cometo you without you having to advertise. The vyavasthit thatbrings customers to your shop is vyavasthit but the foolishones sit in their shops worrying and waiting for the customersto show. They spoil their dhyan and enter into adversemeditation.If you decide that you want to conduct an honest business,then it will happen for you. The Lord has said that there is graveliability in adulterating food and gold.Kacchis (people of a special sect from western Gujarat)too are infected with the dangerous disease of deceit. They areworse than the Vaniks in the art of deceit.The times are such that you have to live amidst deceitfulpeople. But still your intent and awareness should always be onhow to escape from all deceit. With this intent, you will be ableto escape from the greatest liability. If such intent exists thenwith repentance you will encounter circumstances where youwill not have to be deceitful and your business will run well. Onthe contrary people will commend your business.If you want to attain liberation you must follow the wordsof a Gnani and if you do not want liberation then follow thetimes but in your mind you must feel that you do not want adeceitful business. You will then find such a business. Yourbusiness practices should be such that even when a child comesto you, his parents will not have any fear of their child beingcheated.Why Is There A Shortage Of Wealth?Why is there a shortage of wealth? It is because of thepractice of stealing. Goddess of wealth graces her presencewhere there is no deceit or stealing through the mind, the bodyand speech. Wealth is obstructed by the practice of deceit.Intellect is not to be used to make money. It is to be usedfor the good of others.With Gnan you can see clearly which of your actionsbring you happiness and which make you miserable. Peoplewith intellect ruin things by tricking and deceiving others.The word ‘trick’ should not even be in our dictionary.Why have you been given the knowledge of vyavasthit?Whatever is meant to be in vyavasthit, so let it be. If there isAptavani-1109110Aptavani-1to be a profit of thousand dollars, let it be and if there is a lossof a thousand dollars, let that be too. Accept both profit andloss with equanimity. It is all under the control of vyavasthit andnot under your control. If it were under your control, you wouldnot allow your hair to turn gray. You will some how find a wayto keep them black.A man without deceit looks simple and straightforward.One feels good just looking at his face. Whereas the face of adeceitful person looks laden, as if he has just swallowed somecastor oil. Once you become the Self (Self-Realized), will younot have to clean up your old baggage? Will you not have torepay all that you have taken? The baggage you have filledthrough deceit will have to be paid back even through suffering.That is why I say, “Honesty is the best policy and dishonestyis the best foolishness.”Function Of The Intellect And Function Of GnanTo know what is impure (ashuddha), auspicious (shoobha)and inauspicious (ashoobha) is the function of the intellect andnot Gnan. Gnan’s only function is to observe and know the pure(shuddha). But the intellect makes you believe the known (gneya)to be the knower (gnata). “I am Chandulal’ is that which is tobe known (gneya), but the intellect makes you believe it as theknower (gnata). Such is the intellect, the ego is always mixedwith the intellect and it believes the known to be the knower.How can you experience liberation when you believe the functionof the intellect to be the function of Gnan?A great seeming closeness may be perceived by theintellect but it is beyond the reach of intellect to perceive theknown as the known, and the knower as the knower becausethe intellect itself is an object to be known and therefore itcannot see the real truth.This world has no beginning or an end. Even in this matterpeople have used their intellect and confused the issue. How doyou benefit from knowing whether this world has a beginning oran end? This world has no beginning or an end; this analogy islike a circle. How can there be a beginning or and end in acircle? It is only when you go beyond the intellect and becomea Gnani that you will realize that the world has neither a beginningnor an end.Svachhanda (acting according to one’s own whim andbeliefs) is deluded intellect. People do terrible harm to themselvesthrough svachhhand. To act according to your own understandingis called svachhanda, regardless of what you are doing, whetheryou are doing something good, bad or reading the scriptures. Asingle misunderstanding in reading the scripture will become thecause behind endless rounds of rebirth for you. So beware ofsvachaand.From the moment your wrong intellect (vipreet buddhi)begins, you are whole and sole responsible for it. God does nottake any responsibility in those situations. Wrong intellect bringsmisery to both, the giver and the receiver.There are two kinds of intellects : internal and external.Indians have internal intellect and the foreigners have externalintellect. Those with internal intellect suffer more, because themore developed the intellect, the greater the internal suffering.The foreigners are natural and spontaneous by nature whereasthe Indians are natural in certain matters and deliberately difficultin others. However for spirituality, only the internal intellect ishelpful.The intellect that searches externally finds nothing but‘prickly shrubs’. One would benefit only if one searches within.People’s intellect wanders outside incessantly and consequentlygets exhausted. It is only when I bestow upon you the intellectthat wanders within, that your work for liberation will be done.Aptavani-1111112Aptavani-1to be a profit of thousand dollars, let it be and if there is a lossof a thousand dollars, let that be too. Accept both profit andloss with equanimity. It is all under the control of vyavasthit andnot under your control. If it were under your control, you wouldnot allow your hair to turn gray. You will some how find a wayto keep them black.A man without deceit looks simple and straightforward.One feels good just looking at his face. Whereas the face of adeceitful person looks laden, as if he has just swallowed somecastor oil. Once you become the Self (Self-Realized), will younot have to clean up your old baggage? Will you not have torepay all that you have taken? The baggage you have filledthrough deceit will have to be paid back even through suffering.That is why I say, “Honesty is the best policy and dishonestyis the best foolishness.”Function Of The Intellect And Function Of GnanTo know what is impure (ashuddha), auspicious (shoobha)and inauspicious (ashoobha) is the function of the intellect andnot Gnan. Gnan’s only function is to observe and know the pure(shuddha). But the intellect makes you believe the known (gneya)to be the knower (gnata). “I am Chandulal’ is that which is tobe known (gneya), but the intellect makes you believe it as theknower (gnata). Such is the intellect, the ego is always mixedwith the intellect and it believes the known to be the knower.How can you experience liberation when you believe the functionof the intellect to be the function of Gnan?A great seeming closeness may be perceived by theintellect but it is beyond the reach of intellect to perceive theknown as the known, and the knower as the knower becausethe intellect itself is an object to be known and therefore itcannot see the real truth.This world has no beginning or an end. Even in this matterpeople have used their intellect and confused the issue. How doyou benefit from knowing whether this world has a beginning oran end? This world has no beginning or an end; this analogy islike a circle. How can there be a beginning or and end in acircle? It is only when you go beyond the intellect and becomea Gnani that you will realize that the world has neither a beginningnor an end.Svachhanda (acting according to one’s own whim andbeliefs) is deluded intellect. People do terrible harm to themselvesthrough svachhhand. To act according to your own understandingis called svachhanda, regardless of what you are doing, whetheryou are doing something good, bad or reading the scriptures. Asingle misunderstanding in reading the scripture will become thecause behind endless rounds of rebirth for you. So beware ofsvachaand.From the moment your wrong intellect (vipreet buddhi)begins, you are whole and sole responsible for it. God does nottake any responsibility in those situations. Wrong intellect bringsmisery to both, the giver and the receiver.There are two kinds of intellects : internal and external.Indians have internal intellect and the foreigners have externalintellect. Those with internal intellect suffer more, because themore developed the intellect, the greater the internal suffering.The foreigners are natural and spontaneous by nature whereasthe Indians are natural in certain matters and deliberately difficultin others. However for spirituality, only the internal intellect ishelpful.The intellect that searches externally finds nothing but‘prickly shrubs’. One would benefit only if one searches within.People’s intellect wanders outside incessantly and consequentlygets exhausted. It is only when I bestow upon you the intellectthat wanders within, that your work for liberation will be done.Aptavani-1111112Aptavani-1You have wrong intellect that drives away happiness and invitesmisery.You are unable to understand the real nature of pleasureand pain. Intellect will always show you the contrary; that whichis not in your real benefit. It derives only the transient happinessfrom material things. There is no happiness in material things.What would happen if someone were to scratch or dent yournew car? Whatever pleasure you derive through the intellectultimately results in misery. Drawn by the attraction of things,the intellect superimposes happiness on them. There are infinitethings. In order to discover the bliss of the Self, each individualnon realized-soul tastes one thing after another and then decideswherein lies this happiness. That is what humans are in searchof. First they decide that happiness lies in wealth but then theybecome obsessed with money and suffer miserably. Then theydecide that happiness lies in a woman. So then they look forsex in addition to wealth. They are convinced that happiness liesonly with these two. But when their wives retort rudely, it ignitesa fire within them. What happens when their wealth turns againstthem? If the income tax department raids their homes, the samewealth will become a source of their misery.Difference In Intellect : Difference Of OpinionsIn today’s world, there maybe only three people in ahousehold, but by the end of the day they will have thirty-threedifferent opinions. How is one to find a solution? Alas! Even aguru and his disciple, will have difference of opinions by theday’s end. Wherever there is intellect that divides (bhed buddhi)there is bound to be difference of opinions. If intellect withoutdivisions (abhed buddhi) were to arise, then all the problemswould be solved. The one who becomes impartial can sit in thecenter and see everyone as innocent. Whenever the intellectshows you anything negative, you should immediately ask theright (samyak) intellect to go find a solution, and it will.This world arose when the soul became deluded. Whenthe intellect (buddhi) becomes deluded, Gnan will manifest.I do not look at anyone’s intellect; I look at hisunderstanding. The intellect can be skewed at three hundreddifferent places but there is not a problem if the understandingis right. A person with intellect may rise higher through the useof that intellect but he may fall too, whereas the one with rightunderstanding will go higher and higher, to the top and willnever fall. Intellect is a part of the non-Self and not the Self.Right understanding and intuitive perception (darshan) is theinnate quality of the Self.Those with pita (bilious) constitution have sharper intellectand the ones with vata (air) constitution have deeperunderstanding.Everything has arisen out of the imagination of the intellect.It is all worldly in nature. In every religion, whatever came intothe imagination of the people, came to be recorded in theirscriptures. A scripture is knowledge born of the intellect. Pureconsciousness (chetan) is never found in the scriptures. Gnan,on the other hand, is self-illuminating and it can only be foundin the heart of a Gnani. The phases of intellect are full ofscams. The intellect tries to convince the owner that it is Gnanthat is operating. Therefore I tell you to beware of the intellect.When the intellect shows you something, recall ‘Dada’ (theSelf) and say out loud, ‘I am Vitarag’, and the intellect will settledown.Gnan does not find fault with anyone whereas the intellectfinds faults in everyone. The intellect will find faults in even one’sown brother whereas Gnan will not find fault even in a stepmother.If a stepmother serves her stepchild burnt rice from the bottomof the pot, the intellect will immediately rise and accuse thestepmother of being unfair; it will cause the stepson grief. ButAptavani-1113114Aptavani-1You have wrong intellect that drives away happiness and invitesmisery.You are unable to understand the real nature of pleasureand pain. Intellect will always show you the contrary; that whichis not in your real benefit. It derives only the transient happinessfrom material things. There is no happiness in material things.What would happen if someone were to scratch or dent yournew car? Whatever pleasure you derive through the intellectultimately results in misery. Drawn by the attraction of things,the intellect superimposes happiness on them. There are infinitethings. In order to discover the bliss of the Self, each individualnon realized-soul tastes one thing after another and then decideswherein lies this happiness. That is what humans are in searchof. First they decide that happiness lies in wealth but then theybecome obsessed with money and suffer miserably. Then theydecide that happiness lies in a woman. So then they look forsex in addition to wealth. They are convinced that happiness liesonly with these two. But when their wives retort rudely, it ignitesa fire within them. What happens when their wealth turns againstthem? If the income tax department raids their homes, the samewealth will become a source of their misery.Difference In Intellect : Difference Of OpinionsIn today’s world, there maybe only three people in ahousehold, but by the end of the day they will have thirty-threedifferent opinions. How is one to find a solution? Alas! Even aguru and his disciple, will have difference of opinions by theday’s end. Wherever there is intellect that divides (bhed buddhi)there is bound to be difference of opinions. If intellect withoutdivisions (abhed buddhi) were to arise, then all the problemswould be solved. The one who becomes impartial can sit in thecenter and see everyone as innocent. Whenever the intellectshows you anything negative, you should immediately ask theright (samyak) intellect to go find a solution, and it will.This world arose when the soul became deluded. Whenthe intellect (buddhi) becomes deluded, Gnan will manifest.I do not look at anyone’s intellect; I look at hisunderstanding. The intellect can be skewed at three hundreddifferent places but there is not a problem if the understandingis right. A person with intellect may rise higher through the useof that intellect but he may fall too, whereas the one with rightunderstanding will go higher and higher, to the top and willnever fall. Intellect is a part of the non-Self and not the Self.Right understanding and intuitive perception (darshan) is theinnate quality of the Self.Those with pita (bilious) constitution have sharper intellectand the ones with vata (air) constitution have deeperunderstanding.Everything has arisen out of the imagination of the intellect.It is all worldly in nature. In every religion, whatever came intothe imagination of the people, came to be recorded in theirscriptures. A scripture is knowledge born of the intellect. Pureconsciousness (chetan) is never found in the scriptures. Gnan,on the other hand, is self-illuminating and it can only be foundin the heart of a Gnani. The phases of intellect are full ofscams. The intellect tries to convince the owner that it is Gnanthat is operating. Therefore I tell you to beware of the intellect.When the intellect shows you something, recall ‘Dada’ (theSelf) and say out loud, ‘I am Vitarag’, and the intellect will settledown.Gnan does not find fault with anyone whereas the intellectfinds faults in everyone. The intellect will find faults in even one’sown brother whereas Gnan will not find fault even in a stepmother.If a stepmother serves her stepchild burnt rice from the bottomof the pot, the intellect will immediately rise and accuse thestepmother of being unfair; it will cause the stepson grief. ButAptavani-1113114Aptavani-1if the child has acquired Gnan, that Gnan will immediately makehim aware that, ‘She is a pure Soul and I am a pure Soul andwhatever is happening is the interplay and discharge betweenthe two pudgals (non-Self), and that the karmic accounts arebeing settled.’ The pudgal (the non-Self) is made up of mud andthe intellect is made up of light. It can give you light and at thesame time it can scorch you. That is why I call the intellectsinful. It is necessary to become free from intellect (abudha).Intellect can make a person above normal and it can also makehim below normal. There has to be normality in every thing inthe world. Normality can never be achieved without onebecoming free from the intellect.I am sans intellect, free from obstinacy, open-minded andin normality. Just one single strand of my hair contains theknowledge of this entire world.Those with lesser intellect have a soft and tender heart;such a person, if he chooses to solve the puzzle of life, will goall the way on the right path or if he does something wrong, hemay even go all the way on the wrong path. If a person wereto not use his intellect for just one day, he would accomplish hisspiritual work. If you want to sow seeds for a next life then useyour intellect. It is not under your control to increase the lightof the intellect but you do have the control to diminish it.Therefore keep the intellect diminished. The intellect is notuniversally beneficial whereas Gnan is.The Power Of ConcentrationA man with limited intellect will be prone to abhorrence.A man with expansive intellect (worldly wisdom) does not exhibitabhorrence. When you visit a museum, do you show any hatredtowards anything there? Koosung (company of anything oranyone other than the Self) means repeated teasing of theintellect, this way and that way.The power of concentration is limited and depends on thepower of intellect. Whatever a person has brought within hisreceptacle of intellect is what is going to discharge in this lifeand nothing more. The thieves in India are capable ofconcentrating on as many as sixteen different things at the timeof stealing. The thieves go out to steal without eating a meal andso their power of concentration is heightened. Where to steal?At what point? At what time? Where will the policeman be?Where is the purse? In which pocket? How to pick that pocket?How to escape and from which door? Thieves in India canconcentrate on sixteen such things at a time. The power ofconcentration arises completely out of intellect and not out ofGnan. The power of concentration may increase but goes downwith a heavy meal. That is how strange all this is. If concentrationwere result of Gnan, it would remain constant. It would not waxor wane.Questioner : Is intellect the same thing as illusion (maya)?Dadashri : No, maya is ignorance of the Self. Ignoranceleaves as soon as you acquire Gnan, but the inner instrument(antahkaran) remains. Intellect remains and incites one toparticipate in things profitable in the worldly life and makes onewander in the world. What is intellect? If someone was deceivingyour son, your intellect will compel you to interfere. In reality itis vyavasthit that does everything but still the intellect interferes.First the mind informs the intellect and then only the intellect caninterfere. The intellect interferes in everything. At night whenyou are dreaming there is no interference by the intellect andeverything goes well. In the same token the worldly life is alsoa dream in your wakeful state.What would happen if a passenger sitting next to thedriver grabs hold of the driver’s hand, when there is a buscoming directly at them? There would be an accident. But peopleare smart, they would not do such a thing because they knowAptavani-1115116Aptavani-1if the child has acquired Gnan, that Gnan will immediately makehim aware that, ‘She is a pure Soul and I am a pure Soul andwhatever is happening is the interplay and discharge betweenthe two pudgals (non-Self), and that the karmic accounts arebeing settled.’ The pudgal (the non-Self) is made up of mud andthe intellect is made up of light. It can give you light and at thesame time it can scorch you. That is why I call the intellectsinful. It is necessary to become free from intellect (abudha).Intellect can make a person above normal and it can also makehim below normal. There has to be normality in every thing inthe world. Normality can never be achieved without onebecoming free from the intellect.I am sans intellect, free from obstinacy, open-minded andin normality. Just one single strand of my hair contains theknowledge of this entire world.Those with lesser intellect have a soft and tender heart;such a person, if he chooses to solve the puzzle of life, will goall the way on the right path or if he does something wrong, hemay even go all the way on the wrong path. If a person wereto not use his intellect for just one day, he would accomplish hisspiritual work. If you want to sow seeds for a next life then useyour intellect. It is not under your control to increase the lightof the intellect but you do have the control to diminish it.Therefore keep the intellect diminished. The intellect is notuniversally beneficial whereas Gnan is.The Power Of ConcentrationA man with limited intellect will be prone to abhorrence.A man with expansive intellect (worldly wisdom) does not exhibitabhorrence. When you visit a museum, do you show any hatredtowards anything there? Koosung (company of anything oranyone other than the Self) means repeated teasing of theintellect, this way and that way.The power of concentration is limited and depends on thepower of intellect. Whatever a person has brought within hisreceptacle of intellect is what is going to discharge in this lifeand nothing more. The thieves in India are capable ofconcentrating on as many as sixteen different things at the timeof stealing. The thieves go out to steal without eating a meal andso their power of concentration is heightened. Where to steal?At what point? At what time? Where will the policeman be?Where is the purse? In which pocket? How to pick that pocket?How to escape and from which door? Thieves in India canconcentrate on sixteen such things at a time. The power ofconcentration arises completely out of intellect and not out ofGnan. The power of concentration may increase but goes downwith a heavy meal. That is how strange all this is. If concentrationwere result of Gnan, it would remain constant. It would not waxor wane.Questioner : Is intellect the same thing as illusion (maya)?Dadashri : No, maya is ignorance of the Self. Ignoranceleaves as soon as you acquire Gnan, but the inner instrument(antahkaran) remains. Intellect remains and incites one toparticipate in things profitable in the worldly life and makes onewander in the world. What is intellect? If someone was deceivingyour son, your intellect will compel you to interfere. In reality itis vyavasthit that does everything but still the intellect interferes.First the mind informs the intellect and then only the intellect caninterfere. The intellect interferes in everything. At night whenyou are dreaming there is no interference by the intellect andeverything goes well. In the same token the worldly life is alsoa dream in your wakeful state.What would happen if a passenger sitting next to thedriver grabs hold of the driver’s hand, when there is a buscoming directly at them? There would be an accident. But peopleare smart, they would not do such a thing because they knowAptavani-1115116Aptavani-1that the steering wheel is in the hands of the driver and his jobis to steer the car; only he drives the car. You can comprehendthis obvious example of a car but how can you comprehendwhat is happening within? Here you cannot refrain from interferingand consequently confusion arises. There would be no confusionif you were to leave everything to the ‘driver’ even in matterswithin. you have brought the internal driver with you from thepast life.The realization of ‘I am pure Soul’ is elemental intellect(tattva buddhi). Once this realization occurs, the feeling of ‘I amthe body’ will disappear. The intellect that was focused towardsthe body now focuses towards the Self. Elemental intellect meansthe right (samyak) intellect. When the right knowledge begins,real intellect is born. Wrong (vipreet) intellect always prevails inthe absence of right knowledge.Chit : The Third Component Of AntahkaranChit is the third component of the inner psychic organ. Itsfunction is to wander and show images of things as they are. Itcan project scenes of places in America exactly the way theyare, even while one is in India. The mind never leaves the body.It is the impure chit that leaves the body and wanders. Pure chitis the pure Soul (Shuddhatma).Chit is Knowledge (Gnan) + Vision (darshan)Impure Chit is Impure knowledge + Impure visionPure Chit is Pure Knowledge + Pure VisionThe mind shows a pamphlet and the chit shows a picture.These two do the work and the intellect makes the decision, theego then endorses that decision and finally the action takesplace. The chit visualizes a situation. Impure chit comprises ofphases of impure knowledge and impure vision. Before theintellect renders a decision, there is a struggle between the mindand the chit. That struggle stops as soon as the intellect makesa decision between the two. If the intellect is set aside, the mindand the chit do not cause any obstructions.From time immemorial, the chit has been in search of itshome. It continues to wander. It sees all kinds of different thingsand consequently all kinds of knowledge-perception (gnan-darshan) accumulate within. The tendencies of The chit (chitvrutis)collect whatever it sees, takes its stock, and when the timecomes, it shows it as it is in the form of a scene. If the chitbecomes absorbed in what it sees, it attracts atoms (of what itsees), these atoms accumulate and form complex tubers, fromwhich the mind is formed. This mind projects a pamphlet whenthe moment is right, the chit will see the image or a picture andthe intellect renders a decision.These tendencies of your chit that wander outside ceaseto do so once I draw them towards ‘me’ (the Self; the Gnan).The tendencies of your chit thus become bound and that isliberation.These impure tendencies (vrutties) of the chit have beenwandering endlessly. When they keep going to a particular placeand if you try to retract them, they will revolt and go to thesame place again. The fact that these chitvrutis return to theirown home, the Self, after Gnan is a wonder in itself. Whereverthe chitvruti wanders, the body too will have to go there. In thekramik path of liberation one has to cross-endless hurdles ofdifferent phases of the mind and the chit before one reaches theego, which still needs to be purified. But for all of you, I havemade you leap over all these levels and placed you directly inyour own abode, your pure Self.The chit keeps wandering in search of its home, the Self.It seeks happiness. Wherever the chit becomes still, other partsof the inner instrument (antahkaran) become still also and thatAptavani-1117118Aptavani-1that the steering wheel is in the hands of the driver and his jobis to steer the car; only he drives the car. You can comprehendthis obvious example of a car but how can you comprehendwhat is happening within? Here you cannot refrain from interferingand consequently confusion arises. There would be no confusionif you were to leave everything to the ‘driver’ even in matterswithin. you have brought the internal driver with you from thepast life.The realization of ‘I am pure Soul’ is elemental intellect(tattva buddhi). Once this realization occurs, the feeling of ‘I amthe body’ will disappear. The intellect that was focused towardsthe body now focuses towards the Self. Elemental intellect meansthe right (samyak) intellect. When the right knowledge begins,real intellect is born. Wrong (vipreet) intellect always prevails inthe absence of right knowledge.Chit : The Third Component Of AntahkaranChit is the third component of the inner psychic organ. Itsfunction is to wander and show images of things as they are. Itcan project scenes of places in America exactly the way theyare, even while one is in India. The mind never leaves the body.It is the impure chit that leaves the body and wanders. Pure chitis the pure Soul (Shuddhatma).Chit is Knowledge (Gnan) + Vision (darshan)Impure Chit is Impure knowledge + Impure visionPure Chit is Pure Knowledge + Pure VisionThe mind shows a pamphlet and the chit shows a picture.These two do the work and the intellect makes the decision, theego then endorses that decision and finally the action takesplace. The chit visualizes a situation. Impure chit comprises ofphases of impure knowledge and impure vision. Before theintellect renders a decision, there is a struggle between the mindand the chit. That struggle stops as soon as the intellect makesa decision between the two. If the intellect is set aside, the mindand the chit do not cause any obstructions.From time immemorial, the chit has been in search of itshome. It continues to wander. It sees all kinds of different thingsand consequently all kinds of knowledge-perception (gnan-darshan) accumulate within. The tendencies of The chit (chitvrutis)collect whatever it sees, takes its stock, and when the timecomes, it shows it as it is in the form of a scene. If the chitbecomes absorbed in what it sees, it attracts atoms (of what itsees), these atoms accumulate and form complex tubers, fromwhich the mind is formed. This mind projects a pamphlet whenthe moment is right, the chit will see the image or a picture andthe intellect renders a decision.These tendencies of your chit that wander outside ceaseto do so once I draw them towards ‘me’ (the Self; the Gnan).The tendencies of your chit thus become bound and that isliberation.These impure tendencies (vrutties) of the chit have beenwandering endlessly. When they keep going to a particular placeand if you try to retract them, they will revolt and go to thesame place again. The fact that these chitvrutis return to theirown home, the Self, after Gnan is a wonder in itself. Whereverthe chitvruti wanders, the body too will have to go there. In thekramik path of liberation one has to cross-endless hurdles ofdifferent phases of the mind and the chit before one reaches theego, which still needs to be purified. But for all of you, I havemade you leap over all these levels and placed you directly inyour own abode, your pure Self.The chit keeps wandering in search of its home, the Self.It seeks happiness. Wherever the chit becomes still, other partsof the inner instrument (antahkaran) become still also and thatAptavani-1117118Aptavani-1leaves its own residue behind. This is the plight of the relativereligions. Inevitably every process of purifying the chit ultimatelyresults in leaving a taint on it. Only the One who is absolutelyand completely pure Himself can attain absolute purification ofthe chit. Therefore only a Gnani Purush can do this. That is whyall the scriptures ultimately say, “If you want to realize the pureSelf, go to a Gnani. Only He can bestow upon you your pureSelf. We have only the tainted and the impure soul, which isworthless.”On the path of liberation, nothing needs to be done to themind. It is the chit that has to be purified, only then can thepuzzle of life and of liberation be solved. Without understandingthis, many seekers become obsessed in trying to control themind. They are correct from their own viewpoint but if it isliberation that they seek, then they will have to know the facts.By facts they are completely wrong. Once the chit becomespure, you do not have to be concerned with the mind. The purechit will continue to see the ‘film’ of the mind.There are many places in this world, which will still themind, but none to still the chit. What happiness is there inplaying cards? It is nothing but a tool for engaging the chit. Butto engage the chit in playing cards will cause one to slip(spiritually), and one will continue to slip downwards. For howlong can one engage the chit? And ultimately, does it not leadto unhappiness?The chit will wander excessively to places it likes or fears.If you had seen a snake in your bedroom during the day, youwill remember this even at bedtime. The chit will keep on goingthere. Neither the sentient nor insentient, but a mixture of thetwo (mishra chetan), the impure chit wanders in places it likes.It wanders everywhere because it does not need a ticket. Itwould have been better if it had to pay for it, then the chitAptavani-1119120Aptavani-1is why it appears that there is happiness there. But how long willthis state of stillness remain? The chit will then go somewhereelse and project happiness there and the happiness it perceivedin the former situation turns into misery. This is because in thefinal analysis all forms of external happiness result in unhappiness.The intellect will not refrain from imposing its decision that thereis no happiness but misery in the last situation, and so the chitwanders again. There is no end to this wandering. This wanderingceases when the chit returns home, to the Self. When itexperiences real happiness, the bliss of the Self, all otherimaginary happiness automatically become bland. There after,that which wanders is the impure chit and that, which observesand knows the impure chit as it is, is the Pure Chit. The phasesof the impure chit then gradually decrease until they completelycease to exist. Thereafter only the phases of the absolutely PureChit remain and that is Keval Gnan (Absolute Knowledge).The Gnani Purush does not touch the impure chit buthelps you taste your own eternal bliss, the root of endless blissthat is within you. Consequently upon finding its own abode, theSelf is attained, which is none other than the Pure Chit. Theshuddha chit is shuddhatma, the pure Self. As this pure chitgoes on observing exclusively the pure in everybody, the impurechitvruttis grow weaker and weaker until they are no more,after which only the absolute pure chit remains. This is AbsoluteKnowledge.Only the Gnani Can Bestow The Pure Self(Shuddhatma)All the worldly religions are struggling to purify the impurechit. This is like washing dirty laundry with soap. The soap willremove the dirt from the clothes but will leave its own residuebehind. One will then use Tinopol (bleaching soap) to removethe residue of the soap and the Tinopol in turn will leave its ownresidue behind. In this manner each medium of stain removerleaves its own residue behind. This is the plight of the relativereligions. Inevitably every process of purifying the chit ultimatelyresults in leaving a taint on it. Only the One who is absolutelyand completely pure Himself can attain absolute purification ofthe chit. Therefore only a Gnani Purush can do this. That is whyall the scriptures ultimately say, “If you want to realize the pureSelf, go to a Gnani. Only He can bestow upon you your pureSelf. We have only the tainted and the impure soul, which isworthless.”On the path of liberation, nothing needs to be done to themind. It is the chit that has to be purified, only then can thepuzzle of life and of liberation be solved. Without understandingthis, many seekers become obsessed in trying to control themind. They are correct from their own viewpoint but if it isliberation that they seek, then they will have to know the facts.By facts they are completely wrong. Once the chit becomespure, you do not have to be concerned with the mind. The purechit will continue to see the ‘film’ of the mind.There are many places in this world, which will still themind, but none to still the chit. What happiness is there inplaying cards? It is nothing but a tool for engaging the chit. Butto engage the chit in playing cards will cause one to slip(spiritually), and one will continue to slip downwards. For howlong can one engage the chit? And ultimately, does it not leadto unhappiness?The chit will wander excessively to places it likes or fears.If you had seen a snake in your bedroom during the day, youwill remember this even at bedtime. The chit will keep on goingthere. Neither the sentient nor insentient, but a mixture of thetwo (mishra chetan), the impure chit wanders in places it likes.It wanders everywhere because it does not need a ticket. Itwould have been better if it had to pay for it, then the chitAptavani-1119120Aptavani-1is why it appears that there is happiness there. But how long willthis state of stillness remain? The chit will then go somewhereelse and project happiness there and the happiness it perceivedin the former situation turns into misery. This is because in thefinal analysis all forms of external happiness result in unhappiness.The intellect will not refrain from imposing its decision that thereis no happiness but misery in the last situation, and so the chitwanders again. There is no end to this wandering. This wanderingceases when the chit returns home, to the Self. When itexperiences real happiness, the bliss of the Self, all otherimaginary happiness automatically become bland. There after,that which wanders is the impure chit and that, which observesand knows the impure chit as it is, is the Pure Chit. The phasesof the impure chit then gradually decrease until they completelycease to exist. Thereafter only the phases of the absolutely PureChit remain and that is Keval Gnan (Absolute Knowledge).The Gnani Purush does not touch the impure chit buthelps you taste your own eternal bliss, the root of endless blissthat is within you. Consequently upon finding its own abode, theSelf is attained, which is none other than the Pure Chit. Theshuddha chit is shuddhatma, the pure Self. As this pure chitgoes on observing exclusively the pure in everybody, the impurechitvruttis grow weaker and weaker until they are no more,after which only the absolute pure chit remains. This is AbsoluteKnowledge.Only the Gnani Can Bestow The Pure Self(Shuddhatma)All the worldly religions are struggling to purify the impurechit. This is like washing dirty laundry with soap. The soap willremove the dirt from the clothes but will leave its own residuebehind. One will then use Tinopol (bleaching soap) to removethe residue of the soap and the Tinopol in turn will leave its ownresidue behind. In this manner each medium of stain removerwould not wander!The word chetan (sentient) is derived from chit. PureKnowledge (Gnan) + Pure Vision (darshan) = Pure ChetanThat which the chit has seen very frequently in the pastlife will appear more often in this life. The chit will then becomedeeply engrossed in it for hours and longer and this leads tosow seeds of karma. As these phases become less intense, thechit will no longer bind to them with the same intensity. It willstick for a little while and then move away.If you want to talk about gnan and darshan together, thenyou have to call it chit. Chit will only show you transient things.Whatever one’s vasna (the impression on the mind of past actionswhether good or evil which produces pleasure or pain), the chitwill go there. The chit shows two different things : darshan,which is indistinct perception and Gnan, which is exactperception.While doing darshan of an idol in a temple, what theworshipper sees, the darshan, is dependent upon the state of hismind and his chitvruti. So his darshan in the first hour may bedifferent than the darshan in the second hour. Darshan dependson the internal and the external evidences coming together.Darshan of the idol with light coming from the front will bedifferent than that of the light coming in from the side. The faceof the Gnani is the same but according to the state of your mindand the restless state of your chitvruti, your darshan will bedifferent. There is only one way to do the darshan of the Gnani.The Joy Of The ChitAnanddhanji Maharaj (a Gnani Purush) says that whenhe does darshan of the deity of Lord Rishabhdev, who is freefrom any likes and dislikes of the world, it appears to be smiling.The eyes on the deity are made of glass. How come theyappear to be smiling? It can appear that way because theworshipper has focused his chittvruti, his own living energy, intohis darshan and that is why the Lord appears to be smiling tohim. This is called the joy of chit. Joy of chit prevails where allelement of deceit is gone. Joy of chit and deceit do not gotogether.Saint Kabir has said :‘I think the Lord is far away, but in my heart He dwellsThe veil of deceit obscures him, which is why I see him not’The Lord cannot be seen because the veil of deceitobstructs our vision. The chitvruti, which is devoid of any intent,is pure. The joy of the chit will begin the moment mahatmasbecome free from any wanderings of their chit. It is then thatthey will be able to do the right bhakti (devotional worship).People caught up and engulfed by their circumstances cannoteven enjoy worldly happiness. If the chit becomes focused in acertain situation, it will remain in that mode and its burden willbe carried on to the next event or circumstances. For exampleif your chit becomes engrossed in a situation, you will remainpreoccupied with it for hours, so even when the circumstancesunfolding in front of you are that for drinking tea, you drink yourtea preoccupied and under pressure. In the worldly dealings,chit is consciousness (chetan), and so it is only of any worth ifit’s presence is established in the task at hand. If the chit is notpresent while you are eating, of what use is your eating?‘Absence of wandering of the chit is the religion of allreligions.’ If you attain this state, the cycle of rebirth will cometo an end.Questioner : Dada, last night, in my sleep I saw a verypowerful light, like sunlight, for a long time. What could that be?Dadashri : That is called chit chamatkar (miracle of theAptavani-1121122Aptavani-1would not wander!The word chetan (sentient) is derived from chit. PureKnowledge (Gnan) + Pure Vision (darshan) = Pure ChetanThat which the chit has seen very frequently in the pastlife will appear more often in this life. The chit will then becomedeeply engrossed in it for hours and longer and this leads tosow seeds of karma. As these phases become less intense, thechit will no longer bind to them with the same intensity. It willstick for a little while and then move away.If you want to talk about gnan and darshan together, thenyou have to call it chit. Chit will only show you transient things.Whatever one’s vasna (the impression on the mind of past actionswhether good or evil which produces pleasure or pain), the chitwill go there. The chit shows two different things : darshan,which is indistinct perception and Gnan, which is exactperception.While doing darshan of an idol in a temple, what theworshipper sees, the darshan, is dependent upon the state of hismind and his chitvruti. So his darshan in the first hour may bedifferent than the darshan in the second hour. Darshan dependson the internal and the external evidences coming together.Darshan of the idol with light coming from the front will bedifferent than that of the light coming in from the side. The faceof the Gnani is the same but according to the state of your mindand the restless state of your chitvruti, your darshan will bedifferent. There is only one way to do the darshan of the Gnani.The Joy Of The ChitAnanddhanji Maharaj (a Gnani Purush) says that whenhe does darshan of the deity of Lord Rishabhdev, who is freefrom any likes and dislikes of the world, it appears to be smiling.The eyes on the deity are made of glass. How come theyappear to be smiling? It can appear that way because theworshipper has focused his chittvruti, his own living energy, intohis darshan and that is why the Lord appears to be smiling tohim. This is called the joy of chit. Joy of chit prevails where allelement of deceit is gone. Joy of chit and deceit do not gotogether.Saint Kabir has said :‘I think the Lord is far away, but in my heart He dwellsThe veil of deceit obscures him, which is why I see him not’The Lord cannot be seen because the veil of deceitobstructs our vision. The chitvruti, which is devoid of any intent,is pure. The joy of the chit will begin the moment mahatmasbecome free from any wanderings of their chit. It is then thatthey will be able to do the right bhakti (devotional worship).People caught up and engulfed by their circumstances cannoteven enjoy worldly happiness. If the chit becomes focused in acertain situation, it will remain in that mode and its burden willbe carried on to the next event or circumstances. For exampleif your chit becomes engrossed in a situation, you will remainpreoccupied with it for hours, so even when the circumstancesunfolding in front of you are that for drinking tea, you drink yourtea preoccupied and under pressure. In the worldly dealings,chit is consciousness (chetan), and so it is only of any worth ifit’s presence is established in the task at hand. If the chit is notpresent while you are eating, of what use is your eating?‘Absence of wandering of the chit is the religion of allreligions.’ If you attain this state, the cycle of rebirth will cometo an end.Questioner : Dada, last night, in my sleep I saw a verypowerful light, like sunlight, for a long time. What could that be?Dadashri : That is called chit chamatkar (miracle of theAptavani-1121122Aptavani-1chit). There is tremendous power in chit chamatkar.Questioner : Why do they have bells in the temples?Dadashri : To focus the chit. When the drums are playingand the bells are ringing, both the mind and the chit remainfocused there for a while; however perfect focus or concentrationis not possible until one acquires the Self.Things that distract the chit are all vishays (topics orsubjects of enjoyment and attachment). In this world everythingthat takes place on the outside, is a vishaya. Everything intowhich the chit wanders is vishaya. Eating and enjoying fritters orice cream is not a problem but if the chit becomes glued thereand keeps reminding you of ice cream and fritters, then that isconsidered vishaya. Everything outside of Gnan is vishaya.Whenever the chit grazes or indulges in anything but theSelf, seeds for the next birth are sown.The chit always takes photographs, sometimes clear andsometimes blurry. Whatever the quality of photographs you take,that is the quality of the film you create and you will have to seethat film, you will have to endure it. So take good pictures. Donot waste your film.EgoThe fourth and the last component of the inner psychicorgan is the ego. It is the ego, which finally endorses what theintellect decided in agreement with the mind or the chit. As longas the ego does not endorse the decision, no action will takeplace. The intellect is the light of the Self that comes through themedium of the ego and so when the intellect makes any decision,the ego as a rule becomes involved and the action will takeplace.‘I am Chandulal’ is the greatest ego and the ultimate egoaccording to the Gnani. It is the basis of the world’s existence.Liberation can only be achieved upon the demise of this ego.The foundation of life exists on the belief of ‘I am’. ‘I am pureSoul’ is the purity of the ego and it is the only instrument thatleads to liberation. All other forms of ego are instruments forfuture births.It is ego to impose the belief of ‘I am’ on the non-Self(achetan - inanimate). It is not considered an ego to believe ‘Iam the pure Self’ (chetan - animate). ‘I am’, means there isexistence. Therefore you have a right to say, ‘I am’. But you donot have the awareness of where you are and you do not havethe right to identify your existence with the non-Self. You haveabsolutely no awareness of who you are. Once this realizationis acquired, salvation is yours.No one has the power to do anything and yet the worldgoes on functioning. It is merely an ego to claim that you are thedoer. Until you acquire the realization of the Self, you are justlike a wound up toy.The Most Important Thing To RenounceGod has said that you need not renounce anything inorder to achieve liberation. Only the ego and attachment needto be renounced, and when you do this, you will have done itall. ‘I’ is the ego and ‘my’ is attachment. I make you renounceboth, the ‘I’ and the ‘my’, when I make you realize your pureSelf (Gnan). As I make you renounce, do you know what Imake you acquire? Your Pure Self. Thereafter the question ofrenunciation-acquisition never arises. Any and all renunciation isfor the annihilation of the ego. I take away your ego so thenwhere is its existence? It is placed in the original location of itsexistence. Its existence is only in one place and that is where Iplace the ego.If you resolve to wake up at five in the morning, you canAptavani-1123124Aptavani-1chit). There is tremendous power in chit chamatkar.Questioner : Why do they have bells in the temples?Dadashri : To focus the chit. When the drums are playingand the bells are ringing, both the mind and the chit remainfocused there for a while; however perfect focus or concentrationis not possible until one acquires the Self.Things that distract the chit are all vishays (topics orsubjects of enjoyment and attachment). In this world everythingthat takes place on the outside, is a vishaya. Everything intowhich the chit wanders is vishaya. Eating and enjoying fritters orice cream is not a problem but if the chit becomes glued thereand keeps reminding you of ice cream and fritters, then that isconsidered vishaya. Everything outside of Gnan is vishaya.Whenever the chit grazes or indulges in anything but theSelf, seeds for the next birth are sown.The chit always takes photographs, sometimes clear andsometimes blurry. Whatever the quality of photographs you take,that is the quality of the film you create and you will have to seethat film, you will have to endure it. So take good pictures. Donot waste your film.EgoThe fourth and the last component of the inner psychicorgan is the ego. It is the ego, which finally endorses what theintellect decided in agreement with the mind or the chit. As longas the ego does not endorse the decision, no action will takeplace. The intellect is the light of the Self that comes through themedium of the ego and so when the intellect makes any decision,the ego as a rule becomes involved and the action will takeplace.‘I am Chandulal’ is the greatest ego and the ultimate egoaccording to the Gnani. It is the basis of the world’s existence.Liberation can only be achieved upon the demise of this ego.The foundation of life exists on the belief of ‘I am’. ‘I am pureSoul’ is the purity of the ego and it is the only instrument thatleads to liberation. All other forms of ego are instruments forfuture births.It is ego to impose the belief of ‘I am’ on the non-Self(achetan - inanimate). It is not considered an ego to believe ‘Iam the pure Self’ (chetan - animate). ‘I am’, means there isexistence. Therefore you have a right to say, ‘I am’. But you donot have the awareness of where you are and you do not havethe right to identify your existence with the non-Self. You haveabsolutely no awareness of who you are. Once this realizationis acquired, salvation is yours.No one has the power to do anything and yet the worldgoes on functioning. It is merely an ego to claim that you are thedoer. Until you acquire the realization of the Self, you are justlike a wound up toy.The Most Important Thing To RenounceGod has said that you need not renounce anything inorder to achieve liberation. Only the ego and attachment needto be renounced, and when you do this, you will have done itall. ‘I’ is the ego and ‘my’ is attachment. I make you renounceboth, the ‘I’ and the ‘my’, when I make you realize your pureSelf (Gnan). As I make you renounce, do you know what Imake you acquire? Your Pure Self. Thereafter the question ofrenunciation-acquisition never arises. Any and all renunciation isfor the annihilation of the ego. I take away your ego so thenwhere is its existence? It is placed in the original location of itsexistence. Its existence is only in one place and that is where Iplace the ego.If you resolve to wake up at five in the morning, you canAptavani-1123124Aptavani-1certainly do it. To resolve firmly is egoism. What cannot beachieved through egoism? One day the saint Sahajanand Swamimet a King, in the province of Kathiawad. The king toldSahajanand Swami that a very impressive ascetic had come totown. This ascetic had remained buried underground for twoweeks. Swami told the king to make the ascetic repeat this featin his presence. The ascetic, through his ego remained buriedunderground for fifteen days. At the time of his surfacing, Swamitold the King not to send a large procession to greet the asceticas he had previously done, but instead send just two policemen.When the ascetic surfaced and did not see anyone waiting togreet him, he became enraged and began to shout, “Where isthe King? Where is the horse carriage? Where is the band? Hecollapsed while shouting and died. He lived through his ego andwhen that ego was not nourished, he died. The definition of egois to impose yourself where you are not.In reality ‘you’ the Self does not die. It is the ego thatdies and takes birth again. Death does not occur until the egoendorses it, and the foolish do not refrain from endorsing it.When a person is bed-ridden and suffering with pain, heendorsees his death by saying it would be better to die than gothrough the suffering. Here the endorsement becomes inevitable.Who Is The Enjoyer?The Self does not enjoy anything. It cannot enjoy anything.If it were the intrinsic nature of the Self to enjoy, then thattendency would always remain with the Self and liberation wouldnever be achieved. The one who enjoys is merely using his egowhen saying ‘I enjoyed it’. Senses are effective. Because ofcauses, the senses become effective. As effects unfold, becauseof illusion, you egotistically claim to be the doer or the enjoyer.When this illusion of ‘I am the doer’ is removed and youunderstand who the real doer is, liberation is at hand. It ispossible to experience liberation even with the body.The over crowding and congestion today is not becauseof people but their egos. You can live amidst crowds of egosthrough Gnan. Nature follows its own laws and so does theSelf, but it is the ego between the two (Self and non-self) thatis the cause of all suffering; it does what should not be done.It is the ego that perpetuates the worldly life and it is also theego that causes you to take birth in the four worlds of differentlife forms. It is this ego that has separated us from the Self.Even the most attractive person can look repulsive becauseof the ego. When does one become attractive? One appearsattractive when one becomes the embodiment of love(prematma). An attractive person with ego will appear hideous,because the ego is hideous.Questioner : Are there different kinds of egos?Dadashri : To refer to a relative thing as ‘I am’ is ego.Pride with three components, arrogance, envy, respect anddisrespect – are all different words used at different times toexplain the varying degrees of the ego. That is why the Gnanishave given them different names.Many people consider themselves humble and modestbut the intoxication of calling themselves such is acutely moredeluding than those with overt pride and conceit. Vanity isinevitable in those who consider themselves humble and modest.The ego can never be completely destroyed without theknowledge of the Self. And yet people are in pursuit of tryingto acquire a state of humility but what about the ensuing increasedlevel of their intoxication? What about the deplorable subtle egothat is born of such a state?The inner instrument of psyche (antahkaran) remains as itis, even after one acquires Self-realization. The only thing thatAptavani-1125126Aptavani-1certainly do it. To resolve firmly is egoism. What cannot beachieved through egoism? One day the saint Sahajanand Swamimet a King, in the province of Kathiawad. The king toldSahajanand Swami that a very impressive ascetic had come totown. This ascetic had remained buried underground for twoweeks. Swami told the king to make the ascetic repeat this featin his presence. The ascetic, through his ego remained buriedunderground for fifteen days. At the time of his surfacing, Swamitold the King not to send a large procession to greet the asceticas he had previously done, but instead send just two policemen.When the ascetic surfaced and did not see anyone waiting togreet him, he became enraged and began to shout, “Where isthe King? Where is the horse carriage? Where is the band? Hecollapsed while shouting and died. He lived through his ego andwhen that ego was not nourished, he died. The definition of egois to impose yourself where you are not.In reality ‘you’ the Self does not die. It is the ego thatdies and takes birth again. Death does not occur until the egoendorses it, and the foolish do not refrain from endorsing it.When a person is bed-ridden and suffering with pain, heendorsees his death by saying it would be better to die than gothrough the suffering. Here the endorsement becomes inevitable.Who Is The Enjoyer?The Self does not enjoy anything. It cannot enjoy anything.If it were the intrinsic nature of the Self to enjoy, then thattendency would always remain with the Self and liberation wouldnever be achieved. The one who enjoys is merely using his egowhen saying ‘I enjoyed it’. Senses are effective. Because ofcauses, the senses become effective. As effects unfold, becauseof illusion, you egotistically claim to be the doer or the enjoyer.When this illusion of ‘I am the doer’ is removed and youunderstand who the real doer is, liberation is at hand. It ispossible to experience liberation even with the body.The over crowding and congestion today is not becauseof people but their egos. You can live amidst crowds of egosthrough Gnan. Nature follows its own laws and so does theSelf, but it is the ego between the two (Self and non-self) thatis the cause of all suffering; it does what should not be done.It is the ego that perpetuates the worldly life and it is also theego that causes you to take birth in the four worlds of differentlife forms. It is this ego that has separated us from the Self.Even the most attractive person can look repulsive becauseof the ego. When does one become attractive? One appearsattractive when one becomes the embodiment of love(prematma). An attractive person with ego will appear hideous,because the ego is hideous.Questioner : Are there different kinds of egos?Dadashri : To refer to a relative thing as ‘I am’ is ego.Pride with three components, arrogance, envy, respect anddisrespect – are all different words used at different times toexplain the varying degrees of the ego. That is why the Gnanishave given them different names.Many people consider themselves humble and modestbut the intoxication of calling themselves such is acutely moredeluding than those with overt pride and conceit. Vanity isinevitable in those who consider themselves humble and modest.The ego can never be completely destroyed without theknowledge of the Self. And yet people are in pursuit of tryingto acquire a state of humility but what about the ensuing increasedlevel of their intoxication? What about the deplorable subtle egothat is born of such a state?The inner instrument of psyche (antahkaran) remains as itis, even after one acquires Self-realization. The only thing thatAptavani-1125126Aptavani-1is destroyed is the wrong belief of one’s identity; the falseimposition of ‘I am’ where one is not, is removed and this ‘I’is placed where the ‘Real I’ is. Thereafter the ego that remainsin the inner psyche will conduct one’s remaining worldly activities.This discharge ego does not have to be curbed but it is to berendered insipid.Squeeze The Juice Out Of The EgoYou have acquired the main thing, the Self. Now youhave to get rid of the juice (tasteful interest) out of the ego. Ifsomeone insults you, the ego arises; it becomes jarred at theslightest provocation. You get upset and even sulk. Why shouldyou sulk? Now there is nothing left for you to get upset about.All you have to do is to take away the old juice from the ego.Nobody likes insults but I am telling you that it is veryhelpful. Respect and insult are the sweet and bitter juices of theego respectively. Those who insult you come to squeeze thebitter juice out of your ego. When someone tells you ‘you haveno sense’, he extracts the bitter juice out of your ego andbreaks it proportionately, without any effort of your part. Theego is full of juices. Before when you did not have the awareness(of Gnan) and someone squeezed the juice (insulted you), itcaused you tremendous agony. Now with this understanding(Gnan), let the ego be squeezed knowingly and naturally. Whatis better than someone else doing this for you naturally? Peoplecan be extremely helpful in this matter.In any way that you can, extract the juices of the ego inorder to attain final liberation. The ego has a function afterGnan. It carries on your mundane worldly activities. The onlything that needs to be done is to render the ego juiceless.Others will do this cleansing of your ego for you. This is goodfor you. Otherwise you would have to do it yourself. The Gnanisare void of any intellect (abudha) and have so much power thatthey can squeeze the ‘juices’ out of the ego but you do not havesuch power. Therefore you should be happy if someone doesit for you when they insult you. On the contrary they spare youthe effort. For you there is only gain in it. You merely have toassess where your profit lies. For you there is tremendous profitin it.It is the intrinsic nature of the ego to accomplish all yourtasks for you in a make believe (dramatic – i.e. not real)unattached manner, provided the bittersweet juices of your egoare gone. The ego is not to be destroyed but rendered insipidand tasteless, void of the bittersweet juices.For the worldly interactions however, you may even haveto give compliments for a tasty meal.Drink Poison With A SmileA person feels bitter if you hurt his or her ego. You knowthe consequence of hurting others and as far as possible; it isbest that you hurt no one.‘The noble soul drinks poison with a smile,Detached and desireless, he needs no fame or recognition.’I am nilkantha (refers to the blue throated Lord Shivawho could swallow all the poisons of the world). From a veryyoung age I swallowed the poison (problems) people gave mewith a smile and not only that but I also bestowed blessingsupon them and that is why I am a nilkantha.You too will have to drink the poison. It is your account(from the past life) and therefore the poison will come to you nomatter what. So whether you like it or not, you will have to drinkit with a smile or with a frown. People will force you to drink it,whether you like it or not. So why not drink it with a smile andbless those who make you drink? How else will you become anilkantha? Those who offer you poison come to do so to bestowAptavani-1127128Aptavani-1is destroyed is the wrong belief of one’s identity; the falseimposition of ‘I am’ where one is not, is removed and this ‘I’is placed where the ‘Real I’ is. Thereafter the ego that remainsin the inner psyche will conduct one’s remaining worldly activities.This discharge ego does not have to be curbed but it is to berendered insipid.Squeeze The Juice Out Of The EgoYou have acquired the main thing, the Self. Now youhave to get rid of the juice (tasteful interest) out of the ego. Ifsomeone insults you, the ego arises; it becomes jarred at theslightest provocation. You get upset and even sulk. Why shouldyou sulk? Now there is nothing left for you to get upset about.All you have to do is to take away the old juice from the ego.Nobody likes insults but I am telling you that it is veryhelpful. Respect and insult are the sweet and bitter juices of theego respectively. Those who insult you come to squeeze thebitter juice out of your ego. When someone tells you ‘you haveno sense’, he extracts the bitter juice out of your ego andbreaks it proportionately, without any effort of your part. Theego is full of juices. Before when you did not have the awareness(of Gnan) and someone squeezed the juice (insulted you), itcaused you tremendous agony. Now with this understanding(Gnan), let the ego be squeezed knowingly and naturally. Whatis better than someone else doing this for you naturally? Peoplecan be extremely helpful in this matter.In any way that you can, extract the juices of the ego inorder to attain final liberation. The ego has a function afterGnan. It carries on your mundane worldly activities. The onlything that needs to be done is to render the ego juiceless.Others will do this cleansing of your ego for you. This is goodfor you. Otherwise you would have to do it yourself. The Gnanisare void of any intellect (abudha) and have so much power thatthey can squeeze the ‘juices’ out of the ego but you do not havesuch power. Therefore you should be happy if someone doesit for you when they insult you. On the contrary they spare youthe effort. For you there is only gain in it. You merely have toassess where your profit lies. For you there is tremendous profitin it.It is the intrinsic nature of the ego to accomplish all yourtasks for you in a make believe (dramatic – i.e. not real)unattached manner, provided the bittersweet juices of your egoare gone. The ego is not to be destroyed but rendered insipidand tasteless, void of the bittersweet juices.For the worldly interactions however, you may even haveto give compliments for a tasty meal.Drink Poison With A SmileA person feels bitter if you hurt his or her ego. You knowthe consequence of hurting others and as far as possible; it isbest that you hurt no one.‘The noble soul drinks poison with a smile,Detached and desireless, he needs no fame or recognition.’I am nilkantha (refers to the blue throated Lord Shivawho could swallow all the poisons of the world). From a veryyoung age I swallowed the poison (problems) people gave mewith a smile and not only that but I also bestowed blessingsupon them and that is why I am a nilkantha.You too will have to drink the poison. It is your account(from the past life) and therefore the poison will come to you nomatter what. So whether you like it or not, you will have to drinkit with a smile or with a frown. People will force you to drink it,whether you like it or not. So why not drink it with a smile andbless those who make you drink? How else will you become anilkantha? Those who offer you poison come to do so to bestowAptavani-1127128Aptavani-1upon you a higher spiritual state : if you make a wry face, it(spiritual state) will escape you. Whoever has come to me withcups of poison, I have drunk them with a smiling face, whileblessing them and have become Mahadevji (Lord Shiva).As long as your belief of ‘I am Chandulal’ exists,everything will taste bitter, but for me the poison has turned intonectar. Respect or insults, sweet or bitter are all dualities. Fromnow on we are free from such dualities; we are beyond suchdualities. That is why we do these satsangs! After all, eventuallyeveryone wants to achieve the state beyond duality, do theynot?When someone deals you anything bitter and you drinkit with a smile, blessing him or her, your ego will be destroyedand you become that much more free. Not only that but youropponent will also react from your positive reaction and changefor the better. He too will feel better. He will realize his weaknessin being your adversary and appreciate your spiritual strengthfor taking the insult with a smile.Do you think you would drink anything bitter of your ownvolition? How benevolent are those who make you drink it?Those who serve you (the bitter drink) are like a mother. Youhave no choice but to drink. You will have to take the bitter inorder to become nilkantha.‘You’ should tell ‘Chandubhai’ : ‘you will have to takethis bitter drink a hundred times.’ That is all and there after hewill get used to it. We have to force bitter medicine to a childbut once he realizes that the medicine is good for him he will nothave to be forced to drink it, he will drink it on his own. Onceyou make a decision that you want to drink all the bitternessserved to you, you will be able to do so. It is easy to drink‘sweet’ but you have to know how to drink the ‘bitter’ also.Will you not have to drink it some time or another? Besides itis a profit for you, so should you not practice drinking it?You feel very hurt (at a loss) when someone insults youin front of everyone, but that is a tremendous spiritual gain foryou and once you realize this, you will not see it as a loss, willyou?You say, ‘I am Pure Soul (Shuddhatma)’, so don’t youwant to remain in that state forever? For that, you will have toget rid of that ego of yours. You will be able to do that withconviction and hard work.How appropriate is it for a vagabond to continue callinghimself a vagabond after he has been made a king? Afteracquiring the state of ‘Shuddhatma’ you should not consideryourself anything but the pure Self.Do you not want to move away from this state ofbittersweet suffering? So then why do you still keep one foot init? Once having made a decision to be free, how can you keepyour feet in both, the Self and the non-Self? You cannot do that.When do people feel offended? It is when someone servesthem something bitter. During the Gnan Vidhi you say that youare a pure Soul, so then should you protect your pure Self(pure Soul) or the relative self (the other side)? It is very difficultto render your ego juiceless through your own efforts; it isbetter if others do it for you. This way the ego will play its rolein a superficial; make believe manner and the inner machinerywill also function well. If it is so beneficial, why should you nottake what is offered to you, with a smile in order to render theego dry? When the ego becomes completely insipid, the Selfbecomes complete. Just decide that you want to render yourego juiceless and it will continue to become so.If this medicine becomes agreeable to you then nothingwill trouble you. And you now know that it is very profitable for130Aptavani-1Aptavani-1129upon you a higher spiritual state : if you make a wry face, it(spiritual state) will escape you. Whoever has come to me withcups of poison, I have drunk them with a smiling face, whileblessing them and have become Mahadevji (Lord Shiva).As long as your belief of ‘I am Chandulal’ exists,everything will taste bitter, but for me the poison has turned intonectar. Respect or insults, sweet or bitter are all dualities. Fromnow on we are free from such dualities; we are beyond suchdualities. That is why we do these satsangs! After all, eventuallyeveryone wants to achieve the state beyond duality, do theynot?When someone deals you anything bitter and you drinkit with a smile, blessing him or her, your ego will be destroyedand you become that much more free. Not only that but youropponent will also react from your positive reaction and changefor the better. He too will feel better. He will realize his weaknessin being your adversary and appreciate your spiritual strengthfor taking the insult with a smile.Do you think you would drink anything bitter of your ownvolition? How benevolent are those who make you drink it?Those who serve you (the bitter drink) are like a mother. Youhave no choice but to drink. You will have to take the bitter inorder to become nilkantha.‘You’ should tell ‘Chandubhai’ : ‘you will have to takethis bitter drink a hundred times.’ That is all and there after hewill get used to it. We have to force bitter medicine to a childbut once he realizes that the medicine is good for him he will nothave to be forced to drink it, he will drink it on his own. Onceyou make a decision that you want to drink all the bitternessserved to you, you will be able to do so. It is easy to drink‘sweet’ but you have to know how to drink the ‘bitter’ also.Will you not have to drink it some time or another? Besides itis a profit for you, so should you not practice drinking it?You feel very hurt (at a loss) when someone insults youin front of everyone, but that is a tremendous spiritual gain foryou and once you realize this, you will not see it as a loss, willyou?You say, ‘I am Pure Soul (Shuddhatma)’, so don’t youwant to remain in that state forever? For that, you will have toget rid of that ego of yours. You will be able to do that withconviction and hard work.How appropriate is it for a vagabond to continue callinghimself a vagabond after he has been made a king? Afteracquiring the state of ‘Shuddhatma’ you should not consideryourself anything but the pure Self.Do you not want to move away from this state ofbittersweet suffering? So then why do you still keep one foot init? Once having made a decision to be free, how can you keepyour feet in both, the Self and the non-Self? You cannot do that.When do people feel offended? It is when someone servesthem something bitter. During the Gnan Vidhi you say that youare a pure Soul, so then should you protect your pure Self(pure Soul) or the relative self (the other side)? It is very difficultto render your ego juiceless through your own efforts; it isbetter if others do it for you. This way the ego will play its rolein a superficial; make believe manner and the inner machinerywill also function well. If it is so beneficial, why should you nottake what is offered to you, with a smile in order to render theego dry? When the ego becomes completely insipid, the Selfbecomes complete. Just decide that you want to render yourego juiceless and it will continue to become so.If this medicine becomes agreeable to you then nothingwill trouble you. And you now know that it is very profitable for130Aptavani-1Aptavani-1129you in your spiritual progress. Whatever sweetness you find inlife, is equally filled with bitterness. So deal with the bitternessfirst, all that will remain will be sweet and that is easy to dealwith. It is a great achievement to digest the bitterness of life.Everyone smiles when they are offered flowers, but what happenswhen people hurl stones at them?Penance : Invisible (Adeethha taap)Ego is an object to be known (gneya) and ‘You’ are theKnower (gnata). Where there is a relationship between theKnower and the known, the known should not be protected. Ifyou protect one gneya (ego), then you have to protect all others,and they are infinite. From now on you have to practice invisiblepenance (adeetha tapa). You have to maintain awareness thatyou do not become engulfed and become swept away with theego. That awareness is invisible penance. This kind of penancehas to be done because from time immemorial you have acquireda habit of identifying yourselves with the known, the gneyas. Asyou do this penance, these habits will become weaker and sowill the ego and consequently the puzzle will be solved. Onceyou resolve to do this penance, it will continue to occur on itsown.Of what use is the ego that has made you fall in everycircumstance and made you look ugly despite your beauty?Awareness is that which does not allow the known to becomethe knower. That is invisible penance. The awareness that youhave to maintain in order to render the ego juiceless and insipidis invisible penance.Obstacles to spiritual progress come from the outside aswell as from within. Ego is an obstacle against which you willhave to be well prepared.Even the importance and respect people give you, is notacceptable. Only those who can endure insults can endurerespect. Someone once asked me, “Why do you accept thegarlands of flowers people give you?” I replied, ‘Here, let meput a garland around your neck also. But you will not be ableto endure the honor.’ People will be awed to see so manygarlands. If you bow down to someone, he or she will quicklyget up – they cannot bear the respect being given to them.Account Of Respect-InsultThe rule is : ‘No one will insult you when you no longerfear insults’. As long as there is fear, the ‘transactions’ will keepcoming but they will cease when your fear is gone. Keep both,respect and insult in your account. Whatever respect or insultpeople offer you, credit them to your account. Do not create anew account by reacting to the insults. However large or smallthe dose of bitterness people serve you, credit it into youraccount. Decide that you want to credit about a hundred insultsa month in your account and the more the insults, the greater theprofit. Now if you get seventy instead of hundred, you are in aloss by thirty and therefore you have to credit one hundred andthirty the following month. Those who have a credit of threehundred or so insults to their account will not experience anyfear of being insulted. After that there is smooth sailing to theother shore (liberation). So you have to start keeping a recordfrom the first day of the month. Can you do that much or not?When you bow down to a Gnani Purush by putting yourhands together, it means you purify your ego of worldlyinteractions and when you touch your forehead to the Gnani’stoe and do real darshan, you are surrendering your ego at hisfeet. The benefit you gain is in proportion to the degree of yoursurrender of your ego.Pity is not an attribute found in the Gnani, the Gnani hasboundless compassion. Pity is a dangerous attribute of the egoas far as liberation is concerned. In what way is it an egotisticalAptavani-1131132Aptavani-1you in your spiritual progress. Whatever sweetness you find inlife, is equally filled with bitterness. So deal with the bitternessfirst, all that will remain will be sweet and that is easy to dealwith. It is a great achievement to digest the bitterness of life.Everyone smiles when they are offered flowers, but what happenswhen people hurl stones at them?Penance : Invisible (Adeethha taap)Ego is an object to be known (gneya) and ‘You’ are theKnower (gnata). Where there is a relationship between theKnower and the known, the known should not be protected. Ifyou protect one gneya (ego), then you have to protect all others,and they are infinite. From now on you have to practice invisiblepenance (adeetha tapa). You have to maintain awareness thatyou do not become engulfed and become swept away with theego. That awareness is invisible penance. This kind of penancehas to be done because from time immemorial you have acquireda habit of identifying yourselves with the known, the gneyas. Asyou do this penance, these habits will become weaker and sowill the ego and consequently the puzzle will be solved. Onceyou resolve to do this penance, it will continue to occur on itsown.Of what use is the ego that has made you fall in everycircumstance and made you look ugly despite your beauty?Awareness is that which does not allow the known to becomethe knower. That is invisible penance. The awareness that youhave to maintain in order to render the ego juiceless and insipidis invisible penance.Obstacles to spiritual progress come from the outside aswell as from within. Ego is an obstacle against which you willhave to be well prepared.Even the importance and respect people give you, is notacceptable. Only those who can endure insults can endurerespect. Someone once asked me, “Why do you accept thegarlands of flowers people give you?” I replied, ‘Here, let meput a garland around your neck also. But you will not be ableto endure the honor.’ People will be awed to see so manygarlands. If you bow down to someone, he or she will quicklyget up – they cannot bear the respect being given to them.Account Of Respect-InsultThe rule is : ‘No one will insult you when you no longerfear insults’. As long as there is fear, the ‘transactions’ will keepcoming but they will cease when your fear is gone. Keep both,respect and insult in your account. Whatever respect or insultpeople offer you, credit them to your account. Do not create anew account by reacting to the insults. However large or smallthe dose of bitterness people serve you, credit it into youraccount. Decide that you want to credit about a hundred insultsa month in your account and the more the insults, the greater theprofit. Now if you get seventy instead of hundred, you are in aloss by thirty and therefore you have to credit one hundred andthirty the following month. Those who have a credit of threehundred or so insults to their account will not experience anyfear of being insulted. After that there is smooth sailing to theother shore (liberation). So you have to start keeping a recordfrom the first day of the month. Can you do that much or not?When you bow down to a Gnani Purush by putting yourhands together, it means you purify your ego of worldlyinteractions and when you touch your forehead to the Gnani’stoe and do real darshan, you are surrendering your ego at hisfeet. The benefit you gain is in proportion to the degree of yoursurrender of your ego.Pity is not an attribute found in the Gnani, the Gnani hasboundless compassion. Pity is a dangerous attribute of the egoas far as liberation is concerned. In what way is it an egotisticalAptavani-1131132Aptavani-1attribute? Pity is an attribute of duality. Duality means that if aperson has pity within him, he will inevitably also have itsopposing quality, cruelty at the other end. This attribute becomesapparent only when it surfaces and when it does, he will destroyeverything around him. He will make all kinds of dealings. Hewill even forsake his home, his wife and children. The wholeworld is immersed in duality. Until you acquire a state of non-duality, pity is a praiseworthy quality of this world because it isthe foundation for the good of the world. But maintaining pityis for your own safe side and not God’s. Those who go aroundfeeling pity for others deserve pity themselves. Why don’t youpity your own self? Why do you go out worrying about others?Some ascetics show pity towards worldly people : ‘What willbecome of these people?’ You foolish men! Whatever is goingto happen to those people, will happen, but who are you totake pity on them? What will become of you? Why are youconcerned about others when your own problems have notbeen resolved? This is nothing but dangerous intoxication ofego. An ordinary worldly person’s intoxication will diminish withinhours of waiting in a line to buy oil or sugar, but how will theintoxication of these ascetics ever diminish? On the contrary itwill continue to increase. The Lord has said that those who arefree of such intoxication will achieve liberation. Intoxication isthe most dangerous subtle ego; it will make you suffertremendously. Even an ordinary person can point out your grossego. You will find someone or other who will ask you why youwalk around with an inflated chest and will tell you to be humble.This will make you humble. But the intoxication of the subtleego of : ‘I am somebody. I have achieved something. I knowsomething’– will never go away. What is the definition ofknowledge? True knowledge is the light of the Self. Can onestumble in the presence of light? How can people claim to haveknowledge when they stumble every step of the way? Whatright does one have to feel pity for others when he himself is inignorance of his real Self?The Poison Of EgoWhen the ego rises after having attained or accomplishedsomething, beware. Your downfall is inevitable. If the mahatmas’ego gets inflated about having acquired this Knowledge, theywill not fall because of ‘Dada’ presence, but their knowledgewill become veiled. If one’s ego arises because his divinepowers have blossomed, he will fall as low as he becameelevated. Things happen because of divine powers and heclaims to be the doer; this ego will take him to a world oflower life form. If he were to abuse his divine powers, he willreincarnate in a lower life form. Egoism of one’s divinity resultsin a life in hell.In children the ego is in a dormant state. They too havean ego but it is in a compressed form. As the child grows, theego expresses. A child will only grow up to be good and wiseif the negative ego in a child is not nurtured. If you don’t supporta child’s negative ego, he will grow up to be a beautiful and acultured being.Do not become entangled in relationships with the peopleof this world. They are in search of something to feed their ego,and if you do not want to get involved, then feed their ego andmove on otherwise you will encounter obstruction in the path toliberation. An egoistic person will continue to worsen thecomplications arising out of the ego. Such people are unlikelyto have problems with greed.People with ability to think critically and have the abilityto understand are considered cultured. These cultured peoplehave a lot of poison of the ego. The poison of attachment (ofmy-ness) also obstructs them. One can become free fromattachment but it is not possible to become free from the ego.Aptavani-1133134Aptavani-1attribute? Pity is an attribute of duality. Duality means that if aperson has pity within him, he will inevitably also have itsopposing quality, cruelty at the other end. This attribute becomesapparent only when it surfaces and when it does, he will destroyeverything around him. He will make all kinds of dealings. Hewill even forsake his home, his wife and children. The wholeworld is immersed in duality. Until you acquire a state of non-duality, pity is a praiseworthy quality of this world because it isthe foundation for the good of the world. But maintaining pityis for your own safe side and not God’s. Those who go aroundfeeling pity for others deserve pity themselves. Why don’t youpity your own self? Why do you go out worrying about others?Some ascetics show pity towards worldly people : ‘What willbecome of these people?’ You foolish men! Whatever is goingto happen to those people, will happen, but who are you totake pity on them? What will become of you? Why are youconcerned about others when your own problems have notbeen resolved? This is nothing but dangerous intoxication ofego. An ordinary worldly person’s intoxication will diminish withinhours of waiting in a line to buy oil or sugar, but how will theintoxication of these ascetics ever diminish? On the contrary itwill continue to increase. The Lord has said that those who arefree of such intoxication will achieve liberation. Intoxication isthe most dangerous subtle ego; it will make you suffertremendously. Even an ordinary person can point out your grossego. You will find someone or other who will ask you why youwalk around with an inflated chest and will tell you to be humble.This will make you humble. But the intoxication of the subtleego of : ‘I am somebody. I have achieved something. I knowsomething’– will never go away. What is the definition ofknowledge? True knowledge is the light of the Self. Can onestumble in the presence of light? How can people claim to haveknowledge when they stumble every step of the way? Whatright does one have to feel pity for others when he himself is inignorance of his real Self?The Poison Of EgoWhen the ego rises after having attained or accomplishedsomething, beware. Your downfall is inevitable. If the mahatmas’ego gets inflated about having acquired this Knowledge, theywill not fall because of ‘Dada’ presence, but their knowledgewill become veiled. If one’s ego arises because his divinepowers have blossomed, he will fall as low as he becameelevated. Things happen because of divine powers and heclaims to be the doer; this ego will take him to a world oflower life form. If he were to abuse his divine powers, he willreincarnate in a lower life form. Egoism of one’s divinity resultsin a life in hell.In children the ego is in a dormant state. They too havean ego but it is in a compressed form. As the child grows, theego expresses. A child will only grow up to be good and wiseif the negative ego in a child is not nurtured. If you don’t supporta child’s negative ego, he will grow up to be a beautiful and acultured being.Do not become entangled in relationships with the peopleof this world. They are in search of something to feed their ego,and if you do not want to get involved, then feed their ego andmove on otherwise you will encounter obstruction in the path toliberation. An egoistic person will continue to worsen thecomplications arising out of the ego. Such people are unlikelyto have problems with greed.People with ability to think critically and have the abilityto understand are considered cultured. These cultured peoplehave a lot of poison of the ego. The poison of attachment (ofmy-ness) also obstructs them. One can become free fromattachment but it is not possible to become free from the ego.Aptavani-1133134Aptavani-1Committing suicide is a very dangerous ego. When theego is shattered, when it gets no nourishment from anywhere,a person will commit suicide. Consequently that person binds alife of hell. The lesser the ego, the higher the life form and thegreater the ego, the lower one goes.Some exercise ego of killing and some exercise ego ofsaving lives. God sees both these acts as acts of egoism becausenobody has the power to kill or save any living being; they aremerely being egoistic in claiming to save lives. The person whosaves lives incarnates to a higher life form and the one who killswill go to a lower life form. There is bondage in both for sure.Lions have tremendous ego. A lion is the king of theanimal world. He has wandered through all cycles of births andfound happiness nowhere. Finally in his current life form, hegoes around venting his ego through his roars and wails in thejungle. He desires to be free but does not find the right path.It is very difficult to find the right path and what is more, it iseven more difficult to encounter the giver of liberation. Countlesscircumstances come together and dissipate but only thecircumstance of an encounter with a Gnani will give you thepermanent solution.Satisfying The EgoWhat you see around you is not sansar (the worldly life).The ego itself is worldly life. In such a world what is wrong ifnothing is satisfied? If a man has borrowed five hundred rupeesfrom you and when the time comes for him to return the moneyhe does not do so. Your ego remains unsatisfied. To satisfy yourego you file a lawsuit, but if that man comes to you pleading andweeping and gets down on his knees to you, your ego becomessatisfied and so you will let him go.This ego is such that it will not let a person entertain theslightest dislike for the state he is in. Even a pauper hasattachment for his hut and finds happiness in it because of hisego. Ultimately, through his ego he will find happiness in itbecause he feels he is better off than the dogs and the animalsin the street. Whatever happiness a person acquires through hisego, his ego will not let him feel dislike towards it.The ego creates division and factions. The Gnani is ego-less. Division and factions come together in the presence of aGnani. To rule by creating division and factions is the job of anegotist.Sensitiveness And Atkan (get stuck) : Spiritual RoadblockSome people are very sensitive. Sensitiveness is a directexpression of ego. If there is a discussion going on and I aska question and someone speaks out in the middle; that is calleda sensitive ego. The predominant spiritual roadblock, related toego is atkan. Other examples of atkan are sexual matters, greedand pride. For example a strong healthy horse stops dead in itstracks when it comes to a mosque or a graveyard; it will notmove forward at all. That is called a block. Likewise in spiritualprogress there are certain major blocks called atakan. Everyhuman being has an atkan and this is the very thing that makeshim wander life after life. Atkan leads to wandering andwandering leaves one hanging, neither here nor there and Irescue such persons. The ego of atakan is acceptable but notthe one of sensitiveness. There is no progress as long as thereis an ego of sensitiveness. Sensitiveness is present if a personbecomes upset over trivial things. You can get rid of your atkanby just observing it but the ego of sensitiveness will only go ifyou are very forceful and vigilant in breaking it. Whatever youhave brought with you from the past life is indeed what is goingto come forth from within. You have to simply observe it. TheGnani has bestowed upon you the absolute light of the Self, soAptavani-1135136Aptavani-1Committing suicide is a very dangerous ego. When theego is shattered, when it gets no nourishment from anywhere,a person will commit suicide. Consequently that person binds alife of hell. The lesser the ego, the higher the life form and thegreater the ego, the lower one goes.Some exercise ego of killing and some exercise ego ofsaving lives. God sees both these acts as acts of egoism becausenobody has the power to kill or save any living being; they aremerely being egoistic in claiming to save lives. The person whosaves lives incarnates to a higher life form and the one who killswill go to a lower life form. There is bondage in both for sure.Lions have tremendous ego. A lion is the king of theanimal world. He has wandered through all cycles of births andfound happiness nowhere. Finally in his current life form, hegoes around venting his ego through his roars and wails in thejungle. He desires to be free but does not find the right path.It is very difficult to find the right path and what is more, it iseven more difficult to encounter the giver of liberation. Countlesscircumstances come together and dissipate but only thecircumstance of an encounter with a Gnani will give you thepermanent solution.Satisfying The EgoWhat you see around you is not sansar (the worldly life).The ego itself is worldly life. In such a world what is wrong ifnothing is satisfied? If a man has borrowed five hundred rupeesfrom you and when the time comes for him to return the moneyhe does not do so. Your ego remains unsatisfied. To satisfy yourego you file a lawsuit, but if that man comes to you pleading andweeping and gets down on his knees to you, your ego becomessatisfied and so you will let him go.This ego is such that it will not let a person entertain theslightest dislike for the state he is in. Even a pauper hasattachment for his hut and finds happiness in it because of hisego. Ultimately, through his ego he will find happiness in itbecause he feels he is better off than the dogs and the animalsin the street. Whatever happiness a person acquires through hisego, his ego will not let him feel dislike towards it.The ego creates division and factions. The Gnani is ego-less. Division and factions come together in the presence of aGnani. To rule by creating division and factions is the job of anegotist.Sensitiveness And Atkan (get stuck) : Spiritual RoadblockSome people are very sensitive. Sensitiveness is a directexpression of ego. If there is a discussion going on and I aska question and someone speaks out in the middle; that is calleda sensitive ego. The predominant spiritual roadblock, related toego is atkan. Other examples of atkan are sexual matters, greedand pride. For example a strong healthy horse stops dead in itstracks when it comes to a mosque or a graveyard; it will notmove forward at all. That is called a block. Likewise in spiritualprogress there are certain major blocks called atakan. Everyhuman being has an atkan and this is the very thing that makeshim wander life after life. Atkan leads to wandering andwandering leaves one hanging, neither here nor there and Irescue such persons. The ego of atakan is acceptable but notthe one of sensitiveness. There is no progress as long as thereis an ego of sensitiveness. Sensitiveness is present if a personbecomes upset over trivial things. You can get rid of your atkanby just observing it but the ego of sensitiveness will only go ifyou are very forceful and vigilant in breaking it. Whatever youhave brought with you from the past life is indeed what is goingto come forth from within. You have to simply observe it. TheGnani has bestowed upon you the absolute light of the Self, soAptavani-1135136Aptavani-1why then do you still have a sour face? It is because of theatkan and your sensitiveness. A sensitive person becomes onewith his sensitive ego and that is why he or she becomes upsetfor prolonged periods and feels no zest in life.Know where you slip. Why do you see darkness whenyou are walking on an illuminated path - a path illuminated byGnan? It is because of your atkan and sensitiveness. By merelybecoming aware of and knowing about this sensitive quality, thesensitiveness within will disappear. Whatever baggage you havebrought with you will indeed exhaust itself just by your knowingand observing it, so remain the Knower and the Observer. Thisprocess will destroy all atkan but sensitiveness will not leaveeasily. When you become sensitive, electricity is produced withinthe body, and these sparks kill many small life forms within.However if you maintain an unwavering awareness, nothing willstand in the way and your accumulated baggage will dissipate.It is so simple and yet this baggage of atkan and sensitivenesshas taken hold over you.Antahkaran : How It Functions(Antahkaran : Inner complex of mind, chit, ego and intellect)Why does one’s wandering in the world continue? It isbecause the self ‘answers the telephone calls’ in the antahkaran,that were meant for the mind, the chit, the intellect or the ego.This is interference. You are to simply know and observe theduties and the workings of the mind, intellect, chit, and the ego.‘You’ should not answer anyone’s call. ‘You’ are the Knowerand the Observer of what the eyes, ears, nose etc. are doing.If you answer the call of the mind, the chit or any othercomponents, conflicts will arise. So do not answer someoneelse’s call, let them answer their own calls.Have you ever investigated to see what happens to thefood you eat in the stomach or the intestines? Every part of thebody carries out its own natural function. One would not beable to hear if the ears did not carry out their natural functionor smell anything, good or bad, if the nose did not carry out itsown function. Similarly, you have to check to see whether themind, the intellect, the chit and the ego are functioning accordingto their own nature or not. There is no problem if You, the Self,remain in your own pure state, the Shuddhatma state. If theantahkaran carries out its natural function i.e. the mind showsdifferent pamphlets, the chit shows the scenes, the intellect makesthe decisions, the ego endorses that decision and the pure Soul(Shuddhatma) remains in its natural state as the Knower and thePerceiver, then everything is fine. Every component is indeed inits own inherent natural state. All you have to do is to knowwhether any of these components are functioning properly andif not, then how to restore them to their natural state. Insteadpeople claim doership; ‘I thought about it’, ‘I am speaking’, ‘Iam doing everything’. Even the arms and legs carry out theirnatural function and yet people say, ‘I am walking’. They aremerely expressing their ego and what is more they believe theego to be their self. Herein lies the confusion.Can you not tell when the nature of the mind becomesspoiled? Surely you can. If an old lady were to come to yourhome and nag you all whole day long for fifteen days, you willget used to her if you do not get into a conflict with her. Similarlyyou have to become used to the constant bombardment thatgoes on in your mind. As it is, your inability to look at the mindhas resulted in your inability to recognize what kind of a bombis detonating within. All kinds of ammunition have become mixedup. You believe that they are harmless sparklers but they detonatelike firecrackers. Similarly the mind is full of all different kindsof things and they detonate accordingly. But just like your dealingswith the old lady, if You do not interfere with the mind, then You138Aptavani-1Aptavani-1137why then do you still have a sour face? It is because of theatkan and your sensitiveness. A sensitive person becomes onewith his sensitive ego and that is why he or she becomes upsetfor prolonged periods and feels no zest in life.Know where you slip. Why do you see darkness whenyou are walking on an illuminated path - a path illuminated byGnan? It is because of your atkan and sensitiveness. By merelybecoming aware of and knowing about this sensitive quality, thesensitiveness within will disappear. Whatever baggage you havebrought with you will indeed exhaust itself just by your knowingand observing it, so remain the Knower and the Observer. Thisprocess will destroy all atkan but sensitiveness will not leaveeasily. When you become sensitive, electricity is produced withinthe body, and these sparks kill many small life forms within.However if you maintain an unwavering awareness, nothing willstand in the way and your accumulated baggage will dissipate.It is so simple and yet this baggage of atkan and sensitivenesshas taken hold over you.Antahkaran : How It Functions(Antahkaran : Inner complex of mind, chit, ego and intellect)Why does one’s wandering in the world continue? It isbecause the self ‘answers the telephone calls’ in the antahkaran,that were meant for the mind, the chit, the intellect or the ego.This is interference. You are to simply know and observe theduties and the workings of the mind, intellect, chit, and the ego.‘You’ should not answer anyone’s call. ‘You’ are the Knowerand the Observer of what the eyes, ears, nose etc. are doing.If you answer the call of the mind, the chit or any othercomponents, conflicts will arise. So do not answer someoneelse’s call, let them answer their own calls.Have you ever investigated to see what happens to thefood you eat in the stomach or the intestines? Every part of thebody carries out its own natural function. One would not beable to hear if the ears did not carry out their natural functionor smell anything, good or bad, if the nose did not carry out itsown function. Similarly, you have to check to see whether themind, the intellect, the chit and the ego are functioning accordingto their own nature or not. There is no problem if You, the Self,remain in your own pure state, the Shuddhatma state. If theantahkaran carries out its natural function i.e. the mind showsdifferent pamphlets, the chit shows the scenes, the intellect makesthe decisions, the ego endorses that decision and the pure Soul(Shuddhatma) remains in its natural state as the Knower and thePerceiver, then everything is fine. Every component is indeed inits own inherent natural state. All you have to do is to knowwhether any of these components are functioning properly andif not, then how to restore them to their natural state. Insteadpeople claim doership; ‘I thought about it’, ‘I am speaking’, ‘Iam doing everything’. Even the arms and legs carry out theirnatural function and yet people say, ‘I am walking’. They aremerely expressing their ego and what is more they believe theego to be their self. Herein lies the confusion.Can you not tell when the nature of the mind becomesspoiled? Surely you can. If an old lady were to come to yourhome and nag you all whole day long for fifteen days, you willget used to her if you do not get into a conflict with her. Similarlyyou have to become used to the constant bombardment thatgoes on in your mind. As it is, your inability to look at the mindhas resulted in your inability to recognize what kind of a bombis detonating within. All kinds of ammunition have become mixedup. You believe that they are harmless sparklers but they detonatelike firecrackers. Similarly the mind is full of all different kindsof things and they detonate accordingly. But just like your dealingswith the old lady, if You do not interfere with the mind, then You138Aptavani-1Aptavani-1137will get used to it. Your relationship with the mind, chit, intellect,and ego is that of the Knower and the known (gnata-gneya)and not one of matrimony and therefore You can remain separatefrom it.When a person is hypnotized, it is really the antahkaranthat is hypnotized. All the components of the antahkaran arehypnotized. First the chit gets trapped and then rest of thecomponents. Once the inner component is affected, the externalwill be affected also. When the mind becomes still, the externalinstrument then acts according to instructions of the person doingthe hypnosis. When you are hypnotized you will not know orremember anything that happens under hypnosis when you cometo your senses. How can you remember anything when yourwhole antahakaran comes to a stand still? Not every one canbe hypnotized. You can only be hypnotized if it is in your karmicaccount. The effect of hypnotism is short lived. It cannot last fortoo long.If you surrender your antahkaran along with your bodyand sit with a Gnani Purush for only one hour, you can conquerthe whole world. I destroy your sins and bestow upon youdivine eyes; I make you ‘Shuddhatma’, within one hour. This isthe Gnan Vidhi. Thereafter you can go wherever you desire.This Gnan will remain with you all the time until you achieve finalliberation. Your antahkaran will continue to purify in my presence.Your miseries will cease and the antahkaran will be purified.And because of this, you will experience bliss.Questioner : What kinds of activities are going on in theantahkaran of the devotees who turn the rosary? Mentally theyrecite the mantra. Externally they count the beads while theirchit is engrossed in some other activity. What is all this? Whichmind is at work during that time?Dadashri : Counting of beads will automatically beginonce you decide to do so. When the hand is doing its work, themind and the ego are working in the antahkaran, at the sametime. The chit is not present. It is wandering outside. And yetpeople claim that they are the ones performing the ritual, thussowing seeds of karma for their next life. In fact the rituals theyperform is a discharge of their karma from past life but while thedischarge is taking place, they express an opinion (deep innerintent, bhaav). As is the opinion, so is the fruit. If one builds anopinion that he wished his chit would remain focused in thecounting of the beads and not wander around, then that is thefruit he will reap in his next life. And if a person has an innerintent that the rituals of turning the rosary would come to an endand builds that opinion (intent), then in his next life, that is whathe will acquire.The seeds for one’s next life are being sown according towhatever deep inner intent (opinion here) one has. This is wherenew karma is being charged.Children will remember what they read if while readingthere is a presence of all four of the components - mind, intellect,chit and ego, of their antahskaran. But the child’s chit is at acricket match and so all his reading goes to waste. What happensif one of the legs on a bed breaks? What would be the result?Such is the state of this antahkaran. Kavi has sung :“Solitary in a crowd engulfed in a dream world … Listener ‘I’ am and the singer ‘I’ am too”When you travel in an overcrowded local train in Bombayduring the evening rush hour you get pushed and shoved fromall directions. At that time the mind, the intellect, the chit and theego are all overwhelmed and engaged in their own functions.That is when ‘You’ (Shuddhatma) can really enjoy seeing andknowing in an independent state. At such times ‘You’ becomealone and that is when it is fun to Know and See. The greaterAptavani-1139140Aptavani-1will get used to it. Your relationship with the mind, chit, intellect,and ego is that of the Knower and the known (gnata-gneya)and not one of matrimony and therefore You can remain separatefrom it.When a person is hypnotized, it is really the antahkaranthat is hypnotized. All the components of the antahkaran arehypnotized. First the chit gets trapped and then rest of thecomponents. Once the inner component is affected, the externalwill be affected also. When the mind becomes still, the externalinstrument then acts according to instructions of the person doingthe hypnosis. When you are hypnotized you will not know orremember anything that happens under hypnosis when you cometo your senses. How can you remember anything when yourwhole antahakaran comes to a stand still? Not every one canbe hypnotized. You can only be hypnotized if it is in your karmicaccount. The effect of hypnotism is short lived. It cannot last fortoo long.If you surrender your antahkaran along with your bodyand sit with a Gnani Purush for only one hour, you can conquerthe whole world. I destroy your sins and bestow upon youdivine eyes; I make you ‘Shuddhatma’, within one hour. This isthe Gnan Vidhi. Thereafter you can go wherever you desire.This Gnan will remain with you all the time until you achieve finalliberation. Your antahkaran will continue to purify in my presence.Your miseries will cease and the antahkaran will be purified.And because of this, you will experience bliss.Questioner : What kinds of activities are going on in theantahkaran of the devotees who turn the rosary? Mentally theyrecite the mantra. Externally they count the beads while theirchit is engrossed in some other activity. What is all this? Whichmind is at work during that time?Dadashri : Counting of beads will automatically beginonce you decide to do so. When the hand is doing its work, themind and the ego are working in the antahkaran, at the sametime. The chit is not present. It is wandering outside. And yetpeople claim that they are the ones performing the ritual, thussowing seeds of karma for their next life. In fact the rituals theyperform is a discharge of their karma from past life but while thedischarge is taking place, they express an opinion (deep innerintent, bhaav). As is the opinion, so is the fruit. If one builds anopinion that he wished his chit would remain focused in thecounting of the beads and not wander around, then that is thefruit he will reap in his next life. And if a person has an innerintent that the rituals of turning the rosary would come to an endand builds that opinion (intent), then in his next life, that is whathe will acquire.The seeds for one’s next life are being sown according towhatever deep inner intent (opinion here) one has. This is wherenew karma is being charged.Children will remember what they read if while readingthere is a presence of all four of the components - mind, intellect,chit and ego, of their antahskaran. But the child’s chit is at acricket match and so all his reading goes to waste. What happensif one of the legs on a bed breaks? What would be the result?Such is the state of this antahkaran. Kavi has sung :“Solitary in a crowd engulfed in a dream world … Listener ‘I’ am and the singer ‘I’ am too”When you travel in an overcrowded local train in Bombayduring the evening rush hour you get pushed and shoved fromall directions. At that time the mind, the intellect, the chit and theego are all overwhelmed and engaged in their own functions.That is when ‘You’ (Shuddhatma) can really enjoy seeing andknowing in an independent state. At such times ‘You’ becomealone and that is when it is fun to Know and See. The greaterAptavani-1139140Aptavani-1the crowd (gneyas, subjects to be known), the greater is theblossoming powers of the Knower (gnata). When one is in ahuge crowd, the Knower within will flourish tremendously; theKnower will express fully. The greater the scope, the more thepower increases. Some people abandon everything and runaway to the forest for solitude, but the real pleasure is amongsta crowd. It is when there is a crowd on the outside, a crowdon the inside, a crowd everywhere that the Shuddhatmabecomes alone. There it does not identify itself with anything.However this is possible only after acquiring the knowledge ofthe Self.Mandatory Versus VoluntaryIt is not easy to understand how the world functions.Everything in this world is mandatory but people believe thatthey act of their own volition and that is why they becometrapped. Being born is mandatory, education is mandatory, gettingmarried is mandatory and dying too is mandatory. It is extremelyrare to find a person who has even an inkling of where lies thepower of one’s free will. It is only when you become a GnaniPurush (Self-realized) that your independent free will arises inthis mandatory world. Purusharth (Real effort) only begins afteryou become a Purush. From the time you are born until the timeyou die, your every action is mandatory. You have wanderedthrough endless cycles of births under compulsion and you willkeep on wandering in the same way unless you meet a GnaniPurush who can liberate you from this cycle.It is mandatory for a father to raise his children, educatethem, get them married and help them settle in life. Mandatorymeans duty-bound and voluntary means will-bound. Peoplemistakenly believe all that is duty-bound to be will-bound. Youperpetuate your worldly life in the direction of your will; youbelieve you are acting according to your free will whereas infact you are duty bound. That which you are able to change iswhere your free will lies. When a child become disrespectfultowards his father, the father will get angry and remind him ofthe sacrifices he has made for him. The foolish man! Tell mewhat have you done that is new! Everything you did wasmandatory. Tell me where your free will lies!A birth as a celestial being in the devagati too is mandatory.One has to be born there to reap the fruits of one’s meritkarma. In the same token it is mandatory for one to endure theconsequences of one’s demerit karma. Do you think that youroccupation is of your own free will? No, it is mandatory. Doyou think you have done anything in this life of your own freewill? When things go according to your wishes, you believe itwas your own doing and when everything works out to thecontrary, you feel it was inevitable and mandatory. In both theinstances, everything was mandatory. Desire too is mandatory.No activities can be stopped. They are all mandatory andalways bind new karma. It is an illusion to believe that you dosomething willingly or unwillingly. You have no idea as to wherelies your free will. There is no doer-ship in that which ismandatory; whereas when you act according to your free will,you become the doer. It is sheer egoism to believe that anaction is will-bound. When a person earns a lot of money, hebrags that he earned it and when he loses it, he blames God.This in itself is a contradiction. It is egoism. People believethey act according to their free will in this world and that iswhy they bind merit and demerit karma. There is no bondageif they believe that everything in this world is mandatory (duty-bound).When you got married, was it mandatory or voluntary?Questioner : Previously I felt that it was voluntary butnow I feel it was mandatory.142Aptavani-1Aptavani-1141the crowd (gneyas, subjects to be known), the greater is theblossoming powers of the Knower (gnata). When one is in ahuge crowd, the Knower within will flourish tremendously; theKnower will express fully. The greater the scope, the more thepower increases. Some people abandon everything and runaway to the forest for solitude, but the real pleasure is amongsta crowd. It is when there is a crowd on the outside, a crowdon the inside, a crowd everywhere that the Shuddhatmabecomes alone. There it does not identify itself with anything.However this is possible only after acquiring the knowledge ofthe Self.Mandatory Versus VoluntaryIt is not easy to understand how the world functions.Everything in this world is mandatory but people believe thatthey act of their own volition and that is why they becometrapped. Being born is mandatory, education is mandatory, gettingmarried is mandatory and dying too is mandatory. It is extremelyrare to find a person who has even an inkling of where lies thepower of one’s free will. It is only when you become a GnaniPurush (Self-realized) that your independent free will arises inthis mandatory world. Purusharth (Real effort) only begins afteryou become a Purush. From the time you are born until the timeyou die, your every action is mandatory. You have wanderedthrough endless cycles of births under compulsion and you willkeep on wandering in the same way unless you meet a GnaniPurush who can liberate you from this cycle.It is mandatory for a father to raise his children, educatethem, get them married and help them settle in life. Mandatorymeans duty-bound and voluntary means will-bound. Peoplemistakenly believe all that is duty-bound to be will-bound. Youperpetuate your worldly life in the direction of your will; youbelieve you are acting according to your free will whereas infact you are duty bound. That which you are able to change iswhere your free will lies. When a child become disrespectfultowards his father, the father will get angry and remind him ofthe sacrifices he has made for him. The foolish man! Tell mewhat have you done that is new! Everything you did wasmandatory. Tell me where your free will lies!A birth as a celestial being in the devagati too is mandatory.One has to be born there to reap the fruits of one’s meritkarma. In the same token it is mandatory for one to endure theconsequences of one’s demerit karma. Do you think that youroccupation is of your own free will? No, it is mandatory. Doyou think you have done anything in this life of your own freewill? When things go according to your wishes, you believe itwas your own doing and when everything works out to thecontrary, you feel it was inevitable and mandatory. In both theinstances, everything was mandatory. Desire too is mandatory.No activities can be stopped. They are all mandatory andalways bind new karma. It is an illusion to believe that you dosomething willingly or unwillingly. You have no idea as to wherelies your free will. There is no doer-ship in that which ismandatory; whereas when you act according to your free will,you become the doer. It is sheer egoism to believe that anaction is will-bound. When a person earns a lot of money, hebrags that he earned it and when he loses it, he blames God.This in itself is a contradiction. It is egoism. People believethey act according to their free will in this world and that iswhy they bind merit and demerit karma. There is no bondageif they believe that everything in this world is mandatory (duty-bound).When you got married, was it mandatory or voluntary?Questioner : Previously I felt that it was voluntary butnow I feel it was mandatory.142Aptavani-1Aptavani-1141he did of his own free will was completely different. He wasliberated. He had become a Purush (Self-realized), and hadfree will. But on the outside, as far as the worldly life wasconcerned, he was duty-bound and he never lost sight of that.When he renounced his wife, it was mandatory but peoplethought he did it of his free will. Whatever my mahatmas do asmandatory is a luxury and whatever they do voluntarily isliberation. Liberation with grandeur - such is the ‘Akram Gnan’of Dada Bhagwan.The World’s FoundationThe whole world is in search of its foundation, but it isdifficult to find. Pratishthit atma is the main foundation of theworld. Pratishthit atma means the relative self. This relative selfexists because one thinks, ‘I am Chandulal.’ This is a falseimposition of the Self. The Self is not in its original place. Today,through me, the real foundation of this world is revealed naturally.You are the pure Self (Shuddhatma), then who else remainswithin? Who carries out the subtle internal activities? Thepratishthit atma does it all. Pratishthit atma is the result of karmacaused in your previous life. Whatever beliefs you projectedand installed back then, the pratishthit atma is the result of thatcreation. How was this pratishtha (projection) done? Throughthe belief of ‘I am Chandubhai’, ‘this is by body’, ‘this is mymind’, ‘I am the doer of whatever I have accomplished’; theseare all pratishthas. This then becomes the pratisthit soul thatreturns in the body at birth. It is also known as the superimposedself. It superimposes itself everywhere. And during the time ofits dissolution, simultaneously and very subtly another pratisthitatma is being created (because the wrong belief of one’s identitystill prevails). How can anyone understand or know this?When is it called a pratishthit atma? It is when you combinethe ‘I’ with attachment of ‘my’.‘I am this’ (‘I’ in the wrongAptavani-1143144Aptavani-1Dadashri : Your name too is mandatory. It was given toyou when you were an infant and you have to live with thatname, whether you like it or not. There is no escaping it.Everything is mandatory and everything gets done automatically.It does not matter at what stage you are on the natural flow ofthis worldly path. Everything is mandatory and therefore youwill have to do it. A policeman will force you to comply withthe law because it is mandatory. Just as there are policemen onthe outside, there are policemen within. It is the policeman withinthat makes every ‘top’ (everyone) spin.One day I was sitting in the verandah and I saw an oxbeing pulled mercilessly. Three men were pulling at its reinsfrom the front and it appeared as if they would tear its nose.Another man was flogging the poor beast from behind. Theykept poking him with a sharp nailed-stick but even then the oxwould not budge. I asked them why they were treating the oxthat way and why would it not move. They told me that theyhad taken the ox to a vet the day before and it scared him andnow he refuses to move. The ox had no choice in the matter.It would have to go. Instead of going through all the torture,why not go willingly? Either way you will have to comply sowhy not do it willingly instead of complying through torture?Everything is mandatory so proceed without causing any problem,otherwise the world will flog you, like they flog the ox, and willmake you comply.You may not like to drink the poisons of the world but,because they are mandatory, you will be made to drink them.Instead of drinking with a frown, drink with a smile andbecome a nilkantha. Do this and your ego will melt awayand you will become Mahadevji. I have become Mahadevjiin this way.Even for Lord Mahavir renunciation was mandatory. Whathe did of his own free will was completely different. He wasliberated. He had become a Purush (Self-realized), and hadfree will. But on the outside, as far as the worldly life wasconcerned, he was duty-bound and he never lost sight of that.When he renounced his wife, it was mandatory but peoplethought he did it of his free will. Whatever my mahatmas do asmandatory is a luxury and whatever they do voluntarily isliberation. Liberation with grandeur - such is the ‘Akram Gnan’of Dada Bhagwan.The World’s FoundationThe whole world is in search of its foundation, but it isdifficult to find. Pratishthit atma is the main foundation of theworld. Pratishthit atma means the relative self. This relative selfexists because one thinks, ‘I am Chandulal.’ This is a falseimposition of the Self. The Self is not in its original place. Today,through me, the real foundation of this world is revealed naturally.You are the pure Self (Shuddhatma), then who else remainswithin? Who carries out the subtle internal activities? Thepratishthit atma does it all. Pratishthit atma is the result of karmacaused in your previous life. Whatever beliefs you projectedand installed back then, the pratishthit atma is the result of thatcreation. How was this pratishtha (projection) done? Throughthe belief of ‘I am Chandubhai’, ‘this is by body’, ‘this is mymind’, ‘I am the doer of whatever I have accomplished’; theseare all pratishthas. This then becomes the pratisthit soul thatreturns in the body at birth. It is also known as the superimposedself. It superimposes itself everywhere. And during the time ofits dissolution, simultaneously and very subtly another pratisthitatma is being created (because the wrong belief of one’s identitystill prevails). How can anyone understand or know this?When is it called a pratishthit atma? It is when you combinethe ‘I’ with attachment of ‘my’.‘I am this’ (‘I’ in the wrongAptavani-1143144Aptavani-1Dadashri : Your name too is mandatory. It was given toyou when you were an infant and you have to live with thatname, whether you like it or not. There is no escaping it.Everything is mandatory and everything gets done automatically.It does not matter at what stage you are on the natural flow ofthis worldly path. Everything is mandatory and therefore youwill have to do it. A policeman will force you to comply withthe law because it is mandatory. Just as there are policemen onthe outside, there are policemen within. It is the policeman withinthat makes every ‘top’ (everyone) spin.One day I was sitting in the verandah and I saw an oxbeing pulled mercilessly. Three men were pulling at its reinsfrom the front and it appeared as if they would tear its nose.Another man was flogging the poor beast from behind. Theykept poking him with a sharp nailed-stick but even then the oxwould not budge. I asked them why they were treating the oxthat way and why would it not move. They told me that theyhad taken the ox to a vet the day before and it scared him andnow he refuses to move. The ox had no choice in the matter.It would have to go. Instead of going through all the torture,why not go willingly? Either way you will have to comply sowhy not do it willingly instead of complying through torture?Everything is mandatory so proceed without causing any problem,otherwise the world will flog you, like they flog the ox, and willmake you comply.You may not like to drink the poisons of the world but,because they are mandatory, you will be made to drink them.Instead of drinking with a frown, drink with a smile andbecome a nilkantha. Do this and your ego will melt awayand you will become Mahadevji. I have become Mahadevjiin this way.Even for Lord Mahavir renunciation was mandatory. Whatlocation; identifying the relative self as the real Self) and ‘this isall mine’ is attachment. ‘I am not this’ and ‘this is not mine’ iswithout attachment. The association with attachment is that ofthe pratishthit atma and the Self is without any attachment. Thepure ‘I’ never moves from its location. ‘I am Chandulal’ and‘this body is mine’, is pratishthit atma.All the activities are done by the pratishthit atma. Thepure Self does not do anything. All movement, walking, eating,etc., are the attributes of the non-Self and not of the Self. TheSelf does not sleep during the day or the night. It is the non-Self that sleeps. The one that performs the actions needs therest and therefore sleeps. The Self does nothing so why wouldit need any rest? Who seeks rest? It is the one who is interestedin rest, the pratisthit atma. All these activities are of the pratishthitatma. Who knows whether the pratisthit atma had sound sleepor not? The pure Self. The Self is the Knower and the Seer ofthe pratisthit atma and it never interferes in any activities of thepratisthit atma. All interference is done by the pratisthita atma.What the pratisthit atma knows is called gneya (object to beknown) and the one that knows the pratisthit atma is the gnata,the Knower, the pure Self (Shuddhatma). Why does the pratisthitatma meddle or interfere? It meddles because it is interested inthe worldly life. The Shuddhatma has no such interest; it is theKnower and the Seer and is the abode of eternal bliss. The Selfilluminates the Self and the non-Self. The pratisthit atma illuminatesthe non-Self only. The Self Sees and Knows the pratisthit atma.Therefore the pratisthit atma is gneya (the known; object) andthe Self is the Knower (the Gnata). The relation betweenShuddhatma and pratisthit atma is only that of the Knower andthe known.A non-Self-realized (agnani) person may then ask whoendures the suffering. He himself endures suffering. Is he not thesoul? He is the soul but he is the pratisthit soul. He has notknown or recognized the Real Soul, the original Soul, the PureSelf (shuddhatma), so how can he be called the Pure Soul?Yes, if you know and recognize the shuddhatma (achieved Self-Realzation) and constantly remain in that state (of awareness ofyour real identity) then you are Shuddhatma; but if you areChandulal and if this body is yours, then you are the pratisthitatma. You did the pratistha (installation) of the ego andattachment and therefore you are the pratisthit atma.The Japanese manufactured a car, which would run likea wind up toy. It was wound such that it would run five miles.Four people (mind, intellect, chit and ego) sat in the car. Thewinder is the designer of the car himself. They go to meet afriend. They hardly travel a mile or so and on the way they meetthe person they were going to see. He calls out to them andasks them to stop. But how can they stop when the car wasprogrammed to stop only after five miles?Questioner : They would have to make a ‘U’ turn.Dadashri : It is a matter of understanding. The driver istold to stop, he cannot, he has no way to do so, because ofpast life’s programming. The machinery within (antahkaran) keepsturning round and round creating havoc because of the conflict.Such is this world. Once the winding occurs, the drivertoo has to keep going. You yourself have done the pratishtha(charged karma and set things in motion) but during the discharge(of karma), you become trapped.It is the pratishthit atma that experiences through the fivesenses. The one who hears, sees, feels touch, and smells etc.is the pratishthit atma. The one that Knows and Sees what thepratisthit atma experiences through the five senses is theshuddhatma (pure Self). The knowledge acquired through thesenses is that of the pratisthit atma; and the knowledgeAptavani-1145146Aptavani-1location; identifying the relative self as the real Self) and ‘this isall mine’ is attachment. ‘I am not this’ and ‘this is not mine’ iswithout attachment. The association with attachment is that ofthe pratishthit atma and the Self is without any attachment. Thepure ‘I’ never moves from its location. ‘I am Chandulal’ and‘this body is mine’, is pratishthit atma.All the activities are done by the pratishthit atma. Thepure Self does not do anything. All movement, walking, eating,etc., are the attributes of the non-Self and not of the Self. TheSelf does not sleep during the day or the night. It is the non-Self that sleeps. The one that performs the actions needs therest and therefore sleeps. The Self does nothing so why wouldit need any rest? Who seeks rest? It is the one who is interestedin rest, the pratisthit atma. All these activities are of the pratishthitatma. Who knows whether the pratisthit atma had sound sleepor not? The pure Self. The Self is the Knower and the Seer ofthe pratisthit atma and it never interferes in any activities of thepratisthit atma. All interference is done by the pratisthita atma.What the pratisthit atma knows is called gneya (object to beknown) and the one that knows the pratisthit atma is the gnata,the Knower, the pure Self (Shuddhatma). Why does the pratisthitatma meddle or interfere? It meddles because it is interested inthe worldly life. The Shuddhatma has no such interest; it is theKnower and the Seer and is the abode of eternal bliss. The Selfilluminates the Self and the non-Self. The pratisthit atma illuminatesthe non-Self only. The Self Sees and Knows the pratisthit atma.Therefore the pratisthit atma is gneya (the known; object) andthe Self is the Knower (the Gnata). The relation betweenShuddhatma and pratisthit atma is only that of the Knower andthe known.A non-Self-realized (agnani) person may then ask whoendures the suffering. He himself endures suffering. Is he not thesoul? He is the soul but he is the pratisthit soul. He has notknown or recognized the Real Soul, the original Soul, the PureSelf (shuddhatma), so how can he be called the Pure Soul?Yes, if you know and recognize the shuddhatma (achieved Self-Realzation) and constantly remain in that state (of awareness ofyour real identity) then you are Shuddhatma; but if you areChandulal and if this body is yours, then you are the pratisthitatma. You did the pratistha (installation) of the ego andattachment and therefore you are the pratisthit atma.The Japanese manufactured a car, which would run likea wind up toy. It was wound such that it would run five miles.Four people (mind, intellect, chit and ego) sat in the car. Thewinder is the designer of the car himself. They go to meet afriend. They hardly travel a mile or so and on the way they meetthe person they were going to see. He calls out to them andasks them to stop. But how can they stop when the car wasprogrammed to stop only after five miles?Questioner : They would have to make a ‘U’ turn.Dadashri : It is a matter of understanding. The driver istold to stop, he cannot, he has no way to do so, because ofpast life’s programming. The machinery within (antahkaran) keepsturning round and round creating havoc because of the conflict.Such is this world. Once the winding occurs, the drivertoo has to keep going. You yourself have done the pratishtha(charged karma and set things in motion) but during the discharge(of karma), you become trapped.It is the pratishthit atma that experiences through the fivesenses. The one who hears, sees, feels touch, and smells etc.is the pratishthit atma. The one that Knows and Sees what thepratisthit atma experiences through the five senses is theshuddhatma (pure Self). The knowledge acquired through thesenses is that of the pratisthit atma; and the knowledgeAptavani-1145146Aptavani-1transcending the senses is Shuddhatma. The knowledge of thepratisthit atma is indirect and limited and the knowledge ofShuddhatma is direct and unlimited. The energies charged bypratisthit atma are being discharged in this life. At the end boththe pratisthit atma and the Shuddhatma will separate at thesame time. At the time of moksha, final liberation, even thoughthe pure Soul is formless, it takes on two-thirds of the form ofthe final body. In this world, all transactions of give and takewhether gross or subtle, belong to the pratisthit atma. In realityno one can be robbed nor can anyone rob. All these are meredealings of give and take of the pratishtha (charging energies)done by the pratisthit atma.If you hurt the pratisthit atma, you commit tremendoussin. Why? Because the other person believes, that is who he is.He has superimposed his identity with it. Say if you were toburn this table, you would not commit a paap (karma of demerit)if the table had no owner, but if someone has projected hisownership on that table with ‘this is my table’, then you havecommitted paap. Attachment is created during the time onebecomes the enjoyer or the sufferer. During the time ofenjoyment, feeling and belief of ‘My-ness’ or ‘this is mine’, ‘Iam enjoying,’ is being superimposed on the subject beingenjoyed. The same holds true for suffering endured with feelingsof ‘I am in pain, I am suffering’. The baggage within is nothingbut the result of attachment created during the state of enjoymentor suffering. Consequently the kind of fruits you reap dependsupon the kind of projection (prathista) you did. If you projectedhappiness in it, you will experience happiness and if you projectedunhappiness; you will experience unhappiness. The current likesand dislikes you experience are the results of your past pratistha.The pure Soul has never been the enjoyer, the sufferer or thedoer of anything. To be the enjoyer or the sufferer (vedak)means attachment. Vedak means attachment. ‘Shuddhatma’ (pureSelf) and attachment are contradictory. The (vedak) one whoappears to be the doer or an enjoyer is the pratishthit atma. Allactivities visible to the eye or experienced through the sensesare of the pratishthit atma and not of the pure Self. The activitiesof the pure Self are related to Gnan. The pure Self possessespowers of infinite knowledge and infinite vision. These can becomprehended only when one attains the state of the pure Self.It is only then can you understand that as the Self, you are thenon-doer. Until you acquire the knowledge of your Self andbecome the Self, you remain as the pratishthit atma and that iswhy you are a doer, and therefore the enjoyer and the sufferer.In this state of an enjoyer, you become the doer and therebycreate a new pratishthita and a new pratishthit atma and thesame old rut continues!The Pure Self is only the Observer and the Knower. It isthe pratishthit atma that creates everything and that is why peoplelike the look of their faces in the mirror otherwise they wouldnot. All this creation is of the pratishthit atma. As long as thepratishthit atma believes ‘I am the doer’, it does pratishtha(sows karmic seeds). Every human being creates his own newbirth himself. Whatever pratishtha you do, is how you will be.As you sow, so you shall reap. As is your pratishtha, so is yourform. Your pratishtha is your pratishthit atma. This is the doeratma in the worldly interactions (vyavahaar atma).The whole world is groping around in search of absolutetruth (sat). The absolute truth is the Self that gives light andshines within you. At the moment there is no one in this worldthat has found the real Self and if they have, it is the relative selfand that too, only the partial relative self. The relative self is thepratishthit atma.The pratishthit atma (relative self, relative soul) has nopower other than to have deep inner intent called bhaav.Aptavani-1147148Aptavani-1transcending the senses is Shuddhatma. The knowledge of thepratisthit atma is indirect and limited and the knowledge ofShuddhatma is direct and unlimited. The energies charged bypratisthit atma are being discharged in this life. At the end boththe pratisthit atma and the Shuddhatma will separate at thesame time. At the time of moksha, final liberation, even thoughthe pure Soul is formless, it takes on two-thirds of the form ofthe final body. In this world, all transactions of give and takewhether gross or subtle, belong to the pratisthit atma. In realityno one can be robbed nor can anyone rob. All these are meredealings of give and take of the pratishtha (charging energies)done by the pratisthit atma.If you hurt the pratisthit atma, you commit tremendoussin. Why? Because the other person believes, that is who he is.He has superimposed his identity with it. Say if you were toburn this table, you would not commit a paap (karma of demerit)if the table had no owner, but if someone has projected hisownership on that table with ‘this is my table’, then you havecommitted paap. Attachment is created during the time onebecomes the enjoyer or the sufferer. During the time ofenjoyment, feeling and belief of ‘My-ness’ or ‘this is mine’, ‘Iam enjoying,’ is being superimposed on the subject beingenjoyed. The same holds true for suffering endured with feelingsof ‘I am in pain, I am suffering’. The baggage within is nothingbut the result of attachment created during the state of enjoymentor suffering. Consequently the kind of fruits you reap dependsupon the kind of projection (prathista) you did. If you projectedhappiness in it, you will experience happiness and if you projectedunhappiness; you will experience unhappiness. The current likesand dislikes you experience are the results of your past pratistha.The pure Soul has never been the enjoyer, the sufferer or thedoer of anything. To be the enjoyer or the sufferer (vedak)means attachment. Vedak means attachment. ‘Shuddhatma’ (pureSelf) and attachment are contradictory. The (vedak) one whoappears to be the doer or an enjoyer is the pratishthit atma. Allactivities visible to the eye or experienced through the sensesare of the pratishthit atma and not of the pure Self. The activitiesof the pure Self are related to Gnan. The pure Self possessespowers of infinite knowledge and infinite vision. These can becomprehended only when one attains the state of the pure Self.It is only then can you understand that as the Self, you are thenon-doer. Until you acquire the knowledge of your Self andbecome the Self, you remain as the pratishthit atma and that iswhy you are a doer, and therefore the enjoyer and the sufferer.In this state of an enjoyer, you become the doer and therebycreate a new pratishthita and a new pratishthit atma and thesame old rut continues!The Pure Self is only the Observer and the Knower. It isthe pratishthit atma that creates everything and that is why peoplelike the look of their faces in the mirror otherwise they wouldnot. All this creation is of the pratishthit atma. As long as thepratishthit atma believes ‘I am the doer’, it does pratishtha(sows karmic seeds). Every human being creates his own newbirth himself. Whatever pratishtha you do, is how you will be.As you sow, so you shall reap. As is your pratishtha, so is yourform. Your pratishtha is your pratishthit atma. This is the doeratma in the worldly interactions (vyavahaar atma).The whole world is groping around in search of absolutetruth (sat). The absolute truth is the Self that gives light andshines within you. At the moment there is no one in this worldthat has found the real Self and if they have, it is the relative selfand that too, only the partial relative self. The relative self is thepratishthit atma.The pratishthit atma (relative self, relative soul) has nopower other than to have deep inner intent called bhaav.Aptavani-1147148Aptavani-1The souls that are in an unidentifiable state (avyavaharrashi) always remain with the pratishthit soul. These are souls(jivas), which have not yet been identified and given names(categorized). When a soul attains a manifested state (vyvaharRashi), it is given an identity and a name and thereafter beginsit’s vyavasthit (cosmic progression).The inner psychic instrument (antahkaran) belongs to thepratishthit atma but it is distinct from it. The pratishthit atma isdistinct from the mind, intellect, chit and ego. When the mindwants to do something and the pratishthit atma says no, it willnot get done. Intention (bhaav) belongs to pratishthit atma; thepure Soul (Shuddhatma) is just an Observer and the Knowerof these. Desire that arises within, calls for the working of thepratishthit soul. The Pure Soul is merely the Knower and theObserver of whether the pratishthit soul becomes one with themind or not. Even a person without Self-realization, with yoga,derives certain powers by keeping pratishthit atma and the mindseparate.After acquiring Self-realization, you stop doing pratishtha(false projection). Your worldly life continues because ofpreviously done pratishtha. After Self-realization there is noego (charging ego) in the words you utter. It is indeed awonder that new ‘creations’ cease to take place. If pratishthais halted even for just one lifetime, it is a great achievement.What is the difference between the pratishthit atma of a Gnaniand that of an agnani (person without Gnan)? The ‘I’ in aGnani refers to only the Pure Self and it means only for thepure Self whereas the ‘I’ in the agnani person refers only tothe pratishthit atma. For the Gnani, the Knower that knowseverything as the non-self is the pure Soul. The Gnani knowseven pratishthit atma to be the non-Self. But in the one withagnan (ignorance of the real Self), the knower of the non-selfis the pratishthit soul.Questioner : The power (chetan) used in the worldlylife, is it that of the pure Soul?Dadashri : That power belongs to the pratishthit atma.Nothing of the pure Self is spent or used up. A battery chargerwill charge the batteries without losing its own power. No matterwhat actions these life forms carry out or whatever birth theytake, the ‘gold’ (Soul) within remains the same, only the laborof making the ornament goes to waste. The labor of creatingthis buffalo is what goes to waste. Countless life times havebeen spent in hell, but even then the gold within has not becometainted, it has remained one hundred percent gold. The creationand dissolution is that of the pratishthit soul (aka mishra chetan),the charging and discharging is of the mishra chetan and not ofthe pure Soul.Even the pratishtha (ceremonious installation of an idol)done in a stone idol gives benefit to people for a long time, doesit not? How powerful is the ritual of pratishtha! It has enoughpower to make a piece of iron fly! All these scientific inventionsare of the pratishthit soul. When the pratishthit soul possessesso much power, how can we even begin to speak of the infinitepowers of the pure Soul (Shuddhatma)? The Soul has so muchpower, that if it were to do pratishta in a wall, the wall wouldtalk!Even the pratishthit soul is so pure that it has no thoughts.Thoughts arise in the mind. When a tuber of the mind sprouts,it brings about a state of thinking. Thoughts about religion orthoughts about stealing that arise are really tubers of the mind.If the pratishthit soul had the ability to think, the intellect wouldno longer remain. Everything would then become like a computer.The internal activities that the pratishthit soul performs are theactivities of the inner psychic instrument and that is what willmanifest exactly on the outside. Those who learn how to see theAptavani-1149150Aptavani-1The souls that are in an unidentifiable state (avyavaharrashi) always remain with the pratishthit soul. These are souls(jivas), which have not yet been identified and given names(categorized). When a soul attains a manifested state (vyvaharRashi), it is given an identity and a name and thereafter beginsit’s vyavasthit (cosmic progression).The inner psychic instrument (antahkaran) belongs to thepratishthit atma but it is distinct from it. The pratishthit atma isdistinct from the mind, intellect, chit and ego. When the mindwants to do something and the pratishthit atma says no, it willnot get done. Intention (bhaav) belongs to pratishthit atma; thepure Soul (Shuddhatma) is just an Observer and the Knowerof these. Desire that arises within, calls for the working of thepratishthit soul. The Pure Soul is merely the Knower and theObserver of whether the pratishthit soul becomes one with themind or not. Even a person without Self-realization, with yoga,derives certain powers by keeping pratishthit atma and the mindseparate.After acquiring Self-realization, you stop doing pratishtha(false projection). Your worldly life continues because ofpreviously done pratishtha. After Self-realization there is noego (charging ego) in the words you utter. It is indeed awonder that new ‘creations’ cease to take place. If pratishthais halted even for just one lifetime, it is a great achievement.What is the difference between the pratishthit atma of a Gnaniand that of an agnani (person without Gnan)? The ‘I’ in aGnani refers to only the Pure Self and it means only for thepure Self whereas the ‘I’ in the agnani person refers only tothe pratishthit atma. For the Gnani, the Knower that knowseverything as the non-self is the pure Soul. The Gnani knowseven pratishthit atma to be the non-Self. But in the one withagnan (ignorance of the real Self), the knower of the non-selfis the pratishthit soul.Questioner : The power (chetan) used in the worldlylife, is it that of the pure Soul?Dadashri : That power belongs to the pratishthit atma.Nothing of the pure Self is spent or used up. A battery chargerwill charge the batteries without losing its own power. No matterwhat actions these life forms carry out or whatever birth theytake, the ‘gold’ (Soul) within remains the same, only the laborof making the ornament goes to waste. The labor of creatingthis buffalo is what goes to waste. Countless life times havebeen spent in hell, but even then the gold within has not becometainted, it has remained one hundred percent gold. The creationand dissolution is that of the pratishthit soul (aka mishra chetan),the charging and discharging is of the mishra chetan and not ofthe pure Soul.Even the pratishtha (ceremonious installation of an idol)done in a stone idol gives benefit to people for a long time, doesit not? How powerful is the ritual of pratishtha! It has enoughpower to make a piece of iron fly! All these scientific inventionsare of the pratishthit soul. When the pratishthit soul possessesso much power, how can we even begin to speak of the infinitepowers of the pure Soul (Shuddhatma)? The Soul has so muchpower, that if it were to do pratishta in a wall, the wall wouldtalk!Even the pratishthit soul is so pure that it has no thoughts.Thoughts arise in the mind. When a tuber of the mind sprouts,it brings about a state of thinking. Thoughts about religion orthoughts about stealing that arise are really tubers of the mind.If the pratishthit soul had the ability to think, the intellect wouldno longer remain. Everything would then become like a computer.The internal activities that the pratishthit soul performs are theactivities of the inner psychic instrument and that is what willmanifest exactly on the outside. Those who learn how to see theAptavani-1149150Aptavani-1antahkaran will also come to know about the external activities.But one must know how to read the mind, the intellect, the chitand the ego. The mind, the intellect, the chit and the ego arecomponents of the pratishthit soul, in other words the antahkaranis because of the pratishthit soul. Whatever the antahkaran showswithin is what manifests on the outside. The brain is also withthe anatahkaran but it is gross (sthul), whereas the antahkaranis subtle (shookshma). Therefore, whatever activities take placein the antahkaran, take place because of the pratishthit soul.If you perform pratishta in an idol, which has a form, youwill find a God with form and if you do the same in the formless,you will find a formless God.Nishchetan Chetan - Lifeless LifeWhat the world calls life principle (chetan; animate,conciousness), I call lifeless life (nishchetan chetan; inanimateconsciousness) because even though it looks and acts like lifeand living, none of its properties are anything like that of a reallife element (chetan, the Self). So how can you call it living?For example polished brass looks just like gold, it’scharacteristics are like gold but if you were to show it to agoldsmith, he would be able to tell you exactly what it is. Thegoldsmith will first examine it for the presence of any propertiesof gold. If there are no properties of gold in it, then it is notgold. If it has the same appearance but not the properties ofgold, then it is not gold. Similarly if the appearance of life ispresent but not its properties, then how can you call it life? I callit lifeless life. (nishchetan chetan; non-conscious consciousness).Brass looks like gold but it reveals its true identity when it rusts,similarly gold too will reveal its identity.The body is lifeless life (nishchetan chetan). ‘You’ arepure Self (chetan). Whatever charging (pratishtha) you did inthe past is the (charged soul) pratishthit soul and that is thecharged consciousness (pratishthit chetan).Chetan, the Self on its own is fine or achetan, the non-living on its own is fine but mixed chetan, ordinary lives, is notbecause it has all the characteristics of chetan, the self. TheLord has said that you may create vibrations (subtle interactions)with a water well (i.e. an inanimate entity) but not with mishrachetan (other living beings). Natural mundane dealings with mishrachetan are not a problem but one should not slip (becomeentangled by binding) there. When people slip, I caution them:I caution them when they are dealing with mishra chetan. Thereis no problem as far as achetan is concerned. This cigarette isachetan and I have no objection there. The ‘entries’ made in thekarmic ‘account’ (for smoking) will have to be settled, if not,the atoms within will make demands and spoil your mind. Butwhenever mishra chetan is involved, I caution you. Be cautiouseven if you have to involve your ego. Do not be unwaryotherwise your next life will be adversely affected.Do the movies have any objection to you enjoying them?No, because movies are lifeless (achetan), whereas the mishrachetan, a living being will make claims against you becausethere is no peace within him or her. There is tremendous innerturmoil and that is why they will make claims against you. Therewould be no problems if there were peace within. The momentyou have a negative thought about anyone, you shouldimmediately do pratikraman and erase everything. Pratikramanis not needed for achetan. The trouble with mishra chetan is thatnot only does it prevent your moksha (liberation) but it alsoprevents any happiness coming your way.Neither cinema nor good food causes problems. Problemsare created only by the mishra chetan (human being). The fooddoes not sulk but can the mishra chetan ever refrain from sulking?Mishra chetan is the foundation of the entire worldly life. MishraAptavani-1151152Aptavani-1antahkaran will also come to know about the external activities.But one must know how to read the mind, the intellect, the chitand the ego. The mind, the intellect, the chit and the ego arecomponents of the pratishthit soul, in other words the antahkaranis because of the pratishthit soul. Whatever the antahkaran showswithin is what manifests on the outside. The brain is also withthe anatahkaran but it is gross (sthul), whereas the antahkaranis subtle (shookshma). Therefore, whatever activities take placein the antahkaran, take place because of the pratishthit soul.If you perform pratishta in an idol, which has a form, youwill find a God with form and if you do the same in the formless,you will find a formless God.Nishchetan Chetan - Lifeless LifeWhat the world calls life principle (chetan; animate,conciousness), I call lifeless life (nishchetan chetan; inanimateconsciousness) because even though it looks and acts like lifeand living, none of its properties are anything like that of a reallife element (chetan, the Self). So how can you call it living?For example polished brass looks just like gold, it’scharacteristics are like gold but if you were to show it to agoldsmith, he would be able to tell you exactly what it is. Thegoldsmith will first examine it for the presence of any propertiesof gold. If there are no properties of gold in it, then it is notgold. If it has the same appearance but not the properties ofgold, then it is not gold. Similarly if the appearance of life ispresent but not its properties, then how can you call it life? I callit lifeless life. (nishchetan chetan; non-conscious consciousness).Brass looks like gold but it reveals its true identity when it rusts,similarly gold too will reveal its identity.The body is lifeless life (nishchetan chetan). ‘You’ arepure Self (chetan). Whatever charging (pratishtha) you did inthe past is the (charged soul) pratishthit soul and that is thecharged consciousness (pratishthit chetan).Chetan, the Self on its own is fine or achetan, the non-living on its own is fine but mixed chetan, ordinary lives, is notbecause it has all the characteristics of chetan, the self. TheLord has said that you may create vibrations (subtle interactions)with a water well (i.e. an inanimate entity) but not with mishrachetan (other living beings). Natural mundane dealings with mishrachetan are not a problem but one should not slip (becomeentangled by binding) there. When people slip, I caution them:I caution them when they are dealing with mishra chetan. Thereis no problem as far as achetan is concerned. This cigarette isachetan and I have no objection there. The ‘entries’ made in thekarmic ‘account’ (for smoking) will have to be settled, if not,the atoms within will make demands and spoil your mind. Butwhenever mishra chetan is involved, I caution you. Be cautiouseven if you have to involve your ego. Do not be unwaryotherwise your next life will be adversely affected.Do the movies have any objection to you enjoying them?No, because movies are lifeless (achetan), whereas the mishrachetan, a living being will make claims against you becausethere is no peace within him or her. There is tremendous innerturmoil and that is why they will make claims against you. Therewould be no problems if there were peace within. The momentyou have a negative thought about anyone, you shouldimmediately do pratikraman and erase everything. Pratikramanis not needed for achetan. The trouble with mishra chetan is thatnot only does it prevent your moksha (liberation) but it alsoprevents any happiness coming your way.Neither cinema nor good food causes problems. Problemsare created only by the mishra chetan (human being). The fooddoes not sulk but can the mishra chetan ever refrain from sulking?Mishra chetan is the foundation of the entire worldly life. MishraAptavani-1151152Aptavani-1chetan is a “black hole”. Once all dealings cease with the mishrachetan, then where is the difficulty? (Dadashri is referring to thetremendous problems created in the interaction between manand woman).You should keep a safe side so that you can sit with afree mind. If the mind craves for some ice cream, give it some,so that it will allow you to sit peacefully. But mishra chetan willnot let you do that. Even in satsang, it will gnaw and sulk at you.Your being is divided in two parts : one is lifeless life(nischetan chetan, inert consciousness) and the other is pureSelf (chetan; pure consciousness). You mistake the lifeless lifeto be the self. They are both in a mixture form, not in acompound form. If they were in a compound form they wouldboth lose their individual properties.The lifeless life (the body) is mechanical. Even the externalpart is mechanical. You have to ‘turn the handle’ to set thegross machinery in motion, but the inner subtle machinery hasalready been set in motion by you from your past life and it ison auto-pilot. You just have to add fuel (food) to it but you donot have to set it in motion. The subtle inner machinery ismechanical but when you take credit for its actions by saying ‘Idid it’, you charge new karma and sow seeds for the next life.The entire world believes the lifeless life to be life. It alsobelieves that the soul is involved in all actions. The Soul cannotbe in any action nor can any action be in the Soul. But how isone to realize this? The world is run by the interaction of all thatis non-Self. This interaction is an effect of causes created in pastlife for all living entities. The Self is distinct and separate fromthe non-Self. If you delve deeper into this, then what runs thisworld is also totally separate from these two. That is all ‘vibhavikguna’. Vibhavik guna means those attributes that are born outof the coming together of the Self and the non-Self (matter).This third entity that results from this combination is what runsthis world. It is called mishra chetan (mixed life entity). Fromthe perspective of the Self, this entity is the result of an illusionover the Self.Man’s Birthright To LiberationDarwin has written about the theory of evolution but it isnot complete. It goes only up to a certain point. He did notknow that after a human life form there could be a reversal toa lower form of life and therefore he was not able to give thecomplete theory. Liberation cannot be achieved from any otherlife form except the human form. The human life form exclusivelyholds the right to liberation. If one gets a human life form andis blessed to obtain the means and circumstances congenial toliberation, then his liberation will occur. But at present all humanbeings are in the form of nischetan chetan (lifeless life, chargedby past life karma and simply discharging in this life). In otherwords they are all ‘tops’.What people refer to as ‘bhava mun’ (causal mind) and‘dravyamun’ (effective mind) are really lifeless life (nishchetanchetan, mechinical atma). What the Gnani gives you, is yourPure Self (pure Chetan). Everything else is machinery – allmechanical. It is the machine that does everything but peopletake credit for running it by saying, ‘I am the doer’. To say thisis nothing but egoism. The mind is made up of many tubers.When these tubers or rhizomes bear fruits, it is the manifestationof effect. If the effect is involved with a mishra chetan then thereis problem. Meaning that even when you are willing to let go,the other person will not. Whereas if it involves achetan(inanimate) there will be no problem if you let go. Doctors cannotsee the mind but a Gnani can. The mind is completely physicaland the subconscious mind is nishchetan chetan (lifeless life).The nischetan chetan is considered a dual (dvaita) state.Aptavani-1153154Aptavani-1chetan is a “black hole”. Once all dealings cease with the mishrachetan, then where is the difficulty? (Dadashri is referring to thetremendous problems created in the interaction between manand woman).You should keep a safe side so that you can sit with afree mind. If the mind craves for some ice cream, give it some,so that it will allow you to sit peacefully. But mishra chetan willnot let you do that. Even in satsang, it will gnaw and sulk at you.Your being is divided in two parts : one is lifeless life(nischetan chetan, inert consciousness) and the other is pureSelf (chetan; pure consciousness). You mistake the lifeless lifeto be the self. They are both in a mixture form, not in acompound form. If they were in a compound form they wouldboth lose their individual properties.The lifeless life (the body) is mechanical. Even the externalpart is mechanical. You have to ‘turn the handle’ to set thegross machinery in motion, but the inner subtle machinery hasalready been set in motion by you from your past life and it ison auto-pilot. You just have to add fuel (food) to it but you donot have to set it in motion. The subtle inner machinery ismechanical but when you take credit for its actions by saying ‘Idid it’, you charge new karma and sow seeds for the next life.The entire world believes the lifeless life to be life. It alsobelieves that the soul is involved in all actions. The Soul cannotbe in any action nor can any action be in the Soul. But how isone to realize this? The world is run by the interaction of all thatis non-Self. This interaction is an effect of causes created in pastlife for all living entities. The Self is distinct and separate fromthe non-Self. If you delve deeper into this, then what runs thisworld is also totally separate from these two. That is all ‘vibhavikguna’. Vibhavik guna means those attributes that are born outof the coming together of the Self and the non-Self (matter).This third entity that results from this combination is what runsthis world. It is called mishra chetan (mixed life entity). Fromthe perspective of the Self, this entity is the result of an illusionover the Self.Man’s Birthright To LiberationDarwin has written about the theory of evolution but it isnot complete. It goes only up to a certain point. He did notknow that after a human life form there could be a reversal toa lower form of life and therefore he was not able to give thecomplete theory. Liberation cannot be achieved from any otherlife form except the human form. The human life form exclusivelyholds the right to liberation. If one gets a human life form andis blessed to obtain the means and circumstances congenial toliberation, then his liberation will occur. But at present all humanbeings are in the form of nischetan chetan (lifeless life, chargedby past life karma and simply discharging in this life). In otherwords they are all ‘tops’.What people refer to as ‘bhava mun’ (causal mind) and‘dravyamun’ (effective mind) are really lifeless life (nishchetanchetan, mechinical atma). What the Gnani gives you, is yourPure Self (pure Chetan). Everything else is machinery – allmechanical. It is the machine that does everything but peopletake credit for running it by saying, ‘I am the doer’. To say thisis nothing but egoism. The mind is made up of many tubers.When these tubers or rhizomes bear fruits, it is the manifestationof effect. If the effect is involved with a mishra chetan then thereis problem. Meaning that even when you are willing to let go,the other person will not. Whereas if it involves achetan(inanimate) there will be no problem if you let go. Doctors cannotsee the mind but a Gnani can. The mind is completely physicaland the subconscious mind is nishchetan chetan (lifeless life).The nischetan chetan is considered a dual (dvaita) state.Aptavani-1153154Aptavani-1It can be called living (jiva) but not pure life, the Self (chetan).My mahatmas have acquired the state of pure life i.e. it cannotbe called the pure Self (shuddha atma). Your body is nischetanchetan and ‘You’ are pure consciousness.Until you realize your state of pure consciousness, youare nischetan chetan and so is everyone else, whether it be anascetic, a saint, sadhu (saint) or a sanyasi (recluse). Humanbeings, animals, trees, souls in hell and celestial beings are allnischetan chetan and therefore they are all ‘tops’. As long asyou have not realized your pure Self, as long as you have notencountered a Gnani Purush to help you realize your pure Self,you are nischetan chetan.I am the Lord of the universe wielding no ownership orauthority because ‘I’ am pure consciousness in the manifesthuman form.Whatever the situations or circumstances, they are allnischetan chetan and the real You is pure consciousness. Everycircumstance is to be observed and known and must beimmediately settled without any raag or dwesh (sambhaav,equanimity). You should know how to bring about a quickresolution to all circumstances because if you get caught in anyof them, you will have suffering and lose joy. Nishchetan chetanis under the control of some other entity. In nishchetan chetanthere is internal and external turmoil, mental agitation andrestlessness and anxiety (aadhi), physical ailment (vyadhi) andexternally induced problems (upadhi); whereas in pure Chetanthere is bliss and samadhi (absence of adhi, vyadhi and upadhi).It is the nishchetan chetan that experiences worries and anxietybut because one believes the nischetan chetan as being one’sreal identity, worries ensue. That which endures suffering createdthrough the mind, physical ailments or suffering imposed byothers, is all nischetan chetan. Speaking from the perspective ofthe Self - Gnan, there is no life outside the Self. All are nischetanchetan, whoever or whatever they may be. In the term ‘nischetanchetan’, ‘nischetan’ is the adjective. In the term lifeless life,‘lifeless’ is the adjective.It is out of illusion that one says ‘I am Chandulal’. Thereal ‘I’ is the pure Self but one imposes himself to be where heis not, hence nischetan chetan, lifeless life, continues to arise.Until this illusion is destroyed, one has to live as the falselyimposed state of ‘Chandulal’. Once the awareness of ‘I ampure Soul’ is established, then the lifeless - nischetan, can neverbecome one with the pure Self. The pure Chetan can only beunderstood when one acquires the pure Self, and only thendoes one become free from the responsibility of the ensuingconsequence of the state of doership, which is creation of newkarma.As the karmas unfold, those who identify themselves withthe nischetan chetan continue to become free from their liabilityfrom past life but at the same time they also create new liabilityfor the next life.DesireDesire is a burning fire. It will not extinguish until thedesire is fulfilled. The Lord has said that desire is an obstructingkarma. The only desire worth having is a desire for liberationand for a Gnani Purush; such desires will not cause anyobstructions. All other desires will continue to scorch you. Theyare fire-incarnate. People look for water to put it out but instead,end up putting petrol (kashaya) over it. Even before a singledesire is fulfilled, another one springs up. They keep coming,one after another, in succession. The natural law says thatwhatever desires you have will certainly be fulfilled, but nothingwill be accomplished by constantly thinking about them. On thecontrary it causes more entanglements. The desires that comeAptavani-1155156Aptavani-1It can be called living (jiva) but not pure life, the Self (chetan).My mahatmas have acquired the state of pure life i.e. it cannotbe called the pure Self (shuddha atma). Your body is nischetanchetan and ‘You’ are pure consciousness.Until you realize your state of pure consciousness, youare nischetan chetan and so is everyone else, whether it be anascetic, a saint, sadhu (saint) or a sanyasi (recluse). Humanbeings, animals, trees, souls in hell and celestial beings are allnischetan chetan and therefore they are all ‘tops’. As long asyou have not realized your pure Self, as long as you have notencountered a Gnani Purush to help you realize your pure Self,you are nischetan chetan.I am the Lord of the universe wielding no ownership orauthority because ‘I’ am pure consciousness in the manifesthuman form.Whatever the situations or circumstances, they are allnischetan chetan and the real You is pure consciousness. Everycircumstance is to be observed and known and must beimmediately settled without any raag or dwesh (sambhaav,equanimity). You should know how to bring about a quickresolution to all circumstances because if you get caught in anyof them, you will have suffering and lose joy. Nishchetan chetanis under the control of some other entity. In nishchetan chetanthere is internal and external turmoil, mental agitation andrestlessness and anxiety (aadhi), physical ailment (vyadhi) andexternally induced problems (upadhi); whereas in pure Chetanthere is bliss and samadhi (absence of adhi, vyadhi and upadhi).It is the nishchetan chetan that experiences worries and anxietybut because one believes the nischetan chetan as being one’sreal identity, worries ensue. That which endures suffering createdthrough the mind, physical ailments or suffering imposed byothers, is all nischetan chetan. Speaking from the perspective ofthe Self - Gnan, there is no life outside the Self. All are nischetanchetan, whoever or whatever they may be. In the term ‘nischetanchetan’, ‘nischetan’ is the adjective. In the term lifeless life,‘lifeless’ is the adjective.It is out of illusion that one says ‘I am Chandulal’. Thereal ‘I’ is the pure Self but one imposes himself to be where heis not, hence nischetan chetan, lifeless life, continues to arise.Until this illusion is destroyed, one has to live as the falselyimposed state of ‘Chandulal’. Once the awareness of ‘I ampure Soul’ is established, then the lifeless - nischetan, can neverbecome one with the pure Self. The pure Chetan can only beunderstood when one acquires the pure Self, and only thendoes one become free from the responsibility of the ensuingconsequence of the state of doership, which is creation of newkarma.As the karmas unfold, those who identify themselves withthe nischetan chetan continue to become free from their liabilityfrom past life but at the same time they also create new liabilityfor the next life.DesireDesire is a burning fire. It will not extinguish until thedesire is fulfilled. The Lord has said that desire is an obstructingkarma. The only desire worth having is a desire for liberationand for a Gnani Purush; such desires will not cause anyobstructions. All other desires will continue to scorch you. Theyare fire-incarnate. People look for water to put it out but instead,end up putting petrol (kashaya) over it. Even before a singledesire is fulfilled, another one springs up. They keep coming,one after another, in succession. The natural law says thatwhatever desires you have will certainly be fulfilled, but nothingwill be accomplished by constantly thinking about them. On thecontrary it causes more entanglements. The desires that comeAptavani-1155156Aptavani-1incessantly will continue to plague you. You will not have desiresfor everything. Desire is the juice of worldly life. Whicheverjuice one likes the most, he will continue to thirst for it. Whatdo people desire? They desire that which he or she have broughtwith them from their past life in their vessel of intellect (buddhino ashai). They will continue to receive the happiness they havebrought in the vessel of their intellect at the expense of theirmerit karma.You may use both the edges of the sword of this world,but use only one side of the blade of the pure Soul. What wouldhappen if you use the side of the blade of ‘I am impure Soul’,instead of ‘I am pure Soul’? It would destroy everything. Thepure Self has no desires but the interim Self (antaratma) does;it desires to acquire the Absolute State of pure Soul. When itachieves that absolute state, there will be no more desires leftbecause the state of vitaragta – a state void of any attachment- will have been attained. There is no desire in the One who isabsolute vitarag. My desire is a discharging desire whereas youmahatmas have a desire for the attainment of the absolute state.My desire is a discharge because I have already attained theAbsolute State.Questioner : What is the difference between desire andchintvan (persistent focused meditation on a topic)?Dadashri : Chintvan creates future (karmic) accountsand desires divulge what you have brought from your past life.Desire is a discharge and chintvan is charge. What you desireand what you do not, are both contents of your karmic stockfrom your past life. When the link of your merit karma comesinto effect, your desire is fulfilled. When this sequence is broken,undesired things will come before you. For example, if youthrow some numbers in the dark and then you pick them up inthe dark, if there is a fruition of a sequence, only the numbersthat fall in that sequence will come in your hand. The numbertwo will follow one; three will follow two. There will a linkthere. But if there is a fruition of non-sequence (akram), thenumbers you pick up will not be in sequence. You will pick upseven, then fifty-two etc. There will no link here.I met a man from Ratnagiri once who told me that hefinds gold wherever he searches. I cautioned him that it was theresult of his link of merit karma and that the link will break ina short time. When it does, I told him to remember me. Andthat is exactly what happened. He incurred such heavy lossesin his business that both he and his wife tried to commit suicide.The circumstances were such that they both survived and theyremembered what I had told them. Kram (sequence of events)and akram (non sequential events) come and go. Such is theworldly life. Desire is a consequence of past account and duringchintvan one is creating plans; one becomes engrossed in it andcreates new causes. Desire is an effect whereas chintvan is acause; it is a charging point. The writers of scriptures have saidthat desires come on their own; one does not need to createthem.Even when the sun is setting it can appear to look like arising sun. Your desires are ‘setting’ desires; so do not worryabout them. I have told my mahatmas that their desires arebarren; they will not bear any seeds and that is why your desiresare setting. Other people have both rising and setting desires.Rising desire is cause desire and setting desire is effect desire.In this current phase of the Kaliyug time cycle, peoplehave desires for very insignificant things; they do not have thedesire to enjoy everything. They waste away their whole lifelooking for something very trivial.Alas I have even seen affluent businessmen sitting in LordMahavir’s assembly, who in order not miss the Lord’s discourse,Aptavani-1157158Aptavani-1incessantly will continue to plague you. You will not have desiresfor everything. Desire is the juice of worldly life. Whicheverjuice one likes the most, he will continue to thirst for it. Whatdo people desire? They desire that which he or she have broughtwith them from their past life in their vessel of intellect (buddhino ashai). They will continue to receive the happiness they havebrought in the vessel of their intellect at the expense of theirmerit karma.You may use both the edges of the sword of this world,but use only one side of the blade of the pure Soul. What wouldhappen if you use the side of the blade of ‘I am impure Soul’,instead of ‘I am pure Soul’? It would destroy everything. Thepure Self has no desires but the interim Self (antaratma) does;it desires to acquire the Absolute State of pure Soul. When itachieves that absolute state, there will be no more desires leftbecause the state of vitaragta – a state void of any attachment- will have been attained. There is no desire in the One who isabsolute vitarag. My desire is a discharging desire whereas youmahatmas have a desire for the attainment of the absolute state.My desire is a discharge because I have already attained theAbsolute State.Questioner : What is the difference between desire andchintvan (persistent focused meditation on a topic)?Dadashri : Chintvan creates future (karmic) accountsand desires divulge what you have brought from your past life.Desire is a discharge and chintvan is charge. What you desireand what you do not, are both contents of your karmic stockfrom your past life. When the link of your merit karma comesinto effect, your desire is fulfilled. When this sequence is broken,undesired things will come before you. For example, if youthrow some numbers in the dark and then you pick them up inthe dark, if there is a fruition of a sequence, only the numbersthat fall in that sequence will come in your hand. The numbertwo will follow one; three will follow two. There will a linkthere. But if there is a fruition of non-sequence (akram), thenumbers you pick up will not be in sequence. You will pick upseven, then fifty-two etc. There will no link here.I met a man from Ratnagiri once who told me that hefinds gold wherever he searches. I cautioned him that it was theresult of his link of merit karma and that the link will break ina short time. When it does, I told him to remember me. Andthat is exactly what happened. He incurred such heavy lossesin his business that both he and his wife tried to commit suicide.The circumstances were such that they both survived and theyremembered what I had told them. Kram (sequence of events)and akram (non sequential events) come and go. Such is theworldly life. Desire is a consequence of past account and duringchintvan one is creating plans; one becomes engrossed in it andcreates new causes. Desire is an effect whereas chintvan is acause; it is a charging point. The writers of scriptures have saidthat desires come on their own; one does not need to createthem.Even when the sun is setting it can appear to look like arising sun. Your desires are ‘setting’ desires; so do not worryabout them. I have told my mahatmas that their desires arebarren; they will not bear any seeds and that is why your desiresare setting. Other people have both rising and setting desires.Rising desire is cause desire and setting desire is effect desire.In this current phase of the Kaliyug time cycle, peoplehave desires for very insignificant things; they do not have thedesire to enjoy everything. They waste away their whole lifelooking for something very trivial.Alas I have even seen affluent businessmen sitting in LordMahavir’s assembly, who in order not miss the Lord’s discourse,Aptavani-1157158Aptavani-1would order their meals in the assembly hall. They enjoyed theLord’s words so much that they would not leave his side andyet today I see these very men still wandering around. They areleft behind because of their desire for trivial and insignificantthings.Before anything takes place, first sprouts the desire for it.A person who wants to pass an exam will first have the desireto do so. As the obstacles get destroyed, things fall into placeaccording to one’s desires. You may have a deep desire tospend your money for satsang but what can you do? Obstaclescreated in your past life will prevent you from doing so evenwhen the opportunity presents itself. Once the obstacles aredestroyed, things will naturally work out according to yourdesires.Desire (effect of karma) is not the same as bhaav (chintvan,deep inner intent that charges karma).Questioner : What is the difference between desire andbhaav?Dadashri : This bail of cotton lying here is innocuous butwhen you light it with a match, that is desire. Desire is a livingfire and it will continue to burn until it is satisfied. Desire is tolight a fire to anything, and it will keep burning within you. Mystate is such that I do not even have a match to light anything.Emerging desires and diminishing desires are ‘charging’desires and ‘discharging’ desires respectively. Drinking and eatingare diminishing or discharging desires; they are not harmful butemerging or charging desires cause bondage and will createtorment within you.What is Bhaav?The pure Self has no bhaav. The bhaav we refer to is thatof the pratishthit atma. Both the Gnani (Self -Realized) andAgnani (Non Self-realized), have a pratishthit atma. In the agnanithe bhaav is in the form of a strong mental resolve. He stronglyresolves (does a bhaav) that he will do pratikraman and so hisdravya (effect) is created accordingly. Now out of this dravyaemerges another bhaav.Questioner : What is bhaavmun (internal subtle mind,intent mind) and dravyamun (physical mind, effect mind)?Dadashri : When the pratishthit atma does bhaav, it isthe beginning of the bhaavmun (subtle mind, cause mind) andbecause of this, dravyamun (physical mind, effect mind) isformed. Actually, there are two kinds of mind : discharge andcharge.Really speaking the bhaavmun (internal subtle causal mind)is the direct charging part of the pratishthit atma. The dravyamun(physical mind, effect mind) that you see is a discharge. Thecharging part cannot be seen, felt or known. Indeed if chargingwas such that a person could understand it, would he even letit occur? Everyone would be liberated! But bhaav is such thatit cannot be detected. If anyone were to discover it, he wouldseal it up immediately. Only a handful of people understandbhaav but even then they understand it to be that of the ignorantsoul and consequently confuse the whole issue. Bhaav cannotbe comprehended without Gnan. It is extremely subtle. One cansay ‘subtle’ a hundred thousand times over and still there wouldbe no end of its subtlety.The pure Self does not have bhaav. It is separate andbeyond bhhav. Bhaav means existence and it belongs to the onewho projects, the pratishthit atma. People create bhaav towardswhat they like; they continue to have likes and dislikes. Thelikes and the dislikes really belong to the pratishthit atma andthat is what binds karma. They do bhaav for transient things andAptavani-1159160Aptavani-1would order their meals in the assembly hall. They enjoyed theLord’s words so much that they would not leave his side andyet today I see these very men still wandering around. They areleft behind because of their desire for trivial and insignificantthings.Before anything takes place, first sprouts the desire for it.A person who wants to pass an exam will first have the desireto do so. As the obstacles get destroyed, things fall into placeaccording to one’s desires. You may have a deep desire tospend your money for satsang but what can you do? Obstaclescreated in your past life will prevent you from doing so evenwhen the opportunity presents itself. Once the obstacles aredestroyed, things will naturally work out according to yourdesires.Desire (effect of karma) is not the same as bhaav (chintvan,deep inner intent that charges karma).Questioner : What is the difference between desire andbhaav?Dadashri : This bail of cotton lying here is innocuous butwhen you light it with a match, that is desire. Desire is a livingfire and it will continue to burn until it is satisfied. Desire is tolight a fire to anything, and it will keep burning within you. Mystate is such that I do not even have a match to light anything.Emerging desires and diminishing desires are ‘charging’desires and ‘discharging’ desires respectively. Drinking and eatingare diminishing or discharging desires; they are not harmful butemerging or charging desires cause bondage and will createtorment within you.What is Bhaav?The pure Self has no bhaav. The bhaav we refer to is thatof the pratishthit atma. Both the Gnani (Self -Realized) andAgnani (Non Self-realized), have a pratishthit atma. In the agnanithe bhaav is in the form of a strong mental resolve. He stronglyresolves (does a bhaav) that he will do pratikraman and so hisdravya (effect) is created accordingly. Now out of this dravyaemerges another bhaav.Questioner : What is bhaavmun (internal subtle mind,intent mind) and dravyamun (physical mind, effect mind)?Dadashri : When the pratishthit atma does bhaav, it isthe beginning of the bhaavmun (subtle mind, cause mind) andbecause of this, dravyamun (physical mind, effect mind) isformed. Actually, there are two kinds of mind : discharge andcharge.Really speaking the bhaavmun (internal subtle causal mind)is the direct charging part of the pratishthit atma. The dravyamun(physical mind, effect mind) that you see is a discharge. Thecharging part cannot be seen, felt or known. Indeed if chargingwas such that a person could understand it, would he even letit occur? Everyone would be liberated! But bhaav is such thatit cannot be detected. If anyone were to discover it, he wouldseal it up immediately. Only a handful of people understandbhaav but even then they understand it to be that of the ignorantsoul and consequently confuse the whole issue. Bhaav cannotbe comprehended without Gnan. It is extremely subtle. One cansay ‘subtle’ a hundred thousand times over and still there wouldbe no end of its subtlety.The pure Self does not have bhaav. It is separate andbeyond bhhav. Bhaav means existence and it belongs to the onewho projects, the pratishthit atma. People create bhaav towardswhat they like; they continue to have likes and dislikes. Thelikes and the dislikes really belong to the pratishthit atma andthat is what binds karma. They do bhaav for transient things andAptavani-1159160Aptavani-1therefore they become transient. When you believe the image inthe mirror to be your real self (atma, here), what headway canyou possibly make?Nobility – WickednessBoth saints and sinners exist in the world together. It isbecause of a wicked person that a noble person has any worth.What if everyone in the world were noble?Noble person : A person who will never come underthe obligation of a wicked person.Wicked person : A person who constantly harms others.Grateful person : A person who will always remainindebted to those who have helped him and will never recall thehurt he suffered at the hands of others.Ungrateful person : A person, who forgets good deedsof others towards him and despite this obligation, he knowinglyhurts them, even if he gains nothing from it.It is easier to fathom the depth of an ocean but there isno way to fathom the depth of the worldly life.People, who abuse their authority, lose their powers. If aperson does anything unworthy of his authority, he loses thepower of that authority. If your employee abuses you, and youretaliate in return, and thus come down to his level, you will loseyour authority.A lie will cry out from the roof and so will the truth; butthe lie will speak out at once whereas the truth will take timeto be revealed. A lie will come out the very next day.There is no joy in conflicts, joy lies in resolving them. Getyour work done judiciously but do not fight. What is justice? Itis justice if a conflict does not end up in court and it is injusticeif it does. Whatever happens is justice.Use your mind, speech, body and soul for the welfare ofothers. If you use them only for your own self, you will acquirea birth of as a Raina tree. Then you will have to suffer for fivehundred years. People will enjoy your fruits and burn yourwood and use your wood to imprison people. Therefore theLord has said for you to use your mind, speech, body and soulfor the welfare of others. And if after that should you experienceany misery, you should tell the Lord so.A desire to discover non-contradiction is the ‘rightunderstanding’.Those who have tried to destroy the world have them-selves become destroyed in the process. Being a human carriesa tremendous responsibility and liability; it is truly a test and yetpeople believe there is pleasure in it. There are innumerabledanger zones where a human being can fall. Every momentcarries with it the fear of death so why waste even a singlemoment? Therefore do something that will improve your nextlife. This human life is a turning point; from here there is adeviation into the worlds of other life forms. From here everyindividual soul encounters four diversions – hellish life, animal orplant life, human life or celestial life. Liberation too can beattained from the human life form. If you encounter a Gnani,salvation is yours!The Three Forms Of BodyThe body has three different forms : Electrical body, causalbody and effective body.The electrical body, also called the subtle body, constantlystays with the Self. The body’s aura and luster is because of theelectrical body. There are four factors that lead to the body’saura and luster :Aptavani-1161162Aptavani-1therefore they become transient. When you believe the image inthe mirror to be your real self (atma, here), what headway canyou possibly make?Nobility – WickednessBoth saints and sinners exist in the world together. It isbecause of a wicked person that a noble person has any worth.What if everyone in the world were noble?Noble person : A person who will never come underthe obligation of a wicked person.Wicked person : A person who constantly harms others.Grateful person : A person who will always remainindebted to those who have helped him and will never recall thehurt he suffered at the hands of others.Ungrateful person : A person, who forgets good deedsof others towards him and despite this obligation, he knowinglyhurts them, even if he gains nothing from it.It is easier to fathom the depth of an ocean but there isno way to fathom the depth of the worldly life.People, who abuse their authority, lose their powers. If aperson does anything unworthy of his authority, he loses thepower of that authority. If your employee abuses you, and youretaliate in return, and thus come down to his level, you will loseyour authority.A lie will cry out from the roof and so will the truth; butthe lie will speak out at once whereas the truth will take timeto be revealed. A lie will come out the very next day.There is no joy in conflicts, joy lies in resolving them. Getyour work done judiciously but do not fight. What is justice? Itis justice if a conflict does not end up in court and it is injusticeif it does. Whatever happens is justice.Use your mind, speech, body and soul for the welfare ofothers. If you use them only for your own self, you will acquirea birth of as a Raina tree. Then you will have to suffer for fivehundred years. People will enjoy your fruits and burn yourwood and use your wood to imprison people. Therefore theLord has said for you to use your mind, speech, body and soulfor the welfare of others. And if after that should you experienceany misery, you should tell the Lord so.A desire to discover non-contradiction is the ‘rightunderstanding’.Those who have tried to destroy the world have them-selves become destroyed in the process. Being a human carriesa tremendous responsibility and liability; it is truly a test and yetpeople believe there is pleasure in it. There are innumerabledanger zones where a human being can fall. Every momentcarries with it the fear of death so why waste even a singlemoment? Therefore do something that will improve your nextlife. This human life is a turning point; from here there is adeviation into the worlds of other life forms. From here everyindividual soul encounters four diversions – hellish life, animal orplant life, human life or celestial life. Liberation too can beattained from the human life form. If you encounter a Gnani,salvation is yours!The Three Forms Of BodyThe body has three different forms : Electrical body, causalbody and effective body.The electrical body, also called the subtle body, constantlystays with the Self. The body’s aura and luster is because of theelectrical body. There are four factors that lead to the body’saura and luster :Aptavani-1161162Aptavani-1The luster of wealth : It originates from the aristocraticlife of affluence, ease and happiness.The luster of dharma : It radiates from the soul of the onewho lives a religious and righteous life.The luster of knowledge : It radiates from acquiring relativeknowledge through learning different teachings or scriptures.The luster of celibacy (brahmcharya) : It emanates fromthe practice of celibacy.The luster of all these four emanates from the subtle body,the electric body.At the moment of the union of a mother’s ovum and afather’s sperm, the effective body is created. What is a jiva?That which lives and dies is jiva. When the jiva dies, it carrieswith it the subtle body and the causal body. The mind, theintellect, the chit and the ego are freed here. The causal bodythat is carried forward will give rise to a new effective body.The effective body, created by the union of mother’s ovum andfather’s sperm, prepares its own sustenance and thus a tuber(embryo) is created. A jiva cannot survive without sustenanceeven for a minute. If there is no food, it takes at least air orwater.This electrical body is the same as the tejas body and thesubtle body. It digests food and produces heat and energy. Itkeeps the blood circulating. The entire machinery of the bodyworks because of its minute network of inter-connectionsreaching all parts of the body. If there is any karmic deficiency,it will result in certain physical ailments e.g. the stomach willlack in digestive power from infancy. It is the electrical body,within the physical body, that really carries out the bodily functionsbut the gross external body cannot grasp it and that is why iteventually becomes weak. The subtle body in every one is thesame. The shape of your body was already designed in the pastlife and that is the causal body. The gross physical body thatyou acquire is the effective body. Any part of the body thatbecomes above or below normal, is the part that becomes aproblem and suffers. From this one can deduce where theproblem (disease) came from and why.The causal body can be understood. It comes into beingat the time of birth, from the time of its inception in the womb.Attachment and abhorrence (raag and dwesh) begin from themoment breathing starts. Attachment and abhorrence attractatoms. Vitaragta (absence of attachment and abhorrence) doesnot. The attraction of these atoms produces the causal body.The physical body you see today is the causal body from thepast life. The Gnani Purush can visualize the causal body andhas so much spiritual power that he can prevent the formationof a new causal body. He can put a stop to it so that a newcausal body is not created.When the Soul separates from the body, it carries with itthe causal body; merit (punya) and de-merit (paap) karma toogo with it. On the strength of punya, one acquires a beautifulsymmetrical body and happiness. Because of paap one willacquire an asymmetrical, deformed body. When the Soul leavesthe body, the subtle body and the causal body remain togetherand when the scientific circumstantial evidences of atoms of thecausal and the subtle body come together, the gross physicalbody will come into formation. At death, when the Soul leavesthe body, in less than a fraction of time, it arrives at its destinationpredetermined by vyavasthit, and upon the union of the father’ssperm and the mother’s ovum, it attains a body. The Soul atthat time is completely compressed. It does not leave the existingbody until the new body is ready for it. Because of its propertyof elasticity, it stretches its one end to the new effective bodywhile the other end is still anchored to the old body. It onlyAptavani-1163164Aptavani-1The luster of wealth : It originates from the aristocraticlife of affluence, ease and happiness.The luster of dharma : It radiates from the soul of the onewho lives a religious and righteous life.The luster of knowledge : It radiates from acquiring relativeknowledge through learning different teachings or scriptures.The luster of celibacy (brahmcharya) : It emanates fromthe practice of celibacy.The luster of all these four emanates from the subtle body,the electric body.At the moment of the union of a mother’s ovum and afather’s sperm, the effective body is created. What is a jiva?That which lives and dies is jiva. When the jiva dies, it carrieswith it the subtle body and the causal body. The mind, theintellect, the chit and the ego are freed here. The causal bodythat is carried forward will give rise to a new effective body.The effective body, created by the union of mother’s ovum andfather’s sperm, prepares its own sustenance and thus a tuber(embryo) is created. A jiva cannot survive without sustenanceeven for a minute. If there is no food, it takes at least air orwater.This electrical body is the same as the tejas body and thesubtle body. It digests food and produces heat and energy. Itkeeps the blood circulating. The entire machinery of the bodyworks because of its minute network of inter-connectionsreaching all parts of the body. If there is any karmic deficiency,it will result in certain physical ailments e.g. the stomach willlack in digestive power from infancy. It is the electrical body,within the physical body, that really carries out the bodily functionsbut the gross external body cannot grasp it and that is why iteventually becomes weak. The subtle body in every one is thesame. The shape of your body was already designed in the pastlife and that is the causal body. The gross physical body thatyou acquire is the effective body. Any part of the body thatbecomes above or below normal, is the part that becomes aproblem and suffers. From this one can deduce where theproblem (disease) came from and why.The causal body can be understood. It comes into beingat the time of birth, from the time of its inception in the womb.Attachment and abhorrence (raag and dwesh) begin from themoment breathing starts. Attachment and abhorrence attractatoms. Vitaragta (absence of attachment and abhorrence) doesnot. The attraction of these atoms produces the causal body.The physical body you see today is the causal body from thepast life. The Gnani Purush can visualize the causal body andhas so much spiritual power that he can prevent the formationof a new causal body. He can put a stop to it so that a newcausal body is not created.When the Soul separates from the body, it carries with itthe causal body; merit (punya) and de-merit (paap) karma toogo with it. On the strength of punya, one acquires a beautifulsymmetrical body and happiness. Because of paap one willacquire an asymmetrical, deformed body. When the Soul leavesthe body, the subtle body and the causal body remain togetherand when the scientific circumstantial evidences of atoms of thecausal and the subtle body come together, the gross physicalbody will come into formation. At death, when the Soul leavesthe body, in less than a fraction of time, it arrives at its destinationpredetermined by vyavasthit, and upon the union of the father’ssperm and the mother’s ovum, it attains a body. The Soul atthat time is completely compressed. It does not leave the existingbody until the new body is ready for it. Because of its propertyof elasticity, it stretches its one end to the new effective bodywhile the other end is still anchored to the old body. It onlyAptavani-1163164Aptavani-1discards the old body when it is secured in the new effectivebody. There are some rare Souls that cannot secure a newbody immediately. These souls roam in vain without a body andwhen they find a new body, only then do they find release fromwandering.After acquiring a human form, the soul can pass throughother life forms such as those in celestial world, animal world orhell for up to a maximum of eight lives but then returns to thehuman form. It is only through the human life form that one isdegraded or diverted to other life forms. It is also from thehuman life form that the soul’s wandering comes to an end(liberation). If one knows how to successfully fulfill the purposeof the human life, liberation is possible and if one does not, thenthe human life also becomes the instrument for increasing one’sendless wandering and suffering. In all other life forms there isonly release from that life form. In the human form there isrelease but at the same time there is bondage for further lifeforms. Therefore get your work done, now that you have thisrare opportunity of having acquired a human life form. ‘TheSoul has spent endless lives for the body, if the body were tolive just one life for the Soul, your purpose will be fulfilled.’It is only in the human form that an encounter with aGnani Purush will bring about liberation. Even the celestial beingsyearn for a birth as a human. Just by encountering a GnaniPurush and establishing a connection with him, the body, whichfor endless lives had been a foe, becomes a friend. You havemet the Gnani in this human body so get your work done.Complete your connection and swim across to the other side.How much affection do I have for this body of mine? ‘I’have already acquired liberation through this body and procuredmy salvation. My affection and care for this body is only to thepoint that it becomes the instrument for the salvation of others.But otherwise my relationship with this body is one like thatwith a neighbor.I do not have any rights over this body. Whoever has theright will come and make their claim and take it. You have totreat this body of yours as a friend and get your work done.There is no telling what can happen to this body at any time.Nothing however can happen to the territory of the Self. Thebody that will take you to moksha is very strong. The bodythrough which liberation is attained is called the ‘charam sharira’(the ultimate body).How long does God reside in the body? God residesonly as long as the pratishthit atma (charged atma) remains init. But the main support is that of the pure Self. The one thatdepends on air (breathing) is mortal. If the nose were to bepinched shut for eight minutes, the life within would cease. Thisis all machinery.Awareness of the body is considered a state of stuporand ignorance; ‘I am Chandulal’ is ignorance. The awarenessof, ‘I am pure Self’ is liberation.The gross body is free from any attachment andabhorrence (vitarag). It is as detached as this wooden stool.The Self too is vitarag. It is the subtle body (that which is notseen, it is not to be confused with the subtle electrical bodydescribed above) that is responsible for everything. The subtlebody is made up of certain special atoms. None of the activitiesor behaviour of the gross body have anything to do with theSoul. The subtle body alone endures all suffering. The subtlebody is the manifestation of the soul. It is through the subtle bodythat one does the projection (pratishtha) of ‘I-ness’ in the wrongplace. Therefore the subtle body is like the pratishthit atma.The higher the number of karmas the smaller the bodyand as the karmas become lesser the body becomes bigger, forAptavani-1165166Aptavani-1discards the old body when it is secured in the new effectivebody. There are some rare Souls that cannot secure a newbody immediately. These souls roam in vain without a body andwhen they find a new body, only then do they find release fromwandering.After acquiring a human form, the soul can pass throughother life forms such as those in celestial world, animal world orhell for up to a maximum of eight lives but then returns to thehuman form. It is only through the human life form that one isdegraded or diverted to other life forms. It is also from thehuman life form that the soul’s wandering comes to an end(liberation). If one knows how to successfully fulfill the purposeof the human life, liberation is possible and if one does not, thenthe human life also becomes the instrument for increasing one’sendless wandering and suffering. In all other life forms there isonly release from that life form. In the human form there isrelease but at the same time there is bondage for further lifeforms. Therefore get your work done, now that you have thisrare opportunity of having acquired a human life form. ‘TheSoul has spent endless lives for the body, if the body were tolive just one life for the Soul, your purpose will be fulfilled.’It is only in the human form that an encounter with aGnani Purush will bring about liberation. Even the celestial beingsyearn for a birth as a human. Just by encountering a GnaniPurush and establishing a connection with him, the body, whichfor endless lives had been a foe, becomes a friend. You havemet the Gnani in this human body so get your work done.Complete your connection and swim across to the other side.How much affection do I have for this body of mine? ‘I’have already acquired liberation through this body and procuredmy salvation. My affection and care for this body is only to thepoint that it becomes the instrument for the salvation of others.But otherwise my relationship with this body is one like thatwith a neighbor.I do not have any rights over this body. Whoever has theright will come and make their claim and take it. You have totreat this body of yours as a friend and get your work done.There is no telling what can happen to this body at any time.Nothing however can happen to the territory of the Self. Thebody that will take you to moksha is very strong. The bodythrough which liberation is attained is called the ‘charam sharira’(the ultimate body).How long does God reside in the body? God residesonly as long as the pratishthit atma (charged atma) remains init. But the main support is that of the pure Self. The one thatdepends on air (breathing) is mortal. If the nose were to bepinched shut for eight minutes, the life within would cease. Thisis all machinery.Awareness of the body is considered a state of stuporand ignorance; ‘I am Chandulal’ is ignorance. The awarenessof, ‘I am pure Self’ is liberation.The gross body is free from any attachment andabhorrence (vitarag). It is as detached as this wooden stool.The Self too is vitarag. It is the subtle body (that which is notseen, it is not to be confused with the subtle electrical bodydescribed above) that is responsible for everything. The subtlebody is made up of certain special atoms. None of the activitiesor behaviour of the gross body have anything to do with theSoul. The subtle body alone endures all suffering. The subtlebody is the manifestation of the soul. It is through the subtle bodythat one does the projection (pratishtha) of ‘I-ness’ in the wrongplace. Therefore the subtle body is like the pratishthit atma.The higher the number of karmas the smaller the bodyand as the karmas become lesser the body becomes bigger, forAptavani-1165166Aptavani-1example as in elephants and ants. I have seen the ants, dragginga grain of sugar at four o’clock in the morning. But the elephantlives in intoxication of grandeur.Release From Dehadhyas : ‘I Am This Body’Everyone in the world is stuck in the belief of ‘I am thisbody’. They may claim ‘this body is not mine’, or ‘this mind isnot mine’, but if someone were to call them stupid, they wouldnot be able to sleep the whole night. This identification with thebody cannot be broken until one acquires the knowledge of theSelf. ‘I am Chandulal’, ‘ I am his uncle’, ‘I am her husband’ or‘I am a father’ are all connected to the belief of ‘I am thebody’. Unless this belief is broken, subtle and gross attachmentsremain along with the good and bad. The belief of ‘I am thebody’ breaks the moment one gets the exact realization of ‘I amthe pure Soul’. After Self-realization, even if one’s only sonwere to die, no feelings of gloom and grief would ensue. Nosense of right or wrong or any duality would prevail.Just as the sense of ‘I am the body’ had becomeestablished, the awareness of ‘I am pure Soul’ should becomeestablished. This awareness should prevail even during deepsleep. With the knowledge that I bestow upon you, the beliefof ‘I am the pure Soul’ will prevail in every circumstance. Thisknowledge is exclusive and extraordinary. Just as the curd andthe whey remain separate after the yogurt has been churned, sodo the body and the Self, after Gnan.Gnanis of the past had undergone the severest of penanceand suffering. They put their bodies through severe penanceunder the premise that if the Soul is the real ‘I,’ then it matterslittle what happens to the physical body.Three Stages Of The BodyThere are three stages of the body : childhood, youth andold age.Childhood is a stage of constant happiness and naturaljoy. Children have no worries. The milk for their nourishment isready and overflowing even before they are born. Do babieshave to worry when and where their milk will come from? Andyet babies get everything when they need it. The Gnani Purushis just like a child but the child is in a state of ignorance whereasthe Gnani Purush is on the highest pinnacle of knowledge andunderstanding and yet He is just like a child. A child’s mind andintellect are not developed, only his chit is at work and its extentis only limited to the object of his enjoyment. For example, ifa child sees a toy, his chit vruti will remain absorbed only in thattoy until he finds something else. Their chit vruti cannot remainin one object for too long whereas for adults the chit vruti willbecome occupied in two or more different subjects and willkeep wandering amongst them and that is precisely why all theproblems arise. A child will forget after a while and that isbecause a child’s chit vruti does not become fixed on one subjectfor too long. As long as a child’s intellect is not developed,happiness is inherent and natural for it. But as the intellectdevelops, a child’s discontent increases.The youth stage of a human life is like a blazing fire.During this stage arise circumstances, which defile the youth’sexternal conduct. Therefore it is imperative to exercise cautionand vigilance. The celestial beings are not subject to birth, oldage or death. They are perpetually in a youthful state.Old age is a stage of decline. It is very difficult to gothrough old age. All the body parts begin to break down andfail; the teeth tend to break, the ears will ache etc. Great careis needed in old age. If the karmas are not very serious orheavy, one will leave this world while sitting in an easy chair. Butpeople still want to cling on to life a little longer even when allAptavani-1167168Aptavani-1example as in elephants and ants. I have seen the ants, dragginga grain of sugar at four o’clock in the morning. But the elephantlives in intoxication of grandeur.Release From Dehadhyas : ‘I Am This Body’Everyone in the world is stuck in the belief of ‘I am thisbody’. They may claim ‘this body is not mine’, or ‘this mind isnot mine’, but if someone were to call them stupid, they wouldnot be able to sleep the whole night. This identification with thebody cannot be broken until one acquires the knowledge of theSelf. ‘I am Chandulal’, ‘ I am his uncle’, ‘I am her husband’ or‘I am a father’ are all connected to the belief of ‘I am thebody’. Unless this belief is broken, subtle and gross attachmentsremain along with the good and bad. The belief of ‘I am thebody’ breaks the moment one gets the exact realization of ‘I amthe pure Soul’. After Self-realization, even if one’s only sonwere to die, no feelings of gloom and grief would ensue. Nosense of right or wrong or any duality would prevail.Just as the sense of ‘I am the body’ had becomeestablished, the awareness of ‘I am pure Soul’ should becomeestablished. This awareness should prevail even during deepsleep. With the knowledge that I bestow upon you, the beliefof ‘I am the pure Soul’ will prevail in every circumstance. Thisknowledge is exclusive and extraordinary. Just as the curd andthe whey remain separate after the yogurt has been churned, sodo the body and the Self, after Gnan.Gnanis of the past had undergone the severest of penanceand suffering. They put their bodies through severe penanceunder the premise that if the Soul is the real ‘I,’ then it matterslittle what happens to the physical body.Three Stages Of The BodyThere are three stages of the body : childhood, youth andold age.Childhood is a stage of constant happiness and naturaljoy. Children have no worries. The milk for their nourishment isready and overflowing even before they are born. Do babieshave to worry when and where their milk will come from? Andyet babies get everything when they need it. The Gnani Purushis just like a child but the child is in a state of ignorance whereasthe Gnani Purush is on the highest pinnacle of knowledge andunderstanding and yet He is just like a child. A child’s mind andintellect are not developed, only his chit is at work and its extentis only limited to the object of his enjoyment. For example, ifa child sees a toy, his chit vruti will remain absorbed only in thattoy until he finds something else. Their chit vruti cannot remainin one object for too long whereas for adults the chit vruti willbecome occupied in two or more different subjects and willkeep wandering amongst them and that is precisely why all theproblems arise. A child will forget after a while and that isbecause a child’s chit vruti does not become fixed on one subjectfor too long. As long as a child’s intellect is not developed,happiness is inherent and natural for it. But as the intellectdevelops, a child’s discontent increases.The youth stage of a human life is like a blazing fire.During this stage arise circumstances, which defile the youth’sexternal conduct. Therefore it is imperative to exercise cautionand vigilance. The celestial beings are not subject to birth, oldage or death. They are perpetually in a youthful state.Old age is a stage of decline. It is very difficult to gothrough old age. All the body parts begin to break down andfail; the teeth tend to break, the ears will ache etc. Great careis needed in old age. If the karmas are not very serious orheavy, one will leave this world while sitting in an easy chair. Butpeople still want to cling on to life a little longer even when allAptavani-1167168Aptavani-1their body parts are failing. This is because of their temptationfor trivial things.Heavily bound karmas are like fire-works. They are setup to go off only during the declining years. Whatever enjoymentthe body had indulged in, will give pain and suffering when itleaves and whatever suffering it had to endure will give happinessin the end. That is the rule. The peace and happiness oneexperiences will be in proportion to the pain one has endured.Only a rare blessed soul departs in peace. While indulging inworldly pleasures, people are not aware that every part of thatenjoyment will have to be repaid. Indulging in pleasures that onehas no right to will have to be accounted and paid for at theend, at the time of death. For simple and straightforward people,everything remains well. It is an indication that a soul is goingto a higher plane of existence when a person has a chance tobid farewell willingly to his worldly life. Unconsciousness duringthe time of death leads to existence in a state of unconsciousnesslike that of the cattle. There is no telling what happens to thosewho die suddenly of heart failure. Raudra dhyana (anger, abuseand irritation towards fellow beings) and aarta dhyana(preoccupation with worries about ones self) are so pervasivetoday that not only living but dying too has become difficult.Those who die young, die in raudra dhyana and arta dhyana.The old die in anxiety and despair and take on grave liability.Today people acquire food and clothing through dishonest means;they acquire things through aarta dhyana and raudra dhyana andthis results in a lot of pain and suffering during the time of death.Every atom in the body will render suffering and if there is toomuch suffering, one will die as a result of a heart failure. In thenext life, however he will still have to endure karma-effectsagain. This is a science of atoms. This verily is the science ofthe Vitarags. No one can change it.The Lord has said that it is better to receive what iscoming to you through honest means, be it good or bad. Asimple meal or even torn clothes you have earned yourself arebetter than acquiring anything through dishonest means.In old age, when the time comes to leave this world, allthe fire-works are set off all at once. In the absence of Gnan,it is very difficult to go through old age. And if Gnan is firmlyentrenched within, one can remain in the Self and just Knowand Observe all the fireworks that go off. Do you know whatmy mahatmas, who have self-realisation, say as they breath,their last breaths? They say, ‘ Just as you are watching thisbody take it’s last breath, I too am doing the same.’ Theyremain the Knower and the Observer of even their last breath.Sooner or later everyone will have to vacate their ‘shop’, willthey not? It is only in order to leave, that one comes into thisworld. From the moment you are born you are on your way tothe cemetery. So if you are on your way to your funeral, whydo you waste precious time stopping here and there forsomething to eat (in search of trivial things)? At least think aboutthis. Every moment you are heading closer towards your funeral.Sooner or later you will have to reach the final destination. Oneis allowed to have expectations of a quiet exit rather than anearly or a late exit.In old age all miseries combine to become one malady.If one knows the cure for it, one can start the medicine whenthe suffering starts. The last malady comes to take you away (tolife beyond).How can you have affection for the body that withersaway, rots away and stinks? It is nothing but a piece of meatdressed with skin. After all the care you give this body; bathingit, feeding it, ultimately it still lets you down. If your own bodyis disloyal to you, what can you expect from others? Afterpampering the body so much, will you still like it if pus were toAptavani-1169170Aptavani-1their body parts are failing. This is because of their temptationfor trivial things.Heavily bound karmas are like fire-works. They are setup to go off only during the declining years. Whatever enjoymentthe body had indulged in, will give pain and suffering when itleaves and whatever suffering it had to endure will give happinessin the end. That is the rule. The peace and happiness oneexperiences will be in proportion to the pain one has endured.Only a rare blessed soul departs in peace. While indulging inworldly pleasures, people are not aware that every part of thatenjoyment will have to be repaid. Indulging in pleasures that onehas no right to will have to be accounted and paid for at theend, at the time of death. For simple and straightforward people,everything remains well. It is an indication that a soul is goingto a higher plane of existence when a person has a chance tobid farewell willingly to his worldly life. Unconsciousness duringthe time of death leads to existence in a state of unconsciousnesslike that of the cattle. There is no telling what happens to thosewho die suddenly of heart failure. Raudra dhyana (anger, abuseand irritation towards fellow beings) and aarta dhyana(preoccupation with worries about ones self) are so pervasivetoday that not only living but dying too has become difficult.Those who die young, die in raudra dhyana and arta dhyana.The old die in anxiety and despair and take on grave liability.Today people acquire food and clothing through dishonest means;they acquire things through aarta dhyana and raudra dhyana andthis results in a lot of pain and suffering during the time of death.Every atom in the body will render suffering and if there is toomuch suffering, one will die as a result of a heart failure. In thenext life, however he will still have to endure karma-effectsagain. This is a science of atoms. This verily is the science ofthe Vitarags. No one can change it.The Lord has said that it is better to receive what iscoming to you through honest means, be it good or bad. Asimple meal or even torn clothes you have earned yourself arebetter than acquiring anything through dishonest means.In old age, when the time comes to leave this world, allthe fire-works are set off all at once. In the absence of Gnan,it is very difficult to go through old age. And if Gnan is firmlyentrenched within, one can remain in the Self and just Knowand Observe all the fireworks that go off. Do you know whatmy mahatmas, who have self-realisation, say as they breath,their last breaths? They say, ‘ Just as you are watching thisbody take it’s last breath, I too am doing the same.’ Theyremain the Knower and the Observer of even their last breath.Sooner or later everyone will have to vacate their ‘shop’, willthey not? It is only in order to leave, that one comes into thisworld. From the moment you are born you are on your way tothe cemetery. So if you are on your way to your funeral, whydo you waste precious time stopping here and there forsomething to eat (in search of trivial things)? At least think aboutthis. Every moment you are heading closer towards your funeral.Sooner or later you will have to reach the final destination. Oneis allowed to have expectations of a quiet exit rather than anearly or a late exit.In old age all miseries combine to become one malady.If one knows the cure for it, one can start the medicine whenthe suffering starts. The last malady comes to take you away (tolife beyond).How can you have affection for the body that withersaway, rots away and stinks? It is nothing but a piece of meatdressed with skin. After all the care you give this body; bathingit, feeding it, ultimately it still lets you down. If your own bodyis disloyal to you, what can you expect from others? Afterpampering the body so much, will you still like it if pus were toAptavani-1169170Aptavani-1ooze out of it? You could not even bear to look at it; you wouldbecome detached from it. It is nothing but a mass of pus, bloodand flesh. To the Gnani Purush this is clearly visible. The Gnanisees everything exactly as it is and that is why the Gnani remainsdetached from it. Infinite lives have been spent having attachmentfor this body and the reward for this has been the perpetualcycle of birth and death. Just once become attached to theSoul, and become a vitaragi and you will make up for the lossof all the past infinite life cycles.What kind of a body should you have? Your body shouldbe such that it becomes a vehicle for liberation. You shouldacquire the ultimate body (charam sharira).Your body is made of nothing but an accumulation ofatoms. Whatever you experience in this body is the direct resultof the kind of atoms you have been in company of.All birds, animals and plants live to serve humans, whereashumans live for themselves. Despite this the Lord says that thehuman form is worthy of a ‘darshan’ even by the celestial beings.If one understands this, one can get one’s work done.Purpose Of Human LifeWho in this world knows the purpose of the human life?Why does one attain a human life? As such no one has a clue.People believe they can enjoy themselves in life. They pray toGod, practice yoga, do penance and renunciation. But in realitythe human body is acquired to purge oneself of one’s pastmistakes and misdeeds and settle past accounts. This body hasbeen acquired to settle each and every circumstances that arise,with equanimity and to realize the Self.Kavi has written :‘The body that you have acquired, is to rid your misdeeds,The veil of karma need to be shed to see God.’Thought, Speech and ActionThought, speech and action are all fleeting and changing.All You have to do is know what kind of thoughts are occurring.You are not responsible for thoughts that come. Thoughts aremerely sprouting of tubers you had created in your previous lifeand that is why they come forth now and this is precisely whyyou are not responsible for them in this life. But if you were toendorse them again in this life, then you will incur a tremendousliability.The Self is still and unchanging. Whereas thoughts, speechand action, are transient and changing. Motion is inherent inthoughts, speech and action. That which materializes in thephysical form is action. That which springs within is the thoughtand that which is vocalized is speech. If these three remain inequilibrium and within normality, it is called motion in balance(sanchaar). This is the reason one is asked to maintain normalityin the worldly conduct.In Satyug only thoughts became defiled, not speech oractions. In this era, Kaliyug, all three are defiled. You can getby with a defiled mind but not so with defiled speech or action.If all three are defiled, the speech that emanate from a personwill be very adversary and reactionary. Whatever comes outwill be nothing but refuse. Through the impact of Gnan one’sruined external conduct ultimately comes to an end. The conductof the body must be pure. The thoughts of the mind and thecontent of speech will undergo changes. There is a great risk ifthe physical conduct is tainted. Even the celestial beings willgive you misery. Good conduct pleases the celestial and reigningGods and Goddesses.What causes a person’s external conduct to be bad? It isbecause of failure to find happiness from the external world. Theexternal conduct improves as one acquires the infinite bliss within.Aptavani-1171172Aptavani-1ooze out of it? You could not even bear to look at it; you wouldbecome detached from it. It is nothing but a mass of pus, bloodand flesh. To the Gnani Purush this is clearly visible. The Gnanisees everything exactly as it is and that is why the Gnani remainsdetached from it. Infinite lives have been spent having attachmentfor this body and the reward for this has been the perpetualcycle of birth and death. Just once become attached to theSoul, and become a vitaragi and you will make up for the lossof all the past infinite life cycles.What kind of a body should you have? Your body shouldbe such that it becomes a vehicle for liberation. You shouldacquire the ultimate body (charam sharira).Your body is made of nothing but an accumulation ofatoms. Whatever you experience in this body is the direct resultof the kind of atoms you have been in company of.All birds, animals and plants live to serve humans, whereashumans live for themselves. Despite this the Lord says that thehuman form is worthy of a ‘darshan’ even by the celestial beings.If one understands this, one can get one’s work done.Purpose Of Human LifeWho in this world knows the purpose of the human life?Why does one attain a human life? As such no one has a clue.People believe they can enjoy themselves in life. They pray toGod, practice yoga, do penance and renunciation. But in realitythe human body is acquired to purge oneself of one’s pastmistakes and misdeeds and settle past accounts. This body hasbeen acquired to settle each and every circumstances that arise,with equanimity and to realize the Self.Kavi has written :‘The body that you have acquired, is to rid your misdeeds,The veil of karma need to be shed to see God.’Thought, Speech and ActionThought, speech and action are all fleeting and changing.All You have to do is know what kind of thoughts are occurring.You are not responsible for thoughts that come. Thoughts aremerely sprouting of tubers you had created in your previous lifeand that is why they come forth now and this is precisely whyyou are not responsible for them in this life. But if you were toendorse them again in this life, then you will incur a tremendousliability.The Self is still and unchanging. Whereas thoughts, speechand action, are transient and changing. Motion is inherent inthoughts, speech and action. That which materializes in thephysical form is action. That which springs within is the thoughtand that which is vocalized is speech. If these three remain inequilibrium and within normality, it is called motion in balance(sanchaar). This is the reason one is asked to maintain normalityin the worldly conduct.In Satyug only thoughts became defiled, not speech oractions. In this era, Kaliyug, all three are defiled. You can getby with a defiled mind but not so with defiled speech or action.If all three are defiled, the speech that emanate from a personwill be very adversary and reactionary. Whatever comes outwill be nothing but refuse. Through the impact of Gnan one’sruined external conduct ultimately comes to an end. The conductof the body must be pure. The thoughts of the mind and thecontent of speech will undergo changes. There is a great risk ifthe physical conduct is tainted. Even the celestial beings willgive you misery. Good conduct pleases the celestial and reigningGods and Goddesses.What causes a person’s external conduct to be bad? It isbecause of failure to find happiness from the external world. Theexternal conduct improves as one acquires the infinite bliss within.Aptavani-1171172Aptavani-1For the Gnani all internal activity becomes gneya (thatwhich is to be known and seen) and He remains in a state ofKnower and Seer. Our Gnan is such that you can remainunaffected even in the most painful and miserable circumstances.This Gnan is the ‘emergency- chain’; pull it and you will find thesolution.In the absence of Gnan, one has no choice but to spinlike a top. But since you have Gnan, your external conduct mustbe good; otherwise you will face grave liability. Your conductshould not be dishonorable. Bad speech and bad thoughts maybe tolerated but bad external conduct will not be tolerated bythe world. Even the Gods will cease giving you help.You are the Knower and Observer of the mind and speechand they are the objects to be known (gneya) - a movie thathas to be seen and known. But dishonorable conduct cannot betolerated. It is better to get married than to be dishonored byothers. (Here Dadashri places emphasis on illicit sexualrelationships). Such mistakes should be destroyed the momentthey become evident. If you try to maintain Knower-Observerrelationship in your immoral conduct, you do not know when itwill destroy you. Such conduct would over-ride and replaceyour Gnan. You do not have to taste venom in order to confirmit. You should get rid of such conduct even if you have to useyour ego to do so. Once and for all you should decide that yourexternal conduct must be honorable. If you do not make sucha decision, your dishonorable conduct will continue. There isgrave danger in that. Nothing else compares to this danger inthis world. It is not the nature of the world that is dangerous;it is corrupt and immoral conduct that is dangerous. If yourconduct is good, even the celestial beings will be pleased andwill help you in your liberation.You should know what kind of conduct carries greatliability and should surrender it to the Gnani Purush. Why hasworldly conduct degraded and deteriorated? It is because thereis no happiness in the external world. For the one who hasreceived the Self, even though there may be continuing agony, hedoes not feel it because now there is eternal bliss within. You arethe pure Self now, and you should stay away from corrupt andimmoral conduct, even if you have to employ your ego to do so.What is corrupt external conduct?If you pick someone’s pocket but feel afraid of beingcaught – that is what the world considers dishonorable conduct.Similarly swearing, fighting, drinking alcohol, gambling are allconduct of dishonor and are dangerous. Such conduct is tolerablebut what good will it do? Primarily there are two main type ofconduct that cannot be tolerated : violation of celibacy andstealing. Celibacy (brahmacharya) is the ultimate of all ethicalcodes of the worldly conduct. It pleases even the celestial beings.The world does not pose any problems; instead of one, you canhave four wives, but do not defile your external conduct. TheLord considers this sinful behaviour. If you aspire for liberationyou have to avoid all things that obstruct your path.Motion, Emotion, Extreme Emotion -Vega, Aavega, UdvegaEmotion is feeling and is part of the relative self; an intenselevel of emotions is called udvega. It is the surging motion offeelings that severely agitates and disturbs the mind.When thoughts are flowing at a natural rate, there is peace,but when thoughts of anxiousness, depression and fear occur,or when one becomes very emotional, it is a sure sign thatsomething untoward is about to take place.Dadashri : Is a train moving ‘in motion’ or is it movingAptavani-1173174Aptavani-1For the Gnani all internal activity becomes gneya (thatwhich is to be known and seen) and He remains in a state ofKnower and Seer. Our Gnan is such that you can remainunaffected even in the most painful and miserable circumstances.This Gnan is the ‘emergency- chain’; pull it and you will find thesolution.In the absence of Gnan, one has no choice but to spinlike a top. But since you have Gnan, your external conduct mustbe good; otherwise you will face grave liability. Your conductshould not be dishonorable. Bad speech and bad thoughts maybe tolerated but bad external conduct will not be tolerated bythe world. Even the Gods will cease giving you help.You are the Knower and Observer of the mind and speechand they are the objects to be known (gneya) - a movie thathas to be seen and known. But dishonorable conduct cannot betolerated. It is better to get married than to be dishonored byothers. (Here Dadashri places emphasis on illicit sexualrelationships). Such mistakes should be destroyed the momentthey become evident. If you try to maintain Knower-Observerrelationship in your immoral conduct, you do not know when itwill destroy you. Such conduct would over-ride and replaceyour Gnan. You do not have to taste venom in order to confirmit. You should get rid of such conduct even if you have to useyour ego to do so. Once and for all you should decide that yourexternal conduct must be honorable. If you do not make sucha decision, your dishonorable conduct will continue. There isgrave danger in that. Nothing else compares to this danger inthis world. It is not the nature of the world that is dangerous;it is corrupt and immoral conduct that is dangerous. If yourconduct is good, even the celestial beings will be pleased andwill help you in your liberation.You should know what kind of conduct carries greatliability and should surrender it to the Gnani Purush. Why hasworldly conduct degraded and deteriorated? It is because thereis no happiness in the external world. For the one who hasreceived the Self, even though there may be continuing agony, hedoes not feel it because now there is eternal bliss within. You arethe pure Self now, and you should stay away from corrupt andimmoral conduct, even if you have to employ your ego to do so.What is corrupt external conduct?If you pick someone’s pocket but feel afraid of beingcaught – that is what the world considers dishonorable conduct.Similarly swearing, fighting, drinking alcohol, gambling are allconduct of dishonor and are dangerous. Such conduct is tolerablebut what good will it do? Primarily there are two main type ofconduct that cannot be tolerated : violation of celibacy andstealing. Celibacy (brahmacharya) is the ultimate of all ethicalcodes of the worldly conduct. It pleases even the celestial beings.The world does not pose any problems; instead of one, you canhave four wives, but do not defile your external conduct. TheLord considers this sinful behaviour. If you aspire for liberationyou have to avoid all things that obstruct your path.Motion, Emotion, Extreme Emotion -Vega, Aavega, UdvegaEmotion is feeling and is part of the relative self; an intenselevel of emotions is called udvega. It is the surging motion offeelings that severely agitates and disturbs the mind.When thoughts are flowing at a natural rate, there is peace,but when thoughts of anxiousness, depression and fear occur,or when one becomes very emotional, it is a sure sign thatsomething untoward is about to take place.Dadashri : Is a train moving ‘in motion’ or is it movingAptavani-1173174Aptavani-1after becoming ‘emotional’?Questioner : It is in motion.Dadashri : What would happen if the train becameemotional?Questioner : There would be an accident and thousandsof people may die.Similarly, as long as the human body is in motion (withinnormal state), there is no ‘accident’ or himsa, but when itbecomes emotional, an infinite number of subtle life forms withinthe body are killed. Anger, pride, attachment and greed causea person to become emotional. Millions of subtle life formswithin the body are killed and the consequences of this violencewill have to be endured in the life to follow. That is why theGnani says for you to remain in motion and not become emotional.During udvega, an extreme emotional stage, many tuberswithin explode simultaneously. As they all burst at the sametime, the chit is captured completely and it becomes one withthat situation. Because countless atoms are erupting and are setin motion, a heavy veil is created over the Self. Just as theheavy clouds mask the rays of the sun completely, so is theradiance and knowledge of the real Self-obscured by this extremeemotional and agitated state. This results in the stifling of theinfinite strength of the Self. The poise of one’s mind and bodyis lost. The feeling is akin to being stabbed by a spear. Udvegatherefore creates the greatest veil (avran) over the Self. If onepasses through that, one will achieve a lot of clarity. If oneconquers udvega - the most intense of emotional states - thenall the minor ones will be insignificant. But this is only possiblewhen one has the knowledge of the Self. In the absence of Self-realization, it is better if one does not have to experience suchan intense emotional crisis for endless lives, because during suchtimes, there is a horrendous pull of atoms, which inevitably willbear fruits!During an extreme emotional state, one sows seeds for alife in the world of lower life forms. These seeds form to becometubers within, and they lie inert. During times of emotional states,these tubers burst open vehemently. People who have a stubbornstreak, have very strong tubers and when these tubers explodeas a result of all the scientific circumstantial evidences (vyavasthit)coming together, these people become very irritable andaggressive and resort to violence in order to assert themselves.Those who are acquiescent in nature do not have such largetubers.During udvega, one may become confused, scared orcrazy. When one senses the onset of udvega by such irrational,hyper-emotional thoughts, one should postpone any impendingwork. Work done under such a state will be ruined for sure.Only in a state of motion (normality of thought flow) does oneaccomplish a task successfully.Udvega means to rise higher. The right approach to udvegawould take one to a higher spiritual level, but the wrong responsewill plunge one downwards. Udvega is good for increasing one’sspiritual awareness provided one remains in Gnan during theevent.A mahatma is someone who will help pacify your mind;they can help bring an adverse situation down to normality. Thehuman mind should be brought down to the level of normalmotion. A mahatma is verily the one who brings the emotionalmind back to motion.It is worth your while pampering this body and havingaffection for it if it were permanent and immortal. But this bodyis such that it will rot and decay. How can affection for it beAptavani-1175176Aptavani-1after becoming ‘emotional’?Questioner : It is in motion.Dadashri : What would happen if the train becameemotional?Questioner : There would be an accident and thousandsof people may die.Similarly, as long as the human body is in motion (withinnormal state), there is no ‘accident’ or himsa, but when itbecomes emotional, an infinite number of subtle life forms withinthe body are killed. Anger, pride, attachment and greed causea person to become emotional. Millions of subtle life formswithin the body are killed and the consequences of this violencewill have to be endured in the life to follow. That is why theGnani says for you to remain in motion and not become emotional.During udvega, an extreme emotional stage, many tuberswithin explode simultaneously. As they all burst at the sametime, the chit is captured completely and it becomes one withthat situation. Because countless atoms are erupting and are setin motion, a heavy veil is created over the Self. Just as theheavy clouds mask the rays of the sun completely, so is theradiance and knowledge of the real Self-obscured by this extremeemotional and agitated state. This results in the stifling of theinfinite strength of the Self. The poise of one’s mind and bodyis lost. The feeling is akin to being stabbed by a spear. Udvegatherefore creates the greatest veil (avran) over the Self. If onepasses through that, one will achieve a lot of clarity. If oneconquers udvega - the most intense of emotional states - thenall the minor ones will be insignificant. But this is only possiblewhen one has the knowledge of the Self. In the absence of Self-realization, it is better if one does not have to experience suchan intense emotional crisis for endless lives, because during suchtimes, there is a horrendous pull of atoms, which inevitably willbear fruits!During an extreme emotional state, one sows seeds for alife in the world of lower life forms. These seeds form to becometubers within, and they lie inert. During times of emotional states,these tubers burst open vehemently. People who have a stubbornstreak, have very strong tubers and when these tubers explodeas a result of all the scientific circumstantial evidences (vyavasthit)coming together, these people become very irritable andaggressive and resort to violence in order to assert themselves.Those who are acquiescent in nature do not have such largetubers.During udvega, one may become confused, scared orcrazy. When one senses the onset of udvega by such irrational,hyper-emotional thoughts, one should postpone any impendingwork. Work done under such a state will be ruined for sure.Only in a state of motion (normality of thought flow) does oneaccomplish a task successfully.Udvega means to rise higher. The right approach to udvegawould take one to a higher spiritual level, but the wrong responsewill plunge one downwards. Udvega is good for increasing one’sspiritual awareness provided one remains in Gnan during theevent.A mahatma is someone who will help pacify your mind;they can help bring an adverse situation down to normality. Thehuman mind should be brought down to the level of normalmotion. A mahatma is verily the one who brings the emotionalmind back to motion.It is worth your while pampering this body and havingaffection for it if it were permanent and immortal. But this bodyis such that it will rot and decay. How can affection for it beAptavani-1175176Aptavani-1justified? Your affection for it should be limited to the point thatthis body has encountered the Gnani Purush and therefore it hasbecome an instrument for you to get your work done and acquireliberation. It is affection for this body that creates extremes inemotions. And despite your affection for it, it will one daybecome dust. The Lord has referred to the body as a betrayal.Ultimately it will turn into ashes. It is the body that causesattachment-abhorrence. The Lord says that you have devotedinfinite lives for the body, now devote just one life for the Self.Udvega does not occur without a reason. It occursbecause of your account from your past life and you can easilytell why it occurs. Only that which is familiar to you comes toyou (causes that you have created). Nothing happens without areason.Udvega is an accident and not an incident. An incidenthas so many causes and an accident has too many causes.There is only one thing in this world worth becominginebriated with. And that is the love for the Gnani Purush!Anything else has nothing but sorrow and suffering to offer.Only where there is permanent bliss can you afford to becomeinebriated.Udvega arises in whatever instances or situations one islikely to become captivated or intoxicated. That is the cause ofudvega. There is no harm in enjoying life but when the ‘train’(for liberation) arrives, drop everything and get on that train.But instead people get stuck on whatever ‘station’ they have atendency to become intoxicated with and miss the traincompletely. Udvega makes you take irrational leaps and whathappens if you miss the landing altogether? Instead if you wereto take such a leap in my satsang, your work will be done. Onone side there is satsang, which forever enlightens and gives benefitand on the other tempting splendors, which never fail to torment.SleepSleep is a necessity for every living creature. But theproportion of sleep is never maintained. What has become ofpeople nowadays? A peculiar generation has evolved today,otherwise how can sleep be so abnormal? Do birds and animalsever sleep like the humans do? Sleep should be so well balancedthat one does not fall asleep during the day. These wretchedbeings sleep ten long hours lying in bed till the sun rises. Is lifemeant for sleeping away? On the other hand there are somethat cannot fall asleep at all. A high percent of people in Americause sleeping pills to fall asleep. It is poison that may kill you.This is a terrible affliction. They have succeeded in putting aman on the moon and yet they have not been able to reducetheir dependency on the sleeping pills. The real need is for thelatter. People suffer terribly because of their insomnia, why notdo something to help them? Sleep is a natural gift and that toohas been lost. Of what good are other comforts and wealth?People lack in natural sleep because their proportion of laboris not equivalent to the proportion of their intake of food. Thefood intake should be such that one’s tiredness will induce sleep.Proper adjustment of food with labour would induce normalsleep. Everywhere insomnia runs rampant, especially in foreigncountries. I have the prescription for a natural cure. I will teacheveryone how to live a normal life : normal food, normal sleepand normal enjoyment.How much sleep does a person require? God has concededto three hours for sleeping. This life is not meant to be wastedaway through sleep. After Gnan, it is better if you are not ableto sleep long. You will have more time to remain alert as theKnower and Seer. For the past twenty years, I have not sleptmore than an hour and a half each night. I have spent all thosenights in the awareness of the Gnan. One needs enough sleep tofreshen up after a grueling day. This is all the sleep you need.Aptavani-1177178Aptavani-1justified? Your affection for it should be limited to the point thatthis body has encountered the Gnani Purush and therefore it hasbecome an instrument for you to get your work done and acquireliberation. It is affection for this body that creates extremes inemotions. And despite your affection for it, it will one daybecome dust. The Lord has referred to the body as a betrayal.Ultimately it will turn into ashes. It is the body that causesattachment-abhorrence. The Lord says that you have devotedinfinite lives for the body, now devote just one life for the Self.Udvega does not occur without a reason. It occursbecause of your account from your past life and you can easilytell why it occurs. Only that which is familiar to you comes toyou (causes that you have created). Nothing happens without areason.Udvega is an accident and not an incident. An incidenthas so many causes and an accident has too many causes.There is only one thing in this world worth becominginebriated with. And that is the love for the Gnani Purush!Anything else has nothing but sorrow and suffering to offer.Only where there is permanent bliss can you afford to becomeinebriated.Udvega arises in whatever instances or situations one islikely to become captivated or intoxicated. That is the cause ofudvega. There is no harm in enjoying life but when the ‘train’(for liberation) arrives, drop everything and get on that train.But instead people get stuck on whatever ‘station’ they have atendency to become intoxicated with and miss the traincompletely. Udvega makes you take irrational leaps and whathappens if you miss the landing altogether? Instead if you wereto take such a leap in my satsang, your work will be done. Onone side there is satsang, which forever enlightens and gives benefitand on the other tempting splendors, which never fail to torment.SleepSleep is a necessity for every living creature. But theproportion of sleep is never maintained. What has become ofpeople nowadays? A peculiar generation has evolved today,otherwise how can sleep be so abnormal? Do birds and animalsever sleep like the humans do? Sleep should be so well balancedthat one does not fall asleep during the day. These wretchedbeings sleep ten long hours lying in bed till the sun rises. Is lifemeant for sleeping away? On the other hand there are somethat cannot fall asleep at all. A high percent of people in Americause sleeping pills to fall asleep. It is poison that may kill you.This is a terrible affliction. They have succeeded in putting aman on the moon and yet they have not been able to reducetheir dependency on the sleeping pills. The real need is for thelatter. People suffer terribly because of their insomnia, why notdo something to help them? Sleep is a natural gift and that toohas been lost. Of what good are other comforts and wealth?People lack in natural sleep because their proportion of laboris not equivalent to the proportion of their intake of food. Thefood intake should be such that one’s tiredness will induce sleep.Proper adjustment of food with labour would induce normalsleep. Everywhere insomnia runs rampant, especially in foreigncountries. I have the prescription for a natural cure. I will teacheveryone how to live a normal life : normal food, normal sleepand normal enjoyment.How much sleep does a person require? God has concededto three hours for sleeping. This life is not meant to be wastedaway through sleep. After Gnan, it is better if you are not ableto sleep long. You will have more time to remain alert as theKnower and Seer. For the past twenty years, I have not sleptmore than an hour and a half each night. I have spent all thosenights in the awareness of the Gnan. One needs enough sleep tofreshen up after a grueling day. This is all the sleep you need.Aptavani-1177178Aptavani-1Gautam Swami asked Lord Mahavir, “Which is better, tobe asleep or to be aware?” The Lord replied, “Out of a thousandpeople, nine hundred ninety nine are better off asleep but for abenevolent blessed soul, it is better to stay awake”.DreamsThe science of sleep is deep and mysterious. Many greatscientists are engrossed in unfolding its mystery. They areconducting experiments to find what parts of the body are atwork during sleep? What is the function of the inner psyche(antahkaran) during sleep? But the science behind dreams is notso easy to ascertain.During a dream, all outlets of the gross body are closedand only part of the antahkaran - the mind, the intellect and thechit are at work. The ego is not able to do anything during thistime. If the ego were operative in a dream, the dreamer wouldget up and start fighting or get up and leave. The dreamerwould carry out all the activities that are going on in his dream.But during dream the ego has no say in the matter. In a wakefulstate, however, the ego is operational and therefore says, ‘I amdoing this.’ In reality it is not capable of doing anything but inthe wakeful state all the avenues and outlets are open andtherefore through illusion, the ego assumes the doership.Dreams are real and exact. They are effective and thiscan be scientifically proven. Effects of dreams experienced bythe inner body are reflected on the gross body. That is why itis called effective. In what way is it effective? Let me explain.In a dream if a pauper dreams he is a king, he experiencesexhilaration and if a king dreams that he is a pauper, he becomesdepressed. He is as much depressed in a dream, as he is whenhe wakes up. He might even weep in his dream and uponwaking will find his eyes wet with tears. Some times, even afterwaking up the effect of the dream will linger and people continueto weep. Young children are startled and scared by the effectsof dreams and cry for a long time. Nightmares have an affecton the body, the rate of breathing increases, pulse rate, bloodpressure etc. too increase. All these effects can be scientificallyproven. Therefore if dreams are so effective how can they beconsidered unreal?There was a gentleman who had never seen me beforebut had an exact ‘darshan’ of me in his dream. Now how canone explain this phenomenon? How complex is this?Nothing that has never been seen before can appear inyour dreams. It might have been seen in any of your past lifecycles. Dreams are a collection of countless life cycles. It is notanything new. There are some that believe that thoughts of theday manifest as dreams at night. But during the day one thinksof all kinds of things, do they all manifest in dreams? Neverthelessis it not true either that you dream about something you havenever thought of before?In a dream, only the causal body and the subtle body areat work. The gross body does not take any part in it.One man dreamt that he was sick and the doctor examinedhim and pronounced him dead. He saw himself as dead. As hesaw his body being cremated, he woke up in a panic.In dreams even bachelors see themselves getting married,having children and getting those children married also!Questioner : What is the cause behind a dream?Dadashri : The world you see in your wakeful state isthe fruit of your past deeds. The dreams that you see are thematuring fruits of your past merit and demerit karma, but theireffects on you are lighter. Both are effects.Questioner : Is dream a tuber?Aptavani-1179180Aptavani-1Gautam Swami asked Lord Mahavir, “Which is better, tobe asleep or to be aware?” The Lord replied, “Out of a thousandpeople, nine hundred ninety nine are better off asleep but for abenevolent blessed soul, it is better to stay awake”.DreamsThe science of sleep is deep and mysterious. Many greatscientists are engrossed in unfolding its mystery. They areconducting experiments to find what parts of the body are atwork during sleep? What is the function of the inner psyche(antahkaran) during sleep? But the science behind dreams is notso easy to ascertain.During a dream, all outlets of the gross body are closedand only part of the antahkaran - the mind, the intellect and thechit are at work. The ego is not able to do anything during thistime. If the ego were operative in a dream, the dreamer wouldget up and start fighting or get up and leave. The dreamerwould carry out all the activities that are going on in his dream.But during dream the ego has no say in the matter. In a wakefulstate, however, the ego is operational and therefore says, ‘I amdoing this.’ In reality it is not capable of doing anything but inthe wakeful state all the avenues and outlets are open andtherefore through illusion, the ego assumes the doership.Dreams are real and exact. They are effective and thiscan be scientifically proven. Effects of dreams experienced bythe inner body are reflected on the gross body. That is why itis called effective. In what way is it effective? Let me explain.In a dream if a pauper dreams he is a king, he experiencesexhilaration and if a king dreams that he is a pauper, he becomesdepressed. He is as much depressed in a dream, as he is whenhe wakes up. He might even weep in his dream and uponwaking will find his eyes wet with tears. Some times, even afterwaking up the effect of the dream will linger and people continueto weep. Young children are startled and scared by the effectsof dreams and cry for a long time. Nightmares have an affecton the body, the rate of breathing increases, pulse rate, bloodpressure etc. too increase. All these effects can be scientificallyproven. Therefore if dreams are so effective how can they beconsidered unreal?There was a gentleman who had never seen me beforebut had an exact ‘darshan’ of me in his dream. Now how canone explain this phenomenon? How complex is this?Nothing that has never been seen before can appear inyour dreams. It might have been seen in any of your past lifecycles. Dreams are a collection of countless life cycles. It is notanything new. There are some that believe that thoughts of theday manifest as dreams at night. But during the day one thinksof all kinds of things, do they all manifest in dreams? Neverthelessis it not true either that you dream about something you havenever thought of before?In a dream, only the causal body and the subtle body areat work. The gross body does not take any part in it.One man dreamt that he was sick and the doctor examinedhim and pronounced him dead. He saw himself as dead. As hesaw his body being cremated, he woke up in a panic.In dreams even bachelors see themselves getting married,having children and getting those children married also!Questioner : What is the cause behind a dream?Dadashri : The world you see in your wakeful state isthe fruit of your past deeds. The dreams that you see are thematuring fruits of your past merit and demerit karma, but theireffects on you are lighter. Both are effects.Questioner : Is dream a tuber?Aptavani-1179180Aptavani-1Dadashri : Dreams are all tubers (complexes). Dream iskarma bound by two types of bodies. It is not karma bound bythree types of bodies. Therefore only two bodies experience it.Questioner : Can one bind karmas while dreaming?Dadashri : No, dreams are an effect only. Karmas cannotbe bound during dreams because the ego remains inactive.In a dream, the causal body and subtle body are at work.The relative self (pratishthit atma) is the seer of the dream andthe pure Self (shuddhatma) is the Knower and Seer of therelative self. The higher the number of obscuring veils of karmaone has, the less one sees. As the veils become thinner, thedream is seen with more clarity. Some people claim they neverdream. But they do have dreams; they simply cannot recollectthem because of their dense karmic veils.One man told me that he cried for two hours during adream but when I appeared in his dream, it soothed him andeverything subsided. He felt as light as a flower. You gainabundantly more by seeing ‘Dada’ in your dreams and askingfor His assistance than by seeing Him in person. This Dada iscapable of doing everything even in a dream, but you shouldknow how to ask. Many of my mahatmas see Dada every dayin their dreams. The scriptures say :“The One (Gnani) who is seen even once in a dreamWill shatter all illusions of the mind”The darshan of a Gnani Purush, even in a dream, will putan end to all illusions of the mind.The dreams you see during sleep involve two bodies. TheGnani asks if you believe the dream of the two bodies to bereal? No. Similarly, for the Gnani even the dream of three bodiesis not real. For the Gnani even the wakeful state of the threebodies is nothing but a dream. It is illusion (ignorance of one’sReal Self) that makes people believe the dream of three bodiesas real.What exhilaration a pauper feels when he becomes a kingin his dream?! But the moment he wakes up, he finds himselfwhere he was before. Similarly this worldly life is a dream. Assoon as one wakes up from this worldly dream, one has nocause for exhilaration. Everything remains as it is. After onedeparts from this worldly life, everything that belongs hereremains here; nothing accompanies the one who leaves fromhere.The worldly life is the dream of open eyes and the otheris a dream of closed eyes. Both are effective. The only differenceis that in the wakeful state, egoism is present.You can have thousands of dreams at night but they leaveno effect on you when you wake up because during sleep youremain only as the Seer (drashta) of dreams and the ego is notoperative there. The Gnani Purush remains the Knower andSeer of the passing circumstances even during the wakeful state.He is aware of the changes in the circumstances every samay(the minutest fraction of time which cannot be divided further).There is no trace of egoism in the Gnani, and therefore, evenin a wakeful state he finds everything to be a dream. The GnaniPurush always remains the Knower and the Seer of everything.FearEvery living creature in this universe is troubled by fear.Fear is inherent in every living being but the intensity of fear iswithin normal limits. They feel fear only when the circumstancesof fear arise. Humans, however suffer from viprit (wrong) fear.Viprit means in a single situation of fear, one will see or imaginehundreds more. It is also viprit fear to see fear where there isAptavani-1181182Aptavani-1Dadashri : Dreams are all tubers (complexes). Dream iskarma bound by two types of bodies. It is not karma bound bythree types of bodies. Therefore only two bodies experience it.Questioner : Can one bind karmas while dreaming?Dadashri : No, dreams are an effect only. Karmas cannotbe bound during dreams because the ego remains inactive.In a dream, the causal body and subtle body are at work.The relative self (pratishthit atma) is the seer of the dream andthe pure Self (shuddhatma) is the Knower and Seer of therelative self. The higher the number of obscuring veils of karmaone has, the less one sees. As the veils become thinner, thedream is seen with more clarity. Some people claim they neverdream. But they do have dreams; they simply cannot recollectthem because of their dense karmic veils.One man told me that he cried for two hours during adream but when I appeared in his dream, it soothed him andeverything subsided. He felt as light as a flower. You gainabundantly more by seeing ‘Dada’ in your dreams and askingfor His assistance than by seeing Him in person. This Dada iscapable of doing everything even in a dream, but you shouldknow how to ask. Many of my mahatmas see Dada every dayin their dreams. The scriptures say :“The One (Gnani) who is seen even once in a dreamWill shatter all illusions of the mind”The darshan of a Gnani Purush, even in a dream, will putan end to all illusions of the mind.The dreams you see during sleep involve two bodies. TheGnani asks if you believe the dream of the two bodies to bereal? No. Similarly, for the Gnani even the dream of three bodiesis not real. For the Gnani even the wakeful state of the threebodies is nothing but a dream. It is illusion (ignorance of one’sReal Self) that makes people believe the dream of three bodiesas real.What exhilaration a pauper feels when he becomes a kingin his dream?! But the moment he wakes up, he finds himselfwhere he was before. Similarly this worldly life is a dream. Assoon as one wakes up from this worldly dream, one has nocause for exhilaration. Everything remains as it is. After onedeparts from this worldly life, everything that belongs hereremains here; nothing accompanies the one who leaves fromhere.The worldly life is the dream of open eyes and the otheris a dream of closed eyes. Both are effective. The only differenceis that in the wakeful state, egoism is present.You can have thousands of dreams at night but they leaveno effect on you when you wake up because during sleep youremain only as the Seer (drashta) of dreams and the ego is notoperative there. The Gnani Purush remains the Knower andSeer of the passing circumstances even during the wakeful state.He is aware of the changes in the circumstances every samay(the minutest fraction of time which cannot be divided further).There is no trace of egoism in the Gnani, and therefore, evenin a wakeful state he finds everything to be a dream. The GnaniPurush always remains the Knower and the Seer of everything.FearEvery living creature in this universe is troubled by fear.Fear is inherent in every living being but the intensity of fear iswithin normal limits. They feel fear only when the circumstancesof fear arise. Humans, however suffer from viprit (wrong) fear.Viprit means in a single situation of fear, one will see or imaginehundreds more. It is also viprit fear to see fear where there isAptavani-1181182Aptavani-1none. For example you may have invited only one guest fordinner but you feel as if one hundred guests are coming. Thisis viprit fear. Viprit fear is false fear, imaginary and worldly andhighly aggrieved in intensity.What breeds fear? Fear is born from rejection borne outof abhorrence. Also there is continuous presence of fear infeelings of contempt and disgust. Why are some people afraidof the police? It is because they have a dislike towards them.Why do the law courts make one afraid? Does the court itselfharm anyone? No, but because of abhorrence for it, one fearsthe court. Fear is the expression of abhorrence and contemptone nurses within. One fails to see God in a snake and hencefear arises. An encounter with a snake is purely a circumstantialevidence. If one encounters a snake and no feelings of feararises within him, then the snake will pass away quietly withoutbothering him. Nothing will happen if there are no pendingaccounts from the past life.Samsaran marg is the path of spiritual evolution of allembodied living entities. It is the worldly life as we know it andit is full of illusion. It is like a ghost of fear, fright and apprehension.What is this ghost? It is an illusion, a false creation of the mind.If before going to bed one becomes fearful of a ghost or asnake in the room, then he would not be able to sleep the entirenight tormented by this fear. The fear will vanish as the daybreaks and there is light in the room. Such is the worldly lifetoo.The only difference between the fear of ghosts and thefear experienced in worldly life is that the latter is associatedwith a prolonged reaction to fear. For example worldly fear isassociated with abhorrence for a situation or a person onedislikes. In situations of fear of ghosts, the fear lasts only untildaylight arrives. It does not continue. Fear in the worldly life ispropagated through ignorance (raag and dwesh). One constantlytries to get rid of situations that cause fear.Fear exists because of ignorance of the Self. And reactionsof fear are propagated through the belief of ‘I am Chandulal’(believing the relative body to be one’s real self). Fear andreaction to fear is inherent in Chandulal. While praying ormeditating, a sudden loud noise will automatically startle andshake the physical body. This happens to Chandulal (reactivecomplex, reflex action)What happens if you meddle in something that you haveno charge or authority over? What if an office clerk forges hisboss’s signature? He will be scared the whole day long becausehe had no authority to do so. Likewise people in this world too,live outside their authority (parsatta). ‘I am Chandulal’ is thedomain of the non-Self. One has never seen or realized thedomain of the Self and therefore continues to exist in the domainof the non-Self. That is why there is perpetual existence of fearin the relative world.Everything will come to you naturally but you have tohave trust. People have fear in, ‘What is going to happen if Idon’t get this or that?’ This is all unnecessary (viprit) fear.Intellect is good for the peace of mind but not for incitingfear. The intellect that induces fear is false intellect. It should besuppressed even before it sprouts.If you want to fear anything then why not fear death?There is the possibility of death staring at you every moment ofthe day. Why do you not fear that? If you did, you woulddiscover the path to liberation. But instead people becomeindifferent and insensitive to such matters.Self- interest : Relative And RealEach individual should be independently aware of whatAptavani-1183184Aptavani-1none. For example you may have invited only one guest fordinner but you feel as if one hundred guests are coming. Thisis viprit fear. Viprit fear is false fear, imaginary and worldly andhighly aggrieved in intensity.What breeds fear? Fear is born from rejection borne outof abhorrence. Also there is continuous presence of fear infeelings of contempt and disgust. Why are some people afraidof the police? It is because they have a dislike towards them.Why do the law courts make one afraid? Does the court itselfharm anyone? No, but because of abhorrence for it, one fearsthe court. Fear is the expression of abhorrence and contemptone nurses within. One fails to see God in a snake and hencefear arises. An encounter with a snake is purely a circumstantialevidence. If one encounters a snake and no feelings of feararises within him, then the snake will pass away quietly withoutbothering him. Nothing will happen if there are no pendingaccounts from the past life.Samsaran marg is the path of spiritual evolution of allembodied living entities. It is the worldly life as we know it andit is full of illusion. It is like a ghost of fear, fright and apprehension.What is this ghost? It is an illusion, a false creation of the mind.If before going to bed one becomes fearful of a ghost or asnake in the room, then he would not be able to sleep the entirenight tormented by this fear. The fear will vanish as the daybreaks and there is light in the room. Such is the worldly lifetoo.The only difference between the fear of ghosts and thefear experienced in worldly life is that the latter is associatedwith a prolonged reaction to fear. For example worldly fear isassociated with abhorrence for a situation or a person onedislikes. In situations of fear of ghosts, the fear lasts only untildaylight arrives. It does not continue. Fear in the worldly life ispropagated through ignorance (raag and dwesh). One constantlytries to get rid of situations that cause fear.Fear exists because of ignorance of the Self. And reactionsof fear are propagated through the belief of ‘I am Chandulal’(believing the relative body to be one’s real self). Fear andreaction to fear is inherent in Chandulal. While praying ormeditating, a sudden loud noise will automatically startle andshake the physical body. This happens to Chandulal (reactivecomplex, reflex action)What happens if you meddle in something that you haveno charge or authority over? What if an office clerk forges hisboss’s signature? He will be scared the whole day long becausehe had no authority to do so. Likewise people in this world too,live outside their authority (parsatta). ‘I am Chandulal’ is thedomain of the non-Self. One has never seen or realized thedomain of the Self and therefore continues to exist in the domainof the non-Self. That is why there is perpetual existence of fearin the relative world.Everything will come to you naturally but you have tohave trust. People have fear in, ‘What is going to happen if Idon’t get this or that?’ This is all unnecessary (viprit) fear.Intellect is good for the peace of mind but not for incitingfear. The intellect that induces fear is false intellect. It should besuppressed even before it sprouts.If you want to fear anything then why not fear death?There is the possibility of death staring at you every moment ofthe day. Why do you not fear that? If you did, you woulddiscover the path to liberation. But instead people becomeindifferent and insensitive to such matters.Self- interest : Relative And RealEach individual should be independently aware of whatAptavani-1183184Aptavani-1he can do to become happy and what actions on his part bringunhappiness. Not knowing what is in his best interest, he triesto imitate others. Who should one imitate? One should imitatethe one who is intelligent. But there is nobody with suchintelligence around. The reason for this is that as long as thebelief of ‘I am Chandulal’ exists, you are an imitation yourself.Only the real One (the Gnani Purush) merits imitation. Whatwould you gain from imitating an imitation? Realization of theReal will give results.Only the Gnani is Real, all others are imitations. Youshould never mimic others. It is fashionable nowadays to imitateothers. People imitate the way they walk, the way they talk,sleep or sit.In Satyug (the era of the golden age) people were awareof their Self-interest in their worldly life. In those days there wasno impurity of conduct. People were virtuous. But nowadaysthere is immoral conduct everywhere and so how can there beany awareness of one’s Self-interest? People have learnt adverseconduct by watching others. No one has ever sought within andused what really exists within (the Self).As your awareness of your Self-interest (for the Soulonly) grows, your speech will start to become free of attachment.It will begin to become pure and everyone around you willbegin to accept it whether they are friends or foe.In every passing moment you should have the awarenessof that which hurts or helps your Self-interest. There are onlytwo things you have to be aware of : who you are and whatin the relative life is good or bad. The pure Self will neverdeceive or delude anyone. It is only the worldly life that isdeceitful and because of this you should be extremely cautiousand keenly aware of what is good and bad for your Self-interest. No one would drink insecticide (poison) on purpose –would anyone have a desire to do so?Life – AdjustmentsEveryone should have certain principles in life but theymust also adjust according to the circumstances. He who adjuststo his circumstances is worthy of his existence as a man.Adjustment is such a powerful tool that if you know how toadjust to every circumstances, it will take you all the way tomoksha. Adjust with every one who ‘disadjusts’ with you. Thereare inherent disadjustments amongst mother-in-laws, daughter-in-laws, sister-in-laws etc. But the one who wants liberationfrom this never ending cycle of worldly life, will have to adjust.Even in marriage if one of the spouses goes on ‘tearing’, theother should go on ‘mending’; only then the relationship will lastand peace prevail. Those who do not know how to adjust,people will consider them insane. There is no need for beingstubborn or persistent in the relative life. Just adjust everywhere.You should adjust even with a thief. The plight of modern manis like that of a blindfolded ox in the oil mill. How can he escapethe trap of going round and round?Once I had gone for a bath but someone had forgottento put a tumbler in the pail of hot water for me. I am a Gnaniand Gnanis always adjust. The water poured out for me in thebucket was too hot and the cold-water tank was empty. Iadjusted to my situation and took a bath by slowly rubbing thewater on my body. All the mahatmas were wondering whyDada was taking so long. But what else could I do? I had to letthe water get cold. I would never ask anyone to bring me this orthat. I would somehow just adjust. To adjust is dharma– one’sduty. In this world you have to adjust with both the negative andthe positive; the negative has to be turned into positive and thepositive into negative. If someone were to criticize my wisdom Iwould tell him that he is right and adjust immediately.Aptavani-1185186Aptavani-1he can do to become happy and what actions on his part bringunhappiness. Not knowing what is in his best interest, he triesto imitate others. Who should one imitate? One should imitatethe one who is intelligent. But there is nobody with suchintelligence around. The reason for this is that as long as thebelief of ‘I am Chandulal’ exists, you are an imitation yourself.Only the real One (the Gnani Purush) merits imitation. Whatwould you gain from imitating an imitation? Realization of theReal will give results.Only the Gnani is Real, all others are imitations. Youshould never mimic others. It is fashionable nowadays to imitateothers. People imitate the way they walk, the way they talk,sleep or sit.In Satyug (the era of the golden age) people were awareof their Self-interest in their worldly life. In those days there wasno impurity of conduct. People were virtuous. But nowadaysthere is immoral conduct everywhere and so how can there beany awareness of one’s Self-interest? People have learnt adverseconduct by watching others. No one has ever sought within andused what really exists within (the Self).As your awareness of your Self-interest (for the Soulonly) grows, your speech will start to become free of attachment.It will begin to become pure and everyone around you willbegin to accept it whether they are friends or foe.In every passing moment you should have the awarenessof that which hurts or helps your Self-interest. There are onlytwo things you have to be aware of : who you are and whatin the relative life is good or bad. The pure Self will neverdeceive or delude anyone. It is only the worldly life that isdeceitful and because of this you should be extremely cautiousand keenly aware of what is good and bad for your Self-interest. No one would drink insecticide (poison) on purpose –would anyone have a desire to do so?Life – AdjustmentsEveryone should have certain principles in life but theymust also adjust according to the circumstances. He who adjuststo his circumstances is worthy of his existence as a man.Adjustment is such a powerful tool that if you know how toadjust to every circumstances, it will take you all the way tomoksha. Adjust with every one who ‘disadjusts’ with you. Thereare inherent disadjustments amongst mother-in-laws, daughter-in-laws, sister-in-laws etc. But the one who wants liberationfrom this never ending cycle of worldly life, will have to adjust.Even in marriage if one of the spouses goes on ‘tearing’, theother should go on ‘mending’; only then the relationship will lastand peace prevail. Those who do not know how to adjust,people will consider them insane. There is no need for beingstubborn or persistent in the relative life. Just adjust everywhere.You should adjust even with a thief. The plight of modern manis like that of a blindfolded ox in the oil mill. How can he escapethe trap of going round and round?Once I had gone for a bath but someone had forgottento put a tumbler in the pail of hot water for me. I am a Gnaniand Gnanis always adjust. The water poured out for me in thebucket was too hot and the cold-water tank was empty. Iadjusted to my situation and took a bath by slowly rubbing thewater on my body. All the mahatmas were wondering whyDada was taking so long. But what else could I do? I had to letthe water get cold. I would never ask anyone to bring me this orthat. I would somehow just adjust. To adjust is dharma– one’sduty. In this world you have to adjust with both the negative andthe positive; the negative has to be turned into positive and thepositive into negative. If someone were to criticize my wisdom Iwould tell him that he is right and adjust immediately.Aptavani-1185186Aptavani-1Wise is the person who does not hurt any one. Wise isthe one who accepts any misery or trouble given to him byothers. He spends the entire day obliging others. From themoment he wakes up he thinks about how he can be helpful toothers. That is called a human. He will find a path to liberation.Conflicts“Do not get into conflict with anyone and avoid allconflicts.”You will achieve liberation if you sincerely follow thisdictum of mine. Your dedication and the power of my wordswill do all the work. You have to be ready.If someone were to adhere sincerely to just one of mydictums, he will achieve liberation. Albeit even if someone wereto ‘swallow’ just one word of what I say, liberation will be athand – but he has to swallow my word exactly as it is. Onemust not try to chew it (analyze with his intellect). It will notwork and on the contrary it will ruin everything.Living by just a single word of mine for one day willgenerate tremendous spiritual energy. The energy and aura ofthe Self will manifest. Within you exists so much energy that youcan avoid any conflict thrust upon you by anyone. If you collidewith those who are not worried about their own welfare, theywill take you down with them. Do you want liberation or doyou want to remain in conflict with such people? Such peoplewill never achieve liberation but they will also hold you backalong with them. How can you afford that? If you desire liberation,you should not be too concerned about them either. You mustbe cautious and alert from all sides; otherwise the world is suchthat it will not allow you to be free from its bondage, despiteyour earnest desire to be free. Conflicts will constantly arise,but you have to slowly pass through them without creating anyfriction. I go as far as saying that if your ‘dhoti’ is caught in abush and you see that your train for liberation is departing, donot wait to untangle the dhoti. Leave the dhoti behind and runfor the train! It is not worth getting caught even for a fractionof a moment in any situation whatsoever. Wherever you become‘stuck’, there you lose the awareness of the Self.If by mistake you happen to come in conflict withsomeone, you must resolve it. Settle that conflict carefully withequanimity and without creating any friction.EconomyEconomy is to adjust to your financial situation as andwhen it arises. Live comfortably when you have enough butfrugally when money is tight. You should avoid getting into debtsaltogether. If you have to you can borrow money for businessbut not for pleasure. You can borrow money for your survivalbut not to revel in finery.Questioner : What is the difference between greed andmiserliness?Dadashri : A miser is only concerned with moneywhereas a greedy person has a greed for everything. He hasgreed for respect as well as money. He eyes everything greedilyand wants to possess it all. What is the only intention of agreedy person? To collect and hoard is the only driving impulsethat absorbs his life. Take the ants for example. They will seea wing of an insect and they will drag it away. The ants willcollect enough food to last them fifteen years; their focus is tocollect and if somebody interferes with them, they will bite theculprit. The ants go on collecting all their life and a free loadingmouse will finish it all up in no time!Questioner : Dada, is there a difference between beingmiserly and being frugal?Aptavani-1187188Aptavani-1Wise is the person who does not hurt any one. Wise isthe one who accepts any misery or trouble given to him byothers. He spends the entire day obliging others. From themoment he wakes up he thinks about how he can be helpful toothers. That is called a human. He will find a path to liberation.Conflicts“Do not get into conflict with anyone and avoid allconflicts.”You will achieve liberation if you sincerely follow thisdictum of mine. Your dedication and the power of my wordswill do all the work. You have to be ready.If someone were to adhere sincerely to just one of mydictums, he will achieve liberation. Albeit even if someone wereto ‘swallow’ just one word of what I say, liberation will be athand – but he has to swallow my word exactly as it is. Onemust not try to chew it (analyze with his intellect). It will notwork and on the contrary it will ruin everything.Living by just a single word of mine for one day willgenerate tremendous spiritual energy. The energy and aura ofthe Self will manifest. Within you exists so much energy that youcan avoid any conflict thrust upon you by anyone. If you collidewith those who are not worried about their own welfare, theywill take you down with them. Do you want liberation or doyou want to remain in conflict with such people? Such peoplewill never achieve liberation but they will also hold you backalong with them. How can you afford that? If you desire liberation,you should not be too concerned about them either. You mustbe cautious and alert from all sides; otherwise the world is suchthat it will not allow you to be free from its bondage, despiteyour earnest desire to be free. Conflicts will constantly arise,but you have to slowly pass through them without creating anyfriction. I go as far as saying that if your ‘dhoti’ is caught in abush and you see that your train for liberation is departing, donot wait to untangle the dhoti. Leave the dhoti behind and runfor the train! It is not worth getting caught even for a fractionof a moment in any situation whatsoever. Wherever you become‘stuck’, there you lose the awareness of the Self.If by mistake you happen to come in conflict withsomeone, you must resolve it. Settle that conflict carefully withequanimity and without creating any friction.EconomyEconomy is to adjust to your financial situation as andwhen it arises. Live comfortably when you have enough butfrugally when money is tight. You should avoid getting into debtsaltogether. If you have to you can borrow money for businessbut not for pleasure. You can borrow money for your survivalbut not to revel in finery.Questioner : What is the difference between greed andmiserliness?Dadashri : A miser is only concerned with moneywhereas a greedy person has a greed for everything. He hasgreed for respect as well as money. He eyes everything greedilyand wants to possess it all. What is the only intention of agreedy person? To collect and hoard is the only driving impulsethat absorbs his life. Take the ants for example. They will seea wing of an insect and they will drag it away. The ants willcollect enough food to last them fifteen years; their focus is tocollect and if somebody interferes with them, they will bite theculprit. The ants go on collecting all their life and a free loadingmouse will finish it all up in no time!Questioner : Dada, is there a difference between beingmiserly and being frugal?Aptavani-1187188Aptavani-1Dadashri : Yes, a great difference. Say if your incomeis a thousand rupees a month, your expense should be aroundeight hundred rupees a month and if your income is five hundredrupees a month, your expense should be around four hundredrupees. That is called being frugal. But a miser will spend onlyfour hundred rupees whether his salary is a thousand rupees ortwo thousand rupees. He would rather walk than take a taxi.Frugality is economics; it helps make provision for futureproblems. People become irritated with miserly people, not withthose who are frugal. In fact frugality and miserliness are relativevalues. A generous person will not like even a frugal person. Allthese problems arise from the terminology of the worldly language– some people may say that it is not good to be over generous.But a frugal person would never give up his economic approachand a miser will remain a miser. Excessive generosity ormiserliness are natural attributes, and no matter how hard aperson tries, these attributes cannot be changed. All prakrut(the non-Self) attributes are natural. Ultimately normality will beneeded in everything.As far as I am concerned, even the money that mybusiness partner gives me will be used only for the taxi fareor the train fare. For me there is neither the inclination towant to spend nor the inclination to not want to spend. Thereis no decision either way. Money is not to be wasted. It isto be used as needed.This Dada is very precise, frugal and also generous. Heis very generous but completely adjustable. He is very generousbut at the same time he is frugal. He is generous where othersare concerned and for himself he is frugal and in satsang he isvery precise.People notice that I use my speech sparingly in satsang.My economy is adjustable; it is the finest. I am frugal even whenI use water. For me these attributes are natural and spontaneous.Vishaya : Subjects Of EnjoymentThe world says that vishayas (sex and other topics orsubjects that engages the attention of the self) does not allowone to achieve liberation. The term vishaya means a subject ora topic in English. There are endless subjects in this world. Ifthese subjects (vishayas) were truly an obstacle to liberation,then no one would have ever achieved liberation. Visahayas didnot stop Lord Mahavir from achieving liberation, then why dothey become an obstacle for you? It is not vishayas that hindersyour liberation; it is your own obstinacy. The Lord remainednirvishayi – detached from vishaya despite living amindstcountless vishayas and acquired liberation. What is vishaya? Itis anything in which the mind becomes absorbed and delights.Anything in which the mind, buddhi, chit and ego becomeengrossed in, is vishaya. How many kinds of vishayas are there?There are endless vishayas. If you see a rose that you like in agarden and you run after it, then it is a vishaya. If you keepbeing reminded of diamonds - it is vishaya. If after acquiring ityou are not reminded of it again, then it has been settled withequanimity. If you keep remembering it, then it is not settled andthat is indeed a vishaya.It is natural for desire to arise, but it is harmful andobstructive to liberation to continue to desire.Women will look at sarees, but if they keep thinkingabout them, that is their vishaya. Discord is a result of interactionsof vishaya.Abundant vishayas will confront those who are on thepath of liberation. However this Akram path of liberation isDada Bhagwan’s path of liberation, where one can remainnirvishayee amidst endless vishayas!A diseased person (one with excess anger, greed, prideand attachment) is more susceptible to passion and sensuality.Aptavani-1189190Aptavani-1Dadashri : Yes, a great difference. Say if your incomeis a thousand rupees a month, your expense should be aroundeight hundred rupees a month and if your income is five hundredrupees a month, your expense should be around four hundredrupees. That is called being frugal. But a miser will spend onlyfour hundred rupees whether his salary is a thousand rupees ortwo thousand rupees. He would rather walk than take a taxi.Frugality is economics; it helps make provision for futureproblems. People become irritated with miserly people, not withthose who are frugal. In fact frugality and miserliness are relativevalues. A generous person will not like even a frugal person. Allthese problems arise from the terminology of the worldly language– some people may say that it is not good to be over generous.But a frugal person would never give up his economic approachand a miser will remain a miser. Excessive generosity ormiserliness are natural attributes, and no matter how hard aperson tries, these attributes cannot be changed. All prakrut(the non-Self) attributes are natural. Ultimately normality will beneeded in everything.As far as I am concerned, even the money that mybusiness partner gives me will be used only for the taxi fareor the train fare. For me there is neither the inclination towant to spend nor the inclination to not want to spend. Thereis no decision either way. Money is not to be wasted. It isto be used as needed.This Dada is very precise, frugal and also generous. Heis very generous but completely adjustable. He is very generousbut at the same time he is frugal. He is generous where othersare concerned and for himself he is frugal and in satsang he isvery precise.People notice that I use my speech sparingly in satsang.My economy is adjustable; it is the finest. I am frugal even whenI use water. For me these attributes are natural and spontaneous.Vishaya : Subjects Of EnjoymentThe world says that vishayas (sex and other topics orsubjects that engages the attention of the self) does not allowone to achieve liberation. The term vishaya means a subject ora topic in English. There are endless subjects in this world. Ifthese subjects (vishayas) were truly an obstacle to liberation,then no one would have ever achieved liberation. Visahayas didnot stop Lord Mahavir from achieving liberation, then why dothey become an obstacle for you? It is not vishayas that hindersyour liberation; it is your own obstinacy. The Lord remainednirvishayi – detached from vishaya despite living amindstcountless vishayas and acquired liberation. What is vishaya? Itis anything in which the mind becomes absorbed and delights.Anything in which the mind, buddhi, chit and ego becomeengrossed in, is vishaya. How many kinds of vishayas are there?There are endless vishayas. If you see a rose that you like in agarden and you run after it, then it is a vishaya. If you keepbeing reminded of diamonds - it is vishaya. If after acquiring ityou are not reminded of it again, then it has been settled withequanimity. If you keep remembering it, then it is not settled andthat is indeed a vishaya.It is natural for desire to arise, but it is harmful andobstructive to liberation to continue to desire.Women will look at sarees, but if they keep thinkingabout them, that is their vishaya. Discord is a result of interactionsof vishaya.Abundant vishayas will confront those who are on thepath of liberation. However this Akram path of liberation isDada Bhagwan’s path of liberation, where one can remainnirvishayee amidst endless vishayas!A diseased person (one with excess anger, greed, prideand attachment) is more susceptible to passion and sensuality.Aptavani-1189190Aptavani-1A healthy person is more stable.Vishayas do not cause diseases. But only when greedenters into vishayas, does it invite disease.. People blame vishaya.Why condemn vishaya? Blame the greed for it. Vishaya is notharmful but the greed for it is. It is considered greed whenpeople insist that their meal be cooked a certain way and thatthey cannot do without certain ingredients in their food. Becausethere is greed, it is a vishaya and that is the very disease. Anger,pride, attachment and greed are the very things that causedisease.When you drink tea after eating something sweet, do younot find it tasteless? Do you not do injustice to the tea? Tea issweet but why do you not taste the sweetness? It is becauseyou ate something sweet before drinking tea. Similarly, I giveyou Gnan, which has the sweetest taste. Thereafter all sensualpleasures of the world, despite being sweet, will taste bitter.There is a saying that even rice pudding tastes bitter when onehas malaria. It tastes bitter because the mouth becomes bitter,so how can one blame the rice pudding? Similarly, through myAkram Gnan, as your ‘temperature’ of the temptations falls,you will find that the vishayas of the whole world will graduallybecome tasteless. Loss of taste in vishayas is a gauge thatmeasures one’s fever for vishayas.Remove the above linear lineVishayas gradually lose their interest and appeal even inthe Kramic Path, but they are rendered tasteless through theego and therefore they will confront the seeker again. But thisis not so in my Akram Path. In the midst of the ocean ofvishayas, I remain nirvishayee. Nirvishayee is a state like that ofthe lotus growing in the lake and yet it remains untouched by thewater. I have given up ownership of this body, so nothing touchesme or troubles me. I have taken away the sense of ownershipfrom all my mahatmas and that is why they can live like a lotusin the lake of vishayas. It is the pudgal (body complex) thatpaints the picture of vishaya but your involvement in it, endorsesit. If however, you do not endorse it, and remain just the Seerand the Knower, you remain unbound.A person, who has keen interest and propensity towardsa particular subject, will be very proficient in that subject. Peoplebecome deeply engrossed in their own vishaya and it is preciselybecause of this engrossment that they appear idiotic. The pureSelf is nirvishayee. The whole world is filled with vishayas.People have started to revere the vishaya that appeals to them.For example a tapasvi (ascetic) will revere the vishaya of penance(tapa); the renouncers (tyagis) that of renunciation (tyag); thepreachers that of preaching and the ordinary worldly men(sansaaris) that of vishayas of the worldly life (sansaar). Thenthey claim that they do purusharth (independent endeavor forthe Self). They should at least ask the Gnani whether what theyare doing is indeed purusharth or something else. Alas! Theymistakenly believe what they do is of their own independent selfeffort when in reality it is all mandatory. People revere vishayasand yet they seek the Soul, which is free from all vishaya. Thisleads them nowhere. Whatever they do, they do with their ego,they become engrossed in it and go beyond the normal limits.All that is vishaya. No one understands the real knowledgebehind this Gnan and everyone is misled. And yet nobody is atfault. I have to say it exactly as it is and it is purely out ofcompassion that this speech appears stern to some. Otherwisewhy would a Gnani, such as I, have to use harsh words? Whatcan I do? It is because of the current strange times that the rightpath cannot be found, and it is to point people in the rightdirection, that I have to resort to such harsh language. Otherwisethe Gnani Purush is an ocean of compassion.Someone once asked me why I wear a particular coat,Aptavani-1191192Aptavani-1A healthy person is more stable.Vishayas do not cause diseases. But only when greedenters into vishayas, does it invite disease.. People blame vishaya.Why condemn vishaya? Blame the greed for it. Vishaya is notharmful but the greed for it is. It is considered greed whenpeople insist that their meal be cooked a certain way and thatthey cannot do without certain ingredients in their food. Becausethere is greed, it is a vishaya and that is the very disease. Anger,pride, attachment and greed are the very things that causedisease.When you drink tea after eating something sweet, do younot find it tasteless? Do you not do injustice to the tea? Tea issweet but why do you not taste the sweetness? It is becauseyou ate something sweet before drinking tea. Similarly, I giveyou Gnan, which has the sweetest taste. Thereafter all sensualpleasures of the world, despite being sweet, will taste bitter.There is a saying that even rice pudding tastes bitter when onehas malaria. It tastes bitter because the mouth becomes bitter,so how can one blame the rice pudding? Similarly, through myAkram Gnan, as your ‘temperature’ of the temptations falls,you will find that the vishayas of the whole world will graduallybecome tasteless. Loss of taste in vishayas is a gauge thatmeasures one’s fever for vishayas.Remove the above linear lineVishayas gradually lose their interest and appeal even inthe Kramic Path, but they are rendered tasteless through theego and therefore they will confront the seeker again. But thisis not so in my Akram Path. In the midst of the ocean ofvishayas, I remain nirvishayee. Nirvishayee is a state like that ofthe lotus growing in the lake and yet it remains untouched by thewater. I have given up ownership of this body, so nothing touchesme or troubles me. I have taken away the sense of ownershipfrom all my mahatmas and that is why they can live like a lotusin the lake of vishayas. It is the pudgal (body complex) thatpaints the picture of vishaya but your involvement in it, endorsesit. If however, you do not endorse it, and remain just the Seerand the Knower, you remain unbound.A person, who has keen interest and propensity towardsa particular subject, will be very proficient in that subject. Peoplebecome deeply engrossed in their own vishaya and it is preciselybecause of this engrossment that they appear idiotic. The pureSelf is nirvishayee. The whole world is filled with vishayas.People have started to revere the vishaya that appeals to them.For example a tapasvi (ascetic) will revere the vishaya of penance(tapa); the renouncers (tyagis) that of renunciation (tyag); thepreachers that of preaching and the ordinary worldly men(sansaaris) that of vishayas of the worldly life (sansaar). Thenthey claim that they do purusharth (independent endeavor forthe Self). They should at least ask the Gnani whether what theyare doing is indeed purusharth or something else. Alas! Theymistakenly believe what they do is of their own independent selfeffort when in reality it is all mandatory. People revere vishayasand yet they seek the Soul, which is free from all vishaya. Thisleads them nowhere. Whatever they do, they do with their ego,they become engrossed in it and go beyond the normal limits.All that is vishaya. No one understands the real knowledgebehind this Gnan and everyone is misled. And yet nobody is atfault. I have to say it exactly as it is and it is purely out ofcompassion that this speech appears stern to some. Otherwisewhy would a Gnani, such as I, have to use harsh words? Whatcan I do? It is because of the current strange times that the rightpath cannot be found, and it is to point people in the rightdirection, that I have to resort to such harsh language. Otherwisethe Gnani Purush is an ocean of compassion.Someone once asked me why I wear a particular coat,Aptavani-1191192Aptavani-1I told him it is my nirvishayee vishaya. (I have it but I am notinvolved in it).There are two kinds of vishayas (subjects) : One is avishaya (subjective involvement) and the other is a nirvishayeevishaya (subject-without-involvement). The vishaya for whichthere is not an iota of attentiveness, interest or enjoyment isnirvishayee vishaya.Whatever vishayas the ego has brought forth from thepast life, the atoms for those vishayas are present in the bodycomplex in this life. In my mahatmas I have destroyed the egoof vishaya (charging ego) but there still remains the atoms broughtforth from their previous life, which will discharge upon yieldingtheir fruits. They will only be confronted with the dischare egoof the vishayas that was filled in the past life. They will not beconfronted with the ego of vishayas that has been uprooted anddischarged. These vishayas then, will not come in front of them.The body will cease to exist only when the discharge ego iscompletely exhausted and all atoms have dissipated after yieldingtheir fruits. It is only when each and every atom in the body hasbeen discharged with equanimity, that this body will achieveliberation.The relative religions of the world incorrectly believe thatbandha (inflow of karmic matter towards the Self, chargingkarma) is taking place when in fact there is abandha (absenceof inflow, all discharging) taking place. They have no clue as towhere and how charging of karma is actually taking place. Thisis a very profound subtle statement. This concept is difficult tounderstand. The whole world has the knowledge of vishayas(subject) they have studied. They become vishayee (involved)in the subject they have studied. The relative religions havedisclosed only five vishayas but in reality they are infinite. Tobecome abnormal means to become above normal or belownormal i.e. to become a vishayee. To become vishayee meansone is in pursuit of worldly (relative) knowledge. There is noknowledge of the Self in that pursuit.In fact, the real Self is untainted or untouched by anyobject of sense-pleasure (nirvishayee - not in any subject). It isabsolutely unaffected by anything that is in the realm of the non-Self. It is the mind, speech and body that indulge in vishayas.When the Self becomes completely dissociated from these three,final liberation is attained.Vishaya : Sexual IndulgenceThere is a great deal of misunderstanding regarding vishaya(sex) in the world. The scriptures state that sexuality is thepoison that prevents liberation. Many people state the same. Iam the only one who says that sexual indulgence is not thepoison but one’s lack of fear in sexual indulgence is the poison.So beware of sexual indulgence. Fearless indulgence in sex isvenom. When can one be fearless in sexual indulgence? It iswhen one does not instinctively retract his feet out of the wayof two or three approaching snakes. If one has no fear ofsnakes and does not pull his feet up, that is a sign of theabsolute Gnani. Until you are an absolute Gnani, you will retractyour feet in fear. That is why I give you a thermometer as towhen you can remain fearless in sexual indulgence. If you canremain fearless amidst snakes, then you can remain fearless insex. But if you are fearful, then be fearful of sex too. All in allyou cannot remain fearless in sexual indulgence. Lord Mahavirtoo feared it. I too am fearful of it. To be fearless in sex is tobe reckless.You should neither revere sexuality, nor should you fearor detest it. But how do you behave when you are confrontedwith a snake? You act cautiously. Similarly be very cautious inall sexual matters. Do not become fearless here.Revering sexuality begets only more sexuality. AcquisitionAptavani-1193194Aptavani-1I told him it is my nirvishayee vishaya. (I have it but I am notinvolved in it).There are two kinds of vishayas (subjects) : One is avishaya (subjective involvement) and the other is a nirvishayeevishaya (subject-without-involvement). The vishaya for whichthere is not an iota of attentiveness, interest or enjoyment isnirvishayee vishaya.Whatever vishayas the ego has brought forth from thepast life, the atoms for those vishayas are present in the bodycomplex in this life. In my mahatmas I have destroyed the egoof vishaya (charging ego) but there still remains the atoms broughtforth from their previous life, which will discharge upon yieldingtheir fruits. They will only be confronted with the dischare egoof the vishayas that was filled in the past life. They will not beconfronted with the ego of vishayas that has been uprooted anddischarged. These vishayas then, will not come in front of them.The body will cease to exist only when the discharge ego iscompletely exhausted and all atoms have dissipated after yieldingtheir fruits. It is only when each and every atom in the body hasbeen discharged with equanimity, that this body will achieveliberation.The relative religions of the world incorrectly believe thatbandha (inflow of karmic matter towards the Self, chargingkarma) is taking place when in fact there is abandha (absenceof inflow, all discharging) taking place. They have no clue as towhere and how charging of karma is actually taking place. Thisis a very profound subtle statement. This concept is difficult tounderstand. The whole world has the knowledge of vishayas(subject) they have studied. They become vishayee (involved)in the subject they have studied. The relative religions havedisclosed only five vishayas but in reality they are infinite. Tobecome abnormal means to become above normal or belownormal i.e. to become a vishayee. To become vishayee meansone is in pursuit of worldly (relative) knowledge. There is noknowledge of the Self in that pursuit.In fact, the real Self is untainted or untouched by anyobject of sense-pleasure (nirvishayee - not in any subject). It isabsolutely unaffected by anything that is in the realm of the non-Self. It is the mind, speech and body that indulge in vishayas.When the Self becomes completely dissociated from these three,final liberation is attained.Vishaya : Sexual IndulgenceThere is a great deal of misunderstanding regarding vishaya(sex) in the world. The scriptures state that sexuality is thepoison that prevents liberation. Many people state the same. Iam the only one who says that sexual indulgence is not thepoison but one’s lack of fear in sexual indulgence is the poison.So beware of sexual indulgence. Fearless indulgence in sex isvenom. When can one be fearless in sexual indulgence? It iswhen one does not instinctively retract his feet out of the wayof two or three approaching snakes. If one has no fear ofsnakes and does not pull his feet up, that is a sign of theabsolute Gnani. Until you are an absolute Gnani, you will retractyour feet in fear. That is why I give you a thermometer as towhen you can remain fearless in sexual indulgence. If you canremain fearless amidst snakes, then you can remain fearless insex. But if you are fearful, then be fearful of sex too. All in allyou cannot remain fearless in sexual indulgence. Lord Mahavirtoo feared it. I too am fearful of it. To be fearless in sex is tobe reckless.You should neither revere sexuality, nor should you fearor detest it. But how do you behave when you are confrontedwith a snake? You act cautiously. Similarly be very cautious inall sexual matters. Do not become fearless here.Revering sexuality begets only more sexuality. AcquisitionAptavani-1193194Aptavani-1or accumulation (grahan) results in renunciation (tyaag) andrenunciation will result in acquisition. Acquisition is the anti-thesis of renunciation. Anything that is subject to anti-thesis orduality is considered a vishaya.What is the beginning of sexuality? It is to look at awoman lustfully and become captivated. But does one gets lostwith lust by looking at every woman? If seeing one womanincites lust and seeing another does not, then there is somethingwrong. If looking at women adulterates men, then every womanshould have the same effect on men. If women were indeed theroot cause, then looking at every woman would incite lust inmen. But that is not the case; it is only certain atoms that attractother atoms. As long as there is even just one atom of sexuality.one cannot have syadvaad speech (speech that hurts no one).Humans continually desire sex. Animals do not desire sexall the time. If sex was the real culprit, then why does a manhave sexual feelings for his wife but not his mother? It is becausesex is not the issue (vishaya is not a vishaya). Illusion, ignoranceof the Self, is the culprit, that is vishaya.I can show you the way to stop these vishayas. Thesevishayas are like automatic cameras. Do not let images berecorded by them. Take a photograph of only the pure Self‘Shuddhatma’. In reality, there is no such thing as vishaya. Eventhe strongest of brahmacharis (those who have vowed to beand remain celibate) have become exhausted trying to understandit. Anything that a person becomes engrossed in is a vishaya; hebecomes blind to what lies ahead of him and what is behindhim. That is called mohandha (blinded by infatuation, blinded bylust, blinded by illusion).The Lord says that which is not in control, is a vishaya.It is egoism to say, “I am the enjoyer of sex”. If you were theone enjoying the sexual act or thought, then you should becompletely satisfied with it. But it is not so. Vishay does notenjoy the vishaya (the subject does not enjoy the subject, thereis really no enjoyer), it is merely the account and interaction ofatoms (charged and collected from past life discharging anddissipating in current life). Each sense organ is proficient in itsown subject matter (vishaya) but not so in any other. Can thenose taste the sweetness in the ice cream? When an account ofatoms is being settled, it is not considered vishaya, but to becomeengrossed or absorbed during the discharge of that account,that is vishaya. The senses do not play a role in it; they merelyconvey the message. That is why I say : ‘One is not JitendriyaJina (the One who has conquered all senses) if he has conqueredthe vishaya of the senses; Jietendriya Jina is the One whosevision has turned to the Seer, the one whose knowledge andawareness have become one with the Knower.’ Lord Mahavirtoo said the same thing.People do not live for sex but they live to satisfy the egoof sex.People enjoy sex because they have so much sufferingwithin, but if they were to think critically about it, they would beable to eliminate sexuality altogether. If the skin over the bodywere removed, would anyone feel any attraction towards thatbody? The skin is merely a sheet covering the body. And theabdomen is nothing but a pot of excreta; if cut open, only stoolwould come out of it. Would you like to touch a hand that hasbeen skinned and is oozing with pus? No one would touch it.All this prevails because no one has given it any thought. Thisillusion is sheer madness. It exists in the absence of criticalthinking.The vishaya involving inanimate things (achetan) is betterthan vishaya involving an animate (mishra-chetan, another humanbeing) entity. Mishra chetan has a propensity towards attachmentand abhorrence (raag and dwesh) and will not allow you to beAptavani-1195196Aptavani-1or accumulation (grahan) results in renunciation (tyaag) andrenunciation will result in acquisition. Acquisition is the anti-thesis of renunciation. Anything that is subject to anti-thesis orduality is considered a vishaya.What is the beginning of sexuality? It is to look at awoman lustfully and become captivated. But does one gets lostwith lust by looking at every woman? If seeing one womanincites lust and seeing another does not, then there is somethingwrong. If looking at women adulterates men, then every womanshould have the same effect on men. If women were indeed theroot cause, then looking at every woman would incite lust inmen. But that is not the case; it is only certain atoms that attractother atoms. As long as there is even just one atom of sexuality.one cannot have syadvaad speech (speech that hurts no one).Humans continually desire sex. Animals do not desire sexall the time. If sex was the real culprit, then why does a manhave sexual feelings for his wife but not his mother? It is becausesex is not the issue (vishaya is not a vishaya). Illusion, ignoranceof the Self, is the culprit, that is vishaya.I can show you the way to stop these vishayas. Thesevishayas are like automatic cameras. Do not let images berecorded by them. Take a photograph of only the pure Self‘Shuddhatma’. In reality, there is no such thing as vishaya. Eventhe strongest of brahmacharis (those who have vowed to beand remain celibate) have become exhausted trying to understandit. Anything that a person becomes engrossed in is a vishaya; hebecomes blind to what lies ahead of him and what is behindhim. That is called mohandha (blinded by infatuation, blinded bylust, blinded by illusion).The Lord says that which is not in control, is a vishaya.It is egoism to say, “I am the enjoyer of sex”. If you were theone enjoying the sexual act or thought, then you should becompletely satisfied with it. But it is not so. Vishay does notenjoy the vishaya (the subject does not enjoy the subject, thereis really no enjoyer), it is merely the account and interaction ofatoms (charged and collected from past life discharging anddissipating in current life). Each sense organ is proficient in itsown subject matter (vishaya) but not so in any other. Can thenose taste the sweetness in the ice cream? When an account ofatoms is being settled, it is not considered vishaya, but to becomeengrossed or absorbed during the discharge of that account,that is vishaya. The senses do not play a role in it; they merelyconvey the message. That is why I say : ‘One is not JitendriyaJina (the One who has conquered all senses) if he has conqueredthe vishaya of the senses; Jietendriya Jina is the One whosevision has turned to the Seer, the one whose knowledge andawareness have become one with the Knower.’ Lord Mahavirtoo said the same thing.People do not live for sex but they live to satisfy the egoof sex.People enjoy sex because they have so much sufferingwithin, but if they were to think critically about it, they would beable to eliminate sexuality altogether. If the skin over the bodywere removed, would anyone feel any attraction towards thatbody? The skin is merely a sheet covering the body. And theabdomen is nothing but a pot of excreta; if cut open, only stoolwould come out of it. Would you like to touch a hand that hasbeen skinned and is oozing with pus? No one would touch it.All this prevails because no one has given it any thought. Thisillusion is sheer madness. It exists in the absence of criticalthinking.The vishaya involving inanimate things (achetan) is betterthan vishaya involving an animate (mishra-chetan, another humanbeing) entity. Mishra chetan has a propensity towards attachmentand abhorrence (raag and dwesh) and will not allow you to beAptavani-1195196Aptavani-1free even if you so desire. Whereas achetan (non-living) is vitarag(absence of attachment-abhorrence), if you let it go, it will begone. It will be gone as soon as you let go of it. It all dependsupon you.Sexuality is not to be invited. One’s attitude towards sexshould be like that of a vegetarian who is forced to eat meat,as a last resort after several days of starvation. Then it is notconsidered a crime of one’s own volition. Sex should be indulgedin as a last resort. The presence or absence of sexual indulgenceis not in anyone’s control. Does anyone willingly get arrested?No. Sex that is forced upon you is not considered vishaya, butthinking of or contemplating about sex, even though it has notbeen acted upon, is vishaya. This is the law of the Lord. Whenthe body enjoys a sexual act, it is a discharge, but when themind enjoys it, a seed is sown, charged for the next life formore sexual indulgence. When you become avasthit (absorbedin a vishaya), vyavasthit is inevitable (result is inevitable). Thereis endless torment of sexuality going on in this world. By wearingbeautiful clothes and looking attractive, if you become instrumentalin sowing the seed of lust in others, you become liable and willhave to repay. Even if you analyze sex through your intellect,you will find it dirty. Wherever you slip (become the enjoyer),that is vishaya.A person, who prefers death to begging for sex, can winthis world. Such a unique quality indeed accounts for a veryhonorable life.Desire for sex is a natural thing but to continue havingdesires for sex is detrimental and an obstacle in your spiritualprogress.Span of life (longevity) depends on the number ofbreaths; it becomes shorter as one consumes more breaths.Anger, pride, attachment, greed, lust and deceit consume morebreaths. Sexual activity leads to an enormous consumption ofbreaths. That is why I tell people engaged in this worldly lifethat if they cannot do anything it is fine, but they should atleast conserve money and virya (semen, vitality). These twothings are the principle foundations of the worldly life. Alcoholis considered to be harmful because it drives one towardssexuality.There are infinite numbers of vishayas. A million birthswill not suffice for one to enjoy them and exhaust them. I havemade my mahatmas free from the vishayas (nirvishayee) despitethe fact that they continue enjoying all vishayas.Until one acquires Self-realization, one is constantlyengulfed by vishayas because of the presence of the ego andthe belief of doer-ship.Those whose vishay – topic, is non-attachment, only sucha person can understand a Vitarag - the Absolute, but how canthose who are subject to anger, pride, attachment and greed,understand a Vitarag? If a person who is not Self-realized, wereto suppress his sexuality for his entire life, he would still bevunerable to sexuality in his next life. There is no escapingsexuality without Self-realisation.The Self is nirvishayee, so how can it enjoy any vishayas?If the Self is the enjoyer of vishaya, it would never attain liberationbecause enjoyment of sense-pleasure would become an integraland inseparable part of the Self, it would become a compound.This is against the principles of the function of elements. TheSelf can never enjoy any vishaya. It is an illusion, an exerciseof the ego, when one says, ‘I enjoyed’. And this is preciselywhy there is so much confusion and why one’s spiritual progressis at a stand still. If this illusion is destroyed, one can remainnirvishayee (the Self) amidst endless vishayas of the relativeworld.Aptavani-1197198Aptavani-1free even if you so desire. Whereas achetan (non-living) is vitarag(absence of attachment-abhorrence), if you let it go, it will begone. It will be gone as soon as you let go of it. It all dependsupon you.Sexuality is not to be invited. One’s attitude towards sexshould be like that of a vegetarian who is forced to eat meat,as a last resort after several days of starvation. Then it is notconsidered a crime of one’s own volition. Sex should be indulgedin as a last resort. The presence or absence of sexual indulgenceis not in anyone’s control. Does anyone willingly get arrested?No. Sex that is forced upon you is not considered vishaya, butthinking of or contemplating about sex, even though it has notbeen acted upon, is vishaya. This is the law of the Lord. Whenthe body enjoys a sexual act, it is a discharge, but when themind enjoys it, a seed is sown, charged for the next life formore sexual indulgence. When you become avasthit (absorbedin a vishaya), vyavasthit is inevitable (result is inevitable). Thereis endless torment of sexuality going on in this world. By wearingbeautiful clothes and looking attractive, if you become instrumentalin sowing the seed of lust in others, you become liable and willhave to repay. Even if you analyze sex through your intellect,you will find it dirty. Wherever you slip (become the enjoyer),that is vishaya.A person, who prefers death to begging for sex, can winthis world. Such a unique quality indeed accounts for a veryhonorable life.Desire for sex is a natural thing but to continue havingdesires for sex is detrimental and an obstacle in your spiritualprogress.Span of life (longevity) depends on the number ofbreaths; it becomes shorter as one consumes more breaths.Anger, pride, attachment, greed, lust and deceit consume morebreaths. Sexual activity leads to an enormous consumption ofbreaths. That is why I tell people engaged in this worldly lifethat if they cannot do anything it is fine, but they should atleast conserve money and virya (semen, vitality). These twothings are the principle foundations of the worldly life. Alcoholis considered to be harmful because it drives one towardssexuality.There are infinite numbers of vishayas. A million birthswill not suffice for one to enjoy them and exhaust them. I havemade my mahatmas free from the vishayas (nirvishayee) despitethe fact that they continue enjoying all vishayas.Until one acquires Self-realization, one is constantlyengulfed by vishayas because of the presence of the ego andthe belief of doer-ship.Those whose vishay – topic, is non-attachment, only sucha person can understand a Vitarag - the Absolute, but how canthose who are subject to anger, pride, attachment and greed,understand a Vitarag? If a person who is not Self-realized, wereto suppress his sexuality for his entire life, he would still bevunerable to sexuality in his next life. There is no escapingsexuality without Self-realisation.The Self is nirvishayee, so how can it enjoy any vishayas?If the Self is the enjoyer of vishaya, it would never attain liberationbecause enjoyment of sense-pleasure would become an integraland inseparable part of the Self, it would become a compound.This is against the principles of the function of elements. TheSelf can never enjoy any vishaya. It is an illusion, an exerciseof the ego, when one says, ‘I enjoyed’. And this is preciselywhy there is so much confusion and why one’s spiritual progressis at a stand still. If this illusion is destroyed, one can remainnirvishayee (the Self) amidst endless vishayas of the relativeworld.Aptavani-1197198Aptavani-1love will flow constantly without changes. It does not increasenor does it decrease. It is the nature of aasakti to increase andthen decrease.People even insist on sleeping where they sleep. Theybecome attached to what they sleep on. Some insist on sleepingon a sleeping mat while others insist on sleeping on a mattress.Those who sleep on a mattress cannot sleep on a mat and thosewho sleep on a mat cannot fall asleep on a mattress. Any formof insistence is poison and non-insistence is nectar. Unless onebecomes free from all insistence, one cannot get the love of theworld. Pure love manifests through non-insistence and pure loveitself is God.Without having understood true love, all other love istemporary. Today whatever knowledge there is of love, is allrelated to the prakruti (the relative self). Of what use is love thatarises because of such qualities?All doors can be opened with pure love. What can younot attain through the love for the Guru?The most attractive people will appear ugly because oftheir ego. People become beautiful when they exude the ego-less love of the pure Self within (i.e. when they becomeprematma); then even an ugly person will appear beautiful. It isonly when pure love manifests that people begin to lookappealing. What do the people of this world seek? Liberatedlove, wherein there is no element of selfishness or expectations.In the worldly life, conflict is the cause of attraction(aasakti); conflict is the vitamin that nurtures attraction. In theabsence of conflicts, one can become vitarag.The Lord says that all internal suffering stemming fromabhorrence is helpful. Internal feelings stemming from attachment,attraction, and worldly love will never let one be free. TheLove and InfatuationSaint Kabir says :‘Waxing one moment and waning another, that is not love,True Love dwells in the heart, never diminishing, neverchanging’What is true love? It is that love which never increases ordecreases. It is only true love if it remains constant and thesame. ‘Pure love resides in the One in whom the Lord hasmanifest.’Love that increases and decreases is not love; it isattachment or infatuation.A Gnani’s love is pure love, nowhere else can such a lovebe experienced. The love you see in the world, the love betweenhusband, wife, father and mother, between father and child,mother and child, employer-employee, is love filled withexpectations. When does one realize this? It is when that loveis fractured. A person cannot realize the true nature of their loveas long as there is sweetness in the relationship, but thatrealization comes when bitterness arises. Even the most lovingof relationships between a father and a son can become ruinedforever, if the son who has always obeyed his father, one dayin the heat of the moment tells the father that he has no sense.The father will disown the son. If it were true love betweenthem, then it would remain the same no matter what happensbetween the two. Apart from such a love (one without anyexpectations), how can you call anything else true love? Lovewith expectations is called aasakti (attachment / infatuation); itis comparable to the relationship between a businessman andhis client. It is like a business agreement. The love found in thisworld is really aasakti. True love is where you don’t feel likeleaving that person. You like every thing they say. There are noactions or reactions in true love. The Lord is pure love; pureAptavani-1199200Aptavani-1love will flow constantly without changes. It does not increasenor does it decrease. It is the nature of aasakti to increase andthen decrease.People even insist on sleeping where they sleep. Theybecome attached to what they sleep on. Some insist on sleepingon a sleeping mat while others insist on sleeping on a mattress.Those who sleep on a mattress cannot sleep on a mat and thosewho sleep on a mat cannot fall asleep on a mattress. Any formof insistence is poison and non-insistence is nectar. Unless onebecomes free from all insistence, one cannot get the love of theworld. Pure love manifests through non-insistence and pure loveitself is God.Without having understood true love, all other love istemporary. Today whatever knowledge there is of love, is allrelated to the prakruti (the relative self). Of what use is love thatarises because of such qualities?All doors can be opened with pure love. What can younot attain through the love for the Guru?The most attractive people will appear ugly because oftheir ego. People become beautiful when they exude the ego-less love of the pure Self within (i.e. when they becomeprematma); then even an ugly person will appear beautiful. It isonly when pure love manifests that people begin to lookappealing. What do the people of this world seek? Liberatedlove, wherein there is no element of selfishness or expectations.In the worldly life, conflict is the cause of attraction(aasakti); conflict is the vitamin that nurtures attraction. In theabsence of conflicts, one can become vitarag.The Lord says that all internal suffering stemming fromabhorrence is helpful. Internal feelings stemming from attachment,attraction, and worldly love will never let one be free. TheLove and InfatuationSaint Kabir says :‘Waxing one moment and waning another, that is not love,True Love dwells in the heart, never diminishing, neverchanging’What is true love? It is that love which never increases ordecreases. It is only true love if it remains constant and thesame. ‘Pure love resides in the One in whom the Lord hasmanifest.’Love that increases and decreases is not love; it isattachment or infatuation.A Gnani’s love is pure love, nowhere else can such a lovebe experienced. The love you see in the world, the love betweenhusband, wife, father and mother, between father and child,mother and child, employer-employee, is love filled withexpectations. When does one realize this? It is when that loveis fractured. A person cannot realize the true nature of their loveas long as there is sweetness in the relationship, but thatrealization comes when bitterness arises. Even the most lovingof relationships between a father and a son can become ruinedforever, if the son who has always obeyed his father, one dayin the heat of the moment tells the father that he has no sense.The father will disown the son. If it were true love betweenthem, then it would remain the same no matter what happensbetween the two. Apart from such a love (one without anyexpectations), how can you call anything else true love? Lovewith expectations is called aasakti (attachment / infatuation); itis comparable to the relationship between a businessman andhis client. It is like a business agreement. The love found in thisworld is really aasakti. True love is where you don’t feel likeleaving that person. You like every thing they say. There are noactions or reactions in true love. The Lord is pure love; pureAptavani-1199200Aptavani-1world is caught up in the web of worldly love, so keep a safedistance and deal with everyone from a distance. Do notencourage worldly relative love or be trapped by anyone’sworldly love. But neither can you achieve liberation by scorningthe worldly love. So beware! If you aspire liberation, you shouldbe grateful to those who oppose you. Those who love you areactually creating bondage for you, whereas those who opposeyou are beneficial to you. You should gently free yourself fromthose who shower you worldly love without slighting thembecause that kind of love perpetuates the worldly life.Attraction is one of the properties of the body. It is aproperty of the atoms. It is like the attraction between a magnetand a needle. The body attracts atoms that are compatible toit. That is attraction.Attraction can be above or below normal. True love iswithin normality; it is perpetually constant and steady. It doesnot undergo any kind of changes. Attraction is an attribute ofthe inanimate, the non-Self, there is absolutely no Chetan (pureconsciousness, the animate) in it.There is a reason behind the seeming one-ness andharmony that is seen in this world. That is an attribute of atomsand attraction, but there is no telling what may happen at anytime in the future. As long as the atoms are compatible, therewill be attraction and hence a feeling of harmony and one-ness.Incompatibility between atoms will lead to repulsion and causeanimosity. Therefore wherever there is attraction, there isrepulsion. In attraction one does not have the awareness ofwhat is spiritually beneficial and what is not. In pure love thereis complete awareness of that.This is a science of atoms (parmanus). The Self has nothingto do with it, but in the attraction between atoms, people areunder the illusion that it is happening to them. The Self cannever be attracted. In the Self prevails an inherent renunciationfor that which it never becomes absorbed with.Pride of doer-ship is nothing but attraction.The worldly people have attraction for the body andrepulsion for the soul.Fault Is Of The SuffererThere are judges of the world everywhere but there isonly one natural judge of the world of karma : ‘Fault is of thesufferer’. Only this law governs the world but the world iscaught up in worldly justice. This worldly justice, is an illusion,and perpetuates the world.If someone has been robbed, through worldly justicepeople try to comfort or console the victim. They feel sorry forhim and they too experience his anguish. They call the robberall kinds of names. Whereas the law of nature, the real justice,accuses the one who has been robbed. The natural justice willlook at who the sufferer is : the robber or the one who isrobbed? Fault lies with the one who suffers. The one, who didthe stealing, will be deemed guilty when he is arrested but at themoment he is enjoying his loot, he will pay for his mistake whenhe is caught, but who is suffering now? It is the victim and thelaw of nature says that he, the sufferer, is the guilty one. He isfacing the consequences of his mistake from his past life andthat is precisely why he was robbed and is suffering today.I am openly stating to you the natural law that works inthe courts of nature and that is : ‘Fault is of the sufferer’.People suffer only because of their own mistakes. Theone who throws the stone is not at fault but it is the one whois hurt by the stone, the one who suffers is at fault. No matterwhat kind of mistakes or misdeeds those around you commit,if they do not affect you, then you are not at fault but be assuredAptavani-1201202Aptavani-1world is caught up in the web of worldly love, so keep a safedistance and deal with everyone from a distance. Do notencourage worldly relative love or be trapped by anyone’sworldly love. But neither can you achieve liberation by scorningthe worldly love. So beware! If you aspire liberation, you shouldbe grateful to those who oppose you. Those who love you areactually creating bondage for you, whereas those who opposeyou are beneficial to you. You should gently free yourself fromthose who shower you worldly love without slighting thembecause that kind of love perpetuates the worldly life.Attraction is one of the properties of the body. It is aproperty of the atoms. It is like the attraction between a magnetand a needle. The body attracts atoms that are compatible toit. That is attraction.Attraction can be above or below normal. True love iswithin normality; it is perpetually constant and steady. It doesnot undergo any kind of changes. Attraction is an attribute ofthe inanimate, the non-Self, there is absolutely no Chetan (pureconsciousness, the animate) in it.There is a reason behind the seeming one-ness andharmony that is seen in this world. That is an attribute of atomsand attraction, but there is no telling what may happen at anytime in the future. As long as the atoms are compatible, therewill be attraction and hence a feeling of harmony and one-ness.Incompatibility between atoms will lead to repulsion and causeanimosity. Therefore wherever there is attraction, there isrepulsion. In attraction one does not have the awareness ofwhat is spiritually beneficial and what is not. In pure love thereis complete awareness of that.This is a science of atoms (parmanus). The Self has nothingto do with it, but in the attraction between atoms, people areunder the illusion that it is happening to them. The Self cannever be attracted. In the Self prevails an inherent renunciationfor that which it never becomes absorbed with.Pride of doer-ship is nothing but attraction.The worldly people have attraction for the body andrepulsion for the soul.Fault Is Of The SuffererThere are judges of the world everywhere but there isonly one natural judge of the world of karma : ‘Fault is of thesufferer’. Only this law governs the world but the world iscaught up in worldly justice. This worldly justice, is an illusion,and perpetuates the world.If someone has been robbed, through worldly justicepeople try to comfort or console the victim. They feel sorry forhim and they too experience his anguish. They call the robberall kinds of names. Whereas the law of nature, the real justice,accuses the one who has been robbed. The natural justice willlook at who the sufferer is : the robber or the one who isrobbed? Fault lies with the one who suffers. The one, who didthe stealing, will be deemed guilty when he is arrested but at themoment he is enjoying his loot, he will pay for his mistake whenhe is caught, but who is suffering now? It is the victim and thelaw of nature says that he, the sufferer, is the guilty one. He isfacing the consequences of his mistake from his past life andthat is precisely why he was robbed and is suffering today.I am openly stating to you the natural law that works inthe courts of nature and that is : ‘Fault is of the sufferer’.People suffer only because of their own mistakes. Theone who throws the stone is not at fault but it is the one whois hurt by the stone, the one who suffers is at fault. No matterwhat kind of mistakes or misdeeds those around you commit,if they do not affect you, then you are not at fault but be assuredAptavani-1201202Aptavani-1that it is your fault, if you are affected by it.The one who suffers the most in this world is indeed theone with the most faults. In any situation you only have to seewho is suffering and realize that the one who suffers is the guiltyone.One who endures the bitter fruits is verily the doer. Doer-ship is nothing but ego.If your fingers get caught between the gears of a machinethat you invent, it will not let you go, although it is your owninvention. Even if you plead with it, it will not let go. It will letyou know that since you are suffering, you are the one at fault.Similarly every one around you is a machine. People are like thegears, if they were not, no husband or wife would causeunhappiness for each other. Everyone would make his or herhome a happy place to live in. But that is not the case. All thesechildren, husbands and wives are like the gears in a machine.Natural justice punishes only the guilty one. A snake willbite only the guilty one even if there are seven other peoplesleeping beside him. That is how ‘vyavasthit’ all this is.No court judge is required to rule where the natural lawof ‘fault is of the sufferer’ is applicable. Why should anyone besummoned to arbitrate here? All the worldly judges do is listento complaints from both sides, then reprimand them for makingmistakes in spite of their intelligence. All the judges do is coverup their own reputation and expose others.There are no judges where the natural laws are concerned.But in the worldly life, people themselves are the judge, thelawyer and the jury all rolled into one. Therefore they will alwaysrule in their favor. This way they are always making mistakes.From whom should justice be sought? From a Gnani Purushwho is impartial, even towards his own body. But the one whois a judge, a lawyer and a juror, will only rule in his own favor.This is how one continues to be bound. The judge within willsay that he has made a mistake, the lawyer within will never lethim admit his own mistake and in this way, he creates bondagefor himself. For the sake of your own spiritual progress andyour soul, it is imperative that you find out who is the oneresponsible for making mistakes that create bondage. It is thesufferer that is at fault for making mistakes. He or she is at fault.From the worldly perspective it appears that the victim hasbeen wronged or unjustly punished but in the Lord’s eyes, ‘Thefault is of the sufferer’. Dada has seen exactly this in his Gnan:‘The fault is of the sufferer’.‘Fault is of the sufferer’ – if one were to completelyunderstand this statement, one would attain liberation. To seefaults in others is absolutely wrong. You encounter your nimit(those who transgress against you – these beings are merelynimits– instrumental in delivering the fruits of your own karma),solely because of your own mistakes. And if that nimit happensto be a living entity, you place the blame on them, but whatwould you do if the nimit were a thorn? A thorn is lying on theground where hundreds of people walk by and it hurts no one.And yet when Chandubhai passes by, the thorn pricks him evenwhen it is laying side ways. Vyavasthit is very precise. The thornwill prick only the one that has to be pricked. Vyavasthit bringstogether all the circumstances in order for an event to occur.How then can a nimit be blamed?If someone sprays a medicine that makes you coughviolently, it will upset you and you will get angry with him, butdo you get angry when you cough when someone is cookingchili peppers? You get angry with the one you catch, the nimit.But if you were to know the facts about who the doer is andwhy things happen, would there be any more problems?Whose fault is it if you walk on wet slippery soil withAptavani-1203204Aptavani-1that it is your fault, if you are affected by it.The one who suffers the most in this world is indeed theone with the most faults. In any situation you only have to seewho is suffering and realize that the one who suffers is the guiltyone.One who endures the bitter fruits is verily the doer. Doer-ship is nothing but ego.If your fingers get caught between the gears of a machinethat you invent, it will not let you go, although it is your owninvention. Even if you plead with it, it will not let go. It will letyou know that since you are suffering, you are the one at fault.Similarly every one around you is a machine. People are like thegears, if they were not, no husband or wife would causeunhappiness for each other. Everyone would make his or herhome a happy place to live in. But that is not the case. All thesechildren, husbands and wives are like the gears in a machine.Natural justice punishes only the guilty one. A snake willbite only the guilty one even if there are seven other peoplesleeping beside him. That is how ‘vyavasthit’ all this is.No court judge is required to rule where the natural lawof ‘fault is of the sufferer’ is applicable. Why should anyone besummoned to arbitrate here? All the worldly judges do is listento complaints from both sides, then reprimand them for makingmistakes in spite of their intelligence. All the judges do is coverup their own reputation and expose others.There are no judges where the natural laws are concerned.But in the worldly life, people themselves are the judge, thelawyer and the jury all rolled into one. Therefore they will alwaysrule in their favor. This way they are always making mistakes.From whom should justice be sought? From a Gnani Purushwho is impartial, even towards his own body. But the one whois a judge, a lawyer and a juror, will only rule in his own favor.This is how one continues to be bound. The judge within willsay that he has made a mistake, the lawyer within will never lethim admit his own mistake and in this way, he creates bondagefor himself. For the sake of your own spiritual progress andyour soul, it is imperative that you find out who is the oneresponsible for making mistakes that create bondage. It is thesufferer that is at fault for making mistakes. He or she is at fault.From the worldly perspective it appears that the victim hasbeen wronged or unjustly punished but in the Lord’s eyes, ‘Thefault is of the sufferer’. Dada has seen exactly this in his Gnan:‘The fault is of the sufferer’.‘Fault is of the sufferer’ – if one were to completelyunderstand this statement, one would attain liberation. To seefaults in others is absolutely wrong. You encounter your nimit(those who transgress against you – these beings are merelynimits– instrumental in delivering the fruits of your own karma),solely because of your own mistakes. And if that nimit happensto be a living entity, you place the blame on them, but whatwould you do if the nimit were a thorn? A thorn is lying on theground where hundreds of people walk by and it hurts no one.And yet when Chandubhai passes by, the thorn pricks him evenwhen it is laying side ways. Vyavasthit is very precise. The thornwill prick only the one that has to be pricked. Vyavasthit bringstogether all the circumstances in order for an event to occur.How then can a nimit be blamed?If someone sprays a medicine that makes you coughviolently, it will upset you and you will get angry with him, butdo you get angry when you cough when someone is cookingchili peppers? You get angry with the one you catch, the nimit.But if you were to know the facts about who the doer is andwhy things happen, would there be any more problems?Whose fault is it if you walk on wet slippery soil withAptavani-1203204Aptavani-1your shoes and you fall? It is your own fault. Did you not knowthat walking bare feet would give you better traction? So whois to be blamed? – The shoes, mud or you?It is your fault if the person you are dealing with has asulking face. If this happens, by recalling the pure Self withinthat person and asking for forgiveness in his name, you will befreed from that relationship of bondage created in your past life.The one who is experiencing unhappiness is the one atfault and the one who is enjoying himself, happiness is his reward.The worldly law, which is with illusion, accuses the nimit. Nature’slaw, the real law, is very precise which nobody can change it.It accuses only the real culprit. There is no law in this world thatcan inflict undue suffering on anyone. Not even the governmentlaw. The fault lies with the one who suffers.The severity of one’s mistake can be assessed from theamount of suffering one has to endure.In a family of ten, two have no idea about how thehousehold is running. Two of the members think about helpingout but only two other actually do. One of the family membersis constantly preoccupied about how the household will continueto run and consequently cannot sleep at night, while the rest ofthem sleep soundly without a care. Now who is at fault, here?It is the fault of the one who suffers; the one who worries.Those who sleep have nothing to worry about.If a mother-in-law scolds her daughter-in-law and yet thedaughter-in-law remains happy and only the mother-in-lawsuffers, then the mistake lies with the mother-in-law. If someonein the family instigates a quarrel and the daughter-in-law has tosuffer, the fault is hers. It is also her fault when others tormenther without apparent cause. This happens because of a pendingaccount from her past life, which has now come forth forsettlement. She should not make the same mistake againotherwise she will have to endure the consequences again. Soif she wants to be liberated, she should accept whatever isthrown at her, be it sweet or bitter and ‘credit’ her account.Doing so will settle her account. In this world, without pastaccount, you cannot even make an eye contact, so can anythingoccur without past accounts? Whatever you have given to others,will be returned to you. When this happens, credit it to youraccount with pleasure and a sigh of relief that your account isnow being settled. But if you make the same mistake again, youwill have to endure it again.The whole world belongs to you. You are the king of thisentire universe. But you are bound only through your mistakes.Find out why you have to endure suffering! Your bondage isthrough your own mistakes and not through the mistakes ofothers. Liberation is achieved once these mistakes are destroyed.In reality You are free, but bondage is there because of yourmistakes.In the face of such a clear and pure law that I am showingyou, where is the need for you to worry about what is just andunjust? What I am telling you is extremely profound; it is theessence of all scriptures. I am telling you exactly how nature’sjustice is served and that is through the principle of : The faultlies with the one who suffers.Seeing Your Own FaultsPeople go to the derasar (temple) everyday and sing tothe Lord : “Full of infinite faults I am, O compassionate One!”And they sing further :“How shall ‘this frail ship’ sail across,if these faults remain unseen?”Aptavani-1205206Aptavani-1your shoes and you fall? It is your own fault. Did you not knowthat walking bare feet would give you better traction? So whois to be blamed? – The shoes, mud or you?It is your fault if the person you are dealing with has asulking face. If this happens, by recalling the pure Self withinthat person and asking for forgiveness in his name, you will befreed from that relationship of bondage created in your past life.The one who is experiencing unhappiness is the one atfault and the one who is enjoying himself, happiness is his reward.The worldly law, which is with illusion, accuses the nimit. Nature’slaw, the real law, is very precise which nobody can change it.It accuses only the real culprit. There is no law in this world thatcan inflict undue suffering on anyone. Not even the governmentlaw. The fault lies with the one who suffers.The severity of one’s mistake can be assessed from theamount of suffering one has to endure.In a family of ten, two have no idea about how thehousehold is running. Two of the members think about helpingout but only two other actually do. One of the family membersis constantly preoccupied about how the household will continueto run and consequently cannot sleep at night, while the rest ofthem sleep soundly without a care. Now who is at fault, here?It is the fault of the one who suffers; the one who worries.Those who sleep have nothing to worry about.If a mother-in-law scolds her daughter-in-law and yet thedaughter-in-law remains happy and only the mother-in-lawsuffers, then the mistake lies with the mother-in-law. If someonein the family instigates a quarrel and the daughter-in-law has tosuffer, the fault is hers. It is also her fault when others tormenther without apparent cause. This happens because of a pendingaccount from her past life, which has now come forth forsettlement. She should not make the same mistake againotherwise she will have to endure the consequences again. Soif she wants to be liberated, she should accept whatever isthrown at her, be it sweet or bitter and ‘credit’ her account.Doing so will settle her account. In this world, without pastaccount, you cannot even make an eye contact, so can anythingoccur without past accounts? Whatever you have given to others,will be returned to you. When this happens, credit it to youraccount with pleasure and a sigh of relief that your account isnow being settled. But if you make the same mistake again, youwill have to endure it again.The whole world belongs to you. You are the king of thisentire universe. But you are bound only through your mistakes.Find out why you have to endure suffering! Your bondage isthrough your own mistakes and not through the mistakes ofothers. Liberation is achieved once these mistakes are destroyed.In reality You are free, but bondage is there because of yourmistakes.In the face of such a clear and pure law that I am showingyou, where is the need for you to worry about what is just andunjust? What I am telling you is extremely profound; it is theessence of all scriptures. I am telling you exactly how nature’sjustice is served and that is through the principle of : The faultlies with the one who suffers.Seeing Your Own FaultsPeople go to the derasar (temple) everyday and sing tothe Lord : “Full of infinite faults I am, O compassionate One!”And they sing further :“How shall ‘this frail ship’ sail across,if these faults remain unseen?”Aptavani-1205206Aptavani-1Now if you ask them how many of their faults still remain,they say only a few! They claim that they really do not have anyfaults as such, except occasionally they get angry or greedy. Soyou question why do they sing, “Full of infinite faults I am, Ocompassionate one?” and their reply is that they have to singwhatever the words say but they insist that they definitely do nothave many faults. Goodness gracious! Now they have starteddeceiving even God. The Lord has said a person can achieveliberation in a matter of three hours if he has only two faults!Even if you ask the prominent monks and acharyas (preceptors)how many faults they have, they will claim they have only twoor three faults. With only that many faults they will achieveliberation within three hours. It is because of their faults theyremain here. And yet if you ask them to point out faults inothers, they will show you countless faults but none of theirown. Everyone knows how to see faults in others, however oneis able to see one’s own faults only after achieving Self-Realization. It is only then that one develops non-partiality towardsone’s self. Had you learned to see your own faults, you wouldhave achieved liberation by now or at least you would havebecome like a Gnani Purush.In reality, no one is at fault - it is the effect of the currenttime cycle. Everything happens according to the circumstancesthat come about, so how can you blame anyone?Whatever faults you begin to see within yourself will depart.With the blessings of the Gnani Purush, you begin to see yourown faults. First will come the realization that you are full ofinfinite faults and so you will start to look for them and you willbe able to see them. Failure to see your faults is due to spiritualapathy (pramad). However once you come to know that infinitefaults lie within you, you will automatically begin to see them.What happens if a burglar breaks into a deaf person’s home?The owner would not hear the burglar no matter how muchnoise he makes.Whatever faults you begin to see, will depart. Those thatare sticky may take anywhere from a few days to even a year,but once you see them, they begin to leave quickly. How longwill a burglar remain in a house he has broken into? He willremain in the house as long as the owner is unaware of hispresence but will run away as soon as the owner discovers hispresence.Do not see or focus on anyone’s faults or shortcomings.If at all you want to see faults, see your own. How closed andtense the mind becomes when you see faults in others and howhappy you feel when you see their virtues?See no faults of others and correct your own. No onewill speak ill of you unless it is your own account from the past.The Lord has said that real man is he who can find evenone of his mistakes. Real is the man who discovers his ownmistake and brings a halt to his endless wanderings in the densewilderness of the world created by his mistakes. He who showsyou your mistakes is a ‘super human’ in the Lord’s language.You can find everything in this word, except your ownmistakes. That is why you need a Gnani to shed light on yourmistakes. The Gnani Purush alone has a unique and undisputedspiritual authority to show you your mistakes and to make youaware of them. And only then do those mistakes go away.When can this occur? This will occur when you come in contactwith the Gnani Purush who makes you impartial; the goal isachieved when you develop a sense of impartiality, even towardsyourself. Unless and until the Gnani Purush awakens you toyour real Self, you cannot develop this sense of non-partiality.Gnan does not see faults in anyone, whereas intellect (buddhi)sees faults in everyone. It does not spare even one’s own brother.Aptavani-1207208Aptavani-1Now if you ask them how many of their faults still remain,they say only a few! They claim that they really do not have anyfaults as such, except occasionally they get angry or greedy. Soyou question why do they sing, “Full of infinite faults I am, Ocompassionate one?” and their reply is that they have to singwhatever the words say but they insist that they definitely do nothave many faults. Goodness gracious! Now they have starteddeceiving even God. The Lord has said a person can achieveliberation in a matter of three hours if he has only two faults!Even if you ask the prominent monks and acharyas (preceptors)how many faults they have, they will claim they have only twoor three faults. With only that many faults they will achieveliberation within three hours. It is because of their faults theyremain here. And yet if you ask them to point out faults inothers, they will show you countless faults but none of theirown. Everyone knows how to see faults in others, however oneis able to see one’s own faults only after achieving Self-Realization. It is only then that one develops non-partiality towardsone’s self. Had you learned to see your own faults, you wouldhave achieved liberation by now or at least you would havebecome like a Gnani Purush.In reality, no one is at fault - it is the effect of the currenttime cycle. Everything happens according to the circumstancesthat come about, so how can you blame anyone?Whatever faults you begin to see within yourself will depart.With the blessings of the Gnani Purush, you begin to see yourown faults. First will come the realization that you are full ofinfinite faults and so you will start to look for them and you willbe able to see them. Failure to see your faults is due to spiritualapathy (pramad). However once you come to know that infinitefaults lie within you, you will automatically begin to see them.What happens if a burglar breaks into a deaf person’s home?The owner would not hear the burglar no matter how muchnoise he makes.Whatever faults you begin to see, will depart. Those thatare sticky may take anywhere from a few days to even a year,but once you see them, they begin to leave quickly. How longwill a burglar remain in a house he has broken into? He willremain in the house as long as the owner is unaware of hispresence but will run away as soon as the owner discovers hispresence.Do not see or focus on anyone’s faults or shortcomings.If at all you want to see faults, see your own. How closed andtense the mind becomes when you see faults in others and howhappy you feel when you see their virtues?See no faults of others and correct your own. No onewill speak ill of you unless it is your own account from the past.The Lord has said that real man is he who can find evenone of his mistakes. Real is the man who discovers his ownmistake and brings a halt to his endless wanderings in the densewilderness of the world created by his mistakes. He who showsyou your mistakes is a ‘super human’ in the Lord’s language.You can find everything in this word, except your ownmistakes. That is why you need a Gnani to shed light on yourmistakes. The Gnani Purush alone has a unique and undisputedspiritual authority to show you your mistakes and to make youaware of them. And only then do those mistakes go away.When can this occur? This will occur when you come in contactwith the Gnani Purush who makes you impartial; the goal isachieved when you develop a sense of impartiality, even towardsyourself. Unless and until the Gnani Purush awakens you toyour real Self, you cannot develop this sense of non-partiality.Gnan does not see faults in anyone, whereas intellect (buddhi)sees faults in everyone. It does not spare even one’s own brother.Aptavani-1207208Aptavani-1Questioner : Dada, why is it that when we get intodisagreements, the elders always point out the mistakes of theyounger ones?Dadashri : It is like the old preying on the young. Insteadwhy doesn’t the older person take the blame on himself? If hewere to do that, it would solve the problem. What I do is, if theother person is not able to tolerate the mistake, I take it uponmyself. I will not find faults or blame others. Why should I leaveit to others to swallow the bitterness when I have a ‘stomach’as vast as the ocean? Look how the Indian Ocean takes thewater of all the sewers of Bombay. We too should do the same.By doing so you will impress your children and others and theywill learn from that. The children too will realize that you havea heart as big as the ocean. Deposit whatever comes your way.There is a principle that is applicable to the worldly life and itis : the person who insults you also gives you his energies. Soaccept all insults with a smile.If you push down on one eye with your finger, do you notsee double? Now whom can you blame for that? That is howit is with everyone in the world. They continue to make mistakesevery minute that passes by. They are constantly absorbed incircumstances (par-samaya) that involve everything but the Self.They always have time for other things and never for the Self.Those who do not know the Self are in parsamaya. Only afterrealizing the Self, is one in the circumstances of the Self (sva-samaaya).People’s vision has become flawed and consequently theysee everyone else’s faults except their own. You have to makeyour vision flawless. First you, yourself, become flawless (thepure Self) and then your vision turns flawless. You are liberatedwhen you do not see faults in anyone.Everyone is bound by his or her own mistakes. If onemakes an illegal mistake then the law will bind him or her. Noone can see his or her own mistakes.People keep talking about karma but they do notunderstand what karma really is. One’s karma implies one’sown fault. The Self is innocent but it is bound by one’s faults.The more your faults you see, the freer you feel. There aresome faults that have thousands of layers and therefore youhave to see them thousands of times before they are removed.The mind, speech and body are filled with faults.You should be able to see the faults of your mind, bodyand speech every passing moment. There cannot be a singlebody that is free of faults in this current time cycle. The rays ofthe light of the Self increase in proportion with the number offaults one sees. This Akram Gnan has been a unique attainmentin this age. All you have to do is keep your awareness anddischarge the baggage that you have brought with you from pastlife. You have to keep on washing your faults.The awareness of the Self should constantly prevail. Howcan you make any progress if you keep the Self cover-up indarkness during the day? You will make progress as you beginto see your faults and wash them away. There is tremendousbenefit in constantly remaining in Dadashri’s Five Agnas(Dadashri’s five divine dictates); it helps preserve the Self. Forawareness, satsang (understanding and utilizing Gnan) andpurusharth (application of Dadashri’s Agnas) are necessary. Tobe in satsang one first needs to remain with the five Agnas.If you remain unaffected by any loss or damage in yourworldly life, then be assured that your drama of the worldly lifeis on its last and final stages. All you have to do is make surethat any abuses hurled at you in this drama of worldly life donot affect you.No one would speak in your favor or against you if thereAptavani-1209210Aptavani-1Questioner : Dada, why is it that when we get intodisagreements, the elders always point out the mistakes of theyounger ones?Dadashri : It is like the old preying on the young. Insteadwhy doesn’t the older person take the blame on himself? If hewere to do that, it would solve the problem. What I do is, if theother person is not able to tolerate the mistake, I take it uponmyself. I will not find faults or blame others. Why should I leaveit to others to swallow the bitterness when I have a ‘stomach’as vast as the ocean? Look how the Indian Ocean takes thewater of all the sewers of Bombay. We too should do the same.By doing so you will impress your children and others and theywill learn from that. The children too will realize that you havea heart as big as the ocean. Deposit whatever comes your way.There is a principle that is applicable to the worldly life and itis : the person who insults you also gives you his energies. Soaccept all insults with a smile.If you push down on one eye with your finger, do you notsee double? Now whom can you blame for that? That is howit is with everyone in the world. They continue to make mistakesevery minute that passes by. They are constantly absorbed incircumstances (par-samaya) that involve everything but the Self.They always have time for other things and never for the Self.Those who do not know the Self are in parsamaya. Only afterrealizing the Self, is one in the circumstances of the Self (sva-samaaya).People’s vision has become flawed and consequently theysee everyone else’s faults except their own. You have to makeyour vision flawless. First you, yourself, become flawless (thepure Self) and then your vision turns flawless. You are liberatedwhen you do not see faults in anyone.Everyone is bound by his or her own mistakes. If onemakes an illegal mistake then the law will bind him or her. Noone can see his or her own mistakes.People keep talking about karma but they do notunderstand what karma really is. One’s karma implies one’sown fault. The Self is innocent but it is bound by one’s faults.The more your faults you see, the freer you feel. There aresome faults that have thousands of layers and therefore youhave to see them thousands of times before they are removed.The mind, speech and body are filled with faults.You should be able to see the faults of your mind, bodyand speech every passing moment. There cannot be a singlebody that is free of faults in this current time cycle. The rays ofthe light of the Self increase in proportion with the number offaults one sees. This Akram Gnan has been a unique attainmentin this age. All you have to do is keep your awareness anddischarge the baggage that you have brought with you from pastlife. You have to keep on washing your faults.The awareness of the Self should constantly prevail. Howcan you make any progress if you keep the Self cover-up indarkness during the day? You will make progress as you beginto see your faults and wash them away. There is tremendousbenefit in constantly remaining in Dadashri’s Five Agnas(Dadashri’s five divine dictates); it helps preserve the Self. Forawareness, satsang (understanding and utilizing Gnan) andpurusharth (application of Dadashri’s Agnas) are necessary. Tobe in satsang one first needs to remain with the five Agnas.If you remain unaffected by any loss or damage in yourworldly life, then be assured that your drama of the worldly lifeis on its last and final stages. All you have to do is make surethat any abuses hurled at you in this drama of worldly life donot affect you.No one would speak in your favor or against you if thereAptavani-1209210Aptavani-1were no pending karmic account with you. Even opinions youexpress about facts, will offend someone. Satsang will sweepand clean out everyone’s rubbish. If you see other people’strash, you will accumulate even more rubbish. By seeing yourown rubbish, it will be swept away. Those who are lazy orapathetic will see more faults in others.MistakesMistakes made in the dark (ignorant state, non-Self-realized state) and mistakes that remain hidden in the dark arenot visible. As the light of the awareness of the Self increases,so does the visibility of mistakes. Destroying mistakes visible tothe world will create a change in the glow of your eyes. Yourintentions (bhaav) should be pure. As your mistakes depart,your speech will be such that others would look forward tolistening to.But how is it possible for you to see mistakes made ofdarkness, in darkness (ignorance)? Your overt and obviousmistakes will stop as you get into conflict with others. But thereare so many subtle (shookshma), subtler (shookshmatar) andthe subtlest (shookshmatam) mistakes that still remain and whenthese depart, your fragrance (spiritual attraction) will spread.Visible and obvious mistakes or shortcomings of a sternand unyielding person, regardless of their quanity, are still betterthan the invisible mistakes that remain hidden in the dark.You will realize your mistakes when you encounterdisagreeable circumstances, for example when someone hurtsyou or you encounter some misfortune.You should never say, “I am free of faults.” Such astatement should never be made. It is only when one becomesthe Absolute (Keval) that faults and mistakes cease to existwithin one.Mistakes of darkness only become evident when a Gnanisheds light on them. Your visible mistakes are better than themistakes that remain hidden in the dark. Those with ‘electricity’,i.e. mistakes that are lit, can be seen.What does one have to do ‘purusharth’ (effort) for? Onlyafter one becomes a Purush (Self-Realised), does one’s realpurusharth (real independent effort) and sva-parakram(extraordinary independent effort) begin.Within you is a warehouse of countless faults and mistakes.It is only when you can see these faults and mistakes in everypassing moment, that you have accomplished your work. Youare the one responsible for filling this ‘warehouse’ with mistakes,without consulting anyone.Once the awareness of the pure Self is established, youwill begin to see your mistakes. Failure to see them is sheerspiritual apathy (pramad - laziness).During times of dire circumstances, Gnan will stand thetest. The Gnan has attained a very high level when one’sawareness prevails uninterrupted even as one’s ears are beingcut off. Up until this level of awareness is attained, all else isconsidered spiritual apathy.Gnani Purush sleeps only for an hour. He is constantlyaware. The Self is all-illuminating and hence in this state, all isvisible, including the subtlest of mistakes. This awareness willincrease as one’s food intake and sleep decreases. Otherwisefrom the vantage of the relative self, it is all spiritual apathy. Toomuch sleep is spiritual apathy. Too much food is also spiritualapathy (pramad). Pramad is like packing and sealing ‘the Self’in a dark bag.People have no inkling or awareness of what a mistakeis? Only through extraordinary independent effort (sva-parakram)Aptavani-1211212Aptavani-1were no pending karmic account with you. Even opinions youexpress about facts, will offend someone. Satsang will sweepand clean out everyone’s rubbish. If you see other people’strash, you will accumulate even more rubbish. By seeing yourown rubbish, it will be swept away. Those who are lazy orapathetic will see more faults in others.MistakesMistakes made in the dark (ignorant state, non-Self-realized state) and mistakes that remain hidden in the dark arenot visible. As the light of the awareness of the Self increases,so does the visibility of mistakes. Destroying mistakes visible tothe world will create a change in the glow of your eyes. Yourintentions (bhaav) should be pure. As your mistakes depart,your speech will be such that others would look forward tolistening to.But how is it possible for you to see mistakes made ofdarkness, in darkness (ignorance)? Your overt and obviousmistakes will stop as you get into conflict with others. But thereare so many subtle (shookshma), subtler (shookshmatar) andthe subtlest (shookshmatam) mistakes that still remain and whenthese depart, your fragrance (spiritual attraction) will spread.Visible and obvious mistakes or shortcomings of a sternand unyielding person, regardless of their quanity, are still betterthan the invisible mistakes that remain hidden in the dark.You will realize your mistakes when you encounterdisagreeable circumstances, for example when someone hurtsyou or you encounter some misfortune.You should never say, “I am free of faults.” Such astatement should never be made. It is only when one becomesthe Absolute (Keval) that faults and mistakes cease to existwithin one.Mistakes of darkness only become evident when a Gnanisheds light on them. Your visible mistakes are better than themistakes that remain hidden in the dark. Those with ‘electricity’,i.e. mistakes that are lit, can be seen.What does one have to do ‘purusharth’ (effort) for? Onlyafter one becomes a Purush (Self-Realised), does one’s realpurusharth (real independent effort) and sva-parakram(extraordinary independent effort) begin.Within you is a warehouse of countless faults and mistakes.It is only when you can see these faults and mistakes in everypassing moment, that you have accomplished your work. Youare the one responsible for filling this ‘warehouse’ with mistakes,without consulting anyone.Once the awareness of the pure Self is established, youwill begin to see your mistakes. Failure to see them is sheerspiritual apathy (pramad - laziness).During times of dire circumstances, Gnan will stand thetest. The Gnan has attained a very high level when one’sawareness prevails uninterrupted even as one’s ears are beingcut off. Up until this level of awareness is attained, all else isconsidered spiritual apathy.Gnani Purush sleeps only for an hour. He is constantlyaware. The Self is all-illuminating and hence in this state, all isvisible, including the subtlest of mistakes. This awareness willincrease as one’s food intake and sleep decreases. Otherwisefrom the vantage of the relative self, it is all spiritual apathy. Toomuch sleep is spiritual apathy. Too much food is also spiritualapathy (pramad). Pramad is like packing and sealing ‘the Self’in a dark bag.People have no inkling or awareness of what a mistakeis? Only through extraordinary independent effort (sva-parakram)Aptavani-1211212Aptavani-1can these mistakes be seen and destroyed.Know that as your sleep and food intake decreases, sodoes your spiritual apathy. They will increase your awareness.With the elimination of faults, a person’s face will radiatewith inner light. His speech will become sweet and people willbe attracted to him.Mistakes with strong atoms (parmanus) are easily seenand evident. These mistakes represent the force of the prakruti.In the relative world these heavy mistakes will make one becomemore involved in the faults and the same force would reap greatspiritual progress if such a person were to attain GnanWhat does shuddha upyog of Atma (attentiveness of thePure Self) mean? It means that the Soul should not be leftalone, or unattended. When flying a kite, you would tie its stringto your toe. Similarly, you cannot lose sight, even for a moment,of the awareness of the Self.There are infinite faults. These faults make you fall asleep,otherwise what do you need sleep for? Sleep is your enemy. Itis spiritual apathy. Apathy in awareness of the pure Self (shuddhaupyog) is considered impure awareness (ashuddha upyog).In order to destroy all your faults, you will either have togive service to the Gnani and the mahatmas, or do svapurusharth(real independent effort). Darshan of Dada will give you the fruitof devotional worship, but not of knowledge (Gnan).If you believe that you have no faults or mistakes withinyou, then how is it possible for you to see them? Such a personwill sleep soundly. Our ascetics do not sleep (remain inattentive).They remain very alert.The mistakes and faults that bite the owner, I call ‘electrical’mistakes. The mistakes of darkness are the ones that escapethe owner’s awareness. The mistakes that bite are immediatelynoticeable. Those that do not bite, remain unnoticed.Questioner : What are these electrical mistakes?Dadashri : They are mistakes that are open andstraightforward. They go away after making you uneasy andembarrassing you. They are beneficial to you because they keepyou alert and vigilant, whereas no one can see the mistakes ofdarkness, those that remain hidden. The owner is unaware ofthese mistakes, he is in spiritual apathy as far as these mistakesare concerned, and no one else can show these mistakes tohim. He is the culprit behind them and yet he will not findanyone to point those mistakes out to him, whereas he willeasily find someone to point out his mistakes with ‘electricity’.The beliefs ‘I know’ and ‘everything is fine from nowonwards, there is no problem’, and ‘ there is no more mistake’,are mistakes of the dark and are very grave and dangerous.None except the Gnani can say, ‘I have no more mistake left’.From now on maintain only this : ‘I am pure Soul’ andin matters of the non-Self, the relative world, ‘I know nothing’.Then you will never have any problems. You should never allowthe disease of ‘I know’ to gain entry within you. You, the pureSelf is flawless. But within you-your relative self, there are manymistakes and as they come to light, you have to settle them withequanimity.If you have a firm and ardent desire to remain only in theGnani’s Agna, then through his grace you will be able to do so.The ecstasy of the Agnas is with those who follow them. Theecstasy of the Gnan is with those who impart this knowledge toothers. The bliss of the Self is distinct from these two.If a person understands what I am saying but does notallow it to ‘sink’ within him, then realize that he has a tuber ofAptavani-1213214Aptavani-1can these mistakes be seen and destroyed.Know that as your sleep and food intake decreases, sodoes your spiritual apathy. They will increase your awareness.With the elimination of faults, a person’s face will radiatewith inner light. His speech will become sweet and people willbe attracted to him.Mistakes with strong atoms (parmanus) are easily seenand evident. These mistakes represent the force of the prakruti.In the relative world these heavy mistakes will make one becomemore involved in the faults and the same force would reap greatspiritual progress if such a person were to attain GnanWhat does shuddha upyog of Atma (attentiveness of thePure Self) mean? It means that the Soul should not be leftalone, or unattended. When flying a kite, you would tie its stringto your toe. Similarly, you cannot lose sight, even for a moment,of the awareness of the Self.There are infinite faults. These faults make you fall asleep,otherwise what do you need sleep for? Sleep is your enemy. Itis spiritual apathy. Apathy in awareness of the pure Self (shuddhaupyog) is considered impure awareness (ashuddha upyog).In order to destroy all your faults, you will either have togive service to the Gnani and the mahatmas, or do svapurusharth(real independent effort). Darshan of Dada will give you the fruitof devotional worship, but not of knowledge (Gnan).If you believe that you have no faults or mistakes withinyou, then how is it possible for you to see them? Such a personwill sleep soundly. Our ascetics do not sleep (remain inattentive).They remain very alert.The mistakes and faults that bite the owner, I call ‘electrical’mistakes. The mistakes of darkness are the ones that escapethe owner’s awareness. The mistakes that bite are immediatelynoticeable. Those that do not bite, remain unnoticed.Questioner : What are these electrical mistakes?Dadashri : They are mistakes that are open andstraightforward. They go away after making you uneasy andembarrassing you. They are beneficial to you because they keepyou alert and vigilant, whereas no one can see the mistakes ofdarkness, those that remain hidden. The owner is unaware ofthese mistakes, he is in spiritual apathy as far as these mistakesare concerned, and no one else can show these mistakes tohim. He is the culprit behind them and yet he will not findanyone to point those mistakes out to him, whereas he willeasily find someone to point out his mistakes with ‘electricity’.The beliefs ‘I know’ and ‘everything is fine from nowonwards, there is no problem’, and ‘ there is no more mistake’,are mistakes of the dark and are very grave and dangerous.None except the Gnani can say, ‘I have no more mistake left’.From now on maintain only this : ‘I am pure Soul’ andin matters of the non-Self, the relative world, ‘I know nothing’.Then you will never have any problems. You should never allowthe disease of ‘I know’ to gain entry within you. You, the pureSelf is flawless. But within you-your relative self, there are manymistakes and as they come to light, you have to settle them withequanimity.If you have a firm and ardent desire to remain only in theGnani’s Agna, then through his grace you will be able to do so.The ecstasy of the Agnas is with those who follow them. Theecstasy of the Gnan is with those who impart this knowledge toothers. The bliss of the Self is distinct from these two.If a person understands what I am saying but does notallow it to ‘sink’ within him, then realize that he has a tuber ofAptavani-1213214Aptavani-1Dadashri : If you were to break this china cup wouldyou feel as much aggravation as you would if your child brokeit? Everything is a consequence of your own mistakes. If youunderstand that you have to face difficulties because of yourown past account, then would you worry or agonize over it? Byplacing blame on others, you create unnecessary worries andsuffering. Your suffering continues day and night when you feelthat you are the one that has to endure so much.The knowledge of the Self is such that as it grows, ityields results. You will no longer experience any suffering. Thereis no suffering in the Gnata-gneya relationship, where you arethe Knower, merely observing the object, that which is to beknown. Why is it that the person who fights with you, fights withonly you and no one else? That itself is your own fault. Yourown mistakes bind you and you have to become free from onlyyour own mistakes. These are all relationships of circumstances.These are all circumstances in front of you. Without pastaccounts, you would not encounter anyone. You are boundentirely by your own faults and it is only through becomingaware of your faults that you can become free. Seeing only myown faults liberated me. You will continue to become free asyou see your own faults.You can bear losing five hundred rupees if you lost themyourself. In the same token you will find the strength to endurethe consequences of your past mistakes once you realize thatyou are the one at fault. You become free once you realizethat you were at fault, otherwise you become bound evenfurther.People will tell you to become strong and increase yourpower of tolerance. But how long can the rope of tolerance lastbefore it breaks? Tolerance has limits. The amount of strengthor power needed to tolerate would equal the amount of powerAptavani-1215216Aptavani-1a major spiritual obstruction within him and this tuber is a veryserious disease.There are countless faults and mistakes within. Once youbecome aware of this fact, you will start to see them and theywill decrease. Do you think I see faults in others? I do not havetime for that. It is only through the fruition of your many andcumulative meritorious deeds that a Gnani Purush will showyou your faults. That is when I would use my spiritual powers(siddhis) and perform ‘an operation’ on you to rid you of yourdiseased tubers. Such operation is a hundred thousand timesmore complex than that performed by the surgeons of thisworld.The more of your mistakes you see, the more you becometheir master. The one who has no faults, has no superior abovehim. I have no master over me and that is why I am the masterof all masters. I do not have any overt or gross mistakes andthe subtle mistakes too are gone. I have only the subtler and thesubtlest mistakes, of which I remain the absolute Knower andthe Seer. Lord Mahavir too did the same. Only when no traceof any attachment (raag) remains, can one see these subtler andthe subtlest mistakes.Lord Mahavir could see his mistakes up until the time heattained Keval Gnan (Omniscience, Absolutism). The momenthe attained Keval Gnan was exactly the same moment his ultimatefault departed. Both the events took place simultaneously. ‘Themoment the last fault ceases to be seen, there is the manifestationof Keval Gnan’. Such is the law.Questioner : Dada, right from childhood I have had avery tough life. I have had to endure many hardships growingup and now as a parent I continue to endure and suffer becauseof my children. How can I continue to endure? Who is at faulthere?Dadashri : If you were to break this china cup wouldyou feel as much aggravation as you would if your child brokeit? Everything is a consequence of your own mistakes. If youunderstand that you have to face difficulties because of yourown past account, then would you worry or agonize over it? Byplacing blame on others, you create unnecessary worries andsuffering. Your suffering continues day and night when you feelthat you are the one that has to endure so much.The knowledge of the Self is such that as it grows, ityields results. You will no longer experience any suffering. Thereis no suffering in the Gnata-gneya relationship, where you arethe Knower, merely observing the object, that which is to beknown. Why is it that the person who fights with you, fights withonly you and no one else? That itself is your own fault. Yourown mistakes bind you and you have to become free from onlyyour own mistakes. These are all relationships of circumstances.These are all circumstances in front of you. Without pastaccounts, you would not encounter anyone. You are boundentirely by your own faults and it is only through becomingaware of your faults that you can become free. Seeing only myown faults liberated me. You will continue to become free asyou see your own faults.You can bear losing five hundred rupees if you lost themyourself. In the same token you will find the strength to endurethe consequences of your past mistakes once you realize thatyou are the one at fault. You become free once you realizethat you were at fault, otherwise you become bound evenfurther.People will tell you to become strong and increase yourpower of tolerance. But how long can the rope of tolerance lastbefore it breaks? Tolerance has limits. The amount of strengthor power needed to tolerate would equal the amount of powerAptavani-1215216Aptavani-1a major spiritual obstruction within him and this tuber is a veryserious disease.There are countless faults and mistakes within. Once youbecome aware of this fact, you will start to see them and theywill decrease. Do you think I see faults in others? I do not havetime for that. It is only through the fruition of your many andcumulative meritorious deeds that a Gnani Purush will showyou your faults. That is when I would use my spiritual powers(siddhis) and perform ‘an operation’ on you to rid you of yourdiseased tubers. Such operation is a hundred thousand timesmore complex than that performed by the surgeons of thisworld.The more of your mistakes you see, the more you becometheir master. The one who has no faults, has no superior abovehim. I have no master over me and that is why I am the masterof all masters. I do not have any overt or gross mistakes andthe subtle mistakes too are gone. I have only the subtler and thesubtlest mistakes, of which I remain the absolute Knower andthe Seer. Lord Mahavir too did the same. Only when no traceof any attachment (raag) remains, can one see these subtler andthe subtlest mistakes.Lord Mahavir could see his mistakes up until the time heattained Keval Gnan (Omniscience, Absolutism). The momenthe attained Keval Gnan was exactly the same moment his ultimatefault departed. Both the events took place simultaneously. ‘Themoment the last fault ceases to be seen, there is the manifestationof Keval Gnan’. Such is the law.Questioner : Dada, right from childhood I have had avery tough life. I have had to endure many hardships growingup and now as a parent I continue to endure and suffer becauseof my children. How can I continue to endure? Who is at faulthere?required to melt iron with the gaze of the eyes (i.e. it isimpossible). Whereas the rope of Gnan is without limits, and sothere is no question of it breaking. Gnan will take you all theway. My Gnan is such that it leaves nothing for you to tolerate.It is freedom filled with bliss. At the same time you will alsorecognize that your pending accounts are being paid off and youare becoming free.The vision that sees the fault of the self, is right vision(samkit), and defines the right path to liberation. If you get onthe right path just once, your worldly ‘shop’ will begin toempty. The one on the right path will always see his ownfaults, whereas the one on the wrong path will disregard hisown dirty laundry and will volunteer to wash other people’slaundry.I have personally seen in Gnan what has bound this world.One is bound by one’s own faults.What final vision will be required for liberation? It will bewhen your vision becomes flawless, i.e. when you do not seefaults in anyone, be assured that your work for liberation isdone. With such a vision you will not only cease to see faultsin people, but you would not even make comments such as ‘thistree is growing crooked’! (find faults with everything needlessly).Moah! Just let things be. This is all you have done for countlesslives.If you grasp just two of my keys as follows, you canachieve the right vision (samkit) :1. The mind is made of tubers. It is not a part of yourSelf. If you try to control it, it will challenge you. Once youknow that it is merely composed of tubers formed in the pastlife, then nothing needs to be done!2. Fault is of the sufferer.Svacchand : Following Your Own Intellect In SpiritualMattersThere is one trait within you called svacchand. Svachhandmeans to have and do everything your own way; this zealotryand stubbornness is such a fault that it will never let you achieveliberation. The balance sheet of your past infinite births is the‘ledger’ of karmic accounts of your relative self. Is this all youhave earned so far since eternal times? From all eight categoriesof karma you have bound, were you not able to get even adrop of this infinite knowledge? Of all the realization you havehad, you have not acquired even a drop of this permanent bliss.Worldly happiness that you experience is a false projection andit is a false belief; it is not the real happiness. For liberation youcannot get by with merely a false belief of moksha; it has to bethe real thing. Imaginary liberation will not do, you need realliberation. There is no superior that dictates over you. Whenyou realize this, you will feel liberated.Svacchand means ‘to make your own medicine foryourself’. It is like diagnosing your own ailments, makingyour own medicine and prescribing it to yourself. And lo andbehold, you make your own medicine for liberation also?That is why it has become a poison for you. That is preciselywhy when someone compliments you, your attachmentincreases and if someone criticizes you, you feel abhorrence.Svacchand has no place in religion or in religious austeritiesand rituals or in understanding the scriptures. Any following ofscriptures performed with svacchand will not do. Do not beguided by your own intellectual understanding or imaginationin spiritual matters. You go around being the judge, the lawyerand the culprit. Svacchand means self-guided thinking,interpretation and action according to your own intellect.Svacchand will lead you to your doom. Svachhand will destroyyou spiritually.Aptavani-1217218Aptavani-1required to melt iron with the gaze of the eyes (i.e. it isimpossible). Whereas the rope of Gnan is without limits, and sothere is no question of it breaking. Gnan will take you all theway. My Gnan is such that it leaves nothing for you to tolerate.It is freedom filled with bliss. At the same time you will alsorecognize that your pending accounts are being paid off and youare becoming free.The vision that sees the fault of the self, is right vision(samkit), and defines the right path to liberation. If you get onthe right path just once, your worldly ‘shop’ will begin toempty. The one on the right path will always see his ownfaults, whereas the one on the wrong path will disregard hisown dirty laundry and will volunteer to wash other people’slaundry.I have personally seen in Gnan what has bound this world.One is bound by one’s own faults.What final vision will be required for liberation? It will bewhen your vision becomes flawless, i.e. when you do not seefaults in anyone, be assured that your work for liberation isdone. With such a vision you will not only cease to see faultsin people, but you would not even make comments such as ‘thistree is growing crooked’! (find faults with everything needlessly).Moah! Just let things be. This is all you have done for countlesslives.If you grasp just two of my keys as follows, you canachieve the right vision (samkit) :1. The mind is made of tubers. It is not a part of yourSelf. If you try to control it, it will challenge you. Once youknow that it is merely composed of tubers formed in the pastlife, then nothing needs to be done!2. Fault is of the sufferer.Svacchand : Following Your Own Intellect In SpiritualMattersThere is one trait within you called svacchand. Svachhandmeans to have and do everything your own way; this zealotryand stubbornness is such a fault that it will never let you achieveliberation. The balance sheet of your past infinite births is the‘ledger’ of karmic accounts of your relative self. Is this all youhave earned so far since eternal times? From all eight categoriesof karma you have bound, were you not able to get even adrop of this infinite knowledge? Of all the realization you havehad, you have not acquired even a drop of this permanent bliss.Worldly happiness that you experience is a false projection andit is a false belief; it is not the real happiness. For liberation youcannot get by with merely a false belief of moksha; it has to bethe real thing. Imaginary liberation will not do, you need realliberation. There is no superior that dictates over you. Whenyou realize this, you will feel liberated.Svacchand means ‘to make your own medicine foryourself’. It is like diagnosing your own ailments, makingyour own medicine and prescribing it to yourself. And lo andbehold, you make your own medicine for liberation also?That is why it has become a poison for you. That is preciselywhy when someone compliments you, your attachmentincreases and if someone criticizes you, you feel abhorrence.Svacchand has no place in religion or in religious austeritiesand rituals or in understanding the scriptures. Any following ofscriptures performed with svacchand will not do. Do not beguided by your own intellectual understanding or imaginationin spiritual matters. You go around being the judge, the lawyerand the culprit. Svacchand means self-guided thinking,interpretation and action according to your own intellect.Svacchand will lead you to your doom. Svachhand will destroyyou spiritually.Aptavani-1217218Aptavani-1Svacchand is to act only according to your own will. Ifsvacchand is halted, liberation is at hand. You have practicedreligion and meditation as per your own intellectual understandingand it has and it will be all in vain. To carry on wantonly self-guided by your own whim in spiritual matters is to becomebound to the worldly life for infinite life cycles. In fact it is betterthat you do not come to this level of svachhand. It is better thatyou remain where you are. If you do svachhand after meetingThe Gnani, you will fall into endless cycles of births and deaths.You can liberate yourself if you get rid of your svacchand,however svachhand is not something that you will be able to getrid of on your own. You will have to recognize svacchand.Whatever you do is nothing but svacchand. Krupalu Dev(Shrimad Rajchandra) has said :“Whatever is done without awareness of the living embodimentof Omniscience, is all binding. This is what I utter from the coreof my heart.”Whatever you do and no matter how little, it is bondageand that is verily svacchand itself. Whether you go to a religiousdiscourse or become a monk, whether you practice penance orrenunciation and read scriptures, it is all svacchand. Before youdo anything, you should consult the Gnani Purush, otherwise itis considered svacchand and it will cause bondage.To believe, ‘I am Chandubhai’, is svacchand. Once thisbelief is removed, there is no need for penance, renunciation orscriptures. It is because this svacchand has been kept alive thatyou have not achieved liberation. Once you get rid of it, youcan achieve liberation within an hour.Svacchand means blind passion. Believing your relativeself to be your real Self is itself svacchand. And this svachaandwill not let you achieve liberation for endless births. Once it isgone, your work will be done.This world is such that you should not be doing anythingdriven by your self-guided whims and intellect. Until you meetthe Gnani, follow the advice of a person whose spiritual level iseven five percent higher than yours. This is so critical that theGnani Purush Shrimad Rajchandra has said :“Do not seek anything except a Self-realized One.Having found Him, surrender all your feelings and intentsat His lotus feet.And after having done so, remain thus.If then you do not feel liberated, come to me forliberation.”At the moment, all religions are practiced with svachhand.For example, you have been practicing worship and devotion(to some specific guru) for so many years, and yet if someonewere to even utter the name Chandubhai, you immediatelyrespond. Not only that but if someone says something aboutyou, you respond with raag (attachment) or dwesh (abhorrence).Of what use is all your devotion to a guru, when you have notrid yourself of your raag-dwesh? Nevertheless, if your devotionis for liberation, then you will meet a Gnani sooner or later.You cannot afford to do anything with svachhand. If youunknowingly put your hand on a fire, will you not burn yourhand? Even when you act unknowingly, you will have to sufferthe results of your actions. Therefore you should first find outwho you are and what this life is all about.After the fault of sva-chhand leaves, the chhand of Dadawill take over, meaning Dada will lead you in all matters untilfinal liberation. With the removal of svacchand there is Self-Realization. What is a person with minimal svachaand like?Aptavani-1219220Aptavani-1Svacchand is to act only according to your own will. Ifsvacchand is halted, liberation is at hand. You have practicedreligion and meditation as per your own intellectual understandingand it has and it will be all in vain. To carry on wantonly self-guided by your own whim in spiritual matters is to becomebound to the worldly life for infinite life cycles. In fact it is betterthat you do not come to this level of svachhand. It is better thatyou remain where you are. If you do svachhand after meetingThe Gnani, you will fall into endless cycles of births and deaths.You can liberate yourself if you get rid of your svacchand,however svachhand is not something that you will be able to getrid of on your own. You will have to recognize svacchand.Whatever you do is nothing but svacchand. Krupalu Dev(Shrimad Rajchandra) has said :“Whatever is done without awareness of the living embodimentof Omniscience, is all binding. This is what I utter from the coreof my heart.”Whatever you do and no matter how little, it is bondageand that is verily svacchand itself. Whether you go to a religiousdiscourse or become a monk, whether you practice penance orrenunciation and read scriptures, it is all svacchand. Before youdo anything, you should consult the Gnani Purush, otherwise itis considered svacchand and it will cause bondage.To believe, ‘I am Chandubhai’, is svacchand. Once thisbelief is removed, there is no need for penance, renunciation orscriptures. It is because this svacchand has been kept alive thatyou have not achieved liberation. Once you get rid of it, youcan achieve liberation within an hour.Svacchand means blind passion. Believing your relativeself to be your real Self is itself svacchand. And this svachaandwill not let you achieve liberation for endless births. Once it isgone, your work will be done.This world is such that you should not be doing anythingdriven by your self-guided whims and intellect. Until you meetthe Gnani, follow the advice of a person whose spiritual level iseven five percent higher than yours. This is so critical that theGnani Purush Shrimad Rajchandra has said :“Do not seek anything except a Self-realized One.Having found Him, surrender all your feelings and intentsat His lotus feet.And after having done so, remain thus.If then you do not feel liberated, come to me forliberation.”At the moment, all religions are practiced with svachhand.For example, you have been practicing worship and devotion(to some specific guru) for so many years, and yet if someonewere to even utter the name Chandubhai, you immediatelyrespond. Not only that but if someone says something aboutyou, you respond with raag (attachment) or dwesh (abhorrence).Of what use is all your devotion to a guru, when you have notrid yourself of your raag-dwesh? Nevertheless, if your devotionis for liberation, then you will meet a Gnani sooner or later.You cannot afford to do anything with svachhand. If youunknowingly put your hand on a fire, will you not burn yourhand? Even when you act unknowingly, you will have to sufferthe results of your actions. Therefore you should first find outwho you are and what this life is all about.After the fault of sva-chhand leaves, the chhand of Dadawill take over, meaning Dada will lead you in all matters untilfinal liberation. With the removal of svacchand there is Self-Realization. What is a person with minimal svachaand like?Aptavani-1219220Aptavani-1Such a person is very flexible. He will adapt and conform as isnecessary. He will find liberation very easily. But the one withsvacchand is inflexible and obstinate.Svacchand means deluded intellect. There is no one atfault in this world. Svacchand is your greatest fault.The Lord had created a wonderful systematic mixture forthe seekers of liberation and he had disclosed this mixture to all.He had given a formula for that mixture but today that formulahas been destroyed. Nobody has that formula any more. Today,I am giving you the same formula again.That mixture was composed of twenty percent scriptures,seventy percent for absolute humility and reverence for the Gnaniand ten percent for worldly desires. However, people haveemphasized the scriptures exclusively and that is why they havedeveloped dysentery. The lord had said to shake the mixtureand take it three times a day. But some luckless fools simplykept shaking the mixture three times a day and there were somethat just kept singing, ‘take three times a day after shaking thebottle’. They just went on reciting this in a parrot fashion.This is just like making a medicine from an instructionbook meant for doctors. People will not drink any medicinewithout first consulting a doctor because of the fear of dying.They fear dying in just one lifetime and yet they risk death ofendless lives by drinking the mixture of the scriptures of theAbsolutes (the Vitarags) like Lord Mahavir Swami. It has allbecome poison. The Lord calls it svacchand. It is nothing butblind activity.Obstinate Ego : Inflexible Ego : AadaiThe path of liberation is extremely narrow and if youdon’t walk straight there, you will get stuck. There you will haveto walk precisely according to instructions. You will have towalk straight and smooth. You wii have to be flexible, adjustableand without any element of obstinacy. Only then will you reachmoksha. A snake too has to straighten in order to enter its hole.The worldly life is perpetuated through obstinacy andinflexibility. Liberation is unattainable due to this obstinacy andinflexibility. The Lord has said that before becoming a sadhu(one who has renounced the world) one will have to becomestraight. No matter what level a sadhu has reached, what goodis it if his obstinacy still remains? Obstinacy is a dangerouslyperverse ego. This obstinacy is so bad that even if the Real pathcomes your way to embrace you; it will not let you embrace it.Your stubbornness will reject it.People have nurtured their obstinate ego more than theirloved ones, and their own selves. Alas! Even more than nurturingthemselves, they have nurtured their obstinacy and because ofthis obstinacy, they wander life after life. Obstinacy makes oneblind and does not allow one to see the right path. Obstinacymakes one harbour svachhand, which is nothing but poison.In the worldly life, obstinate people receive no respect.Only those without obstinacy are respected. So can obstinacybe tolerated in the path of liberation when even in the relativelife it is a detestable quality?Obstinacy will remain until Keval Gnan. Obstinacy isunpredictable in the path of liberation; it may arise at any time.You have to cross the ocean of obstinacy. You are standing onone shore of obstinacy and you have to cross over to theopposite shore. In this world you will get nowhere if you fightobstinacy with obstinacy. You can only get rid of obstinacy bybecoming flexible and humble. Even a snake has to become‘straight’ to enter its hole. For liberation, you will have to becomeflexible and humble. You will have to destroy all your tubers andbecome abuddha (intellect totally replaced by pragna- the directAptavani-1221222Aptavani-1Such a person is very flexible. He will adapt and conform as isnecessary. He will find liberation very easily. But the one withsvacchand is inflexible and obstinate.Svacchand means deluded intellect. There is no one atfault in this world. Svacchand is your greatest fault.The Lord had created a wonderful systematic mixture forthe seekers of liberation and he had disclosed this mixture to all.He had given a formula for that mixture but today that formulahas been destroyed. Nobody has that formula any more. Today,I am giving you the same formula again.That mixture was composed of twenty percent scriptures,seventy percent for absolute humility and reverence for the Gnaniand ten percent for worldly desires. However, people haveemphasized the scriptures exclusively and that is why they havedeveloped dysentery. The lord had said to shake the mixtureand take it three times a day. But some luckless fools simplykept shaking the mixture three times a day and there were somethat just kept singing, ‘take three times a day after shaking thebottle’. They just went on reciting this in a parrot fashion.This is just like making a medicine from an instructionbook meant for doctors. People will not drink any medicinewithout first consulting a doctor because of the fear of dying.They fear dying in just one lifetime and yet they risk death ofendless lives by drinking the mixture of the scriptures of theAbsolutes (the Vitarags) like Lord Mahavir Swami. It has allbecome poison. The Lord calls it svacchand. It is nothing butblind activity.Obstinate Ego : Inflexible Ego : AadaiThe path of liberation is extremely narrow and if youdon’t walk straight there, you will get stuck. There you will haveto walk precisely according to instructions. You will have towalk straight and smooth. You wii have to be flexible, adjustableand without any element of obstinacy. Only then will you reachmoksha. A snake too has to straighten in order to enter its hole.The worldly life is perpetuated through obstinacy andinflexibility. Liberation is unattainable due to this obstinacy andinflexibility. The Lord has said that before becoming a sadhu(one who has renounced the world) one will have to becomestraight. No matter what level a sadhu has reached, what goodis it if his obstinacy still remains? Obstinacy is a dangerouslyperverse ego. This obstinacy is so bad that even if the Real pathcomes your way to embrace you; it will not let you embrace it.Your stubbornness will reject it.People have nurtured their obstinate ego more than theirloved ones, and their own selves. Alas! Even more than nurturingthemselves, they have nurtured their obstinacy and because ofthis obstinacy, they wander life after life. Obstinacy makes oneblind and does not allow one to see the right path. Obstinacymakes one harbour svachhand, which is nothing but poison.In the worldly life, obstinate people receive no respect.Only those without obstinacy are respected. So can obstinacybe tolerated in the path of liberation when even in the relativelife it is a detestable quality?Obstinacy will remain until Keval Gnan. Obstinacy isunpredictable in the path of liberation; it may arise at any time.You have to cross the ocean of obstinacy. You are standing onone shore of obstinacy and you have to cross over to theopposite shore. In this world you will get nowhere if you fightobstinacy with obstinacy. You can only get rid of obstinacy bybecoming flexible and humble. Even a snake has to become‘straight’ to enter its hole. For liberation, you will have to becomeflexible and humble. You will have to destroy all your tubers andbecome abuddha (intellect totally replaced by pragna- the directAptavani-1221222Aptavani-1light of the soul)) for liberation.SuspicionAs people continue to read scriptures, interpreting themwith their own intellect and imagination (svachhand), theirobstinacy increases; this in turn makes their veils of ignorance(avaran) denser over the self. If reading scriptures enlightensyou, then why do you still stumble? People only stumble in thedark, how can one stumble in the light? If you claim to haveknowledge, have any of your worries decreased as a result? Onthe contrary, your confusion about what is right and what iswrong has increased along with your doubts and uncertainty.And where there is uncertainty, suspicion takes hold. Wherethere is suspicion, ignorance prevails. The Self does not remainwhere there are doubts and suspicions. Gnan is that whichmakes one completely free of doubts.Gnan is such that it will not disturb the stillness of evena single atom within the body. Doubts or suspicion is the enemyof the Self. It will make you ‘throw away the Soul’ (loose allspirituality). Therefore any doubts or suspicions that surfaceshould be ripped out from their root. Once Self-realization isacquired and you become firmly established in the awareness ofthe Self, is there anything that can shake you? Is there anythingin this world that can snatch away from you what is intrinsicallyyour own?Suspicion is a most dangerous disease - one is never ableto tell when it will creep up and how much damage it will do.For this current life, I can guarantee you that nothing is going tohappen outside the law of vyavasthit. So why then should youharbor any doubts or suspicions? In an insecure world wherethere is no guarantee that you will return home once you leaveto go out, where will you entertain doubts and where not? Andwhatever happens, has it not occurred before? Is it anythingnew? Besides the film of this life has already been recorded inyour past life. So why harbor so much turmoil and agony withinyou? You should never harbor suspicions or have doubts aboutanyone. And yet people are skeptical about mokhsa, about theVitarag Lords and religion. The fools! You become ruinedbecause of your suspicions.The Self can only be acquired if the sense, ‘I am thisbody’ (dehadhyas), from infinite life cycles leaves. Otherwisethis belief will not let you realize the Self. The intellect (buddhi)is the culprit in this and it will always show you the oppositebecause it always defends the worldly life and keeps youwandering within it. It continuously functions to the disadvantageof the Self. It will never let you see the right thing and will showyou only the wrong. Once you are on the right path, there is thepossibility of solving everything. To be on the right path meansto be samkit (right belief, ‘ I am pure Soul’). To be on thewrong path means to remain under the influence of a wrongbelief, (‘I am this body, I am Chandulal). To be the Self isGnan. The destruction of wrong belief results in the awakeningof right belief. Only then does one experience the bliss ofliberation. The intellect will keep you roaming in the life cyclesof the world.Insistence Of View PointSo many people become engrossed with a particularviewpoint and get stuck in a camp. They keep strengthening thefoundation of that faction, camp or sect. They become dogmaticand blind to others’ viewpoints. Day and night they are lost inthe activity of strengthening the foundation of the side they havechosen. You fools! Do you want to attain liberation or do youwant to remain stuck in your dogmatism? Liberation anddogmatism are incongruous. Only when one rises beyond allviewpoints does he find the path of liberation. Where there isAptavani-1223224Aptavani-1light of the soul)) for liberation.SuspicionAs people continue to read scriptures, interpreting themwith their own intellect and imagination (svachhand), theirobstinacy increases; this in turn makes their veils of ignorance(avaran) denser over the self. If reading scriptures enlightensyou, then why do you still stumble? People only stumble in thedark, how can one stumble in the light? If you claim to haveknowledge, have any of your worries decreased as a result? Onthe contrary, your confusion about what is right and what iswrong has increased along with your doubts and uncertainty.And where there is uncertainty, suspicion takes hold. Wherethere is suspicion, ignorance prevails. The Self does not remainwhere there are doubts and suspicions. Gnan is that whichmakes one completely free of doubts.Gnan is such that it will not disturb the stillness of evena single atom within the body. Doubts or suspicion is the enemyof the Self. It will make you ‘throw away the Soul’ (loose allspirituality). Therefore any doubts or suspicions that surfaceshould be ripped out from their root. Once Self-realization isacquired and you become firmly established in the awareness ofthe Self, is there anything that can shake you? Is there anythingin this world that can snatch away from you what is intrinsicallyyour own?Suspicion is a most dangerous disease - one is never ableto tell when it will creep up and how much damage it will do.For this current life, I can guarantee you that nothing is going tohappen outside the law of vyavasthit. So why then should youharbor any doubts or suspicions? In an insecure world wherethere is no guarantee that you will return home once you leaveto go out, where will you entertain doubts and where not? Andwhatever happens, has it not occurred before? Is it anythingnew? Besides the film of this life has already been recorded inyour past life. So why harbor so much turmoil and agony withinyou? You should never harbor suspicions or have doubts aboutanyone. And yet people are skeptical about mokhsa, about theVitarag Lords and religion. The fools! You become ruinedbecause of your suspicions.The Self can only be acquired if the sense, ‘I am thisbody’ (dehadhyas), from infinite life cycles leaves. Otherwisethis belief will not let you realize the Self. The intellect (buddhi)is the culprit in this and it will always show you the oppositebecause it always defends the worldly life and keeps youwandering within it. It continuously functions to the disadvantageof the Self. It will never let you see the right thing and will showyou only the wrong. Once you are on the right path, there is thepossibility of solving everything. To be on the right path meansto be samkit (right belief, ‘ I am pure Soul’). To be on thewrong path means to remain under the influence of a wrongbelief, (‘I am this body, I am Chandulal). To be the Self isGnan. The destruction of wrong belief results in the awakeningof right belief. Only then does one experience the bliss ofliberation. The intellect will keep you roaming in the life cyclesof the world.Insistence Of View PointSo many people become engrossed with a particularviewpoint and get stuck in a camp. They keep strengthening thefoundation of that faction, camp or sect. They become dogmaticand blind to others’ viewpoints. Day and night they are lost inthe activity of strengthening the foundation of the side they havechosen. You fools! Do you want to attain liberation or do youwant to remain stuck in your dogmatism? Liberation anddogmatism are incongruous. Only when one rises beyond allviewpoints does he find the path of liberation. Where there isAptavani-1223224Aptavani-1non-partiality, only there, there is God and only there, there isliberation.The one who is blind to the viewpoint of others can neverknow the Self. If you are dogmatic and insist upon only yourown viewpoint, how can you accept the truth of others? Andis your insistence over a permanent or a temporary thing? Thatwhich is needed is a permanent thing and yet you continue tobe dogmatic about temporary things. Then how can you attainthe Self? Become completely free from insistence of all kinds,except that for the Self. Only then will you realize the Self.Leave all other desires and become desirous of only knowingthe ‘truth’. Only then will you attain the ultimate truth.Fanaticism (Drashti Raag)(Exclusive attachment to a particular viewpoint)More harmful than dogma (matandha–blindness for otherviewpoints) is the disease of drashti-raag (fanatic attachment toa viewpoint). This type of fanaticism prevails life after life, andonly leaves after one meets a Gnani Purush. Until one acquiresthe right belief, blind faith prevails. It is said that the Lord is notso much against blind faith and beliefs, as he is against fanaticinsistence on a faith. What is fanaticism? There are 360 degreesand for each degree there are infinite viewpoints. Exclusiveattachment and insistence to any one particular viewpoint isdrashti-raag. This drashti-raag is impossible to get rid of. Onlyafter wandering for infinite life cycles when you meet a GnaniPurush, does this disease of drashti-raag becomes cured.One’s spiritual awareness is veiled because of one’sfanaticism. Worldly attachment and abhorrence can be rid ofbut not fanaticism. There is no solution for it. Neither in thepresent life, nor in the lives to come will this disease disappear.It is incurable.What are the characteristics of drashti-raag? Within itthere is not a single attribute of vitaragta (absolutism, the stateof enlightened world view). A man with drashti-raag will notunderstand what I say, whereas even the most uneducatedperson will.Drashti-raag is the raag of all raags (attachment of allattachments). Only when it is destroyed from its roots can oneunderstand the reality.Animosity And VengeanceQuestioner : If a snake comes to bite me, should I notkill it?Dadashri : Why not move away from it? What do youdo if a train is approaching you head on? You have to moveaside. Similarly, move away from the snake.Snake is a five-sensed life form. If you kill it, it will takeits revenge from you in the next life. It will know that you hurtit without any cause and in your next life it will take revenge.The entire world exists because of revenge. Even an antfeels that had it the strength and the power, it would harassyou. Just switch on the light and see how the bed bugs runaway frightened for their life. The bedbugs too fear that youwill kill them but at the same time they also wonder why youkill them when all they do is eat their own food? The bloodthey suck from you is because of an account from your pastlife.There are two kinds of bondage : one based on love andother on vengeance. There is reverence in the bondage of love,but the bondage of vengeance is what keeps the world bound.Love is sticky by nature and may dry up some day but vengeanceonly grows, increasing day by day.Aptavani-1225226Aptavani-1non-partiality, only there, there is God and only there, there isliberation.The one who is blind to the viewpoint of others can neverknow the Self. If you are dogmatic and insist upon only yourown viewpoint, how can you accept the truth of others? Andis your insistence over a permanent or a temporary thing? Thatwhich is needed is a permanent thing and yet you continue tobe dogmatic about temporary things. Then how can you attainthe Self? Become completely free from insistence of all kinds,except that for the Self. Only then will you realize the Self.Leave all other desires and become desirous of only knowingthe ‘truth’. Only then will you attain the ultimate truth.Fanaticism (Drashti Raag)(Exclusive attachment to a particular viewpoint)More harmful than dogma (matandha–blindness for otherviewpoints) is the disease of drashti-raag (fanatic attachment toa viewpoint). This type of fanaticism prevails life after life, andonly leaves after one meets a Gnani Purush. Until one acquiresthe right belief, blind faith prevails. It is said that the Lord is notso much against blind faith and beliefs, as he is against fanaticinsistence on a faith. What is fanaticism? There are 360 degreesand for each degree there are infinite viewpoints. Exclusiveattachment and insistence to any one particular viewpoint isdrashti-raag. This drashti-raag is impossible to get rid of. Onlyafter wandering for infinite life cycles when you meet a GnaniPurush, does this disease of drashti-raag becomes cured.One’s spiritual awareness is veiled because of one’sfanaticism. Worldly attachment and abhorrence can be rid ofbut not fanaticism. There is no solution for it. Neither in thepresent life, nor in the lives to come will this disease disappear.It is incurable.What are the characteristics of drashti-raag? Within itthere is not a single attribute of vitaragta (absolutism, the stateof enlightened world view). A man with drashti-raag will notunderstand what I say, whereas even the most uneducatedperson will.Drashti-raag is the raag of all raags (attachment of allattachments). Only when it is destroyed from its roots can oneunderstand the reality.Animosity And VengeanceQuestioner : If a snake comes to bite me, should I notkill it?Dadashri : Why not move away from it? What do youdo if a train is approaching you head on? You have to moveaside. Similarly, move away from the snake.Snake is a five-sensed life form. If you kill it, it will takeits revenge from you in the next life. It will know that you hurtit without any cause and in your next life it will take revenge.The entire world exists because of revenge. Even an antfeels that had it the strength and the power, it would harassyou. Just switch on the light and see how the bed bugs runaway frightened for their life. The bedbugs too fear that youwill kill them but at the same time they also wonder why youkill them when all they do is eat their own food? The bloodthey suck from you is because of an account from your pastlife.There are two kinds of bondage : one based on love andother on vengeance. There is reverence in the bondage of love,but the bondage of vengeance is what keeps the world bound.Love is sticky by nature and may dry up some day but vengeanceonly grows, increasing day by day.Aptavani-1225226Aptavani-1Vibrations Of Worldly LifeThe ocean of worldly life is an ocean of subatomic particles(parmanoos). When these subatomic particles vibrate they createwaves, which crash and collide with other particles. The collisionsends out more vibrations and more waves are created andeventually give rise to a storm. The origin of all vibrations is onlyfrom the subatomic particles. If the self becomes engrossedwith it, the vibrations become all the more powerful.This world too is just like the ocean. One vibration willgive rise to numerous other vibrations. The whole world hasarisen out of these echoes. Echoes of every kind are real andare heard in rhythm.If you stick your head in a well and shout, ‘You are athief’, the well echoes back to you, ‘You are a thief’. If youshout, ‘You are a king’, it will echo back, ‘You are a king’.Whatever you shout in the well, will echo back exactly as yousaid it. That is how the world is. It is like a well, whatever youthrow at it, it will throw back at you. The law is : Action andreaction are equal and opposite. Therefore, do unto others, asyou would want done to yourself. I am making you aware ofthe consequences you will have to endure but you have thepower over what kind of vibrations you create. So create theechoes that suit you.If you do not throw a stone to begin with, no vibrationswill arise within you and there will be no ensuing waves in theother person. But what can you do? Every one creates vibrations,large or small. Some will hurl small pebbles and others largerocks. Along with the vibrations there is also the ignorance ofthe Self. This results in even greater entanglement. Vibrationscreated after the attainment of the knowledge of Self areinconsequential. But the Lord has said not to create vibrationsand yet people cannot refrain from doing so. Vibrations of thebody are not harmful, but the ones caused by the mind andspeech, are harmful. So if you want happiness, you should stopthese all together. Wherever you have thrown ‘stones’, vibrationsare bound to occur. Where one has created immense vibrations,a life of infernal suffering awaits him in hell. He will enduresuffering there, unload the vibrations, become light and return tothe human form. Accumulation of mild vibrations leads one toa celestial life. It is not the ocean that troubles us, but thevibrations we create by throwing stones in it. The ocean is calmif left alone and undisturbed but whenever disturbance is created,the resulting vibrations create a problem.The Lord has said that for not even a passing momenthave you become the Self. The entire time has been spentcreating vibrations. You create waves and so do others, whenthat happens you can neither swim, nor can you drown.Vibrations of the body do not cause bondage for nextlife. It is the vibrations caused by the mind and speech thatcause bondage. The Lord has called these the vibrations ofsamrambha (the first initiation, start of an act, thought),samarambha (involvement of the decision making process andvocalization of the decision) and arambha (the visible action).The flash of the first vibration in the mind is samrambha e.g. itis samrambha when you first think about going to Churchgate.Then you plan and make a definite decision to go there (this isequivalent to sowing the seed of a karma for next life) and thisis called samarambha. And when that decision is visible in action,pulled by the waves of the vibrations created, it is called arambha.Now how can you solve this puzzle?Just observe the vibrations generated by the mind whenit has been disrespected or slighted. This is applicable to the selfas well as the other person. The vibrations resulting fromabhorrence and disrespect are very intense in a tyagi (personAptavani-1227228Aptavani-1Vibrations Of Worldly LifeThe ocean of worldly life is an ocean of subatomic particles(parmanoos). When these subatomic particles vibrate they createwaves, which crash and collide with other particles. The collisionsends out more vibrations and more waves are created andeventually give rise to a storm. The origin of all vibrations is onlyfrom the subatomic particles. If the self becomes engrossedwith it, the vibrations become all the more powerful.This world too is just like the ocean. One vibration willgive rise to numerous other vibrations. The whole world hasarisen out of these echoes. Echoes of every kind are real andare heard in rhythm.If you stick your head in a well and shout, ‘You are athief’, the well echoes back to you, ‘You are a thief’. If youshout, ‘You are a king’, it will echo back, ‘You are a king’.Whatever you shout in the well, will echo back exactly as yousaid it. That is how the world is. It is like a well, whatever youthrow at it, it will throw back at you. The law is : Action andreaction are equal and opposite. Therefore, do unto others, asyou would want done to yourself. I am making you aware ofthe consequences you will have to endure but you have thepower over what kind of vibrations you create. So create theechoes that suit you.If you do not throw a stone to begin with, no vibrationswill arise within you and there will be no ensuing waves in theother person. But what can you do? Every one creates vibrations,large or small. Some will hurl small pebbles and others largerocks. Along with the vibrations there is also the ignorance ofthe Self. This results in even greater entanglement. Vibrationscreated after the attainment of the knowledge of Self areinconsequential. But the Lord has said not to create vibrationsand yet people cannot refrain from doing so. Vibrations of thebody are not harmful, but the ones caused by the mind andspeech, are harmful. So if you want happiness, you should stopthese all together. Wherever you have thrown ‘stones’, vibrationsare bound to occur. Where one has created immense vibrations,a life of infernal suffering awaits him in hell. He will enduresuffering there, unload the vibrations, become light and return tothe human form. Accumulation of mild vibrations leads one toa celestial life. It is not the ocean that troubles us, but thevibrations we create by throwing stones in it. The ocean is calmif left alone and undisturbed but whenever disturbance is created,the resulting vibrations create a problem.The Lord has said that for not even a passing momenthave you become the Self. The entire time has been spentcreating vibrations. You create waves and so do others, whenthat happens you can neither swim, nor can you drown.Vibrations of the body do not cause bondage for nextlife. It is the vibrations caused by the mind and speech thatcause bondage. The Lord has called these the vibrations ofsamrambha (the first initiation, start of an act, thought),samarambha (involvement of the decision making process andvocalization of the decision) and arambha (the visible action).The flash of the first vibration in the mind is samrambha e.g. itis samrambha when you first think about going to Churchgate.Then you plan and make a definite decision to go there (this isequivalent to sowing the seed of a karma for next life) and thisis called samarambha. And when that decision is visible in action,pulled by the waves of the vibrations created, it is called arambha.Now how can you solve this puzzle?Just observe the vibrations generated by the mind whenit has been disrespected or slighted. This is applicable to the selfas well as the other person. The vibrations resulting fromabhorrence and disrespect are very intense in a tyagi (personAptavani-1227228Aptavani-1who gives up worldly life). On the other hand, a Vitarag willnever react to a hundred thousand insults; there will not be anytrace of a single vibration in Him. Do not cause any vibrationsin this body of yours as a reaction to insults and pain hurled atyou. All these vibrations of bodies around you are temporary.Ultimately they will all subside. Whether the body is made ofpearls or diamonds, it is still temporary. What do you expect togain by causing vibrations in it?You are trapped because of your mind. But when you getmarried, you become trapped with mishrachetan (the complexof mind, speech, body and ego) which is not your own. Ifvibrations arise with your father, then why would they not occurwith your wife? Wife is a mishrachetan, so what should you dothere? You should stop all vibrations. Vibrations with your fatherare acceptable, but you will not be able to stop vibrations withyour wife.What is this tongue and this speech that creates anddestroys and destroys and creates? It is the ego of the previouslife. It is because of this ego that the tongue lashes out ruthlesslyand creates vibrations, causing conflicts. Most of the miseriestoday are because of vibrations caused by the tongue and thespeech.In the current time cycle one is not fortunate enough torender good karma but has the misfortune of taking part in evilones. After acquiring this Gnan the Mahatmas do not like anynegative activities that take place due to the unfolding of anegative karma. Whether that karma is positive or negative, itis merely a discharge and in the process it will createcorresponding vibrations and then everything will calm down.But for those who do not have Gnan, they may not even feelremorse when a negative karma is unfolding in this life. And soalong with the vibrations of the unfolding karma, their reactions,because of their ignorance, creates new vibrations (causalkarma). Thus the vibrations are doubled. Because of ignorancethere is no telling when the vibrations will occur and it will notmatter whether the person is an ordinary householder or a tyagi(one who renounces worldly life). Wherever there is ignorance,there is presence of imaginary fear and where there is fear,vibrations are bound to occur. Vibrations create causes andeffects of causes create more vibrations and waves.What happens to a mirror if a sparrow comes and sits infront of it? The mirror remains the same but the sparrow seesanother sparrow that looks just like her in front of her. She seesthe same eyes and a beak and her belief changes that there isanother sparrow like her in the mirror. She will start pecking atthe sparrow. This is how everything is in the world. The worldexists on such vibrations. A slightest change in one’s belief willchange one’s vision and perception. Then one becomes whatone sees. What a wonder the mirror is but it has become socommon with people that they fail to see its mystery. They usethe mirror to do their make up, comb their hair etc., and thatis why the mirror has lost its worth. Otherwise the mirror is avery valuable thing. What a marvelous play of the physicalcomplex (body) that is forming and disintegrating? When thesparrow comes before the mirror, it is not her knowledge thatchanges, but her belief. She believes there is another sparrowin the mirror and starts pecking at it. That is how the world is.One vibration gives rise to countless other vibrations.The knowledge of the Self does not change, but beliefschange from moment to moment. If the knowledge of the Selfchanged, there would be no Self because the Self is knowledge.They are not separate. Just as a thing and its attributes remaintogether and never separate from each other, knowledge is theSelf. Ordinarily what happens is people become what theyimagine through their beliefs.Aptavani-1229230Aptavani-1who gives up worldly life). On the other hand, a Vitarag willnever react to a hundred thousand insults; there will not be anytrace of a single vibration in Him. Do not cause any vibrationsin this body of yours as a reaction to insults and pain hurled atyou. All these vibrations of bodies around you are temporary.Ultimately they will all subside. Whether the body is made ofpearls or diamonds, it is still temporary. What do you expect togain by causing vibrations in it?You are trapped because of your mind. But when you getmarried, you become trapped with mishrachetan (the complexof mind, speech, body and ego) which is not your own. Ifvibrations arise with your father, then why would they not occurwith your wife? Wife is a mishrachetan, so what should you dothere? You should stop all vibrations. Vibrations with your fatherare acceptable, but you will not be able to stop vibrations withyour wife.What is this tongue and this speech that creates anddestroys and destroys and creates? It is the ego of the previouslife. It is because of this ego that the tongue lashes out ruthlesslyand creates vibrations, causing conflicts. Most of the miseriestoday are because of vibrations caused by the tongue and thespeech.In the current time cycle one is not fortunate enough torender good karma but has the misfortune of taking part in evilones. After acquiring this Gnan the Mahatmas do not like anynegative activities that take place due to the unfolding of anegative karma. Whether that karma is positive or negative, itis merely a discharge and in the process it will createcorresponding vibrations and then everything will calm down.But for those who do not have Gnan, they may not even feelremorse when a negative karma is unfolding in this life. And soalong with the vibrations of the unfolding karma, their reactions,because of their ignorance, creates new vibrations (causalkarma). Thus the vibrations are doubled. Because of ignorancethere is no telling when the vibrations will occur and it will notmatter whether the person is an ordinary householder or a tyagi(one who renounces worldly life). Wherever there is ignorance,there is presence of imaginary fear and where there is fear,vibrations are bound to occur. Vibrations create causes andeffects of causes create more vibrations and waves.What happens to a mirror if a sparrow comes and sits infront of it? The mirror remains the same but the sparrow seesanother sparrow that looks just like her in front of her. She seesthe same eyes and a beak and her belief changes that there isanother sparrow like her in the mirror. She will start pecking atthe sparrow. This is how everything is in the world. The worldexists on such vibrations. A slightest change in one’s belief willchange one’s vision and perception. Then one becomes whatone sees. What a wonder the mirror is but it has become socommon with people that they fail to see its mystery. They usethe mirror to do their make up, comb their hair etc., and thatis why the mirror has lost its worth. Otherwise the mirror is avery valuable thing. What a marvelous play of the physicalcomplex (body) that is forming and disintegrating? When thesparrow comes before the mirror, it is not her knowledge thatchanges, but her belief. She believes there is another sparrowin the mirror and starts pecking at it. That is how the world is.One vibration gives rise to countless other vibrations.The knowledge of the Self does not change, but beliefschange from moment to moment. If the knowledge of the Selfchanged, there would be no Self because the Self is knowledge.They are not separate. Just as a thing and its attributes remaintogether and never separate from each other, knowledge is theSelf. Ordinarily what happens is people become what theyimagine through their beliefs.Aptavani-1229230Aptavani-1Conflicts‘Liberation is when not an iota of conflict arises withinone even in an environment filled with conflicts.’An atmosphere of conflict will continue to present itself.Does it not get too hot being under the sun? Do the doors notslam open and shut in the wind? When that happens, all youhave to do is keep your distance a little. How could you get ataste of liberation if there were no conflicts? The liberation givento you by Dada is such that you can experience freedom despitebeing surrounded by an environment full of conflict.The Lord does not regard anything as bondage. It is theprakruti-the relative self that is engaged in eating, drinking andall the other activities. Being free from conflicts is liberation. Theworldly routines do not bind you, and they will not change.When no vibration of conflict arises within one in reactionto stressful external conflicts, then one has finished studying allthe scriptures of the world. In the most nauseating and non-agreeable circumstances, if you suppress your reactions andappear calm, then it means that you are well on your way ofstudying the scriptures of the world. Conflicts occur even betweengurus and disciples.After meeting a Gnani Purush conflicts will not ariseregardless of how unpleasant the atmosphere may be. What anamazing Gnan this ‘Dada’ has given to his Mahatmas! Theynever experience any grief and enjoy the bliss of the Vitarag.Elimination of conflicts is liberation. You experience the liberationhere and now.What happens when you experience conflicts? You feelas if your heart and soul are on fire and you cannot put out thefire, no matter how hard you try. The self is not a thing that youburn away. If your clothes catch fire let them burn but not yoursoul. Day and night the world is absorbed in conflict. For ashort while you fall under the spell of illusion of the world onlyto return to your internal anguish. The whole world is immersedin suffering and anguish. The illusion, transiently, makes peopleforget their suffering. Suffering can never be destroyed and ifdestroyed (by Gnani), there is liberation.Today there are waves of conflicts everywhere and whenit gets worse and unbearable people resort to committing suicide.But does that solve the problem? On the contrary, they carrythe problem, magnified many times, into their next birth and willhave to endure it. Therefore, it is better to get through all thisand endure it in this life. There is nothing but misunderstandingand ignorance in this world.Where did all this misery come from? It has come becauseyou have sought solace from those who are unhappy themselves.How can there be any misery if you take solace from the Onewho is in bliss. Dada is in eternal bliss. If you seek solace fromHim, where is the scope of any unhappiness coming your way?Those who have selfish motives in what they do, are unhappypeople. If you seek solace from them, naturally you are goingto be unhappy. Those who are unhappy have not been able toget rid of their own miseries so how can you expect them tohelp you get rid of yours? You can be permanently happy onlywhen you go to the One who is Absolute, the one who is anabode of endless bliss, the one who has no self-interest and isfree from all desires.As conflict increases it turns into open quarrel. How canyou maintain a friendly relationship with a person who isquarrelsome? It is like trying to sweeten soured whey- even thesweetness turns sour. Instead it is better to keep your distancefrom such a person. The other option is to become a Gnani. AGnani would have the real perspective and would understandthat whatever the other person is saying is merely a record andAptavani-1231232Aptavani-1Conflicts‘Liberation is when not an iota of conflict arises withinone even in an environment filled with conflicts.’An atmosphere of conflict will continue to present itself.Does it not get too hot being under the sun? Do the doors notslam open and shut in the wind? When that happens, all youhave to do is keep your distance a little. How could you get ataste of liberation if there were no conflicts? The liberation givento you by Dada is such that you can experience freedom despitebeing surrounded by an environment full of conflict.The Lord does not regard anything as bondage. It is theprakruti-the relative self that is engaged in eating, drinking andall the other activities. Being free from conflicts is liberation. Theworldly routines do not bind you, and they will not change.When no vibration of conflict arises within one in reactionto stressful external conflicts, then one has finished studying allthe scriptures of the world. In the most nauseating and non-agreeable circumstances, if you suppress your reactions andappear calm, then it means that you are well on your way ofstudying the scriptures of the world. Conflicts occur even betweengurus and disciples.After meeting a Gnani Purush conflicts will not ariseregardless of how unpleasant the atmosphere may be. What anamazing Gnan this ‘Dada’ has given to his Mahatmas! Theynever experience any grief and enjoy the bliss of the Vitarag.Elimination of conflicts is liberation. You experience the liberationhere and now.What happens when you experience conflicts? You feelas if your heart and soul are on fire and you cannot put out thefire, no matter how hard you try. The self is not a thing that youburn away. If your clothes catch fire let them burn but not yoursoul. Day and night the world is absorbed in conflict. For ashort while you fall under the spell of illusion of the world onlyto return to your internal anguish. The whole world is immersedin suffering and anguish. The illusion, transiently, makes peopleforget their suffering. Suffering can never be destroyed and ifdestroyed (by Gnani), there is liberation.Today there are waves of conflicts everywhere and whenit gets worse and unbearable people resort to committing suicide.But does that solve the problem? On the contrary, they carrythe problem, magnified many times, into their next birth and willhave to endure it. Therefore, it is better to get through all thisand endure it in this life. There is nothing but misunderstandingand ignorance in this world.Where did all this misery come from? It has come becauseyou have sought solace from those who are unhappy themselves.How can there be any misery if you take solace from the Onewho is in bliss. Dada is in eternal bliss. If you seek solace fromHim, where is the scope of any unhappiness coming your way?Those who have selfish motives in what they do, are unhappypeople. If you seek solace from them, naturally you are goingto be unhappy. Those who are unhappy have not been able toget rid of their own miseries so how can you expect them tohelp you get rid of yours? You can be permanently happy onlywhen you go to the One who is Absolute, the one who is anabode of endless bliss, the one who has no self-interest and isfree from all desires.As conflict increases it turns into open quarrel. How canyou maintain a friendly relationship with a person who isquarrelsome? It is like trying to sweeten soured whey- even thesweetness turns sour. Instead it is better to keep your distancefrom such a person. The other option is to become a Gnani. AGnani would have the real perspective and would understandthat whatever the other person is saying is merely a record andAptavani-1231232Aptavani-1such records are playing everywhere. A Gnani sees the Selfwithin all as pure. Everyone is entrapped in this prison of theworld so what can they do? What can anyone do being caughtup in this trap of conflicts? What kind of trap is this? Everyonein a household will gang up on one person. Just think of theplight of that poor fellow when there is a war within the fourwalls of his home. He does not even sleep in peace. Out of fearof displeasing people at home, he even turns down an invitationfrom a friend to a dinner. Every moment there is misery hecannot escape and he has to endure it. Even at home he has tolive in a hostile environment. Just look at the effects of karma!It is his own karma. The world is such that there is no escapefrom suffering.One man told me that he got married but does not likehis wife.Dadashri : Why, what is the reason for not liking her?Questioner : She is lame. She limps a little when shewalks.Dadashri : Does your wife like you or not?Questioner : I certainly am likeable. I am good looking,educated, I have a good income and I do not have a physicaldeformity.Dadashri : Then the fault is yours. What did you dowrong to deserve a lame wife like her and what kind of meritkarma did she have to deserve a good husband like you?What you reap is what you had sowed so why blameothers for your misfortune? Now go and endure your ownmistakes and do not repeat the same mistake again. The manunderstood all this and his life, which was on the brink of abreakdown started to mend.The destruction of conflict is one of the most importantcomponents of liberation. Bliss follows the destruction of conflict.You may not have Gnan but when can you say you have religionat home? It is when you tolerate any kind of environment anddo not add fuel to the fire of conflict at home, then you areconsidered a noble man. God lives in such a house. Everythinggets destroyed wherever there is conflict. God will not reside ina home where conflicts occur and Laxmiji, the Goddess ofwealth too would leave.Conflicts are not allowed to occur in a religious householdand if once in a while a conflict does occur, it is confined withinthe four walls of the home and everyone will keep awarenessthat it does not occur again.What pleases Goddess Laxmi is compliance of her laws:complete honesty and intention of returning whatever is borrowed.How can Laxmiji be pleased when you worship her but alsobreak her laws?The Lord says that there is perpetuation of the worldlylife as long as the mind is full of conflicts. There is liberationwhen the mind becomes free of all conflicts, such a mind willalways be at peace.Even this small child is comforted by the coolness of mywords; he too can tell the difference between cool water andboiling water. When husband and wife quarrel at home, thechild watches them and listens to the words being exchangedand analyzes who is at fault. He feels helpless because he knowsthat he is too young to do anything but he makes up his mindto take care of matters when he grows up. A child can understandangry eyes and peaceful eyes.The time of conflict passes one way or another, but duringthat time people cause bondage for infinite life cycles. The seedsAptavani-1233234Aptavani-1such records are playing everywhere. A Gnani sees the Selfwithin all as pure. Everyone is entrapped in this prison of theworld so what can they do? What can anyone do being caughtup in this trap of conflicts? What kind of trap is this? Everyonein a household will gang up on one person. Just think of theplight of that poor fellow when there is a war within the fourwalls of his home. He does not even sleep in peace. Out of fearof displeasing people at home, he even turns down an invitationfrom a friend to a dinner. Every moment there is misery hecannot escape and he has to endure it. Even at home he has tolive in a hostile environment. Just look at the effects of karma!It is his own karma. The world is such that there is no escapefrom suffering.One man told me that he got married but does not likehis wife.Dadashri : Why, what is the reason for not liking her?Questioner : She is lame. She limps a little when shewalks.Dadashri : Does your wife like you or not?Questioner : I certainly am likeable. I am good looking,educated, I have a good income and I do not have a physicaldeformity.Dadashri : Then the fault is yours. What did you dowrong to deserve a lame wife like her and what kind of meritkarma did she have to deserve a good husband like you?What you reap is what you had sowed so why blameothers for your misfortune? Now go and endure your ownmistakes and do not repeat the same mistake again. The manunderstood all this and his life, which was on the brink of abreakdown started to mend.The destruction of conflict is one of the most importantcomponents of liberation. Bliss follows the destruction of conflict.You may not have Gnan but when can you say you have religionat home? It is when you tolerate any kind of environment anddo not add fuel to the fire of conflict at home, then you areconsidered a noble man. God lives in such a house. Everythinggets destroyed wherever there is conflict. God will not reside ina home where conflicts occur and Laxmiji, the Goddess ofwealth too would leave.Conflicts are not allowed to occur in a religious householdand if once in a while a conflict does occur, it is confined withinthe four walls of the home and everyone will keep awarenessthat it does not occur again.What pleases Goddess Laxmi is compliance of her laws:complete honesty and intention of returning whatever is borrowed.How can Laxmiji be pleased when you worship her but alsobreak her laws?The Lord says that there is perpetuation of the worldlylife as long as the mind is full of conflicts. There is liberationwhen the mind becomes free of all conflicts, such a mind willalways be at peace.Even this small child is comforted by the coolness of mywords; he too can tell the difference between cool water andboiling water. When husband and wife quarrel at home, thechild watches them and listens to the words being exchangedand analyzes who is at fault. He feels helpless because he knowsthat he is too young to do anything but he makes up his mindto take care of matters when he grows up. A child can understandangry eyes and peaceful eyes.The time of conflict passes one way or another, but duringthat time people cause bondage for infinite life cycles. The seedsAptavani-1233234Aptavani-1of quarrel have been sown from countless past lives; they liedormant within, waiting to sprout as soon as the rightcircumstances arise. The Gnani Purush can burn these seeds ofconflict, whereby no more conflicts would occur.Srimad Rajchandra says that I bow down to the familywhere even a single day passes without a conflict.Pleasure And Pain : Their True NatureWhere does one find misery? Misery is the result offollowing the world. There is never any happiness in followingwhat the world does. No matter which way you turn, there isonly misery. In following the Gnani, there is never any misery.There is no pain where the Gnani is.What is true misery? True misery is when a starving personfinds no food to eat. Misery is when a thirsty man finds nowater. Misery is when a person gasping for air finds no air tobreath. All other afflictions and sufferings can be tolerated insome manner or other but you cannot do without food, waterand air. You can endure all other tensions because you will notdie from them. And yet you walk around unnecessarily burdenedwith such tensions.Questioner : Why does one person find pleasure andanother pain?Dadashri : Pleasure and pain are imaginary - mere mentalprojections. If you believe something is good, then you will likeit. Anything done to the liking of others helps accumulate meritkarma. What is carried in the vessel of the intellect will keepon changing but it is that which is carried in the vessel ofintellect at the time of death, which will give results for yournext life.This is a process of evolution. The knowledge you gainat the ‘first mile’ will continue to evolve at each succeeding mile.In the previous life one might think that there is nothing wrongwith stealing but in this life he may acquire knowledge where hefeels it is wrong to steal. He holds fast to this opinion but thefact that he steals is the effect of his opinion from past life andso the stealing continues. It will not come to a stop, because theeffects cannot be destroyed. These effects have to dischargeand be exhausted, and until they do, one cannot die. All I amsaying is that you should change whatever wrong opinions youhad in the past. Be firm in your decision that you do not wantto steal anymore and keep reminding yourself this. Every timeyou think of stealing, destroy the idea of stealing from itsroots. Then you will succeed and bind merit karma for thenext life.In order to improve their worldly life, I tell people to havean obliging nature and show kindness towards others. Do notthink about yourself. Render service to others for the welfareand good of the world. Whatever you spend for yourself goesdown the drain and whatever you do for others is an adjustmentfor your next birth.What does pure Self (Shuddhatma Bhagwan) say? ‘Itake care of the those who take care of others and the ones thattake care of themselves, I leave them to fend for themselves’.Fault-Finding VisionQuestioner : When we see faults in others, is it becausethose very faults exist in us?Dadashri : No there is no such law but such a fault mayexist. What does the intellect do? It continuously covers upyour own faults and sees faults in others. That is the work ofan unworthy person. The person who has destroyed his fault(wrong belief) does not see faults in others; he does not haveAptavani-1235236Aptavani-1of quarrel have been sown from countless past lives; they liedormant within, waiting to sprout as soon as the rightcircumstances arise. The Gnani Purush can burn these seeds ofconflict, whereby no more conflicts would occur.Srimad Rajchandra says that I bow down to the familywhere even a single day passes without a conflict.Pleasure And Pain : Their True NatureWhere does one find misery? Misery is the result offollowing the world. There is never any happiness in followingwhat the world does. No matter which way you turn, there isonly misery. In following the Gnani, there is never any misery.There is no pain where the Gnani is.What is true misery? True misery is when a starving personfinds no food to eat. Misery is when a thirsty man finds nowater. Misery is when a person gasping for air finds no air tobreath. All other afflictions and sufferings can be tolerated insome manner or other but you cannot do without food, waterand air. You can endure all other tensions because you will notdie from them. And yet you walk around unnecessarily burdenedwith such tensions.Questioner : Why does one person find pleasure andanother pain?Dadashri : Pleasure and pain are imaginary - mere mentalprojections. If you believe something is good, then you will likeit. Anything done to the liking of others helps accumulate meritkarma. What is carried in the vessel of the intellect will keepon changing but it is that which is carried in the vessel ofintellect at the time of death, which will give results for yournext life.This is a process of evolution. The knowledge you gainat the ‘first mile’ will continue to evolve at each succeeding mile.In the previous life one might think that there is nothing wrongwith stealing but in this life he may acquire knowledge where hefeels it is wrong to steal. He holds fast to this opinion but thefact that he steals is the effect of his opinion from past life andso the stealing continues. It will not come to a stop, because theeffects cannot be destroyed. These effects have to dischargeand be exhausted, and until they do, one cannot die. All I amsaying is that you should change whatever wrong opinions youhad in the past. Be firm in your decision that you do not wantto steal anymore and keep reminding yourself this. Every timeyou think of stealing, destroy the idea of stealing from itsroots. Then you will succeed and bind merit karma for thenext life.In order to improve their worldly life, I tell people to havean obliging nature and show kindness towards others. Do notthink about yourself. Render service to others for the welfareand good of the world. Whatever you spend for yourself goesdown the drain and whatever you do for others is an adjustmentfor your next birth.What does pure Self (Shuddhatma Bhagwan) say? ‘Itake care of the those who take care of others and the ones thattake care of themselves, I leave them to fend for themselves’.Fault-Finding VisionQuestioner : When we see faults in others, is it becausethose very faults exist in us?Dadashri : No there is no such law but such a fault mayexist. What does the intellect do? It continuously covers upyour own faults and sees faults in others. That is the work ofan unworthy person. The person who has destroyed his fault(wrong belief) does not see faults in others; he does not haveAptavani-1235236Aptavani-1such bad habits. He sees others as flawless. Gnan is such thatit does not allow anyone to see faults anywhere.People’s faults are their sewers. One does not go aroundopening the sewers in the streets. Even a small child will not doso. Since you have a kitchen you are bound to have a draininggutter, but you should not open the gutter. Everyone has certainfaults – some people may have anger, others may be impatient– to see these faults is the same as opening a sewer. You shouldrather see their virtues. The only sewer worth looking at is yourown. Your own gutters are clogged up and yet you are unawareof it. And even if you were aware of this, what can you do?Such negativity, seeing faults in others, has become part ofone’s nature. People read the scriptures and recite, ‘Do notspeak ill of anyone’, and yet they never cease to do so.If you speak ill of others, no matter how little, the damageis done for sure. No one opens the sewer lids in the streets andyet they keep opening the lids of other people’s sewers.Criticizing someone is like cashing in a ten-rupee noteand getting back only one. The person that criticizes others willalways be at a loss. You should not expend your energy whereyou have nothing to gain. You waste away your energies whenyou criticize others. If you become aware that instead of grindingsesame seeds for oil you are indeed grinding sand, is that nota waste of your time and energy? Why expend your time andenergy when you know you have nothing to gain, on the contrary,you lose valuable time and energy. Criticizing others is like washingother people’s laundry while dirtying your own in the process.Mooah! (one who is dying) when will you wash your own?I keep using the word ‘mooah’, what do I mean by it?Mooah is a very profound word. There is mild rebuke in it butno contempt. Even though I speak a rural dialect, it is verypowerful. Each sentence incites one to start thinking. Becausethis speech comes from the heart of the Gnani, it is incarnateSaraswati (Goddess of Knowledge).MemoryQuestioner : Dada, why is it that the past cannot beforgotten?Dadashri : The past is something that you cannot forgetwhen you try to forget it and it cannot be recalled when youwish to. Everyone in the world wishes to forget the past butwithout the presence of Gnan, the world will not fade intooblivion.Your memory exists because of your raag and dwesh(attachment and abhorrence). The greater the attachment orabhorrence for a particular thing, the more you will rememberit. A woman may go to her father’s home to forget her mother-in-law, but she will not be able to do so because of abhorrencetowards her. She will also keep thinking about her husbandbecause she has attachment towards him. That is because of thehappiness he gives her. You remember what makes you themost happy or unhappy because there is attachment orabhorrence there. If you erase the association of the attachmentor the abhorrence, that memory will disappear. The thoughtsthat come to you automatically is memory. When attachmentand abhorrence is erased (through Gnan), their memory willcease and only then does the aura of liberation appear on yourface. Your smile will exude liberation. Memory creates a pulland tension and this strains the facial expressions. Your mindremains in tension all the time and that is why your face neverradiates with freedom. Everyone’s memory differs. What youremember may not be the same as what others remember. Thisis because everyone’s abhorrence and attachment differs.Memory exists through attachment and abhorrence.Aptavani-1237238Aptavani-1such bad habits. He sees others as flawless. Gnan is such thatit does not allow anyone to see faults anywhere.People’s faults are their sewers. One does not go aroundopening the sewers in the streets. Even a small child will not doso. Since you have a kitchen you are bound to have a draininggutter, but you should not open the gutter. Everyone has certainfaults – some people may have anger, others may be impatient– to see these faults is the same as opening a sewer. You shouldrather see their virtues. The only sewer worth looking at is yourown. Your own gutters are clogged up and yet you are unawareof it. And even if you were aware of this, what can you do?Such negativity, seeing faults in others, has become part ofone’s nature. People read the scriptures and recite, ‘Do notspeak ill of anyone’, and yet they never cease to do so.If you speak ill of others, no matter how little, the damageis done for sure. No one opens the sewer lids in the streets andyet they keep opening the lids of other people’s sewers.Criticizing someone is like cashing in a ten-rupee noteand getting back only one. The person that criticizes others willalways be at a loss. You should not expend your energy whereyou have nothing to gain. You waste away your energies whenyou criticize others. If you become aware that instead of grindingsesame seeds for oil you are indeed grinding sand, is that nota waste of your time and energy? Why expend your time andenergy when you know you have nothing to gain, on the contrary,you lose valuable time and energy. Criticizing others is like washingother people’s laundry while dirtying your own in the process.Mooah! (one who is dying) when will you wash your own?I keep using the word ‘mooah’, what do I mean by it?Mooah is a very profound word. There is mild rebuke in it butno contempt. Even though I speak a rural dialect, it is verypowerful. Each sentence incites one to start thinking. Becausethis speech comes from the heart of the Gnani, it is incarnateSaraswati (Goddess of Knowledge).MemoryQuestioner : Dada, why is it that the past cannot beforgotten?Dadashri : The past is something that you cannot forgetwhen you try to forget it and it cannot be recalled when youwish to. Everyone in the world wishes to forget the past butwithout the presence of Gnan, the world will not fade intooblivion.Your memory exists because of your raag and dwesh(attachment and abhorrence). The greater the attachment orabhorrence for a particular thing, the more you will rememberit. A woman may go to her father’s home to forget her mother-in-law, but she will not be able to do so because of abhorrencetowards her. She will also keep thinking about her husbandbecause she has attachment towards him. That is because of thehappiness he gives her. You remember what makes you themost happy or unhappy because there is attachment orabhorrence there. If you erase the association of the attachmentor the abhorrence, that memory will disappear. The thoughtsthat come to you automatically is memory. When attachmentand abhorrence is erased (through Gnan), their memory willcease and only then does the aura of liberation appear on yourface. Your smile will exude liberation. Memory creates a pulland tension and this strains the facial expressions. Your mindremains in tension all the time and that is why your face neverradiates with freedom. Everyone’s memory differs. What youremember may not be the same as what others remember. Thisis because everyone’s abhorrence and attachment differs.Memory exists through attachment and abhorrence.Aptavani-1237238Aptavani-1Questioner : Dada, surely memory will have to beremoved.Dadashri : This memory itself tells you that it wants tobe cleansed, erased. There would be utter confusion if therewere no memory. What would you erase if there were nomemory? How would you know where your attachment andabhorrence lie? Memory arises for its spontaneous resolution. Itcomes forth so the link to attachment and abhorrence may beerased. So erase whatever comes forth and when you do thatyou will free yourself. You remember only because you have thelink to attachment and abhorrence here. You should repent forit and make a firm resolve never to repeat that mistake and thuserase it. You can wipe it (raag-dwesh) out by doing just this andthat memory will leave forever. Real Gnan is the Gnan that willmake you forget the world.Comfort In DiscomfortThe Lord has said to seek out comfort in discomfort.Comfort lies only in discomfort but one should know how tolook for it.People find discomfort in the sofa they have had for afew years, because they find it outdated. People create discomfortin situations of comfort. Some even sit on an easy chair and yetremain uneasy. Mooah! During your entire life you are allowedto be uneasy just once and yet you spend the entire day beinguneasy. The whole daylong you spend crying out your pain andsorrow. In Bombay there is an abundance of happiness and yetpeople pass their days being unhappy. Discomfort andinconvenience is when your brand new sofa breaks within fivedays of purchase. But here you create discomfort as an excusefor a new sofa; you create discomfort in a perfectly comfortablesofa. A woman sees new sofa (imported furniture) in herneighbor’s home and pesters her husband for weeks to buythem for her, so he buys a new sofa on credit. But when thatsofa breaks, her heart is set on fire. Mooyee! Everything elsecan burn but do not torment your self! You should never imitateanyone. Only those with lesser commonsense do so and sufferin the process. Besides, which household nowadays does nothave sofas? Why must you have the same? You should beoriginal and be yourself, instead of imitating others. Why notfurnish your family room the Indian way with a nice futonmattress, fresh white sheets and plenty of pillows? This way youdo not have to imitate anyone and at the same time have greatcomfort. What does a person truly need? He or she needssomething to eat and drink, something to wear and a place tolive. Today people have created new miseries. In reality thereis no such thing as unhappiness in this world. It is through lackof understanding that people have created so much unhappiness.Your neighbor may invite you to his home one day andnot the next. Why do you have to be invited everyday? Whenhe invites you, you feel that he respects you and that comfortsyou. And when he does not invite you, you feel that he has norespect for you and therefore you feel uncomfortable. You shouldhave an attitude that it is fine if he invites you and it is also fineif he does not.There is infinite bliss within you but you do not know howto uncover it and experience it. There is only one kind of blissbut the society has created so many different levels. You canonly experience true bliss when you understand the true realityof this world. How long are you going to live in this imaginaryand perceived happiness? But then what can you do, now thatyou are already trapped? I will tell you what this trap is like.A baniya (usually a Jain businessman) and his very closeMuslim friend were taking a walk, during Mohrrum (the firstmonth of the Moslem year). On the way they meet TajiyasAptavani-1239240Aptavani-1Questioner : Dada, surely memory will have to beremoved.Dadashri : This memory itself tells you that it wants tobe cleansed, erased. There would be utter confusion if therewere no memory. What would you erase if there were nomemory? How would you know where your attachment andabhorrence lie? Memory arises for its spontaneous resolution. Itcomes forth so the link to attachment and abhorrence may beerased. So erase whatever comes forth and when you do thatyou will free yourself. You remember only because you have thelink to attachment and abhorrence here. You should repent forit and make a firm resolve never to repeat that mistake and thuserase it. You can wipe it (raag-dwesh) out by doing just this andthat memory will leave forever. Real Gnan is the Gnan that willmake you forget the world.Comfort In DiscomfortThe Lord has said to seek out comfort in discomfort.Comfort lies only in discomfort but one should know how tolook for it.People find discomfort in the sofa they have had for afew years, because they find it outdated. People create discomfortin situations of comfort. Some even sit on an easy chair and yetremain uneasy. Mooah! During your entire life you are allowedto be uneasy just once and yet you spend the entire day beinguneasy. The whole daylong you spend crying out your pain andsorrow. In Bombay there is an abundance of happiness and yetpeople pass their days being unhappy. Discomfort andinconvenience is when your brand new sofa breaks within fivedays of purchase. But here you create discomfort as an excusefor a new sofa; you create discomfort in a perfectly comfortablesofa. A woman sees new sofa (imported furniture) in herneighbor’s home and pesters her husband for weeks to buythem for her, so he buys a new sofa on credit. But when thatsofa breaks, her heart is set on fire. Mooyee! Everything elsecan burn but do not torment your self! You should never imitateanyone. Only those with lesser commonsense do so and sufferin the process. Besides, which household nowadays does nothave sofas? Why must you have the same? You should beoriginal and be yourself, instead of imitating others. Why notfurnish your family room the Indian way with a nice futonmattress, fresh white sheets and plenty of pillows? This way youdo not have to imitate anyone and at the same time have greatcomfort. What does a person truly need? He or she needssomething to eat and drink, something to wear and a place tolive. Today people have created new miseries. In reality thereis no such thing as unhappiness in this world. It is through lackof understanding that people have created so much unhappiness.Your neighbor may invite you to his home one day andnot the next. Why do you have to be invited everyday? Whenhe invites you, you feel that he respects you and that comfortsyou. And when he does not invite you, you feel that he has norespect for you and therefore you feel uncomfortable. You shouldhave an attitude that it is fine if he invites you and it is also fineif he does not.There is infinite bliss within you but you do not know howto uncover it and experience it. There is only one kind of blissbut the society has created so many different levels. You canonly experience true bliss when you understand the true realityof this world. How long are you going to live in this imaginaryand perceived happiness? But then what can you do, now thatyou are already trapped? I will tell you what this trap is like.A baniya (usually a Jain businessman) and his very closeMuslim friend were taking a walk, during Mohrrum (the firstmonth of the Moslem year). On the way they meet TajiyasAptavani-1239240Aptavani-1(symbolic biers of Husain the martyr of Islam taken intoprocession on his anniversary day in the month of Moharrum).The Moslem friend became very excited when he saw the Tajiyasand could not resist the urge to join the procession. He told hisfriend he would be back in a few minutes. He got into the thickof the procession and started shouting, ‘Ya Housey…. Housey’.His friend waited patiently as the minutes turned into half anhour but his friend would not leave the procession. The baniyawould signal every five minutes for him to come out, but hewould not. Finally after an hour, the Baniya got tired and grabbedhold of his friend’s arm to pull him out, but instead found himselfbeing dragged in the procession. The Muslim friend told himthat they would do two more minutes of ‘Housey, Housey…’,and then leave. So then the Moslem friend started shouting‘Housey…Housey…’and the baniya friend, with a saddenedface joined in by shouting ‘Ayi Fasaya…Ayi Fasaya!’ (‘I amtrapped, I am trapped’).That is the kind of world this is. Once trapped, it isdifficult to get out. Only a Gnani Purush can pull you out. Theworld is a trap of wrong beliefs and illusions. Only uponelimination of the wrong beliefs is release possible. But how canyou get rid of the wrong beliefs and the illusion? It happens onlywhen the Gnani awakens you by shaking you from your deepsleep of ignorance. No one else can do that. Without His help,the more you try to be free, the more you entangle yourself.Charge And DischargeDarshan moha (illusion due to wrong belief leading toworldly attachment and new karma) is ‘charge moha’ and charitramoha (effect of past life’s moha, illusion, which does not bindnew karma) is ‘discharge moha’. Water is darshan moha andice is charitra moha. What causes the charging to take place?Charging occurs when chetan (the Self) comes in contactwith achetan (non-Self) and loses its self-identity, his realawareness. This absorption of the Self into the non-Self causesthe charging. Getting lost in whatever one repeatedly remembersand recollects causes the charging. What do people remember?It is that towards which they have either extreme attachment(raag) or extreme abhorrence (dwesh). The attachment andabhorrence towards that which is discharging creates chargingof new karma. This is because the Self becomes what it identifieswith in the realm of the non-Self. This is how the worldly life isperpetuated. That, which is charged through the blunder (ofwrong belief of, ‘I am Chandulal’), charged because of illusion,continues to be discharged.A woman passing by a shop sees a beautiful sari. Shebecomes captivated by its beauty and become engrossed withthoughts of the sari. There is nothing wrong with her looking atthe sari and appreciating its beauty, but the illusion (moha) thatarises within her for the sari is the problem. The fact that shesees the sari and likes it is her discharge moha but because shebecomes so engrossed by it, her moha, which was in the processof being discharged, charges anew again. She is so captivatedby the sari that she actually becomes the length and the breadthof the sari. Every floral motif and sequin on the sari becomesingrained on her being. Her entire self raptures in the sari andeven when she comes home, her chit remains in the sari hangingin the shop. When her husband notices that she is preoccupiedand asks if she is feeling ill or lost somewhere, little does thepoor man know that while she is physically at home her chit ishovering in the sari shop. This is what the Lord calls chargemoha, charge illusion.There is nothing wrong in eating and enjoying the bestfoods and desserts, but if the taste of food lingers on and youhave a desire to enjoy it again and again, then it will chargeanew again. When you become engrossed in what you areAptavani-1241242Aptavani-1(symbolic biers of Husain the martyr of Islam taken intoprocession on his anniversary day in the month of Moharrum).The Moslem friend became very excited when he saw the Tajiyasand could not resist the urge to join the procession. He told hisfriend he would be back in a few minutes. He got into the thickof the procession and started shouting, ‘Ya Housey…. Housey’.His friend waited patiently as the minutes turned into half anhour but his friend would not leave the procession. The baniyawould signal every five minutes for him to come out, but hewould not. Finally after an hour, the Baniya got tired and grabbedhold of his friend’s arm to pull him out, but instead found himselfbeing dragged in the procession. The Muslim friend told himthat they would do two more minutes of ‘Housey, Housey…’,and then leave. So then the Moslem friend started shouting‘Housey…Housey…’and the baniya friend, with a saddenedface joined in by shouting ‘Ayi Fasaya…Ayi Fasaya!’ (‘I amtrapped, I am trapped’).That is the kind of world this is. Once trapped, it isdifficult to get out. Only a Gnani Purush can pull you out. Theworld is a trap of wrong beliefs and illusions. Only uponelimination of the wrong beliefs is release possible. But how canyou get rid of the wrong beliefs and the illusion? It happens onlywhen the Gnani awakens you by shaking you from your deepsleep of ignorance. No one else can do that. Without His help,the more you try to be free, the more you entangle yourself.Charge And DischargeDarshan moha (illusion due to wrong belief leading toworldly attachment and new karma) is ‘charge moha’ and charitramoha (effect of past life’s moha, illusion, which does not bindnew karma) is ‘discharge moha’. Water is darshan moha andice is charitra moha. What causes the charging to take place?Charging occurs when chetan (the Self) comes in contactwith achetan (non-Self) and loses its self-identity, his realawareness. This absorption of the Self into the non-Self causesthe charging. Getting lost in whatever one repeatedly remembersand recollects causes the charging. What do people remember?It is that towards which they have either extreme attachment(raag) or extreme abhorrence (dwesh). The attachment andabhorrence towards that which is discharging creates chargingof new karma. This is because the Self becomes what it identifieswith in the realm of the non-Self. This is how the worldly life isperpetuated. That, which is charged through the blunder (ofwrong belief of, ‘I am Chandulal’), charged because of illusion,continues to be discharged.A woman passing by a shop sees a beautiful sari. Shebecomes captivated by its beauty and become engrossed withthoughts of the sari. There is nothing wrong with her looking atthe sari and appreciating its beauty, but the illusion (moha) thatarises within her for the sari is the problem. The fact that shesees the sari and likes it is her discharge moha but because shebecomes so engrossed by it, her moha, which was in the processof being discharged, charges anew again. She is so captivatedby the sari that she actually becomes the length and the breadthof the sari. Every floral motif and sequin on the sari becomesingrained on her being. Her entire self raptures in the sari andeven when she comes home, her chit remains in the sari hangingin the shop. When her husband notices that she is preoccupiedand asks if she is feeling ill or lost somewhere, little does thepoor man know that while she is physically at home her chit ishovering in the sari shop. This is what the Lord calls chargemoha, charge illusion.There is nothing wrong in eating and enjoying the bestfoods and desserts, but if the taste of food lingers on and youhave a desire to enjoy it again and again, then it will chargeanew again. When you become engrossed in what you areAptavani-1241242Aptavani-1eating, you become one with it, and new charging occurs.As you conduct your business, the discharge is occurring.You started your business as a result of having charged karmafor such a business. It starts to discharge the day you start yourbusiness, but your becoming engrossed in it will create a newcharging process all over again.From the moment you were born till the time you die,everything is discharging. Your current existence in the humanform is a discharge. You had charged for a human birth in yourpast life, which is now discharging. The Lord does not objectto any aspect of the discharge process, but the state of yourmeditation during the discharge process is of great significance.For example, in the temple while worshipping the Lord, if yourmind is preoccupied in the shoes you leave outside the temple,then even in worship, you are charging karma related to thenegative meditation of the shoes.Drinking water is equivalent to charging, because theperson believes he is the one drinking it. When the water isconverted into urine and excreted, the excretion is equivalent todischarge.Scratching an itch is a discharge but one experiencespleasure in that sensation. All gross activities of the body are adischarge and there is nothing that merits involvement in it withpleasure or sorrow. It is the relative self (pratishthit Atma) thatexperiences pleasure. The Real Self, shuddhatma, is the Knowerof the relative self. The Knower knows that there will be aburning sensation from the itching. But to become engrossed inthe pleasure of scratching creates new charging. Discharge mohais dissipating but at the same time one keeps charging again forthe next life. One may be trying to charge for a human birth butends up as a donkey! That is how unpredictable all this is. Assuch people have no idea about what is beneficial and what isharmful and consequently they end up doing the wrong thing. Ifwhat you are doing goes against the social norm, then youshould avert your mind, speech and body from those actions.If what you are doing is acceptable to others, there is nothingwrong, but you have to find some other solution if it is not. Theabsolute ‘I’ has no power or control over the mechanical ‘I’,which is on autopilot. Once the charging is done, the dischargeis inevitable and unavoidable. Even the Lord has no power tostop it. As far as discharge is concerned, the batteries of yourmind, speech and body will discharge in exactly the same manneras they were charged. However, once you realize the Self, nonew charging takes place, because after Self-Realization thereis no meddling (the Self remains in the Knower-Seer state) inthe discharge process. And the rest is dissolved throughpurusharth (awareness and application of Dadashri’s 5 Agnas).When moha charges, it is a gradual process of filling. Itstarts at one degree then two degrees and so on till it reachesor fills up to say five hundred degrees. Now when it discharges,that is when it empties, it starts directly from the level of fivehundred degrees. For example when anger explodes, it comesout with a force of five hundred degrees and decreases to fourhundred then continues to diminish till it is completely finished orempties totally; it discharges completely. Everything thatdischarges initially starts from the very top and eventuallydiminishes. Anger, when it surfaces, flares up at five hundreddegrees and then it slowly melts away.You keep experiencing likes and dislikes in all aspects ofyour life. You have no choice in the matter, likes and dislikeswill occur. Why do these likes and dislike occur? No one everthinks about it. You cannot alter these feelings even if you wantto. It has nothing to do with your desires. From the day youwere born, the three batteries of the mind, body and speech aredischarging because they were charged in your past life. At theAptavani-1243244Aptavani-1eating, you become one with it, and new charging occurs.As you conduct your business, the discharge is occurring.You started your business as a result of having charged karmafor such a business. It starts to discharge the day you start yourbusiness, but your becoming engrossed in it will create a newcharging process all over again.From the moment you were born till the time you die,everything is discharging. Your current existence in the humanform is a discharge. You had charged for a human birth in yourpast life, which is now discharging. The Lord does not objectto any aspect of the discharge process, but the state of yourmeditation during the discharge process is of great significance.For example, in the temple while worshipping the Lord, if yourmind is preoccupied in the shoes you leave outside the temple,then even in worship, you are charging karma related to thenegative meditation of the shoes.Drinking water is equivalent to charging, because theperson believes he is the one drinking it. When the water isconverted into urine and excreted, the excretion is equivalent todischarge.Scratching an itch is a discharge but one experiencespleasure in that sensation. All gross activities of the body are adischarge and there is nothing that merits involvement in it withpleasure or sorrow. It is the relative self (pratishthit Atma) thatexperiences pleasure. The Real Self, shuddhatma, is the Knowerof the relative self. The Knower knows that there will be aburning sensation from the itching. But to become engrossed inthe pleasure of scratching creates new charging. Discharge mohais dissipating but at the same time one keeps charging again forthe next life. One may be trying to charge for a human birth butends up as a donkey! That is how unpredictable all this is. Assuch people have no idea about what is beneficial and what isharmful and consequently they end up doing the wrong thing. Ifwhat you are doing goes against the social norm, then youshould avert your mind, speech and body from those actions.If what you are doing is acceptable to others, there is nothingwrong, but you have to find some other solution if it is not. Theabsolute ‘I’ has no power or control over the mechanical ‘I’,which is on autopilot. Once the charging is done, the dischargeis inevitable and unavoidable. Even the Lord has no power tostop it. As far as discharge is concerned, the batteries of yourmind, speech and body will discharge in exactly the same manneras they were charged. However, once you realize the Self, nonew charging takes place, because after Self-Realization thereis no meddling (the Self remains in the Knower-Seer state) inthe discharge process. And the rest is dissolved throughpurusharth (awareness and application of Dadashri’s 5 Agnas).When moha charges, it is a gradual process of filling. Itstarts at one degree then two degrees and so on till it reachesor fills up to say five hundred degrees. Now when it discharges,that is when it empties, it starts directly from the level of fivehundred degrees. For example when anger explodes, it comesout with a force of five hundred degrees and decreases to fourhundred then continues to diminish till it is completely finished orempties totally; it discharges completely. Everything thatdischarges initially starts from the very top and eventuallydiminishes. Anger, when it surfaces, flares up at five hundreddegrees and then it slowly melts away.You keep experiencing likes and dislikes in all aspects ofyour life. You have no choice in the matter, likes and dislikeswill occur. Why do these likes and dislike occur? No one everthinks about it. You cannot alter these feelings even if you wantto. It has nothing to do with your desires. From the day youwere born, the three batteries of the mind, body and speech aredischarging because they were charged in your past life. At theAptavani-1243244Aptavani-1time of their discharge when you do not like what comes infront of you, you will know that the charging was of a negativenature. Therefore if now you charge positively, your next life willturn around. As far as your present life is concerned, it is alreadyrecorded – the movie has already been filmed and so you haveto simply act out your role in the film. The film that you now seeon the screen of your life was filmed in your past life but youget to watch it in this life. But when a disagreeable scene comesalong, you start shouting, ‘Cut! Cut!’ You try to censure it.Mooah! How can you censure it now? You should have thoughtabout it when you were making the film i.e. when you werecharging your karma. Now, absolutely no one can change it.Therefore now, just finish watching your film without any raag-dwesh (attachment-abhorrence).The whole world is under the control of charge.Like and dislike have now become discharge moha, andattachment and abhorrence are charge moha. Charging of karmais against the Lord’s instructions but not discharge of karma.People keep cutting the leaves of the tree of dischargemoha, while their charge moha continues. How will they evermake any progress? Many cut the branches and some haveeven cut the trunk but as long as the main root remains intact,the tree of charge moha will sprout again. No matter how manyschemes people come up with to uproot the tree of the worldlylife, they are not going to succeed. It is a task only for the GnaniPurush. The Gnani Purush will not bother with the leaves,branches or the trunk. He will not even touch the countlessroots, which have spread out. He knows the main root of thetree and he is familiar with it. He puts a little medicine in themain root and consequently the entire tree dries up.As far as charging of karma is concerned the Gnani Purushdoes not do anything except disconnect the battery and pull itaway from the charging point so no new charging occurs. Nomatter what solutions people come up with, as long as thecharging does not stop, one can never become free from moha,illusion of life. You may renounce everything or do all kinds ofrituals but you will not succeed. On the contrary you will becometrapped deeper and deeper in the web of entanglements. Onlyafter all the fifty types of moha, twenty-five charge moha andtwenty-five discharge moha are destroyed, can you can succeed.Claiming doership will charge karma. To say ‘I did this’is charge. ‘I did darshan’, ‘I did pratikraman’ or ‘I did samayik’,is to charge. There is no harm done if you make such statementsacting out your worldly role as if you are an actor in a play. Butif you speak with the conviction of being the real doer, then theego will arise and that is how you bind new karma while the oldone is discharging. While discharge of karma is not under yourcontrol, charging is. Liberation is the only thing worth desiringand when you do, you will find the path. Why don’t you chargefor your liberation?You have a right to look and enjoy the beauty aroundyou, but not the right to become engrossed in it. Gnani Purushtoo looks at everything but there is a difference in the way hesees everything; his chit will not keep visualizing what he hasseen. Along with million others, the Gnani too roams in thisenchanting city of Bombay, but He does not become engrossedin anything. His chit never goes anywhere. He remains in thepresent.Bhaavkarma is the battery that charges. This battery is invery close proximity to the Self and therefore is continuouslycharging. I have stopped that battery from charging in the GnanVidhi. Now only the discharge battery remains for the mahatmas.From now on that battery can discharge with whatever bhaavit wants to. ‘I’ has to just remain the Observer of it. WhetherAptavani-1245246Aptavani-1time of their discharge when you do not like what comes infront of you, you will know that the charging was of a negativenature. Therefore if now you charge positively, your next life willturn around. As far as your present life is concerned, it is alreadyrecorded – the movie has already been filmed and so you haveto simply act out your role in the film. The film that you now seeon the screen of your life was filmed in your past life but youget to watch it in this life. But when a disagreeable scene comesalong, you start shouting, ‘Cut! Cut!’ You try to censure it.Mooah! How can you censure it now? You should have thoughtabout it when you were making the film i.e. when you werecharging your karma. Now, absolutely no one can change it.Therefore now, just finish watching your film without any raag-dwesh (attachment-abhorrence).The whole world is under the control of charge.Like and dislike have now become discharge moha, andattachment and abhorrence are charge moha. Charging of karmais against the Lord’s instructions but not discharge of karma.People keep cutting the leaves of the tree of dischargemoha, while their charge moha continues. How will they evermake any progress? Many cut the branches and some haveeven cut the trunk but as long as the main root remains intact,the tree of charge moha will sprout again. No matter how manyschemes people come up with to uproot the tree of the worldlylife, they are not going to succeed. It is a task only for the GnaniPurush. The Gnani Purush will not bother with the leaves,branches or the trunk. He will not even touch the countlessroots, which have spread out. He knows the main root of thetree and he is familiar with it. He puts a little medicine in themain root and consequently the entire tree dries up.As far as charging of karma is concerned the Gnani Purushdoes not do anything except disconnect the battery and pull itaway from the charging point so no new charging occurs. Nomatter what solutions people come up with, as long as thecharging does not stop, one can never become free from moha,illusion of life. You may renounce everything or do all kinds ofrituals but you will not succeed. On the contrary you will becometrapped deeper and deeper in the web of entanglements. Onlyafter all the fifty types of moha, twenty-five charge moha andtwenty-five discharge moha are destroyed, can you can succeed.Claiming doership will charge karma. To say ‘I did this’is charge. ‘I did darshan’, ‘I did pratikraman’ or ‘I did samayik’,is to charge. There is no harm done if you make such statementsacting out your worldly role as if you are an actor in a play. Butif you speak with the conviction of being the real doer, then theego will arise and that is how you bind new karma while the oldone is discharging. While discharge of karma is not under yourcontrol, charging is. Liberation is the only thing worth desiringand when you do, you will find the path. Why don’t you chargefor your liberation?You have a right to look and enjoy the beauty aroundyou, but not the right to become engrossed in it. Gnani Purushtoo looks at everything but there is a difference in the way hesees everything; his chit will not keep visualizing what he hasseen. Along with million others, the Gnani too roams in thisenchanting city of Bombay, but He does not become engrossedin anything. His chit never goes anywhere. He remains in thepresent.Bhaavkarma is the battery that charges. This battery is invery close proximity to the Self and therefore is continuouslycharging. I have stopped that battery from charging in the GnanVidhi. Now only the discharge battery remains for the mahatmas.From now on that battery can discharge with whatever bhaavit wants to. ‘I’ has to just remain the Observer of it. WhetherAptavani-1245246Aptavani-1the mind is agitated or still, ‘I’ is just the Observer of it. Andthat is why no more charging takes place. From now on whateveris to come your way, let it come. If it comes, that is fine andif it does not, that is fine also.‘Bhavkarma is the charge battery’. These five wordsencompass the essence of all the forty-five Agams of the Lord(The Cardinal Scriptures of Lord Mahavira). Otherwise it takesthousands of lives to destroy just one kind of moha.Questioner : What is the difference between kalpana(imagination), and desire?Dadashri : Kalpana arises out of ignorance of the Self,whereas desire is a discharge. But the root of desire isimagination, ignorance of the Self. Its like this – the rain fallsfrom the sky but the sky remains where it is – the wind movesaround and the water on top mingles with the water at thebottom creating air bubbles. The rain continues to fall. It is notthe desire of the water, the wind or the air to form all this…itsimply occurs. Desire too occurs. This is how it all is.Questioner : How are we to know whether we havecharged or discharged a karma?Dadashri : Charging starts from the moment youconsciously feel ‘I am Chandulal’. And charging ceases themoment you acquire the awareness of ‘I am Shuddhatma’.However, if you were to meddle in the discharge process, thenyou will charge anew, but who would do so? Whatever appearsas charge is really a discharge. You cannot tell when charge ordischarge is taking place. If it were possible to know, theneveryone would stop the charging process. No one except theGnani Purush can shed light on this matter. It is because you arein the Self, the Shuddhatma state that there is only discharge.But if you become the non-Self, ‘Chandulal’, then there is chargealso. As the old battery discharges, it is the effect of one’sinability to endure the discharge that causes charging of a newbattery.Along with charging, worries start. You feel a burningtorment inside. A fire is kindled within and you are tormentedwith confusion and anxiety. Whereas that is not the case whereonly discharge is taking place. In discharge, you do notexperience such suffering because You are not engrossed in itor part of it. You do not get involved in it.The Lord says, ‘I will take full responsibility for alldischarge but do not let any charging take place’. The collectiveknowledge of all the scriptures of the world is contained in justthese two sentences.The halting of charge means the end of discharge. Chargedmoha is equivalent to a promissory note, and discharge mohais cash in hand.I give you a guarantee that after meeting Dada Bhagwan,there shall be no more charging for you.Nature Of MohaThere two kinds of moha : darshan moha or charge mohaand charitra moha or discharge moha.Darshan moha depends on where your fascination lies.Desire for perishable things of the world is mithyatva moha(illusionary infatuation or wrong belief).Mishra moha is the co-existence of a desire for Self-Knowledge as well as a desire for temporary worldly things. Itis a mishra moha to believe both the real and the relative to bethe truth.Samkit moha is an ardent desire to know the Self alongAptavani-1247248Aptavani-1the mind is agitated or still, ‘I’ is just the Observer of it. Andthat is why no more charging takes place. From now on whateveris to come your way, let it come. If it comes, that is fine andif it does not, that is fine also.‘Bhavkarma is the charge battery’. These five wordsencompass the essence of all the forty-five Agams of the Lord(The Cardinal Scriptures of Lord Mahavira). Otherwise it takesthousands of lives to destroy just one kind of moha.Questioner : What is the difference between kalpana(imagination), and desire?Dadashri : Kalpana arises out of ignorance of the Self,whereas desire is a discharge. But the root of desire isimagination, ignorance of the Self. Its like this – the rain fallsfrom the sky but the sky remains where it is – the wind movesaround and the water on top mingles with the water at thebottom creating air bubbles. The rain continues to fall. It is notthe desire of the water, the wind or the air to form all this…itsimply occurs. Desire too occurs. This is how it all is.Questioner : How are we to know whether we havecharged or discharged a karma?Dadashri : Charging starts from the moment youconsciously feel ‘I am Chandulal’. And charging ceases themoment you acquire the awareness of ‘I am Shuddhatma’.However, if you were to meddle in the discharge process, thenyou will charge anew, but who would do so? Whatever appearsas charge is really a discharge. You cannot tell when charge ordischarge is taking place. If it were possible to know, theneveryone would stop the charging process. No one except theGnani Purush can shed light on this matter. It is because you arein the Self, the Shuddhatma state that there is only discharge.But if you become the non-Self, ‘Chandulal’, then there is chargealso. As the old battery discharges, it is the effect of one’sinability to endure the discharge that causes charging of a newbattery.Along with charging, worries start. You feel a burningtorment inside. A fire is kindled within and you are tormentedwith confusion and anxiety. Whereas that is not the case whereonly discharge is taking place. In discharge, you do notexperience such suffering because You are not engrossed in itor part of it. You do not get involved in it.The Lord says, ‘I will take full responsibility for alldischarge but do not let any charging take place’. The collectiveknowledge of all the scriptures of the world is contained in justthese two sentences.The halting of charge means the end of discharge. Chargedmoha is equivalent to a promissory note, and discharge mohais cash in hand.I give you a guarantee that after meeting Dada Bhagwan,there shall be no more charging for you.Nature Of MohaThere two kinds of moha : darshan moha or charge mohaand charitra moha or discharge moha.Darshan moha depends on where your fascination lies.Desire for perishable things of the world is mithyatva moha(illusionary infatuation or wrong belief).Mishra moha is the co-existence of a desire for Self-Knowledge as well as a desire for temporary worldly things. Itis a mishra moha to believe both the real and the relative to bethe truth.Samkit moha is an ardent desire to know the Self alongAptavani-1247248Aptavani-1with a conviction that it is the only reality. Samkit means one’sintellect and vision is set fixed in one’s real Self only. Gnan isto become the Self.Moha for Gnan and the Gnani is the ultimate moha. It iscalled samyak moha (right moha); all others are consideredmithya moha (wrong moha).Darshan moha prevents one from seeing things exactly asthey are. Because of the veil of ignorance over your darshan(perception) you see your self as ‘Chandulal’.What is the basis on which this world exists? It existsbecause of darshan moha. God has no objection to charitramoha because it is a discharging moha. Those who do not haveSelf-realization also have discharge moha but because they believetheir relative self to be their real self, they charge anew again.After gnan vidhi in the Akram path, darsan moha iscompletely destroyed. The belief ‘I am Chandulal’ is darshanmoha.All moha that remains after gnan is charitra moha.Aftergnan even the belief of ‘I am the doer’ and ‘This is mine’ ischaritra moha. You have to understand what charitra moha isprecisely the way the Lord has explained it. The belief, ‘I amdoing samayik’ is charitra moha.The feeling of doership insamayik, pratikraman or any other spiritual or worldly activitiesis charitra moha.Charitra moha is the resultant moha. The moha that standsready to give its fruit is charitra moha, meaning discharge moha.The moha that continues to be charged is darshan moha and themoha that is discharging, is charitra moha.Discharge moha can lead one astray. This is the onlymoha, which unfolds in one’s life.Because of the presence of the Self (chetan), the body(pudgal) becomes charged with conciousness (chetan bhaav).The body becomes charged and this charge at a later time turnsinto a discharge. As the body comes into contact with chetan,it becomes charged with chetan, but in this process, Chetan(pure Self) loses nothing. Everything that is being dischargedfrom the body can be experienced. That is why I am saying thatit was previously charged. There is no chetan, Self in discharge.If a man confined to a life in prison is served regularmeals but not fancy sweet meats, does that mean his moha forsweets is gone? No. He still has the moha – it is dormant within.Just because one does not get certain things, does not meanthat one’s moha for those things is gone.Questioner : Dada is it possible that I have more mohathan others?Dadashri : A very tiny seed of moha is such that it canoccupy the whole world when it expresses itself. So thereforeit is immaterial whether moha is more or less. It is only whenyou completely obliterate moha (charge moha) that you canreach your goal of liberation.Moha for the Lord and for the satsang of the Sat Purush(Gnani) is prashasta moha – moha that is quintessential andthrough it you can attain liberation.There are endless forms of moha. It is almost impossibleto get rid of all of them. You need thousands of life cycles toget rid of even a single moha. The human life is a museum ofmoha. ‘Without Self-Realization, there is no release from moha’.Maya(Power that veils and obscures the true nature of theSelf – Cosmic illusion on account of which the relative appearsas real)Aptavani-1249250Aptavani-1with a conviction that it is the only reality. Samkit means one’sintellect and vision is set fixed in one’s real Self only. Gnan isto become the Self.Moha for Gnan and the Gnani is the ultimate moha. It iscalled samyak moha (right moha); all others are consideredmithya moha (wrong moha).Darshan moha prevents one from seeing things exactly asthey are. Because of the veil of ignorance over your darshan(perception) you see your self as ‘Chandulal’.What is the basis on which this world exists? It existsbecause of darshan moha. God has no objection to charitramoha because it is a discharging moha. Those who do not haveSelf-realization also have discharge moha but because they believetheir relative self to be their real self, they charge anew again.After gnan vidhi in the Akram path, darsan moha iscompletely destroyed. The belief ‘I am Chandulal’ is darshanmoha.All moha that remains after gnan is charitra moha.Aftergnan even the belief of ‘I am the doer’ and ‘This is mine’ ischaritra moha. You have to understand what charitra moha isprecisely the way the Lord has explained it. The belief, ‘I amdoing samayik’ is charitra moha.The feeling of doership insamayik, pratikraman or any other spiritual or worldly activitiesis charitra moha.Charitra moha is the resultant moha. The moha that standsready to give its fruit is charitra moha, meaning discharge moha.The moha that continues to be charged is darshan moha and themoha that is discharging, is charitra moha.Discharge moha can lead one astray. This is the onlymoha, which unfolds in one’s life.Because of the presence of the Self (chetan), the body(pudgal) becomes charged with conciousness (chetan bhaav).The body becomes charged and this charge at a later time turnsinto a discharge. As the body comes into contact with chetan,it becomes charged with chetan, but in this process, Chetan(pure Self) loses nothing. Everything that is being dischargedfrom the body can be experienced. That is why I am saying thatit was previously charged. There is no chetan, Self in discharge.If a man confined to a life in prison is served regularmeals but not fancy sweet meats, does that mean his moha forsweets is gone? No. He still has the moha – it is dormant within.Just because one does not get certain things, does not meanthat one’s moha for those things is gone.Questioner : Dada is it possible that I have more mohathan others?Dadashri : A very tiny seed of moha is such that it canoccupy the whole world when it expresses itself. So thereforeit is immaterial whether moha is more or less. It is only whenyou completely obliterate moha (charge moha) that you canreach your goal of liberation.Moha for the Lord and for the satsang of the Sat Purush(Gnani) is prashasta moha – moha that is quintessential andthrough it you can attain liberation.There are endless forms of moha. It is almost impossibleto get rid of all of them. You need thousands of life cycles toget rid of even a single moha. The human life is a museum ofmoha. ‘Without Self-Realization, there is no release from moha’.Maya(Power that veils and obscures the true nature of theSelf – Cosmic illusion on account of which the relative appearsas real)Aptavani-1249250Aptavani-1Questioner : What can one do to be free from thebondage of maya?Dadashri : Ignorance is maya itself. Ignorance of thereal Self is maya and this maya gives such a beating that no onecan see the wounds it causes. There is no superior above youin this world. It is only because of maya that you feel a senseof oppression.What is maya? Maya is the relative manifestation of God(the Self). What does it mean when people say, ‘It is maya thatentraps us’? Who runs this world? Because people have noknowledge of who runs the world, they believe themselves tobe the doers. That itself is maya and they become trapped init.God is the only one who does not succumb to maya. Theweak continue to suffer and that is the rule of maya. One cannotsay whether the suffering caused by maya is mild or intense, butit is the suffering itself that will inspire one to seek liberation.The great curse of maya is the oblivion of one’s own Self.Once this ignorance is removed, maya is gone.Projection of anything where it is not, is maya.In my presence, your maya cannot remain; it will remainat a distance, but as soon as you leave from here it will shroudover you again. However, if you acquire the Knowledge of yourSelf (Swaroop Gnan) from me, you will remain untouched bymaya wherever you go.The Lord says that everything is a drama (not real). Youshould not become one with it. People blame the mind but it isnot the mind but the maya behind it that creates all the problems.Let maya go and the mind will be a beautiful endless film. Manyhave renounced their attachment of worldly life and becomeascetics, but does that mean they have become free from theirmaya? No; on the contrary their maya doubles. When can onesay that one has truly renounced all attachment? Only when onerenounces maya while enjoying the luxuries and comforts ofworldly life can it be said that he has truly renounced. How canone be considered free of all illusion when he renounces his wifeand children but at the same carries baggage of nothing butillusion? How can you say that he has become free from maya,illusion?Wherever he goes, as long as he identifies with feelingssuch as ‘mine’, ‘yours’ or ‘I did this’, his maya and attachmentwill remain with him too.A man came to me crying profusely. He told me that ithad become very difficult for him to continue living and that hefelt like committing suicide. I knew that his wife had passedaway about fifteen days ago leaving behind four children. Iasked him how long he had been married and he told me tenyears. I asked him whether he would still cry for her if she haddied more than ten years ago, before he had seen her. His replywas how could he cry when he did not even know her? I wenton to explain : ‘Let me tell you why you cry for her now. Whenyou went to marry her, you went in grandeur with a processionof brass band and music. During the ceremonial walk aroundthe fire, you began to wind the feeling of ‘This is my wife… thisis my wife…’. Everytime you looked at her you kept thinking‘This is my wife’, and thus began to wind and twist within you,the feelings of attachment. If the wife turns out to be good, thenyou become bound with a silk thread, and if she turns out to bedifficult, then you become bound with a cotton thread. Now ifyou want to be free, you will have to unwind your attachmentby saying ‘She is not mine…She is not mine’, just as manytimes as you had wound with ‘She is mine’, only then will youbecome free from your attachment.He understood exactly what I told him and started toAptavani-1251252Aptavani-1Questioner : What can one do to be free from thebondage of maya?Dadashri : Ignorance is maya itself. Ignorance of thereal Self is maya and this maya gives such a beating that no onecan see the wounds it causes. There is no superior above youin this world. It is only because of maya that you feel a senseof oppression.What is maya? Maya is the relative manifestation of God(the Self). What does it mean when people say, ‘It is maya thatentraps us’? Who runs this world? Because people have noknowledge of who runs the world, they believe themselves tobe the doers. That itself is maya and they become trapped init.God is the only one who does not succumb to maya. Theweak continue to suffer and that is the rule of maya. One cannotsay whether the suffering caused by maya is mild or intense, butit is the suffering itself that will inspire one to seek liberation.The great curse of maya is the oblivion of one’s own Self.Once this ignorance is removed, maya is gone.Projection of anything where it is not, is maya.In my presence, your maya cannot remain; it will remainat a distance, but as soon as you leave from here it will shroudover you again. However, if you acquire the Knowledge of yourSelf (Swaroop Gnan) from me, you will remain untouched bymaya wherever you go.The Lord says that everything is a drama (not real). Youshould not become one with it. People blame the mind but it isnot the mind but the maya behind it that creates all the problems.Let maya go and the mind will be a beautiful endless film. Manyhave renounced their attachment of worldly life and becomeascetics, but does that mean they have become free from theirmaya? No; on the contrary their maya doubles. When can onesay that one has truly renounced all attachment? Only when onerenounces maya while enjoying the luxuries and comforts ofworldly life can it be said that he has truly renounced. How canone be considered free of all illusion when he renounces his wifeand children but at the same carries baggage of nothing butillusion? How can you say that he has become free from maya,illusion?Wherever he goes, as long as he identifies with feelingssuch as ‘mine’, ‘yours’ or ‘I did this’, his maya and attachmentwill remain with him too.A man came to me crying profusely. He told me that ithad become very difficult for him to continue living and that hefelt like committing suicide. I knew that his wife had passedaway about fifteen days ago leaving behind four children. Iasked him how long he had been married and he told me tenyears. I asked him whether he would still cry for her if she haddied more than ten years ago, before he had seen her. His replywas how could he cry when he did not even know her? I wenton to explain : ‘Let me tell you why you cry for her now. Whenyou went to marry her, you went in grandeur with a processionof brass band and music. During the ceremonial walk aroundthe fire, you began to wind the feeling of ‘This is my wife… thisis my wife…’. Everytime you looked at her you kept thinking‘This is my wife’, and thus began to wind and twist within you,the feelings of attachment. If the wife turns out to be good, thenyou become bound with a silk thread, and if she turns out to bedifficult, then you become bound with a cotton thread. Now ifyou want to be free, you will have to unwind your attachmentby saying ‘She is not mine…She is not mine’, just as manytimes as you had wound with ‘She is mine’, only then will youbecome free from your attachment.He understood exactly what I told him and started toAptavani-1251252Aptavani-1unwind his attachment by saying ‘She is not mine…she is notmine...’, with such fervor that he returned to me in a fortnightand fell at my feet with tears of joy telling me that I had savedhim by showing him how to free himself from his attachment. Bylistening to this story, many others have become free from theirattachments also.AngerNobody in the world can conquer anger. There are twoforms of anger : visible anger (kadhapo) and invisible anger(ajampo). The anger people overcome is the visible anger. Bysuppressing the visible anger, the invisible anger increases. Whenpeople claim they have conquered their anger, their false prideincreases. In reality anger can never be completely conquered.It is the visible anger that is seemingly controlled. Anger is likefire. It burns itself and also others around it.When a person does not get angry in a situation thatprovokes anger, it is considered shubha charitra (good conduct),with such a conduct one’s worldly life will improve. However,liberation is only attainable through shuddha charitra, the stateof the Self.Anger is nothing but highly volatile atoms. It is likegunpowder in a container, which when ignited, will explodereleasing heat and flames and when all the powder has beenused up, it subsides naturally. Anger is volatile atoms, whichexplode as dictated by the laws of vyavasthit and when they do,they burn from all sides. Volatility is not considered anger; angeris the lingering bitterness aroused from the outburst. It isconsidered anger when one burns from within. When a personburns from within, he continues to feel the heat and othersaround him too will feel the effect of that heat. This anger visibleor invisible will continue to torment one, but in both these typesof anger, there is a lingering effect. Volatility is different altogether.It can only be called anger when there is a lingering effect withthat anger. For example, an angry exchange between a husbandand wife in the night keeps them both awake all night and in themorning when the wife serves breakfast, she angrily shoves theteacup in front of her husband. He immediately understands thatthe anger from the night is still lingering. This is anger and theeffect can linger for any length of time; sometimes it can lingerfor a lifetime. A father and son will become estranged fromeach other forever because of this. The lingering effect of angercan be read on one’s face.GreedOf all the kashayas, anger-pride-attachment-greed, thelingering effect of greed is the heaviest and the most difficult toget rid of. Greed means to harbor desire. A greedy person willmanage to smile even if insulted. A Gnani too will smile if insulted,but when a greedy person smiles; he smiles while making histuber of greed even larger.A greedy businessman is not fazed in the least when acustomer comes to him accusing him of cheating his son for fiftycents. He would sit there smiling, unperturbed. Passers by lookon and see the cool and calm demeanor of the businessman anda very vocal and angry customer. They think the customer hasgone mad and ask him to leave without making a scene. Theyare convinced that such a well-respected businessman wouldnever cheat a child. While all this is going on, the businessmanis smiling to himself. Why does he do that? It is because fromwithin his greed tells him that the foolish customer will leaveafter creating a scene, but he has nothing to lose because healready made his fifty cents. On the outside, a greedy personcan look just like a Gnani.On the other hand, a man who has the kashaya of pridewould not laugh if someone were to get angry with him. His254Aptavani-1Aptavani-1253unwind his attachment by saying ‘She is not mine…she is notmine...’, with such fervor that he returned to me in a fortnightand fell at my feet with tears of joy telling me that I had savedhim by showing him how to free himself from his attachment. Bylistening to this story, many others have become free from theirattachments also.AngerNobody in the world can conquer anger. There are twoforms of anger : visible anger (kadhapo) and invisible anger(ajampo). The anger people overcome is the visible anger. Bysuppressing the visible anger, the invisible anger increases. Whenpeople claim they have conquered their anger, their false prideincreases. In reality anger can never be completely conquered.It is the visible anger that is seemingly controlled. Anger is likefire. It burns itself and also others around it.When a person does not get angry in a situation thatprovokes anger, it is considered shubha charitra (good conduct),with such a conduct one’s worldly life will improve. However,liberation is only attainable through shuddha charitra, the stateof the Self.Anger is nothing but highly volatile atoms. It is likegunpowder in a container, which when ignited, will explodereleasing heat and flames and when all the powder has beenused up, it subsides naturally. Anger is volatile atoms, whichexplode as dictated by the laws of vyavasthit and when they do,they burn from all sides. Volatility is not considered anger; angeris the lingering bitterness aroused from the outburst. It isconsidered anger when one burns from within. When a personburns from within, he continues to feel the heat and othersaround him too will feel the effect of that heat. This anger visibleor invisible will continue to torment one, but in both these typesof anger, there is a lingering effect. Volatility is different altogether.It can only be called anger when there is a lingering effect withthat anger. For example, an angry exchange between a husbandand wife in the night keeps them both awake all night and in themorning when the wife serves breakfast, she angrily shoves theteacup in front of her husband. He immediately understands thatthe anger from the night is still lingering. This is anger and theeffect can linger for any length of time; sometimes it can lingerfor a lifetime. A father and son will become estranged fromeach other forever because of this. The lingering effect of angercan be read on one’s face.GreedOf all the kashayas, anger-pride-attachment-greed, thelingering effect of greed is the heaviest and the most difficult toget rid of. Greed means to harbor desire. A greedy person willmanage to smile even if insulted. A Gnani too will smile if insulted,but when a greedy person smiles; he smiles while making histuber of greed even larger.A greedy businessman is not fazed in the least when acustomer comes to him accusing him of cheating his son for fiftycents. He would sit there smiling, unperturbed. Passers by lookon and see the cool and calm demeanor of the businessman anda very vocal and angry customer. They think the customer hasgone mad and ask him to leave without making a scene. Theyare convinced that such a well-respected businessman wouldnever cheat a child. While all this is going on, the businessmanis smiling to himself. Why does he do that? It is because fromwithin his greed tells him that the foolish customer will leaveafter creating a scene, but he has nothing to lose because healready made his fifty cents. On the outside, a greedy personcan look just like a Gnani.On the other hand, a man who has the kashaya of pridewould not laugh if someone were to get angry with him. His254Aptavani-1Aptavani-1253anger would immediately flare up, but a greedy person willnever exhibit anger.The Lord has said that people suffer because of theiranger and pride. Pride breeds contempt and hatred. Anger willburn the one who becomes angry and also everyone aroundhim. People try to come up with solutions to their kashaya bywhat God has said : ‘One should not get angry’, ‘one shouldnot have pride’. They start doing triyoga sadhana (spiritualpractice of controlling the mind, body and speech). Through thissadhana, they control anger and pride to some extent but theirintellect (buddhi) becomes sharper. Because the intellect becomessharper, one becomes even more deceitful in trying to protecthis greed. Anger and pride are guileless. Others too can pointout these qualities in you, whereas greed and deceit are suchthat even the person who has them is not aware of their presence.Once they take hold, they never leave.When does a greedy person become angry? In the finalmoment when the thing he has the most greed for is slippingaway; where even his deceit proves unsuccessful, he resorts toanger.From the moment he is born, the greedy person willnever become free from the thread that perpetuates his greed.His awareness is constantly preoccupied by his greed. As far asa proud person is concerned, his pride wells up when he walksaround outside of his home. Wherever he goes, he is under theinfluence of his false pride but if anyone were to insult him, hewould get angry.What impedes your path to liberation? It is anger, pride,attachment and greed. To protect their greedy tendencies, peopleuse deceit – they tamper with their weighing scales to sell theircustomer short or they stretch the material when they measure.To protect their false pride people use anger. People live enslavedby these four kashays.There are two kinds of anger-pride-attachment-greed :controllable and uncontrollable. For example, if you are angrywith someone and you suppress your anger and pacify it fromwithin, it is a controllable anger. If you can reach such a stage,your interactions in relative life will be wonderful.The uncontrollable anger can never be suppressed. Nomatter how hard you try you cannot prevent it from exploding.This anger harms you and others around you.However the tuber of deceit and greed are heavier andstronger than those of anger and pride. You cannot get rid ofthem easily. Why is greed considered the guiltiest one? Becauseit robs others. If one drains out all the water from a reservoirby opening all the water taps in his home, would others not bedeprived of water?DeceitThe definition of deceit is : To not say things as they are.Deceit affects all three, the mind, the body and the speech.Women have more atoms of deceit and moha (fascination /attachment), and men have more of anger and pride. If a manattracts and pulls more atoms of deceit and moha, then hiscoming life will result in a female body and a greater pull ofatoms of anger and pride will result in a male body.Women use deceit because of their imaginary fear. Thiscreates very dense veils of ignorance. And moha increases theveil of infatuation; moha will increase as deceit increases. Menhave more pride. Pride increases awareness.The Food Of Kashayas :Anger, Pride, Attachment, GreedPeople do not realize that they feed their anger-pride-Aptavani-1255256Aptavani-1anger would immediately flare up, but a greedy person willnever exhibit anger.The Lord has said that people suffer because of theiranger and pride. Pride breeds contempt and hatred. Anger willburn the one who becomes angry and also everyone aroundhim. People try to come up with solutions to their kashaya bywhat God has said : ‘One should not get angry’, ‘one shouldnot have pride’. They start doing triyoga sadhana (spiritualpractice of controlling the mind, body and speech). Through thissadhana, they control anger and pride to some extent but theirintellect (buddhi) becomes sharper. Because the intellect becomessharper, one becomes even more deceitful in trying to protecthis greed. Anger and pride are guileless. Others too can pointout these qualities in you, whereas greed and deceit are suchthat even the person who has them is not aware of their presence.Once they take hold, they never leave.When does a greedy person become angry? In the finalmoment when the thing he has the most greed for is slippingaway; where even his deceit proves unsuccessful, he resorts toanger.From the moment he is born, the greedy person willnever become free from the thread that perpetuates his greed.His awareness is constantly preoccupied by his greed. As far asa proud person is concerned, his pride wells up when he walksaround outside of his home. Wherever he goes, he is under theinfluence of his false pride but if anyone were to insult him, hewould get angry.What impedes your path to liberation? It is anger, pride,attachment and greed. To protect their greedy tendencies, peopleuse deceit – they tamper with their weighing scales to sell theircustomer short or they stretch the material when they measure.To protect their false pride people use anger. People live enslavedby these four kashays.There are two kinds of anger-pride-attachment-greed :controllable and uncontrollable. For example, if you are angrywith someone and you suppress your anger and pacify it fromwithin, it is a controllable anger. If you can reach such a stage,your interactions in relative life will be wonderful.The uncontrollable anger can never be suppressed. Nomatter how hard you try you cannot prevent it from exploding.This anger harms you and others around you.However the tuber of deceit and greed are heavier andstronger than those of anger and pride. You cannot get rid ofthem easily. Why is greed considered the guiltiest one? Becauseit robs others. If one drains out all the water from a reservoirby opening all the water taps in his home, would others not bedeprived of water?DeceitThe definition of deceit is : To not say things as they are.Deceit affects all three, the mind, the body and the speech.Women have more atoms of deceit and moha (fascination /attachment), and men have more of anger and pride. If a manattracts and pulls more atoms of deceit and moha, then hiscoming life will result in a female body and a greater pull ofatoms of anger and pride will result in a male body.Women use deceit because of their imaginary fear. Thiscreates very dense veils of ignorance. And moha increases theveil of infatuation; moha will increase as deceit increases. Menhave more pride. Pride increases awareness.The Food Of Kashayas :Anger, Pride, Attachment, GreedPeople do not realize that they feed their anger-pride-Aptavani-1255256Aptavani-1attachment-greed; these kashayas steal from none other thantheir very own self. If these four were starved for three years,they would leave. Now what is the food they survive on? Howcan you starve them to death if you do not know what feedsthem? Because people do not have an understanding of this, allfour continue to be fed. How do they survive? How have theymanaged to survive since time immemorial? One must stopfeeding them. No one has thought about it in this way and theycontinue their struggle to rid themselves of these kashayas bybeating on them and trying to suppress them. These four are notlikely to go easily. It is only when the Self separates, that internalcleansing of these four occurs. These kashayas will not submit toviolence or coersion. They will only submit to non-violent means.A spiritual master will scold his disciples when he getsangry. If someone questions his anger, he would say that hisdisciples deserve to be scolded. That is it! He is finished! Sucha comment is food for anger. When people become angry, theyprotect and justify their anger, and that is the very food angersurvives on.A tight-fisted person asks you to buy a packet of tea forhim. You pay thirty paisas for the tea packet but when he saysto you, ‘How could you pay so much for the packet?’ hiswords become food for his greed. On the other hand anextravagant person will say it’s a good quality tea at eightypaisas per packet, this too is food for his greed of lavishness.You should remain within normal boundaries.Now what nourishes deceit? A businessman is heavilyinvolved in black-marketeering but when it comes to deceit, hewill clearly and vehemently announce that under no circumstancesdoes he deal in the black-market. On the contrary he will givethe impression of being an ethical and honorable person. Thisis the food for his deceit.And what is the food for pride? If you see Chandulalpassing by, you call out to him and greet him with respect, hefeels pleased and elated, his ego becomes inflated; that is foodfor Chandulal’s pride.Everything, except the Self requires food to survive.I welcome all four kashayas; anger-pride-attachment-greedbut I do not feed them.From where do these four originate? Their origin lies inthe fostering and feeding the relative self because of one’signorance of one’s Real Self. They originate from the chargedrelative self. Gnani Purush puts a stop to the charging. Hefractures the wrong belief that charges the self. By establishingthe Self and the bliss of the Self, one’s fascination for thetransitory world leaves. Thus one gets released from these fourkashayas.Gnani Purush is capable of doing whatever he desires.These kashayas of anger-pride-attachment-greed is a bridge, aconnecting link between the Self and the non-Self. They are thelink between Gnan and agnan. Otherwise, why should God,who is free from attachment, be attached?Home Department : Foreign DepartmentWhen there are natural calamities like cyclones or volcaniceruptions in foreign countries, say Peru for example, the PrimeMinisters of nations will call cabinet meetings. They will sendout letters of condolence to the Prime Minister of Peru throughtheir Foreign Affairs Minister. They express their heartfelt griefover the death and damage caused by the disaster. They expresssorrow and sympathy on behalf of their nation and comfortthem by flying their flags at half-mast. On the one hand theydraft letters of condolence and on the other they continue indulgingin eating and drinking and going to parties. Thus they remainAptavani-1257258Aptavani-1attachment-greed; these kashayas steal from none other thantheir very own self. If these four were starved for three years,they would leave. Now what is the food they survive on? Howcan you starve them to death if you do not know what feedsthem? Because people do not have an understanding of this, allfour continue to be fed. How do they survive? How have theymanaged to survive since time immemorial? One must stopfeeding them. No one has thought about it in this way and theycontinue their struggle to rid themselves of these kashayas bybeating on them and trying to suppress them. These four are notlikely to go easily. It is only when the Self separates, that internalcleansing of these four occurs. These kashayas will not submit toviolence or coersion. They will only submit to non-violent means.A spiritual master will scold his disciples when he getsangry. If someone questions his anger, he would say that hisdisciples deserve to be scolded. That is it! He is finished! Sucha comment is food for anger. When people become angry, theyprotect and justify their anger, and that is the very food angersurvives on.A tight-fisted person asks you to buy a packet of tea forhim. You pay thirty paisas for the tea packet but when he saysto you, ‘How could you pay so much for the packet?’ hiswords become food for his greed. On the other hand anextravagant person will say it’s a good quality tea at eightypaisas per packet, this too is food for his greed of lavishness.You should remain within normal boundaries.Now what nourishes deceit? A businessman is heavilyinvolved in black-marketeering but when it comes to deceit, hewill clearly and vehemently announce that under no circumstancesdoes he deal in the black-market. On the contrary he will givethe impression of being an ethical and honorable person. Thisis the food for his deceit.And what is the food for pride? If you see Chandulalpassing by, you call out to him and greet him with respect, hefeels pleased and elated, his ego becomes inflated; that is foodfor Chandulal’s pride.Everything, except the Self requires food to survive.I welcome all four kashayas; anger-pride-attachment-greedbut I do not feed them.From where do these four originate? Their origin lies inthe fostering and feeding the relative self because of one’signorance of one’s Real Self. They originate from the chargedrelative self. Gnani Purush puts a stop to the charging. Hefractures the wrong belief that charges the self. By establishingthe Self and the bliss of the Self, one’s fascination for thetransitory world leaves. Thus one gets released from these fourkashayas.Gnani Purush is capable of doing whatever he desires.These kashayas of anger-pride-attachment-greed is a bridge, aconnecting link between the Self and the non-Self. They are thelink between Gnan and agnan. Otherwise, why should God,who is free from attachment, be attached?Home Department : Foreign DepartmentWhen there are natural calamities like cyclones or volcaniceruptions in foreign countries, say Peru for example, the PrimeMinisters of nations will call cabinet meetings. They will sendout letters of condolence to the Prime Minister of Peru throughtheir Foreign Affairs Minister. They express their heartfelt griefover the death and damage caused by the disaster. They expresssorrow and sympathy on behalf of their nation and comfortthem by flying their flags at half-mast. On the one hand theydraft letters of condolence and on the other they continue indulgingin eating and drinking and going to parties. Thus they remainAptavani-1257258Aptavani-1superficial in matters of foreign affairs, but very particular andinvolved in their domestic affairs. In matters related to foreigncountries their sorrow and sympathy is shallow and superficial,it is not deep rooted. They remain aloof and continue enjoyingtheir life.Similarly, there are two separate departments within you:home and foreign. In the foreign department you have to remainsuperficial and in the home department you have to be exactand precise. Only in matters concerning the Self you have to bevery exact. In the worldly dealings through your mind, speechand actions, it is better for you to remain aloof as in foreigninteraction.‘Circumstances around you will change continuously butyou should only involve yourself with the circumstances that arerelated to the pure Self. In all the other circumstances youshould remain superficial.’CircumstancesThere are only two things in this world, circumstancesand the Self. If you become one with circumstances, the worldlylife will perpetuate but if you remain just the Knower of thecircumstances, then you are the Self.The world continuously undergoes changes because it isevolutionary (samsaran) by nature. Circumstances come togetheronly to separate again. Circumstances will continue evolving.The entire world functions through association anddissociation of circumstances. Who is the doer in this world?Who makes things happen? There is no one up above oranywhere else who is the doer. Everything happens solely throughscientific circumstantial evidences.The way things come together is the way they will appear.Nobody has to do anything for that to happen. Does anyonehave to fill the colors in a rainbow? The rainbow appears whenall the circumstantial evidences come together. In thesecircumstantial evidences you have the sun, the clouds, theobserver etc. It is only when many such evidences come together,that a rainbow will appear. If the sun claims that without it therainbow could not form it is false ego, because the rainbowwould not form even if the clouds were missing. It is also falseego if the clouds were to claim that the rainbow could not formif they were missing. It is only when all the evidences cometogether that a form becomes visible. Once the association ofthe evidences ends, the event dissipates. Once any of theevidences separate, the rainbow will cease to be.Every association of circumstances is followed by itsdissociation. Circumstances by nature are prone to dissociation,and are under the control of vyavasthit, scientific circumstantialevidences. Vyavasthit determines when and how thesecircumstances will come together. Therefore do not meddle inanything. This world has come about through scientificcircumstantial evidences. It is but natural. Vyavasthit is the ‘doer’.The world is run by vyavasthit with the support of the associationand dissociation of circumstances. So many circumstances haveto come together for a single event to occur. So manycircumstances have to come together before one is able to fallasleep and so many circumstances have to come together inorder for one to wake up. Vyavasthit is a wonderful thing; ithelps circumstances to come together.How many varieties of bubbles you see at the bottom ofa waterfall? Who make all these bubbles of different shapes andsizes? Who forms them? They come about on their own, whenair, the force of falling water and waves come together. Thegreater the force of air on water, the bigger the bubbles and thelesser the force on the water, the smaller the bubbles. All humanAptavani-1259260Aptavani-1superficial in matters of foreign affairs, but very particular andinvolved in their domestic affairs. In matters related to foreigncountries their sorrow and sympathy is shallow and superficial,it is not deep rooted. They remain aloof and continue enjoyingtheir life.Similarly, there are two separate departments within you:home and foreign. In the foreign department you have to remainsuperficial and in the home department you have to be exactand precise. Only in matters concerning the Self you have to bevery exact. In the worldly dealings through your mind, speechand actions, it is better for you to remain aloof as in foreigninteraction.‘Circumstances around you will change continuously butyou should only involve yourself with the circumstances that arerelated to the pure Self. In all the other circumstances youshould remain superficial.’CircumstancesThere are only two things in this world, circumstancesand the Self. If you become one with circumstances, the worldlylife will perpetuate but if you remain just the Knower of thecircumstances, then you are the Self.The world continuously undergoes changes because it isevolutionary (samsaran) by nature. Circumstances come togetheronly to separate again. Circumstances will continue evolving.The entire world functions through association anddissociation of circumstances. Who is the doer in this world?Who makes things happen? There is no one up above oranywhere else who is the doer. Everything happens solely throughscientific circumstantial evidences.The way things come together is the way they will appear.Nobody has to do anything for that to happen. Does anyonehave to fill the colors in a rainbow? The rainbow appears whenall the circumstantial evidences come together. In thesecircumstantial evidences you have the sun, the clouds, theobserver etc. It is only when many such evidences come together,that a rainbow will appear. If the sun claims that without it therainbow could not form it is false ego, because the rainbowwould not form even if the clouds were missing. It is also falseego if the clouds were to claim that the rainbow could not formif they were missing. It is only when all the evidences cometogether that a form becomes visible. Once the association ofthe evidences ends, the event dissipates. Once any of theevidences separate, the rainbow will cease to be.Every association of circumstances is followed by itsdissociation. Circumstances by nature are prone to dissociation,and are under the control of vyavasthit, scientific circumstantialevidences. Vyavasthit determines when and how thesecircumstances will come together. Therefore do not meddle inanything. This world has come about through scientificcircumstantial evidences. It is but natural. Vyavasthit is the ‘doer’.The world is run by vyavasthit with the support of the associationand dissociation of circumstances. So many circumstances haveto come together for a single event to occur. So manycircumstances have to come together before one is able to fallasleep and so many circumstances have to come together inorder for one to wake up. Vyavasthit is a wonderful thing; ithelps circumstances to come together.How many varieties of bubbles you see at the bottom ofa waterfall? Who make all these bubbles of different shapes andsizes? Who forms them? They come about on their own, whenair, the force of falling water and waves come together. Thegreater the force of air on water, the bigger the bubbles and thelesser the force on the water, the smaller the bubbles. All humanAptavani-1259260Aptavani-1beings are just like these bubbles. They come into being throughcircumstances.Circumstances may be the same but they may be agreeableto one person and disagreeable to another. Such is the casewith every circumstance. One person may like them while anothermay not. You may accumulate things you like, but there is notelling when the separation may come. You have no idea whenthe accumulation of agreeable circumstances will dissociate.Moreover circumstances come in succession, one after anotherbut succeeding circumstances do not come before the dissociationof the previous one.There are two types of circumstances : agreeable onesand disagreeable ones. Disagreeable circumstances are the fruitor effect of demerit karma (adharma), and agreeablecircumstances are the fruit of merit karma (dharma). The fruit ofthe state of the Self (svadharma) is liberation.Sorrow is at the root of all circumstances, whetheragreeable or disagreeable. One feels sorrow as agreeablecircumstances come to an end and sorrow when disagreeableones come together. And under the laws of nature, both aresubject to association-dissociation and dissociation-association.The Lord says there are good circumstances and badcircumstances. People label it a bad circumstance when a personstarts to think and behave negatively. If someone gets arrested,it is a bad circumstance and if a person attends satsang, it isconsidered a good circumstance. In this world association orintegration of circumstances is puran (input) and dissociation ordisintegration of circumstances is galan (output). There is nothingelse besides these.It is as difficult to dissociate or disintegrate, as it is toassociate or integrate.The taste of excitement and joy always comes prior tothe event or coming together of agreeable circumstances. Aslong as there is a balance, there will be a taste or sensation ofjoy. As you start using up the balance, the taste starts to diminish.If a pilgrimage was scheduled to start at seven thirty on Sundaymorning, the excitement for it will begin and the balance of joywill gradually go down from the moment the train leaves onSunday morning until there is none left.The moment circumstances come together, they begin tomove towards dissociation and as soon as they dissociate, therebegins another association of other circumstances. As theevidences of one set of circumstances arise and begin todissociate, the next set of circumstances begin to associate.Circumstances are for the purpose of arriving at a finalconclusion (about the puzzle of life); they come so that one mayanalyze and experience them, but instead people get sidetrackedor become stuck in a corner. They get married and then lookfor happiness. Is happiness to be found in a wife? Does it liein having a baby, or a father-in-law or a mother-in-law? Whereis it? Why don’t you try to analyze this? People harbor hatredand abhorrence but they do not bother to analyze the reasonbehind them. All worldly relations are relative relations; they arenot real. They exist in order for you to be able to arrive at thefinal conclusion. Those who do so experience less raag-dweshand become seekers on the path of liberation.Besides the human life form there is no other life form thathas the privilege of liberation. If one is fortunate enough toacquire a human life form, fortunate enough to meet withcircumstances for liberation and find the right vehicle, thenliberation is attainable. Liberation is only attainable when suchcircumstances come together.The only pure circumstance is a meeting with a Gnani.Aptavani-1261262Aptavani-1beings are just like these bubbles. They come into being throughcircumstances.Circumstances may be the same but they may be agreeableto one person and disagreeable to another. Such is the casewith every circumstance. One person may like them while anothermay not. You may accumulate things you like, but there is notelling when the separation may come. You have no idea whenthe accumulation of agreeable circumstances will dissociate.Moreover circumstances come in succession, one after anotherbut succeeding circumstances do not come before the dissociationof the previous one.There are two types of circumstances : agreeable onesand disagreeable ones. Disagreeable circumstances are the fruitor effect of demerit karma (adharma), and agreeablecircumstances are the fruit of merit karma (dharma). The fruit ofthe state of the Self (svadharma) is liberation.Sorrow is at the root of all circumstances, whetheragreeable or disagreeable. One feels sorrow as agreeablecircumstances come to an end and sorrow when disagreeableones come together. And under the laws of nature, both aresubject to association-dissociation and dissociation-association.The Lord says there are good circumstances and badcircumstances. People label it a bad circumstance when a personstarts to think and behave negatively. If someone gets arrested,it is a bad circumstance and if a person attends satsang, it isconsidered a good circumstance. In this world association orintegration of circumstances is puran (input) and dissociation ordisintegration of circumstances is galan (output). There is nothingelse besides these.It is as difficult to dissociate or disintegrate, as it is toassociate or integrate.The taste of excitement and joy always comes prior tothe event or coming together of agreeable circumstances. Aslong as there is a balance, there will be a taste or sensation ofjoy. As you start using up the balance, the taste starts to diminish.If a pilgrimage was scheduled to start at seven thirty on Sundaymorning, the excitement for it will begin and the balance of joywill gradually go down from the moment the train leaves onSunday morning until there is none left.The moment circumstances come together, they begin tomove towards dissociation and as soon as they dissociate, therebegins another association of other circumstances. As theevidences of one set of circumstances arise and begin todissociate, the next set of circumstances begin to associate.Circumstances are for the purpose of arriving at a finalconclusion (about the puzzle of life); they come so that one mayanalyze and experience them, but instead people get sidetrackedor become stuck in a corner. They get married and then lookfor happiness. Is happiness to be found in a wife? Does it liein having a baby, or a father-in-law or a mother-in-law? Whereis it? Why don’t you try to analyze this? People harbor hatredand abhorrence but they do not bother to analyze the reasonbehind them. All worldly relations are relative relations; they arenot real. They exist in order for you to be able to arrive at thefinal conclusion. Those who do so experience less raag-dweshand become seekers on the path of liberation.Besides the human life form there is no other life form thathas the privilege of liberation. If one is fortunate enough toacquire a human life form, fortunate enough to meet withcircumstances for liberation and find the right vehicle, thenliberation is attainable. Liberation is only attainable when suchcircumstances come together.The only pure circumstance is a meeting with a Gnani.Aptavani-1261262Aptavani-1Satsang with the Gnani Purush is the only pure circumstance. Ithas been said about the Gnani :‘The Gnani bestows the pure Self, takes away the egoand the worldly attachments : He alone is the Original purecircumstance Who has liberated me from wandering life afterlife : I bow to the compassionate One.’A meeting with the Gnani is the only circumstance, thebasic instrument (nimit), which helps other realize the pure Self(Shuddhatma) through the separation of ‘I’ and ‘My’. In otherwords the Gnani makes you acquire the pure Self and renounce‘I’ and ‘my’. That is why the Gnani is said to be the maininstrument (nimit) and the only pure circumstance for acquiringliberation.The Self and circumstance have a relation of gnata andgneya respectively (Gnata - Knower – i.e. the Self. Gneya – thesubject to be known i.e. circumstances/events), with each other.The Self is related to circumstances only as a Knower. Thepure Self is constant; it is asanyogi, beyond and without anycircumstance. Everything but the Self is related to circumstances.The association and dissociation of circumstances are objectsto be known and ‘You, the pure Self’, are the Knower. Butbecause the Knower has become one with the gneya, the objectto be known, he has become gneyakar (one with the gneya), hehas to wander for endless life cycles. That which is seen andexperienced through the five senses is tangible (sthool)circumstance, the subtle circumstance of the inner complex(antahskaran : the mind, intellect, chit and ego), and thecircumstance of speech – are all with which the Self is associatedonly through the relationship of association. The Self is not‘married’ (bound) to those circumstances. The relationship ofthe Self with these three is not binding. There is no real orinseparable relationship between the Self and the circumstances.The relation between gnata and gneya is only of the Knowerand circumstance and if this relationship remains confined to thisparameter, then the Self remains unbound.People become ‘married’ to their circumstances andtherefore entrapped by them so much so that try as they may,they cannot free themselves from them.The Self is absolutely distinct. It is such that it can seeand know circumstances from all aspects, but what can anyonedo if the Self becomes married to these circumstances?All circumstances are pudgalic (integrating anddisintegrating through intake and output); they belong to thenon-self. A donkey is not considered pudgalic, because thedonkey is the mixture of the Self and the non-Self. In reality theSelf never becomes one with the non-Self, but through illusionand wrong belief you see them as one. This is a grave mistakeon your part.All circumstances automatically come together and becauseof this phenomenon, Knowledge (svabhavik - the knowledge ofthe Self) too has automatically become distinct and separatefrom its own nature (vibhavik, worldly). However its substance(dravya) and attributes have not changed, only its phases(paryaya) have changed. It is the phases of vision and knowledgethat have become distinct (worldly) and have attained differentproperties.A scientist accidentally inhales some gas, which leaks outwhile he is conducting an experiment and becomesunconsciousness. For the duration of the time he is unconscious,he forgets everything but as he regains consciousness and comesaround, he slowly begins to recall and understand everything.Initially he feels that he was in control of everything and then ashe becomes more aware, he realizes that he was not in control,Aptavani-1263264Aptavani-1Satsang with the Gnani Purush is the only pure circumstance. Ithas been said about the Gnani :‘The Gnani bestows the pure Self, takes away the egoand the worldly attachments : He alone is the Original purecircumstance Who has liberated me from wandering life afterlife : I bow to the compassionate One.’A meeting with the Gnani is the only circumstance, thebasic instrument (nimit), which helps other realize the pure Self(Shuddhatma) through the separation of ‘I’ and ‘My’. In otherwords the Gnani makes you acquire the pure Self and renounce‘I’ and ‘my’. That is why the Gnani is said to be the maininstrument (nimit) and the only pure circumstance for acquiringliberation.The Self and circumstance have a relation of gnata andgneya respectively (Gnata - Knower – i.e. the Self. Gneya – thesubject to be known i.e. circumstances/events), with each other.The Self is related to circumstances only as a Knower. Thepure Self is constant; it is asanyogi, beyond and without anycircumstance. Everything but the Self is related to circumstances.The association and dissociation of circumstances are objectsto be known and ‘You, the pure Self’, are the Knower. Butbecause the Knower has become one with the gneya, the objectto be known, he has become gneyakar (one with the gneya), hehas to wander for endless life cycles. That which is seen andexperienced through the five senses is tangible (sthool)circumstance, the subtle circumstance of the inner complex(antahskaran : the mind, intellect, chit and ego), and thecircumstance of speech – are all with which the Self is associatedonly through the relationship of association. The Self is not‘married’ (bound) to those circumstances. The relationship ofthe Self with these three is not binding. There is no real orinseparable relationship between the Self and the circumstances.The relation between gnata and gneya is only of the Knowerand circumstance and if this relationship remains confined to thisparameter, then the Self remains unbound.People become ‘married’ to their circumstances andtherefore entrapped by them so much so that try as they may,they cannot free themselves from them.The Self is absolutely distinct. It is such that it can seeand know circumstances from all aspects, but what can anyonedo if the Self becomes married to these circumstances?All circumstances are pudgalic (integrating anddisintegrating through intake and output); they belong to thenon-self. A donkey is not considered pudgalic, because thedonkey is the mixture of the Self and the non-Self. In reality theSelf never becomes one with the non-Self, but through illusionand wrong belief you see them as one. This is a grave mistakeon your part.All circumstances automatically come together and becauseof this phenomenon, Knowledge (svabhavik - the knowledge ofthe Self) too has automatically become distinct and separatefrom its own nature (vibhavik, worldly). However its substance(dravya) and attributes have not changed, only its phases(paryaya) have changed. It is the phases of vision and knowledgethat have become distinct (worldly) and have attained differentproperties.A scientist accidentally inhales some gas, which leaks outwhile he is conducting an experiment and becomesunconsciousness. For the duration of the time he is unconscious,he forgets everything but as he regains consciousness and comesaround, he slowly begins to recall and understand everything.Initially he feels that he was in control of everything and then ashe becomes more aware, he realizes that he was not in control,Aptavani-1263264Aptavani-1but God, a higher power, was in control. Now as his awarenessincreases even further, he will come to realize that everythingaround him is an illusion, a wrong belief and that God is not incontrol of anything. As his awareness increases, he realizes thatcircumstances alone are in control and that is when he experiencesbliss of freedom from circumstances. In this way a change istaking place only in his awareness. If the experimenter becomesone with the experiment, if he becomes the experiment, it is agrave state of ignorance. But when he gains the awareness thathe is separate from the circumstances around him, then hebecomes free. Only then he will taste freedom.Innumerable circumstances are constantly arising – if youbecome absorbed in them, you will sow new seeds. How canyou solve this problem? If you can remain just a Seer andKnower of circumstances, then no new seeds will be sown.There are infinite circumstances but as long as they do not resultin any new sowing, there will be liberation.Every human being is bound by circumstances. MyMahatmas are surrounded by circumstances, but they remainonly the Knower and the Seer of these circumstances. Yourenergies become obscured if you become trapped and boundby circumstances. For a Gnani, circumstances come and go butHe does not stop to greet them. All I do is observe them fromafar and the circumstances disperse. Because the Self is self-illuminating, as well as non-Self illuminating, every circumstancewill be illuminated through it. For this illumination, one has toacquire enlightened vision.There is no chetan (consciousness) in circumstances. Our(the Self’s) real nature is beyond circumstances. Positive ornegative feelings towards anyone, is a circumstance and thatcircumstance is not Yours – it does not belong to the Self. Nocircumstance remains forever. That, which is transitory, that whichcomes and goes, is not your real nature. How can you believeit to be yours? Circumstances come and go, just like theneighbors. Those who lack the right understanding believe thatany positive or benevolent thoughts they have is the Self within,but that is not the Self. Regardless of the kind of thoughts andfeelings you have, ‘they are not mine’ (they are of the non-Self),is all you need to know. There should not be a feeling ofownership of any circumstance, whether it is a good thought oran evil one. I am telling the whole world everything and clearlyas it really is :‘All tangible circumstances, subtle circumstances, andcircumstances of speech are of the non-Self and are subject tothe influences of the non-Self’.There are only two things : The Self and circumstances.Presence or absence of action too are dependent uponcircumstances, they are under the control of the non-Self, notthe Self. If anyone had control over circumstances, he wouldnot let negative circumstances come his way and not let goodones leave and consequently no one would attain liberation.Gnan is to know that all that is temporary, which comesand goes through the association and dissociation ofcircumstances, is ‘not mine’. When all the phases of Knowledgeare purified, it is infinite knowledge (anant gnan). Subtlecircumstances can only be seen when certain phases ofKnowledge become pure and when all the phases of Knoweldgebecome pure, that is the Knower of infinity, the Absolute, theOmniscient.A person may not have the knowledge that circumstancesare the only doers in any event, but if through his ego he believesso, he will bind tremendous punya (merit karma). He wouldbecome a great celestial being. But what do people do instead?If something they set out to do turns out wrong, they claim thatAptavani-1265266Aptavani-1but God, a higher power, was in control. Now as his awarenessincreases even further, he will come to realize that everythingaround him is an illusion, a wrong belief and that God is not incontrol of anything. As his awareness increases, he realizes thatcircumstances alone are in control and that is when he experiencesbliss of freedom from circumstances. In this way a change istaking place only in his awareness. If the experimenter becomesone with the experiment, if he becomes the experiment, it is agrave state of ignorance. But when he gains the awareness thathe is separate from the circumstances around him, then hebecomes free. Only then he will taste freedom.Innumerable circumstances are constantly arising – if youbecome absorbed in them, you will sow new seeds. How canyou solve this problem? If you can remain just a Seer andKnower of circumstances, then no new seeds will be sown.There are infinite circumstances but as long as they do not resultin any new sowing, there will be liberation.Every human being is bound by circumstances. MyMahatmas are surrounded by circumstances, but they remainonly the Knower and the Seer of these circumstances. Yourenergies become obscured if you become trapped and boundby circumstances. For a Gnani, circumstances come and go butHe does not stop to greet them. All I do is observe them fromafar and the circumstances disperse. Because the Self is self-illuminating, as well as non-Self illuminating, every circumstancewill be illuminated through it. For this illumination, one has toacquire enlightened vision.There is no chetan (consciousness) in circumstances. Our(the Self’s) real nature is beyond circumstances. Positive ornegative feelings towards anyone, is a circumstance and thatcircumstance is not Yours – it does not belong to the Self. Nocircumstance remains forever. That, which is transitory, that whichcomes and goes, is not your real nature. How can you believeit to be yours? Circumstances come and go, just like theneighbors. Those who lack the right understanding believe thatany positive or benevolent thoughts they have is the Self within,but that is not the Self. Regardless of the kind of thoughts andfeelings you have, ‘they are not mine’ (they are of the non-Self),is all you need to know. There should not be a feeling ofownership of any circumstance, whether it is a good thought oran evil one. I am telling the whole world everything and clearlyas it really is :‘All tangible circumstances, subtle circumstances, andcircumstances of speech are of the non-Self and are subject tothe influences of the non-Self’.There are only two things : The Self and circumstances.Presence or absence of action too are dependent uponcircumstances, they are under the control of the non-Self, notthe Self. If anyone had control over circumstances, he wouldnot let negative circumstances come his way and not let goodones leave and consequently no one would attain liberation.Gnan is to know that all that is temporary, which comesand goes through the association and dissociation ofcircumstances, is ‘not mine’. When all the phases of Knowledgeare purified, it is infinite knowledge (anant gnan). Subtlecircumstances can only be seen when certain phases ofKnowledge become pure and when all the phases of Knoweldgebecome pure, that is the Knower of infinity, the Absolute, theOmniscient.A person may not have the knowledge that circumstancesare the only doers in any event, but if through his ego he believesso, he will bind tremendous punya (merit karma). He wouldbecome a great celestial being. But what do people do instead?If something they set out to do turns out wrong, they claim thatAptavani-1265266Aptavani-1under the circumstances they had no choice, but if an unsuccessfultask turns into a success, then they claim it was just the thingworth doing. Merely by making such a statement they endorsetheir doership and become liable for the consequences. Wrongbelief in my Mahatmas is gone. They still face the samecircumstances, the same karmic effects, and the same relationswith a wife, children, in-laws etc. and yet they experiencetremendous bliss.Why should you fear a circumstance, which is destined topass?‘You, the real Self’, is immortal – you never grow old,you are never born and neither will you die. Only circumstancescome and go. For the Gnani, the circumstance of death and thecircumstance of a meal, are the same – both are merelycircumstances.There is nothing in this world except the circumstance,which is present and in the now (prapta). ‘Let the circumstancein front of you discharge with cordiality and equanimity.’ Thissentence, which I just uttered, is a very powerful sentence. Itencompasses the essence of every scripture of the world. Youare the Knower-Seer of the circumstance that is present in frontof you (prapta) and not of the ones that are not (aprapta).If you are supposed to be in court at eleven o’clock butyour meal is served to you at the same time, then that is thecircumstance directly present in front of you. You will have todeal with that circumstance cordially and with equanimity first.You should eat your meal peacefully and not rush through it.Peacefully means that your chit should be only on what you areeating and not at the court. In other words, you should not bevisualizing scenes of the court while eating. Otherwise the bodyis eating here and you are in the court. First finish your mealpeacefully and then go to the court without haste. But what dopeople do instead? They are not able to enjoy the circumstance,which is present in front of them, and they run after those, whichare not, in a bewildered state. In the process they lose both ofthem. Graciously enjoy the meal that is directly in front of you.Then it is discharged for good. The court is still far away; it isnot in front of you, so why run after it? Accomplish your workaccording to the circumstances present in front of you. If youdo not get your work accomplished when you are in front of aGnani Purush, then it would defeat the very purpose of yourexistence on this earth. Who else would give you such astraightforward and correct understanding? Only the One, whois established as the Self, can do so.This ‘Gnani Purush’ is the instrument (nimit) of the highestcircumstance for all the living beings of this world.‘To him who is simple and spontaneous comes knockingat the door of liberation, the Absolute embodied.’Those who are close to achieving liberation, effortlesslyget the opportunity of coming in contact with the best instrument,a Gnani Purush. Liberation is extremely easy to attain, but acontact with the liberator is extremely rare. The rarity of suchan opportunity is beyond all words.You have come having wandered through every life formand yet you have not found true happiness anywhere. All thewhile you have done nothing but wailed and roared with yourego. You have the desire to be free but you cannot find thepath. Such a path is extremely rare. A circumstance for a meetingwith a Gnani Purush is extremely rare indeed. All othercircumstances will come together and disperse, but thecircumstance of a meeting with the Gnani Purush is the onlyone, which will give you permanent bliss. Now all you have todo is get your work done for your liberation. An ardent desireto remain near a Gnani Purush brings forth extraordinary power,Aptavani-1267268Aptavani-1under the circumstances they had no choice, but if an unsuccessfultask turns into a success, then they claim it was just the thingworth doing. Merely by making such a statement they endorsetheir doership and become liable for the consequences. Wrongbelief in my Mahatmas is gone. They still face the samecircumstances, the same karmic effects, and the same relationswith a wife, children, in-laws etc. and yet they experiencetremendous bliss.Why should you fear a circumstance, which is destined topass?‘You, the real Self’, is immortal – you never grow old,you are never born and neither will you die. Only circumstancescome and go. For the Gnani, the circumstance of death and thecircumstance of a meal, are the same – both are merelycircumstances.There is nothing in this world except the circumstance,which is present and in the now (prapta). ‘Let the circumstancein front of you discharge with cordiality and equanimity.’ Thissentence, which I just uttered, is a very powerful sentence. Itencompasses the essence of every scripture of the world. Youare the Knower-Seer of the circumstance that is present in frontof you (prapta) and not of the ones that are not (aprapta).If you are supposed to be in court at eleven o’clock butyour meal is served to you at the same time, then that is thecircumstance directly present in front of you. You will have todeal with that circumstance cordially and with equanimity first.You should eat your meal peacefully and not rush through it.Peacefully means that your chit should be only on what you areeating and not at the court. In other words, you should not bevisualizing scenes of the court while eating. Otherwise the bodyis eating here and you are in the court. First finish your mealpeacefully and then go to the court without haste. But what dopeople do instead? They are not able to enjoy the circumstance,which is present in front of them, and they run after those, whichare not, in a bewildered state. In the process they lose both ofthem. Graciously enjoy the meal that is directly in front of you.Then it is discharged for good. The court is still far away; it isnot in front of you, so why run after it? Accomplish your workaccording to the circumstances present in front of you. If youdo not get your work accomplished when you are in front of aGnani Purush, then it would defeat the very purpose of yourexistence on this earth. Who else would give you such astraightforward and correct understanding? Only the One, whois established as the Self, can do so.This ‘Gnani Purush’ is the instrument (nimit) of the highestcircumstance for all the living beings of this world.‘To him who is simple and spontaneous comes knockingat the door of liberation, the Absolute embodied.’Those who are close to achieving liberation, effortlesslyget the opportunity of coming in contact with the best instrument,a Gnani Purush. Liberation is extremely easy to attain, but acontact with the liberator is extremely rare. The rarity of suchan opportunity is beyond all words.You have come having wandered through every life formand yet you have not found true happiness anywhere. All thewhile you have done nothing but wailed and roared with yourego. You have the desire to be free but you cannot find thepath. Such a path is extremely rare. A circumstance for a meetingwith a Gnani Purush is extremely rare indeed. All othercircumstances will come together and disperse, but thecircumstance of a meeting with the Gnani Purush is the onlyone, which will give you permanent bliss. Now all you have todo is get your work done for your liberation. An ardent desireto remain near a Gnani Purush brings forth extraordinary power,Aptavani-1267268Aptavani-1which then allows you to overcome any circumstance or obstaclethat comes your way.The Circumstance Of The non-SelfAnything that comes your way is as a result of yourprakruti (nature, inherent characteristic traits). Everything youreceive is in accordance to your prakruti. The type and taste oftea, of vegetables and food you get, all come to you in keepingwith your prakruti. But your internal anger, pride, attachmentand greed interfere with all of this. Greed meddles in this byprompting you to accumulate and hoard things. This leads youto be deceitful and thereby meddle even more with graveconsequences. There is no need to be meddlesome. Everythingwill be provided for you, in accordance with your prakruti,upon demand from within. What would happen if people startedto worry whether the sun would rise the next day? Mooah!Everything is out there for you if you know how to enjoy it. Thesun, the moon, the stars, air, water is all for you.Suppose you get a chance to spend ten days at a hill-station which appeals to your prakruti (relative self), then you’llwish you had ten more days to stay there, but you will find itdifficult to spend even two days at some other location. All thatyou eat and drink comes to you in accordance with your prakruti.But you possibly may not get enough to satisfy your greed.Even the renunciation and fasting you do is in accordance toyour prakruti and yet your ego claims ‘I did it’. Whether youare able to renounce or not, it is all in accordance to yourprakruti.A well to do businessman in Baroda was fed up with hishead strong and nagging wife. He felt he would be better offbecoming an ascetic; at least people will give him respect andrevere him. So he ran away from home and became a sadhu.But his wife was very smart and hunted him down to a Jainmonastery in Delhi. He was sitting in a religious discourse givenby a Jain priest, dressed as a sadhu with his head shaved. Hiswife shows up there unexpectedly and unannounced. She becameindignant and started yelling at her him in the midst of thediscourse, ‘What are you doing to me? You leave home dumpingthe responsibility of six children on me and run away like acoward. Who is going to take care of their expenses of educationand marriage?’ She grabbed his arm and started to drag him.The businessman realized immediately that if he put up anyresistance she would cause a bigger scene. He asks his wife tolet go of him so that he can at least change his clothes. His wifehowever refused, saying that she would not give him theopportunity to run away again and that he should be ashamedof running away in the first place. She told him he would haveto go with her dressed as he was. Even the Jain priest assessedthe situation and signaled him to go. The lady returned homewith her husband in a sadhu’s attire! Renunciation was not in hisprakruti and so he had to return home.A very old maharaj (high ranking ascetic) who becamebed ridden could not find anyone to take care of him and so hestarted to miss his home. Expecting that his daughter-in-lawalong with the help of others at home will take care of him, hesomehow managed to return home. But when he arrived home,the family refused to take care of him. Renunciation was in hisprakruti and so he was faced with it even this late in life.This is how strange the working of the prakruti is. Whatis prakruti? We give things names to identify them. But prakrutimeans circumstantial evidence. People dance according to theway their prakruti dictates and yet they claim ‘I am dancing’ or‘I am fasting’. Renunciation is possible only if it is in one’sprakruti. If renunciation is not in his prakruti, his wife will draghim back home.Aptavani-1269270Aptavani-1which then allows you to overcome any circumstance or obstaclethat comes your way.The Circumstance Of The non-SelfAnything that comes your way is as a result of yourprakruti (nature, inherent characteristic traits). Everything youreceive is in accordance to your prakruti. The type and taste oftea, of vegetables and food you get, all come to you in keepingwith your prakruti. But your internal anger, pride, attachmentand greed interfere with all of this. Greed meddles in this byprompting you to accumulate and hoard things. This leads youto be deceitful and thereby meddle even more with graveconsequences. There is no need to be meddlesome. Everythingwill be provided for you, in accordance with your prakruti,upon demand from within. What would happen if people startedto worry whether the sun would rise the next day? Mooah!Everything is out there for you if you know how to enjoy it. Thesun, the moon, the stars, air, water is all for you.Suppose you get a chance to spend ten days at a hill-station which appeals to your prakruti (relative self), then you’llwish you had ten more days to stay there, but you will find itdifficult to spend even two days at some other location. All thatyou eat and drink comes to you in accordance with your prakruti.But you possibly may not get enough to satisfy your greed.Even the renunciation and fasting you do is in accordance toyour prakruti and yet your ego claims ‘I did it’. Whether youare able to renounce or not, it is all in accordance to yourprakruti.A well to do businessman in Baroda was fed up with hishead strong and nagging wife. He felt he would be better offbecoming an ascetic; at least people will give him respect andrevere him. So he ran away from home and became a sadhu.But his wife was very smart and hunted him down to a Jainmonastery in Delhi. He was sitting in a religious discourse givenby a Jain priest, dressed as a sadhu with his head shaved. Hiswife shows up there unexpectedly and unannounced. She becameindignant and started yelling at her him in the midst of thediscourse, ‘What are you doing to me? You leave home dumpingthe responsibility of six children on me and run away like acoward. Who is going to take care of their expenses of educationand marriage?’ She grabbed his arm and started to drag him.The businessman realized immediately that if he put up anyresistance she would cause a bigger scene. He asks his wife tolet go of him so that he can at least change his clothes. His wifehowever refused, saying that she would not give him theopportunity to run away again and that he should be ashamedof running away in the first place. She told him he would haveto go with her dressed as he was. Even the Jain priest assessedthe situation and signaled him to go. The lady returned homewith her husband in a sadhu’s attire! Renunciation was not in hisprakruti and so he had to return home.A very old maharaj (high ranking ascetic) who becamebed ridden could not find anyone to take care of him and so hestarted to miss his home. Expecting that his daughter-in-lawalong with the help of others at home will take care of him, hesomehow managed to return home. But when he arrived home,the family refused to take care of him. Renunciation was in hisprakruti and so he was faced with it even this late in life.This is how strange the working of the prakruti is. Whatis prakruti? We give things names to identify them. But prakrutimeans circumstantial evidence. People dance according to theway their prakruti dictates and yet they claim ‘I am dancing’ or‘I am fasting’. Renunciation is possible only if it is in one’sprakruti. If renunciation is not in his prakruti, his wife will draghim back home.Aptavani-1269270Aptavani-1There is no end to prakruti. When you become a Purush(Self-realized), prakruti will carry out its own function and thePurush will remain in his own domain. Purush means the Self.Until you become Purush, you will dance according to what theprakruti dictates.All scriptures tell you to acquire the knowledge of theSoul but none tell you to acquire the knowledge of the prakruti.If you first know what is par-kruti (par = foreign, alien and kruti= behaviour or creation), then you will know the Self. If thereis a mixture of oil and water, and if you know the properties ofwater, you will be able to separate it and after separation, youwill come to know what oil is. That is why I tell people to gainknowledge of the prakruti. Know that all that is unsteady andtransitory, changing and fleeting is part of the prakruti. What isfleeting? The five senses. The eyes would see even if you do notwant to; the nose will smell foul odors even if you don’t wantto. The body too is unreliable – how? It will jump out of theway if there is a car approaching head on – it does not wait forthe mind to make a decision. The mind and the chit are alsofickle. You may be sitting here in the satsang and the chit couldbe wandering at the railway station. The intellect is also fickleand changing. If a woman is taking a bath and you know youshould not be looking, the intellect will defy all arguments. Andif someone greets you with a lot of respect, your ego becomesinflated with pride. That is the changing nature of your ego.These are all changing, temporary and transitory parts of theprakruti. Once you completely understand all the changing partsand take them away, the remaining portion that is still andpermanent is the Self. Kindness, pride, ego, grief-joy, happiness-unhappiness are all attributes with duality and they belong to theprakruti. They all change. The Purush is only the steady,unchanging and permanent part. If you know the Purush thenyou have attained the Self and thereafter you will proceed towardsfull enlightenment.Meditation Versus ConcentrationAn engineer came to me and told me that he wanted toattain liberation. I asked him what he had done so far to achievethat. He told me that he practices concentration. I told him thatthose who suffer from mental agitation and confusion tend topractice concentration to attain mental peace. Who practicesmeditation? It is those who suffer from mental agitation andconfusion. Why do these laborers not need to practiceconcentration? They do not suffer from mental disturbance atall. Even I, a Gnani Purush, do not practice concentration. I donot have any mental disturbance at all. Practicing concentrationis like applying a soothing ointment on a burn, but what doesthat have to do with the Self? I asked him whether any of hisworries had diminished as a result? He was very intelligent andreplied that he understood exactly what I was telling him. Hetold me that his intellect (buddhi) accepted my words and hismental agitation is now gone.But he was not finished – he told me that he practicedyoga four hours every day! I asked him what he practiced yogafor; was it for something he already had knowledge of or forsomething he had no knowledge of. I told him he did not havethe knowledge of the Self but had knowledge of only the bodyand that he practiced yoga to discipline the body alone. Wouldone meditate on a face unknown to him or her? No they wouldnot, similarly how can one ignorant of the Self, meditate uponthe Self? Yoga is a physical discipline, how does the Self benefitfrom it? Liberation is achieved only through Atma-yoga (unionwith the Self) whereas dehayoga, union on a physical plane,yields only worldly rewards. All my Mahatmas are Atmayogi(united with the Self) and I am Atmayogeshwar (the AbsoluteOne).Yoga means to join. Yoga of only the known is possible.Aptavani-1271272Aptavani-1There is no end to prakruti. When you become a Purush(Self-realized), prakruti will carry out its own function and thePurush will remain in his own domain. Purush means the Self.Until you become Purush, you will dance according to what theprakruti dictates.All scriptures tell you to acquire the knowledge of theSoul but none tell you to acquire the knowledge of the prakruti.If you first know what is par-kruti (par = foreign, alien and kruti= behaviour or creation), then you will know the Self. If thereis a mixture of oil and water, and if you know the properties ofwater, you will be able to separate it and after separation, youwill come to know what oil is. That is why I tell people to gainknowledge of the prakruti. Know that all that is unsteady andtransitory, changing and fleeting is part of the prakruti. What isfleeting? The five senses. The eyes would see even if you do notwant to; the nose will smell foul odors even if you don’t wantto. The body too is unreliable – how? It will jump out of theway if there is a car approaching head on – it does not wait forthe mind to make a decision. The mind and the chit are alsofickle. You may be sitting here in the satsang and the chit couldbe wandering at the railway station. The intellect is also fickleand changing. If a woman is taking a bath and you know youshould not be looking, the intellect will defy all arguments. Andif someone greets you with a lot of respect, your ego becomesinflated with pride. That is the changing nature of your ego.These are all changing, temporary and transitory parts of theprakruti. Once you completely understand all the changing partsand take them away, the remaining portion that is still andpermanent is the Self. Kindness, pride, ego, grief-joy, happiness-unhappiness are all attributes with duality and they belong to theprakruti. They all change. The Purush is only the steady,unchanging and permanent part. If you know the Purush thenyou have attained the Self and thereafter you will proceed towardsfull enlightenment.Meditation Versus ConcentrationAn engineer came to me and told me that he wanted toattain liberation. I asked him what he had done so far to achievethat. He told me that he practices concentration. I told him thatthose who suffer from mental agitation and confusion tend topractice concentration to attain mental peace. Who practicesmeditation? It is those who suffer from mental agitation andconfusion. Why do these laborers not need to practiceconcentration? They do not suffer from mental disturbance atall. Even I, a Gnani Purush, do not practice concentration. I donot have any mental disturbance at all. Practicing concentrationis like applying a soothing ointment on a burn, but what doesthat have to do with the Self? I asked him whether any of hisworries had diminished as a result? He was very intelligent andreplied that he understood exactly what I was telling him. Hetold me that his intellect (buddhi) accepted my words and hismental agitation is now gone.But he was not finished – he told me that he practicedyoga four hours every day! I asked him what he practiced yogafor; was it for something he already had knowledge of or forsomething he had no knowledge of. I told him he did not havethe knowledge of the Self but had knowledge of only the bodyand that he practiced yoga to discipline the body alone. Wouldone meditate on a face unknown to him or her? No they wouldnot, similarly how can one ignorant of the Self, meditate uponthe Self? Yoga is a physical discipline, how does the Self benefitfrom it? Liberation is achieved only through Atma-yoga (unionwith the Self) whereas dehayoga, union on a physical plane,yields only worldly rewards. All my Mahatmas are Atmayogi(united with the Self) and I am Atmayogeshwar (the AbsoluteOne).Yoga means to join. Yoga of only the known is possible.Aptavani-1271272Aptavani-1There is yoga of the body, yoga of the speech and yoga of themind. Such yogas increase worldly physical energies but theydo not lead to liberation. Only through Atma-yoga does oneachieve liberation.There are those who practice mental yoga (manoyoga),and intellectual yoga (buddhiyoga) in this world. There are peoplewith right kind of intellect and the wrong kind, some with pureand some with perverted intellect. There are all kinds of yogis,some practice physical yoga (dehayoga) doing penance; somepractice yoga of the speech (vachanyoga) these are lawyers.There are so many different forms of yoga but Atma-yoga is theonly real yoga, the rest are ayoga (exercise of the non-Self). Ifyou are in the state of the Self i.e. atma-yoga and your mindbegins to show you all kinds of things, tell your mind to go awayor else you will insult it, tell it to come later on. The experienceyou acquire in the state of the Self will never fade away. Anythingthat you have come to know besides your real Self is ignorance.After becoming the Self whatever you come to know isconsidered real knowledge. Atmayoga is Self-Realization. Gnan-Yoga, being the Self, is the ultimate doctrine. Tri-yoga, the threeyogas of mind, speech and body is a false doctrine.Nirvikalp Samadhi : Bliss of Freedom From EgoThe peace one experiences in the various paths of yogais transient. It allays the internal disturbance of the thoughts,speech and acts temporarily. There is never an experience ofthe bliss of liberation in it. Only the atmayogi experiences thebliss of liberation.What is true samadhi - the state of the Self? The samadhithat is acquired through physical exertion and toil only works aslong as the yogi is practicing it. It is like winding the handle ofthe engine; it lasts as long as effort is put in it. Permanent blissis attained only when nirvikalp samadhi, the state of the Self, thestate without ego is attained. It is a natural and effortless samadhi.It is present even when you are performing your daily activities.It remains with you even when you are fighting. Liberation issuch a samadhi.Vikalpi, a person with ego, ‘I am Chandulal’ can neverbe a nirvikalpi (ego-less, the Self). Those who have naturallybecome nirvikalpi can elevate others to this state. Nirvikalpsamadhi is one where the body and the Self remain completelyseparate, they never become one under any circumstances.Upon the elimination of ‘I-ness’ and ‘my-ness’ (sankalp-‘I’ in the wrong place. Vikalp- my or mine), the self becomesSelf, nirvikalp. This cannot happen without the knowledge ofthe Self. Many yogis have managed to get rid of all their sankalp-vikalp except the ‘I am’ – but there is no spiritual illuminationthere. Nevertheless such yogis rise to a high level and havespiritual luster, but they do not have Gnan – real knowledge.The Soul has its own intrinsic properties, it’s own dharma (itsown function and duty) and it’s own phases. The Self is invisibleand flawless. The Self expresses fully in a Gnani Purush. Unlessyou become aware of the Self you cannot become That. Naturalsamadhi is such that it never leaves even amidst widespreaddestruction and annihilation. All other spiritual attempts areimaginary. The relative self is indirect light. The real Self isinfinite, direct light - it remains only as the Knower and theSeer. Gnan is that which gives closure and peace to the mindfrom all aspects. Samadhi, which prevails despite full awarenessof all the fives senses is real samadhi.Non-attachment in every circumstance and phase of lifeis absolute samadhi (perfect attunement with the Self).How can one attain samadhi by pinching the nose(pranayam)? Try pinching a child’s nostril – he will immediatelybite you. You can suffocate by doing that. Absence of adhiAptavani-1273274Aptavani-1There is yoga of the body, yoga of the speech and yoga of themind. Such yogas increase worldly physical energies but theydo not lead to liberation. Only through Atma-yoga does oneachieve liberation.There are those who practice mental yoga (manoyoga),and intellectual yoga (buddhiyoga) in this world. There are peoplewith right kind of intellect and the wrong kind, some with pureand some with perverted intellect. There are all kinds of yogis,some practice physical yoga (dehayoga) doing penance; somepractice yoga of the speech (vachanyoga) these are lawyers.There are so many different forms of yoga but Atma-yoga is theonly real yoga, the rest are ayoga (exercise of the non-Self). Ifyou are in the state of the Self i.e. atma-yoga and your mindbegins to show you all kinds of things, tell your mind to go awayor else you will insult it, tell it to come later on. The experienceyou acquire in the state of the Self will never fade away. Anythingthat you have come to know besides your real Self is ignorance.After becoming the Self whatever you come to know isconsidered real knowledge. Atmayoga is Self-Realization. Gnan-Yoga, being the Self, is the ultimate doctrine. Tri-yoga, the threeyogas of mind, speech and body is a false doctrine.Nirvikalp Samadhi : Bliss of Freedom From EgoThe peace one experiences in the various paths of yogais transient. It allays the internal disturbance of the thoughts,speech and acts temporarily. There is never an experience ofthe bliss of liberation in it. Only the atmayogi experiences thebliss of liberation.What is true samadhi - the state of the Self? The samadhithat is acquired through physical exertion and toil only works aslong as the yogi is practicing it. It is like winding the handle ofthe engine; it lasts as long as effort is put in it. Permanent blissis attained only when nirvikalp samadhi, the state of the Self, thestate without ego is attained. It is a natural and effortless samadhi.It is present even when you are performing your daily activities.It remains with you even when you are fighting. Liberation issuch a samadhi.Vikalpi, a person with ego, ‘I am Chandulal’ can neverbe a nirvikalpi (ego-less, the Self). Those who have naturallybecome nirvikalpi can elevate others to this state. Nirvikalpsamadhi is one where the body and the Self remain completelyseparate, they never become one under any circumstances.Upon the elimination of ‘I-ness’ and ‘my-ness’ (sankalp-‘I’ in the wrong place. Vikalp- my or mine), the self becomesSelf, nirvikalp. This cannot happen without the knowledge ofthe Self. Many yogis have managed to get rid of all their sankalp-vikalp except the ‘I am’ – but there is no spiritual illuminationthere. Nevertheless such yogis rise to a high level and havespiritual luster, but they do not have Gnan – real knowledge.The Soul has its own intrinsic properties, it’s own dharma (itsown function and duty) and it’s own phases. The Self is invisibleand flawless. The Self expresses fully in a Gnani Purush. Unlessyou become aware of the Self you cannot become That. Naturalsamadhi is such that it never leaves even amidst widespreaddestruction and annihilation. All other spiritual attempts areimaginary. The relative self is indirect light. The real Self isinfinite, direct light - it remains only as the Knower and theSeer. Gnan is that which gives closure and peace to the mindfrom all aspects. Samadhi, which prevails despite full awarenessof all the fives senses is real samadhi.Non-attachment in every circumstance and phase of lifeis absolute samadhi (perfect attunement with the Self).How can one attain samadhi by pinching the nose(pranayam)? Try pinching a child’s nostril – he will immediatelybite you. You can suffocate by doing that. Absence of adhiAptavani-1273274Aptavani-1(mental suffering), vyadhi (physical suffering) and upadhi (sufferingcreated by external forces) is called samadhi. At the time ofdeath, one withdraws to the Self and remains absorbed in theSelf, nirvikalp samadhi. My Mahatmas, endowed with the rightbelief, die a samadhi death. They leave their body with fullawareness of the Pure Soul ‘Shuddhatma’.Questioner : What makes one’s mental tendenciesunsteady and wavering?Dadashri : Are you able to sit still and steady? Thenhow can you expect your mental tendencies to remain steady?There are many spiritual practices or disciplines to steady themind, but there are equal numbers of difficulties in life also.However, it is possible to remain in samadhi even in the midstof the three kinds of suffering of adhi, vyadhi and upadhi.Meditation : The Link Between Object And SubjectQuestioner : I cannot meditate properly Dadashri. Whatshould I do?Dadashri : I can put you in meditation (dhyan) right nowbut what good is that meditation if you still have to scale thousandsmore steps ahead? Instead, I will place you directly in moksha(liberation), come see me about it. You should directly ask forthe Real. Why ask for relative meditation (i.e. temporary andincomplete things)? Besides meditation is incomplete, it doesnot lead to liberation.Questioner : But real meditation is very difficult, is itnot?Dadashri : Where is the difficulty when I am here togrant it to you? When all the work can be achieved through theacquaintance and influence of a President, then what cannot beachieved through the acquaintance of a Gnani? I am free fromall partiality and prejudices. I am vitarag (the fully enlightened).I give to the one who is sincere and meets me.When you meditate, what do you meditate on? What isthe motive or the goal behind your meditation? Who is doingthe meditation? Without a goal, without deciding what the goalis, what will you meditate on? Meditation is a mode and meansto attain the goal. Meditation is fruitful only when the Self is themotive and the Self is the meditator. What benefit do you gainwhen you meditate as, ‘Chandulal’, (the relative self) and arriveat a goal and then meditate according to your own imaginationto attain the Self? When I give you Gnan, I make You the Realmeditator and establish You as the Self. Thus, the meditation,motive and the meditator become one. Only when the Selfremains as the Self can liberation be experienced. But otherwisewhen people sit to do meditation, they wish they would nothave thoughts about their income tax or sex while they aremeditating, and the moment they start, they are immediatelyfaced with thoughts they dislike. How can you call thatmeditation?A wealthy businessman was sitting meditating whensomeone called on him at his home. The caller asked the man’swife where the businessman was and she replied, ‘He has goneto the garbage-shed, where the filth and refuse of the town lies.’The businessman upon hearing this bowed down to his wife inhis heart. Truly he was absorbed in sensual thoughts while hewas meditating.If meditation is done correctly and in the proper manner,there is tremendous power in it. Be clear as to what the termmeditation (dhyan) implies. Having decided on the motive(dhyeya, the object) there becomes a meditator (dhyata, subject).The link that joins the dhyata and dhyeya, the subject to theobject, is dhyan, meditation. And dhyan is what unites the dhyeyaAptavani-1275276Aptavani-1(mental suffering), vyadhi (physical suffering) and upadhi (sufferingcreated by external forces) is called samadhi. At the time ofdeath, one withdraws to the Self and remains absorbed in theSelf, nirvikalp samadhi. My Mahatmas, endowed with the rightbelief, die a samadhi death. They leave their body with fullawareness of the Pure Soul ‘Shuddhatma’.Questioner : What makes one’s mental tendenciesunsteady and wavering?Dadashri : Are you able to sit still and steady? Thenhow can you expect your mental tendencies to remain steady?There are many spiritual practices or disciplines to steady themind, but there are equal numbers of difficulties in life also.However, it is possible to remain in samadhi even in the midstof the three kinds of suffering of adhi, vyadhi and upadhi.Meditation : The Link Between Object And SubjectQuestioner : I cannot meditate properly Dadashri. Whatshould I do?Dadashri : I can put you in meditation (dhyan) right nowbut what good is that meditation if you still have to scale thousandsmore steps ahead? Instead, I will place you directly in moksha(liberation), come see me about it. You should directly ask forthe Real. Why ask for relative meditation (i.e. temporary andincomplete things)? Besides meditation is incomplete, it doesnot lead to liberation.Questioner : But real meditation is very difficult, is itnot?Dadashri : Where is the difficulty when I am here togrant it to you? When all the work can be achieved through theacquaintance and influence of a President, then what cannot beachieved through the acquaintance of a Gnani? I am free fromall partiality and prejudices. I am vitarag (the fully enlightened).I give to the one who is sincere and meets me.When you meditate, what do you meditate on? What isthe motive or the goal behind your meditation? Who is doingthe meditation? Without a goal, without deciding what the goalis, what will you meditate on? Meditation is a mode and meansto attain the goal. Meditation is fruitful only when the Self is themotive and the Self is the meditator. What benefit do you gainwhen you meditate as, ‘Chandulal’, (the relative self) and arriveat a goal and then meditate according to your own imaginationto attain the Self? When I give you Gnan, I make You the Realmeditator and establish You as the Self. Thus, the meditation,motive and the meditator become one. Only when the Selfremains as the Self can liberation be experienced. But otherwisewhen people sit to do meditation, they wish they would nothave thoughts about their income tax or sex while they aremeditating, and the moment they start, they are immediatelyfaced with thoughts they dislike. How can you call thatmeditation?A wealthy businessman was sitting meditating whensomeone called on him at his home. The caller asked the man’swife where the businessman was and she replied, ‘He has goneto the garbage-shed, where the filth and refuse of the town lies.’The businessman upon hearing this bowed down to his wife inhis heart. Truly he was absorbed in sensual thoughts while hewas meditating.If meditation is done correctly and in the proper manner,there is tremendous power in it. Be clear as to what the termmeditation (dhyan) implies. Having decided on the motive(dhyeya, the object) there becomes a meditator (dhyata, subject).The link that joins the dhyata and dhyeya, the subject to theobject, is dhyan, meditation. And dhyan is what unites the dhyeyaAptavani-1275276Aptavani-1and the dhyata. Say you want a tobacco pipe, which you haveseen in a shop. The pipe is your dhyeya and you are the dhyata.If then you were to meditate on that pipe continuously for fiftyminutes, providing that your concentration does not break foreven a fraction of a second, you will have that pipe in yourhands within fifty minutes. Where will it come from? Do notthink about that. Such is the power of meditation. If meditationis done correctly and systematically, then realization of the goalis inevitable. But how can one get results when the method isincorrect? It is even possible to attain the state of Parmatma(Absolue-Self) through meditation. That is how powerfulmeditation can be, but only if one understands what meditationis. When this Dada bestows upon you an unprecedented stateof the Self in the time span of fifty minutes, then what else canyou not attain?When meditation remains continuous for eight minutes, itscredit will commence accumulating and will lead to a maximumcredit of forty-eight minutes. In order to gain any credit theduration of meditation must be at least eight minutes. Meditationof seven minutes will not do.Questioner : Can one attain the attributes of the Self,attributes such as infinite knowledge, infinite vision etc., throughmeditation?Dadashri : Yes certainly, why not? You will acquire allthe attributes that you have known and meditate upon.Is ‘God’ (Bhagwan) a name or an adjective?Questioner : It is a name.Dadashri : If it were a name you would have to call himBhagwandas or Bhagwanbhai. God (Bhagwan) is an adjective.Just as the adjective ‘bhagyavan’ (lucky) is derived from theword ‘bhagya’ (luck), ‘Bhagwan’ (God) is derived from‘Bhagwat’ (Godly). An adjective of bhagwan is befitting to allthose who acquire the qualities of God. Everyone calls meBhagwan but ‘my State’ is beyond any attributes andcomparisons. What adjective will you give? Will you give it tothis body of mine? The body is going to die some day. Butmanifest within is the very Paramatma (The Omniscient).Tremendous light has arisen within.Pure Gnan is Paramatma, the Absolute Self. Atma is justa word. It is placed for the purpose of association to lead tothe Real. Gnan is the Absolute Self. It is Gnan that runseverything but one has to have the right vision of the Self.Liberation is only through pure Gnan. With the right gnan youwill receive happiness and with the wrong, deluded gnan, youwill receive miseries. There is no One (God) above you. Whocan you call a God? The one who has become liberated is Godand He has no one above him (as a boss). There is no oneover-head or no one as an under-hand anywhere. But whenyou don’t have any understanding about your state of dependency(bondage), how will you understand liberation? The worldly lifeis a museum of dependency (on the non-Self) and thatdependency is misery. People remain strangers to their ownSelf. There are as many paths as there are thoughts in thisworld. You are free to wander around where ever you wish andwhen you get tired of wandering, come to this path of liberation(Akram Vignan). Come here when you want to be independent.The worldly life is not wrong. There is nothing wrong in theworldly life, except your understanding. There is danger everymoment; dependency every moment in this world and that iswhy you remain anxious all the time.There are some people that frighten others by repeatedlyrefering to Jamraj (God of death). Jamaraj or Yamraj. Theyhave portrayed the God of Death to be so terrifying – they paintpictures of him as a vicious ferocious bull or a demon with longAptavani-1277278Aptavani-1and the dhyata. Say you want a tobacco pipe, which you haveseen in a shop. The pipe is your dhyeya and you are the dhyata.If then you were to meditate on that pipe continuously for fiftyminutes, providing that your concentration does not break foreven a fraction of a second, you will have that pipe in yourhands within fifty minutes. Where will it come from? Do notthink about that. Such is the power of meditation. If meditationis done correctly and systematically, then realization of the goalis inevitable. But how can one get results when the method isincorrect? It is even possible to attain the state of Parmatma(Absolue-Self) through meditation. That is how powerfulmeditation can be, but only if one understands what meditationis. When this Dada bestows upon you an unprecedented stateof the Self in the time span of fifty minutes, then what else canyou not attain?When meditation remains continuous for eight minutes, itscredit will commence accumulating and will lead to a maximumcredit of forty-eight minutes. In order to gain any credit theduration of meditation must be at least eight minutes. Meditationof seven minutes will not do.Questioner : Can one attain the attributes of the Self,attributes such as infinite knowledge, infinite vision etc., throughmeditation?Dadashri : Yes certainly, why not? You will acquire allthe attributes that you have known and meditate upon.Is ‘God’ (Bhagwan) a name or an adjective?Questioner : It is a name.Dadashri : If it were a name you would have to call himBhagwandas or Bhagwanbhai. God (Bhagwan) is an adjective.Just as the adjective ‘bhagyavan’ (lucky) is derived from theword ‘bhagya’ (luck), ‘Bhagwan’ (God) is derived from‘Bhagwat’ (Godly). An adjective of bhagwan is befitting to allthose who acquire the qualities of God. Everyone calls meBhagwan but ‘my State’ is beyond any attributes andcomparisons. What adjective will you give? Will you give it tothis body of mine? The body is going to die some day. Butmanifest within is the very Paramatma (The Omniscient).Tremendous light has arisen within.Pure Gnan is Paramatma, the Absolute Self. Atma is justa word. It is placed for the purpose of association to lead tothe Real. Gnan is the Absolute Self. It is Gnan that runseverything but one has to have the right vision of the Self.Liberation is only through pure Gnan. With the right gnan youwill receive happiness and with the wrong, deluded gnan, youwill receive miseries. There is no One (God) above you. Whocan you call a God? The one who has become liberated is Godand He has no one above him (as a boss). There is no oneover-head or no one as an under-hand anywhere. But whenyou don’t have any understanding about your state of dependency(bondage), how will you understand liberation? The worldly lifeis a museum of dependency (on the non-Self) and thatdependency is misery. People remain strangers to their ownSelf. There are as many paths as there are thoughts in thisworld. You are free to wander around where ever you wish andwhen you get tired of wandering, come to this path of liberation(Akram Vignan). Come here when you want to be independent.The worldly life is not wrong. There is nothing wrong in theworldly life, except your understanding. There is danger everymoment; dependency every moment in this world and that iswhy you remain anxious all the time.There are some people that frighten others by repeatedlyrefering to Jamraj (God of death). Jamaraj or Yamraj. Theyhave portrayed the God of Death to be so terrifying – they paintpictures of him as a vicious ferocious bull or a demon with longAptavani-1277278Aptavani-1and large teeth, that people are terrified of him. You fool! Thereis no such creature called Jamraj. Death is Niyamraj (Naturallaw). Everything is run by natural laws. It is this Niyamraj thatruns everything. It is the one that dictates our life and death.Now would one have any fear if he had this correctunderstanding?Say if someone is told that the jungle he has to passthrough has no tigers or lions but they forget to tell him that inthe jungle there is one cage with a lion in it. As he is goingthrough the jungle, he hears a roar of the lion. He gets scaredand runs back from the jungle. Had he known that the lion wascaged he would not have been scared. The man fled becausehe had incomplete information. In the same way how can yousolve the problems of life with incomplete information?Gurukilli : A Key That Prevents The Master FromSinkingThe Lord has said that you should not become a guru,but if you do, then you should keep a master’s key (Gurukilli),support with you. Otherwise you will drown spiritually as yourintoxication of ego of being guru increases. The Lord has neverbeen anyone’s guru and here you find gurus everywhere. Thereare some that renounce the burden of a wife and children andburden themselves with two to five hundred disciples. Thesefools will drown themselves. Guru means heavy. The heavyones will themselves drown and drown others along with them.I am the humblest of the humble. I will never drown nor will Idrown others. I am as light as a flower. I swim and help othersswim across the ocean of worldly life, because I am the Savior.I am liberated and posses power to liberate many others. I amno one’s guru.The Lord has even said that if you become a guru, bearin mind that the position of a guru entails a great responsibilityand risk. If you do not maintain this awareness, you will bedoomed. If you want to be a guru, you must get a master’s keyfrom a Gnani Purush. Then only will you be able to help others.Otherwise it is a state that will intoxicate you heavily. The positionof a guru carries great responsibility.Once a few worldly gurus came to visit me and askedme, ‘Is it not necessary for people to have a guru?’ I told themthat only true gurus are helpful. Otherwise guru means heavy –the heavy one will sink and take others down along with him.I am the humblest of the humble in worldly dealings and highestof the high in internal spiritual world. I would never succumb tothe role of a worldly guru; those who assume superiority overothers. Realize that when you become humble in the worldlylife, then in the spiritual life you become elevated. Otherwise, ifas a guru you do not have humility, you will drown yourself andothers along with you.Agam (mysterious, that which can never be understood)Gnan is gnan that has gone beyond everyone’s comprehension.Agam is that which one can never gain insight to. The Gnan Ihave given you is agam gnan. People have the knowledge ofnigam gnan (informative, worldly, relative knowledge) but not ofagam (the Self – realization which is beyond expression ofwords). But if the guru himself is filled with the wrong knowledge,if he mistakes the north for the south, what can be expected ofhim?Shushka gnan (wordy or verbal knowledge) is knowledge,which does not produce any results. It is like a tree that bearsflowers but no fruits. The current time is so strange; there isfruitless gnan everywhere you look.Worldly Interaction Of Akram Path And Kramic PathIn the Kramic, the traditional path to enlightenment, theAptavani-1279280Aptavani-1and large teeth, that people are terrified of him. You fool! Thereis no such creature called Jamraj. Death is Niyamraj (Naturallaw). Everything is run by natural laws. It is this Niyamraj thatruns everything. It is the one that dictates our life and death.Now would one have any fear if he had this correctunderstanding?Say if someone is told that the jungle he has to passthrough has no tigers or lions but they forget to tell him that inthe jungle there is one cage with a lion in it. As he is goingthrough the jungle, he hears a roar of the lion. He gets scaredand runs back from the jungle. Had he known that the lion wascaged he would not have been scared. The man fled becausehe had incomplete information. In the same way how can yousolve the problems of life with incomplete information?Gurukilli : A Key That Prevents The Master FromSinkingThe Lord has said that you should not become a guru,but if you do, then you should keep a master’s key (Gurukilli),support with you. Otherwise you will drown spiritually as yourintoxication of ego of being guru increases. The Lord has neverbeen anyone’s guru and here you find gurus everywhere. Thereare some that renounce the burden of a wife and children andburden themselves with two to five hundred disciples. Thesefools will drown themselves. Guru means heavy. The heavyones will themselves drown and drown others along with them.I am the humblest of the humble. I will never drown nor will Idrown others. I am as light as a flower. I swim and help othersswim across the ocean of worldly life, because I am the Savior.I am liberated and posses power to liberate many others. I amno one’s guru.The Lord has even said that if you become a guru, bearin mind that the position of a guru entails a great responsibilityand risk. If you do not maintain this awareness, you will bedoomed. If you want to be a guru, you must get a master’s keyfrom a Gnani Purush. Then only will you be able to help others.Otherwise it is a state that will intoxicate you heavily. The positionof a guru carries great responsibility.Once a few worldly gurus came to visit me and askedme, ‘Is it not necessary for people to have a guru?’ I told themthat only true gurus are helpful. Otherwise guru means heavy –the heavy one will sink and take others down along with him.I am the humblest of the humble in worldly dealings and highestof the high in internal spiritual world. I would never succumb tothe role of a worldly guru; those who assume superiority overothers. Realize that when you become humble in the worldlylife, then in the spiritual life you become elevated. Otherwise, ifas a guru you do not have humility, you will drown yourself andothers along with you.Agam (mysterious, that which can never be understood)Gnan is gnan that has gone beyond everyone’s comprehension.Agam is that which one can never gain insight to. The Gnan Ihave given you is agam gnan. People have the knowledge ofnigam gnan (informative, worldly, relative knowledge) but not ofagam (the Self – realization which is beyond expression ofwords). But if the guru himself is filled with the wrong knowledge,if he mistakes the north for the south, what can be expected ofhim?Shushka gnan (wordy or verbal knowledge) is knowledge,which does not produce any results. It is like a tree that bearsflowers but no fruits. The current time is so strange; there isfruitless gnan everywhere you look.Worldly Interaction Of Akram Path And Kramic PathIn the Kramic, the traditional path to enlightenment, theAptavani-1279280Aptavani-1distinctions that are made between vyavahar and nischaya (relativeand real) are correct. But in the Akarm path, it is only after theestablishment of the Real (nischaya), that real vyavahar (relativeworldly interactions) begins. This means that true worldlyinteraction (vyavahar) begins only after the attainment of theSelf (nischaya). This results in the Gnan prevailing for all in theirworldly interactions and worldly roles, regardless of whetherone is a monk or a householder. During all interactions with anyliving being, this enlightened worldview results in bliss and totalabsence of any clash or dis-adjustments. One’s worldly life(vyavahar) can be said to be exact only after one acquires theknowledge of the Self. This knowledge is such that in everycircumstance it renders complete equanimity.The Wandering : Four Life Form WorldsThe self, by its innate strength, pulls the pudgal (that whichis constantly forming and disintegrating) upwards spiritually. Whenthe burden of the pudgal increases, it takes the self downwardsto a state of existence in the world of a lower life form. In thiskaliyug – the current time cycle, the spiritual teachings shouldbe: ‘Brother, if you have intentions of stealing from others orhurting someone, erase those feelings in order to prevent a birthin the lower life forms. Wipe off all such animalistic and demonicthoughts within. If you do this, then the Self, by its inherentnature, will rise to a higher state of existence.’This will elevate you into the better life form. One keepson increasing the veils of ignorance over the self with bestial andevil thoughts the whole daylong. Perpetuating one’s own worldlyinterest is a bestial quality.It is possible to erase all this, just as you can erase anaudiotape. Any thought can be erased before it sprouts. That iswhat I tell you, ‘Just erase them.’‘Gnan is itself the Self ’. One becomes what one knows.If the knowledge is deluded and wrong (viprit gnan), the selftoo will be deluded. The self becomes the knowledge on whichone pins his faith. Once you have faith in something, you willacquire knowledge to help that faith. The coming together offaith and knowledge results in conduct (charitra). The selfbecomes like that too. Suppose a mother-in-law tells herdaughter-in-law that she is crazy, the daughter-in-law will notbe affected as long as she does not believe (have faith) in hermother-in-law’s statement. Even if the whole world were to callher mad, it would not have an effect on her. But if her beliefchanged and she started believing that something was wrongwith her mind, she would really turn mad. So never let anyoneor anything in the world influence or affect you.Whatever you empower and charge into the self, that willbecome your state. If you believe that you are Chandulal, youwill become Chandulal.Questioner : What is the difference between shraddha(faith) and Gnan (knowledge)?Dadashri : Shraddha, faith or darshan is undecided gnanand gnan is decided gnan or experiential knowledge. Forexample, we are sitting in a park in the dark and you hear asound. I tell you there is something there and you agree. Nowwhat type of gnan (knowledge) is this? It is shraddha or darshanor belief. Then we go and investigate the noise and find that itis a cow. That knowledge is now decided and it is called gnanor experience. There may be an error in shradha, faith, undecidedgnan or darshan. There is no error in decided gnan. Generalknowledge is darshan and exact and specific knowledge isgnan.How does a pickpocket acquire the art of picking pockets?First arises a belief within him that he can do so, then he acquiresAptavani-1281282Aptavani-1distinctions that are made between vyavahar and nischaya (relativeand real) are correct. But in the Akarm path, it is only after theestablishment of the Real (nischaya), that real vyavahar (relativeworldly interactions) begins. This means that true worldlyinteraction (vyavahar) begins only after the attainment of theSelf (nischaya). This results in the Gnan prevailing for all in theirworldly interactions and worldly roles, regardless of whetherone is a monk or a householder. During all interactions with anyliving being, this enlightened worldview results in bliss and totalabsence of any clash or dis-adjustments. One’s worldly life(vyavahar) can be said to be exact only after one acquires theknowledge of the Self. This knowledge is such that in everycircumstance it renders complete equanimity.The Wandering : Four Life Form WorldsThe self, by its innate strength, pulls the pudgal (that whichis constantly forming and disintegrating) upwards spiritually. Whenthe burden of the pudgal increases, it takes the self downwardsto a state of existence in the world of a lower life form. In thiskaliyug – the current time cycle, the spiritual teachings shouldbe: ‘Brother, if you have intentions of stealing from others orhurting someone, erase those feelings in order to prevent a birthin the lower life forms. Wipe off all such animalistic and demonicthoughts within. If you do this, then the Self, by its inherentnature, will rise to a higher state of existence.’This will elevate you into the better life form. One keepson increasing the veils of ignorance over the self with bestial andevil thoughts the whole daylong. Perpetuating one’s own worldlyinterest is a bestial quality.It is possible to erase all this, just as you can erase anaudiotape. Any thought can be erased before it sprouts. That iswhat I tell you, ‘Just erase them.’‘Gnan is itself the Self ’. One becomes what one knows.If the knowledge is deluded and wrong (viprit gnan), the selftoo will be deluded. The self becomes the knowledge on whichone pins his faith. Once you have faith in something, you willacquire knowledge to help that faith. The coming together offaith and knowledge results in conduct (charitra). The selfbecomes like that too. Suppose a mother-in-law tells herdaughter-in-law that she is crazy, the daughter-in-law will notbe affected as long as she does not believe (have faith) in hermother-in-law’s statement. Even if the whole world were to callher mad, it would not have an effect on her. But if her beliefchanged and she started believing that something was wrongwith her mind, she would really turn mad. So never let anyoneor anything in the world influence or affect you.Whatever you empower and charge into the self, that willbecome your state. If you believe that you are Chandulal, youwill become Chandulal.Questioner : What is the difference between shraddha(faith) and Gnan (knowledge)?Dadashri : Shraddha, faith or darshan is undecided gnanand gnan is decided gnan or experiential knowledge. Forexample, we are sitting in a park in the dark and you hear asound. I tell you there is something there and you agree. Nowwhat type of gnan (knowledge) is this? It is shraddha or darshanor belief. Then we go and investigate the noise and find that itis a cow. That knowledge is now decided and it is called gnanor experience. There may be an error in shradha, faith, undecidedgnan or darshan. There is no error in decided gnan. Generalknowledge is darshan and exact and specific knowledge isgnan.How does a pickpocket acquire the art of picking pockets?First arises a belief within him that he can do so, then he acquiresAptavani-1281282Aptavani-1the knowledge, gnan of how to do it and finally his conduct willautomatically follow.The fruit of gnan and darshan is conduct in action. Samyakmeans real, authentic and right. Samyk Gnan is right knowledge.Samyak darshan is right belief. The combination of these twogives rise to samyak charitra, right conduct (enlightened conduct).The one with enlightened conduct is God. Enlightened, realconduct hurts no one.Darshan, Gnan and charitra (conduct) are interdependent.The knowledge one acquires depends on the belief or darshan.The conduct then results naturally. The conduct does not requireany effort.Kriya, (effort, action) is not an attribute of the Self. TheSelf has its own attributes, but effort or action is not one ofthem. One experiences what one imagines. There is no pleasureor pain. Yet these are experienced according to what onebelieves to be the case. Such pain and pleasure is imaginaryfrom the perspective of the Self. The Self has infinite energiesand is unaffected by all states of the relative self. Yet it is thepresence of the Self that makes all things around us appear tobe full of action.The Lord says that every deed or action will be rewardedwith its fruit. The action or deed, which renders no consequencesor fruits, is the one that liberates. Absolute and utmost humilityleads one to liberation. Everything else is worldly entanglementand there is no end to it – wherever you go. This entanglementwill follow you to a cave in the Himalayas or will follow you ifyou decide to live a worldly life.People advocate religious rites (kriya), but of what goodare these rites in the absence of Gnan? Kriya is a maid of Gnan.The Lord has said for one to do Gnan kriya, ‘Gnan kriyabhyammoksha’. Liberation is attained through Gnan kriya.What is Gnan kriya? It means to know and remain as theSelf. ‘Darshan kriya’ is to see and Gnan kriya is to know.Seeing and knowing are verily the attributes of the Self. Exceptfor the Self, no other elements have the attributes of knowingand seeing (Gnan-Darshan); they have all other kriyas.Dadashri : Is the Self, separate from the body?Questioner : It is separate.Dadashri : So how does your body function; with whosehelp does it function? It is through the help of vyavasthit, scientificcircumstantial evidence that everything functions. Everything thatyou do is really done by vyavasthit shakti. The Self does not doanything; the Self is merely a knower and the observer of allthat is going on.The one who is the knower is not the doer and the onewho is the doer is not the Knower. The doer cannot be theknower and the knower cannot be the doer. The engine doesnot know anything about its working. The electric bulb giveslight without knowing it.Did this ship bring you to the shore from the middle of theocean or did you bring the ship ashore? It is the ship that bringsyou ashore but it does not know that. Thus the knower and thedoer are two separate streams, but when you allow both tobecome one, by saying that ‘I am the doer’ and ‘I am theknower’, you ruin everything. Both are entirely separate.The one who does, knows not; and the one who knows,does not, because evidences are needed in the process ofdoership, whereas no evidence is required in knowing. To doanything, we need the circumstances of evidence to cometogether, nothing can occur on its own accord.Aptavani-1283284Aptavani-1the knowledge, gnan of how to do it and finally his conduct willautomatically follow.The fruit of gnan and darshan is conduct in action. Samyakmeans real, authentic and right. Samyk Gnan is right knowledge.Samyak darshan is right belief. The combination of these twogives rise to samyak charitra, right conduct (enlightened conduct).The one with enlightened conduct is God. Enlightened, realconduct hurts no one.Darshan, Gnan and charitra (conduct) are interdependent.The knowledge one acquires depends on the belief or darshan.The conduct then results naturally. The conduct does not requireany effort.Kriya, (effort, action) is not an attribute of the Self. TheSelf has its own attributes, but effort or action is not one ofthem. One experiences what one imagines. There is no pleasureor pain. Yet these are experienced according to what onebelieves to be the case. Such pain and pleasure is imaginaryfrom the perspective of the Self. The Self has infinite energiesand is unaffected by all states of the relative self. Yet it is thepresence of the Self that makes all things around us appear tobe full of action.The Lord says that every deed or action will be rewardedwith its fruit. The action or deed, which renders no consequencesor fruits, is the one that liberates. Absolute and utmost humilityleads one to liberation. Everything else is worldly entanglementand there is no end to it – wherever you go. This entanglementwill follow you to a cave in the Himalayas or will follow you ifyou decide to live a worldly life.People advocate religious rites (kriya), but of what goodare these rites in the absence of Gnan? Kriya is a maid of Gnan.The Lord has said for one to do Gnan kriya, ‘Gnan kriyabhyammoksha’. Liberation is attained through Gnan kriya.What is Gnan kriya? It means to know and remain as theSelf. ‘Darshan kriya’ is to see and Gnan kriya is to know.Seeing and knowing are verily the attributes of the Self. Exceptfor the Self, no other elements have the attributes of knowingand seeing (Gnan-Darshan); they have all other kriyas.Dadashri : Is the Self, separate from the body?Questioner : It is separate.Dadashri : So how does your body function; with whosehelp does it function? It is through the help of vyavasthit, scientificcircumstantial evidence that everything functions. Everything thatyou do is really done by vyavasthit shakti. The Self does not doanything; the Self is merely a knower and the observer of allthat is going on.The one who is the knower is not the doer and the onewho is the doer is not the Knower. The doer cannot be theknower and the knower cannot be the doer. The engine doesnot know anything about its working. The electric bulb giveslight without knowing it.Did this ship bring you to the shore from the middle of theocean or did you bring the ship ashore? It is the ship that bringsyou ashore but it does not know that. Thus the knower and thedoer are two separate streams, but when you allow both tobecome one, by saying that ‘I am the doer’ and ‘I am theknower’, you ruin everything. Both are entirely separate.The one who does, knows not; and the one who knows,does not, because evidences are needed in the process ofdoership, whereas no evidence is required in knowing. To doanything, we need the circumstances of evidence to cometogether, nothing can occur on its own accord.Aptavani-1283284Aptavani-1Pragna : The Direct Light Of The Self And The ForceThat LiberatesPragna is a direct light of the Self. The intellect (buddhi)is an indirect light of the Self; it flows through the medium of theego.Pragna is a fraction of keval Gnan (Absolute knowledge).Pragna is a phase of Gnan. As the veils of ignorance over theSelf are lifted, there is an increasing light and an increase in thefractions of Keval Gnan. When this progression becomescomplete, it turns into three hundred and sixty degrees; itbecomes keval Gnan.If there was a thousand watts light bulb fitted in a claypot, and the opening of the pot was closed tight, would therebe any light around? No, you would not be able to see anylight. This is the case with the ignorant self (muddhatma). Withinyou there is infinite light of real Knowledge (Gnan prakash), butthe darkness prevails because of the layers of ignorance overthe Self. With the grace and special powers (siddhis) of theGnani Purush, if a tiny hole is made in the clay-pot covering thelight bulb, the whole room will be filled with the light comingthrough. That much covering is broken and that much directlight comes out. This light increases as more of the layers arelifted and as more holes are made in the pot. And when thewhole pot is destroyed and separated, detached away from thebulb, there will be a flood of full light everywhere!The direct ray of light of Gnan (the Self) is called pragna.When the Self becomes free from all the obscuring veils, itbecomes capable of illuminating the entire universe. In otherwords when it attains the power to Observe and Know all thegneyas, all that is to be known in the entire universe, that isKeval Gnan.The power of the Self that illuminates the entire universeis called Keval Gnan.What is the function of this Pragna? Pragna acts like awife who is devoted and dedicated to the goal of her husband.Pragna shows what is helpful to the self in the path to fullenlightenment and protects the self from that which is harmfulwith reference to liberation. Whatever external circumstancespresent, it is pragna that makes you deal with them, withequanimity, and then she returns to the Self (shukla dhyan). Soit carries out all external, as well as internal functions, just likean interim government. This work continues until theestablishment of a fully independent government.What is pragna? It is that which prevents the non-self tobecome one with the Self and conversely it will not let theawakened Self slip into the non-self. It is an integral part of theSelf and it ceaselessly works towards the liberation of the self.A person’s conduct continues to change with progressiveexpression of pragna. As one’s conduct changes, one feels one’sburden become lighter. Pragna keeps the two departments, home-the Self and foreign-the non-self, separate. That is Atmacharitra,the conduct of the enlightened Self. This conduct keeps thenon-self and the Self, separate.When I give Gnan, there is a direct experience of theSelf. This direct experience is associated with the establishmentof the right belief, which is permanent. This is parmaarth samkit(the right belief of the Self). That is why pragna-bhaav ariseswithin you. Everything in this world is unsteady, temporary andtransitory, whereas the pragna-bhaav is the part that remainsstill and steady. With pragna you do not have to ‘climb steps’(effort required as in the traditional kramic path to liberation).Pragna takes you up on an elevator all the way to ultimateliberation. All the bhaavs - deep inner intent and feelings - areAptavani-1285286Aptavani-1Pragna : The Direct Light Of The Self And The ForceThat LiberatesPragna is a direct light of the Self. The intellect (buddhi)is an indirect light of the Self; it flows through the medium of theego.Pragna is a fraction of keval Gnan (Absolute knowledge).Pragna is a phase of Gnan. As the veils of ignorance over theSelf are lifted, there is an increasing light and an increase in thefractions of Keval Gnan. When this progression becomescomplete, it turns into three hundred and sixty degrees; itbecomes keval Gnan.If there was a thousand watts light bulb fitted in a claypot, and the opening of the pot was closed tight, would therebe any light around? No, you would not be able to see anylight. This is the case with the ignorant self (muddhatma). Withinyou there is infinite light of real Knowledge (Gnan prakash), butthe darkness prevails because of the layers of ignorance overthe Self. With the grace and special powers (siddhis) of theGnani Purush, if a tiny hole is made in the clay-pot covering thelight bulb, the whole room will be filled with the light comingthrough. That much covering is broken and that much directlight comes out. This light increases as more of the layers arelifted and as more holes are made in the pot. And when thewhole pot is destroyed and separated, detached away from thebulb, there will be a flood of full light everywhere!The direct ray of light of Gnan (the Self) is called pragna.When the Self becomes free from all the obscuring veils, itbecomes capable of illuminating the entire universe. In otherwords when it attains the power to Observe and Know all thegneyas, all that is to be known in the entire universe, that isKeval Gnan.The power of the Self that illuminates the entire universeis called Keval Gnan.What is the function of this Pragna? Pragna acts like awife who is devoted and dedicated to the goal of her husband.Pragna shows what is helpful to the self in the path to fullenlightenment and protects the self from that which is harmfulwith reference to liberation. Whatever external circumstancespresent, it is pragna that makes you deal with them, withequanimity, and then she returns to the Self (shukla dhyan). Soit carries out all external, as well as internal functions, just likean interim government. This work continues until theestablishment of a fully independent government.What is pragna? It is that which prevents the non-self tobecome one with the Self and conversely it will not let theawakened Self slip into the non-self. It is an integral part of theSelf and it ceaselessly works towards the liberation of the self.A person’s conduct continues to change with progressiveexpression of pragna. As one’s conduct changes, one feels one’sburden become lighter. Pragna keeps the two departments, home-the Self and foreign-the non-self, separate. That is Atmacharitra,the conduct of the enlightened Self. This conduct keeps thenon-self and the Self, separate.When I give Gnan, there is a direct experience of theSelf. This direct experience is associated with the establishmentof the right belief, which is permanent. This is parmaarth samkit(the right belief of the Self). That is why pragna-bhaav ariseswithin you. Everything in this world is unsteady, temporary andtransitory, whereas the pragna-bhaav is the part that remainsstill and steady. With pragna you do not have to ‘climb steps’(effort required as in the traditional kramic path to liberation).Pragna takes you up on an elevator all the way to ultimateliberation. All the bhaavs - deep inner intent and feelings - areAptavani-1285286Aptavani-1subject to change, not pragna bhaav. This pragna bhaav isbeyond all dualities and yet it is not entirely an intrinsic componentof the Self. Pragnabhaav cannot be called Atmabhaav.Pragnabhaav falls into the part, which is steady and unchangingand yet it is time sensitive and has an end. The role of pragnaends upon the attainment of Keval Gnan and that is why itcannot be called Atmabhaav - bhaav of the Self. If you call itan Atmabhaav, then it becomes an inseparable property of theSelf. Even the liberated Souls in the Siddha Kshetra (locationwhere all liberated souls reside), would then have pragna. Butthat is not so. There is no use for pragna in the Siddha Kshetra.Upon establishment of the fully independent government, therole of the interim government automatically ceases. So is thecase with pragna.When I give you the Knowledge of your Self, I kindlepragna within you, which will then alert you from moment tomoment. King Bharat had to employ servants around the clockto remind him to maintain awareness of his enlightened state. Inany critical circumstance, my Gnan will present in front of you;my words will present in front of you and I will be before youand you will come into awareness. My Akram Gnan is such thatit will constantly keep you aware and vigilant. It is worth takingadvantage of. If once this connection is made, there will be aneverlasting solution.There are two parts in this body : one that is chanchal(transitory; unsteady) and the achanchal (eternal; steady). Theeternal within is the Self. If you were to apply the same intensityof meticulousness and surety that you do in your business, in thematters of the Self, your work would be done. One can godeep into all other subjects, but how can one delve deeply intothis, the Self? This is called nirvishaya Gnan (subject-lessKnowledge). It is untainted, pure and immutable.A goldsmith would not get upset with you even if youwere to take to him an item of inferior gold content. All helooks at is the gold itself. People have a habit of getting angrybut not the goldsmith, he simply sees the gold within. Even adoctor gets upset with his patients asking, ‘Why have you ruinedyour health?’ The goldsmith does not do that. The Gnani, justlike the goldsmith, will look at the Self only. He does not lookat the external qualities of the relative self. The phases of goldchanges, from impure, to a powder, to a liquid, to pure again,but the gold remains as gold. Just as the focus of the goldsmithremains only in the gold, if your focus were to remain only onthe Self within everyone, your work will be done. The goldsmithfocuses only on the gold, no matter how much impurity surroundsit. Similarly the Gnani’s focus is only on the Chetan, the Selfwithin.A person may read and assimilate the scriptures, but afterall it is only through his own understanding. People haveinterpreted the scriptures in their own way. The principle of‘jiva-ajiva’ (animate-inanimate, Self and non-self) elements istrue, but they have understood it according to their owninterpretation. Who knows what they understand to be the non-self? How can they understand what the Self is when they donot even understand what the non-Self is? For many, evenwhen the Lord was around, there was still no awareness of theSelf. The awareness was there but it was merely through wordsand such awareness is prone to be forgotten or missed altogether.There is a tremendous difference in the Self, described in words,and the Self experienced. One may forget description written inwords, but one would never forget that which has been seen orexperienced. My Mahatmas are in the bliss of the experience ofthe pure Self.Had there not been a circumstance (sanyoga), there wouldnot have been the ‘samsaran marg’ (path of one’s spiritualAptavani-1287288Aptavani-1subject to change, not pragna bhaav. This pragna bhaav isbeyond all dualities and yet it is not entirely an intrinsic componentof the Self. Pragnabhaav cannot be called Atmabhaav.Pragnabhaav falls into the part, which is steady and unchangingand yet it is time sensitive and has an end. The role of pragnaends upon the attainment of Keval Gnan and that is why itcannot be called Atmabhaav - bhaav of the Self. If you call itan Atmabhaav, then it becomes an inseparable property of theSelf. Even the liberated Souls in the Siddha Kshetra (locationwhere all liberated souls reside), would then have pragna. Butthat is not so. There is no use for pragna in the Siddha Kshetra.Upon establishment of the fully independent government, therole of the interim government automatically ceases. So is thecase with pragna.When I give you the Knowledge of your Self, I kindlepragna within you, which will then alert you from moment tomoment. King Bharat had to employ servants around the clockto remind him to maintain awareness of his enlightened state. Inany critical circumstance, my Gnan will present in front of you;my words will present in front of you and I will be before youand you will come into awareness. My Akram Gnan is such thatit will constantly keep you aware and vigilant. It is worth takingadvantage of. If once this connection is made, there will be aneverlasting solution.There are two parts in this body : one that is chanchal(transitory; unsteady) and the achanchal (eternal; steady). Theeternal within is the Self. If you were to apply the same intensityof meticulousness and surety that you do in your business, in thematters of the Self, your work would be done. One can godeep into all other subjects, but how can one delve deeply intothis, the Self? This is called nirvishaya Gnan (subject-lessKnowledge). It is untainted, pure and immutable.A goldsmith would not get upset with you even if youwere to take to him an item of inferior gold content. All helooks at is the gold itself. People have a habit of getting angrybut not the goldsmith, he simply sees the gold within. Even adoctor gets upset with his patients asking, ‘Why have you ruinedyour health?’ The goldsmith does not do that. The Gnani, justlike the goldsmith, will look at the Self only. He does not lookat the external qualities of the relative self. The phases of goldchanges, from impure, to a powder, to a liquid, to pure again,but the gold remains as gold. Just as the focus of the goldsmithremains only in the gold, if your focus were to remain only onthe Self within everyone, your work will be done. The goldsmithfocuses only on the gold, no matter how much impurity surroundsit. Similarly the Gnani’s focus is only on the Chetan, the Selfwithin.A person may read and assimilate the scriptures, but afterall it is only through his own understanding. People haveinterpreted the scriptures in their own way. The principle of‘jiva-ajiva’ (animate-inanimate, Self and non-self) elements istrue, but they have understood it according to their owninterpretation. Who knows what they understand to be the non-self? How can they understand what the Self is when they donot even understand what the non-Self is? For many, evenwhen the Lord was around, there was still no awareness of theSelf. The awareness was there but it was merely through wordsand such awareness is prone to be forgotten or missed altogether.There is a tremendous difference in the Self, described in words,and the Self experienced. One may forget description written inwords, but one would never forget that which has been seen orexperienced. My Mahatmas are in the bliss of the experience ofthe pure Self.Had there not been a circumstance (sanyoga), there wouldnot have been the ‘samsaran marg’ (path of one’s spiritualAptavani-1287288Aptavani-1evolution). Circumstance caused a change in one’s belief, whichgave rise to one’s worldly life form. And that is why the infiniteenergies within have become obscured. The Self can only beliberated if that being disintegrates in just the way it arose. TheGnani Purush is the end of the samsaran marg. He is the lastnimit of liberation.‘To Him bow we in eternal reverence,Who kindled in us Pure Light;Every Soul, now a temple where ‘bells’ chime,Jai Sachchidanand’Jai Sat-Chit-AnandAptavani-1289GlossaryAadhiMental sufferingAagamJain ScripturesAarta dhyanaPreoccupation with worries about onesselfAasaktiAttachment; infatuationAavegaEmotionAbhed buddhiIntellect without divisionsAbuddhaWithout intellectAchanchalEternal; steadyAcharyasSpiritual preceptorsAchetanInanimate; matter; non-SelfAdeethha TapaInvisible penanceAdharmaDisagreeable circumstances (the fruit oreffect of demerit karma), non-religious,that which is against the benefit of livingbeings, that which is not in its true nature.AgamMysterious, that which can never beunderstood, the Self.AgiyarasObservance of the eleventh day of themoon cycle for fastingAgnaniA non Self-realized; ignorant of reality.AhamkarEgo, sense of doershipAhimsaNon-violenceAjampoInvisible angerAkramNon-sequence events,Akram VignanDadashri’s stepless path to liberation; Hisscience of AbsolutismAnant gnanInfinite knowledgeAntahkaranInner instrument comprising of mind,intellect, chit and egoAntaratmaInner Self; The Self Awakened in AkramVignan in progress towards fullevolution). Circumstance caused a change in one’s belief, whichgave rise to one’s worldly life form. And that is why the infiniteenergies within have become obscured. The Self can only beliberated if that being disintegrates in just the way it arose. TheGnani Purush is the end of the samsaran marg. He is the lastnimit of liberation.‘To Him bow we in eternal reverence,Who kindled in us Pure Light;Every Soul, now a temple where ‘bells’ chime,Jai Sachchidanand’Jai Sat-Chit-AnandAptavani-1289GlossaryAadhiMental sufferingAagamJain ScripturesAarta dhyanaPreoccupation with worries about onesselfAasaktiAttachment; infatuationAavegaEmotionAbhed buddhiIntellect without divisionsAbuddhaWithout intellectAchanchalEternal; steadyAcharyasSpiritual preceptorsAchetanInanimate; matter; non-SelfAdeethha TapaInvisible penanceAdharmaDisagreeable circumstances (the fruit oreffect of demerit karma), non-religious,that which is against the benefit of livingbeings, that which is not in its true nature.AgamMysterious, that which can never beunderstood, the Self.AgiyarasObservance of the eleventh day of themoon cycle for fastingAgnaniA non Self-realized; ignorant of reality.AhamkarEgo, sense of doershipAhimsaNon-violenceAjampoInvisible angerAkramNon-sequence events,Akram VignanDadashri’s stepless path to liberation; Hisscience of AbsolutismAnant gnanInfinite knowledgeAntahkaranInner instrument comprising of mind,intellect, chit and egoAntaratmaInner Self; The Self Awakened in AkramVignan in progress towards fullenlightenment.ApdhyanaPerverted meditation; thinking ill of othersApraptaOf the ones that are not present, of thatwhich has not been attained.AptapurushAbsolutely trustworthy personArambhaBeginning of any actionArta-dhyanaRepressive or self-tormenting contemplationor suffering; preoccupation with worriesabout one’s selfAshhudha upyogImpure awarenessAshoobhaInauspiciousAshuddhaImpureAshuddha upayogImpure useAtiindriya sookhHappiness beyond the senses - bliss of theSelfAtkanSpiritual roadblockAtmabhaavBhaav of the Self, all that is exclusively forthe Self.AtmadharmaReligion of the Soul, the Self.Atma-yogaUnion with the SelfAtmayogeshwarThe Absolute One, The One who hasattained the Self completely.AtmayogeshwarsThose who have known the SoulAtmayogiUnited with the SelfAvaranVeil of ignorance over the SelfAvasthitAbsorbed in the effects of an event orsituation, external or internal.Avyavahar rashiUnnamed stateAyogaExercise of the non-SelfBaahyakaranThe external organBaniyaUsually a Jain businessmanBhaav munIntent or causal mindBhaavkarmaThat which is caused through deep innerintent, usually unknown to the owner andthis is the seed of karma effect in next life.BhagwatGodlyBhagyaLuckBhagyavanLuckyBhed buddhiIntellect that dividesBrahmacharyaCelibacyBrahminThe priests, scholars and thinkersBuddhiIntellect; knowledge through the mediumof the egoBuddhiyogaIntellectual yogaChamatkarMiracleChanchalTransitory; unsteadyChandulalThe relative selfCharam shariraThe ultimate bodyCharitra mohaEffect of past life’s illusion which createdthis life’s illusionary attachment andbondage.CharmachakshuPhysical eyesChetanAnimate; Soul; pure consciousness; the SelfChintvanPersistent focus and rumination on a topic,usually visualized in chit.ChitChit is the third component of Antahkaran;Knowledge+Vision=chit; that which seespreviously registered scenes.ChitvrutisTendencies of the chitDarshanIntuitive perception.Darshan kriyaTo seeDarshan mohaWrong perception due to wrong beliefleading to worldly attachment and newkarma. The operation of illusion.DehadhyasThe belief that ‘I am this body’;enlightenment.ApdhyanaPerverted meditation; thinking ill of othersApraptaOf the ones that are not present, of thatwhich has not been attained.AptapurushAbsolutely trustworthy personArambhaBeginning of any actionArta-dhyanaRepressive or self-tormenting contemplationor suffering; preoccupation with worriesabout one’s selfAshhudha upyogImpure awarenessAshoobhaInauspiciousAshuddhaImpureAshuddha upayogImpure useAtiindriya sookhHappiness beyond the senses - bliss of theSelfAtkanSpiritual roadblockAtmabhaavBhaav of the Self, all that is exclusively forthe Self.AtmadharmaReligion of the Soul, the Self.Atma-yogaUnion with the SelfAtmayogeshwarThe Absolute One, The One who hasattained the Self completely.AtmayogeshwarsThose who have known the SoulAtmayogiUnited with the SelfAvaranVeil of ignorance over the SelfAvasthitAbsorbed in the effects of an event orsituation, external or internal.Avyavahar rashiUnnamed stateAyogaExercise of the non-SelfBaahyakaranThe external organBaniyaUsually a Jain businessmanBhaav munIntent or causal mindBhaavkarmaThat which is caused through deep innerintent, usually unknown to the owner andthis is the seed of karma effect in next life.BhagwatGodlyBhagyaLuckBhagyavanLuckyBhed buddhiIntellect that dividesBrahmacharyaCelibacyBrahminThe priests, scholars and thinkersBuddhiIntellect; knowledge through the mediumof the egoBuddhiyogaIntellectual yogaChamatkarMiracleChanchalTransitory; unsteadyChandulalThe relative selfCharam shariraThe ultimate bodyCharitra mohaEffect of past life’s illusion which createdthis life’s illusionary attachment andbondage.CharmachakshuPhysical eyesChetanAnimate; Soul; pure consciousness; the SelfChintvanPersistent focus and rumination on a topic,usually visualized in chit.ChitChit is the third component of Antahkaran;Knowledge+Vision=chit; that which seespreviously registered scenes.ChitvrutisTendencies of the chitDarshanIntuitive perception.Darshan kriyaTo seeDarshan mohaWrong perception due to wrong beliefleading to worldly attachment and newkarma. The operation of illusion.DehadhyasThe belief that ‘I am this body’;Superimposition of the self over the non-self.DehayogaPhysical yoga, the joining into that which isthe body, becoming the body, the non-self.DerasarJain templeDevalokaA cosmic plane where celestial beings liveDevgatiThe path to celestial life form.DharmaReligion; One’s dutyDharma-dhyanaVirtuous contemplation, absence of adversemeditative states.DhotiWhite cotton or linen garment wrappedaround the waist and tucked in; A traditionalform of male clothing wornby HindusDhyanaMeditation; contemplationDhyataMeditator,DhyeyaThe object, the goalDivyachakshuDivine eyes through which one sees boththe Real and the relative as separate, theenlightened vision.DrashtaSeerDrashti-raagFanatic attachment to a viewpoint;Exclusive attachment and insistence to anyone particular viewpoint; monomaniaDravyaExternal physical substanceDravyamunGross mind; effective mindDurdhyanaEvil meditationDvaitaDual state, dualityDweshAbhorrenceGalanOutput; dischargeGarvaSubtle prideGnanAbsolute knowledge; knowledge without theego, knowledge of the Self.Gnan kriyaThe inner activity of the awakened Selftowards full enlightenmentGnan prakashThe radiance of the light of the SelfGnan VidhiDadashri’s forty eight minute scientificprocess of separating the Self and the non-selfGnan-darshanKnowledge-perceptionGnanisThe Enlightened ones, Self-realized beingsGnata KnowerGneyaObject to be knownGoon dharmaInnate natureGrahanAcquiring or accumulationGunasInherent qualitiesIndriya sookhHappiness related to the sensesJamraj (Yamraj)God of deathJitendriya JinaThe One who has conquered all sensesJivaEmbodied soul; That which lives and diesJiva-ajivaAnimate-inanimate, Self and non-SelfKachchhisPeople of a special sect from westernGujaratKadhapoVisible angerKaliyugCurrent fifth era of the six part half timecycle characterized by a progressive declinein spiritual knowledge and consequently thedegeneration of human civilization.KalpanaImaginationKaphaMucous, one of the triads of Ayurvediccomponents.KarmaThe cycle of cause and effect life afterlife.KashayaPassions (anger, greed, pride, lust, illusion)that obstruct right knowledge andbehavior;these create karma and involvement in theSuperimposition of the self over the non-self.DehayogaPhysical yoga, the joining into that which isthe body, becoming the body, the non-self.DerasarJain templeDevalokaA cosmic plane where celestial beings liveDevgatiThe path to celestial life form.DharmaReligion; One’s dutyDharma-dhyanaVirtuous contemplation, absence of adversemeditative states.DhotiWhite cotton or linen garment wrappedaround the waist and tucked in; A traditionalform of male clothing wornby HindusDhyanaMeditation; contemplationDhyataMeditator,DhyeyaThe object, the goalDivyachakshuDivine eyes through which one sees boththe Real and the relative as separate, theenlightened vision.DrashtaSeerDrashti-raagFanatic attachment to a viewpoint;Exclusive attachment and insistence to anyone particular viewpoint; monomaniaDravyaExternal physical substanceDravyamunGross mind; effective mindDurdhyanaEvil meditationDvaitaDual state, dualityDweshAbhorrenceGalanOutput; dischargeGarvaSubtle prideGnanAbsolute knowledge; knowledge without theego, knowledge of the Self.Gnan kriyaThe inner activity of the awakened Selftowards full enlightenmentGnan prakashThe radiance of the light of the SelfGnan VidhiDadashri’s forty eight minute scientificprocess of separating the Self and the non-selfGnan-darshanKnowledge-perceptionGnanisThe Enlightened ones, Self-realized beingsGnata KnowerGneyaObject to be knownGoon dharmaInnate natureGrahanAcquiring or accumulationGunasInherent qualitiesIndriya sookhHappiness related to the sensesJamraj (Yamraj)God of deathJitendriya JinaThe One who has conquered all sensesJivaEmbodied soul; That which lives and diesJiva-ajivaAnimate-inanimate, Self and non-SelfKachchhisPeople of a special sect from westernGujaratKadhapoVisible angerKaliyugCurrent fifth era of the six part half timecycle characterized by a progressive declinein spiritual knowledge and consequently thedegeneration of human civilization.KalpanaImaginationKaphaMucous, one of the triads of Ayurvediccomponents.KarmaThe cycle of cause and effect life afterlife.KashayaPassions (anger, greed, pride, lust, illusion)that obstruct right knowledge andbehavior;these create karma and involvement in thecalled the worldly self.Mithyatva mohaWrong moha; illusionary infatuation orwrong beliefMohaInfatuation; attachment; illusion.MohandhaBlinded by infatuation, blinded by lust.MoharrumThe first month of the Moslem yearMokshaLiberationMooah!The one who is dying, special exclamationused by Dadashri to shake up the listener.MuddhatmaIgnorant selfMuniSaint; SadhuNigam gnanInformative, worldly, relative knowledgeNilkanthaRefers to the blue neck of Lord Shiva whocould swallow all the poisons of the world;the one who does not retaliate under anycircumstance.NimitInstrument; the person instrumental in theprocess of an unfolding karmaNirindriya sookhHappiness not related to the senses.NirvanaLiberation; ultimate state of liberation fromthe round of rebirthsNirvikalp samadhiOne where the body and the Self remaincompletely separate, they never becomeone under any circumstances. Theabsolutely unaffected state.NirvikalpiEgo less, the Self.Nirvishaya GnanSubject-less KnowledgeNirvishayee vishayThe subject of the Self.NirvishayiNot in any subject; untainted or untouchedby any object of sense-pleasure.NischayaReal; pure alertness on the path toliberation; determinationNishchetan chetanLifeless life; inanimate consciousness; theworld life after life.KevalAbsoluteKeval GnanComplete knowledge, Absolute and perfectKnowledge; absolute OmniscientKnowledge; Omniscience, AbsolutismKevli BhagwanFully enlightened OneKoosungCompany of anything or anyone otherthanthe Self; wrong worldly company.KramSequence of eventsKriyaEffort, action; religious ritesKshatriyaThe warrior classLaukik DharmaWorldly or relative religionLaxmiMoneyMaanPrideMaayaIllusion; ignorance of the SelfMahadevjiLord Shiva, the enlightened One.MaharajaHigh ranking asceticMahatmasThose who have acquired Gnan of the SelfManaMindManahparyavagnanKnowledge of thoughts and feelings ofothers; to know the mind in all its phases.ManoyogaMental yoga; to become joined with themind.MatandhaBlindness for other viewpoints, fixed inone’s own viewpoint.Mishra chetanNeither sentient nor insentient, but a mixtureof the two; pratishthit soul; the mixed self,the worldly self who is unaware of theSelfMishra mohaCo-existence of a desire for Self-Knowledge as well as a desire for thetemporary objects of the world.MishrachetanComplex of mind, speech, body and ego,called the worldly self.Mithyatva mohaWrong moha; illusionary infatuation orwrong beliefMohaInfatuation; attachment; illusion.MohandhaBlinded by infatuation, blinded by lust.MoharrumThe first month of the Moslem yearMokshaLiberationMooah!The one who is dying, special exclamationused by Dadashri to shake up the listener.MuddhatmaIgnorant selfMuniSaint; SadhuNigam gnanInformative, worldly, relative knowledgeNilkanthaRefers to the blue neck of Lord Shiva whocould swallow all the poisons of the world;the one who does not retaliate under anycircumstance.NimitInstrument; the person instrumental in theprocess of an unfolding karmaNirindriya sookhHappiness not related to the senses.NirvanaLiberation; ultimate state of liberation fromthe round of rebirthsNirvikalp samadhiOne where the body and the Self remaincompletely separate, they never becomeone under any circumstances. Theabsolutely unaffected state.NirvikalpiEgo less, the Self.Nirvishaya GnanSubject-less KnowledgeNirvishayee vishayThe subject of the Self.NirvishayiNot in any subject; untainted or untouchedby any object of sense-pleasure.NischayaReal; pure alertness on the path toliberation; determinationNishchetan chetanLifeless life; inanimate consciousness; theworld life after life.KevalAbsoluteKeval GnanComplete knowledge, Absolute and perfectKnowledge; absolute OmniscientKnowledge; Omniscience, AbsolutismKevli BhagwanFully enlightened OneKoosungCompany of anything or anyone otherthanthe Self; wrong worldly company.KramSequence of eventsKriyaEffort, action; religious ritesKshatriyaThe warrior classLaukik DharmaWorldly or relative religionLaxmiMoneyMaanPrideMaayaIllusion; ignorance of the SelfMahadevjiLord Shiva, the enlightened One.MaharajaHigh ranking asceticMahatmasThose who have acquired Gnan of the SelfManaMindManahparyavagnanKnowledge of thoughts and feelings ofothers; to know the mind in all its phases.ManoyogaMental yoga; to become joined with themind.MatandhaBlindness for other viewpoints, fixed inone’s own viewpoint.Mishra chetanNeither sentient nor insentient, but a mixtureof the two; pratishthit soul; the mixed self,the worldly self who is unaware of theSelfMishra mohaCo-existence of a desire for Self-Knowledge as well as a desire for thetemporary objects of the world.MishrachetanComplex of mind, speech, body and ego,thoughts, speech and acts.NiyamrajNatural lawPaapDemerit karmaPaapanubandhi paap Current demerit karma that creates newdemerit karma.Paapanubandhi punya Current merit karma that creates newdemerit karma.PappadumLentil waferPar-dharmaDharma of another; in the context of theatma, the dharmas of the material world;the nature of the non-Self.Parmaarth samkitThe right belief of the SelfParmanooSubatomic particleParmatmaAbsolute SelfPar-samayaConstantly absorbed in circumstances thatinvolve everything but the SelfParsattaOutside one’s authority.ParyayaPhasesPitaBilious; bile; one of the three Ayurvediccomponents of the non-Self.PragnaThe direct light of the SelfPragna bhaavThat which leads towards the Self.PrakrutThe non-SelfPrakrutiNature, inherent characteristic traits;complex of thoughts, speech and actswhich is a result karma of past life; innatenature; the non-Self; relative selfPramadSheer spiritual apathy; lazinessPranayamYoga of breathing techniques.PraptaNow; present in front of youPrarabdhaDestiny; All the unfolding karma effects inthis life; That which happens to a humanbeing in this life;PratikramanReversal from aggression in thoughts,speech and acts after recall, true innerremorseful confession and a determinationnot to repeat the aggression.PratishthaCeremonious installation of an idol; To instillthe life force into the non-Self.Pratishthit atmaRelative or charged self. This relative selfexists because one thinks, ‘I am Chandulal.’The belief is in the wrong place. This createsnew worlds for Chandulal.PratyakhyanSincere pledge of never slipping into themistake againPrematmaEmbodiment of lovePudgalComplex of intake and output; bodycomplexPudgalicIntegrating and disintegrating through intakeand outputPunyaMerit karmasPunyanubandhi paap Current demerit karma causing newmeritkarma.Punyanubandhi punya Current merit karma causing new meritkarma.PuranIntakePuran-galanInput-outputPurushSelf-realizedPurusharthIndependent effort; Self-oriented efforts;That effort which does not require anyexternal evidences.RaagAttachment; a situation arising out ofignorance of the SelfRaina treeUnique to certain parts of India, this treeyields small yellow fruits and very knottyhard wood.thoughts, speech and acts.NiyamrajNatural lawPaapDemerit karmaPaapanubandhi paap Current demerit karma that creates newdemerit karma.Paapanubandhi punya Current merit karma that creates newdemerit karma.PappadumLentil waferPar-dharmaDharma of another; in the context of theatma, the dharmas of the material world;the nature of the non-Self.Parmaarth samkitThe right belief of the SelfParmanooSubatomic particleParmatmaAbsolute SelfPar-samayaConstantly absorbed in circumstances thatinvolve everything but the SelfParsattaOutside one’s authority.ParyayaPhasesPitaBilious; bile; one of the three Ayurvediccomponents of the non-Self.PragnaThe direct light of the SelfPragna bhaavThat which leads towards the Self.PrakrutThe non-SelfPrakrutiNature, inherent characteristic traits;complex of thoughts, speech and actswhich is a result karma of past life; innatenature; the non-Self; relative selfPramadSheer spiritual apathy; lazinessPranayamYoga of breathing techniques.PraptaNow; present in front of youPrarabdhaDestiny; All the unfolding karma effects inthis life; That which happens to a humanbeing in this life;PratikramanReversal from aggression in thoughts,speech and acts after recall, true innerremorseful confession and a determinationnot to repeat the aggression.PratishthaCeremonious installation of an idol; To instillthe life force into the non-Self.Pratishthit atmaRelative or charged self. This relative selfexists because one thinks, ‘I am Chandulal.’The belief is in the wrong place. This createsnew worlds for Chandulal.PratyakhyanSincere pledge of never slipping into themistake againPrematmaEmbodiment of lovePudgalComplex of intake and output; bodycomplexPudgalicIntegrating and disintegrating through intakeand outputPunyaMerit karmasPunyanubandhi paap Current demerit karma causing newmeritkarma.Punyanubandhi punya Current merit karma causing new meritkarma.PuranIntakePuran-galanInput-outputPurushSelf-realizedPurusharthIndependent effort; Self-oriented efforts;That effort which does not require anyexternal evidences.RaagAttachment; a situation arising out ofignorance of the SelfRaina treeUnique to certain parts of India, this treeyields small yellow fruits and very knottyhard wood.RajasThat which incites passion and activity.RaudraInflicting pain on others; oppressive.Raudra-dhyanaEvil contemplation of perverse pleasure ofcausing injury to others – wrathfulmeditation; adverse negative meditation;anger, abuse and irritation towards fellowbeings; that inner state of the self whichhurts the self and others around.SadhuOne who has renunciated the world; onewho perseveres to attain the state of theSelf SadhvisFemale asceticsSajeevan murtiLiving Gnani;The fully enlightened One in life.SamadhiOne-ness with Pure Self, undisturbed byany non-Self reactions;Absence of adhi, vyadhi and upadhi inlife.SamarambhaInvolvement of the decision making processand vocalization of the decision;Implementing the idea into actionSamayThe minutest fraction of timeSamayikMeditation; introspective meditation; to seewithin after Self-realization.SambhaavWithout attachment or abhorrence;equanimitySamkitRight belief, ‘ I am pure Soul; Blessed stateof the Self-realization and equanimitySamkit mohaAn ardent desire to know the Self alongwith a conviction that it is the only reality.SamrambhaThe first initiation, start of an act, thoughtSamsaranEvolutionarySamsaran margThe path of spiritual evolution of allembodied living entitiesSamyak buddhiRight intellect; enlightened intellectSamyak charitraRight conduct; enlightened conductSamyak mohaRight moha, awareness in illusion.SanchaarMotion in balanceSankalp‘My-ness’.SansarThe worldly life; the cycle of birth anddeath; empirical existenceSansarisOrdinary worldly men; the one who livesand dies relating to worldly affairsSanyogaCircumstanceSaraswatiGoddess of speechSaravaniCeremony performed on the thirteenth dayafter a person’s deathSareesTraditional colorful dress of Indian womenSatThe Eternal; The final truth.Sat PurushGnani; Self realized Being.SatsangThe company of the Self; meeting of peopleseeking the Self.SatyugThe first of the four Ages characterizedby virtue, wisdom, happiness and moralitySelfAtma ; chetan - animateShaivaitesThose who follow the religion of Lord ShivaShoobhaAuspiciousShoobha upayogAuspicious useShookshmaSubtleShookshmatamSubtlestShookshmatarSubtlerShraddhaFaithShubha charitraGood conductShuddhaThe pureShuddha upayogPure awareness of the SelfShuddhatmaSoul; Pure SelfShudraThe working classRajasThat which incites passion and activity.RaudraInflicting pain on others; oppressive.Raudra-dhyanaEvil contemplation of perverse pleasure ofcausing injury to others – wrathfulmeditation; adverse negative meditation;anger, abuse and irritation towards fellowbeings; that inner state of the self whichhurts the self and others around.SadhuOne who has renunciated the world; onewho perseveres to attain the state of theSelf SadhvisFemale asceticsSajeevan murtiLiving Gnani;The fully enlightened One in life.SamadhiOne-ness with Pure Self, undisturbed byany non-Self reactions;Absence of adhi, vyadhi and upadhi inlife.SamarambhaInvolvement of the decision making processand vocalization of the decision;Implementing the idea into actionSamayThe minutest fraction of timeSamayikMeditation; introspective meditation; to seewithin after Self-realization.SambhaavWithout attachment or abhorrence;equanimitySamkitRight belief, ‘ I am pure Soul; Blessed stateof the Self-realization and equanimitySamkit mohaAn ardent desire to know the Self alongwith a conviction that it is the only reality.SamrambhaThe first initiation, start of an act, thoughtSamsaranEvolutionarySamsaran margThe path of spiritual evolution of allembodied living entitiesSamyak buddhiRight intellect; enlightened intellectSamyak charitraRight conduct; enlightened conductSamyak mohaRight moha, awareness in illusion.SanchaarMotion in balanceSankalp‘My-ness’.SansarThe worldly life; the cycle of birth anddeath; empirical existenceSansarisOrdinary worldly men; the one who livesand dies relating to worldly affairsSanyogaCircumstanceSaraswatiGoddess of speechSaravaniCeremony performed on the thirteenth dayafter a person’s deathSareesTraditional colorful dress of Indian womenSatThe Eternal; The final truth.Sat PurushGnani; Self realized Being.SatsangThe company of the Self; meeting of peopleseeking the Self.SatyugThe first of the four Ages characterizedby virtue, wisdom, happiness and moralitySelfAtma ; chetan - animateShaivaitesThose who follow the religion of Lord ShivaShoobhaAuspiciousShoobha upayogAuspicious useShookshmaSubtleShookshmatamSubtlestShookshmatarSubtlerShraddhaFaithShubha charitraGood conductShuddhaThe pureShuddha upayogPure awareness of the SelfShuddhatmaSoul; Pure SelfShudraThe working classShukla-dhyanaPure contemplation of the Self; The activityof the Knower-Seer.Shushka gnanWordy or verbal knowledge; That whichnever liberates.Siddha KshetraLocated where all liberated souls resideSiddhisSpiritual powersSookshama ShariraSubtle bodySthoolaPhysical body; tangible; grossSva-dharmaOne’s own dharma.That is atma-dharma,dharma of the Self. The function of theSelfSva-parakramExtraordinary independent effortSva-samaayaCircumstances of the Self; The time ofand with the Self.SwacchandTo act according to one’s own intellect inmatters of salvation and spiritual progress.SwachhandaActing according to one’s own whim andbeliefs; Follwing your own intellect inspiritual mattersSwadharmaThe fruit of the state of the SelfSwaparakramThrough extraordinary independent effort;Pure-Self oriented extraordinary effort.SwapurusharthReal independent effort; effort related toSelf onlySwaroop GnanKnowledge of the SelfSyaadvaadThat which accepts all viewpoints and neverhurts the other.TadbirBad luckTajiyasSymbolic biers of Husain the martyr ofIslam taken into procession on hisanniversary day in the month of MoharrumTakdirGood luckTamasInertia or sluggishnessTapaPenance;austerity; self mortification with aview to attain spiritual knowledge orsalvationTapasviAsceticTattva drashtiElemental vision; to see the Self as one ofthe six eternal elementsTejas bodyThe electrical body within associated withliving energyTinopolBleaching soapTiryanch GatiThe path that leads to a birth in birds andanimal life formsTriyoga sadhanaSpiritual practice of controlling the mind,body and speechTyaagRenunciationTyagiPerson who gives up worldly lifeUdvegaExtreme Emotion; severe anxietyUpadhiAffliction from external source UpayogFocusing of the awareness of the self orthe SelfVachanyogaOf the speech; To be involved in all thatis attained through words.VaishnavasFollowers of Lord KrishnaVaishyaThe businessmenVasnaThe impression on the mind of past actionswhether good or evil which producespleasure or pain; subtle desire; mentaltendenciesVataAir; one of the three Ayurvedic componentsof prakrutiVedakSuffererVegaMotionVibhavikWorldly; distinct from its own nature.Vibhavik gunaAttributes that are born out of comingShukla-dhyanaPure contemplation of the Self; The activityof the Knower-Seer.Shushka gnanWordy or verbal knowledge; That whichnever liberates.Siddha KshetraLocated where all liberated souls resideSiddhisSpiritual powersSookshama ShariraSubtle bodySthoolaPhysical body; tangible; grossSva-dharmaOne’s own dharma.That is atma-dharma,dharma of the Self. The function of theSelfSva-parakramExtraordinary independent effortSva-samaayaCircumstances of the Self; The time ofand with the Self.SwacchandTo act according to one’s own intellect inmatters of salvation and spiritual progress.SwachhandaActing according to one’s own whim andbeliefs; Follwing your own intellect inspiritual mattersSwadharmaThe fruit of the state of the SelfSwaparakramThrough extraordinary independent effort;Pure-Self oriented extraordinary effort.SwapurusharthReal independent effort; effort related toSelf onlySwaroop GnanKnowledge of the SelfSyaadvaadThat which accepts all viewpoints and neverhurts the other.TadbirBad luckTajiyasSymbolic biers of Husain the martyr ofIslam taken into procession on hisanniversary day in the month of MoharrumTakdirGood luckTamasInertia or sluggishnessTapaPenance;austerity; self mortification with aview to attain spiritual knowledge orsalvationTapasviAsceticTattva drashtiElemental vision; to see the Self as one ofthe six eternal elementsTejas bodyThe electrical body within associated withliving energyTinopolBleaching soapTiryanch GatiThe path that leads to a birth in birds andanimal life formsTriyoga sadhanaSpiritual practice of controlling the mind,body and speechTyaagRenunciationTyagiPerson who gives up worldly lifeUdvegaExtreme Emotion; severe anxietyUpadhiAffliction from external source UpayogFocusing of the awareness of the self orthe SelfVachanyogaOf the speech; To be involved in all thatis attained through words.VaishnavasFollowers of Lord KrishnaVaishyaThe businessmenVasnaThe impression on the mind of past actionswhether good or evil which producespleasure or pain; subtle desire; mentaltendenciesVataAir; one of the three Ayurvedic componentsof prakrutiVedakSuffererVegaMotionVibhavikWorldly; distinct from its own nature.Vibhavik gunaAttributes that are born out of comingtogether of the Self and the non-Self(matter)Vikalp‘I-ness’‘I am this’ or ‘I am that’ or ‘I amGeorge’.Viparit gnanKnowledge which is deluded and wrongVipreet buddhiWrong intellectVishayaSexual Indulgence or object of sensepleasure and indulgence therein. It alsomeans subjectVishayeeEnjoyer of sex or other objects of sensepleasure. One preoccupied in vishayaVishayoSex and other subjects of enjoyment VitaragOne without any attachment.VitaragtaVoid of any attachment; absolutism, thestate of enlightened world viewVittadweshVoid of abhorrenceVyabhicharaniLicentious or seductive; pervertedVyadhiPhysical sufferingVyavahaarLife interactions; from relative view pointVyavahaar atmaThe worldly self.Vyavasthit shaktiScientific circumstantial evidencesVyvahar RashiManifested stateYogaTo join; a spiritual process or disciplineleading to oneness with the Divine.YogisThose who practice traditional disciples andmethods to attain the higher state.Persons to ContactDada Bhagwan ParivarAdalaj:Trimandir, Simandhar City,Ahmedabad-Kalol Highway, Adalaj,Dist.: Gandhinagar - 382421, Gujarat, India.Tel : (079) 39830100, Email : info@dadabhagwan.orgAhmedabad:"Dada Darshan", 5, Mamtapark Society,Behind Navgujarat College, Usmanpura,Ahmedabad- 380 014. Tel. : (079) 27540408Rajkot:Trimandir, Ahmedabad-Rajkot Highway, Nr. TarghadiyaChokdi, Maliyasan Village, Rajkot. Tel.: 9274111393Vadodara:"Dada Mandir", 17, Mama ni pol, Opp. Raopura Police Station, Salatvada, Vadodara.Tel. : (0265) 2414142, 9825032901Bhuj:"Trimandir",  B/h Hill garden, Airport Road,Near SahyogNagar, Bhuj (Kutch) Tel. : (02832) 290123Godhra:"Trimandir", Village Bhamaiya, Opp. FCI Godown,Godhra, Dist - Pachmahal Tel. : (02672) 262300Mumbai:Mobile : 9323528901Kolkata:Mobile : 9330133885Bangalore : Mobile : 9341948509U.S.A.:Dada Bhagwan Parivar (USA) +1 877-505-(DADA)3232Dada Bhagwan Vignan Institute : Dr. Bachu Amin,100, SW Redbud Lane, Topeka, Kansas 66606Tel : +1 785 271 0869, Email : bamin@cox.netU.K.:Satsang Activity Centre,College House, 15 CollegeRoad, Harrow, HA1 1BA,Tel. : +44  7956 476 253Email : dadabhagwan_uk@yahoo.comWebsite : www.dadabhagwan.orgKenya:+254  722 722 063Australia:+61 421127947UAE: +971  557316937Singapore: +65  81129229New Zealand: +64 21 0376434Germany:+49 700 32327474together of the Self and the non-Self(matter)Vikalp‘I-ness’‘I am this’ or ‘I am that’ or ‘I amGeorge’.Viparit gnanKnowledge which is deluded and wrongVipreet buddhiWrong intellectVishayaSexual Indulgence or object of sensepleasure and indulgence therein. It alsomeans subjectVishayeeEnjoyer of sex or other objects of sensepleasure. One preoccupied in vishayaVishayoSex and other subjects of enjoyment VitaragOne without any attachment.VitaragtaVoid of any attachment; absolutism, thestate of enlightened world viewVittadweshVoid of abhorrenceVyabhicharaniLicentious or seductive; pervertedVyadhiPhysical sufferingVyavahaarLife interactions; from relative view pointVyavahaar atmaThe worldly self.Vyavasthit shaktiScientific circumstantial evidencesVyvahar RashiManifested stateYogaTo join; a spiritual process or disciplineleading to oneness with the Divine.YogisThose who practice traditional disciples andmethods to attain the higher state.Persons to ContactDada Bhagwan ParivarAdalaj:Trimandir, Simandhar City,Ahmedabad-Kalol Highway, Adalaj,Dist.: Gandhinagar - 382421, Gujarat, India.Tel : (079) 39830100, Email : info@dadabhagwan.orgAhmedabad:"Dada Darshan", 5, Mamtapark Society,Behind Navgujarat College, Usmanpura,Ahmedabad- 380 014. Tel. : (079) 27540408Rajkot:Trimandir, Ahmedabad-Rajkot Highway, Nr. TarghadiyaChokdi, Maliyasan Village, Rajkot. Tel.: 9274111393Vadodara:"Dada Mandir", 17, Mama ni pol, Opp. Raopura Police Station, Salatvada, Vadodara.Tel. : (0265) 2414142, 9825032901Bhuj:"Trimandir",  B/h Hill garden, Airport Road,Near SahyogNagar, Bhuj (Kutch) Tel. : (02832) 290123Godhra:"Trimandir", Village Bhamaiya, Opp. FCI Godown,Godhra, Dist - Pachmahal Tel. : (02672) 262300Mumbai:Mobile : 9323528901Kolkata:Mobile : 9330133885Bangalore : Mobile : 9341948509U.S.A.:Dada Bhagwan Parivar (USA) +1 877-505-(DADA)3232Dada Bhagwan Vignan Institute : Dr. Bachu Amin,100, SW Redbud Lane, Topeka, Kansas 66606Tel : +1 785 271 0869, Email : bamin@cox.netU.K.:Satsang Activity Centre,College House, 15 CollegeRoad, Harrow, HA1 1BA,Tel. : +44  7956 476 253Email : dadabhagwan_uk@yahoo.comWebsite : www.dadabhagwan.orgKenya:+254  722 722 063Australia:+61 421127947UAE: +971  557316937Singapore: +65  81129229New Zealand: +64 21 0376434Germany:+49 700 32327474