Publisher:Mr. Ajit C. PatelMahavideh FoundationTri-Mandir, Simandhar City,Ahmedabad-Kalol Highway, Adalaj,Dist.-Gandhinagar-382421,Gujarat, India.Tel. : +91 79 3983 0100, 23974100E-Mail : info@dadabhagwan.org©:All Rights Reserved Mr. Deepakbhai DesaiTri-Mandir, Simandhar City, Adalaj-382421Dist.-Gandhinagar-, Gujarat, India.Edition:1000 copies, November 2007Price:Ultimate Humality(leads to Universal oneness) andAwareness of "I Don't Know Anything"Rs. 100.00Printer:Mahavideh FoundationBasement, Parshwanath Chambers,Nr. RBI, Usmanpura,Ahmedabad-380014Gujarat, India.Tel. : +91 79 27542964 / 300048238765Originally Compiled in Gujarati by :Dr. Niruben AminAptavani - 9As expounded by theGnani Purush Dada BhagwanPublisher:Mr. Ajit C. PatelMahavideh FoundationTri-Mandir, Simandhar City,Ahmedabad-Kalol Highway, Adalaj,Dist.-Gandhinagar-382421,Gujarat, India.Tel. : +91 79 3983 0100, 23974100E-Mail : info@dadabhagwan.org©:All Rights Reserved Mr. Deepakbhai DesaiTri-Mandir, Simandhar City, Adalaj-382421Dist.-Gandhinagar-, Gujarat, India.Edition:1000 copies, November 2007Price:Ultimate Humality(leads to Universal oneness) andAwareness of "I Don't Know Anything"Rs. 100.00Printer:Mahavideh FoundationBasement, Parshwanath Chambers,Nr. RBI, Usmanpura,Ahmedabad-380014Gujarat, India.Tel. : +91 79 27542964 / 300048238765Originally Compiled in Gujarati by :Dr. Niruben AminAptavani - 9As expounded by theGnani Purush Dada BhagwanTrimantra(The Three Mantras)Namo ArihantanamI bow to the Lord who has annihilated all the innerenemies of anger, pride, attachment and greed.Namo SiddhanamI bow to all the Lord who have attained final liberation.Namo AayariyanamI bow to all the Self-realized masters who unfold thepath of liberation.Namo UvazzayanamI bow to the Self-realized teachers of the path ofliberation.Namo Loye Savva SaahunamI bow to all who have  attained the Self and areprogressing in this path in the universe.Eso Pancha NamukkaroThese five salutations.Saava PaavappanasanoDestroy all the sins.Mangalanam cha SaavesimOf all that is auspicious mantras.Padhamam Havai MangalamThis is the highest.(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67) Namo Bhagavate VasudevayaI bow to the One who has become the Supreme Lordfrom a human being.(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67) Namah ShivaayaI bow to all auspicious beings of this universe who arethe instruments of salvation of the world. Jai Sat Chit AnandThe Awareness Of The Eternal Is Bliss(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Books of Akram Vignan of Dada Bhagwan1.Adjust Everywhere2.Ahimsa : Non-Violence3.Anger4.Aptavani 15.Aptavani 26.Aptavani 57.Aptavani 68.Aptavani 99.Autobiography of Gnani Purush A.M.Patel10.Avoid Clashes11.Brahmacharya : Celibacy Attained With Understanding12.Death : Before, During & After...13.Flawless Vision14.Generation Gap15.Harmony In Marriage16.Life Without Conflict17.Money18.Noble Use of Money19.Pratikraman : The master key that resolves all conflicts( Abridge & Big Volume)20.Pure Love21.Right Understanding to Help Others22.Science of Karma23.Science of Speech24.Shree Simandhar Swami : The Living God25.The Essence Of All Religion26.The Fault Is Of the Sufferer27.The Guru and The Disciple28.Tri Mantra : The mantra that removes all worldly obstacles29.Whatever Happened is Justice30.Who Am I ?31.WorriesTrimantra(The Three Mantras)Namo ArihantanamI bow to the Lord who has annihilated all the innerenemies of anger, pride, attachment and greed.Namo SiddhanamI bow to all the Lord who have attained final liberation.Namo AayariyanamI bow to all the Self-realized masters who unfold thepath of liberation.Namo UvazzayanamI bow to the Self-realized teachers of the path ofliberation.Namo Loye Savva SaahunamI bow to all who have  attained the Self and areprogressing in this path in the universe.Eso Pancha NamukkaroThese five salutations.Saava PaavappanasanoDestroy all the sins.Mangalanam cha SaavesimOf all that is auspicious mantras.Padhamam Havai MangalamThis is the highest.(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67) Namo Bhagavate VasudevayaI bow to the One who has become the Supreme Lordfrom a human being.(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67)(cid:67) Namah ShivaayaI bow to all auspicious beings of this universe who arethe instruments of salvation of the world. Jai Sat Chit AnandThe Awareness Of The Eternal Is Bliss(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Books of Akram Vignan of Dada Bhagwan1.Adjust Everywhere2.Ahimsa : Non-Violence3.Anger4.Aptavani 15.Aptavani 26.Aptavani 57.Aptavani 68.Aptavani 99.Autobiography of Gnani Purush A.M.Patel10.Avoid Clashes11.Brahmacharya : Celibacy Attained With Understanding12.Death : Before, During & After...13.Flawless Vision14.Generation Gap15.Harmony In Marriage16.Life Without Conflict17.Money18.Noble Use of Money19.Pratikraman : The master key that resolves all conflicts( Abridge & Big Volume)20.Pure Love21.Right Understanding to Help Others22.Science of Karma23.Science of Speech24.Shree Simandhar Swami : The Living God25.The Essence Of All Religion26.The Fault Is Of the Sufferer27.The Guru and The Disciple28.Tri Mantra : The mantra that removes all worldly obstacles29.Whatever Happened is Justice30.Who Am I ?31.WorriesNote About This TranslationThe Gnani Purush Ambalal M. Patel, also commonly knownas Dadashri or Dada, had said that it would be impossible totranslate his satsangs and the knowledge about the Science ofSelf-Realization verbatim into English because some of themeanings would be lost in the process. Therefore, in order tounderstand precisely the science of Akram Vignan and Self-Realization He stressed the importance of learning Gujarati.Dadashri did however grant his blessings to translate hiswords into English and other languages so that spiritual seekerscould benefit to a certain degree and later progress through theirown efforts.This is a humble attempt to present to the world, theessence of His Knowledge. This is not a literal translation butgreat care has been taken to preserve His original words and theessence of His message. For certain Gujarati words, severalEnglish words or even sentences are needed to convey the exactmeaning; hence, many Gujarati words have been retained withinthe English text for better reading flow. At the first encounter,the Gujarati word will be italicized followed by an immediateexplanation of its meaning in brackets. Thereafter the Gujaratiword will be used in the text that follows. This serves as a two-fold benefit: firstly ease of translation and reading and secondlyit will make the reader more familiar with the Gujarati wordscritical for a deeper understanding of this science. A glossary ofall the Gujarati words is provided at the back of the book. Foradditional glossary, visit our website at :www.dadabhagwan.orgMany people have worked diligently towards achievingthis goal and we thank them all. Please note that any errorsencountered in this translation are entirely those of the translators.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Note to the readerThe words ‘You’ or ‘Self’ when they begin with an initialcapital ‘Y’ or ‘S’ respectively, refers to the Soul or the real Selfor the Atma. Otherwise, they are used for the non-self, alsoreferred to as the relative-self, ‘Chandulal’ or the prakruti.Whenever Dadashri uses the name ‘Chandulal’ or the nameof the person Dadashri is addressing, the reader should insert hisor her name for exact understanding.Whenever Dadashri uses the term ‘we’, he is referring tothe Gnani Purush and ‘Dada Bhagwan’ who is the fully enlightenedLord within him.The words Self and Soul are interchangeable. The Soul isone’s real Self.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)566Introduction to The GnaniOne June evening, in 1958 at around six o’clock, AmbalalMuljibhai Patel, a family man, and a contractor by profession,was sitting on a bench on the busy platform number three atSurat’s train station. Surat is a city in south Gujarat, a westernstate in India. What happened within the next forty-eight minuteswas phenomenal. Spontaneous Self-Realization occurred withinAmbalal M. Patel. During this event, his ego completely meltedand from that moment onwards, he became completely detachedfrom all of Ambalal’s thoughts, speech, and actions. He becamethe Lord’s living instrument for the salvation of humankind, throughthe path of knowledge. He called this Lord, ‘Dada Bhagwan.’To everyone he met, he would say, “This Lord, Dada Bhagwanis fully manifested within me. He also resides within all livingbeings. The difference is that within me He is completelyexpressed and in you, he has yet to manifest.”Who are we? What is God? Who runs this world? Whatis karma? What is liberation? Etc. All the world’s spiritualquestions were answered during this event. Thus, nature offeredabsolute vision to the world through the medium of Shree AmbalalMuljibhai Patel.Ambalal was born in Tarasali, a suburb of Baroda andwas later raised in Bhadran, Gujarat. His wife’s name was Hiraba.Although he was a contractor by profession, his life at home andhis interactions with everyone around him were exemplary, evenprior to his Self-Realization. After becoming Self-Realized andattaining the state of a Gnani, (The Awakened One, Jnani inHindi), his body became a ‘public charitable trust.’Throughout his entire life, he lived by the principle thatthere should not be any commerce in religion, and in allcommerce, there must be religion. He also never took moneyfrom anyone for his own use. He used the profits from his businessto take his devotees for pilgrimages to various parts of India.His words became the foundation for the new, direct, andstep-less path to Self-Realization called Akram Vignan. Throughhis divine original scientific experiment (The Gnan Vidhi), heimparted this knowledge to others within two hours. Thousandshave received his grace through this process and thousandscontinue to do so even now. ‘Akram’ means without steps; anelevator path or a shortcut, whereas ‘Kram’ means an orderly,step-by-step spiritual path. Akram is now recognized as a directshortcut to the bliss of the Self.Who is Dada Bhagwan?When he explained to others who ‘Dada Bhagwan’ is, hewould say :“What you see here is not ‘Dada Bhagwan’. What yousee is ‘A. M. Patel.’ I am a Gnani Purush and ‘He’ that ismanifested within me, is ‘Dada Bhagwan’. He is the Lord within.He is within you and everyone else. He has not yet manifestedwithin you, whereas within me he is fully manifested. I myself amnot a Bhagwan. I too bow down to Dada Bhagwan within me.”Current link for attaining the knowledge ofSelf-Realization (Atma Gnan)“I am personally going to impart siddhis (special spiritualpowers) to a few people. After I leave, will there not be a needfor them? People of future generations will need this path, willthey not?”   ~ DadashriParam Pujya Dadashri used to go from town to town, andcountry to country, to give satsang and impart the knowledge ofthe Self as well as knowledge of harmonious worldly interactionto all who came to see him. During his final days, in the fall of1987, he gave his blessing to Dr. Niruben Amin and bestowedhis special siddhis upon her, to continue his work. “You will haveto become a mother to this whole world, Niruben” He told heras he blessed her. There was no doubt in Dadashri’s mind thatNiruben was destined to be just that. She had served him withutmost devotion day and night for over twenty years. Dadashri67Introduction to The GnaniOne June evening, in 1958 at around six o’clock, AmbalalMuljibhai Patel, a family man, and a contractor by profession,was sitting on a bench on the busy platform number three atSurat’s train station. Surat is a city in south Gujarat, a westernstate in India. What happened within the next forty-eight minuteswas phenomenal. Spontaneous Self-Realization occurred withinAmbalal M. Patel. During this event, his ego completely meltedand from that moment onwards, he became completely detachedfrom all of Ambalal’s thoughts, speech, and actions. He becamethe Lord’s living instrument for the salvation of humankind, throughthe path of knowledge. He called this Lord, ‘Dada Bhagwan.’To everyone he met, he would say, “This Lord, Dada Bhagwanis fully manifested within me. He also resides within all livingbeings. The difference is that within me He is completelyexpressed and in you, he has yet to manifest.”Who are we? What is God? Who runs this world? Whatis karma? What is liberation? Etc. All the world’s spiritualquestions were answered during this event. Thus, nature offeredabsolute vision to the world through the medium of Shree AmbalalMuljibhai Patel.Ambalal was born in Tarasali, a suburb of Baroda andwas later raised in Bhadran, Gujarat. His wife’s name was Hiraba.Although he was a contractor by profession, his life at home andhis interactions with everyone around him were exemplary, evenprior to his Self-Realization. After becoming Self-Realized andattaining the state of a Gnani, (The Awakened One, Jnani inHindi), his body became a ‘public charitable trust.’Throughout his entire life, he lived by the principle thatthere should not be any commerce in religion, and in allcommerce, there must be religion. He also never took moneyfrom anyone for his own use. He used the profits from his businessto take his devotees for pilgrimages to various parts of India.His words became the foundation for the new, direct, andstep-less path to Self-Realization called Akram Vignan. Throughhis divine original scientific experiment (The Gnan Vidhi), heimparted this knowledge to others within two hours. Thousandshave received his grace through this process and thousandscontinue to do so even now. ‘Akram’ means without steps; anelevator path or a shortcut, whereas ‘Kram’ means an orderly,step-by-step spiritual path. Akram is now recognized as a directshortcut to the bliss of the Self.Who is Dada Bhagwan?When he explained to others who ‘Dada Bhagwan’ is, hewould say :“What you see here is not ‘Dada Bhagwan’. What yousee is ‘A. M. Patel.’ I am a Gnani Purush and ‘He’ that ismanifested within me, is ‘Dada Bhagwan’. He is the Lord within.He is within you and everyone else. He has not yet manifestedwithin you, whereas within me he is fully manifested. I myself amnot a Bhagwan. I too bow down to Dada Bhagwan within me.”Current link for attaining the knowledge ofSelf-Realization (Atma Gnan)“I am personally going to impart siddhis (special spiritualpowers) to a few people. After I leave, will there not be a needfor them? People of future generations will need this path, willthey not?”   ~ DadashriParam Pujya Dadashri used to go from town to town, andcountry to country, to give satsang and impart the knowledge ofthe Self as well as knowledge of harmonious worldly interactionto all who came to see him. During his final days, in the fall of1987, he gave his blessing to Dr. Niruben Amin and bestowedhis special siddhis upon her, to continue his work. “You will haveto become a mother to this whole world, Niruben” He told heras he blessed her. There was no doubt in Dadashri’s mind thatNiruben was destined to be just that. She had served him withutmost devotion day and night for over twenty years. Dadashri67in turn had molded her and prepared her to take on thismonumental task.From the time of Pujya Dadashri’s mortal departure onJanuary 2 1988 to her own mortal departure on March 19th2006, Pujya Niruma as she lovingly came to be called bythousands remained true to her promise to Dadashri to carry onhis mission of the world’s salvation. She became Dadashri’srepresentative of Akram Vignan and became instrumental inspreading the knowledge of Akram Vignan throughout the world.She also became an exemplary of pure and unconditional love.Thousands of people from all walks of life and from all over theworld have attained Self-Realization through her and areestablished in the experience of the pure Soul, while carrying outtheir worldly duties and obligations. They experience freedomhere and now, while living their daily life.The link of Akram Gnanis now continues with the currentspiritual master Pujya Deepakbhai Desai whom Pujya Dadashrihad also graced with special siddhis to continue to teach theworld about Atma Gnan and Akram Vignan. He was furthermolded and trained by Pujya Niruma who blessed him to conductGnan Vidhi in 2003. Dadashri had said that Deepakbhai willbecome the decorum that will add splendor to the Lord’s reign.Pujya Deepakbhai, in keeping with Dada’s and Niruma’s traditiontravels extensively within India and abroad, giving satsangs andimparting the knowledge of the Self to all who come seeking.Powerful words in scriptures help the seeker in increasinghis desire for liberation. The knowledge of the Self is the finalgoal of all one’s seeking. Without the knowledge of the Selfthere is no liberation. This knowledge of the Self (Atma Gnan)does not exist in books. It exists in the heart of a Gnani. Hence,the knowledge of the Self can only be acquired by meeting aGnani. Through the scientific approach of Akram Vignan, eventoday one can attain Atma Gnan, but it can only occur by meetinga living Atma Gnani and receiving the Atma Gnan. Only a litcandle can light another candle.EDITORIALLife after life, human beings have been struggling forliberation (moksha). Many times, one has made progress andmany times he has fallen down. What holds one back fromachieving the desired result? Those who are performing thepractices or helping to perform the practices of attaining liberation,achieve to some degree the success in knowing the ‘Helpfulcauses’. To know and see the ‘Harmful causes’ and to remainunattached from them, can only be done by a Gnani Purush whomanifests very rarely. Once a Gnani Purush has visibly manifestedamong us, the path to liberation (moksha marg) opens upcompletely. And with that, one can reach all the way to the endof that path!One finds the ways up to the path of liberation but whilegoing up, there are ‘Danger points’ and ‘red signals’ that alertsone to these danger points, and usually these are not shown. Assignificant the upward road is, the knowledge and precautionsfor the slippery slopes along the way is of much more significance.Therefore, without those precautions, no matter how much laborone exerts, he inevitably falls back.The success in Self-realization does not occur without theextremely sharp awareness of where one becomes an impedimentto his own self. This means, in the endeavor of Self-realization,it is extremely important to stop the losses than to gain the profit.Once the seeker meets the Gnani Purush and knows andunderstands Him, he begins the worship of the path of liberation.Prior to meeting the Gnani, those who were deeply entrenchedin the worldly life (sansar), now turn towards the path ofliberation. However in their remaining worldly obligations, whichthey must fulfill and complete, often knowingly or unknowingly,they get dragged and immersed back into the worldly life. Whocan show them this ‘leakage’ (their weakness)? To ‘seal’ that‘leakage’, here in this Aptavani is shown the practical knowledge89in turn had molded her and prepared her to take on thismonumental task.From the time of Pujya Dadashri’s mortal departure onJanuary 2 1988 to her own mortal departure on March 19th2006, Pujya Niruma as she lovingly came to be called bythousands remained true to her promise to Dadashri to carry onhis mission of the world’s salvation. She became Dadashri’srepresentative of Akram Vignan and became instrumental inspreading the knowledge of Akram Vignan throughout the world.She also became an exemplary of pure and unconditional love.Thousands of people from all walks of life and from all over theworld have attained Self-Realization through her and areestablished in the experience of the pure Soul, while carrying outtheir worldly duties and obligations. They experience freedomhere and now, while living their daily life.The link of Akram Gnanis now continues with the currentspiritual master Pujya Deepakbhai Desai whom Pujya Dadashrihad also graced with special siddhis to continue to teach theworld about Atma Gnan and Akram Vignan. He was furthermolded and trained by Pujya Niruma who blessed him to conductGnan Vidhi in 2003. Dadashri had said that Deepakbhai willbecome the decorum that will add splendor to the Lord’s reign.Pujya Deepakbhai, in keeping with Dada’s and Niruma’s traditiontravels extensively within India and abroad, giving satsangs andimparting the knowledge of the Self to all who come seeking.Powerful words in scriptures help the seeker in increasinghis desire for liberation. The knowledge of the Self is the finalgoal of all one’s seeking. Without the knowledge of the Selfthere is no liberation. This knowledge of the Self (Atma Gnan)does not exist in books. It exists in the heart of a Gnani. Hence,the knowledge of the Self can only be acquired by meeting aGnani. Through the scientific approach of Akram Vignan, eventoday one can attain Atma Gnan, but it can only occur by meetinga living Atma Gnani and receiving the Atma Gnan. Only a litcandle can light another candle.EDITORIALLife after life, human beings have been struggling forliberation (moksha). Many times, one has made progress andmany times he has fallen down. What holds one back fromachieving the desired result? Those who are performing thepractices or helping to perform the practices of attaining liberation,achieve to some degree the success in knowing the ‘Helpfulcauses’. To know and see the ‘Harmful causes’ and to remainunattached from them, can only be done by a Gnani Purush whomanifests very rarely. Once a Gnani Purush has visibly manifestedamong us, the path to liberation (moksha marg) opens upcompletely. And with that, one can reach all the way to the endof that path!One finds the ways up to the path of liberation but whilegoing up, there are ‘Danger points’ and ‘red signals’ that alertsone to these danger points, and usually these are not shown. Assignificant the upward road is, the knowledge and precautionsfor the slippery slopes along the way is of much more significance.Therefore, without those precautions, no matter how much laborone exerts, he inevitably falls back.The success in Self-realization does not occur without theextremely sharp awareness of where one becomes an impedimentto his own self. This means, in the endeavor of Self-realization,it is extremely important to stop the losses than to gain the profit.Once the seeker meets the Gnani Purush and knows andunderstands Him, he begins the worship of the path of liberation.Prior to meeting the Gnani, those who were deeply entrenchedin the worldly life (sansar), now turn towards the path ofliberation. However in their remaining worldly obligations, whichthey must fulfill and complete, often knowingly or unknowingly,they get dragged and immersed back into the worldly life. Whocan show them this ‘leakage’ (their weakness)? To ‘seal’ that‘leakage’, here in this Aptavani is shown the practical knowledge89(vyavahar gnan), the spiritual knowledge (Gnan), the Scienceof spiritual knowledge (Vignan), the art of knowledge (gnankada) as well as the art of explanation (bodha kada) of theGnani Purush.Moksha-marg means the path to freedom; it is the path ofattaining freedom from all worldly attachments. Whatever practiceone resorts to believing them to be instrumental for his freedom,it does not give him the experience of freedom. His attachmentsare not broken in spite of performing many different practices.Where is the mistake being made? One should serve the ‘causesof freedom’ in order to achieve freedom, and whatever causesone serves, if he experiences freedom and detachment; then onlycan he say that the causes served are those for liberation. Instead,his attachments are not broken in spite of serving the causes forfreedom. Why is that?The Gnani Purush has seen the complete path to finalliberation. He has known that path, He has the experience of itand he has completed it. Therefore, he can show us the mistakesobstructing that path; he can show us the difficulties, obstaclesand dangers along that path. To those who have embarked onthe path of liberation, the Gnani can give complete knowledgeand complete remedy as to how to eradicate those mistakes.There are mistakes, which cause bondage. People in thisworld cannot see those mistakes and so because of constantbondage due to those mistakes and supporting them, peoplehave turned away from the path of final liberation altogether.The Gnanis of the past had cautioned people about themistakes that hinder the path to final liberation. However, onecan steadily progress on the path, if the truly desirous devoteehas, prior to achieving the path and after being on the path, adetailed description of the mistakes that hinder him. Nevertheless,the correct path is to complete it by completely surrendering tothe Gnani Purush.1011The Gnanis have said that bondage and obstruction on thepath of liberation is because of kashayas (anger, pride, deceitand greed). Being absolutely rid of these faults one attains finalliberation. All faults within a person are encompassed in anger,pride, deceit and greed, but how do these faults unfold andmanifest in worldly interactions? This can only be understoodwhen The Gnani Purush explains them to us in detail.Gnani Purush is perfect light, and in his manifest illumination,it is inevitable that, in order to break free from all one’s mistakes,one must review and confess all the mistakes (alochana) to theGnani Purush. The Gnani Purush, by direct interaction with theseeker can erase all his inner mistakes. Whenever one has sufferedfrom pain, has experienced difficulties, uneasiness or lack ofspiritual experience, or has troubling attachments, and he doesdetailed alochana to the Gnani Purush, the Gnani will show himthe light. And in that light, he can see all his mistakes, and finda way to get rid of them.The main issue is that these mistakes or faults haveremained in the form of ‘tubers’. These tubers are always buried‘underground’ (they remain hidden within). Under the rightcircumstances, when these tubers get ‘water’, they germinateand sprout into branches and leaves, and from that, one candiscover which kind of tuber he has; he can discover what‘disease’ lies within him. Unless the nature of the mistakes isidentified, the mistakes continue to get support and nourishment.By coming to the satsang of the Gnani Purush, by repeatedlylistening to his speech, and by repeatedly understanding hisinteraction with specific questioners, the seeker developsawareness and gets the strength to identify and visualize his ownmistakes and faults. After that, he gains awareness to weed outthe sprouts and by effectively practicing this; he can completelyeradicate the tuber. However, this process has to be carried outunder the guidance and instructions (Agnas) from the Gnani Purush(vyavahar gnan), the spiritual knowledge (Gnan), the Scienceof spiritual knowledge (Vignan), the art of knowledge (gnankada) as well as the art of explanation (bodha kada) of theGnani Purush.Moksha-marg means the path to freedom; it is the path ofattaining freedom from all worldly attachments. Whatever practiceone resorts to believing them to be instrumental for his freedom,it does not give him the experience of freedom. His attachmentsare not broken in spite of performing many different practices.Where is the mistake being made? One should serve the ‘causesof freedom’ in order to achieve freedom, and whatever causesone serves, if he experiences freedom and detachment; then onlycan he say that the causes served are those for liberation. Instead,his attachments are not broken in spite of serving the causes forfreedom. Why is that?The Gnani Purush has seen the complete path to finalliberation. He has known that path, He has the experience of itand he has completed it. Therefore, he can show us the mistakesobstructing that path; he can show us the difficulties, obstaclesand dangers along that path. To those who have embarked onthe path of liberation, the Gnani can give complete knowledgeand complete remedy as to how to eradicate those mistakes.There are mistakes, which cause bondage. People in thisworld cannot see those mistakes and so because of constantbondage due to those mistakes and supporting them, peoplehave turned away from the path of final liberation altogether.The Gnanis of the past had cautioned people about themistakes that hinder the path to final liberation. However, onecan steadily progress on the path, if the truly desirous devoteehas, prior to achieving the path and after being on the path, adetailed description of the mistakes that hinder him. Nevertheless,the correct path is to complete it by completely surrendering tothe Gnani Purush.1011The Gnanis have said that bondage and obstruction on thepath of liberation is because of kashayas (anger, pride, deceitand greed). Being absolutely rid of these faults one attains finalliberation. All faults within a person are encompassed in anger,pride, deceit and greed, but how do these faults unfold andmanifest in worldly interactions? This can only be understoodwhen The Gnani Purush explains them to us in detail.Gnani Purush is perfect light, and in his manifest illumination,it is inevitable that, in order to break free from all one’s mistakes,one must review and confess all the mistakes (alochana) to theGnani Purush. The Gnani Purush, by direct interaction with theseeker can erase all his inner mistakes. Whenever one has sufferedfrom pain, has experienced difficulties, uneasiness or lack ofspiritual experience, or has troubling attachments, and he doesdetailed alochana to the Gnani Purush, the Gnani will show himthe light. And in that light, he can see all his mistakes, and finda way to get rid of them.The main issue is that these mistakes or faults haveremained in the form of ‘tubers’. These tubers are always buried‘underground’ (they remain hidden within). Under the rightcircumstances, when these tubers get ‘water’, they germinateand sprout into branches and leaves, and from that, one candiscover which kind of tuber he has; he can discover what‘disease’ lies within him. Unless the nature of the mistakes isidentified, the mistakes continue to get support and nourishment.By coming to the satsang of the Gnani Purush, by repeatedlylistening to his speech, and by repeatedly understanding hisinteraction with specific questioners, the seeker developsawareness and gets the strength to identify and visualize his ownmistakes and faults. After that, he gains awareness to weed outthe sprouts and by effectively practicing this; he can completelyeradicate the tuber. However, this process has to be carried outunder the guidance and instructions (Agnas) from the Gnani PurushPREFACEBy Dr. Niruben AminFrom time immemorial, prakruti, which is the non-selfcomplex (also known as the relative-self), is characteristicallybound by worldly affinities. When one meets a ‘Gnani Purush’,he enters into spirituality i.e. non-worldly affinities. However theprakruti, which was created in the past life and its inherenttendency to remain bound to the worldly life, will not refrainfrom manifesting when circumstances of nature pressure it. Andin the current time cycle of Kaliyug, the effects of past karma ofthe relative-self are such that they oppose and mostly obstructfinal liberation. In such times, to win the conflict between worldlyentanglements and spiritual efforts to attain the real Self, theGnani Purush gives many explanations of His experientialunderstanding here.1. Obstinacy (aadayee) : To be upset and noncommunicative(risavu) : Manipulative tantrum (tragu)Those who are straight and simple achieve straight andsimple liberation. Gnani Purush is straight and simple in everyway. His statements are proven true in all three times; the past,present and future. For any man who comprehends thestatements of such a Gnani Purush, his liberation is at armslength. Gnani Purush says that obstinacy is an obstruction on thepath to liberation, and if one can straighten out, then he canbecome God. What is wrong in becoming straight through yourown understanding as opposed to becoming straight after takinga beating from others?If you admit to your obstinacies, they will go away but ifyou deny them, they become stronger. You can only win overobstinacies by acknowledging and then ‘seeing and knowing’them.You have the right to see only your own obstinacies.1213who shows him his mistakes in detail, helps to identify the natureof those mistakes, thus helping him become free from them.Thus is perfected the path of final liberation (moksha marg).Here in this Aptavani is the speech of Dadashri who is themanifest form of pure Absolute knowledge. This compilation ofthe causes that obstruct the path to final liberation is presentedin an eloquent, basic and heart-touching discussion, for all on thepath of liberation. It will help the spiritual practitioner at everystep from falling down. In this Aptavani, if the informed readerfinds any defect or shortcoming, it is not because of the Gnani’sspeech, but because of the defect of compilation. For that, weoffer apology and prayer.- Dr. Niruben Amin(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)PREFACEBy Dr. Niruben AminFrom time immemorial, prakruti, which is the non-selfcomplex (also known as the relative-self), is characteristicallybound by worldly affinities. When one meets a ‘Gnani Purush’,he enters into spirituality i.e. non-worldly affinities. However theprakruti, which was created in the past life and its inherenttendency to remain bound to the worldly life, will not refrainfrom manifesting when circumstances of nature pressure it. Andin the current time cycle of Kaliyug, the effects of past karma ofthe relative-self are such that they oppose and mostly obstructfinal liberation. In such times, to win the conflict between worldlyentanglements and spiritual efforts to attain the real Self, theGnani Purush gives many explanations of His experientialunderstanding here.1. Obstinacy (aadayee) : To be upset and noncommunicative(risavu) : Manipulative tantrum (tragu)Those who are straight and simple achieve straight andsimple liberation. Gnani Purush is straight and simple in everyway. His statements are proven true in all three times; the past,present and future. For any man who comprehends thestatements of such a Gnani Purush, his liberation is at armslength. Gnani Purush says that obstinacy is an obstruction on thepath to liberation, and if one can straighten out, then he canbecome God. What is wrong in becoming straight through yourown understanding as opposed to becoming straight after takinga beating from others?If you admit to your obstinacies, they will go away but ifyou deny them, they become stronger. You can only win overobstinacies by acknowledging and then ‘seeing and knowing’them.You have the right to see only your own obstinacies.1213who shows him his mistakes in detail, helps to identify the natureof those mistakes, thus helping him become free from them.Thus is perfected the path of final liberation (moksha marg).Here in this Aptavani is the speech of Dadashri who is themanifest form of pure Absolute knowledge. This compilation ofthe causes that obstruct the path to final liberation is presentedin an eloquent, basic and heart-touching discussion, for all on thepath of liberation. It will help the spiritual practitioner at everystep from falling down. In this Aptavani, if the informed readerfinds any defect or shortcoming, it is not because of the Gnani’sspeech, but because of the defect of compilation. For that, weoffer apology and prayer.- Dr. Niruben Amin(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)1415However, you can only see them when you attain impartialvision, or if someone points them out to you and you examinethem. Then that would be the scope to remove your obstinacies.However, if you see other people’s obstinacies, it is regarded asyour own obstinacy. Your obstinacies will vanish the momentyou start to see them.One becomes God when his obstinacies are completelygone.When a true statement that is satisfying to the heart is notaccepted, that verily is the nature of obstinacy. Obstinate peoplebehave according to their own opinions. Obstinacies end inthose who behave according to the Gnani’s opinion.The finest qualities of the prakruti (the innate nature ofone’s relative Self) are freely available to everyone on the pathto liberation. These qualities are ultimate humility, extremesimplicity, spontaneous forgiveness, and total lack of obstinacy.These qualities can be regarded as measures of spiritualprogress.To be aware of one’s own obstinacies is verily calledawareness!Obstinacies may have lessened, however if one has ‘my-ness’ (mamata), then he is absorbed in the worldly life only.Whereas, if there is no ‘my-ness’ and if the subtlest obstinacieshave ended, one will become a Gnani.The root of obstinacy is the ego. If a person has faith inthe opinion of ‘people will only shape up if I sulk, remainobstinate, upset and non-communicative (risavu)’, then obstinacywill not refrain from manifesting in his behavior.If you become obstinate with the Gnani Purush, you willnot get any support or encouragement from Him. There, in frontof the Gnani, one has no choice but straighten out and shape up!Obstinacies succumb and bow down to the one who isnispruha (without any inclination towards needs, or desire, ofany material things of this world). The one who has the virtue ofbeing straight will naturally receive the grace of the Gnani Purushwho himself is completely straightforward in everything.One is considered to have become straightforward whenhe knows his own obstinacies. The obstinacies can be identifiedonly if one has the Knowledge of his real Self. And only thencan they be reduced and ultimately eradicated. On the otherhand, the one who is obstinate will completely miss the wholepath of liberation.Obstinacy arises in making others do according to yourwill. By doing according to the will of others, obstinacies cometo an end.“To have the knowledge ‘the one who is obstinate is notI’ is called Akram Vignan, which is a step-less (short-cut) pathto Self- realization and ‘the one who is obstinate is I and I haveto straighten out’, is called Kramic path, which is a step by steppath (you progress one step at a time).”~ DadashriTo be upset and non-communicative (risavu) is also atype of obstinacy. Who is at a loss from becoming upset andnon-communicative? Will the train wait for the one who remainsupset and non-communicative? The train will leave right in frontof him. The world will not stop for him at all.If someone is being upset and non-communicative (risavu)with you, he is being so with the one that is a risad in you; i.e.the one that gets upset and non-communicative within you. Therisad within you is seeing the one who is upset and non-communicative. The risad within you is not the real Self. Theone who is upset and non-communicative (risavu) with you isnot the real Self either. The Self sees the Self; the Self sees thepure (shuddha) only. Inherent in this, is the path of liberation.1415However, you can only see them when you attain impartialvision, or if someone points them out to you and you examinethem. Then that would be the scope to remove your obstinacies.However, if you see other people’s obstinacies, it is regarded asyour own obstinacy. Your obstinacies will vanish the momentyou start to see them.One becomes God when his obstinacies are completelygone.When a true statement that is satisfying to the heart is notaccepted, that verily is the nature of obstinacy. Obstinate peoplebehave according to their own opinions. Obstinacies end inthose who behave according to the Gnani’s opinion.The finest qualities of the prakruti (the innate nature ofone’s relative Self) are freely available to everyone on the pathto liberation. These qualities are ultimate humility, extremesimplicity, spontaneous forgiveness, and total lack of obstinacy.These qualities can be regarded as measures of spiritualprogress.To be aware of one’s own obstinacies is verily calledawareness!Obstinacies may have lessened, however if one has ‘my-ness’ (mamata), then he is absorbed in the worldly life only.Whereas, if there is no ‘my-ness’ and if the subtlest obstinacieshave ended, one will become a Gnani.The root of obstinacy is the ego. If a person has faith inthe opinion of ‘people will only shape up if I sulk, remainobstinate, upset and non-communicative (risavu)’, then obstinacywill not refrain from manifesting in his behavior.If you become obstinate with the Gnani Purush, you willnot get any support or encouragement from Him. There, in frontof the Gnani, one has no choice but straighten out and shape up!Obstinacies succumb and bow down to the one who isnispruha (without any inclination towards needs, or desire, ofany material things of this world). The one who has the virtue ofbeing straight will naturally receive the grace of the Gnani Purushwho himself is completely straightforward in everything.One is considered to have become straightforward whenhe knows his own obstinacies. The obstinacies can be identifiedonly if one has the Knowledge of his real Self. And only thencan they be reduced and ultimately eradicated. On the otherhand, the one who is obstinate will completely miss the wholepath of liberation.Obstinacy arises in making others do according to yourwill. By doing according to the will of others, obstinacies cometo an end.“To have the knowledge ‘the one who is obstinate is notI’ is called Akram Vignan, which is a step-less (short-cut) pathto Self- realization and ‘the one who is obstinate is I and I haveto straighten out’, is called Kramic path, which is a step by steppath (you progress one step at a time).”~ DadashriTo be upset and non-communicative (risavu) is also atype of obstinacy. Who is at a loss from becoming upset andnon-communicative? Will the train wait for the one who remainsupset and non-communicative? The train will leave right in frontof him. The world will not stop for him at all.If someone is being upset and non-communicative (risavu)with you, he is being so with the one that is a risad in you; i.e.the one that gets upset and non-communicative within you. Therisad within you is seeing the one who is upset and non-communicative. The risad within you is not the real Self. Theone who is upset and non-communicative (risavu) with you isnot the real Self either. The Self sees the Self; the Self sees thepure (shuddha) only. Inherent in this, is the path of liberation.1617If someone is upset and non-communicative (risavu) withthe Gnani Purush, how does the Gnani Purush deal with him?Only the Gnani can explain the state of absolute detachment(vitaragata)! The excellence of the manifest Gnani Purush is inHis unattached state, along with his nishkaran karuna (Gnani’scompassion for us in which He has no ‘personal gain’ oragenda. This is the only ‘reason’ and ‘purpose’ of the Gnani’scompassion is to take us to our Ultimate Freedom, or Moksha).As a result, we become free of faults and become steady on thepath of liberation and attain the bliss of the Self.In the advancing stages of obstinacies, one becomes upsetand non-communicative (risavu) and then if things don’t happenas per his intentions, he will resort to manipulative tantrums(tragu).The characteristics of a tragu is where one will create acommotion like banging his or her head, crying out loud andresorting to any means possible in order to put others in his orher own grip. So much so that it scares people into submittingunder the control of the one doing a tragu! With such people,explaining everything to them and reasoning with them canachieve a resolution, but otherwise it is best to walk away fromthem.It is an art to do a tragu (manipulative tantrum).Tremendous energies are wasted in doing one. One incurstremendous loss and as a result, risks bypassing the animalkingdom altogether and takes birth straight in hell. Dadashri, the Akram Vignani shows us ways to be savedfrom manipulative tantrums. He opens up the vision to getfreedom from all kinds of deformed personalities by looking atthem and experiencing them from all the phases; so that we too,in our own lives can open up and develop that vision and makeourselves free from our obstinacies (aadayee), adamancytowards non-communication (risavu), and tragu (manipulativetantrums), or we can escape from people who are obstinate,upset and non-communicative, or do tragu. Through theScience of Akram, the Gnani Purush gives us the understandingof the art and the knowledge to become free from our relativeself and to not get entangled in the relative self of others; thisbecomes extremely helpful to remove the obstacles in the pathto our final liberation!2. Emotional agitation (udvega) : suspicion (shanka) :intense mental note (nondha)In order to make others do what one wants, one startswith obstinacy, then becomes upset and non-communicative andif he is not successful, he starts to do tragu (manipulativetantrum). And still if things do not happen according to hiswishes, he develops extreme emotional agitation (udvega). Ifthe tendency to make others do what one wants is eroded, hegets freedom from the pain and suffering of emotional agitation(udvega).Emotional agitation is created when attachment (moha)with ego reaches extremes. In a state of extreme emotionalagitation, terrible new karmas are bound.Only the Gnani Purush can show the subtle clarity of thespeed and force of the prakruti and of emotional agitation! Andit is from the Gnani Purush that the keys to becoming free fromcauses that become instrumental in causing emotional agitationcan be easily obtained to tackle the problem.In order to become free from emotional agitation, oneshould find its causes and stay away from them or leave theissue altogether, no matter how priceless. But one must removethe root causes of emotional agitation, because as long as thereis slightest emotional agitation, the path to liberation is not thereat all.In Akram Vignan, one enjoys the freedom as a result of1617If someone is upset and non-communicative (risavu) withthe Gnani Purush, how does the Gnani Purush deal with him?Only the Gnani can explain the state of absolute detachment(vitaragata)! The excellence of the manifest Gnani Purush is inHis unattached state, along with his nishkaran karuna (Gnani’scompassion for us in which He has no ‘personal gain’ oragenda. This is the only ‘reason’ and ‘purpose’ of the Gnani’scompassion is to take us to our Ultimate Freedom, or Moksha).As a result, we become free of faults and become steady on thepath of liberation and attain the bliss of the Self.In the advancing stages of obstinacies, one becomes upsetand non-communicative (risavu) and then if things don’t happenas per his intentions, he will resort to manipulative tantrums(tragu).The characteristics of a tragu is where one will create acommotion like banging his or her head, crying out loud andresorting to any means possible in order to put others in his orher own grip. So much so that it scares people into submittingunder the control of the one doing a tragu! With such people,explaining everything to them and reasoning with them canachieve a resolution, but otherwise it is best to walk away fromthem.It is an art to do a tragu (manipulative tantrum).Tremendous energies are wasted in doing one. One incurstremendous loss and as a result, risks bypassing the animalkingdom altogether and takes birth straight in hell. Dadashri, the Akram Vignani shows us ways to be savedfrom manipulative tantrums. He opens up the vision to getfreedom from all kinds of deformed personalities by looking atthem and experiencing them from all the phases; so that we too,in our own lives can open up and develop that vision and makeourselves free from our obstinacies (aadayee), adamancytowards non-communication (risavu), and tragu (manipulativetantrums), or we can escape from people who are obstinate,upset and non-communicative, or do tragu. Through theScience of Akram, the Gnani Purush gives us the understandingof the art and the knowledge to become free from our relativeself and to not get entangled in the relative self of others; thisbecomes extremely helpful to remove the obstacles in the pathto our final liberation!2. Emotional agitation (udvega) : suspicion (shanka) :intense mental note (nondha)In order to make others do what one wants, one startswith obstinacy, then becomes upset and non-communicative andif he is not successful, he starts to do tragu (manipulativetantrum). And still if things do not happen according to hiswishes, he develops extreme emotional agitation (udvega). Ifthe tendency to make others do what one wants is eroded, hegets freedom from the pain and suffering of emotional agitation(udvega).Emotional agitation is created when attachment (moha)with ego reaches extremes. In a state of extreme emotionalagitation, terrible new karmas are bound.Only the Gnani Purush can show the subtle clarity of thespeed and force of the prakruti and of emotional agitation! Andit is from the Gnani Purush that the keys to becoming free fromcauses that become instrumental in causing emotional agitationcan be easily obtained to tackle the problem.In order to become free from emotional agitation, oneshould find its causes and stay away from them or leave theissue altogether, no matter how priceless. But one must removethe root causes of emotional agitation, because as long as thereis slightest emotional agitation, the path to liberation is not thereat all.In Akram Vignan, one enjoys the freedom as a result of1819simply ‘seeing’ the relative self (prakruti) that is caught inemotional agitation. However, because of ignorance he takes itupon himself by claiming, ‘I am caught in this emotionalagitation.’ And as a consequence he actually becomes trapped!What causes emotional agitation? It is the intellect(buddhi). It is the intellect that brings one from vega towardsaavega and ultimately towards udvega, meaning it is theintellect that takes one from non-consequential motion or aneutral state (vega), into emotional force (aavega) and ultimatelyemotional agitation (udvega) and it is the intellect that gives riseto suspicions (shanka).When the power of intellect does not bring about asolution, one gets puzzled and then suspicions are created.Suspicion means one has deep ignorance.In Akram Vignan, in order to save one’s self from theravages of suspicion, by understanding the scientific knowledgeof vyavasthit (this is the subtle coming together and functioningof ‘scientific circumstantial evidences’ in all actions), as given inthe form of Agna (spiritual directives) by the Gnani Purush, onecan remain in a steady suspicion-less state (nihshank).If suspicion enters into the mind as a result of seeing asnake entering the house; that suspicion will not go away untilthe snake is seen leaving the house. Suspicion will not be bornat all if the knowledge of ‘scientific circumstantial evidence’(vyavasthit) is understood.The Vignan (science) that has manifested through thedivine words of the Gnani is the extract of his analysis of hisexperiences of countless past lives. The original knowledge offreedom attained as a result of going through every phase ofnumerous innate natures (prakrutis), is the research of theGnani Purush!Many incidents occur in the lives of men, wherein theydon’t have any suspicion (they accept their circumstances) aboutwhat is taking place, then why should there be suspicion whereeverything is happening as a natural order? In the matter ofdigesting food, is there any suspicion whether digestion willoccur or not?What benefit is there from being laden with suspicion?The condition of an intensely suspicious person is that of acorpse even though he may be alive! What happens when thereis suspicion about the daughters when they go off to college?That suspicion creates constant restlessness. It only creates painand hurts one’s own self.It is a tremendous risk to have suspicion about someone’scharacter. How can such a risk be taken? One can remainsuspicion-free as long as he does not happen to see anything.But does that mean it was not there before? Did it happenovernight? No. Therefore, if there is suspicion, one shouldconciliate that it was there before. This world is only an illusion.The Soul has no wife and no daughter. Those who don’t want tomiss out on their progress in the path towards their final liberationshould not dwell deeper in any place other than the Soul.In the effect of Kaliyug, the current bad times, wheremorality and sincerity have broken down between husband andwife, where lies any meaningful pleasure? In Kaliyug, the wifewill not be your own. There are tendencies for sheer deceit andfraud flowing in this aspect! So, where is the ground forsuspicion? The best way to conduct oneself in this respect is totake the vow of having only one spouse; otherwise it can onlybe called a ‘toilet’, is that not so? The toilet is where everyonegoes!! Is it not true that the insatiable desire and lure for sexgives rise to suspicion? Once there is freedom from sex,freedom from suspicion will be there. If one does not becomefree from suspicion that arises as a consequence of his sexualindulgences, not only this life, but his infinite lives to come will1819simply ‘seeing’ the relative self (prakruti) that is caught inemotional agitation. However, because of ignorance he takes itupon himself by claiming, ‘I am caught in this emotionalagitation.’ And as a consequence he actually becomes trapped!What causes emotional agitation? It is the intellect(buddhi). It is the intellect that brings one from vega towardsaavega and ultimately towards udvega, meaning it is theintellect that takes one from non-consequential motion or aneutral state (vega), into emotional force (aavega) and ultimatelyemotional agitation (udvega) and it is the intellect that gives riseto suspicions (shanka).When the power of intellect does not bring about asolution, one gets puzzled and then suspicions are created.Suspicion means one has deep ignorance.In Akram Vignan, in order to save one’s self from theravages of suspicion, by understanding the scientific knowledgeof vyavasthit (this is the subtle coming together and functioningof ‘scientific circumstantial evidences’ in all actions), as given inthe form of Agna (spiritual directives) by the Gnani Purush, onecan remain in a steady suspicion-less state (nihshank).If suspicion enters into the mind as a result of seeing asnake entering the house; that suspicion will not go away untilthe snake is seen leaving the house. Suspicion will not be bornat all if the knowledge of ‘scientific circumstantial evidence’(vyavasthit) is understood.The Vignan (science) that has manifested through thedivine words of the Gnani is the extract of his analysis of hisexperiences of countless past lives. The original knowledge offreedom attained as a result of going through every phase ofnumerous innate natures (prakrutis), is the research of theGnani Purush!Many incidents occur in the lives of men, wherein theydon’t have any suspicion (they accept their circumstances) aboutwhat is taking place, then why should there be suspicion whereeverything is happening as a natural order? In the matter ofdigesting food, is there any suspicion whether digestion willoccur or not?What benefit is there from being laden with suspicion?The condition of an intensely suspicious person is that of acorpse even though he may be alive! What happens when thereis suspicion about the daughters when they go off to college?That suspicion creates constant restlessness. It only creates painand hurts one’s own self.It is a tremendous risk to have suspicion about someone’scharacter. How can such a risk be taken? One can remainsuspicion-free as long as he does not happen to see anything.But does that mean it was not there before? Did it happenovernight? No. Therefore, if there is suspicion, one shouldconciliate that it was there before. This world is only an illusion.The Soul has no wife and no daughter. Those who don’t want tomiss out on their progress in the path towards their final liberationshould not dwell deeper in any place other than the Soul.In the effect of Kaliyug, the current bad times, wheremorality and sincerity have broken down between husband andwife, where lies any meaningful pleasure? In Kaliyug, the wifewill not be your own. There are tendencies for sheer deceit andfraud flowing in this aspect! So, where is the ground forsuspicion? The best way to conduct oneself in this respect is totake the vow of having only one spouse; otherwise it can onlybe called a ‘toilet’, is that not so? The toilet is where everyonegoes!! Is it not true that the insatiable desire and lure for sexgives rise to suspicion? Once there is freedom from sex,freedom from suspicion will be there. If one does not becomefree from suspicion that arises as a consequence of his sexualindulgences, not only this life, but his infinite lives to come will2021be ruined! The one on the path of liberation should be withoutsuspicion.Once there is suspicion about a person, there is separationfrom that person. The echoes of suspicion will inevitably reachthe other person. Therefore, there should be no suspicion, andas soon as suspicion occurs, it should be removed withawareness.What happens when the daughters go off to college andparents begin to suspect their character? It only createsunhappiness! Children try to look for love from outsidersbecause they do not receive any at home, and consequently slip.This can be avoided by living with them as their friends andhaving love for them. However, if the daughter takes a wrongstep, can you kick her out of the house? One must giveprotection with love and avoid losses! Caution in the beginningis welcome, but one should never be suspicious!Where there is no suspicion, there is no unhappiness ofany kind.To have suspicion is the result of past karma, but to keepsuspicion is not a result of past karma. That will cause worseningof one’s inner intent.Suspicion is the greatest weakness; it kills the self.If someone has suspicion about the Gnani Purush, theGnani Purush will know everything and yet behave in a naturalway as if nothing has happened. The Gnani does not have theslightest separation from the person who is suspicious about him.His inseparability, his oneness will only make the other personbecome free from suspicion.It is better to slap someone than to suspect him, at leastthis way there is an instant solution but to suspect someone willeat you up day and night all the way to death.Suspicious people can never succeed in any task. Successselects those who do not harbor suspicion. Suspicion isremoved by remaining in a suspicion-less state, in the state of theSelf.Does anyone ever become suspicious about death? Onequickly removes any suspicion there.As long as the Gnani Purush is there to help, all kinds ofsuspicions can be resolved completely and thereafter there willbe no obstacles in the path to liberation.Having suspicion is double the loss. First, there is thedirect suffering and secondly there is a loss (karmic) of seeingfaults in the other person.Akram Vignan says ‘You’ tell the one (your relative-self)who harbors suspicion ‘don’t suspect anyone’. The one whodoes the telling is separate from the one who has suspicions!Can one give a car to a driver who has suspicions aboutgetting into an accident? You should not be in the company ofa suspicion-laden person at all; otherwise he will engulf you insuspicions too.Those with suspicion get into trouble, that is the law ofnature and those who do not listen to suspicion have nodifficulties at all.Why should one be consumed by suspicion in a worldwhere even what is witnessed with one’s own eyes is provenwrong?A single seed of suspicion will grow into an entire jungle!As we do in Algebra, we should just cross out suspicions.Finally, one should remove all suspicions by separating one’sSelf from the one (relative-self) who suspects, by employingGnan and by scolding and threatening the relative self.2021be ruined! The one on the path of liberation should be withoutsuspicion.Once there is suspicion about a person, there is separationfrom that person. The echoes of suspicion will inevitably reachthe other person. Therefore, there should be no suspicion, andas soon as suspicion occurs, it should be removed withawareness.What happens when the daughters go off to college andparents begin to suspect their character? It only createsunhappiness! Children try to look for love from outsidersbecause they do not receive any at home, and consequently slip.This can be avoided by living with them as their friends andhaving love for them. However, if the daughter takes a wrongstep, can you kick her out of the house? One must giveprotection with love and avoid losses! Caution in the beginningis welcome, but one should never be suspicious!Where there is no suspicion, there is no unhappiness ofany kind.To have suspicion is the result of past karma, but to keepsuspicion is not a result of past karma. That will cause worseningof one’s inner intent.Suspicion is the greatest weakness; it kills the self.If someone has suspicion about the Gnani Purush, theGnani Purush will know everything and yet behave in a naturalway as if nothing has happened. The Gnani does not have theslightest separation from the person who is suspicious about him.His inseparability, his oneness will only make the other personbecome free from suspicion.It is better to slap someone than to suspect him, at leastthis way there is an instant solution but to suspect someone willeat you up day and night all the way to death.Suspicious people can never succeed in any task. Successselects those who do not harbor suspicion. Suspicion isremoved by remaining in a suspicion-less state, in the state of theSelf.Does anyone ever become suspicious about death? Onequickly removes any suspicion there.As long as the Gnani Purush is there to help, all kinds ofsuspicions can be resolved completely and thereafter there willbe no obstacles in the path to liberation.Having suspicion is double the loss. First, there is thedirect suffering and secondly there is a loss (karmic) of seeingfaults in the other person.Akram Vignan says ‘You’ tell the one (your relative-self)who harbors suspicion ‘don’t suspect anyone’. The one whodoes the telling is separate from the one who has suspicions!Can one give a car to a driver who has suspicions aboutgetting into an accident? You should not be in the company ofa suspicion-laden person at all; otherwise he will engulf you insuspicions too.Those with suspicion get into trouble, that is the law ofnature and those who do not listen to suspicion have nodifficulties at all.Why should one be consumed by suspicion in a worldwhere even what is witnessed with one’s own eyes is provenwrong?A single seed of suspicion will grow into an entire jungle!As we do in Algebra, we should just cross out suspicions.Finally, one should remove all suspicions by separating one’sSelf from the one (relative-self) who suspects, by employingGnan and by scolding and threatening the relative self.2223When one suspects, suffering occurs right away. But, atthe same time, a new seed is sown that will bring suffering evenin the next life!Suspicion is removed by doing proper pratikraman. Onehas to repent against suspicion. One should not become carelessabout it. The one who did the suspecting, the one who was inviolation, should be made the doer of repenting.After becoming the Self, if the mind shows disorderlythings inside, how can we listen to it? All feelings of attachmentare the qualities of the innate self, they are inanimate qualities,relative qualities; they are not the qualities of the pure Soul at all.You are the owner of infinite powers, how can anyone doanything to You? This fearlessness results in a state that is freeof all suspicion.It is necessary only to raise awareness against suspicion.The knower-seer state can only be maintained if there isawareness and consequently all suspicion is eradicated.When someone suspects you, it is not unfounded. Thereis some fault on your part there. The fault may not haveoccurred now; it may be from the past, but only then would thishappen. The world has never been outside the law of nature, noteven for one second.Only the Gnani Purush can create suspicion over illusorywrong knowledge (mithya-gnan). And that knowledge will begone once there is suspicion about it. There is never anysuspicion about real knowledge.“Who am I?” One has never suspected or questioned hisreal identity or his state of being the owner of the name in anypast lives. That is where one has to have suspicion. If suspicionis created about one’s own deep-rooted wrong beliefs, it iscalled the beginning of realization of the Self.What is the Soul? What is it like? This kind of suspicionis most difficult to get rid of without the help of a Gnani Purush.Who is the owner of anger, pride, deceit, and greed? How isone to understand this? Only the Gnani can make us understandand help us be rid of them.What is the Soul? What is it like? Life is to be spentthinking about this, not in the bedroom or cinema or hotels!!When do all the different types of suspicions go away?They go away, when one becomes free from attachments(vitarag) and free from all fears.Who has suspicion about the Soul? The Self does nothave suspicions at all. Actually, the ‘relative self’ suspects theexistence of the Self.He who becomes suspicion-free in the matter of the Soulis in a state of permanent liberation!Up until now whatever knowledge one moved aroundwith, whatever tools of knowledge he utilized, starting from thetime he became suspicious about that knowledge and the tools,to the point of becoming completely suspicion-less (nihshankta)regarding the Soul, (the Self), that entire duration of period inspirituality is regarded as having suspicion with reference to theSoul. Once that suspicion-less-ness (nihshankta) occurs, onebecomes free of fears (nirbhayta)! And where there isfearlessness, there is a state of nonattachment (asangata) in thepresence of all attachments!Akram Vignan is to be applauded in wonder that withinone hour of the miraculous Gnan Vidhi (the one hour spiritualprocess of Self-realization), one becomes permanently suspicion-free about the Soul.Suspicion about the Soul cannot go away by readingbooks. A manifest Gnani is required there. As one knows more2223When one suspects, suffering occurs right away. But, atthe same time, a new seed is sown that will bring suffering evenin the next life!Suspicion is removed by doing proper pratikraman. Onehas to repent against suspicion. One should not become carelessabout it. The one who did the suspecting, the one who was inviolation, should be made the doer of repenting.After becoming the Self, if the mind shows disorderlythings inside, how can we listen to it? All feelings of attachmentare the qualities of the innate self, they are inanimate qualities,relative qualities; they are not the qualities of the pure Soul at all.You are the owner of infinite powers, how can anyone doanything to You? This fearlessness results in a state that is freeof all suspicion.It is necessary only to raise awareness against suspicion.The knower-seer state can only be maintained if there isawareness and consequently all suspicion is eradicated.When someone suspects you, it is not unfounded. Thereis some fault on your part there. The fault may not haveoccurred now; it may be from the past, but only then would thishappen. The world has never been outside the law of nature, noteven for one second.Only the Gnani Purush can create suspicion over illusorywrong knowledge (mithya-gnan). And that knowledge will begone once there is suspicion about it. There is never anysuspicion about real knowledge.“Who am I?” One has never suspected or questioned hisreal identity or his state of being the owner of the name in anypast lives. That is where one has to have suspicion. If suspicionis created about one’s own deep-rooted wrong beliefs, it iscalled the beginning of realization of the Self.What is the Soul? What is it like? This kind of suspicionis most difficult to get rid of without the help of a Gnani Purush.Who is the owner of anger, pride, deceit, and greed? How isone to understand this? Only the Gnani can make us understandand help us be rid of them.What is the Soul? What is it like? Life is to be spentthinking about this, not in the bedroom or cinema or hotels!!When do all the different types of suspicions go away?They go away, when one becomes free from attachments(vitarag) and free from all fears.Who has suspicion about the Soul? The Self does nothave suspicions at all. Actually, the ‘relative self’ suspects theexistence of the Self.He who becomes suspicion-free in the matter of the Soulis in a state of permanent liberation!Up until now whatever knowledge one moved aroundwith, whatever tools of knowledge he utilized, starting from thetime he became suspicious about that knowledge and the tools,to the point of becoming completely suspicion-less (nihshankta)regarding the Soul, (the Self), that entire duration of period inspirituality is regarded as having suspicion with reference to theSoul. Once that suspicion-less-ness (nihshankta) occurs, onebecomes free of fears (nirbhayta)! And where there isfearlessness, there is a state of nonattachment (asangata) in thepresence of all attachments!Akram Vignan is to be applauded in wonder that withinone hour of the miraculous Gnan Vidhi (the one hour spiritualprocess of Self-realization), one becomes permanently suspicion-free about the Soul.Suspicion about the Soul cannot go away by readingbooks. A manifest Gnani is required there. As one knows more2425and more information from the scriptures, his suspicion increasesmore and more; once he reaches a stage of ‘I don’t knowanything’, he is ready for real knowledge. The knowledge thatgets rid of kashayas i.e. anger, greed, pride, deceit, is realknowledge; it is Gnan. Where there is suspicion, there is agony.The sign of knowing the Soul is a permanent suspicion free state.To have suspicion is to have an awareness of a kind, ‘DidI do this or did someone else do it?’ To have such a suspicionis called higher awareness. ‘I became engrossed (with therelative-self)’, this suspicion that occurs after Self-realization isalso a form of awareness of knowledge. In the final stage thereprevails, at all times, an awareness of: ‘I never becometanmayakar (engrossed) at all.’In Gnani Purush’s state, all the worldly interactions aredone by the pudgal, the relative self and He remains vitarag(detached). In spite of interacting with the world at everymoment, for Him there is no intense mental note (nondha) ofanything. One’s vision becomes muddy when an intense mentalnote (nondha) is made. Always seen in the eyes of the GnaniPurush is vitaragata, a state of freedom from all attachments.Where there is true love, there is no intense mental note(nondha). Where there is no intense mental note, there is atension free state!The worldly love is the love that keeps intense mentalnotes, it is known as attraction-fondness (aasakti). Love thatvacillates; love that goes up and down is called infatuation only.The moment one says ‘This is what you said to me thatday!’ is regarded as keeping an intense mental note and as aresult, one’s love will vanish. By keeping such a note about thewife who is considered to be your own, will result in turning aloving life in to a poisonous one.First comes into one’s conviction (pratiti) the opinion of‘it is wrong to keep an intense mental note’ then it will come intohis experience (anubhav) and then ultimately it will express inhis conduct (charitra). This is the scientific process throughwhich things express in one’s conduct.There will be revenge (vair) in the mind if an intensemental note (nondha) is kept. Half the pain vanishes by notkeeping such a note. Gnani Purush never keeps a note. Whenyou keep a note, the opposing party will also keep one too.First begins the taking of a note (nondha), then starts themind’s battle, then the battle of words and finally it can end upin a physical battle. Therefore, it is best to pluck out the root!The person wanting liberation must get rid of the‘notebook’. For those who stop taking notes (nondha), theirworldly interactions come to an end.Those who are certain in the worldly interactions remainuncertain about liberation. Certainty in the world means supportingthe worldly interactions.In order to dissolve the innate nature (prakruti) of takingnotes, what does Akram Vignan say? It says that note taking isdone by the innate nature (prakruti) and the real Self has tosimply know that. It is not objectionable that a note is made, butif the Self’s agreement with taking notes goes away; the note toowill go away.The habit of ‘taking note nondha’ will not be given upwithout the help of the Science (Vignan). The innate worldlynature will choose to die rather than give up taking intensemental notes.How can a note be made of the karmas that are changing;karmas that are constantly rising and setting?What is the process of making a note? For whateverreason, if one has the slightest like or dislike via a nimit (an2425and more information from the scriptures, his suspicion increasesmore and more; once he reaches a stage of ‘I don’t knowanything’, he is ready for real knowledge. The knowledge thatgets rid of kashayas i.e. anger, greed, pride, deceit, is realknowledge; it is Gnan. Where there is suspicion, there is agony.The sign of knowing the Soul is a permanent suspicion free state.To have suspicion is to have an awareness of a kind, ‘DidI do this or did someone else do it?’ To have such a suspicionis called higher awareness. ‘I became engrossed (with therelative-self)’, this suspicion that occurs after Self-realization isalso a form of awareness of knowledge. In the final stage thereprevails, at all times, an awareness of: ‘I never becometanmayakar (engrossed) at all.’In Gnani Purush’s state, all the worldly interactions aredone by the pudgal, the relative self and He remains vitarag(detached). In spite of interacting with the world at everymoment, for Him there is no intense mental note (nondha) ofanything. One’s vision becomes muddy when an intense mentalnote (nondha) is made. Always seen in the eyes of the GnaniPurush is vitaragata, a state of freedom from all attachments.Where there is true love, there is no intense mental note(nondha). Where there is no intense mental note, there is atension free state!The worldly love is the love that keeps intense mentalnotes, it is known as attraction-fondness (aasakti). Love thatvacillates; love that goes up and down is called infatuation only.The moment one says ‘This is what you said to me thatday!’ is regarded as keeping an intense mental note and as aresult, one’s love will vanish. By keeping such a note about thewife who is considered to be your own, will result in turning aloving life in to a poisonous one.First comes into one’s conviction (pratiti) the opinion of‘it is wrong to keep an intense mental note’ then it will come intohis experience (anubhav) and then ultimately it will express inhis conduct (charitra). This is the scientific process throughwhich things express in one’s conduct.There will be revenge (vair) in the mind if an intensemental note (nondha) is kept. Half the pain vanishes by notkeeping such a note. Gnani Purush never keeps a note. Whenyou keep a note, the opposing party will also keep one too.First begins the taking of a note (nondha), then starts themind’s battle, then the battle of words and finally it can end upin a physical battle. Therefore, it is best to pluck out the root!The person wanting liberation must get rid of the‘notebook’. For those who stop taking notes (nondha), theirworldly interactions come to an end.Those who are certain in the worldly interactions remainuncertain about liberation. Certainty in the world means supportingthe worldly interactions.In order to dissolve the innate nature (prakruti) of takingnotes, what does Akram Vignan say? It says that note taking isdone by the innate nature (prakruti) and the real Self has tosimply know that. It is not objectionable that a note is made, butif the Self’s agreement with taking notes goes away; the note toowill go away.The habit of ‘taking note nondha’ will not be given upwithout the help of the Science (Vignan). The innate worldlynature will choose to die rather than give up taking intensemental notes.How can a note be made of the karmas that are changing;karmas that are constantly rising and setting?What is the process of making a note? For whateverreason, if one has the slightest like or dislike via a nimit (an2627apparent doer who is simply instrumental in the process), anintense mental note is made about it. But if no note is madeabout the nimit, such inner spiritual effort (purusharth) will leadone to liberation.There is always engrossment with the relative self when anote (nondha) is made. Thereafter it will go under the authorityof the relative self. The Self’s realm and energy will be blocked.When note is taken, the mind becomes poisonoustowards that person. The one who has stopped taking notes isconsidered to have turned to the state of becoming a vitarag.3. Commonsense : WeldingThese days commonsense has been sidelined, proclaimsthe Gnani Purush.“Commonsense means it is everywhere applicable,theoretical as well as practical.” This definition of commonsenseis quite original and wonderful.The one with commonsense will open all the locks, nomatter how rusty they are. He does not clash with anyone; heavoids clashes by using his commonsense at home, outside, inthe workplace and everywhere else. He does not allowseparation due to difference of opinions, with his wife at home.No matter how intelligent a person may be but if there isno practicality in him i.e. if there is no commonsense, there willbe clashes.As one’s ego goes down, his ‘dealing’ will becomeproportionately beautiful with everyone.Commonsense develops by talking about various thingswith everyone in an affable way. Commonsense is lessened byscorn for the worldly life. The one with commonsense is in tunewith everyone.In the worldly life, commonsense is useful to makedecisions and to avoid clashes. A simple man will get cheatedbut in return his commonsense will develop.Commonsense can be effective to the point where onecan allow no ‘depression’ to occur, no matter how many insultshe is subjected to.Commonsense does not develop when there is selfishnessor plotting because it is used up in the plotting or in deceitfulintents.If one becomes an expert in any one aspect, hiscommonsense becomes obstructed.The one with commonsense has studied the innate nature(prakruti) of the other person and that is why he can open anytype of locks.Commonsense is a type of an insight and insight is anatural gift. Intellect (buddhi) shows worldly profit and loss. Thedirect light of the Soul (pragnya) is born only after achieving thelight of knowledge, Gnan. Commonsense can open up all thelocks in the world but it can’t open a single lock for one’ssalvation (moksha) whereas pragnya will take one to moksha.To adjust everywhere, one can observe how the GnaniPurush conducts himself by adjusting everywhere in everyway.And the one who has learned how to adjust everywhere hassurmounted the world.It is better to ‘adjust’ rather than complain. If your light isbrighter, dim your light in order to adjust with the person withthe dim light.The Gnani Purush gives us the key to avoid separationdue to difference of opinion (matbhed) and this key is, ‘We areall one and there is no difference in us.’ One should repeat thissentence five times every morning, then one day; a time willcome when you will not have any matbhed with anyone.2627apparent doer who is simply instrumental in the process), anintense mental note is made about it. But if no note is madeabout the nimit, such inner spiritual effort (purusharth) will leadone to liberation.There is always engrossment with the relative self when anote (nondha) is made. Thereafter it will go under the authorityof the relative self. The Self’s realm and energy will be blocked.When note is taken, the mind becomes poisonoustowards that person. The one who has stopped taking notes isconsidered to have turned to the state of becoming a vitarag.3. Commonsense : WeldingThese days commonsense has been sidelined, proclaimsthe Gnani Purush.“Commonsense means it is everywhere applicable,theoretical as well as practical.” This definition of commonsenseis quite original and wonderful.The one with commonsense will open all the locks, nomatter how rusty they are. He does not clash with anyone; heavoids clashes by using his commonsense at home, outside, inthe workplace and everywhere else. He does not allowseparation due to difference of opinions, with his wife at home.No matter how intelligent a person may be but if there isno practicality in him i.e. if there is no commonsense, there willbe clashes.As one’s ego goes down, his ‘dealing’ will becomeproportionately beautiful with everyone.Commonsense develops by talking about various thingswith everyone in an affable way. Commonsense is lessened byscorn for the worldly life. The one with commonsense is in tunewith everyone.In the worldly life, commonsense is useful to makedecisions and to avoid clashes. A simple man will get cheatedbut in return his commonsense will develop.Commonsense can be effective to the point where onecan allow no ‘depression’ to occur, no matter how many insultshe is subjected to.Commonsense does not develop when there is selfishnessor plotting because it is used up in the plotting or in deceitfulintents.If one becomes an expert in any one aspect, hiscommonsense becomes obstructed.The one with commonsense has studied the innate nature(prakruti) of the other person and that is why he can open anytype of locks.Commonsense is a type of an insight and insight is anatural gift. Intellect (buddhi) shows worldly profit and loss. Thedirect light of the Soul (pragnya) is born only after achieving thelight of knowledge, Gnan. Commonsense can open up all thelocks in the world but it can’t open a single lock for one’ssalvation (moksha) whereas pragnya will take one to moksha.To adjust everywhere, one can observe how the GnaniPurush conducts himself by adjusting everywhere in everyway.And the one who has learned how to adjust everywhere hassurmounted the world.It is better to ‘adjust’ rather than complain. If your light isbrighter, dim your light in order to adjust with the person withthe dim light.The Gnani Purush gives us the key to avoid separationdue to difference of opinion (matbhed) and this key is, ‘We areall one and there is no difference in us.’ One should repeat thissentence five times every morning, then one day; a time willcome when you will not have any matbhed with anyone.2829How can anyone create a wedge in our unity? Those whodo are plotters with deceitful gossip. How can they be allowedto interfere? How can one afford to be immature and allowhimself to be instigated by others?One should always do the ‘welding’ (patching up)whenever a wedge is created with anyone. It is considered agreat quality of virtue to do the ‘welding’ for others, even if thereis suffering and difficulty on the part of the one doing thewelding.In these times, the one who does the welding i.e. unifiesothers, will suffer. After the welding, the two estranged partieswill unite and the welder will be at a loss! After this kind ofsuffering the welder backs off. However, the one who wants toimprove for the Self should weld in spite of the suffering!If one is not comfortable in doing the welding, he shouldmaintain the intention in his mind of, ‘I want to do the welding’but he should not have the negative intention of, ‘It is better ifthey are separated.’Those who break up relationships are found everywherebut those who unite people are rarely to be found.4. My-ness (mamata): intense insatiable greed (lalacha)While life is short, how can a single minute be wasted?You should pass through this world without any ‘dirt’ touchingyou. Where there are no expectations of any kind at all, noblemish of any kind at all, where there is complete purity, thereis the status of the Gnani! The Gnani Purush does not have anyattachment even for his body. The Gnani Purush is without egoor ‘my-ness’.Mamata (my-ness) means ‘mine’ and as a result of thismy-ness, ‘I’ has continued to exist. The span of my-ness canexpand from ‘my body’ to ‘my wife, my house, my town, mycountry, my world.’ Etc.My-ness should be there with a boundary. The boundaryof my-ness means, it will exist as long as one is alive, forexample the ‘my-ness’ with the body. Any further extension ofmy-ness should not be there, including the ‘my-ness’ for anonly son. Otherwise, that extended my-ness will only bepainful.If an insured ship sinks, how much worrying does theinsurance agent have? If one’s my-ness is of this kind, it will notcause any pain.If a bungalow burns down after it is sold and all thedocuments are signed, would one feel anything? No; if ‘my-ness’ can vanish simply by signing papers of agreement, can itnot go away by correct understanding? Otherwise, the bungalowwill say, ‘Boss, either I will go or you will go.’What are the rules in a museum? You are allowed to seeeverything and tour around but you can’t take anything with you.In the same token, people have to leave everything behind andgo with respect, lying down in a funeral bier! In such a world,why have all these headaches?What is indicated by the ‘my-ness’ that causes clashes?Why is there pain when the wife who is really not your own,dies? At the time of the marriage ceremony this my-nessbecomes completely binding as the husband begins to think ‘thisis my wife…my wife…my wife...’ Because of this, there is apsychological effect and the ‘my-ness’ about the wife enterswithin. This is what causes pain and freedom from this painoccurs when the complex knots of ‘my-ness’ are untangled bysaying, ‘not mine…not mine...etc.’Worldly things are not the impediments to liberation butmy-ness is. The object for which there is my-ness will be thebinding object. In fact, what object belongs to us when in theend, even the body does not accompany us!2829How can anyone create a wedge in our unity? Those whodo are plotters with deceitful gossip. How can they be allowedto interfere? How can one afford to be immature and allowhimself to be instigated by others?One should always do the ‘welding’ (patching up)whenever a wedge is created with anyone. It is considered agreat quality of virtue to do the ‘welding’ for others, even if thereis suffering and difficulty on the part of the one doing thewelding.In these times, the one who does the welding i.e. unifiesothers, will suffer. After the welding, the two estranged partieswill unite and the welder will be at a loss! After this kind ofsuffering the welder backs off. However, the one who wants toimprove for the Self should weld in spite of the suffering!If one is not comfortable in doing the welding, he shouldmaintain the intention in his mind of, ‘I want to do the welding’but he should not have the negative intention of, ‘It is better ifthey are separated.’Those who break up relationships are found everywherebut those who unite people are rarely to be found.4. My-ness (mamata): intense insatiable greed (lalacha)While life is short, how can a single minute be wasted?You should pass through this world without any ‘dirt’ touchingyou. Where there are no expectations of any kind at all, noblemish of any kind at all, where there is complete purity, thereis the status of the Gnani! The Gnani Purush does not have anyattachment even for his body. The Gnani Purush is without egoor ‘my-ness’.Mamata (my-ness) means ‘mine’ and as a result of thismy-ness, ‘I’ has continued to exist. The span of my-ness canexpand from ‘my body’ to ‘my wife, my house, my town, mycountry, my world.’ Etc.My-ness should be there with a boundary. The boundaryof my-ness means, it will exist as long as one is alive, forexample the ‘my-ness’ with the body. Any further extension ofmy-ness should not be there, including the ‘my-ness’ for anonly son. Otherwise, that extended my-ness will only bepainful.If an insured ship sinks, how much worrying does theinsurance agent have? If one’s my-ness is of this kind, it will notcause any pain.If a bungalow burns down after it is sold and all thedocuments are signed, would one feel anything? No; if ‘my-ness’ can vanish simply by signing papers of agreement, can itnot go away by correct understanding? Otherwise, the bungalowwill say, ‘Boss, either I will go or you will go.’What are the rules in a museum? You are allowed to seeeverything and tour around but you can’t take anything with you.In the same token, people have to leave everything behind andgo with respect, lying down in a funeral bier! In such a world,why have all these headaches?What is indicated by the ‘my-ness’ that causes clashes?Why is there pain when the wife who is really not your own,dies? At the time of the marriage ceremony this my-nessbecomes completely binding as the husband begins to think ‘thisis my wife…my wife…my wife...’ Because of this, there is apsychological effect and the ‘my-ness’ about the wife enterswithin. This is what causes pain and freedom from this painoccurs when the complex knots of ‘my-ness’ are untangled bysaying, ‘not mine…not mine...etc.’Worldly things are not the impediments to liberation butmy-ness is. The object for which there is my-ness will be thebinding object. In fact, what object belongs to us when in theend, even the body does not accompany us!3031The one, who dies without my-ness, attains liberation. Theone with my-ness is not allowed entry in liberation.To have the knowledge of ‘my-ness is wrong,’ is thehighest earning in life.Akram Vignan clarifies this all the way, that the one whohas my-ness is not the Self.‘My-ness’ (mamata) in the one who has attained Self-realization is ‘dramatic’ my-ness. It is the same my-ness as thatin a drama (the same my-ness an actor has playing his role; itis perfunctory).The pleasure that is there when there is no my-ness is thepleasure of the free mind!The person who has no intense insatiable greed (lalacha)in life will find God!A person with only one type of greed is called greedy.There is a difference between a lalachu (an intensely greedyperson) and a lobhi (greedy). The greedy has greed in oneaspect only, whereas a lalachu person is greedy in all aspects.He has an intense insatiable greed to enjoy this way and thatway. For such a person, it is difficult to be free. Intenseinsatiable greed makes one lose sight of the goal. He will betrapped everywhere. The lalachu will self-destruct in everymanner.The intense insatiable greed arises out of the desire toenjoy worldly pleasures. With such greed, there is no rule orlaw. One will snatch pleasure from here or there, by any meanshe can.Horrible pains are invited by the intense insatiable greedfor sexual pleasure. Disgust towards sexual pleasure will givefreedom from sexuality. As long as there is intense insatiablegreed for any sexual pleasure, clashes will be there. One bindsterrible enmity through greed of sexual pleasure. The one whois intensely greedy for sexual pleasure, will even use intimidationas a final resort in order to enjoy sexual pleasure.The intense insatiable greed for sexual pleasure will makeone helpless. So the wife will make him dance like a monkey.And later, will there not be revenge against each other?A lalachu person will not only have lalacha for sexualpleasures but he will also have lalacha for eating, drinking andtraveling; he is lalachu in all things.It is an inner spiritual endeavor (purusharth) to changethoughts for intense insatiable greed when they occur. Then, oneis not responsible and if those thoughts are not changed.A lalachu person, due to being stricken with the intenseinsatiable greed, will take all kinds of risks.A lalachu wants everything. In the same way as a diseaseattracts the remedy, all objects of intense insatiable greed areattracted to the intensely greedy one.Only those businesses that are in one’s prakruti (innatenature) can be performed. Out of intense insatiable greed onegets into imaginary businesses and consequently gets intotrouble.Why should there be intense insatiable greed (lalacha) fortemporary things? When a decision ‘I don’t want any temporarything in this world’ is made, lalacha will go away.Lalacha is an inborn thing. At the time of death, the seedof lalacha will carry forward with one and it will grow in thenext life.If intense insatiable greed (lalacha) is opposed by theego, it will go away. But then later, that ego must be washedaway too. Any ailment can be removed in the presence of a3031The one, who dies without my-ness, attains liberation. Theone with my-ness is not allowed entry in liberation.To have the knowledge of ‘my-ness is wrong,’ is thehighest earning in life.Akram Vignan clarifies this all the way, that the one whohas my-ness is not the Self.‘My-ness’ (mamata) in the one who has attained Self-realization is ‘dramatic’ my-ness. It is the same my-ness as thatin a drama (the same my-ness an actor has playing his role; itis perfunctory).The pleasure that is there when there is no my-ness is thepleasure of the free mind!The person who has no intense insatiable greed (lalacha)in life will find God!A person with only one type of greed is called greedy.There is a difference between a lalachu (an intensely greedyperson) and a lobhi (greedy). The greedy has greed in oneaspect only, whereas a lalachu person is greedy in all aspects.He has an intense insatiable greed to enjoy this way and thatway. For such a person, it is difficult to be free. Intenseinsatiable greed makes one lose sight of the goal. He will betrapped everywhere. The lalachu will self-destruct in everymanner.The intense insatiable greed arises out of the desire toenjoy worldly pleasures. With such greed, there is no rule orlaw. One will snatch pleasure from here or there, by any meanshe can.Horrible pains are invited by the intense insatiable greedfor sexual pleasure. Disgust towards sexual pleasure will givefreedom from sexuality. As long as there is intense insatiablegreed for any sexual pleasure, clashes will be there. One bindsterrible enmity through greed of sexual pleasure. The one whois intensely greedy for sexual pleasure, will even use intimidationas a final resort in order to enjoy sexual pleasure.The intense insatiable greed for sexual pleasure will makeone helpless. So the wife will make him dance like a monkey.And later, will there not be revenge against each other?A lalachu person will not only have lalacha for sexualpleasures but he will also have lalacha for eating, drinking andtraveling; he is lalachu in all things.It is an inner spiritual endeavor (purusharth) to changethoughts for intense insatiable greed when they occur. Then, oneis not responsible and if those thoughts are not changed.A lalachu person, due to being stricken with the intenseinsatiable greed, will take all kinds of risks.A lalachu wants everything. In the same way as a diseaseattracts the remedy, all objects of intense insatiable greed areattracted to the intensely greedy one.Only those businesses that are in one’s prakruti (innatenature) can be performed. Out of intense insatiable greed onegets into imaginary businesses and consequently gets intotrouble.Why should there be intense insatiable greed (lalacha) fortemporary things? When a decision ‘I don’t want any temporarything in this world’ is made, lalacha will go away.Lalacha is an inborn thing. At the time of death, the seedof lalacha will carry forward with one and it will grow in thenext life.If intense insatiable greed (lalacha) is opposed by theego, it will go away. But then later, that ego must be washedaway too. Any ailment can be removed in the presence of a3233Gnani Purush. The other remedy to be free from lalacha is tostop doing all things that cause it. One must not think about themand if they come into his thoughts, he should do pratikraman,and then one day, he may be free from all that tempts him.The lalachu is a betrayer. He will completely ignore andbypass the Agnas of the Gnani Purush; therefore the grace ofGnani Purush will stay away from him. Only if he makes a strongdecision to remain in the Gnani’s Agnas, and becomes verystrong with his mind, body and speech, then there is a possibilitythat the intense insatiable greed (lalacha) will leave.The lalachu can’t give happiness to anyone in the world;he will give only pain.The effect of bad company, leads to an intense insatiablegreed creeping within one. The effect of bad company is worsethan poison.Lalacha does not let Gnan express. It stops at the levelof the intellect only.At first, one sees his own mistakes, and then the pratiti(conviction of ‘it is wrong to have these mistakes’) is established.Once this is firmly established, these mistakes of lalacha can berid of by one’s inner spiritual endeavor (purusharth).The intense insatiable greed to be worshipped will makeone organize groups that will worship him. What is the outcomeof doing this? He will go to hell. To become a guru and enjoythat status is also the same as having an intense insatiable greed!This intense insatiable greed is regarded as a terrible disease. Ifyou want to get rid of this horrible disease that perpetuates theworldly life, spend one lifetime in subservience to the GnaniPurush. One should not open up his own ‘shop’ after meetingthe Gnani Purush.Even God will not question the one who has no greed foranything at all.5. Pride (maan) : Ego of doer-ship (garva) : Wallowingin worldly pleasures (garavata)The Gnani Purush informs us that gnanavarniya karmai.e. the karma that obstructs the full expression of the knowledgeof the Self, goes once mohaniya karma i.e. the karma thatcauses the illusion, is removed. Speaking about himself, TheGnani Purush asks, ‘What kind of moha (illusion-attachment)did I have prior to enlightenment?’ He says ‘I did not have anymoha of any kind. I had no inclination for money or sex. Theonly thing I did have was pride (maan); great attachment withpride. However, there was no abhimaan which is pride with‘my-ness (mamata)’. Abhimaan can only exist if there is my-ness (mamata). This was pride without any my-ness – this wasmaan without mamata.If from a young age one has been subjected to onlyinsults, he will have a strong appetite to gain respect. In the sametoken if one had nothing but respect given to him in childhood,the appetite for respect will not be there later on.When a maani (one with a tuber of pride) gets respect,his tuber of greed (lobh) will decrease. Whereas a lobhi will notlet go of his tuber of greed; there will be no decrease in hisgreed, even when he gets a lot of respect.From the perspective of liberation, simple pride istolerable, but for one to be constantly using his energies in beingpreoccupied with, ‘where will I get respect from, how can I getrespect and recognition in the eyes of the world?’ is gravelydangerous. Pride can be removed but it is extremely difficult toeradicate the hunger for pride.If people give you respect, you should enjoy it but do notbecome habituated by it. You should be careful not to becomeattracted and then attached to the one who gives you respect.In the process of enjoying respect, awareness of the Self3233Gnani Purush. The other remedy to be free from lalacha is tostop doing all things that cause it. One must not think about themand if they come into his thoughts, he should do pratikraman,and then one day, he may be free from all that tempts him.The lalachu is a betrayer. He will completely ignore andbypass the Agnas of the Gnani Purush; therefore the grace ofGnani Purush will stay away from him. Only if he makes a strongdecision to remain in the Gnani’s Agnas, and becomes verystrong with his mind, body and speech, then there is a possibilitythat the intense insatiable greed (lalacha) will leave.The lalachu can’t give happiness to anyone in the world;he will give only pain.The effect of bad company, leads to an intense insatiablegreed creeping within one. The effect of bad company is worsethan poison.Lalacha does not let Gnan express. It stops at the levelof the intellect only.At first, one sees his own mistakes, and then the pratiti(conviction of ‘it is wrong to have these mistakes’) is established.Once this is firmly established, these mistakes of lalacha can berid of by one’s inner spiritual endeavor (purusharth).The intense insatiable greed to be worshipped will makeone organize groups that will worship him. What is the outcomeof doing this? He will go to hell. To become a guru and enjoythat status is also the same as having an intense insatiable greed!This intense insatiable greed is regarded as a terrible disease. Ifyou want to get rid of this horrible disease that perpetuates theworldly life, spend one lifetime in subservience to the GnaniPurush. One should not open up his own ‘shop’ after meetingthe Gnani Purush.Even God will not question the one who has no greed foranything at all.5. Pride (maan) : Ego of doer-ship (garva) : Wallowingin worldly pleasures (garavata)The Gnani Purush informs us that gnanavarniya karmai.e. the karma that obstructs the full expression of the knowledgeof the Self, goes once mohaniya karma i.e. the karma thatcauses the illusion, is removed. Speaking about himself, TheGnani Purush asks, ‘What kind of moha (illusion-attachment)did I have prior to enlightenment?’ He says ‘I did not have anymoha of any kind. I had no inclination for money or sex. Theonly thing I did have was pride (maan); great attachment withpride. However, there was no abhimaan which is pride with‘my-ness (mamata)’. Abhimaan can only exist if there is my-ness (mamata). This was pride without any my-ness – this wasmaan without mamata.If from a young age one has been subjected to onlyinsults, he will have a strong appetite to gain respect. In the sametoken if one had nothing but respect given to him in childhood,the appetite for respect will not be there later on.When a maani (one with a tuber of pride) gets respect,his tuber of greed (lobh) will decrease. Whereas a lobhi will notlet go of his tuber of greed; there will be no decrease in hisgreed, even when he gets a lot of respect.From the perspective of liberation, simple pride istolerable, but for one to be constantly using his energies in beingpreoccupied with, ‘where will I get respect from, how can I getrespect and recognition in the eyes of the world?’ is gravelydangerous. Pride can be removed but it is extremely difficult toeradicate the hunger for pride.If people give you respect, you should enjoy it but do notbecome habituated by it. You should be careful not to becomeattracted and then attached to the one who gives you respect.In the process of enjoying respect, awareness of the Self3435is diminished and if deceit enters into making one wantingrespect, there will be total darkness. There is no objection inenjoying respect that comes naturally but if it leads tocovetousness for wanting more respect (maan will increase)then this deformity of pride results in intoxication of pride; thatis objectionable. The very existence of pride makes one ugly,and then he cannot be attractive. One’s pride persists becausethere is an inherent belief in one that others are inferior.Can the one who loves respect, love insult with the sameintensity? A constant awareness that avoids being insulted isverily beggary for pride.Who is the one who receives insults and respects? Is it theSoul i.e. the real Self? No. This is the affliction of the ego. If youare the Self, no one can insult you. Does respect or insult haveany connection to the Soul?In Akram Vignan, You become separate the moment Yousay, ‘the one who was insulted is not I’.If you see the person insulting you as obliging you, then itwill erode the pride within.In the ignorant state (non-Self-realization state) if the fearof insult leaves, one becomes shameless and hurtful to others,whereas if the fear of insult leaves after one receives Gnan, onebecomes completely independent.There are various phases of pride (maan): Pride with my-ness (abhimaan), false arrogance (ghamand), hot temper(tumakhi), head strong (tundmijaji), self-respect (swamaan),false pride and false my-ness (mithyabhimaan).When one says, ‘My name is Lalvo’, recognize that he isonly egotistic. There is only ego. (Lalvo is a nickname for Lallu.Nicknames are typically used for peons.). When he says, ‘I amLallubhai’, means that there is also pride along with the ego(with ‘bhai’ there is emphasis on the self – adding ‘bhai’ to aname is similar to adding the title of ‘Mr.’). ‘I am Lallubhai thelawyer, did you not recognize me?’ That is ego with richmaterials (ego of showing of his material wealth andachievements); it is pride with my-ness (abhimaan.) When aperson claims ‘I can beat you’ but he has no strength to do so;that is called ghamand. If a person does not have a drop ofknowledge nor any money and yet has a lot of arrogance, he iscalled a tundmijaji. The one with tumakhi will insult and scornrespected members of the community! A ghemraji is someonewho has no substance within and without, and yet puts everyonedown. He would say, ‘I can travel around the whole world’when he is not capable of going even two miles.Hum is different and ahamkar is different. ‘Hum…hum…Iam everything’ is different, and the ego (ahamkar) is different.Ego can go away but the ‘Hum’ does not go away easily, itarises where there is nothing. ‘Hum’ is different from ‘I amsomething’!Ego is the false imposition of the Self, saying ‘I am’ wherethe ‘I’ is really not. The ego is present in everyone except in theGnani Purush.Extension of ego is pride (maan). Pride associated withmy-ness (mamata) is abhimaan. To show off, ‘this is myhouse…this is my car… is ego with my-ness (abhimaan).Where there is abhimaan, there is no saiyam; meaning astate without inner anger, pride, deceit or greed (kashayas);there is only ignorance there.The belief of ‘I am Chandulal’ is ego and ‘I am pure Soul’is the egoless state. After Self-realization, the main ego, thecharging ego that charges new karma is gone but the results ofprevious charging which is the discharge ego, still remains.Absolute knowledge will arise when all the results of thisdischarge ego are gone.3435is diminished and if deceit enters into making one wantingrespect, there will be total darkness. There is no objection inenjoying respect that comes naturally but if it leads tocovetousness for wanting more respect (maan will increase)then this deformity of pride results in intoxication of pride; thatis objectionable. The very existence of pride makes one ugly,and then he cannot be attractive. One’s pride persists becausethere is an inherent belief in one that others are inferior.Can the one who loves respect, love insult with the sameintensity? A constant awareness that avoids being insulted isverily beggary for pride.Who is the one who receives insults and respects? Is it theSoul i.e. the real Self? No. This is the affliction of the ego. If youare the Self, no one can insult you. Does respect or insult haveany connection to the Soul?In Akram Vignan, You become separate the moment Yousay, ‘the one who was insulted is not I’.If you see the person insulting you as obliging you, then itwill erode the pride within.In the ignorant state (non-Self-realization state) if the fearof insult leaves, one becomes shameless and hurtful to others,whereas if the fear of insult leaves after one receives Gnan, onebecomes completely independent.There are various phases of pride (maan): Pride with my-ness (abhimaan), false arrogance (ghamand), hot temper(tumakhi), head strong (tundmijaji), self-respect (swamaan),false pride and false my-ness (mithyabhimaan).When one says, ‘My name is Lalvo’, recognize that he isonly egotistic. There is only ego. (Lalvo is a nickname for Lallu.Nicknames are typically used for peons.). When he says, ‘I amLallubhai’, means that there is also pride along with the ego(with ‘bhai’ there is emphasis on the self – adding ‘bhai’ to aname is similar to adding the title of ‘Mr.’). ‘I am Lallubhai thelawyer, did you not recognize me?’ That is ego with richmaterials (ego of showing of his material wealth andachievements); it is pride with my-ness (abhimaan.) When aperson claims ‘I can beat you’ but he has no strength to do so;that is called ghamand. If a person does not have a drop ofknowledge nor any money and yet has a lot of arrogance, he iscalled a tundmijaji. The one with tumakhi will insult and scornrespected members of the community! A ghemraji is someonewho has no substance within and without, and yet puts everyonedown. He would say, ‘I can travel around the whole world’when he is not capable of going even two miles.Hum is different and ahamkar is different. ‘Hum…hum…Iam everything’ is different, and the ego (ahamkar) is different.Ego can go away but the ‘Hum’ does not go away easily, itarises where there is nothing. ‘Hum’ is different from ‘I amsomething’!Ego is the false imposition of the Self, saying ‘I am’ wherethe ‘I’ is really not. The ego is present in everyone except in theGnani Purush.Extension of ego is pride (maan). Pride associated withmy-ness (mamata) is abhimaan. To show off, ‘this is myhouse…this is my car… is ego with my-ness (abhimaan).Where there is abhimaan, there is no saiyam; meaning astate without inner anger, pride, deceit or greed (kashayas);there is only ignorance there.The belief of ‘I am Chandulal’ is ego and ‘I am pure Soul’is the egoless state. After Self-realization, the main ego, thecharging ego that charges new karma is gone but the results ofprevious charging which is the discharge ego, still remains.Absolute knowledge will arise when all the results of thisdischarge ego are gone.3637One must uphold the intention of ‘Let no living being behurt through this ego’. Yet, if someone gets hurt one should dopratikraman for it and move on.What is the difference between pride (maan) and self-respect (swamaan)? Pride is ego with my-ness and self-respectis pride with a boundary, pride for which one is qualified. Self-respect is engaged in protection of this pride. In the worldly life,self-respect is a virtue but the one who wants liberation will haveto let go of this self-respect also. To set up protection againstinsult is self-respect.An abhimaani person will exhibit all his possessions butthe person with false pride with my-ness (mithyabhimaani) willboast ‘we have this and we have that’; when really he hasnothing.Insult is the ‘thermometer’, i.e. a gauge to measure pride.When insulted, if one gets affected, that verily shows theexistence of pride.A nirmaani person i.e. one who claims or holds the beliefwithin of ‘I am without pride’ will have the ego of, ‘I am withoutpride.’ This ego is very subtle. Such ego too will have to go ifhe wants liberation.The Gnani Purush is with and without inclination (spruha).He is completely disinclined towards the non-self of others(nispruha) and completely inclined (saspruha) towards theSouls of others.There is no unmattata (reaction of swelling with pride) inthe Gnani Purush. People swell with pride when they havemoney in their pockets and in the Gnani, there is no suchreaction even when he is surrounded with luxury.The Gnani Purush does not have any ‘I-ness’ (potapanu).He is not the owner of the mind, speech or body at all.The Gnani Purush has no ego of doer-ship (garva). ‘I amdoing this’ or ‘I have done that’ is all ego of doer-ship. Thereis no doer-ship in the state of the real Self. Garva-ras is ‘juice’of doer-ship; it is very sweet. The instant one feels ‘I did it’, hetastes the sweetness of the ego of doer-ship. It is also, tastingthe ego of doer-ship if one maintains from within ‘It happenedbecause I was there’. In this world, there is nothing sweeter thanthe taste of the ego of doer-ship.How does the taste of the ego of doer-ship go away? Itgoes away by knowing the science (Vignan). Which science? Toknow, ‘Who is doing all this?’ This science will make you knowthat you are not the doer. After that the taste of the ego of doer-ship of ‘I am doing’ is not there. The Gnani Purush does nothave ‘I did’ with any of his actions.The intoxication of ‘I know’ is a terrible danger! Thatdisease will never go away without the Gnani’s help. It is moredangerous than poison. If you want to have an ego, have the egoof, ‘I don’t know anything.’When people praise you and you are in an intoxicatedstate for the whole day; that is called praise intoxication. Andgaravata is, ‘I did such a great job!’ Doer-ship as in ‘I am thedoer’ creates the habit of further tasting the ego of doer-ship.What should one do to not taste the ego of doer-ship?Nothing is to be done. The awareness of, ‘I am the Self,’separates one from, ‘I am the doer,’ and the taste of doer-ship.The one who has acquired Self-realization simply needs to know‘I am not the one tasting the ego of doer-ship’; he simply needsto maintain that awareness.There is no wallowing in worldly pleasures (garavata) inthe Gnani Purush. The garavata of human beings is like abuffalo sitting in the comfort of cool wet mud on a hot summerday. Nothing would make it budge. Similarly, those who are3637One must uphold the intention of ‘Let no living being behurt through this ego’. Yet, if someone gets hurt one should dopratikraman for it and move on.What is the difference between pride (maan) and self-respect (swamaan)? Pride is ego with my-ness and self-respectis pride with a boundary, pride for which one is qualified. Self-respect is engaged in protection of this pride. In the worldly life,self-respect is a virtue but the one who wants liberation will haveto let go of this self-respect also. To set up protection againstinsult is self-respect.An abhimaani person will exhibit all his possessions butthe person with false pride with my-ness (mithyabhimaani) willboast ‘we have this and we have that’; when really he hasnothing.Insult is the ‘thermometer’, i.e. a gauge to measure pride.When insulted, if one gets affected, that verily shows theexistence of pride.A nirmaani person i.e. one who claims or holds the beliefwithin of ‘I am without pride’ will have the ego of, ‘I am withoutpride.’ This ego is very subtle. Such ego too will have to go ifhe wants liberation.The Gnani Purush is with and without inclination (spruha).He is completely disinclined towards the non-self of others(nispruha) and completely inclined (saspruha) towards theSouls of others.There is no unmattata (reaction of swelling with pride) inthe Gnani Purush. People swell with pride when they havemoney in their pockets and in the Gnani, there is no suchreaction even when he is surrounded with luxury.The Gnani Purush does not have any ‘I-ness’ (potapanu).He is not the owner of the mind, speech or body at all.The Gnani Purush has no ego of doer-ship (garva). ‘I amdoing this’ or ‘I have done that’ is all ego of doer-ship. Thereis no doer-ship in the state of the real Self. Garva-ras is ‘juice’of doer-ship; it is very sweet. The instant one feels ‘I did it’, hetastes the sweetness of the ego of doer-ship. It is also, tastingthe ego of doer-ship if one maintains from within ‘It happenedbecause I was there’. In this world, there is nothing sweeter thanthe taste of the ego of doer-ship.How does the taste of the ego of doer-ship go away? Itgoes away by knowing the science (Vignan). Which science? Toknow, ‘Who is doing all this?’ This science will make you knowthat you are not the doer. After that the taste of the ego of doer-ship of ‘I am doing’ is not there. The Gnani Purush does nothave ‘I did’ with any of his actions.The intoxication of ‘I know’ is a terrible danger! Thatdisease will never go away without the Gnani’s help. It is moredangerous than poison. If you want to have an ego, have the egoof, ‘I don’t know anything.’When people praise you and you are in an intoxicatedstate for the whole day; that is called praise intoxication. Andgaravata is, ‘I did such a great job!’ Doer-ship as in ‘I am thedoer’ creates the habit of further tasting the ego of doer-ship.What should one do to not taste the ego of doer-ship?Nothing is to be done. The awareness of, ‘I am the Self,’separates one from, ‘I am the doer,’ and the taste of doer-ship.The one who has acquired Self-realization simply needs to know‘I am not the one tasting the ego of doer-ship’; he simply needsto maintain that awareness.There is no wallowing in worldly pleasures (garavata) inthe Gnani Purush. The garavata of human beings is like abuffalo sitting in the comfort of cool wet mud on a hot summerday. Nothing would make it budge. Similarly, those who are3839engrossed in worldly pleasures such as success, achievementsand prosperity, or for that matter the knowledge of scriptures –they are all in garavata and it will not let them come out of theworldly life. They are stuck there and they make no spiritualprogress. Only the compassion of the Gnani Purush can bringthem out of it.With explanation and later through Gnan (Self-Realization)given by the Gnani Purush, one understands that there is no realhappiness in the worldly life and gets the conviction (pratiti) thatreal happiness lies only in the Self. Once there is a firm decisionon his part, it will help get rid of garavata. Akram Vignan saysthat the one who is experiencing garavata, is not the real Self.Garavata gradually dissolves away with this awareness.The Gnani Purush has no doer-ship (garva), no pleasureindulgence (garavata), no inner or outer inclination (spruha),no swelling with pride (unmattata), no ‘I-ness’ (potapanu).Surrendering to such a One, who is in a magnificent state ofGnan, a seeker’s (spiritual) losses of infinite past lives arerecouped in just one lifetime and he attains the guarantee ofliberation (moksha).6. Laghutam : GurutamThe state of the Gnani Purush is such, that in matters ofworldly interactions (vyavahar) he is laghutam i.e. he is thesmallest; the lowliest and in matters of the Soul, the real Self(nischaya), he is gurutam, the highest. The Gnani Purush isnever the guru of anyone. He is not anyone’s superior and noone is his superior, not even God. Even God is pleased with theone who has no ego and ‘my-ness’.The one who becomes the most ‘junior’ in the world willbe the most ‘senior’ in the whole universe.In mathematics, the smallest and the final indivisibleamount is the lowest common multiple. From this definition, inHis childhood, Dadashri discovered God; God is the smallest inall living beings (laghutam) and common in all. Since that time,his inclination towards becoming laghutam in worldly interactionsled him in becoming laghutam in the worldly life, whilesimultaneously there manifested the state of absolute gurutamas the Self.Being laghutam (lowest; smallest) bestows one withpermanent security. The laghutam has no fear of falling.In the world, everyone likes to be gurutam (biggest,highest) not laghutam (the smallest; lowest). The one who triesto become gurutam will wander around in the world of the fourlife forms and the one who becomes the smallest will soon gotowards final liberation.What does Akram Vignan say? It says for one to be thesmallest in the relative world and biggest in the real and neitherbig nor small (aguru-laghu) in the Self-form! The one who isthe smallest in the relative world, by law, becomes the biggestin the real! In that stage, God will embrace that person.One should not become the world’s guru but should makethe world his guru. A guru without the ‘guru-key’ (gurukilli)becomes very heavy. He will drown himself and will drownthose who follow him. The guru-key must be obtained from theGnani Purush. Guru-key means a constant awareness of ‘I ama disciple of all disciples; I am the smallest.’Everyone needs a guru that fits his or her level of spiritualdevelopment. Kindergarten teachers, first standard or secondstandard teachers, college teacher and the ultimate teacher is theone who makes the whole world his teacher; the ultimate guruis the one who makes the whole world his guru.Until one’s intention of becoming the biggest in the worldis gone, unless ones inner belief of ‘I am something’ is gone, theintention to be the smallest cannot take hold.3839engrossed in worldly pleasures such as success, achievementsand prosperity, or for that matter the knowledge of scriptures –they are all in garavata and it will not let them come out of theworldly life. They are stuck there and they make no spiritualprogress. Only the compassion of the Gnani Purush can bringthem out of it.With explanation and later through Gnan (Self-Realization)given by the Gnani Purush, one understands that there is no realhappiness in the worldly life and gets the conviction (pratiti) thatreal happiness lies only in the Self. Once there is a firm decisionon his part, it will help get rid of garavata. Akram Vignan saysthat the one who is experiencing garavata, is not the real Self.Garavata gradually dissolves away with this awareness.The Gnani Purush has no doer-ship (garva), no pleasureindulgence (garavata), no inner or outer inclination (spruha),no swelling with pride (unmattata), no ‘I-ness’ (potapanu).Surrendering to such a One, who is in a magnificent state ofGnan, a seeker’s (spiritual) losses of infinite past lives arerecouped in just one lifetime and he attains the guarantee ofliberation (moksha).6. Laghutam : GurutamThe state of the Gnani Purush is such, that in matters ofworldly interactions (vyavahar) he is laghutam i.e. he is thesmallest; the lowliest and in matters of the Soul, the real Self(nischaya), he is gurutam, the highest. The Gnani Purush isnever the guru of anyone. He is not anyone’s superior and noone is his superior, not even God. Even God is pleased with theone who has no ego and ‘my-ness’.The one who becomes the most ‘junior’ in the world willbe the most ‘senior’ in the whole universe.In mathematics, the smallest and the final indivisibleamount is the lowest common multiple. From this definition, inHis childhood, Dadashri discovered God; God is the smallest inall living beings (laghutam) and common in all. Since that time,his inclination towards becoming laghutam in worldly interactionsled him in becoming laghutam in the worldly life, whilesimultaneously there manifested the state of absolute gurutamas the Self.Being laghutam (lowest; smallest) bestows one withpermanent security. The laghutam has no fear of falling.In the world, everyone likes to be gurutam (biggest,highest) not laghutam (the smallest; lowest). The one who triesto become gurutam will wander around in the world of the fourlife forms and the one who becomes the smallest will soon gotowards final liberation.What does Akram Vignan say? It says for one to be thesmallest in the relative world and biggest in the real and neitherbig nor small (aguru-laghu) in the Self-form! The one who isthe smallest in the relative world, by law, becomes the biggestin the real! In that stage, God will embrace that person.One should not become the world’s guru but should makethe world his guru. A guru without the ‘guru-key’ (gurukilli)becomes very heavy. He will drown himself and will drownthose who follow him. The guru-key must be obtained from theGnani Purush. Guru-key means a constant awareness of ‘I ama disciple of all disciples; I am the smallest.’Everyone needs a guru that fits his or her level of spiritualdevelopment. Kindergarten teachers, first standard or secondstandard teachers, college teacher and the ultimate teacher is theone who makes the whole world his teacher; the ultimate guruis the one who makes the whole world his guru.Until one’s intention of becoming the biggest in the worldis gone, unless ones inner belief of ‘I am something’ is gone, theintention to be the smallest cannot take hold.4041It is very difficult to achieve the status of the smallest. Itis achieved by the one who has a constant awareness about theline of demarcation between the real and the relative with thehelp of Gnani Purush. He who remains within the Agnas(spiritual directives) of the Gnani Purush can attain the status ofthe smallest; his vision is towards the state of laghutam and thegoal is of only that, so he will become that.What is the characteristic of being the smallest? Oneshould know that he has become the smallest when if he is sittingin the car and is asked to get out of the car, is called back tosit in the car, asked to get out again; if this happens nine timesover and each time he is not affected, then that is the sign ofbecoming laghutam.‘To remain in the intent of becoming the smallest; to havelaghutam bhaav and to keep the vision of oneness (abhedadrashti) is the foundation of Akram Vignan.’~DadashriThe worldly life has been created from the ego of beingthe biggest, and with the ego of becoming the smallest it comesto an end.The race in the race-course starts when one enters therace to become number one. In the intent to come last, there isno race.While running the race to become number one, everyonedies panting while the prize is awarded only to one.Criticism (teeka) and competitiveness (spardha) aresome of the manifestation of the ego. Everyone is undergoing theeffects of their own karma, how can anyone be criticized? Tocriticize means to ruin your own self.The one with the ego of having skills and the know-howwill get exhausted in this worldly race. Instead, one can sit onthe side, enjoy and take it easy by saying, ‘I have no skills’. TheGnani Purush clearly says ‘I don’t even know how to shave,even at this age!’The one with the ego of having skills doesn’t know thathis mistakes are buried under the nature’s ‘factor of safety’ andhe believes, ‘I am so skillful.’People will keep on doing work as long as there is theego of being skillful. What is to be done by those without skills?The knowledge of skill has continued on the basis of ego. Howcan the skill continue where there is no ego or where the ego hasended?The Gnani Purush repeatedly reiterates that He has noskills but people do not believe it. People say ‘Dada knowseverything’. Then, He says, ‘I know about the Self. I know thatthe ‘Soul’ is the knower-seer. Whatever the ‘Soul’ can ‘see’, ‘I’can ‘see’. I do not know anything else.’When the other person insists (khench), the Gnani lets goslowly and leaves and moves ahead. If someone insists, and youinsist in return, it will hinder your progress. The other personinsists according to what he ‘sees’, therefore, where is he atfault?The one who wants to attain final liberation, the world willcall him crazy; the world will beat him up and throw him out.Yet, he should accept defeat and sit down. The way of theGnanis is to win the world by letting others win! Therefore, inthis world, it is worth learning how to be defeated. Only then,he can be free from this world. Otherwise, he who is trying towin is considered as defeated. This research of the Gnani isworth adopting.Gnani Purush Himself has become abuddha (intellect-free; without any use of intellect), whereas the world is trying tobecome intelligent or making attempts to be called intelligent!4041It is very difficult to achieve the status of the smallest. Itis achieved by the one who has a constant awareness about theline of demarcation between the real and the relative with thehelp of Gnani Purush. He who remains within the Agnas(spiritual directives) of the Gnani Purush can attain the status ofthe smallest; his vision is towards the state of laghutam and thegoal is of only that, so he will become that.What is the characteristic of being the smallest? Oneshould know that he has become the smallest when if he is sittingin the car and is asked to get out of the car, is called back tosit in the car, asked to get out again; if this happens nine timesover and each time he is not affected, then that is the sign ofbecoming laghutam.‘To remain in the intent of becoming the smallest; to havelaghutam bhaav and to keep the vision of oneness (abhedadrashti) is the foundation of Akram Vignan.’~DadashriThe worldly life has been created from the ego of beingthe biggest, and with the ego of becoming the smallest it comesto an end.The race in the race-course starts when one enters therace to become number one. In the intent to come last, there isno race.While running the race to become number one, everyonedies panting while the prize is awarded only to one.Criticism (teeka) and competitiveness (spardha) aresome of the manifestation of the ego. Everyone is undergoing theeffects of their own karma, how can anyone be criticized? Tocriticize means to ruin your own self.The one with the ego of having skills and the know-howwill get exhausted in this worldly race. Instead, one can sit onthe side, enjoy and take it easy by saying, ‘I have no skills’. TheGnani Purush clearly says ‘I don’t even know how to shave,even at this age!’The one with the ego of having skills doesn’t know thathis mistakes are buried under the nature’s ‘factor of safety’ andhe believes, ‘I am so skillful.’People will keep on doing work as long as there is theego of being skillful. What is to be done by those without skills?The knowledge of skill has continued on the basis of ego. Howcan the skill continue where there is no ego or where the ego hasended?The Gnani Purush repeatedly reiterates that He has noskills but people do not believe it. People say ‘Dada knowseverything’. Then, He says, ‘I know about the Self. I know thatthe ‘Soul’ is the knower-seer. Whatever the ‘Soul’ can ‘see’, ‘I’can ‘see’. I do not know anything else.’When the other person insists (khench), the Gnani lets goslowly and leaves and moves ahead. If someone insists, and youinsist in return, it will hinder your progress. The other personinsists according to what he ‘sees’, therefore, where is he atfault?The one who wants to attain final liberation, the world willcall him crazy; the world will beat him up and throw him out.Yet, he should accept defeat and sit down. The way of theGnanis is to win the world by letting others win! Therefore, inthis world, it is worth learning how to be defeated. Only then,he can be free from this world. Otherwise, he who is trying towin is considered as defeated. This research of the Gnani isworth adopting.Gnani Purush Himself has become abuddha (intellect-free; without any use of intellect), whereas the world is trying tobecome intelligent or making attempts to be called intelligent!4243One can be an expert in one subject at the most. Insteadto be ‘ignorant in everything’ is best. When one becomesignorant in everything his life will run smoothly. Because you canhire experts in everything; you can hire a lawyer, a doctor, anaccountant, a solicitor, even a manager to run the factory isavailable for hire!Once you say, ‘I don’t have any skills’; you are freedfrom the race-course. Instead of others calling us unskilled, whynot say it ourselves and become free from this world?What is the outcome of running in a horse race? Todayyou may be first, but at some time or other you may also be last.So you should refuse even if God were to tempt you to run ina horse race!Your personality will shine once you have moved awayfrom the horse race. Horse race (competitiveness) and personalitycannot exist side by side.Once the short and sweet course of Akram Vignan iscompleted, your debt of infinite lifetimes is paid off in onelifetime. Then, there is fearlessness (nirbhayta), non-association(asangata) and non-attachment (vitaragata).7. Insistence (khench) : deceit (kapat) : point-man (theone who leads you astray)Akram Vignan is the science of Gnani Purush’s experiencesthat is capable of solving all kinds of worldly or spiritual puzzles.How should life be for the one who has attained AkramVignan? Life should be without any insistence. When you makea true statement but no one accepts it, there should not be aneed to prove it. And if insistence arises, on account of theeffect of your baggage of previous karma, then by simply‘seeing’ it, You will become free from it.In the path of liberation, there is no law. Whateverhappens naturally is correct! No law-law! Otherwise, whilemaking a law, a whole mountain of laws will have to be created.Where there is law, there is no naturalness. Liberation is for theone who becomes natural (sahaj).To start rivalry is like falling from your own position. Ifyou are true but hold on to the truth; that too is considered asego. The world’s truth is not the absolute truth; it is a relativetruth. Why should you hold on to it? The Gnani Purush iscompletely without insistence.Know that you are on the correct path if you become theone without any separation due to differences of opinion(matbhed); there should be no hold or insistence anywhere. Hewho bends to any shape is called straightforward (sarad).Of all the kashayas of anger, greed, pride, and deceit thatobstruct right knowledge and behavior, deceit (kapat) is thetoughest. This is because deceit has a sweet face and can’t beseen. All kinds of accounts of karma are created due to deceit(kapat). Deceit verily means that the owner (the one havingdeceit) is unaware of its existence and its operation and for thatreason it is difficult to remove it.To gain advantage in worldly life by pulling others towardsyour opinion and taking them into your confidence is calleddeceit (kapat). The person being deceitful does not know or isnot aware of his deceitfulness. The constant awareness of‘Except for liberation, I don’t want anything at all,’ will makedeceit leave. Saying this five times every morning will let theawareness arise to defeat deceit.Due to deceit (kapat) that exists and to finish the game ofdeceit, a person will win over others by employing craftiness(chaturai). The one who understands what is good for him andwhat is bad will not enter into this trap of craftiness.By repeatedly and deeply keeping the intention ‘I want to4243One can be an expert in one subject at the most. Insteadto be ‘ignorant in everything’ is best. When one becomesignorant in everything his life will run smoothly. Because you canhire experts in everything; you can hire a lawyer, a doctor, anaccountant, a solicitor, even a manager to run the factory isavailable for hire!Once you say, ‘I don’t have any skills’; you are freedfrom the race-course. Instead of others calling us unskilled, whynot say it ourselves and become free from this world?What is the outcome of running in a horse race? Todayyou may be first, but at some time or other you may also be last.So you should refuse even if God were to tempt you to run ina horse race!Your personality will shine once you have moved awayfrom the horse race. Horse race (competitiveness) and personalitycannot exist side by side.Once the short and sweet course of Akram Vignan iscompleted, your debt of infinite lifetimes is paid off in onelifetime. Then, there is fearlessness (nirbhayta), non-association(asangata) and non-attachment (vitaragata).7. Insistence (khench) : deceit (kapat) : point-man (theone who leads you astray)Akram Vignan is the science of Gnani Purush’s experiencesthat is capable of solving all kinds of worldly or spiritual puzzles.How should life be for the one who has attained AkramVignan? Life should be without any insistence. When you makea true statement but no one accepts it, there should not be aneed to prove it. And if insistence arises, on account of theeffect of your baggage of previous karma, then by simply‘seeing’ it, You will become free from it.In the path of liberation, there is no law. Whateverhappens naturally is correct! No law-law! Otherwise, whilemaking a law, a whole mountain of laws will have to be created.Where there is law, there is no naturalness. Liberation is for theone who becomes natural (sahaj).To start rivalry is like falling from your own position. Ifyou are true but hold on to the truth; that too is considered asego. The world’s truth is not the absolute truth; it is a relativetruth. Why should you hold on to it? The Gnani Purush iscompletely without insistence.Know that you are on the correct path if you become theone without any separation due to differences of opinion(matbhed); there should be no hold or insistence anywhere. Hewho bends to any shape is called straightforward (sarad).Of all the kashayas of anger, greed, pride, and deceit thatobstruct right knowledge and behavior, deceit (kapat) is thetoughest. This is because deceit has a sweet face and can’t beseen. All kinds of accounts of karma are created due to deceit(kapat). Deceit verily means that the owner (the one havingdeceit) is unaware of its existence and its operation and for thatreason it is difficult to remove it.To gain advantage in worldly life by pulling others towardsyour opinion and taking them into your confidence is calleddeceit (kapat). The person being deceitful does not know or isnot aware of his deceitfulness. The constant awareness of‘Except for liberation, I don’t want anything at all,’ will makedeceit leave. Saying this five times every morning will let theawareness arise to defeat deceit.Due to deceit (kapat) that exists and to finish the game ofdeceit, a person will win over others by employing craftiness(chaturai). The one who understands what is good for him andwhat is bad will not enter into this trap of craftiness.By repeatedly and deeply keeping the intention ‘I want to4445not to object to it and to rely only upon the right vision.Everyone will speak according to what they understand but youshould rely only on the right vision.No matter what worldly obstructions may arise in the pathof liberation, Akram Vignan is such and its path is such that onecan surmount all of them. If one says, ‘it is difficult…it isdifficult,’ then it will become difficult for him.‘Why should I care?’ is one statement that should not beuttered by anyone. Saying this creates separation. Where ‘whatdo I care, what is it to me?’ exists, one should do pratikramanand turn it around. The one who says, ‘What do I care?’ hasbecome (nispruha), rejecting attitude. This is a grave danger forthe Self.One has to ensure; be continuously aware that the path tofinal liberation is not missed.The path to final liberation is missed if one asks, ‘whatwere they saying about me when I was gone?’ Let people saywhatever they want to about you. Such questions come up onlyif one has deceit (kapat). To engage in such a practice is to hidethe Self.It is considered a grave disease to eavesdrop in order tocatch something being said about you. The world will talk if youare at fault, so why should there be any objection? If anyonespeaks negatively about you, let him, it is of benefit to You. Youneed to remain strong. Even a small mistake in this matter cancreate terrible problems. The deceit in you leads the mind tosecretly listen in on other people’s conversation.If you happen to listen to what others are saying aboutyou, it will disrupt your sanity. The one talking might have saidit casually without much thought, but look how it ruins your mindand sleep.get rid of all my faults, I want to attain final liberation (moksha)only,’ one can be free from deceit.As long as any sweetness is experienced in worldlyinteraction, the uninterrupted awareness as the Self cannotprevail. Bitterness is not objectionable. With sweetness there willbe interruptions and dozing in the awareness of the Self.Having met the Gnani Purush, one’s train for liberation ison the main line to the final destination of liberation. But, if some‘point-man’ comes across on the way, there is no guarantee ofstaying on course. The whole track may change! The ‘point-man’ talks in such a way, that you will not even know that thetrack has been switched.The seeker will realize that the track changed when theGnani Purush alerts him. Then, analyzing minutely, he willrecognize where the change started, what happened, who did it,on what ground it happened and which intense insatiable greed(lalacha) within led to this, and when easiness (nirakudata) leftand when did uneasiness (akudata) set in. All this has to beknown in the awareness (jagruti). The one whose worldlyinteraction (vyavahar) becomes unsteady, will become shaky inthe Self (nischaya).Progress is made when one is not swayed by anything thathas no relation with the goal of liberation. This prevents theswitching of the ‘tracks’, and ensures spiritual progress. Stick toonly the talk that liberates. Any talk that sways from this goaland the right vision should not be allowed to enter the mind. TheGnani is not so guileless (bhoda). He will not be distracted ifsomeone were to try to change the track.Where there is deceit (kapat), there is guilelessness(bhodpan). Believing anything negative about anyone to be trueis guilelessness. The remedy for this is to listen dramatically (topretend to listen earnestly while really listening only superficially),4445not to object to it and to rely only upon the right vision.Everyone will speak according to what they understand but youshould rely only on the right vision.No matter what worldly obstructions may arise in the pathof liberation, Akram Vignan is such and its path is such that onecan surmount all of them. If one says, ‘it is difficult…it isdifficult,’ then it will become difficult for him.‘Why should I care?’ is one statement that should not beuttered by anyone. Saying this creates separation. Where ‘whatdo I care, what is it to me?’ exists, one should do pratikramanand turn it around. The one who says, ‘What do I care?’ hasbecome (nispruha), rejecting attitude. This is a grave danger forthe Self.One has to ensure; be continuously aware that the path tofinal liberation is not missed.The path to final liberation is missed if one asks, ‘whatwere they saying about me when I was gone?’ Let people saywhatever they want to about you. Such questions come up onlyif one has deceit (kapat). To engage in such a practice is to hidethe Self.It is considered a grave disease to eavesdrop in order tocatch something being said about you. The world will talk if youare at fault, so why should there be any objection? If anyonespeaks negatively about you, let him, it is of benefit to You. Youneed to remain strong. Even a small mistake in this matter cancreate terrible problems. The deceit in you leads the mind tosecretly listen in on other people’s conversation.If you happen to listen to what others are saying aboutyou, it will disrupt your sanity. The one talking might have saidit casually without much thought, but look how it ruins your mindand sleep.get rid of all my faults, I want to attain final liberation (moksha)only,’ one can be free from deceit.As long as any sweetness is experienced in worldlyinteraction, the uninterrupted awareness as the Self cannotprevail. Bitterness is not objectionable. With sweetness there willbe interruptions and dozing in the awareness of the Self.Having met the Gnani Purush, one’s train for liberation ison the main line to the final destination of liberation. But, if some‘point-man’ comes across on the way, there is no guarantee ofstaying on course. The whole track may change! The ‘point-man’ talks in such a way, that you will not even know that thetrack has been switched.The seeker will realize that the track changed when theGnani Purush alerts him. Then, analyzing minutely, he willrecognize where the change started, what happened, who did it,on what ground it happened and which intense insatiable greed(lalacha) within led to this, and when easiness (nirakudata) leftand when did uneasiness (akudata) set in. All this has to beknown in the awareness (jagruti). The one whose worldlyinteraction (vyavahar) becomes unsteady, will become shaky inthe Self (nischaya).Progress is made when one is not swayed by anything thathas no relation with the goal of liberation. This prevents theswitching of the ‘tracks’, and ensures spiritual progress. Stick toonly the talk that liberates. Any talk that sways from this goaland the right vision should not be allowed to enter the mind. TheGnani is not so guileless (bhoda). He will not be distracted ifsomeone were to try to change the track.Where there is deceit (kapat), there is guilelessness(bhodpan). Believing anything negative about anyone to be trueis guilelessness. The remedy for this is to listen dramatically (topretend to listen earnestly while really listening only superficially),4647Some people say that they employ deceit and deceptionout of fear, but fear of what? The one with the fault will havefear, is that not so?He who has the intense burning desire and craving forliberation will not be touched by any hindrances in the path ofliberation.‘I know’ is the biggest hindrance in the path of liberation!It causes death of the Self. ‘I know’ brings on intoxication thatis very difficult to remove! The face of the one without theintoxication of ‘I know’ is attractive. The rising of the belief of‘I know’ after Gnan is tremendous lack of awareness.If one attempts to solve problems with the attitude of ‘Iknow’, it will only complicate matters further.If sweetness prevails in ‘I know’, it will sprout. There, oneshould erase it quickly, as soon as it sprouts, pluck it out.Otherwise, this ailment will grow and it will ruin the awarenessof the Self.All the danger signals in the path to liberation should beknown from the Gnani Purush. Then only, will the safe-side bemaintained. Otherwise, there is no telling where the ‘ship’ willend up.The law is: the one who wants to attain only liberation willalways find the correct path.8. Awareness (jagruti) : Desire to be worshipped(poojavani kaamna)By matching our understanding with the Gnani’sunderstanding, we walk parallel to Him. If we don’t, there is notelling when the path to liberation will change direction. On thepath to final liberation, not a single degree of an individual’s ownunderstanding will work. One has been wandering around lifeafter life because he has not attained the right understanding.The answer to a seeker’s question can only be given tohis satisfaction and full resolution, if the ego of the one answeringthe questions is completely gone. Even the discharge ego has toleave completely. The speech that accepts all viewpoints anddoes not hurt anyone to the slightest extent will not come forthas long as one tastes the sweet juice of doer-ship (garvaras).Thus, there should not be any ego or intellect in the speech thatcomes forth. People will not get any benefit if the ego of the onetrying to preach is not gone. It will feel good to the listener’s ear,so he will praise the preacher but it will cause a terrible loss tothe preacher. The ego will take all the credit and divert him fromthe path of liberation.In the path of Akram Vignan the Gnani Purush shows the‘red light’ (danger signal) to those who want to be preachers(updeshak). Dadashri gives this ‘red signal’: ‘If as much as ahair of ‘our’ knowledge is told to people, people will flock;people have not seen such bliss, they have not heard anythinglike this, therefore, they will flock here! But the ego that is sittinginside will laugh.’ If you want to achieve completion (theabsolute state of the Soul), don’t show your immaturity byanswering when anyone asks questions.The fire is covered under the ashes. As long as theintellect has not been eradicated, as long as the ego has not beeneradicated, as long as worldly desires are not eradicated and aslong as there are thoughts of sexual pleasure (vishaya), there isno predicting when that fire will ignite. Unless the kashayas andvishaya that have been covered up are eradicated, preaching topeople is very dangerous and risky.One will not be able to find his mistakes as long as oneis partial to his own self. Partiality towards the relative self willkeep one in illusion and perpetuate the illusion. When the forceof karma unfolds, one becomes absorbed in it, the awareness(jagruti) is blocked and the application of knowledge (upayog)4647Some people say that they employ deceit and deceptionout of fear, but fear of what? The one with the fault will havefear, is that not so?He who has the intense burning desire and craving forliberation will not be touched by any hindrances in the path ofliberation.‘I know’ is the biggest hindrance in the path of liberation!It causes death of the Self. ‘I know’ brings on intoxication thatis very difficult to remove! The face of the one without theintoxication of ‘I know’ is attractive. The rising of the belief of‘I know’ after Gnan is tremendous lack of awareness.If one attempts to solve problems with the attitude of ‘Iknow’, it will only complicate matters further.If sweetness prevails in ‘I know’, it will sprout. There, oneshould erase it quickly, as soon as it sprouts, pluck it out.Otherwise, this ailment will grow and it will ruin the awarenessof the Self.All the danger signals in the path to liberation should beknown from the Gnani Purush. Then only, will the safe-side bemaintained. Otherwise, there is no telling where the ‘ship’ willend up.The law is: the one who wants to attain only liberation willalways find the correct path.8. Awareness (jagruti) : Desire to be worshipped(poojavani kaamna)By matching our understanding with the Gnani’sunderstanding, we walk parallel to Him. If we don’t, there is notelling when the path to liberation will change direction. On thepath to final liberation, not a single degree of an individual’s ownunderstanding will work. One has been wandering around lifeafter life because he has not attained the right understanding.The answer to a seeker’s question can only be given tohis satisfaction and full resolution, if the ego of the one answeringthe questions is completely gone. Even the discharge ego has toleave completely. The speech that accepts all viewpoints anddoes not hurt anyone to the slightest extent will not come forthas long as one tastes the sweet juice of doer-ship (garvaras).Thus, there should not be any ego or intellect in the speech thatcomes forth. People will not get any benefit if the ego of the onetrying to preach is not gone. It will feel good to the listener’s ear,so he will praise the preacher but it will cause a terrible loss tothe preacher. The ego will take all the credit and divert him fromthe path of liberation.In the path of Akram Vignan the Gnani Purush shows the‘red light’ (danger signal) to those who want to be preachers(updeshak). Dadashri gives this ‘red signal’: ‘If as much as ahair of ‘our’ knowledge is told to people, people will flock;people have not seen such bliss, they have not heard anythinglike this, therefore, they will flock here! But the ego that is sittinginside will laugh.’ If you want to achieve completion (theabsolute state of the Soul), don’t show your immaturity byanswering when anyone asks questions.The fire is covered under the ashes. As long as theintellect has not been eradicated, as long as the ego has not beeneradicated, as long as worldly desires are not eradicated and aslong as there are thoughts of sexual pleasure (vishaya), there isno predicting when that fire will ignite. Unless the kashayas andvishaya that have been covered up are eradicated, preaching topeople is very dangerous and risky.One will not be able to find his mistakes as long as oneis partial to his own self. Partiality towards the relative self willkeep one in illusion and perpetuate the illusion. When the forceof karma unfolds, one becomes absorbed in it, the awareness(jagruti) is blocked and the application of knowledge (upayog)is missed. There, the awareness will be regained if one remainsin the satsang of the Gnani Purush.Awareness (jagruti) is a different matter and Gnan(experiential knowledge as the Self), is a different matter. Toawaken from sleep is called awareness. In awareness, kashayasare dormant but when kashayas are annihilated, it is calledGnan, anubhav. As the awareness increases, pending karmasdo not remain and there occurs complete purity within.As long as there is deceit for pride within, it will not allowawareness to surface. Deceit means to hide and to cover up andit always takes one on the wrong path. Deceit and ego thatsupports anger, pride, illusion and greed will take you on thewrong path.When deceit in any form does not remain, when nothoughts of passion for sensual pleasures remains, and when thekashayas are eradicated, then the awareness that arises willresult in ‘knowledge’ (gnan).When one moves away from the shelter of the GnaniPurush, kashayas will invade with all their family members.These kashayas will try by any means to make one leave theshelter of the Gnani Purush. If a slightest of sweetness is tasted,the kashayas get their nourishment. If the kashayas are notgiven any food at all, they will come to extinction. But theybecome strong if they are fed!The status of Gnani is achieved when there comes a levelof awareness that not a single kashaya ever gets any feeding;such awareness is needed. Kashayas can be won over only ifone is subservient (aadhin) to the Gnani and remains under Hisshelter and never leaves it.Unless the Gnani Purush certifies you, don’t even attemptto preach. All the faults within you are ready and waiting toattack at a moments notice. When all the kashayas areeradicated, such a stage (of becoming certified) arrives by itself!Awareness is the state where the ‘thief of kashaya’ is notallowed to enter. In such awareness, one can see all his faultsand his ego. This ego is definitely there and it makes one tastethe sweet juice of doer-ship (garvaras). When someone says,‘you did well’, he tastes the sweetness of doer-ship right away.This will cause his fall later on! Gnan exists where there is nodifference between bitter or sweet.In satsang, explanations to anyone’s questions should notbe given by anyone other than the Gnani Purush. Only simpleand natural talks are allowed, but the slightest weight given tothe relative self, will give rise to the poison that will kill the Self.The kashayas that are lying dormant are eradicated bythe increasing awareness. The one in whom awareness hastaken hold, should take advantage of the awareness by doingsamayik and pratikraman, meaning introspective meditation andrepentance respectively, to annihilate the faults.There is great fun in walking behind Dada as His child.Dada will pick you up if you become Dada’s child whereas, ifyour ego expresses like a grown up, then you have to walk byyour self and wander around aimlessly! Then after taking abeating, you will turn around.The intense greed and desire to be worshipped is aterrible disease, it is suicidal; someone will bow to you and thenit will become a habit.The Soul (Self) is already revered by all and one is tryingto get his body worshipped, which is going to become ashes oneday! Liberation is prevented because of this disease.When one creates a path that is slightly independent fromthe Gnani’s, he enters into a terrible maze. Once you have beentold that you should follow the Gnani, how can you afford to4849is missed. There, the awareness will be regained if one remainsin the satsang of the Gnani Purush.Awareness (jagruti) is a different matter and Gnan(experiential knowledge as the Self), is a different matter. Toawaken from sleep is called awareness. In awareness, kashayasare dormant but when kashayas are annihilated, it is calledGnan, anubhav. As the awareness increases, pending karmasdo not remain and there occurs complete purity within.As long as there is deceit for pride within, it will not allowawareness to surface. Deceit means to hide and to cover up andit always takes one on the wrong path. Deceit and ego thatsupports anger, pride, illusion and greed will take you on thewrong path.When deceit in any form does not remain, when nothoughts of passion for sensual pleasures remains, and when thekashayas are eradicated, then the awareness that arises willresult in ‘knowledge’ (gnan).When one moves away from the shelter of the GnaniPurush, kashayas will invade with all their family members.These kashayas will try by any means to make one leave theshelter of the Gnani Purush. If a slightest of sweetness is tasted,the kashayas get their nourishment. If the kashayas are notgiven any food at all, they will come to extinction. But theybecome strong if they are fed!The status of Gnani is achieved when there comes a levelof awareness that not a single kashaya ever gets any feeding;such awareness is needed. Kashayas can be won over only ifone is subservient (aadhin) to the Gnani and remains under Hisshelter and never leaves it.Unless the Gnani Purush certifies you, don’t even attemptto preach. All the faults within you are ready and waiting toattack at a moments notice. When all the kashayas areeradicated, such a stage (of becoming certified) arrives by itself!Awareness is the state where the ‘thief of kashaya’ is notallowed to enter. In such awareness, one can see all his faultsand his ego. This ego is definitely there and it makes one tastethe sweet juice of doer-ship (garvaras). When someone says,‘you did well’, he tastes the sweetness of doer-ship right away.This will cause his fall later on! Gnan exists where there is nodifference between bitter or sweet.In satsang, explanations to anyone’s questions should notbe given by anyone other than the Gnani Purush. Only simpleand natural talks are allowed, but the slightest weight given tothe relative self, will give rise to the poison that will kill the Self.The kashayas that are lying dormant are eradicated bythe increasing awareness. The one in whom awareness hastaken hold, should take advantage of the awareness by doingsamayik and pratikraman, meaning introspective meditation andrepentance respectively, to annihilate the faults.There is great fun in walking behind Dada as His child.Dada will pick you up if you become Dada’s child whereas, ifyour ego expresses like a grown up, then you have to walk byyour self and wander around aimlessly! Then after taking abeating, you will turn around.The intense greed and desire to be worshipped is aterrible disease, it is suicidal; someone will bow to you and thenit will become a habit.The Soul (Self) is already revered by all and one is tryingto get his body worshipped, which is going to become ashes oneday! Liberation is prevented because of this disease.When one creates a path that is slightly independent fromthe Gnani’s, he enters into a terrible maze. Once you have beentold that you should follow the Gnani, how can you afford to4849have a diversion? How can you take such a risk? In the end, itwill cause a terrible fall!Whatever comes across as hindrance in the path toliberation should be quickly plucked and thrown out. Then onlycan one stay focused on the goal. If the goal is set for liberationbut the intentions are impure, one will lose the goal. That whichmakes one lose the goal is the enemy.When one wants liberation, he has to become so strongand make a decision that ‘come what may, whatever maybecome of this body, let it be, but I will not forsake the path ofliberation. I want to accomplish my goal’, and for such a one thework, the goal will be accomplished. Only this intent and a firmdecision have to be made.After knowing from the Gnani Purush these dangerouschasms that exist on the way to liberation, one has to be in aconstantly cautious state about them. It is worth being free fromthe faults by expressing them directly to the Gnani and by turningaway from them. Do not attempt to gain any recognition orworship in the path to liberation. The goal of salvation for theworld cannot be harbored with any intent or sense of doer-shipand there is no place for ego in it. One has to walk in the pathof liberation without being recognized. One must not give upGnani Purush’s Satsang or the Gnani’s shelter all the way to thefinal liberation.One should not see the faults of the Gnani Purush; heshould not find mistakes in the Gnani Purush. If nine of theGnani’s statements are understood and one statement is not, thatone statement should be put aside and one should ‘wait andwatch’. It will be understood later.9. ‘I-ness’ (potapanu) : The Supreme Soul (parmatma)The Gnani Purush has oneness (abhedta) with the wholeworld; he has no separation from anyone. Separation will bethere only if the Gnani Purush had buddhi (intellect)! He who iswithout buddhi (intellect) has oneness with the universe.Oneness increases the experience of Gnan and separationscatters all the energies. When ‘I-ness’ is gone the separation isgone and there is oneness with everyone.This A. M. Patel has given up all His ‘I-ness’ and hasoffered it to the Lord. Know that the one whose ‘I-ness’ is gonehas achieved oneness with God.‘I-ness’ is completely gone from the Gnani Purush. Hebehaves completely according to the circumstances and withoutego. Like a ‘bundle’, He goes everywhere He has to go! Onecan remain in his natural state when ‘I-ness’ is gone. He doesnot have any opinion of his own at all! Yet, His life’s interactionsare ideal. He remains ‘dramatic’ (superficial) all the time. Onecan only remain dramatic if his ‘I-ness’ is gone.It is ‘I-ness’ to protect the relative self. To protect therelative self in a deceitful way is known as gaaddha potapanu(severely deep rooted ‘I-ness’).What is the test to check whether the ‘I-ness’ is gone? Ifthere is no change in the facial expression or within, even afterone is asked to get in and out of a car nine times over, then his‘I-ness’ is gone. The knowledge of scientific circumstantialevidence (vyavasthit) frees one from ‘I-ness’ (potapanu).Except for the Gnani Purush, everyone has ‘I-ness’.When the ‘I-ness’ is gone, one becomes God!Once ‘I-ness’ is gone; it is gone forever.After receiving Gnan, the ego that charges karma is gonebut the discharge ego still remains and that discharge ego isknown as ‘I-ness’. When the entire discharge ego is gone, oneis said to be free from potapanu.5051have a diversion? How can you take such a risk? In the end, itwill cause a terrible fall!Whatever comes across as hindrance in the path toliberation should be quickly plucked and thrown out. Then onlycan one stay focused on the goal. If the goal is set for liberationbut the intentions are impure, one will lose the goal. That whichmakes one lose the goal is the enemy.When one wants liberation, he has to become so strongand make a decision that ‘come what may, whatever maybecome of this body, let it be, but I will not forsake the path ofliberation. I want to accomplish my goal’, and for such a one thework, the goal will be accomplished. Only this intent and a firmdecision have to be made.After knowing from the Gnani Purush these dangerouschasms that exist on the way to liberation, one has to be in aconstantly cautious state about them. It is worth being free fromthe faults by expressing them directly to the Gnani and by turningaway from them. Do not attempt to gain any recognition orworship in the path to liberation. The goal of salvation for theworld cannot be harbored with any intent or sense of doer-shipand there is no place for ego in it. One has to walk in the pathof liberation without being recognized. One must not give upGnani Purush’s Satsang or the Gnani’s shelter all the way to thefinal liberation.One should not see the faults of the Gnani Purush; heshould not find mistakes in the Gnani Purush. If nine of theGnani’s statements are understood and one statement is not, thatone statement should be put aside and one should ‘wait andwatch’. It will be understood later.9. ‘I-ness’ (potapanu) : The Supreme Soul (parmatma)The Gnani Purush has oneness (abhedta) with the wholeworld; he has no separation from anyone. Separation will bethere only if the Gnani Purush had buddhi (intellect)! He who iswithout buddhi (intellect) has oneness with the universe.Oneness increases the experience of Gnan and separationscatters all the energies. When ‘I-ness’ is gone the separation isgone and there is oneness with everyone.This A. M. Patel has given up all His ‘I-ness’ and hasoffered it to the Lord. Know that the one whose ‘I-ness’ is gonehas achieved oneness with God.‘I-ness’ is completely gone from the Gnani Purush. Hebehaves completely according to the circumstances and withoutego. Like a ‘bundle’, He goes everywhere He has to go! Onecan remain in his natural state when ‘I-ness’ is gone. He doesnot have any opinion of his own at all! Yet, His life’s interactionsare ideal. He remains ‘dramatic’ (superficial) all the time. Onecan only remain dramatic if his ‘I-ness’ is gone.It is ‘I-ness’ to protect the relative self. To protect therelative self in a deceitful way is known as gaaddha potapanu(severely deep rooted ‘I-ness’).What is the test to check whether the ‘I-ness’ is gone? Ifthere is no change in the facial expression or within, even afterone is asked to get in and out of a car nine times over, then his‘I-ness’ is gone. The knowledge of scientific circumstantialevidence (vyavasthit) frees one from ‘I-ness’ (potapanu).Except for the Gnani Purush, everyone has ‘I-ness’.When the ‘I-ness’ is gone, one becomes God!Once ‘I-ness’ is gone; it is gone forever.After receiving Gnan, the ego that charges karma is gonebut the discharge ego still remains and that discharge ego isknown as ‘I-ness’. When the entire discharge ego is gone, oneis said to be free from potapanu.5051Contents[1] Obstinacy (aadayee) : Sulking (risavu) :Manipulativetantrums (tragu)The Gnani Purush’s words are worth understanding1Will you not have to become straight?2If you admit to be being obstinate, you will defeat the obstinacy.3Obstinacy: Common and Uncommon4Obstinacy in men and women4You have to see your own obstinacy5When obstinacy leaves…6Obstinacy is the only obstacle7Nature of obstinacy8Becoming straight through understanding9Necessities for progress along the path of moksha10Obstinacy during the early years of Ambalal Patel....13The ego is the basis16Never say, ‘I cannot do it’17The knowledge guides one’s conduct18Everyone’s obstinacy is different18Those obstinacies will end19Straight and yet there were subtle obstinacies19In those situations you should be alert20Only a Gnani can straighten him out21The Gnani is pleased with the one who becomes sarad21A Dramatic ego!22Obstinacy leaves by ‘knowing’ that it has occurred23It should not be so25‘You’ are not the obstinate ‘one’26This Akram Vignan is like that27If you become upset and noncompliant, you will miss.....28Who is the loser?30‘I-ness’ is decreased in proportion to the level ofawareness. What kind of awareness is required to get rid of ‘I-ness’? The awareness of, ‘This is ‘I’ (the real Self) and this isnot I’, a constant awareness of the Self, following the Agnas ofthe Gnani Purush and seeing others as faultless and as non-doers; all these are required.No matter what the result is, saying ‘I am not this’ makesone free.Where ‘I-ness’ is gone; there is no ego of doer-ship, andno wallowing in worldly pleasures (garavata).To favor the side of the ego, to favor the side ofignorance, to step away from the Self; is called ‘I-ness’(potapanu).Not to become absorbed (tanmayakar) in the scientificcircumstantial evidence is purusharth (Self oriented effort).Pragnya, which is the force of the Soul, prevents thisabsorption process in the unfolding scientific circumstantialevidence of the non-self, whereas agnya i.e. the intellect willmake one get absorbed in the unfolding scientific circumstantialevidence.Everyone has ‘I-ness’ in the unfolding karma. Afterattaining Gnan, as one employs purusharth in the unfoldingkarma, the ‘I-ness’ decreases and gradually vanishes.The one who can recognize and see the departure of ‘I-ness’ in the Gnani Purush, is eternally blessed and graced.With the departure of ‘I-ness’ (aapopu), one becomesthe supreme Self (parmatma). Thereafter, scientific circumstantialevidence will take care of Him.Jai Sat Chit Anand(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)5253Contents[1] Obstinacy (aadayee) : Sulking (risavu) :Manipulativetantrums (tragu)The Gnani Purush’s words are worth understanding1Will you not have to become straight?2If you admit to be being obstinate, you will defeat the obstinacy.3Obstinacy: Common and Uncommon4Obstinacy in men and women4You have to see your own obstinacy5When obstinacy leaves…6Obstinacy is the only obstacle7Nature of obstinacy8Becoming straight through understanding9Necessities for progress along the path of moksha10Obstinacy during the early years of Ambalal Patel....13The ego is the basis16Never say, ‘I cannot do it’17The knowledge guides one’s conduct18Everyone’s obstinacy is different18Those obstinacies will end19Straight and yet there were subtle obstinacies19In those situations you should be alert20Only a Gnani can straighten him out21The Gnani is pleased with the one who becomes sarad21A Dramatic ego!22Obstinacy leaves by ‘knowing’ that it has occurred23It should not be so25‘You’ are not the obstinate ‘one’26This Akram Vignan is like that27If you become upset and noncompliant, you will miss.....28Who is the loser?30‘I-ness’ is decreased in proportion to the level ofawareness. What kind of awareness is required to get rid of ‘I-ness’? The awareness of, ‘This is ‘I’ (the real Self) and this isnot I’, a constant awareness of the Self, following the Agnas ofthe Gnani Purush and seeing others as faultless and as non-doers; all these are required.No matter what the result is, saying ‘I am not this’ makesone free.Where ‘I-ness’ is gone; there is no ego of doer-ship, andno wallowing in worldly pleasures (garavata).To favor the side of the ego, to favor the side ofignorance, to step away from the Self; is called ‘I-ness’(potapanu).Not to become absorbed (tanmayakar) in the scientificcircumstantial evidence is purusharth (Self oriented effort).Pragnya, which is the force of the Soul, prevents thisabsorption process in the unfolding scientific circumstantialevidence of the non-self, whereas agnya i.e. the intellect willmake one get absorbed in the unfolding scientific circumstantialevidence.Everyone has ‘I-ness’ in the unfolding karma. Afterattaining Gnan, as one employs purusharth in the unfoldingkarma, the ‘I-ness’ decreases and gradually vanishes.The one who can recognize and see the departure of ‘I-ness’ in the Gnani Purush, is eternally blessed and graced.With the departure of ‘I-ness’ (aapopu), one becomesthe supreme Self (parmatma). Thereafter, scientific circumstantialevidence will take care of Him.Jai Sat Chit Anand(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)5253Thereafter he never became upset and non-communicative32Only the ‘one’ who reacts sees the one who.....33The unique method of vitaragata (the state of non-attachment)34Vitarag and yet meddlesome36That is called tragu - manipulative tantrum37That is not a tragu - manipulative tantrum38Keep your distance from manipulative tantrum (tragu)38Consequences of a tragu40In opposing the one doing a tragu (manipulative tantrum)40That is shameless open blackmail (naagai)43Dealing with taipho43Tragu for salvation of the world44Tragu, is an art too49Vigilance with understanding50Tragu became a heavy liability for a lady51Ingrained in the prakruti51Beware of those doing tragu!52Adjustment to save yourself54[2] Udvega (emotional agitation) : Shanka (suspicion) :Nondha (making a deep intense mental note)Against emotional agitation: udvega56Where there is no expectation, there is no emotional agitation57Motion (Vega), emotion (Aavega) and emotional.....58Udvega - so many difficulties60Move away from that aspect of your relationship.....62Intellect is what brings on udvega60The ‘one’ who experiences udvega, is not the Self64The root of suspicion (shanka)66Suspicion is constant death67Suspicion and inquisitiveness68For devotees...69Keep a medicine for suspicions70It all depends on the sub-atomic particles (parmanus)71Does suspicion result in prejudice?72Solution for suspicion73Passing through every phase76The ‘one’ who is beyond worldly interactions, ‘settles’ it77Suspicion leads to destruction77The one who is suspicion-laden is a living dead77Why have suspicions where everything happens automatically?78Suspicion is harmful at all times79The dangers are grave80How much strain should you put on your eyes in the dark?81For those going to moksha83‘Safe-side’ related marital conduct84What a betrayal this is85How can there be moha (attachment due to illusion).....86Solution for situations of extreme suspicion87That is a dangerous disease88Effects of suspicions88Intellect ruins the worldly life89Suspicion, continued suspicion and destructive suspicion90The unawareness of moha (illusionary attachment)92Unconstructive criticism92Beware! Parents of daughters93Suspicion? No, take care of her95Free from kashayas on the path of moksha96Solution for suspicions98Vyavasthit eliminates suspicion98If you want to go to moksha...100It is your own weakness102Dada listens to suspicions through the magic of Gnan102No separation between him and us, even when reprimanding1045455Thereafter he never became upset and non-communicative32Only the ‘one’ who reacts sees the one who.....33The unique method of vitaragata (the state of non-attachment)34Vitarag and yet meddlesome36That is called tragu - manipulative tantrum37That is not a tragu - manipulative tantrum38Keep your distance from manipulative tantrum (tragu)38Consequences of a tragu40In opposing the one doing a tragu (manipulative tantrum)40That is shameless open blackmail (naagai)43Dealing with taipho43Tragu for salvation of the world44Tragu, is an art too49Vigilance with understanding50Tragu became a heavy liability for a lady51Ingrained in the prakruti51Beware of those doing tragu!52Adjustment to save yourself54[2] Udvega (emotional agitation) : Shanka (suspicion) :Nondha (making a deep intense mental note)Against emotional agitation: udvega56Where there is no expectation, there is no emotional agitation57Motion (Vega), emotion (Aavega) and emotional.....58Udvega - so many difficulties60Move away from that aspect of your relationship.....62Intellect is what brings on udvega60The ‘one’ who experiences udvega, is not the Self64The root of suspicion (shanka)66Suspicion is constant death67Suspicion and inquisitiveness68For devotees...69Keep a medicine for suspicions70It all depends on the sub-atomic particles (parmanus)71Does suspicion result in prejudice?72Solution for suspicion73Passing through every phase76The ‘one’ who is beyond worldly interactions, ‘settles’ it77Suspicion leads to destruction77The one who is suspicion-laden is a living dead77Why have suspicions where everything happens automatically?78Suspicion is harmful at all times79The dangers are grave80How much strain should you put on your eyes in the dark?81For those going to moksha83‘Safe-side’ related marital conduct84What a betrayal this is85How can there be moha (attachment due to illusion).....86Solution for situations of extreme suspicion87That is a dangerous disease88Effects of suspicions88Intellect ruins the worldly life89Suspicion, continued suspicion and destructive suspicion90The unawareness of moha (illusionary attachment)92Unconstructive criticism92Beware! Parents of daughters93Suspicion? No, take care of her95Free from kashayas on the path of moksha96Solution for suspicions98Vyavasthit eliminates suspicion98If you want to go to moksha...100It is your own weakness102Dada listens to suspicions through the magic of Gnan102No separation between him and us, even when reprimanding1045455Instead of being suspicious...106Even if it is true do not harbor suspicion107Suspicion even after entrusting someone?107When you remember what you loaned107Suspicion and astrology109Nihshankta: total absence of suspicion109No one will have suspicions of this kind111Solution from the Gnani Purush111Then have suspicion all the way to the end112…otherwise do not harbor suspicions114Be cautious but not suspicious114Never have suspicions, even when knowing everything115The ‘doer’ and the ‘sayer’ are separate116Fearlessness is required there117Precaution is taken by the worldly self, not.....119From a seed to a jungle121A suspicion-laden mind is separate and ‘You’ are separate127Purity through pratikraman128Suspicion that never goes away charges new karma129The non-Self was and is separate from the Self130Awareness of Gnan against suspicion131Opposing suspicion about the other person133The world remains suspicion less where suspicion is needed134Doubt over wrong knowledge135Doubt only over the ego136Suspicion-free about ‘I am Chandulal’ for....137Suspicion-free in regards to the Soul138One cannot waste this precious human life this way139That is when suspicions and uncertainties go away140Who has suspicion about the Atma?141Pragnya (the direct light of the Self) is biased only.....143Nihshankta (suspicion-less-ness): Nirbhayta.....144This is what happens in the Gnan Vidhi145The Science of Separation through Akram147Then there is no liability148Suspicion does not depart through reading books149Knowing causes suspicion150After Gnan, there is no one left to suspect153Gnan shows its presence, where such a suspicion arises154Suspicion-free as to the purity of the Self155Where is the basis for suspicion?157Dealings are of the pudgal (the relative-Self) and.....158Where there is love, there is no nondha.....159Destroy mistakes scientifically162Making intense mental notes increases enmity163Vyavasthit eliminates intense mental notes164Being exact in worldly life will impede your liberation165Intense mental notes perpetuates the worldly life166Intense mental note taker is not You: Do not agree with him168‘We’ are separate from the one making the note169Why keep a note of changing karmas?170The likes and dislikes make one take nondha172Authority to give opinion?172The authority of the non-Self reigns where there is nondha173Intense mental notes and opinion174You need awareness, not an intense mental note176Where there is an intense mental note there is the sting176Absolute darshan of The Gnani177Along the path of the vitarag...178[3] Commonsense : WeldingDeficiency in commonsense179‘Everywhere applicable’1795657Instead of being suspicious...106Even if it is true do not harbor suspicion107Suspicion even after entrusting someone?107When you remember what you loaned107Suspicion and astrology109Nihshankta: total absence of suspicion109No one will have suspicions of this kind111Solution from the Gnani Purush111Then have suspicion all the way to the end112…otherwise do not harbor suspicions114Be cautious but not suspicious114Never have suspicions, even when knowing everything115The ‘doer’ and the ‘sayer’ are separate116Fearlessness is required there117Precaution is taken by the worldly self, not.....119From a seed to a jungle121A suspicion-laden mind is separate and ‘You’ are separate127Purity through pratikraman128Suspicion that never goes away charges new karma129The non-Self was and is separate from the Self130Awareness of Gnan against suspicion131Opposing suspicion about the other person133The world remains suspicion less where suspicion is needed134Doubt over wrong knowledge135Doubt only over the ego136Suspicion-free about ‘I am Chandulal’ for....137Suspicion-free in regards to the Soul138One cannot waste this precious human life this way139That is when suspicions and uncertainties go away140Who has suspicion about the Atma?141Pragnya (the direct light of the Self) is biased only.....143Nihshankta (suspicion-less-ness): Nirbhayta.....144This is what happens in the Gnan Vidhi145The Science of Separation through Akram147Then there is no liability148Suspicion does not depart through reading books149Knowing causes suspicion150After Gnan, there is no one left to suspect153Gnan shows its presence, where such a suspicion arises154Suspicion-free as to the purity of the Self155Where is the basis for suspicion?157Dealings are of the pudgal (the relative-Self) and.....158Where there is love, there is no nondha.....159Destroy mistakes scientifically162Making intense mental notes increases enmity163Vyavasthit eliminates intense mental notes164Being exact in worldly life will impede your liberation165Intense mental notes perpetuates the worldly life166Intense mental note taker is not You: Do not agree with him168‘We’ are separate from the one making the note169Why keep a note of changing karmas?170The likes and dislikes make one take nondha172Authority to give opinion?172The authority of the non-Self reigns where there is nondha173Intense mental notes and opinion174You need awareness, not an intense mental note176Where there is an intense mental note there is the sting176Absolute darshan of The Gnani177Along the path of the vitarag...178[3] Commonsense : WeldingDeficiency in commonsense179‘Everywhere applicable’1795657The Yard stick of commonsense181Lack of practical understanding182Your worldly interactions are at their best when.....182Commonsense increases with a mixing nature.....183‘Singing’ in harmony is the key184Commonsense avoids conflicts185How to stop swachhand (to act according to one’s.....)185Straightness increases commonsense186Solution with commonsense187Selfishness prevents full commonsense187Insight (sooj) is a different thing altogether188Selflessness leads to full commonsense189Buddhi (intellect), Sooj (insight) and Pragnya.....194Only one key to open all the locks195Learn only this in the worldly life196Complaint? No just adjust!196Coming down to the level of others197This is how you attain oneness198Do not encourage negative talk by listening to others198‘Welding’: Settling disputes and reuniting200To the Welder...201Do not let your bhaav turn into abhaav202Insight of welding from the beginning203Welding is an art!204Happiness everywhere with welding206Gnani’s original talk207Everyone breaks but rare is the One who patches up207[4] Mamata (Attachment – my-ness) :Lalacha (Covetousness)Better to stay away from sticky wet mud208The Gnani is without any expectations208Not even a hint of mamata (attachment; ‘my-ness’)209Where there is no ‘my-ness’ there exists the supreme Self210The nature of mamata211The extent of mamata (my-ness)212The boundary of mamata (my-ness)213Mamata of the Insurance Agent214You can have mamata for this body only215Remove mamata through understanding217The rules in a museum218Saying, ‘mine’ makes it stick; saying ‘not mine’ makes it leave221Achieve everything even without mamata223Entrapment is the consequence of greed (lalacha)223Subtle observation of one’s own nature224Belief that creates mamata (my-ness)224The one with mamata is not the Self225Mamata (my-ness) such as the one in a drama226Enjoying without my-ness227He attains liberation227One loses all sense in intense inner greed (lalacha)228Gluttonous greed for pleasure makes one miss the....229Which is harmful, lobh (greed) or lalacha.....231The craving for pleasure from every which way235Lalacha for sex, what a demeaning state237Conflicts because of it239From intense greed (lalacha) to helplessness and.....241The touch of a lalachu person will ruin samskar...241That is purusharth241Covetous people take on a liability243A covetous person is always seeking pleasure243Why has intense greed (lalacha) for this?244Swachhand (intense inner impediment of doing things.....2445859The Yard stick of commonsense181Lack of practical understanding182Your worldly interactions are at their best when.....182Commonsense increases with a mixing nature.....183‘Singing’ in harmony is the key184Commonsense avoids conflicts185How to stop swachhand (to act according to one’s.....)185Straightness increases commonsense186Solution with commonsense187Selfishness prevents full commonsense187Insight (sooj) is a different thing altogether188Selflessness leads to full commonsense189Buddhi (intellect), Sooj (insight) and Pragnya.....194Only one key to open all the locks195Learn only this in the worldly life196Complaint? No just adjust!196Coming down to the level of others197This is how you attain oneness198Do not encourage negative talk by listening to others198‘Welding’: Settling disputes and reuniting200To the Welder...201Do not let your bhaav turn into abhaav202Insight of welding from the beginning203Welding is an art!204Happiness everywhere with welding206Gnani’s original talk207Everyone breaks but rare is the One who patches up207[4] Mamata (Attachment – my-ness) :Lalacha (Covetousness)Better to stay away from sticky wet mud208The Gnani is without any expectations208Not even a hint of mamata (attachment; ‘my-ness’)209Where there is no ‘my-ness’ there exists the supreme Self210The nature of mamata211The extent of mamata (my-ness)212The boundary of mamata (my-ness)213Mamata of the Insurance Agent214You can have mamata for this body only215Remove mamata through understanding217The rules in a museum218Saying, ‘mine’ makes it stick; saying ‘not mine’ makes it leave221Achieve everything even without mamata223Entrapment is the consequence of greed (lalacha)223Subtle observation of one’s own nature224Belief that creates mamata (my-ness)224The one with mamata is not the Self225Mamata (my-ness) such as the one in a drama226Enjoying without my-ness227He attains liberation227One loses all sense in intense inner greed (lalacha)228Gluttonous greed for pleasure makes one miss the....229Which is harmful, lobh (greed) or lalacha.....231The craving for pleasure from every which way235Lalacha for sex, what a demeaning state237Conflicts because of it239From intense greed (lalacha) to helplessness and.....241The touch of a lalachu person will ruin samskar...241That is purusharth241Covetous people take on a liability243A covetous person is always seeking pleasure243Why has intense greed (lalacha) for this?244Swachhand (intense inner impediment of doing things.....2445859The fear of being insulted is beggary (bheekh) of pride282The Soul and respect or insult283How can anyone insult You when he does not.....284Maya: the illusion and her progeny of six sons286The growing pride gives rise to greed288Pride, verily is himsak-bhaav288There are countless phases of pride289‘Hum’ (‘I-ness’ with ego) is an obstacle on the path.....294Ego, pride and pride with ‘my-ness’297The zero state of the Gnani Purush304After Self-realization...306Swamaan and ego with rich material308Swamaan309Abhimaan and false abhimaan312That is false abhimaan (mithya-abhimaan)312The sting of mustard seeds313The thermometer to measure pride315Nirmaani: the ego being pride-less317Nirmohi: the ego of being without attraction.....318Sat Purush is he who...319Nispruha: non-acquisitiveness; no inclination320No complacency in the Gnani322…no potapanu (‘I-ness’ and ‘my-ness’)323The sweetness of doer-ship (garva meethash) is.....324Only ‘Science’ will liberate you from garva327The Gnani has no garva (doer-ship)328The intoxication (keyf) of ‘I know’ increases with.....331Have the ego of ‘I don’t know anything’332The seer and the knower is not involved in.....334Garavata: stuck in indulgence of worldly pleasures336All this is garavata too...340How can one be freed from garavata?3436061The tubers of intense greed (lalacha)245Such resolution can make you free from lalacha246Removing lalacha through the ego247That is when intense greed (lalacha) goes away248A person hurts others because of his intense greed (lalacha)248Make sure you do not abuse it in this way249Effect of bad company250Veils over lalacha are very heavy250The ultimate solution is to follow Agnas251Intense greed (lalacha) for wanting reverence258Live one life by surrendering to the Gnani260Life surrender to gnan261Your intention should be for the absolute state262It is not found in scriptures, it has not even been heard...263[5] Maan : Garva : GaravataMaan without mamata: pride without ‘my-ness’265The pride was a belief only in the mind266It was all for maan268Frightful heat of anger in reaction to obstruction of pride270The Ego before and after Gnan270Ego of a noble man272Craving for respect274‘Tasting’ respect releases one from having greed for it275The beggary for respect276Enjoy the respect people give you but...277Deceit in pride: Distortion of pride278Distortion of pride: Intoxication of ego278You should be indebted to the one insulting you279Love for insults280Education and wisdom281Pratikraman for the attack281The fear of being insulted is beggary (bheekh) of pride282The Soul and respect or insult283How can anyone insult You when he does not.....284Maya: the illusion and her progeny of six sons286The growing pride gives rise to greed288Pride, verily is himsak-bhaav288There are countless phases of pride289‘Hum’ (‘I-ness’ with ego) is an obstacle on the path.....294Ego, pride and pride with ‘my-ness’297The zero state of the Gnani Purush304After Self-realization...306Swamaan and ego with rich material308Swamaan309Abhimaan and false abhimaan312That is false abhimaan (mithya-abhimaan)312The sting of mustard seeds313The thermometer to measure pride315Nirmaani: the ego being pride-less317Nirmohi: the ego of being without attraction.....318Sat Purush is he who...319Nispruha: non-acquisitiveness; no inclination320No complacency in the Gnani322…no potapanu (‘I-ness’ and ‘my-ness’)323The sweetness of doer-ship (garva meethash) is.....324Only ‘Science’ will liberate you from garva327The Gnani has no garva (doer-ship)328The intoxication (keyf) of ‘I know’ increases with.....331Have the ego of ‘I don’t know anything’332The seer and the knower is not involved in.....334Garavata: stuck in indulgence of worldly pleasures336All this is garavata too...340How can one be freed from garavata?3436061The tubers of intense greed (lalacha)245Such resolution can make you free from lalacha246Removing lalacha through the ego247That is when intense greed (lalacha) goes away248A person hurts others because of his intense greed (lalacha)248Make sure you do not abuse it in this way249Effect of bad company250Veils over lalacha are very heavy250The ultimate solution is to follow Agnas251Intense greed (lalacha) for wanting reverence258Live one life by surrendering to the Gnani260Life surrender to gnan261Your intention should be for the absolute state262It is not found in scriptures, it has not even been heard...263[5] Maan : Garva : GaravataMaan without mamata: pride without ‘my-ness’265The pride was a belief only in the mind266It was all for maan268Frightful heat of anger in reaction to obstruction of pride270The Ego before and after Gnan270Ego of a noble man272Craving for respect274‘Tasting’ respect releases one from having greed for it275The beggary for respect276Enjoy the respect people give you but...277Deceit in pride: Distortion of pride278Distortion of pride: Intoxication of ego278You should be indebted to the one insulting you279Love for insults280Education and wisdom281Pratikraman for the attack281Attain Liberation with help of the Gnani346[6] Laghutam (lightest): Gurutam (heaviest)The state of the Gnani is laghutam and gurutam348Laghutam must be your intent349God is very pleased with the one without mamata350Junior of the junior351LCM: Lowest common factor is God352Only the laghutam state has value352Laghuta takes you towards guruta353Instead of being helpless in all respects…become laghutam354Consequences of guruta355Laghutam in the world leads to the ultimate.....358Undertake the yoga of laghutam360The world’s guru? No the world is the guru361What is a gurukilli?362‘Exactness’ through laghutam363The world’s disciple is the world’s superior (upari)364The precise manner in which Akram Vignan arose365Know the State of the Gnani366One’s conduct should be of laghutam intent367Line of Demarcation368The intent of Laghutam makes one follow.....370Where there is total laghutam, there is the state of the absolute372The goal of becoming laghutam373The Grandeur of the state of Laghutam374To attain the Self is verily the gurutam375Test examination of the laghutam375The Foundation of Akram Science376Liberation with the laghutam ego377There is no racecourse in laghutam377The racecourses of the worldly life and.....378Criticism ruins everything for the one who criticizes379The escape from the racecourse380The misuse of intellect in daily life381The zero ego state of The Gnani383Win in this world by losing385You are correct by your viewpoint386Find the ways to lose in life388Expert in One, but in everything else...389The racecourse of life391The prize goes to the winner, the rest die panting394There is no winner when there is jealousy396Let others win397The Course of Akram Vignan398[7] Insistence (khench) : deceit (kapat) :‘point-man’ (the one who leads you astray)The Science of Akram Vignan unravels all entanglements400When one is insistent, the Gnani becomes silent400There should be no insistence for that404Bring a closure by becoming straight (sarad)406The ego after Gnan is lifeless and the prakruti dissipates406Deceit (kapat) and craftiness (chaturai)407‘Point-man’ on the path of liberation417‘What do I care?’ (‘Maarey shoo?’)426The deception that deludes and throws one off the.....430The belief of ‘I know’ is spiritual suicide435[8] Awareness (Jagruti) : The desire to be worshippedDo not rush to answer questions about Gnan443On the path of full enlightenment...444Upsham - it is nothing but a smoldering fire4456263Attain Liberation with help of the Gnani346[6] Laghutam (lightest): Gurutam (heaviest)The state of the Gnani is laghutam and gurutam348Laghutam must be your intent349God is very pleased with the one without mamata350Junior of the junior351LCM: Lowest common factor is God352Only the laghutam state has value352Laghuta takes you towards guruta353Instead of being helpless in all respects…become laghutam354Consequences of guruta355Laghutam in the world leads to the ultimate.....358Undertake the yoga of laghutam360The world’s guru? No the world is the guru361What is a gurukilli?362‘Exactness’ through laghutam363The world’s disciple is the world’s superior (upari)364The precise manner in which Akram Vignan arose365Know the State of the Gnani366One’s conduct should be of laghutam intent367Line of Demarcation368The intent of Laghutam makes one follow.....370Where there is total laghutam, there is the state of the absolute372The goal of becoming laghutam373The Grandeur of the state of Laghutam374To attain the Self is verily the gurutam375Test examination of the laghutam375The Foundation of Akram Science376Liberation with the laghutam ego377There is no racecourse in laghutam377The racecourses of the worldly life and.....378Criticism ruins everything for the one who criticizes379The escape from the racecourse380The misuse of intellect in daily life381The zero ego state of The Gnani383Win in this world by losing385You are correct by your viewpoint386Find the ways to lose in life388Expert in One, but in everything else...389The racecourse of life391The prize goes to the winner, the rest die panting394There is no winner when there is jealousy396Let others win397The Course of Akram Vignan398[7] Insistence (khench) : deceit (kapat) :‘point-man’ (the one who leads you astray)The Science of Akram Vignan unravels all entanglements400When one is insistent, the Gnani becomes silent400There should be no insistence for that404Bring a closure by becoming straight (sarad)406The ego after Gnan is lifeless and the prakruti dissipates406Deceit (kapat) and craftiness (chaturai)407‘Point-man’ on the path of liberation417‘What do I care?’ (‘Maarey shoo?’)426The deception that deludes and throws one off the.....430The belief of ‘I know’ is spiritual suicide435[8] Awareness (Jagruti) : The desire to be worshippedDo not rush to answer questions about Gnan443On the path of full enlightenment...444Upsham - it is nothing but a smoldering fire4456263Partiality towards the self veils the reign of the Self447That is when awareness leads to the experience of Gnan449Starve the kashayas for three years450Certification for doing Satsang452The sweetness of doer-ship (garvaras) makes one fall452Grace and awareness are different454Subtle change of ownership when talking.....455Become a child of The Gnani456Hold the silence to attain the ultimate state of liberation458The intense greed and craving to be worshipped459Danger zones in the path of moksha461To move on inconspicuously464Subservience to the Gnani Purush465Behold the compassion of the Gnani466[9] I-ness (potapanu) : Supreme Soul (Parmatma)Oneness with the entire universe469I-ness (potapanu)470The Gnani does not have ‘I-ness’471Naturalness is attained synchronously as the last.....473Drama begins when ‘I-ness’ decreases474Still the ‘I-ness’ remains475The authority is gone, the ‘I-ness’ remains476I, the lawyer, Mangaddas478Protection of the prakruti is the potapanu479Aggression is intense potapanu480The ‘seer’ does not have ‘I-ness’482The Test of ‘I-ness’483That is when ‘I-ness’ will go away485‘I-ness’ in the things one likes489Purusharth should begin with the right intent4876465‘I-ness’ melts as karmas are cleared489Discharge ego is ‘I-ness’490Relationship between karma, ‘I-ness’ and awareness491The Exact Awareness of Separation492‘I-ness’ melts away with real experience496All this is also ‘I-ness’497Purusharth is needed in whatever is unfolding in front of you497There lies the strength of Pragnya - the direct light of.....498This is how the experience as the Self grows499Specific details of ‘seeing and knowing’500The attainment in Akram Vignan502The one whose prakruti has become upsham.....503The grave danger of leaving the Gnani Purush503Speech without ownership is the sign of the Gnani504Only understand this Vignan, you need not do anything else505Only the one who understands this will attain505One whose ‘I-ness’ is gone becomes Parmatma506(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Partiality towards the self veils the reign of the Self447That is when awareness leads to the experience of Gnan449Starve the kashayas for three years450Certification for doing Satsang452The sweetness of doer-ship (garvaras) makes one fall452Grace and awareness are different454Subtle change of ownership when talking.....455Become a child of The Gnani456Hold the silence to attain the ultimate state of liberation458The intense greed and craving to be worshipped459Danger zones in the path of moksha461To move on inconspicuously464Subservience to the Gnani Purush465Behold the compassion of the Gnani466[9] I-ness (potapanu) : Supreme Soul (Parmatma)Oneness with the entire universe469I-ness (potapanu)470The Gnani does not have ‘I-ness’471Naturalness is attained synchronously as the last.....473Drama begins when ‘I-ness’ decreases474Still the ‘I-ness’ remains475The authority is gone, the ‘I-ness’ remains476I, the lawyer, Mangaddas478Protection of the prakruti is the potapanu479Aggression is intense potapanu480The ‘seer’ does not have ‘I-ness’482The Test of ‘I-ness’483That is when ‘I-ness’ will go away485‘I-ness’ in the things one likes489Purusharth should begin with the right intent4876465‘I-ness’ melts as karmas are cleared489Discharge ego is ‘I-ness’490Relationship between karma, ‘I-ness’ and awareness491The Exact Awareness of Separation492‘I-ness’ melts away with real experience496All this is also ‘I-ness’497Purusharth is needed in whatever is unfolding in front of you497There lies the strength of Pragnya - the direct light of.....498This is how the experience as the Self grows499Specific details of ‘seeing and knowing’500The attainment in Akram Vignan502The one whose prakruti has become upsham.....503The grave danger of leaving the Gnani Purush503Speech without ownership is the sign of the Gnani504Only understand this Vignan, you need not do anything else505Only the one who understands this will attain505One whose ‘I-ness’ is gone becomes Parmatma506(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Note About This TranslationThe Gnani Purush Ambalal M. Patel, also commonly knownas Dadashri or Dada, had said that it would be impossible totranslate his satsangs and the knowledge about the Science ofSelf-Realization verbatim into English because some of themeanings would be lost in the process. Therefore, in order tounderstand precisely the science of Akram Vignan and Self-Realization He stressed the importance of learning Gujarati.Dadashri did however grant his blessings to translate hiswords into English and other languages so that spiritual seekerscould benefit to a certain degree and later progress through theirown efforts.This is a humble attempt to present to the world, theessence of His Knowledge. This is not a literal translation butgreat care has been taken to preserve His original words and theessence of His message. For certain Gujarati words, severalEnglish words or even sentences are needed to convey the exactmeaning; hence, many Gujarati words have been retained withinthe English text for better reading flow. At the first encounter,the Gujarati word will be italicized followed by an immediateexplanation of its meaning in brackets. Thereafter the Gujaratiword will be used in the text that follows. This serves as a two-fold benefit: firstly ease of translation and reading and secondlyit will make the reader more familiar with the Gujarati wordscritical for a deeper understanding of this science. A glossary ofall the Gujarati words is provided at the back of the book. Foradditional glossary, visit our website at :www.dadabhagwan.orgMany people have worked diligently towards achievingthis goal and we thank them all. Please note that any errorsencountered in this translation are entirely those of the translators.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Note to the readerThe words ‘You’ or ‘Self’ when they begin with an initialcapital ‘Y’ or ‘S’ respectively, refers to the Soul or the real Selfor the Atma. Otherwise, they are used for the non-self, alsoreferred to as the relative-self, ‘Chandulal’ or the prakruti.Whenever Dadashri uses the name ‘Chandulal’ or the nameof the person Dadashri is addressing, the reader should insert hisor her name for exact understanding.Whenever Dadashri uses the term ‘we’, he is referring tothe Gnani Purush and ‘Dada Bhagwan’ who is the fully enlightenedLord within him.The words Self and Soul are interchangeable. The Soul isone’s real Self.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)56612Aptavani-1being obstinate and inflexible? You will realize your obstinacywhen some day it surfaces from within. Another way to realizeyour obstinacy is when you come to the Gnani Purush; you willbe surprised to learn how much obstinacy remains within you.Will you not have to become straight?Questioner: Why does obstinacy (aadayee) not goaway?Dadashri: How can it go? It has made a home within youfor many days and then there is the unwritten renter’s law of ourland; a renter never leaves once he rents your home. So is theobstinacy that has entered within you, ever likely to leave?I told one person, “Why are you being so obstinate? Beless obstinate!” He said, “One cannot survive in this worldwithout being obstinate.” I told him, “Even a snake has tostraighten up in order to enter its hole, so become straight if youwant to enter moksha. If not, people will straighten you out andonly then will you be able to go to moksha. People will beat youand straighten you up. So what is wrong in becoming straightyourself?” Do people not beat us and make us shape up(straighten up)?Questioner: They do but even then people do notstraighten up, do they?Dadashri: But there is no choice except to straighten upsooner or later, is there? Obstinacy will leave on its own onceyou have a bitter experience. There exists endless obstinacy.One has never met anyone to straighten him out in any of hisprevious lives. He would not wander in this manner had he metsomeone. So everything happens, but he does not remainstraight. What does the world do? It keeps beating him to thepoint where he straightens up. If he does not straighten up, thenhis wife, his children and the world will beat him into becomingstraight.Aptavani 9[1]Obstinacy (aadayee) : Sulking (risavu) :Manipulative tantrums (tragu)The Gnani Purush’s words are worthunderstandingThe Gnani Purush’s words are actually straight. Moksha(liberation) too is straight. Everyone is allowed into moksha; itis not as if someone is barred from it. However, one must beworthy of it. It is not possible to attain moksha if one walks acrooked line. Therefore, why not become straight from the verystart? Moksha is not difficult to understand, but it helps to knowwhat the Gnani Purush is saying. If you do not understand whatHe is saying, you will become confused. The words of the GnaniPurush remain true for all times; the past, present and the future.Any word the Gnani Purush utters is exactly what theTirthankaras (fully enlightened beings who liberate millions)have said.You should follow the instructions of the Gnani Purush.Why? Who can be called a Gnani Purush? It is the one who isstraight in every way. He is straight while insulting and straightwhile being insulted. However, when He does insult, He doesnot truly insult because He is straight to begin with, so how canHe? ‘We’ have become frank and guileless right from the start.And as far as you are concerned, you will have to get rid of yourobstinacy (aadayee), will you not? How long can you go on12Aptavani-1being obstinate and inflexible? You will realize your obstinacywhen some day it surfaces from within. Another way to realizeyour obstinacy is when you come to the Gnani Purush; you willbe surprised to learn how much obstinacy remains within you.Will you not have to become straight?Questioner: Why does obstinacy (aadayee) not goaway?Dadashri: How can it go? It has made a home within youfor many days and then there is the unwritten renter’s law of ourland; a renter never leaves once he rents your home. So is theobstinacy that has entered within you, ever likely to leave?I told one person, “Why are you being so obstinate? Beless obstinate!” He said, “One cannot survive in this worldwithout being obstinate.” I told him, “Even a snake has tostraighten up in order to enter its hole, so become straight if youwant to enter moksha. If not, people will straighten you out andonly then will you be able to go to moksha. People will beat youand straighten you up. So what is wrong in becoming straightyourself?” Do people not beat us and make us shape up(straighten up)?Questioner: They do but even then people do notstraighten up, do they?Dadashri: But there is no choice except to straighten upsooner or later, is there? Obstinacy will leave on its own onceyou have a bitter experience. There exists endless obstinacy.One has never met anyone to straighten him out in any of hisprevious lives. He would not wander in this manner had he metsomeone. So everything happens, but he does not remainstraight. What does the world do? It keeps beating him to thepoint where he straightens up. If he does not straighten up, thenhis wife, his children and the world will beat him into becomingstraight.Aptavani 9[1]Obstinacy (aadayee) : Sulking (risavu) :Manipulative tantrums (tragu)The Gnani Purush’s words are worthunderstandingThe Gnani Purush’s words are actually straight. Moksha(liberation) too is straight. Everyone is allowed into moksha; itis not as if someone is barred from it. However, one must beworthy of it. It is not possible to attain moksha if one walks acrooked line. Therefore, why not become straight from the verystart? Moksha is not difficult to understand, but it helps to knowwhat the Gnani Purush is saying. If you do not understand whatHe is saying, you will become confused. The words of the GnaniPurush remain true for all times; the past, present and the future.Any word the Gnani Purush utters is exactly what theTirthankaras (fully enlightened beings who liberate millions)have said.You should follow the instructions of the Gnani Purush.Why? Who can be called a Gnani Purush? It is the one who isstraight in every way. He is straight while insulting and straightwhile being insulted. However, when He does insult, He doesnot truly insult because He is straight to begin with, so how canHe? ‘We’ have become frank and guileless right from the start.And as far as you are concerned, you will have to get rid of yourobstinacy (aadayee), will you not? How long can you go onAptavani-934Aptavani-9I became straight and wise after taking beatings frompeople for so many lives. Just behold, when I became straightforward, then this Gnan expressed within, did it not? I too wasnot straight. The world will straighten you out. Those who arenot straight will one day have to become straight. However,people remain obstinate even in their old age. This progeny ofobstinacy is nothing ordinary. It makes one become obstinate inone’s own home!When a child dies, the grandfather will wail and cry outloudly, “My only grandchild is gone.” He cries as if he is nevergoing to die himself. Is he never going to die? Even if he hasbecome a grandfather?! Yet he cries over his son’s son! Youfool, why don’t you straighten up now that you are close toleaving this world? Is departure not imminent for the one whobecomes a grandfather? The signal to exit this world has fallenfrom the day he became a grandfather. And yet he talks as if histrain is never going to leave! The signal has fallen so wake upand be aware.Questioner: The signal for the train’s departure hascome.Dadashri: Yes the signal has fallen, the train is ready toleave and so you need to straighten up.If you admit to be being obstinate, you willdefeat the obstinacyWhat is obstinacy (aadayee)? Many a times you tellpeople, ‘Hey! Why are you being obstinate?’ Or sometimespeople tell you, ‘Why are you being obstinate?’ Do you or doyou not recognize obstinacy?Questioner: Obstinacy is recognizable.Dadashri: How long have you known it?Questioner: From the time I understood it.Dadashri: So have you got rid of your stock of obstinacyor have you kept it? Have you kept it? You are saying ‘yes’. Ifyou say ‘no’ would obstinacy not leave?Questioner: It will leave when we say ‘yes’.Dadashri: Is that so? Would it not leave if you say ‘no’?Questioner: No, it will become stronger if one says ‘no’.Dadashri: Do people not say ‘no’? They say, ‘I do nothave any obstinacy in me.’Obstinacy: Common and UncommonWho does not have the experience of obstinacy? Thegreater the buddhi (intellect), the greater is one’s obstinacy.Those who have wisdom (samaj - right understanding) are lessobstinate. Those with heavy veils over spirituality are veryobstinate. They will not let go of their obstinacy. Now what doyou call such obstinacy? What is the difference between theirobstinacy and that of an average person? What is the differencebetween common and uncommon obstinacy? Uncommonobstinacy is unshakeable (gaaddha) obstinacy. Such obstinacycannot be rid of, just like this state of gaaddha samkit(gaaddha - unshakeable. Samkit - right belief and right visionof ‘I am pure Soul’), which can never leave; neither can the stateof gaaddha mithyatva i.e. unshakable deeply entrenchedwrong belief of ‘I am Chandulal’ ever leave. No matter howmuch you make a person understand, he will not let go of hisposition. Such is the uncommon obstinacy; it will not leave itsposition.Obstinacy in men and womenDo you have a little bit of obstinacy (aadayee) in you? Alittle at least?! Then why not ask him to help you get rid of it?A few hurtful jabs from him will make the obstinacy in you goaway.Questioner: Does obstinacy leave only through hurtfuljabs?Aptavani-934Aptavani-9I became straight and wise after taking beatings frompeople for so many lives. Just behold, when I became straightforward, then this Gnan expressed within, did it not? I too wasnot straight. The world will straighten you out. Those who arenot straight will one day have to become straight. However,people remain obstinate even in their old age. This progeny ofobstinacy is nothing ordinary. It makes one become obstinate inone’s own home!When a child dies, the grandfather will wail and cry outloudly, “My only grandchild is gone.” He cries as if he is nevergoing to die himself. Is he never going to die? Even if he hasbecome a grandfather?! Yet he cries over his son’s son! Youfool, why don’t you straighten up now that you are close toleaving this world? Is departure not imminent for the one whobecomes a grandfather? The signal to exit this world has fallenfrom the day he became a grandfather. And yet he talks as if histrain is never going to leave! The signal has fallen so wake upand be aware.Questioner: The signal for the train’s departure hascome.Dadashri: Yes the signal has fallen, the train is ready toleave and so you need to straighten up.If you admit to be being obstinate, you willdefeat the obstinacyWhat is obstinacy (aadayee)? Many a times you tellpeople, ‘Hey! Why are you being obstinate?’ Or sometimespeople tell you, ‘Why are you being obstinate?’ Do you or doyou not recognize obstinacy?Questioner: Obstinacy is recognizable.Dadashri: How long have you known it?Questioner: From the time I understood it.Dadashri: So have you got rid of your stock of obstinacyor have you kept it? Have you kept it? You are saying ‘yes’. Ifyou say ‘no’ would obstinacy not leave?Questioner: It will leave when we say ‘yes’.Dadashri: Is that so? Would it not leave if you say ‘no’?Questioner: No, it will become stronger if one says ‘no’.Dadashri: Do people not say ‘no’? They say, ‘I do nothave any obstinacy in me.’Obstinacy: Common and UncommonWho does not have the experience of obstinacy? Thegreater the buddhi (intellect), the greater is one’s obstinacy.Those who have wisdom (samaj - right understanding) are lessobstinate. Those with heavy veils over spirituality are veryobstinate. They will not let go of their obstinacy. Now what doyou call such obstinacy? What is the difference between theirobstinacy and that of an average person? What is the differencebetween common and uncommon obstinacy? Uncommonobstinacy is unshakeable (gaaddha) obstinacy. Such obstinacycannot be rid of, just like this state of gaaddha samkit(gaaddha - unshakeable. Samkit - right belief and right visionof ‘I am pure Soul’), which can never leave; neither can the stateof gaaddha mithyatva i.e. unshakable deeply entrenchedwrong belief of ‘I am Chandulal’ ever leave. No matter howmuch you make a person understand, he will not let go of hisposition. Such is the uncommon obstinacy; it will not leave itsposition.Obstinacy in men and womenDo you have a little bit of obstinacy (aadayee) in you? Alittle at least?! Then why not ask him to help you get rid of it?A few hurtful jabs from him will make the obstinacy in you goaway.Questioner: Does obstinacy leave only through hurtfuljabs?Aptavani-956Aptavani-9Dadashri: Then how else? Does he not prod you ever?Otherwise, there is nothing but baggage of obstinacy everywhere.A person without obstinacy is considered straight (sarad) andflexible; he can be molded in any shape or form.Questioner: Do men ever admit to their obstinacy(aadayee)? He will only know his obstinacy when his wife sayssomething to him.Dadashri: Women too are very obstinate. ‘We’ are nottalking about just men. It is only when both parents are so, thatchildren turn out the way they do. And it is men who make thewomen obstinate. Women are not obstinate by nature; they arenot born obstinate. Men are obstinate from their very birth. Evenin the womb, they jab their mothers with their elbows. If themother happens to eat something spicy, he jabs his mother fromthe inside with his arms and legs. Women are not born obstinatelike men.You have to see your own obstinacyPeople talk about obstinacy (aadayee) in others as if theyhave got rid of their own obstinacy. One should not makestatements such as, ‘He is obstinate’.Questioner: Dada, is it my obstinacy if I say, ‘he is veryobstinate’?Dadashri: That is the greatest obstinacy.Questioner: So we have to see our own obstinacy?Dadashri: Then whose? If you point out obstinacy(aadayee) in someone else, he will immediately become anadversary.Questioner: Many times, we do not even recognize ourobstinacy, in fact, many times our obstinacy appears as straightforwardness to us.Dadashri: You would not recognize it. You have to enterdeep within your self to see it. You have to adopt an impartialattitude to see obstinacy.When someone says, ‘Why are you being obstinate?’ yourespond by saying, ‘Just look at him! He is a fool. Am I beingobstinate or he is being obstinate?’, on the contrary the man istelling you to investigate, so then you should. People do not lookat their own obstinacy and they go looking for obstinacy inothers. Why do people not accuse me of being obstinate? Ifthey were to see obstinacy in me, they would not refrain fromtelling me so. The world will tell you what it sees.When obstinacy leaves…Some men tell their wives, ‘If you make the tea, I will notdrink it.’ Oh! ho ho! Then whose tea will you drink? Exercisinghis role as a husband (dhani; owner), he intimidates his wife.What does he tell her? ‘You ruined the tea, so I will not drinktea again if you make it.’ He intimidates the poor woman. Hebecomes awkward and obstinate. So much obstinacy! That iswhy there is so much suffering!Therefore, obstinacy (aadayee) is the obstacle, notattachment (moha). A person may enjoy attachment (moha)once or twice but the third time around he will get tired of it.What happens if someone serves you a good meal with anupset and a non-communicative (risavu; sulking) face? You willnot like it, will you? Would you not say, ‘The heck with yourmeal’? Even if someone gives you diamonds with an upset andnon-communicative (risavu) face, will you not say, ‘Keep yourdiamonds to yourself’? So what is worth more, diamonds or anupset and non-communicative (risavu) face? Our people willnot accept a diamond if given by someone with such a face.People of foreign countries will eat a meal even if their spouseis upset and non-communicative (risavu) but in India, the wifewill get into trouble for doing that. Nevertheless, women in Indiawill not behave this way. It does not matter in the foreignAptavani-956Aptavani-9Dadashri: Then how else? Does he not prod you ever?Otherwise, there is nothing but baggage of obstinacy everywhere.A person without obstinacy is considered straight (sarad) andflexible; he can be molded in any shape or form.Questioner: Do men ever admit to their obstinacy(aadayee)? He will only know his obstinacy when his wife sayssomething to him.Dadashri: Women too are very obstinate. ‘We’ are nottalking about just men. It is only when both parents are so, thatchildren turn out the way they do. And it is men who make thewomen obstinate. Women are not obstinate by nature; they arenot born obstinate. Men are obstinate from their very birth. Evenin the womb, they jab their mothers with their elbows. If themother happens to eat something spicy, he jabs his mother fromthe inside with his arms and legs. Women are not born obstinatelike men.You have to see your own obstinacyPeople talk about obstinacy (aadayee) in others as if theyhave got rid of their own obstinacy. One should not makestatements such as, ‘He is obstinate’.Questioner: Dada, is it my obstinacy if I say, ‘he is veryobstinate’?Dadashri: That is the greatest obstinacy.Questioner: So we have to see our own obstinacy?Dadashri: Then whose? If you point out obstinacy(aadayee) in someone else, he will immediately become anadversary.Questioner: Many times, we do not even recognize ourobstinacy, in fact, many times our obstinacy appears as straightforwardness to us.Dadashri: You would not recognize it. You have to enterdeep within your self to see it. You have to adopt an impartialattitude to see obstinacy.When someone says, ‘Why are you being obstinate?’ yourespond by saying, ‘Just look at him! He is a fool. Am I beingobstinate or he is being obstinate?’, on the contrary the man istelling you to investigate, so then you should. People do not lookat their own obstinacy and they go looking for obstinacy inothers. Why do people not accuse me of being obstinate? Ifthey were to see obstinacy in me, they would not refrain fromtelling me so. The world will tell you what it sees.When obstinacy leaves…Some men tell their wives, ‘If you make the tea, I will notdrink it.’ Oh! ho ho! Then whose tea will you drink? Exercisinghis role as a husband (dhani; owner), he intimidates his wife.What does he tell her? ‘You ruined the tea, so I will not drinktea again if you make it.’ He intimidates the poor woman. Hebecomes awkward and obstinate. So much obstinacy! That iswhy there is so much suffering!Therefore, obstinacy (aadayee) is the obstacle, notattachment (moha). A person may enjoy attachment (moha)once or twice but the third time around he will get tired of it.What happens if someone serves you a good meal with anupset and a non-communicative (risavu; sulking) face? You willnot like it, will you? Would you not say, ‘The heck with yourmeal’? Even if someone gives you diamonds with an upset andnon-communicative (risavu) face, will you not say, ‘Keep yourdiamonds to yourself’? So what is worth more, diamonds or anupset and non-communicative (risavu) face? Our people willnot accept a diamond if given by someone with such a face.People of foreign countries will eat a meal even if their spouseis upset and non-communicative (risavu) but in India, the wifewill get into trouble for doing that. Nevertheless, women in Indiawill not behave this way. It does not matter in the foreignAptavani-978Aptavani-9Questioner: Who is your neighbor?Dadashri: This ‘A. M. Patel’ is the first neighbor. He (A.M. Patel) is also a contractor and an income-tax payer. Thatman is addressing this neighbor of mine.They say that Gnan cannot manifest in the one who livesa worldly life. Hey, the income tax payer is there, and thecontract business where bribery is commonplace is also there,and yet the Gnan has expressed! So then what creates obstaclesin this worldly life? Your obstinacy (aadayee) is the obstacle. Ihad seen a lot of obstinacy in me. I became a Gnani after all theobstinacy went away. When no obstinacy remains within you,then realize that you have become a Gnani.Nature of obstinacyQuestioner: How should I understand the nature ofobstinacy (aadayee)?Dadashri: It is when one does not accept that which hisheart accepts, and acts according to his own opinion andunderstanding. ‘We’ do not say anything to anyone or pressureanyone, and if ‘we’ ever do and even then he does not acceptit, then is that not his aadayee (obstinacy)? Is that not actingaccording to his own opinion and will? Should he not befollowing the Agna (directive) of the Gnani?Questioner: Really speaking, we have to follow theAgnas of the Gnani.Dadashri: Aadayee (obstinacy) is prevalent. Wherever itis, the worldly problems have arisen because of aadayee. Only‘we’ are devoid of such obstinacy. ‘We’ have come to zeroobstinacy. If someone pressures us by saying, ‘You will have todo things this way otherwise we will go on a fast,’ then in orderto prevent them from undergoing the pain and the trouble offasting, ‘we’ would tell him, “‘We’ will do it but do not go ona fast.”countries. There, even if a man were to give diamonds with anupset and non-communicative (risavu) face, the woman willthink, ‘Let him sulk (risavu) if he wants to. At least I get thediamonds.’ What do you think?Questioner: That is true.Dadashri: So then, is the value of being upset and non-communicative (risavu) at home not worth more than the valueof the diamonds?Even a child will not let you touch his money. He will say,‘These are my rupees, give them back to me.’ A person may bestraight in one matter but obstinate in another, he will notbecome free until that obstinacy is gone. It is possible to attainthe state of God if obstinacy leaves. ‘Dada’ has becomecompletely free from all obstinacy.Everyone’s obstinacy is different in method and approach.What you state and consider as obstinate, is obstinacy youcannot see in yourself. If you can see your obstinacy, then youbecome God. One becomes God when he sees his ownobstinacy. Even now, where can you see your own obstinacy?Otherwise, you would have become God.Obstinacy is the only obstacleTherefore, one needs to become straight. Do I have anyproblems, now that I have become straight? I have becomestraight as a result of taking so many beatings over countlesspast lives. Now there is no obstinacy at all left in me. If you tell‘us’ “Let us go down stairs”, then ‘we’ will come with you.‘We’ do not have any obstinacy (aadayee) whatsoever.Someone may say, ‘You are like this’ or ‘you are like that.’ Heis saying it to the ‘one’ who is that way. I would not tell that manhe is wrong. What is more, I will even understand to whom heis addressing. He is not saying it to ‘me’ he is saying it to my‘neighbor’.Aptavani-978Aptavani-9Questioner: Who is your neighbor?Dadashri: This ‘A. M. Patel’ is the first neighbor. He (A.M. Patel) is also a contractor and an income-tax payer. Thatman is addressing this neighbor of mine.They say that Gnan cannot manifest in the one who livesa worldly life. Hey, the income tax payer is there, and thecontract business where bribery is commonplace is also there,and yet the Gnan has expressed! So then what creates obstaclesin this worldly life? Your obstinacy (aadayee) is the obstacle. Ihad seen a lot of obstinacy in me. I became a Gnani after all theobstinacy went away. When no obstinacy remains within you,then realize that you have become a Gnani.Nature of obstinacyQuestioner: How should I understand the nature ofobstinacy (aadayee)?Dadashri: It is when one does not accept that which hisheart accepts, and acts according to his own opinion andunderstanding. ‘We’ do not say anything to anyone or pressureanyone, and if ‘we’ ever do and even then he does not acceptit, then is that not his aadayee (obstinacy)? Is that not actingaccording to his own opinion and will? Should he not befollowing the Agna (directive) of the Gnani?Questioner: Really speaking, we have to follow theAgnas of the Gnani.Dadashri: Aadayee (obstinacy) is prevalent. Wherever itis, the worldly problems have arisen because of aadayee. Only‘we’ are devoid of such obstinacy. ‘We’ have come to zeroobstinacy. If someone pressures us by saying, ‘You will have todo things this way otherwise we will go on a fast,’ then in orderto prevent them from undergoing the pain and the trouble offasting, ‘we’ would tell him, “‘We’ will do it but do not go ona fast.”countries. There, even if a man were to give diamonds with anupset and non-communicative (risavu) face, the woman willthink, ‘Let him sulk (risavu) if he wants to. At least I get thediamonds.’ What do you think?Questioner: That is true.Dadashri: So then, is the value of being upset and non-communicative (risavu) at home not worth more than the valueof the diamonds?Even a child will not let you touch his money. He will say,‘These are my rupees, give them back to me.’ A person may bestraight in one matter but obstinate in another, he will notbecome free until that obstinacy is gone. It is possible to attainthe state of God if obstinacy leaves. ‘Dada’ has becomecompletely free from all obstinacy.Everyone’s obstinacy is different in method and approach.What you state and consider as obstinate, is obstinacy youcannot see in yourself. If you can see your obstinacy, then youbecome God. One becomes God when he sees his ownobstinacy. Even now, where can you see your own obstinacy?Otherwise, you would have become God.Obstinacy is the only obstacleTherefore, one needs to become straight. Do I have anyproblems, now that I have become straight? I have becomestraight as a result of taking so many beatings over countlesspast lives. Now there is no obstinacy at all left in me. If you tell‘us’ “Let us go down stairs”, then ‘we’ will come with you.‘We’ do not have any obstinacy (aadayee) whatsoever.Someone may say, ‘You are like this’ or ‘you are like that.’ Heis saying it to the ‘one’ who is that way. I would not tell that manhe is wrong. What is more, I will even understand to whom heis addressing. He is not saying it to ‘me’ he is saying it to my‘neighbor’.Aptavani-9910Aptavani-9Questioner: Is that not called obstinacy?Dadashri: No, obstinacy (aadayee) is to maintain, ‘Wewill go on a fast.’ This is where the whole world is stuck.Questioner: Is it not aadayee when a person does notfollow your directions?Dadashri: That is indeed an aadayee, what else? IsDadaji likely to tell you to do anything otherwise? He wouldonly say something if it is for your own benefit. Therefore, youshould not be obstinate where Dadaji is concerned.Becoming straight through understandingHave you ever seen aadayee (obstinacy) in someone?Have you seen that it exists in people?Questioner: Dada, I had it within me. I was veryobstinate.Dadashri: Is that so? You are the knower of the one whowas obstinate. Is the knower not separate? Or is the knower theone who is obstinate? No. The one who is obstinate is not theknower. The knower is separate; the knower is the Self. So didall your obstinacy go away?Questioner: It is still there, Dada.Dadashri: Then you still have to become straight.Aadayee (obstinacy) is not acceptable. If you do not becomestraight with this Gnan of ours, then people will beat you intobecoming straight. So, it is better if you straighten up throughunderstanding. That will save you all the hassle. One always getshurt when he interferes (dakho-dakhal; becomes Chandulal).Hence, interference straightens him constantly. When the hornsof obstinacy are broken right here, then all work is done. Allaadayee (obstinacy) is bestial. When a couple of wise menplead with the one with obstinacy, ‘Please listen to us,’ do youknow what he will say? He will say, ‘No I find it hard tobelieve.’ He exposes his obstinacy in front of us thus. Mokshawill be attained only when that obstinacy goes away.Necessities for progress along the path ofmokshaIf someone were to tell us, ‘Dada, bow down to all thesepeople’, then I would do so and I would do it five times over.‘We’ would bow down to even a vagrant. ‘We’ have ways tobow down in any manner that is necessary. ‘We’ have a way tobow down to the Soul and a way to bow down to the vagrant.If he says, ‘Do not bow down to the Soul, bow only to thevagrant,’ ‘we’ would do that too. So you must have humility.Complete humility! The one who completely ‘dissolves in water’(becomes completely egoless) will be blessed with the ultimate.If a lump (ego) remains in water, it means it has not completelydissolved and so it will just keep going round and round.Obstinate people will simply keep wandering round and round,life after life.As a lot of worldly respect is gained, a spiritually elevatedperson will become more humble; his ego will not be evident, hewill not be inflexible. Egoistic inflexibility (akadai) is acharacteristic of an inferior human being. When a person attainsthis spiritual knowledge but still exhibits inflexibility, then he is aninferior human being. How can one have this Gnan and continueto remain rigid and inflexible?The one who readily accepts the truth is called a straight(sarad) person.Questioner: If we accept what others tell us as the truthand follow through, then we become vulnerable to hurt, will wenot?Dadashri: It is better to stumble and learn. If a saint says,‘I have full faith in human beings’ someone may ask him, ‘Whatif someone deceives you some day?’ He will reply, ‘One manmay swindle me, and another may do the same, but some dayAptavani-9910Aptavani-9Questioner: Is that not called obstinacy?Dadashri: No, obstinacy (aadayee) is to maintain, ‘Wewill go on a fast.’ This is where the whole world is stuck.Questioner: Is it not aadayee when a person does notfollow your directions?Dadashri: That is indeed an aadayee, what else? IsDadaji likely to tell you to do anything otherwise? He wouldonly say something if it is for your own benefit. Therefore, youshould not be obstinate where Dadaji is concerned.Becoming straight through understandingHave you ever seen aadayee (obstinacy) in someone?Have you seen that it exists in people?Questioner: Dada, I had it within me. I was veryobstinate.Dadashri: Is that so? You are the knower of the one whowas obstinate. Is the knower not separate? Or is the knower theone who is obstinate? No. The one who is obstinate is not theknower. The knower is separate; the knower is the Self. So didall your obstinacy go away?Questioner: It is still there, Dada.Dadashri: Then you still have to become straight.Aadayee (obstinacy) is not acceptable. If you do not becomestraight with this Gnan of ours, then people will beat you intobecoming straight. So, it is better if you straighten up throughunderstanding. That will save you all the hassle. One always getshurt when he interferes (dakho-dakhal; becomes Chandulal).Hence, interference straightens him constantly. When the hornsof obstinacy are broken right here, then all work is done. Allaadayee (obstinacy) is bestial. When a couple of wise menplead with the one with obstinacy, ‘Please listen to us,’ do youknow what he will say? He will say, ‘No I find it hard tobelieve.’ He exposes his obstinacy in front of us thus. Mokshawill be attained only when that obstinacy goes away.Necessities for progress along the path ofmokshaIf someone were to tell us, ‘Dada, bow down to all thesepeople’, then I would do so and I would do it five times over.‘We’ would bow down to even a vagrant. ‘We’ have ways tobow down in any manner that is necessary. ‘We’ have a way tobow down to the Soul and a way to bow down to the vagrant.If he says, ‘Do not bow down to the Soul, bow only to thevagrant,’ ‘we’ would do that too. So you must have humility.Complete humility! The one who completely ‘dissolves in water’(becomes completely egoless) will be blessed with the ultimate.If a lump (ego) remains in water, it means it has not completelydissolved and so it will just keep going round and round.Obstinate people will simply keep wandering round and round,life after life.As a lot of worldly respect is gained, a spiritually elevatedperson will become more humble; his ego will not be evident, hewill not be inflexible. Egoistic inflexibility (akadai) is acharacteristic of an inferior human being. When a person attainsthis spiritual knowledge but still exhibits inflexibility, then he is aninferior human being. How can one have this Gnan and continueto remain rigid and inflexible?The one who readily accepts the truth is called a straight(sarad) person.Questioner: If we accept what others tell us as the truthand follow through, then we become vulnerable to hurt, will wenot?Dadashri: It is better to stumble and learn. If a saint says,‘I have full faith in human beings’ someone may ask him, ‘Whatif someone deceives you some day?’ He will reply, ‘One manmay swindle me, and another may do the same, but some dayAptavani-91112Aptavani-9I am bound to meet a man through whom my work will getdone.’ What does the saint mean when he says this? He issaying that through subjecting himself to being deceived, one dayhis work will get accomplished. Those who avoid beingdeceived will wander around life after life and never achieveanything because they never trust anyone. When will a personattain anything if he remains suspicious? Do you understand thistheory?Straightness (saradata) means to readily accept whateverthe other person says, even if it means there is a possibility ofbeing cheated in the process. One, two or five people may cheatyou, but you will find one out of five hundred who will not.Otherwise, you will not find that honest person, will you? Is thisnot a good system? You will be cheated only if it is in theunfolding of your karma (prarabdha), otherwise who will cheatyou? You will one day find that truth if you move through lifebeing cheated.What do we mean by being sarad (straight)? Whensomeone tells him, ‘This train is going to Ahmedabad’, he getson it readily, without complaining, that is called being sarad.Whereas the one who is asarad will question, ‘What’s theguarantee that this train will take us to Ahmedabad? Let’s asksomeone else.’ Will the train not leave by that time? Many trains(opportunity to attain the right path) have left and he remainsstanding exactly where he has always been.What is straightness (sarad)? For example, if you cookfreshly picked okra, they will cook within ten minutes. That iscalled straight. And what is asarad (not straight, complicated)?What happens to the okras that are kept in the refrigerator?Those are asarad okras (they do not cook well; they take along time). Similarly, the Lord says that a person who is straight(sarad) and without guile will attain moksha. The one who is notstraight (asarad) will not make any progress on this path.Questioner: It appears that we will find everythingwherever we go but there is a lack of straightness (asarad)there.Dadashri: There is no straightness to be found. Thefollowing qualities are not found anywhere. You do not seespontaneous forgiveness (sahaj kshama) anywhere. If you saysomething to someone, he cannot refrain from making a mentalnote (nondha) of it; he will remember it for months on end. Notkeeping a note is called natural forgiveness (sahaj kshama).Then what is next? Then there is the quality of being harshor callous (kathor). There are all kinds of harshness.Then there is all kind of insistence (aagraha). A personwith these qualities will not have any straightness (saradata) inhim and so no matter how hard one tries to change him, he willnot change. He has no humility (namrata), in addition to lackingstraightness. You will need topmost straightness. Then you needtopmost humility. What is namrata (humility)? It is to bowcompletely before the other person begins to bow. It is to bowto the one who is rigid and inflexible. This is a sign that one willattain moksha. What is the nature of a human being? If someoneis being rigid and inflexible, he too will become rigid andinflexible; he will react in the same manner. People becomeinflexible with the one who refuses to give in.Then one should not have any greed (lobh) whatsoever.Greed holds people back from making any spiritual progress.That is why the Lord has said for people to go on pilgrimageand other such activities and spend money. The tuber of greedwill decrease as you spend money. Otherwise, greed willcontinue to increase like the ‘push of 99’ (if a person has 99rupees, he will be pushed by his greed to save one more rupeeso he can have one hundred rupees). Therefore, one’s innerintent should be to have no need or want for any worldly thing.When all the ‘ghosts’ of kashayas i.e. the inner enemies of anger,Aptavani-91112Aptavani-9I am bound to meet a man through whom my work will getdone.’ What does the saint mean when he says this? He issaying that through subjecting himself to being deceived, one dayhis work will get accomplished. Those who avoid beingdeceived will wander around life after life and never achieveanything because they never trust anyone. When will a personattain anything if he remains suspicious? Do you understand thistheory?Straightness (saradata) means to readily accept whateverthe other person says, even if it means there is a possibility ofbeing cheated in the process. One, two or five people may cheatyou, but you will find one out of five hundred who will not.Otherwise, you will not find that honest person, will you? Is thisnot a good system? You will be cheated only if it is in theunfolding of your karma (prarabdha), otherwise who will cheatyou? You will one day find that truth if you move through lifebeing cheated.What do we mean by being sarad (straight)? Whensomeone tells him, ‘This train is going to Ahmedabad’, he getson it readily, without complaining, that is called being sarad.Whereas the one who is asarad will question, ‘What’s theguarantee that this train will take us to Ahmedabad? Let’s asksomeone else.’ Will the train not leave by that time? Many trains(opportunity to attain the right path) have left and he remainsstanding exactly where he has always been.What is straightness (sarad)? For example, if you cookfreshly picked okra, they will cook within ten minutes. That iscalled straight. And what is asarad (not straight, complicated)?What happens to the okras that are kept in the refrigerator?Those are asarad okras (they do not cook well; they take along time). Similarly, the Lord says that a person who is straight(sarad) and without guile will attain moksha. The one who is notstraight (asarad) will not make any progress on this path.Questioner: It appears that we will find everythingwherever we go but there is a lack of straightness (asarad)there.Dadashri: There is no straightness to be found. Thefollowing qualities are not found anywhere. You do not seespontaneous forgiveness (sahaj kshama) anywhere. If you saysomething to someone, he cannot refrain from making a mentalnote (nondha) of it; he will remember it for months on end. Notkeeping a note is called natural forgiveness (sahaj kshama).Then what is next? Then there is the quality of being harshor callous (kathor). There are all kinds of harshness.Then there is all kind of insistence (aagraha). A personwith these qualities will not have any straightness (saradata) inhim and so no matter how hard one tries to change him, he willnot change. He has no humility (namrata), in addition to lackingstraightness. You will need topmost straightness. Then you needtopmost humility. What is namrata (humility)? It is to bowcompletely before the other person begins to bow. It is to bowto the one who is rigid and inflexible. This is a sign that one willattain moksha. What is the nature of a human being? If someoneis being rigid and inflexible, he too will become rigid andinflexible; he will react in the same manner. People becomeinflexible with the one who refuses to give in.Then one should not have any greed (lobh) whatsoever.Greed holds people back from making any spiritual progress.That is why the Lord has said for people to go on pilgrimageand other such activities and spend money. The tuber of greedwill decrease as you spend money. Otherwise, greed willcontinue to increase like the ‘push of 99’ (if a person has 99rupees, he will be pushed by his greed to save one more rupeeso he can have one hundred rupees). Therefore, one’s innerintent should be to have no need or want for any worldly thing.When all the ‘ghosts’ of kashayas i.e. the inner enemies of anger,Aptavani-91314Aptavani-9pride, deceit and greed, leave and you become straight, thenyou will attain moksha.Obstinacy during the early years of AmbalalPatel (Dadashri’s relative self)Back in the old days, there was a saying:“Duniya diwani kahevashe re, bhoondi bhito mabhatkashe. paap ey enu jyare pragat thashe, tyare bhuva-jatigher jashe”Meaning when one’s demerit karmas come into fruition,he will resort to all kinds of solutions; he will seek help of theexorcists, voodooist, black magicians etc. So a person looksfor an exorcist, a saint, or others for help when his demeritkarma expresses its effect. Some poet has sung something likethat.Questioner: Dada, when did you read this pad (poetichymn)?Dadashri: It is about fifty-five years old; it is not veryold. It is not a two or five thousand years old saying.Questioner: But how can you remember it all?Dadashri: ‘We’ do not remember anything. ‘We’ do noteven remember whether today is Monday or Tuesday!Questioner: Then where did all this come from, Dada?Dadashri: ‘We’ can see it all. If ‘we’ turn one way, ‘we’can immediately see everything and therefore ‘we’ speak. If‘we’ see anything beneficial, then ‘we’ will say it. Why would‘we’ try to commit anything to memory? ‘We’ continue to seeall the way back to when I was young. ‘We’ can see all thephases…‘it was like this…it was like that… ‘we’ used to enterthe classroom only after the school bell rang; ‘we’ can see allthat.’ The teacher used to get very upset. He could not sayanything but he would be aggravated from within.Questioner: Why did you go only after the bell?Dadashri: It was a kind of a pomp; kind of a show-off.It was just a false pride (khumari)! I suffered because of that;I did not straighten up. A straight person would go and sit in theclass before the bell.Questioner: Is showing-off not a wrong path?Dadashri: It is a wrong path indeed. This fellow (A. M.Patel – Dadashri’s relative self) would come into the classroomafter the bell had rung; the teacher would already be in theclassroom. It is acceptable for the teacher to be late but as arule should the students not be in time? This is the obstinacy. Ontop of that, he (A. M. Patel) would say, ‘Who does the teacherthink he is?’ Hey you! Look here! Do you want to learn atschool or do you want confrontations? He would reply, ‘No,first is the confrontation.’ That is called looking for a confrontation.Questioner: So the teacher could not say anything toyou?Dadashri: He could and yet he would not; he dare notbecause he was afraid of the retaliation of being beaten upoutside the school!Questioner: Dada, were you so mischievous?Dadashri: Yes, mischievous indeed. The entire baggagewas nothing but that of a troublemaker and obstinacy.Questioner: And amidst all that such a Gnan expressed!That is great.Dadashri: The Gnan came to be. This is because of thepurity within. There was no attachment (mamata). The problemverily was of this ego. The lack of attachment led to this stateof the Gnani. There was no trace of attachment or greed-ladenAptavani-91314Aptavani-9pride, deceit and greed, leave and you become straight, thenyou will attain moksha.Obstinacy during the early years of AmbalalPatel (Dadashri’s relative self)Back in the old days, there was a saying:“Duniya diwani kahevashe re, bhoondi bhito mabhatkashe. paap ey enu jyare pragat thashe, tyare bhuva-jatigher jashe”Meaning when one’s demerit karmas come into fruition,he will resort to all kinds of solutions; he will seek help of theexorcists, voodooist, black magicians etc. So a person looksfor an exorcist, a saint, or others for help when his demeritkarma expresses its effect. Some poet has sung something likethat.Questioner: Dada, when did you read this pad (poetichymn)?Dadashri: It is about fifty-five years old; it is not veryold. It is not a two or five thousand years old saying.Questioner: But how can you remember it all?Dadashri: ‘We’ do not remember anything. ‘We’ do noteven remember whether today is Monday or Tuesday!Questioner: Then where did all this come from, Dada?Dadashri: ‘We’ can see it all. If ‘we’ turn one way, ‘we’can immediately see everything and therefore ‘we’ speak. If‘we’ see anything beneficial, then ‘we’ will say it. Why would‘we’ try to commit anything to memory? ‘We’ continue to seeall the way back to when I was young. ‘We’ can see all thephases…‘it was like this…it was like that… ‘we’ used to enterthe classroom only after the school bell rang; ‘we’ can see allthat.’ The teacher used to get very upset. He could not sayanything but he would be aggravated from within.Questioner: Why did you go only after the bell?Dadashri: It was a kind of a pomp; kind of a show-off.It was just a false pride (khumari)! I suffered because of that;I did not straighten up. A straight person would go and sit in theclass before the bell.Questioner: Is showing-off not a wrong path?Dadashri: It is a wrong path indeed. This fellow (A. M.Patel – Dadashri’s relative self) would come into the classroomafter the bell had rung; the teacher would already be in theclassroom. It is acceptable for the teacher to be late but as arule should the students not be in time? This is the obstinacy. Ontop of that, he (A. M. Patel) would say, ‘Who does the teacherthink he is?’ Hey you! Look here! Do you want to learn atschool or do you want confrontations? He would reply, ‘No,first is the confrontation.’ That is called looking for a confrontation.Questioner: So the teacher could not say anything toyou?Dadashri: He could and yet he would not; he dare notbecause he was afraid of the retaliation of being beaten upoutside the school!Questioner: Dada, were you so mischievous?Dadashri: Yes, mischievous indeed. The entire baggagewas nothing but that of a troublemaker and obstinacy.Questioner: And amidst all that such a Gnan expressed!That is great.Dadashri: The Gnan came to be. This is because of thepurity within. There was no attachment (mamata). The problemverily was of this ego. The lack of attachment led to this stateof the Gnani. There was no trace of attachment or greed-ladenAptavani-91516Aptavani-9temptation (lalacha) but if someone were to even utter my namein a negative manner, I would let him have it! Many peoplewould make comments behind my back like, ‘he is a trouble-maker’ or ‘Don’t even talk about him, just leave him alone, heis cantankerous and bad tempered!’ They used all kinds ofadjectives for me! I knew what adjectives they were using forme, behind my back. But I had no attachment and that was themain attribute in me. The current glorious state (of a Gnani) isdue to this very attribute. A person with attachment, no matterhow wise, is deeply entrenched in the worldly life. ‘We’ werewithout attachment so life has been fun all along. Attachmentverily is the cause of worldly life. The ego is not the cause ofworldly life.I too feel now that I have straightened up. No one has tostraighten me.Questioner: How did you become straight, Dada?Dadashri: People of the world beat me one way oranother; through their devious and worldly ways, they trappedme one way or another and shaped me up.Questioner: Has this cleansing (straightening) beenongoing from your previous lives?Dadashri: This had been happening from many previouslives and that is why I became completely straight in this life.Otherwise, the stock of India is obstinate by nature; you cannever find straightness in India. Some are even born upsidedown, feet first and there are others who are obstinate even intheir mother’s womb; they hurt their mothers even when they arein the womb! Some change to the wrong position in the womb;they hurt their mother to the point of dying during delivery,even to the point of hurting the reputation of the obstetrician inthe process.Questioner: But he does not have any desire to do allthat. Does that not happen on it own?Dadashri: It happens because he is obstinate by nature.He becomes obstinate wherever he goes. Even in the womb!And a straight person will be straight wherever he goes.Questioner: People of India are obstinate and yet theyare deserving of moksha!Dadashri: It is like this; only those who are obstinate goto moksha. Who becomes obstinate, is it the one withunderstanding or the one without understanding? Would the onewith understanding be the one to become obstinate?Questioner: But all that understanding is wrong is it notDada?Dadashri: It is because the understanding is obstructed.There is no obstinacy in people of foreign countries. They sayit as it is.Questioner: Dada can you explain what you mean bythis understanding being obstructed?Dadashri: Our increased understanding becomes anobstruction. If this understanding does not become helpful toyou, then it will take you on the wrong path.You will find a solution when your obstinacy goes away.Obstinacy is essentially the ego; it is an offshoot of the ego.The ego is the basisDo you like obstinacy?Questioner: I do not like it but it does not go away.Dadashri: I will get rid of it for you. You are aware thatobstinacy arises within you and that it does not go away, are younot? That itself is awakened awareness (jagruti). Otherwise,one is not aware at all of obstinacy when it arises. Theawareness of obstinacy arising is not there at all. If you asksomeone, ‘Why are you being obstinate?’ he will tell you, ‘youare the one who is obstinate.’ Would he not immediatelyAptavani-91516Aptavani-9temptation (lalacha) but if someone were to even utter my namein a negative manner, I would let him have it! Many peoplewould make comments behind my back like, ‘he is a trouble-maker’ or ‘Don’t even talk about him, just leave him alone, heis cantankerous and bad tempered!’ They used all kinds ofadjectives for me! I knew what adjectives they were using forme, behind my back. But I had no attachment and that was themain attribute in me. The current glorious state (of a Gnani) isdue to this very attribute. A person with attachment, no matterhow wise, is deeply entrenched in the worldly life. ‘We’ werewithout attachment so life has been fun all along. Attachmentverily is the cause of worldly life. The ego is not the cause ofworldly life.I too feel now that I have straightened up. No one has tostraighten me.Questioner: How did you become straight, Dada?Dadashri: People of the world beat me one way oranother; through their devious and worldly ways, they trappedme one way or another and shaped me up.Questioner: Has this cleansing (straightening) beenongoing from your previous lives?Dadashri: This had been happening from many previouslives and that is why I became completely straight in this life.Otherwise, the stock of India is obstinate by nature; you cannever find straightness in India. Some are even born upsidedown, feet first and there are others who are obstinate even intheir mother’s womb; they hurt their mothers even when they arein the womb! Some change to the wrong position in the womb;they hurt their mother to the point of dying during delivery,even to the point of hurting the reputation of the obstetrician inthe process.Questioner: But he does not have any desire to do allthat. Does that not happen on it own?Dadashri: It happens because he is obstinate by nature.He becomes obstinate wherever he goes. Even in the womb!And a straight person will be straight wherever he goes.Questioner: People of India are obstinate and yet theyare deserving of moksha!Dadashri: It is like this; only those who are obstinate goto moksha. Who becomes obstinate, is it the one withunderstanding or the one without understanding? Would the onewith understanding be the one to become obstinate?Questioner: But all that understanding is wrong is it notDada?Dadashri: It is because the understanding is obstructed.There is no obstinacy in people of foreign countries. They sayit as it is.Questioner: Dada can you explain what you mean bythis understanding being obstructed?Dadashri: Our increased understanding becomes anobstruction. If this understanding does not become helpful toyou, then it will take you on the wrong path.You will find a solution when your obstinacy goes away.Obstinacy is essentially the ego; it is an offshoot of the ego.The ego is the basisDo you like obstinacy?Questioner: I do not like it but it does not go away.Dadashri: I will get rid of it for you. You are aware thatobstinacy arises within you and that it does not go away, are younot? That itself is awakened awareness (jagruti). Otherwise,one is not aware at all of obstinacy when it arises. Theawareness of obstinacy arising is not there at all. If you asksomeone, ‘Why are you being obstinate?’ he will tell you, ‘youare the one who is obstinate.’ Would he not immediatelyAptavani-91718Aptavani-9retaliate in this manner? If his boss tells him he is being obstinate,he will not speak a word because it is coming from his boss butnevertheless he will retaliate in his mind! And that is because ofthe ego, what will the ego not do? Everything is based on theego. Everything is supported by the ego. One is the absoluteSelf (parmatma) when that ego is gone.Questioner: But, in such instances, so many times weend up saying, ‘This is wrong.’Dadashri: Yes, you will make such statements. That is anold habit of ours from time immemorial! But you also realize thatyou did some thing wrong. Do you not realize this after havingsaid so?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: But it is an old habit that has been there forcountless lives. It is subject to the law of action and reaction andtherefore it is not likely to cease suddenly.Never say, ‘I cannot do it’From now on, you should not say, ‘the obstinacy doesnot go away.’ Because when I ask people how they are doing,they tell me, ‘Sir, I know everything, but I am not able to do it.’What kind of people are you? You have turned the Self to this?In spite of my telling you that the Atma can become whateveryou imagine it to be, you still make statements such as ‘I knoweverything but I cannot do it.’ Is that what you are telling me?Then the Atma will become just like that; it will becomecrippled. You should never say, ‘I know it all but I cannot doit.’ Especially, you should never say, ‘I cannot do it.’ When Ihave a fever and someone asks, ‘Are you running a fever?’ I tellthem, ‘Yes, I know that A. M. Patel has a fever.’ If I say, ‘Ihave a fever’ then it becomes attached to me. You immediatelybecome whatever you envision (kalpey). Therefore, I do notsay any such things.The main nature (swabhav) of the Self is that onebecomes whatever he envisions. If you say ‘I am God’, then youbecome like God, and if you say, ‘I am worthless’, then you willbecome worthless. You become that, the moment you say it.When you say, I should become a God, then at that moment youdo become God, but then you will ask, ‘What should I donow?’ So you do not know it well and hence you revert to whatyou were before, dim-witted! Should you not learn how?Should you not know what you have to do after attaining theSelf? Otherwise, you will revert to what you were before. TheSelf becomes what it envisions (chintavan) and because it is so,it will continue to take on countless different forms and changefrom one form to another of whatever is envisioned. The onewho is envisioning is not doing it independently. The pressureof his surroundings and the prevailing circumstances influencesthe envisioning.The knowledge guides one’s conductQuestioner: So what is the root cause of obstinacy?Dadashri: The ego.Questioner: But is it not the effect of past life’s causes?Dadashri: It is an effect, but only because the causeswere created. How do causes occur? First comes the knowledgeof obstinacy that says, ‘If I become obstinate and inflexible,everyone will straighten out. I will become obstinate to sorteveryone out at home. Obstinacy can be very useful.’ Oneattains this knowledge first, and then the faith (shraddha) sets in.The faith in turn strengthens that knowledge. Knowledge withoutfaith will not last, but when faith develops, it makes theknowledge stronger and then that obstinacy comes into conduct.Then all the fun (!) begins!Everyone’s obstinacy is differentQuestioner: Everyone does not have similar obstinacy,do they?Aptavani-91718Aptavani-9retaliate in this manner? If his boss tells him he is being obstinate,he will not speak a word because it is coming from his boss butnevertheless he will retaliate in his mind! And that is because ofthe ego, what will the ego not do? Everything is based on theego. Everything is supported by the ego. One is the absoluteSelf (parmatma) when that ego is gone.Questioner: But, in such instances, so many times weend up saying, ‘This is wrong.’Dadashri: Yes, you will make such statements. That is anold habit of ours from time immemorial! But you also realize thatyou did some thing wrong. Do you not realize this after havingsaid so?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: But it is an old habit that has been there forcountless lives. It is subject to the law of action and reaction andtherefore it is not likely to cease suddenly.Never say, ‘I cannot do it’From now on, you should not say, ‘the obstinacy doesnot go away.’ Because when I ask people how they are doing,they tell me, ‘Sir, I know everything, but I am not able to do it.’What kind of people are you? You have turned the Self to this?In spite of my telling you that the Atma can become whateveryou imagine it to be, you still make statements such as ‘I knoweverything but I cannot do it.’ Is that what you are telling me?Then the Atma will become just like that; it will becomecrippled. You should never say, ‘I know it all but I cannot doit.’ Especially, you should never say, ‘I cannot do it.’ When Ihave a fever and someone asks, ‘Are you running a fever?’ I tellthem, ‘Yes, I know that A. M. Patel has a fever.’ If I say, ‘Ihave a fever’ then it becomes attached to me. You immediatelybecome whatever you envision (kalpey). Therefore, I do notsay any such things.The main nature (swabhav) of the Self is that onebecomes whatever he envisions. If you say ‘I am God’, then youbecome like God, and if you say, ‘I am worthless’, then you willbecome worthless. You become that, the moment you say it.When you say, I should become a God, then at that moment youdo become God, but then you will ask, ‘What should I donow?’ So you do not know it well and hence you revert to whatyou were before, dim-witted! Should you not learn how?Should you not know what you have to do after attaining theSelf? Otherwise, you will revert to what you were before. TheSelf becomes what it envisions (chintavan) and because it is so,it will continue to take on countless different forms and changefrom one form to another of whatever is envisioned. The onewho is envisioning is not doing it independently. The pressureof his surroundings and the prevailing circumstances influencesthe envisioning.The knowledge guides one’s conductQuestioner: So what is the root cause of obstinacy?Dadashri: The ego.Questioner: But is it not the effect of past life’s causes?Dadashri: It is an effect, but only because the causeswere created. How do causes occur? First comes the knowledgeof obstinacy that says, ‘If I become obstinate and inflexible,everyone will straighten out. I will become obstinate to sorteveryone out at home. Obstinacy can be very useful.’ Oneattains this knowledge first, and then the faith (shraddha) sets in.The faith in turn strengthens that knowledge. Knowledge withoutfaith will not last, but when faith develops, it makes theknowledge stronger and then that obstinacy comes into conduct.Then all the fun (!) begins!Everyone’s obstinacy is differentQuestioner: Everyone does not have similar obstinacy,do they?Aptavani-91920Aptavani-9Dadashri: Each obstinacy is different. Are all vegetablesthe same? There are all kinds of vegetables; obstinacies too areof different kind. Everyone’s kadhee (soup) is different andvaries; everyone’s height is different and so is their color. Iseverything not different?Obstinacy leaves when one attains this Gnan. If obstinacyremains in a person, can one not see it within? No one wishesto hang on to their obstinacy or to keep it safe in a bank vault!Those obstinacies will endQuestioner: We are unable to adjust even when wemake a decision to adjust. What is the reason behind this? Is itdue to our obstinacy or does our vyavasthit not allow our effortsto succeed?Dadashri: No, it is because obstinacies are still there. Itis all obstinacy. For the one whose obstinacy is gone, allentanglements clear. Your obstinacy is starting to leave and oneday it will end. This is because the faucet of the ‘tank’ (pendingkarmic accounts) is wide open and running and nothing more ornew (no new causes are created) is coming into the tank (karmictank) and that is why one day the tank will empty. From nowon, nothing new is taking place in your factory of obstinacy andyour old ones continue to dissipate. One obstinacy will surfaceand it will come to an end, then another one will come to surfaceand it too will clear and a third one will surface. Obstinacies thatcome to surface will leave.Straight and yet there were subtleobstinaciesQuestioner: In the Aptasutra (Dadashri’s major volumeof 4237 Gnan aphorisms) it says, “Before attaining Gnan, ‘we’had crossed the entire ocean of obstinacy. Meaning, this Gnanonly manifested after every obstinacy was broken.”Dadashri: Yes, there was a lot of obstinacy (aadayee).People could not see it but ‘we’ could tell there was obstinacy(aadayee) within. On the contrary, people saw me as beingstraight (sarad). There were small obstinacies, subtle obstinacies,and egotistic ones. They were not of the body; not the kind ofbecoming upset and non-communicative (risavu). They wereobstinacies of the ego. I could tell that the inner adjustment hastaken a wrong turn with reference to an interaction with a certainperson even though that person would not be aware of it.Questioner: Does that count as obstinacy (aadayee)?Dadashri: Then what else? If the other person is rightand we do not accept it within, is that not madness of the ego?Questioner: So is obstinacy not a distortion of the ego?Dadashri: It is definitely the ego. The buddhi (intellect)has nothing to do with it.Questioner: But is it not a distorted ego?Dadashri: Distorted indeed. What kind of a distortion?People will say behind your back, ‘Just leave him alone, he isa little ‘crack (mad)’ Don’t even mention his name.’ Hey you!How can there be a crack in the head if the engine is stillrunning?In those situations you should be alert.Questioner: There are many who pounce on us themoment we gently suggest, ‘Sir, it is like this…’Dadashri: Yes, there are some who will react that waybut you should be careful before you say anything, otherwiseanything is likely to happen. A fight will ensue because they donot understand what you are trying to say. They willmisunderstand you. The other person will not understand yourgood intentions and will take it the wrong way and so he willfight you. If that happens then you should realize that what youare saying is not reaching that person and you should not sayAptavani-91920Aptavani-9Dadashri: Each obstinacy is different. Are all vegetablesthe same? There are all kinds of vegetables; obstinacies too areof different kind. Everyone’s kadhee (soup) is different andvaries; everyone’s height is different and so is their color. Iseverything not different?Obstinacy leaves when one attains this Gnan. If obstinacyremains in a person, can one not see it within? No one wishesto hang on to their obstinacy or to keep it safe in a bank vault!Those obstinacies will endQuestioner: We are unable to adjust even when wemake a decision to adjust. What is the reason behind this? Is itdue to our obstinacy or does our vyavasthit not allow our effortsto succeed?Dadashri: No, it is because obstinacies are still there. Itis all obstinacy. For the one whose obstinacy is gone, allentanglements clear. Your obstinacy is starting to leave and oneday it will end. This is because the faucet of the ‘tank’ (pendingkarmic accounts) is wide open and running and nothing more ornew (no new causes are created) is coming into the tank (karmictank) and that is why one day the tank will empty. From nowon, nothing new is taking place in your factory of obstinacy andyour old ones continue to dissipate. One obstinacy will surfaceand it will come to an end, then another one will come to surfaceand it too will clear and a third one will surface. Obstinacies thatcome to surface will leave.Straight and yet there were subtleobstinaciesQuestioner: In the Aptasutra (Dadashri’s major volumeof 4237 Gnan aphorisms) it says, “Before attaining Gnan, ‘we’had crossed the entire ocean of obstinacy. Meaning, this Gnanonly manifested after every obstinacy was broken.”Dadashri: Yes, there was a lot of obstinacy (aadayee).People could not see it but ‘we’ could tell there was obstinacy(aadayee) within. On the contrary, people saw me as beingstraight (sarad). There were small obstinacies, subtle obstinacies,and egotistic ones. They were not of the body; not the kind ofbecoming upset and non-communicative (risavu). They wereobstinacies of the ego. I could tell that the inner adjustment hastaken a wrong turn with reference to an interaction with a certainperson even though that person would not be aware of it.Questioner: Does that count as obstinacy (aadayee)?Dadashri: Then what else? If the other person is rightand we do not accept it within, is that not madness of the ego?Questioner: So is obstinacy not a distortion of the ego?Dadashri: It is definitely the ego. The buddhi (intellect)has nothing to do with it.Questioner: But is it not a distorted ego?Dadashri: Distorted indeed. What kind of a distortion?People will say behind your back, ‘Just leave him alone, he isa little ‘crack (mad)’ Don’t even mention his name.’ Hey you!How can there be a crack in the head if the engine is stillrunning?In those situations you should be alert.Questioner: There are many who pounce on us themoment we gently suggest, ‘Sir, it is like this…’Dadashri: Yes, there are some who will react that waybut you should be careful before you say anything, otherwiseanything is likely to happen. A fight will ensue because they donot understand what you are trying to say. They willmisunderstand you. The other person will not understand yourgood intentions and will take it the wrong way and so he willfight you. If that happens then you should realize that what youare saying is not reaching that person and you should not sayAptavani-92122Aptavani-9anything further. You should continue listening to him but youshould not try to make him understand what you are saying; hesimply does not understand your viewpoint.Only a Gnani can straighten him outQuestioner: What should we do when someone is beingobstinate?Dadashri: People simply don’t have the courage to dealwith such tasks! That kind of equanimity is ‘our’ (the Gnani’s)task. That person would never behave obstinately around meagain. The day he tries to be obstinate, he will not see anyreward from me. He will try to test me and then he will neverbe obstinate around me. Obstinacy has become strong becauseit has received encouragement. Generally, people are feeble andwhen someone is being obstinate with them, what do they do?They will give in and say, ‘Just let him go.’ People are soft andtherefore they encourage obstinacy. When the obstinate onecomes near ‘us’, he will find out.Questioner: Is it true that we bring this stock ofobstinacy from our past life?Dadashri: It is all from the past life. Nothing of it is fromthis life.Questioner: In that case, will it become strong if it getsencouragement in this life?Dadashri: Yes, it does become stronger but nobody canhave their way with a person who is unattached (nispruha).The Gnani is pleased with the one whobecomes saradNothing that anyone does can affect the detachment(nispruhata) of the Gnani. The one who does not keep anydistinction between ‘mine’ and ‘someone else’s’, can accomplishwhatever he wants. If you make such a person happy (rajipo- if you make the Gnani happy) then the entire universe (one’stotal being) will become happy. But it is not easy to make himhappy because the Gnani Purush is extremely straight (sarad)and that is why it is difficult to do so. An hour’s worth of theGnani’s rajipo will accomplish your goal of salvation. I telleveryone and I give them a guarantee that I can bestow thesame state as mine upon the one who wants it, within an hour.But it is difficult to attain straightness (saradata), is it not?The Gnani Purush is extremely sarad (straight) and that iswhy it is difficult to attain his rajipo and please him. If the GnaniPurush were not straight (asarad) then he would be easilypleased. However, this Gnani Purush is extremely sarad andthus He is difficult to please. Now how can you please the onewho is sarad (straight)? You can please him when you becomesarad (straight) yourself. Yes, He will be pleased if he comesdown from that level (a sarad level), how can He be pleasedotherwise? You can own the whole universe with an hour of theGnani’s rajipo! That is how much rajipo He has. What can theOne, who wants nothing in this world, not give? But it is noteasy to attain such a rajipo. You have to become straight(sarad) in order to attain it. The Gnani Purush is more saradthan even a year old child. Now how can you attain His rajipoand please Him, when you are not straight? How can you attainthat from a straight (sarad) person when you are not straight(sarad) in front of him? You need that level here. Do youunderstand all this?A Dramatic ego!Questioner: It is said in the Aptasutra, ‘There is noproblem with the ego that is flowing but to seize the ego evena little, is obstinacy.’ So what is flowing ego?Dadashri: The ego that you see in women is a flowingego. It is ego when she says, ‘Right now I am making soup andI will cook the vegetables in no time’, but it is a flowing ego.Aptavani-92122Aptavani-9anything further. You should continue listening to him but youshould not try to make him understand what you are saying; hesimply does not understand your viewpoint.Only a Gnani can straighten him outQuestioner: What should we do when someone is beingobstinate?Dadashri: People simply don’t have the courage to dealwith such tasks! That kind of equanimity is ‘our’ (the Gnani’s)task. That person would never behave obstinately around meagain. The day he tries to be obstinate, he will not see anyreward from me. He will try to test me and then he will neverbe obstinate around me. Obstinacy has become strong becauseit has received encouragement. Generally, people are feeble andwhen someone is being obstinate with them, what do they do?They will give in and say, ‘Just let him go.’ People are soft andtherefore they encourage obstinacy. When the obstinate onecomes near ‘us’, he will find out.Questioner: Is it true that we bring this stock ofobstinacy from our past life?Dadashri: It is all from the past life. Nothing of it is fromthis life.Questioner: In that case, will it become strong if it getsencouragement in this life?Dadashri: Yes, it does become stronger but nobody canhave their way with a person who is unattached (nispruha).The Gnani is pleased with the one whobecomes saradNothing that anyone does can affect the detachment(nispruhata) of the Gnani. The one who does not keep anydistinction between ‘mine’ and ‘someone else’s’, can accomplishwhatever he wants. If you make such a person happy (rajipo- if you make the Gnani happy) then the entire universe (one’stotal being) will become happy. But it is not easy to make himhappy because the Gnani Purush is extremely straight (sarad)and that is why it is difficult to do so. An hour’s worth of theGnani’s rajipo will accomplish your goal of salvation. I telleveryone and I give them a guarantee that I can bestow thesame state as mine upon the one who wants it, within an hour.But it is difficult to attain straightness (saradata), is it not?The Gnani Purush is extremely sarad (straight) and that iswhy it is difficult to attain his rajipo and please him. If the GnaniPurush were not straight (asarad) then he would be easilypleased. However, this Gnani Purush is extremely sarad andthus He is difficult to please. Now how can you please the onewho is sarad (straight)? You can please him when you becomesarad (straight) yourself. Yes, He will be pleased if he comesdown from that level (a sarad level), how can He be pleasedotherwise? You can own the whole universe with an hour of theGnani’s rajipo! That is how much rajipo He has. What can theOne, who wants nothing in this world, not give? But it is noteasy to attain such a rajipo. You have to become straight(sarad) in order to attain it. The Gnani Purush is more saradthan even a year old child. Now how can you attain His rajipoand please Him, when you are not straight? How can you attainthat from a straight (sarad) person when you are not straight(sarad) in front of him? You need that level here. Do youunderstand all this?A Dramatic ego!Questioner: It is said in the Aptasutra, ‘There is noproblem with the ego that is flowing but to seize the ego evena little, is obstinacy.’ So what is flowing ego?Dadashri: The ego that you see in women is a flowingego. It is ego when she says, ‘Right now I am making soup andI will cook the vegetables in no time’, but it is a flowing ego.Aptavani-92324Aptavani-9his worldly interaction is within acceptable norms or not.Questioner: But how can one recognize his ownobstinacy?Dadashri: He will know if he has our Gnan. He will nototherwise and even if he knows, he would cover it up andcontinue to remain obstinate. One can know because of thepower of our Gnan.Questioner: What is it to cover up obstinacy?Dadashri: Covering up the obstinacy is double obstinacy.Questioner: Then there is no scope of getting rid of theoriginal obstinacy, is there?Dadashri: On the contrary, it increases.Questioner: But our main aim is to get rid of obstinacyfrom its very roots, is it not? What should we do there?Dadashri: You will not be able to do it yourself if you try.You should ask me how it is and I will tell you ‘Brother, get ridof this obstinacy.’Questioner: There is obstinacy to begin with and then hecovers it up, that is double the obstinacy. Then that obstinacywill not allow him to open up and ask. What should he do there?Dadashri: But someone like me will ask, ‘Where are yougoing? Which ‘town’ do you have to go to (What is yourspiritual destination)?’ Most people are such that if you tell themas it is; they will take the opposite way. In spite of you speakingcandidly to them and they will take the obstinate path.Therefore, I have to twist things around before I say anything tothem. Their spiritual state is still weak, is it not? I have to sweet-talk them in order to get the work done. We have to explainthings to little children.Questioner: They all look like children and you have toWhereas men hold on to the ego, ‘I told you to do this but youdid that!’ That is obstinacy (aadayee).Questioner: So is the flowing ego the same as thedramatic ego – the ego that plays the role of the worldly lifewithout attachment?Dadashri: It is the dramatic ego. There is no problemwith the flowing ego. If men have a flowing ego, there is noproblem. It is obstinacy when they hold on to the ego.Obstinacy leaves by ‘knowing’ that it hasoccurredQuestioner: Once a person realizes he has beenobstinate, how can he turn it around if he wants to?Dadashri: The fact that he ‘Knows’ that obstinacy hasoccurred, verily means that he is turning around. ‘He’ (the onewho has awakened) turns back the instant he ‘knows’ (innerexperience of Knowledge - anubhav) that obstinacy is occurring.He cannot turn back as long as he does not know and‘knowing’ means he will definitely turn around.Questioner: What other adjustments does one have totake to turn around?Dadashri: Nothing else, ‘he’ will turn around automatically.Whatever process is necessary, ‘he’ will turn around with thatprocess. There are processes (vidhis) of adjustments. If one hastaken Gnan, he will come to ‘know’ ‘his’ obstinacy, but nototherwise. And here, he directly begins to see his faults.Questioner: One turns around when he knows hisobstinacy (aadayee). How does he know the obstinacy? Howdoes he recognize it?Dadashri: He will recognize it immediately. If he hastaken ‘our’ Gnan, then he will immediately recognize that he isstarting to become obstinate. He will immediately know whetherAptavani-92324Aptavani-9his worldly interaction is within acceptable norms or not.Questioner: But how can one recognize his ownobstinacy?Dadashri: He will know if he has our Gnan. He will nototherwise and even if he knows, he would cover it up andcontinue to remain obstinate. One can know because of thepower of our Gnan.Questioner: What is it to cover up obstinacy?Dadashri: Covering up the obstinacy is double obstinacy.Questioner: Then there is no scope of getting rid of theoriginal obstinacy, is there?Dadashri: On the contrary, it increases.Questioner: But our main aim is to get rid of obstinacyfrom its very roots, is it not? What should we do there?Dadashri: You will not be able to do it yourself if you try.You should ask me how it is and I will tell you ‘Brother, get ridof this obstinacy.’Questioner: There is obstinacy to begin with and then hecovers it up, that is double the obstinacy. Then that obstinacywill not allow him to open up and ask. What should he do there?Dadashri: But someone like me will ask, ‘Where are yougoing? Which ‘town’ do you have to go to (What is yourspiritual destination)?’ Most people are such that if you tell themas it is; they will take the opposite way. In spite of you speakingcandidly to them and they will take the obstinate path.Therefore, I have to twist things around before I say anything tothem. Their spiritual state is still weak, is it not? I have to sweet-talk them in order to get the work done. We have to explainthings to little children.Questioner: They all look like children and you have toWhereas men hold on to the ego, ‘I told you to do this but youdid that!’ That is obstinacy (aadayee).Questioner: So is the flowing ego the same as thedramatic ego – the ego that plays the role of the worldly lifewithout attachment?Dadashri: It is the dramatic ego. There is no problemwith the flowing ego. If men have a flowing ego, there is noproblem. It is obstinacy when they hold on to the ego.Obstinacy leaves by ‘knowing’ that it hasoccurredQuestioner: Once a person realizes he has beenobstinate, how can he turn it around if he wants to?Dadashri: The fact that he ‘Knows’ that obstinacy hasoccurred, verily means that he is turning around. ‘He’ (the onewho has awakened) turns back the instant he ‘knows’ (innerexperience of Knowledge - anubhav) that obstinacy is occurring.He cannot turn back as long as he does not know and‘knowing’ means he will definitely turn around.Questioner: What other adjustments does one have totake to turn around?Dadashri: Nothing else, ‘he’ will turn around automatically.Whatever process is necessary, ‘he’ will turn around with thatprocess. There are processes (vidhis) of adjustments. If one hastaken Gnan, he will come to ‘know’ ‘his’ obstinacy, but nototherwise. And here, he directly begins to see his faults.Questioner: One turns around when he knows hisobstinacy (aadayee). How does he know the obstinacy? Howdoes he recognize it?Dadashri: He will recognize it immediately. If he hastaken ‘our’ Gnan, then he will immediately recognize that he isstarting to become obstinate. He will immediately know whetherAptavani-92526Aptavani-9pamper them and take them to moksha. What compassion youmust have at the time!Dadashri: They all look like children. It is exactly likewhen a child is upset and non-communicative (risavu) but Ihave to pamper them and make them progress.Questioner: I have even seen you asking them forforgiveness as you pamper them.Dadashri: I have to take them to moksha so do I nothave to proceed with vigilance? What do they stand to lose?There was a man who said, ‘Dadaji, here is your Gnan and hereare your books. I am giving them back to you.’ I told him, ‘Yes,you did a good thing. I am obliged to you.’ He could havethrown the books away. Should I not appreciate the fact that hecame to our home to return the books? Is that not a virtuousquality? ‘I am giving you back your Gnan!’ he said. Only Iwould take it back calmly!Questioner: With calm, and that too with a sense ofobligation!Dadashri: Yes, He is a wise man because he did notthrow them away. He did a good thing.Questioner: It is because you are a Gnani Purush thatthe other person’s obstinacy leaves.Dadashri: It goes away quickly. Otherwise, it leaves afterhe takes a lot of beating and through bitter realization. As onesuffers bitter experiences, he learns from them and the obstinacybegins to leave. Otherwise, it takes many, many lifetimes.It should not be soQuestioner: For the mahatmas who have taken Gnan,what hinders them more; their obstinacy (aadayee) or theirinsurmountable inner obstacle (atkan)?Dadashri: Insurmountable inner obstacle (atkan)! Theobstinacies do not trouble much. As far as obstinacy isconcerned, he understands that it is wrong. After attaining thisGnan, the obstinacy gives ‘him’ a beating. This obstinacy is akarmic stock that was gathered and charged in the past life. Thatstock is now giving its effect in this life in the form of a beating.Therefore, no one likes obstinacy (aadayee). But insurmountableinner obstacle (atkan) leads to more suffering. These faults stillgive you trouble in spite of having this Gnan. You should nothave this stock but once you have brought the stock with youfrom the ‘market’, you cannot deny or avoid it, can you?Whatever stock you have, it is there because you accumulated(puran – created a cause) it in your past life, and now it willdischarge (galan – the effect of the cause created). No one isgoing to accumulate any new stock after Gnan. You have to‘purify’ your old stock through the process of just ‘seeing’ it asit unfolds and let go of it, regardless of what that stock is.Nevertheless from now on, should your internal state not be thatof ‘how can all the worldly interactions (vyavahar) becomecleansed’?‘You’ are not the obstinate ‘one’I have straightened you out! Have I not? Who was theobstinate one? It was ‘Chandulal’, your relative-self. ‘You’ arenot Chandulal. Therefore, ‘You’ just have to say, ‘I am not this.I am this Shuddhatma.’ Then, does your obstinacy not go away?What do you think?That is why this Akram Vignan (Science) has straightenedout all the householders (gruhasthis - married people). In thetraditional Kramic path, one has to become a sadhu (ascetic) inorder to become straight. The householder who becomesstraight has the solution at hand whereas otherwise in order tobecome straight, he has to become a sadhu. You become awarethat this ‘Chandulal’ is obstinate and ‘I’ am straight. Therefore,you have become straight without becoming a sadhu, have younot? Is this Akram Vignan not wonderful!Aptavani-92526Aptavani-9pamper them and take them to moksha. What compassion youmust have at the time!Dadashri: They all look like children. It is exactly likewhen a child is upset and non-communicative (risavu) but Ihave to pamper them and make them progress.Questioner: I have even seen you asking them forforgiveness as you pamper them.Dadashri: I have to take them to moksha so do I nothave to proceed with vigilance? What do they stand to lose?There was a man who said, ‘Dadaji, here is your Gnan and hereare your books. I am giving them back to you.’ I told him, ‘Yes,you did a good thing. I am obliged to you.’ He could havethrown the books away. Should I not appreciate the fact that hecame to our home to return the books? Is that not a virtuousquality? ‘I am giving you back your Gnan!’ he said. Only Iwould take it back calmly!Questioner: With calm, and that too with a sense ofobligation!Dadashri: Yes, He is a wise man because he did notthrow them away. He did a good thing.Questioner: It is because you are a Gnani Purush thatthe other person’s obstinacy leaves.Dadashri: It goes away quickly. Otherwise, it leaves afterhe takes a lot of beating and through bitter realization. As onesuffers bitter experiences, he learns from them and the obstinacybegins to leave. Otherwise, it takes many, many lifetimes.It should not be soQuestioner: For the mahatmas who have taken Gnan,what hinders them more; their obstinacy (aadayee) or theirinsurmountable inner obstacle (atkan)?Dadashri: Insurmountable inner obstacle (atkan)! Theobstinacies do not trouble much. As far as obstinacy isconcerned, he understands that it is wrong. After attaining thisGnan, the obstinacy gives ‘him’ a beating. This obstinacy is akarmic stock that was gathered and charged in the past life. Thatstock is now giving its effect in this life in the form of a beating.Therefore, no one likes obstinacy (aadayee). But insurmountableinner obstacle (atkan) leads to more suffering. These faults stillgive you trouble in spite of having this Gnan. You should nothave this stock but once you have brought the stock with youfrom the ‘market’, you cannot deny or avoid it, can you?Whatever stock you have, it is there because you accumulated(puran – created a cause) it in your past life, and now it willdischarge (galan – the effect of the cause created). No one isgoing to accumulate any new stock after Gnan. You have to‘purify’ your old stock through the process of just ‘seeing’ it asit unfolds and let go of it, regardless of what that stock is.Nevertheless from now on, should your internal state not be thatof ‘how can all the worldly interactions (vyavahar) becomecleansed’?‘You’ are not the obstinate ‘one’I have straightened you out! Have I not? Who was theobstinate one? It was ‘Chandulal’, your relative-self. ‘You’ arenot Chandulal. Therefore, ‘You’ just have to say, ‘I am not this.I am this Shuddhatma.’ Then, does your obstinacy not go away?What do you think?That is why this Akram Vignan (Science) has straightenedout all the householders (gruhasthis - married people). In thetraditional Kramic path, one has to become a sadhu (ascetic) inorder to become straight. The householder who becomesstraight has the solution at hand whereas otherwise in order tobecome straight, he has to become a sadhu. You become awarethat this ‘Chandulal’ is obstinate and ‘I’ am straight. Therefore,you have become straight without becoming a sadhu, have younot? Is this Akram Vignan not wonderful!Aptavani-92728Aptavani-9Yet what do people tell me? ‘This Chandulal is the wayhe always was’, but ‘we’ are not concerned about that. In thatsituation what do ‘we’ tell them? ‘We’ tell them, ‘The Chandulalthat you see is different from the Chandulal ‘we’ see.’ Peoplesee faults, do they not? Will someone not say to you, ‘you runafter ‘Dada’ but you are still just the way you were before?’There ‘You’ are not that obstinate ‘one’. Nevertheless Youshould listen to what they tell you and then when you go home,‘You’ have to tell Chandulal, ‘People will tell you what they seeand how they see you, so now you need to shape up. ‘Dada’and ‘I’ are with you and so straighten up in our presence.’ Thenhe (Chandulal) will straighten up but otherwise a person cannotshape up even if he wants to; he would not be able to do so onhis own. Or else a guru can also straighten him up but that guruhas to be straight himself. However, it is difficult to find sucha guru!This Akram Vignan is like thatSo, the one who was obstinate is not ‘I’. This is how onevacates the whole place altogether. Then what else is left? The‘one’ who was in guilt became free from the liability of that guilt.The original guilty ‘one’ is left right where he was. The mainguilty one was indeed ‘he’ (Chandulal). But ‘You’ (the real self)had unnecessarily become a partner. Now You have becomestraight, have You not? Now that You have become straight,You will remove Chandulal’s obstinacy. Chandulal’s obstinacywill not leave as long as there is partnership with You. Now thepartnership is broken and so You will remove Chandulal’sobstinacy even through scolding, if necessary.Therefore, the power of this Akram Vignan is such that itgives you the separation of: ‘The one that is obstinate is not ‘I’;I am a pure Soul (Shuddhatma).’Questioner: So the one whom he is trying to improvedoes not improve even if he spends his entire life doing so, butthat is not the Self to begin with. Is that how it is?Dadashri: Yes, that is why there is no end to it. That iswhy one has to wander endlessly life after life.That is why people said to the Tirthankara Lord, “DearLord, only the most fortunate attain the continuous link, whichyou also had received.” The continuous link means that fromhere on, one continues to find a path that progresses further andthen a path that moves further from there and then a path evenfurther from that, and on and on; such a link. It is an unbrokenlink. It leads to the end (final liberation)!Whereas these people do not find such an unbroken linkand they end up way off course.I, too, had received this continuous link. I searched formyself trying to find out how all this came about. But that wasbecause I had received a continuous link and that is why thiswhole Akram Vignan has manifested!Therefore, the approach of ‘The one who is obstinate, isnot ‘I’, is Akram Vignan and ‘I am obstinate and I have tostraighten out,’ is the approach of the traditional Kramic path.If you become upset and noncompliant, youwill miss the trainQuestioner: Is getting upset and non-communicative(risavu) a form of obstinacy (aadayee)?Dadashri: Then what else can you call it? Otherwise,where is the need to be upset and non-communicative (risavu)?A person cannot refrain from being obstinate. A slightestdisagreement will result in him becoming obstinate (aadayee).All that is needed is a disagreement.It is only when one becomes upset and non-communicative(risavu), that he becomes obstinate! A man’s wife becomesupset and non-communicative (risavu) at the railway station.The man pleads with her, ‘Get on the train, otherwise the trainwill leave and you will have to spend the night here.’ She wouldAptavani-92728Aptavani-9Yet what do people tell me? ‘This Chandulal is the wayhe always was’, but ‘we’ are not concerned about that. In thatsituation what do ‘we’ tell them? ‘We’ tell them, ‘The Chandulalthat you see is different from the Chandulal ‘we’ see.’ Peoplesee faults, do they not? Will someone not say to you, ‘you runafter ‘Dada’ but you are still just the way you were before?’There ‘You’ are not that obstinate ‘one’. Nevertheless Youshould listen to what they tell you and then when you go home,‘You’ have to tell Chandulal, ‘People will tell you what they seeand how they see you, so now you need to shape up. ‘Dada’and ‘I’ are with you and so straighten up in our presence.’ Thenhe (Chandulal) will straighten up but otherwise a person cannotshape up even if he wants to; he would not be able to do so onhis own. Or else a guru can also straighten him up but that guruhas to be straight himself. However, it is difficult to find sucha guru!This Akram Vignan is like thatSo, the one who was obstinate is not ‘I’. This is how onevacates the whole place altogether. Then what else is left? The‘one’ who was in guilt became free from the liability of that guilt.The original guilty ‘one’ is left right where he was. The mainguilty one was indeed ‘he’ (Chandulal). But ‘You’ (the real self)had unnecessarily become a partner. Now You have becomestraight, have You not? Now that You have become straight,You will remove Chandulal’s obstinacy. Chandulal’s obstinacywill not leave as long as there is partnership with You. Now thepartnership is broken and so You will remove Chandulal’sobstinacy even through scolding, if necessary.Therefore, the power of this Akram Vignan is such that itgives you the separation of: ‘The one that is obstinate is not ‘I’;I am a pure Soul (Shuddhatma).’Questioner: So the one whom he is trying to improvedoes not improve even if he spends his entire life doing so, butthat is not the Self to begin with. Is that how it is?Dadashri: Yes, that is why there is no end to it. That iswhy one has to wander endlessly life after life.That is why people said to the Tirthankara Lord, “DearLord, only the most fortunate attain the continuous link, whichyou also had received.” The continuous link means that fromhere on, one continues to find a path that progresses further andthen a path that moves further from there and then a path evenfurther from that, and on and on; such a link. It is an unbrokenlink. It leads to the end (final liberation)!Whereas these people do not find such an unbroken linkand they end up way off course.I, too, had received this continuous link. I searched formyself trying to find out how all this came about. But that wasbecause I had received a continuous link and that is why thiswhole Akram Vignan has manifested!Therefore, the approach of ‘The one who is obstinate, isnot ‘I’, is Akram Vignan and ‘I am obstinate and I have tostraighten out,’ is the approach of the traditional Kramic path.If you become upset and noncompliant, youwill miss the trainQuestioner: Is getting upset and non-communicative(risavu) a form of obstinacy (aadayee)?Dadashri: Then what else can you call it? Otherwise,where is the need to be upset and non-communicative (risavu)?A person cannot refrain from being obstinate. A slightestdisagreement will result in him becoming obstinate (aadayee).All that is needed is a disagreement.It is only when one becomes upset and non-communicative(risavu), that he becomes obstinate! A man’s wife becomesupset and non-communicative (risavu) at the railway station.The man pleads with her, ‘Get on the train, otherwise the trainwill leave and you will have to spend the night here.’ She wouldAptavani-92930Aptavani-9not get on and she was stranded. When a person is upset andnon-communicative (risavu), twelve trains will leave withouthim. Will the train come and pamper the one who is being upsetin this manner? The world will continue to function; it is not goingto wait for anyone, is it? If a groom’s wedding party is ready toleave and you become upset and non-compliant, are they likelyto wait for you a couple of days? No, they will not. That is howthe world is.Questioner: During a wedding one of the paternal uncleswho becomes upset and non-communicative (risavu), will senda message that he will only come if someone comes to appeasehim.Dadashri: Yes, he will come around when the train isready to leave. He has already experienced that the train willleave without him. The world goes on. Why is one beingobstinate needlessly?If I am being upset and non-compliant (risavu) with atrain guard or the engine driver, they will ask me, ‘Why are youbeing confrontational? Please get on the train.’ And if I remainstubborn and say, ‘I am not going to get on the train.’ Will theynot just take off? Would the world wait for you? The world willgo on. You have to adjust to it otherwise you will be strandedat the station. I have seen cases where the guard blows thewhistle and the train leaves without the one who was beingdifficult!Questioner: Then he comes to his senses that the trainhas left and he is the loser.Dadashri: What he believes is ‘I did the right thing.’ Ifhowever, he realizes that he made a mistake in becoming upsetand non-communicative (risavu), then he will not make thatmistake again. However, one does not have that muchunderstanding. Man does not have the understanding to see hisown loss in this. He does not have that much ability. It requiresa lot of energy (shakti) to do that. Will a person not questionhis actions and second-guess himself when he misses hisscheduled appearance in court that day, after the train has left?Will he not regret his actions? When you get into a confrontation,even if you are right and others are wrong, should you not settlethe matter before the train leaves (before it is too late)? Are younot the greatest fool if you hang on to your side of the story evenwhen they tell you, ‘Sir, please let go of it now, the other personmade a mistake?’ Then the guard blows his whistle and the trainleaves. This is how the world functions and the fools are leftbehind sitting on a bench!Questioner: But then he also finds a few people whoaffirm his action and behavior by saying he did the right thing.Dadashri: Yes, you will find such people who will say,‘You said the right thing. Can I get you some tea and snacks?’People will take away whatever little money you have left. In thefinal analysis, there is no joy in this.If someone were to beat you and push you out of thisDada’s train, get back on it from the back door if you have to.Go into the next cabin if they throw you out of this one. If theythrow you out of there, then go to the third cabin, then go to thefourth and so on. What is the nature of worldly people? Theywill remove you from this train, but you should get back into anyother cabin and not miss the train.Who is the loser?When I was young, I used to sulk a little once in a while.Even then, I concluded that there is complete loss in it. It isnothing but a business of loss. Therefore, I had decided neverto sulk or upset and non-communicative (risavu) again, nomatter what others do. So, I stopped getting upset and non-communicative (risavu) at a young age. I felt there was a hugeloss in this.One day when I behaved that way, I lost my share of milkAptavani-92930Aptavani-9not get on and she was stranded. When a person is upset andnon-communicative (risavu), twelve trains will leave withouthim. Will the train come and pamper the one who is being upsetin this manner? The world will continue to function; it is not goingto wait for anyone, is it? If a groom’s wedding party is ready toleave and you become upset and non-compliant, are they likelyto wait for you a couple of days? No, they will not. That is howthe world is.Questioner: During a wedding one of the paternal uncleswho becomes upset and non-communicative (risavu), will senda message that he will only come if someone comes to appeasehim.Dadashri: Yes, he will come around when the train isready to leave. He has already experienced that the train willleave without him. The world goes on. Why is one beingobstinate needlessly?If I am being upset and non-compliant (risavu) with atrain guard or the engine driver, they will ask me, ‘Why are youbeing confrontational? Please get on the train.’ And if I remainstubborn and say, ‘I am not going to get on the train.’ Will theynot just take off? Would the world wait for you? The world willgo on. You have to adjust to it otherwise you will be strandedat the station. I have seen cases where the guard blows thewhistle and the train leaves without the one who was beingdifficult!Questioner: Then he comes to his senses that the trainhas left and he is the loser.Dadashri: What he believes is ‘I did the right thing.’ Ifhowever, he realizes that he made a mistake in becoming upsetand non-communicative (risavu), then he will not make thatmistake again. However, one does not have that muchunderstanding. Man does not have the understanding to see hisown loss in this. He does not have that much ability. It requiresa lot of energy (shakti) to do that. Will a person not questionhis actions and second-guess himself when he misses hisscheduled appearance in court that day, after the train has left?Will he not regret his actions? When you get into a confrontation,even if you are right and others are wrong, should you not settlethe matter before the train leaves (before it is too late)? Are younot the greatest fool if you hang on to your side of the story evenwhen they tell you, ‘Sir, please let go of it now, the other personmade a mistake?’ Then the guard blows his whistle and the trainleaves. This is how the world functions and the fools are leftbehind sitting on a bench!Questioner: But then he also finds a few people whoaffirm his action and behavior by saying he did the right thing.Dadashri: Yes, you will find such people who will say,‘You said the right thing. Can I get you some tea and snacks?’People will take away whatever little money you have left. In thefinal analysis, there is no joy in this.If someone were to beat you and push you out of thisDada’s train, get back on it from the back door if you have to.Go into the next cabin if they throw you out of this one. If theythrow you out of there, then go to the third cabin, then go to thefourth and so on. What is the nature of worldly people? Theywill remove you from this train, but you should get back into anyother cabin and not miss the train.Who is the loser?When I was young, I used to sulk a little once in a while.Even then, I concluded that there is complete loss in it. It isnothing but a business of loss. Therefore, I had decided neverto sulk or upset and non-communicative (risavu) again, nomatter what others do. So, I stopped getting upset and non-communicative (risavu) at a young age. I felt there was a hugeloss in this.One day when I behaved that way, I lost my share of milkAptavani-93132Aptavani-9for that morning. So I checked further to see what I had lostduring the day and discovered that at the end of the day I gainednothing and on the contrary I lost out. Later everyone in thehouse tried to appease me by giving me a lot of importance butI lost my morning milk nevertheless. As a child I saw whathappens in becoming upset and non-communicative, and Iconcluded that I lost out in doing so; therefore I stopped it alltogether. Does a person not lose out?Questioner: Yes he does.Dadashri: Now we have become the Self, so this is notapplicable to us anymore. Have you ever become upset andnon-communicative (risavu)? Does anyone become upset andnon-communicative at home?Questioner: No.Dadashri: That is good.Questioner: You said you lost out in your morning milkbecause of your obstinacy (aadayee). How old were you?Dadashri: I was about nine or ten then.Questioner: But Dada, even we did the same thing. Wetoo missed our share of milk at that age. We too were lefthungry but we still continued the obstinacy, so how did youstop?Dadashri: My morning milk and everything went. Iconcluded that all the loss was due to my obstinacy. Obstinacyis filled with losses, so stop it. One should not be obstinate.Was all that not obstinacy on my part when I insistedquestioning ‘Why do I get only this much milk?’ Why could Inot just let go and drink it? I thought that maybe I will have myway the next time. Do you know what I used to tell my mother?‘Why do you give me half a cup of milk when you give mysister-in-law half a cup also? Give her less.’ I was happy withwhat I got, I did not want any more, but I wanted my sister-in-law to have less than me. So what did my mother tell me? ‘Yourmother is here, her mother is not, is she? I have to give her thesame otherwise the poor girl will feel bad.’ I was still notsatisfied. My mother continued to explain things and reason withme; she kept patching up the situation. However, one day Ibecame obstinate and lost out and so I decided never to do soagain. Generally people would say, ‘Just let him be.’ Would thatnot happen?Thereafter he never became upset and non-communicativeQuestioner: To instantly recognize a loss is vaniya-buddhi (the intellect of a baniya-business man), is it not?Dadashri: It is nothing like that. Vaniya-intellect isvanik-intellect. Vanik-intellect means thoughtful intellect. It iswise intellect. Having understood the loss, one would neverincur that loss again. Would he?You lose when you become upset and non-communicative(risavu). What will others do if you do so, throw a tantrum andrefuse to eat dinner? Will they all stay awake for you? They willgo to sleep when it is time, so you will be the only loser.What a cycle of becoming upset and non-communicative(risavu) and the appeasement that follows? And who wouldbother pampering and appeasing? When the dinner is ready,they will call out, ‘Uncle, please come down for dinner. It isready and everyone is waiting for you.’ The uncle will say, ‘Go,I am not coming.’ Would everyone beg him over and over tocome? Would they not start eating without him?So I never became upset and non-communicative (risavu)again. Even now, I never become upset and non-communicativewith anyone. Not even with ‘our’ business partner. He used tobecome so occasionally, but not seeing any reaction within ‘us’,he stopped being that way again.Aptavani-93132Aptavani-9for that morning. So I checked further to see what I had lostduring the day and discovered that at the end of the day I gainednothing and on the contrary I lost out. Later everyone in thehouse tried to appease me by giving me a lot of importance butI lost my morning milk nevertheless. As a child I saw whathappens in becoming upset and non-communicative, and Iconcluded that I lost out in doing so; therefore I stopped it alltogether. Does a person not lose out?Questioner: Yes he does.Dadashri: Now we have become the Self, so this is notapplicable to us anymore. Have you ever become upset andnon-communicative (risavu)? Does anyone become upset andnon-communicative at home?Questioner: No.Dadashri: That is good.Questioner: You said you lost out in your morning milkbecause of your obstinacy (aadayee). How old were you?Dadashri: I was about nine or ten then.Questioner: But Dada, even we did the same thing. Wetoo missed our share of milk at that age. We too were lefthungry but we still continued the obstinacy, so how did youstop?Dadashri: My morning milk and everything went. Iconcluded that all the loss was due to my obstinacy. Obstinacyis filled with losses, so stop it. One should not be obstinate.Was all that not obstinacy on my part when I insistedquestioning ‘Why do I get only this much milk?’ Why could Inot just let go and drink it? I thought that maybe I will have myway the next time. Do you know what I used to tell my mother?‘Why do you give me half a cup of milk when you give mysister-in-law half a cup also? Give her less.’ I was happy withwhat I got, I did not want any more, but I wanted my sister-in-law to have less than me. So what did my mother tell me? ‘Yourmother is here, her mother is not, is she? I have to give her thesame otherwise the poor girl will feel bad.’ I was still notsatisfied. My mother continued to explain things and reason withme; she kept patching up the situation. However, one day Ibecame obstinate and lost out and so I decided never to do soagain. Generally people would say, ‘Just let him be.’ Would thatnot happen?Thereafter he never became upset and non-communicativeQuestioner: To instantly recognize a loss is vaniya-buddhi (the intellect of a baniya-business man), is it not?Dadashri: It is nothing like that. Vaniya-intellect isvanik-intellect. Vanik-intellect means thoughtful intellect. It iswise intellect. Having understood the loss, one would neverincur that loss again. Would he?You lose when you become upset and non-communicative(risavu). What will others do if you do so, throw a tantrum andrefuse to eat dinner? Will they all stay awake for you? They willgo to sleep when it is time, so you will be the only loser.What a cycle of becoming upset and non-communicative(risavu) and the appeasement that follows? And who wouldbother pampering and appeasing? When the dinner is ready,they will call out, ‘Uncle, please come down for dinner. It isready and everyone is waiting for you.’ The uncle will say, ‘Go,I am not coming.’ Would everyone beg him over and over tocome? Would they not start eating without him?So I never became upset and non-communicative (risavu)again. Even now, I never become upset and non-communicativewith anyone. Not even with ‘our’ business partner. He used tobecome so occasionally, but not seeing any reaction within ‘us’,he stopped being that way again.Aptavani-93334Aptavani-9Only the ‘one’ who reacts sees the one whois upset and non-communicative.One man told me, ‘My wife repeatedly becomes veryupset and non-communicative (risavu) with me and will notspeak to me.’ I told him, ‘Who is the one saying ‘she is upsetand non-communicative’?’ It is not ‘You’. It is the risad withinyou, i.e. the ‘one’ who is inclined to become upset and non-communicative that is saying ‘she is upset and non-communicative’;who is that? It is the ‘one who is the risad’ himself that iscomplaining. It is not You. So ‘You’ should ‘know’ (janvoo)that the ‘one who has reacted and become upset (risad)’ isseeing all this. The one who is apt to become upset and non-communicative (risad) is the one seeing the other person who isupset and non-communicative. The Self ‘sees’ only the Self. Itdoes not see any other circumstance. Aggravated people see theone who is aggravated. So I told the man, ‘It was the wife whowas upset and non-communicative, it is not her Self (the Soulwithin). She is a woman. And the one who has become upsetin reaction (risad) is not your Self (Atma). Who is the wife upsetand non-communicative (risavu) with? You simply have to ‘see’that she is upset and non-communicative towards the one whois himself apt to be sulking (risad). You simply have to see that!You simply have to keep ‘seeing’.This can bring a solution, can it not? How can you solveit otherwise? Some continue becoming upset and non-communicative (risavu) and others keep cursing. That is how itis. But the Soul is separate from all these phases; the Soul is notto be found in any of this. What is the basis on which everythingis taking place? Everything occurs based on each individual’skarma. A person keeps receiving the fruits of his karma, whatdo ‘we’ have to do with that? Each person is enjoying the fruitsof his karma, what do ‘we’ have to do with them? That is howthis is. If you want to attain the Self, then keep seeing the Selfin others, and nothing else is worth seeing.What is within ‘our’ understanding? Is there not adifference between your understanding and ‘ours’? ‘We’ are notaffected by any pain or misery; what is the reason behind this?It is because ‘our’ understanding is within ‘us’. ‘We’ do notdrag in any ignorance (agnan) from outside, whereas othersdrag in worldly understanding (agnan) from others. What do wehave to do with others? Everything is under the control ofvyavasthit (scientific circumstantial evidences). It is a karmicaccount. Nothing is going to be changed in this account. Canany changes in the ‘book’ of karmic accounts be made from theoutside? Then what is all this fuss about? And if the wife is upsetand non-communicative (risavu), only the one who reacts (therisad) to this can see her as being so. The Self would not seethe one who becomes upset and non-communicative. Only theone prone to be upset in reaction (risad) will see it as such. Therisad is the one seeing the one who is upset. Otherwise, howcan one see the one who is upset? Do you think people whocome to me do not become upset and non-communicative? ButI do not see anyone as being upset. Will you not have to accountand arrive at the correct understanding for all this? Do you nothave to account for all this?The unique method of vitaragata (the stateof non-attachment)Questioner: How do you deal with someone whobecomes upset and non-communicative (risavu) with you?Dadashri: With complete vitarag-bhaav; complete non-attachment from within, along with the deep inner intent ofsalvation of that person. ‘We’ do not have any inner insistenceof any kind. There is no intention of appeasing anyone either. If‘we’ feel that in trying to appease the other person it will havea contrary effect, then ‘we’ would not say anything. If it is goingto have a positive effect, then ‘we’ will say a few words to him,‘Sir, ‘we’ made a mistake, please be patient. We are all proneto mistakes.’ ‘We’ would explain things to him in this way andAptavani-93334Aptavani-9Only the ‘one’ who reacts sees the one whois upset and non-communicative.One man told me, ‘My wife repeatedly becomes veryupset and non-communicative (risavu) with me and will notspeak to me.’ I told him, ‘Who is the one saying ‘she is upsetand non-communicative’?’ It is not ‘You’. It is the risad withinyou, i.e. the ‘one’ who is inclined to become upset and non-communicative that is saying ‘she is upset and non-communicative’;who is that? It is the ‘one who is the risad’ himself that iscomplaining. It is not You. So ‘You’ should ‘know’ (janvoo)that the ‘one who has reacted and become upset (risad)’ isseeing all this. The one who is apt to become upset and non-communicative (risad) is the one seeing the other person who isupset and non-communicative. The Self ‘sees’ only the Self. Itdoes not see any other circumstance. Aggravated people see theone who is aggravated. So I told the man, ‘It was the wife whowas upset and non-communicative, it is not her Self (the Soulwithin). She is a woman. And the one who has become upsetin reaction (risad) is not your Self (Atma). Who is the wife upsetand non-communicative (risavu) with? You simply have to ‘see’that she is upset and non-communicative towards the one whois himself apt to be sulking (risad). You simply have to see that!You simply have to keep ‘seeing’.This can bring a solution, can it not? How can you solveit otherwise? Some continue becoming upset and non-communicative (risavu) and others keep cursing. That is how itis. But the Soul is separate from all these phases; the Soul is notto be found in any of this. What is the basis on which everythingis taking place? Everything occurs based on each individual’skarma. A person keeps receiving the fruits of his karma, whatdo ‘we’ have to do with that? Each person is enjoying the fruitsof his karma, what do ‘we’ have to do with them? That is howthis is. If you want to attain the Self, then keep seeing the Selfin others, and nothing else is worth seeing.What is within ‘our’ understanding? Is there not adifference between your understanding and ‘ours’? ‘We’ are notaffected by any pain or misery; what is the reason behind this?It is because ‘our’ understanding is within ‘us’. ‘We’ do notdrag in any ignorance (agnan) from outside, whereas othersdrag in worldly understanding (agnan) from others. What do wehave to do with others? Everything is under the control ofvyavasthit (scientific circumstantial evidences). It is a karmicaccount. Nothing is going to be changed in this account. Canany changes in the ‘book’ of karmic accounts be made from theoutside? Then what is all this fuss about? And if the wife is upsetand non-communicative (risavu), only the one who reacts (therisad) to this can see her as being so. The Self would not seethe one who becomes upset and non-communicative. Only theone prone to be upset in reaction (risad) will see it as such. Therisad is the one seeing the one who is upset. Otherwise, howcan one see the one who is upset? Do you think people whocome to me do not become upset and non-communicative? ButI do not see anyone as being upset. Will you not have to accountand arrive at the correct understanding for all this? Do you nothave to account for all this?The unique method of vitaragata (the stateof non-attachment)Questioner: How do you deal with someone whobecomes upset and non-communicative (risavu) with you?Dadashri: With complete vitarag-bhaav; complete non-attachment from within, along with the deep inner intent ofsalvation of that person. ‘We’ do not have any inner insistenceof any kind. There is no intention of appeasing anyone either. If‘we’ feel that in trying to appease the other person it will havea contrary effect, then ‘we’ would not say anything. If it is goingto have a positive effect, then ‘we’ will say a few words to him,‘Sir, ‘we’ made a mistake, please be patient. We are all proneto mistakes.’ ‘We’ would explain things to him in this way andAptavani-93536Aptavani-9pacify him. However there would be no insistence on ‘our’ part,there is complete vitaragata within. Constant vitaragata(detachment)! There would not be the least bit of pull (bhaav)towards him or repulsion (abhaav) away from him. And thenwe have to tell ‘Dada Bhagwan’, ‘Please grace this man.’ Then,to the pure Soul, which is separate from ‘Chandulal and‘Chandulal’s’ mind-body-speech, bhaavkarma-dravyakarma-nokarma’ ‘we’ request, ‘please shower Your grace on‘Chandulal’. I make all these connections. Then I remain vitarag(detached). The other person continues to remain upset andnon-communicative (risavu) and I remain straight. This worldlyinteraction continues. He becomes perplexed for a while andthen it all goes away.Questioner: Then, Dada, is it not true that a man who isapt to resorting to becoming upset and non-communicative(risavu), will automatically stop if he does not get anyencouragement for such a behavior?Dadashri: ‘We’ never encourage such people, not evena little. Encouragement has a negative effect on such individuals.Even children will improve if you remain vitarag with thembut by encouraging their upset and non-communicative behavior,they will get on the wrong path. You need vitaragata (detachedinteraction)! Treat them with tender care if they come to you anddo not react if they do not. If they come, hug them gently andif they get agitated just leave them alone. Then if they comeagain, hug them again. You should not concern yourself with theway they are behaving; you simply have to remain vitarag.Whatever they do, you should not be concerned about it andneither should you make a deep mental note (nondha) of it.Questioner: That is a tremendous thing, Dada.Dadashri: There should be no deep mental note (nondha)whatsoever. Nondha creates conflicts. Do not make a mentalnote of anyone. We scold all these people but ‘we’ never makeany note of it. ‘We’ would go crazy if I were to make any noteat all. ‘We’ got rid of the notebook altogether long ago!Vitarag and yet meddlesomeQuestioner: Dada, is there any nishkaran karuna(expectation-free compassion; compassion of the Gnani Purushfor us that has no ‘personal gain’ agenda behind it) in the eyesof the vitarag?Dadashri: Yes, just that! What else? This is nothing butcompassion without expectation (ultimate compassion)! Ourvision is only on his Self (Soul) and not his non-Self complex(pudgal). Nevertheless, ‘we’ will preserve and promote aworldly relationship with him because he is beneficial to thesatsang and therefore ‘we’ would say, ‘welcome, please.’ Ifthere are certain people who are beneficial for others, ‘we’ willmake it a point to welcome them and encourage them. Thatworldly dealing has to be taken care of and nurtured and ‘we’would do that. The tirthankara Lords however, would not dosuch things. They do not meddle whatsoever, do they? And thisis nothing but meddling (khatpat) on ‘our’ part.Questioner: It is because the meddling part for theworld’s salvation that still remains in you, that we are able tocome to you here.Dadashri: Yes, that is it. That is why ‘we’ have halted‘our’ progress towards final liberation. May others attain thesalvation that ‘we’ have acquired and that is why ‘we’ meddle;‘we’ meddle only for this reason. Everything ‘we’ do is simplyso that people too may be blessed. People get to see vitaragata(the detached state) here.Questioner: So far you mentioned obstinacy in yourworldly interaction (vyavahar), where you became upset andnon-communicative (risavu) over milk, but what kind ofobstinacy is there on the path of moksha?Aptavani-93536Aptavani-9pacify him. However there would be no insistence on ‘our’ part,there is complete vitaragata within. Constant vitaragata(detachment)! There would not be the least bit of pull (bhaav)towards him or repulsion (abhaav) away from him. And thenwe have to tell ‘Dada Bhagwan’, ‘Please grace this man.’ Then,to the pure Soul, which is separate from ‘Chandulal and‘Chandulal’s’ mind-body-speech, bhaavkarma-dravyakarma-nokarma’ ‘we’ request, ‘please shower Your grace on‘Chandulal’. I make all these connections. Then I remain vitarag(detached). The other person continues to remain upset andnon-communicative (risavu) and I remain straight. This worldlyinteraction continues. He becomes perplexed for a while andthen it all goes away.Questioner: Then, Dada, is it not true that a man who isapt to resorting to becoming upset and non-communicative(risavu), will automatically stop if he does not get anyencouragement for such a behavior?Dadashri: ‘We’ never encourage such people, not evena little. Encouragement has a negative effect on such individuals.Even children will improve if you remain vitarag with thembut by encouraging their upset and non-communicative behavior,they will get on the wrong path. You need vitaragata (detachedinteraction)! Treat them with tender care if they come to you anddo not react if they do not. If they come, hug them gently andif they get agitated just leave them alone. Then if they comeagain, hug them again. You should not concern yourself with theway they are behaving; you simply have to remain vitarag.Whatever they do, you should not be concerned about it andneither should you make a deep mental note (nondha) of it.Questioner: That is a tremendous thing, Dada.Dadashri: There should be no deep mental note (nondha)whatsoever. Nondha creates conflicts. Do not make a mentalnote of anyone. We scold all these people but ‘we’ never makeany note of it. ‘We’ would go crazy if I were to make any noteat all. ‘We’ got rid of the notebook altogether long ago!Vitarag and yet meddlesomeQuestioner: Dada, is there any nishkaran karuna(expectation-free compassion; compassion of the Gnani Purushfor us that has no ‘personal gain’ agenda behind it) in the eyesof the vitarag?Dadashri: Yes, just that! What else? This is nothing butcompassion without expectation (ultimate compassion)! Ourvision is only on his Self (Soul) and not his non-Self complex(pudgal). Nevertheless, ‘we’ will preserve and promote aworldly relationship with him because he is beneficial to thesatsang and therefore ‘we’ would say, ‘welcome, please.’ Ifthere are certain people who are beneficial for others, ‘we’ willmake it a point to welcome them and encourage them. Thatworldly dealing has to be taken care of and nurtured and ‘we’would do that. The tirthankara Lords however, would not dosuch things. They do not meddle whatsoever, do they? And thisis nothing but meddling (khatpat) on ‘our’ part.Questioner: It is because the meddling part for theworld’s salvation that still remains in you, that we are able tocome to you here.Dadashri: Yes, that is it. That is why ‘we’ have halted‘our’ progress towards final liberation. May others attain thesalvation that ‘we’ have acquired and that is why ‘we’ meddle;‘we’ meddle only for this reason. Everything ‘we’ do is simplyso that people too may be blessed. People get to see vitaragata(the detached state) here.Questioner: So far you mentioned obstinacy in yourworldly interaction (vyavahar), where you became upset andnon-communicative (risavu) over milk, but what kind ofobstinacy is there on the path of moksha?Aptavani-93738Aptavani-9Dadashri: All this is nothing but obstinacy on the path tomoksha and that is why the worldly life continues to perpetuate;that is why people cannot attain moksha. Otherwise, yourliberation is at hand right here only! Obstinacy is the wall ofobstruction to liberation. The obstinacy is still there; a bundle ofsheer obstinacy; that is what he is! He will do only what hewants to.That is called tragu - manipulative tantrumQuestioner: Is making another person do what youwant, considered part of obstinacy (aadayee)?Dadashri: Then what else? If it is not obstinacy(aadayee) than what is it? One gets his way through becomingupset and noncompliant. If not then ultimately through amanipulative tantrum (tragu) one will have his or her way. Onemay even end up throwing a tragu to have his own way. Haveyou ever seen a tragu? You will get a fever if you saw one. Ifsomeone does a tragu, your temperature will rise three degreeseven if you do not have a fever!Questioner: What is a tragu?Dadashri: Tragu means a person does whatever isnecessary to scare you into accepting his or her own way. Thatperson will do anything to make you accept his will. He willbang his head on the wall, hit this or that part on the wall, jumparound, cry loudly, wail, throw a tantrum etc. That whichcompletely scares us from all angles is a tragu.Questioner: What is the difference between doing atragu and pretending?Dadashri: Whether one is pretending or throwing amanipulative tantrum (tragu), he is doing it in order to get hisown way.If everyone is sitting down for dinner and one personsays, ‘I am not going to eat’ - he is an important person in theparty and his stance is one that creates apprehension in theparty; that is called a tragu. The caring people around him willsay, ‘Please come and join us, we would like your company.’They will feed him. But if they were to ignore him, he would eaton his own. No one has starved to death.That is not a tragu - manipulative tantrumQuestioner: Someone locks himself in a room when hegets upset. Everyone else in the home becomes restless but hewill not open the door. Is that a tragu?Dadashri: That is not a tragu. That is obstinacy(aadayee); tragu is a different thing.Questioner: Is it a tragu when one pounds his fists onhis chest or bang his head on a wall?Dadashri: When people bang their heads, some of it isaadayee and some of it is a tragu. The word tragu issomething very different; in a tragu the one doing the tragu isnot affected by it at all. In aadayee, that person continues toexperience internal suffering. Simply put, tragu is pure acting!Locking one’s self in a room is obstinacy. In a tragu, the personcries and shouts but remains unperturbed from within. Lockingone’s self in a room and scaring family members is all obstinacy.She suffers and makes others around her suffer too. In a tragu,she herself is not affected and yet she does a tragu; that istragu! We need a definition, do we not? Surely you cannot labelany action as a tragu, can you?Keep your distance from manipulativetantrum (tragu)Tragu does tremendous damage.Questioner: Can you explain tragu with an example?Dadashri: Can you not tell when someone is doing atragu? You may not know how to do a tragu but can you nottell when someone is doing it?Aptavani-93738Aptavani-9Dadashri: All this is nothing but obstinacy on the path tomoksha and that is why the worldly life continues to perpetuate;that is why people cannot attain moksha. Otherwise, yourliberation is at hand right here only! Obstinacy is the wall ofobstruction to liberation. The obstinacy is still there; a bundle ofsheer obstinacy; that is what he is! He will do only what hewants to.That is called tragu - manipulative tantrumQuestioner: Is making another person do what youwant, considered part of obstinacy (aadayee)?Dadashri: Then what else? If it is not obstinacy(aadayee) than what is it? One gets his way through becomingupset and noncompliant. If not then ultimately through amanipulative tantrum (tragu) one will have his or her way. Onemay even end up throwing a tragu to have his own way. Haveyou ever seen a tragu? You will get a fever if you saw one. Ifsomeone does a tragu, your temperature will rise three degreeseven if you do not have a fever!Questioner: What is a tragu?Dadashri: Tragu means a person does whatever isnecessary to scare you into accepting his or her own way. Thatperson will do anything to make you accept his will. He willbang his head on the wall, hit this or that part on the wall, jumparound, cry loudly, wail, throw a tantrum etc. That whichcompletely scares us from all angles is a tragu.Questioner: What is the difference between doing atragu and pretending?Dadashri: Whether one is pretending or throwing amanipulative tantrum (tragu), he is doing it in order to get hisown way.If everyone is sitting down for dinner and one personsays, ‘I am not going to eat’ - he is an important person in theparty and his stance is one that creates apprehension in theparty; that is called a tragu. The caring people around him willsay, ‘Please come and join us, we would like your company.’They will feed him. But if they were to ignore him, he would eaton his own. No one has starved to death.That is not a tragu - manipulative tantrumQuestioner: Someone locks himself in a room when hegets upset. Everyone else in the home becomes restless but hewill not open the door. Is that a tragu?Dadashri: That is not a tragu. That is obstinacy(aadayee); tragu is a different thing.Questioner: Is it a tragu when one pounds his fists onhis chest or bang his head on a wall?Dadashri: When people bang their heads, some of it isaadayee and some of it is a tragu. The word tragu issomething very different; in a tragu the one doing the tragu isnot affected by it at all. In aadayee, that person continues toexperience internal suffering. Simply put, tragu is pure acting!Locking one’s self in a room is obstinacy. In a tragu, the personcries and shouts but remains unperturbed from within. Lockingone’s self in a room and scaring family members is all obstinacy.She suffers and makes others around her suffer too. In a tragu,she herself is not affected and yet she does a tragu; that istragu! We need a definition, do we not? Surely you cannot labelany action as a tragu, can you?Keep your distance from manipulativetantrum (tragu)Tragu does tremendous damage.Questioner: Can you explain tragu with an example?Dadashri: Can you not tell when someone is doing atragu? You may not know how to do a tragu but can you nottell when someone is doing it?Aptavani-93940Aptavani-9the poor straight people do? They will say, ‘Let him have hisway, whatever may become of us, so be it.’ The poor wife willeven give up all her jewelry.Questioner: The one who does the tragu, does so withan understanding, does he not?Dadashri: He understands everything. Tragu means towillfully and knowingly manipulate for one’s own agenda.Consequences of a traguQuestioner: What are the consequences for doingtragu?Dadashri: One completely bypasses the entire TiryanchaGati (the animal life form), i.e. in the next life he will go directlyto hell. Is it an ordinary feat to by-pass the entire subhumanlife?!!Questioner: Is that considered raudradhyan (adverseinternal meditation that hurts the self as well as others)?Dadashri: In many ways, raudradhyan is better. So ifanyone here has made the mistake of doing a tragu, come andask for forgiveness from ‘us’. If you do this several times, youmay erase one or so of this fault. It is considered a very gravewrongdoing. One bypasses the entire sub-human life form andgoes straight to hell. What is more, it will not be the hell one isborn into for doing raudradhyan either. Through tragu, peopleput others through living hell all the while getting what they want,at any cost. At all cost, meaning no matter what may happen,one will not rest until one gets what one wants.In opposing the one doing a tragu(manipulative tantrum)Questioner: In the current time-cycle, such tragas areoccurring everywhere.Dadashri: No, not everywhere, those are smaller tragas.Questioner: Is insisting on the truth (satyagraha), atragu?Dadashri: That is one kind of a mild tragu for sure, butfor that one can use words or terms that are more ornamentaland suitable. People use the ornamental word ‘satyagraha’.But as far as a tragu (manipulative tantrum) is concerned, noone will call it satyagraha, will they?In short, a tragu means to force others into doing whatyou want when they are not willing to do so. One resorts totragu in order to scare and manipulate others into ultimatelydoing what he wants. He will invoke fear in others, he invokesfear by doing something one way or another; he resorts toemotional blackmail in this manipulative behavior to attain hiscalculated desired end.Questioner: He will make one do what he wants,through using his charm, money, and punishment, even the fearof separation.Dadashri: Yes, but he will not stop until he has his way;that is a tragu. I had witnessed such tragu several times but Ipaid my respect from afar, ‘Hey! Tragu may I never see youand the doer of the tragu, let me not see your face ever.’ Traguis a learnt behavior. One will even find a guru to teach him.Tragu is not something one can learn on his own.Questioner: So if a person insists on doing things hisway, is that called tragu?Dadashri: Insistence is not tragu but to scare others intodoing what one wants, that is tragu. Don’t some people scareothers by saying, ‘…or else I will commit suicide’ or ‘I’ll dothis’ or ‘I’ll do that’?Questioner: They threaten, they charm, and they incitepity or punishment; they do whatever it takes.Dadashri: Yes, they resort to every trick. And what doAptavani-93940Aptavani-9the poor straight people do? They will say, ‘Let him have hisway, whatever may become of us, so be it.’ The poor wife willeven give up all her jewelry.Questioner: The one who does the tragu, does so withan understanding, does he not?Dadashri: He understands everything. Tragu means towillfully and knowingly manipulate for one’s own agenda.Consequences of a traguQuestioner: What are the consequences for doingtragu?Dadashri: One completely bypasses the entire TiryanchaGati (the animal life form), i.e. in the next life he will go directlyto hell. Is it an ordinary feat to by-pass the entire subhumanlife?!!Questioner: Is that considered raudradhyan (adverseinternal meditation that hurts the self as well as others)?Dadashri: In many ways, raudradhyan is better. So ifanyone here has made the mistake of doing a tragu, come andask for forgiveness from ‘us’. If you do this several times, youmay erase one or so of this fault. It is considered a very gravewrongdoing. One bypasses the entire sub-human life form andgoes straight to hell. What is more, it will not be the hell one isborn into for doing raudradhyan either. Through tragu, peopleput others through living hell all the while getting what they want,at any cost. At all cost, meaning no matter what may happen,one will not rest until one gets what one wants.In opposing the one doing a tragu(manipulative tantrum)Questioner: In the current time-cycle, such tragas areoccurring everywhere.Dadashri: No, not everywhere, those are smaller tragas.Questioner: Is insisting on the truth (satyagraha), atragu?Dadashri: That is one kind of a mild tragu for sure, butfor that one can use words or terms that are more ornamentaland suitable. People use the ornamental word ‘satyagraha’.But as far as a tragu (manipulative tantrum) is concerned, noone will call it satyagraha, will they?In short, a tragu means to force others into doing whatyou want when they are not willing to do so. One resorts totragu in order to scare and manipulate others into ultimatelydoing what he wants. He will invoke fear in others, he invokesfear by doing something one way or another; he resorts toemotional blackmail in this manipulative behavior to attain hiscalculated desired end.Questioner: He will make one do what he wants,through using his charm, money, and punishment, even the fearof separation.Dadashri: Yes, but he will not stop until he has his way;that is a tragu. I had witnessed such tragu several times but Ipaid my respect from afar, ‘Hey! Tragu may I never see youand the doer of the tragu, let me not see your face ever.’ Traguis a learnt behavior. One will even find a guru to teach him.Tragu is not something one can learn on his own.Questioner: So if a person insists on doing things hisway, is that called tragu?Dadashri: Insistence is not tragu but to scare others intodoing what one wants, that is tragu. Don’t some people scareothers by saying, ‘…or else I will commit suicide’ or ‘I’ll dothis’ or ‘I’ll do that’?Questioner: They threaten, they charm, and they incitepity or punishment; they do whatever it takes.Dadashri: Yes, they resort to every trick. And what doAptavani-94142Aptavani-9These tragas on the other hand are very serious; they will evenbang their heads in front of you. One person started such atragu in my presence, so I told him, ‘Go to Mahadevji (LordShiva) and offer your head as a sacrifice. Why are you doing ithere? This ‘Dada is the Mahadevji of Mahadevji i.e. Lord of theLords. Even if you do million such tragas here, they will nothave any effect, such is this man.’ Even before Gnan I used tosay, ‘Even if you do a million tragas in front me, it will not moveme a bit. I am such a man.’This art of tragu (manipulative tantrum) is very distressing.‘We’ keep away from it. ‘We’ are telling you so because ‘we’have seen it.Questioner: When two parties are resorting tomanipulative tantrums, what should we do with reference todispensing justice in the matter?Dadashri: ‘We’ would not get involved in that. When itcomes to a tragu, ‘we’ stay away.Questioner: No, but if a question about making ajudgment arises, then what should one do?Dadashri: Arey! Even the one passing a judgment risksbypassing the subhuman life. If someone ever does a tragu infront of me, he will realize it was a mistake to do so; he willnever do it again! He will realize that it is a liability to do atragu.Do you know what one lady who used to do tragu, toldme? She told me that of all the people she had come across withwhom she had had her way; I was the only one with whom shehad not been able to have her own way. I told her that I havea thorough understanding of people like her.Questioner: One has to learn to deal with an upper handwith a person doing a tragu, with a technique of remainingunaffected. That is an art too!Dadashri: That ‘we’ know! But it is still not worth gettinginvolved. ‘We’ get involved only when it is unavoidable.Otherwise, it is not worth initiating. ‘We’ have seen tragas inother places too. A husband would drag his wife by her hair andbring her to me looking for justice. The wife and the husband,both would do tragas, both were manipulative. Therefore, ‘we’have seen a lot of this. It is a wide world. What colors have‘we’ not seen in it?It is a tragu when everyone around has been pressuredto succumb against their wishes. Just as surrendering to officersof the law, people have to surrender there too; that is a tragu.Questioner: Meaning one puts others in a tight grip,correct?Dadashri: Yes, they put them in such a hold.Questioner: How should we act towards the one doinga tragu?Dadashri: You should ask him: Why he is doing it? Forwhat happiness is he doing it? How long can happiness that hasbeen stolen from others, remain with him?Questioner: What should one do if he still does notunderstand?Dadashri: Then move away from there.Questioner: So give into him?Dadashri: It is the same as giving in. It is a way of movingaway from the situation, is it not? So move away from him. If asnake comes after you, who has to run away from the snake, youor the snake? You have to run away. What does the snake haveto lose? If a bull chases you, are you going to say, ‘Why are youchasing me?’ Are you going to stand there and say, ‘I am alawyer from Baroda’? The bull will chase even a king!Questioner: But you did not give in to people who didAptavani-94142Aptavani-9These tragas on the other hand are very serious; they will evenbang their heads in front of you. One person started such atragu in my presence, so I told him, ‘Go to Mahadevji (LordShiva) and offer your head as a sacrifice. Why are you doing ithere? This ‘Dada is the Mahadevji of Mahadevji i.e. Lord of theLords. Even if you do million such tragas here, they will nothave any effect, such is this man.’ Even before Gnan I used tosay, ‘Even if you do a million tragas in front me, it will not moveme a bit. I am such a man.’This art of tragu (manipulative tantrum) is very distressing.‘We’ keep away from it. ‘We’ are telling you so because ‘we’have seen it.Questioner: When two parties are resorting tomanipulative tantrums, what should we do with reference todispensing justice in the matter?Dadashri: ‘We’ would not get involved in that. When itcomes to a tragu, ‘we’ stay away.Questioner: No, but if a question about making ajudgment arises, then what should one do?Dadashri: Arey! Even the one passing a judgment risksbypassing the subhuman life. If someone ever does a tragu infront of me, he will realize it was a mistake to do so; he willnever do it again! He will realize that it is a liability to do atragu.Do you know what one lady who used to do tragu, toldme? She told me that of all the people she had come across withwhom she had had her way; I was the only one with whom shehad not been able to have her own way. I told her that I havea thorough understanding of people like her.Questioner: One has to learn to deal with an upper handwith a person doing a tragu, with a technique of remainingunaffected. That is an art too!Dadashri: That ‘we’ know! But it is still not worth gettinginvolved. ‘We’ get involved only when it is unavoidable.Otherwise, it is not worth initiating. ‘We’ have seen tragas inother places too. A husband would drag his wife by her hair andbring her to me looking for justice. The wife and the husband,both would do tragas, both were manipulative. Therefore, ‘we’have seen a lot of this. It is a wide world. What colors have‘we’ not seen in it?It is a tragu when everyone around has been pressuredto succumb against their wishes. Just as surrendering to officersof the law, people have to surrender there too; that is a tragu.Questioner: Meaning one puts others in a tight grip,correct?Dadashri: Yes, they put them in such a hold.Questioner: How should we act towards the one doinga tragu?Dadashri: You should ask him: Why he is doing it? Forwhat happiness is he doing it? How long can happiness that hasbeen stolen from others, remain with him?Questioner: What should one do if he still does notunderstand?Dadashri: Then move away from there.Questioner: So give into him?Dadashri: It is the same as giving in. It is a way of movingaway from the situation, is it not? So move away from him. If asnake comes after you, who has to run away from the snake, youor the snake? You have to run away. What does the snake haveto lose? If a bull chases you, are you going to say, ‘Why are youchasing me?’ Are you going to stand there and say, ‘I am alawyer from Baroda’? The bull will chase even a king!Questioner: But you did not give in to people who didAptavani-94344Aptavani-9tragu and you told them that you have taken on many peoplelike him without being affected. So how is that?Dadashri: In some situations, ‘we’ have also given in, onlybecause by doing so, that poor fellow will somehow get back onthe right track. It is only with this intent that ‘we’ have done so.That is shameless open blackmail (naagai)Lawyers too meet people who do tragu. Even lawyerswill say, ‘Let me run away from him’, when they meet suchpeople. What will the lawyer tell such a client? He will say, ‘Iwill fight your case. You don’t have to pay me.’ So there are allkinds of people.Questioner: Many times even the lawyer does a tragu.He will tell you at the last minute to give him money or he willnot appear in court.Dadashri: No, that is not a tragu; it is an issue of mutualselfish needs.Questioner: Even after he has been paid for his servicehe does it to extort more money.Dadashri: Yes, he will do that too, still it is not a tragu.It is shamelessness and open blackmail (naagai). You can dealwith shameless people and even win but dealing with those whodo tragu will make you by-pass the subhuman life form and godirectly into hell. Lawyers say shameless things and so do theirclients. The client may say, ‘Sir I have paid your fees. I have notforgotten to pay. In fact you were standing with several peoplewhen I paid you.’ Now what can the lawyer do when the clientcounter attacks him in this way? What can the lawyer do, afterall he is human too!Dealing with taiphoOne woman started a tragu when one of my relative wasvisiting me. He got very scared and told her, ‘Hey, hey! Youshould not do that.’ I told him, ‘No, let her act up. Let us haveour tea and you can watch her. It is something to watch. It isgreat!’ The woman stopped immediately when I said this andasked me ‘Are you doing my taipho (exposing me)?’ I told her,‘You are doing a taipho, so we have to see the taipho, don’twe? What else can we do?’Questioner: If we use the word taipho to the one doinga taipho, then we will get double the beating.Dadashri: If that is the case then you should not use theword taipho. You should take it a little slow at first. I too tookthings very slowly at first, and then I became increasingly stern.I tightened the screw as she started to say more unwarrantedthings and so she mellowed down later.People can be saved from a taipho but not from a tragu.Many people have been destroyed because of tragu. Evensome men do tragu.Tragu for salvation of the worldA person does tragu when he cannot have his way.Anything you do to make others do things your way is a tragu.When one resorts to whatever it takes, including scare tactics toachieve his will and desired result; is all tragu. Throwing things,creating a commotion, fighting and beating, is all tragu. The onewho is meek and mild will get scared very easily and give in.‘We’ did tragu once. Arey! I threw things on the floor;I threw utensils, containers of sugar, tea, cooking fuel etc. Imade a big mess. There was a big mess on the floor.Questioner: Was it to have your own way?Dadashri: Yes, that was the only tragu I did in my wholelife. It is called a tragu. It was done for asserting control. Andit was done for others; it was done for the sake of dharma, notfor me. It was done because ‘we’ had to convey to Hiraba,‘You should not act this way.’Aptavani-94344Aptavani-9tragu and you told them that you have taken on many peoplelike him without being affected. So how is that?Dadashri: In some situations, ‘we’ have also given in, onlybecause by doing so, that poor fellow will somehow get back onthe right track. It is only with this intent that ‘we’ have done so.That is shameless open blackmail (naagai)Lawyers too meet people who do tragu. Even lawyerswill say, ‘Let me run away from him’, when they meet suchpeople. What will the lawyer tell such a client? He will say, ‘Iwill fight your case. You don’t have to pay me.’ So there are allkinds of people.Questioner: Many times even the lawyer does a tragu.He will tell you at the last minute to give him money or he willnot appear in court.Dadashri: No, that is not a tragu; it is an issue of mutualselfish needs.Questioner: Even after he has been paid for his servicehe does it to extort more money.Dadashri: Yes, he will do that too, still it is not a tragu.It is shamelessness and open blackmail (naagai). You can dealwith shameless people and even win but dealing with those whodo tragu will make you by-pass the subhuman life form and godirectly into hell. Lawyers say shameless things and so do theirclients. The client may say, ‘Sir I have paid your fees. I have notforgotten to pay. In fact you were standing with several peoplewhen I paid you.’ Now what can the lawyer do when the clientcounter attacks him in this way? What can the lawyer do, afterall he is human too!Dealing with taiphoOne woman started a tragu when one of my relative wasvisiting me. He got very scared and told her, ‘Hey, hey! Youshould not do that.’ I told him, ‘No, let her act up. Let us haveour tea and you can watch her. It is something to watch. It isgreat!’ The woman stopped immediately when I said this andasked me ‘Are you doing my taipho (exposing me)?’ I told her,‘You are doing a taipho, so we have to see the taipho, don’twe? What else can we do?’Questioner: If we use the word taipho to the one doinga taipho, then we will get double the beating.Dadashri: If that is the case then you should not use theword taipho. You should take it a little slow at first. I too tookthings very slowly at first, and then I became increasingly stern.I tightened the screw as she started to say more unwarrantedthings and so she mellowed down later.People can be saved from a taipho but not from a tragu.Many people have been destroyed because of tragu. Evensome men do tragu.Tragu for salvation of the worldA person does tragu when he cannot have his way.Anything you do to make others do things your way is a tragu.When one resorts to whatever it takes, including scare tactics toachieve his will and desired result; is all tragu. Throwing things,creating a commotion, fighting and beating, is all tragu. The onewho is meek and mild will get scared very easily and give in.‘We’ did tragu once. Arey! I threw things on the floor;I threw utensils, containers of sugar, tea, cooking fuel etc. Imade a big mess. There was a big mess on the floor.Questioner: Was it to have your own way?Dadashri: Yes, that was the only tragu I did in my wholelife. It is called a tragu. It was done for asserting control. Andit was done for others; it was done for the sake of dharma, notfor me. It was done because ‘we’ had to convey to Hiraba,‘You should not act this way.’Aptavani-94546Aptavani-9kerosene etc., on the floor. It was as if a 400-volt current hadtouched it all. I made a mess of everything. The women who hadinstigated Hiraba came to see what was going on. I asked them,‘Who poisoned this Goddess of a woman?’ They responded,‘You are a Gnani, you cannot become angry like this.’ Well onlythe anger of the Gnani Purush is worth seeing. I then told them,‘It is your instigation that has created this situation. Why did youfeed her all this? What have we done to you?’ They responded,‘We did not feed her anything. We simply told her a few things.’I asked them, ‘Why did you have to ruin her life?’ They replied,‘How have we ruined her life?’ I told them, ‘Now she has to livealone. Hiraba has to live separate in a new home in Bhadran. Iwill give her a monthly allowance.’ They said, ‘you cannot dothat. How can you do that at this age?’ I asked them, ‘whatgood is a pot that has a crack in it? It will not hold wateranymore; whatever you put in it will drain out. Can you keep apot with a crack in it?’ The neighbors all got worried when theyrealized that Hiraba would have to go live separately. Yes, thereshould not be any negative effect on dharma; Atma dharma –in spiritual matters regarding the Soul.That day tea, sugar and everything else were all mixed up.But that act was carried out without any attachment orabhorrence (vitarag-bhaav); or any inner reaction. I toldChandulal and the others sitting there, ‘go home and learn.’What was the outcome of this act the next day? The womenstarted telling Hiraba ‘Don’t do anything to cause problems. Letwhoever wants to come and see Dada. You do not get involvedin it.’ They started to tell her just the opposite because they gotworried that they would be blamed if anything were to happen.They knew they had to be very careful. I had created that scenein order to ensure that they would never do what they did again.I have never had to repeat that act either. I had come up withthat much remedy. They may still remember the incident. Hirabatoo was swept up in the rut. She would have never behaved thatThis is what happened. After ‘we’ attained Gnan, younggirls used to come to ‘us’ for vidhis (special spiritual blessingfrom the Gnani Purush by touching His feet) when we lived inMamani Poda in Vadodara. Hiraba was innocent; she is a goodperson. But women in the house across from ours instigated herby telling her, ‘Oh my goodness! Young girls come to Dada andtouch his feet. It looks bad. It is not appropriate, is it? Dada isa good man, but this looks bad. What about Dada’s reputation?’People made all kinds of innuendos and brainwashed Hirabain this way. She worried that our reputation would be ruined.She is a good woman but people put ‘salt’ in her (they instilledsuspicion in her mind). What happens to milk when you putsalt in it?Questioner: It will go bad.Dadashri: I knew that people had started to add ‘salt’ inher and that one-day she would go ‘bad’, but I waited. One daywhen a young lady was doing vidhi, Hiraba deliberately hit thedoor as she was sweeping the floor. She had never done thatbefore. There was no such practice in our home. She did it toscare the girl away; she did not do it to scare me. The girlsbecame anxious that Hiraba would scold them. So this girl gotscared. I immediately understood that there was some kind ofmischief behind this act; can one not recognize the mischiefbehind it? Do you think that I was as naive back then as I amnow? So then, I told Hiraba, ‘From today onwards you and Ihave to separate. We cannot afford this. You go and live inBhadran. I will arrange to send you seven hundred or so rupeesevery month for your expenses. We should no longer be stayingtogether from now on.’ Chandulal and five or six other peoplewere sitting there at the time. Even they got the opportunity tolearn from this scene! Hiraba then started to make tea and whiledoing so, she kept banging the stove. I said to myself ‘I will haveto tighten the screw before this gets out of control.’ So I wentinto the kitchen and started to throw cans of tea, sugar, oil,Aptavani-94546Aptavani-9kerosene etc., on the floor. It was as if a 400-volt current hadtouched it all. I made a mess of everything. The women who hadinstigated Hiraba came to see what was going on. I asked them,‘Who poisoned this Goddess of a woman?’ They responded,‘You are a Gnani, you cannot become angry like this.’ Well onlythe anger of the Gnani Purush is worth seeing. I then told them,‘It is your instigation that has created this situation. Why did youfeed her all this? What have we done to you?’ They responded,‘We did not feed her anything. We simply told her a few things.’I asked them, ‘Why did you have to ruin her life?’ They replied,‘How have we ruined her life?’ I told them, ‘Now she has to livealone. Hiraba has to live separate in a new home in Bhadran. Iwill give her a monthly allowance.’ They said, ‘you cannot dothat. How can you do that at this age?’ I asked them, ‘whatgood is a pot that has a crack in it? It will not hold wateranymore; whatever you put in it will drain out. Can you keep apot with a crack in it?’ The neighbors all got worried when theyrealized that Hiraba would have to go live separately. Yes, thereshould not be any negative effect on dharma; Atma dharma –in spiritual matters regarding the Soul.That day tea, sugar and everything else were all mixed up.But that act was carried out without any attachment orabhorrence (vitarag-bhaav); or any inner reaction. I toldChandulal and the others sitting there, ‘go home and learn.’What was the outcome of this act the next day? The womenstarted telling Hiraba ‘Don’t do anything to cause problems. Letwhoever wants to come and see Dada. You do not get involvedin it.’ They started to tell her just the opposite because they gotworried that they would be blamed if anything were to happen.They knew they had to be very careful. I had created that scenein order to ensure that they would never do what they did again.I have never had to repeat that act either. I had come up withthat much remedy. They may still remember the incident. Hirabatoo was swept up in the rut. She would have never behaved thatThis is what happened. After ‘we’ attained Gnan, younggirls used to come to ‘us’ for vidhis (special spiritual blessingfrom the Gnani Purush by touching His feet) when we lived inMamani Poda in Vadodara. Hiraba was innocent; she is a goodperson. But women in the house across from ours instigated herby telling her, ‘Oh my goodness! Young girls come to Dada andtouch his feet. It looks bad. It is not appropriate, is it? Dada isa good man, but this looks bad. What about Dada’s reputation?’People made all kinds of innuendos and brainwashed Hirabain this way. She worried that our reputation would be ruined.She is a good woman but people put ‘salt’ in her (they instilledsuspicion in her mind). What happens to milk when you putsalt in it?Questioner: It will go bad.Dadashri: I knew that people had started to add ‘salt’ inher and that one-day she would go ‘bad’, but I waited. One daywhen a young lady was doing vidhi, Hiraba deliberately hit thedoor as she was sweeping the floor. She had never done thatbefore. There was no such practice in our home. She did it toscare the girl away; she did not do it to scare me. The girlsbecame anxious that Hiraba would scold them. So this girl gotscared. I immediately understood that there was some kind ofmischief behind this act; can one not recognize the mischiefbehind it? Do you think that I was as naive back then as I amnow? So then, I told Hiraba, ‘From today onwards you and Ihave to separate. We cannot afford this. You go and live inBhadran. I will arrange to send you seven hundred or so rupeesevery month for your expenses. We should no longer be stayingtogether from now on.’ Chandulal and five or six other peoplewere sitting there at the time. Even they got the opportunity tolearn from this scene! Hiraba then started to make tea and whiledoing so, she kept banging the stove. I said to myself ‘I will haveto tighten the screw before this gets out of control.’ So I wentinto the kitchen and started to throw cans of tea, sugar, oil,Aptavani-94748Aptavani-9the insult. She will think, ‘Oh! No one was present!’ She wouldhave just swallowed it and my effort would have gone to waste.Hiraba had the experience and knew that I was moral andsincere. It was only in this one case that her mind becamepoisoned and it became a little difficult to remove the impurity.The impurity did not come out by way of gentle words and soI had to resort to this other method. Further more this remedywas such that whenever Hiraba went to do something, shewould say, ‘Do not do that. We must not interfere in what he isdoing. He is very strict. He is just like Mahadevji (referring tothe angry form of Lord Shiva).’ This big an impression I left onher. Hiraba says, ‘Even now he is like a hot chili pepper!’It is not easy to be a Gnani. If a sprout like this were togerminate in someone, the Gnani would remove that sprout fromits very roots; otherwise it would grow into trees! The womenthen used to tell Hiraba, ‘Do not say anything. You should notsay anything.’ I reassured Hiraba, ‘I am not going to doanything. Who is going to do anything to Dada? What are thesegirls going to do?’ Those women then realized, ‘Why should wetake on the quarrel unnecessarily. We will be held liable for it.’I told the women directly on their face they were responsible forcreating the entire problem. What could be done now that thepot had a crack in it (a crack in the relation)? I told them I willpatch the crack just this one time but I would not do it again andthat the next time I would just leave Hiraba. I sealed the crackone time.Questioner: Hiraba’s banging on the door and slammingthe stove, is that obstinacy (aadayee)?Dadashri: Then what is it if not obstinacy? But it isactually a tragu. It was a tragu on a smaller level. I did the big,heavy one!Questioner: So does one have to use force like that inorder to be rid of the smaller tragu?way on her own accord, it was the other women who led herto believe that if she behaved this way, the girls would go awayand never return.The presence of a Gnani is very rare in this world. Wouldthe poor girls not come to do darshan? They come herebecause they do not find peace elsewhere. At least let them dodarshan peacefully. Those women even told Hiraba that Dadawould marry one of the girls! They also coached Hiraba thatthese young girls would take Dada away from her. Arey! Howcan that happen? I am an old man, what kind of nonsense werethey teaching Hiraba? What fault is it of poor Hiraba? She toorealized she was wrong. Although the girls used to come tosatsang, she was one hundred percent convinced that I wasmorally upright and sincere, but she told me to stop because itlooked bad to others. Is it possible to leave this role of theGnani even if I wanted to? This is all vyavasthit and she said itout of lack of understanding. Is it even possible to do? Besidescan this ‘railway’ line – this path of Akram Vignan - be justplucked up and removed? Therefore, I had to find a solution.An ordinary ‘cork’ would not have worked; I had to look fora ‘cork’ that could be screwed on so tight that it would nevercome off! (Dada had to resolve the situation once and for all).Questioner: The acting you did, is that not considereddeceit (kapat)?Dadashri: No. There is no deceit (kapat) in it. There isno deceit in removing heat from under the milk when it is aboutto boil over. Is there deceit in that?Questioner: But the aim was to do something good, is itnot?Dadashri: It was to cleanse her. Everyone sitting aroundwere stunned. Besides I would only assail her reputation in thepresence of others, otherwise I would not even attempt it; itwould not have any affect on her. Otherwise she would swallowAptavani-94748Aptavani-9the insult. She will think, ‘Oh! No one was present!’ She wouldhave just swallowed it and my effort would have gone to waste.Hiraba had the experience and knew that I was moral andsincere. It was only in this one case that her mind becamepoisoned and it became a little difficult to remove the impurity.The impurity did not come out by way of gentle words and soI had to resort to this other method. Further more this remedywas such that whenever Hiraba went to do something, shewould say, ‘Do not do that. We must not interfere in what he isdoing. He is very strict. He is just like Mahadevji (referring tothe angry form of Lord Shiva).’ This big an impression I left onher. Hiraba says, ‘Even now he is like a hot chili pepper!’It is not easy to be a Gnani. If a sprout like this were togerminate in someone, the Gnani would remove that sprout fromits very roots; otherwise it would grow into trees! The womenthen used to tell Hiraba, ‘Do not say anything. You should notsay anything.’ I reassured Hiraba, ‘I am not going to doanything. Who is going to do anything to Dada? What are thesegirls going to do?’ Those women then realized, ‘Why should wetake on the quarrel unnecessarily. We will be held liable for it.’I told the women directly on their face they were responsible forcreating the entire problem. What could be done now that thepot had a crack in it (a crack in the relation)? I told them I willpatch the crack just this one time but I would not do it again andthat the next time I would just leave Hiraba. I sealed the crackone time.Questioner: Hiraba’s banging on the door and slammingthe stove, is that obstinacy (aadayee)?Dadashri: Then what is it if not obstinacy? But it isactually a tragu. It was a tragu on a smaller level. I did the big,heavy one!Questioner: So does one have to use force like that inorder to be rid of the smaller tragu?way on her own accord, it was the other women who led herto believe that if she behaved this way, the girls would go awayand never return.The presence of a Gnani is very rare in this world. Wouldthe poor girls not come to do darshan? They come herebecause they do not find peace elsewhere. At least let them dodarshan peacefully. Those women even told Hiraba that Dadawould marry one of the girls! They also coached Hiraba thatthese young girls would take Dada away from her. Arey! Howcan that happen? I am an old man, what kind of nonsense werethey teaching Hiraba? What fault is it of poor Hiraba? She toorealized she was wrong. Although the girls used to come tosatsang, she was one hundred percent convinced that I wasmorally upright and sincere, but she told me to stop because itlooked bad to others. Is it possible to leave this role of theGnani even if I wanted to? This is all vyavasthit and she said itout of lack of understanding. Is it even possible to do? Besidescan this ‘railway’ line – this path of Akram Vignan - be justplucked up and removed? Therefore, I had to find a solution.An ordinary ‘cork’ would not have worked; I had to look fora ‘cork’ that could be screwed on so tight that it would nevercome off! (Dada had to resolve the situation once and for all).Questioner: The acting you did, is that not considereddeceit (kapat)?Dadashri: No. There is no deceit (kapat) in it. There isno deceit in removing heat from under the milk when it is aboutto boil over. Is there deceit in that?Questioner: But the aim was to do something good, is itnot?Dadashri: It was to cleanse her. Everyone sitting aroundwere stunned. Besides I would only assail her reputation in thepresence of others, otherwise I would not even attempt it; itwould not have any affect on her. Otherwise she would swallowAptavani-94950Aptavani-9Dadashri: Yes, ‘we’ had deliberately done the tragu andshe did the tragu according to her karma. ‘We’ did it onpurpose, all the while remaining in the Gnan. There were five orten mahatmas sitting there, one of them told me, ‘How can youdo something like this?’ so ‘we’ replied, ‘Learn, Let me teachyou. Just sit there quietly. ‘We’ are teaching you a lesson. Whatmethod will you employ when your wife causes problems foryou at home?’Questioner: You said that you did it while remaining inGnan. Can you tell us how to remain in Gnan while doing it?Dadashri: Just by this Gnan; the Gnan that ‘Ambalal isthe doer’. Is the Gnan married to Hiraba? Besides, just lookhow we (Dada and Hiraba) spent all the years without matbhed(separation due to differences in opinion). Even now, ‘we’ stopany separation due to differences of opinion even before theyarise. Later Hiraba even took Gnan again. Then ‘Dada’ cameinto her dream.Otherwise, ‘we’ have not been ill-at-ease with anyone forthe past forty years. ‘We’ have not raised our voice or beenirritated with anyone for forty years! People too recognize andunderstood this. They even say that I am like God.Tragu, is an art tooTragu is an art; it is one of the seventy-two arts.Questioner: Is stealing also not an art (kada)?Dadashri: Yes, that is also an art but all these arts thatone has acquired (from past life) are what create problems inthis life.Questioner: Where does one learn the art of tragu?Dadashri: The soul has all kinds of energies. When aperson decides, ‘I will get what I want through scaring others’,then he will know how to do a tragu. He will then know howto get his way through tragu.One needs a lot of cleverness (akkal) to do a tragu.Most people are not smart enough to understand or recognizea tragu. If someone is doing a tragu, ‘we’ would know it rightaway. It is no fun to deal with one who comes and does a traguhere.Questioner: Can you recognize when one does tragu?Dadashri: ‘We’ recognize it the moment one resorts toa tragu ‘here comes tragu! He has started doing a tragu!’Vigilance with understandingA ten-year-old son of one of our acquaintance wouldstart crying and wailing as soon as his mother became free fromher household chores. I had to sleep in the room next to his. Hewould do this every day, so one day, when he was alone, I wentin his room and pinched him a few times and he started toscream. His mother became exasperated, ‘This cry-babyharasses me everyday.’ I said, ‘No he is not harassing you. Justlisten to the wonderful sound he is producing. This is music. Justlisten. Call everyone to listen.’ This went on for two or threemore days and then it stopped.We have to come up with some remedy, do we not? Howlong can this go on? People use tragu to scare others. Just oneperson with a tragu can scare and ruin hundred others.They can do such a tragu that will take the wind out ofyou and drain you emotionally. Being a Gnani, Gnan helps ‘us’realize that a person is doing tragu. Even when I did not haveGnan, I could assess a person from every angle and immediatelytell why he is doing it and what his intent is behind his tragu. Iwould tell him right away ‘Have a seat. We are having some tearight now.’ By that time his mind would calm down and even hewould get tense.Aptavani-94950Aptavani-9Dadashri: Yes, ‘we’ had deliberately done the tragu andshe did the tragu according to her karma. ‘We’ did it onpurpose, all the while remaining in the Gnan. There were five orten mahatmas sitting there, one of them told me, ‘How can youdo something like this?’ so ‘we’ replied, ‘Learn, Let me teachyou. Just sit there quietly. ‘We’ are teaching you a lesson. Whatmethod will you employ when your wife causes problems foryou at home?’Questioner: You said that you did it while remaining inGnan. Can you tell us how to remain in Gnan while doing it?Dadashri: Just by this Gnan; the Gnan that ‘Ambalal isthe doer’. Is the Gnan married to Hiraba? Besides, just lookhow we (Dada and Hiraba) spent all the years without matbhed(separation due to differences in opinion). Even now, ‘we’ stopany separation due to differences of opinion even before theyarise. Later Hiraba even took Gnan again. Then ‘Dada’ cameinto her dream.Otherwise, ‘we’ have not been ill-at-ease with anyone forthe past forty years. ‘We’ have not raised our voice or beenirritated with anyone for forty years! People too recognize andunderstood this. They even say that I am like God.Tragu, is an art tooTragu is an art; it is one of the seventy-two arts.Questioner: Is stealing also not an art (kada)?Dadashri: Yes, that is also an art but all these arts thatone has acquired (from past life) are what create problems inthis life.Questioner: Where does one learn the art of tragu?Dadashri: The soul has all kinds of energies. When aperson decides, ‘I will get what I want through scaring others’,then he will know how to do a tragu. He will then know howto get his way through tragu.One needs a lot of cleverness (akkal) to do a tragu.Most people are not smart enough to understand or recognizea tragu. If someone is doing a tragu, ‘we’ would know it rightaway. It is no fun to deal with one who comes and does a traguhere.Questioner: Can you recognize when one does tragu?Dadashri: ‘We’ recognize it the moment one resorts toa tragu ‘here comes tragu! He has started doing a tragu!’Vigilance with understandingA ten-year-old son of one of our acquaintance wouldstart crying and wailing as soon as his mother became free fromher household chores. I had to sleep in the room next to his. Hewould do this every day, so one day, when he was alone, I wentin his room and pinched him a few times and he started toscream. His mother became exasperated, ‘This cry-babyharasses me everyday.’ I said, ‘No he is not harassing you. Justlisten to the wonderful sound he is producing. This is music. Justlisten. Call everyone to listen.’ This went on for two or threemore days and then it stopped.We have to come up with some remedy, do we not? Howlong can this go on? People use tragu to scare others. Just oneperson with a tragu can scare and ruin hundred others.They can do such a tragu that will take the wind out ofyou and drain you emotionally. Being a Gnani, Gnan helps ‘us’realize that a person is doing tragu. Even when I did not haveGnan, I could assess a person from every angle and immediatelytell why he is doing it and what his intent is behind his tragu. Iwould tell him right away ‘Have a seat. We are having some tearight now.’ By that time his mind would calm down and even hewould get tense.Aptavani-95152Aptavani-9Tragu became a heavy liability for a ladyThere was a woman at my friend’s home. She was eitherhis relative or his elder sister. One day she used heavy deception(kapat) in order to bully my friend. When someone was visitinghim, she became hysterical and started hitting herself. Thisscared my friend and the other man. My friend told me what hadhappened when he met me. I told him, ‘I will come to yourhouse next time this happens.’ Then one day I went there andshe performed the same ‘show’ (taipho; open exposition oftragu)! She did a tragu! She would jump and my friend wouldget scared. So I asked that lady, ‘Do you enjoy all this? Youjump very well. Why don’t you jump some more? We enjoy itvery much.’ I said something like this and she started cursing atme, ‘Why did you come to our house?’Therefore, ‘we’ know such deceitful acts and ‘we’ havethe keys to deal with them. Very few people do tragu; abouttwo percent of men do tragu and in women it is about tenpercent. Tragu is more prevalent in women.Did you get the meaning of tragu? Only people in the olddays knew how to do them. I feel the children of today do notknow how to do them. How would they know? Their overallmakeup is not strong enough; they are weaklings. Those who dotragas have a very aggressive constitution. Young people todayget nervous at the slightest scare.Ingrained in the prakrutiQuestioner: Does the one doing a tragu realize that heis doing it?Dadashri: Definitely! Tragu itself means to do accordingto one’s wishes. It has become an ingrained part of one’sprakruti and therefore the owner is not able to discern whetherhis action is beneficial to him or not. But she knows andunderstands everything. Why would she not? When one canunderstand even the smallest of things, tragu is a major thing.Beware of those doing tragu!One lady came to me and started doing a tragu. She wasa respectable lady, elder to me. I did not give into her tragu.Then she tells me, ‘You are the only one who has notsuccumbed to me.’ I told her, ‘It is not that I do not yield. Iwould not yield to God either in such matters.’ This is becausewhenever she initiated a tragu, I would know it immediately.Tragu means to scare the other person to death. ‘We’became a Gnani recently but prior to that I had an ego, did Inot? At that time I would say, ‘Go ahead and bang your head;let me see you do that. Are you trying to scare me? I sit herehaving scared the whole world.’ I am such a man that I can getrid of the tragas of the whole world. I am such a magician!People doing tragu will not let you get ahead in life. To dotragu means to put a lot of pressure on others.I was visiting a man when another man came to him. Doyou know what he started to do in order to scare him? Hestarted to bang his head on the ground and so I asked him, ‘HeyBrother! What is the matter? What is wrong?’ So the other mansaid, ‘Look, he does this to scare me.’ Soft and mild people getscared easily. If a person refuses to sign certain documents, thenthe other man will do tragu to scare him into signing them. Theman will then say, ‘Here, give the papers to me, I will sign them.’Therefore, a man doing tragu will bang his head on the wall inthis way.What is a bad quality in men? It is that of doing a tragu.Do not have any relation with a man who does tragu. Womenby nature may do tragu, but some men do tragu too.Questioner: You said that a bad quality in a man is thatof tragu and that we should not interact with such a person?Dadashri: No, you should not. He will scare you too.You too will get scared.Aptavani-95152Aptavani-9Tragu became a heavy liability for a ladyThere was a woman at my friend’s home. She was eitherhis relative or his elder sister. One day she used heavy deception(kapat) in order to bully my friend. When someone was visitinghim, she became hysterical and started hitting herself. Thisscared my friend and the other man. My friend told me what hadhappened when he met me. I told him, ‘I will come to yourhouse next time this happens.’ Then one day I went there andshe performed the same ‘show’ (taipho; open exposition oftragu)! She did a tragu! She would jump and my friend wouldget scared. So I asked that lady, ‘Do you enjoy all this? Youjump very well. Why don’t you jump some more? We enjoy itvery much.’ I said something like this and she started cursing atme, ‘Why did you come to our house?’Therefore, ‘we’ know such deceitful acts and ‘we’ havethe keys to deal with them. Very few people do tragu; abouttwo percent of men do tragu and in women it is about tenpercent. Tragu is more prevalent in women.Did you get the meaning of tragu? Only people in the olddays knew how to do them. I feel the children of today do notknow how to do them. How would they know? Their overallmakeup is not strong enough; they are weaklings. Those who dotragas have a very aggressive constitution. Young people todayget nervous at the slightest scare.Ingrained in the prakrutiQuestioner: Does the one doing a tragu realize that heis doing it?Dadashri: Definitely! Tragu itself means to do accordingto one’s wishes. It has become an ingrained part of one’sprakruti and therefore the owner is not able to discern whetherhis action is beneficial to him or not. But she knows andunderstands everything. Why would she not? When one canunderstand even the smallest of things, tragu is a major thing.Beware of those doing tragu!One lady came to me and started doing a tragu. She wasa respectable lady, elder to me. I did not give into her tragu.Then she tells me, ‘You are the only one who has notsuccumbed to me.’ I told her, ‘It is not that I do not yield. Iwould not yield to God either in such matters.’ This is becausewhenever she initiated a tragu, I would know it immediately.Tragu means to scare the other person to death. ‘We’became a Gnani recently but prior to that I had an ego, did Inot? At that time I would say, ‘Go ahead and bang your head;let me see you do that. Are you trying to scare me? I sit herehaving scared the whole world.’ I am such a man that I can getrid of the tragas of the whole world. I am such a magician!People doing tragu will not let you get ahead in life. To dotragu means to put a lot of pressure on others.I was visiting a man when another man came to him. Doyou know what he started to do in order to scare him? Hestarted to bang his head on the ground and so I asked him, ‘HeyBrother! What is the matter? What is wrong?’ So the other mansaid, ‘Look, he does this to scare me.’ Soft and mild people getscared easily. If a person refuses to sign certain documents, thenthe other man will do tragu to scare him into signing them. Theman will then say, ‘Here, give the papers to me, I will sign them.’Therefore, a man doing tragu will bang his head on the wall inthis way.What is a bad quality in men? It is that of doing a tragu.Do not have any relation with a man who does tragu. Womenby nature may do tragu, but some men do tragu too.Questioner: You said that a bad quality in a man is thatof tragu and that we should not interact with such a person?Dadashri: No, you should not. He will scare you too.You too will get scared.Aptavani-95354Aptavani-9Questioner: How can one escape from such a man whois doing a tragu?Dadashri: I know how to escape from a woman doinga tragu, but I do not know how to escape from a man doingone. I would make the woman doing a tragu jump all night long.But I too become startled when a man does tragu.Tragu means to create a major uproar in order to attainsomething against the wishes of others. ‘I am going to commitsuicide; I am going to do this. I am going to do that.’ One willget his way through whatever means necessary. He will do anykind of tragu to scare you. There are such men.Questioner: If a man does a tragu by saying, ‘I amgoing to run away, I am going to kill myself, I am going to dothis’, should we believe that he will really carry out his threats?Would he do that?Dadashri: Do not get scared but remain vigilant. He mayeven proceed to do so. Most of it is just tragu and so he willnot do anything; nevertheless it is still better to be vigilant.There are many who do tragu in their worldly interactions.When it comes to interactions in the home, you should not letyourself be affected by anyone doing tragu, otherwise you willsuffer heavily. My whole life I have avoided tragas. I had onesuch ‘system’ of not being affected; that always saved me fromtragas. But on the most part, the world has been intimidated byand has yielded to tragas.Questioner: How should one behave when a person isdoing tragu?Dadashri: How does it concern you in any way? Justcontinue ‘seeing’ it. You will get to see a new play. Otherwise,where can you get the opportunity to see such a play? If you askan actor to do tragu, is he likely to do so? So, you should tellthe person doing the tragu, ‘go ahead and do as many tragasas you want!’Adjustment to save yourself‘We’ have not seen many tragas but those that ‘we’ havewere unpleasant and distressing for all those who were around.Questioner: So how do you feel when someone doestragu in front of you?Dadashri: ‘We’ would immediately recognize that shehas started a tragu.Questioner: What do you do at that time?Dadashri: ‘We’ do not give into her. Even if all of youwere to do a tragu, I would just sit here. You will get tired butnot me. I have become an expert at it.Questioner: What kind of adjustment do you take fromwithin?Dadashri: Unaffected! Without any effects whatsoever!Let her do a tragu, she will get tired and go to sleep!Questioner: But would she not do more tragu, Dada?When she sees that you are unaffected, would she then not actup even more to affect you?Dadashri: Yes and ‘our’ internal state of being unaffectedwill become even stronger! That is how much energy there iswithin ‘us’. In what situations would ‘we’ let go? In situationswhere the person is making a reasonable request or is havingreasonable feeling and emotion, but if she does it as a scaretactic, then ‘we’ will not yield. Are you trying to scare me? EvenGod is not able to scare me. Are you not ashamed? Are youtrying to scare the one who has pleased God in every way?Some people do tragu in front of me, but they are minortragas.Questioner: Then do you not say anything to her? Doyou just remain silent and sit unaffected?Aptavani-95354Aptavani-9Questioner: How can one escape from such a man whois doing a tragu?Dadashri: I know how to escape from a woman doinga tragu, but I do not know how to escape from a man doingone. I would make the woman doing a tragu jump all night long.But I too become startled when a man does tragu.Tragu means to create a major uproar in order to attainsomething against the wishes of others. ‘I am going to commitsuicide; I am going to do this. I am going to do that.’ One willget his way through whatever means necessary. He will do anykind of tragu to scare you. There are such men.Questioner: If a man does a tragu by saying, ‘I amgoing to run away, I am going to kill myself, I am going to dothis’, should we believe that he will really carry out his threats?Would he do that?Dadashri: Do not get scared but remain vigilant. He mayeven proceed to do so. Most of it is just tragu and so he willnot do anything; nevertheless it is still better to be vigilant.There are many who do tragu in their worldly interactions.When it comes to interactions in the home, you should not letyourself be affected by anyone doing tragu, otherwise you willsuffer heavily. My whole life I have avoided tragas. I had onesuch ‘system’ of not being affected; that always saved me fromtragas. But on the most part, the world has been intimidated byand has yielded to tragas.Questioner: How should one behave when a person isdoing tragu?Dadashri: How does it concern you in any way? Justcontinue ‘seeing’ it. You will get to see a new play. Otherwise,where can you get the opportunity to see such a play? If you askan actor to do tragu, is he likely to do so? So, you should tellthe person doing the tragu, ‘go ahead and do as many tragasas you want!’Adjustment to save yourself‘We’ have not seen many tragas but those that ‘we’ havewere unpleasant and distressing for all those who were around.Questioner: So how do you feel when someone doestragu in front of you?Dadashri: ‘We’ would immediately recognize that shehas started a tragu.Questioner: What do you do at that time?Dadashri: ‘We’ do not give into her. Even if all of youwere to do a tragu, I would just sit here. You will get tired butnot me. I have become an expert at it.Questioner: What kind of adjustment do you take fromwithin?Dadashri: Unaffected! Without any effects whatsoever!Let her do a tragu, she will get tired and go to sleep!Questioner: But would she not do more tragu, Dada?When she sees that you are unaffected, would she then not actup even more to affect you?Dadashri: Yes and ‘our’ internal state of being unaffectedwill become even stronger! That is how much energy there iswithin ‘us’. In what situations would ‘we’ let go? In situationswhere the person is making a reasonable request or is havingreasonable feeling and emotion, but if she does it as a scaretactic, then ‘we’ will not yield. Are you trying to scare me? EvenGod is not able to scare me. Are you not ashamed? Are youtrying to scare the one who has pleased God in every way?Some people do tragu in front of me, but they are minortragas.Questioner: Then do you not say anything to her? Doyou just remain silent and sit unaffected?Aptavani-95556Aptavani-9Dadashri: What else can ‘he (Ambalal)’ do? What canyou tell the one doing a tragu?Questioner: She will realize that nothing affects ‘Dada’.Dadashri: She will realize everything. This ‘Dada’ is avery shrewd man. Otherwise, can he run such a largeorganization? There would be quarrels everyday. But just look!There are no rules here and the law here is one of ‘no law-law’;does everything still not run smoothly? If ‘we’ do not seeultimate humility (param vinay) in a person, ‘we’ will keep astern watch over him and if he does not maintain humility(vinay), then ‘we’ will ask him to ‘get out’. But ‘we’ would nottell him in a manner that would create enmity. It would be donegently and with humility. Dada is happy only where there isultimate humility.‘We’ have come here to turn people around. ‘We’ do notneed anything from this world. One goes through immensemisery because he is on the wrong path. While taking the wrongpath he incurs additional liability for his actions. It is a differentmatter if there was no suffering and he was enjoying it. But onegoes through so much misery and on top of that he incurstremendous liability for being on the wrong path. Therefore; outof compassion for him, ‘we’ ask, ‘why are you heading on thewrong path?’* * * * *[2]Udvega (emotional agitation) : Shanka(suspicion) : Nondha (making a deep intensemental note)Against emotional agitation : udvegaSo become straight (sarad) like a child if you want toattain moksha. A child does things without any understandingand the Gnani Purush does it with an understanding that is all.Both are childlike and innocent. Does the worldly life notcontinue for a child even though he has no worldly understanding?The child’s life runs very well. In fact, his worldly life gets worseas he begins to understand. The Gnani Purush is straight (sarad)like a child. Obstinacy (aadayee) is a form of ego; an ego thatsays I don’t want to be straight and I want to do it my way.Obstinacy is a result of wanting to have one’s own way.Obstinacy will go away in a person who does things accordingto the will of others.Questioner: When events do not occur as one hasplanned and willed; he becomes agitated and emotional (udvega).Dadashri: Events never occur as one wishes. Therefore,before throwing the dice just think that they are going to fall thewrong way. Thereafter, whichever dice falls the right way, iscorrect. But if we say that all four must fall my way, then thatday will never come and there will be entanglements, uneasiness,and emotional agitation (udvega). Instead, by saying in advance,‘all four of you fall the wrong way’ then when one or two fallthe right way, you will be pleased with the results and feel easy.So the value is in making the right internal adjustments.Aptavani-95556Aptavani-9Dadashri: What else can ‘he (Ambalal)’ do? What canyou tell the one doing a tragu?Questioner: She will realize that nothing affects ‘Dada’.Dadashri: She will realize everything. This ‘Dada’ is avery shrewd man. Otherwise, can he run such a largeorganization? There would be quarrels everyday. But just look!There are no rules here and the law here is one of ‘no law-law’;does everything still not run smoothly? If ‘we’ do not seeultimate humility (param vinay) in a person, ‘we’ will keep astern watch over him and if he does not maintain humility(vinay), then ‘we’ will ask him to ‘get out’. But ‘we’ would nottell him in a manner that would create enmity. It would be donegently and with humility. Dada is happy only where there isultimate humility.‘We’ have come here to turn people around. ‘We’ do notneed anything from this world. One goes through immensemisery because he is on the wrong path. While taking the wrongpath he incurs additional liability for his actions. It is a differentmatter if there was no suffering and he was enjoying it. But onegoes through so much misery and on top of that he incurstremendous liability for being on the wrong path. Therefore; outof compassion for him, ‘we’ ask, ‘why are you heading on thewrong path?’* * * * *[2]Udvega (emotional agitation) : Shanka(suspicion) : Nondha (making a deep intensemental note)Against emotional agitation : udvegaSo become straight (sarad) like a child if you want toattain moksha. A child does things without any understandingand the Gnani Purush does it with an understanding that is all.Both are childlike and innocent. Does the worldly life notcontinue for a child even though he has no worldly understanding?The child’s life runs very well. In fact, his worldly life gets worseas he begins to understand. The Gnani Purush is straight (sarad)like a child. Obstinacy (aadayee) is a form of ego; an ego thatsays I don’t want to be straight and I want to do it my way.Obstinacy is a result of wanting to have one’s own way.Obstinacy will go away in a person who does things accordingto the will of others.Questioner: When events do not occur as one hasplanned and willed; he becomes agitated and emotional (udvega).Dadashri: Events never occur as one wishes. Therefore,before throwing the dice just think that they are going to fall thewrong way. Thereafter, whichever dice falls the right way, iscorrect. But if we say that all four must fall my way, then thatday will never come and there will be entanglements, uneasiness,and emotional agitation (udvega). Instead, by saying in advance,‘all four of you fall the wrong way’ then when one or two fallthe right way, you will be pleased with the results and feel easy.So the value is in making the right internal adjustments.Aptavani-95758Aptavani-9Questioner: Dada, it is a hundred percent fact that suchan adjustment is only possible if one has this Akram Vignan.Otherwise it is impossible.Dadashri: Yes, otherwise it is impossible; such adjustmentwould not remain, what support could it have? In thosesituations, whatever adjustment one takes will be blown awayand he will become distraught and restless. Then he will walkaround looking as if he just drank some castor oil!Questioner: You just said for us to think that the diceshould fall the wrong way, when we throw them. Why shouldone even have such expectation of a negative result?Dadashri: Then what should you expect instead?Questioner: We should not have any expectations;whatever comes is correct.Dadashri: It is good if your mind agrees to ‘whateverway the dice falls is correct’ then it is a good thing. And whenthe mind is dissatisfied with the result, then you have to say, ‘allof you fall the wrong way.’ Then you will be content even whenjust two of the four fall the right way. So it all depends on thekind of mind you have.Where there is no expectation, there is noemotional agitationIf you make a deal on the phone with someone inBombay and then two days later he changes his mind, you willexperience emotional agitation (udvega) but the other personwill not. Why should you be the one to experience emotionalagitation (udvega)? You are in your dharma (keeping your sideof the deal) and the other person is in adharma (doing wrong)by changing his mind. Why should you be agitated when youhave done nothing wrong? A person may argue, ‘But I lost theprofit, did I not?’ You fool! You have never had a profit, so whynot let it go? Just believe that you never made a deal in the firstplace. But instead he becomes emotionally agitated and his wifewill ask, ‘What happened? Why are you like this?’ There isnothing but udvega, udvega, udvega, udvega! That which wassupposed to flow down towards calmness has gone up towardsemotional agitation. If the other person backed out after makingthe deal, what is the harm? Just think that you never made thedeal in the first place. Instead, one gets trapped in udvega.What does everyone do? While sustaining one loss, theycreate two more. The Gnani Purush lets only one loss go.Questioner: When a person experiences emotionalagitation (udvega), is it not due to moha (attachment due toillusion)?Dadashri: When one loses ten thousand rupees in a deal,there is moha behind it. He has already incurred one loss, whyfret over it? Why double the loss? There was only one losswritten in the effect of his karma, so why take another loss? Isit better to incur one or two losses? Just one, but every oneincurs two losses and then he binds the same karma again forhis next life.Why should there be even a moment of udvega? Udvegabinds much karma. ‘We’ have not experienced even a momentof emotional agitation (udvega) since ‘we’ attained this GnanMotion (Vega), emotion (Aavega) andemotional agitation (udvega)Questioner: Please explain vega, aavega and udvega?Dadashri: Vega (motion) is a natural phenomenon andaavega is unnatural. When one becomes the ‘doer’ (I amChandulal), he becomes emotional (aavega). Emotional agitation(udvega) occurs even when one does not want it to. Emotionalagitation (udvega) occurs against one’s wishes and it is strongenough to crack open his head! The head feels as if it is goingto explode! Even the Gnani is subject to vega, however Hedoes not have aavega and absolutely no udvega.Aptavani-95758Aptavani-9Questioner: Dada, it is a hundred percent fact that suchan adjustment is only possible if one has this Akram Vignan.Otherwise it is impossible.Dadashri: Yes, otherwise it is impossible; such adjustmentwould not remain, what support could it have? In thosesituations, whatever adjustment one takes will be blown awayand he will become distraught and restless. Then he will walkaround looking as if he just drank some castor oil!Questioner: You just said for us to think that the diceshould fall the wrong way, when we throw them. Why shouldone even have such expectation of a negative result?Dadashri: Then what should you expect instead?Questioner: We should not have any expectations;whatever comes is correct.Dadashri: It is good if your mind agrees to ‘whateverway the dice falls is correct’ then it is a good thing. And whenthe mind is dissatisfied with the result, then you have to say, ‘allof you fall the wrong way.’ Then you will be content even whenjust two of the four fall the right way. So it all depends on thekind of mind you have.Where there is no expectation, there is noemotional agitationIf you make a deal on the phone with someone inBombay and then two days later he changes his mind, you willexperience emotional agitation (udvega) but the other personwill not. Why should you be the one to experience emotionalagitation (udvega)? You are in your dharma (keeping your sideof the deal) and the other person is in adharma (doing wrong)by changing his mind. Why should you be agitated when youhave done nothing wrong? A person may argue, ‘But I lost theprofit, did I not?’ You fool! You have never had a profit, so whynot let it go? Just believe that you never made a deal in the firstplace. But instead he becomes emotionally agitated and his wifewill ask, ‘What happened? Why are you like this?’ There isnothing but udvega, udvega, udvega, udvega! That which wassupposed to flow down towards calmness has gone up towardsemotional agitation. If the other person backed out after makingthe deal, what is the harm? Just think that you never made thedeal in the first place. Instead, one gets trapped in udvega.What does everyone do? While sustaining one loss, theycreate two more. The Gnani Purush lets only one loss go.Questioner: When a person experiences emotionalagitation (udvega), is it not due to moha (attachment due toillusion)?Dadashri: When one loses ten thousand rupees in a deal,there is moha behind it. He has already incurred one loss, whyfret over it? Why double the loss? There was only one losswritten in the effect of his karma, so why take another loss? Isit better to incur one or two losses? Just one, but every oneincurs two losses and then he binds the same karma again forhis next life.Why should there be even a moment of udvega? Udvegabinds much karma. ‘We’ have not experienced even a momentof emotional agitation (udvega) since ‘we’ attained this GnanMotion (Vega), emotion (Aavega) andemotional agitation (udvega)Questioner: Please explain vega, aavega and udvega?Dadashri: Vega (motion) is a natural phenomenon andaavega is unnatural. When one becomes the ‘doer’ (I amChandulal), he becomes emotional (aavega). Emotional agitation(udvega) occurs even when one does not want it to. Emotionalagitation (udvega) occurs against one’s wishes and it is strongenough to crack open his head! The head feels as if it is goingto explode! Even the Gnani is subject to vega, however Hedoes not have aavega and absolutely no udvega.Aptavani-95960Aptavani-9Questioner: If one chants mantras with awareness whenudvega arrives, will it make a difference?Dadashri: There is no awareness during udvega. Therewill be some degree of awareness if it is a minor udvega, thenthat udvega could be stopped with chanting mantras but theawareness will not remain during a major udvega.Did you understand the three words exactly, in theirappropriate place?Questioner: I would not understand these three wordseven if I read a book on them by some Ph.D. but I haveunderstood them only because you explained them.Dadashri: The correct meaning of words can only bearrived at if those words stand out and become effective in theirright place, but not otherwise. They should fit appropriately intheir place. What happens when you use the word vega inplace of udvega? It would not be a suitable word in otherplaces. People use words loosely; they do not care whetherthey fit or not.Cunning people are suitable in their own places,pickpockets are suitable in their place and diamond merchantsare suitable in their place. If a diamond merchant came togetherwith a pickpocket, would that be suitable? He will be robbedfrom all directions; therefore, each has its own suitable place.Our people reject and scorn the word randapo(widowhood; losing a spouse). This word randapo is appropriatein its place. Mandapo (marriage) and randapo (widowhood)are both exact.Udvega - so many difficultiesQuestioner: Udvega can also occur because of separationdue to difference of opinions, can it not?Dadashri: Yes, udvega can also occur because ofAs long as one is a doer (of aavega), there is no tellingwhen it will give rise to emotional agitation (udvega). Yes, oncedoer-ship leaves, emotional agitation (udvega) will leave forsure. Udvega will not occur once the belief of doer-ship isdestroyed. Nevertheless, udvega is still a result of karmicaccount. When the sense of doer-ship is broken, the effect ofemotional agitation (udvega) will not manifest as udvega. It willexpress in some other form as a minor entanglement orsuffocation.One man tells me, ‘Dada, I feel as if my head is going toexplode.’ That verily is emotional agitation (udvega). What canone do? But you silly man, does the head ever explode? Theskull is not likely to crack even with a hammer but just look atthe difficulties of an udvega. It can be such that it will breakopen your blood vessels in the head. Emotional agitation(udvega) takes place even when one does not want it becauseudvega is bound to occur as long as one is a doer of aavega.After attaining our Gnan, doer-ship ceases and thereforeudvega will not occur.Questioner: But is udvega not the result of karmacaused in the past life?Dadashri: Yes, one will have to suffer the results of allpast earnings! Does he not ‘enjoy’ the fruits of that udvega?Questioner: Is there a relationship between anger andemotional agitation (udvega)?Dadashri: Yes, udvega occurs only when there is anger.Aavega too occurs only in the presence of anger. Therefore, aslong as one is a ‘doer’, there will be krodha, maan, maya andlobh (anger, pride, deceit and greed) and people continue doingwhat they do. As long as everything remains within normal limits,it is called aavega and when it goes out beyond one’s controlit is called udvega.Aptavani-95960Aptavani-9Questioner: If one chants mantras with awareness whenudvega arrives, will it make a difference?Dadashri: There is no awareness during udvega. Therewill be some degree of awareness if it is a minor udvega, thenthat udvega could be stopped with chanting mantras but theawareness will not remain during a major udvega.Did you understand the three words exactly, in theirappropriate place?Questioner: I would not understand these three wordseven if I read a book on them by some Ph.D. but I haveunderstood them only because you explained them.Dadashri: The correct meaning of words can only bearrived at if those words stand out and become effective in theirright place, but not otherwise. They should fit appropriately intheir place. What happens when you use the word vega inplace of udvega? It would not be a suitable word in otherplaces. People use words loosely; they do not care whetherthey fit or not.Cunning people are suitable in their own places,pickpockets are suitable in their place and diamond merchantsare suitable in their place. If a diamond merchant came togetherwith a pickpocket, would that be suitable? He will be robbedfrom all directions; therefore, each has its own suitable place.Our people reject and scorn the word randapo(widowhood; losing a spouse). This word randapo is appropriatein its place. Mandapo (marriage) and randapo (widowhood)are both exact.Udvega - so many difficultiesQuestioner: Udvega can also occur because of separationdue to difference of opinions, can it not?Dadashri: Yes, udvega can also occur because ofAs long as one is a doer (of aavega), there is no tellingwhen it will give rise to emotional agitation (udvega). Yes, oncedoer-ship leaves, emotional agitation (udvega) will leave forsure. Udvega will not occur once the belief of doer-ship isdestroyed. Nevertheless, udvega is still a result of karmicaccount. When the sense of doer-ship is broken, the effect ofemotional agitation (udvega) will not manifest as udvega. It willexpress in some other form as a minor entanglement orsuffocation.One man tells me, ‘Dada, I feel as if my head is going toexplode.’ That verily is emotional agitation (udvega). What canone do? But you silly man, does the head ever explode? Theskull is not likely to crack even with a hammer but just look atthe difficulties of an udvega. It can be such that it will breakopen your blood vessels in the head. Emotional agitation(udvega) takes place even when one does not want it becauseudvega is bound to occur as long as one is a doer of aavega.After attaining our Gnan, doer-ship ceases and thereforeudvega will not occur.Questioner: But is udvega not the result of karmacaused in the past life?Dadashri: Yes, one will have to suffer the results of allpast earnings! Does he not ‘enjoy’ the fruits of that udvega?Questioner: Is there a relationship between anger andemotional agitation (udvega)?Dadashri: Yes, udvega occurs only when there is anger.Aavega too occurs only in the presence of anger. Therefore, aslong as one is a ‘doer’, there will be krodha, maan, maya andlobh (anger, pride, deceit and greed) and people continue doingwhat they do. As long as everything remains within normal limits,it is called aavega and when it goes out beyond one’s controlit is called udvega.Aptavani-96162Aptavani-9separation due to difference of opinions. Udvega starts wheneverything becomes excessive; when things go beyond limits.When a man stabs someone, he does so when he experiencesudvega.Questioner: Can inner restlessness (ajumpo) beconsidered emotional agitation (udvega)?Dadashri: Restlessness is much better. Restlessnessoccurs even when you break a glass. Restlessness is straight andsimple. In udvega you feel as if someone is hitting sharp blowson your head. But inner restlessness (ajumpo) and outburst thathurts others (kadhapo) occurs even when you drop and breaka glass. Udvega occurs when something major occurs. Udvegastarts as soon as one becomes emotional; it does not even letone sleep.Questioner: But do emotional people not worry more?Dadashri: Emotional people experience more udveganot worries and with udvega they feel as if they are dying.Motion means vega and emotional means udvega.Questioner: Now, is vega (that which is natural) also notin motion?Dadashri: Vega (natural movement) is constantly present.Vega - motion, should always be there. Those who are livingcertainly have vega and they are in motion. All living entities thatexperience fear; that run away in fear if you touch them, alldefinitely have vega. But the single-sensory (ekindriya) beingslike the trees and plants do not have vega. Their vega is of adifferent kind. But every creature has vega. They are always invega, they are constantly in motion and when you disturb thatmotion, they become emotional and that is called udvega. Whatwould happen if a train becomes emotional?Questioner: There will be destruction. It will cause anaccident and people will die.Dadashri: That is what happens within the body. Manyof the jivas (the living micro organisms) that live within the bodyare killed when you become emotional, and for that you incur akarmic liability and the second liability is the external problems(upadhi) that will be caused by the udvega itself.What is udvega like? It makes one jump in front of atrain, into a river or it makes one take an overdose. Udvegameans the rising of motion leading to extreme emotionalreactions in one’s mind and then one tries to commit suicide. Hewill drink poison. ‘You fool, you emptied the whole bottle?’ Hewill say, ‘Yes I drank it all.’A man with udvega will not survive. When a person is inudvega, it will not let him come to do darshan here. Udvegais a big thing. Not everyone has seen udvega. Because of thisGnan, it will all pass in the form of a discharge. So tell theudvega, ‘However many of you want to come, come on as longas this body is strong. Do not come when this body is old.’ Letthem come as long as you have the strength. You can fight themoff now.Move away from that aspect of yourrelationship which causes udvegaQuestioner: So what is the solution for this udvega?Dadashri: First, you have to find the instrument (nimit)behind it. Just thinking about a destructive person will give riseto udvega. In such cases, move away from the situation or getrid of anything that causes udvega even if it is made of gold. Itis not your relative. Anything that causes emotional agitation inyou cannot be related to you. The real thing is that which givesyou peace. The slightest cause of udvega is not the path ofliberation. You should remain only in vega – you should remainonly in motion.If something causes udvega, for example if your son isAptavani-96162Aptavani-9separation due to difference of opinions. Udvega starts wheneverything becomes excessive; when things go beyond limits.When a man stabs someone, he does so when he experiencesudvega.Questioner: Can inner restlessness (ajumpo) beconsidered emotional agitation (udvega)?Dadashri: Restlessness is much better. Restlessnessoccurs even when you break a glass. Restlessness is straight andsimple. In udvega you feel as if someone is hitting sharp blowson your head. But inner restlessness (ajumpo) and outburst thathurts others (kadhapo) occurs even when you drop and breaka glass. Udvega occurs when something major occurs. Udvegastarts as soon as one becomes emotional; it does not even letone sleep.Questioner: But do emotional people not worry more?Dadashri: Emotional people experience more udveganot worries and with udvega they feel as if they are dying.Motion means vega and emotional means udvega.Questioner: Now, is vega (that which is natural) also notin motion?Dadashri: Vega (natural movement) is constantly present.Vega - motion, should always be there. Those who are livingcertainly have vega and they are in motion. All living entities thatexperience fear; that run away in fear if you touch them, alldefinitely have vega. But the single-sensory (ekindriya) beingslike the trees and plants do not have vega. Their vega is of adifferent kind. But every creature has vega. They are always invega, they are constantly in motion and when you disturb thatmotion, they become emotional and that is called udvega. Whatwould happen if a train becomes emotional?Questioner: There will be destruction. It will cause anaccident and people will die.Dadashri: That is what happens within the body. Manyof the jivas (the living micro organisms) that live within the bodyare killed when you become emotional, and for that you incur akarmic liability and the second liability is the external problems(upadhi) that will be caused by the udvega itself.What is udvega like? It makes one jump in front of atrain, into a river or it makes one take an overdose. Udvegameans the rising of motion leading to extreme emotionalreactions in one’s mind and then one tries to commit suicide. Hewill drink poison. ‘You fool, you emptied the whole bottle?’ Hewill say, ‘Yes I drank it all.’A man with udvega will not survive. When a person is inudvega, it will not let him come to do darshan here. Udvegais a big thing. Not everyone has seen udvega. Because of thisGnan, it will all pass in the form of a discharge. So tell theudvega, ‘However many of you want to come, come on as longas this body is strong. Do not come when this body is old.’ Letthem come as long as you have the strength. You can fight themoff now.Move away from that aspect of yourrelationship which causes udvegaQuestioner: So what is the solution for this udvega?Dadashri: First, you have to find the instrument (nimit)behind it. Just thinking about a destructive person will give riseto udvega. In such cases, move away from the situation or getrid of anything that causes udvega even if it is made of gold. Itis not your relative. Anything that causes emotional agitation inyou cannot be related to you. The real thing is that which givesyou peace. The slightest cause of udvega is not the path ofliberation. You should remain only in vega – you should remainonly in motion.If something causes udvega, for example if your son isAptavani-96364Aptavani-9not earning any money, then know that the situation causes youemotional agitation (udvega). You should then stop entering intoany discussion about money with him. You should stop allinteractions related to money. Just have a casual conversationwith him, like, ‘How are you? How are things?’ Do youunderstand?Questioner: We should let go of anything that causesudvega, but udvega is relative (temporary). Udvega isinevitable once all the evidences come together.Dadashri: Yes, udvega will not refrain from occurringbut there is always a cause behind the occurrence of udvega.So what should you do about udvega? You have to uproot it.Intellect is what brings on udvegaQuestioner: Does ahambhav (ego), abhimaan (egowith rich material, extra pride, bragging) cause udvega?Dadashri: No abhimaan (ego of materialistic possessions)does not cause udvega; something else causes it. Say you haveto sleep here with everyone else and the light overhead is dim.No one except you see a small snake come into the room. Willothers who have not seen the snake sleep peacefully?Questioner: YesDadashri: How about the one who sees it?Questioner: He will not be able to sleep.Dadashri: Why is that? He has the knowledge about thesnake coming into the room, others do not and so they are ableto fall asleep. Now when will you be able to sleep? You will beable to sleep when you gain the knowledge that the snake hasleft. Now when will all this end? Therefore, everything becomesemotional because of all this. The intellect (buddhi) makes oneemotional, not the ego. Ego is a good thing. All these tricks areof the buddhi (intellect); it is the intellect that causes all theproblems. It brings on udvega. It brings udvega from vega(motion).The ‘one’ who experiences udvega, is notthe SelfQuestioner: But even now residual feelings of udvegacontinue to arise within us, does it not?Dadashri: Udvega and vega will both occur but theyare occurring to ‘Chandulal’. They are not occurring to You, thepure Self. ‘You’ will know that the udvega is occurring in‘Chandulal’. If Chandulal has done transaction of udvega, then‘Chandulal’ will experience it, otherwise he will have aavega orvega. You (the real Self) can know all that.Questioner: But we live trapped in udvega, do we not?Dadashri: No it is not like that. Do you believe that theone who is trapped in udvega is ‘Chandulal’ or You?Questioner: But ‘Chandulal’ remains trapped does henot?Dadashri: He may be trapped but what does that haveto do with You? Whatever has to discharge is going todischarge, there is no other way. You do not have any say in it.‘You’ should not feel that You are trapped, because the pureSoul is the pure Soul. Shuddhatma is Shuddhatma. Nothing canaffect it and that is Shuddhatma.Questioner: But, I can see that ‘I am pure Soul’ and that‘Chandulal’ still remains the same.Dadashri: Whatever karmas that remain are the onesbeing discharged. If he makes a donation, you will say,‘Chandulal is a good man.’ That too is ‘he’ (Chandulal), and ifhe does such an udvega, even then it is he, Chandulal. Both thesituations are one; with the same nature (swabhav). It is thenature of a human being to scorn and repel from the bitter andAptavani-96364Aptavani-9not earning any money, then know that the situation causes youemotional agitation (udvega). You should then stop entering intoany discussion about money with him. You should stop allinteractions related to money. Just have a casual conversationwith him, like, ‘How are you? How are things?’ Do youunderstand?Questioner: We should let go of anything that causesudvega, but udvega is relative (temporary). Udvega isinevitable once all the evidences come together.Dadashri: Yes, udvega will not refrain from occurringbut there is always a cause behind the occurrence of udvega.So what should you do about udvega? You have to uproot it.Intellect is what brings on udvegaQuestioner: Does ahambhav (ego), abhimaan (egowith rich material, extra pride, bragging) cause udvega?Dadashri: No abhimaan (ego of materialistic possessions)does not cause udvega; something else causes it. Say you haveto sleep here with everyone else and the light overhead is dim.No one except you see a small snake come into the room. Willothers who have not seen the snake sleep peacefully?Questioner: YesDadashri: How about the one who sees it?Questioner: He will not be able to sleep.Dadashri: Why is that? He has the knowledge about thesnake coming into the room, others do not and so they are ableto fall asleep. Now when will you be able to sleep? You will beable to sleep when you gain the knowledge that the snake hasleft. Now when will all this end? Therefore, everything becomesemotional because of all this. The intellect (buddhi) makes oneemotional, not the ego. Ego is a good thing. All these tricks areof the buddhi (intellect); it is the intellect that causes all theproblems. It brings on udvega. It brings udvega from vega(motion).The ‘one’ who experiences udvega, is notthe SelfQuestioner: But even now residual feelings of udvegacontinue to arise within us, does it not?Dadashri: Udvega and vega will both occur but theyare occurring to ‘Chandulal’. They are not occurring to You, thepure Self. ‘You’ will know that the udvega is occurring in‘Chandulal’. If Chandulal has done transaction of udvega, then‘Chandulal’ will experience it, otherwise he will have aavega orvega. You (the real Self) can know all that.Questioner: But we live trapped in udvega, do we not?Dadashri: No it is not like that. Do you believe that theone who is trapped in udvega is ‘Chandulal’ or You?Questioner: But ‘Chandulal’ remains trapped does henot?Dadashri: He may be trapped but what does that haveto do with You? Whatever has to discharge is going todischarge, there is no other way. You do not have any say in it.‘You’ should not feel that You are trapped, because the pureSoul is the pure Soul. Shuddhatma is Shuddhatma. Nothing canaffect it and that is Shuddhatma.Questioner: But, I can see that ‘I am pure Soul’ and that‘Chandulal’ still remains the same.Dadashri: Whatever karmas that remain are the onesbeing discharged. If he makes a donation, you will say,‘Chandulal is a good man.’ That too is ‘he’ (Chandulal), and ifhe does such an udvega, even then it is he, Chandulal. Both thesituations are one; with the same nature (swabhav). It is thenature of a human being to scorn and repel from the bitter andAptavani-96566Aptavani-9be attracted to the sweet and pleasant. The Lord has calledthem both one natured (ek swabhavi).Shrimad Rajchandra has said :“Rajkan ke riddhi vaimanik devaniSarve maanya pudgal ek swabhav jo.”The smallest particle of dirt or the richness of VaimanikDeva (the celestials) - both are considered pudgal nature (asbeing matter, non-Self).There is only one type of non-Self complex (pudgal).Whether a person is a butcher or a philanthropist, both are non-Self complex (pudgal). The one who is neither contemptuoustowards the butcher nor pleased with the philanthropist is avitarag.Questioner: Dada you are not going to let me stand atany location outside the Self.Dadashri: But if you live in the external station, you willget a beating and suffer. You have suffered all this time, do youwant to get more beatings and suffer again? That is why I amshowing you a place where you will never have to suffer. Didyou not suffer before attaining Gnan? Did you suffer a little bit?Everyone has become exhausted from the suffering of all thebeatings.So it is the buddhi (intellect) that causes all the trouble.Buddhi is the one that causes udvega; it turns vega intoudvega. ‘We’ experience bliss because every bit of the intellectis gone from ‘us’. That is why ‘we’ have written in the books,‘We are abuddha (without intellect).’ This is a good adjective,is it not? I saw that no one is even ready to accept this adjective.When ‘we’ tell people, ‘We’ give you the adjective of‘abuddha,’ they will say, ‘No Sir, I want more buddhi.’ ‘We’received the adjective of ‘abuddha’, and so ‘we’ never becomeemotional. ‘We’ are always in motion; whenever you see ‘us’.The root of suspicion (shanka)Questioner: People say they want more intellect but is itnot true that people with more intellect tend to be moresuspicious?Dadashri: Yes. Right now, there is an effect of viparitbuddhi (viparit - wrong kind. Buddhi - intellect). It creates alot of suspicion (shanka) in a person. Suspicion verily istremendous ignorance. One cannot find the answers anywherewithin, so suspicion (shanka) and uncertainty takes hold. Aperson will not become suspicious if he finds a solution. Heapplies his intellect and when he does not find any answers, hebecomes suspicious. He would not become suspicious if hefound a solution. Suspicion will not arise if vyavasthit isunderstood.Questioner: So what is the root of all suspicion? Whydoes suspicion arise?Dadashri: Suspicion is an interference of the buddhi(intellect). It is the interference of excessive buddhi. The intellectthat creates suspicion will show one everything negative. It raisesunnecessary and worthless suspicion. In all the worthlesspursuits of the world, the greatest root cause is suspicion, andthis includes doubt (vahem). Initially a suspicion arises. Theintellect causes suspicions. Suspicion is a display of the intellect.That is why here ‘we’ say only one thing and that is, ‘do nothave any kind of suspicion.’ And there is no reason to besuspicious about anything in this world. So the root of allsuspicions is the buddhi (intellect).Questioner: But this intellect will show both the goodand the bad.Dadashri: No. If a person has just the necessary amountof intellect then he will not even think (worry) about the welfareof his five daughters. Suspicion will arise only when thoughtscome, will it not?Aptavani-96566Aptavani-9be attracted to the sweet and pleasant. The Lord has calledthem both one natured (ek swabhavi).Shrimad Rajchandra has said :“Rajkan ke riddhi vaimanik devaniSarve maanya pudgal ek swabhav jo.”The smallest particle of dirt or the richness of VaimanikDeva (the celestials) - both are considered pudgal nature (asbeing matter, non-Self).There is only one type of non-Self complex (pudgal).Whether a person is a butcher or a philanthropist, both are non-Self complex (pudgal). The one who is neither contemptuoustowards the butcher nor pleased with the philanthropist is avitarag.Questioner: Dada you are not going to let me stand atany location outside the Self.Dadashri: But if you live in the external station, you willget a beating and suffer. You have suffered all this time, do youwant to get more beatings and suffer again? That is why I amshowing you a place where you will never have to suffer. Didyou not suffer before attaining Gnan? Did you suffer a little bit?Everyone has become exhausted from the suffering of all thebeatings.So it is the buddhi (intellect) that causes all the trouble.Buddhi is the one that causes udvega; it turns vega intoudvega. ‘We’ experience bliss because every bit of the intellectis gone from ‘us’. That is why ‘we’ have written in the books,‘We are abuddha (without intellect).’ This is a good adjective,is it not? I saw that no one is even ready to accept this adjective.When ‘we’ tell people, ‘We’ give you the adjective of‘abuddha,’ they will say, ‘No Sir, I want more buddhi.’ ‘We’received the adjective of ‘abuddha’, and so ‘we’ never becomeemotional. ‘We’ are always in motion; whenever you see ‘us’.The root of suspicion (shanka)Questioner: People say they want more intellect but is itnot true that people with more intellect tend to be moresuspicious?Dadashri: Yes. Right now, there is an effect of viparitbuddhi (viparit - wrong kind. Buddhi - intellect). It creates alot of suspicion (shanka) in a person. Suspicion verily istremendous ignorance. One cannot find the answers anywherewithin, so suspicion (shanka) and uncertainty takes hold. Aperson will not become suspicious if he finds a solution. Heapplies his intellect and when he does not find any answers, hebecomes suspicious. He would not become suspicious if hefound a solution. Suspicion will not arise if vyavasthit isunderstood.Questioner: So what is the root of all suspicion? Whydoes suspicion arise?Dadashri: Suspicion is an interference of the buddhi(intellect). It is the interference of excessive buddhi. The intellectthat creates suspicion will show one everything negative. It raisesunnecessary and worthless suspicion. In all the worthlesspursuits of the world, the greatest root cause is suspicion, andthis includes doubt (vahem). Initially a suspicion arises. Theintellect causes suspicions. Suspicion is a display of the intellect.That is why here ‘we’ say only one thing and that is, ‘do nothave any kind of suspicion.’ And there is no reason to besuspicious about anything in this world. So the root of allsuspicions is the buddhi (intellect).Questioner: But this intellect will show both the goodand the bad.Dadashri: No. If a person has just the necessary amountof intellect then he will not even think (worry) about the welfareof his five daughters. Suspicion will arise only when thoughtscome, will it not?Aptavani-96768Aptavani-9Questioner: So this interference occurs only if there isexcessive intellect?Dadashri: It is verily the excessive buddhi (intellect) thatcauses interference. This is because intellect of this era of thecurrent time cycle is of the wrong kind (viparit). It is amisleading intellect (vyabhicharini buddhi) and therefore itsubjects the doer to repeated beatings and suffering.Questioner: So one with the necessary amount ofintellect will not have unnecessary thoughts?Dadashri: Yes. There are many people in India with anecessary amount of buddhi who do not have any otherthoughts. Those laden with extra intellect (akkal) have morethoughts; they have excess unnecessary intellect, they thinkmore, they suffer more. Therefore, when a person has to sufferreal misery he will begin to have suspicions.Suspicion is constant deathQuestioner: It is written in the Gita: “Sanshay-atmavinashyati”, meaning when one begins to have suspicion; oneself-destructs. So is that suspicion referring to the soul orsomething else?Dadashri: Everyone is prone to suspicion. There is not asingle person who does not have suspicion at some time orother. But some people do not have vishvas (trust) i.e. they donot trust anything in the world. They will continue to besuspicious about everything and that kills them; such people are‘dead’ anyway!Questioner: Are we talking about suspicion in theworldly life or in matters related to the Self (nischaya)? Whichsuspicion are we talking about?Dadashri: The whole world has suspicion (uncertainty) inmatters of the Soul (nischaya). That happens as a rule. LordKrishna has said, “sanshay-atma vinashyati,” for the worldlylife. Any man who has suspicions about anything or anyone,whether it is his wife, father, mother, brother or uncle; that manis as good as dead. How can a man who has suspicions abouteverything, live? The entire world is suspicious about the Souland in this regards there is no death. But the one, who hassuspicions in his worldly life, will die; he is dead for sure. Sucha man will not trust anyone; he will continue to have suspicions.He would like to give goods on credit but keeps havingsuspicion about the borrower, such a man is dead for sure.When a young girl goes to college, her father will havesuspicions about what she must be doing now that she is agrown woman. He will wonder about who her friends are. Hewill have such suspicions. So is he not dead?Suspicion is of no use whatsoever. If a man goes out witha knife with the intention of attacking someone, he does not haveany doubts about his actions and that is why he can do that. Andthe victim too will die only because he did not suspect anything.Nevertheless, they die only once whereas a person withsuspicions is dying constantly.Suspicion and inquisitivenessQuestioner: What is the difference between suspicion(shanka) and inquisitiveness (jignasa)?Dadashri: Suspicion and inquisitiveness have nothing incommon. They are not of the same family; there is norelationship whatsoever between the two.Questioner: When scientists do research, they proceedwith uncertainty and suspicion.Dadashri: There is not a single scientist who wouldindulge in doubt and suspicion for more than a minute, otherwisethat science would collapse and cease. Suspicion is like suicide.Those who want to be suspicious can do so.Questioner: Scientists do not accept anything withoutAptavani-96768Aptavani-9Questioner: So this interference occurs only if there isexcessive intellect?Dadashri: It is verily the excessive buddhi (intellect) thatcauses interference. This is because intellect of this era of thecurrent time cycle is of the wrong kind (viparit). It is amisleading intellect (vyabhicharini buddhi) and therefore itsubjects the doer to repeated beatings and suffering.Questioner: So one with the necessary amount ofintellect will not have unnecessary thoughts?Dadashri: Yes. There are many people in India with anecessary amount of buddhi who do not have any otherthoughts. Those laden with extra intellect (akkal) have morethoughts; they have excess unnecessary intellect, they thinkmore, they suffer more. Therefore, when a person has to sufferreal misery he will begin to have suspicions.Suspicion is constant deathQuestioner: It is written in the Gita: “Sanshay-atmavinashyati”, meaning when one begins to have suspicion; oneself-destructs. So is that suspicion referring to the soul orsomething else?Dadashri: Everyone is prone to suspicion. There is not asingle person who does not have suspicion at some time orother. But some people do not have vishvas (trust) i.e. they donot trust anything in the world. They will continue to besuspicious about everything and that kills them; such people are‘dead’ anyway!Questioner: Are we talking about suspicion in theworldly life or in matters related to the Self (nischaya)? Whichsuspicion are we talking about?Dadashri: The whole world has suspicion (uncertainty) inmatters of the Soul (nischaya). That happens as a rule. LordKrishna has said, “sanshay-atma vinashyati,” for the worldlylife. Any man who has suspicions about anything or anyone,whether it is his wife, father, mother, brother or uncle; that manis as good as dead. How can a man who has suspicions abouteverything, live? The entire world is suspicious about the Souland in this regards there is no death. But the one, who hassuspicions in his worldly life, will die; he is dead for sure. Sucha man will not trust anyone; he will continue to have suspicions.He would like to give goods on credit but keeps havingsuspicion about the borrower, such a man is dead for sure.When a young girl goes to college, her father will havesuspicions about what she must be doing now that she is agrown woman. He will wonder about who her friends are. Hewill have such suspicions. So is he not dead?Suspicion is of no use whatsoever. If a man goes out witha knife with the intention of attacking someone, he does not haveany doubts about his actions and that is why he can do that. Andthe victim too will die only because he did not suspect anything.Nevertheless, they die only once whereas a person withsuspicions is dying constantly.Suspicion and inquisitivenessQuestioner: What is the difference between suspicion(shanka) and inquisitiveness (jignasa)?Dadashri: Suspicion and inquisitiveness have nothing incommon. They are not of the same family; there is norelationship whatsoever between the two.Questioner: When scientists do research, they proceedwith uncertainty and suspicion.Dadashri: There is not a single scientist who wouldindulge in doubt and suspicion for more than a minute, otherwisethat science would collapse and cease. Suspicion is like suicide.Those who want to be suspicious can do so.Questioner: Scientists do not accept anything withoutAptavani-96970Aptavani-9suspecting. People make discoveries because they question andhave suspicions.Dadashri: That is not suspicion. It is eagerness to know.They do not have suspicions.Questioner: Are you telling us not to be suspicious ofanyone?Dadashri: Not just people; do not be suspicious aboutanything. You are not to have suspicions about this book either.Suspicion means suicide!Questioner: So do we have to believe everything that iswritten in books?Dadashri: You do not have to believe everything. Youcan be suspicious for only a minute and then you should turnaround. If you go beyond that, then suspicion is such that it willbecome a ‘poison’ and kill you.Questioner: But what if everything that has been writtenis false?Dadashri: It is never wrong or false. But when suspicionarises, you should stop after a minute.For devotees…Questioner: Today in all the religions, the religious gurussay ‘I verily am God.’ Is that to be believed? Is that not worthsuspecting?Dadashri: So what if they write such things? There is noneed for you to have suspicion. You will understand that it iswrong. Doubts or suspicion is a different thing. There is no needto have the kind of suspicion that you are talking about. Thereis no need to have suspicion there. For the time being the guruis God and the disciple is a devotee, and this is how people’slives go on. However when there is a breach of the contract ofsuch a relationship, there is a possibility that suspicion may arise.Otherwise, there is no reason for suspicions.Questioner: A devotee of every God claims that his Godis the Supreme God.Dadashri: That is exactly what should be said. If adevotee does not say that, then I tell him, ‘Consider himSupreme. He is higher than the one here.’ Then if he asks me,‘Is the one here all right?’ I would reply, ‘That one is higher thanthe one here.’ I had told a few devotees of one saint, ‘Brother,go there because there it is higher than here.’ People will sitthere only if they consider him the Supreme; otherwise do youthink they will last there? They will keep having doubts andsuspicions wondering, ‘Is it this one or is it that one…is it thisone or is it that one?’Questioner: So is he not likely to get hurt there? Surely,any form of investigation has suspicion at its root?Dadashri: You may inquire, think on it and then moveaway. There is no need to bring suspicion into it. When doessuspicion arise? It arises when there is a break in their mutualagreement resulting in a problem. Suspicion can never occur onits own.So where do we find suspicion? When there is aconnection between the two and when there is a deviation fromwhat one had ‘decided’ in that agreement between the two, itgives rise to suspicion as to ‘what is all this?’ You should not besuspicious for more than a minute. After that he should decide,‘such is my vyavasthit’. Thereafter, there must not be anysuspicion. Suspicion means killing yourself.Keep a medicine for suspicionsQuestioner: What is it called when a person develops adoubt (vahem) in his mind?Dadashri: Where does it come from? Does it not haveto be exported from somewhere? Only then can it be importedinto us.Aptavani-96970Aptavani-9suspecting. People make discoveries because they question andhave suspicions.Dadashri: That is not suspicion. It is eagerness to know.They do not have suspicions.Questioner: Are you telling us not to be suspicious ofanyone?Dadashri: Not just people; do not be suspicious aboutanything. You are not to have suspicions about this book either.Suspicion means suicide!Questioner: So do we have to believe everything that iswritten in books?Dadashri: You do not have to believe everything. Youcan be suspicious for only a minute and then you should turnaround. If you go beyond that, then suspicion is such that it willbecome a ‘poison’ and kill you.Questioner: But what if everything that has been writtenis false?Dadashri: It is never wrong or false. But when suspicionarises, you should stop after a minute.For devotees…Questioner: Today in all the religions, the religious gurussay ‘I verily am God.’ Is that to be believed? Is that not worthsuspecting?Dadashri: So what if they write such things? There is noneed for you to have suspicion. You will understand that it iswrong. Doubts or suspicion is a different thing. There is no needto have the kind of suspicion that you are talking about. Thereis no need to have suspicion there. For the time being the guruis God and the disciple is a devotee, and this is how people’slives go on. However when there is a breach of the contract ofsuch a relationship, there is a possibility that suspicion may arise.Otherwise, there is no reason for suspicions.Questioner: A devotee of every God claims that his Godis the Supreme God.Dadashri: That is exactly what should be said. If adevotee does not say that, then I tell him, ‘Consider himSupreme. He is higher than the one here.’ Then if he asks me,‘Is the one here all right?’ I would reply, ‘That one is higher thanthe one here.’ I had told a few devotees of one saint, ‘Brother,go there because there it is higher than here.’ People will sitthere only if they consider him the Supreme; otherwise do youthink they will last there? They will keep having doubts andsuspicions wondering, ‘Is it this one or is it that one…is it thisone or is it that one?’Questioner: So is he not likely to get hurt there? Surely,any form of investigation has suspicion at its root?Dadashri: You may inquire, think on it and then moveaway. There is no need to bring suspicion into it. When doessuspicion arise? It arises when there is a break in their mutualagreement resulting in a problem. Suspicion can never occur onits own.So where do we find suspicion? When there is aconnection between the two and when there is a deviation fromwhat one had ‘decided’ in that agreement between the two, itgives rise to suspicion as to ‘what is all this?’ You should not besuspicious for more than a minute. After that he should decide,‘such is my vyavasthit’. Thereafter, there must not be anysuspicion. Suspicion means killing yourself.Keep a medicine for suspicionsQuestioner: What is it called when a person develops adoubt (vahem) in his mind?Dadashri: Where does it come from? Does it not haveto be exported from somewhere? Only then can it be importedinto us.Aptavani-97172Aptavani-9A man hears a story about someone being possessed bya ghost. His wife has gone to visit her parents and he is sleepingalone in his room at night. While he is asleep, around midnight,a mouse makes a noise in the kitchen. He hears the noise andremembers the story about the ghost, so with these twoevidences coming together, he thinks something must be there tomake such a loud noise. Therefore, the doubt (vahem) remainsuntil he discovers the truth. He will remain in this state until hehas knowledge, which is contrary to the knowledge he alreadyhas. Then when his friend comes around the next morning, hegets the courage and tells his friend about how scared he wasthe night before. When his friend tells him to check into thenoise, he goes in the kitchen and finds that a mouse had droppeda tin can and a few other things. Then all his doubts (vahem) goaway. Therefore, it is because of a wrong understanding that oneis not able to sleep at night. But if he has a medicine to removehis doubt (vahem), would he not be able to sleep? So the manwill become happy if he understands a little bit.It all depends on the sub-atomic particles(parmanus)Suspicion that arises is a stock within. Suspicion is afeminine element (streetatva). In every human body there arethree kinds of parmanus (subatomic particles); female (stree),male (purush) and bisexual (napunsak). The body is made upof these three types of parmanus. One is born a male whenthere is an aggregation of predominantly male parmanus. Ifthere is a higher proportion of female parmanus, one is born awoman and neutral when there are more neutral parmanus.Within any body there are more or less these three types ofparmanus. Vahem (doubt), sandeha (dubiousness), shanka(suspicion) etc. are all female parmanus. You have to tell them,‘Get out! I am a Purush (the Self)!’ ‘We’ do not have suchparmanus so ‘we’ never have any suspicion or becomesuspicious.Does suspicion result in prejudice?You should never become suspicious even when you havewitnessed something yourself. Nothing haunts a person as muchas suspicion. You should never have suspicions. Uprootsuspicion the moment it arises by saying, ‘Dada has said ‘no’ toit’. Even if someone says, ‘I have seen this man take money outof someone’s pocket yesterday with my own eyes. He is backagain today,’ you should not be suspicious. Instead of becomingsuspicious, create a safe side for yourself. Otherwise, it is a formof prejudice. Today that person may not be that way. Many willnever steal again. Circumstances force some people to steal,they steal out of necessity and then you may not see them doingso even if you leave money around.Questioner: And yet some are seasoned thieves! Theyhave made a profession of stealing.Dadashri: Such thieves are different altogether. Whenthey are around, you have to hang your coat somewhere safe.Nevertheless, you must not call him a thief. Although you do notcall him a thief to his face, you are calling him so in your mind,are you not? You incur a liability when you call him a thief inyour mind but if you say it to his face, then you are not liable.If you call him a thief to his face, he will beat you up and thatliability is a gross physical liability; an external liability. You areliable for saying it in your mind (liable in two ways; firstly for theadverse mediation and secondly for binding new karma). Sothen what should you do?Questioner: One should not keep it in his mind, norshould he take the punishment.Dadashri: Yes, or it is better to tell him on his face. Hewill curse you and go away. But there is a danger for what iskept in your mind. So what is best? The best thing is to neitherkeep it in your mind nor say it to his face. To keep it in yourmind is what the Lord calls prejudice. A person steals due toAptavani-97172Aptavani-9A man hears a story about someone being possessed bya ghost. His wife has gone to visit her parents and he is sleepingalone in his room at night. While he is asleep, around midnight,a mouse makes a noise in the kitchen. He hears the noise andremembers the story about the ghost, so with these twoevidences coming together, he thinks something must be there tomake such a loud noise. Therefore, the doubt (vahem) remainsuntil he discovers the truth. He will remain in this state until hehas knowledge, which is contrary to the knowledge he alreadyhas. Then when his friend comes around the next morning, hegets the courage and tells his friend about how scared he wasthe night before. When his friend tells him to check into thenoise, he goes in the kitchen and finds that a mouse had droppeda tin can and a few other things. Then all his doubts (vahem) goaway. Therefore, it is because of a wrong understanding that oneis not able to sleep at night. But if he has a medicine to removehis doubt (vahem), would he not be able to sleep? So the manwill become happy if he understands a little bit.It all depends on the sub-atomic particles(parmanus)Suspicion that arises is a stock within. Suspicion is afeminine element (streetatva). In every human body there arethree kinds of parmanus (subatomic particles); female (stree),male (purush) and bisexual (napunsak). The body is made upof these three types of parmanus. One is born a male whenthere is an aggregation of predominantly male parmanus. Ifthere is a higher proportion of female parmanus, one is born awoman and neutral when there are more neutral parmanus.Within any body there are more or less these three types ofparmanus. Vahem (doubt), sandeha (dubiousness), shanka(suspicion) etc. are all female parmanus. You have to tell them,‘Get out! I am a Purush (the Self)!’ ‘We’ do not have suchparmanus so ‘we’ never have any suspicion or becomesuspicious.Does suspicion result in prejudice?You should never become suspicious even when you havewitnessed something yourself. Nothing haunts a person as muchas suspicion. You should never have suspicions. Uprootsuspicion the moment it arises by saying, ‘Dada has said ‘no’ toit’. Even if someone says, ‘I have seen this man take money outof someone’s pocket yesterday with my own eyes. He is backagain today,’ you should not be suspicious. Instead of becomingsuspicious, create a safe side for yourself. Otherwise, it is a formof prejudice. Today that person may not be that way. Many willnever steal again. Circumstances force some people to steal,they steal out of necessity and then you may not see them doingso even if you leave money around.Questioner: And yet some are seasoned thieves! Theyhave made a profession of stealing.Dadashri: Such thieves are different altogether. Whenthey are around, you have to hang your coat somewhere safe.Nevertheless, you must not call him a thief. Although you do notcall him a thief to his face, you are calling him so in your mind,are you not? You incur a liability when you call him a thief inyour mind but if you say it to his face, then you are not liable.If you call him a thief to his face, he will beat you up and thatliability is a gross physical liability; an external liability. You areliable for saying it in your mind (liable in two ways; firstly for theadverse mediation and secondly for binding new karma). Sothen what should you do?Questioner: One should not keep it in his mind, norshould he take the punishment.Dadashri: Yes, or it is better to tell him on his face. Hewill curse you and go away. But there is a danger for what iskept in your mind. So what is best? The best thing is to neitherkeep it in your mind nor say it to his face. To keep it in yourmind is what the Lord calls prejudice. A person steals due toAptavani-97374Aptavani-9maturation of his karma and today that karma may not be there.Every living being in the world is dependent upon his karmas. Soare such things not likely to happen?Question: Yes they are.Dadashri: Still, our people are experts at harboringsuspicion, are they not? ‘We’ never have suspicions. ‘We’ stopthem before they arise. The one who gets rid of all suspicionsis a Gnani. The whole world is dying because of the ghosts ofsuspicions. Someone will say, ‘Yesterday I saw that personstealing as he passed by this way. Today he has come again.’This is suspicion rising within.Questioner: What happens if a suspicion of ‘This man isinterfering’ arises within the mind?Dadashri: No one is interfering. The one who has suchsuspicion is the guilty one and should be thrown in jail. Such aperson will suffer. He is the one who will suffer. Nobody has tomake him suffer; nature will do that.How can the world remain calm even for a moment? Howmany kinds of suspicions are there? And how much suffering isthere in being suspicious? All these sufferings of taapa,santaap, prataap, uttaapa (various forms of suffering) havearisen because of suspicion.Solution for suspicionYou never experience any doubts or suspicions, do you?Questioner: It is bound to happen, is it not?Dadashri: What do you do when suspicion arises withinyou?Questioner: I will inspect it very closely!Dadashri: You will create more doubts and suspicion byattempting to check out whether it is true or not. If there is onething in this world that is absolutely worth rejecting, it issuspicion. The root of all miseries is suspicion.When someone tells ‘us’ that suspicion has arisen withinhim, I teach him to remove it instantly from its roots and throwit out. It is not worth having any suspicions. Suspicion destroysa person. Whatever may happen, under no circumstancesshould you have suspicion; because nothing is going to changeby being suspicious. On the contrary, it gets worse. Suspicion,doubts and other such diseases then arise.Questioner: Then how can suspicion be removed?Dadashri: It can never be removed and therefore it isbest not to let it enter the mind.Questioner: But how can one get rid of suspicion thathas already entered?Dadashri: When a person comes to ‘us’ for the vidhi(special blessings), ‘we’ will remove it from him. But moreimportant is to not let suspicion arise in the first place.Questioner: But one needs a closure for his suspicion,does he not?Dadashri: Yes, one will achieve something when hissuspicions are removed. If you see a small snake going into yourhome, what will happen when you have to go to sleep? Will younot continue to have suspicions? That snake may have left thehouse but you may not have seen it leave, will you still notsuspect that it is still there? What kind of a state will you be in?How well will you be able to sleep?Questioner: I will lose my sleep.Dadashri: Those who are unaware will sleep well andthose who are aware will think, ‘We will not be able to sleepnow that we saw it, but at least let those other poor peoplesleep.’ Those who are unaware will snore away. How can theAptavani-97374Aptavani-9maturation of his karma and today that karma may not be there.Every living being in the world is dependent upon his karmas. Soare such things not likely to happen?Question: Yes they are.Dadashri: Still, our people are experts at harboringsuspicion, are they not? ‘We’ never have suspicions. ‘We’ stopthem before they arise. The one who gets rid of all suspicionsis a Gnani. The whole world is dying because of the ghosts ofsuspicions. Someone will say, ‘Yesterday I saw that personstealing as he passed by this way. Today he has come again.’This is suspicion rising within.Questioner: What happens if a suspicion of ‘This man isinterfering’ arises within the mind?Dadashri: No one is interfering. The one who has suchsuspicion is the guilty one and should be thrown in jail. Such aperson will suffer. He is the one who will suffer. Nobody has tomake him suffer; nature will do that.How can the world remain calm even for a moment? Howmany kinds of suspicions are there? And how much suffering isthere in being suspicious? All these sufferings of taapa,santaap, prataap, uttaapa (various forms of suffering) havearisen because of suspicion.Solution for suspicionYou never experience any doubts or suspicions, do you?Questioner: It is bound to happen, is it not?Dadashri: What do you do when suspicion arises withinyou?Questioner: I will inspect it very closely!Dadashri: You will create more doubts and suspicion byattempting to check out whether it is true or not. If there is onething in this world that is absolutely worth rejecting, it issuspicion. The root of all miseries is suspicion.When someone tells ‘us’ that suspicion has arisen withinhim, I teach him to remove it instantly from its roots and throwit out. It is not worth having any suspicions. Suspicion destroysa person. Whatever may happen, under no circumstancesshould you have suspicion; because nothing is going to changeby being suspicious. On the contrary, it gets worse. Suspicion,doubts and other such diseases then arise.Questioner: Then how can suspicion be removed?Dadashri: It can never be removed and therefore it isbest not to let it enter the mind.Questioner: But how can one get rid of suspicion thathas already entered?Dadashri: When a person comes to ‘us’ for the vidhi(special blessings), ‘we’ will remove it from him. But moreimportant is to not let suspicion arise in the first place.Questioner: But one needs a closure for his suspicion,does he not?Dadashri: Yes, one will achieve something when hissuspicions are removed. If you see a small snake going into yourhome, what will happen when you have to go to sleep? Will younot continue to have suspicions? That snake may have left thehouse but you may not have seen it leave, will you still notsuspect that it is still there? What kind of a state will you be in?How well will you be able to sleep?Questioner: I will lose my sleep.Dadashri: Those who are unaware will sleep well andthose who are aware will think, ‘We will not be able to sleepnow that we saw it, but at least let those other poor peoplesleep.’ Those who are unaware will snore away. How can the76Aptavani-9Aptavani-975one who is aware, sleep? He knows that there is a snake there,so what can we do about that?Therefore, what do the scriptures say? ‘You had theknowledge of the snake entering your home and now you willbe free only when you attain the knowledge of the snake leavingyour home.’ One will continue to be suspicious if he is not awareof the snake leaving and he will not be able to fall asleep. Hewill toss and turn whole nightlong. He will continue to wonder,‘What if the snake comes here?’ What is the snake going to do?What is it going to take out of your pocket?Questioner: What can it do with things in the pocket?Dadashri: Then what is it going to do?Questioner: It will bite.Dadashri: For what? Will it be a lawful bite or anunlawful one? There is nothing in this world that is happeningthat is unlawful, not even for a moment. Everything that happens,happens within the laws of nature. So do not be mistaken.Whatever happens, or has happened, was within the dictatesof nature’s law. What does our Gnan say? It says, ‘Forgetabout the snake entering the house; it is vyavasthit. Why don’tyou go to sleep?’ Our Gnan will help him sleep without anysuspicions.‘We’ have slept in many such situations because most of‘our’ business was in the jungles. A snake would be sleepingwhere I could see it. When ‘we’ woke up in the morning, ‘we’would see the snake sleeping. The snake would sleep and sowould ‘we’. Where else could that poor snake go in the jungle?Wherever it found a place to sleep, that place would be his. Wecan at least go to our in-laws for a couple of days but the snakehas no in-laws to go to!That is why ‘we’ have said ‘vyavasthit’. There is‘exactness’. Not a grain worth of change can be made.Passing through every phase‘We’ have analyzed all these things and this analysis is notof just one life. Can there be so many analyses in just one life?How many analyses can occur in eighty years? This analysis,which is coming forth today, is of many life times.Questioner: In what way does the analysis of so manypast lives, come together now, and present itself?Dadashri: It is because the veils of ignorance have beendestroyed. Knowledge (Gnan) is ready and present within butthe veils over it have to be destroyed. The stock of Gnan isalready there but it can only manifest if the veils of ignoranceover it are destroyed.I have discovered the knowledge (Gnan) of all phases. Ihave gone through all the phases and have brought about an‘end’ to all those phases. Thereafter this Gnan manifested.How many phases does the moon have? There are fifteenphases. Those fifteen phases have influenced the world sincetime immemorial. When people say it is the second day of themoon, they are referring to the same old moon. Then they willsay it is the moon of the third day, or half moon, or full moon.If the moon itself were to say, ‘I am the third lunar moon. I amthe third lunar moon’, people would comment, ‘Why do you sayyou are the third lunar moon? Are you not going to changetomorrow?’ The moon is one and the same all along. Its phaseswill change as the days go by. But people question even this, ‘Isit the second or the third lunar moon today? No it can’t be thethird, it must be the second!’ And someone else will say, ‘It isthe third.’ People have doubts even over such things. Does oneeven have to go looking for suspicions and doubts? This is why people are miserable. Suspicion is the verycause of their misery. That is why I am asking you to understandwhat I am saying. You need to understand all the phases. Every76Aptavani-9Aptavani-975one who is aware, sleep? He knows that there is a snake there,so what can we do about that?Therefore, what do the scriptures say? ‘You had theknowledge of the snake entering your home and now you willbe free only when you attain the knowledge of the snake leavingyour home.’ One will continue to be suspicious if he is not awareof the snake leaving and he will not be able to fall asleep. Hewill toss and turn whole nightlong. He will continue to wonder,‘What if the snake comes here?’ What is the snake going to do?What is it going to take out of your pocket?Questioner: What can it do with things in the pocket?Dadashri: Then what is it going to do?Questioner: It will bite.Dadashri: For what? Will it be a lawful bite or anunlawful one? There is nothing in this world that is happeningthat is unlawful, not even for a moment. Everything that happens,happens within the laws of nature. So do not be mistaken.Whatever happens, or has happened, was within the dictatesof nature’s law. What does our Gnan say? It says, ‘Forgetabout the snake entering the house; it is vyavasthit. Why don’tyou go to sleep?’ Our Gnan will help him sleep without anysuspicions.‘We’ have slept in many such situations because most of‘our’ business was in the jungles. A snake would be sleepingwhere I could see it. When ‘we’ woke up in the morning, ‘we’would see the snake sleeping. The snake would sleep and sowould ‘we’. Where else could that poor snake go in the jungle?Wherever it found a place to sleep, that place would be his. Wecan at least go to our in-laws for a couple of days but the snakehas no in-laws to go to!That is why ‘we’ have said ‘vyavasthit’. There is‘exactness’. Not a grain worth of change can be made.Passing through every phase‘We’ have analyzed all these things and this analysis is notof just one life. Can there be so many analyses in just one life?How many analyses can occur in eighty years? This analysis,which is coming forth today, is of many life times.Questioner: In what way does the analysis of so manypast lives, come together now, and present itself?Dadashri: It is because the veils of ignorance have beendestroyed. Knowledge (Gnan) is ready and present within butthe veils over it have to be destroyed. The stock of Gnan isalready there but it can only manifest if the veils of ignoranceover it are destroyed.I have discovered the knowledge (Gnan) of all phases. Ihave gone through all the phases and have brought about an‘end’ to all those phases. Thereafter this Gnan manifested.How many phases does the moon have? There are fifteenphases. Those fifteen phases have influenced the world sincetime immemorial. When people say it is the second day of themoon, they are referring to the same old moon. Then they willsay it is the moon of the third day, or half moon, or full moon.If the moon itself were to say, ‘I am the third lunar moon. I amthe third lunar moon’, people would comment, ‘Why do you sayyou are the third lunar moon? Are you not going to changetomorrow?’ The moon is one and the same all along. Its phaseswill change as the days go by. But people question even this, ‘Isit the second or the third lunar moon today? No it can’t be thethird, it must be the second!’ And someone else will say, ‘It isthe third.’ People have doubts even over such things. Does oneeven have to go looking for suspicions and doubts? This is why people are miserable. Suspicion is the verycause of their misery. That is why I am asking you to understandwhat I am saying. You need to understand all the phases. EveryAptavani-97778Aptavani-9phase of the world has come to me. There is not a single phaseof the world, which I have not traversed. I am aware of thephases of every lifetime and this talk is the experience of allthose phases.The ‘one’ who is beyond worldly interactions,‘settles’ itThe ‘one’ who is beyond worldly interactions (vyavahar)can ‘settle’ it for you. Otherwise, nothing can be settled inworldly interactions. The one who is involved in the worldly lifecan never have the awareness of the worldly life. He will insiston the worldly life and is absorbed in it, consequently he will not‘know’ the worldly interaction. The Gnani Purush is beyond theworldly life and therefore His speech comes forth such thateverything becomes ‘exact’ for us. Suspicion is something thatwill never go away, even if one tries to get rid of it. On thecontrary, it increases. It leaves through the speech of the Gnani.Suspicion leads to destructionOutside of this satsang, people are of the opinion,‘Suspicions occur when it is a fact. We are not humans ifsuspicions do not arise. Do animals have suspicions? We arehumans and that is why we have suspicions about ourdaughters.’ That is what they teach us. Why do ‘we’ get rid ofyour suspicions? It is because they do not help at all, not evena little bit, and it causes harm to no end. That is why. ‘We’would not be able to say this if suspicion is helpful. Even if ithelps ten percent and harms ninety percent, ‘we’ would not beable to speak this way. However, it does not help even in theslightest and it does tremendous damage.The one who is suspicion-laden is a living deadSuspicion is the cause of destruction. That is what killspeople. Once it starts, there is no end to it and that is why itdestroys people.On the most part, if women become suspicious, they willforget about it but if they remember; then it will destroy them.On the other hand, men will create suspicion even if there is nocause for it. When a woman becomes suspicious, she is calleda witch. Meaning she is possessed by both a ghost and a witch.This will kill a human being. ‘We’ ask those who meet ‘us’,whom they become suspicious about, whether it is people intheir home, the neighbors, brother, wife, or anyone else. ‘We’encourage them to tell ‘us’ so that ‘we’ can repair it for them.Suspicion is a very contagious disease; it has become verywidespread. A person with suspicion becomes very unhappy. Itis very difficult! Once a person is overcome with suspicion, hewill be suspicious about everyone. In this world, a deadperson and a suspicion-laden (shankashil) person are boththe same. A man that becomes suspicion-laden is suspiciouseverywhere. Such a person is same as a dead person; he livesa life of the dead.Why have suspicions where everythinghappens automatically?You must not have suspicion on anything. Suspicion is thegreatest of miseries. There is no other misery like it.At night when you eat your supper and go to sleep, doyou check to see if all the digestive enzymes are releasedproperly or not? Do you check to see how much digestiveenzyme is released or how much bile is released? Did you everlook into this?Questioner: All that occurs automatically. What is theneed for us to verify all that?Dadashri: So then, do things not occur automatically onthe outside? It works wonderfully internally and like wise,nothing needs to be done on the outside either. How well theblood, urine and excreta are separated internally! Even milk fora newborn baby is made in a new mother. So much preparationAptavani-97778Aptavani-9phase of the world has come to me. There is not a single phaseof the world, which I have not traversed. I am aware of thephases of every lifetime and this talk is the experience of allthose phases.The ‘one’ who is beyond worldly interactions,‘settles’ itThe ‘one’ who is beyond worldly interactions (vyavahar)can ‘settle’ it for you. Otherwise, nothing can be settled inworldly interactions. The one who is involved in the worldly lifecan never have the awareness of the worldly life. He will insiston the worldly life and is absorbed in it, consequently he will not‘know’ the worldly interaction. The Gnani Purush is beyond theworldly life and therefore His speech comes forth such thateverything becomes ‘exact’ for us. Suspicion is something thatwill never go away, even if one tries to get rid of it. On thecontrary, it increases. It leaves through the speech of the Gnani.Suspicion leads to destructionOutside of this satsang, people are of the opinion,‘Suspicions occur when it is a fact. We are not humans ifsuspicions do not arise. Do animals have suspicions? We arehumans and that is why we have suspicions about ourdaughters.’ That is what they teach us. Why do ‘we’ get rid ofyour suspicions? It is because they do not help at all, not evena little bit, and it causes harm to no end. That is why. ‘We’would not be able to say this if suspicion is helpful. Even if ithelps ten percent and harms ninety percent, ‘we’ would not beable to speak this way. However, it does not help even in theslightest and it does tremendous damage.The one who is suspicion-laden is a living deadSuspicion is the cause of destruction. That is what killspeople. Once it starts, there is no end to it and that is why itdestroys people.On the most part, if women become suspicious, they willforget about it but if they remember; then it will destroy them.On the other hand, men will create suspicion even if there is nocause for it. When a woman becomes suspicious, she is calleda witch. Meaning she is possessed by both a ghost and a witch.This will kill a human being. ‘We’ ask those who meet ‘us’,whom they become suspicious about, whether it is people intheir home, the neighbors, brother, wife, or anyone else. ‘We’encourage them to tell ‘us’ so that ‘we’ can repair it for them.Suspicion is a very contagious disease; it has become verywidespread. A person with suspicion becomes very unhappy. Itis very difficult! Once a person is overcome with suspicion, hewill be suspicious about everyone. In this world, a deadperson and a suspicion-laden (shankashil) person are boththe same. A man that becomes suspicion-laden is suspiciouseverywhere. Such a person is same as a dead person; he livesa life of the dead.Why have suspicions where everythinghappens automatically?You must not have suspicion on anything. Suspicion is thegreatest of miseries. There is no other misery like it.At night when you eat your supper and go to sleep, doyou check to see if all the digestive enzymes are releasedproperly or not? Do you check to see how much digestiveenzyme is released or how much bile is released? Did you everlook into this?Questioner: All that occurs automatically. What is theneed for us to verify all that?Dadashri: So then, do things not occur automatically onthe outside? It works wonderfully internally and like wise,nothing needs to be done on the outside either. How well theblood, urine and excreta are separated internally! Even milk fora newborn baby is made in a new mother. So much preparationAptavani-97980Aptavani-9Dadashri: No, good intellect will get rid of deceit andbetrayal; it will maintain a safe-side. On the one hand, suspicionkills a person, then deceit and betrayal is inevitable, andeveryone is caught up indulging in their worldly ‘happiness’. Questioner: But to remain in such happiness, does onenot use deceit and betrayal with the help of the intellect?Dadashri: There is no presence of good buddhi(intellect) when one is looking for his own happiness. Goodbuddhi looks for everyone’s collective happiness in the home.But here, the son looks for his own happiness, the wife looks forher own happiness, the daughter looks for her own happiness,the father looks for his own happiness and so everyone looksfor his or her own happiness. If these facts were exposed, thenno family members would live with each other. But they all eat,drink and live together, so it is best left covered.There is absolutely no need to be suspicious in anysituation. Suspicion verily destroys a person. Everyone is dyingbecause of his or her suspicions. The mightiest ‘ghost’ in thisworld is that of suspicion. The best of people have beendestroyed by it; therefore do not let suspicion arise in the firstplace. Destroy it the moment it arises. Do not let it grow.Otherwise it will not let you live peacefully. Suspicion has killedand destroyed even the greatest of men like the powerfulChakravarti emperors.The dangers are graveEven if people tell you, ‘this man is worthless’, you shouldcall him worthy because at times he may not be worthless andif you call him worthless, you will incur a tremendous liability. Ifa woman is chaste and virtuous, it is a terrible sin to call her aprostitute. You incur such a liability that you will have to pay forit for many lives to come. Therefore, do not say anything thatwill violate someone’s character because what if it is not true?What is your own worth if you say things about someonetakes place! Yet, you sleep soundly. How much preparation isgoing on within while you sleep peacefully! Who does all thatinternally? Do you not have any suspicions about this?Questioner: No.Dadashri: Then you should not have any suspicionsabout the outside world either. Whatever is taking place withinthe inner complex of mind-intellect-chit and ego (antahkaran),the same is taking place on the outside, so why get upset overit? Why do you invite unnecessary external problems?Suspicion is harmful at all timesOne becomes suspicious of his daughter when she goes tocollege. He will even suspect his wife. What a betrayal! In thisera of Kaliyug, there is betrayal even amongst people in thesame home. Kaliyug means an era of betrayal. There is nothingbut deceit and betrayal, deceit and betrayal, deceit and betrayal.For what happiness does a person do this? And that too, onedoes it in complete unawareness. Intelligent people should notbe doing this. People with clean intellect should not have deceitand betrayal; only the foolish do. Kaliyug means collection offoolish people.Questioner: Does attachment and abhorrence not play arole in mistrust and betrayal?Dadashri: Only in the presence of attachment andabhorrence (raag-dwesh) does all this take place. Otherwise, ifa person does not have any raag-dwesh, he will not have theseproblems. It makes no difference if a person without raag-dwesh does good or bad, because although he plays with dirt,there is no oil on his body (nothing will stick to him i.e. he willnot create any karma because he does not have raag ordwesh), while others have oil on their body!Questioner: But does the buddhi (intellect) not take partin deceit (kapat) and betrayal?Aptavani-97980Aptavani-9Dadashri: No, good intellect will get rid of deceit andbetrayal; it will maintain a safe-side. On the one hand, suspicionkills a person, then deceit and betrayal is inevitable, andeveryone is caught up indulging in their worldly ‘happiness’. Questioner: But to remain in such happiness, does onenot use deceit and betrayal with the help of the intellect?Dadashri: There is no presence of good buddhi(intellect) when one is looking for his own happiness. Goodbuddhi looks for everyone’s collective happiness in the home.But here, the son looks for his own happiness, the wife looks forher own happiness, the daughter looks for her own happiness,the father looks for his own happiness and so everyone looksfor his or her own happiness. If these facts were exposed, thenno family members would live with each other. But they all eat,drink and live together, so it is best left covered.There is absolutely no need to be suspicious in anysituation. Suspicion verily destroys a person. Everyone is dyingbecause of his or her suspicions. The mightiest ‘ghost’ in thisworld is that of suspicion. The best of people have beendestroyed by it; therefore do not let suspicion arise in the firstplace. Destroy it the moment it arises. Do not let it grow.Otherwise it will not let you live peacefully. Suspicion has killedand destroyed even the greatest of men like the powerfulChakravarti emperors.The dangers are graveEven if people tell you, ‘this man is worthless’, you shouldcall him worthy because at times he may not be worthless andif you call him worthless, you will incur a tremendous liability. Ifa woman is chaste and virtuous, it is a terrible sin to call her aprostitute. You incur such a liability that you will have to pay forit for many lives to come. Therefore, do not say anything thatwill violate someone’s character because what if it is not true?What is your own worth if you say things about someonetakes place! Yet, you sleep soundly. How much preparation isgoing on within while you sleep peacefully! Who does all thatinternally? Do you not have any suspicions about this?Questioner: No.Dadashri: Then you should not have any suspicionsabout the outside world either. Whatever is taking place withinthe inner complex of mind-intellect-chit and ego (antahkaran),the same is taking place on the outside, so why get upset overit? Why do you invite unnecessary external problems?Suspicion is harmful at all timesOne becomes suspicious of his daughter when she goes tocollege. He will even suspect his wife. What a betrayal! In thisera of Kaliyug, there is betrayal even amongst people in thesame home. Kaliyug means an era of betrayal. There is nothingbut deceit and betrayal, deceit and betrayal, deceit and betrayal.For what happiness does a person do this? And that too, onedoes it in complete unawareness. Intelligent people should notbe doing this. People with clean intellect should not have deceitand betrayal; only the foolish do. Kaliyug means collection offoolish people.Questioner: Does attachment and abhorrence not play arole in mistrust and betrayal?Dadashri: Only in the presence of attachment andabhorrence (raag-dwesh) does all this take place. Otherwise, ifa person does not have any raag-dwesh, he will not have theseproblems. It makes no difference if a person without raag-dwesh does good or bad, because although he plays with dirt,there is no oil on his body (nothing will stick to him i.e. he willnot create any karma because he does not have raag ordwesh), while others have oil on their body!Questioner: But does the buddhi (intellect) not take partin deceit (kapat) and betrayal?Aptavani-98182Aptavani-9because others say so? ‘We’ have never said anything aboutanybody and ‘we’ will never do so. ‘We’ do not interfere. Whowould want to take on the liability? You should never besuspicious about anyone’s character. It carries a great danger.‘We’ never become suspicious. Why should ‘we’ take on theliability?How much strain should you put on youreyes in the dark?Questioner: What adjustment should one take if he hasdeveloped a habit of viewing everything with suspicion(shankashil)?Dadashri: When you see inappropriate conduct insomeone, was it not there before? Do you think it has comeabout all of a sudden? So you should understand that this iswhat the world is all about. You should never judge anyone’scharacter in these times of Kaliyug. It is like this everywhere inthe current time cycle. It may not be clearly visible but the mindwill become ruined for sure. In all this, a woman’s character isa museum filled with illusion (moha) and deceit (kapat), andthat is why they are born as women. The best way amidst all thisis for one to become free from all sexuality.Questioner: We realize that is the way it is in sexualconduct, nevertheless, when the mind becomes suspicious, onebecomes engrossed (tanmayakar) in it. What adjustmentshould one take there?Dadashri: After becoming the Self, do not get involvedin anything. All that (suspicions etc.,) belongs to the ‘foreigndepartment’; to the non-Self. You should remain in the ‘homedepartment’ (the Self). Stay in your real Self! You will not findGnan such as this again so get your work done. One manconstantly used to be suspicious about his wife. ‘We’ asked himwhy he was suspicious about his wife. Was he suspiciousbecause he saw something? And if that was the case, was thesame thing not going on before he witnessed it? People call aperson who gets caught stealing, a thief, but those who do notget caught are thieves from within, are they not? Here peopleonly label the ones who get caught as thieves. Why are youcalling them thieves? In fact they are trivial thieves because theyget caught. Do you think those who steal on a regular basis arelikely to get caught?Questioner: But it is when one is caught stealing, that heis called a thief.Dadashri: No, the ones who steal occasionally are theones who get caught. And because they are caught, people callthem thieves. The real thief is the one who does not get caught,but this is how the world is.So this man understood ‘our’ whole Vignan. Then he tellsme, ‘From now I will not be alarmed even when someone putshis arm around my wife.’ Yes that is how it should be if you wantto go to moksha! Otherwise, you will keep quarreling with yourwife. Your wife can never be your wife in this current time cycleof dushamkaal (aka as Kaliyug, this current time cycle ischaracterized as a time of lack of unity in people’s thoughts,speech and action; an era of moral and spiritual decline) and itis futile to even expect that. This is the dushamkaal, she is yoursas long as she stays with you and cares for you otherwise sheis someone else’s if she cares for another.That is why ‘we’ have told all the mahatmas, not toharbor suspicions. ‘We’ also ask them why would they takethings for granted and believe everything true just because theyhave not witnessed anything in this current time cycle. Everythingis hollow and without substance to begin with. If ‘we’ were todescribe to you what ‘we’ have seen, no man would be living.Therefore, in this time cycle, there is nothing better than to bealone and be pleasantly absorbed in living alone. Furthermore,if one has this Gnan, then there is nothing better.Aptavani-98182Aptavani-9because others say so? ‘We’ have never said anything aboutanybody and ‘we’ will never do so. ‘We’ do not interfere. Whowould want to take on the liability? You should never besuspicious about anyone’s character. It carries a great danger.‘We’ never become suspicious. Why should ‘we’ take on theliability?How much strain should you put on youreyes in the dark?Questioner: What adjustment should one take if he hasdeveloped a habit of viewing everything with suspicion(shankashil)?Dadashri: When you see inappropriate conduct insomeone, was it not there before? Do you think it has comeabout all of a sudden? So you should understand that this iswhat the world is all about. You should never judge anyone’scharacter in these times of Kaliyug. It is like this everywhere inthe current time cycle. It may not be clearly visible but the mindwill become ruined for sure. In all this, a woman’s character isa museum filled with illusion (moha) and deceit (kapat), andthat is why they are born as women. The best way amidst all thisis for one to become free from all sexuality.Questioner: We realize that is the way it is in sexualconduct, nevertheless, when the mind becomes suspicious, onebecomes engrossed (tanmayakar) in it. What adjustmentshould one take there?Dadashri: After becoming the Self, do not get involvedin anything. All that (suspicions etc.,) belongs to the ‘foreigndepartment’; to the non-Self. You should remain in the ‘homedepartment’ (the Self). Stay in your real Self! You will not findGnan such as this again so get your work done. One manconstantly used to be suspicious about his wife. ‘We’ asked himwhy he was suspicious about his wife. Was he suspiciousbecause he saw something? And if that was the case, was thesame thing not going on before he witnessed it? People call aperson who gets caught stealing, a thief, but those who do notget caught are thieves from within, are they not? Here peopleonly label the ones who get caught as thieves. Why are youcalling them thieves? In fact they are trivial thieves because theyget caught. Do you think those who steal on a regular basis arelikely to get caught?Questioner: But it is when one is caught stealing, that heis called a thief.Dadashri: No, the ones who steal occasionally are theones who get caught. And because they are caught, people callthem thieves. The real thief is the one who does not get caught,but this is how the world is.So this man understood ‘our’ whole Vignan. Then he tellsme, ‘From now I will not be alarmed even when someone putshis arm around my wife.’ Yes that is how it should be if you wantto go to moksha! Otherwise, you will keep quarreling with yourwife. Your wife can never be your wife in this current time cycleof dushamkaal (aka as Kaliyug, this current time cycle ischaracterized as a time of lack of unity in people’s thoughts,speech and action; an era of moral and spiritual decline) and itis futile to even expect that. This is the dushamkaal, she is yoursas long as she stays with you and cares for you otherwise sheis someone else’s if she cares for another.That is why ‘we’ have told all the mahatmas, not toharbor suspicions. ‘We’ also ask them why would they takethings for granted and believe everything true just because theyhave not witnessed anything in this current time cycle. Everythingis hollow and without substance to begin with. If ‘we’ were todescribe to you what ‘we’ have seen, no man would be living.Therefore, in this time cycle, there is nothing better than to bealone and be pleasantly absorbed in living alone. Furthermore,if one has this Gnan, then there is nothing better.Aptavani-98384Aptavani-9Therefore, it is worth getting your work done and that iswhy ‘we’ repeatedly keep telling you, ‘get your work done, getyour work done, get your work done!’ The intent behind it isthat this Vignan, this Gnan has never manifested in any of thetime cycles, therefore you should get your work done.So do you understand? If you had not seen anything,nothing would have happened. All this is the poison of seeing.Questioner: Yes, it happens only because I saw it.Dadashri: So this whole world moves about in darknessand there is nothing but hollowness in it; there is no integrity orsubstance to this world. ‘We’ have seen all this in Gnan but youhave not and that is why you get alarmed when you seesomething. Why do you get alarmed? Such things go on all thetime, but you simply don’t see it. What is there to be alarmedabout when you are the Self? All it is, is simply a discharge ofkarma of all that was charged in the past life. The entire worldis clearly in the form of discharge. The world is not outside ofdischarge. And that is why ‘we’ tell you, the world is in the formof a discharge and that is why no one is at fault.Questioner: So does the principle of karma work heretoo?Dadashri: Yes, purely the principle of karma is workinghere and nothing else. No individual is at fault. It is the poorman’s karma that makes him go round and round. But if one hassuspicion in all this, then he is doomed for no reason.For those going to mokshaKnow that you are on your way to moksha whendehadhyas goes away. Dehadhyas means to believe ‘I am thebody’. You are on the path of the vitarag if you do notexperience any attachment or abhorrence when someonecurses you, beats you or takes your wife away from youbefore your very eyes. Men allow it to happen because of theirphysical weakness. If the other man is strong, he will let himtake his wife away.So nothing belongs to you; everything is of the non-Self.If you want to live the worldly life, then become strong in it andif you want to go to moksha, then become worthy of it. Wheneven your own body is not your own, how can the wife beyours? How can the daughter be yours? So you should thinkabout all this in advance; think about what you should do ifsomeone were to take your wife away from you.Therefore, nothing that is destined to occur can bechanged; such is vyavasthit. Therefore do not have any fear.That is why it has been said that it is vyavasthit. As long as oneis spared of witnessing a scene of infidelity, one carries onsaying, ‘my wife…my wife’. And once he sees it, the innerturmoil begins. Look here you! It was like this all along. Do notlook for anything new here.Questioner: But Dada you are being very lenient here.Dadashri: What ‘we’ are saying is that there is no sensein having unnecessary expectations in this era of the current timecycle (dushamkaal). Even the government has created divorcelaws because it is aware that this will happen. That is why theycreated the law first. That is why always a medicinal plant willgrow first and then will come the disease. Similarly, a law iscreated first and then the incidents take place.‘Safe-side’ related marital conductTherefore, any man who wants peace of mind withregards to his wife should marry an unattractive woman so thatno other man will be interested in her. She herself will say, ‘Noone else will have me, only my husband keeps me.’ She willremain very sincere to him. If she is good looking, other men willenjoy her by looking at her lustfully. They will have badintentions towards her. When a man marries a good-looking girl,Aptavani-98384Aptavani-9Therefore, it is worth getting your work done and that iswhy ‘we’ repeatedly keep telling you, ‘get your work done, getyour work done, get your work done!’ The intent behind it isthat this Vignan, this Gnan has never manifested in any of thetime cycles, therefore you should get your work done.So do you understand? If you had not seen anything,nothing would have happened. All this is the poison of seeing.Questioner: Yes, it happens only because I saw it.Dadashri: So this whole world moves about in darknessand there is nothing but hollowness in it; there is no integrity orsubstance to this world. ‘We’ have seen all this in Gnan but youhave not and that is why you get alarmed when you seesomething. Why do you get alarmed? Such things go on all thetime, but you simply don’t see it. What is there to be alarmedabout when you are the Self? All it is, is simply a discharge ofkarma of all that was charged in the past life. The entire worldis clearly in the form of discharge. The world is not outside ofdischarge. And that is why ‘we’ tell you, the world is in the formof a discharge and that is why no one is at fault.Questioner: So does the principle of karma work heretoo?Dadashri: Yes, purely the principle of karma is workinghere and nothing else. No individual is at fault. It is the poorman’s karma that makes him go round and round. But if one hassuspicion in all this, then he is doomed for no reason.For those going to mokshaKnow that you are on your way to moksha whendehadhyas goes away. Dehadhyas means to believe ‘I am thebody’. You are on the path of the vitarag if you do notexperience any attachment or abhorrence when someonecurses you, beats you or takes your wife away from youbefore your very eyes. Men allow it to happen because of theirphysical weakness. If the other man is strong, he will let himtake his wife away.So nothing belongs to you; everything is of the non-Self.If you want to live the worldly life, then become strong in it andif you want to go to moksha, then become worthy of it. Wheneven your own body is not your own, how can the wife beyours? How can the daughter be yours? So you should thinkabout all this in advance; think about what you should do ifsomeone were to take your wife away from you.Therefore, nothing that is destined to occur can bechanged; such is vyavasthit. Therefore do not have any fear.That is why it has been said that it is vyavasthit. As long as oneis spared of witnessing a scene of infidelity, one carries onsaying, ‘my wife…my wife’. And once he sees it, the innerturmoil begins. Look here you! It was like this all along. Do notlook for anything new here.Questioner: But Dada you are being very lenient here.Dadashri: What ‘we’ are saying is that there is no sensein having unnecessary expectations in this era of the current timecycle (dushamkaal). Even the government has created divorcelaws because it is aware that this will happen. That is why theycreated the law first. That is why always a medicinal plant willgrow first and then will come the disease. Similarly, a law iscreated first and then the incidents take place.‘Safe-side’ related marital conductTherefore, any man who wants peace of mind withregards to his wife should marry an unattractive woman so thatno other man will be interested in her. She herself will say, ‘Noone else will have me, only my husband keeps me.’ She willremain very sincere to him. If she is good looking, other men willenjoy her by looking at her lustfully. They will have badintentions towards her. When a man marries a good-looking girl,Aptavani-98586Aptavani-9‘we’ think about what is going to become of that poor man.There is a safe side only if she is not good-looking.A man will forget God when his wife is beautiful and awoman too, will forget God when her husband is good looking.That is why it is good if everything is average. Our elders usedto say, ‘Keep your farm barren and have an ugly wife.’ Why didthey say that? If your wife is beautiful, some man will have badintentions towards her and that is why it is better to have an uglywife. They were saying this from a different perspective, notfrom a religious perspective. ‘We’ are telling you from thereligious perspective. You do not have to worry about anythingif your wife is ugly. If she goes out, no one will have badintentions towards her. Our elders were very smart, but that isnot what ‘we’ are telling you; it is quite different. If she is ugly,then it will not bother you; you will not be tormented andpreoccupied by mistrust.What a betrayal this isWhat kind of people do you find today? Wherever theysee a ‘hotel’ (woman, sexual outlet), they will ‘dine’ (indulge inlustful fancy or more). Suspicion is the cause of all misery. Bothmen and women ‘dine’ wherever they see a ‘hotel’. A man doesnot think about what his wife is doing. He thinks she is a goodwoman, but he does not realize that she is cheating on him. Mencheat on their wives and the wives cheat on their husbands.Women however will win because men do not have as muchkapat (deceit). That is why women easily deceive men.This worldly life was worth enjoying when there wassincerity and morality in it. Nowadays there is tremendousbetrayal. If ‘we’ were to tell men about their wives, they wouldnot even go to them. ‘We’ know everything about everybodybut ‘we’ would not do anything about it. Men are not angelseither, but a woman is a factory of sheer deceit. A warehouseof deceit is not to be found anywhere except in a woman.How can there be moha (attachment due toillusion) towards such betrayal?The toilets that we have, are they used by many or justone person?Questioner: Everyone uses them.Dadashri: So a place everyone goes to is called a toilet.A place where many people go is called a toilet. A relationshipof fidelity to one man and one woman is a conduct of virtue. Tillthen a woman’s conduct is considered virtuous otherwise it isconsidered a toilet. How many people use the toilet in yourhome?Questioner: Everyone.Dadashri: It is not used by just one person is it? Sowhether two people use it or everyone else does, then it is atoilet.People will ‘dine’ when they come across a ‘hotel’.Hey! They may even wine and dine! So get rid of anysuspicion. With suspicion, you will lose the moksha that is inthe palm of your hands. Therefore, you have to understand justthis much that you are married and that she is your tenant! Thatis all you have to keep in your mind. Then whomever she goesout with, you should not harbor any suspicion. Your concernis only with your needs, is it not? When you need to use thetoilet; go use it. That which cannot be refrained from visiting,is called a toilet. That is why the Gnanis have said that theworldly life is a betrayal.Questioner: Why does it not appear as a betrayal?Dadashri: Because of moha (illusionary attachment).And there has never been anyone to tell you so either. The trainwill stop only when someone waves a red flag, otherwise it willcontinue and become derailed.Aptavani-98586Aptavani-9‘we’ think about what is going to become of that poor man.There is a safe side only if she is not good-looking.A man will forget God when his wife is beautiful and awoman too, will forget God when her husband is good looking.That is why it is good if everything is average. Our elders usedto say, ‘Keep your farm barren and have an ugly wife.’ Why didthey say that? If your wife is beautiful, some man will have badintentions towards her and that is why it is better to have an uglywife. They were saying this from a different perspective, notfrom a religious perspective. ‘We’ are telling you from thereligious perspective. You do not have to worry about anythingif your wife is ugly. If she goes out, no one will have badintentions towards her. Our elders were very smart, but that isnot what ‘we’ are telling you; it is quite different. If she is ugly,then it will not bother you; you will not be tormented andpreoccupied by mistrust.What a betrayal this isWhat kind of people do you find today? Wherever theysee a ‘hotel’ (woman, sexual outlet), they will ‘dine’ (indulge inlustful fancy or more). Suspicion is the cause of all misery. Bothmen and women ‘dine’ wherever they see a ‘hotel’. A man doesnot think about what his wife is doing. He thinks she is a goodwoman, but he does not realize that she is cheating on him. Mencheat on their wives and the wives cheat on their husbands.Women however will win because men do not have as muchkapat (deceit). That is why women easily deceive men.This worldly life was worth enjoying when there wassincerity and morality in it. Nowadays there is tremendousbetrayal. If ‘we’ were to tell men about their wives, they wouldnot even go to them. ‘We’ know everything about everybodybut ‘we’ would not do anything about it. Men are not angelseither, but a woman is a factory of sheer deceit. A warehouseof deceit is not to be found anywhere except in a woman.How can there be moha (attachment due toillusion) towards such betrayal?The toilets that we have, are they used by many or justone person?Questioner: Everyone uses them.Dadashri: So a place everyone goes to is called a toilet.A place where many people go is called a toilet. A relationshipof fidelity to one man and one woman is a conduct of virtue. Tillthen a woman’s conduct is considered virtuous otherwise it isconsidered a toilet. How many people use the toilet in yourhome?Questioner: Everyone.Dadashri: It is not used by just one person is it? Sowhether two people use it or everyone else does, then it is atoilet.People will ‘dine’ when they come across a ‘hotel’.Hey! They may even wine and dine! So get rid of anysuspicion. With suspicion, you will lose the moksha that is inthe palm of your hands. Therefore, you have to understand justthis much that you are married and that she is your tenant! Thatis all you have to keep in your mind. Then whomever she goesout with, you should not harbor any suspicion. Your concernis only with your needs, is it not? When you need to use thetoilet; go use it. That which cannot be refrained from visiting,is called a toilet. That is why the Gnanis have said that theworldly life is a betrayal.Questioner: Why does it not appear as a betrayal?Dadashri: Because of moha (illusionary attachment).And there has never been anyone to tell you so either. The trainwill stop only when someone waves a red flag, otherwise it willcontinue and become derailed.Aptavani-98788Aptavani-9Solution for situations of extreme suspicionThis world exists because of suspicions. The very tree thatneeds to dry out is the tree people ‘water’ with suspicions andtherefore it thrives even more. Therefore, it is not worth beingsuspicious in this world.Do you now get suspicious about anything in this world?How would you feel if from a distance you see your wife sittingon a bench with some other man?Questioner: Now nothing will happen. Initially I wouldbe affected but then it would be fine. Then I would understandthat it is vyavasthit and that it has to do with past karmic ties(roonanubandha).Dadashri: How shrewd you are! What a tremendouscalculation to clear out your karmic account. And you will notbecome suspicious will you?Questioner: No Dada.Dadashri: And these people start getting suspicious evenwhen the wife comes home late. Suspicion is not worth gettinginto. Nothing is going to happen outside of your karmic account.If your wife comes home late, explain things to her and reasonwith her but do not become suspicious. Suspicion actually feedsthe problem. Yes, you have to caution her, but do not besuspicious. Those who become suspicious miss moksha.So if you want liberation, if you want to go to moksha, donot become suspicious. Just because you see your wife withanother man’s arm around her, does that mean you have to drinkpoison?Questioner: No, why should I do that?Dadashri: Then what should you do?Questioner: Act up a little in a dramatic manner. Later,make her understand. If she still continues to do it, then it isvyavasthit.Dadashri: Yes, that is right. Now you will not have anysuspicions about your wife or anyone else in your home, willyou? These are all ‘files’ and there is nothing to becomesuspicious about; is anything worth being suspicious about?Whatever is the karmic account, whatever the karmic connection,the ‘files’ will wander accordingly and your goal is to go tomoksha.That is a dangerous diseaseWhen doubt (vahem) enters in these matters, it will giveyou a lot of happiness, will it not?Questioner: It gnaws away on the inside, like big ants!Dadashri: Yes, all the waking hours it will eat you alive.It is like the disease of tuberculosis! In fact TB is better; itremains active only for a certain time. So suspicion is like theinfection of TB The one in whom suspicion arises, is in the samecondition as the one who comes in contact with TB andbecomes infected with it. Therefore suspicion does not help inany way. It only causes harm. It should be uprooted the momentit starts; otherwise it will grow into a tree!Effects of suspicionsWhat does suspicion mean? It is like putting a pound ofsalt in the milk pudding that is prepared for a large gathering.What happens if we do that? The milk will turn rancid. Peopledo not realize the liability of doing this. ‘We’ stay far away fromsuspicion. ‘We’ do have thoughts, ‘we’ have a mind so thoughtsare inevitable, but ‘we’ do not have any suspicions. If ever ‘we’were to look at someone with a suspicious eye, his mind willbecome estranged from ‘us’ the next day; the next day he willbegin to feel different about ‘us’.Therefore, do not have suspicions about anyone oranything. You have to be alert (jagrut) but not suspicioustowards the other people. Suspicions will destroy you. WhateverAptavani-98788Aptavani-9Solution for situations of extreme suspicionThis world exists because of suspicions. The very tree thatneeds to dry out is the tree people ‘water’ with suspicions andtherefore it thrives even more. Therefore, it is not worth beingsuspicious in this world.Do you now get suspicious about anything in this world?How would you feel if from a distance you see your wife sittingon a bench with some other man?Questioner: Now nothing will happen. Initially I wouldbe affected but then it would be fine. Then I would understandthat it is vyavasthit and that it has to do with past karmic ties(roonanubandha).Dadashri: How shrewd you are! What a tremendouscalculation to clear out your karmic account. And you will notbecome suspicious will you?Questioner: No Dada.Dadashri: And these people start getting suspicious evenwhen the wife comes home late. Suspicion is not worth gettinginto. Nothing is going to happen outside of your karmic account.If your wife comes home late, explain things to her and reasonwith her but do not become suspicious. Suspicion actually feedsthe problem. Yes, you have to caution her, but do not besuspicious. Those who become suspicious miss moksha.So if you want liberation, if you want to go to moksha, donot become suspicious. Just because you see your wife withanother man’s arm around her, does that mean you have to drinkpoison?Questioner: No, why should I do that?Dadashri: Then what should you do?Questioner: Act up a little in a dramatic manner. Later,make her understand. If she still continues to do it, then it isvyavasthit.Dadashri: Yes, that is right. Now you will not have anysuspicions about your wife or anyone else in your home, willyou? These are all ‘files’ and there is nothing to becomesuspicious about; is anything worth being suspicious about?Whatever is the karmic account, whatever the karmic connection,the ‘files’ will wander accordingly and your goal is to go tomoksha.That is a dangerous diseaseWhen doubt (vahem) enters in these matters, it will giveyou a lot of happiness, will it not?Questioner: It gnaws away on the inside, like big ants!Dadashri: Yes, all the waking hours it will eat you alive.It is like the disease of tuberculosis! In fact TB is better; itremains active only for a certain time. So suspicion is like theinfection of TB The one in whom suspicion arises, is in the samecondition as the one who comes in contact with TB andbecomes infected with it. Therefore suspicion does not help inany way. It only causes harm. It should be uprooted the momentit starts; otherwise it will grow into a tree!Effects of suspicionsWhat does suspicion mean? It is like putting a pound ofsalt in the milk pudding that is prepared for a large gathering.What happens if we do that? The milk will turn rancid. Peopledo not realize the liability of doing this. ‘We’ stay far away fromsuspicion. ‘We’ do have thoughts, ‘we’ have a mind so thoughtsare inevitable, but ‘we’ do not have any suspicions. If ever ‘we’were to look at someone with a suspicious eye, his mind willbecome estranged from ‘us’ the next day; the next day he willbegin to feel different about ‘us’.Therefore, do not have suspicions about anyone oranything. You have to be alert (jagrut) but not suspicioustowards the other people. Suspicions will destroy you. WhateverAptavani-98990Aptavani-9is going to happen to the other person, will happen but suspicionwill destroy you in the process. Suspicion will not leave a personuntil it destroys him. Do you think suspicion is healthy? Withsuspicion, a person lives like a corpse.Therefore, it is best not to be suspicious about anything;it should be removed from its roots. Suspicion should also beremoved from worldly interactions. Avoid any interaction thatleads to the possibility of suspicion. Suspicion does not help; itdestroys a person. Certain words only cause harm. This wordrisavu (being upset and non-communicative) is one such word.If there is benefit and a loss, it is acceptable but there is onlyharm in these words. It is better to get rid of them.Intellect ruins the worldly lifeQuestioner: Why does a man with lot of buddhi(intellect) have more suspicion?Dadashri: He can see all the phases through his intellect.He can see, ‘it must be this way, this is how he must have puthis arm around her etc.’ If some man were to put his arm aroundhis wife, that would give rise to suspicions of all kind and all thephases (paryaya) of, ‘what must be going on?’ And that chainof phases initiated by the intellect will continue, whereas anabuddha person i.e. a person without excess buddhi (intellect)will not be concerned with it much. Actually, such a person isnot truly abuddha i.e. he is not truly without intellect. The Gnanihas gone beyond the intellect; he has enough intellect to run hisdaily life. He does not have any other unnecessary intellectwith its other complications. Something will happen within andthen it will stop. He will use whatever intellect is necessary andthen stop.Questioner: So are you talking about those who lackworldly intelligence; those whose intellect has not developedyet?Dadashri: No there are very few such people; peoplelike the laborers and such people.Questioner: But do people not attain intellect first andthen attain the state of abuddha (the state of being withoutexcess intellect)?Dadashri: That is a different thing altogether. That is aparmatma state – the state of the supreme Soul. After attainingintellect, when one becomes abuddha, that is the state ofparmatma (the state of the absolute Self).But this worldly life becomes very difficult for a personwith intellect. If a man with excess intellect has five daughters,when the daughters grow up and start going out, he will start torecall all the phases. He can understand everything with hisintellect. He can visualize everything and then he becomes verytroubled and entangled. Nevertheless, he has no choice but sendhis daughters off to college and yet he has to see all the phaseshis intellect shows him. Whether something happens or not Godonly knows but he dies of suspicions.He has no knowledge of events that are actually takingplaces and so he has no suspicions about them but he hasendless suspicions where there is nothing going on. He isscorched by endless suspicions and he becomes fearful. So, themoment suspicion arises in a person, he is doomed.Suspicion, continued suspicion anddestructive suspicionQuestioner: Please explain shanka (suspicion), aashanka(repeated suspicion), and kushanka (destructive suspicion)?Dadashri: A father with intellect has a grown updaughter. He does not have a lot of attachment towards her, sohe will automatically understand that he has to keep a suspiciouseye (shanka) on his daughter. He will have to keep a careful eyeon her. A man with awareness will always be alert. One canAptavani-98990Aptavani-9is going to happen to the other person, will happen but suspicionwill destroy you in the process. Suspicion will not leave a personuntil it destroys him. Do you think suspicion is healthy? Withsuspicion, a person lives like a corpse.Therefore, it is best not to be suspicious about anything;it should be removed from its roots. Suspicion should also beremoved from worldly interactions. Avoid any interaction thatleads to the possibility of suspicion. Suspicion does not help; itdestroys a person. Certain words only cause harm. This wordrisavu (being upset and non-communicative) is one such word.If there is benefit and a loss, it is acceptable but there is onlyharm in these words. It is better to get rid of them.Intellect ruins the worldly lifeQuestioner: Why does a man with lot of buddhi(intellect) have more suspicion?Dadashri: He can see all the phases through his intellect.He can see, ‘it must be this way, this is how he must have puthis arm around her etc.’ If some man were to put his arm aroundhis wife, that would give rise to suspicions of all kind and all thephases (paryaya) of, ‘what must be going on?’ And that chainof phases initiated by the intellect will continue, whereas anabuddha person i.e. a person without excess buddhi (intellect)will not be concerned with it much. Actually, such a person isnot truly abuddha i.e. he is not truly without intellect. The Gnanihas gone beyond the intellect; he has enough intellect to run hisdaily life. He does not have any other unnecessary intellectwith its other complications. Something will happen within andthen it will stop. He will use whatever intellect is necessary andthen stop.Questioner: So are you talking about those who lackworldly intelligence; those whose intellect has not developedyet?Dadashri: No there are very few such people; peoplelike the laborers and such people.Questioner: But do people not attain intellect first andthen attain the state of abuddha (the state of being withoutexcess intellect)?Dadashri: That is a different thing altogether. That is aparmatma state – the state of the supreme Soul. After attainingintellect, when one becomes abuddha, that is the state ofparmatma (the state of the absolute Self).But this worldly life becomes very difficult for a personwith intellect. If a man with excess intellect has five daughters,when the daughters grow up and start going out, he will start torecall all the phases. He can understand everything with hisintellect. He can visualize everything and then he becomes verytroubled and entangled. Nevertheless, he has no choice but sendhis daughters off to college and yet he has to see all the phaseshis intellect shows him. Whether something happens or not Godonly knows but he dies of suspicions.He has no knowledge of events that are actually takingplaces and so he has no suspicions about them but he hasendless suspicions where there is nothing going on. He isscorched by endless suspicions and he becomes fearful. So, themoment suspicion arises in a person, he is doomed.Suspicion, continued suspicion anddestructive suspicionQuestioner: Please explain shanka (suspicion), aashanka(repeated suspicion), and kushanka (destructive suspicion)?Dadashri: A father with intellect has a grown updaughter. He does not have a lot of attachment towards her, sohe will automatically understand that he has to keep a suspiciouseye (shanka) on his daughter. He will have to keep a careful eyeon her. A man with awareness will always be alert. One canAptavani-99192Aptavani-9keep a suspicious eye for one day but does it have to beeveryday? To keep a suspicious eye the next day is aashanka.Should there not be an end to it? Whatever vision of suspicionwas employed, should it not end? All that is aashanka. Nowwhat is kushanka? If she is going out with a boy, the father willhave all kinds of kushanka (negative phases in suspicion) in hismind. Now it may or may not be true. These kinds of suspicionsmake human beings miserable.In this world it is not worth harboring suspicion (shanka);it is worth being aware (jagruti). Suspicion is taking onunnecessary misery upon one’s self. It eats away a person onthe inside, day and night. It is necessary to be aware. What isthe point of fretting unnecessarily when it is not under yourcontrol? Or if you have any understanding in this regard, thenstop the girls from going to college. To this statement, the fatherwill claim, ‘Who would marry her if she is not educated?’ He isnot happy this way and he is not happy the other way. Lookhere you! Take one position and come to a closure. Alternatively,yet another solution is to go around with the daughter day andnight! Go with her to college and sit with her in the class. If theprofessor asks, ‘Why do you accompany your daughter?’ thentell him, ‘Sir, I keep having suspicions about her and so if I staywith her, I will no longer have suspicions.’ People will call hima stupid fool. The daughter herself will say he is a little crazy.Therefore, I am telling you not to be suspicious of yourdaughters. There are people who are not suspicions about theirdaughter. Even if they have seven daughters, there is nothing ofthe sort. They are carefree.They have other kinds of suspicions; ‘My partner isdefinitely taking a few rupees home everyday from the business.’He has this kind of suspicion, it’s because he loves money.Suspicion for one day is called shanka (suspicion) and suspicionthat is done over and over again, is called aashanka.The unawareness of moha (illusionaryattachment)A person may not have suspicions towards his daughtersbecause he has moha (attachment due to illusion; moha orraag) for them. One can never see a mistake or a wrongdoingwhere there is illusion (moha). The whole world takes a beatingdue to this moha. Every parent will say, ‘My daughters aregood girls.’ So that must mean that the current cycle is that ofSatyug (an era of virtue and morality)! Any parent you ask willsay the same thing, so this must be Satyug, don’t you think? Andthen they will say, ‘Other people’s daughters are unchaste.’They even say this.Questioner: And nowadays if one says anything abouthis daughter, he will come down on you.Dadashri: You can never say that. He will come downhard on you and curse you. You can never say anything toanyone. It is good that parents have attachment (raag) towardstheir children. They do not see any faults in their childrenbecause of their attachment and yet they will see faults in otherpeople’s children. It is good that they do not see faults in theirdaughters; it keeps them at peace for the time being, and theywill worry about other things when the time comes.Unconstructive criticismOne man told me, ‘My daughters are very sensible andwise.’ I told him, ‘That is very nice.’ Then he started to criticizeother girls so I told him, ‘Why are you criticizing other girls?Other people will criticize you if you criticize them.’ He told methere was nothing in him that warranted criticism. So I told him,‘I will show you something, but you must remain silent.’ Then Ishowed him his daughter’s books and everything in it. He wasshocked and so I told him, ‘Just keep quiet. Do not criticizeanyone. I knew all this about you and yet why did I not say aword to you? Why do I remain quiet even when you are beingAptavani-99192Aptavani-9keep a suspicious eye for one day but does it have to beeveryday? To keep a suspicious eye the next day is aashanka.Should there not be an end to it? Whatever vision of suspicionwas employed, should it not end? All that is aashanka. Nowwhat is kushanka? If she is going out with a boy, the father willhave all kinds of kushanka (negative phases in suspicion) in hismind. Now it may or may not be true. These kinds of suspicionsmake human beings miserable.In this world it is not worth harboring suspicion (shanka);it is worth being aware (jagruti). Suspicion is taking onunnecessary misery upon one’s self. It eats away a person onthe inside, day and night. It is necessary to be aware. What isthe point of fretting unnecessarily when it is not under yourcontrol? Or if you have any understanding in this regard, thenstop the girls from going to college. To this statement, the fatherwill claim, ‘Who would marry her if she is not educated?’ He isnot happy this way and he is not happy the other way. Lookhere you! Take one position and come to a closure. Alternatively,yet another solution is to go around with the daughter day andnight! Go with her to college and sit with her in the class. If theprofessor asks, ‘Why do you accompany your daughter?’ thentell him, ‘Sir, I keep having suspicions about her and so if I staywith her, I will no longer have suspicions.’ People will call hima stupid fool. The daughter herself will say he is a little crazy.Therefore, I am telling you not to be suspicious of yourdaughters. There are people who are not suspicions about theirdaughter. Even if they have seven daughters, there is nothing ofthe sort. They are carefree.They have other kinds of suspicions; ‘My partner isdefinitely taking a few rupees home everyday from the business.’He has this kind of suspicion, it’s because he loves money.Suspicion for one day is called shanka (suspicion) and suspicionthat is done over and over again, is called aashanka.The unawareness of moha (illusionaryattachment)A person may not have suspicions towards his daughtersbecause he has moha (attachment due to illusion; moha orraag) for them. One can never see a mistake or a wrongdoingwhere there is illusion (moha). The whole world takes a beatingdue to this moha. Every parent will say, ‘My daughters aregood girls.’ So that must mean that the current cycle is that ofSatyug (an era of virtue and morality)! Any parent you ask willsay the same thing, so this must be Satyug, don’t you think? Andthen they will say, ‘Other people’s daughters are unchaste.’They even say this.Questioner: And nowadays if one says anything abouthis daughter, he will come down on you.Dadashri: You can never say that. He will come downhard on you and curse you. You can never say anything toanyone. It is good that parents have attachment (raag) towardstheir children. They do not see any faults in their childrenbecause of their attachment and yet they will see faults in otherpeople’s children. It is good that they do not see faults in theirdaughters; it keeps them at peace for the time being, and theywill worry about other things when the time comes.Unconstructive criticismOne man told me, ‘My daughters are very sensible andwise.’ I told him, ‘That is very nice.’ Then he started to criticizeother girls so I told him, ‘Why are you criticizing other girls?Other people will criticize you if you criticize them.’ He told methere was nothing in him that warranted criticism. So I told him,‘I will show you something, but you must remain silent.’ Then Ishowed him his daughter’s books and everything in it. He wasshocked and so I told him, ‘Just keep quiet. Do not criticizeanyone. I knew all this about you and yet why did I not say aword to you? Why do I remain quiet even when you are beingAptavani-99394Aptavani-9pompous about all this?’ I understood that he got satisfactionby being self-righteous; at least he felt at peace but when hestarted to criticize others, I had to tell him, ‘Do not criticize.’It is wrong to criticize other people’s daughters when you havedaughters of your own. People who do not have daughters oftheir own would not criticize this way but the ones withdaughters criticize a lot. Being a father yourself, are you notashamed of criticizing in this way? If you entertain suchsuspicion, where will it end?Girls today are so naive that they think their fathers willnever read their personal diaries. They keep their personalletters in their schoolbooks. The fathers are naïve too; they trusttheir daughters. But I know everything and realize that the girl ismature and grown up. I would advice him to get his daughtermarried, what else can I say?Beware! Parents of daughtersOne of my close relatives had four daughters. He wasvery aware in worldly matters. He tells me, ‘These girls aregrown up and are going to college but I cannot trust them.’ Itold him, ‘Then go to the college with them and follow them tillthey come home. You can do that for one day but what will youdo the following day? Send your wife?’ He had no understandingof where he should place his trust and where not. You simplyhave to tell your daughter, ‘Dear daughter. Ours is a noble familyand well respected in the community. Please take this intoconsideration as you interact with the world.’ You have tocaution her this way and then whatever happens is correct. Donot have suspicions. How many parents will be suspicious?Those who have worldly awareness due to excessive intellectwill keep having suspicions. The dumb ones will not.Any suspicion that arises should be removed the momentit arises. One becomes suspicious even when his daughter goesout to play. Would he be happy once suspicion arises?Questioner: No, then there is no point in having anysuspicion about her.Dadashri: Yes, that is it. Whatever the reason, oneshould not let suspicion arise. You should be vigilant and awarebut do not become suspicious. The moment you allow suspicionto occur, realize that ‘death’ has come.Questioner: But suspicion arises on its own does it not?Dadashri: Yes, but it is a tremendously dangerousignorance. It causes a lot of pain. When your daughter goes outand someone tells you that she has gone to meet her boyfriend,it will cause you to have suspicion on your daughter. How willyou feel?Questioner: That is it, after that the restlessness continueswithin.Dadashri: Will your restlessness solve the problem onthe outside? Is it going to stop her from going out with herboyfriend? Nothing is going to change and that suspicion will killyou. Therefore, the moment suspicion arises, instantly rememberthat Dada has said ‘no’ to it and that you are to stop it.Nevertheless, you should take the necessary precautions.Do others not have daughters too? And do theirdaughters not go to college also? It is not like the old days whengirls were kept at home, is it? So do you not have to actaccording to the current times? If other girls talk to their boyfriends, then can your daughters not do the same with their boyfriends?It is no fun to see these parents when they becomesuspicious about their daughters because they either have seenor heard something about their daughters. When they come tome asking for help, I tell them to get rid of their suspicions. Youare suspicious because you saw something, what if you had notseen it? Suspicion arose only from what you saw, so why don’tAptavani-99394Aptavani-9pompous about all this?’ I understood that he got satisfactionby being self-righteous; at least he felt at peace but when hestarted to criticize others, I had to tell him, ‘Do not criticize.’It is wrong to criticize other people’s daughters when you havedaughters of your own. People who do not have daughters oftheir own would not criticize this way but the ones withdaughters criticize a lot. Being a father yourself, are you notashamed of criticizing in this way? If you entertain suchsuspicion, where will it end?Girls today are so naive that they think their fathers willnever read their personal diaries. They keep their personalletters in their schoolbooks. The fathers are naïve too; they trusttheir daughters. But I know everything and realize that the girl ismature and grown up. I would advice him to get his daughtermarried, what else can I say?Beware! Parents of daughtersOne of my close relatives had four daughters. He wasvery aware in worldly matters. He tells me, ‘These girls aregrown up and are going to college but I cannot trust them.’ Itold him, ‘Then go to the college with them and follow them tillthey come home. You can do that for one day but what will youdo the following day? Send your wife?’ He had no understandingof where he should place his trust and where not. You simplyhave to tell your daughter, ‘Dear daughter. Ours is a noble familyand well respected in the community. Please take this intoconsideration as you interact with the world.’ You have tocaution her this way and then whatever happens is correct. Donot have suspicions. How many parents will be suspicious?Those who have worldly awareness due to excessive intellectwill keep having suspicions. The dumb ones will not.Any suspicion that arises should be removed the momentit arises. One becomes suspicious even when his daughter goesout to play. Would he be happy once suspicion arises?Questioner: No, then there is no point in having anysuspicion about her.Dadashri: Yes, that is it. Whatever the reason, oneshould not let suspicion arise. You should be vigilant and awarebut do not become suspicious. The moment you allow suspicionto occur, realize that ‘death’ has come.Questioner: But suspicion arises on its own does it not?Dadashri: Yes, but it is a tremendously dangerousignorance. It causes a lot of pain. When your daughter goes outand someone tells you that she has gone to meet her boyfriend,it will cause you to have suspicion on your daughter. How willyou feel?Questioner: That is it, after that the restlessness continueswithin.Dadashri: Will your restlessness solve the problem onthe outside? Is it going to stop her from going out with herboyfriend? Nothing is going to change and that suspicion will killyou. Therefore, the moment suspicion arises, instantly rememberthat Dada has said ‘no’ to it and that you are to stop it.Nevertheless, you should take the necessary precautions.Do others not have daughters too? And do theirdaughters not go to college also? It is not like the old days whengirls were kept at home, is it? So do you not have to actaccording to the current times? If other girls talk to their boyfriends, then can your daughters not do the same with their boyfriends?It is no fun to see these parents when they becomesuspicious about their daughters because they either have seenor heard something about their daughters. When they come tome asking for help, I tell them to get rid of their suspicions. Youare suspicious because you saw something, what if you had notseen it? Suspicion arose only from what you saw, so why don’tAptavani-99596Aptavani-9you correct it thus: just behave as if that you never saw anythingin the first place? It is all already there ‘underground’, but thefather worries, ‘What if this were to happen?’ He becomespossessed with ghosts of suspicion, which will not leave himalone, the whole nightlong. These ghosts will not let him go formonths on end. Therefore, it is wrong to have suspicions.Suspicion? No, take care of herA father of four girls had come to me for advice. He said,‘I have four daughters going to college and it is natural to beconcerned. What should I do about it? What should I do aboutthese four girls? What if they get on the wrong path?’ I told him,‘But they will not improve by you being suspicious.’ Do not besuspicious. When they come home, sit down with them and talkto them properly, be friends with them. Talk to them about theirlikes and dislikes. Do not be preoccupied with your job andmaking money. Take care of your daughters needs first. Theylove it when you eat, drink and talk with them. The love youhave for them is superficial and that is why they seek loveelsewhere.Then I asked him if he would throw his daughter out ofthe house if she fell in love with someone and stayed out late atnight? He tells me, ‘Yes, I will tell her to get out. I would notlet her come into the house.’ I told him, ‘Do not ever do that.Where would she go in the middle of the night? Where wouldshe take shelter? You should tell her, ‘Come. Sit. Go to sleep’There is a rule that you have already suffered damage but nowjust make sure that you do not suffer double the damage. Thegirl had already done harm by her actions but it would be adisaster if you were to throw her out of the house. When youhave incurred a loss of a hundred thousand dollars, would youdo something to reduce the loss or increase it? Should there notbe a solution for the loss you are incurring? So do not incur anymore loss. Let her go to sleep and the next day explain to herthat she should come home on time and that it makes you veryanxious when she comes home late; it makes you so anxious thatyou may get a heart attack. You have to reason with her oneway or another.’ He then realized the consequences of whatwould happen to her if he were to kick her out. Other peoplewould take advantage of her and that would be the end. If youthrow her out at one o’clock in the morning, how helpless wouldthat poor girl become? Should you not think about what peopleof this time cycle are like?So do not be suspicious even if your daughter ever comeshome late. How much benefit is there in getting rid of yoursuspicions? What is the point of worrying unnecessarily?Nothing is going to change in one lifetime. Do not cause yoursons and daughters any unnecessary misery. You have to tellthem, ‘Daughter, you should not come late when you go out.Our family is very honorable so it does not suit us. So do notcome home late.’ Talk to them and reason with them this way.But you cannot afford to worry about who she may be going outwith and what she must be doing. And when she comes homeat midnight you still have to tell her, ‘Daughter, this should nothappen again.’ You do not know where she will go if you throwher out. Do you understand that? Where is the gain in it if youdo? Is it not better to have the least amount of harm? That iswhy I have told everyone to let their daughters come into thehouse even if they come home late; do not throw them out.Strong headed people will throw them out, will they not? Howstrange is the current era! How anxiety filled this era is? This isthe Kaliyug, so sit down with them and explain things to them.Free from kashayas on the path of mokshaSo what ‘we’ tell you to do is settle your files withequanimity. These are all files. They are not your daughter orwife. These daughters and wives are all ‘files’. Settle matterswith all your files with equanimity. When you become paralyzed,no one will stand by you. On the contrary, they will get irritatedif it goes on for long time. Even the person with paralysis willAptavani-99596Aptavani-9you correct it thus: just behave as if that you never saw anythingin the first place? It is all already there ‘underground’, but thefather worries, ‘What if this were to happen?’ He becomespossessed with ghosts of suspicion, which will not leave himalone, the whole nightlong. These ghosts will not let him go formonths on end. Therefore, it is wrong to have suspicions.Suspicion? No, take care of herA father of four girls had come to me for advice. He said,‘I have four daughters going to college and it is natural to beconcerned. What should I do about it? What should I do aboutthese four girls? What if they get on the wrong path?’ I told him,‘But they will not improve by you being suspicious.’ Do not besuspicious. When they come home, sit down with them and talkto them properly, be friends with them. Talk to them about theirlikes and dislikes. Do not be preoccupied with your job andmaking money. Take care of your daughters needs first. Theylove it when you eat, drink and talk with them. The love youhave for them is superficial and that is why they seek loveelsewhere.Then I asked him if he would throw his daughter out ofthe house if she fell in love with someone and stayed out late atnight? He tells me, ‘Yes, I will tell her to get out. I would notlet her come into the house.’ I told him, ‘Do not ever do that.Where would she go in the middle of the night? Where wouldshe take shelter? You should tell her, ‘Come. Sit. Go to sleep’There is a rule that you have already suffered damage but nowjust make sure that you do not suffer double the damage. Thegirl had already done harm by her actions but it would be adisaster if you were to throw her out of the house. When youhave incurred a loss of a hundred thousand dollars, would youdo something to reduce the loss or increase it? Should there notbe a solution for the loss you are incurring? So do not incur anymore loss. Let her go to sleep and the next day explain to herthat she should come home on time and that it makes you veryanxious when she comes home late; it makes you so anxious thatyou may get a heart attack. You have to reason with her oneway or another.’ He then realized the consequences of whatwould happen to her if he were to kick her out. Other peoplewould take advantage of her and that would be the end. If youthrow her out at one o’clock in the morning, how helpless wouldthat poor girl become? Should you not think about what peopleof this time cycle are like?So do not be suspicious even if your daughter ever comeshome late. How much benefit is there in getting rid of yoursuspicions? What is the point of worrying unnecessarily?Nothing is going to change in one lifetime. Do not cause yoursons and daughters any unnecessary misery. You have to tellthem, ‘Daughter, you should not come late when you go out.Our family is very honorable so it does not suit us. So do notcome home late.’ Talk to them and reason with them this way.But you cannot afford to worry about who she may be going outwith and what she must be doing. And when she comes homeat midnight you still have to tell her, ‘Daughter, this should nothappen again.’ You do not know where she will go if you throwher out. Do you understand that? Where is the gain in it if youdo? Is it not better to have the least amount of harm? That iswhy I have told everyone to let their daughters come into thehouse even if they come home late; do not throw them out.Strong headed people will throw them out, will they not? Howstrange is the current era! How anxiety filled this era is? This isthe Kaliyug, so sit down with them and explain things to them.Free from kashayas on the path of mokshaSo what ‘we’ tell you to do is settle your files withequanimity. These are all files. They are not your daughter orwife. These daughters and wives are all ‘files’. Settle matterswith all your files with equanimity. When you become paralyzed,no one will stand by you. On the contrary, they will get irritatedif it goes on for long time. Even the person with paralysis willAptavani-99798Aptavani-9understand that everyone is irritated, but what can he do? Thepath that Dada has shown you is straight; it is ekavtari i.e. youcan achieve liberation within one more lifetime. So remain insaiyam (without kashayas: anger-pride-deceit and greed) andsettle your files with equanimity. Whether she is your daughter,your wife or anyone else, deal with her, with equanimity. No oneis anyone’s daughter or wife, in this world. Everything isdependant upon the fruition of one’s own karma. However, wecannot make this statement to those who do not have Gnan. Ifyou tell them this, they will fight with you.Now when does your moksha become ruined? When youbecome asaiyami (with kashayas: anger-pride-deceit-greed).Our Gnan is not such that it will cause asaiyam. Gnan isconstant saiyam. Externally induced troubles (upadhi) arise themoment suspicion arises.Therefore, to have suspicion or to become laden withsuspicion (shankashil) is a grave liability. I have seen a father ofnine girls be free of suspicions, even in the worst of Kaliyug.And all the girls got married. How long would he have lived, hadhe lived in suspicion? So never become suspicious because youwill be the greatest loser.Questioner: What kind of a loss does one incur withsuspicion? Please clarify this.Dadashri: It is nothing but misery. Direct living misery!Is that a minor loss? If one goes deeper and becomes evenmore suspicious, it will cause him pain that is comparable todeath.Questioner: It will hurt like being struck with a spear.Dadashri: A spear is better. There is greater pain andmisery in suspicion. A spear just jabs but suspicion will kill aperson. Do not be suspicious otherwise it will lead to moreanguish and turmoil.Solution for suspicionsNo man can be free from suspicion. When my motherwas alive, there were moments when I would get off the train atBaroda station, I would have thoughts like, ‘What if mother diedsuddenly today? How am I even going to enter the home?’ Iused to have such suspicions. All kinds of suspicions can arisein a man. But I studied all this from all the angles and concludedthat it all mounted to nothing. This world is not such that oneshould have any suspicions.Questioner: Even I become suspicious when I get aphone call from India, ‘What if something happened to mother?’Dadashri: But suspicion does not help at all. It causesmisery. One never knows when an elderly person may die. Areyou able to save them? If suspicion is going to arise, keep doinga vidhi (special inner spiritual adjustment) to the pure Soul ofthat person, as follows: ‘Dear pure Soul within the (name of theperson concerned), which is separate from his dravya (discharge)karma, bhaav (charge) karma and nokarma (neutral), pleasegrant peace to him.’ Do this vidhi before suspicion arises. Ifsuspicion arises then change it around with this vidhi.Vyavasthit eliminates suspicionThe world is miserable from suspicions. Suspicions cantake a human being to a lower life form. Nothing is to be gainedfrom suspicions. According to the law of vyavasthit, no one candestroy anything so why are you meddling needlessly bybecoming suspicious.Vyavasthit means whatever ‘is’, is and whatever ‘is not’,is not. Whatever ‘is’, is not going to become ‘is not’ and what‘is not’, is not going to become ‘is’. Your meddling is not goingto change anything. Therefore, become suspicious-less. Afterattaining this Gnan, you have become suspicious-free in mattersof the Soul; the awareness that you have attained is verily theSoul and everything else is a discharge of past karmas.Aptavani-99798Aptavani-9understand that everyone is irritated, but what can he do? Thepath that Dada has shown you is straight; it is ekavtari i.e. youcan achieve liberation within one more lifetime. So remain insaiyam (without kashayas: anger-pride-deceit and greed) andsettle your files with equanimity. Whether she is your daughter,your wife or anyone else, deal with her, with equanimity. No oneis anyone’s daughter or wife, in this world. Everything isdependant upon the fruition of one’s own karma. However, wecannot make this statement to those who do not have Gnan. Ifyou tell them this, they will fight with you.Now when does your moksha become ruined? When youbecome asaiyami (with kashayas: anger-pride-deceit-greed).Our Gnan is not such that it will cause asaiyam. Gnan isconstant saiyam. Externally induced troubles (upadhi) arise themoment suspicion arises.Therefore, to have suspicion or to become laden withsuspicion (shankashil) is a grave liability. I have seen a father ofnine girls be free of suspicions, even in the worst of Kaliyug.And all the girls got married. How long would he have lived, hadhe lived in suspicion? So never become suspicious because youwill be the greatest loser.Questioner: What kind of a loss does one incur withsuspicion? Please clarify this.Dadashri: It is nothing but misery. Direct living misery!Is that a minor loss? If one goes deeper and becomes evenmore suspicious, it will cause him pain that is comparable todeath.Questioner: It will hurt like being struck with a spear.Dadashri: A spear is better. There is greater pain andmisery in suspicion. A spear just jabs but suspicion will kill aperson. Do not be suspicious otherwise it will lead to moreanguish and turmoil.Solution for suspicionsNo man can be free from suspicion. When my motherwas alive, there were moments when I would get off the train atBaroda station, I would have thoughts like, ‘What if mother diedsuddenly today? How am I even going to enter the home?’ Iused to have such suspicions. All kinds of suspicions can arisein a man. But I studied all this from all the angles and concludedthat it all mounted to nothing. This world is not such that oneshould have any suspicions.Questioner: Even I become suspicious when I get aphone call from India, ‘What if something happened to mother?’Dadashri: But suspicion does not help at all. It causesmisery. One never knows when an elderly person may die. Areyou able to save them? If suspicion is going to arise, keep doinga vidhi (special inner spiritual adjustment) to the pure Soul ofthat person, as follows: ‘Dear pure Soul within the (name of theperson concerned), which is separate from his dravya (discharge)karma, bhaav (charge) karma and nokarma (neutral), pleasegrant peace to him.’ Do this vidhi before suspicion arises. Ifsuspicion arises then change it around with this vidhi.Vyavasthit eliminates suspicionThe world is miserable from suspicions. Suspicions cantake a human being to a lower life form. Nothing is to be gainedfrom suspicions. According to the law of vyavasthit, no one candestroy anything so why are you meddling needlessly bybecoming suspicious.Vyavasthit means whatever ‘is’, is and whatever ‘is not’,is not. Whatever ‘is’, is not going to become ‘is not’ and what‘is not’, is not going to become ‘is’. Your meddling is not goingto change anything. Therefore, become suspicious-less. Afterattaining this Gnan, you have become suspicious-free in mattersof the Soul; the awareness that you have attained is verily theSoul and everything else is a discharge of past karmas.Aptavani-999100Aptavani-9not. If your finger is going to get hurt, then it will happen if that‘is’ the case and it will not happen if that ‘is not’. Therefore, ifit ‘is not’ meant to happen, then it will not happen and if it does,then we do not have any objections. And even if the worldraises objection, where will it go? You are not going to be ableto change anything by thinking about it. So whatever ‘is’ is andthat which ‘is not’ is not. However, if someone who does nothave this Gnan takes the wrong meaning of this, then he will doa great deal of damage. This information is only for those whohave this Gnan (those who have attained Self-realization).Just as we accept the knowledge of the eternal elementswhich the Lord has said exists, and whatever He said is notthere, we accept it as such, similarly here too, whatever there is;‘is’. Do you worry about what you will do if you do not find abarber? Now if you do not find a barber for two or threemonths, do you have to worry about whether you will find onefor the rest of your life? Is there a need to have suchmultiplications (increase) in this way, by worrying about whatwill happen if your hair keeps growing longer and longer?Therefore, you will not experience any misery if you donot have any suspicions or misgivings. What if you do not haveany suspicions? Push aside any suspicion that does arise; tell thesuspicions, ‘Why do you come here? I am here, so who askedfor your advice? Now I do not take advice from anyone, nolawyer or any one else. I take advice only from Dada; that is all.Whenever I have a problem, I tell Dada about it. I do not wantto give advice to anyone. Let others give it to me.’ And cananything be done outside the laws of vyavasthit? So are younow convinced that no one can do anything outside ofvyavasthit?If you want to go to moksha…So do not ever have suspicions about any one. Do not besuspicious if you come home and see your sister talking to someIf you were to use vyavasthit in this way, it will stop manysuspicions from arising. You cannot say ‘whatever is going tohappen will happen’. If you understand whatever is ‘is’ andwhatever is not ‘is not’; then there will be no suspicions. And ifsuspicion does arise, you can erase it. What is there to besuspicious about when ‘what is’ is, and what ‘is not’ is not?Why fret over whether ‘will it happen or will it not? Will ithappen or will it not? Will my losses come to an end?’ You fool,What ‘is not’, is not. If your loss is going to break, it will andif it is not meant to, then it will not. So why fret about it?Therefore, there is no reason to be suspicious of what is andwhat is not.However, you cannot take the approach of vyavasthit bysaying, ‘don’t worry. Whatever is going to happen, will happen.’You cannot say, ‘Only that which is meant to happen, willhappen.’ That is a one-track viewpoint. That is misuse ofvyavasthit. This mind, buddhi (intellect) etc., is ignorant bynature and as long as there are such inner opponents, Youshould remain alert.Questioner: We worry about the future, ‘this is going tohappen’ or ‘it would be nice if this were to happen’. At suchtimes, can we say, ‘Do not worry, whatever will be in vyavasthit,will happen?’Dadashri: There is no need to say, ‘Whatever is invyavasthit, will happen’, because whatever ‘is’ is, and whatever‘is not’ is not. So there is no need to think about that. What ‘isnot’ is not going to become ‘is’ and what ‘is’, is not going tobecome ‘is not’, so then you don’t have to think about anything.You become suspicion-free in that matter.Besides, the future is under the control of vyavasthit. Is itunder our control?There is no need to say, ‘that it will happen if it is invyavasthit’. But you can say, ‘what ‘is’ is and what is ‘is not’ isAptavani-999100Aptavani-9not. If your finger is going to get hurt, then it will happen if that‘is’ the case and it will not happen if that ‘is not’. Therefore, ifit ‘is not’ meant to happen, then it will not happen and if it does,then we do not have any objections. And even if the worldraises objection, where will it go? You are not going to be ableto change anything by thinking about it. So whatever ‘is’ is andthat which ‘is not’ is not. However, if someone who does nothave this Gnan takes the wrong meaning of this, then he will doa great deal of damage. This information is only for those whohave this Gnan (those who have attained Self-realization).Just as we accept the knowledge of the eternal elementswhich the Lord has said exists, and whatever He said is notthere, we accept it as such, similarly here too, whatever there is;‘is’. Do you worry about what you will do if you do not find abarber? Now if you do not find a barber for two or threemonths, do you have to worry about whether you will find onefor the rest of your life? Is there a need to have suchmultiplications (increase) in this way, by worrying about whatwill happen if your hair keeps growing longer and longer?Therefore, you will not experience any misery if you donot have any suspicions or misgivings. What if you do not haveany suspicions? Push aside any suspicion that does arise; tell thesuspicions, ‘Why do you come here? I am here, so who askedfor your advice? Now I do not take advice from anyone, nolawyer or any one else. I take advice only from Dada; that is all.Whenever I have a problem, I tell Dada about it. I do not wantto give advice to anyone. Let others give it to me.’ And cananything be done outside the laws of vyavasthit? So are younow convinced that no one can do anything outside ofvyavasthit?If you want to go to moksha…So do not ever have suspicions about any one. Do not besuspicious if you come home and see your sister talking to someIf you were to use vyavasthit in this way, it will stop manysuspicions from arising. You cannot say ‘whatever is going tohappen will happen’. If you understand whatever is ‘is’ andwhatever is not ‘is not’; then there will be no suspicions. And ifsuspicion does arise, you can erase it. What is there to besuspicious about when ‘what is’ is, and what ‘is not’ is not?Why fret over whether ‘will it happen or will it not? Will ithappen or will it not? Will my losses come to an end?’ You fool,What ‘is not’, is not. If your loss is going to break, it will andif it is not meant to, then it will not. So why fret about it?Therefore, there is no reason to be suspicious of what is andwhat is not.However, you cannot take the approach of vyavasthit bysaying, ‘don’t worry. Whatever is going to happen, will happen.’You cannot say, ‘Only that which is meant to happen, willhappen.’ That is a one-track viewpoint. That is misuse ofvyavasthit. This mind, buddhi (intellect) etc., is ignorant bynature and as long as there are such inner opponents, Youshould remain alert.Questioner: We worry about the future, ‘this is going tohappen’ or ‘it would be nice if this were to happen’. At suchtimes, can we say, ‘Do not worry, whatever will be in vyavasthit,will happen?’Dadashri: There is no need to say, ‘Whatever is invyavasthit, will happen’, because whatever ‘is’ is, and whatever‘is not’ is not. So there is no need to think about that. What ‘isnot’ is not going to become ‘is’ and what ‘is’, is not going tobecome ‘is not’, so then you don’t have to think about anything.You become suspicion-free in that matter.Besides, the future is under the control of vyavasthit. Is itunder our control?There is no need to say, ‘that it will happen if it is invyavasthit’. But you can say, ‘what ‘is’ is and what is ‘is not’ isAptavani-9101102Aptavani-9man. Suspicion causes the greatest of miseries and will uprootyour entire Gnan and throw it out. Nothing is going to happenoutside of vyavasthit. What is; is and what is not; is not. Insteadyou can ask your sister to serve you your dinner and you canseparate the two in this way but you should never becomesuspicious. Suspicion can only make you miserable. Whatever isin vyavasthit is, and what is not, is not. Do not becomesuspicious.Questioner: But is suspicion not due to the fruition ofkarma?Dadashri: To have suspicions is not considered fruitionof karma. Suspicion is spoiling your inner intent; it means youare meddling and therefore it will give you misery. Never haveany suspicions.If someone is talking to your sister do not get suspiciousbecause now you want to go to moksha, and besides nothing isgoing to happen outside of vyavasthit in one lifetime. It willhappen regardless of whether you have awareness of Gnan ornot. No change is going to occur whether you are a Gnani oragnani. So there is no reason to have suspicions.Questioner: Because nothing is going to change.Dadashri: Yes, nothing is going to change and there isgreat harm in suspicion.Questioner: But there is no charging after this Gnan, isthere?Dadashri: There is no charging, but there is ‘charging’ ifyou harbor such suspicions for a very prolonged time to theextent that you become shankashil (obsessed) with suspicion.In this state your ego has arisen to the level of a worldly being,Chandulal. You cannot have suspicions if you want moksha. Stillin the absence of Self-realization, that is exactly what happens.Whereas here, you get the benefit of Gnan, you get the benefitof freedom and only that which is destined to occur, will occur.Therefore, there is no reason to have suspicions. You have tostop being suspicious. Dada has said ‘no’ to suspicions.It is your own weaknessQuestioner: Suspicions first hurts one’s own self, does itnot?Dadashri: Yes, suspicion destroys only the person whois being suspicious. The other person has nothing to do with it.What harm comes to the other person? He does not care, hewill tell you, ‘whatever is going to happen to me will happen,why you are being suspicious?’Now if you have suspicions, it is your weakness. It isdifferent if there is no weakness but there is always weakness inhumans, it is naturally present, no matter how little. When thatweakness goes away, you become God. There is only one thing;he, whose weaknesses go away, is God.Dada listens to suspicions through the magicof GnanIf a person becomes suspicious of ‘us’, is he likely to bespared? It will haunt him even in sleep. Because of the puritywithin ‘us’, ‘we’ can make others pure (shuddha) too. ‘We’ donot have any problems even if someone has suspicions about‘us’. Suspicion is his own weakness.That is why Kaviraj has written:‘Even though we are full of suspicions from amisguided intellect, He (the Gnani) observed with theprofound magic of Gnan, And yet never punished us.And He did not differentiate between Him and us.’What is Kaviraj trying to say? When does suspicion aboutDada arise? It arises when there is wrong intellect.This happened one time. ‘We’ had placed our hand onAptavani-9101102Aptavani-9man. Suspicion causes the greatest of miseries and will uprootyour entire Gnan and throw it out. Nothing is going to happenoutside of vyavasthit. What is; is and what is not; is not. Insteadyou can ask your sister to serve you your dinner and you canseparate the two in this way but you should never becomesuspicious. Suspicion can only make you miserable. Whatever isin vyavasthit is, and what is not, is not. Do not becomesuspicious.Questioner: But is suspicion not due to the fruition ofkarma?Dadashri: To have suspicions is not considered fruitionof karma. Suspicion is spoiling your inner intent; it means youare meddling and therefore it will give you misery. Never haveany suspicions.If someone is talking to your sister do not get suspiciousbecause now you want to go to moksha, and besides nothing isgoing to happen outside of vyavasthit in one lifetime. It willhappen regardless of whether you have awareness of Gnan ornot. No change is going to occur whether you are a Gnani oragnani. So there is no reason to have suspicions.Questioner: Because nothing is going to change.Dadashri: Yes, nothing is going to change and there isgreat harm in suspicion.Questioner: But there is no charging after this Gnan, isthere?Dadashri: There is no charging, but there is ‘charging’ ifyou harbor such suspicions for a very prolonged time to theextent that you become shankashil (obsessed) with suspicion.In this state your ego has arisen to the level of a worldly being,Chandulal. You cannot have suspicions if you want moksha. Stillin the absence of Self-realization, that is exactly what happens.Whereas here, you get the benefit of Gnan, you get the benefitof freedom and only that which is destined to occur, will occur.Therefore, there is no reason to have suspicions. You have tostop being suspicious. Dada has said ‘no’ to suspicions.It is your own weaknessQuestioner: Suspicions first hurts one’s own self, does itnot?Dadashri: Yes, suspicion destroys only the person whois being suspicious. The other person has nothing to do with it.What harm comes to the other person? He does not care, hewill tell you, ‘whatever is going to happen to me will happen,why you are being suspicious?’Now if you have suspicions, it is your weakness. It isdifferent if there is no weakness but there is always weakness inhumans, it is naturally present, no matter how little. When thatweakness goes away, you become God. There is only one thing;he, whose weaknesses go away, is God.Dada listens to suspicions through the magicof GnanIf a person becomes suspicious of ‘us’, is he likely to bespared? It will haunt him even in sleep. Because of the puritywithin ‘us’, ‘we’ can make others pure (shuddha) too. ‘We’ donot have any problems even if someone has suspicions about‘us’. Suspicion is his own weakness.That is why Kaviraj has written:‘Even though we are full of suspicions from amisguided intellect, He (the Gnani) observed with theprofound magic of Gnan, And yet never punished us.And He did not differentiate between Him and us.’What is Kaviraj trying to say? When does suspicion aboutDada arise? It arises when there is wrong intellect.This happened one time. ‘We’ had placed our hand onAptavani-9103104Aptavani-9one lady’s head just like ‘we’ do on the men. Her husbandbecame suspicious. Then ‘we’ may have unknowingly placedthe hand on her shoulder. He became suspicious again. Thesuspicion of: ‘Dada’s intentions have turned bad’ started to playon his mind. ‘We’ understood that this poor man had suspicionsin his mind, what can anyone do? We knew he must besuffering.So he wrote me a letter saying, ‘Dadaji, I am hurting inthis way so I would appreciate it if you do not do this anymore.You being a Gnani cannot do this.’ Later when that man wouldmeet ‘us’, he would look at ‘us’ and realize that ‘Dada does notseem to be affected’. Then he met ‘us’ again a few days later.‘We’ greeted him with ‘Jai Sat Chit Anand’ as if nothing hadhappened. This happened six or seven times and when he didnot see any effect on ‘us’ he got tired. He became veryconfused from within, ‘what is all this about? I wrote him a letter.He received it and read it and yet I cannot see an effect on himat all.’You silly man! Only the guilty one will be affected. Howcan there be an effect on ‘us’ when ‘we’ are not guilty? Nomatter how many letters you write or do whatever you can, ‘we’have no problem. ‘We’ do not have an answer for the letter.‘We’ have vitaragata - ‘we’ are detached. It is you who believesotherwise. Then later he tells me, ‘Did anything happen to you?’‘We’ told him, ‘What can happen to ‘us’? You have thesuspicion but ‘we’ are not involved in it and so ‘we’ do not havea problem.’That is why Kavi wrote ‘profound Gnan’. Other peoplewould be affected if someone were to write them such a letter.Questioner: Yes, any other person would be shaken up.Dadashri: Then what would become of that disciple?Whereas this incident did not put a stain on his wife or me. Thetime passed without a dent on anyone. The moment of suspicionwill pass one day, will it not? Does it ever remain forever?Has Kavi not written a powerful sentence about whatsuspicion is? This suspicion is of a misguided intellect. And I ama Gnani Purush and yet that man became suspicious of even theGnani? Here the Gnani Purush makes you nihshank (free fromall suspicion. The Gnani makes everyone nihshank through theknowledge of ‘my real Self is the Soul’), and still you havesuspicions about Him? But this is how the world is, what willone not say? I would listen to such suspicions with the ‘magic’of Gnan, and then I regard everything with vitaragata.No separation between him and us, evenwhen reprimandingThen what does Kavi go on to say?“Even then He did not punish us by keeping a separationof ‘me’ and ‘you’.”Yes I have never punished anyone and I have nevermaintained a separation of ‘you’ and ‘I’, or ‘you are like this,why do you do this, why do you become suspicious?’ There isnothing of the sort. I know that this is the way things always areand that he simply has a misunderstanding.In our satsangs, there has never been a separation of‘You’ and ‘I’. So far, over all these years, this separation(bheda) has never taken place. Man naturally makes a mistakebecause he is full of mistakes and so what can the poor man do?Yet, I have never said, ‘You are like this.’ When we say ‘youand I’, we create divisions. That is the end of it! And here thereis complete oneness (abhedta). Do you not feel this oneness?I do not have such a sense of separation. Otherwise, suspicionwill create differences and divisions. And suspicion over thesematters is a very grave mistake. Therefore, this statement is verysignificant. With the Gnani, there is no, ‘Why are you like this?’or ‘Why did you do such a thing?’ or ‘You’ and ‘me’; there isAptavani-9103104Aptavani-9one lady’s head just like ‘we’ do on the men. Her husbandbecame suspicious. Then ‘we’ may have unknowingly placedthe hand on her shoulder. He became suspicious again. Thesuspicion of: ‘Dada’s intentions have turned bad’ started to playon his mind. ‘We’ understood that this poor man had suspicionsin his mind, what can anyone do? We knew he must besuffering.So he wrote me a letter saying, ‘Dadaji, I am hurting inthis way so I would appreciate it if you do not do this anymore.You being a Gnani cannot do this.’ Later when that man wouldmeet ‘us’, he would look at ‘us’ and realize that ‘Dada does notseem to be affected’. Then he met ‘us’ again a few days later.‘We’ greeted him with ‘Jai Sat Chit Anand’ as if nothing hadhappened. This happened six or seven times and when he didnot see any effect on ‘us’ he got tired. He became veryconfused from within, ‘what is all this about? I wrote him a letter.He received it and read it and yet I cannot see an effect on himat all.’You silly man! Only the guilty one will be affected. Howcan there be an effect on ‘us’ when ‘we’ are not guilty? Nomatter how many letters you write or do whatever you can, ‘we’have no problem. ‘We’ do not have an answer for the letter.‘We’ have vitaragata - ‘we’ are detached. It is you who believesotherwise. Then later he tells me, ‘Did anything happen to you?’‘We’ told him, ‘What can happen to ‘us’? You have thesuspicion but ‘we’ are not involved in it and so ‘we’ do not havea problem.’That is why Kavi wrote ‘profound Gnan’. Other peoplewould be affected if someone were to write them such a letter.Questioner: Yes, any other person would be shaken up.Dadashri: Then what would become of that disciple?Whereas this incident did not put a stain on his wife or me. Thetime passed without a dent on anyone. The moment of suspicionwill pass one day, will it not? Does it ever remain forever?Has Kavi not written a powerful sentence about whatsuspicion is? This suspicion is of a misguided intellect. And I ama Gnani Purush and yet that man became suspicious of even theGnani? Here the Gnani Purush makes you nihshank (free fromall suspicion. The Gnani makes everyone nihshank through theknowledge of ‘my real Self is the Soul’), and still you havesuspicions about Him? But this is how the world is, what willone not say? I would listen to such suspicions with the ‘magic’of Gnan, and then I regard everything with vitaragata.No separation between him and us, evenwhen reprimandingThen what does Kavi go on to say?“Even then He did not punish us by keeping a separationof ‘me’ and ‘you’.”Yes I have never punished anyone and I have nevermaintained a separation of ‘you’ and ‘I’, or ‘you are like this,why do you do this, why do you become suspicious?’ There isnothing of the sort. I know that this is the way things always areand that he simply has a misunderstanding.In our satsangs, there has never been a separation of‘You’ and ‘I’. So far, over all these years, this separation(bheda) has never taken place. Man naturally makes a mistakebecause he is full of mistakes and so what can the poor man do?Yet, I have never said, ‘You are like this.’ When we say ‘youand I’, we create divisions. That is the end of it! And here thereis complete oneness (abhedta). Do you not feel this oneness?I do not have such a sense of separation. Otherwise, suspicionwill create differences and divisions. And suspicion over thesematters is a very grave mistake. Therefore, this statement is verysignificant. With the Gnani, there is no, ‘Why are you like this?’or ‘Why did you do such a thing?’ or ‘You’ and ‘me’; there isAptavani-9105106Aptavani-9no separation like this here. Amongst fifty thousand peoplewords such as ‘you’ and ‘I’, have never been used by ‘us’.Questioner: But do we not see differences of ‘you’ and‘I’ elsewhere in other religious gatherings?Dadashri: That is all there is! What else can there be? Aslong as there exist the differences of ‘you’ and ‘I’, there is thepresence of jivaatma (mortal state, non-Self-realized state).When such differences go away one becomes parmatma – theabsolute Self. Parmatma, what else can there be? But if onedoes not wish to become parmatma, he will keep thedifferences of ‘you’ and ‘I’.Even when a person may have had suspicion about ‘us’through the wrong intellect, ‘we’ have never made the distinctionof ‘you’ and ‘I’. Everywhere in the world, if this were the case,they will reprimand you to no end; ‘You are worthless!’ ‘Youare like this!’ ‘You are like that!’ It is like this everywhere,except here. This path is a path of exception in every way.Everywhere else a distinction between ‘you’ and ‘I’ are made.Questioner: Whenever we become suspicious aboutyou, you are aware of that fact and yet why do you not keepany separation (bheda) between us?Dadashri: ‘We’ have the knowledge of: ‘This is a radishand it has a certain distinct odor’ or ‘this is an onion and it hasa specific odor’. Don’t ‘we’ understand that? So then is it notwrong to scold these ‘vegetables’ when they smell? An onion isan onion, what is there to scold about it? A radish smells as itis in its nature. If there is an onion over there, you will be ableto smell it sitting here; that is the nature of the onion. ‘We’ willknow such is its nature (swabhav).If ‘we’ were to do anything wrong, then he (the one whohas suspicions about Dada) will no longer have our grace andthat will hurt him. ‘We’ will harm the very person ‘we’ have setout to help. It is always ‘our’ deepest intent of ‘our’ life to neverhurt anything, even if it interferes with ‘our’ plans. If ‘we’ planta tree and later in planning for a road, that tree becomes anobstruction, even then ‘we’ will not cut it down. We have nochoice but turn the direction of the road. ‘We’ will never uproota tree that ‘we’ have planted, nurtured and watered. ‘We’ justhave to circumvent that situation. All ‘we’ have to do is change‘our’ plans.This has been ‘our’ practice from the very beginning;anything sown with ‘our’ own hands will never be removed bythe same hands. ‘We’ meet all kinds of human beings, do ‘we’not?One has endless suspicions. The world is such that thereis suspicion every step of the way. A man becomes suspiciouseven if you accidentally put your hand on his wife. This will leadto endless quarrels at home even if the poor lady is innocent.Now how can you deal with such people? Therefore, shouldanyone’s arm fall upon your wife, you should remove thatsuspicion. How can you destroy suspicion? You can destroysuspicion through the suspicion-less state (nihshankpanu). Tellpeople that your suspicion went away through Dada’s state ofnihshankpanu.Instead of being suspicious…Suspicion is the gravest disease in this world.Questioner: This is a great sentence of yours: ‘Thisworld is not worth becoming suspicious about.’Dadashri: This world exists on suspicion; suspicion andvengeance. There are certain words, which perpetuate theworldly life; they keep people in bondage life after life. It isbetter to slap someone than to be suspicious about him. Theconsequences of a slap is realized when he slaps you back, butthe consequences of your suspicions will be such that you dig aAptavani-9105106Aptavani-9no separation like this here. Amongst fifty thousand peoplewords such as ‘you’ and ‘I’, have never been used by ‘us’.Questioner: But do we not see differences of ‘you’ and‘I’ elsewhere in other religious gatherings?Dadashri: That is all there is! What else can there be? Aslong as there exist the differences of ‘you’ and ‘I’, there is thepresence of jivaatma (mortal state, non-Self-realized state).When such differences go away one becomes parmatma – theabsolute Self. Parmatma, what else can there be? But if onedoes not wish to become parmatma, he will keep thedifferences of ‘you’ and ‘I’.Even when a person may have had suspicion about ‘us’through the wrong intellect, ‘we’ have never made the distinctionof ‘you’ and ‘I’. Everywhere in the world, if this were the case,they will reprimand you to no end; ‘You are worthless!’ ‘Youare like this!’ ‘You are like that!’ It is like this everywhere,except here. This path is a path of exception in every way.Everywhere else a distinction between ‘you’ and ‘I’ are made.Questioner: Whenever we become suspicious aboutyou, you are aware of that fact and yet why do you not keepany separation (bheda) between us?Dadashri: ‘We’ have the knowledge of: ‘This is a radishand it has a certain distinct odor’ or ‘this is an onion and it hasa specific odor’. Don’t ‘we’ understand that? So then is it notwrong to scold these ‘vegetables’ when they smell? An onion isan onion, what is there to scold about it? A radish smells as itis in its nature. If there is an onion over there, you will be ableto smell it sitting here; that is the nature of the onion. ‘We’ willknow such is its nature (swabhav).If ‘we’ were to do anything wrong, then he (the one whohas suspicions about Dada) will no longer have our grace andthat will hurt him. ‘We’ will harm the very person ‘we’ have setout to help. It is always ‘our’ deepest intent of ‘our’ life to neverhurt anything, even if it interferes with ‘our’ plans. If ‘we’ planta tree and later in planning for a road, that tree becomes anobstruction, even then ‘we’ will not cut it down. We have nochoice but turn the direction of the road. ‘We’ will never uproota tree that ‘we’ have planted, nurtured and watered. ‘We’ justhave to circumvent that situation. All ‘we’ have to do is change‘our’ plans.This has been ‘our’ practice from the very beginning;anything sown with ‘our’ own hands will never be removed bythe same hands. ‘We’ meet all kinds of human beings, do ‘we’not?One has endless suspicions. The world is such that thereis suspicion every step of the way. A man becomes suspiciouseven if you accidentally put your hand on his wife. This will leadto endless quarrels at home even if the poor lady is innocent.Now how can you deal with such people? Therefore, shouldanyone’s arm fall upon your wife, you should remove thatsuspicion. How can you destroy suspicion? You can destroysuspicion through the suspicion-less state (nihshankpanu). Tellpeople that your suspicion went away through Dada’s state ofnihshankpanu.Instead of being suspicious…Suspicion is the gravest disease in this world.Questioner: This is a great sentence of yours: ‘Thisworld is not worth becoming suspicious about.’Dadashri: This world exists on suspicion; suspicion andvengeance. There are certain words, which perpetuate theworldly life; they keep people in bondage life after life. It isbetter to slap someone than to be suspicious about him. Theconsequences of a slap is realized when he slaps you back, butthe consequences of your suspicions will be such that you dig aAptavani-9107108Aptavani-9deeper hole for yourself. They linger on for a much longer time.You will not be able to crawl out of it.Even if it is true do not harbor suspicionAll these miseries are caused by suspicions. Suspicion willshow you all kinds of things about a person when it arises. It willsay, ‘He did such and such a thing.’ That suspicion will then eatyou away from the inside. Even if the other person has indeeddone something wrong and suspicion (shanka) about himbothers you, just tell the suspicion, ‘hey shanka, you leave. Heis my brother.’Questioner: If a man swears at me, how can I believethat he did not swear at me? How can I convince my mind ofthis?Dadashri: You can never say that anyway! How can youwhen in fact he did swear at you. There is no question about it.But what am I saying? Do not be suspicious of him.Suspicion even after entrusting someone?If you ask someone on the train to take care of fivethousand rupees for you so that you can use the restroom, whatshould you do when a suspicion of ‘what if he runs away withthe money?’ arises while you are in the restroom? You shouldtell the suspicion, ‘Go away, I have given the five thousandrupees. What is done is done! If the money is meant to go, itwill go and if it is meant to stay, it will.’ Suspicion makes youcreate unnecessary bondage by seeing faults in the other person.And if a person were to give money to someone like me forsafekeeping, what would become of him if he were to havesuspicions about me? Therefore, this world is not worth beingsuspicious about, over anything.When you remember what you loaned.When you are in bed and suddenly at eleven o’clock inthe night, you get a thought, ‘I forgot to get an official documentfor the five lakh rupees I had loaned. What if he does not signit tomorrow?’ That is it! Then you become like a living corpse.Say a man pays you interest of a thousand rupees everymonth on a principle of one hundred thousand he has borrowedfrom you. This man incurs a loss of two or three hundredthousand rupees in his business. Even though he sends youpayment of interest this month, knowing that he has sustained aloss, if you suspect ‘What if he does not pay back the hundredthousand? What will I do if he does not give me the money?’Once this suspicion takes hold in your mind, where will it end?A suspicion has no end, and it kills the one who suspects.Suspicion will arise at odd times at night, what if he doesnot return the money? This suspicion did not arise during the daytime and then it causes you misery when it arises at night. Wasthere no misery, during the entire daytime? When you have giventhe money, and if suspicion of, ‘will he return it or not?’ arises,then you will feel the pain, will you not? Why did you have thesuspicion at night and not during the day?Questioner: What is the reason?Dadashri: It is our foolishness. If you are going to besuspicious, then be suspicious constantly. Be suspicious with somuch awareness that you are suspicious from the time you lendthe money.So if you lend a hundred thousand rupees to someone andlater at some point in time you feel that man is not reliable, eventhen you should not let suspicion arise. ‘What is going to happennow?’ is creating another suspicion. And what do you think isgoing to happen? This body is going to go away and so is themoney. Is everything not going to go away eventually? Ultimatelyyou will have to cry. Ultimately, it will all burn in a pyre, will itnot? So then why are you killing yourself prematurely? Why notlive peacefully?Aptavani-9107108Aptavani-9deeper hole for yourself. They linger on for a much longer time.You will not be able to crawl out of it.Even if it is true do not harbor suspicionAll these miseries are caused by suspicions. Suspicion willshow you all kinds of things about a person when it arises. It willsay, ‘He did such and such a thing.’ That suspicion will then eatyou away from the inside. Even if the other person has indeeddone something wrong and suspicion (shanka) about himbothers you, just tell the suspicion, ‘hey shanka, you leave. Heis my brother.’Questioner: If a man swears at me, how can I believethat he did not swear at me? How can I convince my mind ofthis?Dadashri: You can never say that anyway! How can youwhen in fact he did swear at you. There is no question about it.But what am I saying? Do not be suspicious of him.Suspicion even after entrusting someone?If you ask someone on the train to take care of fivethousand rupees for you so that you can use the restroom, whatshould you do when a suspicion of ‘what if he runs away withthe money?’ arises while you are in the restroom? You shouldtell the suspicion, ‘Go away, I have given the five thousandrupees. What is done is done! If the money is meant to go, itwill go and if it is meant to stay, it will.’ Suspicion makes youcreate unnecessary bondage by seeing faults in the other person.And if a person were to give money to someone like me forsafekeeping, what would become of him if he were to havesuspicions about me? Therefore, this world is not worth beingsuspicious about, over anything.When you remember what you loaned.When you are in bed and suddenly at eleven o’clock inthe night, you get a thought, ‘I forgot to get an official documentfor the five lakh rupees I had loaned. What if he does not signit tomorrow?’ That is it! Then you become like a living corpse.Say a man pays you interest of a thousand rupees everymonth on a principle of one hundred thousand he has borrowedfrom you. This man incurs a loss of two or three hundredthousand rupees in his business. Even though he sends youpayment of interest this month, knowing that he has sustained aloss, if you suspect ‘What if he does not pay back the hundredthousand? What will I do if he does not give me the money?’Once this suspicion takes hold in your mind, where will it end?A suspicion has no end, and it kills the one who suspects.Suspicion will arise at odd times at night, what if he doesnot return the money? This suspicion did not arise during the daytime and then it causes you misery when it arises at night. Wasthere no misery, during the entire daytime? When you have giventhe money, and if suspicion of, ‘will he return it or not?’ arises,then you will feel the pain, will you not? Why did you have thesuspicion at night and not during the day?Questioner: What is the reason?Dadashri: It is our foolishness. If you are going to besuspicious, then be suspicious constantly. Be suspicious with somuch awareness that you are suspicious from the time you lendthe money.So if you lend a hundred thousand rupees to someone andlater at some point in time you feel that man is not reliable, eventhen you should not let suspicion arise. ‘What is going to happennow?’ is creating another suspicion. And what do you think isgoing to happen? This body is going to go away and so is themoney. Is everything not going to go away eventually? Ultimatelyyou will have to cry. Ultimately, it will all burn in a pyre, will itnot? So then why are you killing yourself prematurely? Why notlive peacefully?Aptavani-9109110Aptavani-9What do I do when such things happen to me? I tellAmbalal, ‘Ambalal, deposit it in your account. Your money hascome!’ Rather than incur a loss from suspicion, it is better tosecretly deposit it in your account; do it discretely without theknowledge of the other person.Suspicion and astrologyOtherwise, people go to astrologers seeking help. AnAstrologer may say, ‘Look, how good all the stars are. Nothingis going to happen to you. You will get your money back.’ Andso he will believe him. When the astrologer is not stable himself,how is he going to predict the future for you? How is he goingto look into your future, when he does not know how to lookinto his own future? When he wears worn out shoes, can younot realize that he cannot see into his own future so how is hegoing to look into your future? But they trap greedy people.Just look at the vast influence these astrologers have. Evenpowerful managers and CEOs believe in them. How can youbelieve in them? How can you let them into your home? If youlet them enter your home, there will be grief, so you must notlet them in. Yes, you can tell them they are welcome as anyother guests but not in the capacity as astrologers. Come butdo not start looking at horoscopes or do any fortune telling.Leave things the way they are. Do not adulterate what is goingon. No one knows what is going to happen in the future, sohow can he?Nihshankta: total absence of suspicionTherefore when suspicion arises, you will experiencemisery. If a person does not know how to read accountbooks, he may see a profit of six hundred thousand as a lossof four hundred thousand. Then would he not remain miserableas long as he does not know how to read the ledger book? Hisignorance of how to read financial statements is the reason forhis misery. That is how the world is. The pain and suffering isfrom not being able to read the ‘ledger book’ (of karmicaccounts). Otherwise, there is no pain or suffering in thisworld.The whole world lives in the atmosphere of suspicion,‘this will happen and that will happen!’ Why do you fretunnecessarily? Nothing is going to happen. Why not sleeppeacefully instead of tossing and turning needlessly? The faithyou have placed in yourself, ‘I am this body’, is one hundredpercent wrong. Nothing is going to happen and yet just look atthe amount of fear and anxiety people have; as if they are goingto take something with them when they leave this world.The whole daylong they fret; ‘What is going to happen,what is going to happen?’ Hey! What is going to happen? Thisworld has never fallen off; when the world falls, so will God -and that is not going to happen.What was that village in U.P. (the state of Uttar Pradesh)that we came to at midnight, on our way to the pilgrimage inNepal?Questioner: It was Bareli.Dadashri: Yes. The police officers and other people ofBareli told us to stop the bus. I asked them, ‘What is theproblem?’ They told us not to go any further and to spend thenight there because people were being robbed in the fifty-mileradius. So I told them, ‘Let them rob us if they want to but weare going forward.’ Finally, they told us to take two policeofficers as escorts. I agreed and two police officers came withus with guns but nothing happened. It is very difficult for acircumstance of being robbed in a large group to occur and ifit were meant to happen, then even if you make thousands ofefforts to prevent it, your efforts would be in vain. So do not befearful, do not become suspicious. No work can be successfuluntil suspicions are removed. Nihshankta (absolute freedomfrom suspicion) is the state of the Self, and until that state isAptavani-9109110Aptavani-9What do I do when such things happen to me? I tellAmbalal, ‘Ambalal, deposit it in your account. Your money hascome!’ Rather than incur a loss from suspicion, it is better tosecretly deposit it in your account; do it discretely without theknowledge of the other person.Suspicion and astrologyOtherwise, people go to astrologers seeking help. AnAstrologer may say, ‘Look, how good all the stars are. Nothingis going to happen to you. You will get your money back.’ Andso he will believe him. When the astrologer is not stable himself,how is he going to predict the future for you? How is he goingto look into your future, when he does not know how to lookinto his own future? When he wears worn out shoes, can younot realize that he cannot see into his own future so how is hegoing to look into your future? But they trap greedy people.Just look at the vast influence these astrologers have. Evenpowerful managers and CEOs believe in them. How can youbelieve in them? How can you let them into your home? If youlet them enter your home, there will be grief, so you must notlet them in. Yes, you can tell them they are welcome as anyother guests but not in the capacity as astrologers. Come butdo not start looking at horoscopes or do any fortune telling.Leave things the way they are. Do not adulterate what is goingon. No one knows what is going to happen in the future, sohow can he?Nihshankta: total absence of suspicionTherefore when suspicion arises, you will experiencemisery. If a person does not know how to read accountbooks, he may see a profit of six hundred thousand as a lossof four hundred thousand. Then would he not remain miserableas long as he does not know how to read the ledger book? Hisignorance of how to read financial statements is the reason forhis misery. That is how the world is. The pain and suffering isfrom not being able to read the ‘ledger book’ (of karmicaccounts). Otherwise, there is no pain or suffering in thisworld.The whole world lives in the atmosphere of suspicion,‘this will happen and that will happen!’ Why do you fretunnecessarily? Nothing is going to happen. Why not sleeppeacefully instead of tossing and turning needlessly? The faithyou have placed in yourself, ‘I am this body’, is one hundredpercent wrong. Nothing is going to happen and yet just look atthe amount of fear and anxiety people have; as if they are goingto take something with them when they leave this world.The whole daylong they fret; ‘What is going to happen,what is going to happen?’ Hey! What is going to happen? Thisworld has never fallen off; when the world falls, so will God -and that is not going to happen.What was that village in U.P. (the state of Uttar Pradesh)that we came to at midnight, on our way to the pilgrimage inNepal?Questioner: It was Bareli.Dadashri: Yes. The police officers and other people ofBareli told us to stop the bus. I asked them, ‘What is theproblem?’ They told us not to go any further and to spend thenight there because people were being robbed in the fifty-mileradius. So I told them, ‘Let them rob us if they want to but weare going forward.’ Finally, they told us to take two policeofficers as escorts. I agreed and two police officers came withus with guns but nothing happened. It is very difficult for acircumstance of being robbed in a large group to occur and ifit were meant to happen, then even if you make thousands ofefforts to prevent it, your efforts would be in vain. So do not befearful, do not become suspicious. No work can be successfuluntil suspicions are removed. Nihshankta (absolute freedomfrom suspicion) is the state of the Self, and until that state isAptavani-9111112Aptavani-9attained, one cannot become fearless. There is always fearwhere there is suspicion.No one will have suspicions of this kindAsk any man in Mumbai whether he has a suspicion thathe is going to die. He will tell you no because that is one thoughthe will throw out; he will uproot it from its main trunk and throwit out. He knows that if such a suspicion arises, it will kill him.Similarly, suspicions of any other kind are not worth having.Pluck out all other suspicions that arise within; remove them themoment they sprout. Become suspicion-free everywhere else.However people will harbor all other suspicions from within butthe moment they begin to have suspicions about death, theypluck it out; they will not let it sprout.Solution from the Gnani PurushIf the business is going down, the owner worries andsuspects, ‘What will happen if the business goes down? Whatwill happen if the business goes in a loss?’ You fool! Do nothave suspicions. One will use the saying, ‘Those who aresuccessful will remain successful and those who are unsuccessfulwill remain unsuccessful. The unsuccessful one will neversucceed and the successful one will never fail.’ Look what astatement! But no, both positive and negative have to be thereotherwise no electricity will be produced. Anything that goes upwill come down and that which is down will go up. That is thenatural law.Now that you have attained the knowledge to go tomoksha, make preparations for going there. Whenever anysuspicion arises, come and tell me, ‘Dadaji, I have suchsuspicions and I will find a solution for you.’ Otherwise,suspicion is a very dangerous thing. It is like a ghost. It is betterto be possessed by a ghost than by suspicion; at least someonewill be able to exorcise the ghost for you. Possession by theghost of suspicion cannot be removed.Then have suspicion all the way to the endThis is our Atma Gnan! It is not an ordinary thing. It is awonderful thing that you have acquired! These (bhaav) feelings,which arise from the mind and from the intellect, are the ones,which create fear. You just have to know once, that these arethe ones that create fear. Buddhi (intellect) will create interferenceas long as it is in operation. Does your intellect interfere?Questioner: Sometimes it arises. The negative intellectarises.Dadashri: But you have realized that it is a wrong thing,have you not?Questioner: Yes, I have realized that much.Dadashri: You have realized that it is wrong and all themischief it creates is wrong; have you not? You have realizedthat it is not right. Yes when you realize all that, there is an effortto move towards the Self. Still if the power from the other side(intellect) is strong then it will destabilize you.When you incur a loss in your business, you do not sit forhours worrying about it, do you? When that phase (thoughts ofa loss) comes, you do not sit up for hours worrying, do you?Questioner: Of course I do, but I get nowhere!Dadashri: But it does stop, does it not?Questioner: Then it stops.Dadashri: Now when the worrying stops, is it becauseyou recovered the loss you had incurred that the phase ofworrying ends or is the loss still there and the phase of worryingjust comes to an end? Say, this is triggered by a loss of fivehundred rupees that you incurred. The worrying may go on fortwelve hours or two days but it will eventually come to an end.So does the worrying stop after the amount of loss is recoveredor does it stop even when the loss is still there?Aptavani-9111112Aptavani-9attained, one cannot become fearless. There is always fearwhere there is suspicion.No one will have suspicions of this kindAsk any man in Mumbai whether he has a suspicion thathe is going to die. He will tell you no because that is one thoughthe will throw out; he will uproot it from its main trunk and throwit out. He knows that if such a suspicion arises, it will kill him.Similarly, suspicions of any other kind are not worth having.Pluck out all other suspicions that arise within; remove them themoment they sprout. Become suspicion-free everywhere else.However people will harbor all other suspicions from within butthe moment they begin to have suspicions about death, theypluck it out; they will not let it sprout.Solution from the Gnani PurushIf the business is going down, the owner worries andsuspects, ‘What will happen if the business goes down? Whatwill happen if the business goes in a loss?’ You fool! Do nothave suspicions. One will use the saying, ‘Those who aresuccessful will remain successful and those who are unsuccessfulwill remain unsuccessful. The unsuccessful one will neversucceed and the successful one will never fail.’ Look what astatement! But no, both positive and negative have to be thereotherwise no electricity will be produced. Anything that goes upwill come down and that which is down will go up. That is thenatural law.Now that you have attained the knowledge to go tomoksha, make preparations for going there. Whenever anysuspicion arises, come and tell me, ‘Dadaji, I have suchsuspicions and I will find a solution for you.’ Otherwise,suspicion is a very dangerous thing. It is like a ghost. It is betterto be possessed by a ghost than by suspicion; at least someonewill be able to exorcise the ghost for you. Possession by theghost of suspicion cannot be removed.Then have suspicion all the way to the endThis is our Atma Gnan! It is not an ordinary thing. It is awonderful thing that you have acquired! These (bhaav) feelings,which arise from the mind and from the intellect, are the ones,which create fear. You just have to know once, that these arethe ones that create fear. Buddhi (intellect) will create interferenceas long as it is in operation. Does your intellect interfere?Questioner: Sometimes it arises. The negative intellectarises.Dadashri: But you have realized that it is a wrong thing,have you not?Questioner: Yes, I have realized that much.Dadashri: You have realized that it is wrong and all themischief it creates is wrong; have you not? You have realizedthat it is not right. Yes when you realize all that, there is an effortto move towards the Self. Still if the power from the other side(intellect) is strong then it will destabilize you.When you incur a loss in your business, you do not sit forhours worrying about it, do you? When that phase (thoughts ofa loss) comes, you do not sit up for hours worrying, do you?Questioner: Of course I do, but I get nowhere!Dadashri: But it does stop, does it not?Questioner: Then it stops.Dadashri: Now when the worrying stops, is it becauseyou recovered the loss you had incurred that the phase ofworrying ends or is the loss still there and the phase of worryingjust comes to an end? Say, this is triggered by a loss of fivehundred rupees that you incurred. The worrying may go on fortwelve hours or two days but it will eventually come to an end.So does the worrying stop after the amount of loss is recoveredor does it stop even when the loss is still there?Aptavani-9113114Aptavani-9Questioner: The loss remains the same.Dadashri: Then what is the point of stopping theworrying? Should you not continue to worry until you recoverthe loss?Questioner: But worrying starts again on its own and itstops on its own.Dadashri: When it stops, you should again say, ‘Whyhave you stopped when the loss has not been recovered? Comeback.’There is no problem of thinking about the loss, but it isonly worth thinking about it to the point where you sustain nopersonal inner loss. Otherwise if worrying and suspicion stop ontheir own, even if the loss is still at hand, then there is no pointof worrying or having suspicion. It is best to stop worrying, rightfrom the beginning.People tend to forget all the phases. They forget the pastas they proceed forward. ‘We’ do not forget even for a second,even if the incident occurred some forty years ago. But peopleforget. It is better to forget before nature forces you to do so.It is fruition of karma that reminds you and it is also fruition ofkarma that makes you forget. So ‘You’ should pat your relative-self on the back and tell your relative-self, Chandulal, ‘what is‘is’ and what is ‘is not’ is not’, nothing is going to change thatwhich is in vyavasthit.Therefore if you are going to worry, worry your whole lifeotherwise do not. Worry about incurring a loss until it isrecovered. But like a top (toy), we remain under control ofother things and the worrying stops on its own, what is that allabout? If your worrying stops on its own even before the lossis recovered, then why not put a stop to it from the beginning?Does it not stop before the loss ends?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Then you have to ask the ‘worrier’, ‘Why didyou stop? Why did you start in the first place? Now that youhave started, let it go till the loss is recovered.’…otherwise do not harbor suspicions‘We’ had understood one thing even before attainingGnan. Once I had become suspicious about one man. I felt thathe was going to cheat me. Then I came to a decision that if Iwas going to be suspicious then I should be suspiciousthroughout my life otherwise I should not do it at all. If you aregoing to be suspicious, be that way throughout your life. That iswhat the Lord considers awareness. If suspicion is going to endonce it starts, then do not even start it. If you leave Baroda togo to Kashi-Banaras but return home half way, from Mathura,it would have been better if you had never left. So from the dayI became suspicious of that man, from that time onwards, I donot harbor any suspicions. Otherwise I would not have anymore dealings with him. I would not be cheated anymore. If Iwanted to continue being suspicious, then I would avoid worldlyinteraction with that person for the rest of my life.Be cautious but not suspiciousQuestioner: We have to maintain awareness when weare driving, do we similarly not have to maintain awareness inour worldly dealings, such as ‘If I do it this way, will this mantake advantage of me’? Do we not have to keep that in ourawareness?Dadashri: You have to be cautious and aware but do nothave suspicions. You do not need to be preoccupied with thesuspicion of ‘what if he takes advantage of me?’ Suspicion isvery harmful. You just have to be cautious. Suspicion will causeyou misery the moment it arises.Questioner: Often problems arise at work and they aresuch that we begin to have suspicions about certain people andthat causes continuous unhappiness within.Aptavani-9113114Aptavani-9Questioner: The loss remains the same.Dadashri: Then what is the point of stopping theworrying? Should you not continue to worry until you recoverthe loss?Questioner: But worrying starts again on its own and itstops on its own.Dadashri: When it stops, you should again say, ‘Whyhave you stopped when the loss has not been recovered? Comeback.’There is no problem of thinking about the loss, but it isonly worth thinking about it to the point where you sustain nopersonal inner loss. Otherwise if worrying and suspicion stop ontheir own, even if the loss is still at hand, then there is no pointof worrying or having suspicion. It is best to stop worrying, rightfrom the beginning.People tend to forget all the phases. They forget the pastas they proceed forward. ‘We’ do not forget even for a second,even if the incident occurred some forty years ago. But peopleforget. It is better to forget before nature forces you to do so.It is fruition of karma that reminds you and it is also fruition ofkarma that makes you forget. So ‘You’ should pat your relative-self on the back and tell your relative-self, Chandulal, ‘what is‘is’ and what is ‘is not’ is not’, nothing is going to change thatwhich is in vyavasthit.Therefore if you are going to worry, worry your whole lifeotherwise do not. Worry about incurring a loss until it isrecovered. But like a top (toy), we remain under control ofother things and the worrying stops on its own, what is that allabout? If your worrying stops on its own even before the lossis recovered, then why not put a stop to it from the beginning?Does it not stop before the loss ends?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Then you have to ask the ‘worrier’, ‘Why didyou stop? Why did you start in the first place? Now that youhave started, let it go till the loss is recovered.’…otherwise do not harbor suspicions‘We’ had understood one thing even before attainingGnan. Once I had become suspicious about one man. I felt thathe was going to cheat me. Then I came to a decision that if Iwas going to be suspicious then I should be suspiciousthroughout my life otherwise I should not do it at all. If you aregoing to be suspicious, be that way throughout your life. That iswhat the Lord considers awareness. If suspicion is going to endonce it starts, then do not even start it. If you leave Baroda togo to Kashi-Banaras but return home half way, from Mathura,it would have been better if you had never left. So from the dayI became suspicious of that man, from that time onwards, I donot harbor any suspicions. Otherwise I would not have anymore dealings with him. I would not be cheated anymore. If Iwanted to continue being suspicious, then I would avoid worldlyinteraction with that person for the rest of my life.Be cautious but not suspiciousQuestioner: We have to maintain awareness when weare driving, do we similarly not have to maintain awareness inour worldly dealings, such as ‘If I do it this way, will this mantake advantage of me’? Do we not have to keep that in ourawareness?Dadashri: You have to be cautious and aware but do nothave suspicions. You do not need to be preoccupied with thesuspicion of ‘what if he takes advantage of me?’ Suspicion isvery harmful. You just have to be cautious. Suspicion will causeyou misery the moment it arises.Questioner: Often problems arise at work and they aresuch that we begin to have suspicions about certain people andthat causes continuous unhappiness within.Aptavani-9115116Aptavani-9Dadashri: Yes, those are baseless suspicions. Twothings happen in suspicions. First, it causes unhappiness andthe other is that you bind a negative karma because of yoursuspicions. The law is that it takes one to a birth in the lowerlife form.Questioner: But at work when we have to construct aroad or a bridge, do we not have to account for all the safetyfactors? If we don’t, the bridge may collapse. It is notacceptable for us to be unaware and build a bridge, is it?Dadashri: That is correct. Keep all the safety factors buthaving done that, suspicions must not arise again. It will give riseto misery if they do.Questioner: But in anything we do, do we not have toworry and think things through to ensure that the other persondoes not make any mistakes?Dadashri: Yes, you have all the freedom to think but notto be suspicious. Think as much as you want, even if you wantto spend the whole night thinking but do not become suspiciousbecause there is no end to it. Suspicion is endless whereasthoughts will end. The mind becomes tired does it not? The mindgets tired from thinking too much and so it will stop on its own.Suspicions do not get tired or exhausted. Suspicions willbe about one person or another, so do not have any suspicions.There is no other misery like that of suspicion. Suspicion firstharms the owner (the one who has suspicions) and then it harmsothers. I had discovered from the very beginning that havingsuspicion is very harmful.Never have suspicions, even when knowingeverythingThat is why ‘we’ have never had any suspicions towardsanyone. ‘We’ will check everything out in minute details, but wenever become suspicious. Those who have suspicions suffer.‘We’ know everything but ‘we’ do not have any suspicions. Youshould not have the slightest of suspicions. ‘We’ have not hadany suspicion about anybody. ‘We’ know everything; there isnothing ‘we’ do not know. ‘We’ know everything abouteveryone down to his or her deepest levels. ‘We’ can seeeverything but ‘we’ do not have any suspicions. What good issuspicion?Questioner: It is very harmful.Dadashri: What damage does it cause?Questioner: Does it not harm one’s own self?Dadashri: No, but how much happiness does it give?The moment suspicion enters one’s mind it is the same asbecoming possessed; ‘he has taken my things for sure!’ entersyour mind. Whatever is to become of the other person, let it beso, but you become possessed by suspicion in the process. ThisDada is very particular; He will never have suspicions aboutanyone. He knows everything but He will not have anysuspicions.The ‘doer’ and the ‘sayer’ are separateYou will incur a great liability, and hence it is a tremendousfault to have any kind of suspicions in this worldly life. Nothingis gained by suspicion. Now that you have attained this Gnan,why not continue doing your work with a mind free ofsuspicions! If you employ the intellect you will ruin the work athand and if you let it occur naturally (sahaj) then everything willwork out on its own. Instead of doing your work with suspicion,it will work out better if you leave it alone and let it happennaturally; let it happen without employing any buddhi (intellect).No work is done if there is the slightest of suspicion.Questioner: Still what should one do if suspicions(shanka) and negative suspicions (kushanka) keep occurring inany work?Aptavani-9115116Aptavani-9Dadashri: Yes, those are baseless suspicions. Twothings happen in suspicions. First, it causes unhappiness andthe other is that you bind a negative karma because of yoursuspicions. The law is that it takes one to a birth in the lowerlife form.Questioner: But at work when we have to construct aroad or a bridge, do we not have to account for all the safetyfactors? If we don’t, the bridge may collapse. It is notacceptable for us to be unaware and build a bridge, is it?Dadashri: That is correct. Keep all the safety factors buthaving done that, suspicions must not arise again. It will give riseto misery if they do.Questioner: But in anything we do, do we not have toworry and think things through to ensure that the other persondoes not make any mistakes?Dadashri: Yes, you have all the freedom to think but notto be suspicious. Think as much as you want, even if you wantto spend the whole night thinking but do not become suspiciousbecause there is no end to it. Suspicion is endless whereasthoughts will end. The mind becomes tired does it not? The mindgets tired from thinking too much and so it will stop on its own.Suspicions do not get tired or exhausted. Suspicions willbe about one person or another, so do not have any suspicions.There is no other misery like that of suspicion. Suspicion firstharms the owner (the one who has suspicions) and then it harmsothers. I had discovered from the very beginning that havingsuspicion is very harmful.Never have suspicions, even when knowingeverythingThat is why ‘we’ have never had any suspicions towardsanyone. ‘We’ will check everything out in minute details, but wenever become suspicious. Those who have suspicions suffer.‘We’ know everything but ‘we’ do not have any suspicions. Youshould not have the slightest of suspicions. ‘We’ have not hadany suspicion about anybody. ‘We’ know everything; there isnothing ‘we’ do not know. ‘We’ know everything abouteveryone down to his or her deepest levels. ‘We’ can seeeverything but ‘we’ do not have any suspicions. What good issuspicion?Questioner: It is very harmful.Dadashri: What damage does it cause?Questioner: Does it not harm one’s own self?Dadashri: No, but how much happiness does it give?The moment suspicion enters one’s mind it is the same asbecoming possessed; ‘he has taken my things for sure!’ entersyour mind. Whatever is to become of the other person, let it beso, but you become possessed by suspicion in the process. ThisDada is very particular; He will never have suspicions aboutanyone. He knows everything but He will not have anysuspicions.The ‘doer’ and the ‘sayer’ are separateYou will incur a great liability, and hence it is a tremendousfault to have any kind of suspicions in this worldly life. Nothingis gained by suspicion. Now that you have attained this Gnan,why not continue doing your work with a mind free ofsuspicions! If you employ the intellect you will ruin the work athand and if you let it occur naturally (sahaj) then everything willwork out on its own. Instead of doing your work with suspicion,it will work out better if you leave it alone and let it happennaturally; let it happen without employing any buddhi (intellect).No work is done if there is the slightest of suspicion.Questioner: Still what should one do if suspicions(shanka) and negative suspicions (kushanka) keep occurring inany work?Aptavani-9117118Aptavani-9Dadashri: That verily is the one thing that is destructive,is it not? It can place you in difficulty.Questioner: But what should we do?Dadashri: What can you do? ‘You’ have to tell‘Chandulal’, ‘do not be suspicious. Do whatever comes along.’That is all. ‘You’ are there along with Chandulal to caution him.Before there was no one to guide Chandulal and that is why youwere confused but now there is.Fearlessness is required thereDo not initiate any task that invites suspicion. Whereversuspicion occurs, do not proceed with that work or stop thatwork.Say a group of pilgrims are leaving for Ahmedabad fromhere. Some in the group say, ‘We will not reach there if it rains.’What do you have to do with such people who are inclinedtowards suspicion? If there are two or three such people, youhave to send them back or else they will ruin the whole group.Nothing can be achieved as long as there is presence ofsuspicion. A person with suspicion will not be able to do anywork. He may be able to turn around with a lot of effort, andif he does, that is good. Then everyone will be happy.If a person is fearless, then if someday he decides to takematters in his own hands, he will be able to accomplish whateverhe sets his mind to. Therefore, you should have fearlessnesssuch that you are convinced that nothing can happen to you. Ifyou want to take poison then you can but who is going to makeyou take it if you do not want to?If your driver tells you, ‘What if we have an accident?’You should tell him, ‘Stop the car and get out of the car.’ Youshould not let such a person even touch anything. Do not goaround with such a person; he will ruin your mind. Why shouldthere be any suspicion? The mind should be clear and withoutsuspicions. Any kind of thoughts may come but are we not thePurush (the Soul; the Self)? Man will die if he is not a Purush.Having become a Purush (attained the Self), how can you havesuspicion in your purusharth? How can you have suspicionabout your own Self? Why should you have any fear afterbecoming the Purush? For you the state of swa-purusharth andswa-parakram have arisen, i.e. for you, you have come intoyour own domain as the Soul; you are the ‘Knower’ and the‘Observer’ and your energies of the Self have arisen, so whyfear anything?Questioner: Do we have to maintain fearlessness ordoes this state automatically remain?Dadashri: You have to maintain it. Even if you do notthink about the possibility of an accident, is it going to stop fromoccurring if it was meant to? And what about the person whothinks about it? It will occur for him too. But a person who sitsin the car without having such thoughts is what we call fearless.Such people are likely to get less injured and will come out ofthe situation with minor injuries. After sitting in a train, does a suspicion of ‘two days agothere was a train accident, what if that happens today?’ arise?Why does such suspicion not arise? Therefore do not have anysuspicion in any work that you have to do and if you havesuspicion, then do not attempt that work. Do either this or that.How can we accept such things? To anyone who talks this waywith suspicion, tell him, ‘Not here, go home.’ We need talks offearlessness (shooraatan) here.You want to go home and if someone keeps saying,‘What happens if we have an accident on our way home?’ Thenwhat will become of everyone’s minds? Do not allow such talks.Why should you have such suspicions?If you are walking along a beach and someone says,‘what if a huge wave comes and washes us away?’ SomeoneAptavani-9117118Aptavani-9Dadashri: That verily is the one thing that is destructive,is it not? It can place you in difficulty.Questioner: But what should we do?Dadashri: What can you do? ‘You’ have to tell‘Chandulal’, ‘do not be suspicious. Do whatever comes along.’That is all. ‘You’ are there along with Chandulal to caution him.Before there was no one to guide Chandulal and that is why youwere confused but now there is.Fearlessness is required thereDo not initiate any task that invites suspicion. Whereversuspicion occurs, do not proceed with that work or stop thatwork.Say a group of pilgrims are leaving for Ahmedabad fromhere. Some in the group say, ‘We will not reach there if it rains.’What do you have to do with such people who are inclinedtowards suspicion? If there are two or three such people, youhave to send them back or else they will ruin the whole group.Nothing can be achieved as long as there is presence ofsuspicion. A person with suspicion will not be able to do anywork. He may be able to turn around with a lot of effort, andif he does, that is good. Then everyone will be happy.If a person is fearless, then if someday he decides to takematters in his own hands, he will be able to accomplish whateverhe sets his mind to. Therefore, you should have fearlessnesssuch that you are convinced that nothing can happen to you. Ifyou want to take poison then you can but who is going to makeyou take it if you do not want to?If your driver tells you, ‘What if we have an accident?’You should tell him, ‘Stop the car and get out of the car.’ Youshould not let such a person even touch anything. Do not goaround with such a person; he will ruin your mind. Why shouldthere be any suspicion? The mind should be clear and withoutsuspicions. Any kind of thoughts may come but are we not thePurush (the Soul; the Self)? Man will die if he is not a Purush.Having become a Purush (attained the Self), how can you havesuspicion in your purusharth? How can you have suspicionabout your own Self? Why should you have any fear afterbecoming the Purush? For you the state of swa-purusharth andswa-parakram have arisen, i.e. for you, you have come intoyour own domain as the Soul; you are the ‘Knower’ and the‘Observer’ and your energies of the Self have arisen, so whyfear anything?Questioner: Do we have to maintain fearlessness ordoes this state automatically remain?Dadashri: You have to maintain it. Even if you do notthink about the possibility of an accident, is it going to stop fromoccurring if it was meant to? And what about the person whothinks about it? It will occur for him too. But a person who sitsin the car without having such thoughts is what we call fearless.Such people are likely to get less injured and will come out ofthe situation with minor injuries. After sitting in a train, does a suspicion of ‘two days agothere was a train accident, what if that happens today?’ arise?Why does such suspicion not arise? Therefore do not have anysuspicion in any work that you have to do and if you havesuspicion, then do not attempt that work. Do either this or that.How can we accept such things? To anyone who talks this waywith suspicion, tell him, ‘Not here, go home.’ We need talks offearlessness (shooraatan) here.You want to go home and if someone keeps saying,‘What happens if we have an accident on our way home?’ Thenwhat will become of everyone’s minds? Do not allow such talks.Why should you have such suspicions?If you are walking along a beach and someone says,‘what if a huge wave comes and washes us away?’ SomeoneAptavani-9119120Aptavani-9may have told him about an incident where a person drownedin a big wave. So what happens if you start to becomesuspicious? These are all foolish talks. It is a fool’s paradise!So there should be no suspicion in the work you are doingand if suspicion does arise, then do not proceed with that work.Your work will not be successful from the moment you start tohave suspicions about your work. Suspicion that prevails is anuisance caused by the intellect (buddhi).Besides, such things do not happen. Problems are createdfor those in whom suspicion arises. The rule of the ‘king ofkarma’ is that he will visit the one who has suspicions. He willnot stay where there is no tuber of suspicion. Therefore, keepa strong mind.Precaution is taken by the worldly self, not‘You’ - the real SelfSuspicion causes tremendous misery. When can you getrid of it? If you have been mugged and robbed of yourexpensive jewelry, then when you go out again wearingexpensive jewelry, suspicion of ‘what if I get robbed today?’ willarise. Now what does nature’s justice say? If you are going toencounter such a robber as a consequence of your karma fromyour past life, then you have no choice but to meet him, so whybecome suspicious needlessly?Questioner: Should one not take precautions when suchsuspicion arises?Dadashri: Everything gets ruined because of takingprecautions. It is fine for someone who has not taken Gnan. Ifyou want liberation then ‘do’ everything exactly for reaching thatgoal. If you want to remain in the worldly life then make theworldly adjustments (take precaution). If you want to harborsuspicions, then remain in the worldly life. Be on one side of theshore or the other, it is meaningless to be in the middle.Questioner: But if there are signs of danger, I may notlet suspicion arise but should I not take the necessary precautionagainst it?Dadashri: You cannot take precautions. You do not havethe energy or the power to take precautions. What is the pointof trying to adopt the energy you do not have?Questioner: Do we not have the power to takeprecautions?Dadashri: Absolutely none! There is no point in believingin the power You do not possess. There is no power to takeprecaution or to do anything else in You, and besides theprecautions are taken by ‘Chandulal’ anyway. You are meddlingunnecessarily. Someone else does it and You take on the doer-ship and that is why things get ruined.Questioner: So if ‘Chandulal’ takes precautions, is therenot a problem?Dadashri: He will do so for sure. He will always takeprecautions. A man may be walking inattentively but if he seesa snake, he will immediately jump aside. What is the energy thatmakes him jump? Who makes him jump? Do people not jumpin this manner? There is so much natural response (sahajikata)in this body. This ‘Chandulal’ has so much naturalness, that hewill jump the moment he sees something.Questioner: But such naturalness does not come in ourbusiness interactions and other worldly interactions.Dadashri: That is because of Your meddling (dakho).If you are going to have suspicion, then have suspicions ofall kinds, like ‘Brother, what if I die tomorrow?’ Do people notdie?Questioner: They do.Dadashri: So if you are going to have suspicion, thenAptavani-9119120Aptavani-9may have told him about an incident where a person drownedin a big wave. So what happens if you start to becomesuspicious? These are all foolish talks. It is a fool’s paradise!So there should be no suspicion in the work you are doingand if suspicion does arise, then do not proceed with that work.Your work will not be successful from the moment you start tohave suspicions about your work. Suspicion that prevails is anuisance caused by the intellect (buddhi).Besides, such things do not happen. Problems are createdfor those in whom suspicion arises. The rule of the ‘king ofkarma’ is that he will visit the one who has suspicions. He willnot stay where there is no tuber of suspicion. Therefore, keepa strong mind.Precaution is taken by the worldly self, not‘You’ - the real SelfSuspicion causes tremendous misery. When can you getrid of it? If you have been mugged and robbed of yourexpensive jewelry, then when you go out again wearingexpensive jewelry, suspicion of ‘what if I get robbed today?’ willarise. Now what does nature’s justice say? If you are going toencounter such a robber as a consequence of your karma fromyour past life, then you have no choice but to meet him, so whybecome suspicious needlessly?Questioner: Should one not take precautions when suchsuspicion arises?Dadashri: Everything gets ruined because of takingprecautions. It is fine for someone who has not taken Gnan. Ifyou want liberation then ‘do’ everything exactly for reaching thatgoal. If you want to remain in the worldly life then make theworldly adjustments (take precaution). If you want to harborsuspicions, then remain in the worldly life. Be on one side of theshore or the other, it is meaningless to be in the middle.Questioner: But if there are signs of danger, I may notlet suspicion arise but should I not take the necessary precautionagainst it?Dadashri: You cannot take precautions. You do not havethe energy or the power to take precautions. What is the pointof trying to adopt the energy you do not have?Questioner: Do we not have the power to takeprecautions?Dadashri: Absolutely none! There is no point in believingin the power You do not possess. There is no power to takeprecaution or to do anything else in You, and besides theprecautions are taken by ‘Chandulal’ anyway. You are meddlingunnecessarily. Someone else does it and You take on the doer-ship and that is why things get ruined.Questioner: So if ‘Chandulal’ takes precautions, is therenot a problem?Dadashri: He will do so for sure. He will always takeprecautions. A man may be walking inattentively but if he seesa snake, he will immediately jump aside. What is the energy thatmakes him jump? Who makes him jump? Do people not jumpin this manner? There is so much natural response (sahajikata)in this body. This ‘Chandulal’ has so much naturalness, that hewill jump the moment he sees something.Questioner: But such naturalness does not come in ourbusiness interactions and other worldly interactions.Dadashri: That is because of Your meddling (dakho).If you are going to have suspicion, then have suspicions ofall kinds, like ‘Brother, what if I die tomorrow?’ Do people notdie?Questioner: They do.Dadashri: So if you are going to have suspicion, thenAptavani-9121122Aptavani-9So be like ‘us’. Remove suspicion, no matter what it is,even when you have seen something with your own eyes; Youshould simply know (janvoo) it all. There is nothing wrong inknowing and what you see with your eyes can sometimes bewrong. ‘We’ have experienced exactly that kind of problems.So can you believe other things? Therefore; do not becomesuspicious even when you see things with your own eyes. Just‘know’ it. This is ‘our’ very deep and profound discovery. Onlyif ‘we’ talk about these things, will you experience them.Suspicion has not been removed from people of this world.Only a Gnani, having become absolutely suspicion-free, can helpremove suspicion in others; no one else can do so. Man cannotremove suspicion by himself. It is the worst ghost. It is thebiggest demon.What happens if you see a man walking with his armaround a lady? That poor man is the only one who knows whyhis arm is around her. But what will you think? How many otherseeds will sprout from that one seed of suspicion? Suspicion isworse than a demon. It is better to be possessed by a demon;at least an exorcist will be able to remove the demon but whocan remove suspicions? ‘We’ can remove your suspicions foryou, no one else can.Questioner: Suspicion arises when we think about thepast.Dadashri: Do not think about the past. You should forgetabout the past. Even a Brahmin will not read old astrologycalendars. If you ask a Brahmin, ‘Was it fifteen days ago thatour daughter became a widow?’ he will reply, ‘No one asksthose kind of question. That is all past and gone.’Questioner: But sometimes suspicion does arise.Dadashri: Yes alas it does, but how many trees sproutfrom that? The seed is only one, but the vegetation that sproutsfrom it is of countless types.have suspicions of all kinds. Why have suspicions of only onekind? What can you not have suspicions about in this world?What is not worth being suspicious about? There is no guaranteethat you will reach home safely once you leave here. Why doyou not have suspicion there? There should never be anysuspicions whatsoever. Therefore, you should tell suspicions,‘Go away. I am nihshank – the suspicion-less Self.’ How canthe Self ever have any suspicion?From a seed to a jungleWhat am I saying is that suspicion is like a ghost. You canlet other ‘witches’ possess you if you want to, if you can affordto do so but what should You tell the ghost of suspicion thatarise within you? Say to ‘Chandulal’, ‘Why do you have suchsuspicions now that you are a Dada’s follower? Are you notashamed? Dada, at his age, does not have suspicions aboutanyone and you being so young, why do you keep any? Stopthem!’ Suspicions will cease when You talk like this.‘We’ got rid of all suspicions in life. ‘We’ do not getsuspicious towards anyone. Is that a safe side or not?Questioner: A huge safe side!Dadashri: Not a word of suspicion. Even when ‘we’ seesomeone take money from someone’s pocket, ‘we’ will nothave suspicion towards him. Even if someone does a lot of harmto ‘us’, ‘we’ will not have any suspicions. ‘We’ would know forsure; it would be in our Gnan, ‘This is like this and this is likethat,’ but no suspicion.Suspicion is a very harmful thing and it can give rise to anew kind of worldly life. Only a banyan tree will grow from abanyan seed and only an oak tree from a single oak seed. Buta seed of suspicion will give rise to seventeen hundred types of‘vegetation’. How can you ever harbor such a seed? ‘We’ arethe only one who has removed the seed of suspicion completely.But suspicions arise within you from time to time, does it not?Aptavani-9121122Aptavani-9So be like ‘us’. Remove suspicion, no matter what it is,even when you have seen something with your own eyes; Youshould simply know (janvoo) it all. There is nothing wrong inknowing and what you see with your eyes can sometimes bewrong. ‘We’ have experienced exactly that kind of problems.So can you believe other things? Therefore; do not becomesuspicious even when you see things with your own eyes. Just‘know’ it. This is ‘our’ very deep and profound discovery. Onlyif ‘we’ talk about these things, will you experience them.Suspicion has not been removed from people of this world.Only a Gnani, having become absolutely suspicion-free, can helpremove suspicion in others; no one else can do so. Man cannotremove suspicion by himself. It is the worst ghost. It is thebiggest demon.What happens if you see a man walking with his armaround a lady? That poor man is the only one who knows whyhis arm is around her. But what will you think? How many otherseeds will sprout from that one seed of suspicion? Suspicion isworse than a demon. It is better to be possessed by a demon;at least an exorcist will be able to remove the demon but whocan remove suspicions? ‘We’ can remove your suspicions foryou, no one else can.Questioner: Suspicion arises when we think about thepast.Dadashri: Do not think about the past. You should forgetabout the past. Even a Brahmin will not read old astrologycalendars. If you ask a Brahmin, ‘Was it fifteen days ago thatour daughter became a widow?’ he will reply, ‘No one asksthose kind of question. That is all past and gone.’Questioner: But sometimes suspicion does arise.Dadashri: Yes alas it does, but how many trees sproutfrom that? The seed is only one, but the vegetation that sproutsfrom it is of countless types.have suspicions of all kinds. Why have suspicions of only onekind? What can you not have suspicions about in this world?What is not worth being suspicious about? There is no guaranteethat you will reach home safely once you leave here. Why doyou not have suspicion there? There should never be anysuspicions whatsoever. Therefore, you should tell suspicions,‘Go away. I am nihshank – the suspicion-less Self.’ How canthe Self ever have any suspicion?From a seed to a jungleWhat am I saying is that suspicion is like a ghost. You canlet other ‘witches’ possess you if you want to, if you can affordto do so but what should You tell the ghost of suspicion thatarise within you? Say to ‘Chandulal’, ‘Why do you have suchsuspicions now that you are a Dada’s follower? Are you notashamed? Dada, at his age, does not have suspicions aboutanyone and you being so young, why do you keep any? Stopthem!’ Suspicions will cease when You talk like this.‘We’ got rid of all suspicions in life. ‘We’ do not getsuspicious towards anyone. Is that a safe side or not?Questioner: A huge safe side!Dadashri: Not a word of suspicion. Even when ‘we’ seesomeone take money from someone’s pocket, ‘we’ will nothave suspicion towards him. Even if someone does a lot of harmto ‘us’, ‘we’ will not have any suspicions. ‘We’ would know forsure; it would be in our Gnan, ‘This is like this and this is likethat,’ but no suspicion.Suspicion is a very harmful thing and it can give rise to anew kind of worldly life. Only a banyan tree will grow from abanyan seed and only an oak tree from a single oak seed. Buta seed of suspicion will give rise to seventeen hundred types of‘vegetation’. How can you ever harbor such a seed? ‘We’ arethe only one who has removed the seed of suspicion completely.But suspicions arise within you from time to time, does it not?Aptavani-9123124Aptavani-9Questioner: It becomes a jungle.Dadashri: Yes, it will become a jungle. A gardenbecomes a jungle. Dada creates a garden with great difficultyand then it turns into a jungle. A huge garden like this and it turnsinto a jungle? Arey! Dada has become exhausted planting rosebushes one by one, so take care that you do not let it turn intoa jungle. Do not let it turn into a jungle. You won’t let it, willyou?Questioner: Dada, I do not like having suspicions at all,but it remains pending because it does not come to a closure.Dadashri: Does it remain pending? Do you not bring anend to it? Just as in Algebra we do not leave any denominatorwith ‘a², b², this too is like that. Those who know algebra willknow about all this.All your troubles and miseries arise from your suspicions,and then does that ever ruin your sleep?Questioner: It is not like that, but it comes back if it isnot settled.Dadashri: What will you do now? Why don’t you ‘roast’the seeds so they do not sprout again? A roasted seed will neversprout. Problems arise only when the seeds germinate, do theynot?So you should say to your relative self, ‘Are you notashamed being a follower of Dada?’ or you should say, ‘I willslap you, why are you being suspicious?’ You should scold yourrelative self in this way. What is wrong in You doing the scoldingrather than someone else doing it? Who would you prefer didthe scolding, You or someone else?Questioner: These suspicions do not leave even after wetake a beating.Dadashri: Yes, it will not go away even after you take abeating. That is why this discussion came out. Such talk comesout when suspicion is ready to go away and not otherwise.Do everything systematically but do not be suspicious.What would happen if you make a small mistake or invitetrouble standing on the railway tracks?Questioner: Everything will get cut up or torn up.Dadashri: How well do people behave in that situation?Why do people behave in these situations? It is because theiractions will give instant results (fruits) but the fruit of suspicioncomes much later. One cannot see its results today and that iswhy he invites troubles. Is it an ordinary thing to invite troublethrough suspicion?Questioner: Does it not sow a seed for the future,Dada?Dadashri: Why are you talking about the future? If youinvite troubles through being suspicious today, it will multiplyendlessly. Suspicion will show you negative things even aboutthe Gnani Purush. Once this ‘witch of suspicion’ enters, whatwill it not show you?Questioner: It will show us everything.Dadashri: It will show you negative things about Dadatoo. Even a single suspicion towards Dada will send a person toa lower life form. You cannot afford to have even the slightestsuspicion about this Dada; such a one He is. There can neverbe a suspicion-less (nihshank) person like Dada in this world.Questioner: You say that suspicions merely arise andthat no one does them deliberately.Dadashri: That is a different thing. Why it happens is adifferent matter, but you cannot have suspicions towards thisDada. If you do, then you have to find a solution for it. I havegiven you the solution. I am saying that suspicions do occur butyou have to solve them by saying, ‘Dada, I ask for yourAptavani-9123124Aptavani-9Questioner: It becomes a jungle.Dadashri: Yes, it will become a jungle. A gardenbecomes a jungle. Dada creates a garden with great difficultyand then it turns into a jungle. A huge garden like this and it turnsinto a jungle? Arey! Dada has become exhausted planting rosebushes one by one, so take care that you do not let it turn intoa jungle. Do not let it turn into a jungle. You won’t let it, willyou?Questioner: Dada, I do not like having suspicions at all,but it remains pending because it does not come to a closure.Dadashri: Does it remain pending? Do you not bring anend to it? Just as in Algebra we do not leave any denominatorwith ‘a², b², this too is like that. Those who know algebra willknow about all this.All your troubles and miseries arise from your suspicions,and then does that ever ruin your sleep?Questioner: It is not like that, but it comes back if it isnot settled.Dadashri: What will you do now? Why don’t you ‘roast’the seeds so they do not sprout again? A roasted seed will neversprout. Problems arise only when the seeds germinate, do theynot?So you should say to your relative self, ‘Are you notashamed being a follower of Dada?’ or you should say, ‘I willslap you, why are you being suspicious?’ You should scold yourrelative self in this way. What is wrong in You doing the scoldingrather than someone else doing it? Who would you prefer didthe scolding, You or someone else?Questioner: These suspicions do not leave even after wetake a beating.Dadashri: Yes, it will not go away even after you take abeating. That is why this discussion came out. Such talk comesout when suspicion is ready to go away and not otherwise.Do everything systematically but do not be suspicious.What would happen if you make a small mistake or invitetrouble standing on the railway tracks?Questioner: Everything will get cut up or torn up.Dadashri: How well do people behave in that situation?Why do people behave in these situations? It is because theiractions will give instant results (fruits) but the fruit of suspicioncomes much later. One cannot see its results today and that iswhy he invites troubles. Is it an ordinary thing to invite troublethrough suspicion?Questioner: Does it not sow a seed for the future,Dada?Dadashri: Why are you talking about the future? If youinvite troubles through being suspicious today, it will multiplyendlessly. Suspicion will show you negative things even aboutthe Gnani Purush. Once this ‘witch of suspicion’ enters, whatwill it not show you?Questioner: It will show us everything.Dadashri: It will show you negative things about Dadatoo. Even a single suspicion towards Dada will send a person toa lower life form. You cannot afford to have even the slightestsuspicion about this Dada; such a one He is. There can neverbe a suspicion-less (nihshank) person like Dada in this world.Questioner: You say that suspicions merely arise andthat no one does them deliberately.Dadashri: That is a different thing. Why it happens is adifferent matter, but you cannot have suspicions towards thisDada. If you do, then you have to find a solution for it. I havegiven you the solution. I am saying that suspicions do occur butyou have to solve them by saying, ‘Dada, I ask for yourAptavani-9125126Aptavani-9Dadashri: Get rid of the awareness? Do you want to getrid of awareness or suspicion?Questioner: Only the suspicion.Dadashri: Yes, you want to keep the awareness, do younot? ‘We’ have removed all roots of suspicion. Have youremoved it from its main root or have you kept some of it?Questioner: A lot of introspection was going on aboutsuspicion within.Dadashri: But have you not uprooted it yet?Questioner: Today, I found a nimit (external evidence)through Dada.Dadashri: Yes that must be the case otherwise such talkswould not surface. Besides, do I talk about this only at certaintimes? It comes out only when all the evidences come together.It comes out only when an end to it is approaching, both for youand for the other person. The time for you to have a closuremust be here, only then would such talks come out.Otherwise, suspicion will not let you sleep the wholenightlong.Questioner: It eats away on the inside and even after allthe suffering; it still does not go away.Dadashri: What do you gain out of it?Questioner: There is no gain.Dadashri: Yet it still remains, does it not? Why did thisdiscussion occur? ‘We’ did not realize how rampant suspicionis. Because of the Gnan ‘we’ have given you, you can get ridof little things yourself; whatever bites you, you can get rid of.Now that you have Gnan, would you not be able to tell whensomething is gnawing away at you? That which hurts and jabsyou from within like a jagged pebble, would You not knowabout it? Would You not get rid of it? Would You allow it to stay?forgiveness. I should not have any suspicion about you, but I stillhave them.’ Should there not be such a solution? Dada is anamazingly astonishing human being of this current time cycle. Heis a wonder of all wonders.Today would you be able to sell only pure ghee? What astrange and peculiar time this is. You will not be able to affordeven the rent for your shop if you try to sell only pure ghee.They will sell a lot faster if the goods are adulterated. Thisreligion, our Akram Vignan is real. People will be able to takeadvantage of it as the fruits of their good deeds mature. Theirgood deeds are going to mature; that is inevitable.The world is roasting in a fire pit. How much ‘roasting’does a person experience when suspicions arise?Questioner: Too much.Dadashri: Are they being roasted or being eaten alive?Questioner: They are being eaten alive also.Dadashri: So watch out! Do not have suspicions aboutany one. This world is not worth having suspicions at all.Suspicions occur when you look deep into something. Oncesuspicion enters, only when it leaves will there be any good foryou. Now, it cannot leave on its own. You do not have the powerto remove it. Only the Gnani Purush can remove it for you; noone else can. Those with lesser amount of buddhi (intellect) willnot be bothered by suspicion. In whom does suspicion occur?It is a problem for those with excess buddhi. Before ‘we’attained Gnan, I used to have suspicions every step of the way.Therefore; there is less external suffering for those who donot have awareness and those who are very aware, due to theirexcess buddhi, have a lot of externally induced suffering(upadhi). Does awareness end up being beneficial or harmful?Questioner: It is very beneficial but one should get rid ofit if it causes suspicion.Aptavani-9125126Aptavani-9Dadashri: Get rid of the awareness? Do you want to getrid of awareness or suspicion?Questioner: Only the suspicion.Dadashri: Yes, you want to keep the awareness, do younot? ‘We’ have removed all roots of suspicion. Have youremoved it from its main root or have you kept some of it?Questioner: A lot of introspection was going on aboutsuspicion within.Dadashri: But have you not uprooted it yet?Questioner: Today, I found a nimit (external evidence)through Dada.Dadashri: Yes that must be the case otherwise such talkswould not surface. Besides, do I talk about this only at certaintimes? It comes out only when all the evidences come together.It comes out only when an end to it is approaching, both for youand for the other person. The time for you to have a closuremust be here, only then would such talks come out.Otherwise, suspicion will not let you sleep the wholenightlong.Questioner: It eats away on the inside and even after allthe suffering; it still does not go away.Dadashri: What do you gain out of it?Questioner: There is no gain.Dadashri: Yet it still remains, does it not? Why did thisdiscussion occur? ‘We’ did not realize how rampant suspicionis. Because of the Gnan ‘we’ have given you, you can get ridof little things yourself; whatever bites you, you can get rid of.Now that you have Gnan, would you not be able to tell whensomething is gnawing away at you? That which hurts and jabsyou from within like a jagged pebble, would You not knowabout it? Would You not get rid of it? Would You allow it to stay?forgiveness. I should not have any suspicion about you, but I stillhave them.’ Should there not be such a solution? Dada is anamazingly astonishing human being of this current time cycle. Heis a wonder of all wonders.Today would you be able to sell only pure ghee? What astrange and peculiar time this is. You will not be able to affordeven the rent for your shop if you try to sell only pure ghee.They will sell a lot faster if the goods are adulterated. Thisreligion, our Akram Vignan is real. People will be able to takeadvantage of it as the fruits of their good deeds mature. Theirgood deeds are going to mature; that is inevitable.The world is roasting in a fire pit. How much ‘roasting’does a person experience when suspicions arise?Questioner: Too much.Dadashri: Are they being roasted or being eaten alive?Questioner: They are being eaten alive also.Dadashri: So watch out! Do not have suspicions aboutany one. This world is not worth having suspicions at all.Suspicions occur when you look deep into something. Oncesuspicion enters, only when it leaves will there be any good foryou. Now, it cannot leave on its own. You do not have the powerto remove it. Only the Gnani Purush can remove it for you; noone else can. Those with lesser amount of buddhi (intellect) willnot be bothered by suspicion. In whom does suspicion occur?It is a problem for those with excess buddhi. Before ‘we’attained Gnan, I used to have suspicions every step of the way.Therefore; there is less external suffering for those who donot have awareness and those who are very aware, due to theirexcess buddhi, have a lot of externally induced suffering(upadhi). Does awareness end up being beneficial or harmful?Questioner: It is very beneficial but one should get rid ofit if it causes suspicion.Aptavani-9127128Aptavani-9Purity through pratikramanQuestioner: But sometimes a knot of suspicion is formedin the prakruti itself, how can that be untangled?Dadashri: What Dada is saying is not to have anysuspicions, if however it arises, you have to say, ‘Go to Dada!’Even when such circumstances arise, the circumstance and Youare separate.Questioner: Suspicions about someone will arise evenwhen I don’t want it to, so how can that suspicion beeliminated?Dadashri: In that situation, you have to recall the otherperson’s pure Self, and ask for His forgiveness and dopratikraman. This suspicion arises because of the mistake youmade in your past life.Questioner: Whatever consequences we have to sufferbecause of our past karmas, is the suffering reduced byrepeated pratikraman?Dadashri: Yes. And ‘You’ do not have to suffer it. ‘You’tell ‘Chandulal’, ‘Do pratikraman’, and it will be reduced. Themore pratikraman you do, the more it is reduced, until it iscompletely gone.Everyone comes together as a consequence of their pastkarmas. Neither a Gnani nor an agnani can change anything, sowhy should you incur double the loss?Questioner: Dada, you are right, you said that the worldhas been this way from the very beginning.Dadashri: There is nothing else to it. It appears the wayit does because it has been covered up, but really suspicion killspeople. Therefore, do not allow suspicion to arise and dopratikraman. Do pratikraman for any suspicion that arisestowards someone.Questioner: No, I will get rid of it.Dadashri: It will not remain anymore, will it?A suspicion-laden mind is separate and ‘You’are separateQuestioner: The effect of suspicion is felt instantly butwill that effect take place in the next life too?Dadashri: One reaps the fruits of the seeds he sows.Therefore destroy the seed altogether. If a seed of suspicionsprouts, you can recognize it and distinguish it from all othertypes of seeds. Uproot it and throw it away so that no newseeds come from it. Only when the fruit comes, will new seedscome.Questioner: So then it will not create an effect in the nextlife?Dadashri: There will be no effect in the next life if theseed is not sown (no cause). A seed was sown (cause wascreated) in your past life and that is why it gives rise to the effectof suspicion in this life. So do not allow any seed to be sown.This world is not worth having suspicion over, so go to sleeppeacefully.Questioner: It is not until one attains the vision free ofsuspicion (nihshank drashti) that he sees the world without anyfault (nirdosh).Dadashri: That is why I see people as flawless; withoutfaults. Now that you have become Shuddhatma; the pure Soul,the mind will not change. The mind however, is in the form ofa discharge. If the mind has become suspicion-laden (shankashil);it will be suspicious and if it shows you negative things, it isnegative, but there is no need to be afraid. ‘You’ should justobserve it. It will say, ‘I will die.’ So what? You should say,‘whatever happens, will happen and I don’t have any problemswith that either’ – this is what You have to say.Aptavani-9127128Aptavani-9Purity through pratikramanQuestioner: But sometimes a knot of suspicion is formedin the prakruti itself, how can that be untangled?Dadashri: What Dada is saying is not to have anysuspicions, if however it arises, you have to say, ‘Go to Dada!’Even when such circumstances arise, the circumstance and Youare separate.Questioner: Suspicions about someone will arise evenwhen I don’t want it to, so how can that suspicion beeliminated?Dadashri: In that situation, you have to recall the otherperson’s pure Self, and ask for His forgiveness and dopratikraman. This suspicion arises because of the mistake youmade in your past life.Questioner: Whatever consequences we have to sufferbecause of our past karmas, is the suffering reduced byrepeated pratikraman?Dadashri: Yes. And ‘You’ do not have to suffer it. ‘You’tell ‘Chandulal’, ‘Do pratikraman’, and it will be reduced. Themore pratikraman you do, the more it is reduced, until it iscompletely gone.Everyone comes together as a consequence of their pastkarmas. Neither a Gnani nor an agnani can change anything, sowhy should you incur double the loss?Questioner: Dada, you are right, you said that the worldhas been this way from the very beginning.Dadashri: There is nothing else to it. It appears the wayit does because it has been covered up, but really suspicion killspeople. Therefore, do not allow suspicion to arise and dopratikraman. Do pratikraman for any suspicion that arisestowards someone.Questioner: No, I will get rid of it.Dadashri: It will not remain anymore, will it?A suspicion-laden mind is separate and ‘You’are separateQuestioner: The effect of suspicion is felt instantly butwill that effect take place in the next life too?Dadashri: One reaps the fruits of the seeds he sows.Therefore destroy the seed altogether. If a seed of suspicionsprouts, you can recognize it and distinguish it from all othertypes of seeds. Uproot it and throw it away so that no newseeds come from it. Only when the fruit comes, will new seedscome.Questioner: So then it will not create an effect in the nextlife?Dadashri: There will be no effect in the next life if theseed is not sown (no cause). A seed was sown (cause wascreated) in your past life and that is why it gives rise to the effectof suspicion in this life. So do not allow any seed to be sown.This world is not worth having suspicion over, so go to sleeppeacefully.Questioner: It is not until one attains the vision free ofsuspicion (nihshank drashti) that he sees the world without anyfault (nirdosh).Dadashri: That is why I see people as flawless; withoutfaults. Now that you have become Shuddhatma; the pure Soul,the mind will not change. The mind however, is in the form ofa discharge. If the mind has become suspicion-laden (shankashil);it will be suspicious and if it shows you negative things, it isnegative, but there is no need to be afraid. ‘You’ should justobserve it. It will say, ‘I will die.’ So what? You should say,‘whatever happens, will happen and I don’t have any problemswith that either’ – this is what You have to say.Aptavani-9129130Aptavani-9Suspicion that never goes away charges newkarmaQuestioner: You have said that after Gnan all worldlyinteractions are a discharge; that is true. But when there isinappropriate conduct or interaction, where does the danger ofcharging anew lie in that?Dadashri: There is nothing in the world that poses adanger of charging, but charging of a new karma can occurwhen suspicion arises. If suspicion takes hold, know that thereis a danger of charging new karmas. Now what kind ofsuspicion are we talking about? It is suspicion that does not letyou sleep. Those are not trivial suspicions, they are notsuspicions that come and go. Suspicions that come and areforgotten have no significance.Questioner: Does that mean we should remain carefree?Can we be fearless and careless?Dadashri: No, if you become careless and carefree, youwill suffer. Why do you not put your hands on burningcharcoals?Questioner: Then what kind of a remedial action shouldbe taken there?Dadashri: What other actions will you take? Repentanceand pratikraman are the only ‘actions’ you can take.Questioner: So what is the independent internal effort(purusharth) after attaining Gnan? Do we have to continuerepenting or should we leave it to the charging mind (bhaavmun)?Dadashri: The bhaavmun (charging mind) does notremain after Gnan. But people whose Gnan is weak do have alittle of bhaavmun left, otherwise there is no bhaavmun afterGnan. If the result of Gnan is weak, if you did not hear the Gnancompletely or properly or you did not speak the Gnan sentencescompletely during the Gnan Vidhi, then the Gnan is weak inside.Sometimes even a brand new engine will not run, does thathappen or not?So repenting is all that is needed and You are not the onerepenting. You have to make the non-self (Chandulal) do therepenting. Tell him, ‘You must repent. You are like this and likethat.’ That is what You have to tell ‘Chandulal’. Is anyone likelyto complain about You if You scold Chandulal in this manner?The non-Self was and is separate from theSelfSo suspicion will make everything cling to you, to yourrelative self. The internal enemies of anger, pride, attachment andgreed within will surround you and imprison you. All thoseinternal enemies are inanimate (achetan bhaav, jada bhaav).What can the inanimate, the non-Self, do to the animate(chetan, the Self)?Unnecessary thoughts, which carry you away, will notcome now that You have become the Self, and if they do, Youdo not have to listen to them. They are all related to the bodycomplex (pudgal), they are the intent (bhaav) of the non-Self(pudgal bhaav). So do not submit to them. Nobody will botherYou. It is just like a barking dog. An elephant will not turnaround if a dog barks at it; it will realize that it is just a dog. Ifthere are two hundred dogs barking behind an elephant, will theelephant turn around to see who is barking? That is how thesepudgal bhaavs are. They will bother an agnani (those who donot have Self-realization) because he has not become an‘elephant’ (the Self) yet. An agnani will get involved (affected)with them, immediately.‘No body has the power to do anything’ to have thisbhaav is fearlessness (shoorvirata). Everything else is matter(jada) and You are chetan, the Self. You are the one withinfinite energy!Aptavani-9129130Aptavani-9Suspicion that never goes away charges newkarmaQuestioner: You have said that after Gnan all worldlyinteractions are a discharge; that is true. But when there isinappropriate conduct or interaction, where does the danger ofcharging anew lie in that?Dadashri: There is nothing in the world that poses adanger of charging, but charging of a new karma can occurwhen suspicion arises. If suspicion takes hold, know that thereis a danger of charging new karmas. Now what kind ofsuspicion are we talking about? It is suspicion that does not letyou sleep. Those are not trivial suspicions, they are notsuspicions that come and go. Suspicions that come and areforgotten have no significance.Questioner: Does that mean we should remain carefree?Can we be fearless and careless?Dadashri: No, if you become careless and carefree, youwill suffer. Why do you not put your hands on burningcharcoals?Questioner: Then what kind of a remedial action shouldbe taken there?Dadashri: What other actions will you take? Repentanceand pratikraman are the only ‘actions’ you can take.Questioner: So what is the independent internal effort(purusharth) after attaining Gnan? Do we have to continuerepenting or should we leave it to the charging mind (bhaavmun)?Dadashri: The bhaavmun (charging mind) does notremain after Gnan. But people whose Gnan is weak do have alittle of bhaavmun left, otherwise there is no bhaavmun afterGnan. If the result of Gnan is weak, if you did not hear the Gnancompletely or properly or you did not speak the Gnan sentencescompletely during the Gnan Vidhi, then the Gnan is weak inside.Sometimes even a brand new engine will not run, does thathappen or not?So repenting is all that is needed and You are not the onerepenting. You have to make the non-self (Chandulal) do therepenting. Tell him, ‘You must repent. You are like this and likethat.’ That is what You have to tell ‘Chandulal’. Is anyone likelyto complain about You if You scold Chandulal in this manner?The non-Self was and is separate from theSelfSo suspicion will make everything cling to you, to yourrelative self. The internal enemies of anger, pride, attachment andgreed within will surround you and imprison you. All thoseinternal enemies are inanimate (achetan bhaav, jada bhaav).What can the inanimate, the non-Self, do to the animate(chetan, the Self)?Unnecessary thoughts, which carry you away, will notcome now that You have become the Self, and if they do, Youdo not have to listen to them. They are all related to the bodycomplex (pudgal), they are the intent (bhaav) of the non-Self(pudgal bhaav). So do not submit to them. Nobody will botherYou. It is just like a barking dog. An elephant will not turnaround if a dog barks at it; it will realize that it is just a dog. Ifthere are two hundred dogs barking behind an elephant, will theelephant turn around to see who is barking? That is how thesepudgal bhaavs are. They will bother an agnani (those who donot have Self-realization) because he has not become an‘elephant’ (the Self) yet. An agnani will get involved (affected)with them, immediately.‘No body has the power to do anything’ to have thisbhaav is fearlessness (shoorvirata). Everything else is matter(jada) and You are chetan, the Self. You are the one withinfinite energy!Aptavani-9131132Aptavani-9Questioner: We will tackle those thoughts when theycome!Dadashri: How will they come in the first place? You willnot have to tackle them even if they come; You have nothing todo with them. They are of a different caste and so are You.Different caste and different lineage! So nothing can happen, infact nothing really happens either. One has not even seenanything happen. All are just suspicions and that too it is merelya pudgal bhaav i.e. it is all inanimate and of the non-Self.Nothing happens to You and it is a waste of time and energy.Yes indeed if it were of the chetan bhaav; of the Self, it wouldovercome You but that is not so, so then? What can theinanimate do to the animate? It would be a different matter if itwere chetan. The Gnan says that all that anoints, the anointingtendencies of the mind-speech-body are inanimate - ‘man-vachan-kayana tammam lepaymaan bhaavo, ey jada nabhaavo chhe’ and the ‘Self’ is nirleyp i.e. it can never beaffected; it can never be anointed. So what is going to anointyou? Do we not say that the inanimate bhaav are those of theprakruti (non-Self)?Questioner: Yes we do.Dadashri: Then the questions and the speculation of‘what could it be, what could it not be?’ would never arise. Allthe anointing tendencies of the mind-body-speech are inanimateattributes, tendencies of matter (the non-Self); they are not ofthe Self. Their form, their caste and their guise are different.What do they have to do with You?Awareness of Gnan against suspicionQuestioner: Now after Gnan, what do we have to do,when suspicion arises?Dadashri: You just have to continue to ‘see’ thatsuspicion has arisen.Questioner: Should we not show our opposition towardsthe suspicion?Dadashri: You don’t have to do anything! The adjustmentswill be taken on their own. You just have to keep observing,‘Oh ho! Chandulal has suspicion.’ When suspicion arises, he isalways in serious torment (santaap). He is in tremendousmisery. The Lord has said that suspicion is the biggest mistakethat gives instant misery. That suspicion will give misery to theother person whenever it will, but before it does, it will causetremendous misery to the one having suspicion. By retaliating(pratibhav), the pain of suspicion will increase.Questioner: So do we have to remain separate withawareness at the time of suspicion?Dadashri: You have to remain separate at that time butalso you have to remain separate all other times too. Try toremain separate for one day; try to do it one day out of theweek. Then you will realize that there is nothing to it if you haveto do it the next day. You will not fall.Questioner: The problem is not with the falling; it is withthe entanglements it creates.Dadashri: The entanglement is due to your priorpractices and habits and that is why it does not go away. It doesnot leave. But there is no need for suspicion now.Questioner: Does suspicion get destroyed when I remainseparate?Dadashri: Yes, suspicion dissipates on its own.Questioner: So from now on all that is needed is for usto maintain this awakened awareness (jagruti after Gnan).Dadashri: The ‘seer’ (jonaar) is always aware. If one isa ‘seer’ then he is jagrut (awake). One is knower-seer (gnata-drashta) only when he is aware or awake. Otherwise, theAptavani-9131132Aptavani-9Questioner: We will tackle those thoughts when theycome!Dadashri: How will they come in the first place? You willnot have to tackle them even if they come; You have nothing todo with them. They are of a different caste and so are You.Different caste and different lineage! So nothing can happen, infact nothing really happens either. One has not even seenanything happen. All are just suspicions and that too it is merelya pudgal bhaav i.e. it is all inanimate and of the non-Self.Nothing happens to You and it is a waste of time and energy.Yes indeed if it were of the chetan bhaav; of the Self, it wouldovercome You but that is not so, so then? What can theinanimate do to the animate? It would be a different matter if itwere chetan. The Gnan says that all that anoints, the anointingtendencies of the mind-speech-body are inanimate - ‘man-vachan-kayana tammam lepaymaan bhaavo, ey jada nabhaavo chhe’ and the ‘Self’ is nirleyp i.e. it can never beaffected; it can never be anointed. So what is going to anointyou? Do we not say that the inanimate bhaav are those of theprakruti (non-Self)?Questioner: Yes we do.Dadashri: Then the questions and the speculation of‘what could it be, what could it not be?’ would never arise. Allthe anointing tendencies of the mind-body-speech are inanimateattributes, tendencies of matter (the non-Self); they are not ofthe Self. Their form, their caste and their guise are different.What do they have to do with You?Awareness of Gnan against suspicionQuestioner: Now after Gnan, what do we have to do,when suspicion arises?Dadashri: You just have to continue to ‘see’ thatsuspicion has arisen.Questioner: Should we not show our opposition towardsthe suspicion?Dadashri: You don’t have to do anything! The adjustmentswill be taken on their own. You just have to keep observing,‘Oh ho! Chandulal has suspicion.’ When suspicion arises, he isalways in serious torment (santaap). He is in tremendousmisery. The Lord has said that suspicion is the biggest mistakethat gives instant misery. That suspicion will give misery to theother person whenever it will, but before it does, it will causetremendous misery to the one having suspicion. By retaliating(pratibhav), the pain of suspicion will increase.Questioner: So do we have to remain separate withawareness at the time of suspicion?Dadashri: You have to remain separate at that time butalso you have to remain separate all other times too. Try toremain separate for one day; try to do it one day out of theweek. Then you will realize that there is nothing to it if you haveto do it the next day. You will not fall.Questioner: The problem is not with the falling; it is withthe entanglements it creates.Dadashri: The entanglement is due to your priorpractices and habits and that is why it does not go away. It doesnot leave. But there is no need for suspicion now.Questioner: Does suspicion get destroyed when I remainseparate?Dadashri: Yes, suspicion dissipates on its own.Questioner: So from now on all that is needed is for usto maintain this awakened awareness (jagruti after Gnan).Dadashri: The ‘seer’ (jonaar) is always aware. If one isa ‘seer’ then he is jagrut (awake). One is knower-seer (gnata-drashta) only when he is aware or awake. Otherwise, theAptavani-9133134Aptavani-9suffering he has to endure is correspondingly proportionate tothe lack of awareness (ajagruti).Opposing suspicion about the other personQuestioner: If someone is suspicious about me, how canI solve the problem?Dadashri: If you have knowledge of his suspiciontowards you then you should forget about that knowledge. Thatknowledge should be forgotten. How do you know whether hehas suspicions about you or not?Questioner: What if he tells me directly on my face thathe has suspicions about certain things about me?Dadashri: If he tells you on your face then tell him, ‘Youhave the suspicion. You will suffer from it. If you keepsuspecting, you will be the sufferer.’ Just say this much andwhatever happens after that, what can you do? No one will besuspicious of you if your conduct is good. That is the principleof the world. Your conduct had been inappropriate sometime orother in the past and that is why the suspicion is there. It is asif a person made a mistake when he was twenty-five years oldbut his case is heard in court when he is sixty. That is howeverything is. Therefore, whenever a person has suspicion aboutyou, it is your own fault.Questioner: Do I have to ask him why he is suspectingme?Dadashri: There is no joy in asking. You should not ask.You should immediately realize that it is your own fault.Otherwise, why would he have suspicion? Many people aresuspected of stealing things even though they do not steal.Therefore, they must have been thieves in their past. Otherwise,suspicion would not arise.Questioner: What can I do if the other person sees itthat way?Dadashri: No, the faulty vision is not of the other person.It is the result of your own mistake. The world is not so unjustthat others will see you with suspicion if you are innocent. Theworld is absolutely just; it is just every second.Applying the principle, ‘Fault is of the sufferer’ will solvethis problem. You have to ‘see’ who is suffering: the onesuspecting or the one being suspected.Questioner: My understanding is that all these questionsand suspicions arise because one is not following the five Agnasof Dada properly.Dadashri: Yes, otherwise they will never arise. There isnothing if you practice the five Agnas. Any deficiency inpracticing the Agnas will give rise to those things. Thousands ofpeople who practice these Agnas live in internal and externalharmony (samadhi).The world remains suspicion less wheresuspicion is neededThere is only one place where there is a need forsuspicion and that is to question yourself ‘Am I reallyChandulal?’ that is the only suspicion you need to continue tohave. That is not suicide.Questioner: Suspicion on, ‘I am Chandulal’…Dadashri: Then your work is done. Nobody has thissuspicion, even when I question them repeatedly about who theyare, they just tell me, ‘I am Chandulal.’ This suspicion abouttheir identity never arises, does it?When I keep stirring this issue, then the suspicion arisesand one starts to think, ‘What Dada is saying is correct; thereis some truth in it.’ Otherwise, one will never begin to havesuspicions about his real identity.Questioner: Is it necessary for that suspicion to arisebefore one can progress further?Aptavani-9133134Aptavani-9suffering he has to endure is correspondingly proportionate tothe lack of awareness (ajagruti).Opposing suspicion about the other personQuestioner: If someone is suspicious about me, how canI solve the problem?Dadashri: If you have knowledge of his suspiciontowards you then you should forget about that knowledge. Thatknowledge should be forgotten. How do you know whether hehas suspicions about you or not?Questioner: What if he tells me directly on my face thathe has suspicions about certain things about me?Dadashri: If he tells you on your face then tell him, ‘Youhave the suspicion. You will suffer from it. If you keepsuspecting, you will be the sufferer.’ Just say this much andwhatever happens after that, what can you do? No one will besuspicious of you if your conduct is good. That is the principleof the world. Your conduct had been inappropriate sometime orother in the past and that is why the suspicion is there. It is asif a person made a mistake when he was twenty-five years oldbut his case is heard in court when he is sixty. That is howeverything is. Therefore, whenever a person has suspicion aboutyou, it is your own fault.Questioner: Do I have to ask him why he is suspectingme?Dadashri: There is no joy in asking. You should not ask.You should immediately realize that it is your own fault.Otherwise, why would he have suspicion? Many people aresuspected of stealing things even though they do not steal.Therefore, they must have been thieves in their past. Otherwise,suspicion would not arise.Questioner: What can I do if the other person sees itthat way?Dadashri: No, the faulty vision is not of the other person.It is the result of your own mistake. The world is not so unjustthat others will see you with suspicion if you are innocent. Theworld is absolutely just; it is just every second.Applying the principle, ‘Fault is of the sufferer’ will solvethis problem. You have to ‘see’ who is suffering: the onesuspecting or the one being suspected.Questioner: My understanding is that all these questionsand suspicions arise because one is not following the five Agnasof Dada properly.Dadashri: Yes, otherwise they will never arise. There isnothing if you practice the five Agnas. Any deficiency inpracticing the Agnas will give rise to those things. Thousands ofpeople who practice these Agnas live in internal and externalharmony (samadhi).The world remains suspicion less wheresuspicion is neededThere is only one place where there is a need forsuspicion and that is to question yourself ‘Am I reallyChandulal?’ that is the only suspicion you need to continue tohave. That is not suicide.Questioner: Suspicion on, ‘I am Chandulal’…Dadashri: Then your work is done. Nobody has thissuspicion, even when I question them repeatedly about who theyare, they just tell me, ‘I am Chandulal.’ This suspicion abouttheir identity never arises, does it?When I keep stirring this issue, then the suspicion arisesand one starts to think, ‘What Dada is saying is correct; thereis some truth in it.’ Otherwise, one will never begin to havesuspicions about his real identity.Questioner: Is it necessary for that suspicion to arisebefore one can progress further?Aptavani-9135136Aptavani-9Dadashri: No, not like that. These words are specificallyfor that suspicion; the words ‘Am I Chandulal?’ is helpful to him.All other suspicion is suicide. If the suspicion, ‘Am I reallyChandulal… am I really a son... a father… like the world saysI am?’ arises, then it is worth it.So which suspicion is worth having? Suspicion related tothe self, ‘Is this the atma (soul, the real Self) or that is the atma?’Until one realizes the Atma (the Self), he will continue to havesuspicions, just as the world does.All accusations are made because of the belief ‘I amChandulal for sure. I am decidedly (nischaya thi - in reality)Chandulal. I am truly Chandulal.’ But now suspicion has arisenabout this identity, has it not? A real doubt (vahem) has arisenin this matter, has it not? This suspicion will attain your work ofSelf-realization. No one gets doubts in this matter. No one willhave suspicions in this matter even when one tries to.How can such suspicion arise? Arey! Even the authorities,the government allows this blunder to continue. They willannounce, ‘Is Chandulal present?’ and so Chandulal will standup and the authorities will accept that. But he will neversuspect that he is not Chandulal and that he is holding on tothe wrong thing.There is nothing in the outside world that will allow oneto suspect one’s identity of, ‘Am I really Chandulal?’ Evenlegal documents endorse that he is Chandulal. When so manypeople accept this, how can he then have any suspicion aboutthis?Doubt over wrong knowledgeThe one who creates doubts about one’s own knowledge(of ‘I am Chandulal’) is a Gnani. Your own knowledge is neverwrong, is it? But a Gnani can do everything and that is why youwill have doubts within you; he will raise doubt about your ownknowledge (about your identity). Your work is done once thatwrong belief is removed.One man told me, ‘I have never had any suspicions aboutmy ‘self’. Today I do.’ I asked him, ‘A real doubt has fallentoday on your knowledge that you are Chandulal, has it not?’Doubt means a crack has occurred. So should a crack notappear in the knowledge of ‘I am Chandulal’? This suspicionmust arise. One has to be absolutely suspicion free (nihshank)about the real knowledge, of ‘I am the Soul; that is my realSelf’. People on the other hand, remain absolutely suspicion freeabout the wrong knowledge of, ‘I am Chandulal.’So when a doubt arises over the knowledge that has beenknown so far, then ‘we’ know that that knowledge is going tocollapse. The knowledge in which doubt (vahem) and suspicion(shanka) falls, that knowledge is going to dissipate. There hasto be knowledge that allows no suspicions. And that knowledge,which is real, will never have any suspicions. Sometimes, due toa veil of ignorance, one may not be able to understand, but thatis a different matter altogether. Otherwise, no suspicion can everoccur in the knowledge that is real. This knowledge is Gnan, theSelf. It is because therein lies the Self.Doubt only over the egoThere has never been doubt over the ego. Doubt occursover everything but not over the ego. Doubt over the belief of,‘This Chandulal is I’ is considered doubt over the ego.And you are not to get rid of your doubt over Chandulal;you simply have to keep it ‘dramatic’. A performer playing therole of King Bhartruhari is required to play his role veryprecisely. He will shout, he will renounce, he will cry, he willmake all the gestures that will convince the audience of hissorrow. After the play if we ask him, ‘were you very sad andhurting you a lot?’ He will tell you, ‘No! I am Laxmichand. Iwas simply playing the role of King Bhartruhari.’ That is exactlyAptavani-9135136Aptavani-9Dadashri: No, not like that. These words are specificallyfor that suspicion; the words ‘Am I Chandulal?’ is helpful to him.All other suspicion is suicide. If the suspicion, ‘Am I reallyChandulal… am I really a son... a father… like the world saysI am?’ arises, then it is worth it.So which suspicion is worth having? Suspicion related tothe self, ‘Is this the atma (soul, the real Self) or that is the atma?’Until one realizes the Atma (the Self), he will continue to havesuspicions, just as the world does.All accusations are made because of the belief ‘I amChandulal for sure. I am decidedly (nischaya thi - in reality)Chandulal. I am truly Chandulal.’ But now suspicion has arisenabout this identity, has it not? A real doubt (vahem) has arisenin this matter, has it not? This suspicion will attain your work ofSelf-realization. No one gets doubts in this matter. No one willhave suspicions in this matter even when one tries to.How can such suspicion arise? Arey! Even the authorities,the government allows this blunder to continue. They willannounce, ‘Is Chandulal present?’ and so Chandulal will standup and the authorities will accept that. But he will neversuspect that he is not Chandulal and that he is holding on tothe wrong thing.There is nothing in the outside world that will allow oneto suspect one’s identity of, ‘Am I really Chandulal?’ Evenlegal documents endorse that he is Chandulal. When so manypeople accept this, how can he then have any suspicion aboutthis?Doubt over wrong knowledgeThe one who creates doubts about one’s own knowledge(of ‘I am Chandulal’) is a Gnani. Your own knowledge is neverwrong, is it? But a Gnani can do everything and that is why youwill have doubts within you; he will raise doubt about your ownknowledge (about your identity). Your work is done once thatwrong belief is removed.One man told me, ‘I have never had any suspicions aboutmy ‘self’. Today I do.’ I asked him, ‘A real doubt has fallentoday on your knowledge that you are Chandulal, has it not?’Doubt means a crack has occurred. So should a crack notappear in the knowledge of ‘I am Chandulal’? This suspicionmust arise. One has to be absolutely suspicion free (nihshank)about the real knowledge, of ‘I am the Soul; that is my realSelf’. People on the other hand, remain absolutely suspicion freeabout the wrong knowledge of, ‘I am Chandulal.’So when a doubt arises over the knowledge that has beenknown so far, then ‘we’ know that that knowledge is going tocollapse. The knowledge in which doubt (vahem) and suspicion(shanka) falls, that knowledge is going to dissipate. There hasto be knowledge that allows no suspicions. And that knowledge,which is real, will never have any suspicions. Sometimes, due toa veil of ignorance, one may not be able to understand, but thatis a different matter altogether. Otherwise, no suspicion can everoccur in the knowledge that is real. This knowledge is Gnan, theSelf. It is because therein lies the Self.Doubt only over the egoThere has never been doubt over the ego. Doubt occursover everything but not over the ego. Doubt over the belief of,‘This Chandulal is I’ is considered doubt over the ego.And you are not to get rid of your doubt over Chandulal;you simply have to keep it ‘dramatic’. A performer playing therole of King Bhartruhari is required to play his role veryprecisely. He will shout, he will renounce, he will cry, he willmake all the gestures that will convince the audience of hissorrow. After the play if we ask him, ‘were you very sad andhurting you a lot?’ He will tell you, ‘No! I am Laxmichand. Iwas simply playing the role of King Bhartruhari.’ That is exactlyAptavani-9137138Aptavani-9how you will have to play the role of ‘Chandulal’ in your worldlyinteractions. Your work is done when you realize the answer to,‘Who am I?’Suspicion-free about ‘I am Chandulal’ forcountless past livesNo one has really any suspicions or doubts regarding theissue of, ‘Who am I?’ Even the greatest of ascetics and spiritualmasters have never had suspicions over their identity with theirname. If suspicions were to arise then we can know that theyare approaching samyak darshan - the right vision. However,that suspicion does not arise in the first place! On the contrary,they strengthen their ignorance of their identity and because ofthat, anger-pride-attachment-greed remain intact. One has heldon to the non-truth, this has caused an awareness of this non-truth to be the truth. If one hangs on to the non-truth for a longperiod of time, that non-truth becomes the truth for him. If thenon-truth becomes deeply engrained in his belief, it becomes thetruth and then he will never come to the realization that it is thenon-truth; it will always be the truth for him.Hence anger-pride-attachment-greed will go away ifsuspicions about one’s true identity arises, but such suspicionsnever do. How would they? Who would help you in doing so?Man has been suspicion-free about his real identity for endlesspast lives, who can create suspicion in this matter? Whatevername one has been given in any life, he assumed it to be thetruth. Suspicion has never arisen about it, has it? Howtremendously difficult this is? And anger-pride-attachment-greedremains intact because of that. You do not need anger-pride-attachment-greed if you are the pure Soul and if you areChandulal, then you need them. The ‘solution’ of all thescriptures comes from knowing only this – the knowledge of theSelf. But how can one attain the knowledge of the Self? Afterattaining the knowledge of the Self, nothing more remains to beknown, but how is one to know this?Suspicion-free in regards to the SoulThe Lord has said that one cannot become suspicion freeregarding the Self. This had indeed happened for Lord Krishna.Otherwise, suspicion over what the Soul must be like will alwaysremain: ‘Is the Soul like this? What must the Soul be like? Surelythere must be some doer-ship in the Soul?’ Uncertainties suchas these are bound to remain. Otherwise people will claim,‘How can everything function without doer-ship?’ Alas onlythe Gnani Purush can know how everything works. The Gnanihas come to know the Soul (the Self). The Gnani knows andexperiences the Self and it is not the kind that is described inthe scriptures. Nothing related to the Self is to be found inbooks.No one has become suspicion free in matters of the Self.People claim, ‘Surely the soul must have at least this much intent(bhavna)? Now the soul that people believe to be the Soul isthe soul I call nischetan-chetan (‘lifeless life’ or the ‘chargedsoul’ or ‘charged consciousness’). So how can anyone attain theSoul based on these beliefs? Suspicion is bound to remain here.The whole world has suspicion in matters of the Soul.People tell me, ‘the soul is doing anger-pride-attachment-greed’I respond, ‘So then we don’t have to worry about anything. Thematter is over!’ They go on to justify, ‘because matter which isinanimate (jada) can never do anything.’ I tell them, ‘Yes, theinanimate cannot do anything but, how can the Soul? When theenergy or the power to ‘do’ is not an inherent property of anentity, how can that entity do anything?’ In fact, people do nothave knowledge of the vyatirek (tertiary) property that ariseswhen jada matter (inanimate) and chetan (Soul) the animate,come in close proximity with each other. They do not know thatwhen these two elements come together, a third property arisesspontaneously. Neither the Soul nor the matter loses its intrinsic(anvaya) property but a new, a third property (vyatirek) arises.However, only the Gnani can make one understand this.Aptavani-9137138Aptavani-9how you will have to play the role of ‘Chandulal’ in your worldlyinteractions. Your work is done when you realize the answer to,‘Who am I?’Suspicion-free about ‘I am Chandulal’ forcountless past livesNo one has really any suspicions or doubts regarding theissue of, ‘Who am I?’ Even the greatest of ascetics and spiritualmasters have never had suspicions over their identity with theirname. If suspicions were to arise then we can know that theyare approaching samyak darshan - the right vision. However,that suspicion does not arise in the first place! On the contrary,they strengthen their ignorance of their identity and because ofthat, anger-pride-attachment-greed remain intact. One has heldon to the non-truth, this has caused an awareness of this non-truth to be the truth. If one hangs on to the non-truth for a longperiod of time, that non-truth becomes the truth for him. If thenon-truth becomes deeply engrained in his belief, it becomes thetruth and then he will never come to the realization that it is thenon-truth; it will always be the truth for him.Hence anger-pride-attachment-greed will go away ifsuspicions about one’s true identity arises, but such suspicionsnever do. How would they? Who would help you in doing so?Man has been suspicion-free about his real identity for endlesspast lives, who can create suspicion in this matter? Whatevername one has been given in any life, he assumed it to be thetruth. Suspicion has never arisen about it, has it? Howtremendously difficult this is? And anger-pride-attachment-greedremains intact because of that. You do not need anger-pride-attachment-greed if you are the pure Soul and if you areChandulal, then you need them. The ‘solution’ of all thescriptures comes from knowing only this – the knowledge of theSelf. But how can one attain the knowledge of the Self? Afterattaining the knowledge of the Self, nothing more remains to beknown, but how is one to know this?Suspicion-free in regards to the SoulThe Lord has said that one cannot become suspicion freeregarding the Self. This had indeed happened for Lord Krishna.Otherwise, suspicion over what the Soul must be like will alwaysremain: ‘Is the Soul like this? What must the Soul be like? Surelythere must be some doer-ship in the Soul?’ Uncertainties suchas these are bound to remain. Otherwise people will claim,‘How can everything function without doer-ship?’ Alas onlythe Gnani Purush can know how everything works. The Gnanihas come to know the Soul (the Self). The Gnani knows andexperiences the Self and it is not the kind that is described inthe scriptures. Nothing related to the Self is to be found inbooks.No one has become suspicion free in matters of the Self.People claim, ‘Surely the soul must have at least this much intent(bhavna)? Now the soul that people believe to be the Soul isthe soul I call nischetan-chetan (‘lifeless life’ or the ‘chargedsoul’ or ‘charged consciousness’). So how can anyone attain theSoul based on these beliefs? Suspicion is bound to remain here.The whole world has suspicion in matters of the Soul.People tell me, ‘the soul is doing anger-pride-attachment-greed’I respond, ‘So then we don’t have to worry about anything. Thematter is over!’ They go on to justify, ‘because matter which isinanimate (jada) can never do anything.’ I tell them, ‘Yes, theinanimate cannot do anything but, how can the Soul? When theenergy or the power to ‘do’ is not an inherent property of anentity, how can that entity do anything?’ In fact, people do nothave knowledge of the vyatirek (tertiary) property that ariseswhen jada matter (inanimate) and chetan (Soul) the animate,come in close proximity with each other. They do not know thatwhen these two elements come together, a third property arisesspontaneously. Neither the Soul nor the matter loses its intrinsic(anvaya) property but a new, a third property (vyatirek) arises.However, only the Gnani can make one understand this.Aptavani-9139140Aptavani-9One cannot waste this precious human lifethis wayWhen a person starts thinking, ‘I wonder what the Soulis like? Is it like this or like that?’ the Lord called this statesamyaktva mohaniya (delusional state of identity with egowhich has understood the separate existence of the Real Selfand strives to achieve that state; fascination of the real). Peoplehave not even come close to such an inquiry. This question hasnot even arisen. Currently everyone is in mithyatva mohaniya(delusional state of residing in, and identifying with, andexistence as the ego) and mishra mohaniya (delusional state ofexistence which is a mixture of alternating state betweensamyaktva and mithyatva), both the states are that of beingdeluded by the illusion that this world is real. A man in whomsamyaktva mohaniya arises, the Lord would call him a greatsoul. But here man considers himself something great if he hasa house and some land; he considers himself so fortunate that herubs his belly with contentment, belches with satisfaction andfalls asleep. Hey you foolish one! How can you sleep? You haveslept for countless past lives in this way, rubbing your belly. Areyou not ashamed? You rub your big belly this way and belchwith contentment. How can you fall asleep? Is this world forsleeping away your life like this? How can you sleep when youhave attained this precious human life? You have attained ahuman life form, you have all the conveniences, you haveconveniences of reading all the great scriptures, you haveattained a high level of devotion (bhakti), you have haddarshan of the vitarag Lords in derasars and you go off to sleepfeeling content like this?And now people have created ‘bedrooms’. You foolishones, you cannot have bedrooms. Everyone should sleeptogether in one room. Bedrooms create worldly troubles!Bedrooms have caused people to become preoccupied withthat which perpetuate worldly troubles whole nightlong. So howcan they even think about the Self? Can one have thoughtsabout the Self in his private bedroom?I asked one person, ‘What is your meditation (dhyan)before you go to sleep?’ He replied, ‘It is ten thirty now soshould I not go to sleep?’ Hey you!! You are going to sleepwithout earning anything? ‘Tell me what you earned today?’ Iasked him and he replied, ‘At least I do something, she does notdo anything.’ I asked her and she proceeded to tell me, ‘Hedoes not do anything either.’ This is how people talk.Questioner: Yes, that is how people look at things ratherthan looking at themselves.Dadashri: All this is nothing but deceit!The entire world lives in suspicion without exception.Their suspicions never ventures into ‘what is the Soul?’ Theyhave uncertainties about, ‘I wonder if the Soul is like this? Ormaybe it is like that?’ Uncertainty always remains and that givesrise to all kinds of suspicions and more suspicions.That is when suspicions and uncertainties goawayQuestioner: I am not saying that I have become freefrom suspicions, but suspicion does not arise within.Dadashri: Yes, they may not arise, that is a differentmatter. You will feel that way for a certain period of time. Thenwhen difficulties come, suspicions will arise again. Does anythingever remain the same? Just as day and night keep changing, timekeeps changing, circumstances will constantly change.Therefore when will man’s suspicions leave? They willleave when he becomes vitarag (free from all attachments) andnirbhay (fearless). Otherwise, suspicions will not leave. As longas there is peace, it will appear to be comforting and easy.When external problems arise, turmoil and restlessness begins.Aptavani-9139140Aptavani-9One cannot waste this precious human lifethis wayWhen a person starts thinking, ‘I wonder what the Soulis like? Is it like this or like that?’ the Lord called this statesamyaktva mohaniya (delusional state of identity with egowhich has understood the separate existence of the Real Selfand strives to achieve that state; fascination of the real). Peoplehave not even come close to such an inquiry. This question hasnot even arisen. Currently everyone is in mithyatva mohaniya(delusional state of residing in, and identifying with, andexistence as the ego) and mishra mohaniya (delusional state ofexistence which is a mixture of alternating state betweensamyaktva and mithyatva), both the states are that of beingdeluded by the illusion that this world is real. A man in whomsamyaktva mohaniya arises, the Lord would call him a greatsoul. But here man considers himself something great if he hasa house and some land; he considers himself so fortunate that herubs his belly with contentment, belches with satisfaction andfalls asleep. Hey you foolish one! How can you sleep? You haveslept for countless past lives in this way, rubbing your belly. Areyou not ashamed? You rub your big belly this way and belchwith contentment. How can you fall asleep? Is this world forsleeping away your life like this? How can you sleep when youhave attained this precious human life? You have attained ahuman life form, you have all the conveniences, you haveconveniences of reading all the great scriptures, you haveattained a high level of devotion (bhakti), you have haddarshan of the vitarag Lords in derasars and you go off to sleepfeeling content like this?And now people have created ‘bedrooms’. You foolishones, you cannot have bedrooms. Everyone should sleeptogether in one room. Bedrooms create worldly troubles!Bedrooms have caused people to become preoccupied withthat which perpetuate worldly troubles whole nightlong. So howcan they even think about the Self? Can one have thoughtsabout the Self in his private bedroom?I asked one person, ‘What is your meditation (dhyan)before you go to sleep?’ He replied, ‘It is ten thirty now soshould I not go to sleep?’ Hey you!! You are going to sleepwithout earning anything? ‘Tell me what you earned today?’ Iasked him and he replied, ‘At least I do something, she does notdo anything.’ I asked her and she proceeded to tell me, ‘Hedoes not do anything either.’ This is how people talk.Questioner: Yes, that is how people look at things ratherthan looking at themselves.Dadashri: All this is nothing but deceit!The entire world lives in suspicion without exception.Their suspicions never ventures into ‘what is the Soul?’ Theyhave uncertainties about, ‘I wonder if the Soul is like this? Ormaybe it is like that?’ Uncertainty always remains and that givesrise to all kinds of suspicions and more suspicions.That is when suspicions and uncertainties goawayQuestioner: I am not saying that I have become freefrom suspicions, but suspicion does not arise within.Dadashri: Yes, they may not arise, that is a differentmatter. You will feel that way for a certain period of time. Thenwhen difficulties come, suspicions will arise again. Does anythingever remain the same? Just as day and night keep changing, timekeeps changing, circumstances will constantly change.Therefore when will man’s suspicions leave? They willleave when he becomes vitarag (free from all attachments) andnirbhay (fearless). Otherwise, suspicions will not leave. As longas there is peace, it will appear to be comforting and easy.When external problems arise, turmoil and restlessness begins.Aptavani-9141142Aptavani-9Then inner entanglements commence and these give rise to allkinds of suspicions.Who has suspicion about the Atma?Questioner: Shrimad Rajchandraji has written in theAtma siddhi:‘Atma ni shanka kare Atma potey aap,Shanka no karnaar tey, acharaj eh amaap.’The existence of the soul is suspected by the soul itself,This is verily a matter of immeasurable amazement.Who has suspicions about the Soul, is it the soul or is itthe (buddhi) intellect?Dadashri: Suspicions about the Soul are done by thesoul itself; the intellect is not the one doing the suspecting. By thesoul, ‘we’ mean the soul that is in your belief or projection andnot the main Soul; the two are completely separate. What youcall the atma (soul), is the atma that is associated with theintellect and the ego. The ego, the intellect etc., collectively beginto have suspicions about the main Soul. What kind of suspicionsdo they have? ‘It does not seem like the main Soul. It does notfeel like that.’ They have suspicions and uncertainties about whatthe Soul must be like.Questioner: So besides the intellect, the atma is theretoo, is it associated with the intellect?Dadashri: What do you or the world currently believethe soul to be? One believes ‘I am Chandulal. The intellect ismine. The ego is mine. I myself am the soul and I have to makethe soul pure.’ That is what one believes. He does not realizethat the main Soul is pure (shuddha) indeed and all other thingsthat have a form are things that have been created. Therefore,the ego is in all this, the intellect is there too and that is whatcreates suspicions. The intellect (buddhi) alone does not createsuspicions; the intellect along with the ego creates suspicions.That is the one who does the suspecting.“The existence of the Soul is suspected by the soul (i.e.the charged soul with ego and intellect) itself.”One is the soul and he has suspicions about his own self.So besides ‘him’, who else would have suspicion? Neither thecomplex of anger-pride-attachment-greed nor the mind or theintellect does the suspecting. It is the soul (non-Self realized) thathas suspicions about the Soul. It is a wonder it says. It suspectsits own self. The ignorance in one has pervaded to such anextent that he begins to suspect his own existence: ‘do I or doI not exist?’ That is what he is trying to say. This is a beautifulquote from Krupadudev but only if one understands it.Questioner: Is it the work of the pratishthit atma (therelative or the charged atma, the relative-self, ‘I am Chandulal’)to have suspicions?Dadashri: The main Atma, the Self does not havesuspicion. But the pratishthit atma is definitely laden withsuspicions (shankashil). Depending on the kind of pratishtha(projections of one’s inner intent) you do of a murti (idol; yourbody; the one with a form), the fruits you reap from yourpratishtha will be matching. Similarly, you have also donepratishtha in this murti (your body). There is no differencebetween this idol and that idol. Whatever pratishtha you havedone in this body; whatever projections of belief you haveinstilled in this body is what you will receive. Good pratishthawill give you good fruits.Questioner: So it is the pratishthit atma that hassuspicion about the shuddha atma (pure atma; the main Soul)?Dadashri: Yes, the pratishthit atma. I have referred toit as ‘pratishthit atma’ but people call it ‘vyavahar atma’ (theworldly soul). What you currently believe as the atma is reallyAptavani-9141142Aptavani-9Then inner entanglements commence and these give rise to allkinds of suspicions.Who has suspicion about the Atma?Questioner: Shrimad Rajchandraji has written in theAtma siddhi:‘Atma ni shanka kare Atma potey aap,Shanka no karnaar tey, acharaj eh amaap.’The existence of the soul is suspected by the soul itself,This is verily a matter of immeasurable amazement.Who has suspicions about the Soul, is it the soul or is itthe (buddhi) intellect?Dadashri: Suspicions about the Soul are done by thesoul itself; the intellect is not the one doing the suspecting. By thesoul, ‘we’ mean the soul that is in your belief or projection andnot the main Soul; the two are completely separate. What youcall the atma (soul), is the atma that is associated with theintellect and the ego. The ego, the intellect etc., collectively beginto have suspicions about the main Soul. What kind of suspicionsdo they have? ‘It does not seem like the main Soul. It does notfeel like that.’ They have suspicions and uncertainties about whatthe Soul must be like.Questioner: So besides the intellect, the atma is theretoo, is it associated with the intellect?Dadashri: What do you or the world currently believethe soul to be? One believes ‘I am Chandulal. The intellect ismine. The ego is mine. I myself am the soul and I have to makethe soul pure.’ That is what one believes. He does not realizethat the main Soul is pure (shuddha) indeed and all other thingsthat have a form are things that have been created. Therefore,the ego is in all this, the intellect is there too and that is whatcreates suspicions. The intellect (buddhi) alone does not createsuspicions; the intellect along with the ego creates suspicions.That is the one who does the suspecting.“The existence of the Soul is suspected by the soul (i.e.the charged soul with ego and intellect) itself.”One is the soul and he has suspicions about his own self.So besides ‘him’, who else would have suspicion? Neither thecomplex of anger-pride-attachment-greed nor the mind or theintellect does the suspecting. It is the soul (non-Self realized) thathas suspicions about the Soul. It is a wonder it says. It suspectsits own self. The ignorance in one has pervaded to such anextent that he begins to suspect his own existence: ‘do I or doI not exist?’ That is what he is trying to say. This is a beautifulquote from Krupadudev but only if one understands it.Questioner: Is it the work of the pratishthit atma (therelative or the charged atma, the relative-self, ‘I am Chandulal’)to have suspicions?Dadashri: The main Atma, the Self does not havesuspicion. But the pratishthit atma is definitely laden withsuspicions (shankashil). Depending on the kind of pratishtha(projections of one’s inner intent) you do of a murti (idol; yourbody; the one with a form), the fruits you reap from yourpratishtha will be matching. Similarly, you have also donepratishtha in this murti (your body). There is no differencebetween this idol and that idol. Whatever pratishtha you havedone in this body; whatever projections of belief you haveinstilled in this body is what you will receive. Good pratishthawill give you good fruits.Questioner: So it is the pratishthit atma that hassuspicion about the shuddha atma (pure atma; the main Soul)?Dadashri: Yes, the pratishthit atma. I have referred toit as ‘pratishthit atma’ but people call it ‘vyavahar atma’ (theworldly soul). What you currently believe as the atma is reallyAptavani-9143144Aptavani-9the vyavahar atma – the relative self. But people do notunderstand what goes on within the relative self. You have nounderstanding about the vyavahar atma; the creator of another(new) pratishthit atma is ‘you’ yourself. Because you dopratishtha, it gives rise to the pratishthit atma. By having thebelief of ‘I am Chandulal’ and being Chandulal, your (new)pratishthit atma arises again; another pratishtha is beingformed within. Because you believe in the one with a form, youare doing pratishtha in the form and that is why the one witha form will be born. With the belief ‘I am a pure Soul’ everythingwill fall away.Pragnya (the direct light of the Self) isbiased only towards the SelfQuestioner: Does not the intellect (buddhi) also say, ‘Iam Shuddhatma (pure Soul) and not the body?’Dadashri: Here it is not the buddhi that says so. Thebuddhi will not allow you to say, ‘I am Shuddhatma.’ It is self-destruction for the intellect to say so. It will lose its ownexistence. Therefore the intellect will never side with theShuddhatma. If it says, ‘I am Shuddhatma,’ then the mind, body,chit and ego will lose their existence; so even the mind will notaccept this. They understand it but they will not accept it. Theintellect will always side with the worldly life and the worldlysoul; it will never side with the pure Soul. It will always opposethe pure Soul. Now there is an energy within you called‘pragnya shakti’; it has become separated from the Self. Aslong as it is involved in the worldly life, the Self does not haveto do anything. This energy of the Self, called pragnya shakti,does the ‘work’ on behalf of the Self. What is its function? Dayand night, it will keep guiding the relative-self towards the Self.The whole day it is constantly working to take the self towardsthe Self. And the energy called agnya shakti (ignorance of theSelf) which is what we call buddhi (intellect), works day andnight to take the relative self towards the worldly life. There isa constant and an on going tug of war within, between the two.Agnya is the intellect (buddhi) and pragnya is the main thing,the real thing. Pragnya always cautions and alerts You, theawakened Self inside and it is always trying to take You towardsmoksha. This pragnya shakti has arisen within You. Thespiritual level of pragnya shakti in Akram Vignan is much higherthan the level of sthita pragnya. In the state of sthita pragnyaone is an expert of the worldly interaction and will not criticizeanyone. He will consider himself to be the state of sthitapragnya because his intellect has become still. But this pragnyashakti is the energy that will take You to moksha, whereas theone who has sthita pragnya will need to find a path furtherahead to go to moksha.When suspicions about the Soul goes away completely,then know that you have attained moksha. When one isconvinced, ‘This verily is the Self’, then the work is attained.Nihshankta (suspicion-less-ness): Nirbhayta(fear-less-ness): Asangata (a state of beingfree from all association): MokshaWherever there is suspicion, there is misery. And ‘I ampure Soul’, is the state of suspicion-less-ness (nihshankta).Nihshankta is moksha. One’s spiritual work will be done onlywhen one becomes without any suspicion whatsoever. So youcan ask anything you want here. This Gnani Purush is here toget rid of all your suspicions. The Gnani can make younihshank when all kinds of suspicions arise. Suspicion-lessstate gives rise to fearlessness (nirbhayta). Fearlessness thenleads to the state of being asang. The one who is asang is notassociated whatsoever with any activities of thoughts speechor actions, even as they are being carried out. Asangata verilyis moksha.What has Krupadudev said?‘Suspicion less state (nihshankta) gives rise to fearlessnessAptavani-9143144Aptavani-9the vyavahar atma – the relative self. But people do notunderstand what goes on within the relative self. You have nounderstanding about the vyavahar atma; the creator of another(new) pratishthit atma is ‘you’ yourself. Because you dopratishtha, it gives rise to the pratishthit atma. By having thebelief of ‘I am Chandulal’ and being Chandulal, your (new)pratishthit atma arises again; another pratishtha is beingformed within. Because you believe in the one with a form, youare doing pratishtha in the form and that is why the one witha form will be born. With the belief ‘I am a pure Soul’ everythingwill fall away.Pragnya (the direct light of the Self) isbiased only towards the SelfQuestioner: Does not the intellect (buddhi) also say, ‘Iam Shuddhatma (pure Soul) and not the body?’Dadashri: Here it is not the buddhi that says so. Thebuddhi will not allow you to say, ‘I am Shuddhatma.’ It is self-destruction for the intellect to say so. It will lose its ownexistence. Therefore the intellect will never side with theShuddhatma. If it says, ‘I am Shuddhatma,’ then the mind, body,chit and ego will lose their existence; so even the mind will notaccept this. They understand it but they will not accept it. Theintellect will always side with the worldly life and the worldlysoul; it will never side with the pure Soul. It will always opposethe pure Soul. Now there is an energy within you called‘pragnya shakti’; it has become separated from the Self. Aslong as it is involved in the worldly life, the Self does not haveto do anything. This energy of the Self, called pragnya shakti,does the ‘work’ on behalf of the Self. What is its function? Dayand night, it will keep guiding the relative-self towards the Self.The whole day it is constantly working to take the self towardsthe Self. And the energy called agnya shakti (ignorance of theSelf) which is what we call buddhi (intellect), works day andnight to take the relative self towards the worldly life. There isa constant and an on going tug of war within, between the two.Agnya is the intellect (buddhi) and pragnya is the main thing,the real thing. Pragnya always cautions and alerts You, theawakened Self inside and it is always trying to take You towardsmoksha. This pragnya shakti has arisen within You. Thespiritual level of pragnya shakti in Akram Vignan is much higherthan the level of sthita pragnya. In the state of sthita pragnyaone is an expert of the worldly interaction and will not criticizeanyone. He will consider himself to be the state of sthitapragnya because his intellect has become still. But this pragnyashakti is the energy that will take You to moksha, whereas theone who has sthita pragnya will need to find a path furtherahead to go to moksha.When suspicions about the Soul goes away completely,then know that you have attained moksha. When one isconvinced, ‘This verily is the Self’, then the work is attained.Nihshankta (suspicion-less-ness): Nirbhayta(fear-less-ness): Asangata (a state of beingfree from all association): MokshaWherever there is suspicion, there is misery. And ‘I ampure Soul’, is the state of suspicion-less-ness (nihshankta).Nihshankta is moksha. One’s spiritual work will be done onlywhen one becomes without any suspicion whatsoever. So youcan ask anything you want here. This Gnani Purush is here toget rid of all your suspicions. The Gnani can make younihshank when all kinds of suspicions arise. Suspicion-lessstate gives rise to fearlessness (nirbhayta). Fearlessness thenleads to the state of being asang. The one who is asang is notassociated whatsoever with any activities of thoughts speechor actions, even as they are being carried out. Asangata verilyis moksha.What has Krupadudev said?‘Suspicion less state (nihshankta) gives rise to fearlessnessAptavani-9145146Aptavani-9(nirbhayta) and because of that one attains the state withoutany association (nisangata).’Now the suspicion referred to here is different fromworldly suspicion. It means suspicion that occurs starting pointof gnan, the pursuit of spiritual knowledge, the entry into path ofliberation to the final liberation. All this suspicion is regarding theSelf. Up to what point is it considered suspicion? To the pointwhere one no longer has suspicions about the Self; to the pointwhere there are no suspicions or uncertainties about what theSoul is and what it may not be. Until then one will not attain thestate devoid of suspicions (nihshankta). When one attains thestate free of suspicions, then no energy in this world can createfear. Absolute fearlessness is nirbhayta. And when one attainsthe state of fearlessness, then despite all company andassociations, he is nisang - meaning he is aloof, withoutassociation (independent). Despite grave and threateningassociations and connections, there prevails a state of absolutefreedom and that is moksha. That is what Krupadudev is saying.There is not a single person in this world that has becomecompletely free from suspicions about the Soul. Had anyoneattained this state, he would have found liberation and he wouldhave helped another five people or more achieve the same. Butinstead people are wandering aimlessly and so is he.This is what happens in the Gnan VidhiOtherwise, man has not become suspicion-free in any ofhis past lives, and especially in matters of the Soul, no one hasbecome suspicion-free (nihshankta). It is not easy to besuspicion-free about the Soul.This Gnan makes you suspicion-free (nihshank). Howdoes it happen? When the component of mind-intellect-chit-ego(antahkaran), the sense organs (gnanendriyas), organs ofaction (karmendriyas) all become unanimously accepting(ekmata) that is when one becomes suspicion-free (nihshank).When everything of the body becomes unified in agreement(ekmata), when the Gnan that is spoken by ‘Dada’ becomesone voice, all accept it, then one becomes suspicion-free(nihshank).You no longer have suspicions within, do you? Otherwise,one cannot go even one hour without having suspicions; there issuch a ‘big crowd’ within. There is no knowledge which all (theaforementioned components of the antahkaran, gnanendriyasetc.) within will accept. Either the mind will ‘shout andcomplain’, or the chit will ‘shout’. One entity or other within willbe upset and find faults. Therefore, they are such that they willnot become unanimous. There is a densely ‘packed’ ‘community’within. Even if one entity within questions, ‘What if thishappens?’ it will give rise to suspicion. And for You (the onewho has taken the Gnan in the Gnan Vidhi), there is no uprisingwithin anymore, is there? They are all united and present, arethey not? So it is only when everything within is uniformlyunanimous, that one becomes suspicion-free.Never before have all entities within the body becomeunanimous and uniformly united. It is a different thing when onebecomes focused in a deluded state (moorchha) in worldlymatters. This worldly state is like the state of one intoxicatedwith alcohol. Once you give them some ‘alcohol’, all within fallunder the spell of worldly fun (masti); whereas this Gnan iswithout such moorchha (delusion). This Gnan is such that evenif one is intoxicated with a little delusion, it will bring it down.So wherever you go, everyone has suspicions about theSoul and because of that they remain here caught up in theworldly life. They do not become suspicion-free and they do notachieve anything. Without a Gnani Purush, not a single personhas ever become suspicion-free, in matters of the Self. Peopleare looking for knowledge that removes all suspicion, it is not tobe found anywhere in anyone. It is not to be found even in theKramic path. It is only possible here because of Akram Vignan.Aptavani-9145146Aptavani-9(nirbhayta) and because of that one attains the state withoutany association (nisangata).’Now the suspicion referred to here is different fromworldly suspicion. It means suspicion that occurs starting pointof gnan, the pursuit of spiritual knowledge, the entry into path ofliberation to the final liberation. All this suspicion is regarding theSelf. Up to what point is it considered suspicion? To the pointwhere one no longer has suspicions about the Self; to the pointwhere there are no suspicions or uncertainties about what theSoul is and what it may not be. Until then one will not attain thestate devoid of suspicions (nihshankta). When one attains thestate free of suspicions, then no energy in this world can createfear. Absolute fearlessness is nirbhayta. And when one attainsthe state of fearlessness, then despite all company andassociations, he is nisang - meaning he is aloof, withoutassociation (independent). Despite grave and threateningassociations and connections, there prevails a state of absolutefreedom and that is moksha. That is what Krupadudev is saying.There is not a single person in this world that has becomecompletely free from suspicions about the Soul. Had anyoneattained this state, he would have found liberation and he wouldhave helped another five people or more achieve the same. Butinstead people are wandering aimlessly and so is he.This is what happens in the Gnan VidhiOtherwise, man has not become suspicion-free in any ofhis past lives, and especially in matters of the Soul, no one hasbecome suspicion-free (nihshankta). It is not easy to besuspicion-free about the Soul.This Gnan makes you suspicion-free (nihshank). Howdoes it happen? When the component of mind-intellect-chit-ego(antahkaran), the sense organs (gnanendriyas), organs ofaction (karmendriyas) all become unanimously accepting(ekmata) that is when one becomes suspicion-free (nihshank).When everything of the body becomes unified in agreement(ekmata), when the Gnan that is spoken by ‘Dada’ becomesone voice, all accept it, then one becomes suspicion-free(nihshank).You no longer have suspicions within, do you? Otherwise,one cannot go even one hour without having suspicions; there issuch a ‘big crowd’ within. There is no knowledge which all (theaforementioned components of the antahkaran, gnanendriyasetc.) within will accept. Either the mind will ‘shout andcomplain’, or the chit will ‘shout’. One entity or other within willbe upset and find faults. Therefore, they are such that they willnot become unanimous. There is a densely ‘packed’ ‘community’within. Even if one entity within questions, ‘What if thishappens?’ it will give rise to suspicion. And for You (the onewho has taken the Gnan in the Gnan Vidhi), there is no uprisingwithin anymore, is there? They are all united and present, arethey not? So it is only when everything within is uniformlyunanimous, that one becomes suspicion-free.Never before have all entities within the body becomeunanimous and uniformly united. It is a different thing when onebecomes focused in a deluded state (moorchha) in worldlymatters. This worldly state is like the state of one intoxicatedwith alcohol. Once you give them some ‘alcohol’, all within fallunder the spell of worldly fun (masti); whereas this Gnan iswithout such moorchha (delusion). This Gnan is such that evenif one is intoxicated with a little delusion, it will bring it down.So wherever you go, everyone has suspicions about theSoul and because of that they remain here caught up in theworldly life. They do not become suspicion-free and they do notachieve anything. Without a Gnani Purush, not a single personhas ever become suspicion-free, in matters of the Self. Peopleare looking for knowledge that removes all suspicion, it is not tobe found anywhere in anyone. It is not to be found even in theKramic path. It is only possible here because of Akram Vignan.Aptavani-9147148Aptavani-9One can only get his work done if the suspicion, regarding theSelf, leaves.Here one attains the Self in an hour and thereforebecomes suspicion-free (nihshank). This is no ordinary state ofworldly ease and splendor. This is the luxury and the splendorof Akram Vignan but human beings do not understand it.Otherwise one can never become suspicion-free regarding theSoul, even in a million life times and one can never attain theSelf.One cannot get rid of suspicions about the Soul withouta Gnani Purush and one’s suspicions in the worldly life will nevergo away until he becomes suspicion-free about the Soul. Whenone becomes suspicion-free about the Soul, all other suspicionsbecome exposed and are seen as they are. Here in AkramVignan, no suspicions about the Soul remain at all.The Science of Separation through AkramYou should not have any suspicions anywhere. In thisworld, there is no misery like suspicion. I have given you thesuspicion-free Self. That Self is such that suspicion will neverarise. So all suspicions of, ‘is it like this?’ or ‘is it like that?’; aregone. This is Akram Vignan and therefore the pure Soul hasbeen attained.There are two parts in this body. One is the Self, whichis Your own ‘home’ and the other is the non-Self, which is‘foreign’ to You. As long as one does not have knowledge ofthese two parts, one keeps saying, ‘I am Chandulal’.The Gnan ‘we’ give you here is Akram Vignan. What isAkram Vignan? In it, the Self and the non-Self are exposed asthey are and they become separate. The Self sits in the place ofthe Self (swakshetra) and the non-Self is the parkshetra the‘foreign’ location. This separation occurs in the Gnan Vidhi.Therefore, a line of demarcation falls between the Self and thenon-Self, and then everything falls in its regular course.And the soul (atma) that is out there is an adulterated soul.Its worth is the same as adulterated goods you get for eightpennies in the market. It is a tasteless mixture, whereas you can‘taste’ this One (Self) here, immediately. One’s freedom hasexpressed. Now only the ‘files’ (the pending karmic effects)need to be settled with equanimity. Until then there will be an‘interim government’ and when all the files have been settledwith equanimity, the ‘full government’ will arrive.Then there is no liabilityDo you now have suspicion about the knowledge of ‘I amChandulal’ or do you not have any such suspicions?Questioner: That specific suspicion has arisen. So nowI am the Self and Chandulal is the non-Self, under the influenceof other forces (parsatta). He is the neighbor.Dadashri: Yes, Chandulal is the neighbor. Suppose thereare two brothers jointly own a piece of land. Both have to sharelosses that incur from that property. Later, when the land isdivided between the two, each will own the property separately.So then, one brother is not responsible for the other brother’sportion and his liability. That is how a division is made betweenthe ‘Self’ and the ‘non-Self’. ‘We’ have put an exact line ofdemarcation between the two. This is the science, the AkramVignan that has arisen in this time cycle and so You have to takeadvantage of it.With the line of demarcation placed between the Self andthe non-Self, Your relation with Chandulal now is that of aneighbor. You are not responsible for any wrong doings of theneighbor. There is no ownership of the non-Self, so You are notguilty. Only the owner is guilty. Once the ownership leaves, thereis no guilt or liability.If we ask someone, ‘Why do you look down when youwalk?’ he will reply, ‘If I don’t then I will accidentally walk overthe insects’ So ‘we’ ask him, ‘Why? Are these legs yours?’ andAptavani-9147148Aptavani-9One can only get his work done if the suspicion, regarding theSelf, leaves.Here one attains the Self in an hour and thereforebecomes suspicion-free (nihshank). This is no ordinary state ofworldly ease and splendor. This is the luxury and the splendorof Akram Vignan but human beings do not understand it.Otherwise one can never become suspicion-free regarding theSoul, even in a million life times and one can never attain theSelf.One cannot get rid of suspicions about the Soul withouta Gnani Purush and one’s suspicions in the worldly life will nevergo away until he becomes suspicion-free about the Soul. Whenone becomes suspicion-free about the Soul, all other suspicionsbecome exposed and are seen as they are. Here in AkramVignan, no suspicions about the Soul remain at all.The Science of Separation through AkramYou should not have any suspicions anywhere. In thisworld, there is no misery like suspicion. I have given you thesuspicion-free Self. That Self is such that suspicion will neverarise. So all suspicions of, ‘is it like this?’ or ‘is it like that?’; aregone. This is Akram Vignan and therefore the pure Soul hasbeen attained.There are two parts in this body. One is the Self, whichis Your own ‘home’ and the other is the non-Self, which is‘foreign’ to You. As long as one does not have knowledge ofthese two parts, one keeps saying, ‘I am Chandulal’.The Gnan ‘we’ give you here is Akram Vignan. What isAkram Vignan? In it, the Self and the non-Self are exposed asthey are and they become separate. The Self sits in the place ofthe Self (swakshetra) and the non-Self is the parkshetra the‘foreign’ location. This separation occurs in the Gnan Vidhi.Therefore, a line of demarcation falls between the Self and thenon-Self, and then everything falls in its regular course.And the soul (atma) that is out there is an adulterated soul.Its worth is the same as adulterated goods you get for eightpennies in the market. It is a tasteless mixture, whereas you can‘taste’ this One (Self) here, immediately. One’s freedom hasexpressed. Now only the ‘files’ (the pending karmic effects)need to be settled with equanimity. Until then there will be an‘interim government’ and when all the files have been settledwith equanimity, the ‘full government’ will arrive.Then there is no liabilityDo you now have suspicion about the knowledge of ‘I amChandulal’ or do you not have any such suspicions?Questioner: That specific suspicion has arisen. So nowI am the Self and Chandulal is the non-Self, under the influenceof other forces (parsatta). He is the neighbor.Dadashri: Yes, Chandulal is the neighbor. Suppose thereare two brothers jointly own a piece of land. Both have to sharelosses that incur from that property. Later, when the land isdivided between the two, each will own the property separately.So then, one brother is not responsible for the other brother’sportion and his liability. That is how a division is made betweenthe ‘Self’ and the ‘non-Self’. ‘We’ have put an exact line ofdemarcation between the two. This is the science, the AkramVignan that has arisen in this time cycle and so You have to takeadvantage of it.With the line of demarcation placed between the Self andthe non-Self, Your relation with Chandulal now is that of aneighbor. You are not responsible for any wrong doings of theneighbor. There is no ownership of the non-Self, so You are notguilty. Only the owner is guilty. Once the ownership leaves, thereis no guilt or liability.If we ask someone, ‘Why do you look down when youwalk?’ he will reply, ‘If I don’t then I will accidentally walk overthe insects’ So ‘we’ ask him, ‘Why? Are these legs yours?’ andAptavani-9149150Aptavani-9he will say, ‘Of course they are mine!’ Will he not say that?Therefore, if the legs belong to you, then you are responsible forall the insects that get crushed beneath them. After Gnan, theawareness of, ‘This body is not mine,’ (I am not the body)remains for You. Therefore, You have to let go of the ownershipof the body. ‘We’ take away the ownership when ‘we’ give youthe Gnan. Now, if you take back that ownership, it will be yourresponsibility. Otherwise, everything will remain exact. ThisVignan is such that it will keep You in a state similar to that ofLord Mahavir!Therefore, You should not interfere with whatever thisexternal part, is doing. Then, You are not responsible at all. And,You are not able to do anything at all. The belief ‘I can dosomething’ is verily the wrong understanding. This belief ruinsthe next life.When dust is flying all around, one cannot see clearlywhat is on the other side. Similarly, the entanglements of karmasprevent you from seeing clearly and thus you get confused. Butthose entanglements will go away if there is the awareness of ‘Iam Shuddhatma’. That is why ‘we’ have given you the fivesentences (Five Agnas) so that you can remain in the same stateas that of Lord Mahavir.The path to moksha is straight (sarad), easy (sahelo) andnatural (sahaj); but its attainment is very difficult. It is very rareto come into contact with a Gnani Purush and if and when youdo, it is very difficult to attain Gnan from him. Some people havebeen trying for several years to attain this Gnan without success.Then, there are those who attain it within an hour! Everyone’scircumstances are different are they not?Suspicion does not depart through readingbooksQuestioner: But Dada, actions occur through humanbeings. It is only when God manifests in a human being that onebecomes free of suspicions. The final suspicion would not goaway simply from reading books, would it?Dadashri: There is nothing in the books and you will notget anything out of them in this regard. Can you taste sweetnessby merely reading the sentence, ‘Sugar is sweet,’ in a book?What good does it do for you? Would the experience ofsweetness not come only when you put sugar in your mouth?Questioner: So one cannot find a human being in whomGod has manifested and the scriptures do not work. Does thatmean that one has to wander around life after life?Dadashri: Yes, one has to wander, that is all.Questioner: From one shop to another, and from thatone to another.Dadashri: Yes, one has to wander around, shop aftershop.Questioner: And the more shops we wander, the morethe stock that is filled from other shops.Dadashri: Yes, that increases. And suspicions like, ‘WillI get it from here or will I get it from there?’ keep on increasing.Only when one finds the ultimate shop, will he find the solution.In that shop, all suspicions about everything will depart.Knowing causes suspicionWhen does suspicion arise? If a person reads too much,it creates projections of intellect, which leads to entanglementsand confusion. That confusion leads to suspicions and they willnot let him come out of the worldly life. Suspicions arise fromthe familiarity of reading scriptures for many life times. Thereforethe more one reads, the more it troubles him. This kind ofknowing, the Lord has referred to as ‘overwiseness’.If you are a lawyer, then the overwiseness of being alawyer will bother you. If your wife buys sugar in the blackAptavani-9149150Aptavani-9he will say, ‘Of course they are mine!’ Will he not say that?Therefore, if the legs belong to you, then you are responsible forall the insects that get crushed beneath them. After Gnan, theawareness of, ‘This body is not mine,’ (I am not the body)remains for You. Therefore, You have to let go of the ownershipof the body. ‘We’ take away the ownership when ‘we’ give youthe Gnan. Now, if you take back that ownership, it will be yourresponsibility. Otherwise, everything will remain exact. ThisVignan is such that it will keep You in a state similar to that ofLord Mahavir!Therefore, You should not interfere with whatever thisexternal part, is doing. Then, You are not responsible at all. And,You are not able to do anything at all. The belief ‘I can dosomething’ is verily the wrong understanding. This belief ruinsthe next life.When dust is flying all around, one cannot see clearlywhat is on the other side. Similarly, the entanglements of karmasprevent you from seeing clearly and thus you get confused. Butthose entanglements will go away if there is the awareness of ‘Iam Shuddhatma’. That is why ‘we’ have given you the fivesentences (Five Agnas) so that you can remain in the same stateas that of Lord Mahavir.The path to moksha is straight (sarad), easy (sahelo) andnatural (sahaj); but its attainment is very difficult. It is very rareto come into contact with a Gnani Purush and if and when youdo, it is very difficult to attain Gnan from him. Some people havebeen trying for several years to attain this Gnan without success.Then, there are those who attain it within an hour! Everyone’scircumstances are different are they not?Suspicion does not depart through readingbooksQuestioner: But Dada, actions occur through humanbeings. It is only when God manifests in a human being that onebecomes free of suspicions. The final suspicion would not goaway simply from reading books, would it?Dadashri: There is nothing in the books and you will notget anything out of them in this regard. Can you taste sweetnessby merely reading the sentence, ‘Sugar is sweet,’ in a book?What good does it do for you? Would the experience ofsweetness not come only when you put sugar in your mouth?Questioner: So one cannot find a human being in whomGod has manifested and the scriptures do not work. Does thatmean that one has to wander around life after life?Dadashri: Yes, one has to wander, that is all.Questioner: From one shop to another, and from thatone to another.Dadashri: Yes, one has to wander around, shop aftershop.Questioner: And the more shops we wander, the morethe stock that is filled from other shops.Dadashri: Yes, that increases. And suspicions like, ‘WillI get it from here or will I get it from there?’ keep on increasing.Only when one finds the ultimate shop, will he find the solution.In that shop, all suspicions about everything will depart.Knowing causes suspicionWhen does suspicion arise? If a person reads too much,it creates projections of intellect, which leads to entanglementsand confusion. That confusion leads to suspicions and they willnot let him come out of the worldly life. Suspicions arise fromthe familiarity of reading scriptures for many life times. Thereforethe more one reads, the more it troubles him. This kind ofknowing, the Lord has referred to as ‘overwiseness’.If you are a lawyer, then the overwiseness of being alawyer will bother you. If your wife buys sugar in the blackAptavani-9151152Aptavani-9market, even then your mind you will say, ‘Don’t do that…don’tdo that.’ So if a lawyer wants to do anything, suspicions will firstarise in him saying, ‘If I do that, such and such a law will applyto me,’ and so he will miss the target and he will end upsomewhere else.Such is the evident problem of the excessive knowledgethat you have attained. That is why it continues to push and prodyou. One continues to suffer because of this ‘knowing’. That iswhy ‘we’ say to you to say, ‘I do not know anything.’ Destroyall the ‘goods’ within you by doing this. They are like chewedpieces of sugarcane which have been discarded. It has nothelped you at all. You simply believe it has, but it has not beenof any help at all. Your worries have not decreased, your egohas not gone down and neither have your anger-pride-deceit-greed. So just get rid of all the ‘quarrelsome goods’ within youthat have accumulated from your countless past lives. That iswhy ‘we’ tell you to keep the intent (bhaav) of, ‘I do not knowanything.’ All the knowledge you have makes you suffer; it hasnot reduced your kashayas of anger-pride-deceit-pride, has it?So, that means that you have not really known anything. If youhad, then your kashayas would not be so evident to others.Nevertheless, even in the situation where your kashayas are notevident on the outside, you do not achieve anything because younever know when the not-so-evident kashayas, will eruptagain. You keep feeding them through your intellect but thathas led you to suffer in countless past lives. That is why, youwill find a solution if you have the inner intent of, ‘I do notknow anything.’One seeker had read many scriptures. When he came toreceive this Gnan, I told him, ‘Can you show me the claycontainer that holds your doodhpaak (a delicacy of sweetmilk)?’ When he showed me what he had, I told to him, ‘If youtake this to a vendor who sells hot peppers and you ask him ifit was okay for you to put his hot peppers in it, he will tell you,you can put a little in it, because he wants to sell his goods toyou. Then if you go to the salt merchant and ask him the same,he will tell you that you can. If you go and ask any vendors, theywill tell you it is okay for you to add whatever they are sellingto your sweet dish. In this way, your precious sweet dish willbecome ruined; it will ruin the taste in your mouth.That is why ‘we’ make you throw away the sweet dishalong with the container. We do not want even the smell of it.So, everything that you have known so far is wrong. What is thepoint of knowing something that did not help you, it did notdestroy your anger-pride-deceit-greed and it did not help youattain the Self? And after attaining the knowledge of the Self,there is no need to know anything more. If someone feels thathe has attained the Self from what he knows, then there is noneed for him to know this Akram Vignan. This is the science ofAkram Vignan and the other is the Kramic path. So if a personfeels he has attained the Self, then there is no need for him tomix the two. He will not gain anything from mixing the two. Hehas to continue taking the medicine he normally takes. On thecontrary, he may create some other problems by mixing the twomedicines. So why would you want to mix the two? Krupadudevhas said to follow the path that removes impurities within.Because all we want to see and need is to remove the impurities,what else do we need?So this worldly life does not let go of those who havesuspicions. This world will not let go of anyone who has theslightest of doubt, delusion, or suspicion. That is exactly whyone remains bound to the worldly life. Your work will not beaccomplished successfully if suspicions arise. Instead uneducatedpeople are better off. These so-called experts of scriptures areall engrossed in their suspicions. Suspicion has not arisen for ourmahatmas who have attained Gnan. Suspicion will arise if youhave read a lot, will it not? For the one who becomes suspicion-free, his Self is there with eternal bliss.Aptavani-9151152Aptavani-9market, even then your mind you will say, ‘Don’t do that…don’tdo that.’ So if a lawyer wants to do anything, suspicions will firstarise in him saying, ‘If I do that, such and such a law will applyto me,’ and so he will miss the target and he will end upsomewhere else.Such is the evident problem of the excessive knowledgethat you have attained. That is why it continues to push and prodyou. One continues to suffer because of this ‘knowing’. That iswhy ‘we’ say to you to say, ‘I do not know anything.’ Destroyall the ‘goods’ within you by doing this. They are like chewedpieces of sugarcane which have been discarded. It has nothelped you at all. You simply believe it has, but it has not beenof any help at all. Your worries have not decreased, your egohas not gone down and neither have your anger-pride-deceit-greed. So just get rid of all the ‘quarrelsome goods’ within youthat have accumulated from your countless past lives. That iswhy ‘we’ tell you to keep the intent (bhaav) of, ‘I do not knowanything.’ All the knowledge you have makes you suffer; it hasnot reduced your kashayas of anger-pride-deceit-pride, has it?So, that means that you have not really known anything. If youhad, then your kashayas would not be so evident to others.Nevertheless, even in the situation where your kashayas are notevident on the outside, you do not achieve anything because younever know when the not-so-evident kashayas, will eruptagain. You keep feeding them through your intellect but thathas led you to suffer in countless past lives. That is why, youwill find a solution if you have the inner intent of, ‘I do notknow anything.’One seeker had read many scriptures. When he came toreceive this Gnan, I told him, ‘Can you show me the claycontainer that holds your doodhpaak (a delicacy of sweetmilk)?’ When he showed me what he had, I told to him, ‘If youtake this to a vendor who sells hot peppers and you ask him ifit was okay for you to put his hot peppers in it, he will tell you,you can put a little in it, because he wants to sell his goods toyou. Then if you go to the salt merchant and ask him the same,he will tell you that you can. If you go and ask any vendors, theywill tell you it is okay for you to add whatever they are sellingto your sweet dish. In this way, your precious sweet dish willbecome ruined; it will ruin the taste in your mouth.That is why ‘we’ make you throw away the sweet dishalong with the container. We do not want even the smell of it.So, everything that you have known so far is wrong. What is thepoint of knowing something that did not help you, it did notdestroy your anger-pride-deceit-greed and it did not help youattain the Self? And after attaining the knowledge of the Self,there is no need to know anything more. If someone feels thathe has attained the Self from what he knows, then there is noneed for him to know this Akram Vignan. This is the science ofAkram Vignan and the other is the Kramic path. So if a personfeels he has attained the Self, then there is no need for him tomix the two. He will not gain anything from mixing the two. Hehas to continue taking the medicine he normally takes. On thecontrary, he may create some other problems by mixing the twomedicines. So why would you want to mix the two? Krupadudevhas said to follow the path that removes impurities within.Because all we want to see and need is to remove the impurities,what else do we need?So this worldly life does not let go of those who havesuspicions. This world will not let go of anyone who has theslightest of doubt, delusion, or suspicion. That is exactly whyone remains bound to the worldly life. Your work will not beaccomplished successfully if suspicions arise. Instead uneducatedpeople are better off. These so-called experts of scriptures areall engrossed in their suspicions. Suspicion has not arisen for ourmahatmas who have attained Gnan. Suspicion will arise if youhave read a lot, will it not? For the one who becomes suspicion-free, his Self is there with eternal bliss.Aptavani-9153154Aptavani-9This world is trapped because of suspicions. Very rarelywill the mahatma who has taken Gnan, have suspicion even fora fraction of a second about the Self. This has not happened; ithas never been heard of to occur. Here ‘we’ have not heard ofanything like suspicion.Questioner: Those who have not heard of the Selfbefore would not have any suspicions but those who have heardof Atma repeatedly, will wonder, which is true, this or that?Dadashri: What is the reason when a person does nothave suspicion about the Self after having heard about it? Afterattaining this Gnan, one attains the experience that he indeed isthe Self, and this experience never leaves; it is present evenwhen he wakes up at two in the morning. Such a phenomenonas this, where the Self presents automatically, can never occuranywhere in the world. This is what we call the experience(anubhav). Attaining the Self is considered the experience.The awareness (laksha) of the Self is considered theexperience (anubhav) because the Self is present even beforehe wakes up.So, the one whose suspicion is gone has attained theabsolute Self. Otherwise, no one’s suspicions of, ‘What is theSoul like?’ are likely to go away. The suspicion and uncertaintyof ‘there is Atma’ may go away on occasion, but not thesuspicion over ‘What is the Atma like?’ This is deeplyentrenched.Turmoil and anguish will occur wherever there issuspicion. When there is no suspicion, not even for a fractionof a second; that is where the Self is. Then there is nosuspicion left.After Gnan, there is no one left to suspectOnce suspicions depart, everything falls into place.However, the fact you are rid of your suspicion is dependantupon your karmic account, is it not? Just because someone elsehas been able to get rid of it, does that mean that you too willbe able to do so? Not everyone has the same suspicions. SoYou have to ask within, ‘What are you suspicious about? Whatkinds of suspicions remain?’ One may reply, ‘No, I do not haveany suspicions left any more.’ Those who do will remain here fora while and by asking me questions, their suspicions will goaway and their problems will be solved.Questioner: When you ask me who I am, I havesuspicions about saying, ‘I am Shuddhatma.’Dadashri: The one who has this suspicion ‘I amShuddhatma’ is verily the Shuddhatma. So ‘You’ are not sittingin the right seat. Take the correct seat, that seat will let You seewho is having the suspicion.Gnan shows its presence, where such asuspicion arisesNow, after attaining this Gnan when you do somethingand have a suspicion of ‘will I be bound by my mistake?’ at thistime because of the presence of the Self, that suspicion will fadeaway. Otherwise, who would have such suspicions? Do peopleof this world have such suspicions? Why not? It is because theSelf is not present there.So who experiences suspicions over doer-ship, over thebelief, ‘I am the doer’? Whenever you have such a suspicion,know that the Self is present there and that is why that suspicionfades away.Questioner: As long as the light of Gnan is burning thatis when suspicions arise. How can there be suspicion when thereis no such light?Dadashri: Yes. You can see insects being crushed by acar only if the car’s headlights are on but what if there is nolight? There will be no suspicion at all.Aptavani-9153154Aptavani-9This world is trapped because of suspicions. Very rarelywill the mahatma who has taken Gnan, have suspicion even fora fraction of a second about the Self. This has not happened; ithas never been heard of to occur. Here ‘we’ have not heard ofanything like suspicion.Questioner: Those who have not heard of the Selfbefore would not have any suspicions but those who have heardof Atma repeatedly, will wonder, which is true, this or that?Dadashri: What is the reason when a person does nothave suspicion about the Self after having heard about it? Afterattaining this Gnan, one attains the experience that he indeed isthe Self, and this experience never leaves; it is present evenwhen he wakes up at two in the morning. Such a phenomenonas this, where the Self presents automatically, can never occuranywhere in the world. This is what we call the experience(anubhav). Attaining the Self is considered the experience.The awareness (laksha) of the Self is considered theexperience (anubhav) because the Self is present even beforehe wakes up.So, the one whose suspicion is gone has attained theabsolute Self. Otherwise, no one’s suspicions of, ‘What is theSoul like?’ are likely to go away. The suspicion and uncertaintyof ‘there is Atma’ may go away on occasion, but not thesuspicion over ‘What is the Atma like?’ This is deeplyentrenched.Turmoil and anguish will occur wherever there issuspicion. When there is no suspicion, not even for a fractionof a second; that is where the Self is. Then there is nosuspicion left.After Gnan, there is no one left to suspectOnce suspicions depart, everything falls into place.However, the fact you are rid of your suspicion is dependantupon your karmic account, is it not? Just because someone elsehas been able to get rid of it, does that mean that you too willbe able to do so? Not everyone has the same suspicions. SoYou have to ask within, ‘What are you suspicious about? Whatkinds of suspicions remain?’ One may reply, ‘No, I do not haveany suspicions left any more.’ Those who do will remain here fora while and by asking me questions, their suspicions will goaway and their problems will be solved.Questioner: When you ask me who I am, I havesuspicions about saying, ‘I am Shuddhatma.’Dadashri: The one who has this suspicion ‘I amShuddhatma’ is verily the Shuddhatma. So ‘You’ are not sittingin the right seat. Take the correct seat, that seat will let You seewho is having the suspicion.Gnan shows its presence, where such asuspicion arisesNow, after attaining this Gnan when you do somethingand have a suspicion of ‘will I be bound by my mistake?’ at thistime because of the presence of the Self, that suspicion will fadeaway. Otherwise, who would have such suspicions? Do peopleof this world have such suspicions? Why not? It is because theSelf is not present there.So who experiences suspicions over doer-ship, over thebelief, ‘I am the doer’? Whenever you have such a suspicion,know that the Self is present there and that is why that suspicionfades away.Questioner: As long as the light of Gnan is burning thatis when suspicions arise. How can there be suspicion when thereis no such light?Dadashri: Yes. You can see insects being crushed by acar only if the car’s headlights are on but what if there is nolight? There will be no suspicion at all.Aptavani-9155156Aptavani-9You do not become tanmayakar i.e. you do not becomeengrossed or become one with your relative self because of theGnan ‘we’ have given you. But You may feel and wonder, ‘DidI become tanmayakar?’ But no You do not, it is merely asuspicion. The Lord says the fact that you have suspicion meansyou are in Gnan, because others (people without Gnan) will nothave such suspicions as to whether they become tanmayakar(become one with the self). In fact they are always tanmayakar.You have this Gnan and so you will have the suspicions of,‘Did I become tanmayakar or not?’ and that is the suspicion!Still the Lord says, ‘I forgive You for that suspicion.’ One mayask, ‘Lord! Why are you so forgiving?’ He will tell you, ‘Youdid not become tanmayakar; there is a misunderstanding onyour part.’You do not become tanmayakar; it is merely yoursuspicion. Why do others not have such suspicions? Do otherpeople have suspicions like that? No. they have never even hada thought of ‘I am separate and free’. Therefore, You aredefinitely separate. The Lord even pardons your suspicions of,‘Did I become tanmayakar or not?’ But the Lord also says thateven such suspicion should not arise with gradual practice.Suspicion-free as to the purity of the SelfIn reality the Soul is like the space, and ‘Shuddhatma’ isa sangnya (an understanding through association), a symbol ora sign of sort. What is that sangnya?Questioner: In order to understand the soul.Dadashri: No. No matter what kind of deeds, good orbad, are done by this body, You are pure (shuddha). One maysay, ‘Dear Lord, I am pure but what about this body that doesnegative things?’ The Lord still says, ‘Those deeds are notYours. You are pure (shuddha) but if You believe those deedsto be yours, then you are bound by them.’ That is why the wordShuddhatma is written as a symbol association (sangnya).And why do ‘we’ call it the pure Soul (Shuddhatma)? Itis because it is not affected by any impurities (ashuddhatma),despite going through the entire worldly life. But the belief ‘I amShuddhatma (I am a pure Soul)’ does not become established,does it? ‘How can I be pure? I do so many bad deeds, I dothis and I do that, etc.’ So the belief ‘I am pure’ does notbecome established, and the suspicion, ‘How can you say ‘I ama pure Soul’?’ continues.After attaining this Gnan, You have an establishedawareness (laksha) of ‘I am a pure Soul’. Therefore, regardlessof whether you do good deeds or bad deeds, You are not thedoer of those deeds. You are pure. You will not become taintedby the good deeds or the bad deeds and therefore you are verilypure (shuddha). ‘We’ tell You that nothing is going to touchYou, when ‘we’ give you Gnan. You will progress once Youbecome suspicion-free (nihshank) about this. If you becomesuspicious, then you will be bound by it but if you do notbecome suspicious, then You are free. It will not affect You ifyou remain in Dada’s Agnas.The main fact is that it is not worth having any suspicion.Really, You are not doing anything. You are not doing any suchactions. It is merely a delusion; it is a twisted perception.Therefore, the word ‘Shuddhatma’ is the sangnya (a symbol) tounderstand that the Soul is pure, has been pure and it always willbe pure. So it becomes unshakably established if You remain inthat understanding. After that the Self attains the Absolute state,full enlightenment as the Self, called kevalgnan.The original Self is the absolute Self (kevalgnan swaroop).So then, what is the difference between You and ‘us’? ‘We’remain as ‘kevalgnan swaroop’ as the absolute Self and You,the mahatmas remain as Shuddhatma (the pure Self). Thesuspicions You have about the original Self are gone, so all othersuspicions have gone away. Still some, who by their old waysAptavani-9155156Aptavani-9You do not become tanmayakar i.e. you do not becomeengrossed or become one with your relative self because of theGnan ‘we’ have given you. But You may feel and wonder, ‘DidI become tanmayakar?’ But no You do not, it is merely asuspicion. The Lord says the fact that you have suspicion meansyou are in Gnan, because others (people without Gnan) will nothave such suspicions as to whether they become tanmayakar(become one with the self). In fact they are always tanmayakar.You have this Gnan and so you will have the suspicions of,‘Did I become tanmayakar or not?’ and that is the suspicion!Still the Lord says, ‘I forgive You for that suspicion.’ One mayask, ‘Lord! Why are you so forgiving?’ He will tell you, ‘Youdid not become tanmayakar; there is a misunderstanding onyour part.’You do not become tanmayakar; it is merely yoursuspicion. Why do others not have such suspicions? Do otherpeople have suspicions like that? No. they have never even hada thought of ‘I am separate and free’. Therefore, You aredefinitely separate. The Lord even pardons your suspicions of,‘Did I become tanmayakar or not?’ But the Lord also says thateven such suspicion should not arise with gradual practice.Suspicion-free as to the purity of the SelfIn reality the Soul is like the space, and ‘Shuddhatma’ isa sangnya (an understanding through association), a symbol ora sign of sort. What is that sangnya?Questioner: In order to understand the soul.Dadashri: No. No matter what kind of deeds, good orbad, are done by this body, You are pure (shuddha). One maysay, ‘Dear Lord, I am pure but what about this body that doesnegative things?’ The Lord still says, ‘Those deeds are notYours. You are pure (shuddha) but if You believe those deedsto be yours, then you are bound by them.’ That is why the wordShuddhatma is written as a symbol association (sangnya).And why do ‘we’ call it the pure Soul (Shuddhatma)? Itis because it is not affected by any impurities (ashuddhatma),despite going through the entire worldly life. But the belief ‘I amShuddhatma (I am a pure Soul)’ does not become established,does it? ‘How can I be pure? I do so many bad deeds, I dothis and I do that, etc.’ So the belief ‘I am pure’ does notbecome established, and the suspicion, ‘How can you say ‘I ama pure Soul’?’ continues.After attaining this Gnan, You have an establishedawareness (laksha) of ‘I am a pure Soul’. Therefore, regardlessof whether you do good deeds or bad deeds, You are not thedoer of those deeds. You are pure. You will not become taintedby the good deeds or the bad deeds and therefore you are verilypure (shuddha). ‘We’ tell You that nothing is going to touchYou, when ‘we’ give you Gnan. You will progress once Youbecome suspicion-free (nihshank) about this. If you becomesuspicious, then you will be bound by it but if you do notbecome suspicious, then You are free. It will not affect You ifyou remain in Dada’s Agnas.The main fact is that it is not worth having any suspicion.Really, You are not doing anything. You are not doing any suchactions. It is merely a delusion; it is a twisted perception.Therefore, the word ‘Shuddhatma’ is the sangnya (a symbol) tounderstand that the Soul is pure, has been pure and it always willbe pure. So it becomes unshakably established if You remain inthat understanding. After that the Self attains the Absolute state,full enlightenment as the Self, called kevalgnan.The original Self is the absolute Self (kevalgnan swaroop).So then, what is the difference between You and ‘us’? ‘We’remain as ‘kevalgnan swaroop’ as the absolute Self and You,the mahatmas remain as Shuddhatma (the pure Self). Thesuspicions You have about the original Self are gone, so all othersuspicions have gone away. Still some, who by their old waysAptavani-9157158Aptavani-9and nature are prone to use excessive intellect, will continue tohave suspicions about this.Where is the basis for suspicion?Questioner: Now through your grace, finally we feel andare convinced that no suspicions remain.Dadashri: Yes, no suspicions can remain here. And thisworld is not worth having any suspicions over. I would not tellyou not to have suspicions in my absence if there were any meritin it. On the contrary, I have told you to eat, drink and be merryand I have also told you not to have suspicions because I haveseen the suspicion-free world. That is why I am telling you. Ihave seen a suspicion-free world on the one side and a worldwith suspicions on the other. Once I show you the direction ofthe suspicion-free world, there will be no problem.Can You function without suspicion?Questioner: We can function very well! But that should(suspicion-free state) occur, should it not?Dadashri: That will happen. People of India have beendestroyed by doubts, suspicion and fear. So I am trying to getrid of the word suspicion from this world. That word is worthgetting rid of. There is no ghost worse than that in the world.That is why many people are in misery: misery caused bysuspicion.Why do they have doubts (vahem)? It is not worth havingdoubts (vahem) of any kind. It is not a problem that helps; it isharmful. It makes worse, whatever bad situation that alreadyexists. And whatever damage is going to occur – there will notbe any problems in that. So let go of any doubts. That is whatI have been telling you all along and I have helped many get ridof it.Now all this Gnan is based on my own experiences. I amgiving you my own experiences and they are appropriate. Theyare experiences of my awareness (jagruti) which prevails everysecond; they are not just of this life but also of countless pastlives. What is more, they are original. There is no problem if youdo not find this knowledge in any scripture but it is original,coming out for the first time in this world.Dealings are of the pudgal (the relative-Self)and the Self is vitaragQuestioner: I have read in the scriptures about thevitarag (the detached One) and the description about their stateof being vitarag, but I have never seen a living vitarag.Dadashri: You will not find one. You will not be able todo darshan of a vitarag. I failed in this time cycle and that iswhy I am still wandering. However, that is also why all of youare able to do the darshan. Otherwise, you will not even get todo darshan of the one who is very close to the Absolute stateof full enlightenment (kevalgnan)! It is because you are able todo the darshan of the vitarag that you can understand vitarag.That is how ‘we’ remain.See, do ‘we’ have any differences of opinion (matbhed)or problems with anyone even when they say negative things?‘We’ know how to deal with such people. ‘We’ know how toremain ‘vitarag’ (detached) and deal with them at the same time.The pudgal, the non-Self complex, does the dealing and ‘we’remain vitarag. So people have a chance to see a vitarag in thistime cycle; that is if they understand this. You will be able to seepure vitarag if You delve deeper. ‘We’ never keep a mental noteof any events that transpire. Once an incident takes place, it isover; ‘we’ never keep a mental note of it. ‘We’ got rid of our‘notebook’ a long time ago.Questioner: You do not make note of any complimentsor praises given, or being showered with flower garlands orsomeone hurling insults or stones at You!Aptavani-9157158Aptavani-9and nature are prone to use excessive intellect, will continue tohave suspicions about this.Where is the basis for suspicion?Questioner: Now through your grace, finally we feel andare convinced that no suspicions remain.Dadashri: Yes, no suspicions can remain here. And thisworld is not worth having any suspicions over. I would not tellyou not to have suspicions in my absence if there were any meritin it. On the contrary, I have told you to eat, drink and be merryand I have also told you not to have suspicions because I haveseen the suspicion-free world. That is why I am telling you. Ihave seen a suspicion-free world on the one side and a worldwith suspicions on the other. Once I show you the direction ofthe suspicion-free world, there will be no problem.Can You function without suspicion?Questioner: We can function very well! But that should(suspicion-free state) occur, should it not?Dadashri: That will happen. People of India have beendestroyed by doubts, suspicion and fear. So I am trying to getrid of the word suspicion from this world. That word is worthgetting rid of. There is no ghost worse than that in the world.That is why many people are in misery: misery caused bysuspicion.Why do they have doubts (vahem)? It is not worth havingdoubts (vahem) of any kind. It is not a problem that helps; it isharmful. It makes worse, whatever bad situation that alreadyexists. And whatever damage is going to occur – there will notbe any problems in that. So let go of any doubts. That is whatI have been telling you all along and I have helped many get ridof it.Now all this Gnan is based on my own experiences. I amgiving you my own experiences and they are appropriate. Theyare experiences of my awareness (jagruti) which prevails everysecond; they are not just of this life but also of countless pastlives. What is more, they are original. There is no problem if youdo not find this knowledge in any scripture but it is original,coming out for the first time in this world.Dealings are of the pudgal (the relative-Self)and the Self is vitaragQuestioner: I have read in the scriptures about thevitarag (the detached One) and the description about their stateof being vitarag, but I have never seen a living vitarag.Dadashri: You will not find one. You will not be able todo darshan of a vitarag. I failed in this time cycle and that iswhy I am still wandering. However, that is also why all of youare able to do the darshan. Otherwise, you will not even get todo darshan of the one who is very close to the Absolute stateof full enlightenment (kevalgnan)! It is because you are able todo the darshan of the vitarag that you can understand vitarag.That is how ‘we’ remain.See, do ‘we’ have any differences of opinion (matbhed)or problems with anyone even when they say negative things?‘We’ know how to deal with such people. ‘We’ know how toremain ‘vitarag’ (detached) and deal with them at the same time.The pudgal, the non-Self complex, does the dealing and ‘we’remain vitarag. So people have a chance to see a vitarag in thistime cycle; that is if they understand this. You will be able to seepure vitarag if You delve deeper. ‘We’ never keep a mental noteof any events that transpire. Once an incident takes place, it isover; ‘we’ never keep a mental note of it. ‘We’ got rid of our‘notebook’ a long time ago.Questioner: You do not make note of any complimentsor praises given, or being showered with flower garlands orsomeone hurling insults or stones at You!Aptavani-9159160Aptavani-9Dadashri: Yes otherwise, the notebook will eventually fillup resulting in negativity and then it will change the inner vision(drashti) towards the other person. When the other person seesyou, he will be able to sense it in the way you look at him. Willthe other person not know about the note you have madeabout him? He will immediately know that you have made anote of something he said to you a while ago. These people maynot know how to see anything else but they do know how tolook in your eyes about the notes you make. But in ‘our’ eyesthey see vitaragata (the detached state) and immediately realizethat Dada is the same as he was. They see vitaragata in ‘our’eyes. Just as you can recognize a man’s immoral intent from hiseyes or recognize a greedy person from his eyes, similarly youcan recognize a vitarag from his eyes. When there is noagitation, fidgety sign in the eyes it means that nothing has beennoted within.Where there is love, there is no nondha(intense mental note)The love that arises should be such that it neither increasesnor decreases; you need that kind of love. Real love is love thatwill not decrease for the person who insults you or curses you.The love that increases or decreases is really an infatuation(aasakti). If any love begins to increase or decrease, then itbecomes an infatuation (aasakti). In health too, when healthgoes up or down, it is referred to as disease. When the soncomes home from earning good money, he is praised, ‘Hey son,you did a great job!’ and when he loses money a few yearslater, the father will say, ‘He is crazy. I have told him so manytimes that I am tired of telling him. It has given me aheadache!’ This is aasakti! Instead, the opinion that we havein ‘our college (Akram Vignan)’ is preferable. It remains withus, forever the same.Questioner: It is the same between a husband and awife. They say, ‘I love you. I need you’ and then they fight.Dadashri: That is aasakti. There is no telling where it isand where it will end up. Oho ho! The great lovers! A man withtrue love will not let go of her until she dies. There cannot bedeep mental notes (nondha) where there is love. It is notpossible to have both love and a ‘mental notebook’. When youmake a note of, ‘You did this…You did that’, there is no lovethere any more.‘We’ have so many mahatmas here but ‘we’ do notmake a note of anybody, even when they do distressful things.There is neither an external note nor an internal one. If an innermental note (nondha) is made then, tension will arise evenwhen there is no cause for it. You will see ‘us’ tension free, nomatter when you see ‘us’, day or night. And that is why thereis no hassle anywhere. Even when ‘our’ health is not goodthey all say, ‘Dada is smiling.’ There is a smile because thereis no tension! So do not get involved with anyone’s affairs.Tension will arise even if you become concerned about yourphysical health, ‘I have this problem and that problem’, will itnot?Questioner: ‘Where there is love there is no nondha(intense mental note),’ this is an important statement.Dadashri: Yes, love that keeps mental notes is not love.The love of this world is one which has mental notes. Awoman will make a note of, ‘He said this to me today.’ Nowhow can you call that love? There is no need to make anynotes if it is love, otherwise it will become infatuation(attraction-repulsion). Love that increases or decreases is notlove. The world will not refrain from making notes. They maynot tell you on your face but in their mind they will say, ‘he toldme off a few days ago.’ Would she not keep that on her mind?Therefore, does she not keep a note? The one who does notkeep notes has real love. I do not have a notebook, how canAptavani-9159160Aptavani-9Dadashri: Yes otherwise, the notebook will eventually fillup resulting in negativity and then it will change the inner vision(drashti) towards the other person. When the other person seesyou, he will be able to sense it in the way you look at him. Willthe other person not know about the note you have madeabout him? He will immediately know that you have made anote of something he said to you a while ago. These people maynot know how to see anything else but they do know how tolook in your eyes about the notes you make. But in ‘our’ eyesthey see vitaragata (the detached state) and immediately realizethat Dada is the same as he was. They see vitaragata in ‘our’eyes. Just as you can recognize a man’s immoral intent from hiseyes or recognize a greedy person from his eyes, similarly youcan recognize a vitarag from his eyes. When there is noagitation, fidgety sign in the eyes it means that nothing has beennoted within.Where there is love, there is no nondha(intense mental note)The love that arises should be such that it neither increasesnor decreases; you need that kind of love. Real love is love thatwill not decrease for the person who insults you or curses you.The love that increases or decreases is really an infatuation(aasakti). If any love begins to increase or decrease, then itbecomes an infatuation (aasakti). In health too, when healthgoes up or down, it is referred to as disease. When the soncomes home from earning good money, he is praised, ‘Hey son,you did a great job!’ and when he loses money a few yearslater, the father will say, ‘He is crazy. I have told him so manytimes that I am tired of telling him. It has given me aheadache!’ This is aasakti! Instead, the opinion that we havein ‘our college (Akram Vignan)’ is preferable. It remains withus, forever the same.Questioner: It is the same between a husband and awife. They say, ‘I love you. I need you’ and then they fight.Dadashri: That is aasakti. There is no telling where it isand where it will end up. Oho ho! The great lovers! A man withtrue love will not let go of her until she dies. There cannot bedeep mental notes (nondha) where there is love. It is notpossible to have both love and a ‘mental notebook’. When youmake a note of, ‘You did this…You did that’, there is no lovethere any more.‘We’ have so many mahatmas here but ‘we’ do notmake a note of anybody, even when they do distressful things.There is neither an external note nor an internal one. If an innermental note (nondha) is made then, tension will arise evenwhen there is no cause for it. You will see ‘us’ tension free, nomatter when you see ‘us’, day or night. And that is why thereis no hassle anywhere. Even when ‘our’ health is not goodthey all say, ‘Dada is smiling.’ There is a smile because thereis no tension! So do not get involved with anyone’s affairs.Tension will arise even if you become concerned about yourphysical health, ‘I have this problem and that problem’, will itnot?Questioner: ‘Where there is love there is no nondha(intense mental note),’ this is an important statement.Dadashri: Yes, love that keeps mental notes is not love.The love of this world is one which has mental notes. Awoman will make a note of, ‘He said this to me today.’ Nowhow can you call that love? There is no need to make anynotes if it is love, otherwise it will become infatuation(attraction-repulsion). Love that increases or decreases is notlove. The world will not refrain from making notes. They maynot tell you on your face but in their mind they will say, ‘he toldme off a few days ago.’ Would she not keep that on her mind?Therefore, does she not keep a note? The one who does notkeep notes has real love. I do not have a notebook, how canAptavani-9161162Aptavani-9Questioner: But I have a habit of making intense mentalnotes.Dadashri: That habit will now go down now that youhave heard this satsang. Do you not understand all this? Fromthe moment you hear this; you will start making fewer notes. Youkeep an intense mental note of your wife too, do you not?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: The ‘wife’ whom you call your own! Youkeep a note even about her? And she does the same about you.If you say something to her, she will say to herself, ‘Wait till Ihave my moment.’ That is not true love; it is aasakti(infatuation). True love will lessen or change. ‘Our’ love is truelove. ‘We’ never make a note of anything.Questioner: With your grace (krupa) this can happenfast.Dadashri: ‘Our’ grace and blessing is always there butwhat can anyone do when you do not want to get rid of ityourself? ‘My wife did this, she did that,’ do you not do thesame, so why are you accusing your wife? She will make anintense mental note when you make an intense mental note.‘We’ do not make a note of anyone and so no one makes anote of ‘us’. They do not make a note even when ‘we’ scoldthem. Why do you have to make a note when ‘we’ havestopped doing so? Is your wife going to leave you alone whenyou make notes of her? It is good that this man here is notmarried, otherwise would he not start making notes of his wife?‘We’ never make any note about anyone. Also ‘we’ do not talkabout one person to another.Destroy mistakes scientificallyQuestioner: Dada what is the reason behind one makingintense mental notes?Dadashri: One does not realize the harm it causes andthere even be such a book? There can be a notebook only ifyou make a mental note. Now you must throw away yourmental notes. They are not worth keeping. Give away yournotebook to some other businessman. It is not somethingworth keeping.Questioner: When someone makes an intense mentalnote, ‘You said this to me and you said that’, then that love isbroken.Dadashri: Yes, but one cannot refrain from making anintense mental note. Would even the wife not do that? Will yourwife not be doing that?Questioner: Dada everyone does it, but can we noterase it through Gnan and pratikraman?Dadashri: No matter how much you try to erase it, youwill not succeed. Once you make an intense mental note(nondha), you cannot get rid of it by attempting to erase it. Theintense mental note will weaken a little but one cannot refrainfrom making a comment, can one? Whatever this gentlemanhere may do, or whatever changes may occur in you, ‘we’ willnot make any note. Therefore, there is no interference or itseffects from ‘us’ at all. Have you ever seen Dada making a noteabout you?Questioner: Never.Dadashri: Yes, there is no note on anyone.Questioner: So is that pure love?Dadashri: Yes, it is pure love. So you will never beunloved by ‘us’, you will always be dear to ‘us’. ‘We’ have noconcern with what you said to ‘us’ two days ago. If ‘we’ keepmental notes, then ‘we’ would have problems, right? ‘We’understand that your weakness has not gone away and somistakes are bound to occur.Aptavani-9161162Aptavani-9Questioner: But I have a habit of making intense mentalnotes.Dadashri: That habit will now go down now that youhave heard this satsang. Do you not understand all this? Fromthe moment you hear this; you will start making fewer notes. Youkeep an intense mental note of your wife too, do you not?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: The ‘wife’ whom you call your own! Youkeep a note even about her? And she does the same about you.If you say something to her, she will say to herself, ‘Wait till Ihave my moment.’ That is not true love; it is aasakti(infatuation). True love will lessen or change. ‘Our’ love is truelove. ‘We’ never make a note of anything.Questioner: With your grace (krupa) this can happenfast.Dadashri: ‘Our’ grace and blessing is always there butwhat can anyone do when you do not want to get rid of ityourself? ‘My wife did this, she did that,’ do you not do thesame, so why are you accusing your wife? She will make anintense mental note when you make an intense mental note.‘We’ do not make a note of anyone and so no one makes anote of ‘us’. They do not make a note even when ‘we’ scoldthem. Why do you have to make a note when ‘we’ havestopped doing so? Is your wife going to leave you alone whenyou make notes of her? It is good that this man here is notmarried, otherwise would he not start making notes of his wife?‘We’ never make any note about anyone. Also ‘we’ do not talkabout one person to another.Destroy mistakes scientificallyQuestioner: Dada what is the reason behind one makingintense mental notes?Dadashri: One does not realize the harm it causes andthere even be such a book? There can be a notebook only ifyou make a mental note. Now you must throw away yourmental notes. They are not worth keeping. Give away yournotebook to some other businessman. It is not somethingworth keeping.Questioner: When someone makes an intense mentalnote, ‘You said this to me and you said that’, then that love isbroken.Dadashri: Yes, but one cannot refrain from making anintense mental note. Would even the wife not do that? Will yourwife not be doing that?Questioner: Dada everyone does it, but can we noterase it through Gnan and pratikraman?Dadashri: No matter how much you try to erase it, youwill not succeed. Once you make an intense mental note(nondha), you cannot get rid of it by attempting to erase it. Theintense mental note will weaken a little but one cannot refrainfrom making a comment, can one? Whatever this gentlemanhere may do, or whatever changes may occur in you, ‘we’ willnot make any note. Therefore, there is no interference or itseffects from ‘us’ at all. Have you ever seen Dada making a noteabout you?Questioner: Never.Dadashri: Yes, there is no note on anyone.Questioner: So is that pure love?Dadashri: Yes, it is pure love. So you will never beunloved by ‘us’, you will always be dear to ‘us’. ‘We’ have noconcern with what you said to ‘us’ two days ago. If ‘we’ keepmental notes, then ‘we’ would have problems, right? ‘We’understand that your weakness has not gone away and somistakes are bound to occur.Aptavani-9163164Aptavani-9that is why he continues to do so. Now that he understands this,he will tend to do less of it.You are now convinced (pratiti) that it is wrong to keepintense mental notes. Now you will experience (anubhav) thebenefits of not doing so. You will gradually taste the benefits ofthis and then it will manifest in your conduct (charitra). This ishow it works.So if one wants to be free of such conduct (acharan),one must first have a conviction (pratiti) of it, then he will cometo experience (anubhav) it and then the negative conduct(charitra) will go away. So everything happens through ascientific process and hence the results are scientific. If you wantto climb stairs, can you do it in one leap? You can only do it stepby step. You cannot do it in one leap.You have never heard this word nondha (keeping mentalnotes), before, have you? Is this not the first time?Making intense mental notes increasesenmitySo do not keep an intense mental note of anything. Whathave you gained so far by keeping such notes? On the contrary,miseries have increased. So do not keep intense mental notes.Have you not observed that Dada does not keep any notes?Questioner: I experienced that today. Otherwise, wewould not know that you do not make mental notes.Dadashri: But you must be seeing that Dada does notkeep a note, do you not?Questioner: Yes, you do not keep notes but youremember everything, do you not?Dadashri: Yes, I remember but I do not keep notes.Questioner: What is the difference between the two,Dada?Dadashri: When an intense mental note (nondha) ismade on someone, it means that you are harboring vengeancewithin towards him. And to remember (yaad) means it is merelyrelated to ‘this man has certain weakness in him’, that is all. Iremember that he has certain weakness within him so that I canbless him; that is the reason for remembering. Otherwise, I donot make a note of anything. If I made a note (nondha) ofsomething then I would have a tendency to take revenge. So‘we’ do not make notes. And that is why you do not makenotes against ‘us’, even when ‘Dadaji’ scolds you.Questioner: There is love from Dadaji, even when hescolds us.Dadashri: Yes, so you should not make a note. Half yourmiseries will go away if you stop making and keeping suchnotes.Do people in the world keep intense mental notes?It is their business to keep intense mental notes. They willsay, ‘He did this to me and he did that to me.’It is because I do not keep notes that you do not keepnotes on me. People will definitely keep intense mental notes onyou if you keep intense mental notes on them. If you takesomething from my shop, I will keep a note of it. So then willyou refrain from keeping a note in your own shop? If I do notmake a note to begin with, then the other person will not do soeither. Who will keep notes when dealing with me? Even whenI tell them off or do anything to them! Everything will be fine ifyou do not keep intense mental notes. It is not worth keepingsuch notes.Vyavasthit eliminates intense mental notesThe relative knowledge is illusionary knowledge. So thenwhat is the use of keeping intense mental notes about anyone inthis world? You should not make an intense mental note even ifAptavani-9163164Aptavani-9that is why he continues to do so. Now that he understands this,he will tend to do less of it.You are now convinced (pratiti) that it is wrong to keepintense mental notes. Now you will experience (anubhav) thebenefits of not doing so. You will gradually taste the benefits ofthis and then it will manifest in your conduct (charitra). This ishow it works.So if one wants to be free of such conduct (acharan),one must first have a conviction (pratiti) of it, then he will cometo experience (anubhav) it and then the negative conduct(charitra) will go away. So everything happens through ascientific process and hence the results are scientific. If you wantto climb stairs, can you do it in one leap? You can only do it stepby step. You cannot do it in one leap.You have never heard this word nondha (keeping mentalnotes), before, have you? Is this not the first time?Making intense mental notes increasesenmitySo do not keep an intense mental note of anything. Whathave you gained so far by keeping such notes? On the contrary,miseries have increased. So do not keep intense mental notes.Have you not observed that Dada does not keep any notes?Questioner: I experienced that today. Otherwise, wewould not know that you do not make mental notes.Dadashri: But you must be seeing that Dada does notkeep a note, do you not?Questioner: Yes, you do not keep notes but youremember everything, do you not?Dadashri: Yes, I remember but I do not keep notes.Questioner: What is the difference between the two,Dada?Dadashri: When an intense mental note (nondha) ismade on someone, it means that you are harboring vengeancewithin towards him. And to remember (yaad) means it is merelyrelated to ‘this man has certain weakness in him’, that is all. Iremember that he has certain weakness within him so that I canbless him; that is the reason for remembering. Otherwise, I donot make a note of anything. If I made a note (nondha) ofsomething then I would have a tendency to take revenge. So‘we’ do not make notes. And that is why you do not makenotes against ‘us’, even when ‘Dadaji’ scolds you.Questioner: There is love from Dadaji, even when hescolds us.Dadashri: Yes, so you should not make a note. Half yourmiseries will go away if you stop making and keeping suchnotes.Do people in the world keep intense mental notes?It is their business to keep intense mental notes. They willsay, ‘He did this to me and he did that to me.’It is because I do not keep notes that you do not keepnotes on me. People will definitely keep intense mental notes onyou if you keep intense mental notes on them. If you takesomething from my shop, I will keep a note of it. So then willyou refrain from keeping a note in your own shop? If I do notmake a note to begin with, then the other person will not do soeither. Who will keep notes when dealing with me? Even whenI tell them off or do anything to them! Everything will be fine ifyou do not keep intense mental notes. It is not worth keepingsuch notes.Vyavasthit eliminates intense mental notesThe relative knowledge is illusionary knowledge. So thenwhat is the use of keeping intense mental notes about anyone inthis world? You should not make an intense mental note even ifAptavani-9165166Aptavani-9your wife says, ‘Your nature is bad. I am going to my parents’home and I am not coming back,’ because everything is underthe control of vyavasthit. Is it under her control? Is it under hercontrol or in the control of vyavasthit? So then what happens ifyou make an intense mental note in response of, ‘Is that so?What arrogance on her part! Who the hell does she think sheis? Let her try it!’? What will happen then? A war will breakout!Questioner: If she talks like that, the mind will goberserk. One will get very excited.Dadashri: Yes, he will get all excited and a mental warwill break out. That mental war will lead to a verbal one. Itmay even turn into a physical war. What if you remove thecause of all this from its very root? Everything will clear whenyou remove it from its root. So it is not worth getting into allthese problems.Therefore, it is not worth keeping an intense mental noteof anything. What is vyavasthit? Vyavasthit is when you do notkeep a note of anything; that is vyavasthit. How can you call itvyavasthit when you make notes and keep them?Being exact in worldly life will impede yourliberationIf you do not make an intense mental note in the firstplace, then where is the problem? Wanting moksha and makingan intense mental note; both these cannot occur together. Dopeople refrain from keeping an intense mental note? You have tostop making notes if you desire moksha. You have to get rid ofsuch a notebook.In our business naïve that I was, I was not concerned withmaking notes of everything, if things become documented, it wasfine and if it did not, that was fine too. I do not want such an‘account’ at all; people like me do not keep notes even if theyhave a shop. Otherwise, people keep a note of everything:‘Chandulal took one pair…Chaturbhai took one pair’. Theywrite everything down, but they also make an intense mentalnote.We used to keep one notebook in the shop but we wouldforget to write in it and so the business suffered. Thereforemaking notes improves efficiency of business and bringsprecision to worldly interaction, but it will not let you get out ofyour worldly life. And now, ‘we’ do not have to trouble‘ourselves’ by making notes of anything; ‘We’ do not even haveto carry a notebook. What is the point of picking up a pen? Itis good that ‘we’ are so naïve that ‘we’ do not keep any notes.And therefore, no one keeps any notes about ‘us’. So ‘our’problem is solved and ‘we’ are free. No note and no problems!Is that not helpful towards your goal?Intense mental notes perpetuates theworldly lifeQuestioner: It is important Dada but in the worldly lifewe have been taught to keep notes.Dadashri: You need such teachings as long as you wantto remain in the worldly life but if you want to go to moksha, youneed to learn not to keep notes (nondha).Questioner: In the worldly life one is taught to keepprecise notes of, ‘what he did, what the other person did, andwhat I have to do.’Dadashri: When you keep such notes you becomedeeply entrenched in the worldly life (sansari) and the world willnot let you go as long as you maintain such notes. The worldlylife ends when you cease to keep notes.Questioner: In the worldly life, I am in the habit ofmaking notes like, ‘this man is very careful and well organized’or ‘this is what happens when one is careless and disorganized’.Aptavani-9165166Aptavani-9your wife says, ‘Your nature is bad. I am going to my parents’home and I am not coming back,’ because everything is underthe control of vyavasthit. Is it under her control? Is it under hercontrol or in the control of vyavasthit? So then what happens ifyou make an intense mental note in response of, ‘Is that so?What arrogance on her part! Who the hell does she think sheis? Let her try it!’? What will happen then? A war will breakout!Questioner: If she talks like that, the mind will goberserk. One will get very excited.Dadashri: Yes, he will get all excited and a mental warwill break out. That mental war will lead to a verbal one. Itmay even turn into a physical war. What if you remove thecause of all this from its very root? Everything will clear whenyou remove it from its root. So it is not worth getting into allthese problems.Therefore, it is not worth keeping an intense mental noteof anything. What is vyavasthit? Vyavasthit is when you do notkeep a note of anything; that is vyavasthit. How can you call itvyavasthit when you make notes and keep them?Being exact in worldly life will impede yourliberationIf you do not make an intense mental note in the firstplace, then where is the problem? Wanting moksha and makingan intense mental note; both these cannot occur together. Dopeople refrain from keeping an intense mental note? You have tostop making notes if you desire moksha. You have to get rid ofsuch a notebook.In our business naïve that I was, I was not concerned withmaking notes of everything, if things become documented, it wasfine and if it did not, that was fine too. I do not want such an‘account’ at all; people like me do not keep notes even if theyhave a shop. Otherwise, people keep a note of everything:‘Chandulal took one pair…Chaturbhai took one pair’. Theywrite everything down, but they also make an intense mentalnote.We used to keep one notebook in the shop but we wouldforget to write in it and so the business suffered. Thereforemaking notes improves efficiency of business and bringsprecision to worldly interaction, but it will not let you get out ofyour worldly life. And now, ‘we’ do not have to trouble‘ourselves’ by making notes of anything; ‘We’ do not even haveto carry a notebook. What is the point of picking up a pen? Itis good that ‘we’ are so naïve that ‘we’ do not keep any notes.And therefore, no one keeps any notes about ‘us’. So ‘our’problem is solved and ‘we’ are free. No note and no problems!Is that not helpful towards your goal?Intense mental notes perpetuates theworldly lifeQuestioner: It is important Dada but in the worldly lifewe have been taught to keep notes.Dadashri: You need such teachings as long as you wantto remain in the worldly life but if you want to go to moksha, youneed to learn not to keep notes (nondha).Questioner: In the worldly life one is taught to keepprecise notes of, ‘what he did, what the other person did, andwhat I have to do.’Dadashri: When you keep such notes you becomedeeply entrenched in the worldly life (sansari) and the world willnot let you go as long as you maintain such notes. The worldlylife ends when you cease to keep notes.Questioner: In the worldly life, I am in the habit ofmaking notes like, ‘this man is very careful and well organized’or ‘this is what happens when one is careless and disorganized’.Aptavani-9167168Aptavani-9Dadashri: The fact that you see disorganization andcarelessness is the same as saying that the support of the worldlylife is now disintegrating. Would the worldly life remain whenthat happens? Once the support of the worldly life collapses,can the worldly life continue to exist? People will begin towonder ‘what’s happening here?’ But it is when one becomescarefree and disorganized, without any mental notes that he goesto moksha. Otherwise, the same old clothes and guise, beingparticular about this and particular about that, particular aboutmoney; how can one achieve anything this way? There shouldnot be any note taking. Here you keep a note of everythingsomeone told you yesterday.What do people assert? They say ‘Only this man can goto moksha. Only when one is so particular and alert will he goto moksha.’ Whereas I say that only a carefree and disorganizedperson will go to moksha. The solution will arise when youbecome bankrupt in the worldly shop. So you will have tobankrupt this worldly shop (sansar) if you want moksha. Youwant to be careful, exact and organized and at the same timeyou want to go to moksha, both are not possible. How manypersons amongst all these seekers of moksha are there who arewithout intense mental notes?Questioner: The desire of moksha is only in words, is itnot?Dadashri: That is why I am asking who has come intospiritualism? Who has come closer to the Self? When onebecomes desire-less and keeps no note of anything, then hecomes closer to the Self. It is not possible to be careful, exactand precise in the worldly life and come closer to the Self at thesame time. That is why the Lord had said that one will have toleave home and come to Him if he wants moksha. Why is that?That is because it will not happen by remaining at home.For us here in Akram Vignan however, we have toachieve all that while living at home. So what do ‘we’ makepeople do? ‘We’ make them stop making intense mental notes.Remain at home but without keeping intense mental notes. Whatyou need to ‘keep’ in the worldly life is not to be kept here andwhat is to be kept here is not to be kept there.Intense mental note taker is not You: Donot agree with himQuestioner: What should one who is desirous ofliberation do if making intense mental notes (nondha) hasbecome part of his prakruti?Dadashri: You have to tell Chandulal (the relative self),‘Now stop making notes’.Questioner: But what should he do about this prakrutithat is bent on keeping intense mental notes?Dadashri: ‘We’ (the Self and the awakened Lord within)do not have a problem with the prakruti doing it, do we? In fact‘we’ are doing it in collaboration with the prakruti. There willnot be any note if ‘our’ collaboration (agreement) goes away.The prakruti will not even do it; it will get tired of it. If you donot make a note then the other person will not do it either. If Ido not make a note of what you take from my shop then youwill not do it either. You yourself will say, ‘He does not makea note so why should I?’ Is that not the rule?Questioner: Does the making of notes stop naturally andspontaneously or does it occur when one gets to taste the sweetbliss of Your Gnan, Dada?Dadashri: Yes, otherwise such habits do not leave.Questioner: Otherwise and until then, it is very difficult tolet go of making intense mental notes.Dadashri: Arey! A person will say, ‘I would rather diethan let go of the note. I would rather throw myself off the cliffAptavani-9167168Aptavani-9Dadashri: The fact that you see disorganization andcarelessness is the same as saying that the support of the worldlylife is now disintegrating. Would the worldly life remain whenthat happens? Once the support of the worldly life collapses,can the worldly life continue to exist? People will begin towonder ‘what’s happening here?’ But it is when one becomescarefree and disorganized, without any mental notes that he goesto moksha. Otherwise, the same old clothes and guise, beingparticular about this and particular about that, particular aboutmoney; how can one achieve anything this way? There shouldnot be any note taking. Here you keep a note of everythingsomeone told you yesterday.What do people assert? They say ‘Only this man can goto moksha. Only when one is so particular and alert will he goto moksha.’ Whereas I say that only a carefree and disorganizedperson will go to moksha. The solution will arise when youbecome bankrupt in the worldly shop. So you will have tobankrupt this worldly shop (sansar) if you want moksha. Youwant to be careful, exact and organized and at the same timeyou want to go to moksha, both are not possible. How manypersons amongst all these seekers of moksha are there who arewithout intense mental notes?Questioner: The desire of moksha is only in words, is itnot?Dadashri: That is why I am asking who has come intospiritualism? Who has come closer to the Self? When onebecomes desire-less and keeps no note of anything, then hecomes closer to the Self. It is not possible to be careful, exactand precise in the worldly life and come closer to the Self at thesame time. That is why the Lord had said that one will have toleave home and come to Him if he wants moksha. Why is that?That is because it will not happen by remaining at home.For us here in Akram Vignan however, we have toachieve all that while living at home. So what do ‘we’ makepeople do? ‘We’ make them stop making intense mental notes.Remain at home but without keeping intense mental notes. Whatyou need to ‘keep’ in the worldly life is not to be kept here andwhat is to be kept here is not to be kept there.Intense mental note taker is not You: Donot agree with himQuestioner: What should one who is desirous ofliberation do if making intense mental notes (nondha) hasbecome part of his prakruti?Dadashri: You have to tell Chandulal (the relative self),‘Now stop making notes’.Questioner: But what should he do about this prakrutithat is bent on keeping intense mental notes?Dadashri: ‘We’ (the Self and the awakened Lord within)do not have a problem with the prakruti doing it, do we? In fact‘we’ are doing it in collaboration with the prakruti. There willnot be any note if ‘our’ collaboration (agreement) goes away.The prakruti will not even do it; it will get tired of it. If you donot make a note then the other person will not do it either. If Ido not make a note of what you take from my shop then youwill not do it either. You yourself will say, ‘He does not makea note so why should I?’ Is that not the rule?Questioner: Does the making of notes stop naturally andspontaneously or does it occur when one gets to taste the sweetbliss of Your Gnan, Dada?Dadashri: Yes, otherwise such habits do not leave.Questioner: Otherwise and until then, it is very difficult tolet go of making intense mental notes.Dadashri: Arey! A person will say, ‘I would rather diethan let go of the note. I would rather throw myself off the cliffAptavani-9169170Aptavani-9than forget.’ It is because he feels that, it is his basis for living.Then if you ask him, ‘will it work if we take away your food?’He will say, ‘No, I do need the food.’ And yet keeping noteskeeps him going. Keeping intense mental notes will not let goof anything. ‘We’ are separate from the one making thenoteAn intense mental note (nondha) is made because thereremains a tanto (tanto is a link connected to a specific incident,internal or external.) If a person continues to be upset and non-communicative (risavu); that is a tanto within him. One cannotsee the tanto (link); it is not evident. But when one makes anondha, then know that the link (tanto) exists there.If someone insulted you yesterday and you make anintense mental note of it, then I will know that you have a tanto.This tanto – this link is a very dangerous thing to have. Thereshould not be any nondha (intense mental note), at all. Theessence of all this is that nothing happens on its own; everythingis vyavasthit. How can there be a nondha in the face ofvyavasthit? A link of intense mental note is a tanto.Questioner: Even when we do not have a habit of doingso, we end up making an intense mental note.Dadashri: Yes, that will happen but you have to eraseit later by saying, ‘making an intense mental note was amistake’. Just by saying this, it will be erased. You should beof the opinion that You are separate from the one taking thenote. Then You are not one (in agreement) with the onemaking that note. Therefore, You are not of that vote andopinion. If You do not ‘say anything’ from within then it impliesthat You are in agreement with the opinion of the note. Thisnote-making is an age-old habit but this Gnan is such that nonote will remain. All your current problems are due to theintense mental notes.Questioner: We have made a habit of making intensemental notes only.Dadashri: Yes, but that habit will have to be broken, willit not? Until now you were ‘Chandulal’ and now You havebecome ‘Shuddhatma’. So if that has changed, should this notchange too? Will You not have to let go of the intense mentalnotes? How long can you keep making such notes? ‘We’ do nothave any kind of notes, no matter what anyone might say. Fromthe very beginning, ‘we’ have not kept any notes. What doworldly people call that? They call it dissipation of previouslyheld opinions (purvagraha). Call it what you will, call itprejudice or anything else, but keeping intense mental notes isharmful. Intense mental note itself is a tanto. How can there beeven the slightest of misery? If there is any misery, it is due tonondha (mental notes). How can there be any misery in theocean of bliss? Is this Gnan not the ocean of bliss?Questioner: It is Dada, it is.Dadashri: But do you still not make intense mental notes?Questioner: Dada, they linger on.Dadashri: Do not harbor them anymore and if thathappens, erase them. To keep a tanto means to be obstinate.It means to insist! Don’t you think that people come and saythings to ‘us’ too?Questioner: But what is the reason to keep a tanto (linkof intense mental note) now?Dadashri: Yes, keeping a tanto has not helped; it hasonly caused the account of karma to fill up.Why keep a note of changing karmas?What is the justice of nature when someone insults you?That person insults you due to the fruition of your karma. Thetime of expression of that karma is over for him, and it is overAptavani-9169170Aptavani-9than forget.’ It is because he feels that, it is his basis for living.Then if you ask him, ‘will it work if we take away your food?’He will say, ‘No, I do need the food.’ And yet keeping noteskeeps him going. Keeping intense mental notes will not let goof anything. ‘We’ are separate from the one making thenoteAn intense mental note (nondha) is made because thereremains a tanto (tanto is a link connected to a specific incident,internal or external.) If a person continues to be upset and non-communicative (risavu); that is a tanto within him. One cannotsee the tanto (link); it is not evident. But when one makes anondha, then know that the link (tanto) exists there.If someone insulted you yesterday and you make anintense mental note of it, then I will know that you have a tanto.This tanto – this link is a very dangerous thing to have. Thereshould not be any nondha (intense mental note), at all. Theessence of all this is that nothing happens on its own; everythingis vyavasthit. How can there be a nondha in the face ofvyavasthit? A link of intense mental note is a tanto.Questioner: Even when we do not have a habit of doingso, we end up making an intense mental note.Dadashri: Yes, that will happen but you have to eraseit later by saying, ‘making an intense mental note was amistake’. Just by saying this, it will be erased. You should beof the opinion that You are separate from the one taking thenote. Then You are not one (in agreement) with the onemaking that note. Therefore, You are not of that vote andopinion. If You do not ‘say anything’ from within then it impliesthat You are in agreement with the opinion of the note. Thisnote-making is an age-old habit but this Gnan is such that nonote will remain. All your current problems are due to theintense mental notes.Questioner: We have made a habit of making intensemental notes only.Dadashri: Yes, but that habit will have to be broken, willit not? Until now you were ‘Chandulal’ and now You havebecome ‘Shuddhatma’. So if that has changed, should this notchange too? Will You not have to let go of the intense mentalnotes? How long can you keep making such notes? ‘We’ do nothave any kind of notes, no matter what anyone might say. Fromthe very beginning, ‘we’ have not kept any notes. What doworldly people call that? They call it dissipation of previouslyheld opinions (purvagraha). Call it what you will, call itprejudice or anything else, but keeping intense mental notes isharmful. Intense mental note itself is a tanto. How can there beeven the slightest of misery? If there is any misery, it is due tonondha (mental notes). How can there be any misery in theocean of bliss? Is this Gnan not the ocean of bliss?Questioner: It is Dada, it is.Dadashri: But do you still not make intense mental notes?Questioner: Dada, they linger on.Dadashri: Do not harbor them anymore and if thathappens, erase them. To keep a tanto means to be obstinate.It means to insist! Don’t you think that people come and saythings to ‘us’ too?Questioner: But what is the reason to keep a tanto (linkof intense mental note) now?Dadashri: Yes, keeping a tanto has not helped; it hasonly caused the account of karma to fill up.Why keep a note of changing karmas?What is the justice of nature when someone insults you?That person insults you due to the fruition of your karma. Thetime of expression of that karma is over for him, and it is overAptavani-9171172Aptavani-9for you too. Now, you are done with it, you have nothing to dowith it anymore. But now, you are seeing it again through the link(tanto) that you have maintained, and are bringing back thefruition (udaya) of the very karma that has passed and creatingan entanglement. Now, that other person is in some other karmaall together at this time. Is this not worth understanding? This isvery subtle.There is no closure in this matter of keeping a link(tanto) is there? And it is verily those who keep such links(tantos) that look for closure and justice! Where and how canall this end?So if someone were to insult ‘us’ yesterday and ‘we’ seehim again today, he would appear as a new person to ‘us’; andhe is new indeed. Not seeing this is verily our own mistake.We are seeing him in the older form. He is indeed in the newform. One karma is over, and therefore now he is in anotherkarma. Will he be in a new karma or will he be in the sameold karma?Questioner: He will be in another karma.Dadashri: And we are still in the same old karma. Nowhow much garbage is that? Do you ever make such mistakes?Do you keep intense mental notes?Questioner: I had a habit of making intense mental notes,but I do not have it anymore.Dadashri: So you do not do it anymore, do you? Whywaste a notebook unnecessarily? People keep notebooks.One man tells this person, sitting here, ‘You danceaccording to your prakruti. You are like a top.’ But even then,‘we’ did not make a note of it. Later, ‘we’ scolded him, ‘Whatkind of a man are you? How can you say that to someone likeher?’ Yes, she did not make a note of it either. ‘We’ do notmake notes. ‘We’ will tell the person directly to his face but then‘we’ will not make a note of it. It is a grave mistake to makeintense mental notes.Therefore, pay no attention to anyone, nor complainabout anyone, do nothing. If someone has insulted you, eventhen you do not have to come complaining to me or seek justice.Whatever happens is correct, is that not justice? There is noquestion about it, is there? That is how this Vignan (science) is;it is exact and clear.The likes and dislikes make one takenondhaQuestioner: Can you give an example how an intensemental note (nondha) is made?Dadashri: If you are out walking and someone says toyou, ‘You don’t have to follow this Dada, things will be fine. Youare needlessly creating difficulties for yourself.’ He may use afew words that you do not appreciate, and so you make anintense mental note of, ‘Why did I have to meet such aworthless person?’ Otherwise one would make a note ofsomething that he likes. So people make intense mental notes ofthings they do not like as well as things they do like.The slightest dislike arises and one will make an intensemental note of it. If you do not make nondha of your dislikes,you will achieve moksha. If you do not make a note whensomeone does you wrong, you will achieve moksha. That is thestep to moksha and it is the same step that one uses to go down.The steps that take you up is the same step that takes you down.Authority to give opinion?Questioner: What is wrong in giving an opinion(abhipraya) about something exactly the way it is, if we do nothave a negative intent behind it?Dadashri: Do you have any authority to say it as it is?You do not have that vision. You cannot say anything without theAptavani-9171172Aptavani-9for you too. Now, you are done with it, you have nothing to dowith it anymore. But now, you are seeing it again through the link(tanto) that you have maintained, and are bringing back thefruition (udaya) of the very karma that has passed and creatingan entanglement. Now, that other person is in some other karmaall together at this time. Is this not worth understanding? This isvery subtle.There is no closure in this matter of keeping a link(tanto) is there? And it is verily those who keep such links(tantos) that look for closure and justice! Where and how canall this end?So if someone were to insult ‘us’ yesterday and ‘we’ seehim again today, he would appear as a new person to ‘us’; andhe is new indeed. Not seeing this is verily our own mistake.We are seeing him in the older form. He is indeed in the newform. One karma is over, and therefore now he is in anotherkarma. Will he be in a new karma or will he be in the sameold karma?Questioner: He will be in another karma.Dadashri: And we are still in the same old karma. Nowhow much garbage is that? Do you ever make such mistakes?Do you keep intense mental notes?Questioner: I had a habit of making intense mental notes,but I do not have it anymore.Dadashri: So you do not do it anymore, do you? Whywaste a notebook unnecessarily? People keep notebooks.One man tells this person, sitting here, ‘You danceaccording to your prakruti. You are like a top.’ But even then,‘we’ did not make a note of it. Later, ‘we’ scolded him, ‘Whatkind of a man are you? How can you say that to someone likeher?’ Yes, she did not make a note of it either. ‘We’ do notmake notes. ‘We’ will tell the person directly to his face but then‘we’ will not make a note of it. It is a grave mistake to makeintense mental notes.Therefore, pay no attention to anyone, nor complainabout anyone, do nothing. If someone has insulted you, eventhen you do not have to come complaining to me or seek justice.Whatever happens is correct, is that not justice? There is noquestion about it, is there? That is how this Vignan (science) is;it is exact and clear.The likes and dislikes make one takenondhaQuestioner: Can you give an example how an intensemental note (nondha) is made?Dadashri: If you are out walking and someone says toyou, ‘You don’t have to follow this Dada, things will be fine. Youare needlessly creating difficulties for yourself.’ He may use afew words that you do not appreciate, and so you make anintense mental note of, ‘Why did I have to meet such aworthless person?’ Otherwise one would make a note ofsomething that he likes. So people make intense mental notes ofthings they do not like as well as things they do like.The slightest dislike arises and one will make an intensemental note of it. If you do not make nondha of your dislikes,you will achieve moksha. If you do not make a note whensomeone does you wrong, you will achieve moksha. That is thestep to moksha and it is the same step that one uses to go down.The steps that take you up is the same step that takes you down.Authority to give opinion?Questioner: What is wrong in giving an opinion(abhipraya) about something exactly the way it is, if we do nothave a negative intent behind it?Dadashri: Do you have any authority to say it as it is?You do not have that vision. You cannot say anything without theAptavani-9173174Aptavani-9exact vision. The word opinion is completely unnecessary forYou. You should have only one opinion and that is, ‘There is theSelf and five other eternal elements.’ There is no other opinion.That is how it should be.Opinions means there is some attachment (raag) orabhorrence (dwesh), otherwise opinions will not be there.Opinions are formed when there is like and dislike.If you did not like the tea you drank, you will give anopinion that the tea was not good. So you cannot refrain fromcriticizing the tea. Not only that, but you will also make anintense mental note of it. And in doing so, you also criticize theone who made the tea. It is because you have criticized the tea,that you are now ‘married’ to it. So are you likely to stopdrinking tea? No. It is better to have less attachment to anything.I am not asking you to let go of the tea or the existingattachments that you have. I am simply saying ‘no’ to opinions(abhipraya) and the intense mental note (nondha) making. Youcan eat and drink and do whatever you like. ‘We’ do not keepnotes of such things. ‘We’ do not have a problem there. OurVignan does not raise objections with anything else. There is atremendous consequence for making intense mental notes(nondha). One has to understand this.The authority of the non-Self reigns wherethere is nondhaOne cannot refrain from making intense mental notes.What is the greatest sign of ignorance? It is that of makingintense mental note (nondha). After attaining Gnan, nondhashould not remain. Making intense mental notes and the non-Self(pudgal) stand together. The non-Self remains as long as thereis nondha; during that time, the non-Self is the authority and notthe Self.That is why ‘we’ have to say something about nondhaevery fortnight or so. ‘We’ have to keep warning everyone. Bymaking intense mental notes, the non-Self comes in power andnot the Self. There the Self is powerless.Intense mental notes and opinionQuestioner: What is the difference between nondha(intense mental note) and (abhipraya) opinion?Dadashri: There is a difference. Nondha gives rise to theworldly life and opinions give rise to the mind. Intense mentalnotes give rise to the entire worldly life, the way it was; itrejuvenates the whole tree, all over again.Questioner: But it is because we make notes that weform opinions, is that not so?Dadashri: That is true but a nondha is not the samething as opinion. Opinion is something we give after a nondhais made. We may give opinion of good or bad, but only if wemake an intense mental note (nondha) of something. Butmaking a nondha is the biggest mistake. We can deal withopinions.Opinions give rise to the mind, which you yourself willhave to deal with later on. But making nondha gives rise to theworldly life all over again. The one who does not make intensemental notes, will not have to come back to the worldly life.Questioner: Is the intense mental note made first andthen the opinion is the verbal expression of it?Dadashri: Once a note is made it all falls on the side ofthe non-Self (the pudgal). The non-Self side starts working andon the other side the Self comes to a halt. The Self is not to befound there.Questioner: So when we make notes (nondha), is therean opinion that…Dadashri: There is no problem with an opinion. It is notAptavani-9173174Aptavani-9exact vision. The word opinion is completely unnecessary forYou. You should have only one opinion and that is, ‘There is theSelf and five other eternal elements.’ There is no other opinion.That is how it should be.Opinions means there is some attachment (raag) orabhorrence (dwesh), otherwise opinions will not be there.Opinions are formed when there is like and dislike.If you did not like the tea you drank, you will give anopinion that the tea was not good. So you cannot refrain fromcriticizing the tea. Not only that, but you will also make anintense mental note of it. And in doing so, you also criticize theone who made the tea. It is because you have criticized the tea,that you are now ‘married’ to it. So are you likely to stopdrinking tea? No. It is better to have less attachment to anything.I am not asking you to let go of the tea or the existingattachments that you have. I am simply saying ‘no’ to opinions(abhipraya) and the intense mental note (nondha) making. Youcan eat and drink and do whatever you like. ‘We’ do not keepnotes of such things. ‘We’ do not have a problem there. OurVignan does not raise objections with anything else. There is atremendous consequence for making intense mental notes(nondha). One has to understand this.The authority of the non-Self reigns wherethere is nondhaOne cannot refrain from making intense mental notes.What is the greatest sign of ignorance? It is that of makingintense mental note (nondha). After attaining Gnan, nondhashould not remain. Making intense mental notes and the non-Self(pudgal) stand together. The non-Self remains as long as thereis nondha; during that time, the non-Self is the authority and notthe Self.That is why ‘we’ have to say something about nondhaevery fortnight or so. ‘We’ have to keep warning everyone. Bymaking intense mental notes, the non-Self comes in power andnot the Self. There the Self is powerless.Intense mental notes and opinionQuestioner: What is the difference between nondha(intense mental note) and (abhipraya) opinion?Dadashri: There is a difference. Nondha gives rise to theworldly life and opinions give rise to the mind. Intense mentalnotes give rise to the entire worldly life, the way it was; itrejuvenates the whole tree, all over again.Questioner: But it is because we make notes that weform opinions, is that not so?Dadashri: That is true but a nondha is not the samething as opinion. Opinion is something we give after a nondhais made. We may give opinion of good or bad, but only if wemake an intense mental note (nondha) of something. Butmaking a nondha is the biggest mistake. We can deal withopinions.Opinions give rise to the mind, which you yourself willhave to deal with later on. But making nondha gives rise to theworldly life all over again. The one who does not make intensemental notes, will not have to come back to the worldly life.Questioner: Is the intense mental note made first andthen the opinion is the verbal expression of it?Dadashri: Once a note is made it all falls on the side ofthe non-Self (the pudgal). The non-Self side starts working andon the other side the Self comes to a halt. The Self is not to befound there.Questioner: So when we make notes (nondha), is therean opinion that…Dadashri: There is no problem with an opinion. It is notAptavani-9175176Aptavani-9as harmful. Opinion creates a new mind. The harm is entirely inmaking intense mental notes.Questioner: Please explain the difference betweenopinions and intense mental note, in detail.Dadashri: There is no problem if a little of an opinionremains but there should not be even a fraction of a nondha.Nondha means the non-Self (pudgal); nondha is exclusivelybiased towards the non-Self. When a person makes a nondha,he reverts to the way he was before. When one who has takenGnan makes a nondha, he is no different from a person who hasnot taken Gnan.Questioner: But is opinion not formed only when onemakes a nondha of something?Dadashri: There is always an opinion behind it. We canaccept an opinion but there should not be any nondha. Whenone gives an opinion, that opinion creates a new mind. Whenyou give an opinion like ‘the soup is salty’ then you give rise tothe mind. But when you make an intense mental note, then theone who made the soup is made to be the guilty party.Questioner: What kind of an intense mental note is madeat that time?Dadashri: Many notes such as, ‘He said this to me…hesaid that to me…he spoke in this manner…he spoke in thatmanner etc.’ When I make an intense mental note that Chandulalwent to a hotel, whose side am I on? On the side of the pudgal.There is grave danger in making a nondha.Questioner: How is an intense mental note of, ‘This soupis very salty’ made?Dadashri: Such an intense mental note, ‘the soup issalty’, immediately places the blame on the doer, the personwho made it. The nondha sees the other person as a doer andopinion sees only the item.You need awareness, not an intense mentalnoteQuestioner: In short, the machinery of intense mentalnote will not remain if there is awareness (jagruti).Dadashri: It will not remain. The problem lies in theawareness becoming dim. You have to bring on the awareness,and not keep any intense mental note. If one does this, then hebecomes that much aware. Or you can increase awareness bywatching ‘us’. A person may say anything to this ‘Dadaji’ andyet he will not see a single change in expression on ‘our’ face.Why is that so? Hey you! What kind of results are you lookingfor here? ‘We’ have not written an assay on it, an essay startsfrom a note, and for a note you need a notebook, and we nevereven keep a notebook! Many such people come and go.Regardless of what ‘we’ tell them on their face, that is not what‘we’ believe. He is a Shuddhatma. He is not at all at fault! Heis completely faultless (nirdosh) on the outside and he is aShuddhatma within. That is ‘our’ vision when ‘we’ speak. As itis, this is ‘our’ colloquial Patidar language and language cannotgo away, can it? However, ‘we’ do not keep a note.So all this has to be understood. Making intense mentalnotes (nondha) is what causes more damage. Especially thesevaniks (those who make a living through their speech andintellect, mostly businessman in India), they keep a notebook ofintense mental notes. Women also keep large notebooks. ‘Dadsaid this and mom was saying this.’ So everyone keeps notes;they do not let go of these notebooks. They have still kept thenotebooks, just the way they were before attaining this Gnan.They have let go of the rest of the things.Where there is an intense mental note thereis the stingSome human beings do not keep opinions about othersbut they keep more intense mental notes. They keep only theAptavani-9175176Aptavani-9as harmful. Opinion creates a new mind. The harm is entirely inmaking intense mental notes.Questioner: Please explain the difference betweenopinions and intense mental note, in detail.Dadashri: There is no problem if a little of an opinionremains but there should not be even a fraction of a nondha.Nondha means the non-Self (pudgal); nondha is exclusivelybiased towards the non-Self. When a person makes a nondha,he reverts to the way he was before. When one who has takenGnan makes a nondha, he is no different from a person who hasnot taken Gnan.Questioner: But is opinion not formed only when onemakes a nondha of something?Dadashri: There is always an opinion behind it. We canaccept an opinion but there should not be any nondha. Whenone gives an opinion, that opinion creates a new mind. Whenyou give an opinion like ‘the soup is salty’ then you give rise tothe mind. But when you make an intense mental note, then theone who made the soup is made to be the guilty party.Questioner: What kind of an intense mental note is madeat that time?Dadashri: Many notes such as, ‘He said this to me…hesaid that to me…he spoke in this manner…he spoke in thatmanner etc.’ When I make an intense mental note that Chandulalwent to a hotel, whose side am I on? On the side of the pudgal.There is grave danger in making a nondha.Questioner: How is an intense mental note of, ‘This soupis very salty’ made?Dadashri: Such an intense mental note, ‘the soup issalty’, immediately places the blame on the doer, the personwho made it. The nondha sees the other person as a doer andopinion sees only the item.You need awareness, not an intense mentalnoteQuestioner: In short, the machinery of intense mentalnote will not remain if there is awareness (jagruti).Dadashri: It will not remain. The problem lies in theawareness becoming dim. You have to bring on the awareness,and not keep any intense mental note. If one does this, then hebecomes that much aware. Or you can increase awareness bywatching ‘us’. A person may say anything to this ‘Dadaji’ andyet he will not see a single change in expression on ‘our’ face.Why is that so? Hey you! What kind of results are you lookingfor here? ‘We’ have not written an assay on it, an essay startsfrom a note, and for a note you need a notebook, and we nevereven keep a notebook! Many such people come and go.Regardless of what ‘we’ tell them on their face, that is not what‘we’ believe. He is a Shuddhatma. He is not at all at fault! Heis completely faultless (nirdosh) on the outside and he is aShuddhatma within. That is ‘our’ vision when ‘we’ speak. As itis, this is ‘our’ colloquial Patidar language and language cannotgo away, can it? However, ‘we’ do not keep a note.So all this has to be understood. Making intense mentalnotes (nondha) is what causes more damage. Especially thesevaniks (those who make a living through their speech andintellect, mostly businessman in India), they keep a notebook ofintense mental notes. Women also keep large notebooks. ‘Dadsaid this and mom was saying this.’ So everyone keeps notes;they do not let go of these notebooks. They have still kept thenotebooks, just the way they were before attaining this Gnan.They have let go of the rest of the things.Where there is an intense mental note thereis the stingSome human beings do not keep opinions about othersbut they keep more intense mental notes. They keep only theAptavani-9177178Aptavani-9intense mental notes. What do these mental notes (nondha) do?They make the mind carry vengeance; a poisonous sting andthus it becomes inclined to sting and attack. If someone ‘stings’you, your mind will become inclined to sting back, so do notkeep intense mental notes. These things go on but do not keepintense mental notes. He is the victim of the fruition of his karma.Nondha creates a worldly life for the next life. Nondha does notexercise its superiority over the mind, nor does it create anothermind in the next life. Nondha is a ‘poisonous’ sting, and onekeeps the ‘poison’ within. When there is too much poison of thenondha within, it will not refrain from avenging by ‘stinging’.Questioner: Who makes the intense mental notes andwho forms the opinion?Dadashri: The ego does both.Questioner: Does the intellect make a note?Dadashri: It has nothing to do with the intellect. To giveand take is job of the ego.Absolute darshan of The GnaniMaking an intense mental note is something very different.I can understand what I am saying but it is little difficult to showothers. I tell many people not to keep nondha, they evenunderstand that it is due to their nondha that they are in certainpredicaments.‘We’ do not keep any note. All circumstances arise, but‘we’ do not make any nondha.Questioner: What do you see at that time?Dadashri: ‘We’ look at the whole picture and not justthe isolated note like, ‘he was the only one running.’Questioner: But even in the whole picture, he is the onerunning, is he not?Dadashri: He is part of the picture but I look at thewhole picture.Along the path of the vitarag…One becomes a vitarag if he does not make intense mentalnotes. One is considered a vitarag if he does not make nondha.‘We’ are not saying do not make any notes whatsoever. It ismore than enough if your note making decreases so that ‘we’can realize that you have become somewhat of a vitarag.Nevertheless, ‘we’ cannot truly use the word vitarag in thissituation.Now when you keep listening to such talks, things willautomatically begin to release their grip over you. You do nothave to perform any rituals or fast or anything like that. You onlyneed to understand this.* * * * *Aptavani-9177178Aptavani-9intense mental notes. What do these mental notes (nondha) do?They make the mind carry vengeance; a poisonous sting andthus it becomes inclined to sting and attack. If someone ‘stings’you, your mind will become inclined to sting back, so do notkeep intense mental notes. These things go on but do not keepintense mental notes. He is the victim of the fruition of his karma.Nondha creates a worldly life for the next life. Nondha does notexercise its superiority over the mind, nor does it create anothermind in the next life. Nondha is a ‘poisonous’ sting, and onekeeps the ‘poison’ within. When there is too much poison of thenondha within, it will not refrain from avenging by ‘stinging’.Questioner: Who makes the intense mental notes andwho forms the opinion?Dadashri: The ego does both.Questioner: Does the intellect make a note?Dadashri: It has nothing to do with the intellect. To giveand take is job of the ego.Absolute darshan of The GnaniMaking an intense mental note is something very different.I can understand what I am saying but it is little difficult to showothers. I tell many people not to keep nondha, they evenunderstand that it is due to their nondha that they are in certainpredicaments.‘We’ do not keep any note. All circumstances arise, but‘we’ do not make any nondha.Questioner: What do you see at that time?Dadashri: ‘We’ look at the whole picture and not justthe isolated note like, ‘he was the only one running.’Questioner: But even in the whole picture, he is the onerunning, is he not?Dadashri: He is part of the picture but I look at thewhole picture.Along the path of the vitarag…One becomes a vitarag if he does not make intense mentalnotes. One is considered a vitarag if he does not make nondha.‘We’ are not saying do not make any notes whatsoever. It ismore than enough if your note making decreases so that ‘we’can realize that you have become somewhat of a vitarag.Nevertheless, ‘we’ cannot truly use the word vitarag in thissituation.Now when you keep listening to such talks, things willautomatically begin to release their grip over you. You do nothave to perform any rituals or fast or anything like that. You onlyneed to understand this.* * * * *Aptavani-9179180Aptavani-9[3]Commonsense : WeldingDeficiency in commonsenseThis speech is without attachment or abhorrence. It isvitarag speech. If a person hears, beholds and absorbs thisspeech he will attain salvation. Holding and absorbing thisspeech will cleanse all the ‘diseases’ within. It will flush out allthe bad attributes and their parmanus (atoms).I am giving you the essence of all the talks; this is thecomplete and ultimate extract. This is the essence of myexperiences. Otherwise, do you think I can write in a book‘nobody has commonsense today’? If people read this, theywould immediately come here to complain that they do havecommonsense. If someone were to come to me and tell me so,I would tell him, ‘Come let’s see. I will come to your house andstay with you for fifteen days.’ People think they havecommonsense!If I do not say this people will arrogantly walk aroundthinking there is no one like them around.‘Everywhere applicable’What is commonsense? It is that which is “everywhereapplicable, theoretical as well as practical”. I have not seen suchcommonsense in anyone. Commonsense is such a key that it isapplicable anywhere, it can unlock even the ‘rustiest of locks’(solve the most difficult of problems). Otherwise, even a newand the best of locks will sometimes not open. If you can dealwith the worst of men, then realize that you have commonsense.Otherwise, people talk without commonsense; they have nounderstanding at all.Have you ever seen a man with commonsense? I have notseen a single man with commonsense as yet. Big officials askme, ‘Have you never seen commonsense in anyone?’ I have totell them, ‘From where will they get commonsense? Men fightwith their wives so how can they have commonsense?’ How cana man with commonsense fight with his wife? How can you fightwith the person you eat, drink and live with? Can you call thatcommonsense? Where did you get such commonsense? Peoplewalk around with undue arrogance of, ‘I know something’.What do they know? And yet men have no idea of whatcommonsense is. Everything happens as a result of fruition ofone’s karma.Even a person the world fears will not refrain frombickering with his wife. Why does he bicker with his wife? Doeshe not quarrel at least three or four times in a twelve-year span?Questioner: He bickers everyday.Dadashri: Everyday! So how can you consider him aman? And then he claims he has sense. Where is the sense? Ifhe had any sense, he would not fight with his wife. When he hasseparation due to difference of opinion with his wife, do you notrealize he lacks commonsense?Questioner: How can we tell who of the two has lesscommonsense?Dadashri: Can you not know who creates the separationdue to differences in opinion (matbhed) first? Will you not needsome sense?A man with commonsense will adjust everywhere. He willadjust even with the person that abuses him, he will say, ‘Noproblem, come and sit down.’ So commonsense is required. Butgenerally one will walk around with a sulking (risavu; upset andAptavani-9179180Aptavani-9[3]Commonsense : WeldingDeficiency in commonsenseThis speech is without attachment or abhorrence. It isvitarag speech. If a person hears, beholds and absorbs thisspeech he will attain salvation. Holding and absorbing thisspeech will cleanse all the ‘diseases’ within. It will flush out allthe bad attributes and their parmanus (atoms).I am giving you the essence of all the talks; this is thecomplete and ultimate extract. This is the essence of myexperiences. Otherwise, do you think I can write in a book‘nobody has commonsense today’? If people read this, theywould immediately come here to complain that they do havecommonsense. If someone were to come to me and tell me so,I would tell him, ‘Come let’s see. I will come to your house andstay with you for fifteen days.’ People think they havecommonsense!If I do not say this people will arrogantly walk aroundthinking there is no one like them around.‘Everywhere applicable’What is commonsense? It is that which is “everywhereapplicable, theoretical as well as practical”. I have not seen suchcommonsense in anyone. Commonsense is such a key that it isapplicable anywhere, it can unlock even the ‘rustiest of locks’(solve the most difficult of problems). Otherwise, even a newand the best of locks will sometimes not open. If you can dealwith the worst of men, then realize that you have commonsense.Otherwise, people talk without commonsense; they have nounderstanding at all.Have you ever seen a man with commonsense? I have notseen a single man with commonsense as yet. Big officials askme, ‘Have you never seen commonsense in anyone?’ I have totell them, ‘From where will they get commonsense? Men fightwith their wives so how can they have commonsense?’ How cana man with commonsense fight with his wife? How can you fightwith the person you eat, drink and live with? Can you call thatcommonsense? Where did you get such commonsense? Peoplewalk around with undue arrogance of, ‘I know something’.What do they know? And yet men have no idea of whatcommonsense is. Everything happens as a result of fruition ofone’s karma.Even a person the world fears will not refrain frombickering with his wife. Why does he bicker with his wife? Doeshe not quarrel at least three or four times in a twelve-year span?Questioner: He bickers everyday.Dadashri: Everyday! So how can you consider him aman? And then he claims he has sense. Where is the sense? Ifhe had any sense, he would not fight with his wife. When he hasseparation due to difference of opinion with his wife, do you notrealize he lacks commonsense?Questioner: How can we tell who of the two has lesscommonsense?Dadashri: Can you not know who creates the separationdue to differences in opinion (matbhed) first? Will you not needsome sense?A man with commonsense will adjust everywhere. He willadjust even with the person that abuses him, he will say, ‘Noproblem, come and sit down.’ So commonsense is required. Butgenerally one will walk around with a sulking (risavu; upset andAptavani-9181182Aptavani-9non-communicative) face if someone tells him, ‘You do not haveany sense.’ Hey! Do you not have commonsense? Why do youhave a sulking face just because someone tells you this? Youthink to yourself ‘I have a lot of sense’, don’t you? Just look atyou! You are nothing but a ‘sack of sense’! No one will give youa dime for your ‘sack of commonsense’ and yet you needlesslyfret over this. A sensible man will adjust everywhere. There isa shortage of commonsense in the current time cycle.Have they defined ‘commonsense’ properly? Is this anold meaning or a new one?Questioner: Original, it is a new meaning.Dadashri: It is original, is it not? Has anyone defined itbefore? People get excited when I tell them that the meaning ofcommonsense is that it is applicable everywhere, theoretically aswell as practically. They tell me that I have defined it very nicely.So I tell them, ‘this verily is the sign of my failing matriculation!’The Yard stick of commonsenseYou have a degree of C.A. (Chartered Accountant) butyou still have roles to play. You will have to act accordingly; theroles of a C.A., then the role of a husband to your wife; will younot have to know all that? Otherwise, your wife will give youtrouble. Is that not so, because you do not know how to dealwith her? She would not give you any trouble if you did. Andyour wife has not come to give you trouble; she has come tomake a home for you. But when one of you falls short in yourrole, the other party will start to nag; the nagging will start. Yes,it is because you do not have the know-how!What do young women say when I ask them for theiropinions about the young men of today? They tell me, “They arestupid.” Is that not something to be ashamed of, when they saythis?It is natural for a ten-year old girl to have the maturity andworldly knowledge a fifteen-year-old boy would have. She maybe ten years old but she has foresight. Therefore women havegreater foresight, home administration skill etc.Lack of practical understandingI asked one lady, ‘Why do you not get along with yourhusband?’ She told me, ‘He is so smart and intelligent; youcannot even begin to talk about it.’ I said to her, ‘It is good foryou if your husband is smart.’ She then says, ‘But he is notpractical.’ So what she is saying is that he does not havecommonsense and so he fights over the most trivial things. Thenshe tells me, ‘What should I do, he does not have anycommonsense?’ I told her, ‘I understand everything; you don’thave to say any more.’ How can one have reconciliation here!Should a person not have at least some commonsense forworldly interaction? Should a person not be practical?So what do I tell the women? I tell them, ‘Listen dear.What will become of you if your husband turns out to besomeone without practical commonsense? Will you like living a“nonsense life” with someone like that? Nevertheless, you willnot be able to escape your prarabdha (the effect of past karma;one’s destiny; karma effect), and yet you cannot do as you wisheither. Such is this world, so if you get a husband withoutcommonsense, come and tell me immediately and I will ‘repair’him and give you the keys to have a harmonious life.’ This ishow I solved that woman’s problem.Your worldly interactions are at their bestwhen your ego is downA man without commonsense will not have even an hourof harmony with his wife! Problems arise because there is nocommonsense. What happens when such a man gets married?Today he will get a wife; they get together at night and separatewithin an hour. To begin with they do not know how to deal witheach other. They do not even know where to begin. Should onenot have the art of how to live in harmony?Aptavani-9181182Aptavani-9non-communicative) face if someone tells him, ‘You do not haveany sense.’ Hey! Do you not have commonsense? Why do youhave a sulking face just because someone tells you this? Youthink to yourself ‘I have a lot of sense’, don’t you? Just look atyou! You are nothing but a ‘sack of sense’! No one will give youa dime for your ‘sack of commonsense’ and yet you needlesslyfret over this. A sensible man will adjust everywhere. There isa shortage of commonsense in the current time cycle.Have they defined ‘commonsense’ properly? Is this anold meaning or a new one?Questioner: Original, it is a new meaning.Dadashri: It is original, is it not? Has anyone defined itbefore? People get excited when I tell them that the meaning ofcommonsense is that it is applicable everywhere, theoretically aswell as practically. They tell me that I have defined it very nicely.So I tell them, ‘this verily is the sign of my failing matriculation!’The Yard stick of commonsenseYou have a degree of C.A. (Chartered Accountant) butyou still have roles to play. You will have to act accordingly; theroles of a C.A., then the role of a husband to your wife; will younot have to know all that? Otherwise, your wife will give youtrouble. Is that not so, because you do not know how to dealwith her? She would not give you any trouble if you did. Andyour wife has not come to give you trouble; she has come tomake a home for you. But when one of you falls short in yourrole, the other party will start to nag; the nagging will start. Yes,it is because you do not have the know-how!What do young women say when I ask them for theiropinions about the young men of today? They tell me, “They arestupid.” Is that not something to be ashamed of, when they saythis?It is natural for a ten-year old girl to have the maturity andworldly knowledge a fifteen-year-old boy would have. She maybe ten years old but she has foresight. Therefore women havegreater foresight, home administration skill etc.Lack of practical understandingI asked one lady, ‘Why do you not get along with yourhusband?’ She told me, ‘He is so smart and intelligent; youcannot even begin to talk about it.’ I said to her, ‘It is good foryou if your husband is smart.’ She then says, ‘But he is notpractical.’ So what she is saying is that he does not havecommonsense and so he fights over the most trivial things. Thenshe tells me, ‘What should I do, he does not have anycommonsense?’ I told her, ‘I understand everything; you don’thave to say any more.’ How can one have reconciliation here!Should a person not have at least some commonsense forworldly interaction? Should a person not be practical?So what do I tell the women? I tell them, ‘Listen dear.What will become of you if your husband turns out to besomeone without practical commonsense? Will you like living a“nonsense life” with someone like that? Nevertheless, you willnot be able to escape your prarabdha (the effect of past karma;one’s destiny; karma effect), and yet you cannot do as you wisheither. Such is this world, so if you get a husband withoutcommonsense, come and tell me immediately and I will ‘repair’him and give you the keys to have a harmonious life.’ This ishow I solved that woman’s problem.Your worldly interactions are at their bestwhen your ego is downA man without commonsense will not have even an hourof harmony with his wife! Problems arise because there is nocommonsense. What happens when such a man gets married?Today he will get a wife; they get together at night and separatewithin an hour. To begin with they do not know how to deal witheach other. They do not even know where to begin. Should onenot have the art of how to live in harmony?Aptavani-9183184Aptavani-9Questioner: One definitely has to have that. He cannotdo without it.Dadashri: The husband should have commonsense, shouldhe not? If the wife makes a mistake, he starts fighting with her.You fool, that mistake did not occur so that you could have a fight.A man with commonsense is able to understand and settledifferences even with a street vendor. What kind of people getinto fights? A person who has no sense ruins things everywherehe goes. Is there any benefit in fighting with someone withoutknowing the facts; without knowing the circumstances thatcaused the poor person to make a mistake?Questioner: No it does not, it causes harm.Dadashri: So those who do not have commonsense,fight. And when they fight, that is the end. It brings an end to therelationship between the two.So decrease your ego to such an extent that you can getalong with everyone. Does the ego have threads that you canturn or twist in order to reduce it? So is this something you dowith or without an understanding? There is no problem with theego that has understanding but what good is the ego that lacksunderstanding?Commonsense increases with a mixingnature (to be social)That is why I tell you that if you spend time with people,if you get acquainted with them, it will create affection in theirhearts for you. When you discuss things you can pick up onpeople’s experiences and in doing so, your commonsense willincrease. By mixing with people and moving around with them,your commonsense will increase.Questioner: You have said that one should live inharmony with others, but I experience contempt and scorn insuch situations.Dadashri: It happens because there is a presence ofcontempt. So if you get rid of contempt and live in harmony withothers then your commonsense will increase. When one cannothave contempt even towards animals, how can one have ittowards human beings? One would understand if you showedcontempt if you had a certain social status, but that is not so.You cannot be contemptuous.What do we mean by sense? It is when one gets marriedbut has only a few conflicts with his wife throughout his life, theydo not have conflicts everyday; that is sensible living. But if aman is without this sensibility, he brings home a wife, she sulks,she becomes upset and non-communicative with him and hedoes not know how to deal with her; he does not know howto open the ‘lock’ (solve problems). So what is to become ofthe wife?‘Singing’ in harmony is the keyA husband will not speak with his wife for five days afterthey have a row. He does not know what to do there, so howcan he get beyond the stage of being non-communicative? Thatrelationship will then begin to rust. If this were the case with aMuslim man, he would immediately know how to appease hiswife and live in harmony with her. Commonsense means to‘sing’ in harmony with the right ‘note’.Questioner: What does ‘singing in harmony with the rightnote’ mean?Dadashri: It means that his method is similar to ‘ours’. Itmeans to handle matters the way I do. What would a Muslimgentleman say? ‘I will never fight with my wife. She will fightwith me but I will not fight with her.’A man with commonsense will not say, ‘such is mypredicament, what should I do?’ If it is not applicable, then it isnot commonsense.Aptavani-9183184Aptavani-9Questioner: One definitely has to have that. He cannotdo without it.Dadashri: The husband should have commonsense, shouldhe not? If the wife makes a mistake, he starts fighting with her.You fool, that mistake did not occur so that you could have a fight.A man with commonsense is able to understand and settledifferences even with a street vendor. What kind of people getinto fights? A person who has no sense ruins things everywherehe goes. Is there any benefit in fighting with someone withoutknowing the facts; without knowing the circumstances thatcaused the poor person to make a mistake?Questioner: No it does not, it causes harm.Dadashri: So those who do not have commonsense,fight. And when they fight, that is the end. It brings an end to therelationship between the two.So decrease your ego to such an extent that you can getalong with everyone. Does the ego have threads that you canturn or twist in order to reduce it? So is this something you dowith or without an understanding? There is no problem with theego that has understanding but what good is the ego that lacksunderstanding?Commonsense increases with a mixingnature (to be social)That is why I tell you that if you spend time with people,if you get acquainted with them, it will create affection in theirhearts for you. When you discuss things you can pick up onpeople’s experiences and in doing so, your commonsense willincrease. By mixing with people and moving around with them,your commonsense will increase.Questioner: You have said that one should live inharmony with others, but I experience contempt and scorn insuch situations.Dadashri: It happens because there is a presence ofcontempt. So if you get rid of contempt and live in harmony withothers then your commonsense will increase. When one cannothave contempt even towards animals, how can one have ittowards human beings? One would understand if you showedcontempt if you had a certain social status, but that is not so.You cannot be contemptuous.What do we mean by sense? It is when one gets marriedbut has only a few conflicts with his wife throughout his life, theydo not have conflicts everyday; that is sensible living. But if aman is without this sensibility, he brings home a wife, she sulks,she becomes upset and non-communicative with him and hedoes not know how to deal with her; he does not know howto open the ‘lock’ (solve problems). So what is to become ofthe wife?‘Singing’ in harmony is the keyA husband will not speak with his wife for five days afterthey have a row. He does not know what to do there, so howcan he get beyond the stage of being non-communicative? Thatrelationship will then begin to rust. If this were the case with aMuslim man, he would immediately know how to appease hiswife and live in harmony with her. Commonsense means to‘sing’ in harmony with the right ‘note’.Questioner: What does ‘singing in harmony with the rightnote’ mean?Dadashri: It means that his method is similar to ‘ours’. Itmeans to handle matters the way I do. What would a Muslimgentleman say? ‘I will never fight with my wife. She will fightwith me but I will not fight with her.’A man with commonsense will not say, ‘such is mypredicament, what should I do?’ If it is not applicable, then it isnot commonsense.Aptavani-9185186Aptavani-9Commonsense avoids conflictsQuestioner: If a person had commonsense, would he notfind solutions to everything?Dadashri: He would solve all kinds of problems; hewould solve all worldly entanglements.Questioner: Does he have any conflicts?Dadashri: There will be less conflict. Commonsensereduces conflicts.Questioner: Does that mean where there is conflicts,there is no commonsense?Dadashri: Not like that, but there is less commonsensethere.Questioner: But who, with the exception of a Gnani, canstay away from conflicts?Dadashri: There will not be any conflict where there iscommonsense. A man with commonsense will fix relationshipsimmediately; even when something goes wrong he will turnthings around. It will not take him long to do so. That iscommonsense. It is “everywhere applicable”.Questioner: But is commonsense not pushed asidewhenever attachment or abhorrence occurs?Dadashri: Commonsense is a matter of experience. Ithas nothing to do with attachment or abhorrence. Commonsenseis the net experience of the worldly life.How to stop swachhand (to act according toone’s own will and intellect)Questioner: Is insight (sooj) helpful in making decisionsabout worldly affairs?Dadashri: Yes, insight (sooj) is helpful. Where can aperson get such insight if he does not have it? In that case heshould consult someone he trusts for guidance. In this world,there is nothing better than to ask for advice before you doanything. If you ask your boss, ‘Can I go to the rest room?’ andhe says ‘Go’, then it does not matter even if you smoke for tenminutes while you are there. But if you go without asking himyou will be caught. He will ask, ‘Why did you go to smoke?’So ask before you go.Questioner: Does swachhand (acting according to one’swill and intellect), get destroyed if one asks for permission?Dadashri: Yes, that is precisely why one needs to ask forpermission - to get rid of his swachhand. That is why you aretold to make a guru. That way you will not be driven by yourown intellect (dahapan)! And whatever the guru says goes onehundred percent.If ‘we’ tell this man, ‘go run in this direction’, and hedoes not stop to question why, that is defined as him nothaving any swachhand. That is when we can say hisswachhand is gone. But if he stops to ask someone, ‘ShouldI run in the direction Dada has told me to or not?’ then it iscalled swachhand.Yes, there is no need to ask me anything about worldlymatters. For that you can ask your father or your elders oranyone who has experience in such matters. Ask them, they willexplain everything to you.Questioner: But during the time of worldly interactions,it is the commonsense that is applicable, is it not?Dadashri: But where will he get commonsense? If hereads our books, he will attain some insight (sooj) but where willhe get commonsense? Is it anything cheap or worthless?Straightness increases commonsenseQuestioner: Does commonsense increase when onebecomes straight (sarad)?Aptavani-9185186Aptavani-9Commonsense avoids conflictsQuestioner: If a person had commonsense, would he notfind solutions to everything?Dadashri: He would solve all kinds of problems; hewould solve all worldly entanglements.Questioner: Does he have any conflicts?Dadashri: There will be less conflict. Commonsensereduces conflicts.Questioner: Does that mean where there is conflicts,there is no commonsense?Dadashri: Not like that, but there is less commonsensethere.Questioner: But who, with the exception of a Gnani, canstay away from conflicts?Dadashri: There will not be any conflict where there iscommonsense. A man with commonsense will fix relationshipsimmediately; even when something goes wrong he will turnthings around. It will not take him long to do so. That iscommonsense. It is “everywhere applicable”.Questioner: But is commonsense not pushed asidewhenever attachment or abhorrence occurs?Dadashri: Commonsense is a matter of experience. Ithas nothing to do with attachment or abhorrence. Commonsenseis the net experience of the worldly life.How to stop swachhand (to act according toone’s own will and intellect)Questioner: Is insight (sooj) helpful in making decisionsabout worldly affairs?Dadashri: Yes, insight (sooj) is helpful. Where can aperson get such insight if he does not have it? In that case heshould consult someone he trusts for guidance. In this world,there is nothing better than to ask for advice before you doanything. If you ask your boss, ‘Can I go to the rest room?’ andhe says ‘Go’, then it does not matter even if you smoke for tenminutes while you are there. But if you go without asking himyou will be caught. He will ask, ‘Why did you go to smoke?’So ask before you go.Questioner: Does swachhand (acting according to one’swill and intellect), get destroyed if one asks for permission?Dadashri: Yes, that is precisely why one needs to ask forpermission - to get rid of his swachhand. That is why you aretold to make a guru. That way you will not be driven by yourown intellect (dahapan)! And whatever the guru says goes onehundred percent.If ‘we’ tell this man, ‘go run in this direction’, and hedoes not stop to question why, that is defined as him nothaving any swachhand. That is when we can say hisswachhand is gone. But if he stops to ask someone, ‘ShouldI run in the direction Dada has told me to or not?’ then it iscalled swachhand.Yes, there is no need to ask me anything about worldlymatters. For that you can ask your father or your elders oranyone who has experience in such matters. Ask them, they willexplain everything to you.Questioner: But during the time of worldly interactions,it is the commonsense that is applicable, is it not?Dadashri: But where will he get commonsense? If hereads our books, he will attain some insight (sooj) but where willhe get commonsense? Is it anything cheap or worthless?Straightness increases commonsenseQuestioner: Does commonsense increase when onebecomes straight (sarad)?Aptavani-9187188Aptavani-9Dadashri: Yes, it may happen. It will happen if the otherperson is weak, he will be hurt. In this world the weak personwill become miserable. Misery is proportional to one’s innerweakness. What can a stronger person do if a weaker personfeels miserable? What can a big scary looking man do if peoplerun away from him in fear the moment they see him? Where ishis fault?Questioner: A person may have the art of pleasingothers with his words and actions and with such a gift; he is ableto accomplish his work through others, is he not?Dadashri: All that may be there, but deep within, allthose gifts are the result of selfish intents, and they are not good.Such gifts prevent the expression of complete commonsense.Commonsense does not become complete where the slightestselfish motive exists. Only commonsense without selfishness isworthy. Thereafter, pleasing others without any selfish motives isdone with the aim of not hurting them. Worldly people on theother hand, please others for selfish reasons; for fulfilling theirown selfish goals and desires, and therefore such people neverdevelop full commonsense. This is because commonsense getsused up in their selfish aim and intent.Insight (sooj) is a different thing altogetherQuestioner: Is it commonsense that in order to quicklyaccomplish any worldly task, a person reduces conflicts withothers?Dadashri: That which accomplishes any kind of workfast is really insight (sooj). Commonsense is different, it isapplicable everywhere, it will open any ‘locks’ that one cannotnormally open (It can solve problems that otherwise cannot be).Questioner: Some people get confused when they haveto make a decision while others make decisions very fast, is thatinsight (sooj)?Dadashri: Yes, it increases lot. Straight people are easilydeceived, but their commonsense will also increase a great dealin the process. Someone may cheat a straight person bycharging him more money but in return his commonsense willincrease. Nothing in this world happens without an exchange ofgive and take. An exchange of one kind or another willinevitably take place.Questioner: Commonsense is applicable everywhere,right? So then, how does one get cheated?Dadashri: A person gets cheated because of hisstraightness and lack of excess intellect. He may not get cheatedoften but he will get cheated one or two times. However, hiscommonsense will blossom when he gets cheated. He willrealize that he gets cheated in certain circumstances and so hiscommonsense will continue to increase.Solution with commonsenseCommonsense is a tremendous thing. One man went tohis boss and started to say all kinds of things to him. Becausethe boss had commonsense, he was not affected at all. So wecan see a practical application of commonsense here. Any otherperson will get discouraged and get very depressed. But I didnot see any depression in this boss. I was observing him to seewhether he would become depressed or not. Despite all theinsults, he did not get depressed at all.So what do I tell everyone? Solve all your problems withcommonsense. No matter what the other person says, it is alldependant upon that person’s mind. And it is only because ofyour own punya (merit karma) (!) that he speaks that way toyou! No one will say anything to you without your punya(!)Selfishness prevents full commonsenseQuestioner: A person with commonsense may not getaffected but can he become instrumental (nimit) in causing hurtto someone else?Aptavani-9187188Aptavani-9Dadashri: Yes, it may happen. It will happen if the otherperson is weak, he will be hurt. In this world the weak personwill become miserable. Misery is proportional to one’s innerweakness. What can a stronger person do if a weaker personfeels miserable? What can a big scary looking man do if peoplerun away from him in fear the moment they see him? Where ishis fault?Questioner: A person may have the art of pleasingothers with his words and actions and with such a gift; he is ableto accomplish his work through others, is he not?Dadashri: All that may be there, but deep within, allthose gifts are the result of selfish intents, and they are not good.Such gifts prevent the expression of complete commonsense.Commonsense does not become complete where the slightestselfish motive exists. Only commonsense without selfishness isworthy. Thereafter, pleasing others without any selfish motives isdone with the aim of not hurting them. Worldly people on theother hand, please others for selfish reasons; for fulfilling theirown selfish goals and desires, and therefore such people neverdevelop full commonsense. This is because commonsense getsused up in their selfish aim and intent.Insight (sooj) is a different thing altogetherQuestioner: Is it commonsense that in order to quicklyaccomplish any worldly task, a person reduces conflicts withothers?Dadashri: That which accomplishes any kind of workfast is really insight (sooj). Commonsense is different, it isapplicable everywhere, it will open any ‘locks’ that one cannotnormally open (It can solve problems that otherwise cannot be).Questioner: Some people get confused when they haveto make a decision while others make decisions very fast, is thatinsight (sooj)?Dadashri: Yes, it increases lot. Straight people are easilydeceived, but their commonsense will also increase a great dealin the process. Someone may cheat a straight person bycharging him more money but in return his commonsense willincrease. Nothing in this world happens without an exchange ofgive and take. An exchange of one kind or another willinevitably take place.Questioner: Commonsense is applicable everywhere,right? So then, how does one get cheated?Dadashri: A person gets cheated because of hisstraightness and lack of excess intellect. He may not get cheatedoften but he will get cheated one or two times. However, hiscommonsense will blossom when he gets cheated. He willrealize that he gets cheated in certain circumstances and so hiscommonsense will continue to increase.Solution with commonsenseCommonsense is a tremendous thing. One man went tohis boss and started to say all kinds of things to him. Becausethe boss had commonsense, he was not affected at all. So wecan see a practical application of commonsense here. Any otherperson will get discouraged and get very depressed. But I didnot see any depression in this boss. I was observing him to seewhether he would become depressed or not. Despite all theinsults, he did not get depressed at all.So what do I tell everyone? Solve all your problems withcommonsense. No matter what the other person says, it is alldependant upon that person’s mind. And it is only because ofyour own punya (merit karma) (!) that he speaks that way toyou! No one will say anything to you without your punya(!)Selfishness prevents full commonsenseQuestioner: A person with commonsense may not getaffected but can he become instrumental (nimit) in causing hurtto someone else?Aptavani-9189190Aptavani-9Dadashri: No, to make a decision is intellect, but toaccomplish an hours worth of work in fifteen minutes is insight(sooj).Questioner: Is that what we call practicality?Dadashri: No, it is called insight (sooj). Many haveintellect and insight. Their intellect allows them to make quickdecisions. Insight is darshan (vision) and intellect is gnan(knowledge), but they are viparit gnan and darshan i.e. theyare deluded knowledge and vision. Meaning it is worldlyknowledge and vision; it is mithya (wrong) knowledge andvision.Selflessness leads to full commonsenseQuestioner: The one who has become an expert inworldly interaction is the true expert, is he not?Dadashri: Yes, the world considers such a person anexpert. But the one who has developed commonsense to itsfullest is even higher than the expert in worldly interactions. Inthe expert the commonsense is one sided whereas in the otherindividual (vyavaharikta), the commonsense is all embracing.Commonsense is from all perspectives and is fully developed.When one tries to be an expert in one thing, he shuts himself offfrom other things. The expert becomes inadequate in situationsthat are beyond his expertise.Questioner: One can be expert only in a limited field.Dadashri: Yes, he is expert only in certain matters and hebecomes weak and inadequate in others.Questioner: When one sees the worldly interactionsthrough commonsense, it is all a calculated approach meaning itis through the medium of the intellect. And when he sees itthrough Gnan, that is when he sees through the enlightenedworldview, he never sees others as ‘doer’; he sees all under therealm of vyavasthit (scientific circumstantial evidences). What isthe difference between the two solutions that have been used inthe worldly interactions?Dadashri: Solution through our Gnan is different.Questioner: Of the two, which is superior?Dadashri: The solution through commonsense is superior.Gnan does not have the level of the specific solution.Questioner: Solution achieved through Gnan will stop allinner burning and turmoil.Dadashri: Yes, it does, but the external worldly work stillremains, does it not? In this respect our mahatmas fall short;Gnan is not useful in bringing solutions to the worldly tasks athand. Our mahatmas lack this commonsense. He (mahatma,one who has received the knowledge of the Self) marries ayoung woman, but does not know how to interact with her andsettle the relationship with equanimity. Even the sadhus andacharyas (spiritual masters of the traditional Kramic path)would run away on the third day, if they were made to marry awoman! Why? They simply have no knowledge of how to dealwith such a life.Questioner: A person with commonsense will not benefitas much from this Gnan, will he? That is because his vision isalso directed towards the worldly life.Dadashri: That is not considered commonsense. Thoseare all results of self-interest, they are one sided. Commonsenseis that which is applicable everywhere; it has 360° of applicability.Such a person is not an expert in any specific task or matter.Questioner: But the expert’s expertise is in worldlyinteractions (vyavaharikta), is it not?Dadashri: An expert’s involvement is only in one or twoworldly tasks. In other matters he has no expertise. In othermatters he may have zero expertise. The one with commonsensedoes not have a zero in any matter.Aptavani-9189190Aptavani-9Dadashri: No, to make a decision is intellect, but toaccomplish an hours worth of work in fifteen minutes is insight(sooj).Questioner: Is that what we call practicality?Dadashri: No, it is called insight (sooj). Many haveintellect and insight. Their intellect allows them to make quickdecisions. Insight is darshan (vision) and intellect is gnan(knowledge), but they are viparit gnan and darshan i.e. theyare deluded knowledge and vision. Meaning it is worldlyknowledge and vision; it is mithya (wrong) knowledge andvision.Selflessness leads to full commonsenseQuestioner: The one who has become an expert inworldly interaction is the true expert, is he not?Dadashri: Yes, the world considers such a person anexpert. But the one who has developed commonsense to itsfullest is even higher than the expert in worldly interactions. Inthe expert the commonsense is one sided whereas in the otherindividual (vyavaharikta), the commonsense is all embracing.Commonsense is from all perspectives and is fully developed.When one tries to be an expert in one thing, he shuts himself offfrom other things. The expert becomes inadequate in situationsthat are beyond his expertise.Questioner: One can be expert only in a limited field.Dadashri: Yes, he is expert only in certain matters and hebecomes weak and inadequate in others.Questioner: When one sees the worldly interactionsthrough commonsense, it is all a calculated approach meaning itis through the medium of the intellect. And when he sees itthrough Gnan, that is when he sees through the enlightenedworldview, he never sees others as ‘doer’; he sees all under therealm of vyavasthit (scientific circumstantial evidences). What isthe difference between the two solutions that have been used inthe worldly interactions?Dadashri: Solution through our Gnan is different.Questioner: Of the two, which is superior?Dadashri: The solution through commonsense is superior.Gnan does not have the level of the specific solution.Questioner: Solution achieved through Gnan will stop allinner burning and turmoil.Dadashri: Yes, it does, but the external worldly work stillremains, does it not? In this respect our mahatmas fall short;Gnan is not useful in bringing solutions to the worldly tasks athand. Our mahatmas lack this commonsense. He (mahatma,one who has received the knowledge of the Self) marries ayoung woman, but does not know how to interact with her andsettle the relationship with equanimity. Even the sadhus andacharyas (spiritual masters of the traditional Kramic path)would run away on the third day, if they were made to marry awoman! Why? They simply have no knowledge of how to dealwith such a life.Questioner: A person with commonsense will not benefitas much from this Gnan, will he? That is because his vision isalso directed towards the worldly life.Dadashri: That is not considered commonsense. Thoseare all results of self-interest, they are one sided. Commonsenseis that which is applicable everywhere; it has 360° of applicability.Such a person is not an expert in any specific task or matter.Questioner: But the expert’s expertise is in worldlyinteractions (vyavaharikta), is it not?Dadashri: An expert’s involvement is only in one or twoworldly tasks. In other matters he has no expertise. In othermatters he may have zero expertise. The one with commonsensedoes not have a zero in any matter.Aptavani-9191192Aptavani-9(taaran – a quick internal assessment, the bottom line of anysituations) of the event of the clash?Dadashri: Such a person comes to a quick criticalassessment because of selflessness. The selfish person will haveno clue at all and he will not be able to evaluate it at all. So manysuch events will occur that will give him the opportunity toevaluate critically and increase spiritually within, but alas all thesituations go away ‘free of cost’ (wasted). Many such eventsoccur, but the world forgets, whereas, the one who is selfless isable to learn very quickly from the ability to see and concludedecisively through quick critical internal assessment. The ‘taaran’simply happens.Questioner: The ‘taaran’ simply happens? He does nothave to do anything?Dadashri: No, nothing at all. The ‘taaran’ simplyhappens for the one with commonsense. And the one with Gnansimply applies the Gnan for the ‘taaran’ and thereby Gnanexpresses even further.Questioner: In Gnan one ‘sees’ within that ‘this is realand this is relative,’ ‘who is the doer?’ ‘Who is this?’ etc.Similarly, the one with commonsense will have some kind of a‘light’ that lets him ‘see’, will he not?Dadashri: The person with commonsense will be able toopen all the ‘locks’ (solve all worldly problems and obstructions)that are difficult to open otherwise.Questioner: With what solution, with what keys does heopen these locks?Dadashri: No, it comes naturally to him; it is part of hisnature (swabhavik) and experience. These are the keys that hehas gained as he passed through the experiences of all the eventsthat have unfolded in front of him. The experience of an eventleaves within him a key that he uses to get the work done withQuestioner: Dada, is there any connection betweencommonsense and Gnan?Dadashri: The only connection is that Gnan is selfless.The one who is going to attain Gnan has arrived at the stage ofselflessness. After attaining Gnan, both Gnan and commonsense,blossom. Otherwise there is no connection between Gnan andcommonsense. All of you here (mahatmas) have Gnan, do younot? It is because of the lack of any selfish intent; it is becauseof selflessness that both commonsense and Gnan continue tobloom in you. And the one who is selfish, his commonsensebecomes one sided and the Gnan will not blossom at all.Questioner: But the one who has a selfish interest, hisability of worldly interactions (vyavaharikta) will improve, willit not?Dadashri: It will but it will be only one sided; it will beonly in specific matters. That which is one sided, focused, andunilateral is not considered commonsense. Commonsense isapplicable everywhere. That is why I have used the English term‘everywhere applicable,’ so that people will not make their own‘convenient’ meaning in their own language.Questioner: But Dada, a person may or may not haveany internal attachment (raag) or abhorrence (dwesh), in this.Dadashri: Attachment and abhorrence will keepdecreasing if one proceeds selflessly. Only the selfish one has allthe attachment and abhorrence.Questioner: And does the one with commonsense haveattachment and abhorrence?Dadashri: His attachment and abhorrence keepsdecreasing day by day, the Gnan keeps increasing and thecommonsense keeps blossoming, everything blooms.Questioner: Does commonsense increase from all theclashes that occur if a person knows how to extract the essenceAptavani-9191192Aptavani-9(taaran – a quick internal assessment, the bottom line of anysituations) of the event of the clash?Dadashri: Such a person comes to a quick criticalassessment because of selflessness. The selfish person will haveno clue at all and he will not be able to evaluate it at all. So manysuch events will occur that will give him the opportunity toevaluate critically and increase spiritually within, but alas all thesituations go away ‘free of cost’ (wasted). Many such eventsoccur, but the world forgets, whereas, the one who is selfless isable to learn very quickly from the ability to see and concludedecisively through quick critical internal assessment. The ‘taaran’simply happens.Questioner: The ‘taaran’ simply happens? He does nothave to do anything?Dadashri: No, nothing at all. The ‘taaran’ simplyhappens for the one with commonsense. And the one with Gnansimply applies the Gnan for the ‘taaran’ and thereby Gnanexpresses even further.Questioner: In Gnan one ‘sees’ within that ‘this is realand this is relative,’ ‘who is the doer?’ ‘Who is this?’ etc.Similarly, the one with commonsense will have some kind of a‘light’ that lets him ‘see’, will he not?Dadashri: The person with commonsense will be able toopen all the ‘locks’ (solve all worldly problems and obstructions)that are difficult to open otherwise.Questioner: With what solution, with what keys does heopen these locks?Dadashri: No, it comes naturally to him; it is part of hisnature (swabhavik) and experience. These are the keys that hehas gained as he passed through the experiences of all the eventsthat have unfolded in front of him. The experience of an eventleaves within him a key that he uses to get the work done withQuestioner: Dada, is there any connection betweencommonsense and Gnan?Dadashri: The only connection is that Gnan is selfless.The one who is going to attain Gnan has arrived at the stage ofselflessness. After attaining Gnan, both Gnan and commonsense,blossom. Otherwise there is no connection between Gnan andcommonsense. All of you here (mahatmas) have Gnan, do younot? It is because of the lack of any selfish intent; it is becauseof selflessness that both commonsense and Gnan continue tobloom in you. And the one who is selfish, his commonsensebecomes one sided and the Gnan will not blossom at all.Questioner: But the one who has a selfish interest, hisability of worldly interactions (vyavaharikta) will improve, willit not?Dadashri: It will but it will be only one sided; it will beonly in specific matters. That which is one sided, focused, andunilateral is not considered commonsense. Commonsense isapplicable everywhere. That is why I have used the English term‘everywhere applicable,’ so that people will not make their own‘convenient’ meaning in their own language.Questioner: But Dada, a person may or may not haveany internal attachment (raag) or abhorrence (dwesh), in this.Dadashri: Attachment and abhorrence will keepdecreasing if one proceeds selflessly. Only the selfish one has allthe attachment and abhorrence.Questioner: And does the one with commonsense haveattachment and abhorrence?Dadashri: His attachment and abhorrence keepsdecreasing day by day, the Gnan keeps increasing and thecommonsense keeps blossoming, everything blooms.Questioner: Does commonsense increase from all theclashes that occur if a person knows how to extract the essenceAptavani-9193194Aptavani-9ease. However, an ‘expert’ may get cheated; he too would getcheated.Questioner: The one with commonsense will not becomeentangled (confused in the task), will he?Dadashri: He will not become entangled, but he mayallow himself to be deceived (taken advantage of). He mayallow himself to be cheated in order to get himself out of a trapor a situation of entanglement. These lawyers are all experts.There are all kinds of experts. They are experts in their ownfield, but they also get cheated. The more trusting one is, themore his commonsense blooms and expresses. The more heallows himself to be deceived, the more the commonsenseexpresses; selflessness also increases.Questioner: You also say that the one with commonsensenever gets confused and entangled. Then why would he getdeceived?Dadashri: He will not get confused or entangled once hiscommonsense has expressed; once it has blossomed. But he isbound to become entangled as it is developing, is he not? Alsoin the process of gaining the experience of commonsense, oneis likely to be deceived, is he not? His commonsense increasesas a result of being cheated by others.Questioner: Now when he assesses the situation(taaran), and searches for his own fault, he is only able to seehis gross, overt (sthool) mistakes, is he not?Dadashri: No, no. He is not able to see the grossmistakes, but he gains a lot of experience and knowledge of thetypes and nature of people who deceive him.Questioner: Should the one with commonsense not havea good study of the prakruti (nature or characteristics) of theother person?Dadashri: He has that for sure. That is calledcommonsense. Then only he will be able to open that(prakruti) lock.Questioner: Say we want to mend a relationship withsomeone that has turned bad but whenever we approach thatperson, his behavior towards us gets worse. In that case shouldwe just maintain our distance and try to work things out?Dadashri: You have to employ some special techniquesand skills there.Questioner: Is that considered commonsense?Dadashri: Yes, that falls under commonsense.Questioner: In that respect Dada, your commonsense isof the highest order.Dadashri: My commonsense is of a different kind alltogether. I have traversed through all these experiences selflessly.I can ‘see’ them all. It is because of selfishness that one is notable to see them. One has married a woman for infinite lifetimes, yet is anyone able to get rid of his attachment (moha) forthe woman? And he suffers so much too.Questioner: And one is not able to get the ‘taaran’ ofthat, is he?Dadashri: No, he is not. Taaran cannot be madebecause of self-interest (attachment for a woman). The asceticsand the acharyas who have made the inner intent of, ‘from nowon I do not want to get married’, is because they have made thetaaran (in their past life).Buddhi (intellect), Sooj (insight) and Pragnya(energy of the Soul)Questioner: Is commonsense based on intellect or is itbased on insight?Dadashri: Commonsense is based on insight (sooj).Aptavani-9193194Aptavani-9ease. However, an ‘expert’ may get cheated; he too would getcheated.Questioner: The one with commonsense will not becomeentangled (confused in the task), will he?Dadashri: He will not become entangled, but he mayallow himself to be deceived (taken advantage of). He mayallow himself to be cheated in order to get himself out of a trapor a situation of entanglement. These lawyers are all experts.There are all kinds of experts. They are experts in their ownfield, but they also get cheated. The more trusting one is, themore his commonsense blooms and expresses. The more heallows himself to be deceived, the more the commonsenseexpresses; selflessness also increases.Questioner: You also say that the one with commonsensenever gets confused and entangled. Then why would he getdeceived?Dadashri: He will not get confused or entangled once hiscommonsense has expressed; once it has blossomed. But he isbound to become entangled as it is developing, is he not? Alsoin the process of gaining the experience of commonsense, oneis likely to be deceived, is he not? His commonsense increasesas a result of being cheated by others.Questioner: Now when he assesses the situation(taaran), and searches for his own fault, he is only able to seehis gross, overt (sthool) mistakes, is he not?Dadashri: No, no. He is not able to see the grossmistakes, but he gains a lot of experience and knowledge of thetypes and nature of people who deceive him.Questioner: Should the one with commonsense not havea good study of the prakruti (nature or characteristics) of theother person?Dadashri: He has that for sure. That is calledcommonsense. Then only he will be able to open that(prakruti) lock.Questioner: Say we want to mend a relationship withsomeone that has turned bad but whenever we approach thatperson, his behavior towards us gets worse. In that case shouldwe just maintain our distance and try to work things out?Dadashri: You have to employ some special techniquesand skills there.Questioner: Is that considered commonsense?Dadashri: Yes, that falls under commonsense.Questioner: In that respect Dada, your commonsense isof the highest order.Dadashri: My commonsense is of a different kind alltogether. I have traversed through all these experiences selflessly.I can ‘see’ them all. It is because of selfishness that one is notable to see them. One has married a woman for infinite lifetimes, yet is anyone able to get rid of his attachment (moha) forthe woman? And he suffers so much too.Questioner: And one is not able to get the ‘taaran’ ofthat, is he?Dadashri: No, he is not. Taaran cannot be madebecause of self-interest (attachment for a woman). The asceticsand the acharyas who have made the inner intent of, ‘from nowon I do not want to get married’, is because they have made thetaaran (in their past life).Buddhi (intellect), Sooj (insight) and Pragnya(energy of the Soul)Questioner: Is commonsense based on intellect or is itbased on insight?Dadashri: Commonsense is based on insight (sooj).Aptavani-9195196Aptavani-9complete commonsense. You need steadiness (sthirata) andserenity (gambhirata). Should all attributes not manifest? It willnot do if one of them is lacking and people will not accept iteither. Do you not have to use a key to open a lock? You needone key that will open all the locks. You cannot afford to havea large bunch of keys.Therefore commonsense is to keep the worldly interactionspure (shuddha vyavahar). And when will shuddha nischaya(determination to remain as the real Self) remain continuously?It will when your worldly interactions become pure. And whenwill your worldly interaction become pure? It will occur whencommonsense will be ‘applicable everywhere’.Learn only this in the worldly lifeNo one has ever ‘disadjusted’ (become estranged) withme. Whereas here, even four people, cannot adjust with eachother within a family. Can you not learn to adjust by observingme? Is that possible or not? Will you not learn from what yousee? The law of this world is that you will definitely learn fromobserving. No one has to teach you that. What will you notlearn? You will not learn by me giving lectures (updesh) andpreaching. But you will learn with a natural ease if you -observemy conduct.It is fine if you do not know anything in this world but youmust know how to adjust in this world. It is fine if you do notknow anything else; you will get by even if you do not knowmuch about running your business but you should know how toadjust. One must know how to adjust in all circumstances. Youwill suffer if you do not know how to adjust in this time cycle.Complaint? No just adjust!You should also know how to adjust at home. What willyour family say if you go home late from satsang? They will tellyou, ‘Should you not come home on time at least?’ So what iswrong with going home early? A bullock has to be poked withSooj is a different thing. It is a natural gift. Everyone has innersooj; everyone has insight that helps them do everything.Questioner: But is insight (sooj) the direct light of theSoul?Dadashri: No, it is not a direct light but inner insight(antarsooj) is a natural gift. Insight helps one to get workaccomplished in the worldly life. It also shows one what to doand what to avoid.Questioner: Is intellect not involved in insight?Dadashri: No, the intellect merely shows profit and lossand nothing else.Questioner: So what is the difference between pragnyaand sooj?Dadashri: Everyone has insight (sooj), even the animals.A young child runs around according his sooj. Even a puppy hassooj but it does not have pragnya. Pragnya is the energy andthe light that arises after one attains Gnan.Questioner: Are all the tasks accomplished through sooj(insight), good?Dadashri: Anything achieved through sooj is done well.Questioner: What is a difference between commonsenseand pragnya?Dadashri: Commonsense helps solve all worldly problems;it helps you open all the ‘locks’. However, nothing opens thelock of moksha. Pragnya does not arise until one attains Gnan;otherwise pragnya begins upon attaining samkit – the rightunderstanding, right belief.Only one key to open all the locksHaving attained this Gnan now, what should You do forshuddha vyavahar (for pure worldly interactions)? You needAptavani-9195196Aptavani-9complete commonsense. You need steadiness (sthirata) andserenity (gambhirata). Should all attributes not manifest? It willnot do if one of them is lacking and people will not accept iteither. Do you not have to use a key to open a lock? You needone key that will open all the locks. You cannot afford to havea large bunch of keys.Therefore commonsense is to keep the worldly interactionspure (shuddha vyavahar). And when will shuddha nischaya(determination to remain as the real Self) remain continuously?It will when your worldly interactions become pure. And whenwill your worldly interaction become pure? It will occur whencommonsense will be ‘applicable everywhere’.Learn only this in the worldly lifeNo one has ever ‘disadjusted’ (become estranged) withme. Whereas here, even four people, cannot adjust with eachother within a family. Can you not learn to adjust by observingme? Is that possible or not? Will you not learn from what yousee? The law of this world is that you will definitely learn fromobserving. No one has to teach you that. What will you notlearn? You will not learn by me giving lectures (updesh) andpreaching. But you will learn with a natural ease if you -observemy conduct.It is fine if you do not know anything in this world but youmust know how to adjust in this world. It is fine if you do notknow anything else; you will get by even if you do not knowmuch about running your business but you should know how toadjust. One must know how to adjust in all circumstances. Youwill suffer if you do not know how to adjust in this time cycle.Complaint? No just adjust!You should also know how to adjust at home. What willyour family say if you go home late from satsang? They will tellyou, ‘Should you not come home on time at least?’ So what iswrong with going home early? A bullock has to be poked withSooj is a different thing. It is a natural gift. Everyone has innersooj; everyone has insight that helps them do everything.Questioner: But is insight (sooj) the direct light of theSoul?Dadashri: No, it is not a direct light but inner insight(antarsooj) is a natural gift. Insight helps one to get workaccomplished in the worldly life. It also shows one what to doand what to avoid.Questioner: Is intellect not involved in insight?Dadashri: No, the intellect merely shows profit and lossand nothing else.Questioner: So what is the difference between pragnyaand sooj?Dadashri: Everyone has insight (sooj), even the animals.A young child runs around according his sooj. Even a puppy hassooj but it does not have pragnya. Pragnya is the energy andthe light that arises after one attains Gnan.Questioner: Are all the tasks accomplished through sooj(insight), good?Dadashri: Anything achieved through sooj is done well.Questioner: What is a difference between commonsenseand pragnya?Dadashri: Commonsense helps solve all worldly problems;it helps you open all the ‘locks’. However, nothing opens thelock of moksha. Pragnya does not arise until one attains Gnan;otherwise pragnya begins upon attaining samkit – the rightunderstanding, right belief.Only one key to open all the locksHaving attained this Gnan now, what should You do forshuddha vyavahar (for pure worldly interactions)? You needAptavani-9197198Aptavani-9a prodder (a stick with a nail at the end) in order to make himwalk, instead would it not be better for him to walk withoutbeing prodded? Otherwise, the farmer will poke him and he willhave to start walking. The bullock is going to walk anyway.Have you ever seen this? They dig the nail into the bullock tomake him walk. What can the poor dumb animal say? Whomwill it complain to? If you were to prod a person, some otherperson will come to his rescue. But to whom can the pooranimal complain? Now why do these animals have to suffer thisway? Their suffering is the result of too much complaining andaccusations in their past life. When they had the power and theenergy to do anything, they kept complaining and now that theyhave no power, they simply have to suffer everything silently. Sonow you simply have to do ‘plus-minus’, i.e. adjust toeverything. Instead why not stop complaining in the first place?It is only when you complain that you become the accused. Youshould be neither the accuser nor the accused. Credit yourkarmic account with any abuse people give you. Do not becomea complainer. What do you think? Is it better to be acomplainer? Then what is wrong with adjusting from the start?Coming down to the level of othersQuestioner: We have to deal with many who are not atthe same level as our self and so often it does not work.Dadashri: It will not work but you have to adjust andthat is why I have told you do settle with equanimity.You can make your bright light dimmer, but you cannotmake a dim light brighter. Therefore dim your bright light andthen deal with the other person. When your light increases, doyou adjust it so that it ‘fits’ the person you are dealing with? Youshould make it fit that way. You have endless energy and power;you have to make it fit this way. Take Dada’s name and say,‘Dada, help me make it fit,’ and it will happen immediately.Besides you already have decided with your inner intent that youdo not want to hurt anyone even in the slightest degree. If youhave made that decision, the other person will not be hurt.Therefore, you have to make that decision first.This is how you attain onenessOne man asked me, ‘How can we get rid of matbhed(separation due to differences in opinions) that constantly existsin our home? Show me a way.’ I told him, ‘Adults have thematbhed, not the children. Those who have ego and awarenesshave matbhed. Therefore, the one whose ego has beenawakened has to say the following, five times every morning,‘We are all one; there is no separation amongst us.’ Thenoneness will prevail the whole day if you make a decision in thisway and say it out loud together in the home. You have to repeatit everyday; otherwise the energy of what you have charged willrun down. If there are three people in the home, all three haveto say the same thing.Questioner: How can those who have differences(matbhed) come to agree on this subject? What if they havedifferences about this suggestion of yours too?Dadashri: No. It is not like that. No, that is why you sayit if you want to avoid separation due to difference in opinions.If you do not like the sense of separation, then you should all gettogether and do what Dada has said. If anyone asks, simply tellthem, ‘Dada has told us to repeat this sentence five timeseveryday, ‘We are all one; there is no separation amongst us.’Say it five times. When you say it five times, it is possible for thatcharge to remain for twenty-four hours. You have to repeat thesame thing the next day otherwise the energy will go down.When you keep doing this, it will eventually materialize.Do not encourage negative talk by listeningto othersOtherwise, the world is very different. Even when youwant to avoid separation due to differences at home, outsiderswill drive a wedge between you.Aptavani-9197198Aptavani-9a prodder (a stick with a nail at the end) in order to make himwalk, instead would it not be better for him to walk withoutbeing prodded? Otherwise, the farmer will poke him and he willhave to start walking. The bullock is going to walk anyway.Have you ever seen this? They dig the nail into the bullock tomake him walk. What can the poor dumb animal say? Whomwill it complain to? If you were to prod a person, some otherperson will come to his rescue. But to whom can the pooranimal complain? Now why do these animals have to suffer thisway? Their suffering is the result of too much complaining andaccusations in their past life. When they had the power and theenergy to do anything, they kept complaining and now that theyhave no power, they simply have to suffer everything silently. Sonow you simply have to do ‘plus-minus’, i.e. adjust toeverything. Instead why not stop complaining in the first place?It is only when you complain that you become the accused. Youshould be neither the accuser nor the accused. Credit yourkarmic account with any abuse people give you. Do not becomea complainer. What do you think? Is it better to be acomplainer? Then what is wrong with adjusting from the start?Coming down to the level of othersQuestioner: We have to deal with many who are not atthe same level as our self and so often it does not work.Dadashri: It will not work but you have to adjust andthat is why I have told you do settle with equanimity.You can make your bright light dimmer, but you cannotmake a dim light brighter. Therefore dim your bright light andthen deal with the other person. When your light increases, doyou adjust it so that it ‘fits’ the person you are dealing with? Youshould make it fit that way. You have endless energy and power;you have to make it fit this way. Take Dada’s name and say,‘Dada, help me make it fit,’ and it will happen immediately.Besides you already have decided with your inner intent that youdo not want to hurt anyone even in the slightest degree. If youhave made that decision, the other person will not be hurt.Therefore, you have to make that decision first.This is how you attain onenessOne man asked me, ‘How can we get rid of matbhed(separation due to differences in opinions) that constantly existsin our home? Show me a way.’ I told him, ‘Adults have thematbhed, not the children. Those who have ego and awarenesshave matbhed. Therefore, the one whose ego has beenawakened has to say the following, five times every morning,‘We are all one; there is no separation amongst us.’ Thenoneness will prevail the whole day if you make a decision in thisway and say it out loud together in the home. You have to repeatit everyday; otherwise the energy of what you have charged willrun down. If there are three people in the home, all three haveto say the same thing.Questioner: How can those who have differences(matbhed) come to agree on this subject? What if they havedifferences about this suggestion of yours too?Dadashri: No. It is not like that. No, that is why you sayit if you want to avoid separation due to difference in opinions.If you do not like the sense of separation, then you should all gettogether and do what Dada has said. If anyone asks, simply tellthem, ‘Dada has told us to repeat this sentence five timeseveryday, ‘We are all one; there is no separation amongst us.’Say it five times. When you say it five times, it is possible for thatcharge to remain for twenty-four hours. You have to repeat thesame thing the next day otherwise the energy will go down.When you keep doing this, it will eventually materialize.Do not encourage negative talk by listeningto othersOtherwise, the world is very different. Even when youwant to avoid separation due to differences at home, outsiderswill drive a wedge between you.Aptavani-9199200Aptavani-9human being is the biggest crime and yet people do this, don’tthey? A noble human being will cover up anything negative hehears about anyone. If someone says things in the heat of themoment, you should cover it up.‘Welding’: Settling disputes and reunitingEven before ‘we’ attained Gnan, I would not listen totalks that created a wedge between people. On the contrary, Iwould help mend other people’s break up; I would do the‘welding’ for them, but I encountered many difficulties when Itried to patch things up because I did not have Gnan.Questioner: You say that you had many difficulties whenyou helped people reunite because of absence of Gnan, how isthat?Dadashri: I met with many obstacles. From a very youngage, my nature was to ‘weld’ relationships. I would ‘weld’wherever there were disputes. ‘Welding’ is the greatest attributea person can have. No one will object to it, will they? I had lotof difficulties while welding but I still persisted.Questioner: Did it ever occur to you that in trying toweld people together, one of them did not appreciate it?Dadashri: No it was not like that. I made sure that boththe parties were in agreement with my welding. The weldingwould not occur if it were not acceptable to both the parties.Welding is a special energy (siddhi). I would bring both the ends(people) together and then I would weld. But I subjected myselfto a lot of harm in the process. Every time there was nothing butharm to me.Questioner: In what way? Can you give us an example?Dadashri: If two brothers had been fighting constantly,what would I do? I would do the welding for both of them.Now how long would my friendship be valuable to them? Theyboth would value my friendship as long as they were fightingIf someone comes to me and complains about someoneelse, I would question him and take him to task first: ‘Why didyou come to tell me this? You came to complain, so you are theguilty one.’ Write-off everyone who comes complaining in thismanner; such people are called busybodies. You should noteven go near such people. No one has carried on a uselessdiscussion with me. Even if such a person were to come to me,he will not be able to say a word. In fact, you should not believewhat people tell you in matters of religion. I would not listen toanyone regarding even worldly matters. If someone were to say,‘Hiraba was saying this,’ then I would say, ‘Why did you haveto come and tell me this? What do you gain by telling me whatshe said?’Even in our satsang, you have to find the busybody andwarn others about him. We do not have any attachment orabhorrence towards such a person but we do have to warnothers.How dare someone come to us and tell us things? Somepeople will come and tell you things as if they are your well-wishers. You should not listen to them when they are talkingabout someone else. You should know how to recognize suchpeople and ask them ‘Why have you come to tell me this? Whatkind of commission do you make from doing this? What do yougain by telling me all this?’In fact, you should not listen to talks about anyone. Butpeople’s minds have become weak today. You should not listento talks that are destructive or talks that sabotage others; thereason being if you do, your mind will become adulteratedtowards that person and it will affect that person too. Man hasno capacity to understand all this. The other person may besaying something indirectly and vaguely but the person listeningtakes it directly.And to say anything that will cause difficulties for anotherAptavani-9199200Aptavani-9human being is the biggest crime and yet people do this, don’tthey? A noble human being will cover up anything negative hehears about anyone. If someone says things in the heat of themoment, you should cover it up.‘Welding’: Settling disputes and reunitingEven before ‘we’ attained Gnan, I would not listen totalks that created a wedge between people. On the contrary, Iwould help mend other people’s break up; I would do the‘welding’ for them, but I encountered many difficulties when Itried to patch things up because I did not have Gnan.Questioner: You say that you had many difficulties whenyou helped people reunite because of absence of Gnan, how isthat?Dadashri: I met with many obstacles. From a very youngage, my nature was to ‘weld’ relationships. I would ‘weld’wherever there were disputes. ‘Welding’ is the greatest attributea person can have. No one will object to it, will they? I had lotof difficulties while welding but I still persisted.Questioner: Did it ever occur to you that in trying toweld people together, one of them did not appreciate it?Dadashri: No it was not like that. I made sure that boththe parties were in agreement with my welding. The weldingwould not occur if it were not acceptable to both the parties.Welding is a special energy (siddhi). I would bring both the ends(people) together and then I would weld. But I subjected myselfto a lot of harm in the process. Every time there was nothing butharm to me.Questioner: In what way? Can you give us an example?Dadashri: If two brothers had been fighting constantly,what would I do? I would do the welding for both of them.Now how long would my friendship be valuable to them? Theyboth would value my friendship as long as they were fightingIf someone comes to me and complains about someoneelse, I would question him and take him to task first: ‘Why didyou come to tell me this? You came to complain, so you are theguilty one.’ Write-off everyone who comes complaining in thismanner; such people are called busybodies. You should noteven go near such people. No one has carried on a uselessdiscussion with me. Even if such a person were to come to me,he will not be able to say a word. In fact, you should not believewhat people tell you in matters of religion. I would not listen toanyone regarding even worldly matters. If someone were to say,‘Hiraba was saying this,’ then I would say, ‘Why did you haveto come and tell me this? What do you gain by telling me whatshe said?’Even in our satsang, you have to find the busybody andwarn others about him. We do not have any attachment orabhorrence towards such a person but we do have to warnothers.How dare someone come to us and tell us things? Somepeople will come and tell you things as if they are your well-wishers. You should not listen to them when they are talkingabout someone else. You should know how to recognize suchpeople and ask them ‘Why have you come to tell me this? Whatkind of commission do you make from doing this? What do yougain by telling me all this?’In fact, you should not listen to talks about anyone. Butpeople’s minds have become weak today. You should not listento talks that are destructive or talks that sabotage others; thereason being if you do, your mind will become adulteratedtowards that person and it will affect that person too. Man hasno capacity to understand all this. The other person may besaying something indirectly and vaguely but the person listeningtakes it directly.And to say anything that will cause difficulties for anotherAptavani-9201202Aptavani-9with each other. But in many cases, I actually lost money inthese welding. I would have recovered the money had I notdone the welding. After the welding, the two would become oneand I became the outsider. But nature watches all this, does itnot? So I continued doing what I did. But I did have many bitterexperiences. I left it to nature. Had the welding not been done,even the other person’s wife would tell him, ‘Why don’t youreturn his money?’ But after the welding, the wife would not sayanything.Did you understand this example? Would there not bemany such incidents?To the Welder…And what do people generally do? Once they get burnt,they stop welding and start driving a wedge between the two.This way at least they maintain their importance and reputation(rof).Many people will not cause a rift between two people butwhere a rift exists, they would not help mend it either and allbecause of their own self-importance (rof). There are alsopeople who will create rifts between people, but these are fewin numbers. Some will not help mend the rift because it worksout to their advantage. Only a few would make the mistakes Imade! But I used to patch things up everywhere, not just incertain instances because my desire was to fix, not destroy.Questioner: Dada this is a great science, the science ofwelding.Dadashri: Yes, it is a great science but the world doesnot find it acceptable. Generally, in this world, when two peoplemeet, one of them will start complaining about someone and theother person will join in.Should one not understand what I am saying?It happened in our family too. The one who tries to patchthings up takes a beating and the one who does not weld, theygive him a lot of importance, ‘Welcome uncle. Welcome. Comein uncle.’ But the welding begets one a lot of beating which leadsto vairagya (dispassion towards the worldly life), will it not?What is the end result? One is overcome with vairagya;otherwise there is no way to attain vairagya. How is it possibleto attain dispassion in this world? Do you ever feel likerenouncing even a little of it? And if you try to do this kind ofwelding, you will always take a beating. In this world, only theone doing the welding will take a beating. And in the end he isfilled with dispassion; ‘I did it all for their happiness but eventhen I end up with all the beating!’ I have taken so much beating;I have paid a tremendous price in this process.Do not let your bhaav turn into abhaavQuestioner: Welding was in my prakruti from the verybeginning but I stopped after I got a beating.Dadashri: It will stop! It is the same for the whole world.Those raised in a noble home will have the intent of welding.Then they will stop after they get hurt. They cannot deal withthat. You will get hurt so get involved only if you have the energyand the strength to take the punishment!Questioner: As it is, the beating is inevitable. Why ruinour spiritual progress by getting hurt, instead why not try toimprove things for our atma (soul), for our own inner growth?Dadashri: Because, when you call someone ‘donkey’,the Self within understands, ‘He called me a donkey! He calledme names’; there are consequences for that. The Self alsorecognizes when the ‘welding (patching up) is being done by‘him’ (welder). So then, one has come towards the Self and inthe relative realm (pudgal) there is the beating.Questioner: But there is nothing wrong in it if itincreases dispassion towards the worldly life (vairagya) in thismanner.Aptavani-9201202Aptavani-9with each other. But in many cases, I actually lost money inthese welding. I would have recovered the money had I notdone the welding. After the welding, the two would become oneand I became the outsider. But nature watches all this, does itnot? So I continued doing what I did. But I did have many bitterexperiences. I left it to nature. Had the welding not been done,even the other person’s wife would tell him, ‘Why don’t youreturn his money?’ But after the welding, the wife would not sayanything.Did you understand this example? Would there not bemany such incidents?To the Welder…And what do people generally do? Once they get burnt,they stop welding and start driving a wedge between the two.This way at least they maintain their importance and reputation(rof).Many people will not cause a rift between two people butwhere a rift exists, they would not help mend it either and allbecause of their own self-importance (rof). There are alsopeople who will create rifts between people, but these are fewin numbers. Some will not help mend the rift because it worksout to their advantage. Only a few would make the mistakes Imade! But I used to patch things up everywhere, not just incertain instances because my desire was to fix, not destroy.Questioner: Dada this is a great science, the science ofwelding.Dadashri: Yes, it is a great science but the world doesnot find it acceptable. Generally, in this world, when two peoplemeet, one of them will start complaining about someone and theother person will join in.Should one not understand what I am saying?It happened in our family too. The one who tries to patchthings up takes a beating and the one who does not weld, theygive him a lot of importance, ‘Welcome uncle. Welcome. Comein uncle.’ But the welding begets one a lot of beating which leadsto vairagya (dispassion towards the worldly life), will it not?What is the end result? One is overcome with vairagya;otherwise there is no way to attain vairagya. How is it possibleto attain dispassion in this world? Do you ever feel likerenouncing even a little of it? And if you try to do this kind ofwelding, you will always take a beating. In this world, only theone doing the welding will take a beating. And in the end he isfilled with dispassion; ‘I did it all for their happiness but eventhen I end up with all the beating!’ I have taken so much beating;I have paid a tremendous price in this process.Do not let your bhaav turn into abhaavQuestioner: Welding was in my prakruti from the verybeginning but I stopped after I got a beating.Dadashri: It will stop! It is the same for the whole world.Those raised in a noble home will have the intent of welding.Then they will stop after they get hurt. They cannot deal withthat. You will get hurt so get involved only if you have the energyand the strength to take the punishment!Questioner: As it is, the beating is inevitable. Why ruinour spiritual progress by getting hurt, instead why not try toimprove things for our atma (soul), for our own inner growth?Dadashri: Because, when you call someone ‘donkey’,the Self within understands, ‘He called me a donkey! He calledme names’; there are consequences for that. The Self alsorecognizes when the ‘welding (patching up) is being done by‘him’ (welder). So then, one has come towards the Self and inthe relative realm (pudgal) there is the beating.Questioner: But there is nothing wrong in it if itincreases dispassion towards the worldly life (vairagya) in thismanner.Aptavani-9203204Aptavani-9Dadashri: Yes vairagya will increase tremendously butwhat will happen if you start to dislike (abhaav) the otherperson? What happens if the ego arises, ‘I tried to help thosepeople but look how they turned out!’ So what will happen ifyou start to detest (abhaav) them?Questioner: That is another hole. Instead of this hole,that is another hole.Dadashri: One will dig another hole. ‘We’ did not fall inthat hole despite the big ego. ‘We’ did not have any negativefeelings towards anyone, even while experiencing difficulties.Insight of welding from the beginningQuestioner: How did you weld? How did you not letdifficulties bother you and still manage to keep your ego fromarising while ‘welding’?Dadashri: It must be that kind of ego.Questioner: How can we do the same, now that wehave Gnan?Dadashri: You will be able to do that when you decideahead of time ‘I want to take a beating in the process.’ Eitherway, the beating is inevitable. Who does not suffer in this world?So, why not suffer in the right way?Questioner: That is true. Otherwise, we take a beatingand we also ruin things in regards to the progress towards theSelf.Dadashri: No. Now the inner suffering has stopped andyou have to take the beatings, whereas previously you had totake the beatings as well as endure internal suffering. As long asthere is a body, the suffering will be there. After becoming aGnani, ‘we’ have not had to suffer. After Gnan, ‘we’ can seewhose karma is bearing the fruit and how it came about. ‘We’must have had a part in it, which is why ‘we’ have to suffer thebeatings now. ‘We’ can see everything. Even then nothing of thesort comes to ‘us’ now. I had experienced my share of thebeatings before Gnan. How many of these beatings can therebe? Surely, there must be some kind of calculation for this in theworld, should there not? After having united (welded) a fatherand son who were at odds with each other, they would becomeone, then they no longer had any need for me.Questioner: Does it ever happen that in trying to weld,one of the parties will point the finger at you and accuse you ofsiding with the other person?Dadashri: No. It is not like that. I did not have any suchthing within me that they could accuse me of doing that. Even inmy ignorant pre-Gnan state I did not have any such thing thatcould become a basis for others to point a finger at me. This iswhy I did not have to face such a dilemma. Both the partiesbecame obliged and were appreciative of my efforts. Theywould dine together and do things together and this reinforcedtheir unity. The problems would arise afterwards.Welding is an art!Questioner: But we do not know how to weld and soit may even go wrong.Dadashri: That happens because one does not have thequalifications. That never happened to me. It can only happenwhen the person is deficient in his qualifications. However, thatwas not the case with me. Everyone accepts what I say; if I tellthem ‘this is how it is’, everyone will accept it. Your state is onthe deficient side.The state of deficiency in this regard is such that, to beginwith, one is weak and then when he tries to ‘patch and weldothers’ or tries to mend other people’s problems, and so he‘breaks’ down with others in the process. All these are weakstates. I will never break down. I have never broken down withAptavani-9203204Aptavani-9Dadashri: Yes vairagya will increase tremendously butwhat will happen if you start to dislike (abhaav) the otherperson? What happens if the ego arises, ‘I tried to help thosepeople but look how they turned out!’ So what will happen ifyou start to detest (abhaav) them?Questioner: That is another hole. Instead of this hole,that is another hole.Dadashri: One will dig another hole. ‘We’ did not fall inthat hole despite the big ego. ‘We’ did not have any negativefeelings towards anyone, even while experiencing difficulties.Insight of welding from the beginningQuestioner: How did you weld? How did you not letdifficulties bother you and still manage to keep your ego fromarising while ‘welding’?Dadashri: It must be that kind of ego.Questioner: How can we do the same, now that wehave Gnan?Dadashri: You will be able to do that when you decideahead of time ‘I want to take a beating in the process.’ Eitherway, the beating is inevitable. Who does not suffer in this world?So, why not suffer in the right way?Questioner: That is true. Otherwise, we take a beatingand we also ruin things in regards to the progress towards theSelf.Dadashri: No. Now the inner suffering has stopped andyou have to take the beatings, whereas previously you had totake the beatings as well as endure internal suffering. As long asthere is a body, the suffering will be there. After becoming aGnani, ‘we’ have not had to suffer. After Gnan, ‘we’ can seewhose karma is bearing the fruit and how it came about. ‘We’must have had a part in it, which is why ‘we’ have to suffer thebeatings now. ‘We’ can see everything. Even then nothing of thesort comes to ‘us’ now. I had experienced my share of thebeatings before Gnan. How many of these beatings can therebe? Surely, there must be some kind of calculation for this in theworld, should there not? After having united (welded) a fatherand son who were at odds with each other, they would becomeone, then they no longer had any need for me.Questioner: Does it ever happen that in trying to weld,one of the parties will point the finger at you and accuse you ofsiding with the other person?Dadashri: No. It is not like that. I did not have any suchthing within me that they could accuse me of doing that. Even inmy ignorant pre-Gnan state I did not have any such thing thatcould become a basis for others to point a finger at me. This iswhy I did not have to face such a dilemma. Both the partiesbecame obliged and were appreciative of my efforts. Theywould dine together and do things together and this reinforcedtheir unity. The problems would arise afterwards.Welding is an art!Questioner: But we do not know how to weld and soit may even go wrong.Dadashri: That happens because one does not have thequalifications. That never happened to me. It can only happenwhen the person is deficient in his qualifications. However, thatwas not the case with me. Everyone accepts what I say; if I tellthem ‘this is how it is’, everyone will accept it. Your state is onthe deficient side.The state of deficiency in this regard is such that, to beginwith, one is weak and then when he tries to ‘patch and weldothers’ or tries to mend other people’s problems, and so he‘breaks’ down with others in the process. All these are weakstates. I will never break down. I have never broken down withAptavani-9205206Aptavani-9anyone. As long as there is weakness in me, the other personcan never benefit. It is a different matter if someone breaks itand makes it strong, however I will not break it. If I do notsmoke myself and tell the other person to stop smoking, he mayaccept my advice. Surely, one should have this energy to beginwith. If your own friendship with someone is broken and you tryto weld other people’s friendship, the energy within will notwork.Questioner: What should we do when we are not ableto weld successfully?Dadashri: If you are not qualified to weld, then what isthe use of trying? Try and do as much as you can and then leavethe rest alone. Your inner intent should be that it would be niceif they make up. If the welding does not take place methodicallyand systematically, then at least keep this your inner intent. Youshould not let it destroy your inner intent. You should neverthink, ‘It will be good if they separate.’ As it is, there is miseryeven in being together! They too are thinking to themselves,‘Why did I get into this mess?’ but even so it is wrong toseparate them.Questioner: But Dada, we cannot maintain equanimity atthat moment. At that moment we feel, ‘Why is he doing this?’Dadashri: There is so much weakness. Is that not aweakness? That is exactly what will happen when the timecomes. You nourish and nurture a snake and then one day hitthat snake and see what happens? Just test it out, ‘I have fed itmilk for so many days. Now I will hit it’. What will the snake do?Questioner: Now if the person we are ‘welding’ turnsagainst us and we feel ‘Why is he doing this?’ is it because wehad set out to do so through the ego?Dadashri: Yes it was done through the ego. It was doneto taste the sweetness in it.Questioner: The inner intent is to weld but we are notable to do so. At first we feel good and then we let go becausewe cannot deal with it anymore.Dadashri: You should continue to maintain your intent.Then if the welding is successful, it is good. Have theunderstanding that everything that happens, welding or separation,‘it was their lot and that is why it happened to them.’ This iswhat You have to maintain.Happiness everywhere with weldingThe person who knows the answers to, ‘how can thesetwo people get back together; how can their problems besolved?’ etc., is the one qualified to be called a ‘welder’.Questioner: Dada, your welding takes place at a subtlelevel whereas welding done by others is at a gross level.Dadashri: Yes, but there are many at the gross level.Questioner: I like this quality of yours very much. Youdo the welding by making people understand and in the end theyare very happy.Dadashri: And when they are happy, I am happy too. Ifsomeone is upset and non-communicative (risavu), I will firstask, ‘is something wrong? What is making you so unhappy? Weall have to die one day so why not live in happiness? And wewill worry about dying when the day comes, but for the timebeing at least live happily!’They will be happy for a year or two but then they willbe back to being unhappy. This body is such that it will bringunhappiness. Does the body not bring suffering when you geta headache? So if you experience unhappiness from your ownbody, can your husband not bring unhappiness too? Still thereis great fun when husband and wife are united after their‘welding’.Aptavani-9205206Aptavani-9anyone. As long as there is weakness in me, the other personcan never benefit. It is a different matter if someone breaks itand makes it strong, however I will not break it. If I do notsmoke myself and tell the other person to stop smoking, he mayaccept my advice. Surely, one should have this energy to beginwith. If your own friendship with someone is broken and you tryto weld other people’s friendship, the energy within will notwork.Questioner: What should we do when we are not ableto weld successfully?Dadashri: If you are not qualified to weld, then what isthe use of trying? Try and do as much as you can and then leavethe rest alone. Your inner intent should be that it would be niceif they make up. If the welding does not take place methodicallyand systematically, then at least keep this your inner intent. Youshould not let it destroy your inner intent. You should neverthink, ‘It will be good if they separate.’ As it is, there is miseryeven in being together! They too are thinking to themselves,‘Why did I get into this mess?’ but even so it is wrong toseparate them.Questioner: But Dada, we cannot maintain equanimity atthat moment. At that moment we feel, ‘Why is he doing this?’Dadashri: There is so much weakness. Is that not aweakness? That is exactly what will happen when the timecomes. You nourish and nurture a snake and then one day hitthat snake and see what happens? Just test it out, ‘I have fed itmilk for so many days. Now I will hit it’. What will the snake do?Questioner: Now if the person we are ‘welding’ turnsagainst us and we feel ‘Why is he doing this?’ is it because wehad set out to do so through the ego?Dadashri: Yes it was done through the ego. It was doneto taste the sweetness in it.Questioner: The inner intent is to weld but we are notable to do so. At first we feel good and then we let go becausewe cannot deal with it anymore.Dadashri: You should continue to maintain your intent.Then if the welding is successful, it is good. Have theunderstanding that everything that happens, welding or separation,‘it was their lot and that is why it happened to them.’ This iswhat You have to maintain.Happiness everywhere with weldingThe person who knows the answers to, ‘how can thesetwo people get back together; how can their problems besolved?’ etc., is the one qualified to be called a ‘welder’.Questioner: Dada, your welding takes place at a subtlelevel whereas welding done by others is at a gross level.Dadashri: Yes, but there are many at the gross level.Questioner: I like this quality of yours very much. Youdo the welding by making people understand and in the end theyare very happy.Dadashri: And when they are happy, I am happy too. Ifsomeone is upset and non-communicative (risavu), I will firstask, ‘is something wrong? What is making you so unhappy? Weall have to die one day so why not live in happiness? And wewill worry about dying when the day comes, but for the timebeing at least live happily!’They will be happy for a year or two but then they willbe back to being unhappy. This body is such that it will bringunhappiness. Does the body not bring suffering when you geta headache? So if you experience unhappiness from your ownbody, can your husband not bring unhappiness too? Still thereis great fun when husband and wife are united after their‘welding’.Aptavani-9207208Aptavani-9Gnani’s original talkQuestioner: The word ‘welding’ is Dada’s original andunprecedented talk!Dadashri: ‘Welding’ is itself Dada’s word! If someonesays, ‘I did welding between two people’, that confirms thatthey are definitely using Dada’s word. This ‘welding’ is anoriginal thing. Currently many people use this word ‘welding’.Questioner: How immense is this science (Vignan)!Dadashri: I have many such sciences.Questioner: Why don’t you bring them out Dada?Dadashri: They will only come out when the circumstancesarise.Everyone breaks but rare is the One whopatches upDid you not know that this Dada would not breakanything that has been fixed?Questioner: I know that but I also know that he patcheswhatever is broken.Dadashri: People come to drive in a wedge. Many raiseobjections, directly or indirectly. ‘We’ let go of the ones who arenot in front of me but those who are; ‘we’ will deal with themdirectly to their face. ‘We’ have not allowed anyone to getaway. If impediments continue, then they do so for a whilebecause of past accounts. And if a person does get away withit, we simply have to understand that there is a fault from thepast, which is now being corrected.‘We’ are here to solve problems in whatever way ‘we’can. I have been solving problems all my life.* * * * *[4]Mamata (Attachment – my-ness) : Lalacha(Covetousness)Better to stay away from sticky wet mudEveryone is a guest in this ‘home’; the world. One is aguest as long as he stays and then one day he will leave. Haveyou not seen them leave? Those with attachment (mamata) andthose without attachment eventually leave, do they not?Therefore, do not waste even a minute. Why would youwant to waste even a minute of the five or fifty years you aregoing to stay? You will pick up ‘stains’ (bind karma). Theclothes (body) will remain here and the stain (karma) will stickto you and go with you to the next life. So why would you allowyourself to pick up any stain? Now (after Gnan) you do not pickup stain everywhere. All you have to do is to be careful whilewalking close to ‘sticky wet mud’ (grave circumstances orincidents that pull you away from Gnan). We are not concernedabout all the ‘flying dust’ (trivial incidents) that dust will fall offon its own but the mud will stick to you. You can easily shakethe dust off your clothes but you cannot remove the mud soeasily and it will stain your cloth. Therefore, stay away from wetsticky mud.The Gnani is without any expectationsAbsolute purity (shuddhata) is rare in this world becausethe lives of agnanis (worldly people) are relative and are filledwith expectations (sapeksha). Even the lives of the Gnanis ofthe Kramic path (traditional religious path) are filled withAptavani-9207208Aptavani-9Gnani’s original talkQuestioner: The word ‘welding’ is Dada’s original andunprecedented talk!Dadashri: ‘Welding’ is itself Dada’s word! If someonesays, ‘I did welding between two people’, that confirms thatthey are definitely using Dada’s word. This ‘welding’ is anoriginal thing. Currently many people use this word ‘welding’.Questioner: How immense is this science (Vignan)!Dadashri: I have many such sciences.Questioner: Why don’t you bring them out Dada?Dadashri: They will only come out when the circumstancesarise.Everyone breaks but rare is the One whopatches upDid you not know that this Dada would not breakanything that has been fixed?Questioner: I know that but I also know that he patcheswhatever is broken.Dadashri: People come to drive in a wedge. Many raiseobjections, directly or indirectly. ‘We’ let go of the ones who arenot in front of me but those who are; ‘we’ will deal with themdirectly to their face. ‘We’ have not allowed anyone to getaway. If impediments continue, then they do so for a whilebecause of past accounts. And if a person does get away withit, we simply have to understand that there is a fault from thepast, which is now being corrected.‘We’ are here to solve problems in whatever way ‘we’can. I have been solving problems all my life.* * * * *[4]Mamata (Attachment – my-ness) : Lalacha(Covetousness)Better to stay away from sticky wet mudEveryone is a guest in this ‘home’; the world. One is aguest as long as he stays and then one day he will leave. Haveyou not seen them leave? Those with attachment (mamata) andthose without attachment eventually leave, do they not?Therefore, do not waste even a minute. Why would youwant to waste even a minute of the five or fifty years you aregoing to stay? You will pick up ‘stains’ (bind karma). Theclothes (body) will remain here and the stain (karma) will stickto you and go with you to the next life. So why would you allowyourself to pick up any stain? Now (after Gnan) you do not pickup stain everywhere. All you have to do is to be careful whilewalking close to ‘sticky wet mud’ (grave circumstances orincidents that pull you away from Gnan). We are not concernedabout all the ‘flying dust’ (trivial incidents) that dust will fall offon its own but the mud will stick to you. You can easily shakethe dust off your clothes but you cannot remove the mud soeasily and it will stain your cloth. Therefore, stay away from wetsticky mud.The Gnani is without any expectationsAbsolute purity (shuddhata) is rare in this world becausethe lives of agnanis (worldly people) are relative and are filledwith expectations (sapeksha). Even the lives of the Gnanis ofthe Kramic path (traditional religious path) are filled withAptavani-9209210Aptavani-9expectations. The Lord has made ‘us’ the only exception. Hehas made ‘us’ ‘the one with a life free from all expectations(nirpeksha)’. There is complete purity here. There are no stainsof any kind here.Not even a hint of mamata(attachment; ‘my-ness’)People of this world cannot be free from expectations;there is always some expectation. This Gnani is without anyexpectation (nirpeksha). He has no attachments (mamata ormamatva) such as ‘this is my body, my mind, my chit, this ismine or that is mine’. He has no such attachments (mamata)and that is why this is a wonderful Vignan.‘We’ had gone to Surat. There ‘we’ met an ascetic whowas a great renunciant. He practiced renunciation with strictdiscipline. Many people would come to do his darshan; thatwas the kind of man he was. He told everyone, ‘Come look!Look! Who is this Dada? If ever I have seen a man completelyfree of all attachment (mamata), He is the one. He is completelyfree from expectations. I have met some two hundred or sosaints and very religious men but I have not seen a single saintwho is without any expectations. Everyone I met had at leastsome expectation or the other, whereas this Dada is the onlyman without any expectation that I have seen in my life.’ ‘We’understood that this ascetic was truly blessed that he could seethis and he knew how to test this criteria in the spiritual path.I can say this because I knew that there was absolutely noattachment (mamatva; ‘my-ness’) in me; I did not have suchattachment from a very young age. Therefore, there is no onein this world without any mamata. Without attachment(mamata) means a person without ego. You do not have tolook for ego where there is no attachment. A person withoutmamata means a person without ego. You don’t have to lookfor ego there.So what is a Gnani Purush like? He is without anyattachment and He is ego-less. He lives the way nature keepshim. He does not have any ‘I-ness’ (potapanu).Where there is no ‘my-ness’ there exists thesupreme SelfWhere one has any selfish interest, where there is even atrace of my-ness (mamata), there cannot be any salvation. Godmanifests where there is no my-ness. Ego exists only due toattachment (this is mine; mamata).Questioner: Is it possible that mamata gives rise to theego, which in turn gives rise to raag (attachment)?Dadashri: No, it is mamata which gives rise toeverything. Why does the ‘I’ exist? It exists because of ‘my’.Otherwise, the ‘I’ is the absolute Self (parmatma). ‘My’ meansmamata. Once there is a separation between the ‘I’ and the‘my’, then what is left? The ‘I’ and that ‘I’ verily is the pureSoul.Questioner: Would everyone become a Gnani if theybecame free from mamata?Dadashri: Yes. A person will become a Gnani if hebecomes free of mamata. All those who became tirthankaras,they were all free from mamata. Mamata can never existthere.Questioner: What gives rise to this ‘my-ness’(mamatva)?Dadashri: It arises out of greed (lalacha); greed of anykind.Questioner: Is it because of what had been done in thepast life?Dadashri: It is only because you have come into thisGnan that you are able to understand that everything oneAptavani-9209210Aptavani-9expectations. The Lord has made ‘us’ the only exception. Hehas made ‘us’ ‘the one with a life free from all expectations(nirpeksha)’. There is complete purity here. There are no stainsof any kind here.Not even a hint of mamata(attachment; ‘my-ness’)People of this world cannot be free from expectations;there is always some expectation. This Gnani is without anyexpectation (nirpeksha). He has no attachments (mamata ormamatva) such as ‘this is my body, my mind, my chit, this ismine or that is mine’. He has no such attachments (mamata)and that is why this is a wonderful Vignan.‘We’ had gone to Surat. There ‘we’ met an ascetic whowas a great renunciant. He practiced renunciation with strictdiscipline. Many people would come to do his darshan; thatwas the kind of man he was. He told everyone, ‘Come look!Look! Who is this Dada? If ever I have seen a man completelyfree of all attachment (mamata), He is the one. He is completelyfree from expectations. I have met some two hundred or sosaints and very religious men but I have not seen a single saintwho is without any expectations. Everyone I met had at leastsome expectation or the other, whereas this Dada is the onlyman without any expectation that I have seen in my life.’ ‘We’understood that this ascetic was truly blessed that he could seethis and he knew how to test this criteria in the spiritual path.I can say this because I knew that there was absolutely noattachment (mamatva; ‘my-ness’) in me; I did not have suchattachment from a very young age. Therefore, there is no onein this world without any mamata. Without attachment(mamata) means a person without ego. You do not have tolook for ego where there is no attachment. A person withoutmamata means a person without ego. You don’t have to lookfor ego there.So what is a Gnani Purush like? He is without anyattachment and He is ego-less. He lives the way nature keepshim. He does not have any ‘I-ness’ (potapanu).Where there is no ‘my-ness’ there exists thesupreme SelfWhere one has any selfish interest, where there is even atrace of my-ness (mamata), there cannot be any salvation. Godmanifests where there is no my-ness. Ego exists only due toattachment (this is mine; mamata).Questioner: Is it possible that mamata gives rise to theego, which in turn gives rise to raag (attachment)?Dadashri: No, it is mamata which gives rise toeverything. Why does the ‘I’ exist? It exists because of ‘my’.Otherwise, the ‘I’ is the absolute Self (parmatma). ‘My’ meansmamata. Once there is a separation between the ‘I’ and the‘my’, then what is left? The ‘I’ and that ‘I’ verily is the pureSoul.Questioner: Would everyone become a Gnani if theybecame free from mamata?Dadashri: Yes. A person will become a Gnani if hebecomes free of mamata. All those who became tirthankaras,they were all free from mamata. Mamata can never existthere.Questioner: What gives rise to this ‘my-ness’(mamatva)?Dadashri: It arises out of greed (lalacha); greed of anykind.Questioner: Is it because of what had been done in thepast life?Dadashri: It is only because you have come into thisGnan that you are able to understand that everything oneAptavani-9211212Aptavani-9experiences is due to his actions of the past life. But otherpeople will not understand this. This is all due to their lalacha(greed). Their greed is very obvious and visible and whereverthere is greed, mamata is bound to be there without fail. ‘We’had lot of pride (maan) but ‘we’ did not have any mamataat all.Questioner: So does the ego exist because of greed(lalacha) and my-ness (mamata)?Dadashri: ‘I’ exists because of ‘my’. Otherwise, the ‘I’part is the pure Soul if you get rid of the ‘my’ part. The ego willexist as long as ‘my’ is associated with the ‘I’. He whose ‘my’is gone, loses his ego and becomes the supreme Soul(parmatma)! This is as clear as daylight!The nature of mamataThat in which ‘my-ness’, enters; that wherein one projectsthe self, is what we call mamata. For example, when you say,‘this teacup is mine’, you give ‘my-ness’ to it and so whathappens when it breaks? There is problem even when yourteacup breaks! In fact, if I tell this child to throw away thisteacup, he will shrug his shoulders and say, ‘How can I throwit away?’ Can you not understand the mamata in this? Whydoes he shrug his shoulders right away? Then if you tell him,‘throw out Dadaji’s shoes’ he will say, ‘I cannot do that.’ Lookhow particular those who have understanding can be, it is onlybecause of the ego that everything has gone wrong. The ego of‘Hum, hum, hum! Hum means ‘I’.Questioner: Does the ego dissolve through Gnan?Dadashri: Ego means ignorance. And Gnan meansabsence of ego; an egoless state. So there is no ego thatcannot be dissolved through Gnan. Gnan is the egoless stateand ignorance is a state with ego; there are only these twostates.The extent of mamata (my-ness)The world keeps nurturing and watering the plant ofmamata. One keeps nurturing it by projecting, ‘This ismine’…‘this is mine.’ If you ask them what is not theirs, they willtell you ‘this is not ours. This is my brother’s’ Then a few yearslater they tell you, ‘My brother has taken away some of ourthings’, and then they will go to court. Then they die and theirchildren will fight complaining about the same thing. Now willyou not call such a person ‘a sack of misguided intellect’? If hetries to sell this ‘sack of intellect’, no one will pay even a dimefor it, will they?Their mamata; their ‘my-ness’ goes even as far as, ‘Thiscountry of India, is ours.’ Then what do they claim about thestate of Gujarat? They will say, ‘Gujarat is ours.’ And in Gujaratsome will say, ‘Our district of Charotar is very good.’ Onebecomes the owner of entire Charotar! Then in Charotar, aperson from the town of Anand will say, ‘We the people ofAnand are like this’ and a person from the town of Bhadran willsay, ‘Our Bhadran people are like this.’ He becomes the ownerof the whole village. Then people from two different streets fromthe same village will argue, ‘Our street is better than yours.’Then two families from the same street argue about theirfamilies. This goes down all the way to two brothers arguingabout who is better. So it is the same everywhere and peopletry to protect their little ownerships. They try to protect (own)the whole country, and the whole state of Gujarat. What is thepoint of spreading ownership all throughout India? One has notdone anything for his own salvation and yet he is busy claimingand spreading ownership all around.Now who creates this drashtibhed (a vision of division)?The intellect (buddhi) creates it. It will be so divisive that it willmake one say, ‘I have nothing to do with those other people.’‘This is our home, this is ours and that is ours. We do not haveanything to do with anyone else,’ this is how divisive it is; theseAptavani-9211212Aptavani-9experiences is due to his actions of the past life. But otherpeople will not understand this. This is all due to their lalacha(greed). Their greed is very obvious and visible and whereverthere is greed, mamata is bound to be there without fail. ‘We’had lot of pride (maan) but ‘we’ did not have any mamataat all.Questioner: So does the ego exist because of greed(lalacha) and my-ness (mamata)?Dadashri: ‘I’ exists because of ‘my’. Otherwise, the ‘I’part is the pure Soul if you get rid of the ‘my’ part. The ego willexist as long as ‘my’ is associated with the ‘I’. He whose ‘my’is gone, loses his ego and becomes the supreme Soul(parmatma)! This is as clear as daylight!The nature of mamataThat in which ‘my-ness’, enters; that wherein one projectsthe self, is what we call mamata. For example, when you say,‘this teacup is mine’, you give ‘my-ness’ to it and so whathappens when it breaks? There is problem even when yourteacup breaks! In fact, if I tell this child to throw away thisteacup, he will shrug his shoulders and say, ‘How can I throwit away?’ Can you not understand the mamata in this? Whydoes he shrug his shoulders right away? Then if you tell him,‘throw out Dadaji’s shoes’ he will say, ‘I cannot do that.’ Lookhow particular those who have understanding can be, it is onlybecause of the ego that everything has gone wrong. The ego of‘Hum, hum, hum! Hum means ‘I’.Questioner: Does the ego dissolve through Gnan?Dadashri: Ego means ignorance. And Gnan meansabsence of ego; an egoless state. So there is no ego thatcannot be dissolved through Gnan. Gnan is the egoless stateand ignorance is a state with ego; there are only these twostates.The extent of mamata (my-ness)The world keeps nurturing and watering the plant ofmamata. One keeps nurturing it by projecting, ‘This ismine’…‘this is mine.’ If you ask them what is not theirs, they willtell you ‘this is not ours. This is my brother’s’ Then a few yearslater they tell you, ‘My brother has taken away some of ourthings’, and then they will go to court. Then they die and theirchildren will fight complaining about the same thing. Now willyou not call such a person ‘a sack of misguided intellect’? If hetries to sell this ‘sack of intellect’, no one will pay even a dimefor it, will they?Their mamata; their ‘my-ness’ goes even as far as, ‘Thiscountry of India, is ours.’ Then what do they claim about thestate of Gujarat? They will say, ‘Gujarat is ours.’ And in Gujaratsome will say, ‘Our district of Charotar is very good.’ Onebecomes the owner of entire Charotar! Then in Charotar, aperson from the town of Anand will say, ‘We the people ofAnand are like this’ and a person from the town of Bhadran willsay, ‘Our Bhadran people are like this.’ He becomes the ownerof the whole village. Then people from two different streets fromthe same village will argue, ‘Our street is better than yours.’Then two families from the same street argue about theirfamilies. This goes down all the way to two brothers arguingabout who is better. So it is the same everywhere and peopletry to protect their little ownerships. They try to protect (own)the whole country, and the whole state of Gujarat. What is thepoint of spreading ownership all throughout India? One has notdone anything for his own salvation and yet he is busy claimingand spreading ownership all around.Now who creates this drashtibhed (a vision of division)?The intellect (buddhi) creates it. It will be so divisive that it willmake one say, ‘I have nothing to do with those other people.’‘This is our home, this is ours and that is ours. We do not haveanything to do with anyone else,’ this is how divisive it is; theseAptavani-9213214Aptavani-9are the kind of divisiveness it creates. If you were to asksomeone, ‘Since you claim this is your home; then you must nothave any separation due to differences in your home.’ He willtell you, ‘No there is no matbhed (separation due to differences)in our home.’ But what do they do when they fight with eachother in the home? Do two people not fight with each other inthe home?Questioner: Yes they do.Dadashri: What do they do at that time? Will they notsay, ‘You are like this’, and she will say, ‘You are like that.’Where do these differences end up? It all comes down to,‘From now on, I am all alone. No one is mine. No one else ismine.’ This same old divisive vision of ‘yours and mine, yoursand mine’ continues over and over again.The boundary of mamata (my-ness)One man tells me, ‘I cannot get rid of my mamata.’ I toldhim, ‘How can you get rid of it? As far as you know, whateverfalls within the boundary of your property is yours, is thatcorrect? Or do you claim you own things beyond thatboundary? You are able to define certain boundaries, are younot? So can you show me the boundary of mamata? What isthe boundary of mamata? Other people too can show you theboundary of your house but do you not need to define theboundary of mamata as well?People have not seen the boundary of mamata. Everythinglooks good with a boundary. Do you look beyond theboundaries of your home and say that the house next door isalso yours?Questioner: No.Dadashri: Does the house not have a boundary too? Youdon’t claim the neighbor’s house as yours do you? So, what Iam saying is let mamata be but it should be within a boundary.So what should be the boundary of mamata? Your boundary is:whatever you have mamata for will come with you when youdie; that is the boundary of mamata. So what does theboundary of mamata mean? It means that as long as you areliving, it will remain yours and not after you die. The Lord hassaid to have mamata towards your finger; according to theLord you may say, ‘this is ‘my’ finger’, but He has said that weshould not have mamata for the ring on the finger. Why,because the ring will be taken away; it will be left behind. Willthey not take away the ring? And sometimes if the ring does notcome out, they will even break the finger in order to take it out!So do not have mamata there.So that which no longer exists after one leaves this worldis the limit for one’s mamata. Mamata beyond this boundaryshould be removed. So what kind of mamata should go away?The mamata, (my-ness) towards your one and only sonshould go away and similarly any other such mamataelsewhere should also go away. This is not just mere talk.Elsewhere people can multiply the non-truth with non-truth andstill pass the exam. But one cannot pass the examination of theGnani. Here one cannot get by with just idle talks. With theGnani you need ‘exactness’. Mamata of the Insurance AgentIf a ship is sinking and the insurance agent is watching, willit have an effect on him? If the ship ends up sinking, will he nothave to pay money?Questioner: Yes, he has to pay.Dadashri: But will he be affected by it personally?Questioner: He will not be affected personally.Dadashri: Why is that? So if something belonging to abusiness is lost, who will worry about it? Everyone claims, ‘thisis our’, but do they have any mamata?Aptavani-9213214Aptavani-9are the kind of divisiveness it creates. If you were to asksomeone, ‘Since you claim this is your home; then you must nothave any separation due to differences in your home.’ He willtell you, ‘No there is no matbhed (separation due to differences)in our home.’ But what do they do when they fight with eachother in the home? Do two people not fight with each other inthe home?Questioner: Yes they do.Dadashri: What do they do at that time? Will they notsay, ‘You are like this’, and she will say, ‘You are like that.’Where do these differences end up? It all comes down to,‘From now on, I am all alone. No one is mine. No one else ismine.’ This same old divisive vision of ‘yours and mine, yoursand mine’ continues over and over again.The boundary of mamata (my-ness)One man tells me, ‘I cannot get rid of my mamata.’ I toldhim, ‘How can you get rid of it? As far as you know, whateverfalls within the boundary of your property is yours, is thatcorrect? Or do you claim you own things beyond thatboundary? You are able to define certain boundaries, are younot? So can you show me the boundary of mamata? What isthe boundary of mamata? Other people too can show you theboundary of your house but do you not need to define theboundary of mamata as well?People have not seen the boundary of mamata. Everythinglooks good with a boundary. Do you look beyond theboundaries of your home and say that the house next door isalso yours?Questioner: No.Dadashri: Does the house not have a boundary too? Youdon’t claim the neighbor’s house as yours do you? So, what Iam saying is let mamata be but it should be within a boundary.So what should be the boundary of mamata? Your boundary is:whatever you have mamata for will come with you when youdie; that is the boundary of mamata. So what does theboundary of mamata mean? It means that as long as you areliving, it will remain yours and not after you die. The Lord hassaid to have mamata towards your finger; according to theLord you may say, ‘this is ‘my’ finger’, but He has said that weshould not have mamata for the ring on the finger. Why,because the ring will be taken away; it will be left behind. Willthey not take away the ring? And sometimes if the ring does notcome out, they will even break the finger in order to take it out!So do not have mamata there.So that which no longer exists after one leaves this worldis the limit for one’s mamata. Mamata beyond this boundaryshould be removed. So what kind of mamata should go away?The mamata, (my-ness) towards your one and only sonshould go away and similarly any other such mamataelsewhere should also go away. This is not just mere talk.Elsewhere people can multiply the non-truth with non-truth andstill pass the exam. But one cannot pass the examination of theGnani. Here one cannot get by with just idle talks. With theGnani you need ‘exactness’. Mamata of the Insurance AgentIf a ship is sinking and the insurance agent is watching, willit have an effect on him? If the ship ends up sinking, will he nothave to pay money?Questioner: Yes, he has to pay.Dadashri: But will he be affected by it personally?Questioner: He will not be affected personally.Dadashri: Why is that? So if something belonging to abusiness is lost, who will worry about it? Everyone claims, ‘thisis our’, but do they have any mamata?Aptavani-9215216Aptavani-9So there should be two kinds of mamata. You shouldhave full mamata over your body. And mamata that hasspread towards external things should be like this mamata.‘This house is mine, this watch is mine, this ring is mine,’all this is extended mamata. But really, they will remove all yourjewelry and everything else when you leave (die).There should be a boundary (limitations) for mamata.Should there not be a boundary for everything? So should therenot be a boundary for mamata too?Questioner: So does that mean one should not haveraag-dwesh towards things of extended mamata?Dadashri: You should be like the insurance agent whodoes not become affected by any losses.You can have mamata for this body onlySo have mamata for only those things that will come withyou. Otherwise, is there anything that will no longer be thereafter one leaves? ‘This leg is mine, this arm is mine, this nose ismine, ear is mine, this eye is mine, this finger is mine, all thethirty-two teeth are mine…’- there are many such things in thebody. This much mamata is more than enough. Then there is nointerference. There is no need for external and extendedmamata. People have mistakenly created the extended mamata.It has come about because of a lack of understanding.Otherwise, mamata should not be extended externally.Questioner: Does that mean mamata should be for onlythe body?Dadashri: Only for this body and you should have fullmamata for it. You should give it food and drink; there is greathappiness in such mamata. But people do not enjoy thathappiness and instead they take pleasure of, ‘This house ismine…that is mine…this is my wife, etc.’ No body is going tobe yours! Whatever you believe to be ‘yours’, will not comewith you. ‘You’ are permanent. Temporary things will not suityou.Ultimately when even your own body is not going to beyours, then how can the wife be yours? Is the wife going to beyours? What if you keep having mamata towards the wife andone day she divorces you? There is no such problem with thisbody, is there?Questioner: But what is there in this body that meritshaving unnecessary mamata?Dadashri: Then what on the outside is worth havingmore mamata for? So there is nothing that is yours. Whateveris yours, will come with you; that is the principle. And anythingthat is not yours is not going to. So is it not meaningless to havemamata for anything that is not yours?Questioner: But how much mamata can there betowards the body?Dadashri: There are many things in the body. There arethirty-two teeth and a tongue that work the whole day but doesnot get crushed between the teeth. So it is more than enough ifyou increase this much mamata towards the body.Questioner: What is the benefit in keeping this muchmamata?Dadashri: When you keep this much mamata for thebody, there is an adjustment for the body. There is arrangementfor everything the body needs. Everything is orderly. What theeyes need, what the ears need, what the stomach needs,everything will get what is needed.Questioner: What if the mamata gets focused exclusivelyon the body?Dadashri: When that happens, just relax and go to sleeppeacefully! But people do not even sleep peacefully.Aptavani-9215216Aptavani-9So there should be two kinds of mamata. You shouldhave full mamata over your body. And mamata that hasspread towards external things should be like this mamata.‘This house is mine, this watch is mine, this ring is mine,’all this is extended mamata. But really, they will remove all yourjewelry and everything else when you leave (die).There should be a boundary (limitations) for mamata.Should there not be a boundary for everything? So should therenot be a boundary for mamata too?Questioner: So does that mean one should not haveraag-dwesh towards things of extended mamata?Dadashri: You should be like the insurance agent whodoes not become affected by any losses.You can have mamata for this body onlySo have mamata for only those things that will come withyou. Otherwise, is there anything that will no longer be thereafter one leaves? ‘This leg is mine, this arm is mine, this nose ismine, ear is mine, this eye is mine, this finger is mine, all thethirty-two teeth are mine…’- there are many such things in thebody. This much mamata is more than enough. Then there is nointerference. There is no need for external and extendedmamata. People have mistakenly created the extended mamata.It has come about because of a lack of understanding.Otherwise, mamata should not be extended externally.Questioner: Does that mean mamata should be for onlythe body?Dadashri: Only for this body and you should have fullmamata for it. You should give it food and drink; there is greathappiness in such mamata. But people do not enjoy thathappiness and instead they take pleasure of, ‘This house ismine…that is mine…this is my wife, etc.’ No body is going tobe yours! Whatever you believe to be ‘yours’, will not comewith you. ‘You’ are permanent. Temporary things will not suityou.Ultimately when even your own body is not going to beyours, then how can the wife be yours? Is the wife going to beyours? What if you keep having mamata towards the wife andone day she divorces you? There is no such problem with thisbody, is there?Questioner: But what is there in this body that meritshaving unnecessary mamata?Dadashri: Then what on the outside is worth havingmore mamata for? So there is nothing that is yours. Whateveris yours, will come with you; that is the principle. And anythingthat is not yours is not going to. So is it not meaningless to havemamata for anything that is not yours?Questioner: But how much mamata can there betowards the body?Dadashri: There are many things in the body. There arethirty-two teeth and a tongue that work the whole day but doesnot get crushed between the teeth. So it is more than enough ifyou increase this much mamata towards the body.Questioner: What is the benefit in keeping this muchmamata?Dadashri: When you keep this much mamata for thebody, there is an adjustment for the body. There is arrangementfor everything the body needs. Everything is orderly. What theeyes need, what the ears need, what the stomach needs,everything will get what is needed.Questioner: What if the mamata gets focused exclusivelyon the body?Dadashri: When that happens, just relax and go to sleeppeacefully! But people do not even sleep peacefully.Aptavani-9217218Aptavani-9Questioner: But people’s mamata is spread out is itnot?Dadashri: But at whose expense are they extending it?Everyone has desires, do they not? How much land does afarmer desire? And there is a limit on the amount of availableland, is there not? People’s desire for land is endless. Oneperson will say, ‘I want five-hundred acres.’ Another will say, ‘Iwant one hundred acres,’ and a third person will say, ‘I wanthundred acres.’ How can this be possible? People suffermiserably in the process but achieve nothing.Remove mamata through understandingOne man had a beautiful bungalow. He started to crywhen talks about selling it came up. He said, ‘Do not sell thisbungalow, no matter what.’ He had to sell it anyway because offinancial problems. After the transfer of papers, the bungalowburnt down. Someone asked him, ‘Hey did your bungalow burndown?’ He replied, ‘What do I have to do with it?’ The youngman replied, ‘But that was your bungalow!’ so the older mansays, ‘But I had sold it.’ Now it was such a wonderful bungalowwhen he lived in it, so why did his mamata towards it go awaya day later?Questioner: Because he sold it.Dadashri: But how can his mamata go away?Questioner: His mamata went away because he let goof it.Dadashri: He did not let go of it but he was forced tolet go, was he not? On the contrary, when the bungalow burntdown, he was relieved. So, did his ‘my-ness’ not go away onthe same day when he sold his property? And what did he getin return? Papers? Will one’s ‘my-ness’ go away with papers?Yes it will; did you not see that? And will papers go away ornot? Yes, they will too. So if a mere paper can remove thefeelings of ‘my-ness’, then what is wrong in you removing it byway of understanding? And can it not be removed throughunderstanding? Then one would not cry even if his home wereto burn down, would he?Questioner: But if the court rules that the transfer ofpapers was invalid, then he will start crying again.Dadashri: Yes, he will start crying again.Questioner: So why did his mamata not go away tilltoday?Dadashri: It will not until he finds a way to do so. Andeventually what does the bungalow of a half million say? It says,‘Hey! Nagindas sheth, either you will have to leave me or I willhave to leave you.’ So Nagindas sheth says, ‘Where are yougoing to go?’ And the bungalow says, ‘I will have to go whenyou file bankruptcy. Or else, you are going to go away anyway(die) and I will remain standing here.’ Now when the bungalowsays this, would one not feel ashamed?So, people have needlessly extended their mamata. Whydo houses and bungalows not extend their mamata by claiming,‘only this owner is mine?’ and yet man extends his mamatatowards the whole world.Questioner: But in the eyes of the world, a man isconsidered big if his mamata is well extended.Dadashri: Yes, he is considered big, but he is just asmiserable. People have needlessly extended their mamata.The rules in a museumWhat causes one to have mamata? It is caused by thetendency to be worldly (sansari swabhav). This tendency to beworldly is binding. This binding, the feeling of ‘my-ness’ ismamata. For that matter has the intellect (buddhi) doneanything less? The world has been made wonderful through theAptavani-9217218Aptavani-9Questioner: But people’s mamata is spread out is itnot?Dadashri: But at whose expense are they extending it?Everyone has desires, do they not? How much land does afarmer desire? And there is a limit on the amount of availableland, is there not? People’s desire for land is endless. Oneperson will say, ‘I want five-hundred acres.’ Another will say, ‘Iwant one hundred acres,’ and a third person will say, ‘I wanthundred acres.’ How can this be possible? People suffermiserably in the process but achieve nothing.Remove mamata through understandingOne man had a beautiful bungalow. He started to crywhen talks about selling it came up. He said, ‘Do not sell thisbungalow, no matter what.’ He had to sell it anyway because offinancial problems. After the transfer of papers, the bungalowburnt down. Someone asked him, ‘Hey did your bungalow burndown?’ He replied, ‘What do I have to do with it?’ The youngman replied, ‘But that was your bungalow!’ so the older mansays, ‘But I had sold it.’ Now it was such a wonderful bungalowwhen he lived in it, so why did his mamata towards it go awaya day later?Questioner: Because he sold it.Dadashri: But how can his mamata go away?Questioner: His mamata went away because he let goof it.Dadashri: He did not let go of it but he was forced tolet go, was he not? On the contrary, when the bungalow burntdown, he was relieved. So, did his ‘my-ness’ not go away onthe same day when he sold his property? And what did he getin return? Papers? Will one’s ‘my-ness’ go away with papers?Yes it will; did you not see that? And will papers go away ornot? Yes, they will too. So if a mere paper can remove thefeelings of ‘my-ness’, then what is wrong in you removing it byway of understanding? And can it not be removed throughunderstanding? Then one would not cry even if his home wereto burn down, would he?Questioner: But if the court rules that the transfer ofpapers was invalid, then he will start crying again.Dadashri: Yes, he will start crying again.Questioner: So why did his mamata not go away tilltoday?Dadashri: It will not until he finds a way to do so. Andeventually what does the bungalow of a half million say? It says,‘Hey! Nagindas sheth, either you will have to leave me or I willhave to leave you.’ So Nagindas sheth says, ‘Where are yougoing to go?’ And the bungalow says, ‘I will have to go whenyou file bankruptcy. Or else, you are going to go away anyway(die) and I will remain standing here.’ Now when the bungalowsays this, would one not feel ashamed?So, people have needlessly extended their mamata. Whydo houses and bungalows not extend their mamata by claiming,‘only this owner is mine?’ and yet man extends his mamatatowards the whole world.Questioner: But in the eyes of the world, a man isconsidered big if his mamata is well extended.Dadashri: Yes, he is considered big, but he is just asmiserable. People have needlessly extended their mamata.The rules in a museumWhat causes one to have mamata? It is caused by thetendency to be worldly (sansari swabhav). This tendency to beworldly is binding. This binding, the feeling of ‘my-ness’ ismamata. For that matter has the intellect (buddhi) doneanything less? The world has been made wonderful through theAptavani-9219220Aptavani-9intellect and I am telling you not to get trapped; not to becomeattached to it. You may eat, drink and enjoy but do not gettrapped and yet people get attached. Do not get attached. Enjoyit and go to sleep!What is this world? It is the largest museum! It is amuseum just like the one we have in Baroda. What are the ruleswhen you enter a museum with your ticket? The conditions are‘Go in, take your time and observe; and enjoy as much and foras long as you want to. Eat and drink as much as you want to,if and when you want. You can enjoy doing all that in themuseum. But you cannot take anything with you when you leave.If you do, you will be guilty and incur a liability.’ Then whywould you want to mess with anything once you enter in? Justenjoy the different collections in the museum. You cannot takeanything with you when you leave. This world is a museum thatyou have entered. There is a problem only if you touch things ortry to take things out of it. Then one will say, ‘Sir, the problemis only when I carry it out physically, is it not?’ No, the law says,you cannot carry it out even in your mind and not with yourspeech either. Do not take anything out. Yet, you are free toenjoy it all. Is there anything wrong with this law?Questioner: That is true.Dadashri: Now is it not possible to leave the world inthis same way? But people keep taking things, some even putthings in their pockets and walk out but then they get caughtthere, in the next life. And people take many things in their mind,‘Ah! There is no one like the girl I saw,’ and she will say, ‘Ihave never seen anyone like him in my entire life.’ Hey, you!!What are you going to do with them now?Questioner: But this ‘museum’ is such that it gives rise toall kinds of covetousness (lalacha).Dadashri: Museums are always like that. But when thelaw is such that you cannot take anything with you, then what?Do you have a custom of taking things away with you in yourtown?Questioner: No.Dadashri: Then why do you fret and worry in this way?Simply ‘see’ and ‘know’ (joovo ane jaano)! When theAlphanso mango arrives, enjoy it at leisure. Enjoy them. Thereis no problem. Turn on the fan, turn on the air conditioner, sitpeacefully and enjoy your mangos. But you cannot take themwith you and you must not worry about anything. So the wholeworld is a museum where you can eat, drink and enjoy. Peopledo not know how to enjoy. They eat as if there is a daggerhanging over their head (under stress). Darn your eating! Theheck with it all! If you are afraid of the dagger, before you sitdown to eat, tell the dagger, ‘fall whenever you want to. I amsitting here to eat.’ Such is the state of everyone; they sit todine with the weight of a dagger hanging overhead. And youcan see it on their faces. Do you not see their castor-oil-ingested faces?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: So eat and drink whatever you like. Enjoyyour comforts. Women are not the problem, either. Do not getmarried if possible, but if you do, keep it as a worldly relation;understand that it is a temporary state. Do not get marriedthinking and believing she is yours forever. People marry as if therelationship is going to last forever. Do they not?Questioner: Yes they do!Dadashri: Now, You (mahatma, the one who has takenGnan) get married and so do others. Others say ‘my wife, mywife, my wife…’ whereas You understand that You are settlingthe account of that file (of the wife) with equanimity, becauseYou have taken the Gnan. But are you able to take anything withyou even though you have claimed it as yours by saying,‘mine…mine?’ Has anyone been able to do so?Aptavani-9219220Aptavani-9intellect and I am telling you not to get trapped; not to becomeattached to it. You may eat, drink and enjoy but do not gettrapped and yet people get attached. Do not get attached. Enjoyit and go to sleep!What is this world? It is the largest museum! It is amuseum just like the one we have in Baroda. What are the ruleswhen you enter a museum with your ticket? The conditions are‘Go in, take your time and observe; and enjoy as much and foras long as you want to. Eat and drink as much as you want to,if and when you want. You can enjoy doing all that in themuseum. But you cannot take anything with you when you leave.If you do, you will be guilty and incur a liability.’ Then whywould you want to mess with anything once you enter in? Justenjoy the different collections in the museum. You cannot takeanything with you when you leave. This world is a museum thatyou have entered. There is a problem only if you touch things ortry to take things out of it. Then one will say, ‘Sir, the problemis only when I carry it out physically, is it not?’ No, the law says,you cannot carry it out even in your mind and not with yourspeech either. Do not take anything out. Yet, you are free toenjoy it all. Is there anything wrong with this law?Questioner: That is true.Dadashri: Now is it not possible to leave the world inthis same way? But people keep taking things, some even putthings in their pockets and walk out but then they get caughtthere, in the next life. And people take many things in their mind,‘Ah! There is no one like the girl I saw,’ and she will say, ‘Ihave never seen anyone like him in my entire life.’ Hey, you!!What are you going to do with them now?Questioner: But this ‘museum’ is such that it gives rise toall kinds of covetousness (lalacha).Dadashri: Museums are always like that. But when thelaw is such that you cannot take anything with you, then what?Do you have a custom of taking things away with you in yourtown?Questioner: No.Dadashri: Then why do you fret and worry in this way?Simply ‘see’ and ‘know’ (joovo ane jaano)! When theAlphanso mango arrives, enjoy it at leisure. Enjoy them. Thereis no problem. Turn on the fan, turn on the air conditioner, sitpeacefully and enjoy your mangos. But you cannot take themwith you and you must not worry about anything. So the wholeworld is a museum where you can eat, drink and enjoy. Peopledo not know how to enjoy. They eat as if there is a daggerhanging over their head (under stress). Darn your eating! Theheck with it all! If you are afraid of the dagger, before you sitdown to eat, tell the dagger, ‘fall whenever you want to. I amsitting here to eat.’ Such is the state of everyone; they sit todine with the weight of a dagger hanging overhead. And youcan see it on their faces. Do you not see their castor-oil-ingested faces?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: So eat and drink whatever you like. Enjoyyour comforts. Women are not the problem, either. Do not getmarried if possible, but if you do, keep it as a worldly relation;understand that it is a temporary state. Do not get marriedthinking and believing she is yours forever. People marry as if therelationship is going to last forever. Do they not?Questioner: Yes they do!Dadashri: Now, You (mahatma, the one who has takenGnan) get married and so do others. Others say ‘my wife, mywife, my wife…’ whereas You understand that You are settlingthe account of that file (of the wife) with equanimity, becauseYou have taken the Gnan. But are you able to take anything withyou even though you have claimed it as yours by saying,‘mine…mine?’ Has anyone been able to do so?Aptavani-9221222Aptavani-9Questioner: No, no one has so far.Dadashri: So if there is no allowance and agreement oftaking anything with you, then why this unnecessary hassle? Sodo not take anything from this ‘museum of the world’ even if youlike it a lot. If you do, you will have to suffer the consequences.But instead people put things in their pockets and they try tosneak out from the other side. Then they have to face theconsequences of their actions when they are caught in their nextlife. So do not take anything; enjoy everything but do not makeit ‘mine’. Can you say ‘this is mine’ to anything in the museum?What do you think?Questioner: That is true.Dadashri: Wherever there is quarrel, there verily is my-ness within (mamata). There is no quarrel with anyone on theoutside. Then he will say, ‘my wife is no good.’ You fool, whydo you say, ‘my’? He still does not let go of his ‘my-ness’. Hewould not let go of that, would he?Questioner: These words ‘my’ and ‘no-good’ arebeing used at the same time; such a thought never occurs toanyone!Dadashri: Yes, he will even say, ‘my wife is no good.She is worth divorcing.’ Spoken words have an effect. Everyspoken word will have an effect. The effect of, ‘She is not mine’remains and the effect of ‘she is mine,’ remains.Saying, ‘mine’ makes it stick; saying ‘notmine’ makes it leaveA friend of ours was married for ten years and then hiswife died leaving behind three young children. He used to cryand so I had gone to console him, as did many others. I askedhim, ‘Why are you crying? What is the point of it now?’ he toldme, ‘But what about these three children? I am lost without her.’I asked him, ‘but what will you do? Is she going to come back?’he replied, ‘But I do not like it without her, what should I doabout that?’ I told him, ‘You do not like being without your wifenow but what if the two of you had met on a train eleven yearsago? You would have shoved past her. You married her tenyears ago but is it possible that even ten days prior to yourmarriage, you would have ignored her? Is that possible or not?’he said, ‘But I did not know her then, did I?’ I told him, ‘Wouldyou not have insisted that she vacate your reserved seat on thetrain had you met her prior to your marriage?’ He asked mewhat my point was. I told him that when he sat across from herunder their wedding canopy and looked at her; that was whenhe twisted the first knot of ‘my-ness’ with her. The knot ofmamata with her was tied by saying ‘this is my wife’ and shedid the same by saying ‘this is my husband’. I told him, ‘neitherof you had the mamata prior to your wedding day. From thetime you got married, up until now, you have continuouslytwisted and tightened the knots of attachment of ‘my, my,my…’ This created a mental effect; it has created apsychological effect. You will create a psychological effecteven by saying it just once, whereas this is an effect of tenyears worth.’ He replied, ‘Yes I do agree that a psychologicaleffect has taken over me. How can I get rid of it now?’ I toldhim, ‘Now keep saying, ‘not mine…not mine…not mine…’and thus unwind the knots exactly the way you had woundthem! This is the only solution.’In reality there is no bondage. It is merely a psychologicaleffect that takes place; then when the wife dies leaving threechildren behind, the poor man cries. He became happy after Iexplained things to him this way. As such there is no relation. Itis all because one believes ‘she is my wife…she is mine…mine’that the attachment and my-ness (mamata) takes hold. And thiseffect will go away simply by saying, ‘she is not mine, notmine….’ This ‘we’ guarantee you!Anything that you get attached to by saying ‘my or mine,’Aptavani-9221222Aptavani-9Questioner: No, no one has so far.Dadashri: So if there is no allowance and agreement oftaking anything with you, then why this unnecessary hassle? Sodo not take anything from this ‘museum of the world’ even if youlike it a lot. If you do, you will have to suffer the consequences.But instead people put things in their pockets and they try tosneak out from the other side. Then they have to face theconsequences of their actions when they are caught in their nextlife. So do not take anything; enjoy everything but do not makeit ‘mine’. Can you say ‘this is mine’ to anything in the museum?What do you think?Questioner: That is true.Dadashri: Wherever there is quarrel, there verily is my-ness within (mamata). There is no quarrel with anyone on theoutside. Then he will say, ‘my wife is no good.’ You fool, whydo you say, ‘my’? He still does not let go of his ‘my-ness’. Hewould not let go of that, would he?Questioner: These words ‘my’ and ‘no-good’ arebeing used at the same time; such a thought never occurs toanyone!Dadashri: Yes, he will even say, ‘my wife is no good.She is worth divorcing.’ Spoken words have an effect. Everyspoken word will have an effect. The effect of, ‘She is not mine’remains and the effect of ‘she is mine,’ remains.Saying, ‘mine’ makes it stick; saying ‘notmine’ makes it leaveA friend of ours was married for ten years and then hiswife died leaving behind three young children. He used to cryand so I had gone to console him, as did many others. I askedhim, ‘Why are you crying? What is the point of it now?’ he toldme, ‘But what about these three children? I am lost without her.’I asked him, ‘but what will you do? Is she going to come back?’he replied, ‘But I do not like it without her, what should I doabout that?’ I told him, ‘You do not like being without your wifenow but what if the two of you had met on a train eleven yearsago? You would have shoved past her. You married her tenyears ago but is it possible that even ten days prior to yourmarriage, you would have ignored her? Is that possible or not?’he said, ‘But I did not know her then, did I?’ I told him, ‘Wouldyou not have insisted that she vacate your reserved seat on thetrain had you met her prior to your marriage?’ He asked mewhat my point was. I told him that when he sat across from herunder their wedding canopy and looked at her; that was whenhe twisted the first knot of ‘my-ness’ with her. The knot ofmamata with her was tied by saying ‘this is my wife’ and shedid the same by saying ‘this is my husband’. I told him, ‘neitherof you had the mamata prior to your wedding day. From thetime you got married, up until now, you have continuouslytwisted and tightened the knots of attachment of ‘my, my,my…’ This created a mental effect; it has created apsychological effect. You will create a psychological effecteven by saying it just once, whereas this is an effect of tenyears worth.’ He replied, ‘Yes I do agree that a psychologicaleffect has taken over me. How can I get rid of it now?’ I toldhim, ‘Now keep saying, ‘not mine…not mine…not mine…’and thus unwind the knots exactly the way you had woundthem! This is the only solution.’In reality there is no bondage. It is merely a psychologicaleffect that takes place; then when the wife dies leaving threechildren behind, the poor man cries. He became happy after Iexplained things to him this way. As such there is no relation. Itis all because one believes ‘she is my wife…she is mine…mine’that the attachment and my-ness (mamata) takes hold. And thiseffect will go away simply by saying, ‘she is not mine, notmine….’ This ‘we’ guarantee you!Anything that you get attached to by saying ‘my or mine,’Aptavani-9223224Aptavani-9can be removed by saying ‘Not mine, not mine.’ And if youwant to get attached again, then instead of saying ‘not mine’, say‘mine’ and you will get attached. Do you understand that? Youdo not need any glue for this; it will stick without glue!Achieve everything even without mamataThis is just a ghost of mamata (my-ness) that haspossessed you. It will go away if I remove it for you. Mamatais the demon witch and I am the exorcist for it. So if you movearound in this world without mamata, you will get a lot ofrespect. But no one lets go of his or her my-ness. I ask people,‘what do you want?’ What do you crave for?’ and they say, ‘Ihave a craving for respect (maan).’ What else? Then they willsay, ‘Something to eat and drink.’ So then let go of this my-ness(mamata) and you will get whatever you need. But people tellme, ‘If I let go, I will lose whatever I do have.’ And so they willnot let go.Entrapment is the consequence of greed(lalacha)Greed (lalacha) makes a monkey force his hand throughthe narrow opening of a pot, thinking ‘I will take out some nuts’.He forces his hand through, grabs the nuts in a fist but cannotpull his hand out because his fist is too wide. He starts screamingbecause he cannot pull his hand out. Now why won’t he let goof what is inside his fist? All he understands is ‘since I was ableto put my hand in, I should be able to pull it out, but why Ican’t? Maybe somebody has grabbed hold of me from theinside!’ But he will not let go of the nuts in his fist, and he keepson screaming. In trying to free himself he tries to pick up the potbut he cannot because it is stuck in the ground. Then people willgather around and catch him. This is how people catchmonkeys. People are clever too because they have been there.They know their ‘relatives’! Don’t they catch monkeys thisway? You will have to understand all this, won’t you?Subtle observation of one’s own natureIn the old days, people used to make yogurt in small claypots. Cats have a habit of drinking milk and yogurt so what dothey do? They stick their heads in the pot to taste the yogurtbecause they can smell it. They will not leave the pot alone.When no one is around, the cat will force its head inside the pot.It has the strength to force its head in but not to pull it out. Sothen, it walks around with the pot around its head! I have seencats do this. Have you not seen such a thing? I used to be verymischievous so I would find ways of playing tricks. If I could notthen others would teach me. You have to be mischievous inorder to play games like this. It was because of my nature thatI found such tricks.Questioner: All of us are walking around with our headsin a pot, Dada.Dadashri: Arey! People walk around doing just that,don’t they? I see them all the time. I have broken the pots formany people, what can the poor people do? How long can theygo around with their heads in a pot? Poor fellows, they cannoteven see.Questioner: How many such ‘pots’ have you broken?Dadashri: I will not tell you the number but I havebroken the pots for sure. Now that they can see, they say, ‘I willnot stick my head in the pot again!’ They learn from theirexperiences. Having learnt from their experience, they will notrepeat the mistake again.Belief that creates mamata (my-ness)There is nothing in the worldly life that hinders you. Whatis there in the world to hinder you? Where nothing is truly yours,you believe it to be yours. Have you made a decision thatnothing is yours? What kind of belief is this? Say if you believea certain bank to be yours. And one day when you go there andAptavani-9223224Aptavani-9can be removed by saying ‘Not mine, not mine.’ And if youwant to get attached again, then instead of saying ‘not mine’, say‘mine’ and you will get attached. Do you understand that? Youdo not need any glue for this; it will stick without glue!Achieve everything even without mamataThis is just a ghost of mamata (my-ness) that haspossessed you. It will go away if I remove it for you. Mamatais the demon witch and I am the exorcist for it. So if you movearound in this world without mamata, you will get a lot ofrespect. But no one lets go of his or her my-ness. I ask people,‘what do you want?’ What do you crave for?’ and they say, ‘Ihave a craving for respect (maan).’ What else? Then they willsay, ‘Something to eat and drink.’ So then let go of this my-ness(mamata) and you will get whatever you need. But people tellme, ‘If I let go, I will lose whatever I do have.’ And so they willnot let go.Entrapment is the consequence of greed(lalacha)Greed (lalacha) makes a monkey force his hand throughthe narrow opening of a pot, thinking ‘I will take out some nuts’.He forces his hand through, grabs the nuts in a fist but cannotpull his hand out because his fist is too wide. He starts screamingbecause he cannot pull his hand out. Now why won’t he let goof what is inside his fist? All he understands is ‘since I was ableto put my hand in, I should be able to pull it out, but why Ican’t? Maybe somebody has grabbed hold of me from theinside!’ But he will not let go of the nuts in his fist, and he keepson screaming. In trying to free himself he tries to pick up the potbut he cannot because it is stuck in the ground. Then people willgather around and catch him. This is how people catchmonkeys. People are clever too because they have been there.They know their ‘relatives’! Don’t they catch monkeys thisway? You will have to understand all this, won’t you?Subtle observation of one’s own natureIn the old days, people used to make yogurt in small claypots. Cats have a habit of drinking milk and yogurt so what dothey do? They stick their heads in the pot to taste the yogurtbecause they can smell it. They will not leave the pot alone.When no one is around, the cat will force its head inside the pot.It has the strength to force its head in but not to pull it out. Sothen, it walks around with the pot around its head! I have seencats do this. Have you not seen such a thing? I used to be verymischievous so I would find ways of playing tricks. If I could notthen others would teach me. You have to be mischievous inorder to play games like this. It was because of my nature thatI found such tricks.Questioner: All of us are walking around with our headsin a pot, Dada.Dadashri: Arey! People walk around doing just that,don’t they? I see them all the time. I have broken the pots formany people, what can the poor people do? How long can theygo around with their heads in a pot? Poor fellows, they cannoteven see.Questioner: How many such ‘pots’ have you broken?Dadashri: I will not tell you the number but I havebroken the pots for sure. Now that they can see, they say, ‘I willnot stick my head in the pot again!’ They learn from theirexperiences. Having learnt from their experience, they will notrepeat the mistake again.Belief that creates mamata (my-ness)There is nothing in the worldly life that hinders you. Whatis there in the world to hinder you? Where nothing is truly yours,you believe it to be yours. Have you made a decision thatnothing is yours? What kind of belief is this? Say if you believea certain bank to be yours. And one day when you go there andAptavani-9225226Aptavani-9tell the manager, ‘This bank is mine so why don’t you leave?’What will he tell you? So everything that you believe to be yourswill one day put you in ‘jail’ (causes bondage). So then whywould you want to believe this? Besides what good does simply‘believing’ do? There should be a firm decision about what isexact and precise; beliefs have no basis. On the contrary, youwill be ridiculed and thrown in jail.Everything binds you because you created my-nesstowards it. Nothing belongs to you, not even the body. It wouldbe your friend if it were truly yours. But look how much painand suffering it gives you before it leaves and ‘You’ have tovacate the ‘home’. In which past life have you departed withoutmy-ness (mamata)? You have died as an uncle, you have diedas a father; you have done all this. Dying without my-ness is theentrance to liberation. And if you die with mamata then thisworld is always there for you to come back to. You have diedin every past life but that mamata has not gone, has it? It stillremains. Now you have also attained the knowledge that thismamata is not real and yet it has not gone. It is very difficult toattain the knowledge that teaches you ‘mamata is not real’; itis extremely rare and difficult.The one with mamata is not the SelfI have made you without mamata; attachment or my-nessand you still do not validate this by saying so. I have made youwithout mamata but you still do not say, ‘I too am withoutmamata.’Questioner: But how can mamata go away?Dadashri: Your mamata is gone after attaining thisGnan. So now why would you want to remove it again? Your‘shop’ was a partnership between you and Chandulal and nowit is divided. Chandulal is the one with mamata and there is noproblem with that, but You are without mamata, now. Thepartnership in the shop has been divided so with whom does themamata go with? It goes with ‘Chandulal’. It did not come withYou, so Your problem is solved.This is a museum. It is like a hotel so we drink tea andso do others. But what do other people do in the museum? Theygive all kinds of opinions ‘This tea is very good, the other onewas not. This tea is strong, the other was weak.’ We (the Gnaniand His mahatmas) on the other hand, do not do this. We dealwith whatever comes our way, with equanimity.Mamata (my-ness) such as the one in adramaThe Lord has not forbidden one to keep mamata; youcan have mamata but it should be like the one played out in adrama; it should be perfunctory. Just like the mamata an actorwould show in a play. Do actors in a play not show mamata(attachment or my-ness)? In the play, King Bhartruhari willcome and then Queen Pingda will come. King Bhartruhari willcry, but it is all a drama (for the sake of the play). So thereis no bondage or liability from that mamata. Similarly; youshould carry out your part of ‘acting’; eat, drink and enjoyyourself but do it dramatically. ‘We’ too do the ‘drama’, do‘we’ not?Questioner: Can you find anyone with ‘dramatic mamata’in this day and age?Dadashri: There cannot be any dramatic mamata. But Ido the drama. How I inquire about Hiraba’s (Dadashri’s wife)welfare! Once a fortnight she would tell my nephew, ‘Please askDada to come and have dinner today.’ And so ‘we’ have togo, ‘we’ have to make the time, no matter how busy ‘we’ areand go there for dinner. ‘We’ have to please her. ‘We’ wouldlose whatever little respect there was, if she were to get upset.But ‘we’ make sure she never gets upset. So ‘we’ go toHiraba’s home for dinner. If Hiraba tells ‘us’ ‘Come tomorrow’,then ‘we’ would go again. Everyone will also comment, ‘DadaAptavani-9225226Aptavani-9tell the manager, ‘This bank is mine so why don’t you leave?’What will he tell you? So everything that you believe to be yourswill one day put you in ‘jail’ (causes bondage). So then whywould you want to believe this? Besides what good does simply‘believing’ do? There should be a firm decision about what isexact and precise; beliefs have no basis. On the contrary, youwill be ridiculed and thrown in jail.Everything binds you because you created my-nesstowards it. Nothing belongs to you, not even the body. It wouldbe your friend if it were truly yours. But look how much painand suffering it gives you before it leaves and ‘You’ have tovacate the ‘home’. In which past life have you departed withoutmy-ness (mamata)? You have died as an uncle, you have diedas a father; you have done all this. Dying without my-ness is theentrance to liberation. And if you die with mamata then thisworld is always there for you to come back to. You have diedin every past life but that mamata has not gone, has it? It stillremains. Now you have also attained the knowledge that thismamata is not real and yet it has not gone. It is very difficult toattain the knowledge that teaches you ‘mamata is not real’; itis extremely rare and difficult.The one with mamata is not the SelfI have made you without mamata; attachment or my-nessand you still do not validate this by saying so. I have made youwithout mamata but you still do not say, ‘I too am withoutmamata.’Questioner: But how can mamata go away?Dadashri: Your mamata is gone after attaining thisGnan. So now why would you want to remove it again? Your‘shop’ was a partnership between you and Chandulal and nowit is divided. Chandulal is the one with mamata and there is noproblem with that, but You are without mamata, now. Thepartnership in the shop has been divided so with whom does themamata go with? It goes with ‘Chandulal’. It did not come withYou, so Your problem is solved.This is a museum. It is like a hotel so we drink tea andso do others. But what do other people do in the museum? Theygive all kinds of opinions ‘This tea is very good, the other onewas not. This tea is strong, the other was weak.’ We (the Gnaniand His mahatmas) on the other hand, do not do this. We dealwith whatever comes our way, with equanimity.Mamata (my-ness) such as the one in adramaThe Lord has not forbidden one to keep mamata; youcan have mamata but it should be like the one played out in adrama; it should be perfunctory. Just like the mamata an actorwould show in a play. Do actors in a play not show mamata(attachment or my-ness)? In the play, King Bhartruhari willcome and then Queen Pingda will come. King Bhartruhari willcry, but it is all a drama (for the sake of the play). So thereis no bondage or liability from that mamata. Similarly; youshould carry out your part of ‘acting’; eat, drink and enjoyyourself but do it dramatically. ‘We’ too do the ‘drama’, do‘we’ not?Questioner: Can you find anyone with ‘dramatic mamata’in this day and age?Dadashri: There cannot be any dramatic mamata. But Ido the drama. How I inquire about Hiraba’s (Dadashri’s wife)welfare! Once a fortnight she would tell my nephew, ‘Please askDada to come and have dinner today.’ And so ‘we’ have togo, ‘we’ have to make the time, no matter how busy ‘we’ areand go there for dinner. ‘We’ have to please her. ‘We’ wouldlose whatever little respect there was, if she were to get upset.But ‘we’ make sure she never gets upset. So ‘we’ go toHiraba’s home for dinner. If Hiraba tells ‘us’ ‘Come tomorrow’,then ‘we’ would go again. Everyone will also comment, ‘DadaAptavani-9227228Aptavani-9had come today to eat.’ But what a drama ‘we’ play, evenHiraba would not realize ‘we’ are acting. ‘We’ would even tellher, ‘I do not like it if you are not with me.’ She would notknow that ‘we’ are saying it ‘dramatically’. I am telling youthis.Enjoying without my-nessWhen you come here to stay for a few days, you canenjoy the comforts of a bed, mattress, chair, etc.; there is noproblem with that, but do so without any mamata towards it.That is called ‘enjoying’, so you have to experience everythingwithout mamata, enjoy with an understanding of ‘this is notmine’. Now if the head of the house understands that althoughhe is the landlord but nothing belongs to him even though he isthe landlord, then how well he would enjoy everything in amamata-free state. Then even if children were to jump on hisbed and break it, he would not be affected because he doesnot have any mamata; attachment through ownership of thatbed.Therefore, it is worth knowing all this from the GnaniPurush. Otherwise you have done nothing but wander forcountless past lives, you have not left any place to wander andyet the ‘Central station’ (for liberation) has not arrived. Here,when you meet the Gnani Purush, you have finally arrived atyour destination.He attains liberationNow this – liberation through Akram Vignan – is theCentral Station. You do not have to go any further from thispoint; your journey ends here. There are no mental difficulties(adhi), physical difficulties (vyadhi) or externally induceddifficulties (upadhi). Otherwise there is nothing but wandering atevery station anyway and people do exactly just that. Peoplewander from here to there and from there to here because oftheir intense greed (lalacha) of ‘I want this and I want that’. TheLord says, ‘Once you fulfill your intense greed (lalacha), cometake my shelter. Then, you and I are one.’ But people haveintense unsatisfied greed for so many things that their wanderingsnever cease.A person can attain liberation on his own if he did notharbor any intense greed (lalacha). He can discover liberationif he is not bound by his lalacha. But people keep wandering(caught up in the life-death cycle) as a result of their intensegreed and they suffer tremendously in the process.I asked one man who had come here, ‘Do you have anyintense greed (lalacha)?’ he replied, ‘I do not harbor any greedwhatsoever!’ I told him, ‘That is a great adjustment.’ The onewho has never had intense greed can reach the Self.One loses all sense in intense inner greed(lalacha)Questioner: Is there just one kind of lalacha or arethere many?Dadashri: There is no problem if there were just onekind. Then it is called greed of one kind.Questioner: But the intense greed you are talking aboutis that of one kind?Dadashri: No there are all kinds of intense greed(lalacha). People want to extract happiness from wherever theycan.Questioner: Is it an illusionary happiness?Dadashri: Yes, that is it. What else? There is no limit toit. It is fine if there is lalacha for only sex. Then it is consideredlobh (just greed). Then he would not have an intense greed(lalacha) for anything else, would he? No. But a person withintense greed will have all kinds of intense greed (lalacha) hewill be absorbed in all kinds of lalacha.Aptavani-9227228Aptavani-9had come today to eat.’ But what a drama ‘we’ play, evenHiraba would not realize ‘we’ are acting. ‘We’ would even tellher, ‘I do not like it if you are not with me.’ She would notknow that ‘we’ are saying it ‘dramatically’. I am telling youthis.Enjoying without my-nessWhen you come here to stay for a few days, you canenjoy the comforts of a bed, mattress, chair, etc.; there is noproblem with that, but do so without any mamata towards it.That is called ‘enjoying’, so you have to experience everythingwithout mamata, enjoy with an understanding of ‘this is notmine’. Now if the head of the house understands that althoughhe is the landlord but nothing belongs to him even though he isthe landlord, then how well he would enjoy everything in amamata-free state. Then even if children were to jump on hisbed and break it, he would not be affected because he doesnot have any mamata; attachment through ownership of thatbed.Therefore, it is worth knowing all this from the GnaniPurush. Otherwise you have done nothing but wander forcountless past lives, you have not left any place to wander andyet the ‘Central station’ (for liberation) has not arrived. Here,when you meet the Gnani Purush, you have finally arrived atyour destination.He attains liberationNow this – liberation through Akram Vignan – is theCentral Station. You do not have to go any further from thispoint; your journey ends here. There are no mental difficulties(adhi), physical difficulties (vyadhi) or externally induceddifficulties (upadhi). Otherwise there is nothing but wandering atevery station anyway and people do exactly just that. Peoplewander from here to there and from there to here because oftheir intense greed (lalacha) of ‘I want this and I want that’. TheLord says, ‘Once you fulfill your intense greed (lalacha), cometake my shelter. Then, you and I are one.’ But people haveintense unsatisfied greed for so many things that their wanderingsnever cease.A person can attain liberation on his own if he did notharbor any intense greed (lalacha). He can discover liberationif he is not bound by his lalacha. But people keep wandering(caught up in the life-death cycle) as a result of their intensegreed and they suffer tremendously in the process.I asked one man who had come here, ‘Do you have anyintense greed (lalacha)?’ he replied, ‘I do not harbor any greedwhatsoever!’ I told him, ‘That is a great adjustment.’ The onewho has never had intense greed can reach the Self.One loses all sense in intense inner greed(lalacha)Questioner: Is there just one kind of lalacha or arethere many?Dadashri: There is no problem if there were just onekind. Then it is called greed of one kind.Questioner: But the intense greed you are talking aboutis that of one kind?Dadashri: No there are all kinds of intense greed(lalacha). People want to extract happiness from wherever theycan.Questioner: Is it an illusionary happiness?Dadashri: Yes, that is it. What else? There is no limit toit. It is fine if there is lalacha for only sex. Then it is consideredlobh (just greed). Then he would not have an intense greed(lalacha) for anything else, would he? No. But a person withintense greed will have all kinds of intense greed (lalacha) hewill be absorbed in all kinds of lalacha.Aptavani-9229230Aptavani-9Gluttonous greed for pleasure makes onemiss the goal of liberationIf you show a piece of poori (fried Indian flat bread) toa dog, he will forget his entire family. He will forget everyone,his puppies, his territory where he lives, the general vicinity of hisresidence and he will stray far away from his location. He wagshis tail from lalacha for a single poori! I am a strong opponentof such lalacha (addictive avarice). I am amazed when I seethis in people, what kind of greed! It is open poison! Oneshould eat what comes in front, but such addictive greed mustnot exist.Questioner: One’s needs are satisfied without having toresort to such covetousness.Dadashri: Therefore, the trouble is for only the covetouspeople. Otherwise everything is available right at home. I do nothave any desire for anything and yet I get everything. There isno desire for anything let alone any avarice.Questioner: What is the difference between avarice anddesire?Dadashri: Everyone is free to harbor desire, of any kind.There is no problem in having desire, but there is with avarice(lalacha). If you dangle a piece of bread in front of a dog, hewill run from anywhere to anywhere because a gluttonous greedhas taken hold.Questioner: So with such addictive avarice one losessense of what is right and what is wrong?Dadashri: Insatiable avarice (gluttonous greed; lalacha),it gives you the right to label a man as an animal! It is an animalroaming around in the human form.Questioner: What are the consequences if we performreligious activities in a gluttonous greed for prestige and fame?Dadashri: That is not gluttonous greed (lalacha). It isnatural for one to seek recognition. As long as there is theworldly life, there will always be a desire to make a name foroneself; there will be other desires too. That is not consideredgluttonous greed (lalacha). The kind of lalacha I am talkingabout is the kind in the example of the dog. If a dog sees apoori, he will keep hovering around it. He will lose awarenessthat he has strayed far away from his location and family. Heloses all awareness.Everyone has at least some element of such gluttonousavarice but the term lalachu (the addicted glutton) is reservedfor the one who behaves like an animal in human form.Say a man brings home some wonderful sweets andanother man (visiting him) loves those sweets. He will sit aroundfor hours, because of his avarice and greed, hoping he will beoffered some of it. He will leave only when you give him some.He sits for a long time because of his insatiable greed within. Onthe other hand an egoistic person—one who is heavily ladenwith the sense of the self—will say, ‘the heck with it, I wouldrather go home.’ He will take off. He does not covet. Thereforethis world is bound by such lalacha (excessive greed orgluttonous avarice) and promise of pleasure. Hey, the dogs anddonkeys have such lalacha, not humans! How dare we humanshave such avarice?When does a mouse enter a cage? When does it gettrapped in the cage?Questioner: When there is excessive greed (lalacha).Dadashri: Yes, it smells a dhebru (small spicy deep-friedbread) and when it goes to eat it, it gets trapped. When it seesthe dhebru in the cage, it sits outside impatiently thinking, ‘Whenshall I go in? When shall I go in?’ and once it enters, the cagedoor shuts behind him automatically. Therefore insatiable greedfor pleasure (lalacha) is the cause of all misery.Aptavani-9229230Aptavani-9Gluttonous greed for pleasure makes onemiss the goal of liberationIf you show a piece of poori (fried Indian flat bread) toa dog, he will forget his entire family. He will forget everyone,his puppies, his territory where he lives, the general vicinity of hisresidence and he will stray far away from his location. He wagshis tail from lalacha for a single poori! I am a strong opponentof such lalacha (addictive avarice). I am amazed when I seethis in people, what kind of greed! It is open poison! Oneshould eat what comes in front, but such addictive greed mustnot exist.Questioner: One’s needs are satisfied without having toresort to such covetousness.Dadashri: Therefore, the trouble is for only the covetouspeople. Otherwise everything is available right at home. I do nothave any desire for anything and yet I get everything. There isno desire for anything let alone any avarice.Questioner: What is the difference between avarice anddesire?Dadashri: Everyone is free to harbor desire, of any kind.There is no problem in having desire, but there is with avarice(lalacha). If you dangle a piece of bread in front of a dog, hewill run from anywhere to anywhere because a gluttonous greedhas taken hold.Questioner: So with such addictive avarice one losessense of what is right and what is wrong?Dadashri: Insatiable avarice (gluttonous greed; lalacha),it gives you the right to label a man as an animal! It is an animalroaming around in the human form.Questioner: What are the consequences if we performreligious activities in a gluttonous greed for prestige and fame?Dadashri: That is not gluttonous greed (lalacha). It isnatural for one to seek recognition. As long as there is theworldly life, there will always be a desire to make a name foroneself; there will be other desires too. That is not consideredgluttonous greed (lalacha). The kind of lalacha I am talkingabout is the kind in the example of the dog. If a dog sees apoori, he will keep hovering around it. He will lose awarenessthat he has strayed far away from his location and family. Heloses all awareness.Everyone has at least some element of such gluttonousavarice but the term lalachu (the addicted glutton) is reservedfor the one who behaves like an animal in human form.Say a man brings home some wonderful sweets andanother man (visiting him) loves those sweets. He will sit aroundfor hours, because of his avarice and greed, hoping he will beoffered some of it. He will leave only when you give him some.He sits for a long time because of his insatiable greed within. Onthe other hand an egoistic person—one who is heavily ladenwith the sense of the self—will say, ‘the heck with it, I wouldrather go home.’ He will take off. He does not covet. Thereforethis world is bound by such lalacha (excessive greed orgluttonous avarice) and promise of pleasure. Hey, the dogs anddonkeys have such lalacha, not humans! How dare we humanshave such avarice?When does a mouse enter a cage? When does it gettrapped in the cage?Questioner: When there is excessive greed (lalacha).Dadashri: Yes, it smells a dhebru (small spicy deep-friedbread) and when it goes to eat it, it gets trapped. When it seesthe dhebru in the cage, it sits outside impatiently thinking, ‘Whenshall I go in? When shall I go in?’ and once it enters, the cagedoor shuts behind him automatically. Therefore insatiable greedfor pleasure (lalacha) is the cause of all misery.Aptavani-9231232Aptavani-9Which is harmful, lobh (greed) or lalacha(covetousness or intense greed)?Questioner: What makes one intensely greedy andcovetous? Is it the mind?Dadashri: It is the mind but it is one of the main attributesof the ego, is it not? Intense greed (lalacha) of past life areexpressed through the mind in this life, and because of the ego,one will continue to have on going lalacha (intense greed).Questioner: Which kashayas (anger, pride, deceit andgreed) does intense greed (lalacha) fall under?Dadashri: Lalacha is a raag kashaya i.e. it is akashaya of attachment. When attachment and deceit (raag andkapat respectively) come together, they give rise to intensegreed lalacha.Questioner: Does it not come under illusion (moha) aswell, Dada?Dadashri: You can call it whatever you want, but intensegreed (lalacha) is different.Questioner: Is deceit (kapat) like intense greed?Dadashri: This is not even deceit (kapat). This is allintense greed. Even you would know how to deceive. This isintense greed. The main thing in intense greed (lalacha) is greed(lobh).Questioner: Does that greed (lobh) gradually change tointense greed (lalacha)?Dadashri: No. Greed (lobh) arises only after intensegreed (lalacha) arises. There is no problem with being greedy(lobhi). At least a person with greed will win some day but notthe person with intense greed (lalacha).A man with intense (lalacha) greed is worse than a manwith greed (lobh). At least a greedy person will not let swindlersor con artists starve. Who will make the swindlers go hungry?Everyone except a man with greed (lobh). A person’s greed isfood for the con artist.Questioner: Then what is the difference between agreedy man (lobhi) and a man with intense greed (lalacha)?Dadashri: A man with intense greed (lalacha) will betempted by anything that promises pleasure whereas a greedyman is greedy about only one thing, for example, his greedmaybe only for money. He will have greed for anything that willhelp him get money. Whereas a man with intense greed(lalacha) will go after whatever he can. He will go for anythingthat will give him pleasure. When such a man gets upset, he willthrow a tantrum (tragu). He will try to get what he wants byscaring people; he will make statements like, ‘I will kill myself.I will commit suicide.’Questioner: What kind of intense greed (lalacha) doeshe have that he would do that?Dadashri: He wants pleasure out of something and whenhe is denied that pleasure, he throws tantrums like, ‘I will dothis…I will commit suicide.’Questioner: Usually the intense greed is for sex, is it not?Dadashri: For sex as well as everything else.Questioner: So does that include other things like prideor the need to be worshipped and respected, etc.?Dadashri: Yes, that too. He will do the same if he isdenied alcohol.Questioner: Is the intense greed lalacha for the materialthing itself or is it for the pleasure derived from those materialthings?Dadashri: It is all about pleasure; it is not for the actualAptavani-9231232Aptavani-9Which is harmful, lobh (greed) or lalacha(covetousness or intense greed)?Questioner: What makes one intensely greedy andcovetous? Is it the mind?Dadashri: It is the mind but it is one of the main attributesof the ego, is it not? Intense greed (lalacha) of past life areexpressed through the mind in this life, and because of the ego,one will continue to have on going lalacha (intense greed).Questioner: Which kashayas (anger, pride, deceit andgreed) does intense greed (lalacha) fall under?Dadashri: Lalacha is a raag kashaya i.e. it is akashaya of attachment. When attachment and deceit (raag andkapat respectively) come together, they give rise to intensegreed lalacha.Questioner: Does it not come under illusion (moha) aswell, Dada?Dadashri: You can call it whatever you want, but intensegreed (lalacha) is different.Questioner: Is deceit (kapat) like intense greed?Dadashri: This is not even deceit (kapat). This is allintense greed. Even you would know how to deceive. This isintense greed. The main thing in intense greed (lalacha) is greed(lobh).Questioner: Does that greed (lobh) gradually change tointense greed (lalacha)?Dadashri: No. Greed (lobh) arises only after intensegreed (lalacha) arises. There is no problem with being greedy(lobhi). At least a person with greed will win some day but notthe person with intense greed (lalacha).A man with intense (lalacha) greed is worse than a manwith greed (lobh). At least a greedy person will not let swindlersor con artists starve. Who will make the swindlers go hungry?Everyone except a man with greed (lobh). A person’s greed isfood for the con artist.Questioner: Then what is the difference between agreedy man (lobhi) and a man with intense greed (lalacha)?Dadashri: A man with intense greed (lalacha) will betempted by anything that promises pleasure whereas a greedyman is greedy about only one thing, for example, his greedmaybe only for money. He will have greed for anything that willhelp him get money. Whereas a man with intense greed(lalacha) will go after whatever he can. He will go for anythingthat will give him pleasure. When such a man gets upset, he willthrow a tantrum (tragu). He will try to get what he wants byscaring people; he will make statements like, ‘I will kill myself.I will commit suicide.’Questioner: What kind of intense greed (lalacha) doeshe have that he would do that?Dadashri: He wants pleasure out of something and whenhe is denied that pleasure, he throws tantrums like, ‘I will dothis…I will commit suicide.’Questioner: Usually the intense greed is for sex, is it not?Dadashri: For sex as well as everything else.Questioner: So does that include other things like prideor the need to be worshipped and respected, etc.?Dadashri: Yes, that too. He will do the same if he isdenied alcohol.Questioner: Is the intense greed lalacha for the materialthing itself or is it for the pleasure derived from those materialthings?Dadashri: It is all about pleasure; it is not for the actualAptavani-9233234Aptavani-9material thing. What is he going to do with things? The intensegreed (lalacha) is for what is derived from such things.Questioner: Is it not the same for a greedy (lobhi)person?Dadashri: A greedy person is better because he hasgreed for only certain things. He does not worry about anythingelse. Sometimes he does not even care about women or otherthings. The only problem he has is with his greed (lobh).Questioner: Which is worse, greed or intense greed?Dadashri: Intense greed (lalacha)! A person with intensegreed will not get the opportunity for liberation. Straight peopledo not have any such difficulties. The life of a person withintense greed (lalacha) will remain full of insults and difficulties.Questioner: But does he feel hurt by the insults?Dadashri: If that were the case, his inclination towardsintense greed (lalacha) would subside. A person with too muchintense greed (lalacha) is openly shameless (naffat).Questioner: So the one who has pride (maan) andwants respect, does not care about intense greed (lalacha)?Dadashri: The one who is concerned about his pride andstatus is not likely to give into other weaknesses. This is becausehe is afraid of being insulted.Questioner: But what if intense greed for pride entersinto it?Dadashri: Yes, that intense greed is there too. That is theintense greed (lalacha)! We call that beggary (bheekh) forrespect (maan).Questioner: But can a greedy (lobhi) person also be a(lalachu) (one with intense greed)?Dadashri: No, there is a big difference between the two.Greedy means greedy and intensely greedy (lalachu) meansintensely greedy and covetous. A greedy person has awarenessbut a person with intense greed (lalacha) and avarice movesabout without any care or awareness (bebhaan) of what isbeneficial or harmful to him; he is constantly harming himself.Questioner: Does he realize he is harming himself?Dadashri: No, he does not. He is not aware of it at all.That is why a person with greed (lobh) can become freesome day. Which kind of person becomes free first? It is amaani (one with a lot of pride; one who wants a lot ofimportance) and a krodhi (someone with anger). These peopleare naïve and are easily deceived. Others can see theirshortcomings and will point them out to them however; greed(lobh) cannot be seen. The one with greed cannot see his owngreed. Greed can be so deep that even the owner cannot seeit. ‘We’ have to point it out to him!Questioner: Greed will not go away, is it because it is sodeep?Dadashri: Yes, it will not go away that easily, it will worka person to death. Nevertheless, a greedy person has someprinciples. A person with avarice and intense greed (lalacha) onthe other hand, has no principles. A person with lalacha will notabide by or practice the Gnani’s Agnas at all. He would not beable to do so even if he wants to.Questioner: But what if he has good inner intent andfeelings for the Gnani Purush?Dadashri: He would not be able to attain anything evenif he has good intentions. So a lobhi (greedy person) can befreed but not a lalachu – one with avarice and intense greed.After this Gnan, a little of greed remains somewhat alivewhereas lalacha (intense greed) remains completely alive. Butthe greedy person has a ‘safe-side’ (his liberation will occur atAptavani-9233234Aptavani-9material thing. What is he going to do with things? The intensegreed (lalacha) is for what is derived from such things.Questioner: Is it not the same for a greedy (lobhi)person?Dadashri: A greedy person is better because he hasgreed for only certain things. He does not worry about anythingelse. Sometimes he does not even care about women or otherthings. The only problem he has is with his greed (lobh).Questioner: Which is worse, greed or intense greed?Dadashri: Intense greed (lalacha)! A person with intensegreed will not get the opportunity for liberation. Straight peopledo not have any such difficulties. The life of a person withintense greed (lalacha) will remain full of insults and difficulties.Questioner: But does he feel hurt by the insults?Dadashri: If that were the case, his inclination towardsintense greed (lalacha) would subside. A person with too muchintense greed (lalacha) is openly shameless (naffat).Questioner: So the one who has pride (maan) andwants respect, does not care about intense greed (lalacha)?Dadashri: The one who is concerned about his pride andstatus is not likely to give into other weaknesses. This is becausehe is afraid of being insulted.Questioner: But what if intense greed for pride entersinto it?Dadashri: Yes, that intense greed is there too. That is theintense greed (lalacha)! We call that beggary (bheekh) forrespect (maan).Questioner: But can a greedy (lobhi) person also be a(lalachu) (one with intense greed)?Dadashri: No, there is a big difference between the two.Greedy means greedy and intensely greedy (lalachu) meansintensely greedy and covetous. A greedy person has awarenessbut a person with intense greed (lalacha) and avarice movesabout without any care or awareness (bebhaan) of what isbeneficial or harmful to him; he is constantly harming himself.Questioner: Does he realize he is harming himself?Dadashri: No, he does not. He is not aware of it at all.That is why a person with greed (lobh) can become freesome day. Which kind of person becomes free first? It is amaani (one with a lot of pride; one who wants a lot ofimportance) and a krodhi (someone with anger). These peopleare naïve and are easily deceived. Others can see theirshortcomings and will point them out to them however; greed(lobh) cannot be seen. The one with greed cannot see his owngreed. Greed can be so deep that even the owner cannot seeit. ‘We’ have to point it out to him!Questioner: Greed will not go away, is it because it is sodeep?Dadashri: Yes, it will not go away that easily, it will worka person to death. Nevertheless, a greedy person has someprinciples. A person with avarice and intense greed (lalacha) onthe other hand, has no principles. A person with lalacha will notabide by or practice the Gnani’s Agnas at all. He would not beable to do so even if he wants to.Questioner: But what if he has good inner intent andfeelings for the Gnani Purush?Dadashri: He would not be able to attain anything evenif he has good intentions. So a lobhi (greedy person) can befreed but not a lalachu – one with avarice and intense greed.After this Gnan, a little of greed remains somewhat alivewhereas lalacha (intense greed) remains completely alive. Butthe greedy person has a ‘safe-side’ (his liberation will occur atAptavani-9235236Aptavani-9sometime in future) whereas the person with lalacha does nothave a ‘safe-side’. I have seen this in many places.A person with greed, most of the time will not be able toabide by the Gnani’s Agnas, although at times he will be able to.A person with intense greed (lalacha) will not be able to followthe Agnas at all. This is the difference between a greedy personand a covetous (lalachu) one. A lalachu commits spiritualsuicide; he is constantly killing the self.The craving for pleasure from every whichwayQuestioner: What other things are included in thislalacha (gluttonous greed for pleasure)?Dadashri: Everything falls into it.Questioner: Yes, but what type of greed is included in it?Dadashri: Greed for all kinds of pleasure. Nothing is leftout!Questioner: Please, explain it to us with some examples.Dadashri: Everyone understands this. Would anyonehave lalacha for getting beaten? Would anyone have anylalacha for verbal abuse? Can people not understand what kindof lalacha there is? It is lalacha of ‘let me enjoy this, let meenjoy that; let me enjoy everything’; that verily is lalacha (theinsatiable greed).Questioner: But on what basis is such lalacha maintainedand sustained?Dadashri: On the basis of enjoying pleasure. Such aperson wants to experience pleasure from whatever andwhichever source available. There is no meaningful goal in life.Such a person does not care for public recognition or respectand is impervious to defamation and insults. He runs afterpleasure in a shameless manner. There is no respect for any manmade laws or discipline.Questioner: So what is the cause of this kind ofgluttony? How do these avarices originate?Dadashri: It is to enjoy pleasure from wherever and bywhatever means, to snatch away from whomever he can. Thereis no law or principle to what he does. He is not concernedabout how shameful his conduct is in the eye of the society andmuch of his gluttony for pleasure is along the lines of publiccensure (loknindya) and disgrace. Therefore such gluttony leadsa person into disgraceful acts and does not let him remainhuman.Questioner: So what kinds of bhaav (intents) arisewithin such a state of gluttony?Dadashri: One is driven towards experiencing pleasurefrom anything that comes in front of him. Lalacha means tointensely seek pleasure from the physical and the relative worldall day long.Questioner: Meaning he wants to experience pleasure atany cost?Dadashri: Yes, correct. Our mahatmas who haveattained this Gnan do not seek such pleasures. They settle their‘files’ (a term used by Dadashri for all non-Self karmic accountsthat come forth in this life after Self-Realization) with equanimity.Whatever comes his way, he settles with equanimity, he does notgo looking for it.This intense greed has never been purged in any previouslife and that is why all these miseries exist now. One will findmisery in endless lives but he will not find happiness in any life.This lalacha is the very cause for all miseries in life. This intensegreed has existed not only in the past life but also in manyprevious lives. Now if one were to fracture it in this life, theneverything will be fine and smooth from hereon. As long as itexists, the danger remains.Aptavani-9235236Aptavani-9sometime in future) whereas the person with lalacha does nothave a ‘safe-side’. I have seen this in many places.A person with greed, most of the time will not be able toabide by the Gnani’s Agnas, although at times he will be able to.A person with intense greed (lalacha) will not be able to followthe Agnas at all. This is the difference between a greedy personand a covetous (lalachu) one. A lalachu commits spiritualsuicide; he is constantly killing the self.The craving for pleasure from every whichwayQuestioner: What other things are included in thislalacha (gluttonous greed for pleasure)?Dadashri: Everything falls into it.Questioner: Yes, but what type of greed is included in it?Dadashri: Greed for all kinds of pleasure. Nothing is leftout!Questioner: Please, explain it to us with some examples.Dadashri: Everyone understands this. Would anyonehave lalacha for getting beaten? Would anyone have anylalacha for verbal abuse? Can people not understand what kindof lalacha there is? It is lalacha of ‘let me enjoy this, let meenjoy that; let me enjoy everything’; that verily is lalacha (theinsatiable greed).Questioner: But on what basis is such lalacha maintainedand sustained?Dadashri: On the basis of enjoying pleasure. Such aperson wants to experience pleasure from whatever andwhichever source available. There is no meaningful goal in life.Such a person does not care for public recognition or respectand is impervious to defamation and insults. He runs afterpleasure in a shameless manner. There is no respect for any manmade laws or discipline.Questioner: So what is the cause of this kind ofgluttony? How do these avarices originate?Dadashri: It is to enjoy pleasure from wherever and bywhatever means, to snatch away from whomever he can. Thereis no law or principle to what he does. He is not concernedabout how shameful his conduct is in the eye of the society andmuch of his gluttony for pleasure is along the lines of publiccensure (loknindya) and disgrace. Therefore such gluttony leadsa person into disgraceful acts and does not let him remainhuman.Questioner: So what kinds of bhaav (intents) arisewithin such a state of gluttony?Dadashri: One is driven towards experiencing pleasurefrom anything that comes in front of him. Lalacha means tointensely seek pleasure from the physical and the relative worldall day long.Questioner: Meaning he wants to experience pleasure atany cost?Dadashri: Yes, correct. Our mahatmas who haveattained this Gnan do not seek such pleasures. They settle their‘files’ (a term used by Dadashri for all non-Self karmic accountsthat come forth in this life after Self-Realization) with equanimity.Whatever comes his way, he settles with equanimity, he does notgo looking for it.This intense greed has never been purged in any previouslife and that is why all these miseries exist now. One will findmisery in endless lives but he will not find happiness in any life.This lalacha is the very cause for all miseries in life. This intensegreed has existed not only in the past life but also in manyprevious lives. Now if one were to fracture it in this life, theneverything will be fine and smooth from hereon. As long as itexists, the danger remains.Aptavani-9237238Aptavani-9Questioner: Is it because of lack of awareness (jagruti)that these faults in matters of sexuality arise?Dadashri: Awareness cannot remain where there is intensegreed (lalacha). The root cause is intense greed for pleasure.Questioner: So how does one get rid of his intensegreed (lalacha)? Does he do it by saying, ‘I do not want sex’?Dadashri: He has to understand facts about sexuality. Hehas to understand everything about it very clearly. Sex issomething that does not appeal to any of the senses; the eyes donot like it, the ears do not like to hear it, the nose does not liketo smell it, the tongue does not like to taste it. It does not appealto any of the five senses; he has to understand all this. ‘We’ findit hard to understand why one is stuck with this intense greed forsex when even the mind, the intellect and the ego do not like it.Questioner: One experiences momentary pleasure in it.Dadashri: No, it is not a question of momentarypleasure. Everyone is stuck in it because the world indulges init and finds it pleasurable.It is something even the sense organs do not accept.There is no problem with eating jalebee. Jalebee too is avishaya (object of pleasure) but there is no problem with it. Itlooks appealing to the eyes and when you break it, you can hearit crack. It smells fragrant and it appeals to the taste buds. Eventhe fingers like to touch it. So, what ‘we’ are saying is that ifyour senses accept it, eat the jalebee. But with sex, the senseof smell finds it so repugnant that one will not feel like eating forthree days!A lalachu man will beg and bow down to a woman forsex. That is how unaware a man can become. What I am sayingis that, what is the need for seeking any other pleasure afterexperiencing the bliss of the Self?Sex is nothing but filth! It is covered up filth. One wouldWhat does our Gnan (Self-knowledge) say? What is inthis world worth enjoying? You are needlessly struggling inpursuit of these pleasures. The bliss of the Self is the onlyexperience worth pursuing.Questioner: The bliss that exists in the Self does not existanywhere else.Dadashri: Where else can bliss exist? All those pleasuresare imaginary. If you imagine happiness (project happiness insomething), you feel happy. One person says, ‘I like jalebee(crisp fried sweet soaked in sugar syrup) very much,’ andanother person says, ‘when I see jalebee I feel like throwingup.’ So these pleasures are imagined, not real.The whole world accepts gold as something precious andpleasing but the Gnani Purush does not. Even the Jain saintsreject it. The world has imagined pleasure to exist in sex. Sexualinteraction is nothing but sheer filth. How can bliss exist there?Lalacha for sex; what a demeaning stateQuestioner: Are all conflicts and quarrels results of onetaking pleasure from sex?Dadashri: All this has arisen from sex and there is nopleasure in it. In the morning, these people’s faces look like theyjust took some castor oil!Questioner: It sends shivers through my body to seepeople go through so much suffering just for such a momentarypleasure.Dadashri: That is lalacha; intense greed (lalacha) ofenjoying sex. Then when he experiences the miseries of a life inhell, he comes to the realization of ‘what is there to enjoy in it?’You can call a man having lalacha for sex, an animal. Sex willstop only when one shudders with horror at the thought of it.How can it stop otherwise? That is why Krupadudev has saidthat one would not like to even spit at it.Aptavani-9237238Aptavani-9Questioner: Is it because of lack of awareness (jagruti)that these faults in matters of sexuality arise?Dadashri: Awareness cannot remain where there is intensegreed (lalacha). The root cause is intense greed for pleasure.Questioner: So how does one get rid of his intensegreed (lalacha)? Does he do it by saying, ‘I do not want sex’?Dadashri: He has to understand facts about sexuality. Hehas to understand everything about it very clearly. Sex issomething that does not appeal to any of the senses; the eyes donot like it, the ears do not like to hear it, the nose does not liketo smell it, the tongue does not like to taste it. It does not appealto any of the five senses; he has to understand all this. ‘We’ findit hard to understand why one is stuck with this intense greed forsex when even the mind, the intellect and the ego do not like it.Questioner: One experiences momentary pleasure in it.Dadashri: No, it is not a question of momentarypleasure. Everyone is stuck in it because the world indulges init and finds it pleasurable.It is something even the sense organs do not accept.There is no problem with eating jalebee. Jalebee too is avishaya (object of pleasure) but there is no problem with it. Itlooks appealing to the eyes and when you break it, you can hearit crack. It smells fragrant and it appeals to the taste buds. Eventhe fingers like to touch it. So, what ‘we’ are saying is that ifyour senses accept it, eat the jalebee. But with sex, the senseof smell finds it so repugnant that one will not feel like eating forthree days!A lalachu man will beg and bow down to a woman forsex. That is how unaware a man can become. What I am sayingis that, what is the need for seeking any other pleasure afterexperiencing the bliss of the Self?Sex is nothing but filth! It is covered up filth. One wouldWhat does our Gnan (Self-knowledge) say? What is inthis world worth enjoying? You are needlessly struggling inpursuit of these pleasures. The bliss of the Self is the onlyexperience worth pursuing.Questioner: The bliss that exists in the Self does not existanywhere else.Dadashri: Where else can bliss exist? All those pleasuresare imaginary. If you imagine happiness (project happiness insomething), you feel happy. One person says, ‘I like jalebee(crisp fried sweet soaked in sugar syrup) very much,’ andanother person says, ‘when I see jalebee I feel like throwingup.’ So these pleasures are imagined, not real.The whole world accepts gold as something precious andpleasing but the Gnani Purush does not. Even the Jain saintsreject it. The world has imagined pleasure to exist in sex. Sexualinteraction is nothing but sheer filth. How can bliss exist there?Lalacha for sex; what a demeaning stateQuestioner: Are all conflicts and quarrels results of onetaking pleasure from sex?Dadashri: All this has arisen from sex and there is nopleasure in it. In the morning, these people’s faces look like theyjust took some castor oil!Questioner: It sends shivers through my body to seepeople go through so much suffering just for such a momentarypleasure.Dadashri: That is lalacha; intense greed (lalacha) ofenjoying sex. Then when he experiences the miseries of a life inhell, he comes to the realization of ‘what is there to enjoy in it?’You can call a man having lalacha for sex, an animal. Sex willstop only when one shudders with horror at the thought of it.How can it stop otherwise? That is why Krupadudev has saidthat one would not like to even spit at it.Aptavani-9239240Aptavani-9realize it when it is exposed. It is all filth covered with a ‘silkcloth’. It is a betrayal. One does not remember all this and thatis why he finds himself in this predicament. And what will acovetous man do? In his intense greed (lalacha), if the womantells him to lick the pus coming out of a boil on her arm, he willdo it! Even dogs would not lick in this way! That is avarice andintense greed (lalacha). His ego will not bother him there; it willnot arise to question, ‘How can I do this? The hell with it, I donot want this.’ Intense greed (lalacha) can kill a person. Therule is that if a person eats a lot of onions, he will not be ableto smell onions even if he is sitting next to them. And the personwho does not eat them will be able to smell it even if he is sittingthree rooms away. Similarly, a covetous person is completelyimpervious and unaware.Sex means bestiality! It is a sign of animalistic behavior. Isit a human behavior? Sex should only be for having two or threechildren. After that, is sex even meant for humans?Conflicts because of itQuestioner: When a person is not successful in hisintense greed (lalacha) for sex, does he not start becomingsuspicious?Dadashri: He will do everything when he does notsucceed. He will become suspicious and have negative thoughtsdisguised in many ways. After that, may the Lord have mercy onhim! It will give rise to further avarice but on top of that, it willdisgrace him. Once it takes control over him, it will disgrace himwithout fail.There is absolutely no relation with the ‘wife’ through themind, body, thoughts or speech and so a man should not behavelike he owns her or try to boss her around (do dhanipanu;dominate as a husband). What is considered dhanipanu? It isconsidered dhanipanu, as long as he maintains a bestialrelationship through his mind, speech and body.Questioner: But he exercises his dominance (dhanipanu)and bosses her around only when sex is involved, is that not so?Dadashri: Bossiness as a husband means to threaten thewife into having sex. But then he will pay the price for it in hisnext life.Questioner: What will happen?Dadashri: It binds vengeance (vair). Is any soul likely toremain suppressed?When husband and wife have a lot of conflicts, he will sayto her, ‘Why do you walk around sulking?’ She will sulk evenmore and she will keep that disdain on her mind. She will sayto herself, ‘I will take care of him when the time comes.’ Shewill not refrain from remembering and avenging her disdain.Every living being will do the same; every living being harborsthis inner grudge of vengeance (rees); all it takes is a littleprodding and teasing and it will express. No one will remainsuppressed by anyone. Each and every soul lives independentlyand they have no real connections with one another. It is onlythrough illusion that everything appears as ‘mine’ and ‘yours’.Women remain suppressed under societal pressure againsttheir will and they take revenge in their next life. They may evenbite back as a snake in the next life.From intense greed (lalacha) to helplessnessand humiliationOne woman used to make her husband prostrate in frontof her four times before she would even let him touch her. Thefool! Instead it would be better for him to jump in the sea andkill himself! For what do you prostrate four times before her?Questioner: Why does a woman do that?Dadashri: That is one kind of ego.Questioner: But what does she get out of it?Aptavani-9239240Aptavani-9realize it when it is exposed. It is all filth covered with a ‘silkcloth’. It is a betrayal. One does not remember all this and thatis why he finds himself in this predicament. And what will acovetous man do? In his intense greed (lalacha), if the womantells him to lick the pus coming out of a boil on her arm, he willdo it! Even dogs would not lick in this way! That is avarice andintense greed (lalacha). His ego will not bother him there; it willnot arise to question, ‘How can I do this? The hell with it, I donot want this.’ Intense greed (lalacha) can kill a person. Therule is that if a person eats a lot of onions, he will not be ableto smell onions even if he is sitting next to them. And the personwho does not eat them will be able to smell it even if he is sittingthree rooms away. Similarly, a covetous person is completelyimpervious and unaware.Sex means bestiality! It is a sign of animalistic behavior. Isit a human behavior? Sex should only be for having two or threechildren. After that, is sex even meant for humans?Conflicts because of itQuestioner: When a person is not successful in hisintense greed (lalacha) for sex, does he not start becomingsuspicious?Dadashri: He will do everything when he does notsucceed. He will become suspicious and have negative thoughtsdisguised in many ways. After that, may the Lord have mercy onhim! It will give rise to further avarice but on top of that, it willdisgrace him. Once it takes control over him, it will disgrace himwithout fail.There is absolutely no relation with the ‘wife’ through themind, body, thoughts or speech and so a man should not behavelike he owns her or try to boss her around (do dhanipanu;dominate as a husband). What is considered dhanipanu? It isconsidered dhanipanu, as long as he maintains a bestialrelationship through his mind, speech and body.Questioner: But he exercises his dominance (dhanipanu)and bosses her around only when sex is involved, is that not so?Dadashri: Bossiness as a husband means to threaten thewife into having sex. But then he will pay the price for it in hisnext life.Questioner: What will happen?Dadashri: It binds vengeance (vair). Is any soul likely toremain suppressed?When husband and wife have a lot of conflicts, he will sayto her, ‘Why do you walk around sulking?’ She will sulk evenmore and she will keep that disdain on her mind. She will sayto herself, ‘I will take care of him when the time comes.’ Shewill not refrain from remembering and avenging her disdain.Every living being will do the same; every living being harborsthis inner grudge of vengeance (rees); all it takes is a littleprodding and teasing and it will express. No one will remainsuppressed by anyone. Each and every soul lives independentlyand they have no real connections with one another. It is onlythrough illusion that everything appears as ‘mine’ and ‘yours’.Women remain suppressed under societal pressure againsttheir will and they take revenge in their next life. They may evenbite back as a snake in the next life.From intense greed (lalacha) to helplessnessand humiliationOne woman used to make her husband prostrate in frontof her four times before she would even let him touch her. Thefool! Instead it would be better for him to jump in the sea andkill himself! For what do you prostrate four times before her?Questioner: Why does a woman do that?Dadashri: That is one kind of ego.Questioner: But what does she get out of it?Aptavani-9241242Aptavani-9Questioner: Does intense greed (lalacha) mean that onegets excited at the mere sight of something?Dadashri: He will get very excited. But it is good if herecognizes it as intense greed.The moment a covetous person sees someone he knows,he thinks, ‘We will go eat together.’ What should one do forsuch an intense greed? He should tell himself ‘I just hadsomething to eat. I am not interested.’ Should there not besome self-respect and dignity? People will take you out fordinner and that impression will remain in your mind, will it not?Does it get erased from your mind? So when you see thatperson again, you will immediately have the thought, ‘it will benice if he takes me out again,’ will you not? It is Your job toturn such thoughts around. That is called purusharth. And youare at risk for not turning that around - if you don’t, that riskremains.Questioner: If we decline his invitation to eat out are wenot insulting and rejecting (tarchhod) him?Dadashri: How can that be rejecting him? What ifsomeone tells you, ‘Let us go out for a drink?’ where is therejection in that? Why are you looking for sorry excuses likethat? If he invites you, you should go and if you do not like thefood, take it and put it aside. Surely, you should know how tohandle yourself in such situations!If one eats only one thing, even then there is no problem.He does not have any other intense greed (lalacha). If he hasintense greed for just one thing, even then there is no problem;at least he will be preoccupied with just one thing. But avariciouspeople are tempted by anything and everything. So whereverthieving tendencies of intense greed (lalacha) creep in, aperson has to create a safe-side for himself. Intense greed isvery poisonous. There is no problem if lalacha is limited toonly one thing.Dadashri: She does not gain anything; it is the ego thatclaims ‘See how I straightened him out?’ And that poor man outof intense greed lalacha will do whatever she asks. But then shewill pay the price later, will she not?Questioner: Is she protecting her womanhood (prakrutinature as a woman - streepanu) by doing that?Dadashri: No, it is not protection of streepanu. It is ashow of the ego. She treats him like a little monkey. Would therenot be a reaction to that later? He too will remember what sheput him through. He will remember, ‘You took advantage of meand disgraced me when I was under your control. Wait until youcome under my control.’ Then he will disgrace her and destroyher in no time.The touch of a lalachu person will ruinsamskar (moral values)An avaricious (lalachu) person should not even touchyoung boys and girls. His influence will corrupt their values. Soit is better if he does not even touch them. A covetous man willentice young girls and play with them for his own pleasure; hewill not do that with unattractive children. He will play withchildren that look like beautiful rosebuds; that too for his ownpleasure. Now there is no sex involved in this, is there? But stillit is better if he does not touch the children. It is because themind of an avaricious person will keep going there over andover again. Sex is not the only thing that attracts. And in thiscase there is no sex, but the attraction is there all the same.Instead it is better if nothing becomes defiled.That is purusharthIs there intense greed only for sex? No, there are all kindsof intense greed. Eating and drinking, are all these not intensegreed (lalacha)? There is nothing wrong in eating but thereshould not be any intense greed for it.Aptavani-9241242Aptavani-9Questioner: Does intense greed (lalacha) mean that onegets excited at the mere sight of something?Dadashri: He will get very excited. But it is good if herecognizes it as intense greed.The moment a covetous person sees someone he knows,he thinks, ‘We will go eat together.’ What should one do forsuch an intense greed? He should tell himself ‘I just hadsomething to eat. I am not interested.’ Should there not besome self-respect and dignity? People will take you out fordinner and that impression will remain in your mind, will it not?Does it get erased from your mind? So when you see thatperson again, you will immediately have the thought, ‘it will benice if he takes me out again,’ will you not? It is Your job toturn such thoughts around. That is called purusharth. And youare at risk for not turning that around - if you don’t, that riskremains.Questioner: If we decline his invitation to eat out are wenot insulting and rejecting (tarchhod) him?Dadashri: How can that be rejecting him? What ifsomeone tells you, ‘Let us go out for a drink?’ where is therejection in that? Why are you looking for sorry excuses likethat? If he invites you, you should go and if you do not like thefood, take it and put it aside. Surely, you should know how tohandle yourself in such situations!If one eats only one thing, even then there is no problem.He does not have any other intense greed (lalacha). If he hasintense greed for just one thing, even then there is no problem;at least he will be preoccupied with just one thing. But avariciouspeople are tempted by anything and everything. So whereverthieving tendencies of intense greed (lalacha) creep in, aperson has to create a safe-side for himself. Intense greed isvery poisonous. There is no problem if lalacha is limited toonly one thing.Dadashri: She does not gain anything; it is the ego thatclaims ‘See how I straightened him out?’ And that poor man outof intense greed lalacha will do whatever she asks. But then shewill pay the price later, will she not?Questioner: Is she protecting her womanhood (prakrutinature as a woman - streepanu) by doing that?Dadashri: No, it is not protection of streepanu. It is ashow of the ego. She treats him like a little monkey. Would therenot be a reaction to that later? He too will remember what sheput him through. He will remember, ‘You took advantage of meand disgraced me when I was under your control. Wait until youcome under my control.’ Then he will disgrace her and destroyher in no time.The touch of a lalachu person will ruinsamskar (moral values)An avaricious (lalachu) person should not even touchyoung boys and girls. His influence will corrupt their values. Soit is better if he does not even touch them. A covetous man willentice young girls and play with them for his own pleasure; hewill not do that with unattractive children. He will play withchildren that look like beautiful rosebuds; that too for his ownpleasure. Now there is no sex involved in this, is there? But stillit is better if he does not touch the children. It is because themind of an avaricious person will keep going there over andover again. Sex is not the only thing that attracts. And in thiscase there is no sex, but the attraction is there all the same.Instead it is better if nothing becomes defiled.That is purusharthIs there intense greed only for sex? No, there are all kindsof intense greed. Eating and drinking, are all these not intensegreed (lalacha)? There is nothing wrong in eating but thereshould not be any intense greed for it.Aptavani-9243244Aptavani-9Covetous people take on a liabilityQuestioner: Is it just one intense greed that is to theextreme, which traps a person?Dadashri: Yes, that is what happens. If he has animportant date at the court and he is tempted by something, hewill not show up at the court; by doing this he makes hisproblems worse.Questioner: Such a person is considered veryirresponsible.Dadashri: Leave alone irresponsibility but he is takingon tremendous liabilities. He remains undaunted because of hisintense greed (lalacha) and so he takes on tremendousliability.A covetous person is always seekingpleasureBut a covetous person (lalachu) is the owner of every‘port’. His ship will stop at every port. And the rule is that amerchant will always find customers.Questioner: But that is what he is looking for, is he not?Dadashri: No, not because he is looking for it, but thatis the law. Because when you take some medicine, where doesit go? It goes where there is a problem. How does the medicineyou take through your mouth go to where the problem is? Thatis the law; it is attracted there. So what am I saying? Painattracts the medicine; it is not the medicine that traps the pain.So it is the pain that attracts the medicine. You may not be ableto find your medicine anywhere in the stores but your friendcomes along saying, ‘I could not find this medicine anywhere. Ifound just this one bottle. The man I bought it from had onlyone’, I would tell him ‘Yes, I understand. I understand withoutyou even telling me!’Why has intense greed (lalacha) for this?Questioner: Is it possible for an avaricious person(lalachu) to not like working because of his intense greed?Dadashri: He will not find a job and neither does he likeworking.Now people will tempt you with all kinds of new thingsand you will start to wonder, ‘should I take one or the wholebunch?’ You will come across something to tempt you whenyou are about to lose your hard earned money. People willtempt you but if your intense greed (lalacha) arises, you willfind yourself in a predicament. You should do business that willhelp you. You will be successful only if you do business thatsuits your prakruti. If you try to do any business that is merelycastles in the air, then you are doomed. One’s own prakrutitoo is gullible to such ‘castles in the air’ businesses. Themoment a con artist comes with a proposal, one becomestempted and goes for it. It is all ‘castles in the air’. This hadhappened to ‘us’ also. ‘We’ have seen all such fakebusinesses.Whether you harbor simple expectations, intense greed(lalacha) or no greed at all in this world, you will reap the samefruits. Why then should you have intense greed (lalacha)? Theseare perishable, temporary things. They will come back even ifyou were to kick them out and on the other hand no matter howmuch you beg for them to come, they will not because it is allmechanical, scientific circumstantial evidence.Swachhand (intense inner impediment ofdoing things according to self-guided ego)and lalacha (intense greed)This intense greed that still remains within will kill you.That is why ‘we’ keep cautioning you repeatedly. Otherwise,even a very strong person will not make any progress.Aptavani-9243244Aptavani-9Covetous people take on a liabilityQuestioner: Is it just one intense greed that is to theextreme, which traps a person?Dadashri: Yes, that is what happens. If he has animportant date at the court and he is tempted by something, hewill not show up at the court; by doing this he makes hisproblems worse.Questioner: Such a person is considered veryirresponsible.Dadashri: Leave alone irresponsibility but he is takingon tremendous liabilities. He remains undaunted because of hisintense greed (lalacha) and so he takes on tremendousliability.A covetous person is always seekingpleasureBut a covetous person (lalachu) is the owner of every‘port’. His ship will stop at every port. And the rule is that amerchant will always find customers.Questioner: But that is what he is looking for, is he not?Dadashri: No, not because he is looking for it, but thatis the law. Because when you take some medicine, where doesit go? It goes where there is a problem. How does the medicineyou take through your mouth go to where the problem is? Thatis the law; it is attracted there. So what am I saying? Painattracts the medicine; it is not the medicine that traps the pain.So it is the pain that attracts the medicine. You may not be ableto find your medicine anywhere in the stores but your friendcomes along saying, ‘I could not find this medicine anywhere. Ifound just this one bottle. The man I bought it from had onlyone’, I would tell him ‘Yes, I understand. I understand withoutyou even telling me!’Why has intense greed (lalacha) for this?Questioner: Is it possible for an avaricious person(lalachu) to not like working because of his intense greed?Dadashri: He will not find a job and neither does he likeworking.Now people will tempt you with all kinds of new thingsand you will start to wonder, ‘should I take one or the wholebunch?’ You will come across something to tempt you whenyou are about to lose your hard earned money. People willtempt you but if your intense greed (lalacha) arises, you willfind yourself in a predicament. You should do business that willhelp you. You will be successful only if you do business thatsuits your prakruti. If you try to do any business that is merelycastles in the air, then you are doomed. One’s own prakrutitoo is gullible to such ‘castles in the air’ businesses. Themoment a con artist comes with a proposal, one becomestempted and goes for it. It is all ‘castles in the air’. This hadhappened to ‘us’ also. ‘We’ have seen all such fakebusinesses.Whether you harbor simple expectations, intense greed(lalacha) or no greed at all in this world, you will reap the samefruits. Why then should you have intense greed (lalacha)? Theseare perishable, temporary things. They will come back even ifyou were to kick them out and on the other hand no matter howmuch you beg for them to come, they will not because it is allmechanical, scientific circumstantial evidence.Swachhand (intense inner impediment ofdoing things according to self-guided ego)and lalacha (intense greed)This intense greed that still remains within will kill you.That is why ‘we’ keep cautioning you repeatedly. Otherwise,even a very strong person will not make any progress.Aptavani-9245246Aptavani-9Questioner: But can he not progress if his intense greed(lalacha) goes away or is overcome?Dadashri: But alas! The lalacha does not go away. Ittakes a long time to get rid of intense greed (lalacha).Questioner: What is the difference between an avariciousperson (lalachu) and the one who proceeds according to hiswill and intellect (swachhandi)?Dadashri: There is no problem with being swachhandibut there is a big problem with being a lalachu.Questioner: What is the difference between atkan(intense inner obstruction) that impedes one’s spiritual progressand intense greed (lalacha)?Dadashri: Atkan is a different thing. It is possible to getrid of atkan; everyone has intense inner obstacle (atkan) forsure, but it can be removed. There are many who have atkanand yet they are also able to abide by ‘our’ Agnas. Atkan is notthe problem. But an avaricious person (lalachu) will not be ableto follow ‘our’ Agnas because when he is faced with situationsthat create lalacha within him, he becomes deluded. He will notbe able to maintain awareness.The tubers of intense greed (lalacha)Questioner: Is a person born with intense greed(lalacha) or does it arise through mixing in the wrong company?Dadashri: One is born with tubers of intense greed(lalacha).Questioner: So is the intense greed lalacha from this lifeor is it from the previous one?Dadashri: It is from one’s previous life but in this life hebecomes deluded. If he did not become deluded at the criticaltimes, then the lalacha can depart. But it is not possible for himto not fall under delusion.Intense greed (lalacha) is the worst thing. It will go awayonly when one dies. But because there is the presence of theseed of lalacha (intense greed), it will arise again in his next life.Intense greed will not go away and it kills people. Intense greedis the sign of ignorance (agnan).Such resolution can make you free fromlalachaThe gluttonous intense greed (lalacha) will disappearonce he makes a resolution, ‘I do not want any temporary thingsof this world.’ Otherwise this intense greed in itself is a risk, isit not? Action is not the risk; avarice and gluttony are. It is adifferent thing when you say, ‘I do not want anything temporaryin this world’, and then you accept it if it comes to you naturally.Excess gluttonous greed is rare amongst ‘us’ (Dadashri’smahatmas). Such greed can drag you to hell and will not let youprogress in the Gnan.Questioner: Will this intense greed (lalacha) persisteven after one attains this Gnan?Dadashri: It may persist in a rare individual.Questioner: How can one become free from theseavarices (lalacha) if he wants to?Dadashri: If he resolves to be rid of it, then it will leave.One should become free from lalacha, should one not? It is forone’s own benefit, isn’t it? Once you make a firm decision(nischaya) that you want to be free from lalacha, you willbecome free and you will experience happiness. One has fear oflosing happiness. On the contrary, you will become even happierand experience bliss once you are free of lalacha.Questioner: But a person cannot get that benefit until thefear of losing the pleasure leaves, can he? As long as the fearexists, it will not allow him to make that resolution (nischaya),will it? He will not be inclined to leave the greed will he?Aptavani-9245246Aptavani-9Questioner: But can he not progress if his intense greed(lalacha) goes away or is overcome?Dadashri: But alas! The lalacha does not go away. Ittakes a long time to get rid of intense greed (lalacha).Questioner: What is the difference between an avariciousperson (lalachu) and the one who proceeds according to hiswill and intellect (swachhandi)?Dadashri: There is no problem with being swachhandibut there is a big problem with being a lalachu.Questioner: What is the difference between atkan(intense inner obstruction) that impedes one’s spiritual progressand intense greed (lalacha)?Dadashri: Atkan is a different thing. It is possible to getrid of atkan; everyone has intense inner obstacle (atkan) forsure, but it can be removed. There are many who have atkanand yet they are also able to abide by ‘our’ Agnas. Atkan is notthe problem. But an avaricious person (lalachu) will not be ableto follow ‘our’ Agnas because when he is faced with situationsthat create lalacha within him, he becomes deluded. He will notbe able to maintain awareness.The tubers of intense greed (lalacha)Questioner: Is a person born with intense greed(lalacha) or does it arise through mixing in the wrong company?Dadashri: One is born with tubers of intense greed(lalacha).Questioner: So is the intense greed lalacha from this lifeor is it from the previous one?Dadashri: It is from one’s previous life but in this life hebecomes deluded. If he did not become deluded at the criticaltimes, then the lalacha can depart. But it is not possible for himto not fall under delusion.Intense greed (lalacha) is the worst thing. It will go awayonly when one dies. But because there is the presence of theseed of lalacha (intense greed), it will arise again in his next life.Intense greed will not go away and it kills people. Intense greedis the sign of ignorance (agnan).Such resolution can make you free fromlalachaThe gluttonous intense greed (lalacha) will disappearonce he makes a resolution, ‘I do not want any temporary thingsof this world.’ Otherwise this intense greed in itself is a risk, isit not? Action is not the risk; avarice and gluttony are. It is adifferent thing when you say, ‘I do not want anything temporaryin this world’, and then you accept it if it comes to you naturally.Excess gluttonous greed is rare amongst ‘us’ (Dadashri’smahatmas). Such greed can drag you to hell and will not let youprogress in the Gnan.Questioner: Will this intense greed (lalacha) persisteven after one attains this Gnan?Dadashri: It may persist in a rare individual.Questioner: How can one become free from theseavarices (lalacha) if he wants to?Dadashri: If he resolves to be rid of it, then it will leave.One should become free from lalacha, should one not? It is forone’s own benefit, isn’t it? Once you make a firm decision(nischaya) that you want to be free from lalacha, you willbecome free and you will experience happiness. One has fear oflosing happiness. On the contrary, you will become even happierand experience bliss once you are free of lalacha.Questioner: But a person cannot get that benefit until thefear of losing the pleasure leaves, can he? As long as the fearexists, it will not allow him to make that resolution (nischaya),will it? He will not be inclined to leave the greed will he?Aptavani-9247248Aptavani-9Dadashri: So the intense greed will not leave because offear. And he has fear, ‘This pleasure of mine will go away.’ Whydon’t you let it go? Only then will that bliss arrive.Removing lalacha through the egoQuestioner: In a sense, is intense greed (lalacha) not thefruition of one’s karma; is it not the effect of one’s karma?Dadashri: Yes it is, but it is wrong, is it not?Questioner: So then what causes it to arise?Dadashri: When the right circumstances arise, intensegreed will arise.Questioner: Will it go away if he scornfully rejects(tiraskar) the things he has an intense greed for?Dadashri: Scorn or not but when he rejects one thing,there will arise intense greed for another. And there are manythings out there, which create an intense greed within. Just asthere are many things in a grocery store, similarly there are manythings within a lalachu. The problem is solved only when he getsrid of everything, the whole entire stock all at once! Otherwise,rejection with scorn (tiraskar) for one thing will cause him tosink deeper into another. One day, by sitting in our satsangs, itwill go away, but it will not go away suddenly; lalacha is noteasy to get rid of.There is no way to get rid of intense greed unless you doit through the ego. You have to have tremendous ego in orderto get rid of it. It can be done; ask Dada for the strength andthen awaken the ego, then you will be able to get rid of itthrough the ego. It cannot be rid of otherwise. How can you getrid of that which has become natural to one’s daily life (sahaj)?You can get rid of it through your ego, but then you have to getrid of that ego later. First, you have to get rid of the intensegreed (lalacha) and then the ego.So you can also get rid of it through the ego. Then ‘we’can get rid of the ego for you. Otherwise, how long will it taketo remove this disease of countless past lives? If it is going tocome out, it will come out in the presence of someone like ‘us’otherwise you can forget about it!That is when intense greed (lalacha) goesawayQuestioner: Are there any other solutions for one tobecome free from his lalacha?Dadashri: Lalacha will only go away if he lets go of ithimself. If he destroys it completely in every way, then only willit happen. Otherwise, it is suicidal by nature. Intense greed(lalacha) means to commit suicide. There is no written solutionfor it.Questioner: How can one get rid of it completely if hewants to?Dadashri: No it will not go away completely. If he stopseverything that tempts him, if he does not indulge in his intensegreed (lalacha) for twelve months, then he will be able to forgetit. He needs to remove himself from indulging in experiencing thepleasure. The lalachu will be ready even if the temptation arisesat two in the morning. He does not even care for sleep.If he puts aside everything that tempts him and does noteven think about it and does pratikraman when he happens tothink about it, then he can be free. Otherwise, even writers ofscriptures do not have any solution for it. Everything has asolution, but there is no solution for lalacha. There is a solutionfor lobh (greed). When a greedy person incurs a heavy loss, hisgreed (lobh) will go away in a hurry.A person hurts others because of his intensegreed (lalacha)He runs around whole day in intense greed. Intense greedAptavani-9247248Aptavani-9Dadashri: So the intense greed will not leave because offear. And he has fear, ‘This pleasure of mine will go away.’ Whydon’t you let it go? Only then will that bliss arrive.Removing lalacha through the egoQuestioner: In a sense, is intense greed (lalacha) not thefruition of one’s karma; is it not the effect of one’s karma?Dadashri: Yes it is, but it is wrong, is it not?Questioner: So then what causes it to arise?Dadashri: When the right circumstances arise, intensegreed will arise.Questioner: Will it go away if he scornfully rejects(tiraskar) the things he has an intense greed for?Dadashri: Scorn or not but when he rejects one thing,there will arise intense greed for another. And there are manythings out there, which create an intense greed within. Just asthere are many things in a grocery store, similarly there are manythings within a lalachu. The problem is solved only when he getsrid of everything, the whole entire stock all at once! Otherwise,rejection with scorn (tiraskar) for one thing will cause him tosink deeper into another. One day, by sitting in our satsangs, itwill go away, but it will not go away suddenly; lalacha is noteasy to get rid of.There is no way to get rid of intense greed unless you doit through the ego. You have to have tremendous ego in orderto get rid of it. It can be done; ask Dada for the strength andthen awaken the ego, then you will be able to get rid of itthrough the ego. It cannot be rid of otherwise. How can you getrid of that which has become natural to one’s daily life (sahaj)?You can get rid of it through your ego, but then you have to getrid of that ego later. First, you have to get rid of the intensegreed (lalacha) and then the ego.So you can also get rid of it through the ego. Then ‘we’can get rid of the ego for you. Otherwise, how long will it taketo remove this disease of countless past lives? If it is going tocome out, it will come out in the presence of someone like ‘us’otherwise you can forget about it!That is when intense greed (lalacha) goesawayQuestioner: Are there any other solutions for one tobecome free from his lalacha?Dadashri: Lalacha will only go away if he lets go of ithimself. If he destroys it completely in every way, then only willit happen. Otherwise, it is suicidal by nature. Intense greed(lalacha) means to commit suicide. There is no written solutionfor it.Questioner: How can one get rid of it completely if hewants to?Dadashri: No it will not go away completely. If he stopseverything that tempts him, if he does not indulge in his intensegreed (lalacha) for twelve months, then he will be able to forgetit. He needs to remove himself from indulging in experiencing thepleasure. The lalachu will be ready even if the temptation arisesat two in the morning. He does not even care for sleep.If he puts aside everything that tempts him and does noteven think about it and does pratikraman when he happens tothink about it, then he can be free. Otherwise, even writers ofscriptures do not have any solution for it. Everything has asolution, but there is no solution for lalacha. There is a solutionfor lobh (greed). When a greedy person incurs a heavy loss, hisgreed (lobh) will go away in a hurry.A person hurts others because of his intensegreed (lalacha)He runs around whole day in intense greed. Intense greedAptavani-9249250Aptavani-9causes inner turmoil. As long as he is in satsang, he feels atpeace and that is why he comes here. Otherwise, he spends hiswhole day in intense greed (lalacha).Even the Gnani Purush’s grace does not work for him.Even the Gnani’s grace will be defeated there. Lalacha meansdeceit. He would not even follow the Gnani’s Agnas, so howcan he be blessed with the Gnani’s grace? He never givesanyone any happiness and on the contrary because of his intensegreed, he hurts people. All other kashayas (inner enemies ofanger, pride, deceit and greed) face only one death but lalachafaces the death of countless lives.Make sure you do not abuse it in this wayQuestioner: He will pay for his intense greed (lalacha),will he not?Dadashri: He will pay very dearly.Questioner: Will he not turn it around?Dadashri: When one’s intense greed (lalacha) hurts him,he will indulge in another to heal the wound from the previousone.Questioner: So he has many ways to heal his problems!Dadashri: Yes. Still if he remains as the Self, abides bythe Agnas and lets go of everything else, then he will be fine.However, he is oblivious to the fact that he has intense greed(lalacha). He is not even aware of it. Would he not free himselfif he were? It is only when ‘we’ point out his intense greed tohim that he becomes aware of it. He believes he is dealing witheverything, with equanimity. How can one be dealing withequanimity when his behavior is socially unacceptable? How isthat possible? There is no problem if he is intimate with his ownwife, but if his conduct is not socially acceptable and then hebelieves he is abiding by Dada’s Agnas, then it is a seriousmisuse of the Agnas. It is the ultimate misuse of the Agnas. Evenan ordinary person misuses the Gnani’s Agnas, but a covetousperson (lalachu) commits suicide when he does; he is destroyinghimself. If he has the merit karma (punya), he will becomeaware of his lalacha but not otherwise. How can he possiblybecome aware? As long as he has interest in it, he is likely tolose himself in it.Therefore the seed of lalacha is not destroyed and so itwill sprout if it is ‘watered’. It has not ‘sprouted’ because thecircumstances have not been right for it to do so. However themoment the right circumstances arise, it will sprout immediately.We may not see any roots or tubers there, but the tubers arehidden beneath for sure. They will sprout the moment they getwater. So you should not be of the opinion that it is gone. Theintense greed (lalacha) does not decrease that way, how can it?An end will come for everyone but not for the lalachu.Effect of bad companyFor countless lives, only this has been ruined; the ruin isinternal, due to the kashaya of intense greed. Man ruins his lifeas well as of those around him.This happens because of bad company (kusang). These‘tubers’ will not go away once they become established. Thesetubers become huge. They would go away if they were small. Ifa magnet is large, it will attract and pull a small needle. But whathappens if you try to pull a large piece of iron? Even the magnetwill be pulled towards it. Even if you try to hang on to themagnet, your hand will get pulled away. That is what badcompany (kusang) is like.That is why writers of scriptures have said it is better totake poison and die than be affected by the influence of badcompany (kusang).Veils over lalacha are very heavyIt is not possible for one to be free from any intense greedAptavani-9249250Aptavani-9causes inner turmoil. As long as he is in satsang, he feels atpeace and that is why he comes here. Otherwise, he spends hiswhole day in intense greed (lalacha).Even the Gnani Purush’s grace does not work for him.Even the Gnani’s grace will be defeated there. Lalacha meansdeceit. He would not even follow the Gnani’s Agnas, so howcan he be blessed with the Gnani’s grace? He never givesanyone any happiness and on the contrary because of his intensegreed, he hurts people. All other kashayas (inner enemies ofanger, pride, deceit and greed) face only one death but lalachafaces the death of countless lives.Make sure you do not abuse it in this wayQuestioner: He will pay for his intense greed (lalacha),will he not?Dadashri: He will pay very dearly.Questioner: Will he not turn it around?Dadashri: When one’s intense greed (lalacha) hurts him,he will indulge in another to heal the wound from the previousone.Questioner: So he has many ways to heal his problems!Dadashri: Yes. Still if he remains as the Self, abides bythe Agnas and lets go of everything else, then he will be fine.However, he is oblivious to the fact that he has intense greed(lalacha). He is not even aware of it. Would he not free himselfif he were? It is only when ‘we’ point out his intense greed tohim that he becomes aware of it. He believes he is dealing witheverything, with equanimity. How can one be dealing withequanimity when his behavior is socially unacceptable? How isthat possible? There is no problem if he is intimate with his ownwife, but if his conduct is not socially acceptable and then hebelieves he is abiding by Dada’s Agnas, then it is a seriousmisuse of the Agnas. It is the ultimate misuse of the Agnas. Evenan ordinary person misuses the Gnani’s Agnas, but a covetousperson (lalachu) commits suicide when he does; he is destroyinghimself. If he has the merit karma (punya), he will becomeaware of his lalacha but not otherwise. How can he possiblybecome aware? As long as he has interest in it, he is likely tolose himself in it.Therefore the seed of lalacha is not destroyed and so itwill sprout if it is ‘watered’. It has not ‘sprouted’ because thecircumstances have not been right for it to do so. However themoment the right circumstances arise, it will sprout immediately.We may not see any roots or tubers there, but the tubers arehidden beneath for sure. They will sprout the moment they getwater. So you should not be of the opinion that it is gone. Theintense greed (lalacha) does not decrease that way, how can it?An end will come for everyone but not for the lalachu.Effect of bad companyFor countless lives, only this has been ruined; the ruin isinternal, due to the kashaya of intense greed. Man ruins his lifeas well as of those around him.This happens because of bad company (kusang). These‘tubers’ will not go away once they become established. Thesetubers become huge. They would go away if they were small. Ifa magnet is large, it will attract and pull a small needle. But whathappens if you try to pull a large piece of iron? Even the magnetwill be pulled towards it. Even if you try to hang on to themagnet, your hand will get pulled away. That is what badcompany (kusang) is like.That is why writers of scriptures have said it is better totake poison and die than be affected by the influence of badcompany (kusang).Veils over lalacha are very heavyIt is not possible for one to be free from any intense greedAptavani-9251252Aptavani-9is a tuber of intense greed within! This intense greed (lalacha)will not allow the Gnan to give result. That is why the scripturessay a covetous person (lalachu) gradually works his way downto hell. He will not leave anything alone.Questioner: Is it possible to remain as the knower-seer(gnata-drashta) of intense greed (lalacha) after attainingGnan?Dadashri: No. When the time comes, temptation arisesand the intense greed (lalacha) will drag him there and makehim slip. The place where he ‘slips’ is where he losesawareness. In all other matters he remains very aware, butduring situations, which cause him to slip, he is not able tomaintain awareness.Questioner: But Dada, he has attained the state ofShuddhatma. So does He (the Self), not keep ‘seeing’ that?Dadashri: But he is not able to ‘see’ in situations wherehe slips. He sees everywhere else but not there. And he slipsbecause of intense greed lalacha.Questioner: Does he slip because he does not remain inthe Gnani’s Agnas at that time?Dadashri: It is because of intense greed that he cannotremain in the Gnani’s Agnas. Because of the lalacha hebecomes the self, i.e. he becomes absorbed with the relative-self(Chandulal). Therefore, he needs to make a great purusharth(effort) there.Questioner: Will his intense greed (lalacha) go if hetakes Gnan again?Dadashri: No it will not. Is it going to go away just bysitting in the Gnan Vidhi? It will happen only when he makes aneffort to abide by the Agnas and he makes a firm decision toconstantly abide by them. If he breaches the Agna then he mustdo pratikraman for it, then he will make progress.(lalacha). So when a person with intense greed comes here,I tell him directly, ‘Shape up here! You have taken a lot ofbeating and suffered for countless lives and yet the intensegreed (lalacha) within has not gone. If after coming here to theGnani Purush you cannot take care of this problem, what goodis it?’The speech of the Gnani Purush is vitarag (speech freefrom all attachment). So the lashings one gets from this vitaragspeech will hurt a lot, nevertheless these lashings are veryeffective. It brings about a tremendous change from within,however it is not evident externally.The main attribute of intense greed at work is such that itwill completely disregard even the words of the Gnani Purush.It will crush the Gnani’s words and discard them. Intense greed- lalacha! The ego in the form of intense greed in a person willnot break. When ‘we’ give Gnan, this particular ego does notbreak; this part remains alive. That is what puts people in sucha grave danger life after life.The ultimate solution is to follow AgnasQuestioner: Does intense greed (lalacha) not go awayafter attaining this Gnan?Dadashri: It remains alive.Questioner: So does that mean the Gnan does not havethe desired result for him?Dadashri: Certain portion of Gnan has given results butthe intense greed (lalacha) is still alive.Questioner: So does that mean that Gnan has notproduced the kind of results one needs and is that why thishappens?Dadashri: No. The Gnan cannot give results becauseone is a lalachu. Intense greed (lalacha) is at the core; thereAptavani-9251252Aptavani-9is a tuber of intense greed within! This intense greed (lalacha)will not allow the Gnan to give result. That is why the scripturessay a covetous person (lalachu) gradually works his way downto hell. He will not leave anything alone.Questioner: Is it possible to remain as the knower-seer(gnata-drashta) of intense greed (lalacha) after attainingGnan?Dadashri: No. When the time comes, temptation arisesand the intense greed (lalacha) will drag him there and makehim slip. The place where he ‘slips’ is where he losesawareness. In all other matters he remains very aware, butduring situations, which cause him to slip, he is not able tomaintain awareness.Questioner: But Dada, he has attained the state ofShuddhatma. So does He (the Self), not keep ‘seeing’ that?Dadashri: But he is not able to ‘see’ in situations wherehe slips. He sees everywhere else but not there. And he slipsbecause of intense greed lalacha.Questioner: Does he slip because he does not remain inthe Gnani’s Agnas at that time?Dadashri: It is because of intense greed that he cannotremain in the Gnani’s Agnas. Because of the lalacha hebecomes the self, i.e. he becomes absorbed with the relative-self(Chandulal). Therefore, he needs to make a great purusharth(effort) there.Questioner: Will his intense greed (lalacha) go if hetakes Gnan again?Dadashri: No it will not. Is it going to go away just bysitting in the Gnan Vidhi? It will happen only when he makes aneffort to abide by the Agnas and he makes a firm decision toconstantly abide by them. If he breaches the Agna then he mustdo pratikraman for it, then he will make progress.(lalacha). So when a person with intense greed comes here,I tell him directly, ‘Shape up here! You have taken a lot ofbeating and suffered for countless lives and yet the intensegreed (lalacha) within has not gone. If after coming here to theGnani Purush you cannot take care of this problem, what goodis it?’The speech of the Gnani Purush is vitarag (speech freefrom all attachment). So the lashings one gets from this vitaragspeech will hurt a lot, nevertheless these lashings are veryeffective. It brings about a tremendous change from within,however it is not evident externally.The main attribute of intense greed at work is such that itwill completely disregard even the words of the Gnani Purush.It will crush the Gnani’s words and discard them. Intense greed- lalacha! The ego in the form of intense greed in a person willnot break. When ‘we’ give Gnan, this particular ego does notbreak; this part remains alive. That is what puts people in sucha grave danger life after life.The ultimate solution is to follow AgnasQuestioner: Does intense greed (lalacha) not go awayafter attaining this Gnan?Dadashri: It remains alive.Questioner: So does that mean the Gnan does not havethe desired result for him?Dadashri: Certain portion of Gnan has given results butthe intense greed (lalacha) is still alive.Questioner: So does that mean that Gnan has notproduced the kind of results one needs and is that why thishappens?Dadashri: No. The Gnan cannot give results becauseone is a lalachu. Intense greed (lalacha) is at the core; thereAptavani-9253254Aptavani-9If he is going to turn around, he will do so by being closeto the Gnani. There, he can turn around if he remains strongthrough unity of his mind, body and speech and speaks with apure chit; then something can be done and he can turn around.But intense greed will not allow the chit to become pure(shuddha). His decision cannot remain firm. Intense greed(lalacha) will break that determination.Questioner: But does he not feel on occasion, that hewants to get out of that trap?Dadashri: Of course, that may be there, but intensegreed is such that it has to go first, then he can get out.Questioner: Will it not come to an end if he remains inthe Gnani Purush’s Agnas?Dadashri: It will come to an end if he gets rid of hisintense greed (lalacha). If he makes an effort and determinationthat he absolutely wants to remain in the Gnani’s Agnas anddoes pratikraman when he cannot, then he will make progress.Then he must become ‘regular’; be without conflict witheveryone at home. If he abides by the Agna in order to deal withequanimity with all his files, then he will become ‘regular’ will henot? Then he should continue to observe the ‘real-relative’; hewill have to abide by the Agnas.Even then ‘we’ have to ask him whether he has ‘seen’everything according to the Agnas. This would not be theoutcome if he had, would it? The result of ‘seeing’ through Agnawould be instant. This is all done through the intellect (buddhi),which does not help at all. All the talks here in this regard arealso through the intellect.Questioner: So does he adjust to all the Agnas throughthe intellect (buddhi)?Dadashri: Yes, through the intellect; not through Gnan.Questioner: So what kinds of result will that produce?Dadashri: Nothing at all. The intellect actually destroyseverything. The intellect is temporary and therefore whateverhappens through the intellect is also temporary.Questioner: No, but how is it with Gnan? What is thedifference between practicing the Agna through the intellect orthrough the Gnan?Dadashri: Agna practiced through Gnan will give resultseverywhere whereas application of Agna through the intellectwill not produce any results.Questioner: What lies where there is such result?Dadashri: Everything will be settled when it is done withequanimity.Questioner: So the results become evident?Dadashri: It definitely will. He will pass. Howevernothing has ever been settled, if you really look. Not even fora day or an hour for that matter.Questioner: So the belief, ‘I am abiding by the Agnas.I have attained everything’ was all wrong?Dadashri: It is all wrong, what else? It is all a play of theintellect (buddhi). Anything he says to anyone, whenever hetalks to others, it is all through his intellect. It does not have anyeffect but the other person will think, ‘what a great man’. ‘We’have to tell the other person that truly there is nothing there.Otherwise, you can easily see the results; you willexperience the ‘fragrance’.Questioner: So does that mean that one is practicing theAgnas through the intellect if it does not produce visible results?I am asking this question for other mahatmas.Dadashri: No, not for others, it does not affect othermahatmas. I am talking about those who have intense greedAptavani-9253254Aptavani-9If he is going to turn around, he will do so by being closeto the Gnani. There, he can turn around if he remains strongthrough unity of his mind, body and speech and speaks with apure chit; then something can be done and he can turn around.But intense greed will not allow the chit to become pure(shuddha). His decision cannot remain firm. Intense greed(lalacha) will break that determination.Questioner: But does he not feel on occasion, that hewants to get out of that trap?Dadashri: Of course, that may be there, but intensegreed is such that it has to go first, then he can get out.Questioner: Will it not come to an end if he remains inthe Gnani Purush’s Agnas?Dadashri: It will come to an end if he gets rid of hisintense greed (lalacha). If he makes an effort and determinationthat he absolutely wants to remain in the Gnani’s Agnas anddoes pratikraman when he cannot, then he will make progress.Then he must become ‘regular’; be without conflict witheveryone at home. If he abides by the Agna in order to deal withequanimity with all his files, then he will become ‘regular’ will henot? Then he should continue to observe the ‘real-relative’; hewill have to abide by the Agnas.Even then ‘we’ have to ask him whether he has ‘seen’everything according to the Agnas. This would not be theoutcome if he had, would it? The result of ‘seeing’ through Agnawould be instant. This is all done through the intellect (buddhi),which does not help at all. All the talks here in this regard arealso through the intellect.Questioner: So does he adjust to all the Agnas throughthe intellect (buddhi)?Dadashri: Yes, through the intellect; not through Gnan.Questioner: So what kinds of result will that produce?Dadashri: Nothing at all. The intellect actually destroyseverything. The intellect is temporary and therefore whateverhappens through the intellect is also temporary.Questioner: No, but how is it with Gnan? What is thedifference between practicing the Agna through the intellect orthrough the Gnan?Dadashri: Agna practiced through Gnan will give resultseverywhere whereas application of Agna through the intellectwill not produce any results.Questioner: What lies where there is such result?Dadashri: Everything will be settled when it is done withequanimity.Questioner: So the results become evident?Dadashri: It definitely will. He will pass. Howevernothing has ever been settled, if you really look. Not even fora day or an hour for that matter.Questioner: So the belief, ‘I am abiding by the Agnas.I have attained everything’ was all wrong?Dadashri: It is all wrong, what else? It is all a play of theintellect (buddhi). Anything he says to anyone, whenever hetalks to others, it is all through his intellect. It does not have anyeffect but the other person will think, ‘what a great man’. ‘We’have to tell the other person that truly there is nothing there.Otherwise, you can easily see the results; you willexperience the ‘fragrance’.Questioner: So does that mean that one is practicing theAgnas through the intellect if it does not produce visible results?I am asking this question for other mahatmas.Dadashri: No, not for others, it does not affect othermahatmas. I am talking about those who have intense greedAptavani-9255256Aptavani-9(lalacha); if a person is avaricious and covetous, then Gnan hasnot really given results in him.The entire Gnan of ‘ours’ will be present in a lalachuperson; but it will be through the medium of the intellect.Therefore, it abandons him in the moment of need. It will nothelp him during the time of need, it will move aside. It willappear to look just like this Gnan; one cannot tell the difference.But in a person with intense greed, the Gnan will slip away atthe crucial moment, but not so for others.Questioner: Does Gnan through the intellect mean he hasunderstood this Gnan through the intellect?Dadashri: For him, this knowledge has manifestedthrough the intellect (buddhi gnan). Because of the impurity ofintense greed (lalacha) Gnan will not arise. It is a huge problemfor the poor man. He repents a lot but what can he do? Thereis not a minute of bliss for him.Questioner: What if he confesses and repents; doespratikraman in front of the Gnani for all the mistakes he hasmade and then again he follows, with firm determination(nischaya) what the Gnani shows him?Dadashri: How can he do pratikraman when he cannoteven see his mistakes? He will be able to see his mistakesgradually as he progresses forward according to my instructions.Right now, he cannot even see the mistakes he has already made.Therefore, when he starts to abide by ‘our’ Agnas, andthen as he takes care of those in his home and everyone aroundhim, he will begin to see all his own faults and mistakes. Andwhen he reaches a certain stage of seeing his own faults, theneven ‘we’ will pave the way for him. But what happens is thatwhen any intense greed (lalacha) arises, he gets sucked into it,so all his energies get used up in that. The energies that ‘we’bestow upon him become exhausted in his intense greed(lalacha). The liability of this falls on ‘our’ shoulders. Aftersome positive result, when ‘we’ are convinced, then ‘we’ willplace ‘our’ energies behind him otherwise those energies areused up in this lalacha and then they become a tonic forwrong use.Therefore, it is worth instilling some energy when I cansee he has attained some level of freedom from his kashaya(saiyam). Otherwise his current predicament is because he hasbeen getting all the energies, is it not? I have come to thisconclusion.Questioner: But then you will tell him the ways by whichhe can benefit, will you not?Dadashri: Yes, I will tell him the ways he can benefit. Butif he ever does what I tell him, if he changes his ways witheveryone at home, then he will benefit. Furthermore, he will noteven have any shortage of money.So first he has to realize and be convinced about hismistakes. Then his mistake will begin to be destroyed. Thenintense inner spiritual endeavor (purusharth) of a focusednature has to be made. This mistake is not such that it will goaway without purusharth. It needs tremendous inner spiritualendeavor (purusharth). Then this will give rise to an energy thatis say twenty-fold. This twenty-fold energy is applied exclusivelyto remove this mistake. Then the inner energy will rise forty-fold,this is the benefit. Tremendous energy will arise in this manner.Questioner: If he makes an inner intent (bhavna) that hedefinitely wants to stay in the Agna, will that give result?Dadashri: One should remain in the Agnas, should onenot? So he should deal with everything, with equanimity. Theneveryone at home will say, ‘Dadaji, we do not have anycomplaints about him.’ Will it not show results within a month?The correct remedy will always give results. False remedy willhave a result too. Therefore, ‘we’ say take care of those athome first; bring about some solution right there.Aptavani-9255256Aptavani-9(lalacha); if a person is avaricious and covetous, then Gnan hasnot really given results in him.The entire Gnan of ‘ours’ will be present in a lalachuperson; but it will be through the medium of the intellect.Therefore, it abandons him in the moment of need. It will nothelp him during the time of need, it will move aside. It willappear to look just like this Gnan; one cannot tell the difference.But in a person with intense greed, the Gnan will slip away atthe crucial moment, but not so for others.Questioner: Does Gnan through the intellect mean he hasunderstood this Gnan through the intellect?Dadashri: For him, this knowledge has manifestedthrough the intellect (buddhi gnan). Because of the impurity ofintense greed (lalacha) Gnan will not arise. It is a huge problemfor the poor man. He repents a lot but what can he do? Thereis not a minute of bliss for him.Questioner: What if he confesses and repents; doespratikraman in front of the Gnani for all the mistakes he hasmade and then again he follows, with firm determination(nischaya) what the Gnani shows him?Dadashri: How can he do pratikraman when he cannoteven see his mistakes? He will be able to see his mistakesgradually as he progresses forward according to my instructions.Right now, he cannot even see the mistakes he has already made.Therefore, when he starts to abide by ‘our’ Agnas, andthen as he takes care of those in his home and everyone aroundhim, he will begin to see all his own faults and mistakes. Andwhen he reaches a certain stage of seeing his own faults, theneven ‘we’ will pave the way for him. But what happens is thatwhen any intense greed (lalacha) arises, he gets sucked into it,so all his energies get used up in that. The energies that ‘we’bestow upon him become exhausted in his intense greed(lalacha). The liability of this falls on ‘our’ shoulders. Aftersome positive result, when ‘we’ are convinced, then ‘we’ willplace ‘our’ energies behind him otherwise those energies areused up in this lalacha and then they become a tonic forwrong use.Therefore, it is worth instilling some energy when I cansee he has attained some level of freedom from his kashaya(saiyam). Otherwise his current predicament is because he hasbeen getting all the energies, is it not? I have come to thisconclusion.Questioner: But then you will tell him the ways by whichhe can benefit, will you not?Dadashri: Yes, I will tell him the ways he can benefit. Butif he ever does what I tell him, if he changes his ways witheveryone at home, then he will benefit. Furthermore, he will noteven have any shortage of money.So first he has to realize and be convinced about hismistakes. Then his mistake will begin to be destroyed. Thenintense inner spiritual endeavor (purusharth) of a focusednature has to be made. This mistake is not such that it will goaway without purusharth. It needs tremendous inner spiritualendeavor (purusharth). Then this will give rise to an energy thatis say twenty-fold. This twenty-fold energy is applied exclusivelyto remove this mistake. Then the inner energy will rise forty-fold,this is the benefit. Tremendous energy will arise in this manner.Questioner: If he makes an inner intent (bhavna) that hedefinitely wants to stay in the Agna, will that give result?Dadashri: One should remain in the Agnas, should onenot? So he should deal with everything, with equanimity. Theneveryone at home will say, ‘Dadaji, we do not have anycomplaints about him.’ Will it not show results within a month?The correct remedy will always give results. False remedy willhave a result too. Therefore, ‘we’ say take care of those athome first; bring about some solution right there.Aptavani-9257258Aptavani-9Only if he brings forth results, will he benefit, right? If hebrings forth a little result, by that I mean if he brings resolutionfor ten things, he will get the energy to resolve twenty. Thenspending the energy for twenty will bring forth the energy offorty. That energy will double again. Then only one will realizethat his energy has increased, otherwise all the energy is‘dissolved’ and wasted.Until now he has not been in Agna even for a minute.Would people at home be hurt if he was abiding by the Agna?How wonderfully he would win the love of his family by dealingwith them with equanimity. But he does not remain in the Agnas;he does not even know what the Agnas are. He knows theAgnas only through the medium of his intellect or words but hedoes not understand what it really means. Those abiding by theAgnas may have some separation due to differences of opinions(matbhed) but they do not have quarrels. People at home willnot get fed up with him.Questioner: So in practical terms one has to remain asthe pure Self, do pratikraman and stay away from that whichmakes him slip?Dadashri: Yes, and he should be able to adjust with hisfamily members. ‘Settling files with equanimity’, is the mainAgna, is it not? And should he not see the pure Soul in everyoneat home? But he does not even think that way; he does not evenhave this much awareness.The solution for this is to make a firm decision that youwant to remain in Dada’s Agnas and then start practicing it fromthe next day. Then do pratikraman for the times you did notremain in the Agna. Please everyone at home by dealing withthem, with equanimity. Despite doing all this, if anyone in the familygets upset, just ‘see’ that incident and continue ‘seeing’ it. Theyare acting that way because of the past karmic account. It is onlytoday that you have made the decision to abide by the Agnas, sowin the family over with love. Then, you will notice that thingsare beginning to settle down. But you can only believe this ifyour family members agree that things are changing and settlingdown for the better. Eventually the family will always be there forthe one who has overcome this disastrous kashaya of lalacha.Then you should not dominate and boss your wife around(dhanipanu). You are not her boss or her owner (dhani), sowhy behave like one? You are a husband in name only so whybehave as an owner (dhani)? There is no problem if you reallywere her dhani. Would problems not arise if you try to boss heraround when you are not even her boss? Therefore, you shouldnot be bossy. When she bosses you around, accept it with asmile and tell yourself, ‘Oh ho ho! Even you made me pay upa pending account!’ Isn’t it good that she is making you pay offyour accounts?There is no problem if you constantly remain in Dada’sAgnas. Do pratikraman if you cannot remain in His Agnas.Intense greed (lalacha) for wantingreverenceThere is no telling when intense greed (lalacha) to beworshipped and revered will sprout within. All one needs is fiveto seven people. That is all. These five to seven will tell the entirecity of Mumbai that a ‘Gnani’ has come to town; they will evenmake all the arrangements. They will go to the extent of proppinghim up, making him presentable, giving him a wig if he is bald!Alas, one has done only this for countless lives. Theseverily are the attributes of it; all the misery and the obstacles arethe consequences of doing just that, this is all one has done. Allhe needs is a handful of people to blow the horn, create publicityand things will start to roll. A person does not realize theconsequences of doing this. It will be great if he becomes freein this life but that only happens if he understands all this.Otherwise, intense greed (lalacha) to be worshipped andrevered will not allow him to attain liberation.Aptavani-9257258Aptavani-9Only if he brings forth results, will he benefit, right? If hebrings forth a little result, by that I mean if he brings resolutionfor ten things, he will get the energy to resolve twenty. Thenspending the energy for twenty will bring forth the energy offorty. That energy will double again. Then only one will realizethat his energy has increased, otherwise all the energy is‘dissolved’ and wasted.Until now he has not been in Agna even for a minute.Would people at home be hurt if he was abiding by the Agna?How wonderfully he would win the love of his family by dealingwith them with equanimity. But he does not remain in the Agnas;he does not even know what the Agnas are. He knows theAgnas only through the medium of his intellect or words but hedoes not understand what it really means. Those abiding by theAgnas may have some separation due to differences of opinions(matbhed) but they do not have quarrels. People at home willnot get fed up with him.Questioner: So in practical terms one has to remain asthe pure Self, do pratikraman and stay away from that whichmakes him slip?Dadashri: Yes, and he should be able to adjust with hisfamily members. ‘Settling files with equanimity’, is the mainAgna, is it not? And should he not see the pure Soul in everyoneat home? But he does not even think that way; he does not evenhave this much awareness.The solution for this is to make a firm decision that youwant to remain in Dada’s Agnas and then start practicing it fromthe next day. Then do pratikraman for the times you did notremain in the Agna. Please everyone at home by dealing withthem, with equanimity. Despite doing all this, if anyone in the familygets upset, just ‘see’ that incident and continue ‘seeing’ it. Theyare acting that way because of the past karmic account. It is onlytoday that you have made the decision to abide by the Agnas, sowin the family over with love. Then, you will notice that thingsare beginning to settle down. But you can only believe this ifyour family members agree that things are changing and settlingdown for the better. Eventually the family will always be there forthe one who has overcome this disastrous kashaya of lalacha.Then you should not dominate and boss your wife around(dhanipanu). You are not her boss or her owner (dhani), sowhy behave like one? You are a husband in name only so whybehave as an owner (dhani)? There is no problem if you reallywere her dhani. Would problems not arise if you try to boss heraround when you are not even her boss? Therefore, you shouldnot be bossy. When she bosses you around, accept it with asmile and tell yourself, ‘Oh ho ho! Even you made me pay upa pending account!’ Isn’t it good that she is making you pay offyour accounts?There is no problem if you constantly remain in Dada’sAgnas. Do pratikraman if you cannot remain in His Agnas.Intense greed (lalacha) for wantingreverenceThere is no telling when intense greed (lalacha) to beworshipped and revered will sprout within. All one needs is fiveto seven people. That is all. These five to seven will tell the entirecity of Mumbai that a ‘Gnani’ has come to town; they will evenmake all the arrangements. They will go to the extent of proppinghim up, making him presentable, giving him a wig if he is bald!Alas, one has done only this for countless lives. Theseverily are the attributes of it; all the misery and the obstacles arethe consequences of doing just that, this is all one has done. Allhe needs is a handful of people to blow the horn, create publicityand things will start to roll. A person does not realize theconsequences of doing this. It will be great if he becomes freein this life but that only happens if he understands all this.Otherwise, intense greed (lalacha) to be worshipped andrevered will not allow him to attain liberation.Aptavani-9259260Aptavani-9Questioner: But what are the consequences of gatheringpeople and ‘blowing your own horn’ (preaching Gnan) andbecoming a ‘Gnani’?Dadashri: That is nothing but a ravaging fire! A life inhell! He will experience a life in hell and then return here to thesame old thing. Intense greed (lalacha) that exists within will notgo away, will it? He will change a little in the presence of a GnaniPurush.Not even a moth will hover (bother) around you if youhave no intense greed (lalacha). A man without lalacha forreverence is the king of the world. And the one with such greedwill achieve nothing, no matter how hard he tries.Intense greed can stay alive and get stronger only if yougive it a cause to. Then you have to do pratikraman. You shouldsay to the relative self, ‘Chandulal, you should not go there again.’You may have a lalacha (strong desire) to become freefrom the need to be worshipped and respected, but this lalachawill obstruct you. If you keep this in mind to eradicate it, just asone keeps in mind an external enemy, then you will be able todo so. Otherwise it is not easy to get rid of this desire to beworshipped.Questioner: This intense greed (lalacha) is a dangerousdisease!Dadashri: It is a disease that has prevailed fromcountless past lives. This disease makes him want others to listento him and follow him. He is preoccupied with, ‘how can I makethem listen and follow me?’ The moment one sees a mangodangling on the tree, something within starts stirring too. Just themere site of a mango stirring in the wind will cause stirring withinhim. The lalacha within will take over the minute he encountersthe right circumstances.Questioner: Some people are such that they want to bethe center of attention in a group of a hundred, no matter whatit takes.Dadashri: That is because he has a habit of being a guruof five or ten. He does not even know how to be a disciple andhe wants to be a guru. Such a person will sit down wherever hefinds a ‘customer’ (anyone who would listen to him). It is allbecause of his intense greed (lalacha) to enjoy everything. Hedoes not want to leave out a single thing.Live one life by surrendering to the GnaniThat is why I have told you not to leave the oneness ofthis satsang. Otherwise one would want to start something on hisown. But he will not know anything. People will throw him out.This is not acceptable, how can it be? For how long can a faketiger last? Would it work if one disguises himself as a tiger? Thatis why I have told you so that you do not let any such root growhere. You have to spend this life of yours in surrender, do notlet go of your dependency on the Gnani Purush. You will be ableto form your own group or crowd if you try, you will have one,but it will harm you as well as others.One man had gone off and started a ‘business’ of his ownin the name of Dada. He attracted large crowds and conductedsatsang. I told him, ‘You will pay a heavy price eventually. Howlong will you be able to hide under covers?’ He would return tous on and off. He was not obstinate. But his intense greed(lalacha) would lead him astray again and he would say, ‘NowI will go and do something’, and he was capable of doing that.One time he managed to gather over a thousand people. Hecould do that because his face was attractive and he had an auraabout him. But I cautioned him, ‘If you fail in your obedience toDada, you will go to hell. Where are you going to get thewords? You will have to use my words for people. If you try touse new words, you will spend a life in hell.’Therefore, I have to caution you. There is this intenseAptavani-9259260Aptavani-9Questioner: But what are the consequences of gatheringpeople and ‘blowing your own horn’ (preaching Gnan) andbecoming a ‘Gnani’?Dadashri: That is nothing but a ravaging fire! A life inhell! He will experience a life in hell and then return here to thesame old thing. Intense greed (lalacha) that exists within will notgo away, will it? He will change a little in the presence of a GnaniPurush.Not even a moth will hover (bother) around you if youhave no intense greed (lalacha). A man without lalacha forreverence is the king of the world. And the one with such greedwill achieve nothing, no matter how hard he tries.Intense greed can stay alive and get stronger only if yougive it a cause to. Then you have to do pratikraman. You shouldsay to the relative self, ‘Chandulal, you should not go there again.’You may have a lalacha (strong desire) to become freefrom the need to be worshipped and respected, but this lalachawill obstruct you. If you keep this in mind to eradicate it, just asone keeps in mind an external enemy, then you will be able todo so. Otherwise it is not easy to get rid of this desire to beworshipped.Questioner: This intense greed (lalacha) is a dangerousdisease!Dadashri: It is a disease that has prevailed fromcountless past lives. This disease makes him want others to listento him and follow him. He is preoccupied with, ‘how can I makethem listen and follow me?’ The moment one sees a mangodangling on the tree, something within starts stirring too. Just themere site of a mango stirring in the wind will cause stirring withinhim. The lalacha within will take over the minute he encountersthe right circumstances.Questioner: Some people are such that they want to bethe center of attention in a group of a hundred, no matter whatit takes.Dadashri: That is because he has a habit of being a guruof five or ten. He does not even know how to be a disciple andhe wants to be a guru. Such a person will sit down wherever hefinds a ‘customer’ (anyone who would listen to him). It is allbecause of his intense greed (lalacha) to enjoy everything. Hedoes not want to leave out a single thing.Live one life by surrendering to the GnaniThat is why I have told you not to leave the oneness ofthis satsang. Otherwise one would want to start something on hisown. But he will not know anything. People will throw him out.This is not acceptable, how can it be? For how long can a faketiger last? Would it work if one disguises himself as a tiger? Thatis why I have told you so that you do not let any such root growhere. You have to spend this life of yours in surrender, do notlet go of your dependency on the Gnani Purush. You will be ableto form your own group or crowd if you try, you will have one,but it will harm you as well as others.One man had gone off and started a ‘business’ of his ownin the name of Dada. He attracted large crowds and conductedsatsang. I told him, ‘You will pay a heavy price eventually. Howlong will you be able to hide under covers?’ He would return tous on and off. He was not obstinate. But his intense greed(lalacha) would lead him astray again and he would say, ‘NowI will go and do something’, and he was capable of doing that.One time he managed to gather over a thousand people. Hecould do that because his face was attractive and he had an auraabout him. But I cautioned him, ‘If you fail in your obedience toDada, you will go to hell. Where are you going to get thewords? You will have to use my words for people. If you try touse new words, you will spend a life in hell.’Therefore, I have to caution you. There is this intenseAptavani-9261262Aptavani-9greed (lalacha) to move away from Dada in an independentdirection. You have now become independent; you are notdependent are you? It would be a different matter if you weresuppressed or controlled by me. It is a different matter if youwere under the control of those other gurus and you tried to beindependent. Here no one is suppressed, there is no controlover you and I even say, ‘I am everyone’s disciple’, so whereis the problem? But because of the habit of endless past lives,one has fun in being independent; there is interest in that. Let goof this interest! Why don’t you remain only in this satsang?Questioner: But Dada, rather than independence, it is toshow off to people ‘I know something’.Dadashri: That is the problem, he believes ‘I knoweverything’ and yet he knows nothing.Now spend one life in total surrender (adheenta) to theGnani.Questioner: It is better to remain surrendered; at leastwe will not have any externally induced problems (upadhi).Dadashri: Yes, no upadhi. Everyone has surrenderedand is free from upadhi. But if someone has a root that iscrooked, it will not refrain from playing its part. He will start adifferent group. He will dance to a different tune.Life surrender to gnanThere are many who tell me, ‘Do you not hold back some‘keys’ with you?’ Why would I hang on to some keys? I woulddo that only if I want to remain as a guru and show mysuperiority. But I neither want to be anyone’s guru nor do I wantto be a superior. To me, you are the guru now. Those who wantto be gurus will not bestow their full knowledge (gnan) on toothers. They do that so that their disciples will not run away andtheir ‘business’ can remain in operation.And here, everyone has freedom. I tell those who livehere that they are free to leave whenever they like. I will notstop them even if they were to put me in a difficulty. So thenwhere is the problem? Why would I want to take on theirresponsibility? The gurus who have intense greed (lalacha) forreverence will resort to doing such things.Even the Lord would not question the one who has nointense greed (lalacha). Because if the Lord were to questionhim ‘where have you been?’ then the Lord would be in trouble.How can he question the one who has no lalacha at all? Itwould be a mistake on His part. No one has the right toquestion the one who is free from all intense greed (lalacha),not even God! Once a person lets go of intense greed (lalacha),he has attained everything.Your intention should be for the absolutestateHave you seen excessive intense greed (lalacha)?Questioner: You know what Dada? I myself was verycovetous and greedy.Dadashri: Is that so? In what matters?Questioner: Oh! In everything; I was excessively greedyabout satsang too!Dadashri: Greed for me (Dada, the Gnani purush) is notconsidered greed but it is considered greed if it is for all otherthings. Greed for satsang is not called greed. Selfishness is notconsidered selfishness if it is for me; it is considered the ultimateaim (parmarth).Questioner: Now we are greedy for Dada.Dadashri: No, with me it is not considered greed. Withme it is not considered selfishness. With me if you becomeselfish it is for the ultimate good (parmarth). With the worldeven if you try to do the ultimate good it becomes a selfishAptavani-9261262Aptavani-9greed (lalacha) to move away from Dada in an independentdirection. You have now become independent; you are notdependent are you? It would be a different matter if you weresuppressed or controlled by me. It is a different matter if youwere under the control of those other gurus and you tried to beindependent. Here no one is suppressed, there is no controlover you and I even say, ‘I am everyone’s disciple’, so whereis the problem? But because of the habit of endless past lives,one has fun in being independent; there is interest in that. Let goof this interest! Why don’t you remain only in this satsang?Questioner: But Dada, rather than independence, it is toshow off to people ‘I know something’.Dadashri: That is the problem, he believes ‘I knoweverything’ and yet he knows nothing.Now spend one life in total surrender (adheenta) to theGnani.Questioner: It is better to remain surrendered; at leastwe will not have any externally induced problems (upadhi).Dadashri: Yes, no upadhi. Everyone has surrenderedand is free from upadhi. But if someone has a root that iscrooked, it will not refrain from playing its part. He will start adifferent group. He will dance to a different tune.Life surrender to gnanThere are many who tell me, ‘Do you not hold back some‘keys’ with you?’ Why would I hang on to some keys? I woulddo that only if I want to remain as a guru and show mysuperiority. But I neither want to be anyone’s guru nor do I wantto be a superior. To me, you are the guru now. Those who wantto be gurus will not bestow their full knowledge (gnan) on toothers. They do that so that their disciples will not run away andtheir ‘business’ can remain in operation.And here, everyone has freedom. I tell those who livehere that they are free to leave whenever they like. I will notstop them even if they were to put me in a difficulty. So thenwhere is the problem? Why would I want to take on theirresponsibility? The gurus who have intense greed (lalacha) forreverence will resort to doing such things.Even the Lord would not question the one who has nointense greed (lalacha). Because if the Lord were to questionhim ‘where have you been?’ then the Lord would be in trouble.How can he question the one who has no lalacha at all? Itwould be a mistake on His part. No one has the right toquestion the one who is free from all intense greed (lalacha),not even God! Once a person lets go of intense greed (lalacha),he has attained everything.Your intention should be for the absolutestateHave you seen excessive intense greed (lalacha)?Questioner: You know what Dada? I myself was verycovetous and greedy.Dadashri: Is that so? In what matters?Questioner: Oh! In everything; I was excessively greedyabout satsang too!Dadashri: Greed for me (Dada, the Gnani purush) is notconsidered greed but it is considered greed if it is for all otherthings. Greed for satsang is not called greed. Selfishness is notconsidered selfishness if it is for me; it is considered the ultimateaim (parmarth).Questioner: Now we are greedy for Dada.Dadashri: No, with me it is not considered greed. Withme it is not considered selfishness. With me if you becomeselfish it is for the ultimate good (parmarth). With the worldeven if you try to do the ultimate good it becomes a selfishAptavani-9263264Aptavani-9interest. There, even if you try to do the ultimate good, it willbecome your selfish interest. People wonder and ask, ‘How canwe be selfish for you Dada?’ Hey, go ahead and be selfish aboutme. It will be for your ultimate good—parmarth.Questioner: I came here because I was attracted but Ihave come for the lalacha (greed) to attain Gnan, is that not so?Dadashri: That is the best lalacha (greed). That is thehighest kind of lalacha worth having. If one does not have sucha lalacha, I would tell him, ‘You are not very shrewd, you havea deficiency in this area.’ There is nothing in this worldly life thatmerits having greed (lalacha) for. Greed (lalacha) for this; theGnani and the Gnan is greed worth having. It is great that youhave greed for this.Questioner: But is this not greed for Gnan?Dadashri: It is the intention behind the greed that is takeninto consideration, because greed does great work if theintention is good.Questioner: This can be considered greed for a goodcause, can it not?Dadashri: It is not greed for a good (shubha) cause butit is for the absolute (shuddha) cause. Even giving to charity ordoing something similar is considered an auspicious cause. Thencomes the inauspicious (ashubha) intent. But wherever there ispure (shuddha) intention, where the ultimate is to be gained; thatis the pure intention.It is not found in scriptures, it has not evenbeen heard of…Questioner: Now who besides a Gnani would clarifythings in this way? Otherwise it is so difficult to become liberatedfrom this world.Dadashri: There is no such awareness, is there? It will bevery good even if a person were to recognize that he is inbondage. However, because he is in bondage, he feels,‘Everyone else is doing it’ and so he finds an excuse to do thesame. You fool! Everyone will jump in a well, but does thatmean you have to do the same?A person becomes ‘fragrant’ if his intense greed (lalacha)goes away!Questioner: I have never heard the word lalacha withreference to spirituality.Dadashri: No one would make such a distinction, wouldthey? Who would do that? ‘We’ explain to you things in details.Those who have read the scriptures will tell you that they speakabout the four kashayas: anger-pride-deceit-greed! So someonemay claim, ‘Sir, but that is in the scriptures too. Tell ussomething new.’ Therefore, this has been going on from timeimmemorial. When the scriptures were created it was written, ‘Itis an illusion when one sees a snake in a charred rope. Similarly,this world appears as an illusion.’ Until today there has been noone to change or alter these words. Everything has been goingon based on these words. This is a simile. They do not knowany other simile. The greatest of men have given the same simile.Another simile is, ‘One sees silver in a shell’. These two simileshave been used from the time scriptures were written. So whynot say something new? Go ahead and say something new! Thewords should be new or they should be with a new effectivedesign (designed to be effective), and they should be practical.They should bring about a meaningful change in human beings.Otherwise, of what good is anything that has been carrying on fora long time? I too would have found that simile if I were to read!That is why Krupadudev has said that it is not to be foundin the scriptures, it has not been heard before and yet the onewhose speech gives you the experience, is considered a Gnani.Otherwise, he cannot be called a Gnani.* * * * *Aptavani-9263264Aptavani-9interest. There, even if you try to do the ultimate good, it willbecome your selfish interest. People wonder and ask, ‘How canwe be selfish for you Dada?’ Hey, go ahead and be selfish aboutme. It will be for your ultimate good—parmarth.Questioner: I came here because I was attracted but Ihave come for the lalacha (greed) to attain Gnan, is that not so?Dadashri: That is the best lalacha (greed). That is thehighest kind of lalacha worth having. If one does not have sucha lalacha, I would tell him, ‘You are not very shrewd, you havea deficiency in this area.’ There is nothing in this worldly life thatmerits having greed (lalacha) for. Greed (lalacha) for this; theGnani and the Gnan is greed worth having. It is great that youhave greed for this.Questioner: But is this not greed for Gnan?Dadashri: It is the intention behind the greed that is takeninto consideration, because greed does great work if theintention is good.Questioner: This can be considered greed for a goodcause, can it not?Dadashri: It is not greed for a good (shubha) cause butit is for the absolute (shuddha) cause. Even giving to charity ordoing something similar is considered an auspicious cause. Thencomes the inauspicious (ashubha) intent. But wherever there ispure (shuddha) intention, where the ultimate is to be gained; thatis the pure intention.It is not found in scriptures, it has not evenbeen heard of…Questioner: Now who besides a Gnani would clarifythings in this way? Otherwise it is so difficult to become liberatedfrom this world.Dadashri: There is no such awareness, is there? It will bevery good even if a person were to recognize that he is inbondage. However, because he is in bondage, he feels,‘Everyone else is doing it’ and so he finds an excuse to do thesame. You fool! Everyone will jump in a well, but does thatmean you have to do the same?A person becomes ‘fragrant’ if his intense greed (lalacha)goes away!Questioner: I have never heard the word lalacha withreference to spirituality.Dadashri: No one would make such a distinction, wouldthey? Who would do that? ‘We’ explain to you things in details.Those who have read the scriptures will tell you that they speakabout the four kashayas: anger-pride-deceit-greed! So someonemay claim, ‘Sir, but that is in the scriptures too. Tell ussomething new.’ Therefore, this has been going on from timeimmemorial. When the scriptures were created it was written, ‘Itis an illusion when one sees a snake in a charred rope. Similarly,this world appears as an illusion.’ Until today there has been noone to change or alter these words. Everything has been goingon based on these words. This is a simile. They do not knowany other simile. The greatest of men have given the same simile.Another simile is, ‘One sees silver in a shell’. These two simileshave been used from the time scriptures were written. So whynot say something new? Go ahead and say something new! Thewords should be new or they should be with a new effectivedesign (designed to be effective), and they should be practical.They should bring about a meaningful change in human beings.Otherwise, of what good is anything that has been carrying on fora long time? I too would have found that simile if I were to read!That is why Krupadudev has said that it is not to be foundin the scriptures, it has not been heard before and yet the onewhose speech gives you the experience, is considered a Gnani.Otherwise, he cannot be called a Gnani.* * * * *Aptavani-9265266Aptavani-9[5]Maan (False pride, self-importance, the needto be recognized and respected) : Garva(Ego of doer-ship) : Garavata (Wallowing inworldly pleasures)Maan without mamata :pride without ‘my-ness’You can ask the Gnani Purush anything. This AkramVignan is such that you can ask anything. You ask anythingabout the forty-five Agamas (Scriptures of Jain religion) or theVedantas (the end of the Vedas, ancient scriptures of the Hinduteachings). This Akram Vignan is considered one of thegreatest wonder; it is the eleventh wonder (spiritual) that hasoccurred naturally. Here, all your work is attained within an hour.Questioner: When you had so many good karmas fromyour past life, why did Gnan manifest in you at such an old age?Why not earlier?Dadashri: It is like this, the gnan-avarniya karma i.e.knowledge obscuring karma can only break once the mohaniyakarma - karma that is delusive and causes attachment, comesto an end. When is the knowledge-obscuring veil (gnan-avarniya karma) destroyed? It is when the mohaniya karmacomes to an end. What moha (attachment due to illusion) wasthere within ‘us’? ‘We’ did not have moha for anything, not formoney, sex or anything. The only moha was that for maan(pride, the need to be recognized and respected).Questioner: Yes, can you explain that to us please?Please explain in detail, your inner state prior to Gnanmanifesting within you in 1958.Dadashri: Yes, before Gnan manifested in me amidst thekashayas of krodha-maan-maya-lobh and raag-dwesh (theinner enemies of anger-pride-attachment-greed and attachment-abhorrence respectively), the force of maan was the mostdominant. The rest of the kashayas were alive under the reignand domain of maan (pride). It was the reign of the maan andnot of abhimaan (excessive pride). Abhimaan is maan withmamata, i.e. this excessive pride is associated with a sense of‘my-ness’. The pride that I had was without mamata (my-ness).Questioner: What is pride without my-ness (mamata)like?Dadashri: ‘I only’ ‘I am something’ ‘I am something!’that is what it is.Questioner: That is called mamata (my-ness).Dadashri: No mamata is something different. ‘This ismine’ is extra pride (abhimaan). ‘This is mine. What do youthink of it? It is mine,’ that is extra pride. The extra weight thatis given to the ‘I’ is pride maan. It is natural to have pride; thereis nothing wrong with that. Extra pride (abhimaan) indicatesattachment. Extra pride is the display of my-ness (mamata).Extra pride will be there only if there is my-ness (mamata). My-ness was hardly existent in me. Only this pride of ‘I amsomething’ was there and it was all wrong. One does not gainor attain anything from it. He simply has the belief of ‘I amsomething’.I am talking about my life before attaining Gnan. The otherkashayas of anger-deceit-greed were subservient to this pride.There was no trace of mamata from the very beginning.The pride was a belief only in the mindSo he (Ambalal) used to think a lot of himself, ‘there is noAptavani-9265266Aptavani-9[5]Maan (False pride, self-importance, the needto be recognized and respected) : Garva(Ego of doer-ship) : Garavata (Wallowing inworldly pleasures)Maan without mamata :pride without ‘my-ness’You can ask the Gnani Purush anything. This AkramVignan is such that you can ask anything. You ask anythingabout the forty-five Agamas (Scriptures of Jain religion) or theVedantas (the end of the Vedas, ancient scriptures of the Hinduteachings). This Akram Vignan is considered one of thegreatest wonder; it is the eleventh wonder (spiritual) that hasoccurred naturally. Here, all your work is attained within an hour.Questioner: When you had so many good karmas fromyour past life, why did Gnan manifest in you at such an old age?Why not earlier?Dadashri: It is like this, the gnan-avarniya karma i.e.knowledge obscuring karma can only break once the mohaniyakarma - karma that is delusive and causes attachment, comesto an end. When is the knowledge-obscuring veil (gnan-avarniya karma) destroyed? It is when the mohaniya karmacomes to an end. What moha (attachment due to illusion) wasthere within ‘us’? ‘We’ did not have moha for anything, not formoney, sex or anything. The only moha was that for maan(pride, the need to be recognized and respected).Questioner: Yes, can you explain that to us please?Please explain in detail, your inner state prior to Gnanmanifesting within you in 1958.Dadashri: Yes, before Gnan manifested in me amidst thekashayas of krodha-maan-maya-lobh and raag-dwesh (theinner enemies of anger-pride-attachment-greed and attachment-abhorrence respectively), the force of maan was the mostdominant. The rest of the kashayas were alive under the reignand domain of maan (pride). It was the reign of the maan andnot of abhimaan (excessive pride). Abhimaan is maan withmamata, i.e. this excessive pride is associated with a sense of‘my-ness’. The pride that I had was without mamata (my-ness).Questioner: What is pride without my-ness (mamata)like?Dadashri: ‘I only’ ‘I am something’ ‘I am something!’that is what it is.Questioner: That is called mamata (my-ness).Dadashri: No mamata is something different. ‘This ismine’ is extra pride (abhimaan). ‘This is mine. What do youthink of it? It is mine,’ that is extra pride. The extra weight thatis given to the ‘I’ is pride maan. It is natural to have pride; thereis nothing wrong with that. Extra pride (abhimaan) indicatesattachment. Extra pride is the display of my-ness (mamata).Extra pride will be there only if there is my-ness (mamata). My-ness was hardly existent in me. Only this pride of ‘I amsomething’ was there and it was all wrong. One does not gainor attain anything from it. He simply has the belief of ‘I amsomething’.I am talking about my life before attaining Gnan. The otherkashayas of anger-deceit-greed were subservient to this pride.There was no trace of mamata from the very beginning.The pride was a belief only in the mindSo he (Ambalal) used to think a lot of himself, ‘there is noAptavani-9267268Aptavani-9one like me in the entire world.’ Behold! What he thought abouthimself! He had nothing to speak of; no wealth, only ten-vighaland (four acres) and a home. Besides these, he had nothing buthe went around in arrogance thinking he was the king of theCharotar villages (northern Gujarat). This is because people ofthe surrounding six villages had put me on a pedestal as a‘bachelor-with-dowry’. Pay the dowry and the bachelor wouldagree to marry! A bachelor from these six villages could demandany amount of dowry before he would agree to marry. Thesekinds of comments had fed much arrogance in this mind. Andsomething in addition, was brought forth from the past life, whichsupported such arrogance in the mind.My elder brother was a very proud man. I used to call myelder brother a maani (one laden with heavy self importanceand pride) and he accused me of the same. So one day do youknow what he told me? ‘I have never seen a maani like you.’I asked him, ‘Where do you see the maan (self-importance) inme?’ and he replied, ‘in everything you do.’So then I investigated within and I could see that mymaan surfaced everywhere and that was the very thing that hadgnawed away at me. Let me tell you what I did to gain respect.Everyone used to address me as, ‘Amba-lal-bhai’ (the term‘bhai’ is a form of respect, similar to Mr. or sir); no onewould call me just ‘Ambalal’. And so I became accustomed tobeing addressed as ‘Ambalal-bhai’. Now because I had a lot ofpride, I protected that pride. If someone was in a hurry andfailed to call me by my full name, was it such a terrible thing todo? How can a person say such a long name in a hurry?Questioner: But you have that expectation, don’t you?Dadashri: Then I weighed the incident in my mind. ‘Hecalled me Ambalal? Who does he think he is? Could he not sayAmbalal-bhai?’ Now he (Ambalal) had some land in the villageand nothing else but what did he think of himself? ‘I am an‘Amin’ from the six-village of Vakad—rightful demanders ofdowry from the bride’s parents.’ Don’t we also have ‘Desais’of Vakad? Even they think a fat lot of themselves, too!Now if someone failed to address me as ‘Ambalal-bhai’,I would not be able to sleep. I would be restless the whole night.What was I going to get out of that? Was it going to sweetenmy mouth? How selfish can a man be? Such selfishness has notaste, yet one assumes it and takes it on due to societalinfluence (lokasangnya). People elevated him - Ambalal; theyput him on a pedestal and they believed he was praiseworthytoo. Hey! What are you going to do with what people thinkand believe?Just because the cows and the buffalos look at you andwag their ears back and forth, does it mean they are lookingupon you with respect or they are admiring you? This is howeverything is. You might think they are watching you withrespect. It is simply in your head. But really everyone is caughtup in his own miseries; everyone is caught up in his own worries.No one has time for you.It was all for maanI had told everyone, ‘Come and get your work done fromme, whatever it may be; whether it is advice, consolation orwhatever else. I will also give you money if I have some. Youdo not have to do my work but I will do yours. This way youwill not have any fear or uncertainties from my end because youdo not have to do anything for me. If I am going home after alate night movie and happen to stop by your house, you mightthink, ‘He has never done this before, he must want somethingand that is why he is here.’ On the contrary, thinking this wayabout me is the same as looking lustfully at a sati (chastewoman). I do not need anything and when others look at menegatively and get worried that I may ask them for something;that was not acceptable. Therefore, I told everyone, ‘TheseAptavani-9267268Aptavani-9one like me in the entire world.’ Behold! What he thought abouthimself! He had nothing to speak of; no wealth, only ten-vighaland (four acres) and a home. Besides these, he had nothing buthe went around in arrogance thinking he was the king of theCharotar villages (northern Gujarat). This is because people ofthe surrounding six villages had put me on a pedestal as a‘bachelor-with-dowry’. Pay the dowry and the bachelor wouldagree to marry! A bachelor from these six villages could demandany amount of dowry before he would agree to marry. Thesekinds of comments had fed much arrogance in this mind. Andsomething in addition, was brought forth from the past life, whichsupported such arrogance in the mind.My elder brother was a very proud man. I used to call myelder brother a maani (one laden with heavy self importanceand pride) and he accused me of the same. So one day do youknow what he told me? ‘I have never seen a maani like you.’I asked him, ‘Where do you see the maan (self-importance) inme?’ and he replied, ‘in everything you do.’So then I investigated within and I could see that mymaan surfaced everywhere and that was the very thing that hadgnawed away at me. Let me tell you what I did to gain respect.Everyone used to address me as, ‘Amba-lal-bhai’ (the term‘bhai’ is a form of respect, similar to Mr. or sir); no onewould call me just ‘Ambalal’. And so I became accustomed tobeing addressed as ‘Ambalal-bhai’. Now because I had a lot ofpride, I protected that pride. If someone was in a hurry andfailed to call me by my full name, was it such a terrible thing todo? How can a person say such a long name in a hurry?Questioner: But you have that expectation, don’t you?Dadashri: Then I weighed the incident in my mind. ‘Hecalled me Ambalal? Who does he think he is? Could he not sayAmbalal-bhai?’ Now he (Ambalal) had some land in the villageand nothing else but what did he think of himself? ‘I am an‘Amin’ from the six-village of Vakad—rightful demanders ofdowry from the bride’s parents.’ Don’t we also have ‘Desais’of Vakad? Even they think a fat lot of themselves, too!Now if someone failed to address me as ‘Ambalal-bhai’,I would not be able to sleep. I would be restless the whole night.What was I going to get out of that? Was it going to sweetenmy mouth? How selfish can a man be? Such selfishness has notaste, yet one assumes it and takes it on due to societalinfluence (lokasangnya). People elevated him - Ambalal; theyput him on a pedestal and they believed he was praiseworthytoo. Hey! What are you going to do with what people thinkand believe?Just because the cows and the buffalos look at you andwag their ears back and forth, does it mean they are lookingupon you with respect or they are admiring you? This is howeverything is. You might think they are watching you withrespect. It is simply in your head. But really everyone is caughtup in his own miseries; everyone is caught up in his own worries.No one has time for you.It was all for maanI had told everyone, ‘Come and get your work done fromme, whatever it may be; whether it is advice, consolation orwhatever else. I will also give you money if I have some. Youdo not have to do my work but I will do yours. This way youwill not have any fear or uncertainties from my end because youdo not have to do anything for me. If I am going home after alate night movie and happen to stop by your house, you mightthink, ‘He has never done this before, he must want somethingand that is why he is here.’ On the contrary, thinking this wayabout me is the same as looking lustfully at a sati (chastewoman). I do not need anything and when others look at menegatively and get worried that I may ask them for something;that was not acceptable. Therefore, I told everyone, ‘TheseAptavani-9269270Aptavani-9hands are not for taking, they are for giving; you can ask me foranything you need.’ And this is how everyone stopped havingany kind of fear about me.Everyday there would be several cars parked in front ofmy home in Mamani Poda in Baroda. I used to pay fifteenrupees rent for that house in a well-respected area. How manypeople lived in bungalows some forty-four years ago? MamaniPoda was considered a very good location. People normallylived in homes paying seven rupees for rent and I was payingfifteen rupees for our home. I was looked upon as a verysuccessful contractor. So those who lived in that area woulddrive their cars to my home whenever they had any difficulties.They would come to me having done something illegal and yetI would help them escape through a ‘back-door’ (find anunderhanded solution or a loop-hole for them) solution for them.I would show them the ‘back door’ and tell them to ‘leave’from there. Now they were the ones who committed the crimeand I would find a way for them to escape. So I took theresponsibility (karmic) of their crime upon myself. Why is that?It was to feed my maan! Is it not a crime to find a ‘back-door’for others? I would use my good judgment to show them theway out and help them escape. So they would treat me withrespect, but I was the one left to face the consequences; Itook on the liability of facing the consequences. Later Irealized that it was sheer unawareness on my part that led meto take on the liability of such consequences and all becauseof maan. That was when I recognized the maan within. Whatworries it had caused me!! What anxieties I had for justwanting maan (respect)!Questioner: How did you destroy that maan once you‘caught’ it?Dadashri: Maan cannot be destroyed; it can be covered(upsham) so that it does not hurt so much but it cannot bedestroyed. How can it be destroyed when the one who isdestroying it will be destroyed? How can one kill one’s ownself? Do you understand that? So I covered that maan and dealtwith it as much as I could and let the days pass.Frightful heat of anger in reaction toobstruction of prideI did not have any greed from my very childhood. But Ihad tremendous maan and therefore the anger that comes alongwith it.Questioner: Does that mean that you would get veryangry at the slightest interference if your maan was hurt,restricted or obstructed?Dadashri: Even the slightest of agitation in that respectwould incite such anger in me that people around me wouldtremble with fear. That anger was so intense that it would causethe other person to ‘burn’ also! The anger was that bad,because there was no other greed, only the greed for thisrespect (maan). Prior to Gnan, if the anger ever erupted, itwould ‘kill’ the victim on the spot. One Sikh almost died; I hadto go and pacify him in order to turn things around.So that was the state ‘we’ were in. At home there washardly any money, only this superficial pompousness. Andbecause of that, there were endless difficulties and worries.The Ego before and after GnanWhat would people around me say? ‘He is a very happyman!’ I had a contract business; money flowed in and out. I hadlot of love towards people and people could see it in my eyes;they said I was God-like. They said I was very happy! Peoplethought I was a happy man but I used to worry incessantly. Oneday I could not sleep because I could not stop worrying. So I‘wrapped’ my worries in a ‘package’, did a vidhi on it withsome mantras and placed it between two pillows and went offAptavani-9269270Aptavani-9hands are not for taking, they are for giving; you can ask me foranything you need.’ And this is how everyone stopped havingany kind of fear about me.Everyday there would be several cars parked in front ofmy home in Mamani Poda in Baroda. I used to pay fifteenrupees rent for that house in a well-respected area. How manypeople lived in bungalows some forty-four years ago? MamaniPoda was considered a very good location. People normallylived in homes paying seven rupees for rent and I was payingfifteen rupees for our home. I was looked upon as a verysuccessful contractor. So those who lived in that area woulddrive their cars to my home whenever they had any difficulties.They would come to me having done something illegal and yetI would help them escape through a ‘back-door’ (find anunderhanded solution or a loop-hole for them) solution for them.I would show them the ‘back door’ and tell them to ‘leave’from there. Now they were the ones who committed the crimeand I would find a way for them to escape. So I took theresponsibility (karmic) of their crime upon myself. Why is that?It was to feed my maan! Is it not a crime to find a ‘back-door’for others? I would use my good judgment to show them theway out and help them escape. So they would treat me withrespect, but I was the one left to face the consequences; Itook on the liability of facing the consequences. Later Irealized that it was sheer unawareness on my part that led meto take on the liability of such consequences and all becauseof maan. That was when I recognized the maan within. Whatworries it had caused me!! What anxieties I had for justwanting maan (respect)!Questioner: How did you destroy that maan once you‘caught’ it?Dadashri: Maan cannot be destroyed; it can be covered(upsham) so that it does not hurt so much but it cannot bedestroyed. How can it be destroyed when the one who isdestroying it will be destroyed? How can one kill one’s ownself? Do you understand that? So I covered that maan and dealtwith it as much as I could and let the days pass.Frightful heat of anger in reaction toobstruction of prideI did not have any greed from my very childhood. But Ihad tremendous maan and therefore the anger that comes alongwith it.Questioner: Does that mean that you would get veryangry at the slightest interference if your maan was hurt,restricted or obstructed?Dadashri: Even the slightest of agitation in that respectwould incite such anger in me that people around me wouldtremble with fear. That anger was so intense that it would causethe other person to ‘burn’ also! The anger was that bad,because there was no other greed, only the greed for thisrespect (maan). Prior to Gnan, if the anger ever erupted, itwould ‘kill’ the victim on the spot. One Sikh almost died; I hadto go and pacify him in order to turn things around.So that was the state ‘we’ were in. At home there washardly any money, only this superficial pompousness. Andbecause of that, there were endless difficulties and worries.The Ego before and after GnanWhat would people around me say? ‘He is a very happyman!’ I had a contract business; money flowed in and out. I hadlot of love towards people and people could see it in my eyes;they said I was God-like. They said I was very happy! Peoplethought I was a happy man but I used to worry incessantly. Oneday I could not sleep because I could not stop worrying. So I‘wrapped’ my worries in a ‘package’, did a vidhi on it withsome mantras and placed it between two pillows and went offAptavani-9271272Aptavani-9to sleep and I had a good night sleep. Next morning I put that‘package’ in the Vishvamitri River and then my worries started todecrease. But when Gnan manifested, ‘I’ ‘saw-understood’(joyu) and ‘knew-experienced’ (jaanyu) the entire world as it is.Questioner: But even before Gnan you had the awarenessthat it was the ego, did you not?Dadashri: Yes, I did have that awareness. I also knewthat it was the ego, but I liked it. But it was when it botheredme so much that I realized there was no fun in it; it was thenthat I realized that the ego was not my friend but rather, myfoe.Questioner: When did you begin to recognize the ego tobe a foe?Dadashri: When I could not sleep at night, I realized thenwhat kind of an ego it was. That is why that night I ‘wrappedthe worries in a package’ and dropped it off in the VishvamitriRiver the next morning. What else could I do?Questioner: So what did you place in the package?Dadashri: The entire ego! The heck with it! What goodwas it for me? What was it for? I had nothing to gain from it.People would make comments about me such as, ‘there is noend to his happiness’ whereas I could not see even a drop ofhappiness in me. The ego caused me continued worries andproblems within.The slightest jolt to the ego and I would be up all night,unable to sleep. I would not sleep the whole nightlong. Beforewhen I attended weddings, if someone greeted me but I did notsee them do so, it would create chaos within me. I thoughtmyself to be so great! And yet there was nothing there. It wouldhave been different if I had some wealth in estates, but I did nothave anything. I just had pomp without the wealth. That is whatpompous people are like. And the clothes I wore, as if I wasa great paternal relative of the Gayakvad of the Royal Family!Now what can be gained from all this? It eventually came ‘downto earth’.Questioner: Did you remain separate from the ego atthat time? Was it something like that?Dadashri: No. This state of worries occurred becausethere was no separation. That is why I could not sleep. If I wereseparate at that time, would I not have been able to shut theego, right away?But the ego was the only thing that was being nurtured.Except for the ego, there was absolutely no deceit (kapat)within; no my-ness (mamata) either. There was no mamata formoney. I did not know anything and yet I had an enormous ego.All I knew was how to help others.Ego of a noble manSo, I had tremendous maan. I believed myself to besomebody great because I was born in a Kshatriya family(warrior class family). Patels are Kshatriya, so people give themdowries. So from the time one is born, people around him talkabout the ‘check’ (dowry) that will be forthcoming. I hadworthy attributes too. People don’t just pay dowries without areason. They pay for the attributes of the family lineage; they payfor the social status. The lineage alone would not suffice, theyalso look at the family and it’s prestige and honorableupstanding. Would they give dowries otherwise? What is aperson from an honorable family like? He is noble. Noblemeans he has some good family qualities. He does not cheatanyone; he has no attributes of deceit within him. When he isfrom an honorable family and good caste, then he is worthy ofa good dowry.Now what is the definition of a noble (khandaan)person? It is someone who ‘sheds’ readily i.e. someone whoAptavani-9271272Aptavani-9to sleep and I had a good night sleep. Next morning I put that‘package’ in the Vishvamitri River and then my worries started todecrease. But when Gnan manifested, ‘I’ ‘saw-understood’(joyu) and ‘knew-experienced’ (jaanyu) the entire world as it is.Questioner: But even before Gnan you had the awarenessthat it was the ego, did you not?Dadashri: Yes, I did have that awareness. I also knewthat it was the ego, but I liked it. But it was when it botheredme so much that I realized there was no fun in it; it was thenthat I realized that the ego was not my friend but rather, myfoe.Questioner: When did you begin to recognize the ego tobe a foe?Dadashri: When I could not sleep at night, I realized thenwhat kind of an ego it was. That is why that night I ‘wrappedthe worries in a package’ and dropped it off in the VishvamitriRiver the next morning. What else could I do?Questioner: So what did you place in the package?Dadashri: The entire ego! The heck with it! What goodwas it for me? What was it for? I had nothing to gain from it.People would make comments about me such as, ‘there is noend to his happiness’ whereas I could not see even a drop ofhappiness in me. The ego caused me continued worries andproblems within.The slightest jolt to the ego and I would be up all night,unable to sleep. I would not sleep the whole nightlong. Beforewhen I attended weddings, if someone greeted me but I did notsee them do so, it would create chaos within me. I thoughtmyself to be so great! And yet there was nothing there. It wouldhave been different if I had some wealth in estates, but I did nothave anything. I just had pomp without the wealth. That is whatpompous people are like. And the clothes I wore, as if I wasa great paternal relative of the Gayakvad of the Royal Family!Now what can be gained from all this? It eventually came ‘downto earth’.Questioner: Did you remain separate from the ego atthat time? Was it something like that?Dadashri: No. This state of worries occurred becausethere was no separation. That is why I could not sleep. If I wereseparate at that time, would I not have been able to shut theego, right away?But the ego was the only thing that was being nurtured.Except for the ego, there was absolutely no deceit (kapat)within; no my-ness (mamata) either. There was no mamata formoney. I did not know anything and yet I had an enormous ego.All I knew was how to help others.Ego of a noble manSo, I had tremendous maan. I believed myself to besomebody great because I was born in a Kshatriya family(warrior class family). Patels are Kshatriya, so people give themdowries. So from the time one is born, people around him talkabout the ‘check’ (dowry) that will be forthcoming. I hadworthy attributes too. People don’t just pay dowries without areason. They pay for the attributes of the family lineage; they payfor the social status. The lineage alone would not suffice, theyalso look at the family and it’s prestige and honorableupstanding. Would they give dowries otherwise? What is aperson from an honorable family like? He is noble. Noblemeans he has some good family qualities. He does not cheatanyone; he has no attributes of deceit within him. When he isfrom an honorable family and good caste, then he is worthy ofa good dowry.Now what is the definition of a noble (khandaan)person? It is someone who ‘sheds’ readily i.e. someone whoAptavani-9273274Aptavani-9gives readily when it comes to giving or taking. Like a piece oflog; it sheds wood when you pull the saw and also when youpush it. So, a noble man is very humble - he gives even in theact of receiving; he allows himself to be cheated when he givesto others. He gives more than he should so that the otherperson does not feel hurt. So he allows himself to lose whengiving and also when he receives. Such a man is a noble(khandaan) man.And there is no problem with the ego of such nobility.Such an ego will preserve nobility; one loses his nobility andbecomes morally bankrupt if such an ego is not present.My elder brother lives here in Baroda so whenever Ivisited him, his friends would ask me, ‘Bring back a pair ofpants’, or ‘bring me a vest’ or ‘bring me a shirt’. Friends do thisdon’t they? And what was my nature? I would buy from the firstvendor I stopped at to inquire about the goods. Then I wouldaccept his prices whether they were high or low. I would buyfrom him so that he would not feel hurt. Therefore, I knew mynature and I also knew the nature of the people who asked meto buy things for them. They would go to seven different shops,insult the vendors while bargaining with them and then theywould make their purchases. I knew these people would buythings even two aanaas cheaper than what I would buy for.Therefore, I would automatically deduct two aanaas and thenone extra aanaa from the price I paid for their goods. If I paidtwelve aanaas, I would tell them I paid nine. This way theycould not accuse me of charging them a ‘commission’. Theywould say, ‘I paid ten aanaas for the same thing and you aretaking your commission by charging me twelve aanaas?’ Ihave never taken any commission. I have not learnt to chargeany commission.I have never taken commission in my life. If someoneasked me for a favor - ‘Can you make arrangements for themto release my goods, when you go there?’ Now that person mayhave goods worth twenty-five thousand rupees. What if I wereto charge a commission of three hundred rupees or so in that?Would he even think that I would charge a commission? Is thatwhy he asked me for help? No. He asked me because hetrusts me, so would I violate his trust in this way? This did notsuit me.Questioner: But this is all natural, is it not?Dadashri: What is natural? Can you take money thisway? Not to do so is nobility. If one does not try to preservethis ego of nobility, in the absence of Gnan, then he will becomecompletely bankrupt. We are noble people! Noble peoplecannot do anything wrong. Nobility is to not do anything that issocially unacceptable. A noble person cannot do anything thatpeople will criticize him for. It is false nobility if a person claimsto be noble when he carries out deeds that are sociallyunacceptable. No one will accept that. There is contradiction ina situation when one claims to be noble but others criticize him;this equation does not work.If you do something and then say, ‘I did it,’ then thenobility (khandaani) goes away. A noble man will give boththe times, when he comes and also when he goes. He is likethe sawdust that sheds whether you pull on the saw or youpush on it; he gives when he gives but he also gives when hetakes.Craving for respectNow if a person was given a lot of respect (maan) whenhe was growing up, he will not be hungry for it when he growsup. If his hunger for respect (maan) has been satisfied in hischildhood, then he has no hunger for it later on. A human life canbe destroyed if one has been scarred with contempt in hischildhood. If a person is subject to repeated insults in hischildhood to the point where his need for respect was rejected,Aptavani-9273274Aptavani-9gives readily when it comes to giving or taking. Like a piece oflog; it sheds wood when you pull the saw and also when youpush it. So, a noble man is very humble - he gives even in theact of receiving; he allows himself to be cheated when he givesto others. He gives more than he should so that the otherperson does not feel hurt. So he allows himself to lose whengiving and also when he receives. Such a man is a noble(khandaan) man.And there is no problem with the ego of such nobility.Such an ego will preserve nobility; one loses his nobility andbecomes morally bankrupt if such an ego is not present.My elder brother lives here in Baroda so whenever Ivisited him, his friends would ask me, ‘Bring back a pair ofpants’, or ‘bring me a vest’ or ‘bring me a shirt’. Friends do thisdon’t they? And what was my nature? I would buy from the firstvendor I stopped at to inquire about the goods. Then I wouldaccept his prices whether they were high or low. I would buyfrom him so that he would not feel hurt. Therefore, I knew mynature and I also knew the nature of the people who asked meto buy things for them. They would go to seven different shops,insult the vendors while bargaining with them and then theywould make their purchases. I knew these people would buythings even two aanaas cheaper than what I would buy for.Therefore, I would automatically deduct two aanaas and thenone extra aanaa from the price I paid for their goods. If I paidtwelve aanaas, I would tell them I paid nine. This way theycould not accuse me of charging them a ‘commission’. Theywould say, ‘I paid ten aanaas for the same thing and you aretaking your commission by charging me twelve aanaas?’ Ihave never taken any commission. I have not learnt to chargeany commission.I have never taken commission in my life. If someoneasked me for a favor - ‘Can you make arrangements for themto release my goods, when you go there?’ Now that person mayhave goods worth twenty-five thousand rupees. What if I wereto charge a commission of three hundred rupees or so in that?Would he even think that I would charge a commission? Is thatwhy he asked me for help? No. He asked me because hetrusts me, so would I violate his trust in this way? This did notsuit me.Questioner: But this is all natural, is it not?Dadashri: What is natural? Can you take money thisway? Not to do so is nobility. If one does not try to preservethis ego of nobility, in the absence of Gnan, then he will becomecompletely bankrupt. We are noble people! Noble peoplecannot do anything wrong. Nobility is to not do anything that issocially unacceptable. A noble person cannot do anything thatpeople will criticize him for. It is false nobility if a person claimsto be noble when he carries out deeds that are sociallyunacceptable. No one will accept that. There is contradiction ina situation when one claims to be noble but others criticize him;this equation does not work.If you do something and then say, ‘I did it,’ then thenobility (khandaani) goes away. A noble man will give boththe times, when he comes and also when he goes. He is likethe sawdust that sheds whether you pull on the saw or youpush on it; he gives when he gives but he also gives when hetakes.Craving for respectNow if a person was given a lot of respect (maan) whenhe was growing up, he will not be hungry for it when he growsup. If his hunger for respect (maan) has been satisfied in hischildhood, then he has no hunger for it later on. A human life canbe destroyed if one has been scarred with contempt in hischildhood. If a person is subject to repeated insults in hischildhood to the point where his need for respect was rejected,Aptavani-9275276Aptavani-9then he makes a firm inner resolution (niyanu) exclusively forearning maan (respect). Such a person grows to be a bigmaani (one perpetually hungry for respect and recognition).From a very young age he makes a decision of, ‘now I wantto get ahead of everybody and be successful’. So he makesthis his main goal. He will say, ‘I will prove that I am betterthan everybody and will go farther than everyone’, and he willaccomplish this too. Yes, he will do whatever it takes; give hisall for it and will progress further ahead. A person who hasbeen given a lot of maan growing up will not have this extradrive.Now if one receives lots of respect then his appetite forit would be satisfied. If a person gets excessive, then his hungerfor it is fulfilled. He will then begin to dislike respect people givehim. Do you think people don’t give me enough respect? If youtoo were to get such abundant respect, your appetite for it willbe finished, too.‘Tasting’ respect releases one from havinggreed for itDo you like respect?Questioner: Dada, up until today, I used to be intimidatedby the fear of being insulted or by losing respect. Because of thisfear I would not take part in any activities and I used to bedepressed. But now all that has gone away. As I got respect andrecognition (maan) I began to feel free.Dadashri: No, that is lobh-granthi - a ‘tuber’ of greed(lobh – greed. Granthi or gaanth - tuber). That is why whenone gets respect and the taste he gets out of it, will break histuber of greed. As he gets to taste respect, his tuber of greedwill begin to dissolve very fast.Now if a person has a tuber of pride (maan), it will makehim run around for respect and recognition. Wherever he getsrespect he will be there. If they tell him, ‘We will hang a plaquewith your name on the wall’, he will say, ‘Put me down for fiftythousand rupees.’ When a maani person gets respect he will letgo of his greed, whereas a greedy (lobhi) person will not let goof his greed even for million times the respect. It is very difficultto find such greedy people in this current time cycle. There isno one as such. Such greedy people were to be found duringthe third and the fourth Ara (past eras of the present cosmictime cycle). They were very greedy. In the current time cyclethere is no telling where pride (maan) lies or where greed(lobh) lies.The beggary for respectHe who says, ‘I do not want anything’, his work getsdone. Even when things come before him naturally, there is nowant in him. And you, you still have needs and wants, do younot? What do you want?Questioner: I recognize that I want respect (maan).Dadashri: There is no problem with wanting respect, butare you preoccupied with attaining it? Are you caught up with‘how can I get respect’?Questioner: No, not that kind of preoccupation.Dadashri: Then what if you do not get any respect?Questioner: Then there is no problem.Dadashri: Then there is no problem with that. If youhave an intense desire (kaamna) for respect, it is consideredbeggary (bheekh). An intense desire for anything is calledbeggary. Intense desire or beggary is not a (karmic) discharge.Words like kaamna and bheekh (intense desire and beggary)are very similar. But nothing will affect You if Your upayog,meaning applied awareness as the Self is maintained. Therefore,our spiritual path is not obstructed by simple pride. But it can beAptavani-9275276Aptavani-9then he makes a firm inner resolution (niyanu) exclusively forearning maan (respect). Such a person grows to be a bigmaani (one perpetually hungry for respect and recognition).From a very young age he makes a decision of, ‘now I wantto get ahead of everybody and be successful’. So he makesthis his main goal. He will say, ‘I will prove that I am betterthan everybody and will go farther than everyone’, and he willaccomplish this too. Yes, he will do whatever it takes; give hisall for it and will progress further ahead. A person who hasbeen given a lot of maan growing up will not have this extradrive.Now if one receives lots of respect then his appetite forit would be satisfied. If a person gets excessive, then his hungerfor it is fulfilled. He will then begin to dislike respect people givehim. Do you think people don’t give me enough respect? If youtoo were to get such abundant respect, your appetite for it willbe finished, too.‘Tasting’ respect releases one from havinggreed for itDo you like respect?Questioner: Dada, up until today, I used to be intimidatedby the fear of being insulted or by losing respect. Because of thisfear I would not take part in any activities and I used to bedepressed. But now all that has gone away. As I got respect andrecognition (maan) I began to feel free.Dadashri: No, that is lobh-granthi - a ‘tuber’ of greed(lobh – greed. Granthi or gaanth - tuber). That is why whenone gets respect and the taste he gets out of it, will break histuber of greed. As he gets to taste respect, his tuber of greedwill begin to dissolve very fast.Now if a person has a tuber of pride (maan), it will makehim run around for respect and recognition. Wherever he getsrespect he will be there. If they tell him, ‘We will hang a plaquewith your name on the wall’, he will say, ‘Put me down for fiftythousand rupees.’ When a maani person gets respect he will letgo of his greed, whereas a greedy (lobhi) person will not let goof his greed even for million times the respect. It is very difficultto find such greedy people in this current time cycle. There isno one as such. Such greedy people were to be found duringthe third and the fourth Ara (past eras of the present cosmictime cycle). They were very greedy. In the current time cyclethere is no telling where pride (maan) lies or where greed(lobh) lies.The beggary for respectHe who says, ‘I do not want anything’, his work getsdone. Even when things come before him naturally, there is nowant in him. And you, you still have needs and wants, do younot? What do you want?Questioner: I recognize that I want respect (maan).Dadashri: There is no problem with wanting respect, butare you preoccupied with attaining it? Are you caught up with‘how can I get respect’?Questioner: No, not that kind of preoccupation.Dadashri: Then what if you do not get any respect?Questioner: Then there is no problem.Dadashri: Then there is no problem with that. If youhave an intense desire (kaamna) for respect, it is consideredbeggary (bheekh). An intense desire for anything is calledbeggary. Intense desire or beggary is not a (karmic) discharge.Words like kaamna and bheekh (intense desire and beggary)are very similar. But nothing will affect You if Your upayog,meaning applied awareness as the Self is maintained. Therefore,our spiritual path is not obstructed by simple pride. But it can beAptavani-9277278Aptavani-9Questioner: Does respect not make a person fall?Dadashri: Rather it is the abhimaan (extra or excessivepride) that makes one fall. So there is nothing wrong withenjoying maan (respect) others give you, however at the sametime you should maintain the awareness of ‘this should not beso.’ Now, ‘we’ have given you the freedom to accept respectbut you should not become attached (have raag) to those whogive you respect. There is no restriction on accepting respect butyou should not have any attachment (raag) for the one whogives you respect.Deceit in pride (kapat in maan): Distortionof pride (vikruti of maan)Questioner: Does enjoying respect not weaken theawareness (jagruti) Dada?Dadashri: It will definitely reduce the awareness (jagruti).Awareness will not arise where there is deceit in pride – wherethere is kapat in maan. When one’s deceit is operational in hispride, he cannot see his pride.Distortion of pride: Intoxication of ego (keyf)Questioner: There is no problem in enjoying respect(maan) that comes spontaneously and naturally. But then thereis a possibility of it becoming complex and distorted (vikruti),and then will arise the desire for respect. Is this likely to happen?Dadashri: Something of the sort happens but thereshould not be any desire (ichchha) at all. Desire is harmful.Questioner: What kinds of distortion (vikruti) of prideand how far does it stretch?Dadashri: There are many kinds of distortions of prideand that is what makes one fall. There is nothing wrong inenjoying respect. If someone tells you, ‘Welcome sir…welcome’,then enjoy that respect. You will feel good inside; enjoy it withsaid that the one who has beggary for respect, has deviatedfrom the path.Questioner: Is it considered beggary for respect whenwe feel good when someone gives us respect?Dadashri: No. It is natural to feel good. Do you like teawith or without sugar? It is natural to like tea with sugar. But ifsomeone insists, ‘I only like tea without sugar, so there!’ then Iwould say that is an ego. Why don’t you quietly drink the teawith sugar? It is tasty. Is that true or not?Questioner: What is it called if someone likes respect?Dadashri: There is nothing wrong in liking respect. Oneis bound to like it, is one not? Go ahead and let respect be fun.There is nothing wrong there. If someone says, ‘I cannot get ridof my pride and need for respect’, then I will tell him, ‘If youcannot get rid of it in this life, you can do it in the next life.’ Butenjoy your respect with leisure!Enjoy the respect people give you but…Enjoy the respect people give you but you should nothave any desire for it. When someone respects you, when itlands in your plate, enjoy it. Enjoy it leisurely. But you should notharbor a desire for it.Questioner: But when he ‘cashes in’ the respect, will henot have problems?Dadashri: What is wrong with cashing in the respect?You can cash it in, it will get used up, but the desire for it doesnot arise again, does it? Enjoy the respect, I am telling you toenjoy it. Are you going to enjoy it ‘there’? Are you going toreceive any respect in the Siddha gati (abode of the completelyliberated Souls)? So, whatever you receive here, enjoy it asmuch as you can, but do not make a habit of it. Do not becomehabituated.Aptavani-9277278Aptavani-9Questioner: Does respect not make a person fall?Dadashri: Rather it is the abhimaan (extra or excessivepride) that makes one fall. So there is nothing wrong withenjoying maan (respect) others give you, however at the sametime you should maintain the awareness of ‘this should not beso.’ Now, ‘we’ have given you the freedom to accept respectbut you should not become attached (have raag) to those whogive you respect. There is no restriction on accepting respect butyou should not have any attachment (raag) for the one whogives you respect.Deceit in pride (kapat in maan): Distortionof pride (vikruti of maan)Questioner: Does enjoying respect not weaken theawareness (jagruti) Dada?Dadashri: It will definitely reduce the awareness (jagruti).Awareness will not arise where there is deceit in pride – wherethere is kapat in maan. When one’s deceit is operational in hispride, he cannot see his pride.Distortion of pride: Intoxication of ego (keyf)Questioner: There is no problem in enjoying respect(maan) that comes spontaneously and naturally. But then thereis a possibility of it becoming complex and distorted (vikruti),and then will arise the desire for respect. Is this likely to happen?Dadashri: Something of the sort happens but thereshould not be any desire (ichchha) at all. Desire is harmful.Questioner: What kinds of distortion (vikruti) of prideand how far does it stretch?Dadashri: There are many kinds of distortions of prideand that is what makes one fall. There is nothing wrong inenjoying respect. If someone tells you, ‘Welcome sir…welcome’,then enjoy that respect. You will feel good inside; enjoy it withsaid that the one who has beggary for respect, has deviatedfrom the path.Questioner: Is it considered beggary for respect whenwe feel good when someone gives us respect?Dadashri: No. It is natural to feel good. Do you like teawith or without sugar? It is natural to like tea with sugar. But ifsomeone insists, ‘I only like tea without sugar, so there!’ then Iwould say that is an ego. Why don’t you quietly drink the teawith sugar? It is tasty. Is that true or not?Questioner: What is it called if someone likes respect?Dadashri: There is nothing wrong in liking respect. Oneis bound to like it, is one not? Go ahead and let respect be fun.There is nothing wrong there. If someone says, ‘I cannot get ridof my pride and need for respect’, then I will tell him, ‘If youcannot get rid of it in this life, you can do it in the next life.’ Butenjoy your respect with leisure!Enjoy the respect people give you but…Enjoy the respect people give you but you should nothave any desire for it. When someone respects you, when itlands in your plate, enjoy it. Enjoy it leisurely. But you should notharbor a desire for it.Questioner: But when he ‘cashes in’ the respect, will henot have problems?Dadashri: What is wrong with cashing in the respect?You can cash it in, it will get used up, but the desire for it doesnot arise again, does it? Enjoy the respect, I am telling you toenjoy it. Are you going to enjoy it ‘there’? Are you going toreceive any respect in the Siddha gati (abode of the completelyliberated Souls)? So, whatever you receive here, enjoy it asmuch as you can, but do not make a habit of it. Do not becomehabituated.Aptavani-9279280Aptavani-9leisure, but do not become intoxicated (keyf) with it. Theintoxication of pride will make it ugly. One appears ugly andunattractive when there is such an intoxicated ego for pride.Even a handsome face will appear ugly.Why does pride or the need for importance exist? It existsbecause one sees others as inferior. Therefore do not see othersas inferior and tell yourself that they are superior to you. Thenthat pride will disappear.You should be indebted to the one insultingyouQuestioner: Respects-insults are very bothersome, howcan I be free from them?Dadashri: What bothers you, is it the insult (upmaan) orthe respect (maan)?Questioner: Actually, it is the insult.Dadashri: Even respect can be very bothersome! A manwill get up immediately if someone gives him too much respect.If a man gets too much respect, he will run away from there. Ifeveryday people keep giving him a lot of respect, he will gettired and run away from there, whereas he would not be ableto tolerate insults even for a short time. He will like respect evenfor a short time. Nevertheless man can tolerate insult but he willnot be able to tolerate respect (excessive). Yes, to toleraterespect is like swallowing lead. When a newly married manbows at his father’s feet for blessings, the father immediatelygets up from his seat. If you ask him, ‘Why did you get up?’ Hewill tell you he cannot handle it.Questioner: And yet he does not like insult, what is that?Dadashri: It is very wrong not to like insults. No bodylikes insults. The shakti (the energy or the ability) to like insulthas not arisen in anyone. People should hire someone to insultthem, but no one does! And when people are truly insulted, theyget hurt and feel let down. One should be thankful to the personinsulting him but instead he feels hurt and let down. He shouldnot feel hurt and let down after an insult, but should feel obligedto the person hurling the insult. If someone truly insults you,consider him your upkari i.e. someone who does you a greatfavor. You should think, ‘it would be great if he is around me allthe time.’Love for insultsWhen a person insults you, he is simply a nimit(instrumental in the process of your unfolding karmas; anapparent doer) in the fruition of your past karma. How can thatpoor man be the guilty one when you have to endure the fruitsof your own karma? So try looking at it this way. Understandthat it is a fruition of your own karma when someone insults you.What would you do if a piece of rock were to fall from a hilland hit you on the head?Questioner: I would get hurt if it were in my fate.Dadashri: No, not so. When the rock comes tumblingdown and hits you, you look up to see who threw it and whenyou find no one up there, you do not get upset; you do not dokashaya with anyone. But if someone throws a stone at you,you will do kashaya, you get angry with him. What is the reasonbehind this? It is because there is a difference in yourunderstanding. In the former case, the hill threw the stone at youand in the latter, it also a ‘hill’ that throws the stone. There is nopure consciousness (shuddha chetan) in a person; it ismishrachetan (a mixture of the non-Self and the Self; theworldly being). He too is a ‘rock’; he is a ‘hill’, the poorfellow! If you ‘see’ and ‘understand’ it this way, then it is morethan enough.You cannot love insults, can you? You cannot love insultsas much as respect, can you? Can a person like losses as muchas he likes profits?Aptavani-9279280Aptavani-9leisure, but do not become intoxicated (keyf) with it. Theintoxication of pride will make it ugly. One appears ugly andunattractive when there is such an intoxicated ego for pride.Even a handsome face will appear ugly.Why does pride or the need for importance exist? It existsbecause one sees others as inferior. Therefore do not see othersas inferior and tell yourself that they are superior to you. Thenthat pride will disappear.You should be indebted to the one insultingyouQuestioner: Respects-insults are very bothersome, howcan I be free from them?Dadashri: What bothers you, is it the insult (upmaan) orthe respect (maan)?Questioner: Actually, it is the insult.Dadashri: Even respect can be very bothersome! A manwill get up immediately if someone gives him too much respect.If a man gets too much respect, he will run away from there. Ifeveryday people keep giving him a lot of respect, he will gettired and run away from there, whereas he would not be ableto tolerate insults even for a short time. He will like respect evenfor a short time. Nevertheless man can tolerate insult but he willnot be able to tolerate respect (excessive). Yes, to toleraterespect is like swallowing lead. When a newly married manbows at his father’s feet for blessings, the father immediatelygets up from his seat. If you ask him, ‘Why did you get up?’ Hewill tell you he cannot handle it.Questioner: And yet he does not like insult, what is that?Dadashri: It is very wrong not to like insults. No bodylikes insults. The shakti (the energy or the ability) to like insulthas not arisen in anyone. People should hire someone to insultthem, but no one does! And when people are truly insulted, theyget hurt and feel let down. One should be thankful to the personinsulting him but instead he feels hurt and let down. He shouldnot feel hurt and let down after an insult, but should feel obligedto the person hurling the insult. If someone truly insults you,consider him your upkari i.e. someone who does you a greatfavor. You should think, ‘it would be great if he is around me allthe time.’Love for insultsWhen a person insults you, he is simply a nimit(instrumental in the process of your unfolding karmas; anapparent doer) in the fruition of your past karma. How can thatpoor man be the guilty one when you have to endure the fruitsof your own karma? So try looking at it this way. Understandthat it is a fruition of your own karma when someone insults you.What would you do if a piece of rock were to fall from a hilland hit you on the head?Questioner: I would get hurt if it were in my fate.Dadashri: No, not so. When the rock comes tumblingdown and hits you, you look up to see who threw it and whenyou find no one up there, you do not get upset; you do not dokashaya with anyone. But if someone throws a stone at you,you will do kashaya, you get angry with him. What is the reasonbehind this? It is because there is a difference in yourunderstanding. In the former case, the hill threw the stone at youand in the latter, it also a ‘hill’ that throws the stone. There is nopure consciousness (shuddha chetan) in a person; it ismishrachetan (a mixture of the non-Self and the Self; theworldly being). He too is a ‘rock’; he is a ‘hill’, the poorfellow! If you ‘see’ and ‘understand’ it this way, then it is morethan enough.You cannot love insults, can you? You cannot love insultsas much as respect, can you? Can a person like losses as muchas he likes profits?Aptavani-9281282Aptavani-9Education and wisdomWhat would you do if someone were to insult you? What‘we’ are saying is where you do not have any authority and thepower (satta) to change anything; you simply have to say ‘I likeit’. What do you have to do when you have no energy (shakti)or control? If you say ‘I do not like it’, it will gnaw away at youfrom within. It will eat away at you all nightlong, do youunderstand? Has this ever happened to you?Questioner: It will bite and bother me the wholenightlong; it feels like I am being beaten!Dadashri: Alas! Just look at the way people spend theirdays! Education is bhanatar. Reasoning ability, wisdom isganatar. Educated people will reduce their upadhi (externallyinduced difficulties and pains). If they can, they will completelyget rid of their difficulties (upadhis); they will leave nothingpending. But if a person is not able to do anything, he becomesentangled. Educated people who do not have a reasoning power(ganatar) will get entangled; they have education (bhanatar)but they do not have the wisdom of reasoning (ganatar).Reasoning is a different thing. I have not learnt education(bhanatar) but I did learn very good reasoning (ganatar). Ifailed my matriculation grade but I have tremendous reasoningenergy and wisdom (ganatar).Pratikraman for the attackQuestioner: What should I do when I do not like beinginsulted?Dadashri: No problem with that, but you do not attack(humlo) the person who insults you, do you?Questioner: Attacking speech does come out; the attackis done through words.Dadashri: But that is not your inner intent (bhaav), is it?Questioner: Absolutely not! I feel bad after speakingsuch words. But when such words do come out, does it notmean both internal and external asaiyam (expression ofkashaya) has occurred? There is no benefit in that is there?Dadashri: The first saiyam (absence of kashayas) withinis, ‘No. This should not be so. Why does this happen?’ That isthe first saiyam. However, this saiyam must commence. Thisverily is the true saiyam. Then the last saiyam will comegradually.Questioner: Sometimes when I am insulted in such amanner, the attack of the mind continues, although it may notmanifest in speech.Dadashri: We are not concerned with whatever happensat that time. Even if it ends up in a physical attack, the worldlyinteraction (vyavahar) is dependant upon whatever energy(shakti) exists within. The one in whom the shakti hasmanifested completely, his attack from even the mind will cease.Still what do ‘we’ say? You simply have to do pratikraman if anattack from the mind or speech occurs, or even if a physicalattack occurs. Do pratikraman if the weakness of all three kindsof attacks arises.Questioner: Say if someone insults me and my pride ishurt so badly that a tragu (state of severe obstinacy) ariseswithin me, but only against myself, how far will I fall? In otherwords, I do not follow your instructions about how to deal withthe insult.Dadashri: One has already fallen, has he not? The factthat obstinacy arises is the fall in itself. Severe obstinacy (tragu)is the greatest danger. One has fallen completely; he cannot godown any further.The fear of being insulted is beggary(bheekh) of prideWhat do ‘we’ say? It is not a problem if you do not likeAptavani-9281282Aptavani-9Education and wisdomWhat would you do if someone were to insult you? What‘we’ are saying is where you do not have any authority and thepower (satta) to change anything; you simply have to say ‘I likeit’. What do you have to do when you have no energy (shakti)or control? If you say ‘I do not like it’, it will gnaw away at youfrom within. It will eat away at you all nightlong, do youunderstand? Has this ever happened to you?Questioner: It will bite and bother me the wholenightlong; it feels like I am being beaten!Dadashri: Alas! Just look at the way people spend theirdays! Education is bhanatar. Reasoning ability, wisdom isganatar. Educated people will reduce their upadhi (externallyinduced difficulties and pains). If they can, they will completelyget rid of their difficulties (upadhis); they will leave nothingpending. But if a person is not able to do anything, he becomesentangled. Educated people who do not have a reasoning power(ganatar) will get entangled; they have education (bhanatar)but they do not have the wisdom of reasoning (ganatar).Reasoning is a different thing. I have not learnt education(bhanatar) but I did learn very good reasoning (ganatar). Ifailed my matriculation grade but I have tremendous reasoningenergy and wisdom (ganatar).Pratikraman for the attackQuestioner: What should I do when I do not like beinginsulted?Dadashri: No problem with that, but you do not attack(humlo) the person who insults you, do you?Questioner: Attacking speech does come out; the attackis done through words.Dadashri: But that is not your inner intent (bhaav), is it?Questioner: Absolutely not! I feel bad after speakingsuch words. But when such words do come out, does it notmean both internal and external asaiyam (expression ofkashaya) has occurred? There is no benefit in that is there?Dadashri: The first saiyam (absence of kashayas) withinis, ‘No. This should not be so. Why does this happen?’ That isthe first saiyam. However, this saiyam must commence. Thisverily is the true saiyam. Then the last saiyam will comegradually.Questioner: Sometimes when I am insulted in such amanner, the attack of the mind continues, although it may notmanifest in speech.Dadashri: We are not concerned with whatever happensat that time. Even if it ends up in a physical attack, the worldlyinteraction (vyavahar) is dependant upon whatever energy(shakti) exists within. The one in whom the shakti hasmanifested completely, his attack from even the mind will cease.Still what do ‘we’ say? You simply have to do pratikraman if anattack from the mind or speech occurs, or even if a physicalattack occurs. Do pratikraman if the weakness of all three kindsof attacks arises.Questioner: Say if someone insults me and my pride ishurt so badly that a tragu (state of severe obstinacy) ariseswithin me, but only against myself, how far will I fall? In otherwords, I do not follow your instructions about how to deal withthe insult.Dadashri: One has already fallen, has he not? The factthat obstinacy arises is the fall in itself. Severe obstinacy (tragu)is the greatest danger. One has fallen completely; he cannot godown any further.The fear of being insulted is beggary(bheekh) of prideWhat do ‘we’ say? It is not a problem if you do not likeAptavani-9283284Aptavani-9Questioner: The body is the non-Self (anatma), whateffects do respect-insults have on the non-Self?Dadashri: What happens when you touch a block of icewith a flame? Will the flame scorch the ice?Questioner: It will not scorch it, but it will melt the ice.Dadashri: On the contrary, its cooling attribute cools thatflame. Similarly, pain and misery do not touch the Self. They donot affect even the body or the Self.Questioner: Then what does it affect?Dadashri: Who is the one that endures the suffering? Itis the ego! It is the ego that suffers. Nothing touches the Self.The Self does not accept anything that is not of its own.How can anyone insult You when he doesnot even know You?What happens if someone were to insult Chandulal? Hewill not be able to sleep at night, will he? It will keep botheringhim from within. The person who insulted him sleeps peacefullywhile Chandulal feels the hurt and will not be able to sleep.What kind of weakness is it that does not let you sleep whensomeone insults you? Why should You not sleep just becausesomeone insulted you? And besides, it is not You that wasinsulted, it is someone else. If they insulted You, you should nottolerate it, but he did not insult ‘You’, so why fret over it?Someone else is being insulted and You take it personally. Youshould not take it as ‘I am being insulted’, should You? Yes,nobody should insult You, but no one will insult You either. Howcan they when they do not even know You? They knowChandulal but not You.When you regard the person insulting you as someonewho obliges you; then your desire for respect (maan) will end.Who is to be insulted? ‘Ambalal Muljibhai’ (reader to insertbeing insulted but you should not harbor beggary or a desirefor respect.Questioner: But do we not have to get rid of thisweakness of fearing insults?Dadashri: That will go down, as you get insulted.Whatever you have dished out will be returned. The problemlies in being a beggar for respect.Questioner: What does it mean to be constantlypreoccupied (laksha) with the feeling of not wanting to beinsulted?Dadashri: Such a laksha where one is constantlyconcerned about not being insulted is verily beggary for respect.Otherwise, charitra mohaniya (conduct with moha; attachmentto the relative self) is a discharge moha; it will come and go. TheSelf has nothing to do with it.The Soul and respect or insultTherefore, respect and disrespect is all the beggary of thepudgal – the physical or the relative self. If someone were toslap ‘us’, ‘we’ do not have any problem with that.Questioner: All these talks about respect and insults,who is the one that becomes aware of it; it is not the body, itis the soul, the self, is it not?Dadashri: The Atma (the Self) does not have respect ordisrespect. The Self is not a beggar that it has anything to dowith respect or disrespect. The Self is the King of the entireuniverse; it is the Lord of the Universe.Questioner: But when that reaches within, is it not thesoul that gets hurt?Dadashri: No, it does not hurt the Soul (Atma); it doesnot touch the Soul, the Self at all.Aptavani-9283284Aptavani-9Questioner: The body is the non-Self (anatma), whateffects do respect-insults have on the non-Self?Dadashri: What happens when you touch a block of icewith a flame? Will the flame scorch the ice?Questioner: It will not scorch it, but it will melt the ice.Dadashri: On the contrary, its cooling attribute cools thatflame. Similarly, pain and misery do not touch the Self. They donot affect even the body or the Self.Questioner: Then what does it affect?Dadashri: Who is the one that endures the suffering? Itis the ego! It is the ego that suffers. Nothing touches the Self.The Self does not accept anything that is not of its own.How can anyone insult You when he doesnot even know You?What happens if someone were to insult Chandulal? Hewill not be able to sleep at night, will he? It will keep botheringhim from within. The person who insulted him sleeps peacefullywhile Chandulal feels the hurt and will not be able to sleep.What kind of weakness is it that does not let you sleep whensomeone insults you? Why should You not sleep just becausesomeone insulted you? And besides, it is not You that wasinsulted, it is someone else. If they insulted You, you should nottolerate it, but he did not insult ‘You’, so why fret over it?Someone else is being insulted and You take it personally. Youshould not take it as ‘I am being insulted’, should You? Yes,nobody should insult You, but no one will insult You either. Howcan they when they do not even know You? They knowChandulal but not You.When you regard the person insulting you as someonewho obliges you; then your desire for respect (maan) will end.Who is to be insulted? ‘Ambalal Muljibhai’ (reader to insertbeing insulted but you should not harbor beggary or a desirefor respect.Questioner: But do we not have to get rid of thisweakness of fearing insults?Dadashri: That will go down, as you get insulted.Whatever you have dished out will be returned. The problemlies in being a beggar for respect.Questioner: What does it mean to be constantlypreoccupied (laksha) with the feeling of not wanting to beinsulted?Dadashri: Such a laksha where one is constantlyconcerned about not being insulted is verily beggary for respect.Otherwise, charitra mohaniya (conduct with moha; attachmentto the relative self) is a discharge moha; it will come and go. TheSelf has nothing to do with it.The Soul and respect or insultTherefore, respect and disrespect is all the beggary of thepudgal – the physical or the relative self. If someone were toslap ‘us’, ‘we’ do not have any problem with that.Questioner: All these talks about respect and insults,who is the one that becomes aware of it; it is not the body, itis the soul, the self, is it not?Dadashri: The Atma (the Self) does not have respect ordisrespect. The Self is not a beggar that it has anything to dowith respect or disrespect. The Self is the King of the entireuniverse; it is the Lord of the Universe.Questioner: But when that reaches within, is it not thesoul that gets hurt?Dadashri: No, it does not hurt the Soul (Atma); it doesnot touch the Soul, the Self at all.Aptavani-9285286Aptavani-9their names here – the relative self); ‘Insult him as much as youwant. What relation do I have with him? He is ‘our’ neighbor.’If he is hurt and cries, I will pacify him.But the poor man will not get any sleep because hebelieves ‘I am insulted’. Otherwise, there is tremendous energy(shakti) in each and every Indian. All they need is someone toawaken it for them. Still, look at how helpless people havebecome? Wherever you look, you see them standing in queues.That is how helpless they have become. Otherwise, what werethese people like? If they felt a slightest shun in an invitation, theywould refuse to go. But look at them now! They dragthemselves everywhere and stand in lines. If you ask them,‘Why are you waiting in a line?’ They will say, ‘We have totake a bus.’ Why do you have to go by bus everyday? Do younot know how to find an alternative and an independent way ofgoing? They will ask, ‘What other way can I find when I haveto work?’ So the whole life is fractured. Otherwise, in the pastthey would not go to anyone’s home for dinner if they felt theslightest of insult. They paid too much importance to insults.So ‘our’ intention is to give people such knowledge thatwherever they go, whichever countries they visit, no one candepress them; no one will be able to depress them. Any onewho causes depression to others will become depressedhimself. This is for sure. No matter how important the otherperson is or even the whole world for that matter, how cananyone shake us?Nevertheless, if the fear of being insulted goes away in aperson, who is not Self-realized, then that person will becomeshameless (naffat). People have some sense of shame due tothis fear of being insulted. Would they have any boundsotherwise? And for the one who is Self-realized, when the fearof being insulted goes away, he becomes liberated. Here, in oursatsang, you will be liberated if your fear of insult goes away.Maya: the illusion and her progeny of six sonsIs everyone not concerned about respect and disrespect?Questioner: But Dada, has this not been the case fromthe very beginning?Dadashri: This is the same old stock from endless time.The phenomenon of respect and insults begins from the time oneenters the human life form. There is nothing like this in other lifeforms; it is only here in the human life form and the celestial lifeform that there is a lot of it.Questioner: Does one forget about respect-insult whenhe goes into another life form?Dadashri: He forgets. He forgets the moment he leavesfrom here, he does not remember. Do you remember what youate four days ago?Questioner: No. Why does an embodied soul (jiva)‘remember’ vengeance-enmity (vair-zair), respect-insults (maan-upmaan) and forgets all this?Dadashri: No, he does not remember even that. He only‘remembers’ anger-pride-deceit-greed. These four remainconstantly as sangnya (subtle inner association). Vengeance andenmity occur later on. That does not come into one’s memory(yaad). The moment one is insulted, he starts yelling. What doyou call those sweets children eat?Questioner: Peppermint.Dadashri: Now if this young girl and boy were to takesome peppermint from here, the greedy one (lobhio) of the twowill take more. From that we will know which of the two isgreedy. A greedy person will be recognized. A greedy personis always the first one in line.Questioner: Man should confront all his difficultiespeacefully, but that does not happen. So what should he do?Aptavani-9285286Aptavani-9their names here – the relative self); ‘Insult him as much as youwant. What relation do I have with him? He is ‘our’ neighbor.’If he is hurt and cries, I will pacify him.But the poor man will not get any sleep because hebelieves ‘I am insulted’. Otherwise, there is tremendous energy(shakti) in each and every Indian. All they need is someone toawaken it for them. Still, look at how helpless people havebecome? Wherever you look, you see them standing in queues.That is how helpless they have become. Otherwise, what werethese people like? If they felt a slightest shun in an invitation, theywould refuse to go. But look at them now! They dragthemselves everywhere and stand in lines. If you ask them,‘Why are you waiting in a line?’ They will say, ‘We have totake a bus.’ Why do you have to go by bus everyday? Do younot know how to find an alternative and an independent way ofgoing? They will ask, ‘What other way can I find when I haveto work?’ So the whole life is fractured. Otherwise, in the pastthey would not go to anyone’s home for dinner if they felt theslightest of insult. They paid too much importance to insults.So ‘our’ intention is to give people such knowledge thatwherever they go, whichever countries they visit, no one candepress them; no one will be able to depress them. Any onewho causes depression to others will become depressedhimself. This is for sure. No matter how important the otherperson is or even the whole world for that matter, how cananyone shake us?Nevertheless, if the fear of being insulted goes away in aperson, who is not Self-realized, then that person will becomeshameless (naffat). People have some sense of shame due tothis fear of being insulted. Would they have any boundsotherwise? And for the one who is Self-realized, when the fearof being insulted goes away, he becomes liberated. Here, in oursatsang, you will be liberated if your fear of insult goes away.Maya: the illusion and her progeny of six sonsIs everyone not concerned about respect and disrespect?Questioner: But Dada, has this not been the case fromthe very beginning?Dadashri: This is the same old stock from endless time.The phenomenon of respect and insults begins from the time oneenters the human life form. There is nothing like this in other lifeforms; it is only here in the human life form and the celestial lifeform that there is a lot of it.Questioner: Does one forget about respect-insult whenhe goes into another life form?Dadashri: He forgets. He forgets the moment he leavesfrom here, he does not remember. Do you remember what youate four days ago?Questioner: No. Why does an embodied soul (jiva)‘remember’ vengeance-enmity (vair-zair), respect-insults (maan-upmaan) and forgets all this?Dadashri: No, he does not remember even that. He only‘remembers’ anger-pride-deceit-greed. These four remainconstantly as sangnya (subtle inner association). Vengeance andenmity occur later on. That does not come into one’s memory(yaad). The moment one is insulted, he starts yelling. What doyou call those sweets children eat?Questioner: Peppermint.Dadashri: Now if this young girl and boy were to takesome peppermint from here, the greedy one (lobhio) of the twowill take more. From that we will know which of the two isgreedy. A greedy person will be recognized. A greedy personis always the first one in line.Questioner: Man should confront all his difficultiespeacefully, but that does not happen. So what should he do?Aptavani-9287288Aptavani-9Dadashri: How can he confront his problems when thereis weakness of anger-pride-deceit-greed within him? Angerdoes not stand-alone. It always accompanies the enemy calledpride (maan). Anger is there to protect maan. Therefore, aslong as there is a presence of pride there will also be a presenceof its bodyguard, anger, for sure.Questioner: So does that mean that one has to learn totolerate insults?Dadashri: The energy (shakti) to tolerate will comewhen one’s pride (maan) goes away; anger is the bodyguard ofpride. Pride has employed a bodyguard and told him to teacha lesson to anyone who comes to insult. Greed (lobh) also hasemployed a bodyguard; it is deceit (kapat) – that verily ismaya itself. That maya will go away when greed (lobh) goesaway. Anger is the bodyguard of pride. If someone tells you,‘Are you a fool? Don’t you have any sense?’ you should tellhim, ‘Sir, this is not something new; I have always been likethis.’People try to fight their anger do they not? Some try tofight their pride. But what does maya (illusion) say? It says, ‘Ihave six sons: krodha-maan-maya (kapat)-lobh-raag anddwesh (anger-pride-deceit-greed-attachment and abhorrence)and I am the seventh. No one except a Gnani Purush has beenable to wipe out my family till today. No matter how much youdestroy my anger and greed, as long as my son, pride (maan)is alive; everyone will become alive again.’The Gnani Purush kills maya’s (illusion’s) son namedpride (maan); He does not actually kill him, he does not evenevict him from his seat. He simply changes the seat for him. Ifthe Gnani were to kill pride, then he would be guilty of himsa(violence). The word ‘kill’ implies himsa. There cannot be anyhimsa. He will not beat the ego.The growing pride gives rise to greedQuestioner: From the kashayas of sexuality-anger-illusion-greed and pride (kaam-krodha-moha-lobh and madaor maan respectively), which one is the worst?Dadashri: Pride (mada) is the worst.Questioner: Why is pride the worst? Is greed not theworst?Dadashri: Should we not look at what supports all theother kashayas? It is based on pride (mada, maan). Nothingwould stick around if that support were not there.Questioner: Then what is mada?Dadashri: What do they call a baby elephant?Questioner: Madaniyu (mada-niyu).Dadashri: That is it.Questioner: All these things can be brought undercontrol, but not greed (lobh), correct?Dadashri: But if the one having greed is brought undercontrol, then everything will automatically come under control,will it not? Have I ever told anyone to get rid of his greed? Icatch the one responsible for greed and throw him off his throneand then everything collapses! As soon as the king is killed, hisarmy scatters away. When there is talk amongst the soldiersabout the king dying, none of them will stay to fight. Therefore,the king has to be captured, that is all. If there is mada (pride)then there will be greed (lobh), otherwise there will not be anygreed, will there? Greed will not remain if mada (pride) leaves.Those who are poor do not have any greed do they? There isno pride so where is the greed?Pride, verily is himsak-bhaavAnger-pride-deceit-greed (krodha-maan-maya-lobh) areAptavani-9287288Aptavani-9Dadashri: How can he confront his problems when thereis weakness of anger-pride-deceit-greed within him? Angerdoes not stand-alone. It always accompanies the enemy calledpride (maan). Anger is there to protect maan. Therefore, aslong as there is a presence of pride there will also be a presenceof its bodyguard, anger, for sure.Questioner: So does that mean that one has to learn totolerate insults?Dadashri: The energy (shakti) to tolerate will comewhen one’s pride (maan) goes away; anger is the bodyguard ofpride. Pride has employed a bodyguard and told him to teacha lesson to anyone who comes to insult. Greed (lobh) also hasemployed a bodyguard; it is deceit (kapat) – that verily ismaya itself. That maya will go away when greed (lobh) goesaway. Anger is the bodyguard of pride. If someone tells you,‘Are you a fool? Don’t you have any sense?’ you should tellhim, ‘Sir, this is not something new; I have always been likethis.’People try to fight their anger do they not? Some try tofight their pride. But what does maya (illusion) say? It says, ‘Ihave six sons: krodha-maan-maya (kapat)-lobh-raag anddwesh (anger-pride-deceit-greed-attachment and abhorrence)and I am the seventh. No one except a Gnani Purush has beenable to wipe out my family till today. No matter how much youdestroy my anger and greed, as long as my son, pride (maan)is alive; everyone will become alive again.’The Gnani Purush kills maya’s (illusion’s) son namedpride (maan); He does not actually kill him, he does not evenevict him from his seat. He simply changes the seat for him. Ifthe Gnani were to kill pride, then he would be guilty of himsa(violence). The word ‘kill’ implies himsa. There cannot be anyhimsa. He will not beat the ego.The growing pride gives rise to greedQuestioner: From the kashayas of sexuality-anger-illusion-greed and pride (kaam-krodha-moha-lobh and madaor maan respectively), which one is the worst?Dadashri: Pride (mada) is the worst.Questioner: Why is pride the worst? Is greed not theworst?Dadashri: Should we not look at what supports all theother kashayas? It is based on pride (mada, maan). Nothingwould stick around if that support were not there.Questioner: Then what is mada?Dadashri: What do they call a baby elephant?Questioner: Madaniyu (mada-niyu).Dadashri: That is it.Questioner: All these things can be brought undercontrol, but not greed (lobh), correct?Dadashri: But if the one having greed is brought undercontrol, then everything will automatically come under control,will it not? Have I ever told anyone to get rid of his greed? Icatch the one responsible for greed and throw him off his throneand then everything collapses! As soon as the king is killed, hisarmy scatters away. When there is talk amongst the soldiersabout the king dying, none of them will stay to fight. Therefore,the king has to be captured, that is all. If there is mada (pride)then there will be greed (lobh), otherwise there will not be anygreed, will there? Greed will not remain if mada (pride) leaves.Those who are poor do not have any greed do they? There isno pride so where is the greed?Pride, verily is himsak-bhaavAnger-pride-deceit-greed (krodha-maan-maya-lobh) areAptavani-9289290Aptavani-9verily himsak-bhaav (violent intent); it is all considered himsaindeed. Deceit (kapat) is a major himsa. Maya here meansdeceit (kapat). Maya is also used for illusion as well; it is thatwhich veils the Soul (the Self). Anger is overt himsa; it is openviolence.Questioner: You said that there is himsak bhaav(violent intent) in kashaya (anger-pride-deceit-greed), so pleaseexplain what kind of himsak bhaav is inherent in pride (maan)?Dadashri: Pride itself is himsak bhaav (violent intent).The one with pride does himsa towards others, however, if thatother person has any self-interest or feels he may benefit or gainpersonally, then he will put up with the person who has pride.But how does one generally feel about proud people? Anger isalways associated with pride; there is always contempt in it.Pride means contempt (tiraskar)! The aura of ‘I am something!’leads to contempt (tiraskar) for others. Pride is verily contempt.An abhimaani - a person that has pride with ‘my-ness’(mamata), will be even more contemptuous.A man with pride (maani) is different. A person withpride with ‘my-ness’ (abhimaan) is different. A tundmijaji isdifferent and a ghemraji is different.There are countless phases of prideThere are many phases of pride and there are words foreach phase of maan.Questioner: Tundmijaji, ghamand, are these some ofthe phases?Dadashri: Yes. Those are all different words. Peoplehave their own understanding and meaning of different words.For example, people have their own understanding of the wordsgarva (doer-ship) and garavata (to wallow in worldlyindulgence). Some people even refer to abhimaan (pride with‘my-ness’), as garva. What is the definition of ahamkar (ego),what is abhimaan, what is maan (pride), what is garva andwhat is tumakhi?Questioner: What is the meaning of khumari?Dadashri: Khumari is a kind of abhimaan – excessivepride. These are different types of abhimaan. Then there is theword ghamandi! A ghamandi is someone who has nosubstance but will make claims such as ‘I can defeat even thelawyer’s father!’ You should realize that he is a ghamandi – afake show-off. There are all kinds of people with all kinds ofbaggage. Then a machharayelo is someone whose bite stingslike a mosquito. Then people also say, ‘that man has a lot ofghemraji.’ These are all different phases of pride and that iswhy they have been given different names.Questioner: But all these different phases of pride suchas abhimaan, ghamand etc., do they not manifest after acertain age? A young child does not have any of thesekashayas.Dadashri: A child does not have them at all. But as theintellect increases, so do the kashayas and their consequences.So the phases of these words are very immense. It is verydifficult to understand these phases. You can only know themfrom a Gnani Purush.Questioner: Please explain them individually.Dadashri: If you call out to a laborer passing by, ‘Heyyou! What is your name?’ he will reply, ‘Lalvo’. Now he did notcall himself, ‘Lallubhai’, so you should realize that he has onlythe ego (ahamkar). (‘Lalvo’ is a nickname for Lallu and ‘-bhai’is a formality like ‘Mr.’)If we ask another person his name and he says‘Lallubhai’, you should realize that, he is also a maani (he hasan ego as well as pride. He called himself Lallu with ‘bhai’attached at the end).Aptavani-9289290Aptavani-9verily himsak-bhaav (violent intent); it is all considered himsaindeed. Deceit (kapat) is a major himsa. Maya here meansdeceit (kapat). Maya is also used for illusion as well; it is thatwhich veils the Soul (the Self). Anger is overt himsa; it is openviolence.Questioner: You said that there is himsak bhaav(violent intent) in kashaya (anger-pride-deceit-greed), so pleaseexplain what kind of himsak bhaav is inherent in pride (maan)?Dadashri: Pride itself is himsak bhaav (violent intent).The one with pride does himsa towards others, however, if thatother person has any self-interest or feels he may benefit or gainpersonally, then he will put up with the person who has pride.But how does one generally feel about proud people? Anger isalways associated with pride; there is always contempt in it.Pride means contempt (tiraskar)! The aura of ‘I am something!’leads to contempt (tiraskar) for others. Pride is verily contempt.An abhimaani - a person that has pride with ‘my-ness’(mamata), will be even more contemptuous.A man with pride (maani) is different. A person withpride with ‘my-ness’ (abhimaan) is different. A tundmijaji isdifferent and a ghemraji is different.There are countless phases of prideThere are many phases of pride and there are words foreach phase of maan.Questioner: Tundmijaji, ghamand, are these some ofthe phases?Dadashri: Yes. Those are all different words. Peoplehave their own understanding and meaning of different words.For example, people have their own understanding of the wordsgarva (doer-ship) and garavata (to wallow in worldlyindulgence). Some people even refer to abhimaan (pride with‘my-ness’), as garva. What is the definition of ahamkar (ego),what is abhimaan, what is maan (pride), what is garva andwhat is tumakhi?Questioner: What is the meaning of khumari?Dadashri: Khumari is a kind of abhimaan – excessivepride. These are different types of abhimaan. Then there is theword ghamandi! A ghamandi is someone who has nosubstance but will make claims such as ‘I can defeat even thelawyer’s father!’ You should realize that he is a ghamandi – afake show-off. There are all kinds of people with all kinds ofbaggage. Then a machharayelo is someone whose bite stingslike a mosquito. Then people also say, ‘that man has a lot ofghemraji.’ These are all different phases of pride and that iswhy they have been given different names.Questioner: But all these different phases of pride suchas abhimaan, ghamand etc., do they not manifest after acertain age? A young child does not have any of thesekashayas.Dadashri: A child does not have them at all. But as theintellect increases, so do the kashayas and their consequences.So the phases of these words are very immense. It is verydifficult to understand these phases. You can only know themfrom a Gnani Purush.Questioner: Please explain them individually.Dadashri: If you call out to a laborer passing by, ‘Heyyou! What is your name?’ he will reply, ‘Lalvo’. Now he did notcall himself, ‘Lallubhai’, so you should realize that he has onlythe ego (ahamkar). (‘Lalvo’ is a nickname for Lallu and ‘-bhai’is a formality like ‘Mr.’)If we ask another person his name and he says‘Lallubhai’, you should realize that, he is also a maani (he hasan ego as well as pride. He called himself Lallu with ‘bhai’attached at the end).Aptavani-9291292Aptavani-9If he answers, ‘I am Lallubhai, the lawyer, did you notrecognize me?’ you can say he also has abhimaan (pride with‘my-ness’).So these are all its traits.Abhimaan arises when ahamkar associates with mamata,i.e. when the ego associates with ‘my-ness’. This ‘my-ness’ canbe of any kind. When the ego is by itself, without ‘my-ness’(mamata), it is called simply ego (ahamkar).Questioner: Then there is the word tundmijaji? What isthe definition of that?Dadashri: Tundmijaji! This is a person who does nothave any understanding or money and yet he has endlessarrogance (mijaj). He cannot even get married (no body willhave him!) ‘Why are you being so arrogant when you can’t evenget married?’ That is called tundmijaji.Then we have a tumakhi. Some seventy-five years agothe collectors, police, D.S.P. (District Superintendent of Police)all had tumakhi - as if they were God. They used to beat upprominent businessmen. What tumakhi! I witnessed that not toolong ago. Because of my business as a contractor, I had to meetwith these officers and so I have seen these traits in them. In atrain, a person could not sit in front of a collector in the firstclass. They were honest and disciplined but they had infinitetumakhi. What tumakhi! They petrified people. An executiveengineer, who used to come to our business, would create avery intense situation. He would do as he pleased because hehad authority.I have seen such tumakhi, but now it makes me laughwhen I look at these collectors. In the past they displayed suchauthority with arrogance, as if they were God visiting offices. Buttoday these very people walk around with slippers and if youaccidentally step on their toes, they say ‘please! please!’whereas before if someone were to do the same to them, theywould hit that person with a ‘hunter’ (leather cane), but todaythey are reduced to being subservient. They have straightenedup after a lot of beating. Their arrogance- tumakhi has gonedown. Before a person could not utter even a word to thesecollectors on the train but look how they have mellowed fromall the beatings. Now they will tell you, ‘Yes, it is fine. It will do.’They even succumb to their wives, ‘Yes, yes it will do.’ Beforethey would never say, ‘It will do’ and now?They have calmed down considerably. Today people cancriticize prominent people without any repercussions. See howthey have mellowed and straightened up. They are going tostraighten up more with further beating.Questioner: Next, what are the qualities of a ghemraji?Dadashri: What does ghemraji mean?Questioner: Does it mean ghamand?Dadashri: No, ghamand is different and ghemraji isdifferent. People are very shrewd. Up to a certain point there isghamand and if it goes beyond this point then we call itghemraji. It becomes distinctive the moment there is a changein intensity. People are very smart.Ghemraji is someone who boasts and brags. He will say,‘I can go all over the world,’ when he can’t even travel threemiles. People needlessly walk around boasting and bragging likethis. It is all in their mind but there are people who bring themdown to earth. People will openly make comments about them‘he is a ghamandi or ghemraji.’ ‘He has abhimaan.’ Peoplewill comment this way.What is a ghemraji? A ghemraji is someone who snubspeople wherever he goes, ‘move away from here!’ We can tellhim, ‘Arey! Let me sit for a while!’ but he will not let you sit;he will ask you to move. Such people do not value anyone. ToAptavani-9291292Aptavani-9If he answers, ‘I am Lallubhai, the lawyer, did you notrecognize me?’ you can say he also has abhimaan (pride with‘my-ness’).So these are all its traits.Abhimaan arises when ahamkar associates with mamata,i.e. when the ego associates with ‘my-ness’. This ‘my-ness’ canbe of any kind. When the ego is by itself, without ‘my-ness’(mamata), it is called simply ego (ahamkar).Questioner: Then there is the word tundmijaji? What isthe definition of that?Dadashri: Tundmijaji! This is a person who does nothave any understanding or money and yet he has endlessarrogance (mijaj). He cannot even get married (no body willhave him!) ‘Why are you being so arrogant when you can’t evenget married?’ That is called tundmijaji.Then we have a tumakhi. Some seventy-five years agothe collectors, police, D.S.P. (District Superintendent of Police)all had tumakhi - as if they were God. They used to beat upprominent businessmen. What tumakhi! I witnessed that not toolong ago. Because of my business as a contractor, I had to meetwith these officers and so I have seen these traits in them. In atrain, a person could not sit in front of a collector in the firstclass. They were honest and disciplined but they had infinitetumakhi. What tumakhi! They petrified people. An executiveengineer, who used to come to our business, would create avery intense situation. He would do as he pleased because hehad authority.I have seen such tumakhi, but now it makes me laughwhen I look at these collectors. In the past they displayed suchauthority with arrogance, as if they were God visiting offices. Buttoday these very people walk around with slippers and if youaccidentally step on their toes, they say ‘please! please!’whereas before if someone were to do the same to them, theywould hit that person with a ‘hunter’ (leather cane), but todaythey are reduced to being subservient. They have straightenedup after a lot of beating. Their arrogance- tumakhi has gonedown. Before a person could not utter even a word to thesecollectors on the train but look how they have mellowed fromall the beatings. Now they will tell you, ‘Yes, it is fine. It will do.’They even succumb to their wives, ‘Yes, yes it will do.’ Beforethey would never say, ‘It will do’ and now?They have calmed down considerably. Today people cancriticize prominent people without any repercussions. See howthey have mellowed and straightened up. They are going tostraighten up more with further beating.Questioner: Next, what are the qualities of a ghemraji?Dadashri: What does ghemraji mean?Questioner: Does it mean ghamand?Dadashri: No, ghamand is different and ghemraji isdifferent. People are very shrewd. Up to a certain point there isghamand and if it goes beyond this point then we call itghemraji. It becomes distinctive the moment there is a changein intensity. People are very smart.Ghemraji is someone who boasts and brags. He will say,‘I can go all over the world,’ when he can’t even travel threemiles. People needlessly walk around boasting and bragging likethis. It is all in their mind but there are people who bring themdown to earth. People will openly make comments about them‘he is a ghamandi or ghemraji.’ ‘He has abhimaan.’ Peoplewill comment this way.What is a ghemraji? A ghemraji is someone who snubspeople wherever he goes, ‘move away from here!’ We can tellhim, ‘Arey! Let me sit for a while!’ but he will not let you sit;he will ask you to move. Such people do not value anyone. ToAptavani-9293294Aptavani-9them everyone appears to be like animals. Now tell me, suchare the ghemrajis. Where do you think this word came from?Is it a Persian word?Questioner: This is the vintage native Charotari (districtin the state of Gujarat) language.Dadashri: Yes, Charotari (Gujarati dialect) language-bhasha. People will comment, ‘so and so is very ghemraji. Hehas nothing and yet he is a ghemraji.’ Is this not in our Gujaratilanguage? Now where did this word come from? What is itsroot cause? I am looking but I cannot find it. I can find the rootcause of abhimaan and all that.Questioner: So these words are not as simple as theyseem. There is a deep hidden meaning in them.Dadashri: Yes. These words are full of meanings. Oneshould not define them superficially. There is an absolutemeaning (parmarth) within but this can only be realized whenmany layers are discarded.Questioner: You said, ‘There was a lot of ego (Dadahad a lot of ego before Gnan)’, so did you experience all thesephases through that ego?Dadashri: Yes. I experienced them from all the sides. Ialso saw their ‘perspective view’ (three dimensional) too. Icould ‘see’ what the ‘perspective’ ego looks like.Questioner: What does it look like?Dadashri: I recognize it. I recognize its front elevation,back elevation; a perspective view. I would know from all theseviews. I can see what ‘Dada’ looks like in back elevation, infront elevation and from the perspective view. I can see andknow what the nose looks like.Questioner: The nose is part of the body but what dothe phases of the ego look like?Dadashri: I can see the ego in the same way too. Onceyou see that perspective of the body, then you will see that ofthe ego too. The ego will melt but these are ‘body parts’ andthey are dependent upon the body.Questioner: What do you mean by ‘body parts’?Dadashri: If a person has a small nose, his ego is smalltoo and if his nose is big, his ego is big. Therefore, however itis with the body, it is the same with the ego.‘Hum’ (‘I-ness’ with ego) is an obstacle onthe path to mokshaQuestioner: What is the difference between ahamkarand ego?Dadashri: They are the same thing.Questioner: When one says, ‘Hum’, is that also an ego(ahamkar)?Dadashri: ‘Hum’ is different and ego is different.Generally it is considered that wife and children are majorobstacles in attaining liberation. Are these the only things thathinder liberation? There are many other things that hinder one’sliberation. How do the poor wife and children hinder him? Theysleep in their own beds so how are they a hindrance to you?Do they get inside your stomach and go to sleep? If they didthen you can consider them a hindrance, but is that what theydo? Each sleeps in his or her own bed, so where is theproblem for you?But this ‘hum’ ego gets into your stomach and hinders bysaying, ‘hum, hum, hum?’ This ‘I am something, I amsomething,’ does not go away, it will go wherever one goes.Have you ever seen this ‘hum’? It is not visible. But from itstrait you will know, ‘here comes the ‘hum’; you can see it inthe eyes.’Aptavani-9293294Aptavani-9them everyone appears to be like animals. Now tell me, suchare the ghemrajis. Where do you think this word came from?Is it a Persian word?Questioner: This is the vintage native Charotari (districtin the state of Gujarat) language.Dadashri: Yes, Charotari (Gujarati dialect) language-bhasha. People will comment, ‘so and so is very ghemraji. Hehas nothing and yet he is a ghemraji.’ Is this not in our Gujaratilanguage? Now where did this word come from? What is itsroot cause? I am looking but I cannot find it. I can find the rootcause of abhimaan and all that.Questioner: So these words are not as simple as theyseem. There is a deep hidden meaning in them.Dadashri: Yes. These words are full of meanings. Oneshould not define them superficially. There is an absolutemeaning (parmarth) within but this can only be realized whenmany layers are discarded.Questioner: You said, ‘There was a lot of ego (Dadahad a lot of ego before Gnan)’, so did you experience all thesephases through that ego?Dadashri: Yes. I experienced them from all the sides. Ialso saw their ‘perspective view’ (three dimensional) too. Icould ‘see’ what the ‘perspective’ ego looks like.Questioner: What does it look like?Dadashri: I recognize it. I recognize its front elevation,back elevation; a perspective view. I would know from all theseviews. I can see what ‘Dada’ looks like in back elevation, infront elevation and from the perspective view. I can see andknow what the nose looks like.Questioner: The nose is part of the body but what dothe phases of the ego look like?Dadashri: I can see the ego in the same way too. Onceyou see that perspective of the body, then you will see that ofthe ego too. The ego will melt but these are ‘body parts’ andthey are dependent upon the body.Questioner: What do you mean by ‘body parts’?Dadashri: If a person has a small nose, his ego is smalltoo and if his nose is big, his ego is big. Therefore, however itis with the body, it is the same with the ego.‘Hum’ (‘I-ness’ with ego) is an obstacle onthe path to mokshaQuestioner: What is the difference between ahamkarand ego?Dadashri: They are the same thing.Questioner: When one says, ‘Hum’, is that also an ego(ahamkar)?Dadashri: ‘Hum’ is different and ego is different.Generally it is considered that wife and children are majorobstacles in attaining liberation. Are these the only things thathinder liberation? There are many other things that hinder one’sliberation. How do the poor wife and children hinder him? Theysleep in their own beds so how are they a hindrance to you?Do they get inside your stomach and go to sleep? If they didthen you can consider them a hindrance, but is that what theydo? Each sleeps in his or her own bed, so where is theproblem for you?But this ‘hum’ ego gets into your stomach and hinders bysaying, ‘hum, hum, hum?’ This ‘I am something, I amsomething,’ does not go away, it will go wherever one goes.Have you ever seen this ‘hum’? It is not visible. But from itstrait you will know, ‘here comes the ‘hum’; you can see it inthe eyes.’Aptavani-9295296Aptavani-9One is free from everything except the ‘hum’, and this‘hum’ is very wrong. Instead it would be better to have twowives; at least his ‘I am something’ (the hum) would go away.Would that not happen when the wife curses or insults him? Butwho will curse this useless bull-like man when he lives byhimself? When he does not have a wife and never comes underanyone’s control, the ‘hum’ will increase. In addition he hascountless inner spiritual blocks (atkan).One does not create ego; it is something that is natural toone’s being. It is there. One is caught in the forces ofcircumstances. Ego is nothing but a wrong belief and so one canbecome free from it. Whereas this ‘hum-I am something’ is adifferent thing. I have seen all those ‘hums’. When one keepssaying, ‘hum’ ‘hum’. I know what is going to become of him.I will immediately know what seat he has reserved for himself(rebirth in a lower life form). Would I not know that?Questioner: So is this ‘hum-I am someone great’ astrong ego?Dadashri: No, ‘hum’ does not touch the ego. The egomay subside but the ‘hum’ will not.‘Hum’ will do whatever it chooses. These poor policemendo not have ‘hum’ of this kind. The ego will subside if youreason with it or coax it, but this ‘hum’ is a completely differentthing. The ‘hum’ of worldly people will leave after it takes abeating.Questioner: Is this ‘hum’ connected with adhyas (theconstant belief of I am the body)?Dadashri: Adhyas? No. This is all considered adhyasbut ‘hum’ surpasses even adhyas. The belief of ‘I am thebody,’ is a different thing. But you cannot deal with the belief of‘hum’. The poor body is naïve and so is anger-pride-deceit-greed. But there is nothing like ‘hum’ in this world because it isautomatically born on its own when there is nothing there.I would recognize a person with ‘hum’. He has a certainsound just as a counterfeit coin has a certain sound. Have youever seen a counterfeit coin?Questioner: Certain people with ‘hum-I am somethinggreat’ that walk around are recognizable, are they not?Dadashri: No. ‘I am something’ is a different thing.Those people around you with ‘I am something’ are peopleliving a worldly life. Their ‘hum’ will go away sooner or later.As soon as they experience any suffering, their ‘hum’ goesaway. But who will get rid of ‘hum’ in those others (so calledascetics)? That ‘hum’ is then taken into ‘sohum’ (I am that)!Questioner: Does a person have some quality in orderfor this ‘hum’ to arise? Does he have any substance?Dadashri: What substance? They have nothing. Humarises because how is one to live otherwise? What is the basisof his existence? He exists on this ‘hum’. Before his living wasbased on material things and now he lives on ‘hum’. Eventhough he is alone, he gets food to eat and water to drinkbecause of his merit karma (punya). He gets to eat and drinkand his ‘hum’ will continue to increase. He claims, ‘Just lookwhat I get! I get everything. There is nothing that I cannot get.’Yes! We agree that you get everything you want, but how canyou know where you are getting them from? Then when your‘hum’ gets bigger and stronger, who will remove it for you?Questioner: So how can one get rid of the ‘hum’?Dadashri: Is ‘hum’ ever likely to go away? How can‘hum’ go away? How can that which one created himself evergo away? The ego will go but not the ‘hum’. The definition ofego (ahamkar) is to claim to be at a place where one is not.Such ego can go away. One does not do anything and yet heclaims to be the doer; that is ahamkar. Whereas, he himself hasgiven birth to ‘hum’, so how can it leave? The ‘hum…hum’continues.Aptavani-9295296Aptavani-9One is free from everything except the ‘hum’, and this‘hum’ is very wrong. Instead it would be better to have twowives; at least his ‘I am something’ (the hum) would go away.Would that not happen when the wife curses or insults him? Butwho will curse this useless bull-like man when he lives byhimself? When he does not have a wife and never comes underanyone’s control, the ‘hum’ will increase. In addition he hascountless inner spiritual blocks (atkan).One does not create ego; it is something that is natural toone’s being. It is there. One is caught in the forces ofcircumstances. Ego is nothing but a wrong belief and so one canbecome free from it. Whereas this ‘hum-I am something’ is adifferent thing. I have seen all those ‘hums’. When one keepssaying, ‘hum’ ‘hum’. I know what is going to become of him.I will immediately know what seat he has reserved for himself(rebirth in a lower life form). Would I not know that?Questioner: So is this ‘hum-I am someone great’ astrong ego?Dadashri: No, ‘hum’ does not touch the ego. The egomay subside but the ‘hum’ will not.‘Hum’ will do whatever it chooses. These poor policemendo not have ‘hum’ of this kind. The ego will subside if youreason with it or coax it, but this ‘hum’ is a completely differentthing. The ‘hum’ of worldly people will leave after it takes abeating.Questioner: Is this ‘hum’ connected with adhyas (theconstant belief of I am the body)?Dadashri: Adhyas? No. This is all considered adhyasbut ‘hum’ surpasses even adhyas. The belief of ‘I am thebody,’ is a different thing. But you cannot deal with the belief of‘hum’. The poor body is naïve and so is anger-pride-deceit-greed. But there is nothing like ‘hum’ in this world because it isautomatically born on its own when there is nothing there.I would recognize a person with ‘hum’. He has a certainsound just as a counterfeit coin has a certain sound. Have youever seen a counterfeit coin?Questioner: Certain people with ‘hum-I am somethinggreat’ that walk around are recognizable, are they not?Dadashri: No. ‘I am something’ is a different thing.Those people around you with ‘I am something’ are peopleliving a worldly life. Their ‘hum’ will go away sooner or later.As soon as they experience any suffering, their ‘hum’ goesaway. But who will get rid of ‘hum’ in those others (so calledascetics)? That ‘hum’ is then taken into ‘sohum’ (I am that)!Questioner: Does a person have some quality in orderfor this ‘hum’ to arise? Does he have any substance?Dadashri: What substance? They have nothing. Humarises because how is one to live otherwise? What is the basisof his existence? He exists on this ‘hum’. Before his living wasbased on material things and now he lives on ‘hum’. Eventhough he is alone, he gets food to eat and water to drinkbecause of his merit karma (punya). He gets to eat and drinkand his ‘hum’ will continue to increase. He claims, ‘Just lookwhat I get! I get everything. There is nothing that I cannot get.’Yes! We agree that you get everything you want, but how canyou know where you are getting them from? Then when your‘hum’ gets bigger and stronger, who will remove it for you?Questioner: So how can one get rid of the ‘hum’?Dadashri: Is ‘hum’ ever likely to go away? How can‘hum’ go away? How can that which one created himself evergo away? The ego will go but not the ‘hum’. The definition ofego (ahamkar) is to claim to be at a place where one is not.Such ego can go away. One does not do anything and yet heclaims to be the doer; that is ahamkar. Whereas, he himself hasgiven birth to ‘hum’, so how can it leave? The ‘hum…hum’continues.Aptavani-9297298Aptavani-9Questioner: Does that ‘hum’ ever go away; is there anysolution for it?Dadashri: There is no solution for it. He will go to alower life form and take continuous beating there. That is wherethe ‘hum’ will be crushed.When does ‘hum’ sprout? It starts when he becomesbankrupt everywhere. What then does he live on? Then comesthis hum of ‘my Grandfather was so and so…’ Thus begins thehum.Hum—‘I am something great’ is born when there isnothing there. Whereas the condition that gave rise to the ego isstill there. Now, when does the ego go down? It goes downwhen a thug mugs him and takes away his clothes, that is whenhis ego will go away!Questioner: Is this discussion for those who are not Self-realized?Dadashri: It is for the one who is not Self-realized. InGnan, there is no ego. The ego does not decrease or leave inthe one who has ego (those who are not Self-realized). Such aperson will encounter people who will increase his ego. The egowill decrease from incidents such as if someone were to rob himor beat him up or even if he incurs a loss of 1.5 million rupeeswhen his income is only a million rupees.Questioner: But then the ego will go in another corner,will it not?Dadashri: No, it will go down; it will not increase. Egoand mamata (‘my-ness’) are naturally attained things; they are notcreated. This hum of ‘I am something great’ is a created thing.Ego, pride and pride with ‘my-ness’(ahamkar, maan and abhimaan)Questioner: What is the difference between ego(ahamkar), pride (maan) and pride with ‘my-ness’ (abhimaan)?Dadashri: The extended form of ego is called pride(maan) and if it is associated with ‘my-ness’ (mamata), then itis called abhimaan. When there is even the slightest ofmamata, one will say things like, ‘this is my car.’ Why does aperson show people his car? It is because of his abhimaan. Ifhe has good-looking children, he will say, ‘Wait till I show youmy four children.’ That is mamata and abhimaan. So wherethere is abhimaan he will keep showing you such things. Andpride (maan) is an extended form of the ego.Questioner: Is abhimaan born out of maan?Dadashri: No. When is abhimaan born? It is born when‘my-ness’ (mamata) is present.Ego (ahamkar) is a different state and abhimaan is adifferent state. People have no awareness of this whatsoeverand yet they go around using inappropriate words; they saywhatever comes to their mind. They will say, ‘He is anabhimaani man, he is ahamkari man.’ Every human being isahamkari; there is not a single person who is not. Only theGnani and his followers are not ahamkari, everyone else is.What is ego (ahamkar)? It is to claim to be somethingyou are not. One does not know who he really is and he claimsto be what he is not. That is ego. So to whom does thisstatement apply? It applies to everyone; everyone is consideredahamkari. Ego implies independence. It does not depend onany other thing. What is his belief? He believes to be what heis not. The ‘I’ (the real Self) is not Chandulal but he believes ‘Iam Chandulal’ and that is ego (ahamkar)! Therefore, if one is‘Shuddhatma (the pure soul)’, then there is no ego. There is egoin ‘I am Chandulal’. Then, ‘I am this lady’s husband’, is anotherego. Then, ‘I am this child’s father’, is a third ego. So how manydifferent forms of egos are there? Then even if he does not haveAptavani-9297298Aptavani-9Questioner: Does that ‘hum’ ever go away; is there anysolution for it?Dadashri: There is no solution for it. He will go to alower life form and take continuous beating there. That is wherethe ‘hum’ will be crushed.When does ‘hum’ sprout? It starts when he becomesbankrupt everywhere. What then does he live on? Then comesthis hum of ‘my Grandfather was so and so…’ Thus begins thehum.Hum—‘I am something great’ is born when there isnothing there. Whereas the condition that gave rise to the ego isstill there. Now, when does the ego go down? It goes downwhen a thug mugs him and takes away his clothes, that is whenhis ego will go away!Questioner: Is this discussion for those who are not Self-realized?Dadashri: It is for the one who is not Self-realized. InGnan, there is no ego. The ego does not decrease or leave inthe one who has ego (those who are not Self-realized). Such aperson will encounter people who will increase his ego. The egowill decrease from incidents such as if someone were to rob himor beat him up or even if he incurs a loss of 1.5 million rupeeswhen his income is only a million rupees.Questioner: But then the ego will go in another corner,will it not?Dadashri: No, it will go down; it will not increase. Egoand mamata (‘my-ness’) are naturally attained things; they are notcreated. This hum of ‘I am something great’ is a created thing.Ego, pride and pride with ‘my-ness’(ahamkar, maan and abhimaan)Questioner: What is the difference between ego(ahamkar), pride (maan) and pride with ‘my-ness’ (abhimaan)?Dadashri: The extended form of ego is called pride(maan) and if it is associated with ‘my-ness’ (mamata), then itis called abhimaan. When there is even the slightest ofmamata, one will say things like, ‘this is my car.’ Why does aperson show people his car? It is because of his abhimaan. Ifhe has good-looking children, he will say, ‘Wait till I show youmy four children.’ That is mamata and abhimaan. So wherethere is abhimaan he will keep showing you such things. Andpride (maan) is an extended form of the ego.Questioner: Is abhimaan born out of maan?Dadashri: No. When is abhimaan born? It is born when‘my-ness’ (mamata) is present.Ego (ahamkar) is a different state and abhimaan is adifferent state. People have no awareness of this whatsoeverand yet they go around using inappropriate words; they saywhatever comes to their mind. They will say, ‘He is anabhimaani man, he is ahamkari man.’ Every human being isahamkari; there is not a single person who is not. Only theGnani and his followers are not ahamkari, everyone else is.What is ego (ahamkar)? It is to claim to be somethingyou are not. One does not know who he really is and he claimsto be what he is not. That is ego. So to whom does thisstatement apply? It applies to everyone; everyone is consideredahamkari. Ego implies independence. It does not depend onany other thing. What is his belief? He believes to be what heis not. The ‘I’ (the real Self) is not Chandulal but he believes ‘Iam Chandulal’ and that is ego (ahamkar)! Therefore, if one is‘Shuddhatma (the pure soul)’, then there is no ego. There is egoin ‘I am Chandulal’. Then, ‘I am this lady’s husband’, is anotherego. Then, ‘I am this child’s father’, is a third ego. So how manydifferent forms of egos are there? Then even if he does not haveAptavani-9299300Aptavani-9abhimaan (ego with ‘my-ness’) about his home, people will stillsay that this is his ego.It is not wrong to have an ego. Ego is just to claim to bewhat one is not. That is the only error of the ego, nothing more.Now what is maan (pride)? It is when one wears niceclothes but rolls up his sleeves so that people can see a three-thousand-rupee watch on his wrist. Then when someone asks,‘How are you sheth?’ you can clearly see his pride. Maan is“ego with rich materials”. He will wear expensive clothes,jewels, etc. That is maan.Questioner: What is the difference between an ahamkariand a maani person?Dadashri: An ahamkari (egotistic) person does nothave any fear of being insulted (upmaan) whereas a maani(person with pride) does. If a person has pride (maan) thenhe will be affected by insults (upmaan), but what if he has nopride?Questioner: But when his ego is broken, will he not feelinsulted?Dadashri: No that is simply called breaking the ego. Butonly if there is maan, there will be upmaan.What is abhimaan (pride with ‘my-ness’)? If a personhas possessions, he will tell others about them; that is what wecall abhimaan. Everyone does this; people cannot refrain fromtelling others about their possessions. But when is it consideredabhimaan? The ego is there for sure but suppose you are goingto a shop and you are in hurry, someone you know stops you,you ask him, ‘What is it? I am in a hurry’, he will say, ‘Theseare my homes, these two buildings and those two buildings aremine.’ That is called abhimaan. ‘Why are you telling me now,I have to go. Why are you bothering me?’ But he is showingabhimaan. He will tell you how good something is even whenyou do not ask. What is the reason behind it? He has thatabhimaan. It is a different matter if you had asked him, but ifhe tells you without being asked, it is abhimaan. When he isitching to tell you, it is abhimaan.Questioner: Is it because of abhimaan one says, ‘Mineis higher (better) than his?’Dadashri: Yes, it is because of abhimaan. Abhimaanmeans he gives examples of ‘this is better, this is mine’. This ismy property; that is my property, this is my car etc.’ so basedon this he is trying to say that his is better than others’. He doesnot say it directly. Abhimaan is when one has more than whatis necessary and makes a show of it. He believes, ‘How happyI am.’ Thus he tries to make others feel inferior. This isabhimaan.So an abhimaani will show off all his possessions, he willeven show you his expensive eyeglasses he bought. He will say,‘Did you see my glasses?’ What am I going to do with yourglasses that you keep showing them to me? But he does it tofeed his abhimaan. He will also show off his clothes or theshoes he bought. That is abhimaan.He will go so far as to show off his son-in-law if he iseducated and good-looking. He will tell you, ‘Come and see myson-in-law.’ What is so special about your son-in-law? Everyonehas one, what is there to see? But he will say, ‘No, you haveto meet my son-in-law.’ Then when you tell him ‘you have foundyourself a good son-in-law. What a good looking man!’ he issatisfied. Then he will also take you out to dinner. He will say,‘You have to dine with us today. You cannot leave withouthaving something to eat.’Abhimaan means to exhibit pride (maan) wherever onecan. Even if his brother’s house is small, he will show it to you,‘This is my brother’s house, this is my uncle’s house and that ismy house.’ Whenever he tries to show anything big, that isAptavani-9299300Aptavani-9abhimaan (ego with ‘my-ness’) about his home, people will stillsay that this is his ego.It is not wrong to have an ego. Ego is just to claim to bewhat one is not. That is the only error of the ego, nothing more.Now what is maan (pride)? It is when one wears niceclothes but rolls up his sleeves so that people can see a three-thousand-rupee watch on his wrist. Then when someone asks,‘How are you sheth?’ you can clearly see his pride. Maan is“ego with rich materials”. He will wear expensive clothes,jewels, etc. That is maan.Questioner: What is the difference between an ahamkariand a maani person?Dadashri: An ahamkari (egotistic) person does nothave any fear of being insulted (upmaan) whereas a maani(person with pride) does. If a person has pride (maan) thenhe will be affected by insults (upmaan), but what if he has nopride?Questioner: But when his ego is broken, will he not feelinsulted?Dadashri: No that is simply called breaking the ego. Butonly if there is maan, there will be upmaan.What is abhimaan (pride with ‘my-ness’)? If a personhas possessions, he will tell others about them; that is what wecall abhimaan. Everyone does this; people cannot refrain fromtelling others about their possessions. But when is it consideredabhimaan? The ego is there for sure but suppose you are goingto a shop and you are in hurry, someone you know stops you,you ask him, ‘What is it? I am in a hurry’, he will say, ‘Theseare my homes, these two buildings and those two buildings aremine.’ That is called abhimaan. ‘Why are you telling me now,I have to go. Why are you bothering me?’ But he is showingabhimaan. He will tell you how good something is even whenyou do not ask. What is the reason behind it? He has thatabhimaan. It is a different matter if you had asked him, but ifhe tells you without being asked, it is abhimaan. When he isitching to tell you, it is abhimaan.Questioner: Is it because of abhimaan one says, ‘Mineis higher (better) than his?’Dadashri: Yes, it is because of abhimaan. Abhimaanmeans he gives examples of ‘this is better, this is mine’. This ismy property; that is my property, this is my car etc.’ so basedon this he is trying to say that his is better than others’. He doesnot say it directly. Abhimaan is when one has more than whatis necessary and makes a show of it. He believes, ‘How happyI am.’ Thus he tries to make others feel inferior. This isabhimaan.So an abhimaani will show off all his possessions, he willeven show you his expensive eyeglasses he bought. He will say,‘Did you see my glasses?’ What am I going to do with yourglasses that you keep showing them to me? But he does it tofeed his abhimaan. He will also show off his clothes or theshoes he bought. That is abhimaan.He will go so far as to show off his son-in-law if he iseducated and good-looking. He will tell you, ‘Come and see myson-in-law.’ What is so special about your son-in-law? Everyonehas one, what is there to see? But he will say, ‘No, you haveto meet my son-in-law.’ Then when you tell him ‘you have foundyourself a good son-in-law. What a good looking man!’ he issatisfied. Then he will also take you out to dinner. He will say,‘You have to dine with us today. You cannot leave withouthaving something to eat.’Abhimaan means to exhibit pride (maan) wherever onecan. Even if his brother’s house is small, he will show it to you,‘This is my brother’s house, this is my uncle’s house and that ismy house.’ Whenever he tries to show anything big, that isAptavani-9301302Aptavani-9abhimaan. His abhimaan (pride with ‘my-ness’) is at workthere. Abhimaan is to show off your possession in order toimpress others. Why does he show off? For pride - maan!When he goes beyond maan, he will not be satisfied even withabhimaan. Nature will sort him out by punishing him and thenhe will get back on track. Just because you have four cars, youshould not have any ego or abhimaan about it. If one exhibitsabhimaan, it is the beginning of departure of the very things hehas abhimaan over. One should maintain humbleness. As youbegin to acquire worldly comforts, you should maintainhumility.When a man claims ‘I have four sons, this son is aChartered Accountant, etc.,’ it is all abhimaan. ‘I am fairskinned, I am slim…, all that is abhimaan too. ‘I am fairer thanother people; they have a dark complexion’, all that isabhimaan. Do people not have pride (mada) because of theirlooks?Questioner: Yes they do.Dadashri: If someone has a beautiful wife, he has mada(pride) of, ‘There is no one like my wife.’ Does that happen ornot?Questioner: Yes it does.Dadashri: Now, this beauty is not going to remain thesame. It does not take long for this beauty to become ugly.What will happen to that beauty when the face becomescovered with small pox blisters? Would the beauty remain withthe scars of pockmarks even if the face used to be verybeautiful? Is any of this under our control? Therefore, oneshould not have an ego about beauty. ‘There is no one betterlooking than me,’ is abhimaan—pride with ‘my-ness’. So whensomeone says, ‘I am fair’ it is not considered ego. It isabhimaan. People have no understanding at all of what ego is.A person with abhimaan is easily recognized.Questioner: This abhimaan is clearly visible when theytake a group picture.Dadashri: Yes. The photographer can also see that aperson is affected with the abhimaan. But photographers willtake my pictures the moment they see me because they do notsee any abhimaan (ego) in me. A person with the abhimaanwill stiffen up this way or that way, whereas I remain natural.Questioner: Is abhimaan not like the ego (ahamkar)?Dadashri: No, ego is better. It can be removed.However, abhimaan causes tremendous misery. What is the jobof nature? Nature’s job is to reduce abhimaan. As soon asabhimaan increases in a person, he will be brought down witha beating. There is no problem with ego (ahamkar).What is the difference between abhimaan and ego? ‘I amChandulal’, is ego (ahamkar). To claim to be where one is not,is ego and to show off, ‘this is my bungalow, this is my car etc.’is abhimaan. If that is the case, then why don’t you showpeople your grey hair? ‘Look I have grey hair’ but nowadayspeople dye their hair black instead. Ego has arisen out ofignorance and abhimaan has arisen with understanding. Whena person takes garva (pride here), ‘Look at this, look at myestate,’ we should recognize that abhimaan is rising.If someone here were to sing a song and it pleaseseveryone and so he sings two or three more songs; that isabhimaan.Do you understand now what abhimaan is? It is tobelieve the weight of the non-Self (pudgal) to be ‘your own’weight. You have gold, jewelry, expensive watches, house, caretc., these are all non-Self weights and to believe those weightsto be your own weight is abhimaan. A person may believe theweight of his bungalow to be his weight. People consider it anego when someone brags about his home, they will call himahamkari, but it is not ego; it is abhimaan. The materialAptavani-9301302Aptavani-9abhimaan. His abhimaan (pride with ‘my-ness’) is at workthere. Abhimaan is to show off your possession in order toimpress others. Why does he show off? For pride - maan!When he goes beyond maan, he will not be satisfied even withabhimaan. Nature will sort him out by punishing him and thenhe will get back on track. Just because you have four cars, youshould not have any ego or abhimaan about it. If one exhibitsabhimaan, it is the beginning of departure of the very things hehas abhimaan over. One should maintain humbleness. As youbegin to acquire worldly comforts, you should maintainhumility.When a man claims ‘I have four sons, this son is aChartered Accountant, etc.,’ it is all abhimaan. ‘I am fairskinned, I am slim…, all that is abhimaan too. ‘I am fairer thanother people; they have a dark complexion’, all that isabhimaan. Do people not have pride (mada) because of theirlooks?Questioner: Yes they do.Dadashri: If someone has a beautiful wife, he has mada(pride) of, ‘There is no one like my wife.’ Does that happen ornot?Questioner: Yes it does.Dadashri: Now, this beauty is not going to remain thesame. It does not take long for this beauty to become ugly.What will happen to that beauty when the face becomescovered with small pox blisters? Would the beauty remain withthe scars of pockmarks even if the face used to be verybeautiful? Is any of this under our control? Therefore, oneshould not have an ego about beauty. ‘There is no one betterlooking than me,’ is abhimaan—pride with ‘my-ness’. So whensomeone says, ‘I am fair’ it is not considered ego. It isabhimaan. People have no understanding at all of what ego is.A person with abhimaan is easily recognized.Questioner: This abhimaan is clearly visible when theytake a group picture.Dadashri: Yes. The photographer can also see that aperson is affected with the abhimaan. But photographers willtake my pictures the moment they see me because they do notsee any abhimaan (ego) in me. A person with the abhimaanwill stiffen up this way or that way, whereas I remain natural.Questioner: Is abhimaan not like the ego (ahamkar)?Dadashri: No, ego is better. It can be removed.However, abhimaan causes tremendous misery. What is the jobof nature? Nature’s job is to reduce abhimaan. As soon asabhimaan increases in a person, he will be brought down witha beating. There is no problem with ego (ahamkar).What is the difference between abhimaan and ego? ‘I amChandulal’, is ego (ahamkar). To claim to be where one is not,is ego and to show off, ‘this is my bungalow, this is my car etc.’is abhimaan. If that is the case, then why don’t you showpeople your grey hair? ‘Look I have grey hair’ but nowadayspeople dye their hair black instead. Ego has arisen out ofignorance and abhimaan has arisen with understanding. Whena person takes garva (pride here), ‘Look at this, look at myestate,’ we should recognize that abhimaan is rising.If someone here were to sing a song and it pleaseseveryone and so he sings two or three more songs; that isabhimaan.Do you understand now what abhimaan is? It is tobelieve the weight of the non-Self (pudgal) to be ‘your own’weight. You have gold, jewelry, expensive watches, house, caretc., these are all non-Self weights and to believe those weightsto be your own weight is abhimaan. A person may believe theweight of his bungalow to be his weight. People consider it anego when someone brags about his home, they will call himahamkari, but it is not ego; it is abhimaan. The materialAptavani-9303304Aptavani-9possessions are there, but to claim them as yours and to enjoythe taste that results from displaying them, is abhimaan. Thetaste of abhimaan can be very sweet. Pleasure arises within, themoment he says, ‘These are my homes.’ Then it becomes ahabit for him, like going to the Havmor ice cream parlor.Questioner: You had once said that the whole world istrapped in ‘Havmor’ (brand name for ice-cream).Dadashri: In ‘Havmor’! I do not need this Havmor andtherefore I am not trapped by it, nevertheless I will eat ice-cream if someone offers me some. That (the pursuit of pleasure)is the aim of worldly people and for me such aim is meaningless.My goal is different.Havmor becomes a habit for people because of ajagruti(unawareness); they do not have the awareness of its benefitsversus harm. When can one become habituated? When he is notaware of what is right and what is wrong. If someone feeds meice-cream everyday, I would not even remember (think of) it thenext day. I would not miss it for a second, even if he feeds meice cream everyday for months and then stops suddenly. I wouldgive compliments and say, ‘the ice-cream is very good’ I wouldsay this, but superfluously! If the ice cream were to continuegiving its sweet taste after it is gone, then I would accept that itis a good thing. After we finish eating it, no matter how much wesay, ‘give me more taste’, it will not, will it? So what is the useof such a taste? Many people become so engrossed in the tastethat as their portion of the ice cream gets smaller; they leave itlonger in their mouth and savor it for as long as they can. Whathappens when only the last bite is left? After you swallow it, thetaste will no longer be there.Do you now understand what abhimaan is and whatahamkar is?Questioner: And when one attains saiyam, (absence ofkashaya) will his abhimaan not increase too?Dadashri: There is no abhimaan where there is saiyam(absence of kashaya). Abhimaan is blind and where there issaiyam, you will not find abhimaan. Not only abhimaan butyou will not find ego (ahamkar) there either.The zero state of the Gnani Purush‘We’ are allowed to have abhimaan about attaining thestatus of the Lord of the whole universe and yet ‘we’ have lessabhimaan than even a young child. ‘We’ do not have an egoahamkar at all. ‘We’ would not be able to attain all this if ‘we’had ego. The one who has no ownership of the body, the mind,the speech; he becomes the owner of the entire universe.Questioner: But some people say that one can often seeabhimaan in a Gnani Purush. How can that be?Dadashri: Where there is abhimaan, there is no Gnan,and where there is Gnan, there cannot be any abhimaan.Questioner: Does that mean that Gnan and abhimaancannot co-exist?Dadashri: Gnan and abhimaan can never co-exist.There is either Gnan or abhimaan. If you see abhimaan whenyou slap the ‘Gnani’, then that is ignorance (agnan) and you willclearly see that he cannot be a Gnani.Yes, until ‘we’ attained Gnan, deh-abhimaan (abhimaanof ‘I am this body’) existed. It increased, as I grew older. WhenI was born it was about 25% but as I grew up, it increased150%! It used to gnaw at me even when it was about 25% sodo you think it did not bite me more as it increased? When itbites or gnaws at you, it is abhimaan and when there isinternal suffering, it is the ahamkar ego. Abhimaan is aconstant gnawing.Instead of just mere ego, I had abhimaan (pride with‘my-ness’). I was also a tundmijaji (someone who does notAptavani-9303304Aptavani-9possessions are there, but to claim them as yours and to enjoythe taste that results from displaying them, is abhimaan. Thetaste of abhimaan can be very sweet. Pleasure arises within, themoment he says, ‘These are my homes.’ Then it becomes ahabit for him, like going to the Havmor ice cream parlor.Questioner: You had once said that the whole world istrapped in ‘Havmor’ (brand name for ice-cream).Dadashri: In ‘Havmor’! I do not need this Havmor andtherefore I am not trapped by it, nevertheless I will eat ice-cream if someone offers me some. That (the pursuit of pleasure)is the aim of worldly people and for me such aim is meaningless.My goal is different.Havmor becomes a habit for people because of ajagruti(unawareness); they do not have the awareness of its benefitsversus harm. When can one become habituated? When he is notaware of what is right and what is wrong. If someone feeds meice-cream everyday, I would not even remember (think of) it thenext day. I would not miss it for a second, even if he feeds meice cream everyday for months and then stops suddenly. I wouldgive compliments and say, ‘the ice-cream is very good’ I wouldsay this, but superfluously! If the ice cream were to continuegiving its sweet taste after it is gone, then I would accept that itis a good thing. After we finish eating it, no matter how much wesay, ‘give me more taste’, it will not, will it? So what is the useof such a taste? Many people become so engrossed in the tastethat as their portion of the ice cream gets smaller; they leave itlonger in their mouth and savor it for as long as they can. Whathappens when only the last bite is left? After you swallow it, thetaste will no longer be there.Do you now understand what abhimaan is and whatahamkar is?Questioner: And when one attains saiyam, (absence ofkashaya) will his abhimaan not increase too?Dadashri: There is no abhimaan where there is saiyam(absence of kashaya). Abhimaan is blind and where there issaiyam, you will not find abhimaan. Not only abhimaan butyou will not find ego (ahamkar) there either.The zero state of the Gnani Purush‘We’ are allowed to have abhimaan about attaining thestatus of the Lord of the whole universe and yet ‘we’ have lessabhimaan than even a young child. ‘We’ do not have an egoahamkar at all. ‘We’ would not be able to attain all this if ‘we’had ego. The one who has no ownership of the body, the mind,the speech; he becomes the owner of the entire universe.Questioner: But some people say that one can often seeabhimaan in a Gnani Purush. How can that be?Dadashri: Where there is abhimaan, there is no Gnan,and where there is Gnan, there cannot be any abhimaan.Questioner: Does that mean that Gnan and abhimaancannot co-exist?Dadashri: Gnan and abhimaan can never co-exist.There is either Gnan or abhimaan. If you see abhimaan whenyou slap the ‘Gnani’, then that is ignorance (agnan) and you willclearly see that he cannot be a Gnani.Yes, until ‘we’ attained Gnan, deh-abhimaan (abhimaanof ‘I am this body’) existed. It increased, as I grew older. WhenI was born it was about 25% but as I grew up, it increased150%! It used to gnaw at me even when it was about 25% sodo you think it did not bite me more as it increased? When itbites or gnaws at you, it is abhimaan and when there isinternal suffering, it is the ahamkar ego. Abhimaan is aconstant gnawing.Instead of just mere ego, I had abhimaan (pride with‘my-ness’). I was also a tundmijaji (someone who does notAptavani-9305306Aptavani-9have any understanding, no money and yet he has endlessarrogance) and some even used to say that I had lot ofghemraji (such people do not value anyone). I did not haveGnan at that time, but because I had collected baggage (karmic)of such high quality from my past life, I felt that I was somebody.I knew that and consequently had ghemraji about it.I have awareness of what the ego (ahamkar) should beand what abhimaan should be. Today you cannot find a personwith only ego (ahamkar); there is always some degree ofperversion of the ego and for sure it has progressed to the stageof abhimaan.A person with ego only is considered spontaneous andnatural. It is a natural ego but such a person is not to be foundin this current time cycle. Where can one find such an ‘ego only’person? Today we have people with abhimaan. What is ego?It is the belief, ‘I am Chandulal’, but that is a natural state andhe is not at fault for having this belief. But what is abhimaan?When someone says, ‘see this bungalow of mine, see thishospital of mine, see this factory of mine’ then realize what istalking; his abhimaan is talking.Questioner: But you said that your abhimaan hadincreased, then how did it go down to zero?Dadashri: All of a sudden! I did not do anything. ‘Thisis but natural’; it occurred naturally. That is why I tell peoplethey should not try to imitate this. What are you going to dowhen it is a natural phenomenon? Now come to me and I willshow you the way. I have found a path. But if you try to followthe path that I took to get to this stage, you will die, because myabhimaan had gone from 25% to 150%, and I could not bearit. Only I know how I managed to pass those days!Questioner: There is a saying, ‘one had abhimaanworth a quarter of a pound. As he became learned it increasedfour times and when he became a guru, it increased forty times.’Now the only thing of importance is how one can come downto the level of zero.Dadashri: Now after attaining Gnan, where is yourpurusharth (independent spiritual endeavor) of day and nighttaking you? This purusharth is taking you towards zero. Whatwas the case before? It used to increase three fold, and it washeaded in the direction of growth. Now You are headedtowards its dissolution. So it is futile to look for solutions here.Everything here is very systematic. You are headed towards the‘zero state’, and that state will come for sure.After Self-realization…After attaining Gnan, you have no ego at all. What is thedefinition of ego? To decide and believe, ‘I am Chandulal’ isego (ahamkar). Now you have doubt over the knowledge of‘I am Chandulal’. So now that you are not Chandulal, but thepure Soul (Shuddhatma), you do not have ego. ‘You’ areegoless.Questioner: So you consider ‘I am Chandulal’ as theego?Dadashri: Yes, that is called ego (ahamkar).Questioner: That ego part is gone, but does ourabhimaan still remain?Dadashri: Yes, but there is no problem with abhimaan.It is a discharge (nikali). You do not have ego left at all. Thereis no problem with abhimaan. Maan and abhimaan are adischarge. Then beyond this there is garva (doer-ship) andother things. The main ego is gone but the effect of that egoremains, does it not? The root cause is gone but the branchesstill remain, however they will eventually dry up.Questioner: So is abhimaan the result of the old ego?Aptavani-9305306Aptavani-9have any understanding, no money and yet he has endlessarrogance) and some even used to say that I had lot ofghemraji (such people do not value anyone). I did not haveGnan at that time, but because I had collected baggage (karmic)of such high quality from my past life, I felt that I was somebody.I knew that and consequently had ghemraji about it.I have awareness of what the ego (ahamkar) should beand what abhimaan should be. Today you cannot find a personwith only ego (ahamkar); there is always some degree ofperversion of the ego and for sure it has progressed to the stageof abhimaan.A person with ego only is considered spontaneous andnatural. It is a natural ego but such a person is not to be foundin this current time cycle. Where can one find such an ‘ego only’person? Today we have people with abhimaan. What is ego?It is the belief, ‘I am Chandulal’, but that is a natural state andhe is not at fault for having this belief. But what is abhimaan?When someone says, ‘see this bungalow of mine, see thishospital of mine, see this factory of mine’ then realize what istalking; his abhimaan is talking.Questioner: But you said that your abhimaan hadincreased, then how did it go down to zero?Dadashri: All of a sudden! I did not do anything. ‘Thisis but natural’; it occurred naturally. That is why I tell peoplethey should not try to imitate this. What are you going to dowhen it is a natural phenomenon? Now come to me and I willshow you the way. I have found a path. But if you try to followthe path that I took to get to this stage, you will die, because myabhimaan had gone from 25% to 150%, and I could not bearit. Only I know how I managed to pass those days!Questioner: There is a saying, ‘one had abhimaanworth a quarter of a pound. As he became learned it increasedfour times and when he became a guru, it increased forty times.’Now the only thing of importance is how one can come downto the level of zero.Dadashri: Now after attaining Gnan, where is yourpurusharth (independent spiritual endeavor) of day and nighttaking you? This purusharth is taking you towards zero. Whatwas the case before? It used to increase three fold, and it washeaded in the direction of growth. Now You are headedtowards its dissolution. So it is futile to look for solutions here.Everything here is very systematic. You are headed towards the‘zero state’, and that state will come for sure.After Self-realization…After attaining Gnan, you have no ego at all. What is thedefinition of ego? To decide and believe, ‘I am Chandulal’ isego (ahamkar). Now you have doubt over the knowledge of‘I am Chandulal’. So now that you are not Chandulal, but thepure Soul (Shuddhatma), you do not have ego. ‘You’ areegoless.Questioner: So you consider ‘I am Chandulal’ as theego?Dadashri: Yes, that is called ego (ahamkar).Questioner: That ego part is gone, but does ourabhimaan still remain?Dadashri: Yes, but there is no problem with abhimaan.It is a discharge (nikali). You do not have ego left at all. Thereis no problem with abhimaan. Maan and abhimaan are adischarge. Then beyond this there is garva (doer-ship) andother things. The main ego is gone but the effect of that egoremains, does it not? The root cause is gone but the branchesstill remain, however they will eventually dry up.Questioner: So is abhimaan the result of the old ego?Aptavani-9307308Aptavani-9five hundred thousand gallons! The bigger the tank the longer ittakes to empty out, but it is emptying all the same. So what doesit matter for the one whose tank is emptying?Questioner: But while it is emptying, it will sweep oneaway like the floodwaters; it will topple someone and it will hurtsomeone.Dadashri: Yes, but all those are ‘his’ consequences; it isa result. What do You have to do with that? However, youshould do pratikraman for it if someone gets hurt in the process.Swamaan and ego with rich materialQuestioner: What is the difference between maan(pride) and swamaan (pride within limits)?Dadashri: Maan means ‘ego with rich materials’ (materialsattached through ‘my’ or ‘mine’ with the ego) and swamaan isconfined to having pride over one’s own qualities; it isassociated with one’s own personal attributes, such as, ‘I am agraduate’ – that is the extent of his pride. That is pride withinlimits; that is swamaan. He asks to be recognized for what hehas achieved and nothing more. When that is violated he feels,‘Why are they doing this when I am a graduate?’ so hisexpectations are confined to him being a graduate. He considersit important for him and so you should not violate that. Youshould not violate someone’s swamaan (pride within limits).And what is maan? In maan one is not concernedwhether he has a degree or any specific qualification. In fact,forget about qualification; it is ‘ego with rich materials’. Hewears a long coat (fancy clothes), a three-thousand dollarwatch, gold frame glasses, that is maan!Questioner: What is the difference between hurtingone’s ego ahamkar and hurting one’s swamaan?Dadashri: A lot! The one whose swamaan is hurt willbind vengeance (vair).Dadashri: Yes, abhimaan is a result of the ego. Thatresult remains but the root cause is gone. The ego is gone.Kevalgnan (absolute enlightenment) occurs when all the resultsof the ego go away.Questioner: But abhimaan is a result of the ego, sodoes kevalgnan come when abhimaan goes away?Dadashri: No, abhimaan is not the only result of ego;there are many other results too. One achieves kevalgnan whenthey are all gone.Questioner: Then what are the other results of the ego(ahamkar)?Dadashri: There are many different kinds of results.Questioner: What should we do so that our abhimaandoes not cause anyone any difficulty and makes them happyinstead?Dadashri: All you have to do is have such an inner intent,nothing else. Your intent should be, ‘My abhimaan should nothurt anyone but it should make them happy.’ And if someonestill gets hurt, then do pratikraman and move on. What else canyou do? Do you have to sit there the whole night? You cannotsit there even if you want to, so what can you do?Nevertheless you should proceed in a way that it does nothurt anyone.Questioner: Is the worldly life not supported by theresult of the ego, ‘I am Chandulal’?Dadashri: But that ego is gone after attaining this Gnan.If the ego remained it would continue to produce results, wouldit not? New results do not arise after attaining this Gnan. The oldones will dissipate; only the old ones will dissipate. So then theproblem is solved. The karmic ‘tank’ does not refill. One personmay have a fifty-gallon tank; another may have a tank of twenty-Aptavani-9307308Aptavani-9five hundred thousand gallons! The bigger the tank the longer ittakes to empty out, but it is emptying all the same. So what doesit matter for the one whose tank is emptying?Questioner: But while it is emptying, it will sweep oneaway like the floodwaters; it will topple someone and it will hurtsomeone.Dadashri: Yes, but all those are ‘his’ consequences; it isa result. What do You have to do with that? However, youshould do pratikraman for it if someone gets hurt in the process.Swamaan and ego with rich materialQuestioner: What is the difference between maan(pride) and swamaan (pride within limits)?Dadashri: Maan means ‘ego with rich materials’ (materialsattached through ‘my’ or ‘mine’ with the ego) and swamaan isconfined to having pride over one’s own qualities; it isassociated with one’s own personal attributes, such as, ‘I am agraduate’ – that is the extent of his pride. That is pride withinlimits; that is swamaan. He asks to be recognized for what hehas achieved and nothing more. When that is violated he feels,‘Why are they doing this when I am a graduate?’ so hisexpectations are confined to him being a graduate. He considersit important for him and so you should not violate that. Youshould not violate someone’s swamaan (pride within limits).And what is maan? In maan one is not concernedwhether he has a degree or any specific qualification. In fact,forget about qualification; it is ‘ego with rich materials’. Hewears a long coat (fancy clothes), a three-thousand dollarwatch, gold frame glasses, that is maan!Questioner: What is the difference between hurtingone’s ego ahamkar and hurting one’s swamaan?Dadashri: A lot! The one whose swamaan is hurt willbind vengeance (vair).Dadashri: Yes, abhimaan is a result of the ego. Thatresult remains but the root cause is gone. The ego is gone.Kevalgnan (absolute enlightenment) occurs when all the resultsof the ego go away.Questioner: But abhimaan is a result of the ego, sodoes kevalgnan come when abhimaan goes away?Dadashri: No, abhimaan is not the only result of ego;there are many other results too. One achieves kevalgnan whenthey are all gone.Questioner: Then what are the other results of the ego(ahamkar)?Dadashri: There are many different kinds of results.Questioner: What should we do so that our abhimaandoes not cause anyone any difficulty and makes them happyinstead?Dadashri: All you have to do is have such an inner intent,nothing else. Your intent should be, ‘My abhimaan should nothurt anyone but it should make them happy.’ And if someonestill gets hurt, then do pratikraman and move on. What else canyou do? Do you have to sit there the whole night? You cannotsit there even if you want to, so what can you do?Nevertheless you should proceed in a way that it does nothurt anyone.Questioner: Is the worldly life not supported by theresult of the ego, ‘I am Chandulal’?Dadashri: But that ego is gone after attaining this Gnan.If the ego remained it would continue to produce results, wouldit not? New results do not arise after attaining this Gnan. The oldones will dissipate; only the old ones will dissipate. So then theproblem is solved. The karmic ‘tank’ does not refill. One personmay have a fifty-gallon tank; another may have a tank of twenty-Aptavani-9309310Aptavani-9Questioner: So one would not avenge his ego gettinghurt?Dadashri: No, nothing. There is no problem with theego. But the wealthy do not have an ego; only the poor havean ego. If a person remains unaffected when you say to him,‘Come along you useless person!’; it is so because there isonly the ego ahamkar. Still it is not always like that. It may ormay not affect his ego but wealthy people do not have just theego alone.Questioner: Then what do the wealthy people have?Dadashri: They have pride maan, abhimaan, swamaan;they have all these different things. They have everything elsealong with the ego. And the poor do not have any thing; all theyhave is the ego.Questioner: A person will have abhimaan if he doessomething good, but what if he becomes proud about humiliatingsomeone?Dadashri: That is not considered abhimaan.Questioner: So then what is the difference between thetwo?Dadashri: Maan and abhimaan both are with richmaterial.Questioner: So are maan and abhimaan connected tomaterial wealth?Dadashri: Yes, nothing else.SwamaanQuestioner: What is the difference between swamaanand abhimaan?Dadashri: Swamaan, what kind of pride is that? It isone, which maintains, ‘no one must instigate me or shake mytranquility’, it is confined to only this. He keeps only this muchpride so that no one can irritate him. Abhimaan is when aperson will say, ‘The property of my bungalow starts from hereand it goes all the way up that line. And you haven’t even seenwhat is behind it.’ Then he shows off all the jewelry he boughtfor his daughter. He does that to feed his abhimaan. He willshow you all the real estate he owns, ‘these 200 acres belongto me’. He will keep looking in the mirror to see how good-looking he is. When people talk about their grandfather andfamily lineage and how great it is, that is abhimaan; that is notswamaan.A person with swamaan is involved in a worldlyexchange of give and take. Swamaan is to respect others andbe respected in return. Therefore, to respect people is a worldlyinteraction of the worldly life. You have to make do with thingsto the point where you do not violate anyone’s swamaan. Forus all, having attained this path of liberation, we are notconcerned with swamaan. But we do have to accept swamaanas a necessary thing for worldly interactions, otherwise, one isconsidered shameless. In the non-realized state (agnan) oneshould have swamaan. Should one at least not maintain thisboundary? How can you cross that boundary? Swamaan is theprotection one employs to insulate oneself from insult.Swamaan is a great thing. It is the limit of a positiveattribute of a non-Self-realized state. I have praised swamaana lot in a sense that it is the limit of positive attribute of a non-self-realized state. Are there not positive attributes of a non-self-realized state? This is the limit of it.Questioner: Is swamaan a pardonable or not?Dadashri: If one has taken Gnan, then swamaan ispardonable. Even otherwise one should maintain swamaan.Even in the absence of Self-realization, one should haveswamaan. If a person does not have swamaan, he will becomeAptavani-9309310Aptavani-9Questioner: So one would not avenge his ego gettinghurt?Dadashri: No, nothing. There is no problem with theego. But the wealthy do not have an ego; only the poor havean ego. If a person remains unaffected when you say to him,‘Come along you useless person!’; it is so because there isonly the ego ahamkar. Still it is not always like that. It may ormay not affect his ego but wealthy people do not have just theego alone.Questioner: Then what do the wealthy people have?Dadashri: They have pride maan, abhimaan, swamaan;they have all these different things. They have everything elsealong with the ego. And the poor do not have any thing; all theyhave is the ego.Questioner: A person will have abhimaan if he doessomething good, but what if he becomes proud about humiliatingsomeone?Dadashri: That is not considered abhimaan.Questioner: So then what is the difference between thetwo?Dadashri: Maan and abhimaan both are with richmaterial.Questioner: So are maan and abhimaan connected tomaterial wealth?Dadashri: Yes, nothing else.SwamaanQuestioner: What is the difference between swamaanand abhimaan?Dadashri: Swamaan, what kind of pride is that? It isone, which maintains, ‘no one must instigate me or shake mytranquility’, it is confined to only this. He keeps only this muchpride so that no one can irritate him. Abhimaan is when aperson will say, ‘The property of my bungalow starts from hereand it goes all the way up that line. And you haven’t even seenwhat is behind it.’ Then he shows off all the jewelry he boughtfor his daughter. He does that to feed his abhimaan. He willshow you all the real estate he owns, ‘these 200 acres belongto me’. He will keep looking in the mirror to see how good-looking he is. When people talk about their grandfather andfamily lineage and how great it is, that is abhimaan; that is notswamaan.A person with swamaan is involved in a worldlyexchange of give and take. Swamaan is to respect others andbe respected in return. Therefore, to respect people is a worldlyinteraction of the worldly life. You have to make do with thingsto the point where you do not violate anyone’s swamaan. Forus all, having attained this path of liberation, we are notconcerned with swamaan. But we do have to accept swamaanas a necessary thing for worldly interactions, otherwise, one isconsidered shameless. In the non-realized state (agnan) oneshould have swamaan. Should one at least not maintain thisboundary? How can you cross that boundary? Swamaan is theprotection one employs to insulate oneself from insult.Swamaan is a great thing. It is the limit of a positiveattribute of a non-Self-realized state. I have praised swamaana lot in a sense that it is the limit of positive attribute of a non-self-realized state. Are there not positive attributes of a non-self-realized state? This is the limit of it.Questioner: Is swamaan a pardonable or not?Dadashri: If one has taken Gnan, then swamaan ispardonable. Even otherwise one should maintain swamaan.Even in the absence of Self-realization, one should haveswamaan. If a person does not have swamaan, he will becomeAptavani-9311312Aptavani-9shameless and brazen. Once that happens, he crosses theboundary.Questioner: But is there a part of the ego in swamaan?Dadashri: Let it be; there is ego there for sure but atleast he will not become shameless. Because of the swamaan,he will remain within the boundary; he will never cross that line.Therefore swamaan is needed even in worldly interaction in theabsence of Self-realization.Questioner: Now everyone has swamaan. So shouldwe not keep ours too?Dadashri: Why should You keep your swamaan nowthat You have attained this Gnan? Now there is no swamaan.Questioner: But under certain circumstances if somethinghappens, should we not maintain our swamaan?Dadashri: But now we all have nothing to do withswamaan. Pride and limits of pride are all gone. It is like this,if the ‘swa’ (the self) has not changed, then one must maintainswamaan. Chandulal has to maintain his boundaries swamaan,not You. Now, for you the ‘swa’ has changed. The self is nolonger Chandulal. You are the Self. Do you understand this?Questioner: But should one not keep a ‘dramatic’swamaan?Dadashri: That will be there. Whatever there is, it isgood. But there is no need to keep swamaan. Why would youwant to start such new business?Swamaan means ‘I am Chandulal’ and to maintain theboundary of that pride and respect. But that is as long as youare ‘Chandulal’, and now that You are a Shuddhatma, where isthe need for such a discussion? After this Gnan, one has becomethe Self. Then where is the place for swamaan? Swamaan isthe pride of ‘I am Chandulal; I am the body’. But now that‘You’ are the ‘Self’, there does not remain any swamaan.Whatever swamaan there is, it is a discharge. And we are notconcerned with that which is a discharge.Abhimaan and false abhimaanQuestioner: What is the difference between abhimaanand mithyabhimaan (false abhimaan)?Dadashri: Abhimaan is when one shows off hispossessions where as mithya-abhimaan is when one does nothave anything; not even food to eat but he still goes aroundtelling people, ‘We have so many comforts’; have you not seensuch people? Mithya-abhimaan means to show false pride andboast without having anything to show for it; it means to bragunnecessarily. Whereas people know that, ‘as an abhimaani hehas wealth and he is being ostentatious. He has something toshow for his abhimaan, although he should not be abhimaani.He should not boast about his wealth.’ Abhimaani meanspeople will always give him more respect because he is wealthy.But when he brags about his wealth, they are put off and think‘why did you have to say that? We may give you a lot ofimportance but all you have to do is to listen!’That is false abhimaan (mithya-abhimaan)Questioner: Can you please give an example of falseabhimaan?Dadashri: What is false abhimaan? It is when a personhas nothing and yet he brags, ‘I have lot of wealth’; that is falseabhimaan.One Patel from our village was sitting with a nice manfrom another village on a train. The man asked, ‘Uncle, whereare you going?’ Our Patel said, ‘I am going to Bhadran.’ Whenthe man asked, ‘How long are you going for?’ he responded, ‘Iam going only for ten to twelve days but it will take two daysjust to have our home cleaned.’ The man said, ‘It takes only twoAptavani-9311312Aptavani-9shameless and brazen. Once that happens, he crosses theboundary.Questioner: But is there a part of the ego in swamaan?Dadashri: Let it be; there is ego there for sure but atleast he will not become shameless. Because of the swamaan,he will remain within the boundary; he will never cross that line.Therefore swamaan is needed even in worldly interaction in theabsence of Self-realization.Questioner: Now everyone has swamaan. So shouldwe not keep ours too?Dadashri: Why should You keep your swamaan nowthat You have attained this Gnan? Now there is no swamaan.Questioner: But under certain circumstances if somethinghappens, should we not maintain our swamaan?Dadashri: But now we all have nothing to do withswamaan. Pride and limits of pride are all gone. It is like this,if the ‘swa’ (the self) has not changed, then one must maintainswamaan. Chandulal has to maintain his boundaries swamaan,not You. Now, for you the ‘swa’ has changed. The self is nolonger Chandulal. You are the Self. Do you understand this?Questioner: But should one not keep a ‘dramatic’swamaan?Dadashri: That will be there. Whatever there is, it isgood. But there is no need to keep swamaan. Why would youwant to start such new business?Swamaan means ‘I am Chandulal’ and to maintain theboundary of that pride and respect. But that is as long as youare ‘Chandulal’, and now that You are a Shuddhatma, where isthe need for such a discussion? After this Gnan, one has becomethe Self. Then where is the place for swamaan? Swamaan isthe pride of ‘I am Chandulal; I am the body’. But now that‘You’ are the ‘Self’, there does not remain any swamaan.Whatever swamaan there is, it is a discharge. And we are notconcerned with that which is a discharge.Abhimaan and false abhimaanQuestioner: What is the difference between abhimaanand mithyabhimaan (false abhimaan)?Dadashri: Abhimaan is when one shows off hispossessions where as mithya-abhimaan is when one does nothave anything; not even food to eat but he still goes aroundtelling people, ‘We have so many comforts’; have you not seensuch people? Mithya-abhimaan means to show false pride andboast without having anything to show for it; it means to bragunnecessarily. Whereas people know that, ‘as an abhimaani hehas wealth and he is being ostentatious. He has something toshow for his abhimaan, although he should not be abhimaani.He should not boast about his wealth.’ Abhimaani meanspeople will always give him more respect because he is wealthy.But when he brags about his wealth, they are put off and think‘why did you have to say that? We may give you a lot ofimportance but all you have to do is to listen!’That is false abhimaan (mithya-abhimaan)Questioner: Can you please give an example of falseabhimaan?Dadashri: What is false abhimaan? It is when a personhas nothing and yet he brags, ‘I have lot of wealth’; that is falseabhimaan.One Patel from our village was sitting with a nice manfrom another village on a train. The man asked, ‘Uncle, whereare you going?’ Our Patel said, ‘I am going to Bhadran.’ Whenthe man asked, ‘How long are you going for?’ he responded, ‘Iam going only for ten to twelve days but it will take two daysjust to have our home cleaned.’ The man said, ‘It takes only twoAptavani-9313314Aptavani-9or three hours to clean a house, does it not?’ Patel told him, ‘Itmay take two to four days just to clean the lower floor. Thenthe second and the third floor will need to be cleaned. Thereare bathrooms and other things that need cleaning also. Theremight be about hundred to hundred fifty mattresses which willneed to be dusted.’ He started to brag this way and the otherman just kept listening. This is how the Patel kept painting thepicture.Then his wife came to me and said, ‘Look Dada, this iswhat he was telling the man on the train.’ Then her husband tellsme, ‘I was talking to that man and telling him all this and sheruined my reputation. She told him not to believe me becausewe had nothing of the sort. You cannot believe this but I wastrying to build a reputation for myself. I was trying to gainrespect and she goes and destroys it!’ How was this going tobuild his reputation? Whose reputation was going to increase?What nonsense is this? This is false abhimaan. You live as arenter and you talk so big!People even rent the clothes they wear and then they goaround saying, ‘I have two bungalows with gardens and a farm’His jacket may be well ironed but it is rented. Your jacket maybe at the laundry for cleaning but the laundry man will haverented it out to this man! Then you end up wearing the jacketsomeone else wore. So look at the world! Then you brag thatyou do not wear hand-me-down-clothes! This is how the worldworks. I have seen all this. You may even recognize that theother man was wearing a jacket just like yours. It even had astain in the same place as your jacket has. But what can you sayto that man? That is how this world is.The sting of mustard seedsWhat is the saying people use? They say, ‘Your head isfull of mustard seeds (rai).’ Yes some say mustard seeds andothers say potatoes!Questioner: Dada, why do they say mustard seeds?Dadashri: Because whenever he says anything, it stings!He will say something and it will give you a migraine!Questioner: Everyone has ‘mustard seeds’ in their headsfor sure.Dadashri: Is that so? Is that true? Mustard is cheap inGujarat, is it not? That is why people eat it. Has the ‘mustard’gone away from your head or not?Questioner: Yes, it has gone.Dadashri: Since it is gone, everything is resolved.Questioner: Does the expression ‘filled with mustard’mean that a person has more abhimaan?Dadashri: Those with abhimaan are different and thosewith ‘mustard seeds’ are different. One with mustard seeds doesnot have any wealth. There is nothing to be proud of and yet hishead is full of mustard seeds. Who can be an abhimaani? It issomeone who owns large homes; someone who has wealth toshow for it. Those who have some real estate can beabhimaani. What is the point of filling your head with mustardseeds when all you have is an apartment of ten-twenty thousandrupees? It is acceptable for a person to have abhimaan whenhis wealth is not affected regardless of what rules and regulationsthe government imposes.People have a right to be proud of their possessions likea car or a flat etc., but there is no reason to be abhimaani.Even if you have a lot of real estate, what will you gain byabhimaan? On the contrary, your possession went away, did itnot? Besides when a person has abhimaan, his crown will beone of thorns. There is no telling when someone will come toattack you and that is why it is better if you don’t wear thecrown. It is only recently that people have started to call theirliving quarters ‘my flat’ otherwise they used to call them ‘nests’Aptavani-9313314Aptavani-9or three hours to clean a house, does it not?’ Patel told him, ‘Itmay take two to four days just to clean the lower floor. Thenthe second and the third floor will need to be cleaned. Thereare bathrooms and other things that need cleaning also. Theremight be about hundred to hundred fifty mattresses which willneed to be dusted.’ He started to brag this way and the otherman just kept listening. This is how the Patel kept painting thepicture.Then his wife came to me and said, ‘Look Dada, this iswhat he was telling the man on the train.’ Then her husband tellsme, ‘I was talking to that man and telling him all this and sheruined my reputation. She told him not to believe me becausewe had nothing of the sort. You cannot believe this but I wastrying to build a reputation for myself. I was trying to gainrespect and she goes and destroys it!’ How was this going tobuild his reputation? Whose reputation was going to increase?What nonsense is this? This is false abhimaan. You live as arenter and you talk so big!People even rent the clothes they wear and then they goaround saying, ‘I have two bungalows with gardens and a farm’His jacket may be well ironed but it is rented. Your jacket maybe at the laundry for cleaning but the laundry man will haverented it out to this man! Then you end up wearing the jacketsomeone else wore. So look at the world! Then you brag thatyou do not wear hand-me-down-clothes! This is how the worldworks. I have seen all this. You may even recognize that theother man was wearing a jacket just like yours. It even had astain in the same place as your jacket has. But what can you sayto that man? That is how this world is.The sting of mustard seedsWhat is the saying people use? They say, ‘Your head isfull of mustard seeds (rai).’ Yes some say mustard seeds andothers say potatoes!Questioner: Dada, why do they say mustard seeds?Dadashri: Because whenever he says anything, it stings!He will say something and it will give you a migraine!Questioner: Everyone has ‘mustard seeds’ in their headsfor sure.Dadashri: Is that so? Is that true? Mustard is cheap inGujarat, is it not? That is why people eat it. Has the ‘mustard’gone away from your head or not?Questioner: Yes, it has gone.Dadashri: Since it is gone, everything is resolved.Questioner: Does the expression ‘filled with mustard’mean that a person has more abhimaan?Dadashri: Those with abhimaan are different and thosewith ‘mustard seeds’ are different. One with mustard seeds doesnot have any wealth. There is nothing to be proud of and yet hishead is full of mustard seeds. Who can be an abhimaani? It issomeone who owns large homes; someone who has wealth toshow for it. Those who have some real estate can beabhimaani. What is the point of filling your head with mustardseeds when all you have is an apartment of ten-twenty thousandrupees? It is acceptable for a person to have abhimaan whenhis wealth is not affected regardless of what rules and regulationsthe government imposes.People have a right to be proud of their possessions likea car or a flat etc., but there is no reason to be abhimaani.Even if you have a lot of real estate, what will you gain byabhimaan? On the contrary, your possession went away, did itnot? Besides when a person has abhimaan, his crown will beone of thorns. There is no telling when someone will come toattack you and that is why it is better if you don’t wear thecrown. It is only recently that people have started to call theirliving quarters ‘my flat’ otherwise they used to call them ‘nests’Aptavani-9315316Aptavani-9– a nest of a sparrow and pigeon. But here even if a person hasa one-room kitchen, they call it ‘diwan khanu’ (prime minister’sliving room).The thermometer to measure prideQuestioner: Do people not have pride for things otherthan material possessions? Saints and ascetics do not have anymaterial possessions and yet they have tremendous pride. Whatkind of pride is that?Dadashri: They have pride about knowing the scriptures.But this too is a kind of a wealth, is it not? ‘I know all thescriptures’, is that not wealth too? These are all consideredmaterials. It is all maan.Questioner: It is also possible for a person to have pride(maan) even when he knows nothing?Dadashri: Yes, that happens because that is what hebelieves. If a person does not accept the respect people givehim, even in his mind, he starts believing that he has overcomehis pride. He may think to himself that he has no maan left inhim because he is not affected by the respect people give him;he does not accept it from within either. Furthermore, hebehaves in such a way that he does not offend anyone. Heknows in his mind that the level of the ‘mercury’ of the gaugethat measures his pride does not rise (i.e. he does not becomeflattered from within) and therefore he has no pride left.Otherwise would the level not rise, if someone were to givehim lot of importance? If people give him importance and heaccepts it (swells up with pride) is that not considered anincrease in the level?So the level will not rise if he does not internally acceptthe respect people give him. So then I ask him, ‘You do nothave any maan left, have you? Now check with that‘thermometer’ (gauge) to see whether the fever goes up ordown?’ He asks me ‘What thermometer?’ I tell him, ‘If thereare fifteen or twenty relatives of yours sitting here and someonetells you, ‘you have no sense’, that comment will affect you, sowhere did it all go? I thought you said you do not have anymaan left! There is no maan like that of an insult (upmaan). Allother forms of pride have no significance but there is no pridelike the effect of an insult. He who cannot bear an insult is aproud person (maani). A person can accept respect peoplegive him but he cannot bear an insult. Such a person isconsidered the biggest maani. I have all kinds of‘thermometers’. I employ these thermometers wheneversomeone comes along. A ‘thermometer’ is such a thing thatyou will know immediately.People build castles in the air like Shekhchalli. He startedday dreaming because of a cooking pot; ‘I will get married, Iwill do this, I will do that.’ A mere cooking pot gave rise to hisentire worldly life, did it not? ‘I will bring a lamb. I will bring this.I will bring that and I will get married. Then I will have a son.Then he will come to call me, ‘Dad, come and have dinner.’ Butwhat I do is I topple over people’s ‘pots’ and bring them downto earth so that everything will vanish in the air. Once the pottopples over nothing will remain, right? Hence, I would quicklytopple over his pot and so his ‘marriage, wife, son, lamb etc.,’will have no basis. What else can I do? However, people arenot at fault here either.Therefore, people have come to merely believe andaccept certain things in this way. The ascetics too have come tobelieve certain things without any reason. Not all ascetics arebad; there are many good ones. By good I mean, if you callthem ‘Bapji…bapji…(call them with respect), they will behappy. They do not care for money; they do not care about sexor any worldly pleasures. If you call them ‘Bapji’, they arehappy, but in their mind they believe, ‘I do not have any dualityin me anymore. I am beyond all duality.’ But just a single wordAptavani-9315316Aptavani-9– a nest of a sparrow and pigeon. But here even if a person hasa one-room kitchen, they call it ‘diwan khanu’ (prime minister’sliving room).The thermometer to measure prideQuestioner: Do people not have pride for things otherthan material possessions? Saints and ascetics do not have anymaterial possessions and yet they have tremendous pride. Whatkind of pride is that?Dadashri: They have pride about knowing the scriptures.But this too is a kind of a wealth, is it not? ‘I know all thescriptures’, is that not wealth too? These are all consideredmaterials. It is all maan.Questioner: It is also possible for a person to have pride(maan) even when he knows nothing?Dadashri: Yes, that happens because that is what hebelieves. If a person does not accept the respect people givehim, even in his mind, he starts believing that he has overcomehis pride. He may think to himself that he has no maan left inhim because he is not affected by the respect people give him;he does not accept it from within either. Furthermore, hebehaves in such a way that he does not offend anyone. Heknows in his mind that the level of the ‘mercury’ of the gaugethat measures his pride does not rise (i.e. he does not becomeflattered from within) and therefore he has no pride left.Otherwise would the level not rise, if someone were to givehim lot of importance? If people give him importance and heaccepts it (swells up with pride) is that not considered anincrease in the level?So the level will not rise if he does not internally acceptthe respect people give him. So then I ask him, ‘You do nothave any maan left, have you? Now check with that‘thermometer’ (gauge) to see whether the fever goes up ordown?’ He asks me ‘What thermometer?’ I tell him, ‘If thereare fifteen or twenty relatives of yours sitting here and someonetells you, ‘you have no sense’, that comment will affect you, sowhere did it all go? I thought you said you do not have anymaan left! There is no maan like that of an insult (upmaan). Allother forms of pride have no significance but there is no pridelike the effect of an insult. He who cannot bear an insult is aproud person (maani). A person can accept respect peoplegive him but he cannot bear an insult. Such a person isconsidered the biggest maani. I have all kinds of‘thermometers’. I employ these thermometers wheneversomeone comes along. A ‘thermometer’ is such a thing thatyou will know immediately.People build castles in the air like Shekhchalli. He startedday dreaming because of a cooking pot; ‘I will get married, Iwill do this, I will do that.’ A mere cooking pot gave rise to hisentire worldly life, did it not? ‘I will bring a lamb. I will bring this.I will bring that and I will get married. Then I will have a son.Then he will come to call me, ‘Dad, come and have dinner.’ Butwhat I do is I topple over people’s ‘pots’ and bring them downto earth so that everything will vanish in the air. Once the pottopples over nothing will remain, right? Hence, I would quicklytopple over his pot and so his ‘marriage, wife, son, lamb etc.,’will have no basis. What else can I do? However, people arenot at fault here either.Therefore, people have come to merely believe andaccept certain things in this way. The ascetics too have come tobelieve certain things without any reason. Not all ascetics arebad; there are many good ones. By good I mean, if you callthem ‘Bapji…bapji…(call them with respect), they will behappy. They do not care for money; they do not care about sexor any worldly pleasures. If you call them ‘Bapji’, they arehappy, but in their mind they believe, ‘I do not have any dualityin me anymore. I am beyond all duality.’ But just a single wordAptavani-9317318Aptavani-9of disrespect will set them off. When just one word sets you off,what will you do when the whole load falls on you and you haveto deal with it? It takes just one word to tear you apart. Say ifyou add 5 pounds of salt in 100 gallons of milk, the milk has thecapacity to absorb it; it will not curdle up. But here with just oneword, you fall apart!Nirmaani: the ego of being pride-lessThere are many ‘saints’ who walk around claiming to be‘nirmaani’ (free from wanting maan i.e. free from wantingrespect and importance). This will not work in religion. Haveyou ever seen a nirmaani person? A nirmaani person can beconsidered nirahamkari, can he not?Questioner: Yes, ego-free.Dadashri: Be careful; do not ever say that. People, whoare nirmaani, have the ego of being nirmaani (free fromwanting maan). They have the ego of, ‘I am a nirmaani’. Andproud people (maani) have the ego of maan. The ego of aproud man is better, but in which lifetime will a nirmaani get ridof his ego of being nirmaani? The ego of not having pride is asubtle ego, once you have it; it is very hard to get rid of. Sucha nirmaani will keep telling everyone, ‘I am nirmaani … I amnirmaani.’ There is a subtle ego behind that. Gross ego is betterbecause even other people will tell you that you have so muchego that you walk around with an inflated chest. Would peoplesay that or not? But in the other case, there is no one to tell himso – no one to tell him off, so his ego will continue to grow dayby day. That is why I have to say this directly to such nirmaanipeople, ‘understand this otherwise you will end up wanderingaround. You will have to become ego-free (nirahamkari). Justbeing nirmaani alone will not do.’ Do you understand whatnirmaani means?When I give you Gnan, you become nirahamkari (ego-free). It is a big ego to be a nirmaani. Alas! That lafru(something that possess a person) is very big. This lafru ofmaan i.e. wanting importance and recognition is better; it isdocile. Someone will come and tell you, ‘why are you walkingaround with your chest inflated?’ Will people not comment thisway? You yourself may comment to a maani, ‘Even I don’twalk around with inflated chest when I am working, so why areyou?’ But no one will make a comment or say anything to anirmaani. The state of a nirmaani is a state of subtle ego.What does this mean? It means his external ‘horns’ have beencut off but his internal ones still remain. Neither external norinternal ‘horns’ are acceptable. Internal horns will create aninternal sting but he does not hurt anyone externally, does he?For him everything on the outside is clean and proper. Hisservants take out the bedbugs and mosquitoes for him, so hedoes not have anything bothering him on the outside andneither does he have any external problems or afflictions. Buthow will the inner stinging leave him alone? The inner stingingis more intense. Have you ever seen or experienced innerstinging?Questioner: I have seen it and experienced it too.Dadashri: So one will have to become ego-free, beingnirmaani alone will not do.Nirmohi: the ego of being without attractionor infatuationQuestioner: Dada then there is another word ‘nirmohi’that needs clarification.Dadashri: Nirmohi is not a complete word. Nirmohidoes not mean that one is completely without attachment. Wecannot use the word nirmohi for a person whose illusion hasgone away completely. Therefore, nirmohi is not a state of theend of his illusion (moha). We can use the word anasakta,which means free from fascination or infatuation, but we cannotuse the word nirmohi. Where is the word nirmohi applicable?Aptavani-9317318Aptavani-9of disrespect will set them off. When just one word sets you off,what will you do when the whole load falls on you and you haveto deal with it? It takes just one word to tear you apart. Say ifyou add 5 pounds of salt in 100 gallons of milk, the milk has thecapacity to absorb it; it will not curdle up. But here with just oneword, you fall apart!Nirmaani: the ego of being pride-lessThere are many ‘saints’ who walk around claiming to be‘nirmaani’ (free from wanting maan i.e. free from wantingrespect and importance). This will not work in religion. Haveyou ever seen a nirmaani person? A nirmaani person can beconsidered nirahamkari, can he not?Questioner: Yes, ego-free.Dadashri: Be careful; do not ever say that. People, whoare nirmaani, have the ego of being nirmaani (free fromwanting maan). They have the ego of, ‘I am a nirmaani’. Andproud people (maani) have the ego of maan. The ego of aproud man is better, but in which lifetime will a nirmaani get ridof his ego of being nirmaani? The ego of not having pride is asubtle ego, once you have it; it is very hard to get rid of. Sucha nirmaani will keep telling everyone, ‘I am nirmaani … I amnirmaani.’ There is a subtle ego behind that. Gross ego is betterbecause even other people will tell you that you have so muchego that you walk around with an inflated chest. Would peoplesay that or not? But in the other case, there is no one to tell himso – no one to tell him off, so his ego will continue to grow dayby day. That is why I have to say this directly to such nirmaanipeople, ‘understand this otherwise you will end up wanderingaround. You will have to become ego-free (nirahamkari). Justbeing nirmaani alone will not do.’ Do you understand whatnirmaani means?When I give you Gnan, you become nirahamkari (ego-free). It is a big ego to be a nirmaani. Alas! That lafru(something that possess a person) is very big. This lafru ofmaan i.e. wanting importance and recognition is better; it isdocile. Someone will come and tell you, ‘why are you walkingaround with your chest inflated?’ Will people not comment thisway? You yourself may comment to a maani, ‘Even I don’twalk around with inflated chest when I am working, so why areyou?’ But no one will make a comment or say anything to anirmaani. The state of a nirmaani is a state of subtle ego.What does this mean? It means his external ‘horns’ have beencut off but his internal ones still remain. Neither external norinternal ‘horns’ are acceptable. Internal horns will create aninternal sting but he does not hurt anyone externally, does he?For him everything on the outside is clean and proper. Hisservants take out the bedbugs and mosquitoes for him, so hedoes not have anything bothering him on the outside andneither does he have any external problems or afflictions. Buthow will the inner stinging leave him alone? The inner stingingis more intense. Have you ever seen or experienced innerstinging?Questioner: I have seen it and experienced it too.Dadashri: So one will have to become ego-free, beingnirmaani alone will not do.Nirmohi: the ego of being without attractionor infatuationQuestioner: Dada then there is another word ‘nirmohi’that needs clarification.Dadashri: Nirmohi is not a complete word. Nirmohidoes not mean that one is completely without attachment. Wecannot use the word nirmohi for a person whose illusion hasgone away completely. Therefore, nirmohi is not a state of theend of his illusion (moha). We can use the word anasakta,which means free from fascination or infatuation, but we cannotuse the word nirmohi. Where is the word nirmohi applicable?Aptavani-9319320Aptavani-9It is applicable to a person who pushes away his attraction(moha) through his ego; we can call him nirmohi. This meansthat the ego itself is still present but he has reduced everythingelse. If someone insults him or swears at him, he will say,‘What is it to me?’ But his ego still remains. His ego of beingnirmaani or nirmohi remains. Will this ego not have to beremoved in the end?The Gnani can get rid of the ego of a maani. However,the ego of not being proud in a nirmaani is so subtle that eventhe Lord cannot remove it. If such an ego were to arise withinyou, it will destroy you. So ask someone before you do anythingalong these lines.That is why Krupadudev has written, ‘why does one notattain liberation?’ Then He said it is not greed or any suchproblems but if maan were not there, one would attain liberationhere and now!This is written to give encouragement to people; aviewpoint is stated. It is correct. It is to show those who do nothave Self-realization that everything else will be overlooked butone must not lose his focus of his maan. Maan (pride) is thecause of the worldly life.Sat Purush is he who…Krupadudev has said that a Sat Purush is the one who hascontinuous focused awareness (upayog) of the Self. Therefore,the one, who never misses his upayog, not even for a second,is called Sat Purush. Then it is the one whose speech is notfound in scriptures; it is a speech that has never been heardbefore and it is a speech that gives experience. His words cancreate new scriptures. A person can achieve liberation if hehears just one word of the one who has a constant awarenessas the Self, day and night. Because His speech has vachanbudi.e. it has energy and power in it. He does not have any innerdesires whatsoever; such non-visible is His conduct. There areinfinite other such virtues besides these. That is where you canfind a Sat Purush.Krupadudev has gone as far as writing:“Sansar kevad ashata mai che…ek ansha shata thikarine poorna kamta soodhi ni sarva samadhi tenu satpurush je kaaran che”‘The worldly life is filled with nothing but ashata -suffering… underlying the phenomena in which, from the point ofa fraction of easiness (shata) to the entire expression of the stateof eternal bliss, lies the exclusive cause (kaaran), and that causeis a Sat Purush. Despite having amazing prowess and capability,he has no spruha (acquisitiveness or inclination of anything), norelative sense of accomplishment (unmattata), no sense of ‘I-ness’ (potapanu), no doer-ship (garva), no indulgence inworldly comforts (garavata); to such an awe inspiring SatPurush, I reminisce over and over again and I bow.’Nispruha: non-acquisitiveness; no inclinationQuestioner: When Shrimad Rajchandra says that the SatPurush has no spruha - in what regard?Dadashri: Shrimad Rajchandra said ‘there is no spruha(no inclination)’. Many people in India are nispruhi (non-acquisitive) so are these people acceptable? No these nispruhipeople will not do. There are countless such people.All hermits, ascetics etc., are nispruhis; complete nispruhi.They reject everything; they are non-acquisitive in worldlymatters. Such ascetics claim in scornful tones, ‘What do I care?I do not need anything.’ People bring them milk thinking, ‘Bapji(the ascetic) will be pleased and he will be helpful to me someday. Besides my son does not have any children.’ The asceticon the other hand responds, ‘I do not need anything. Go awayfrom here, why did you come?’ he also curses at them. Butpeople are greedy and so the ascetic’s work gets done. AndAptavani-9319320Aptavani-9It is applicable to a person who pushes away his attraction(moha) through his ego; we can call him nirmohi. This meansthat the ego itself is still present but he has reduced everythingelse. If someone insults him or swears at him, he will say,‘What is it to me?’ But his ego still remains. His ego of beingnirmaani or nirmohi remains. Will this ego not have to beremoved in the end?The Gnani can get rid of the ego of a maani. However,the ego of not being proud in a nirmaani is so subtle that eventhe Lord cannot remove it. If such an ego were to arise withinyou, it will destroy you. So ask someone before you do anythingalong these lines.That is why Krupadudev has written, ‘why does one notattain liberation?’ Then He said it is not greed or any suchproblems but if maan were not there, one would attain liberationhere and now!This is written to give encouragement to people; aviewpoint is stated. It is correct. It is to show those who do nothave Self-realization that everything else will be overlooked butone must not lose his focus of his maan. Maan (pride) is thecause of the worldly life.Sat Purush is he who…Krupadudev has said that a Sat Purush is the one who hascontinuous focused awareness (upayog) of the Self. Therefore,the one, who never misses his upayog, not even for a second,is called Sat Purush. Then it is the one whose speech is notfound in scriptures; it is a speech that has never been heardbefore and it is a speech that gives experience. His words cancreate new scriptures. A person can achieve liberation if hehears just one word of the one who has a constant awarenessas the Self, day and night. Because His speech has vachanbudi.e. it has energy and power in it. He does not have any innerdesires whatsoever; such non-visible is His conduct. There areinfinite other such virtues besides these. That is where you canfind a Sat Purush.Krupadudev has gone as far as writing:“Sansar kevad ashata mai che…ek ansha shata thikarine poorna kamta soodhi ni sarva samadhi tenu satpurush je kaaran che”‘The worldly life is filled with nothing but ashata -suffering… underlying the phenomena in which, from the point ofa fraction of easiness (shata) to the entire expression of the stateof eternal bliss, lies the exclusive cause (kaaran), and that causeis a Sat Purush. Despite having amazing prowess and capability,he has no spruha (acquisitiveness or inclination of anything), norelative sense of accomplishment (unmattata), no sense of ‘I-ness’ (potapanu), no doer-ship (garva), no indulgence inworldly comforts (garavata); to such an awe inspiring SatPurush, I reminisce over and over again and I bow.’Nispruha: non-acquisitiveness; no inclinationQuestioner: When Shrimad Rajchandra says that the SatPurush has no spruha - in what regard?Dadashri: Shrimad Rajchandra said ‘there is no spruha(no inclination)’. Many people in India are nispruhi (non-acquisitive) so are these people acceptable? No these nispruhipeople will not do. There are countless such people.All hermits, ascetics etc., are nispruhis; complete nispruhi.They reject everything; they are non-acquisitive in worldlymatters. Such ascetics claim in scornful tones, ‘What do I care?I do not need anything.’ People bring them milk thinking, ‘Bapji(the ascetic) will be pleased and he will be helpful to me someday. Besides my son does not have any children.’ The asceticon the other hand responds, ‘I do not need anything. Go awayfrom here, why did you come?’ he also curses at them. Butpeople are greedy and so the ascetic’s work gets done. AndAptavani-9321322Aptavani-9served him some tea and gave him five more rupees. Then hedid not say anything more.So these nispruhi people go around saying, ‘What is it tome…what is it to me…?’ They end up wandering life after lifeand they take others on the same path. And what is a GnaniPurush like? He has spruha i.e. he has acquisitiveness andinclination for the Self in you and is interested in your salvation.He is nispruha – non-acquisitive and non-inclined - in yourworldly matters. He does not want anything worldly. His onlyinclination (spruha) is how salvation can be attained for all. Yet,he is not completely without inclination (nispruha). This means‘we’, the Gnani Purush is nispruha-saspruha; which is a stateof being non-acquisitive towards the non-Self, and acquisitive ofthe Self. What does this mean? Neither that shore nor this shore;neither at the shore of the non-Self nor at the shore of theabsolute Self – that is where ‘we’ are at. Therefore, ‘we’ arenispruha towards your relative self and saspruha towards yourreal Self. Therefore even if you were to swear at ‘us’ or insultus, ‘we’ keep spruha (inclination) for You. ‘We’ place an innerprotection even for the unfortunate person that does wrong by‘us’. Do you understand?No complacency (unmattata) in the GnaniWhat is another attribute of the Sat Purush?Questioner: There is no unmattata, meaning anoverflowing sense of satisfaction and inflated pride, in the Gnani.Dadashri: Yes. What is unmattata? Do you understandthis? I will explain it to you in your language.What kind of an ego do people have? If we see a personpassing by, he walks in a straightforward manner. He isspontaneous, natural and is walking along in a very orderlyfashion. As he passes by again we notice a change in him. Hisface has a different expression; he appears smug and self-there is the principle of vyavasthit. People bring them food anddrink even if they call them names and curse them. Theascetics survive this way. It is the principle of vyavasthit so itwill not fail to provide them with food and drink. People alsocomment, ‘the man is crazy but what great renunciation! Let’stake him some food.’ They will bring him food even if hecurses them. Now when one says, ‘I do not want anything,’that too is considered a spruha (inclination). That too is an egoof ‘not wanting anything’. Have you ever seen such nispruhimen? I have.One such nispruhi had come to me. He showed me hispadlock. He had made a hole through his penis and put a lockthrough it. He removed his clothes and told me, ‘Look!’ Youfool! Why do you have to put a lock on a sense organ? Whatcrime did the organ commit that you are putting a lock on it? Idid not have Gnan in those days, so I was strong and biased andone-sided. I asked him, ‘Why are you here? Why are you doingthis? Why are you showing me this?’ So he tells me, ‘I have puton a lock, can’t you see it?’ I told him, ‘I do see it. Why didyou put it only in one place? Why not put it over here too?’ Heretorted, ‘Why do you talk to me like this?’ I asked him, ‘sowhat do you want from me?’ He says, ‘Give me five rupeesright now.’ I told him, ‘I do not have any rupees if you threatenme, but I do have money if you were to ask me for it. I haveall the money that you ask for but I do not have any money foryour threats. My guru has told me to give to anyone whorequests it but not to anyone who demands it from me.’ So hebecame belligerent, ‘I am going to do this to you! I am going totake care of you!’ I told him, ‘You are a big man. You can dowhatever you choose. I have nothing so what am I capable ofdoing? And the money I have is for those who ask withhumility’ He then said, ‘Is there nothing for me?’ So I told him,‘Take one rupee.’ He did not say anything right away and ashe started to walk out of the gate I invited him back andAptavani-9321322Aptavani-9served him some tea and gave him five more rupees. Then hedid not say anything more.So these nispruhi people go around saying, ‘What is it tome…what is it to me…?’ They end up wandering life after lifeand they take others on the same path. And what is a GnaniPurush like? He has spruha i.e. he has acquisitiveness andinclination for the Self in you and is interested in your salvation.He is nispruha – non-acquisitive and non-inclined - in yourworldly matters. He does not want anything worldly. His onlyinclination (spruha) is how salvation can be attained for all. Yet,he is not completely without inclination (nispruha). This means‘we’, the Gnani Purush is nispruha-saspruha; which is a stateof being non-acquisitive towards the non-Self, and acquisitive ofthe Self. What does this mean? Neither that shore nor this shore;neither at the shore of the non-Self nor at the shore of theabsolute Self – that is where ‘we’ are at. Therefore, ‘we’ arenispruha towards your relative self and saspruha towards yourreal Self. Therefore even if you were to swear at ‘us’ or insultus, ‘we’ keep spruha (inclination) for You. ‘We’ place an innerprotection even for the unfortunate person that does wrong by‘us’. Do you understand?No complacency (unmattata) in the GnaniWhat is another attribute of the Sat Purush?Questioner: There is no unmattata, meaning anoverflowing sense of satisfaction and inflated pride, in the Gnani.Dadashri: Yes. What is unmattata? Do you understandthis? I will explain it to you in your language.What kind of an ego do people have? If we see a personpassing by, he walks in a straightforward manner. He isspontaneous, natural and is walking along in a very orderlyfashion. As he passes by again we notice a change in him. Hisface has a different expression; he appears smug and self-there is the principle of vyavasthit. People bring them food anddrink even if they call them names and curse them. Theascetics survive this way. It is the principle of vyavasthit so itwill not fail to provide them with food and drink. People alsocomment, ‘the man is crazy but what great renunciation! Let’stake him some food.’ They will bring him food even if hecurses them. Now when one says, ‘I do not want anything,’that too is considered a spruha (inclination). That too is an egoof ‘not wanting anything’. Have you ever seen such nispruhimen? I have.One such nispruhi had come to me. He showed me hispadlock. He had made a hole through his penis and put a lockthrough it. He removed his clothes and told me, ‘Look!’ Youfool! Why do you have to put a lock on a sense organ? Whatcrime did the organ commit that you are putting a lock on it? Idid not have Gnan in those days, so I was strong and biased andone-sided. I asked him, ‘Why are you here? Why are you doingthis? Why are you showing me this?’ So he tells me, ‘I have puton a lock, can’t you see it?’ I told him, ‘I do see it. Why didyou put it only in one place? Why not put it over here too?’ Heretorted, ‘Why do you talk to me like this?’ I asked him, ‘sowhat do you want from me?’ He says, ‘Give me five rupeesright now.’ I told him, ‘I do not have any rupees if you threatenme, but I do have money if you were to ask me for it. I haveall the money that you ask for but I do not have any money foryour threats. My guru has told me to give to anyone whorequests it but not to anyone who demands it from me.’ So hebecame belligerent, ‘I am going to do this to you! I am going totake care of you!’ I told him, ‘You are a big man. You can dowhatever you choose. I have nothing so what am I capable ofdoing? And the money I have is for those who ask withhumility’ He then said, ‘Is there nothing for me?’ So I told him,‘Take one rupee.’ He did not say anything right away and ashe started to walk out of the gate I invited him back andAptavani-9323324Aptavani-9satisfied. We can see that the man has changed; there has beenan ‘effect’ on him of some kind.So we say to him, ‘Come in, come and have some tea.’We offer him tea, not for his air of superiority but to inquire intohis changed disposition. He believes we are offering him teabecause of his superior stand. We give him tea and ask him,‘Where did you go?’ He will reply smugly, ‘I needed to collectthe five thousand rupees from him, now I have them.’ He getsfive thousand rupees in his pocket and he becomes self-satisfied(unmattata). He now has the disease of swelling with pride -unmattata. So the ‘eggplant’ becomes ‘tight’, otherwise the‘eggplant’ becomes limp.Now if a person has unmattata with just five thousandrupees, then as far as the Gnani Purush is concerned, the Lordof three worlds is pleased with Him. So tell me, how much‘unmattata’ will He be in? And yet there is none. Is that not awonder? But no, that is precisely where true laghuta - smallerthan the smallest, lies. ‘We’ are like a little child.…no potapanu (‘I-ness’ and ‘my-ness’)Then what is the third sentence Shrimad Rajchandrawrites?Questioner: There is no potapanu (no sense of ‘I-ness’and ‘my-ness’).Dadashri: Potapanu means ‘I am this and this is mine.’What does ‘no potapanu’ mean? This body is not mine. Thisbody verily is not mine, so all that belongs to the body is notmine. This mind (mun) is not mine. This speech is not mine.This speech that is being spoken is not ‘my speech’. Thisis the ‘original taped record’ that is speaking. He (Ambalal) isthe speaker (vakta). You are the listener (shrota) ‘I’ am theknower-seer (gnata-drashta). This is the interaction (vyavahar)of these three. ‘We’ are not the owner of the speech. ‘We’ arenot the owner of the body. ‘We’ are not the owner of the mind.The sweetness of doer-ship (garvameethash) is the cause of worldly lifeQuestioner: What is garva? Is there a differencebetween garva and abhimaan (pride with ‘my-ness’)?Dadashri: What happens when you place garva andabhimaan on the opposite sides of the scale? Do they weigh thesame? Abhimaan will be a quarter of a pound and garva willbe forty pounds.Questioner: How is that, can you please explain that?Dadashri: People do not understand abhimaan orgarva. Abhimaan is different, garva is different and ahamkaris different.Questioner: So does garva mean ‘I-ness’ (hoonpad)?Dadashri: No, the ‘I-ness’ (hoonpad) is ego. ‘I amChandulal’ is ego. At times you may or may not haveabhimaan, you may not even have garva. Hoonpad (I-ness) isto believe to be where you are not. Those who are not in theswapad (the Self), are in the hoonpad. But what is garvaras? Garvaras is very sticky.Abhimaan is mild and docile in comparison. It is very light,whereas garva is very heavy.Questioner: Can you explain garvaras with an example?Dadashri: In abhimaan one does not have the sense ‘Iam the doer of all this.’ In garvaras he believes ‘I am the doer’.So being the doer in one thing, he also believes he is the doerin the entire universe. So garvaras extends very far and wide.Does anyone do garva? There is garva in everything. Thesense of, ‘I am doing’ is all garva.When the awareness of ‘I am doing’ went away forAptavani-9323324Aptavani-9satisfied. We can see that the man has changed; there has beenan ‘effect’ on him of some kind.So we say to him, ‘Come in, come and have some tea.’We offer him tea, not for his air of superiority but to inquire intohis changed disposition. He believes we are offering him teabecause of his superior stand. We give him tea and ask him,‘Where did you go?’ He will reply smugly, ‘I needed to collectthe five thousand rupees from him, now I have them.’ He getsfive thousand rupees in his pocket and he becomes self-satisfied(unmattata). He now has the disease of swelling with pride -unmattata. So the ‘eggplant’ becomes ‘tight’, otherwise the‘eggplant’ becomes limp.Now if a person has unmattata with just five thousandrupees, then as far as the Gnani Purush is concerned, the Lordof three worlds is pleased with Him. So tell me, how much‘unmattata’ will He be in? And yet there is none. Is that not awonder? But no, that is precisely where true laghuta - smallerthan the smallest, lies. ‘We’ are like a little child.…no potapanu (‘I-ness’ and ‘my-ness’)Then what is the third sentence Shrimad Rajchandrawrites?Questioner: There is no potapanu (no sense of ‘I-ness’and ‘my-ness’).Dadashri: Potapanu means ‘I am this and this is mine.’What does ‘no potapanu’ mean? This body is not mine. Thisbody verily is not mine, so all that belongs to the body is notmine. This mind (mun) is not mine. This speech is not mine.This speech that is being spoken is not ‘my speech’. Thisis the ‘original taped record’ that is speaking. He (Ambalal) isthe speaker (vakta). You are the listener (shrota) ‘I’ am theknower-seer (gnata-drashta). This is the interaction (vyavahar)of these three. ‘We’ are not the owner of the speech. ‘We’ arenot the owner of the body. ‘We’ are not the owner of the mind.The sweetness of doer-ship (garvameethash) is the cause of worldly lifeQuestioner: What is garva? Is there a differencebetween garva and abhimaan (pride with ‘my-ness’)?Dadashri: What happens when you place garva andabhimaan on the opposite sides of the scale? Do they weigh thesame? Abhimaan will be a quarter of a pound and garva willbe forty pounds.Questioner: How is that, can you please explain that?Dadashri: People do not understand abhimaan orgarva. Abhimaan is different, garva is different and ahamkaris different.Questioner: So does garva mean ‘I-ness’ (hoonpad)?Dadashri: No, the ‘I-ness’ (hoonpad) is ego. ‘I amChandulal’ is ego. At times you may or may not haveabhimaan, you may not even have garva. Hoonpad (I-ness) isto believe to be where you are not. Those who are not in theswapad (the Self), are in the hoonpad. But what is garvaras? Garvaras is very sticky.Abhimaan is mild and docile in comparison. It is very light,whereas garva is very heavy.Questioner: Can you explain garvaras with an example?Dadashri: In abhimaan one does not have the sense ‘Iam the doer of all this.’ In garvaras he believes ‘I am the doer’.So being the doer in one thing, he also believes he is the doerin the entire universe. So garvaras extends very far and wide.Does anyone do garva? There is garva in everything. Thesense of, ‘I am doing’ is all garva.When the awareness of ‘I am doing’ went away forAptavani-9325326Aptavani-9Krupadudev, he attained right vision (samkit) and he sang,‘Mityon udayakarma no garva re (The sense of doer-ship inthe fruition of karma is gone)’. The whole world is in garva(doer-ship) of fruition of the karma. There is no exception tothat. This is because as long as one has not attained the Self,he is verily elsewhere (in the non-Self), and therefore garva(doer-ship) remains.Why did egoism creep in, in the first place? It is becauseof ignorance. Ignorance of what? Ignorance about who the doeris in all this. That is why Narsinh Mehta said:‘Hoon Karoo, hoon Karoo eyj agnanta,Shakata no bhaar jeym shwan taaney,Shrushti mandaan chhe sarva eni perey,Jogi Jogeshwara kok jaaney!’‘I am the doer, I am the doer, is verily the ignorance,It is like the dog believing, ‘I am pulling the cart(which the bullocks are pulling),Everything in the universe goes on, on its own,This is known by the rare yogi or the fully enlightenedOne’Is Narsinh Mehta saying anything wrong? Many peopleclaim, ‘I did this, I did swadhyaya – religious study, I didpenance, I did chants etc.’ so what is the truth? ‘I am the doer.I am the doer’ is ignorance so how can man proceed further?And what is garva? It is when one takes credit of doingsomething, when in fact he is not the doer of anything. He doesnot do anything, things just happen. But what do people claiminstead?Questioner: ‘I did it.’Dadashri: That is called garva.Questioner: Can it be said that one can have garva ofGnan?Dadashri: We can accept garva of Gnan because it issomething good. But this is garva of ignorance.Questioner: Garva is also used in a positive way; forexample one says, ‘this is something worth taking garva for.’Dadashri: There it is used in a positive way. But the maingarva of the world is here (doer-ship). They have taken it todenote something good.Garva means to believe ‘I am the doer’, when in fact oneis not the doer. And when a person takes credit for doing, itcreates ‘sweetness’ (garvaras) within him and so he getsenjoyment out of ‘doing’; he gets sweetness in claiming ‘I did it’.Questioner: And the circumstances around him are suchthat people reinforce it by further accolades and respect, in theform of garlands, complimentary letters etc, to the nimit, bysaying, ‘you are the one who did it, what a great job!’Dadashri: Yes they latch on to him by saying, ‘You arethe one who did it; you did it!’Some people take garva for doing something good forothers. They even take garva for doing something bad. Aperson will take garva for killing someone great and famous ortake garva of making others rich. He would say, ‘I have madequite a few millionaires.’ That is not call swamaan (pride withinlimits) or abhimaan (pride with ‘my-ness)’.Sometimes it is hard to find good paan (mouth freshenermade from beetle nut leaf) but if someone manages to find one,he will tell you three times, ‘It was not available anywhere, butI got it.’ That is garvaras. He will tell you, ‘I went out andlooked for it everywhere. I found it otherwise you would nothave been able to enjoy it.’ He takes garvaras in this. Heenjoys it very much.Aptavani-9325326Aptavani-9Krupadudev, he attained right vision (samkit) and he sang,‘Mityon udayakarma no garva re (The sense of doer-ship inthe fruition of karma is gone)’. The whole world is in garva(doer-ship) of fruition of the karma. There is no exception tothat. This is because as long as one has not attained the Self,he is verily elsewhere (in the non-Self), and therefore garva(doer-ship) remains.Why did egoism creep in, in the first place? It is becauseof ignorance. Ignorance of what? Ignorance about who the doeris in all this. That is why Narsinh Mehta said:‘Hoon Karoo, hoon Karoo eyj agnanta,Shakata no bhaar jeym shwan taaney,Shrushti mandaan chhe sarva eni perey,Jogi Jogeshwara kok jaaney!’‘I am the doer, I am the doer, is verily the ignorance,It is like the dog believing, ‘I am pulling the cart(which the bullocks are pulling),Everything in the universe goes on, on its own,This is known by the rare yogi or the fully enlightenedOne’Is Narsinh Mehta saying anything wrong? Many peopleclaim, ‘I did this, I did swadhyaya – religious study, I didpenance, I did chants etc.’ so what is the truth? ‘I am the doer.I am the doer’ is ignorance so how can man proceed further?And what is garva? It is when one takes credit of doingsomething, when in fact he is not the doer of anything. He doesnot do anything, things just happen. But what do people claiminstead?Questioner: ‘I did it.’Dadashri: That is called garva.Questioner: Can it be said that one can have garva ofGnan?Dadashri: We can accept garva of Gnan because it issomething good. But this is garva of ignorance.Questioner: Garva is also used in a positive way; forexample one says, ‘this is something worth taking garva for.’Dadashri: There it is used in a positive way. But the maingarva of the world is here (doer-ship). They have taken it todenote something good.Garva means to believe ‘I am the doer’, when in fact oneis not the doer. And when a person takes credit for doing, itcreates ‘sweetness’ (garvaras) within him and so he getsenjoyment out of ‘doing’; he gets sweetness in claiming ‘I did it’.Questioner: And the circumstances around him are suchthat people reinforce it by further accolades and respect, in theform of garlands, complimentary letters etc, to the nimit, bysaying, ‘you are the one who did it, what a great job!’Dadashri: Yes they latch on to him by saying, ‘You arethe one who did it; you did it!’Some people take garva for doing something good forothers. They even take garva for doing something bad. Aperson will take garva for killing someone great and famous ortake garva of making others rich. He would say, ‘I have madequite a few millionaires.’ That is not call swamaan (pride withinlimits) or abhimaan (pride with ‘my-ness)’.Sometimes it is hard to find good paan (mouth freshenermade from beetle nut leaf) but if someone manages to find one,he will tell you three times, ‘It was not available anywhere, butI got it.’ That is garvaras. He will tell you, ‘I went out andlooked for it everywhere. I found it otherwise you would nothave been able to enjoy it.’ He takes garvaras in this. Heenjoys it very much.Aptavani-9327328Aptavani-9Questioner: It is wrong to take garva, is it not?Dadashri: The worldly life is based on garva (doer-ship). The seed for the worldly life is garva, not ego.Questioner: How is garva a seed?Dadashri: There is no sweetness in the ego (ahamkar).The ego offers no enjoyment but garvaras (doer-ship), is verysweet! Pride and abhimaan have some sweetness also but notas much as garvaras. There is nothing as tasteful as garvaras.Only ‘Science’ will liberate you from garvaSo we are not the real doers, some other entity is thedoer. One makes false claims of doer-ship (arop); he makes thearopit bhaav of ‘I am doing this.’ Then he gets to taste the juiceof doer-ship (garvaras), which tastes very sweet, and thatbinds karma. You bind karma the moment you take false prideand taste the sweetness of doing something,However, one can be liberated if he knows the realityexactly as it is; that is if he knows that he is not the doer butvyavasthit is. One should have such a science (Vignan) within.Then there will be absolutely no attachment (raag) or abhorrence(dwesh), will there? He will be able to realize through thisVignan ‘I am not this (the body).’ All this knowledge that I amtalking of is not my Vignan (science); it is the Vignan of theVitarags, the Vignan of the twenty-four tirthankaras. How canone attain the Self without this Vitarag Vignan and see it as it is?Questioner: According to your ‘theory’, it is vyavasthitthat runs everything nevertheless garvaras continues to occurwithin, does it not?Dadashri: No, garva will not occur. Garva only occurs,as long as you have decided, ‘I am Chandulal’. There is garvaas long as this wrong belief exists. Once this wrong belief leaves,garva will not remain.Questioner: But that wrong belief does not go away thateasily does it?Dadashri: The wrong belief does go away for sure.‘We’ remove it for you. There are many people whose wrongbelief has gone and there is not just one wrong belief; ‘I amhis brother, his uncle, etc’ there are so many such wrongbeliefs.Questioner: But that wrong belief does not go away untilYou make us realize the Self (swaroop), does it?Dadashri: No, it will not. That awareness (bhan) has tobe attained. The awareness ‘I am not Chandulal, Chandulal isjust for the worldly drama,’ has to occur. Then saiyam (the statewithout kashaya) will prevail within. One will not tastegarvaras when inner saiyam prevails, he will not take delight inthe sweetness of the juice of doer-ship. So much bliss of saiyamarises that one has no need to taste garvaras. One takesgarvaras because he has no inner bliss. When such bliss is notthere, there is at least the sweetness of garvaras.The Gnani has no garva (doer-ship)Indulging in garvaras will continue to increase keyf(intoxication) of ego. Then one becomes very intoxicated. Howwill this keyf come down? How will the intoxication of theillusion (moha) that has risen come down? In life, the profits thatcome are mandatory (farajiyat) and so are the losses. Butwhen a person makes a profit, he claims, ‘I earned it.’ Andwhen he incurs a loss, he says, ‘God did it’ or ‘my stars are notfavorable.’One wants to taste the sweetness of the garvaras andthat is the cause of the worldly life. The worldly life is notperpetuated by drinking alcohol, smoking cigarettes or drinkingtea. It is this garvaras that perpetuates the worldly life.Garvaras is the only thing that no one likes to get rid of.Aptavani-9327328Aptavani-9Questioner: It is wrong to take garva, is it not?Dadashri: The worldly life is based on garva (doer-ship). The seed for the worldly life is garva, not ego.Questioner: How is garva a seed?Dadashri: There is no sweetness in the ego (ahamkar).The ego offers no enjoyment but garvaras (doer-ship), is verysweet! Pride and abhimaan have some sweetness also but notas much as garvaras. There is nothing as tasteful as garvaras.Only ‘Science’ will liberate you from garvaSo we are not the real doers, some other entity is thedoer. One makes false claims of doer-ship (arop); he makes thearopit bhaav of ‘I am doing this.’ Then he gets to taste the juiceof doer-ship (garvaras), which tastes very sweet, and thatbinds karma. You bind karma the moment you take false prideand taste the sweetness of doing something,However, one can be liberated if he knows the realityexactly as it is; that is if he knows that he is not the doer butvyavasthit is. One should have such a science (Vignan) within.Then there will be absolutely no attachment (raag) or abhorrence(dwesh), will there? He will be able to realize through thisVignan ‘I am not this (the body).’ All this knowledge that I amtalking of is not my Vignan (science); it is the Vignan of theVitarags, the Vignan of the twenty-four tirthankaras. How canone attain the Self without this Vitarag Vignan and see it as it is?Questioner: According to your ‘theory’, it is vyavasthitthat runs everything nevertheless garvaras continues to occurwithin, does it not?Dadashri: No, garva will not occur. Garva only occurs,as long as you have decided, ‘I am Chandulal’. There is garvaas long as this wrong belief exists. Once this wrong belief leaves,garva will not remain.Questioner: But that wrong belief does not go away thateasily does it?Dadashri: The wrong belief does go away for sure.‘We’ remove it for you. There are many people whose wrongbelief has gone and there is not just one wrong belief; ‘I amhis brother, his uncle, etc’ there are so many such wrongbeliefs.Questioner: But that wrong belief does not go away untilYou make us realize the Self (swaroop), does it?Dadashri: No, it will not. That awareness (bhan) has tobe attained. The awareness ‘I am not Chandulal, Chandulal isjust for the worldly drama,’ has to occur. Then saiyam (the statewithout kashaya) will prevail within. One will not tastegarvaras when inner saiyam prevails, he will not take delight inthe sweetness of the juice of doer-ship. So much bliss of saiyamarises that one has no need to taste garvaras. One takesgarvaras because he has no inner bliss. When such bliss is notthere, there is at least the sweetness of garvaras.The Gnani has no garva (doer-ship)Indulging in garvaras will continue to increase keyf(intoxication) of ego. Then one becomes very intoxicated. Howwill this keyf come down? How will the intoxication of theillusion (moha) that has risen come down? In life, the profits thatcome are mandatory (farajiyat) and so are the losses. Butwhen a person makes a profit, he claims, ‘I earned it.’ Andwhen he incurs a loss, he says, ‘God did it’ or ‘my stars are notfavorable.’One wants to taste the sweetness of the garvaras andthat is the cause of the worldly life. The worldly life is notperpetuated by drinking alcohol, smoking cigarettes or drinkingtea. It is this garvaras that perpetuates the worldly life.Garvaras is the only thing that no one likes to get rid of.Aptavani-9329330Aptavani-9What does garva mean? I will explain this to you. Whensomeone tells you he did four samayiks (introspective meditation),you will see great happiness on his face. Then if you ask himhow many samayik some other person did, he will tell you, ‘Hecannot do samayik. He did only one’. If you ask him, ‘You dofour samayiks?’ he will respond, ‘Then who else? I am the onewho did them.’ That is when we realize how intoxicated he iswith the sense of doer-ship (keyf of garvaras)! He may haveall kinds of notions of greatness. Then if you ask him the nextday ‘How many samayiks did you do today?’ he will tell youhe could not do any because his legs were hurting or he had aheadache. So did he do the samayik yesterday or his legs?Who did it? If you did the samayik then do not use your legsas an excuse. You were able to do a samayik because your legswere fine and your head or your stomach was not hurting you.When everything is regular and the circumstances are conducive,then you can do the samayik. So why do you alone take thedoer-ship for it; take credit for it? Therefore when something isdependent on other circumstances, what part in it is yours? Dopeople take such doer-ship or not? It is just egoism that onecontinues to do so. Scientific circumstantial evidences doeverything but one claims ‘I am doing it’ and that is garvaras.The worldly life continues as long as this habit of tastinggarvaras continues. Will you not have to understand this? Cansuch wrong belief continue to prevail?Questioner: But are we not born with all this?Dadashri: Yes, one is born with it but that awarenessdoes not stay does it? And he continues to enjoy garvaras.‘He’ likes the garvaras a lot. The moment he says, ‘I did foursamayiks,’ he swells with pride and then he feels sorry for theperson who does only one samayik. He will say that this poorman cannot do samayiks. First, he feels sorry for the man andthen he becomes contemptuous; he has tiraskar towards him.So the worldly life is perpetuated as a result of garvaras. Thatis a big mistake. What can the Lord do in all this? That is whyKrupadudev has said,‘Das varshey re dhara ullasi, mityon udaya karma nogarva re.’‘At the age of ten, the brim of the ocean of bliss wasreached, along with the loss of the sense of doer-ship in thefruition of karma.’Does any man understand ‘udaya karma no garva’ –the sweetness of doer ship of the fruition of karma? Who inIndia can understand this? One can understand it only after ‘we’explain it to him.Fruition of karma (udayakarma) means that the udaya(fruition of karma) is doing the samayik, not me. Then he hasno garva (doer-ship) if he maintains this. But people cannotrefrain from tasting the garvaras, right? Do they taste it or not?‘I did four samayiks’ one will say and when you ask ‘why doyou say four?’ he will reply, ‘this man did only one’. I willunderstand right away that this man is headed for moksha, forsure (!)What happens by taking garva? Your ‘neck’ getscaught in a noose. Forget about moksha, but you createthousands of lifetimes worth of obstacles towards moksha. Hedid garva of samayik! Garva of the worldly life such as ‘wewent to this place’ and ‘we went to that place’ occurs. Doesone not take garva about going to different places? As if heachieved something! As if his worries are gone. That is calledgarva.That is why people use the expression ‘a noose on theneck’. It is a noose around your neck when you say you didsamayik, or you did pratikraman, or you did penance; that iscalled taking garva.Now what does it mean when people say, ‘A Sat PurushAptavani-9329330Aptavani-9What does garva mean? I will explain this to you. Whensomeone tells you he did four samayiks (introspective meditation),you will see great happiness on his face. Then if you ask himhow many samayik some other person did, he will tell you, ‘Hecannot do samayik. He did only one’. If you ask him, ‘You dofour samayiks?’ he will respond, ‘Then who else? I am the onewho did them.’ That is when we realize how intoxicated he iswith the sense of doer-ship (keyf of garvaras)! He may haveall kinds of notions of greatness. Then if you ask him the nextday ‘How many samayiks did you do today?’ he will tell youhe could not do any because his legs were hurting or he had aheadache. So did he do the samayik yesterday or his legs?Who did it? If you did the samayik then do not use your legsas an excuse. You were able to do a samayik because your legswere fine and your head or your stomach was not hurting you.When everything is regular and the circumstances are conducive,then you can do the samayik. So why do you alone take thedoer-ship for it; take credit for it? Therefore when something isdependent on other circumstances, what part in it is yours? Dopeople take such doer-ship or not? It is just egoism that onecontinues to do so. Scientific circumstantial evidences doeverything but one claims ‘I am doing it’ and that is garvaras.The worldly life continues as long as this habit of tastinggarvaras continues. Will you not have to understand this? Cansuch wrong belief continue to prevail?Questioner: But are we not born with all this?Dadashri: Yes, one is born with it but that awarenessdoes not stay does it? And he continues to enjoy garvaras.‘He’ likes the garvaras a lot. The moment he says, ‘I did foursamayiks,’ he swells with pride and then he feels sorry for theperson who does only one samayik. He will say that this poorman cannot do samayiks. First, he feels sorry for the man andthen he becomes contemptuous; he has tiraskar towards him.So the worldly life is perpetuated as a result of garvaras. Thatis a big mistake. What can the Lord do in all this? That is whyKrupadudev has said,‘Das varshey re dhara ullasi, mityon udaya karma nogarva re.’‘At the age of ten, the brim of the ocean of bliss wasreached, along with the loss of the sense of doer-ship in thefruition of karma.’Does any man understand ‘udaya karma no garva’ –the sweetness of doer ship of the fruition of karma? Who inIndia can understand this? One can understand it only after ‘we’explain it to him.Fruition of karma (udayakarma) means that the udaya(fruition of karma) is doing the samayik, not me. Then he hasno garva (doer-ship) if he maintains this. But people cannotrefrain from tasting the garvaras, right? Do they taste it or not?‘I did four samayiks’ one will say and when you ask ‘why doyou say four?’ he will reply, ‘this man did only one’. I willunderstand right away that this man is headed for moksha, forsure (!)What happens by taking garva? Your ‘neck’ getscaught in a noose. Forget about moksha, but you createthousands of lifetimes worth of obstacles towards moksha. Hedid garva of samayik! Garva of the worldly life such as ‘wewent to this place’ and ‘we went to that place’ occurs. Doesone not take garva about going to different places? As if heachieved something! As if his worries are gone. That is calledgarva.That is why people use the expression ‘a noose on theneck’. It is a noose around your neck when you say you didsamayik, or you did pratikraman, or you did penance; that iscalled taking garva.Now what does it mean when people say, ‘A Sat PurushAptavani-9331332Aptavani-9does not have garva?’ No matter how much peace a SatPurush gives to others, he does not have a sense of, ‘I am givinghim peace, I am doing it.’ He knows that He is merelyinstrumental (nimit) in the process and that He is merelyunfolding His own bliss for him.Therefore He (the Gnani) does not have garva ofanything because when there is no ego at all, how can there beany garva? There is garva when the ego is present.‘We’ do not have that garva. ‘We’ do not have anysense of, ‘I performed this action or I did this.’ It is becausepeople indulge in the taste of doer-ship that they are able to live.Today even renowned readers of scriptures live on the basis oftaking garva, ‘I am doing it’; they are caught up in its euphoria!In the presence of this garvaras, which he enjoys somuch, he does not like anything else. One will say, ‘I renouncedeverything. I renounced my wife, I have come here leavingmillions of rupees behind, so I must be here for liberation!’ SoI tell him, ‘you know the reason you have come here but howcan we tell what other tastes you like to enjoy? You do not likemoney, but there are many other tastes of garva out there; thereis garva of fame. As long as a person enjoys any garvaras, heshould not talk about liberation (moksha).If we pour water on a drunk, will he not lose hisintoxication? The poor man will say, ‘Sir, there is no fool likeme. I do not understand anything. Sir punish me if you have tobut give me something.’ ‘We’ will liberate him first, because hehas become worthy of liberation. This is all the worthiness oneneeds for liberation.The intoxication (keyf) of ‘I know’ increaseswith garvarasOne has read scriptures for many lives without attaininganything. That is why Krupadudev said, ‘there is no solution (forliberation) in the scriptures; the solution is through experientialknowledge. Therefore, go to a Gnani instead of wrecking yourbrain and ruining your eyes reading the scriptures.’ But thenpeople brag unnecessarily! Then the intoxication (keyf) of ‘Iknow’ increases. That is a very strong intoxication. Theintoxication from alcohol comes down if we pour water over adrunk but this intoxication can never come down, not even ifthe Lord himself was to come down to decrease it. Peoplealso have their own ideas about God because of theintoxication (keyf) of ‘I know it’ has arisen within. When willall this end for them?Along with this keyf, one also harbors a desire for maan;he wants importance and respect from others. As it is, he hasthe habit of enjoying garvaras (taste of doer-ship). He wouldnot let go of garvaras, would he? It is very sweet. Hisgarvaras keeps increasing every time he says, ‘I did this’ and‘I did that.’ How good he feels when he tells people what he hasdone! Does he not feel good?Have the ego of ‘I don’t know anything’When does one attain the essence (dharma) of anything?When he reads with intense devotion the words of great men;highly evolved spiritual being with an inner intent of (bhavna) ‘Ido not know anything’, he binds merit karma (punya) and whenhe does it with the intent of ‘I know it’, then he binds demeritkarma (paap) for sure.Questioner: But it used to happen with only the bhaavof ‘I know it’.Dadashri: Nevertheless, what I am saying is that this isall contrary. People merely believe they are binding meritkarmas; at least it is better than gambling.Questioner: But how does that bind demerit karma(paap)? That is not his intention. No one even gets hurt.Aptavani-9331332Aptavani-9does not have garva?’ No matter how much peace a SatPurush gives to others, he does not have a sense of, ‘I am givinghim peace, I am doing it.’ He knows that He is merelyinstrumental (nimit) in the process and that He is merelyunfolding His own bliss for him.Therefore He (the Gnani) does not have garva ofanything because when there is no ego at all, how can there beany garva? There is garva when the ego is present.‘We’ do not have that garva. ‘We’ do not have anysense of, ‘I performed this action or I did this.’ It is becausepeople indulge in the taste of doer-ship that they are able to live.Today even renowned readers of scriptures live on the basis oftaking garva, ‘I am doing it’; they are caught up in its euphoria!In the presence of this garvaras, which he enjoys somuch, he does not like anything else. One will say, ‘I renouncedeverything. I renounced my wife, I have come here leavingmillions of rupees behind, so I must be here for liberation!’ SoI tell him, ‘you know the reason you have come here but howcan we tell what other tastes you like to enjoy? You do not likemoney, but there are many other tastes of garva out there; thereis garva of fame. As long as a person enjoys any garvaras, heshould not talk about liberation (moksha).If we pour water on a drunk, will he not lose hisintoxication? The poor man will say, ‘Sir, there is no fool likeme. I do not understand anything. Sir punish me if you have tobut give me something.’ ‘We’ will liberate him first, because hehas become worthy of liberation. This is all the worthiness oneneeds for liberation.The intoxication (keyf) of ‘I know’ increaseswith garvarasOne has read scriptures for many lives without attaininganything. That is why Krupadudev said, ‘there is no solution (forliberation) in the scriptures; the solution is through experientialknowledge. Therefore, go to a Gnani instead of wrecking yourbrain and ruining your eyes reading the scriptures.’ But thenpeople brag unnecessarily! Then the intoxication (keyf) of ‘Iknow’ increases. That is a very strong intoxication. Theintoxication from alcohol comes down if we pour water over adrunk but this intoxication can never come down, not even ifthe Lord himself was to come down to decrease it. Peoplealso have their own ideas about God because of theintoxication (keyf) of ‘I know it’ has arisen within. When willall this end for them?Along with this keyf, one also harbors a desire for maan;he wants importance and respect from others. As it is, he hasthe habit of enjoying garvaras (taste of doer-ship). He wouldnot let go of garvaras, would he? It is very sweet. Hisgarvaras keeps increasing every time he says, ‘I did this’ and‘I did that.’ How good he feels when he tells people what he hasdone! Does he not feel good?Have the ego of ‘I don’t know anything’When does one attain the essence (dharma) of anything?When he reads with intense devotion the words of great men;highly evolved spiritual being with an inner intent of (bhavna) ‘Ido not know anything’, he binds merit karma (punya) and whenhe does it with the intent of ‘I know it’, then he binds demeritkarma (paap) for sure.Questioner: But it used to happen with only the bhaavof ‘I know it’.Dadashri: Nevertheless, what I am saying is that this isall contrary. People merely believe they are binding meritkarmas; at least it is better than gambling.Questioner: But how does that bind demerit karma(paap)? That is not his intention. No one even gets hurt.Aptavani-9333334Aptavani-9Dadashri: It is not to hurt anyone. He wants to enjoy andkeep on tasting doer-ship (garvaras) in it. There is nosubstance in whatever he does when he enjoys the greatestgarvaras of, ‘I know it, I understand it’. Anything is done withthe foundation of this assumption has no substance. It is notworth mentioning. Do not expose it too much. I expose it tosome extent and it looks bad. As long as one harbors the belief,‘I know’, his face will never look fresh.Questioner: But how can that be attained without theego?Dadashri: What kind of ego does one need to maintain?The ego one needs to maintain is where anything is done, it isdone with the ego of, ‘I do not know anything’. Such an ego willgive benefits, otherwise how can it? Otherwise it will only serveto increase the ‘poison’, the poison within will keep increasingfor sure. If someone who knows all the four Vedas comes andtells me, ‘I know all that’, then I will tell him in just one sentence,‘you have not known even a drop worth!’ The definition ofknowing is that where one does not need to say anything.Questioner: Can a person attain the goal if his ego issaatvik i.e. if the ego is good and worthy?Dadashri: It is difficult to maintain a saatvik ego. It isvery difficult to define such an ego. Saatvik ego, worthy ego isthat which maintains, ‘I do not know anything’.Questioner: It is that which happens spontaneously andnaturally.Dadashri: No, it is simply the ego of ‘I do not knowanything’. Therefore everyone is searching in vain. The wholeworld is searching in vain. It is not possible to find even a singleword of truth. This truth is not such that it can be discovered.The truth people have found is temporary truth; it is truth thatwill perish.Nothing can be achieved without realizing the Self. Untilthen one has to keep wandering. This is because the Self cannotbe found in books. Where can you find it? The Soul can beattained only from a Gnani but Gnanis are very rarely around.That is why Krupadudev has said, ‘it (to find a Gnani) is rare,rare, rare, rare.’ Gnani is never to be found. Where will youfind one?The seer and the knower is not involved intasting garvarasQuestioner: What is a compliment (swaprashansa) andwhat is garva? And what is the cause behind tasting garva?What is the solution for avoiding it?Dadashri: Compliment is when someone says, ‘you area very nice and likable person. It is hard to find a man like you.’When someone says this to him, he will forget everything and allday long he will do everything that person asks him.And garva means to claim ‘I did such a great job! I didit so well’. He enjoys the sweetness from saying, ‘howwonderful a job’ about a task he accomplishes.What is the reason behind wanting to enjoy garvaras? Itis the ego. There is ego behind it; the ego of ‘I am something’.And what is the solution for avoiding and overcoming it?After attaining this Gnan, all that has been done away with. Nowwhatever remains is in the form of discharge. ‘You’ have toremain separate from all ‘that’.Questioner: Dada how can we maintain awareness; howcan we remain jagrut during the discharge (discharging effectsof karma)?Dadashri: ‘You’ just have to ‘see’ whatever ‘Chandulal’does. You have to ‘see’ even when ‘Chandulal’ is takinggarvaras and also continue ‘seeing’ him when he feels pleasedwhen someone gives him a compliment.Aptavani-9333334Aptavani-9Dadashri: It is not to hurt anyone. He wants to enjoy andkeep on tasting doer-ship (garvaras) in it. There is nosubstance in whatever he does when he enjoys the greatestgarvaras of, ‘I know it, I understand it’. Anything is done withthe foundation of this assumption has no substance. It is notworth mentioning. Do not expose it too much. I expose it tosome extent and it looks bad. As long as one harbors the belief,‘I know’, his face will never look fresh.Questioner: But how can that be attained without theego?Dadashri: What kind of ego does one need to maintain?The ego one needs to maintain is where anything is done, it isdone with the ego of, ‘I do not know anything’. Such an ego willgive benefits, otherwise how can it? Otherwise it will only serveto increase the ‘poison’, the poison within will keep increasingfor sure. If someone who knows all the four Vedas comes andtells me, ‘I know all that’, then I will tell him in just one sentence,‘you have not known even a drop worth!’ The definition ofknowing is that where one does not need to say anything.Questioner: Can a person attain the goal if his ego issaatvik i.e. if the ego is good and worthy?Dadashri: It is difficult to maintain a saatvik ego. It isvery difficult to define such an ego. Saatvik ego, worthy ego isthat which maintains, ‘I do not know anything’.Questioner: It is that which happens spontaneously andnaturally.Dadashri: No, it is simply the ego of ‘I do not knowanything’. Therefore everyone is searching in vain. The wholeworld is searching in vain. It is not possible to find even a singleword of truth. This truth is not such that it can be discovered.The truth people have found is temporary truth; it is truth thatwill perish.Nothing can be achieved without realizing the Self. Untilthen one has to keep wandering. This is because the Self cannotbe found in books. Where can you find it? The Soul can beattained only from a Gnani but Gnanis are very rarely around.That is why Krupadudev has said, ‘it (to find a Gnani) is rare,rare, rare, rare.’ Gnani is never to be found. Where will youfind one?The seer and the knower is not involved intasting garvarasQuestioner: What is a compliment (swaprashansa) andwhat is garva? And what is the cause behind tasting garva?What is the solution for avoiding it?Dadashri: Compliment is when someone says, ‘you area very nice and likable person. It is hard to find a man like you.’When someone says this to him, he will forget everything and allday long he will do everything that person asks him.And garva means to claim ‘I did such a great job! I didit so well’. He enjoys the sweetness from saying, ‘howwonderful a job’ about a task he accomplishes.What is the reason behind wanting to enjoy garvaras? Itis the ego. There is ego behind it; the ego of ‘I am something’.And what is the solution for avoiding and overcoming it?After attaining this Gnan, all that has been done away with. Nowwhatever remains is in the form of discharge. ‘You’ have toremain separate from all ‘that’.Questioner: Dada how can we maintain awareness; howcan we remain jagrut during the discharge (discharging effectsof karma)?Dadashri: ‘You’ just have to ‘see’ whatever ‘Chandulal’does. You have to ‘see’ even when ‘Chandulal’ is takinggarvaras and also continue ‘seeing’ him when he feels pleasedwhen someone gives him a compliment.Aptavani-9335336Aptavani-9Questioner: And if he has done something good, he willtell ten other people, ‘I did this and I did that’. What should bedone if that happens?Dadashri: Yes, but it will only arise if he tells others abouthis deeds. Garvaras is that which arises when he tells others.He gets enjoyment from that. And if the other person is asleep,he will not be satisfied until he wakes him up and tells him!Questioner: But does he not get encouragement whenthat happens?Dadashri: He gets encouragement but what increases asa result? Is the soul likely to increase? It is the ego thatincreases.Questioner: As the ego continues to get encouragementdoes the soul not lose by that much?Dadashri: That does happen.Questioner: Now when it is in the form of a dischargeand one continues to ‘see’ it as a discharge, without interruption;what is the process of that ‘seeing’?Dadashri: When you watch a movie, what is being usedin the process? Your sthool (external) eyes and your sookshma(subtle) eyes, both are used. When it is needed, these externaleyes are used for external things and the inner eye is used forsubtle understanding of internal things. So keep ‘seeing’ what ‘it’(the pudgal-the relative self) is doing, that is all! Know what itis doing.Keep seeing all the garvaras the relative-self tastes, andlater, admonish him a little by saying, ‘Chandulal, why do youstill taste this? Why don’t you smarten up a little bit?’ That is all.Questioner: Sometimes I tell him, ‘Be quiet and sit downyou bundle of nonsense!’Dadashri: Yes, he will straighten out if you call him a‘bundle of nonsense’. Tell him he will not get even four penniesfor his sense! Before they used to say, ‘akkal na baardaanaviya’ ‘here comes the one laden with intellect’.Now, is that garvaras bitter or sweet?Questioner: It tastes sweet. But what should a persondo in order not to taste it?Dadashri: You do not have to do anything. Our Gnan isto simply know: ‘I am not the taster of garvaras.’ You have tomaintain the awareness (laksha) of who you are. There isnothing to be done there, is there?Our Gnan is such that you will not be able to takegarvaras and even if you do, you will do instant pratikraman.If at any time, due to past habits the tendencies (vrutti) movein that direction, then it will immediately uproot them.Therefore those who have taken Gnan, our mahatmas, do nottaste garvaras. Others do because they have not found theright path yet.Garavata : stuck in indulgence of worldlypleasuresQuestioner: Then Krupadudev has used the wordgaravata. Please explain the word garavata in detail.Dadashri: What do you call garavata? What doesgaravata mean? It is a different thing. Humans have garavataand so do cows and buffalos. All humans, even our mahatmas,have garavata. Even now people are immersed in garavata.Now what is garavata? If you want to personally witnessgaravata let me give you an analogy. Usually there are ditchesof fetid water near factories. These ditches are full of wastewaterfrom the factories. Because of the salt in the water, the soil in theditch breaks down to mud. There is a small amount of pitch-black water and mud about two feet deep. In order to escapethe hot summer sun, the water buffalos look for trees or otherAptavani-9335336Aptavani-9Questioner: And if he has done something good, he willtell ten other people, ‘I did this and I did that’. What should bedone if that happens?Dadashri: Yes, but it will only arise if he tells others abouthis deeds. Garvaras is that which arises when he tells others.He gets enjoyment from that. And if the other person is asleep,he will not be satisfied until he wakes him up and tells him!Questioner: But does he not get encouragement whenthat happens?Dadashri: He gets encouragement but what increases asa result? Is the soul likely to increase? It is the ego thatincreases.Questioner: As the ego continues to get encouragementdoes the soul not lose by that much?Dadashri: That does happen.Questioner: Now when it is in the form of a dischargeand one continues to ‘see’ it as a discharge, without interruption;what is the process of that ‘seeing’?Dadashri: When you watch a movie, what is being usedin the process? Your sthool (external) eyes and your sookshma(subtle) eyes, both are used. When it is needed, these externaleyes are used for external things and the inner eye is used forsubtle understanding of internal things. So keep ‘seeing’ what ‘it’(the pudgal-the relative self) is doing, that is all! Know what itis doing.Keep seeing all the garvaras the relative-self tastes, andlater, admonish him a little by saying, ‘Chandulal, why do youstill taste this? Why don’t you smarten up a little bit?’ That is all.Questioner: Sometimes I tell him, ‘Be quiet and sit downyou bundle of nonsense!’Dadashri: Yes, he will straighten out if you call him a‘bundle of nonsense’. Tell him he will not get even four penniesfor his sense! Before they used to say, ‘akkal na baardaanaviya’ ‘here comes the one laden with intellect’.Now, is that garvaras bitter or sweet?Questioner: It tastes sweet. But what should a persondo in order not to taste it?Dadashri: You do not have to do anything. Our Gnan isto simply know: ‘I am not the taster of garvaras.’ You have tomaintain the awareness (laksha) of who you are. There isnothing to be done there, is there?Our Gnan is such that you will not be able to takegarvaras and even if you do, you will do instant pratikraman.If at any time, due to past habits the tendencies (vrutti) movein that direction, then it will immediately uproot them.Therefore those who have taken Gnan, our mahatmas, do nottaste garvaras. Others do because they have not found theright path yet.Garavata : stuck in indulgence of worldlypleasuresQuestioner: Then Krupadudev has used the wordgaravata. Please explain the word garavata in detail.Dadashri: What do you call garavata? What doesgaravata mean? It is a different thing. Humans have garavataand so do cows and buffalos. All humans, even our mahatmas,have garavata. Even now people are immersed in garavata.Now what is garavata? If you want to personally witnessgaravata let me give you an analogy. Usually there are ditchesof fetid water near factories. These ditches are full of wastewaterfrom the factories. Because of the salt in the water, the soil in theditch breaks down to mud. There is a small amount of pitch-black water and mud about two feet deep. In order to escapethe hot summer sun, the water buffalos look for trees or other338Aptavani-9Aptavani-9337things to cool down. Water buffalos are more warm-bloodedthan the cows therefore they cannot tolerate as much sun. Cowsand goats can tolerate it. So a water buffalo looks to see ‘isthere a cool place anywhere?’ Don’t people do the same too?They look for an air-conditioned room. So when the buffalosees water in the ditch, she goes in and when she finds mud inthere, she makes herself comfortable in the ditch.So the buffalo goes and sits in it. On a hot day, the watergets warm but the mud inside remains cool. The buffalo sits init peacefully. As she sits in it, the mud rises and covers her likea coat. Her whole body feels as if it has been placed in arefrigerator. The mud covers it completely up to her neck,leaving only her head exposed. Only her neck is sticking out andthen she looks around. The coolness of the mud makes her feelas if she is sitting in a fridge. The buffalos sit in this kind of ‘air-condition’ and humans sit in their rooms with air-conditioners.Do you understand this? The buffalo feels as if she is sittinginside an air-conditioned room! She will not leave this ‘fridge’,no matter what you give her.Now the owner usually milks his buffalo at three in theafternoon so he starts to look for her and when he cannot findher anywhere, he comes to the ditch. When he sees her sittingin the ditch, he wonders how she is ever going to come out. Hebrings her some hay and tries to entice her, standing at the edgeof the ditch, ‘Come get it, come and get it.’ The buffalo raisesher ears, looks at him and turns her head away but she will notget up. Every day she gets excited when she sees hay but todayshe is being obstinate. What is so good about that water? It isthe ‘coolness of the fridge’! Is she likely to come out from the‘air conditioning’ and go back into the scorching heat of the sun?This is called garavata. The owner realizes he cannot tempt herwith just hay, so he might try offering something tastier, perhapsthen she will get up. He realizes that for the time being she doesnot care and will not come out until she is enticed with somethingelse. So, he brings some un-ginned cotton and jaggery andshows it to her. He occasionally feeds her this and so he showsit to her, to see if she recognizes it. She sees it and knows whatit is, but no matter what, she will not move away from thisgaravata! She does not budge. She will not pay attention toanything because the pleasure she feels in the ditch is not to befound anywhere else. That is why she will not come out of themud. She will look but she will not budge. She thinks toherself, ‘Who would leave such pleasure?’ This verily isgaravata.This is considered the pleasure of garavata. This is howeveryone in the world takes pleasure in the garavata of theworldly life. They will not come out of it. Men and women donot budge at all! How can they when they believe the worldlylife to be the ‘fridge’ just as the water buffalo does? Do youunderstand what garavata is? One can understand garavataonly when the Gnani explains it. So, understand the exactmeaning of what Krupadudev is saying. This analogy of thecoolness of mud in the ditch is given as a comparison with thecoolness people have found in the garavata of the worldly life.Many Sat Purush – enlightened beings and Gnanis - have saidthus but people continue to sit in the garavata of the worldlylife, they give mere lip service to spiritual talks and remain sittingin the ‘fridge’.The Sat Purush is not in such garavata. They do notremain in the ‘fridge’ anywhere. Even if you seat them in a‘fridge’ or in a warm place, they will come out of it. They donot like such garavata. People on the other hand enjoy thegaravata of the worldly life and remain in it all day long, theydo not even go to listen to spiritual discourses. That apathy isgaravata. People remain in worldly garavata and the buffalosremain in the other garavata. People’s garavata is the pleasureof the five senses. Carefree! Therefore, the whole world istrapped in garavata.338Aptavani-9Aptavani-9337things to cool down. Water buffalos are more warm-bloodedthan the cows therefore they cannot tolerate as much sun. Cowsand goats can tolerate it. So a water buffalo looks to see ‘isthere a cool place anywhere?’ Don’t people do the same too?They look for an air-conditioned room. So when the buffalosees water in the ditch, she goes in and when she finds mud inthere, she makes herself comfortable in the ditch.So the buffalo goes and sits in it. On a hot day, the watergets warm but the mud inside remains cool. The buffalo sits init peacefully. As she sits in it, the mud rises and covers her likea coat. Her whole body feels as if it has been placed in arefrigerator. The mud covers it completely up to her neck,leaving only her head exposed. Only her neck is sticking out andthen she looks around. The coolness of the mud makes her feelas if she is sitting in a fridge. The buffalos sit in this kind of ‘air-condition’ and humans sit in their rooms with air-conditioners.Do you understand this? The buffalo feels as if she is sittinginside an air-conditioned room! She will not leave this ‘fridge’,no matter what you give her.Now the owner usually milks his buffalo at three in theafternoon so he starts to look for her and when he cannot findher anywhere, he comes to the ditch. When he sees her sittingin the ditch, he wonders how she is ever going to come out. Hebrings her some hay and tries to entice her, standing at the edgeof the ditch, ‘Come get it, come and get it.’ The buffalo raisesher ears, looks at him and turns her head away but she will notget up. Every day she gets excited when she sees hay but todayshe is being obstinate. What is so good about that water? It isthe ‘coolness of the fridge’! Is she likely to come out from the‘air conditioning’ and go back into the scorching heat of the sun?This is called garavata. The owner realizes he cannot tempt herwith just hay, so he might try offering something tastier, perhapsthen she will get up. He realizes that for the time being she doesnot care and will not come out until she is enticed with somethingelse. So, he brings some un-ginned cotton and jaggery andshows it to her. He occasionally feeds her this and so he showsit to her, to see if she recognizes it. She sees it and knows whatit is, but no matter what, she will not move away from thisgaravata! She does not budge. She will not pay attention toanything because the pleasure she feels in the ditch is not to befound anywhere else. That is why she will not come out of themud. She will look but she will not budge. She thinks toherself, ‘Who would leave such pleasure?’ This verily isgaravata.This is considered the pleasure of garavata. This is howeveryone in the world takes pleasure in the garavata of theworldly life. They will not come out of it. Men and women donot budge at all! How can they when they believe the worldlylife to be the ‘fridge’ just as the water buffalo does? Do youunderstand what garavata is? One can understand garavataonly when the Gnani explains it. So, understand the exactmeaning of what Krupadudev is saying. This analogy of thecoolness of mud in the ditch is given as a comparison with thecoolness people have found in the garavata of the worldly life.Many Sat Purush – enlightened beings and Gnanis - have saidthus but people continue to sit in the garavata of the worldlylife, they give mere lip service to spiritual talks and remain sittingin the ‘fridge’.The Sat Purush is not in such garavata. They do notremain in the ‘fridge’ anywhere. Even if you seat them in a‘fridge’ or in a warm place, they will come out of it. They donot like such garavata. People on the other hand enjoy thegaravata of the worldly life and remain in it all day long, theydo not even go to listen to spiritual discourses. That apathy isgaravata. People remain in worldly garavata and the buffalosremain in the other garavata. People’s garavata is the pleasureof the five senses. Carefree! Therefore, the whole world istrapped in garavata.Aptavani-9339340Aptavani-9The water buffalo does not realize that she willeventually have to go home when the sun sets. So why notshape up and get out. There is food at home and at the sametime she will also maintain her owner’s respect and her self-dignity. But she will not get up. Will she not have to go homeat night? When she feels cold she will come out of the ditch butas long as she remains in the ditch, it is called a state ofgaravata. When one becomes restless from the heat of a hotsummer day and indulges in three scoops of ice cream; that isgaravata.See the garavata! The buffalo’s garavata is mud and thehuman’s garavata is this worldly life. Buffalos have garavata ofonly certain places but humans have garavata of women, air-conditioners etc! A father will smile ear to ear because he thinks,‘I have three sons so I will have three daughter-in-laws. I wantto build three homes for them.’ All such garavata arises. Justas the water buffalo sits in the smelly ditch, the whole world isstuck in garavata. People sit in the stench - nothing but thestench of sense pleasures. In order to indulge in the stench ofsuch pleasures, they will put up with bitterness of quarrels.People take pleasure of garavata from their looks, garavata ofsex, garavata of taste, garavata of illusion and greed and thisis why they do not like to come out of it.Questioner: Dada, can it be said that we have becomelike the buffalos because of wealth, fame, respect, status, etc.,that we have attained?Dadashri: Yes, you have become like the buffalos!Questioner: Do we not need someone to get us out ofthat garavata?Dadashri: Yes you do need someone to get you out.Who would do the enticing and the coaxing? What would it taketo entice you? What will the buffalo respond to when she willnot budge even with un-ginned cotton and jaggery? Is thebuffalo likely to ever come out? Such a pleasure is calledgaravata.Questioner: Which entity in the antahkaran–the innermechanism of mind, intellect, chit and ego - indulges ingaravata?Dadashri: Which can it be? It is the ego; it is not anythingelse. The intellect will explain this is garavata and it is pleasant.Questioner: But the main involvement in garavata is ofthe chit vrutti – the tendencies of chit, is it not?Dadashri: The chit will have a tendency to rove aroundthere.Questioner: In the places of garavata?Dadashri: Yes, just like a fly, it roves and hovers aroundthere.The mind (mun) is born out of opinions; a lot ofimportance is given to the mind. Now how does an opinionarise? Vishesh-bhaav - the sense of ‘I am Chandulal’ asopposed to ‘I am Shuddhatma’ - gives rise to the ego and theego gives rise to opinions. Opinions give rise to the mind, whichin turn begins to make the chit impure. And as the chit beginsto become impure, one starts to sink in the mud. Now, who willpull him out of that mud? In addition to that, there is the issueof garavata! There is ras-garavata, which is garavata oftaste, riddhi-garavata, which is garavata of wealth, andsiddhi-garavata, which is garavata of special energies! Aperson is trapped in these three kinds of garavata, so who willpull him out of these garavata?All this is garavata too…Questioner: Can you explain this ras-garavata?Dadashri: All the juices, like the juice of mangos, othertypes of juices, the taste of basundi (ambrosia milk) etc.Aptavani-9339340Aptavani-9The water buffalo does not realize that she willeventually have to go home when the sun sets. So why notshape up and get out. There is food at home and at the sametime she will also maintain her owner’s respect and her self-dignity. But she will not get up. Will she not have to go homeat night? When she feels cold she will come out of the ditch butas long as she remains in the ditch, it is called a state ofgaravata. When one becomes restless from the heat of a hotsummer day and indulges in three scoops of ice cream; that isgaravata.See the garavata! The buffalo’s garavata is mud and thehuman’s garavata is this worldly life. Buffalos have garavata ofonly certain places but humans have garavata of women, air-conditioners etc! A father will smile ear to ear because he thinks,‘I have three sons so I will have three daughter-in-laws. I wantto build three homes for them.’ All such garavata arises. Justas the water buffalo sits in the smelly ditch, the whole world isstuck in garavata. People sit in the stench - nothing but thestench of sense pleasures. In order to indulge in the stench ofsuch pleasures, they will put up with bitterness of quarrels.People take pleasure of garavata from their looks, garavata ofsex, garavata of taste, garavata of illusion and greed and thisis why they do not like to come out of it.Questioner: Dada, can it be said that we have becomelike the buffalos because of wealth, fame, respect, status, etc.,that we have attained?Dadashri: Yes, you have become like the buffalos!Questioner: Do we not need someone to get us out ofthat garavata?Dadashri: Yes you do need someone to get you out.Who would do the enticing and the coaxing? What would it taketo entice you? What will the buffalo respond to when she willnot budge even with un-ginned cotton and jaggery? Is thebuffalo likely to ever come out? Such a pleasure is calledgaravata.Questioner: Which entity in the antahkaran–the innermechanism of mind, intellect, chit and ego - indulges ingaravata?Dadashri: Which can it be? It is the ego; it is not anythingelse. The intellect will explain this is garavata and it is pleasant.Questioner: But the main involvement in garavata is ofthe chit vrutti – the tendencies of chit, is it not?Dadashri: The chit will have a tendency to rove aroundthere.Questioner: In the places of garavata?Dadashri: Yes, just like a fly, it roves and hovers aroundthere.The mind (mun) is born out of opinions; a lot ofimportance is given to the mind. Now how does an opinionarise? Vishesh-bhaav - the sense of ‘I am Chandulal’ asopposed to ‘I am Shuddhatma’ - gives rise to the ego and theego gives rise to opinions. Opinions give rise to the mind, whichin turn begins to make the chit impure. And as the chit beginsto become impure, one starts to sink in the mud. Now, who willpull him out of that mud? In addition to that, there is the issueof garavata! There is ras-garavata, which is garavata oftaste, riddhi-garavata, which is garavata of wealth, andsiddhi-garavata, which is garavata of special energies! Aperson is trapped in these three kinds of garavata, so who willpull him out of these garavata?All this is garavata too…Questioner: Can you explain this ras-garavata?Dadashri: All the juices, like the juice of mangos, othertypes of juices, the taste of basundi (ambrosia milk) etc.Aptavani-9341342Aptavani-9Questioner: So does garavata halt progress?Dadashri: Yes, because he becomes happy when peoplestart respecting him.Therefore there is garavata of spiritual energy, wealthand sense pleasures. There are many such garavata. There isgaravata even in scriptures.Questioner: Is there garavata of scriptures too?Dadashri: Simply put, garavata is anywhere where onedoes not feel like moving away from; it is all garavata.Otherwise, progress must be made everyday.Questioner: Therefore, on the way to the final destination,one should not stop anywhere, no matter what the location islike.Dadashri: You should not get stuck in any kind ofpleasures or happiness that comes along the way. A person willfeel good when he reads scriptures. He will feel at peacebecause the words he reads are the words of a Gnani Purush.If someone acquires a kingdom and becomes stuck in enjoyingit; it is all garavata.People do not understand garavata; they do notunderstand what it is.Questioner: We understood very clearly from theexample you gave us of the buffalo.Dadashri: Having heard this example, when people seea water-buffalo sitting in a ditch, they will say, ‘Hey, therecomes garavata. Dada look at that garavata.’ I tell them,‘Yes, you do remember!’No one has defined garavata. The meaning of garavatais not in any books and that is why I have exposed its meaningwith an example.Questioner: Are you referring to the tastes of food?Dadashri: Yes, the taste; all those are called ras-garavata. Some people like certain foods a lot. If he is goingto get his favorite food for dinner, his chit will be in it from themorning till it is cooked. His chit will be in it even after hefinishes eating. That is called ras-garavata.The buffalo sitting in the mud is ras-garavata. Humanshave garavata in the taste of the five senses. One will not budgefrom there; that is the ras-garavata of sense organs.Then there is riddhi-garavata. ‘I have a mill…I have fivechildren…I have a bungalow…’ it is all riddhi-garavata.Riddhi means anything related to money; worldly possession isriddhi.Questioner: What comes under siddhi?Dadashri: Siddhi is spiritual.Questioner: Give us an example of siddhi.Dadashri: There is no problem for a tiger and a lambto come together in the presence of an ahimsak human being– a person who is non-violent through the mind, body andspeech. Or if an angry person comes here (in this satsang), hewill forget everything when he sees ‘us’. It will make him forgethis nature.The saints, ascetics and spiritual leaders have siddhi-garavata. When someone comes to them saying, ‘I have suchand such an ailment’, they cash in their siddhi, they use theirspecial spiritual energy and then they remain in its garavata.They feel happy when people give them respect and recognition.People will bring them good food as a token of theirappreciation and they will eat and enjoy it. This is the kind ofgaravata they enjoy. If they happen to attain certain siddhis,they will live in the garavata of that siddhi. They do not thinkof advancing themselves further.Aptavani-9341342Aptavani-9Questioner: So does garavata halt progress?Dadashri: Yes, because he becomes happy when peoplestart respecting him.Therefore there is garavata of spiritual energy, wealthand sense pleasures. There are many such garavata. There isgaravata even in scriptures.Questioner: Is there garavata of scriptures too?Dadashri: Simply put, garavata is anywhere where onedoes not feel like moving away from; it is all garavata.Otherwise, progress must be made everyday.Questioner: Therefore, on the way to the final destination,one should not stop anywhere, no matter what the location islike.Dadashri: You should not get stuck in any kind ofpleasures or happiness that comes along the way. A person willfeel good when he reads scriptures. He will feel at peacebecause the words he reads are the words of a Gnani Purush.If someone acquires a kingdom and becomes stuck in enjoyingit; it is all garavata.People do not understand garavata; they do notunderstand what it is.Questioner: We understood very clearly from theexample you gave us of the buffalo.Dadashri: Having heard this example, when people seea water-buffalo sitting in a ditch, they will say, ‘Hey, therecomes garavata. Dada look at that garavata.’ I tell them,‘Yes, you do remember!’No one has defined garavata. The meaning of garavatais not in any books and that is why I have exposed its meaningwith an example.Questioner: Are you referring to the tastes of food?Dadashri: Yes, the taste; all those are called ras-garavata. Some people like certain foods a lot. If he is goingto get his favorite food for dinner, his chit will be in it from themorning till it is cooked. His chit will be in it even after hefinishes eating. That is called ras-garavata.The buffalo sitting in the mud is ras-garavata. Humanshave garavata in the taste of the five senses. One will not budgefrom there; that is the ras-garavata of sense organs.Then there is riddhi-garavata. ‘I have a mill…I have fivechildren…I have a bungalow…’ it is all riddhi-garavata.Riddhi means anything related to money; worldly possession isriddhi.Questioner: What comes under siddhi?Dadashri: Siddhi is spiritual.Questioner: Give us an example of siddhi.Dadashri: There is no problem for a tiger and a lambto come together in the presence of an ahimsak human being– a person who is non-violent through the mind, body andspeech. Or if an angry person comes here (in this satsang), hewill forget everything when he sees ‘us’. It will make him forgethis nature.The saints, ascetics and spiritual leaders have siddhi-garavata. When someone comes to them saying, ‘I have suchand such an ailment’, they cash in their siddhi, they use theirspecial spiritual energy and then they remain in its garavata.They feel happy when people give them respect and recognition.People will bring them good food as a token of theirappreciation and they will eat and enjoy it. This is the kind ofgaravata they enjoy. If they happen to attain certain siddhis,they will live in the garavata of that siddhi. They do not thinkof advancing themselves further.Aptavani-9343344Aptavani-9How can one be freed from garavata?Questioner: So this illusion bhranti of pleasure, is a formof garavata?Dadashri: Everything is garavata.Questioner: Does one not bring all the circumstances ofgaravata one encounters from his past life? Is it not his karmicaccount?Dadashri: It has all been done and decided and he hasbrought it with him.Questioner: But even then he clings on to it again?Dadashri: If one is not Self-realized (agnani) he clingson to them. If one has Gnan and abides by the five Agnas, hewill not hang on.Questioner: Can he still not break free from it? He hasto endure the suffering from it does he not?Dadashri: He had endorsed it. (He had taken on theliability by being the doer in the past life)Questioner: Is he not endorsing it again by takingpleasure from the current garavata again?Dadashri: No, not if he has taken our Gnan.Questioner: In this garavata, so far in this life, are thetendencies of the chit not spread out?Dadashri: It is all spread out. That is why focusedconcentration cannot be achieved.Questioner: So is this garavata not the height ofspiritual laziness (pramaad)?Dadashri: Pramaad is a different thing and this garavatais different. Garavata means one does not even think aboutgetting out. But a person with pramaad will think, ‘I am beinglazy (pramaadi), I need to do something higher’. Whereas theone in garavata is not even aware or he does not even think‘I am in garavata’. The whole world is in garavata. Up untilnow everything is considered garavata. The water buffalo willnot get up.Questioner: The sun will eventually set and the waterbuffalo will have to come out. But do circumstances not changein this way in order for human beings to come out of theirgaravata?Dadashri: No, it likes this. Even when the buffalo’sowner feeds her good food, she will say, ‘No, I don’t want todo anything with him’ but when she gets very hungry, she will notperceive pleasure sitting in the ditch. She will get up if the hungerpangs hurt her. She will get up if she is very hungry or if thetemperature outside cools down and it is no longer comfortableto remain in the ditch.Questioner: But there must be a key to getting out ofgaravata?Dadashri: When the temperature cools down she willautomatically come out.Questioner: But do such circumstances arise in the life ofthese human beings in garavata?Dadashri: No, no. Right now they are all in garavata.Are they likely to go from Pedar Road (luxurious area ofMumbai) to Santa Cruz (working class neighborhood)? Theywill only go when they become bankrupt. They will go whenthey have no money, when they have nothing or when they getevicted.Questioner: So people cannot get out of garavata atall?Dadashri: Garavata! O ho ho! But are they evenprepared to come out of garavata? No, they are happy whereAptavani-9343344Aptavani-9How can one be freed from garavata?Questioner: So this illusion bhranti of pleasure, is a formof garavata?Dadashri: Everything is garavata.Questioner: Does one not bring all the circumstances ofgaravata one encounters from his past life? Is it not his karmicaccount?Dadashri: It has all been done and decided and he hasbrought it with him.Questioner: But even then he clings on to it again?Dadashri: If one is not Self-realized (agnani) he clingson to them. If one has Gnan and abides by the five Agnas, hewill not hang on.Questioner: Can he still not break free from it? He hasto endure the suffering from it does he not?Dadashri: He had endorsed it. (He had taken on theliability by being the doer in the past life)Questioner: Is he not endorsing it again by takingpleasure from the current garavata again?Dadashri: No, not if he has taken our Gnan.Questioner: In this garavata, so far in this life, are thetendencies of the chit not spread out?Dadashri: It is all spread out. That is why focusedconcentration cannot be achieved.Questioner: So is this garavata not the height ofspiritual laziness (pramaad)?Dadashri: Pramaad is a different thing and this garavatais different. Garavata means one does not even think aboutgetting out. But a person with pramaad will think, ‘I am beinglazy (pramaadi), I need to do something higher’. Whereas theone in garavata is not even aware or he does not even think‘I am in garavata’. The whole world is in garavata. Up untilnow everything is considered garavata. The water buffalo willnot get up.Questioner: The sun will eventually set and the waterbuffalo will have to come out. But do circumstances not changein this way in order for human beings to come out of theirgaravata?Dadashri: No, it likes this. Even when the buffalo’sowner feeds her good food, she will say, ‘No, I don’t want todo anything with him’ but when she gets very hungry, she will notperceive pleasure sitting in the ditch. She will get up if the hungerpangs hurt her. She will get up if she is very hungry or if thetemperature outside cools down and it is no longer comfortableto remain in the ditch.Questioner: But there must be a key to getting out ofgaravata?Dadashri: When the temperature cools down she willautomatically come out.Questioner: But do such circumstances arise in the life ofthese human beings in garavata?Dadashri: No, no. Right now they are all in garavata.Are they likely to go from Pedar Road (luxurious area ofMumbai) to Santa Cruz (working class neighborhood)? Theywill only go when they become bankrupt. They will go whenthey have no money, when they have nothing or when they getevicted.Questioner: So people cannot get out of garavata atall?Dadashri: Garavata! O ho ho! But are they evenprepared to come out of garavata? No, they are happy whereAptavani-9345346Aptavani-9they are so they will remain there forever.Questioner: But the real happiness is not there, is it?Dadashri: It is not, is it? And yet the whole worldremains in garavata.Questioner: So how can this garavata go away forhuman beings?Dadashri: It will go away if they see happiness elsewhere.Questioner: Will it go away when they see happiness ofanother kind, which is better?Dadashri: Yes, then one can be freed. Happiness ofanother kind will become established in his conviction (pratiti).He will become convinced about the happiness, which he hasnever seen before; ‘It is exactly what Dada says’, then it will goaway.Questioner: Do our mahatmas have this garavata?Dadashri: Yes, and they are able to understand that theyare possessed by garavata but they still like it.Questioner: What is the solution for not wanting to stayin the garavata and to come out of it?Dadashri: The solution is to decide in your mind,‘whether I have this or that, it does not make any difference tome. They are both the same.’ Then there is a solution. Equal –samaan! They are both equal in your eyes!Questioner: So the pleasure one gets from garavata…Dadashri: He considers the value of this and the value ofthat to be equal; he makes them both equal.Questioner: But what two values?Dadashri: The value of this garavata and the value ofother things like food and drink that is available. It (garavata)will go away when the value of the two is made equal. When hecomes to know and experience that there is no pleasure in eitherof them, then it will go way.People do not understand garavata.Questioner: But for those who have taken this Gnan isthere any other solution to get out of garavata?Dadashri: But who comes under the effect of garavata‘Chandulal’ or the ‘Shuddhatma’? If the effect of garavataremains, then he is ‘Chandulal’ and if not, then he has become‘Shuddhatma’.Questioner: But Dada we have come here to do Dada’sdarshan, we want to sit with Dada, we have interest in that too,is that also not garavata?Dadashri: No. That is not garavata. How can you callit garavata? This is the main thing. This is like nectar. ‘We’ donot have any garavata. ‘We’ do not have ras-garavata, ‘We’do not have riddhi-garavata or siddhi-garavata; no form ofgaravata whatsoever. The whole world is rotting in garavata.The Gnani is never in garavata.Attain Liberation with help of the Gnani.God is very pleased with ‘us’. What kind of attributesdoes a Gnani with whom God is pleased, have? He does nothave garva (doer-ship), he does not have garavata (anyworldly indulgence); he is nispruha (no inner inclinations) andno unmattata (smugness).Questioner: All these things go away when one becomeshighly spiritually elevated, do they not?Dadashri: No. But one is considered a Gnani only whenall these kashaya go away. After they go away, ‘we’ say ‘It (theGnani’s speech) is a ‘taped record’ that is speaking.’ Nobodyin the world says, ‘It is a taped record’ (about their speech). IfAptavani-9345346Aptavani-9they are so they will remain there forever.Questioner: But the real happiness is not there, is it?Dadashri: It is not, is it? And yet the whole worldremains in garavata.Questioner: So how can this garavata go away forhuman beings?Dadashri: It will go away if they see happiness elsewhere.Questioner: Will it go away when they see happiness ofanother kind, which is better?Dadashri: Yes, then one can be freed. Happiness ofanother kind will become established in his conviction (pratiti).He will become convinced about the happiness, which he hasnever seen before; ‘It is exactly what Dada says’, then it will goaway.Questioner: Do our mahatmas have this garavata?Dadashri: Yes, and they are able to understand that theyare possessed by garavata but they still like it.Questioner: What is the solution for not wanting to stayin the garavata and to come out of it?Dadashri: The solution is to decide in your mind,‘whether I have this or that, it does not make any difference tome. They are both the same.’ Then there is a solution. Equal –samaan! They are both equal in your eyes!Questioner: So the pleasure one gets from garavata…Dadashri: He considers the value of this and the value ofthat to be equal; he makes them both equal.Questioner: But what two values?Dadashri: The value of this garavata and the value ofother things like food and drink that is available. It (garavata)will go away when the value of the two is made equal. When hecomes to know and experience that there is no pleasure in eitherof them, then it will go way.People do not understand garavata.Questioner: But for those who have taken this Gnan isthere any other solution to get out of garavata?Dadashri: But who comes under the effect of garavata‘Chandulal’ or the ‘Shuddhatma’? If the effect of garavataremains, then he is ‘Chandulal’ and if not, then he has become‘Shuddhatma’.Questioner: But Dada we have come here to do Dada’sdarshan, we want to sit with Dada, we have interest in that too,is that also not garavata?Dadashri: No. That is not garavata. How can you callit garavata? This is the main thing. This is like nectar. ‘We’ donot have any garavata. ‘We’ do not have ras-garavata, ‘We’do not have riddhi-garavata or siddhi-garavata; no form ofgaravata whatsoever. The whole world is rotting in garavata.The Gnani is never in garavata.Attain Liberation with help of the Gnani.God is very pleased with ‘us’. What kind of attributesdoes a Gnani with whom God is pleased, have? He does nothave garva (doer-ship), he does not have garavata (anyworldly indulgence); he is nispruha (no inner inclinations) andno unmattata (smugness).Questioner: All these things go away when one becomeshighly spiritually elevated, do they not?Dadashri: No. But one is considered a Gnani only whenall these kashaya go away. After they go away, ‘we’ say ‘It (theGnani’s speech) is a ‘taped record’ that is speaking.’ Nobodyin the world says, ‘It is a taped record’ (about their speech). IfAptavani-9347348Aptavani-9they say something good, they swell with pride and say, ‘Ispoke so well. Look how well I spoke!’ Whereas ‘we’ say, ‘itis a taped record that is speaking,’ because it is the speech thathas no ownership.’ Then there is no question of garva orgaravata. There is nothing of the sort. There is no other hassle.The only sense of bondage is the inner intent (bhaav) from thepast life of wanting others to attain the same bliss that I haveattained. That is the only activity (kriya). This (the status ofGnani) is the fruit of that intent.Therefore, this is considered alaukik - beyond this world;it is not worldly (laukik). Here ‘our’ speech (vani), conduct(vartan) and humility (vinaya), all three win over your mind.That eventually has to happen. You too will have to become likethat. If you follow the one who has become like that, will younot become like Him too?Questioner: Yes, we will.Dadashri: That is all; there is nothing else to be done.You should go after Him. Losses of countless past lives have tobe recouped in this one life. So you will have to be careful,won’t you? This loss is from how many lifetimes? Fromcountless past lives!* * * * *[6]Laghutam : Gurutam(Laghutam – smallest, lightest, lowest, absolute humility.Gurutam – largest, heaviest, highest)The state of the Gnani is laghutam andgurutam‘We’ are not concerned even if ‘our’ liberation is delayedby one more lifetime, but ‘our’ wish is that this Vignan bepropagated and that the world should benefit from it. That iswhy I have come to explain it. I have the time. I have nothingto do. I do not have any problems because I am the idlestperson in the world and absolutely without any intellect. I amon my own and so I do not have any hassles. You have manyhassles. Otherwise, I am no better than you. Do you feel that?It is only for the worldly interactions I am sitting on this highseat.In addition to that, do you know what my ‘height’ is (howhigh I am)? Laghutam! What does laghutam mean? I am thesmallest and the lightest of all the jivas (living beings) in thisworld. That is my ‘height’. As far as the worldly life isconcerned, I am the smallest. When it comes to name, fame,looks, wealth, pride etc., I am laghutam (the lightest; lowest)and from the perspective of the Self (the Soul), I am gurutam(heaviest, highest). Therefore, in the home department – the Self- I am gurutam and in the foreign department – the non-Self -I am laghutam.So what is laghutam?Aptavani-9347348Aptavani-9they say something good, they swell with pride and say, ‘Ispoke so well. Look how well I spoke!’ Whereas ‘we’ say, ‘itis a taped record that is speaking,’ because it is the speech thathas no ownership.’ Then there is no question of garva orgaravata. There is nothing of the sort. There is no other hassle.The only sense of bondage is the inner intent (bhaav) from thepast life of wanting others to attain the same bliss that I haveattained. That is the only activity (kriya). This (the status ofGnani) is the fruit of that intent.Therefore, this is considered alaukik - beyond this world;it is not worldly (laukik). Here ‘our’ speech (vani), conduct(vartan) and humility (vinaya), all three win over your mind.That eventually has to happen. You too will have to become likethat. If you follow the one who has become like that, will younot become like Him too?Questioner: Yes, we will.Dadashri: That is all; there is nothing else to be done.You should go after Him. Losses of countless past lives have tobe recouped in this one life. So you will have to be careful,won’t you? This loss is from how many lifetimes? Fromcountless past lives!* * * * *[6]Laghutam : Gurutam(Laghutam – smallest, lightest, lowest, absolute humility.Gurutam – largest, heaviest, highest)The state of the Gnani is laghutam andgurutam‘We’ are not concerned even if ‘our’ liberation is delayedby one more lifetime, but ‘our’ wish is that this Vignan bepropagated and that the world should benefit from it. That iswhy I have come to explain it. I have the time. I have nothingto do. I do not have any problems because I am the idlestperson in the world and absolutely without any intellect. I amon my own and so I do not have any hassles. You have manyhassles. Otherwise, I am no better than you. Do you feel that?It is only for the worldly interactions I am sitting on this highseat.In addition to that, do you know what my ‘height’ is (howhigh I am)? Laghutam! What does laghutam mean? I am thesmallest and the lightest of all the jivas (living beings) in thisworld. That is my ‘height’. As far as the worldly life isconcerned, I am the smallest. When it comes to name, fame,looks, wealth, pride etc., I am laghutam (the lightest; lowest)and from the perspective of the Self (the Soul), I am gurutam(heaviest, highest). Therefore, in the home department – the Self- I am gurutam and in the foreign department – the non-Self -I am laghutam.So what is laghutam?Aptavani-9349350Aptavani-9Dadashri: Why? Is it not possible? It is like this,gurutam means to climb higher. When you have to climb amountain, does it take more effort to climb up or down?Questioner: To climb up.Dadashri: So laghutam means to come down; that canbe done very effortlessly, can’t it? ‘We’ did it very easily. Soalways, have an inner intent of laghutam. The more the innerintent (bhaav) of laghutam you have the greater will be yourprogress towards gurutam - the Self. And you attain a state ofgurutam only when you become laghutam in the relative lifeGod is very pleased with the one withoutmamataThat is why in the worldly interactions (vyavahar) I amlaghutam and in nischaya – in the realm of the Self - I amactually gurutam. I do not have any superiors. Even God, thefully enlightened One, is very pleased with me. Then what elseremains for me?People tell me, ‘You call yourself ‘Dada Bhagwan’?’ I tellthem, ‘No Why would I do that? When God, the fullyenlightened One within, is pleased with me, then why would Ihave a need to be called Bhagwan (God)? The ‘ruler’ of thefourteen worlds has become pleased with me and your ‘ruler’within you too, will be pleased with you if you do what I tell you.It is better to have the Lord within be pleased with you. Whatwill anyone gain from being a God? Let him be the God,whoever he is. The ruler of the fourteen worlds has becomepleased with me and I am showing you the way in which you toocan attain the same.There is great danger in being a God and I would invitetremendous liability on my head. What do you have to lose?Why would I get into that? Why would I want to do that? Godhas become very pleased with me, what is wrong in that?Questioner: It means smallest of the small but can wecall it the best of all?Dadashri: No, not the best. Laghutam! It is not the bestfrom this perspective. Laghu means small. Laghutam meansthe smallest; there is no living being (jiva) smaller than the onewho is laghutam. That is the definition of laghutam.Questioner: Is it the same as when people say, ‘I amdasanudas – I am the servant of servants’ – the humble most?Dadashri: No. People have reached a state of being aservant of servants (dasanudas) but no one has reached thestate of laghutam. Whereas I am in a laghutam state and thatis why people will attain salvation. In the worldly sense, from therelative perspective, I am laghutam and in nischaya – from thereal or absolute perspective, I am gurutam. I am nobody’sguru. I consider the whole world as being my guru. I consideryou all, my guru. If I am sitting on the floor here, someone willask, ‘Why are you sitting here?’ People will not let me sit on thefloor. They will make me get up and sit higher up. Otherwise, Iprefer sitting down on the floor. Therefore, I am not in a stateof being a superior (gurupad), I am laghutam.Laghutam must be your intentSo I am not your superior. You are my superior. I havenever thought myself as being superior, so you do not have aproblem do you? You will be afraid of me only if I was superiorto you, you may feel ‘He is a big man, what will he say?’ Youmay scold me but I will not scold you. If I scold you then itmeans I am in the wrong place. And if you scold me, it isbecause of a misunderstanding on your part. You do it becausethere is weakness in you, is that not so? Otherwise, the wholeworld is my superior because I am laghutam. How manysuperiors do you have? Why don’t you say something?Questioner: I am not ready to accept laghutam.Aptavani-9349350Aptavani-9Dadashri: Why? Is it not possible? It is like this,gurutam means to climb higher. When you have to climb amountain, does it take more effort to climb up or down?Questioner: To climb up.Dadashri: So laghutam means to come down; that canbe done very effortlessly, can’t it? ‘We’ did it very easily. Soalways, have an inner intent of laghutam. The more the innerintent (bhaav) of laghutam you have the greater will be yourprogress towards gurutam - the Self. And you attain a state ofgurutam only when you become laghutam in the relative lifeGod is very pleased with the one withoutmamataThat is why in the worldly interactions (vyavahar) I amlaghutam and in nischaya – in the realm of the Self - I amactually gurutam. I do not have any superiors. Even God, thefully enlightened One, is very pleased with me. Then what elseremains for me?People tell me, ‘You call yourself ‘Dada Bhagwan’?’ I tellthem, ‘No Why would I do that? When God, the fullyenlightened One within, is pleased with me, then why would Ihave a need to be called Bhagwan (God)? The ‘ruler’ of thefourteen worlds has become pleased with me and your ‘ruler’within you too, will be pleased with you if you do what I tell you.It is better to have the Lord within be pleased with you. Whatwill anyone gain from being a God? Let him be the God,whoever he is. The ruler of the fourteen worlds has becomepleased with me and I am showing you the way in which you toocan attain the same.There is great danger in being a God and I would invitetremendous liability on my head. What do you have to lose?Why would I get into that? Why would I want to do that? Godhas become very pleased with me, what is wrong in that?Questioner: It means smallest of the small but can wecall it the best of all?Dadashri: No, not the best. Laghutam! It is not the bestfrom this perspective. Laghu means small. Laghutam meansthe smallest; there is no living being (jiva) smaller than the onewho is laghutam. That is the definition of laghutam.Questioner: Is it the same as when people say, ‘I amdasanudas – I am the servant of servants’ – the humble most?Dadashri: No. People have reached a state of being aservant of servants (dasanudas) but no one has reached thestate of laghutam. Whereas I am in a laghutam state and thatis why people will attain salvation. In the worldly sense, from therelative perspective, I am laghutam and in nischaya – from thereal or absolute perspective, I am gurutam. I am nobody’sguru. I consider the whole world as being my guru. I consideryou all, my guru. If I am sitting on the floor here, someone willask, ‘Why are you sitting here?’ People will not let me sit on thefloor. They will make me get up and sit higher up. Otherwise, Iprefer sitting down on the floor. Therefore, I am not in a stateof being a superior (gurupad), I am laghutam.Laghutam must be your intentSo I am not your superior. You are my superior. I havenever thought myself as being superior, so you do not have aproblem do you? You will be afraid of me only if I was superiorto you, you may feel ‘He is a big man, what will he say?’ Youmay scold me but I will not scold you. If I scold you then itmeans I am in the wrong place. And if you scold me, it isbecause of a misunderstanding on your part. You do it becausethere is weakness in you, is that not so? Otherwise, the wholeworld is my superior because I am laghutam. How manysuperiors do you have? Why don’t you say something?Questioner: I am not ready to accept laghutam.Aptavani-9351352Aptavani-9So is it better to be a God or to have God become verypleased with you? Which state is better?Questioner: The state where God becomes very pleasedwith us.Dadashri: Now who would give up a higher state for alower one? And I assure you that God is very pleased with me.I also tell him, ‘Why don’t you leave?’ and he tells me, ‘Wherecan I go? I will tell you if there is any place.’ I told him, ‘If youmanifest within someone else, I do not have any problems withthat. You have stayed here for many days.’ But surely there hasto be a suitable place where He can go, right? That location hasto be without mamata – without ‘my-ness’; without ego, onlythen can God manifest there. Such a ‘room’ is needed. Does henot need a good place?God can become pleased with anyone. If a person has alittle ego there is no problem, however God will inevitablybecome pleased with the one in whom all mamata (‘my-ness’)is gone. He will be very pleased with the one whose mamatais completely gone.Junior of the juniorI am the only junior in this world. A person can becomea senior of the entire universe if he becomes a junior of juniors.I am the only remaining junior. Do you want to make me asenior? If you do, you will become the junior of a junior.Questioner: But as compared to you, we are like littlechildren!Dadashri: That is a different matter altogether and whatI am talking about is different. People think I am a guru, but Iam not a guru; I am laghutam. Laghutam means junior.Everyone and everything around me are my seniors. The trees,the leaves, they are all senior to me. So would you like to bea senior or a junior from now on?Questioner: In that sense, I would like to be a junior ofall juniors.Dadashri: Yes, yes. There is benefit in it. Then you canbecome a senior of all seniors. Those who want to remain as ajunior of all juniors; they will be able to become the senior of asenior.LCM: Lowest common factor is GodWhen I was young, a teacher in a Gujarati School told usto learn laghutam (LCM). So I asked him, ‘What do you meanby laghutam? How can something be laghutam?’ He replied,‘You have to find the smallest indivisible number, a number thatcannot be further divided, from the numbers I have given you.’At that age, do you know what term I used for people andindividuals? I used to say, ‘this ‘number’ (rakam) is no good.’Therefore, this subject suited me. I used the same terminology.So then it occurred to me, ‘it is the same in these ‘numbers’(humans) too, is it not?’ I thought to myself, is it not the samein these ‘numbers’ (human beings) too? God dwells in everyonein an indivisible form.From that moment onwards, my nature began to leantowards laghutam. It did not become laghutam but it began tolean towards laghutam and then eventually it became laghutam.Now “by relative view point I am completely laghutam and byreal view point I am completely gurutam.” Therefore, in mattersconcerning worldly dealings, I am laghutam. I was able toadopt this theory of laghutam right from the beginning.Only the laghutam state has valueQuestioner: So Dada why do you give so muchimportance to the laghutam state?Dadashri: This laghutam is forever a safe side. The onewho is gurutam has fears. There is no fear of falling if I saylaghutam, is there? Those who sit higher have fear of falling.Aptavani-9351352Aptavani-9So is it better to be a God or to have God become verypleased with you? Which state is better?Questioner: The state where God becomes very pleasedwith us.Dadashri: Now who would give up a higher state for alower one? And I assure you that God is very pleased with me.I also tell him, ‘Why don’t you leave?’ and he tells me, ‘Wherecan I go? I will tell you if there is any place.’ I told him, ‘If youmanifest within someone else, I do not have any problems withthat. You have stayed here for many days.’ But surely there hasto be a suitable place where He can go, right? That location hasto be without mamata – without ‘my-ness’; without ego, onlythen can God manifest there. Such a ‘room’ is needed. Does henot need a good place?God can become pleased with anyone. If a person has alittle ego there is no problem, however God will inevitablybecome pleased with the one in whom all mamata (‘my-ness’)is gone. He will be very pleased with the one whose mamatais completely gone.Junior of the juniorI am the only junior in this world. A person can becomea senior of the entire universe if he becomes a junior of juniors.I am the only remaining junior. Do you want to make me asenior? If you do, you will become the junior of a junior.Questioner: But as compared to you, we are like littlechildren!Dadashri: That is a different matter altogether and whatI am talking about is different. People think I am a guru, but Iam not a guru; I am laghutam. Laghutam means junior.Everyone and everything around me are my seniors. The trees,the leaves, they are all senior to me. So would you like to bea senior or a junior from now on?Questioner: In that sense, I would like to be a junior ofall juniors.Dadashri: Yes, yes. There is benefit in it. Then you canbecome a senior of all seniors. Those who want to remain as ajunior of all juniors; they will be able to become the senior of asenior.LCM: Lowest common factor is GodWhen I was young, a teacher in a Gujarati School told usto learn laghutam (LCM). So I asked him, ‘What do you meanby laghutam? How can something be laghutam?’ He replied,‘You have to find the smallest indivisible number, a number thatcannot be further divided, from the numbers I have given you.’At that age, do you know what term I used for people andindividuals? I used to say, ‘this ‘number’ (rakam) is no good.’Therefore, this subject suited me. I used the same terminology.So then it occurred to me, ‘it is the same in these ‘numbers’(humans) too, is it not?’ I thought to myself, is it not the samein these ‘numbers’ (human beings) too? God dwells in everyonein an indivisible form.From that moment onwards, my nature began to leantowards laghutam. It did not become laghutam but it began tolean towards laghutam and then eventually it became laghutam.Now “by relative view point I am completely laghutam and byreal view point I am completely gurutam.” Therefore, in mattersconcerning worldly dealings, I am laghutam. I was able toadopt this theory of laghutam right from the beginning.Only the laghutam state has valueQuestioner: So Dada why do you give so muchimportance to the laghutam state?Dadashri: This laghutam is forever a safe side. The onewho is gurutam has fears. There is no fear of falling if I saylaghutam, is there? Those who sit higher have fear of falling.Aptavani-9353354Aptavani-9Nobody in the world is in a laghutam state; the world is in agurutam state. Those who become gurutam are the ones whowill fall. That is why I have become laghutam. My intent(bhaav) towards the world is laghutam and that is why I donot have any fear of falling; nothing affects me and nothinghinders me.In the ‘relative’ realm, I am laghutam. I say, ‘Sir, I amsmaller than you. I am even smaller (lower) than the word youuse to insult me with.’ At the most, he can call me a donkey.But I am way smaller (lower) than a donkey. Being a donkeyis a heavy load, is it not! And I am without any load. So if youwant to curse me, I am laghutam. Laghutam is like space -akaash. Laghutam does not feel anything; he will not beaffected if he is insulted; nothing affects the one who islaghutam.What I am really saying is that if you want to show-offyour importance (rof) towards me then I am laghutam and ifyou want me to be important, then I am gurutam.Laghuta takes you towards gurutaIf someone calls you unworthy, then an unworthy personwill not have any grounds to argue, will he? Unworthy meanslaghutam. So is there only one kind of lineage of people in theworld? Everything has been going on from the beginning of time,and as such there are no unworthy people but the worthypeople call them unworthy and those unworthy people callthese worthy people, unworthy. I investigated this deeper andfound that they call each other unworthy. So it is not easy tofind justice in this.Questioner: Laghutam is the justice.Dadashri: Yes, laghutam is the justice. Everyone shapesup when a laghutam person comes along. Then there is nothingto worry. And those who are worthy, no matter how much youtry to make them laghutam they will take you towardsgurutam.Instead of being helpless in allrespects…become laghutamSo eventually will you not have to have intent (bhaav) ofbeing laghutam? Otherwise, does a man miserable from asickness not become helpless and dependent (laachaar) beforea doctor?Questioner: He does!Dadashri: It is better to become laghutam than tobecome helpless and dependent (laachaar). You should notbecome helpless, no matter what.All these prominent people, if they get a stomachache,they will say ‘I will do whatever you tell me, doc.’ They becomehelpless at that time. They are very helpless; they cannot toleratepain, ‘please save me from this pain, doctor.’ They have triedlifelong to be gurutam and their constitution becomes weak andsensitive. One needs to have a strong constitution to becomelaghutam. A laghutam person will take the approach of ‘dowhat you have to, doctor’ but they will not become helpless(laachaar).‘We’ have never shown any helplessness in ‘our’ life, noteven if they were to cut ‘us’. To be helpless (laachaar) in allareas is tremendous violence (himsa) towards the Self. It isatmahimsa - violence towards the self. There is bound to bepain and suffering as long as there is a body. There is no wayout of that. But you should not become helpless. You shouldbecome laghutam instead.One’s real Self is the Soul - the owner of infinite energy.So when you say, ‘I am helpless’, how low a state is that? Howcan you be helpless? How can something that has Soul beAptavani-9353354Aptavani-9Nobody in the world is in a laghutam state; the world is in agurutam state. Those who become gurutam are the ones whowill fall. That is why I have become laghutam. My intent(bhaav) towards the world is laghutam and that is why I donot have any fear of falling; nothing affects me and nothinghinders me.In the ‘relative’ realm, I am laghutam. I say, ‘Sir, I amsmaller than you. I am even smaller (lower) than the word youuse to insult me with.’ At the most, he can call me a donkey.But I am way smaller (lower) than a donkey. Being a donkeyis a heavy load, is it not! And I am without any load. So if youwant to curse me, I am laghutam. Laghutam is like space -akaash. Laghutam does not feel anything; he will not beaffected if he is insulted; nothing affects the one who islaghutam.What I am really saying is that if you want to show-offyour importance (rof) towards me then I am laghutam and ifyou want me to be important, then I am gurutam.Laghuta takes you towards gurutaIf someone calls you unworthy, then an unworthy personwill not have any grounds to argue, will he? Unworthy meanslaghutam. So is there only one kind of lineage of people in theworld? Everything has been going on from the beginning of time,and as such there are no unworthy people but the worthypeople call them unworthy and those unworthy people callthese worthy people, unworthy. I investigated this deeper andfound that they call each other unworthy. So it is not easy tofind justice in this.Questioner: Laghutam is the justice.Dadashri: Yes, laghutam is the justice. Everyone shapesup when a laghutam person comes along. Then there is nothingto worry. And those who are worthy, no matter how much youtry to make them laghutam they will take you towardsgurutam.Instead of being helpless in allrespects…become laghutamSo eventually will you not have to have intent (bhaav) ofbeing laghutam? Otherwise, does a man miserable from asickness not become helpless and dependent (laachaar) beforea doctor?Questioner: He does!Dadashri: It is better to become laghutam than tobecome helpless and dependent (laachaar). You should notbecome helpless, no matter what.All these prominent people, if they get a stomachache,they will say ‘I will do whatever you tell me, doc.’ They becomehelpless at that time. They are very helpless; they cannot toleratepain, ‘please save me from this pain, doctor.’ They have triedlifelong to be gurutam and their constitution becomes weak andsensitive. One needs to have a strong constitution to becomelaghutam. A laghutam person will take the approach of ‘dowhat you have to, doctor’ but they will not become helpless(laachaar).‘We’ have never shown any helplessness in ‘our’ life, noteven if they were to cut ‘us’. To be helpless (laachaar) in allareas is tremendous violence (himsa) towards the Self. It isatmahimsa - violence towards the self. There is bound to bepain and suffering as long as there is a body. There is no wayout of that. But you should not become helpless. You shouldbecome laghutam instead.One’s real Self is the Soul - the owner of infinite energy.So when you say, ‘I am helpless’, how low a state is that? Howcan you be helpless? How can something that has Soul beAptavani-9355356Aptavani-9helpless? There is no helplessness where there is the Self. Whynot become laghutam instead?Consequences of gurutaDo you have a desire to be laghutam?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: That is very good.Questioner: They say, ‘Prabhuta se prabhu door’meaning God distances himself from the one who wants tobecome God.Dadashri: Yes and that is why I have said that I remainliberated and laghutam. Still I enjoy the grandeur of a gurutamstate. My appearance and conduct is laghutam. For the worldI am the smallest; I am laghutam and for those who want toattain Gnan, I am the greatest, I am gurutam. So, if you wantliberation, I am gurutam and there is no one higher than me.And if you want to be great in the worldly life, then I amlaghutam. Now if people want liberation and if I do not say Iam gurutam, then nothing will be achieved. And what dopeople want to be in this world?Questioner: They want to be gurutam.Dadashri: Where did you see that?Questioner: I have seen it in me.Dadashri: But that is not the case with people outside, isit? Are there any gurutam people out there?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Is that so? Are they all not in gurutam? Theyall believe ‘this, the relative self, is the atma and we have tomake it gurutam.’ Everyone has a desire to be gurutam.Everyone wants gurutam. They get the slightest of respect andthey are happy and their gurutam increases. They wantliberation and yet they become gurutam. Now is that acontradiction or not? That is a sign for wandering for countlesslives because all those who have tried to be gurutam in theworldly life, have fallen. They all became trapped. Tell me, didthey get trapped or not? Only those who became laghutamwere able to swim (through the ocean of life). This path is notfor those who want to be gurutam. Those who try to begurutam take a beating and in the end become senseless, andcreate obstacles (antaray) in their path to liberation. Do youunderstand what I mean by obstacles?Questioner: How can one get rid of those obstacles(antaray)?Dadashri: You have to have the bhaav of laghutam –the inner intent of beings small - then the obstacles will all goaway. All the obstacles will go away by doing ‘plus-minus’. Theobstacles arose from the inner intent of wanting to be gurutamand with intent of becoming laghutam, they will all go away.What do you need gurutam for? What is the advantageof it? The higher one goes the harder he falls. Instead, what iswrong with staying at the bottom? Then there will be noproblems! Your bliss will remain with you and when it is time foryour liberation, dharmastikaya - the element of motion - willautomatically take you there; you do not have to do anything.So become laghutam and everything will be resolved. Tobecome laghutam is your absolute state (purnapad). This ismy laghutam form and only then can there be a gurutamform. No one has become gurutam without becominglaghutam first.And where I have become laghutam, people are tryingto be gurutam. People want to be guru in the relative world.They try to be guru only of the relative world. Guru means onehas an inner intent of ‘I want to become someone big andfamous’. Those who try to be laghutam in the relative worldAptavani-9355356Aptavani-9helpless? There is no helplessness where there is the Self. Whynot become laghutam instead?Consequences of gurutaDo you have a desire to be laghutam?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: That is very good.Questioner: They say, ‘Prabhuta se prabhu door’meaning God distances himself from the one who wants tobecome God.Dadashri: Yes and that is why I have said that I remainliberated and laghutam. Still I enjoy the grandeur of a gurutamstate. My appearance and conduct is laghutam. For the worldI am the smallest; I am laghutam and for those who want toattain Gnan, I am the greatest, I am gurutam. So, if you wantliberation, I am gurutam and there is no one higher than me.And if you want to be great in the worldly life, then I amlaghutam. Now if people want liberation and if I do not say Iam gurutam, then nothing will be achieved. And what dopeople want to be in this world?Questioner: They want to be gurutam.Dadashri: Where did you see that?Questioner: I have seen it in me.Dadashri: But that is not the case with people outside, isit? Are there any gurutam people out there?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Is that so? Are they all not in gurutam? Theyall believe ‘this, the relative self, is the atma and we have tomake it gurutam.’ Everyone has a desire to be gurutam.Everyone wants gurutam. They get the slightest of respect andthey are happy and their gurutam increases. They wantliberation and yet they become gurutam. Now is that acontradiction or not? That is a sign for wandering for countlesslives because all those who have tried to be gurutam in theworldly life, have fallen. They all became trapped. Tell me, didthey get trapped or not? Only those who became laghutamwere able to swim (through the ocean of life). This path is notfor those who want to be gurutam. Those who try to begurutam take a beating and in the end become senseless, andcreate obstacles (antaray) in their path to liberation. Do youunderstand what I mean by obstacles?Questioner: How can one get rid of those obstacles(antaray)?Dadashri: You have to have the bhaav of laghutam –the inner intent of beings small - then the obstacles will all goaway. All the obstacles will go away by doing ‘plus-minus’. Theobstacles arose from the inner intent of wanting to be gurutamand with intent of becoming laghutam, they will all go away.What do you need gurutam for? What is the advantageof it? The higher one goes the harder he falls. Instead, what iswrong with staying at the bottom? Then there will be noproblems! Your bliss will remain with you and when it is time foryour liberation, dharmastikaya - the element of motion - willautomatically take you there; you do not have to do anything.So become laghutam and everything will be resolved. Tobecome laghutam is your absolute state (purnapad). This ismy laghutam form and only then can there be a gurutamform. No one has become gurutam without becominglaghutam first.And where I have become laghutam, people are tryingto be gurutam. People want to be guru in the relative world.They try to be guru only of the relative world. Guru means onehas an inner intent of ‘I want to become someone big andfamous’. Those who try to be laghutam in the relative worldAptavani-9357358Aptavani-9will go to a higher life form. But no one shows any signs of tryingto be laghutam in the relative world. Whose fault is it if peoplebind karma of a life in the animal kingdom by trying to becomegurutam? They try to be gurutam where they should belaghutam and consequently they increase their ‘number of legs’(subsequent birth in the animal kingdom); they go from two legsto four and they even get a tail! This is because in the gurutamstate their certain actions will cause them to bind karmas suchthat in the next life they will have two extra legs and a tail.Whereas with the laghutam belief, whatever you do will bedone wonderfully. But the whole world is looking towardsgurutam.Questioner: So one becomes laghu - light and humble?Dadashri: No, no, not laghu. They become animals withfour legs! As they try to become gurutam in the relative world,gurutam will enter into the picture again. Then do we not needa solution to get rid of that gurutam? They go from ‘two legs’to ‘four legs’ so that they do not fall! Otherwise, from wherewill we get donkeys? Where will you get these cows and waterbuffalos? These poor people are nice enough they becomecows and water buffalos and clear their karmic debts witheach other.It is all because they became gurutam in the worldly lifeand deprived others of their possessions. Do people not dothat?There are two things people do. In the relative life gurutaworks in two ways: one as a super human being and the otheras a beast. If a person conducts his life as a super human beingwhere he does good deeds, he will get a life in the celestial form.The other consequence of guruta is that he will go into theanimal life form first and come back into the human form afterhe gets rid of (pays for) all the entanglements he created. I havepersonally witnessed this law of nature. People do not realizewhat justice is going to be served to them. They will go from atwo-legged human to a four-legged creature with a tail!However, we cannot say this to these people. At the momentthey are living a carefree life. What do they say? ‘We will worryabout all that when we fall’. So let them flaunt their superiority(rof) for the time being.Laghutam in the world leads to the ultimategurutam, the SelfThe whole world looks for gurutam in the relative. So tobegin with there is a desire to be guru and then they show theirsuperiority (guruta). Then he tries to be gurutam - the highestof all, after becoming a superior. But no one has becomegurutam this way. What does our Vignan – our spiritual science- say? It says, ‘Laghutam in the relative and gurutam in thereal.’ That is our main thing.What does every religion claim? They say liberation isthrough their religion. Does anyone say there is no liberationthrough their religion? Everyone will tell you, ‘Our religion is thebest.’ Who is the only one that can say his religion is the lowest?The one who has found the path of the Vitarags can say, ‘Ourreligion is lower, but yours is higher.’ Children will always callthat which is small, big. Those who are not mature will beimpressed by anything and anyone. Older, mature people placethemselves lower and make others feel higher and moreimportant; they are content with that.And we are not anyone’s superior; are we? On thecontrary we are below him and that is why he behaves well; heremains straightforward otherwise he would not. He will opposeyou if you try to be his superior. If you say, ‘I am your disciple’,he will be straight with you.’ Everyone enjoys being a guru andthus showing superiority in the relative world. There is alsocompetition with one another. One guru will claim ‘I have onehundred sixty disciples’ and other will say, ‘I have one hundredAptavani-9357358Aptavani-9will go to a higher life form. But no one shows any signs of tryingto be laghutam in the relative world. Whose fault is it if peoplebind karma of a life in the animal kingdom by trying to becomegurutam? They try to be gurutam where they should belaghutam and consequently they increase their ‘number of legs’(subsequent birth in the animal kingdom); they go from two legsto four and they even get a tail! This is because in the gurutamstate their certain actions will cause them to bind karmas suchthat in the next life they will have two extra legs and a tail.Whereas with the laghutam belief, whatever you do will bedone wonderfully. But the whole world is looking towardsgurutam.Questioner: So one becomes laghu - light and humble?Dadashri: No, no, not laghu. They become animals withfour legs! As they try to become gurutam in the relative world,gurutam will enter into the picture again. Then do we not needa solution to get rid of that gurutam? They go from ‘two legs’to ‘four legs’ so that they do not fall! Otherwise, from wherewill we get donkeys? Where will you get these cows and waterbuffalos? These poor people are nice enough they becomecows and water buffalos and clear their karmic debts witheach other.It is all because they became gurutam in the worldly lifeand deprived others of their possessions. Do people not dothat?There are two things people do. In the relative life gurutaworks in two ways: one as a super human being and the otheras a beast. If a person conducts his life as a super human beingwhere he does good deeds, he will get a life in the celestial form.The other consequence of guruta is that he will go into theanimal life form first and come back into the human form afterhe gets rid of (pays for) all the entanglements he created. I havepersonally witnessed this law of nature. People do not realizewhat justice is going to be served to them. They will go from atwo-legged human to a four-legged creature with a tail!However, we cannot say this to these people. At the momentthey are living a carefree life. What do they say? ‘We will worryabout all that when we fall’. So let them flaunt their superiority(rof) for the time being.Laghutam in the world leads to the ultimategurutam, the SelfThe whole world looks for gurutam in the relative. So tobegin with there is a desire to be guru and then they show theirsuperiority (guruta). Then he tries to be gurutam - the highestof all, after becoming a superior. But no one has becomegurutam this way. What does our Vignan – our spiritual science- say? It says, ‘Laghutam in the relative and gurutam in thereal.’ That is our main thing.What does every religion claim? They say liberation isthrough their religion. Does anyone say there is no liberationthrough their religion? Everyone will tell you, ‘Our religion is thebest.’ Who is the only one that can say his religion is the lowest?The one who has found the path of the Vitarags can say, ‘Ourreligion is lower, but yours is higher.’ Children will always callthat which is small, big. Those who are not mature will beimpressed by anything and anyone. Older, mature people placethemselves lower and make others feel higher and moreimportant; they are content with that.And we are not anyone’s superior; are we? On thecontrary we are below him and that is why he behaves well; heremains straightforward otherwise he would not. He will opposeyou if you try to be his superior. If you say, ‘I am your disciple’,he will be straight with you.’ Everyone enjoys being a guru andthus showing superiority in the relative world. There is alsocompetition with one another. One guru will claim ‘I have onehundred sixty disciples’ and other will say, ‘I have one hundredAptavani-9359360Aptavani-9twenty disciples.’ All this is superiority (guruta). One needs tobe laghutam in the relative. Then he will not fall; there is nosuffering or misery in laghutam.Otherwise, one will have to become a cow or a buffalofrom here. When a person dies, he will take anger-pride-deceit-greed along with him. Separation due to differences of opinions(matbhed) is not going to go away easily in this life! They willgo automatically when one’s life form changes but not otherwise.There are no such straight men around, are there? On thecontrary, one claims, ‘I am something.’ You fool! What do youthink you are?’Now, who would want to be laghutam in the relative?Does anyone seek this state? If you were to look for such aperson, are you likely to find one in this car, train or anywhereelse; can you find such a person? Will you find one amongst theascetics? Every ascetic keeps saying, ‘hum, hum, hum, I knowthis many scriptures…I know this…I know that etc.’Whatever degree of laghutam you have in the relativeworld, you will attain that much gurutam in the real - in therealm of the Self. I became laghutam and that is why I attainedthe state of gurutam. The path is not difficult. The difficulty liesin understanding this.God will definitely come to you if you take up thelaghutam yoga -union with laghutam. People are all in thegurutam yoga - union of gurutam - in this world. ‘I am greaterthan him, I am greater than them…’ So why don’t you startbecoming smaller. If you become smaller in worldly interactions,you will become bigger in nischaya, the realm of the Self, andif you try to become gurutam in the relative world, you willremain laghutam in nischaya (in the realm of the Self). So ifone holds on to the union of laghutam, then when he achievesthe laghutam state, he will begin to be gurutam on the otherside (real). He who becomes laghutam in the worldly life,becomes gurutam in the realm of the Self, and thus Godbecomes very pleased with him. So do become laghutam.Union of laghutam is a little difficult. It is difficult in thebeginning and then it becomes easy. Is there any fear for thosewho want to be small? That is why I became laghutam first;only then did I attain the state of gurutam. I have not tried tobe a guru. Those who become guru will continue to wander inthe cycles of different life forms. When they bind merit karma,they are born as celestial beings. Then they return here as ahuman beings and bind demerit karma, which takes them to alife in the animal kingdom.People have practiced all other yogas for so long. Manhas practiced them for countless past lives, then when someonegives him a little respect, he loses whatever little he gained. Oncehe gets a little respect he will start, ‘Not this, bring me this, bringme that and this...’ So then he loses whatever he had gainedfrom all the yogas, whereas laghutam yoga is better because inthat practice, no one will come to do your darshan.Undertake the yoga of laghutamSo ‘our’ yoga is of laghutam. Nobody in the world hassuch yoga.Questioner: What does a person have to do in suchyoga?Dadashri: You have to become lighter day by day. Youhave to become laghu, not guru (heavy); you have to becomelighter. By becoming a disciple (shishya) of everyone you willbecome a disciple of the whole world, even of the dogs,donkeys, trees, leaves; disciple of everybody and so you willbecome laghutam. You become laghutam by making everyonegurutam. Do you like this yoga of laghutam or not?Questioner: I do like it.Aptavani-9359360Aptavani-9twenty disciples.’ All this is superiority (guruta). One needs tobe laghutam in the relative. Then he will not fall; there is nosuffering or misery in laghutam.Otherwise, one will have to become a cow or a buffalofrom here. When a person dies, he will take anger-pride-deceit-greed along with him. Separation due to differences of opinions(matbhed) is not going to go away easily in this life! They willgo automatically when one’s life form changes but not otherwise.There are no such straight men around, are there? On thecontrary, one claims, ‘I am something.’ You fool! What do youthink you are?’Now, who would want to be laghutam in the relative?Does anyone seek this state? If you were to look for such aperson, are you likely to find one in this car, train or anywhereelse; can you find such a person? Will you find one amongst theascetics? Every ascetic keeps saying, ‘hum, hum, hum, I knowthis many scriptures…I know this…I know that etc.’Whatever degree of laghutam you have in the relativeworld, you will attain that much gurutam in the real - in therealm of the Self. I became laghutam and that is why I attainedthe state of gurutam. The path is not difficult. The difficulty liesin understanding this.God will definitely come to you if you take up thelaghutam yoga -union with laghutam. People are all in thegurutam yoga - union of gurutam - in this world. ‘I am greaterthan him, I am greater than them…’ So why don’t you startbecoming smaller. If you become smaller in worldly interactions,you will become bigger in nischaya, the realm of the Self, andif you try to become gurutam in the relative world, you willremain laghutam in nischaya (in the realm of the Self). So ifone holds on to the union of laghutam, then when he achievesthe laghutam state, he will begin to be gurutam on the otherside (real). He who becomes laghutam in the worldly life,becomes gurutam in the realm of the Self, and thus Godbecomes very pleased with him. So do become laghutam.Union of laghutam is a little difficult. It is difficult in thebeginning and then it becomes easy. Is there any fear for thosewho want to be small? That is why I became laghutam first;only then did I attain the state of gurutam. I have not tried tobe a guru. Those who become guru will continue to wander inthe cycles of different life forms. When they bind merit karma,they are born as celestial beings. Then they return here as ahuman beings and bind demerit karma, which takes them to alife in the animal kingdom.People have practiced all other yogas for so long. Manhas practiced them for countless past lives, then when someonegives him a little respect, he loses whatever little he gained. Oncehe gets a little respect he will start, ‘Not this, bring me this, bringme that and this...’ So then he loses whatever he had gainedfrom all the yogas, whereas laghutam yoga is better because inthat practice, no one will come to do your darshan.Undertake the yoga of laghutamSo ‘our’ yoga is of laghutam. Nobody in the world hassuch yoga.Questioner: What does a person have to do in suchyoga?Dadashri: You have to become lighter day by day. Youhave to become laghu, not guru (heavy); you have to becomelighter. By becoming a disciple (shishya) of everyone you willbecome a disciple of the whole world, even of the dogs,donkeys, trees, leaves; disciple of everybody and so you willbecome laghutam. You become laghutam by making everyonegurutam. Do you like this yoga of laghutam or not?Questioner: I do like it.Aptavani-9361362Aptavani-9be. But how can a guru swim across the ocean of the worldlylife and help others swim across too? Such gurus have to keepa gurukilli (special key) with them so that they are able to swimand help others do the same. The Gnani can give them thegurukilli to become laghutam, and then they may become aguru. Otherwise, to become a guru in the current time cycle isa sign of going down to a lower life form. Gurus of the Dwaparand Tretayug - the previous eras of the present cosmic timecycle - were true gurus. And now? Now they do not even havethe gurukilli as a guru. So I tell the gurus, ‘Do not become aguru otherwise you will sink and drown and you will drownothers too. Take the gurukilli from me.’ One has to have thegurukilli. When ‘we’ give that gurukilli, his work will be done.Gurus should be certified, they must be free of all kashayas andthey should also have the gurukilli.What is a gurukilli?Questioner: What is a gurukilli?Dadashri: A guru should keep in mind his role as guruand which path he needs to take so that he does not sustain aloss, and that all his disciples benefit. Therefore, his guru shouldhave taught him to remain laghutam: remain laghutam and thencarry out your duties as a guru. Yes, this is the gurukilli. He willpay a heavy price, while playing the role of the guru, hebecomes gurutam – assumes superiority. If he remains laghutamand then plays his role as a guru or whatever else, then the realfruit of his actions will be a gurutam state, the expression of thestate of the Self. But for the time being, he continues to belaghutam.Questioner: But what should that guru do in order tobecome laghutam?Dadashri: He just has to maintain an inner intent (bhaav)of wanting to be laghutam. When someone refers to him as aDadashri: This is the very meaning of yoga. One getshold of either yoga of gurutam, excelling in worldly life, or yogaof laghutam; it is one or the other.With the yoga of gurutam one becomes heavy; hebecomes gurutam. Guru means heavy and when something isheavy; it will sink. As he sinks, he also takes down everyonearound with him. When does a guru not sink? He will not sinkwhen he has the gurukilli – the key that helps him float. Laghumeans light and guru means heavy. Those who want to be bigand famous have grabbed on to the gurutam yoga. Everyonewants to be big and they have all taken a beating in the process,they have died in such beatings, life after life. No one succeedsbecause how many can take the first prize in a horse race? Howmany horses win the trophy? If five million ‘horses’ run a race,how many come first? The first prize goes only to the winninghorse, does it not? The rest die huffing and puffing. Therefore,practice laghutam yoga.Questioner: Yes, but what is the vidhi - special process- for it?Dadashri: The vidhi is to become a disciple of everyonein this world. If someone calls you unworthy then become hisdisciple by saying, ‘You are my guru because you made meaware that I am unworthy.’The world’s guru? No the world is the guruAnd people tell me, ‘We want to make you our guru.’ Itell them, ‘No. Do not make me a guru. There are many guruselsewhere. I have made the whole world my guru. I consideryou all as my guru. Why are you making me a guru?’I am nobody’s guru. I am a laghutam Purush. I am notnaïve that I would become a guru. I have never been anyone’sguru. I live as the disciple of the whole world and I tell everyoneto become laghutam. Whoever wants to become a guru let himAptavani-9361362Aptavani-9be. But how can a guru swim across the ocean of the worldlylife and help others swim across too? Such gurus have to keepa gurukilli (special key) with them so that they are able to swimand help others do the same. The Gnani can give them thegurukilli to become laghutam, and then they may become aguru. Otherwise, to become a guru in the current time cycle isa sign of going down to a lower life form. Gurus of the Dwaparand Tretayug - the previous eras of the present cosmic timecycle - were true gurus. And now? Now they do not even havethe gurukilli as a guru. So I tell the gurus, ‘Do not become aguru otherwise you will sink and drown and you will drownothers too. Take the gurukilli from me.’ One has to have thegurukilli. When ‘we’ give that gurukilli, his work will be done.Gurus should be certified, they must be free of all kashayas andthey should also have the gurukilli.What is a gurukilli?Questioner: What is a gurukilli?Dadashri: A guru should keep in mind his role as guruand which path he needs to take so that he does not sustain aloss, and that all his disciples benefit. Therefore, his guru shouldhave taught him to remain laghutam: remain laghutam and thencarry out your duties as a guru. Yes, this is the gurukilli. He willpay a heavy price, while playing the role of the guru, hebecomes gurutam – assumes superiority. If he remains laghutamand then plays his role as a guru or whatever else, then the realfruit of his actions will be a gurutam state, the expression of thestate of the Self. But for the time being, he continues to belaghutam.Questioner: But what should that guru do in order tobecome laghutam?Dadashri: He just has to maintain an inner intent (bhaav)of wanting to be laghutam. When someone refers to him as aDadashri: This is the very meaning of yoga. One getshold of either yoga of gurutam, excelling in worldly life, or yogaof laghutam; it is one or the other.With the yoga of gurutam one becomes heavy; hebecomes gurutam. Guru means heavy and when something isheavy; it will sink. As he sinks, he also takes down everyonearound with him. When does a guru not sink? He will not sinkwhen he has the gurukilli – the key that helps him float. Laghumeans light and guru means heavy. Those who want to be bigand famous have grabbed on to the gurutam yoga. Everyonewants to be big and they have all taken a beating in the process,they have died in such beatings, life after life. No one succeedsbecause how many can take the first prize in a horse race? Howmany horses win the trophy? If five million ‘horses’ run a race,how many come first? The first prize goes only to the winninghorse, does it not? The rest die huffing and puffing. Therefore,practice laghutam yoga.Questioner: Yes, but what is the vidhi - special process- for it?Dadashri: The vidhi is to become a disciple of everyonein this world. If someone calls you unworthy then become hisdisciple by saying, ‘You are my guru because you made meaware that I am unworthy.’The world’s guru? No the world is the guruAnd people tell me, ‘We want to make you our guru.’ Itell them, ‘No. Do not make me a guru. There are many guruselsewhere. I have made the whole world my guru. I consideryou all as my guru. Why are you making me a guru?’I am nobody’s guru. I am a laghutam Purush. I am notnaïve that I would become a guru. I have never been anyone’sguru. I live as the disciple of the whole world and I tell everyoneto become laghutam. Whoever wants to become a guru let himAptavani-9363364Aptavani-9‘guru’ – and there is no other word for this worldly interactionvyavahar, then he should say, ‘Yes, I am his guru’, but fromwithin he should know that he is laghu.Therefore everyone in the relative world should try tomaintain a state of being small to the smallest. One should nottry to be guru - superior.‘Exactness’ through laghutamQuestioner: You say, ‘I am the most laghutam of atma.There is no superior over me. I am absolutely independent.’How can others not remain free in this way? Why is it necessaryto follow the agna of a guru?Dadashri: Everyone is independent indeed! What is theneed to abide by a guru’s instructions (agna)? One has toremain in the agna of the one within, but the kashayas of anger-pride-deceit-greed within continue to beat him up incessantly.So who can become free and independent? The one whoseanger-pride-deceit-greed is gone, can be free. Otherwise hecannot be, can he?And the disciple will follow the guru’s agnas if they areacceptable or he will not if they are not. These Agnas (the fiveAgnas) are not mine. They are one’s ‘own’. I never scoldanyone. I have never scolded anyone to this day. I have toldeveryone that I am his or her disciple. By the relative viewpointI am everyone’s disciple; I am laghutam and by real viewpointI am gurutam. Therefore, from the viewpoint of worldlyinteraction (vyavaharik), there is no one inferior to me;everyone is superior to me. And through the real viewpoint, theviewpoint of the Lord, there is no one superior to me. That iswhat I am saying. Do you understand? So is everyone not mysuperior? I am the disciple of everyone.Questioner: But they come here to you to attain (gnan)from you. How can a guru come to you?Dadashri: ‘We’ have already become laghutam. Theyhave not become laghutam yet, have they?One will become like me when he becomes laghutam.But Gnan and everything has been given. I have given the kindof Gnan, which alleviates all worries, which abolishes allattachments and abhorrence, even while conducting worldlybusiness. But one cannot attain the state as ‘ours’ until hebecomes laghutam.Questioner: You refer to everyone as guru, so when willthey become disciples? And how will they become disciples?Dadashri: Now that is the very effort everyone hasgradually started of ‘I want to be like Dada.’ ‘We’ have onlyone condition, and that is ‘we’ do not scold anyone. You justhave to observe me and become like me, that is all. (Watch theGnani and become like him). Become laghutam and only thenwill ‘exactness’ come. Therefore, that much work is left.The world’s disciple is the world’s superior(upari)In our Vignan (science), ‘Dada’ becomes your disciple. Ihave given Gnan to so many people; I am the disciple of everyone of them. I am a disciple of the whole world. Who canbecome the supreme being of the whole world? The one whohas not become a disciple of the whole world cannot be thesupreme most. Who can become supreme (upari)? Noneexcept the one who has become the disciple of the entireworld.Questioner: Lord Dattatraya adopted good attributesfrom wherever he could and from whomever he could and it issaid that He had twenty-four gurus. Now the scriptures say thatone should have only one guru. Please shed some light on this.Dadashri: One needs to make the whole world his guru.Attain gnan (knowledge) from wherever you can, but whatAptavani-9363364Aptavani-9‘guru’ – and there is no other word for this worldly interactionvyavahar, then he should say, ‘Yes, I am his guru’, but fromwithin he should know that he is laghu.Therefore everyone in the relative world should try tomaintain a state of being small to the smallest. One should nottry to be guru - superior.‘Exactness’ through laghutamQuestioner: You say, ‘I am the most laghutam of atma.There is no superior over me. I am absolutely independent.’How can others not remain free in this way? Why is it necessaryto follow the agna of a guru?Dadashri: Everyone is independent indeed! What is theneed to abide by a guru’s instructions (agna)? One has toremain in the agna of the one within, but the kashayas of anger-pride-deceit-greed within continue to beat him up incessantly.So who can become free and independent? The one whoseanger-pride-deceit-greed is gone, can be free. Otherwise hecannot be, can he?And the disciple will follow the guru’s agnas if they areacceptable or he will not if they are not. These Agnas (the fiveAgnas) are not mine. They are one’s ‘own’. I never scoldanyone. I have never scolded anyone to this day. I have toldeveryone that I am his or her disciple. By the relative viewpointI am everyone’s disciple; I am laghutam and by real viewpointI am gurutam. Therefore, from the viewpoint of worldlyinteraction (vyavaharik), there is no one inferior to me;everyone is superior to me. And through the real viewpoint, theviewpoint of the Lord, there is no one superior to me. That iswhat I am saying. Do you understand? So is everyone not mysuperior? I am the disciple of everyone.Questioner: But they come here to you to attain (gnan)from you. How can a guru come to you?Dadashri: ‘We’ have already become laghutam. Theyhave not become laghutam yet, have they?One will become like me when he becomes laghutam.But Gnan and everything has been given. I have given the kindof Gnan, which alleviates all worries, which abolishes allattachments and abhorrence, even while conducting worldlybusiness. But one cannot attain the state as ‘ours’ until hebecomes laghutam.Questioner: You refer to everyone as guru, so when willthey become disciples? And how will they become disciples?Dadashri: Now that is the very effort everyone hasgradually started of ‘I want to be like Dada.’ ‘We’ have onlyone condition, and that is ‘we’ do not scold anyone. You justhave to observe me and become like me, that is all. (Watch theGnani and become like him). Become laghutam and only thenwill ‘exactness’ come. Therefore, that much work is left.The world’s disciple is the world’s superior(upari)In our Vignan (science), ‘Dada’ becomes your disciple. Ihave given Gnan to so many people; I am the disciple of everyone of them. I am a disciple of the whole world. Who canbecome the supreme being of the whole world? The one whohas not become a disciple of the whole world cannot be thesupreme most. Who can become supreme (upari)? Noneexcept the one who has become the disciple of the entireworld.Questioner: Lord Dattatraya adopted good attributesfrom wherever he could and from whomever he could and it issaid that He had twenty-four gurus. Now the scriptures say thatone should have only one guru. Please shed some light on this.Dadashri: One needs to make the whole world his guru.Attain gnan (knowledge) from wherever you can, but whatAptavani-9365366Aptavani-9does it mean when they say there should be one guru? It meansthat one guru is needed for the kindergarten level, one for thefirst standard, one for the second standard etc. The person whogoes to college will need twenty-four gurus and the one going tograduate school-university level will need to become a discipleof the whole world. That is why ‘we’ have become a discipleof the whole world. This will be the case for the upper levelcollege. But before that, how long should a person have onlyone guru? One guru is fine for the levels of the kindergarten, thefirst standard, the second standard; one guru will suffice for thelower standards where children are taught ‘for the time being,do only this much and do not look anywhere else’. Otherwise,everything will be ruined. In this way they establish a base forthem. Then as the standards progress, they have to make thewhole world their guru. The lower standards have to make onlyone guru. If a person tells me, ‘Sir I have made one guru’, thenI would understand right away that he is in the second standard.I will tell him, ‘You are right.’ Does that answer your question?Questioner: Yes, it does.Dadashri: Ultimately, it is worth making every livingbeing on the earth your guru. What did Lord Mahavir do? Hemade every living being of this world his guru and he lived astheir disciple. That is because there is always something to learnfrom every living being.The precise manner in which Akram VignanaroseThis Akram Science of ‘ours’ is one which I have cometo learn from you all and you tell me, ‘You are giving us theKnowledge.’ This Akram Vignan is not to be found in books sowhere did it come from? It has come from everyone. They lefttheir (gnan) knowledge for me and took other gnan with them.They left behind the gnan they could not digest and took withthem the knowledge they could. So all that gnan, which theycould not digest accumulated with ‘me’ and that Gnan came tomanifest as Akram.Questioner: But did such Akram Vignan come out ofworthless people like us?Dadashri: No, not worthless. It was the gnan that youcould not digest, it lay around, it all came to me here; and youtook from here, all that you could digest. So the full Gnan; “thefull stop Gnan” (the absolute knowledge) came to me!Now how can people understand this talk? The educated(bhanela) and the wise (ganela) will understand this but otherswill not. This is not for those other poor people, is it? This isscientific (vignanik). This means this science is such that eventhe scientists of foreign countries will accept it if they sit andlisten to it.Know the State of the GnaniNo body actually touches my feet although they seem tothink they are. ‘I’ do not remain in this body even for a minute;‘I’ have not been in this body for a moment in the past twenty-five years. People, on the other hand, are constantly in the stateof ‘I am this body. This hand is me, this leg is me, this head isalso me and all this is me too.’‘I’ remain absolutely separate from this mind, body andspeech. So if someone was to insult or strike ‘this’ (the body;non-Self), ‘I’ (Self) will not have any problems, will ‘I’? Peopledo not know ‘me’ so how can they insult ‘me’? Those whoknow me, know me as the Parmatma (Absolute Self), so theywould never insult me or behave negatively towards me. Peopleknow me either as A. M. Patel or they know me as a guru. ButI am not any one’s guru. I am a laghutam Purush. I am whatpeople call ‘Gnani’. As a Gnani, ‘I’ am absolutely laghutam.‘We’ have attained this state because ‘we’ do not haveany beggary. The state that is the highest of all, the greatest stateAptavani-9365366Aptavani-9does it mean when they say there should be one guru? It meansthat one guru is needed for the kindergarten level, one for thefirst standard, one for the second standard etc. The person whogoes to college will need twenty-four gurus and the one going tograduate school-university level will need to become a discipleof the whole world. That is why ‘we’ have become a discipleof the whole world. This will be the case for the upper levelcollege. But before that, how long should a person have onlyone guru? One guru is fine for the levels of the kindergarten, thefirst standard, the second standard; one guru will suffice for thelower standards where children are taught ‘for the time being,do only this much and do not look anywhere else’. Otherwise,everything will be ruined. In this way they establish a base forthem. Then as the standards progress, they have to make thewhole world their guru. The lower standards have to make onlyone guru. If a person tells me, ‘Sir I have made one guru’, thenI would understand right away that he is in the second standard.I will tell him, ‘You are right.’ Does that answer your question?Questioner: Yes, it does.Dadashri: Ultimately, it is worth making every livingbeing on the earth your guru. What did Lord Mahavir do? Hemade every living being of this world his guru and he lived astheir disciple. That is because there is always something to learnfrom every living being.The precise manner in which Akram VignanaroseThis Akram Science of ‘ours’ is one which I have cometo learn from you all and you tell me, ‘You are giving us theKnowledge.’ This Akram Vignan is not to be found in books sowhere did it come from? It has come from everyone. They lefttheir (gnan) knowledge for me and took other gnan with them.They left behind the gnan they could not digest and took withthem the knowledge they could. So all that gnan, which theycould not digest accumulated with ‘me’ and that Gnan came tomanifest as Akram.Questioner: But did such Akram Vignan come out ofworthless people like us?Dadashri: No, not worthless. It was the gnan that youcould not digest, it lay around, it all came to me here; and youtook from here, all that you could digest. So the full Gnan; “thefull stop Gnan” (the absolute knowledge) came to me!Now how can people understand this talk? The educated(bhanela) and the wise (ganela) will understand this but otherswill not. This is not for those other poor people, is it? This isscientific (vignanik). This means this science is such that eventhe scientists of foreign countries will accept it if they sit andlisten to it.Know the State of the GnaniNo body actually touches my feet although they seem tothink they are. ‘I’ do not remain in this body even for a minute;‘I’ have not been in this body for a moment in the past twenty-five years. People, on the other hand, are constantly in the stateof ‘I am this body. This hand is me, this leg is me, this head isalso me and all this is me too.’‘I’ remain absolutely separate from this mind, body andspeech. So if someone was to insult or strike ‘this’ (the body;non-Self), ‘I’ (Self) will not have any problems, will ‘I’? Peopledo not know ‘me’ so how can they insult ‘me’? Those whoknow me, know me as the Parmatma (Absolute Self), so theywould never insult me or behave negatively towards me. Peopleknow me either as A. M. Patel or they know me as a guru. ButI am not any one’s guru. I am a laghutam Purush. I am whatpeople call ‘Gnani’. As a Gnani, ‘I’ am absolutely laghutam.‘We’ have attained this state because ‘we’ do not haveany beggary. The state that is the highest of all, the greatest stateAptavani-9367368Aptavani-9there is in the universe, I have attained, because there is nobeggary (bheekh) of any kind at all. ‘We’ do not have anybeggary for money. Even if people were to bring heaps of gold,‘we’ have no use for it. There are no thoughts of sex. Even ifthe celestial goddesses were to come down here to earth, therewould be no untoward thoughts. There is no beggary for maan(respect). There is no beggary for disciples. There is no beggaryof wanting to build temples.Now if you understand me as a Gnani, then you too willbecome a Gnani. If you understand me as an acharya - spiritualmaster - then you will become an acharya. I do not have anyproblems if you think of me as an acharya, but you will becomean acharya. So whatever state you desire to be, see me asbeing that state and you will attain that state. I do not want tobecome anything; I have already attained the state. I am a manwho has failed by four degrees (in attaining the Absolute state)!Having failed, I sit here as a laghutam Purush. Therefore, thisstate of ‘ours’, however one understands it as, ‘that’ is the statehe will become. If one understands this, then his work is done.One’s conduct should be of laghutam intentThere is no state smaller than that of the laghutam. So ifyou attain this bhaav of laghutam, do you have anything tofear? You cannot become prominent by simply having the intent(bhavna) to be so. You can only become gurutam if youremain in a state of laghutam. So if the worldly interactions arein a laghutam state, if ‘Chandulal’ remains in a laghutam state,then the gurutam state will be attained automatically but nototherwise.Questioner: Does not the Gnan you give us, make usattain the state of laghutam?Dadashri: Yes, it will give you a laghutam state but thisbhaav –the deep inner intent - of gurutam within you has notgone yet, has it? The intent of wanting to be gurutam in theinteractions of worldly life (vyavahar) has not gone, has it? Youhave to get rid of anything residual like, ‘I am something’. Thereis a solution if you understand this point, but otherwise it is notpossible.There is no state other than the state of laghutam if onewants to become absolute (purna). The most difficult bhaav inthe world is that of laghutam. How can the world attain theintent of laghutam? Not a single person in the world can attainthe state of laghutam that you all (mahatmas) have attained; itis not an easy thing to attain; it is the most difficult state to attain.People may ask you, ‘how is it going?’ Then you shouldsay, ‘I lose my friend. I give up.’ Now, when you say, ‘I lose’,then in the realm of the real, you become gurutam automaticallyand naturally. Therefore you should have an inner intent ofbecoming laghutam. Otherwise there is wandering around indifferent life forms if you become gurutam. The enlightenedones in human form are never ‘gurutam’. Only the partiallyfilled ‘pots’ try to become ‘gurutam’. The absolute beingsnever make a sound (to draw attention to themselves).Is there anyone who would not want to becomegurutam? The prominent people in society may also appear ofwanting to be laghutam; they appear to be laghutam on theoutside but within, their bhaav is that of gurutam. It is a bhaavof, ‘I am something compared to everyone else’. On the outsidethey are respected, but they can never attain the vastu - theSelf, the Soul. That state can only be attained when onemaintains a line of demarcation between the real and the relative.Otherwise, worldly conflicts can never decrease.Line of Demarcation“The world is the puzzle itself”; it has puzzled itself. Godhas not puzzled this world at all.” It has become a deep puzzleby itself. ‘There are two view points to solve this puzzle. Oneis a relative viewpoint and the other is the real viewpoint.’Aptavani-9367368Aptavani-9there is in the universe, I have attained, because there is nobeggary (bheekh) of any kind at all. ‘We’ do not have anybeggary for money. Even if people were to bring heaps of gold,‘we’ have no use for it. There are no thoughts of sex. Even ifthe celestial goddesses were to come down here to earth, therewould be no untoward thoughts. There is no beggary for maan(respect). There is no beggary for disciples. There is no beggaryof wanting to build temples.Now if you understand me as a Gnani, then you too willbecome a Gnani. If you understand me as an acharya - spiritualmaster - then you will become an acharya. I do not have anyproblems if you think of me as an acharya, but you will becomean acharya. So whatever state you desire to be, see me asbeing that state and you will attain that state. I do not want tobecome anything; I have already attained the state. I am a manwho has failed by four degrees (in attaining the Absolute state)!Having failed, I sit here as a laghutam Purush. Therefore, thisstate of ‘ours’, however one understands it as, ‘that’ is the statehe will become. If one understands this, then his work is done.One’s conduct should be of laghutam intentThere is no state smaller than that of the laghutam. So ifyou attain this bhaav of laghutam, do you have anything tofear? You cannot become prominent by simply having the intent(bhavna) to be so. You can only become gurutam if youremain in a state of laghutam. So if the worldly interactions arein a laghutam state, if ‘Chandulal’ remains in a laghutam state,then the gurutam state will be attained automatically but nototherwise.Questioner: Does not the Gnan you give us, make usattain the state of laghutam?Dadashri: Yes, it will give you a laghutam state but thisbhaav –the deep inner intent - of gurutam within you has notgone yet, has it? The intent of wanting to be gurutam in theinteractions of worldly life (vyavahar) has not gone, has it? Youhave to get rid of anything residual like, ‘I am something’. Thereis a solution if you understand this point, but otherwise it is notpossible.There is no state other than the state of laghutam if onewants to become absolute (purna). The most difficult bhaav inthe world is that of laghutam. How can the world attain theintent of laghutam? Not a single person in the world can attainthe state of laghutam that you all (mahatmas) have attained; itis not an easy thing to attain; it is the most difficult state to attain.People may ask you, ‘how is it going?’ Then you shouldsay, ‘I lose my friend. I give up.’ Now, when you say, ‘I lose’,then in the realm of the real, you become gurutam automaticallyand naturally. Therefore you should have an inner intent ofbecoming laghutam. Otherwise there is wandering around indifferent life forms if you become gurutam. The enlightenedones in human form are never ‘gurutam’. Only the partiallyfilled ‘pots’ try to become ‘gurutam’. The absolute beingsnever make a sound (to draw attention to themselves).Is there anyone who would not want to becomegurutam? The prominent people in society may also appear ofwanting to be laghutam; they appear to be laghutam on theoutside but within, their bhaav is that of gurutam. It is a bhaavof, ‘I am something compared to everyone else’. On the outsidethey are respected, but they can never attain the vastu - theSelf, the Soul. That state can only be attained when onemaintains a line of demarcation between the real and the relative.Otherwise, worldly conflicts can never decrease.Line of Demarcation“The world is the puzzle itself”; it has puzzled itself. Godhas not puzzled this world at all.” It has become a deep puzzleby itself. ‘There are two view points to solve this puzzle. Oneis a relative viewpoint and the other is the real viewpoint.’Aptavani-9369370Aptavani-9If the Gnani Purush can draw a line of demarcation foryou between the ‘real’ and the ‘relative’, then this puzzle can besolved.Besides the Tirthankara Lords, no one had this line ofdemarcation. The twenty-four Tirthankaras had placed this lineof demarcation correctly as did some others who becameGnanis. Then, ‘we’ have placed a precise and exact line ofdemarcation. Whom can you call a Gnani? You need Gnanis likethe Tirthankaras, who differ only slightly and who place aprecise line of demarcation between what is real and what isrelative. They make it clear: “This is real and this is relative.”What has happened in the world is people believe therelative to be real and then they go about their life with thisbelief. They have not attained the reality even for a day and theyaccomplish nothing. They wander around for countless birthsfrom one life to another. There has never been a line ofdemarcation between the real and the relative and that is whythe world is in a state of confusion. Because of this peoplebelieve the relative to be real and they try to make the relativegurutam; give it increasing and undue importance. They makegurutam of that which is to be made laghutam; that whichneeds to be devalued. This verily is the illusion (bhranti). Thenwhat do they claim? ‘We are removing the illusion’, but theillusion is actually increasing. Don’t you think so?Say a scientist carries out a certain experiment and I carryout the same experiment. If I do not know how to conduct theexperiment, what is likely to happen?Questioner: A sudden fire.Dadashri: Yes and all the ingredients would be wasted.All my efforts would be wasted and on top of that I will burnmy fingers. What would happen if I stuck my finger in theexperiment to test it? And if the scientist were to stick hisfinger to check it, he would not get burnt. Do you understand?Therefore, the one conducting the experiment should befamiliar with it. I have given you the line of demarcationbetween the ‘relative’ and the ‘real’ and so you do not haveto worry.The intent of Laghutam makes one followThe Five AgnasNow what are ‘we’ saying? You now have the exact lineof demarcation of what is real and what is relative. The line ofdemarcation delineates exactly, ‘this much is real and this muchis relative’. In the ‘real’ there is the Shuddhatma, the Self. Andin ‘the relative’, you have been given the five sentences (the FiveAgnas). Everything else is nikali - simply a discharge of pastkarmas - it is of no concern to You, the real Self.Questioner: Does the discharge continue to take place?Dadashri: Yes, the discharge is taking place on its own.A person does not have to wait in anticipation to go to thebathroom in order to relieve himself. The one who sits and waitsis a fool. Thus, everything else is a discharge. So what do youhave to become?Questioner: Laghutam.Dadashri: Laghutam! Yes, just simply this bhaav. AndDada’s Agnas are in the laghutam bhaav. So now, you simplyhave to become laghutam in the relative. When the line ofdemarcation between the ‘real’ and the ‘relative’ is established,and when you become laghutam in the relative, then you willhave inner bliss amidst all the worldly miseries. That is truesamadhi.How laghutam have you become?Questioner: That only Dada can know. I do not have a‘thermometer’ to gauge that.Aptavani-9369370Aptavani-9If the Gnani Purush can draw a line of demarcation foryou between the ‘real’ and the ‘relative’, then this puzzle can besolved.Besides the Tirthankara Lords, no one had this line ofdemarcation. The twenty-four Tirthankaras had placed this lineof demarcation correctly as did some others who becameGnanis. Then, ‘we’ have placed a precise and exact line ofdemarcation. Whom can you call a Gnani? You need Gnanis likethe Tirthankaras, who differ only slightly and who place aprecise line of demarcation between what is real and what isrelative. They make it clear: “This is real and this is relative.”What has happened in the world is people believe therelative to be real and then they go about their life with thisbelief. They have not attained the reality even for a day and theyaccomplish nothing. They wander around for countless birthsfrom one life to another. There has never been a line ofdemarcation between the real and the relative and that is whythe world is in a state of confusion. Because of this peoplebelieve the relative to be real and they try to make the relativegurutam; give it increasing and undue importance. They makegurutam of that which is to be made laghutam; that whichneeds to be devalued. This verily is the illusion (bhranti). Thenwhat do they claim? ‘We are removing the illusion’, but theillusion is actually increasing. Don’t you think so?Say a scientist carries out a certain experiment and I carryout the same experiment. If I do not know how to conduct theexperiment, what is likely to happen?Questioner: A sudden fire.Dadashri: Yes and all the ingredients would be wasted.All my efforts would be wasted and on top of that I will burnmy fingers. What would happen if I stuck my finger in theexperiment to test it? And if the scientist were to stick hisfinger to check it, he would not get burnt. Do you understand?Therefore, the one conducting the experiment should befamiliar with it. I have given you the line of demarcationbetween the ‘relative’ and the ‘real’ and so you do not haveto worry.The intent of Laghutam makes one followThe Five AgnasNow what are ‘we’ saying? You now have the exact lineof demarcation of what is real and what is relative. The line ofdemarcation delineates exactly, ‘this much is real and this muchis relative’. In the ‘real’ there is the Shuddhatma, the Self. Andin ‘the relative’, you have been given the five sentences (the FiveAgnas). Everything else is nikali - simply a discharge of pastkarmas - it is of no concern to You, the real Self.Questioner: Does the discharge continue to take place?Dadashri: Yes, the discharge is taking place on its own.A person does not have to wait in anticipation to go to thebathroom in order to relieve himself. The one who sits and waitsis a fool. Thus, everything else is a discharge. So what do youhave to become?Questioner: Laghutam.Dadashri: Laghutam! Yes, just simply this bhaav. AndDada’s Agnas are in the laghutam bhaav. So now, you simplyhave to become laghutam in the relative. When the line ofdemarcation between the ‘real’ and the ‘relative’ is established,and when you become laghutam in the relative, then you willhave inner bliss amidst all the worldly miseries. That is truesamadhi.How laghutam have you become?Questioner: That only Dada can know. I do not have a‘thermometer’ to gauge that.Aptavani-9371372Aptavani-9Dadashri: But have you become somewhat laghutam?Two cents or four cents worth?!Questioner: But how can we measure that?Dadashri: You will know that you have not becomecompletely laghutam when you are fighting with someone. Youstill have the tendency to attack people, ‘who does he think heis?’ So now you have to look for laghutam. Do you want tobecome gurutam or laghutam?Questioner: Laghutam.Dadashri: You like it when people give you importanceand yet you say you want to become laghutam? When peopleput their hands together and do ‘namaste’ to you, you feelhappy, and then you say, ‘I want to become laghutam.’ Thebaggage within is so difficult and complicated; everywhere thereis baggage of only gurutam. Despite this, what should yourvision (drashti) be?Questioner: To become laghutam.Dadashri: Then the soul within will continue to becomegurutam. ‘We’ sit here having become laghutam. ‘Our’ Self isgurutam. You too have to cultivate the same vision. What else,there is nothing difficult in this.What does our Vignan say? What does Akram Vignansay? However much laghutam you become in the relative, Youwill become gurutam by that much in the real; You will becomeabsolute. Is there anything wrong in this? Otherwise, the entireworld is trying to be gurutam in the relative. That is why wehave bulls and buffalos here! What is the basis for theirexistence? It is simply because of this mistake of wanting to begurutam in the relative. So should you not break this mistakeonce you are born as a human? Don’t you think the mistakeneeds to be broken?Where there is total laghutam, there is thestate of the absoluteThe one who has attained a state of ‘devaluation’(devaluing the relative-self) in the relative becomes absolute inthe real. Therefore, devaluation in the relative is needed. Youmay eat, drink and enjoy, but there must be devaluation, nothingelse. Does the devaluation of the rupees that occurs sometimes,affect people? Life goes on. Sometimes there is devaluation andsometimes there is elevation. But does that affect people atlarge? Similarly there is no harm in devaluing the relative life. Onthe contrary, there is nothing but gain. You just have to livehappily. Just look at me. I am sitting here having gone throughthe process of devaluation. What fun it is.Now what am I saying? Your absolute state will blossomas your devaluation of the relative increases. So is this not theeasiest way? Is anything difficult in this? There is nothing else tounderstand here and laghutam will not make you worry aboutanything. See is there any worry about money after devaluation?Before, how many worries did you have when there was‘valuation’? People had anxieties and fear about being attackedon their way to the bank. Now there is nobody there to attackand no worries. There is no problem after devaluation.If you are a millionaire but you know how to maintainhumility, if you know how to sit low, you begin to becomelaghutam (be humble) in other ways; you will become gurutamat the other end, the Self.The one who tries to be laghutam in the relative, willbecome gurutam in the real; his state will become absolute. Youdo not have to do anything in order to become gurutam. So inyour worldly interactions, when you want to say anything, justkeep in mind, ‘there is no jiva (living being) smaller than myself.I am the smallest’. If you maintain this awareness, it is more thanenough. If you become laghutam only then will you attain theAptavani-9371372Aptavani-9Dadashri: But have you become somewhat laghutam?Two cents or four cents worth?!Questioner: But how can we measure that?Dadashri: You will know that you have not becomecompletely laghutam when you are fighting with someone. Youstill have the tendency to attack people, ‘who does he think heis?’ So now you have to look for laghutam. Do you want tobecome gurutam or laghutam?Questioner: Laghutam.Dadashri: You like it when people give you importanceand yet you say you want to become laghutam? When peopleput their hands together and do ‘namaste’ to you, you feelhappy, and then you say, ‘I want to become laghutam.’ Thebaggage within is so difficult and complicated; everywhere thereis baggage of only gurutam. Despite this, what should yourvision (drashti) be?Questioner: To become laghutam.Dadashri: Then the soul within will continue to becomegurutam. ‘We’ sit here having become laghutam. ‘Our’ Self isgurutam. You too have to cultivate the same vision. What else,there is nothing difficult in this.What does our Vignan say? What does Akram Vignansay? However much laghutam you become in the relative, Youwill become gurutam by that much in the real; You will becomeabsolute. Is there anything wrong in this? Otherwise, the entireworld is trying to be gurutam in the relative. That is why wehave bulls and buffalos here! What is the basis for theirexistence? It is simply because of this mistake of wanting to begurutam in the relative. So should you not break this mistakeonce you are born as a human? Don’t you think the mistakeneeds to be broken?Where there is total laghutam, there is thestate of the absoluteThe one who has attained a state of ‘devaluation’(devaluing the relative-self) in the relative becomes absolute inthe real. Therefore, devaluation in the relative is needed. Youmay eat, drink and enjoy, but there must be devaluation, nothingelse. Does the devaluation of the rupees that occurs sometimes,affect people? Life goes on. Sometimes there is devaluation andsometimes there is elevation. But does that affect people atlarge? Similarly there is no harm in devaluing the relative life. Onthe contrary, there is nothing but gain. You just have to livehappily. Just look at me. I am sitting here having gone throughthe process of devaluation. What fun it is.Now what am I saying? Your absolute state will blossomas your devaluation of the relative increases. So is this not theeasiest way? Is anything difficult in this? There is nothing else tounderstand here and laghutam will not make you worry aboutanything. See is there any worry about money after devaluation?Before, how many worries did you have when there was‘valuation’? People had anxieties and fear about being attackedon their way to the bank. Now there is nobody there to attackand no worries. There is no problem after devaluation.If you are a millionaire but you know how to maintainhumility, if you know how to sit low, you begin to becomelaghutam (be humble) in other ways; you will become gurutamat the other end, the Self.The one who tries to be laghutam in the relative, willbecome gurutam in the real; his state will become absolute. Youdo not have to do anything in order to become gurutam. So inyour worldly interactions, when you want to say anything, justkeep in mind, ‘there is no jiva (living being) smaller than myself.I am the smallest’. If you maintain this awareness, it is more thanenough. If you become laghutam only then will you attain theAptavani-9373374Aptavani-9are the only ones who would make this decision that they wantto become the most humble amongst all beings, because theyhave attained the Self. And the people out there in the world areunder the illusion of that which prevents the awareness of thereal Self.The Grandeur of the state of LaghutamTherefore, after this Gnan I have given you a line ofdemarcation: an adjustment of relative-real has been established.Now there should exist in you, the khumari (the vigor of non-fluctuating spiritual energy) of the state of laghutam. Khumariof what? The whole world has external khumari (an aura ofsuperiority) about being gurutam and what is Your khumari? Itis that of being laghutam. So there is nothing else to it.People say, behold the khumari of Dada! There iskhumari in the state of ignorance. But this too is a state ofkhumari, is it not? It is khumari that can never change, noteven for a second. No matter when you look at him (Dada),he looks the same. Circumstances may change, but not Dada.Ultimately, you have to become like Him. That should be yourgoal.So I have given you this line of demarcation and now youremain in the khumari of laghutam. Whenever you do anybusiness now, it is in the hands of vyavasthit. All You have to sayis, ‘Chandulal, continue working. Drink tea if you have to butcontinue working.’ That is all You have to do. So You shouldhave a khumari of laghutam. People have a khumari ofgurutam anyway. But what kind of khumari should You have?Questioner: Of laghutam.Dadashri: Yes, but do not keep a khumari of yourmaterial wealth. It has to be the khumari of laghutam. Can youhandle that?Questioner: Yes I can.main state and only then will the state of the absolute Self(Parmatma) become yours. Therefore, the state of the Lord isto become complete laghutam. When you attempt to becomelaghutam in the relative life, then you will naturally becomegurutam and absolute. The absolute state of the Self willmanifest naturally; it will become ‘exact’ naturally.The goal of becoming laghutamHave you ever seen a laghutam Purush in this world?Questioner: Dada is laghutam, is He not?Dadashri: Yes, that’s it, all you need to do is observe thislaghutam Purush and become like him, what else? You do nothave to learn anything else from here.Our mahatmas have understood that Dada has taughtlaghutam - the state of ultimate humility. Now Dada Himselfhas become laghutam, so others have no choice but becomelaghutam too, correct? And that is the only goal one shoulddecide on. If you want to attain eternal bliss then nothing elseneeds to be done in this world. ‘We’ are sitting in the laghutamstate; the ego-less state, in the relative world, and ‘we’ aretelling you all to become just that. ‘We’ are not saying anythingelse, are ‘we’? ‘We’ estimate that it is going to take you a yearor so to become laghutam? Questioner: But to become laghutam, is no ordinaryfeat.Dadashri: No, It is not that big a feat. Once You havedecided, ‘I want to become laghutam’ the mind, intellect, chit,and the ego will all go only in that direction. Thus they willproceed in the direction of the decided goal. If You say, ‘I wantto go Santa Cruz right now, then it - the non-Self complex willgo there. Therefore decide the goal.’Nobody in this entire world will ever make a decision toattain the state of ultimate humility (laghutam). Our mahatmasAptavani-9373374Aptavani-9are the only ones who would make this decision that they wantto become the most humble amongst all beings, because theyhave attained the Self. And the people out there in the world areunder the illusion of that which prevents the awareness of thereal Self.The Grandeur of the state of LaghutamTherefore, after this Gnan I have given you a line ofdemarcation: an adjustment of relative-real has been established.Now there should exist in you, the khumari (the vigor of non-fluctuating spiritual energy) of the state of laghutam. Khumariof what? The whole world has external khumari (an aura ofsuperiority) about being gurutam and what is Your khumari? Itis that of being laghutam. So there is nothing else to it.People say, behold the khumari of Dada! There iskhumari in the state of ignorance. But this too is a state ofkhumari, is it not? It is khumari that can never change, noteven for a second. No matter when you look at him (Dada),he looks the same. Circumstances may change, but not Dada.Ultimately, you have to become like Him. That should be yourgoal.So I have given you this line of demarcation and now youremain in the khumari of laghutam. Whenever you do anybusiness now, it is in the hands of vyavasthit. All You have to sayis, ‘Chandulal, continue working. Drink tea if you have to butcontinue working.’ That is all You have to do. So You shouldhave a khumari of laghutam. People have a khumari ofgurutam anyway. But what kind of khumari should You have?Questioner: Of laghutam.Dadashri: Yes, but do not keep a khumari of yourmaterial wealth. It has to be the khumari of laghutam. Can youhandle that?Questioner: Yes I can.main state and only then will the state of the absolute Self(Parmatma) become yours. Therefore, the state of the Lord isto become complete laghutam. When you attempt to becomelaghutam in the relative life, then you will naturally becomegurutam and absolute. The absolute state of the Self willmanifest naturally; it will become ‘exact’ naturally.The goal of becoming laghutamHave you ever seen a laghutam Purush in this world?Questioner: Dada is laghutam, is He not?Dadashri: Yes, that’s it, all you need to do is observe thislaghutam Purush and become like him, what else? You do nothave to learn anything else from here.Our mahatmas have understood that Dada has taughtlaghutam - the state of ultimate humility. Now Dada Himselfhas become laghutam, so others have no choice but becomelaghutam too, correct? And that is the only goal one shoulddecide on. If you want to attain eternal bliss then nothing elseneeds to be done in this world. ‘We’ are sitting in the laghutamstate; the ego-less state, in the relative world, and ‘we’ aretelling you all to become just that. ‘We’ are not saying anythingelse, are ‘we’? ‘We’ estimate that it is going to take you a yearor so to become laghutam? Questioner: But to become laghutam, is no ordinaryfeat.Dadashri: No, It is not that big a feat. Once You havedecided, ‘I want to become laghutam’ the mind, intellect, chit,and the ego will all go only in that direction. Thus they willproceed in the direction of the decided goal. If You say, ‘I wantto go Santa Cruz right now, then it - the non-Self complex willgo there. Therefore decide the goal.’Nobody in this entire world will ever make a decision toattain the state of ultimate humility (laghutam). Our mahatmasAptavani-9375376Aptavani-9Dadashri: In this Vignan you can get your sons anddaughters married, that is, you can carry on with your worldlylife and celebrate everything. Nothing will hinder You because itis all relative and You are in a state of laghutam. So go aheadand celebrate with as much pomp as you want because wheredoes your khumari lie? It lies in the state of laghutam. Thosewho have the khumari of gurutam have problems but thekhumari of laghutam will remain for sure.To attain the Self is verily the gurutamWhen one becomes laghutam, the Self is gurutam. Sothere is no need to make the atma (the self) gurutam. It isnecessary for you to become laghutam.Questioner: If one becomes laghutam then the soul (theself) will become gurutam, but the Soul (the Self) by nature isaguru-laghu neither heavy nor light.Dadashri: It is aguru-laghu but that is a differentperspective. What does gurutam mean? It means to proceedtowards the state of the aguru-laghu. That is gurutam.Questioner: But it is not aguru-laghu in reality?Dadashri: Now that is different. Its absolute state isaguru-laghu and in the worldly interaction (vyavahar) when itbecomes laghutam, then gurutam is the state in the real. Ieasily remain laghutam in the relative and the Self and withinthere is gurutam all the way.Test examination of the laghutamQuestioner: Give us an example of You having becomelaghutam in the relative realm.Dadashri: For example, ‘we’ are verily the open, talkingUpanishad, are we not? ‘We’ are the talking Puraan, are ‘we’not?!I will explain what it means to become laghutam in therelative perspective. Say if someone is giving you a ride in a carand one of his relatives comes along. If he tells you to get outof the car because of his relative, you should do so withoutbeing affected. A little later, he tells you to get back in the carand so you get inside the car. Again, another of his relativescomes along and he asks you to come out again. Again, youshould get out without being affected. What if this happens eightto ten times? What usually happens to people? They get upset.They get terribly upset.Questioner: One will be terribly upset the first time ithappens.Dadashri: And ‘we’ remain the same, unperturbed evenif they were to do that to ‘us’ twenty seven times! ‘We’ will getout and get back in because ‘we’ have become laghutam.The Foundation of Akram ScienceLaghutam is our center. Gurutam is attained while sittingcomfortably in that center. Our theories are unique andcompletely new!The foundation of this Akram Vignan is to remainlaghutam and maintain abheda drashti – vision of oneness; noseparation with anyone. To keep this vision of oneness (abhedadrashti) with all living beings in the entire universe is verily thefoundation of Akram Vignan. This Vignan is not without afoundation.All other activities (kriya) are occurring automatically;they continue mechanically. There is a big difference betweenvision (drashti) and ‘mechanical’- that which is occurring byitself. Vision is the main thing and the mechanical part is adifferent thing all together.The one, who has not received, decided or experiencedthe vision of becoming a disciple of the whole world, cannotbecome a Mahavir (the fully enlightened One). It is the vision ofAptavani-9375376Aptavani-9Dadashri: In this Vignan you can get your sons anddaughters married, that is, you can carry on with your worldlylife and celebrate everything. Nothing will hinder You because itis all relative and You are in a state of laghutam. So go aheadand celebrate with as much pomp as you want because wheredoes your khumari lie? It lies in the state of laghutam. Thosewho have the khumari of gurutam have problems but thekhumari of laghutam will remain for sure.To attain the Self is verily the gurutamWhen one becomes laghutam, the Self is gurutam. Sothere is no need to make the atma (the self) gurutam. It isnecessary for you to become laghutam.Questioner: If one becomes laghutam then the soul (theself) will become gurutam, but the Soul (the Self) by nature isaguru-laghu neither heavy nor light.Dadashri: It is aguru-laghu but that is a differentperspective. What does gurutam mean? It means to proceedtowards the state of the aguru-laghu. That is gurutam.Questioner: But it is not aguru-laghu in reality?Dadashri: Now that is different. Its absolute state isaguru-laghu and in the worldly interaction (vyavahar) when itbecomes laghutam, then gurutam is the state in the real. Ieasily remain laghutam in the relative and the Self and withinthere is gurutam all the way.Test examination of the laghutamQuestioner: Give us an example of You having becomelaghutam in the relative realm.Dadashri: For example, ‘we’ are verily the open, talkingUpanishad, are we not? ‘We’ are the talking Puraan, are ‘we’not?!I will explain what it means to become laghutam in therelative perspective. Say if someone is giving you a ride in a carand one of his relatives comes along. If he tells you to get outof the car because of his relative, you should do so withoutbeing affected. A little later, he tells you to get back in the carand so you get inside the car. Again, another of his relativescomes along and he asks you to come out again. Again, youshould get out without being affected. What if this happens eightto ten times? What usually happens to people? They get upset.They get terribly upset.Questioner: One will be terribly upset the first time ithappens.Dadashri: And ‘we’ remain the same, unperturbed evenif they were to do that to ‘us’ twenty seven times! ‘We’ will getout and get back in because ‘we’ have become laghutam.The Foundation of Akram ScienceLaghutam is our center. Gurutam is attained while sittingcomfortably in that center. Our theories are unique andcompletely new!The foundation of this Akram Vignan is to remainlaghutam and maintain abheda drashti – vision of oneness; noseparation with anyone. To keep this vision of oneness (abhedadrashti) with all living beings in the entire universe is verily thefoundation of Akram Vignan. This Vignan is not without afoundation.All other activities (kriya) are occurring automatically;they continue mechanically. There is a big difference betweenvision (drashti) and ‘mechanical’- that which is occurring byitself. Vision is the main thing and the mechanical part is adifferent thing all together.The one, who has not received, decided or experiencedthe vision of becoming a disciple of the whole world, cannotbecome a Mahavir (the fully enlightened One). It is the vision ofAptavani-9377378Aptavani-9becoming a disciple of young children, the foolish and all the restof the people.Liberation with the laghutam egoQuestioner: How do you define laghutam? Is bringingour ego to a zero level considered being laghutam?Dadashri: No. The ego remains the same but it is also anego to say ‘I am smaller than everyone.’ Laghu means ‘I amsmall’, laghutar means ‘I am even smaller than small’ andlaghutam means ‘everyone is bigger than me.’ That too is akind of an ego (ahamkar).Now the world is based on the ego of gurutam, whichis the intent to be bigger than everyone; it is the belief of ‘I amgreater than everyone’; this verily is the cause of the worldly life(sansar), whereas with a laghutam ego, one goes towardsattaining liberation (moksha). Laghutam ego means to conductinteractions of worldly life with the intent, ‘I am smaller thaneveryone.’ That will take him towards liberation. By believing, ‘Iam greater than everyone’, one enters into a ‘race course’(competition) and on to the wrong path through unawareness.With laghutam ego one gradually becomes smaller and smalleruntil he becomes completely laghutam; therefore one becomesParmatma, the absolute Self.There is no racecourse in laghutamUp until now, all efforts have been towards becominggurutam, have they not? ‘I want to be greater than him; I wantto be greater than him.’ See, the competition has begun, has itnot? Who wins the prize? The prize goes only to the horse thatcomes first. What about the rest? There is no prize for themeven after running so hard.Questioner: Dada is there a racecourse in a laghutamstate?Dadashri: No there cannot be any racecourse in thestate of laghutam. The racecourse is in the gurutam state. SoI have no intellect (abuddha) and I am in a laghutam state andtherefore I do not have a relationship of exchange of kashayawith anyone. There is not an iota of intellect in me.The racecourses of the worldly life andcompetitiveness (spardha)Questioner: Everyone has a desire to be something, andhere around you, we have the desire of not wanting to beanything, we want to be free from any semblance of superiority(visheshata). In the worldly interactions, one feels, ‘I amsomething. And I want to be something.’Dadashri: That is because they enter a racecourse there,do they not? He wants to run because so many other horses arerunning. Hey you! You are sick so why don’t you relax and takeit easy? All the others are strong horses, besides only the onewho comes first will get the prize and the rest will die huffing andpuffing.So, not even a fool would take part in a competition(racecourse). Yes if they were going to award five hundredprizes or so, then one can believe that he may get lucky and wina prize. But you are not going to come first, so why are you inthe competition? Go home and go to sleep. Who would enterthe competition? How can you enter their racecourse? Somehorses may be so strong from a diet of chick peas (garbanzobeans) while others may be eating grass.Therefore, I did not enter the racecourse of the worldlylife. That is how I found this Lord within.And the prize goes only to the one who comes first,does it not? The rest are left wandering around life after life.They die huffing and puffing and gain nothing. How can oneenter a racecourse of the world with that kind of justice? Whatdo you think?Aptavani-9377378Aptavani-9becoming a disciple of young children, the foolish and all the restof the people.Liberation with the laghutam egoQuestioner: How do you define laghutam? Is bringingour ego to a zero level considered being laghutam?Dadashri: No. The ego remains the same but it is also anego to say ‘I am smaller than everyone.’ Laghu means ‘I amsmall’, laghutar means ‘I am even smaller than small’ andlaghutam means ‘everyone is bigger than me.’ That too is akind of an ego (ahamkar).Now the world is based on the ego of gurutam, whichis the intent to be bigger than everyone; it is the belief of ‘I amgreater than everyone’; this verily is the cause of the worldly life(sansar), whereas with a laghutam ego, one goes towardsattaining liberation (moksha). Laghutam ego means to conductinteractions of worldly life with the intent, ‘I am smaller thaneveryone.’ That will take him towards liberation. By believing, ‘Iam greater than everyone’, one enters into a ‘race course’(competition) and on to the wrong path through unawareness.With laghutam ego one gradually becomes smaller and smalleruntil he becomes completely laghutam; therefore one becomesParmatma, the absolute Self.There is no racecourse in laghutamUp until now, all efforts have been towards becominggurutam, have they not? ‘I want to be greater than him; I wantto be greater than him.’ See, the competition has begun, has itnot? Who wins the prize? The prize goes only to the horse thatcomes first. What about the rest? There is no prize for themeven after running so hard.Questioner: Dada is there a racecourse in a laghutamstate?Dadashri: No there cannot be any racecourse in thestate of laghutam. The racecourse is in the gurutam state. SoI have no intellect (abuddha) and I am in a laghutam state andtherefore I do not have a relationship of exchange of kashayawith anyone. There is not an iota of intellect in me.The racecourses of the worldly life andcompetitiveness (spardha)Questioner: Everyone has a desire to be something, andhere around you, we have the desire of not wanting to beanything, we want to be free from any semblance of superiority(visheshata). In the worldly interactions, one feels, ‘I amsomething. And I want to be something.’Dadashri: That is because they enter a racecourse there,do they not? He wants to run because so many other horses arerunning. Hey you! You are sick so why don’t you relax and takeit easy? All the others are strong horses, besides only the onewho comes first will get the prize and the rest will die huffing andpuffing.So, not even a fool would take part in a competition(racecourse). Yes if they were going to award five hundredprizes or so, then one can believe that he may get lucky and wina prize. But you are not going to come first, so why are you inthe competition? Go home and go to sleep. Who would enterthe competition? How can you enter their racecourse? Somehorses may be so strong from a diet of chick peas (garbanzobeans) while others may be eating grass.Therefore, I did not enter the racecourse of the worldlylife. That is how I found this Lord within.And the prize goes only to the one who comes first,does it not? The rest are left wandering around life after life.They die huffing and puffing and gain nothing. How can oneenter a racecourse of the world with that kind of justice? Whatdo you think?Aptavani-9379380Aptavani-9Questioner: That is correct.Dadashri: And the human nature is to be competitive.Are people not competitive?Questioner: Yes they are. That becomes cheap.Dadashri: There is competition everywhere. Even athome, if an argumentative person comes along, he will start acompetition between the husband and wife. If the wife sayssomething, the husband will tell her, ‘You be quiet, you did it thisway and I am going to do it this way…’ Hey! Both the horseshave started running? Who is going to give you the prize? Thatis why ‘we’ say, ‘We’ do not know how to do things the wayHiraba knows.’ So ‘we’ let her run. Run. Run as much as youwant to! Even Hiraba says, ‘You are naïve (bhoda).’ I tell her,‘Yes that is fine.’People suffer because they compete. They entercompetitions. Just watch the competition; you have to simply‘see’ which horse comes first. When one continues to simply‘see’, then the ‘seer’ (jonaar) has no pain or suffering. Thosewho enter a ‘racecourse’ have to suffer the pain. So it is notworth entering a ‘racecourse.’Criticism ruins everything for the one whocriticizesSecondly, you should no criticize (do teeka of) anyone;the one who criticizes, hurts himself. Whatever anyone does, theperson who criticizes him will ‘stain his own clothes’, and thenhe will ruin his body as he goes deeper into the criticism. If hegoes even deeper, he will ruin his heart. So criticism is a tool thatruins people. You should not get involved in it. Know things forthe sake of knowing them but do not get involved in anything.You have not attained this human life to criticize anyone. Whatis more, it is not worth making an intense mental note (nondha)of anyone that criticizes you.Questioner: A person must have some interest in ourwork that he criticizes (do teeka), is that not so?Dadashri: To criticize is the main attribute of the ego. Itis an attribute of competitiveness (spardha) and that is whycriticism remains. Besides, competitiveness is always there in thisworldly life. There is liberation when competitiveness leaves.When people go on fasts, it all occurs due to the effect of theattribute of competitiveness; ‘that other person did fifteen fasts,so I will do thirty!’ Still, it is not worth criticizing anyone.When you criticize other people, you ruin your ‘clothes’first, then your body and then your heart. That is it. So do notget involved with anyone because is everyone not an owner ofhis world, his space, inner and outer? The ownership titles arehis own. How can you criticize or violate that? You aretrespassing when you do so.The escape from the racecourseNow all this (competitiveness) is going to carry on forsure. One is not at all the doer of anything; he has simplydeveloped a habit of tasting the fruit of doer-ship (garvaras).When a person learns that someone earns eight hundred rupees,he thinks, ‘I earn eighteen hundred so I do not have a problem.He gets only eight hundred.’ This is how it all starts. As if no oneearns more than eighteen hundred rupees. There is alwayscompetition where there is someone higher. What possiblereason do we have for staying in this race course? Are we hereto take part in a ‘racecourse’? Are we horses of theracecourse? Instead, why not simply admit that you have nosense? I say, ‘I do not have sense. I lack worldly understanding.’I am being very candid, am I not?I do not even know how to shave and that is why I cutmyself shaving. I have yet to meet a man who knows how toshave. What ego people walk around with! Only someone likeme would make such a statement, would he not? There is aAptavani-9379380Aptavani-9Questioner: That is correct.Dadashri: And the human nature is to be competitive.Are people not competitive?Questioner: Yes they are. That becomes cheap.Dadashri: There is competition everywhere. Even athome, if an argumentative person comes along, he will start acompetition between the husband and wife. If the wife sayssomething, the husband will tell her, ‘You be quiet, you did it thisway and I am going to do it this way…’ Hey! Both the horseshave started running? Who is going to give you the prize? Thatis why ‘we’ say, ‘We’ do not know how to do things the wayHiraba knows.’ So ‘we’ let her run. Run. Run as much as youwant to! Even Hiraba says, ‘You are naïve (bhoda).’ I tell her,‘Yes that is fine.’People suffer because they compete. They entercompetitions. Just watch the competition; you have to simply‘see’ which horse comes first. When one continues to simply‘see’, then the ‘seer’ (jonaar) has no pain or suffering. Thosewho enter a ‘racecourse’ have to suffer the pain. So it is notworth entering a ‘racecourse.’Criticism ruins everything for the one whocriticizesSecondly, you should no criticize (do teeka of) anyone;the one who criticizes, hurts himself. Whatever anyone does, theperson who criticizes him will ‘stain his own clothes’, and thenhe will ruin his body as he goes deeper into the criticism. If hegoes even deeper, he will ruin his heart. So criticism is a tool thatruins people. You should not get involved in it. Know things forthe sake of knowing them but do not get involved in anything.You have not attained this human life to criticize anyone. Whatis more, it is not worth making an intense mental note (nondha)of anyone that criticizes you.Questioner: A person must have some interest in ourwork that he criticizes (do teeka), is that not so?Dadashri: To criticize is the main attribute of the ego. Itis an attribute of competitiveness (spardha) and that is whycriticism remains. Besides, competitiveness is always there in thisworldly life. There is liberation when competitiveness leaves.When people go on fasts, it all occurs due to the effect of theattribute of competitiveness; ‘that other person did fifteen fasts,so I will do thirty!’ Still, it is not worth criticizing anyone.When you criticize other people, you ruin your ‘clothes’first, then your body and then your heart. That is it. So do notget involved with anyone because is everyone not an owner ofhis world, his space, inner and outer? The ownership titles arehis own. How can you criticize or violate that? You aretrespassing when you do so.The escape from the racecourseNow all this (competitiveness) is going to carry on forsure. One is not at all the doer of anything; he has simplydeveloped a habit of tasting the fruit of doer-ship (garvaras).When a person learns that someone earns eight hundred rupees,he thinks, ‘I earn eighteen hundred so I do not have a problem.He gets only eight hundred.’ This is how it all starts. As if no oneearns more than eighteen hundred rupees. There is alwayscompetition where there is someone higher. What possiblereason do we have for staying in this race course? Are we hereto take part in a ‘racecourse’? Are we horses of theracecourse? Instead, why not simply admit that you have nosense? I say, ‘I do not have sense. I lack worldly understanding.’I am being very candid, am I not?I do not even know how to shave and that is why I cutmyself shaving. I have yet to meet a man who knows how toshave. What ego people walk around with! Only someone likeme would make such a statement, would he not? There is aAptavani-9381382Aptavani-9whole world out there, and here I am all alone with this vision(of laghutam). There is no one to give my vision the vote. I amthe only one with this vote, against the racecourse and that iswhy I am not raising my voice. I would remain quiet because Iam the only one voting (on the side of laghutam). Otherwisewho would caution you this way? Why would I sit here tocaution you? So, what a world one is trapped in?Do you like to listen to all this talk? You are not bored areyou? Do not try to analyze this. Just accept it as it is, otherwisethe liability will fall upon you. This is a pure thing; this knowledgeis pure, why do you have to analyze it with your intellect? Thatis why I say it very clearly; ‘We’ do not understand anything inworldly matters’. Only then will everyone leave ‘us’ alone! Onlythen can I be free of all worldly possessions!The misuse of intellect in daily lifeYou can find all kinds of people who abuse their intellect.Such people will say ‘I will win your case for you. Just pay methree hundred rupees.’ Do people not say that? He eats anddrinks at home, takes abuse from his wife and then he doeswork for us! Nowadays, the standard of living has gone up, hasit not? So they charge more now, do they not?Also, people of India do things according to their ownunderstanding, they are over-wise, they misuse the intellect,(they are vikalpi people). They don’t learn by asking, ‘what willhappen if we press this button on this machine?’ They do notlearn by asking the technicians of the machines. Everything goeson haphazardly. People in India do not even know how to usea razor blade; they don’t even know how sharp a razor shouldbe; they sharpen it once and it is done. And if a person is amiser he will keep using a sharpening stone and on the contrarylose whatever sharpness the blade already had. What arepeople of foreign countries like? They are not vikalpi and over-wise, are they? The shaving razors always come with instructions.Why are there numbers printed on the razor blade 1,2,3,4,5,6,7?They (non-Indians) will ask the technician and do as he instructsthem. Whereas our people, the vikalpi Indians are over-wise!If the wife says ‘I am going to the temple and I will be backsoon’, the husband will say, ‘I will prepare the food,’ and he will(without asking anyone how to make it). But whatever spices heuses will leave a bad taste in the mouth!If the radio is playing and the children ask me to switchthe station, I will tell them I do not know how. I always askbefore I do anything; I learn by asking. I do not attempt anythingaimlessly on my own.I would ask someone how to use the razor, but he hasnot consulted a technician himself and then he tries to teachme! Does that mean I know how to use it? He is a fool andso am I. Whom would I ask if I cannot find a technician? Itis like trying to cook a curry without learning from anyone andruining it.Our people are such that they will cut their own hair ifthey cannot find a barber. That is how people are. Just becauseyou clip them this way and that way, does that mean the job isdone? It (hair cutting) would not be considered a skill if it werethat easy. How did all these barbers learn to cut hair? By trialand error?The foreigners have made machines to last because theyknow that people of India are vikalpi; they are over-wise andthus they might take shortcuts. They make the machines in sucha way that they do not breakdown easily. They build in extrasafety features, which would not be necessary if people usingthem were not vikalpi. You never know which buttons theywill end up pushing. They build in extra safety even whenlaying the foundation in construction of homes because thesecrazy people will overcrowd the homes! What if the housewere to collapse?Aptavani-9381382Aptavani-9whole world out there, and here I am all alone with this vision(of laghutam). There is no one to give my vision the vote. I amthe only one with this vote, against the racecourse and that iswhy I am not raising my voice. I would remain quiet because Iam the only one voting (on the side of laghutam). Otherwisewho would caution you this way? Why would I sit here tocaution you? So, what a world one is trapped in?Do you like to listen to all this talk? You are not bored areyou? Do not try to analyze this. Just accept it as it is, otherwisethe liability will fall upon you. This is a pure thing; this knowledgeis pure, why do you have to analyze it with your intellect? Thatis why I say it very clearly; ‘We’ do not understand anything inworldly matters’. Only then will everyone leave ‘us’ alone! Onlythen can I be free of all worldly possessions!The misuse of intellect in daily lifeYou can find all kinds of people who abuse their intellect.Such people will say ‘I will win your case for you. Just pay methree hundred rupees.’ Do people not say that? He eats anddrinks at home, takes abuse from his wife and then he doeswork for us! Nowadays, the standard of living has gone up, hasit not? So they charge more now, do they not?Also, people of India do things according to their ownunderstanding, they are over-wise, they misuse the intellect,(they are vikalpi people). They don’t learn by asking, ‘what willhappen if we press this button on this machine?’ They do notlearn by asking the technicians of the machines. Everything goeson haphazardly. People in India do not even know how to usea razor blade; they don’t even know how sharp a razor shouldbe; they sharpen it once and it is done. And if a person is amiser he will keep using a sharpening stone and on the contrarylose whatever sharpness the blade already had. What arepeople of foreign countries like? They are not vikalpi and over-wise, are they? The shaving razors always come with instructions.Why are there numbers printed on the razor blade 1,2,3,4,5,6,7?They (non-Indians) will ask the technician and do as he instructsthem. Whereas our people, the vikalpi Indians are over-wise!If the wife says ‘I am going to the temple and I will be backsoon’, the husband will say, ‘I will prepare the food,’ and he will(without asking anyone how to make it). But whatever spices heuses will leave a bad taste in the mouth!If the radio is playing and the children ask me to switchthe station, I will tell them I do not know how. I always askbefore I do anything; I learn by asking. I do not attempt anythingaimlessly on my own.I would ask someone how to use the razor, but he hasnot consulted a technician himself and then he tries to teachme! Does that mean I know how to use it? He is a fool andso am I. Whom would I ask if I cannot find a technician? Itis like trying to cook a curry without learning from anyone andruining it.Our people are such that they will cut their own hair ifthey cannot find a barber. That is how people are. Just becauseyou clip them this way and that way, does that mean the job isdone? It (hair cutting) would not be considered a skill if it werethat easy. How did all these barbers learn to cut hair? By trialand error?The foreigners have made machines to last because theyknow that people of India are vikalpi; they are over-wise andthus they might take shortcuts. They make the machines in sucha way that they do not breakdown easily. They build in extrasafety features, which would not be necessary if people usingthem were not vikalpi. You never know which buttons theywill end up pushing. They build in extra safety even whenlaying the foundation in construction of homes because thesecrazy people will overcrowd the homes! What if the housewere to collapse?Aptavani-9383384Aptavani-9A miser thinks he knows how to use a razor very well. Hewill keep sharpening the blade with a sharpening stone. You foolthis blade is not something that can be sharpened on asharpening stone. There is no relation between the blade and thesharpening stone. It is a wonder if one knows how to use itcorrectly. Once I told someone, ‘I do not know how to use theblade and neither do you, so whom should we ask?’ You bringstainless steel blades for me but I do not know how to use them,so what can the stainless steel do about it? It becomes uselessin the hands of the one who does not know how to use it.Therefore all this is misuse of intellect, being over-wise(vikalpi, thoka thok). All worldly knowledge is such that it willnever lead you to liberation.The zero ego state of The GnaniI do not even know how to give lectures. I know only‘this Gnan’. I don’t know anything else in the world. I came toknow this Gnan because I did not know anything else. And Ihave not gone anywhere to learn the worldly things. Otherwiseanyone and everyone will want to be my guru. Instead, why notbecome an expert in the Self? This will make me nirleyp -absolutely unaffected?I do not even know anything about the worldly life. I didnot know anything in school either. All I knew was that I didnot want a boss (upari). That was the only thing that botheredme. I did not have any problems with whatever I got to eat ordrink, but I did not want anyone as a boss over me. This bodyhas brought forth with it all its adjustments, and necessities forthis life.Now this Gnan is such that it will do everything. I do notknow anything related to the worldly life but even then the workcontinues very well, better than everyone else’s. Everyone elsehas to complain and shout to get things done. I do not have toshout or say anything. Yet the work gets done better than one’sexpertise and know-how. Those who know how to mend shoeshave to continue mending shoes. Those who know how to stitchclothes have to continue stitching clothes and those who do notknow anything; they have to sit around idle. What can the onewho knows nothing, do?The Lord has said that whatever knowledge of learningone has is sustained on the basis of the ego. The one, whoknows nothing, does not have the ego, does he? If the ego isthere, then he will know what to do for sure. I know only thisone thing; the Gnan. Yet people have an illusion that Dadaknows everything! But what does ‘He’ know? He does notknow anything.‘I’ know only this: ‘I’ know only about ‘the Self’. ‘I’know that the Self is the knower-seer (gnata-drashta). ‘I’ cansee whatever the Self ‘sees’, but I do not know anything else.‘I’ would know only if ‘I’ had the ego (ahamkar). The ego hasbeen absolutely uprooted. It has no roots left whatsoever. Thereis no trace or sign of where it was. All its rootlets are gone. Howgreat a state that must be!It must be due to sadhana (spiritual endeavor) of somany past lives that this current state of ours has manifested soabruptly. Otherwise, I have not learnt anything from this currentlife at all. I have not seen any proficiency in any man. I have notseen any human being as a doer at all.If a shoemaker is not proficient in his trade, he willcontinue making shoes but at the end of the year, he will haveincurred nothing but a loss. This is how people in this time cycle,are. They incur nothing but a loss. Those who misuse theintellect incur more losses than profits. They ruin all the leather.They make the shoes but they also waste leather worth fivehundred pairs. Where is the profit in that? They will put in theeffort but incur unnecessary loss as well. This is the story of theworldly people. They work and struggle hard in their pursuits ofAptavani-9383384Aptavani-9A miser thinks he knows how to use a razor very well. Hewill keep sharpening the blade with a sharpening stone. You foolthis blade is not something that can be sharpened on asharpening stone. There is no relation between the blade and thesharpening stone. It is a wonder if one knows how to use itcorrectly. Once I told someone, ‘I do not know how to use theblade and neither do you, so whom should we ask?’ You bringstainless steel blades for me but I do not know how to use them,so what can the stainless steel do about it? It becomes uselessin the hands of the one who does not know how to use it.Therefore all this is misuse of intellect, being over-wise(vikalpi, thoka thok). All worldly knowledge is such that it willnever lead you to liberation.The zero ego state of The GnaniI do not even know how to give lectures. I know only‘this Gnan’. I don’t know anything else in the world. I came toknow this Gnan because I did not know anything else. And Ihave not gone anywhere to learn the worldly things. Otherwiseanyone and everyone will want to be my guru. Instead, why notbecome an expert in the Self? This will make me nirleyp -absolutely unaffected?I do not even know anything about the worldly life. I didnot know anything in school either. All I knew was that I didnot want a boss (upari). That was the only thing that botheredme. I did not have any problems with whatever I got to eat ordrink, but I did not want anyone as a boss over me. This bodyhas brought forth with it all its adjustments, and necessities forthis life.Now this Gnan is such that it will do everything. I do notknow anything related to the worldly life but even then the workcontinues very well, better than everyone else’s. Everyone elsehas to complain and shout to get things done. I do not have toshout or say anything. Yet the work gets done better than one’sexpertise and know-how. Those who know how to mend shoeshave to continue mending shoes. Those who know how to stitchclothes have to continue stitching clothes and those who do notknow anything; they have to sit around idle. What can the onewho knows nothing, do?The Lord has said that whatever knowledge of learningone has is sustained on the basis of the ego. The one, whoknows nothing, does not have the ego, does he? If the ego isthere, then he will know what to do for sure. I know only thisone thing; the Gnan. Yet people have an illusion that Dadaknows everything! But what does ‘He’ know? He does notknow anything.‘I’ know only this: ‘I’ know only about ‘the Self’. ‘I’know that the Self is the knower-seer (gnata-drashta). ‘I’ cansee whatever the Self ‘sees’, but I do not know anything else.‘I’ would know only if ‘I’ had the ego (ahamkar). The ego hasbeen absolutely uprooted. It has no roots left whatsoever. Thereis no trace or sign of where it was. All its rootlets are gone. Howgreat a state that must be!It must be due to sadhana (spiritual endeavor) of somany past lives that this current state of ours has manifested soabruptly. Otherwise, I have not learnt anything from this currentlife at all. I have not seen any proficiency in any man. I have notseen any human being as a doer at all.If a shoemaker is not proficient in his trade, he willcontinue making shoes but at the end of the year, he will haveincurred nothing but a loss. This is how people in this time cycle,are. They incur nothing but a loss. Those who misuse theintellect incur more losses than profits. They ruin all the leather.They make the shoes but they also waste leather worth fivehundred pairs. Where is the profit in that? They will put in theeffort but incur unnecessary loss as well. This is the story of theworldly people. They work and struggle hard in their pursuits ofAptavani-9385386Aptavani-9worldly profits but in the end they lose, because they have notgained even a glimpse of the Self. And so the bottom line in theirbusiness (life) is a loss. Karmas dictate what one will gain orlose so what is one going to earn of one’s own accord? Allone’s earnings are because of his punya – merit karma. But allthese ‘sacks of intelligence’ just wear away their shoes out byrunning here and there in their struggle.So why not just go about your business with the approachof ‘I don’t know anything’. Just come down to a zero level,cross out everything and start a new. Begin with new values.What value is this? Our value of Shuddhatma is for sure thebest. The Self is unaffected (nirleyp) and without any association(asang). Here ‘we’ have given you the absolute values. Youhave become a Shuddhatma when Dada gave you the state ofShuddhatma. Otherwise, there was nothing there, not even apenny’s worth.Win in this world by losingAfter Gnan You have the constant meditation (dhyan) ofShuddhatma, the Self. So every evening You should ask within,‘Are you Chandulal or Shuddhatma? If the reply is, ‘Shuddhatma’,then realize that the whole day you had the meditation (dhyan)of Shuddhatma.Questioner: People will think we are mad if we say that.Dadashri: If they say you are mad, they are saying it to‘Chandulal’. Nobody will tell ‘You’ (the Self) that because theydo not even know You, do they? Therefore, you can tellChandulal, ‘Chandulal if you are mad, people will say so. If theycall you mad when you are not, then the liability is theirs. It isnot your responsibility!’ You have to say this to Chandulal.Questioner: We do not like it when someone calls usmad or senseless.Dadashri: You cannot have the best of both worlds; youcan have one or the other. If you want liberation, then youshould let go even if people call you crazy or beat you orwhatever else. You should tell them, ‘Sir I sit here defeated.’ Itold one man who had come to me, ‘You have a desire to defeat‘Dada’, don’t you? Well I accept defeat! You got what youwanted. Instead of you going back having lost; I am alreadydefeated so you just have a nice meal and go to sleep.’So how can one deal with such people? All this is nothingbut unnecessary mental wars and entanglements. It is better forthe body to suffer but this affects your mind and that is the bigproblem.People want to enjoy the transient and fleeting worldlypleasures but they also want the bliss of the Self; they want bothand that is not possible. If someone comes to defeat you in theworld then you should allow yourself to be defeated and sitdown peacefully. People will taunt you, ‘so you’ve become aShuddhatma, eh?’ They will abuse you in many ways becausethat is their nature. They have not found the path of liberationand they will not let others find one either. That is how peopleare. Ultimately You will have to reason with them or coax themone way or another and tell them, ‘I have lost’, then they will letyou go.These people have not listened to anyone. Therefore, youshould realize that they come to you having defeated everyone,so all you have to do is say, ‘I lose and you win. I have lostagainst you.’ They will be able to sleep if you tell them this. Theyfeel triumphant in thinking they defeated Chandulal and they willbe content.You are correct by your viewpoint‘We’ do not halt ‘our’ progress in any situation. ‘We’would make a request to the other person one time, then ‘we’let go and move on. How long can ‘we’ sit around? ‘We’ wouldexplain everything to you, but if you keep sticking to yourAptavani-9385386Aptavani-9worldly profits but in the end they lose, because they have notgained even a glimpse of the Self. And so the bottom line in theirbusiness (life) is a loss. Karmas dictate what one will gain orlose so what is one going to earn of one’s own accord? Allone’s earnings are because of his punya – merit karma. But allthese ‘sacks of intelligence’ just wear away their shoes out byrunning here and there in their struggle.So why not just go about your business with the approachof ‘I don’t know anything’. Just come down to a zero level,cross out everything and start a new. Begin with new values.What value is this? Our value of Shuddhatma is for sure thebest. The Self is unaffected (nirleyp) and without any association(asang). Here ‘we’ have given you the absolute values. Youhave become a Shuddhatma when Dada gave you the state ofShuddhatma. Otherwise, there was nothing there, not even apenny’s worth.Win in this world by losingAfter Gnan You have the constant meditation (dhyan) ofShuddhatma, the Self. So every evening You should ask within,‘Are you Chandulal or Shuddhatma? If the reply is, ‘Shuddhatma’,then realize that the whole day you had the meditation (dhyan)of Shuddhatma.Questioner: People will think we are mad if we say that.Dadashri: If they say you are mad, they are saying it to‘Chandulal’. Nobody will tell ‘You’ (the Self) that because theydo not even know You, do they? Therefore, you can tellChandulal, ‘Chandulal if you are mad, people will say so. If theycall you mad when you are not, then the liability is theirs. It isnot your responsibility!’ You have to say this to Chandulal.Questioner: We do not like it when someone calls usmad or senseless.Dadashri: You cannot have the best of both worlds; youcan have one or the other. If you want liberation, then youshould let go even if people call you crazy or beat you orwhatever else. You should tell them, ‘Sir I sit here defeated.’ Itold one man who had come to me, ‘You have a desire to defeat‘Dada’, don’t you? Well I accept defeat! You got what youwanted. Instead of you going back having lost; I am alreadydefeated so you just have a nice meal and go to sleep.’So how can one deal with such people? All this is nothingbut unnecessary mental wars and entanglements. It is better forthe body to suffer but this affects your mind and that is the bigproblem.People want to enjoy the transient and fleeting worldlypleasures but they also want the bliss of the Self; they want bothand that is not possible. If someone comes to defeat you in theworld then you should allow yourself to be defeated and sitdown peacefully. People will taunt you, ‘so you’ve become aShuddhatma, eh?’ They will abuse you in many ways becausethat is their nature. They have not found the path of liberationand they will not let others find one either. That is how peopleare. Ultimately You will have to reason with them or coax themone way or another and tell them, ‘I have lost’, then they will letyou go.These people have not listened to anyone. Therefore, youshould realize that they come to you having defeated everyone,so all you have to do is say, ‘I lose and you win. I have lostagainst you.’ They will be able to sleep if you tell them this. Theyfeel triumphant in thinking they defeated Chandulal and they willbe content.You are correct by your viewpoint‘We’ do not halt ‘our’ progress in any situation. ‘We’would make a request to the other person one time, then ‘we’let go and move on. How long can ‘we’ sit around? ‘We’ wouldexplain everything to you, but if you keep sticking to yourAptavani-9387388Aptavani-9viewpoint and become obstinate, then ‘we’ will let go. ‘We’would recognize that you do not see what ‘we’ are saying; sohow long can ‘we’ sit there and explain things to you? Oneshould not remain sitting forever, should he? Should we not justmove along? The other person cannot see beyond his viewpoint,can he?If a man is standing with a white horse about 300 feetfrom here, and you ask someone, ‘what is that standing overthere?’ He might say, ‘It is a cow’, does that mean we shouldhit him? Why would you want to hit him? He is calling the horsea cow, so should we hit him because of that? No! He cannot seeat distance, so where is he at fault? At least it is good that heis not calling it a donkey! You will have to accept that. He sayswhat he sees. That is how this world is. Each person says whathe sees.Do you understand what I am saying from this example ofa donkey? Would people not say things as they see them? Youshould understand that is what the poor man sees and that iswhy he says what he does. You should tell him, ‘you are right.’According to what you see, you are right. You should not tellhim ‘I am right according to my viewpoint’, either. Otherwise, hewill say ‘wait, tell me what is your viewpoint’. On the contrary,he will make you sit. Instead, tell him he is correct in what hesees and move on.‘We’ may look naive but ‘we’ are very shrewd. ‘We’may appear like a child but ‘we’ are very shrewd. ‘We’ will notsit around with anyone. ‘We’ will move on. ‘We’ will not hinder‘our’ progress.The Gnani Purush has only talks that are of benefit to all.Even if you understand only two of His words, it is enough. Ifyou understand just two of His words and if you take them toheart and digest only one of the two words, that word will notleave you until You attain liberation. That is how much energyand power there is behind the Gnani’s words (vachanbud).That is how effective these words are - vachan siddhi.Find the ways to lose in lifeThat is exactly why ‘we’ say to you, ‘all of you are right.’There is no competition (spardha) in our Akram Vignan. It isunparallel (ajod) and second to none. You can call it heavy ifyou want or you can call it light if you want to, but it isincomparable (ajod). No one is in competition with it.‘We’ are not in competition with anyone. If someonewere to ask ‘us’, ‘Sir, what is this group (religious) all about?What is their teaching like?’, ‘we’ will immediately tell him that‘we’ do not have any attachment (raag) or abhorrence(dwesh) towards them. ‘We’ will tell them as it is. ‘We’ haveno competition (spardha) within. ‘We’ are not concerned withit. And ‘we’ do no want to win in this competition. What will‘we’ do by winning? ‘We’ are only interested in the goal ofsalvation.Some people even come to me and talk negatively, I sayto them, ‘I had no knowledge about that all; I only came toknow about this through you and you know everything.’ I willsay this to him and send him back because he will not be ableto sleep otherwise, and I will incur a fault if I do not let him win.‘You win, so go home now and sleep peacefully.’ I tell that tomany people. He wants to win so let him win. He will not sleepif he is defeated and I will sleep even if I am defeated. The moreI lose, the better I sleep.Find ways to lose. Learn to lose. This is ‘our’ newdiscovery. The winner will lose one day, but a loser will neverlose. The one who sets out to win has failed from the start.These are not battles. Whether one sets out to win in thescriptures or anything else, he has failed the moment he sets outto win.Aptavani-9387388Aptavani-9viewpoint and become obstinate, then ‘we’ will let go. ‘We’would recognize that you do not see what ‘we’ are saying; sohow long can ‘we’ sit there and explain things to you? Oneshould not remain sitting forever, should he? Should we not justmove along? The other person cannot see beyond his viewpoint,can he?If a man is standing with a white horse about 300 feetfrom here, and you ask someone, ‘what is that standing overthere?’ He might say, ‘It is a cow’, does that mean we shouldhit him? Why would you want to hit him? He is calling the horsea cow, so should we hit him because of that? No! He cannot seeat distance, so where is he at fault? At least it is good that heis not calling it a donkey! You will have to accept that. He sayswhat he sees. That is how this world is. Each person says whathe sees.Do you understand what I am saying from this example ofa donkey? Would people not say things as they see them? Youshould understand that is what the poor man sees and that iswhy he says what he does. You should tell him, ‘you are right.’According to what you see, you are right. You should not tellhim ‘I am right according to my viewpoint’, either. Otherwise, hewill say ‘wait, tell me what is your viewpoint’. On the contrary,he will make you sit. Instead, tell him he is correct in what hesees and move on.‘We’ may look naive but ‘we’ are very shrewd. ‘We’may appear like a child but ‘we’ are very shrewd. ‘We’ will notsit around with anyone. ‘We’ will move on. ‘We’ will not hinder‘our’ progress.The Gnani Purush has only talks that are of benefit to all.Even if you understand only two of His words, it is enough. Ifyou understand just two of His words and if you take them toheart and digest only one of the two words, that word will notleave you until You attain liberation. That is how much energyand power there is behind the Gnani’s words (vachanbud).That is how effective these words are - vachan siddhi.Find the ways to lose in lifeThat is exactly why ‘we’ say to you, ‘all of you are right.’There is no competition (spardha) in our Akram Vignan. It isunparallel (ajod) and second to none. You can call it heavy ifyou want or you can call it light if you want to, but it isincomparable (ajod). No one is in competition with it.‘We’ are not in competition with anyone. If someonewere to ask ‘us’, ‘Sir, what is this group (religious) all about?What is their teaching like?’, ‘we’ will immediately tell him that‘we’ do not have any attachment (raag) or abhorrence(dwesh) towards them. ‘We’ will tell them as it is. ‘We’ haveno competition (spardha) within. ‘We’ are not concerned withit. And ‘we’ do no want to win in this competition. What will‘we’ do by winning? ‘We’ are only interested in the goal ofsalvation.Some people even come to me and talk negatively, I sayto them, ‘I had no knowledge about that all; I only came toknow about this through you and you know everything.’ I willsay this to him and send him back because he will not be ableto sleep otherwise, and I will incur a fault if I do not let him win.‘You win, so go home now and sleep peacefully.’ I tell that tomany people. He wants to win so let him win. He will not sleepif he is defeated and I will sleep even if I am defeated. The moreI lose, the better I sleep.Find ways to lose. Learn to lose. This is ‘our’ newdiscovery. The winner will lose one day, but a loser will neverlose. The one who sets out to win has failed from the start.These are not battles. Whether one sets out to win in thescriptures or anything else, he has failed the moment he sets outto win.Aptavani-9389390Aptavani-9This Gnan is non-competitive. It is not a competitiveGnan. That is why we say it is very rare…rare…rare. It is veryrare to find a Gnani Purush.Expert in One, but in everything else…It has also been printed in the Aptavani (Dadashri’s bookson Gnan) that ‘we’ are abuddha (without any intellect). I tellpeople ‘I am abuddha’, so the well wishers plead, ‘do not saythat, please do not say that!’ Dear brother! You too should saythe same thing. You too become abuddha! If not, you will bebeaten to no end. These people will ‘break your legs’.Therefore, you should not talk about becoming someonewith intellect (akkal). That is why ‘we’ have discovered thefactory of ‘abuddha’. See what ‘we’ discovered! And in theworldly life if we do not understand something, we can find alawyer and tell him, ‘please take this money and do somethingabout it. This man has been after me so find me a solution.’ Whywould we use our akkal (intellect) negatively when we can findsomeone to do so? You can hire someone for twenty-fiverupees, some for Rs. 50 and some for Rs. 100, and some youcan hire for 500 rupees for the whole day. Why should we useour akkal when you can hire people like these? Do youunderstand this?And this man is very punyashadi (one with a lot of meritkarma), that people tell him, ‘you have no sense (akkal)’. Thatis very good. That is like winning a trophy.Such people have not allowed me to sink deeper. Theysay to me, ‘hey, wait do not go in. You will sink. You will getstuck in the mud!’ And so ‘we’ say, ‘very well.’ ‘We’ attainedthis Gnan because we remained at this shore, otherwise wewould have sunk. We did not use the intellect that misguidesand leads people into conflicts. Otherwise look at the faces ofthose who are sunk; they look as if they just had some castoroil!Questioner: But what if the people consider us fools inall respect?Dadashri: Yes, but that is precisely what you need tobecome. Your tremendous merit karmas have awakened! Youshould not interact with those people with pleasure and ease.With them, you should pretend, only as a show, that you wantto enter the ‘horserace’ and compete against them. But whenyou go there, go ahead and lose the race, so that they feel goodabout winning. I have done that so many times and I tell them,‘I am not very smart. I am clumsy.’ This is the best solution.Otherwise all these are nothing but race horses and racecourses.In these racecourses, whom will you run against? When we donot have even the energy to walk, whom will we run against?However, people will then tell you, ‘then run with the olderpeople’ so I tell them ‘but I can’t even run with people olderthan myself and really I don’t know anything else.’ What use dowe have for this babuchak’s (incompetent’s) intellect; anintellect that one can even rent?You can hire experts from anywhere. If you ask someonewhat his expertise is, he will say ‘income tax’. He will be forhire, the doctors are for hire, the lawyers are for hire, andeverything and everyone is for hire!Every man is an expert in his own field and occupationand incompetent in others. I am better off. Instead of callingmyself an expert in something, I say ‘I am babuchak(incompetent) in everything.’ A person can be the best solicitorin India but in certain matters he will say, ‘For this you will haveto go to someone else.’ Even a prominent doctor will come tous when he wants his home built, however the poor man ismodest. It is because he has no clue about construction. That ishow the world is. They are incompetent in other matters. Noone person can be good in everything and therefore he has tobe considered incompetent in other things, does he not? So whynot be incompetent in everything? Do you not understand?Aptavani-9389390Aptavani-9This Gnan is non-competitive. It is not a competitiveGnan. That is why we say it is very rare…rare…rare. It is veryrare to find a Gnani Purush.Expert in One, but in everything else…It has also been printed in the Aptavani (Dadashri’s bookson Gnan) that ‘we’ are abuddha (without any intellect). I tellpeople ‘I am abuddha’, so the well wishers plead, ‘do not saythat, please do not say that!’ Dear brother! You too should saythe same thing. You too become abuddha! If not, you will bebeaten to no end. These people will ‘break your legs’.Therefore, you should not talk about becoming someonewith intellect (akkal). That is why ‘we’ have discovered thefactory of ‘abuddha’. See what ‘we’ discovered! And in theworldly life if we do not understand something, we can find alawyer and tell him, ‘please take this money and do somethingabout it. This man has been after me so find me a solution.’ Whywould we use our akkal (intellect) negatively when we can findsomeone to do so? You can hire someone for twenty-fiverupees, some for Rs. 50 and some for Rs. 100, and some youcan hire for 500 rupees for the whole day. Why should we useour akkal when you can hire people like these? Do youunderstand this?And this man is very punyashadi (one with a lot of meritkarma), that people tell him, ‘you have no sense (akkal)’. Thatis very good. That is like winning a trophy.Such people have not allowed me to sink deeper. Theysay to me, ‘hey, wait do not go in. You will sink. You will getstuck in the mud!’ And so ‘we’ say, ‘very well.’ ‘We’ attainedthis Gnan because we remained at this shore, otherwise wewould have sunk. We did not use the intellect that misguidesand leads people into conflicts. Otherwise look at the faces ofthose who are sunk; they look as if they just had some castoroil!Questioner: But what if the people consider us fools inall respect?Dadashri: Yes, but that is precisely what you need tobecome. Your tremendous merit karmas have awakened! Youshould not interact with those people with pleasure and ease.With them, you should pretend, only as a show, that you wantto enter the ‘horserace’ and compete against them. But whenyou go there, go ahead and lose the race, so that they feel goodabout winning. I have done that so many times and I tell them,‘I am not very smart. I am clumsy.’ This is the best solution.Otherwise all these are nothing but race horses and racecourses.In these racecourses, whom will you run against? When we donot have even the energy to walk, whom will we run against?However, people will then tell you, ‘then run with the olderpeople’ so I tell them ‘but I can’t even run with people olderthan myself and really I don’t know anything else.’ What use dowe have for this babuchak’s (incompetent’s) intellect; anintellect that one can even rent?You can hire experts from anywhere. If you ask someonewhat his expertise is, he will say ‘income tax’. He will be forhire, the doctors are for hire, the lawyers are for hire, andeverything and everyone is for hire!Every man is an expert in his own field and occupationand incompetent in others. I am better off. Instead of callingmyself an expert in something, I say ‘I am babuchak(incompetent) in everything.’ A person can be the best solicitorin India but in certain matters he will say, ‘For this you will haveto go to someone else.’ Even a prominent doctor will come tous when he wants his home built, however the poor man ismodest. It is because he has no clue about construction. That ishow the world is. They are incompetent in other matters. Noone person can be good in everything and therefore he has tobe considered incompetent in other things, does he not? So whynot be incompetent in everything? Do you not understand?Aptavani-9391392Aptavani-9Instead of calling yourself a banker with assets of as little as athousand dollars why not say, ‘I am not a banker, you are.’ Isthis discovery of ‘our’ not good?I asked one person, ‘How are you going to run yourfactory now that your boss has died?’ He tells me, ‘We will hirea manager.’ So one can hire people to manage factories? Sowhy are you crying because the owner is dead? If you can hiresuch a person, hire such an intelligent person, why not do so?And can this (Gnan) be hired? This Gnan is the real wealth.You can hire people can’t you? You can hire a lawyer, can younot? If he charges 5000 rupees, then why not give him 10,000? He will come running. He can be hired but the Selfcannot be hired. And is anyone going to hire the Self? Howcan they afford that which is priceless? This is a proper and aneasy road, is it not?And why harbor such intellect in such matters? So ‘we’have let go from the very beginning in these matters, I had let goof the control of the reigns and tell everyone, ‘I do notunderstand anything!’ So ‘we’ are free! I also say, ‘You will notfind any intellect in me even if you were to look for it.’ They tellme, ‘Please don’t say that.’Now we have the control of the ‘kite’. Other people’s‘kites’ can take a nosedive if they want but our ‘kite’ is incontrol and the control is in our hands. Why enter the horse raceof these people? Each person to himself; I will take care ofmyself.And what are you going to do with this misguided intellect(akkal) anyway? You would have sunk very deep for sure hadyou gone deeper into it. It is good that you stayed away just likeme.People come to me and tell me, ‘you show us a lot ofgood things’ and I tell them, ‘no’, and in the end I even tell them,‘I have forgotten everything. I cannot remember things anymore.’People like it when I tell them, ‘There is no substance orcompetence left in me.’ Otherwise these ‘people with substanceand competence’ will come to make deals with me. Is this evena place – with the Gnani – to make deals? ‘We’ are higher thaneveryone! Deals are to be made with people of your owncaliber. I am above everything and at the same time without anysubstance and competence. That is why ‘we’ say, ‘What areyou looking for in someone who has no substance?’ Even to therobbers and thugs ‘we’ say, ‘what is there to take from me;from the one without any substance and competence? In fact Idon’t even know how to give and so take whatever you wantfrom my pocket, yourself!’When I was young, people used to scold me and tell me‘you do not have any substance or competence.’ Now ratherthan have anyone else tell ‘us’, ‘we’ might as well tell ‘ourselves’that ‘we’ have no substance. All the problems will go away ifyou certify yourself this way before anyone else does. People goaround telling you, ‘you have no substance in you,’ and you goaround trying to show that you are something, now how can itwork? Instead, just certify your own self as not having anysubstance or competence and the problem will be solved.The racecourse of lifeWhen our construction contract business was recognizedas being number one in the area, a kind of power entered themind that my mind was working like a genius. However that toowas not akkal (wisdom, right intellect); on the contrary it wasfoolishness. It was nothing but a museum of inviting troubles(upadhi). Right intellect, wisdom is that which reduces externalproblems (upadhi); it is where potential problems coming yourway gets diverted and end up going to someone else. They goto someone else.People’s methods are all wrong. The practices they use orresort to for progress in life are also wrong. We ran aroundAptavani-9391392Aptavani-9Instead of calling yourself a banker with assets of as little as athousand dollars why not say, ‘I am not a banker, you are.’ Isthis discovery of ‘our’ not good?I asked one person, ‘How are you going to run yourfactory now that your boss has died?’ He tells me, ‘We will hirea manager.’ So one can hire people to manage factories? Sowhy are you crying because the owner is dead? If you can hiresuch a person, hire such an intelligent person, why not do so?And can this (Gnan) be hired? This Gnan is the real wealth.You can hire people can’t you? You can hire a lawyer, can younot? If he charges 5000 rupees, then why not give him 10,000? He will come running. He can be hired but the Selfcannot be hired. And is anyone going to hire the Self? Howcan they afford that which is priceless? This is a proper and aneasy road, is it not?And why harbor such intellect in such matters? So ‘we’have let go from the very beginning in these matters, I had let goof the control of the reigns and tell everyone, ‘I do notunderstand anything!’ So ‘we’ are free! I also say, ‘You will notfind any intellect in me even if you were to look for it.’ They tellme, ‘Please don’t say that.’Now we have the control of the ‘kite’. Other people’s‘kites’ can take a nosedive if they want but our ‘kite’ is incontrol and the control is in our hands. Why enter the horse raceof these people? Each person to himself; I will take care ofmyself.And what are you going to do with this misguided intellect(akkal) anyway? You would have sunk very deep for sure hadyou gone deeper into it. It is good that you stayed away just likeme.People come to me and tell me, ‘you show us a lot ofgood things’ and I tell them, ‘no’, and in the end I even tell them,‘I have forgotten everything. I cannot remember things anymore.’People like it when I tell them, ‘There is no substance orcompetence left in me.’ Otherwise these ‘people with substanceand competence’ will come to make deals with me. Is this evena place – with the Gnani – to make deals? ‘We’ are higher thaneveryone! Deals are to be made with people of your owncaliber. I am above everything and at the same time without anysubstance and competence. That is why ‘we’ say, ‘What areyou looking for in someone who has no substance?’ Even to therobbers and thugs ‘we’ say, ‘what is there to take from me;from the one without any substance and competence? In fact Idon’t even know how to give and so take whatever you wantfrom my pocket, yourself!’When I was young, people used to scold me and tell me‘you do not have any substance or competence.’ Now ratherthan have anyone else tell ‘us’, ‘we’ might as well tell ‘ourselves’that ‘we’ have no substance. All the problems will go away ifyou certify yourself this way before anyone else does. People goaround telling you, ‘you have no substance in you,’ and you goaround trying to show that you are something, now how can itwork? Instead, just certify your own self as not having anysubstance or competence and the problem will be solved.The racecourse of lifeWhen our construction contract business was recognizedas being number one in the area, a kind of power entered themind that my mind was working like a genius. However that toowas not akkal (wisdom, right intellect); on the contrary it wasfoolishness. It was nothing but a museum of inviting troubles(upadhi). Right intellect, wisdom is that which reduces externalproblems (upadhi); it is where potential problems coming yourway gets diverted and end up going to someone else. They goto someone else.People’s methods are all wrong. The practices they use orresort to for progress in life are also wrong. We ran aroundAptavani-9393394Aptavani-9according to other people’s methods and practices. We comefirst and win but then we even come last too. I understood thatall this is nothing but betrayal indeed. I too had joined others inthe competition by entering the racecourse; I ran very hard andafter coming first, I then came in last. That is when I felt, ‘Whatkind of madness is this? It is all a trap!’ You never know whensome unscrupulous person will destroy you. Do people not dosuch things? One day you may be number one and the next daysuch a person will come and make you puff and pant in the raceto no end. ‘We’ realized that a person can lose everything frombeing number one and that one should not enter into such horseraces (competition).‘We’ used to live very peacefully and in ease. Before theroads used to be crooked; full of winding curves so innercalculations would arise, as to which road was the shortest.‘We’ never followed the paths everyone else followed. ‘We’would try to look for short cuts. ‘Our’ method and practice wasdifferent. ‘We’ never did anything just because other people didit or because it was the traditional thing to do so. ‘Our’ methodand practice was completely different. I never painted the wallin my house, if the wall were to get the paint on its own, thenso be it.‘We’ say just one thing and that is, ‘there is nocompetency (barkat) left in ‘us”. ‘We’ have seen the face ofcompetence! ‘We’ ran a lot! ‘We’ ran to no end! ‘We’ aretelling you from ‘our’ experiences of life after life, that all therunning of countless lives has been a failure and completelyworthless! I have run so hard, hard enough to be sitting on thetop but I have also suffered miserably in the process. Insteadwhy not run away form this racecourse! Let us discover our truedomain…it is, oh my…gigantic”!So even if the devas (celestial beings) were to comedown and tell you, ‘We are giving you the first place in thishorse race’, you can tell them, ‘No, Dada has been there andI believe him when he tells us about what he saw there and hisexperiences. Thank you very much. I do not want such arace.’A relative of mine, while talking about money, tells me,‘You have done well, you have made good money in thebusiness.’ I told him, ‘I really do not have any such thing; it isyou who has done very well. You have factories etc. How canI compare myself to where you are at! I do not have the skillsyou have; you have been able to accumulate so much wealth. Ido not know anything about this. I only know about the otherthings (Self realization).’ There was nothing left to discuss anyfurther when I said that. There was nothing to compete, wasthere? There was no relation left. Why would I want to enterinto competition (spardha) with them?People are always competing in this way, but how can Irun with them? Let them win the prize. You just observe them.What happens when you compete against them? You end uphurting yourself so that is not for you.The prize goes to the winner, the rest diepantingIf I am invited to a wedding of an acquaintance and I sitin the middle, they will ask me to move and make room forsome ‘Jaichandbhai’ or other that comes along and then somedoctor or someone else will come along. I would get tired ofbeing moved around in this manner and end up sitting in theback. So I stopped sitting in the front row altogether. I said tomyself, ‘I cannot afford to do this. I do not want to compete (fora seat) with anyone. Only the winner takes the prize, others donot.’ So then the host would come to me and tell me, ‘We havekept a seat for you in the middle because you are the uncle.Why did you not sit there? Why do you move around and standin the back? It does not look good for the order and pomp ofAptavani-9393394Aptavani-9according to other people’s methods and practices. We comefirst and win but then we even come last too. I understood thatall this is nothing but betrayal indeed. I too had joined others inthe competition by entering the racecourse; I ran very hard andafter coming first, I then came in last. That is when I felt, ‘Whatkind of madness is this? It is all a trap!’ You never know whensome unscrupulous person will destroy you. Do people not dosuch things? One day you may be number one and the next daysuch a person will come and make you puff and pant in the raceto no end. ‘We’ realized that a person can lose everything frombeing number one and that one should not enter into such horseraces (competition).‘We’ used to live very peacefully and in ease. Before theroads used to be crooked; full of winding curves so innercalculations would arise, as to which road was the shortest.‘We’ never followed the paths everyone else followed. ‘We’would try to look for short cuts. ‘Our’ method and practice wasdifferent. ‘We’ never did anything just because other people didit or because it was the traditional thing to do so. ‘Our’ methodand practice was completely different. I never painted the wallin my house, if the wall were to get the paint on its own, thenso be it.‘We’ say just one thing and that is, ‘there is nocompetency (barkat) left in ‘us”. ‘We’ have seen the face ofcompetence! ‘We’ ran a lot! ‘We’ ran to no end! ‘We’ aretelling you from ‘our’ experiences of life after life, that all therunning of countless lives has been a failure and completelyworthless! I have run so hard, hard enough to be sitting on thetop but I have also suffered miserably in the process. Insteadwhy not run away form this racecourse! Let us discover our truedomain…it is, oh my…gigantic”!So even if the devas (celestial beings) were to comedown and tell you, ‘We are giving you the first place in thishorse race’, you can tell them, ‘No, Dada has been there andI believe him when he tells us about what he saw there and hisexperiences. Thank you very much. I do not want such arace.’A relative of mine, while talking about money, tells me,‘You have done well, you have made good money in thebusiness.’ I told him, ‘I really do not have any such thing; it isyou who has done very well. You have factories etc. How canI compare myself to where you are at! I do not have the skillsyou have; you have been able to accumulate so much wealth. Ido not know anything about this. I only know about the otherthings (Self realization).’ There was nothing left to discuss anyfurther when I said that. There was nothing to compete, wasthere? There was no relation left. Why would I want to enterinto competition (spardha) with them?People are always competing in this way, but how can Irun with them? Let them win the prize. You just observe them.What happens when you compete against them? You end uphurting yourself so that is not for you.The prize goes to the winner, the rest diepantingIf I am invited to a wedding of an acquaintance and I sitin the middle, they will ask me to move and make room forsome ‘Jaichandbhai’ or other that comes along and then somedoctor or someone else will come along. I would get tired ofbeing moved around in this manner and end up sitting in theback. So I stopped sitting in the front row altogether. I said tomyself, ‘I cannot afford to do this. I do not want to compete (fora seat) with anyone. Only the winner takes the prize, others donot.’ So then the host would come to me and tell me, ‘We havekept a seat for you in the middle because you are the uncle.Why did you not sit there? Why do you move around and standin the back? It does not look good for the order and pomp ofAptavani-9395396Aptavani-9this wedding.’ I tell them, ‘No it does not look bad. Peopleknow me and they understand that I am a man of God and thatI am not in tune with worldly things.’ But they would insist andsay, ‘No but it makes us look bad.’ So then I made one of themunderstand, I told him, ‘Normally I would not say anything butsince you ask I will tell you the truth. If I were to sit in the middlethere, and if the jeweler Laxmichand were to come along, Iwould have to move. Then I would have to move again whenMaganbhai Shankarbhai comes. So I have to keep changing myseat, so instead of suffering insults this way, what is wrong insimply standing here with dignity? I will not enter intocompetition in such a racecourse. I am better off standing herethan sitting in the middle and taking the number nine seat andfeeling insulted.’ I did not say this directly to him, but I came tothe conclusion that only the horse that comes in first, wins theprize and not others. I do not like such races. The one thatcomes first gets the prize and others that run just as hard andcome in second and get nothing. So, he said, ‘That is veryshrewd of you.’ I told him, ‘Call it what you want but that is myway.’ He said, ‘You have found a very shrewd way of gettingout of it.’This is ‘our’ art of tackling all situations. ‘We’ doeverything; we eat, drink, and eat ice cream with leisure. I sitback and ‘see’ which horse comes first. But I will not run in thatrace. I will remain the knower and the seer (gnata drashta) ofthe race. Why would I want to run with those horses?Still, I did try it once. I have calluses on my feet fromwhen a nail had poked through the sole of my shoes. (Dada isreferring to his self-imposed penance that he subjected himselfto before Gnan. Following the philosophy of the Kramic path,in search of the Soul, he thought physical penance wasnecessary. When a nail in his shoe had poked through the innersole, he left it there, he endured it, entering the race course ofpenance as seekers do in the Kramic path).There is no winner when there is jealousyWherever you look there is a racecourse. All thesepeople have entered the racecourse. At home, there is aracecourse even with the wife! If two bullocks are walking sideby side and one tries to get ahead of the other just a little, theother will also exerts more.Questioner: Why is that?Dadashri: It is because they have entered the racecourse(into competition). If the two are walking side by side and oneof them gets ahead a little, the one left behind will feel jealous(irsha) and wonders how he can make him fall behind.There is no winner in this race of jealousy (irsha). I donot enter into such a race. It is a race where one will die huffingand puffing without getting anywhere. Even the one who is fullof intellect will get exhausted and in his latter years of life willaccuse others, ‘He cheated me and the other fellow cheated me’and on and on. Hey you! You got cheated even at the age ofeighty?! You will run in the racecourse for countless lives andyou will still be cheated at the end. This is how the world is.Everything will go to waste and on top of that, you will alsosuffer miserably in the process. Instead discover your rightfulplace, your home of bliss, the Self and then run to it.No one has been able to win the world and that is whythis discovery of ‘ours’ is very profound, it is one which allowsthe world to win. Just say, ‘I sit here having lost but if you wantto win, then come here.’ This discovery will amaze the worldand ‘we’ have won the world through it. Otherwise, no one haswon it. Each of ‘our’ discoveries is such that they help theworld to win. This is Akram Vignan! The whole science isAkram. This is not the case in the Kramic path. You can neversay that you have no competence and aptitude (barkat) in theKramic path.Aptavani-9395396Aptavani-9this wedding.’ I tell them, ‘No it does not look bad. Peopleknow me and they understand that I am a man of God and thatI am not in tune with worldly things.’ But they would insist andsay, ‘No but it makes us look bad.’ So then I made one of themunderstand, I told him, ‘Normally I would not say anything butsince you ask I will tell you the truth. If I were to sit in the middlethere, and if the jeweler Laxmichand were to come along, Iwould have to move. Then I would have to move again whenMaganbhai Shankarbhai comes. So I have to keep changing myseat, so instead of suffering insults this way, what is wrong insimply standing here with dignity? I will not enter intocompetition in such a racecourse. I am better off standing herethan sitting in the middle and taking the number nine seat andfeeling insulted.’ I did not say this directly to him, but I came tothe conclusion that only the horse that comes in first, wins theprize and not others. I do not like such races. The one thatcomes first gets the prize and others that run just as hard andcome in second and get nothing. So, he said, ‘That is veryshrewd of you.’ I told him, ‘Call it what you want but that is myway.’ He said, ‘You have found a very shrewd way of gettingout of it.’This is ‘our’ art of tackling all situations. ‘We’ doeverything; we eat, drink, and eat ice cream with leisure. I sitback and ‘see’ which horse comes first. But I will not run in thatrace. I will remain the knower and the seer (gnata drashta) ofthe race. Why would I want to run with those horses?Still, I did try it once. I have calluses on my feet fromwhen a nail had poked through the sole of my shoes. (Dada isreferring to his self-imposed penance that he subjected himselfto before Gnan. Following the philosophy of the Kramic path,in search of the Soul, he thought physical penance wasnecessary. When a nail in his shoe had poked through the innersole, he left it there, he endured it, entering the race course ofpenance as seekers do in the Kramic path).There is no winner when there is jealousyWherever you look there is a racecourse. All thesepeople have entered the racecourse. At home, there is aracecourse even with the wife! If two bullocks are walking sideby side and one tries to get ahead of the other just a little, theother will also exerts more.Questioner: Why is that?Dadashri: It is because they have entered the racecourse(into competition). If the two are walking side by side and oneof them gets ahead a little, the one left behind will feel jealous(irsha) and wonders how he can make him fall behind.There is no winner in this race of jealousy (irsha). I donot enter into such a race. It is a race where one will die huffingand puffing without getting anywhere. Even the one who is fullof intellect will get exhausted and in his latter years of life willaccuse others, ‘He cheated me and the other fellow cheated me’and on and on. Hey you! You got cheated even at the age ofeighty?! You will run in the racecourse for countless lives andyou will still be cheated at the end. This is how the world is.Everything will go to waste and on top of that, you will alsosuffer miserably in the process. Instead discover your rightfulplace, your home of bliss, the Self and then run to it.No one has been able to win the world and that is whythis discovery of ‘ours’ is very profound, it is one which allowsthe world to win. Just say, ‘I sit here having lost but if you wantto win, then come here.’ This discovery will amaze the worldand ‘we’ have won the world through it. Otherwise, no one haswon it. Each of ‘our’ discoveries is such that they help theworld to win. This is Akram Vignan! The whole science isAkram. This is not the case in the Kramic path. You can neversay that you have no competence and aptitude (barkat) in theKramic path.Aptavani-9397398Aptavani-9This is Akram Vignan. One’s personality is apparent themoment he exits the racecourse. Such a human being radiatespeace and harmony. Nobody running in the racecourse has anypersonality.Let others winYou have done nothing but the same thing over and overagain in countless past lives. Now it will change because of thepresence of Gnan, but not otherwise. This Gnan can show You(the enlightened Self) your mistakes! And You will believe andaccept that the fault lies with you, whereas there (in the Kramicpath) you have to ask someone else. Besides, what competenceand aptitude does he have himself that he can show you? Youyourself must ‘feel’ that the fault is indeed yours. So there is noneed to win. ‘We’ have always maintained this. ‘We’ have neverkept the principle of winning. I would let others win and thenleave. And then I will forget about it. He too will getpreoccupied with something else. Now if I were to send himaway defeated, he will harbor the link (tanto) of kashaya andnot let go. So just let the other person win and let him go.Questioner: Yes, ‘I lose and you win, my brother.’Dadashri: You should not say this openly to him,otherwise he will think, ‘Oh ho ho! He has calmed down. Thisis great. This is how it should be.’Questioner: What happens if you say this to him openly?Dadashri: If you tell him this openly, he will start adispute (tante chaddhe), ‘I don’t want to win this way.’ Oneman did tell me this once. I said to him, ‘Sir, I sit here defeated.You have won so go home and sleep peacefully.’ He told me,‘I do not want it this way.’ I said to him, ‘Do not try to extractany sweetness out of this situation.’ This is how he enters intoa dispute (tant). If you say this, he will move that way, and ifyou say that, he will move this way. The world is full ofobjections and obstacles. Other people want to create objectionsand obstacles whereas we remove whatever objections andobstacles there may be.Now you have to make Dada’s Gnan shine. However, ifafter trying it does not shine, then so be it. If it does not, doesit mean you have to be adamant and persistent about it? Ourefforts should be positive. What can we do when circumstancesmake them negative? Do you have to be obstinate about it? Butno, people continue to have tanto – a link of kashaya - wantingto defeat others. The worldly play of win or lose! ‘We’ believeit is a grave danger to defeat anyone. The defeated person willthen make preparation to defeat you. So why not let him winand let him go? Will there be any problems then? There is noproblem from your end. Then he will look for someone else todeal with. If he wins with you, he will go somewhere else andcompete.So this Akram Vignan is very good, is it not? If you doas Dada tells you, then you will become free from this ‘furnace’of life. Remain ‘dramatic’ (superficial) from within and theworldly interactions will be solved. People will show you a ‘redflag’ (they will obstruct you) if you do not bring a solution in theworldly interactions. This (Akram Vignan) is a clear path so noone will show you a red flag. This Vignan is completely different.There is no deceit (kapat) here about taking anything fromanyone. This fact is irrefutable. And here we do not keepdifferences of ‘this is ours and that is not’; this too is anirrefutable fact. So are there any problems here for us?The Course of Akram VignanAnd this is Akram Science. It is completely different; it isabsolutely unique. How beneficial it is!Questioner: What if one were to learn and then do it?Dadashri: Yes, one will attain salvation if he learns ‘our’Aptavani-9397398Aptavani-9This is Akram Vignan. One’s personality is apparent themoment he exits the racecourse. Such a human being radiatespeace and harmony. Nobody running in the racecourse has anypersonality.Let others winYou have done nothing but the same thing over and overagain in countless past lives. Now it will change because of thepresence of Gnan, but not otherwise. This Gnan can show You(the enlightened Self) your mistakes! And You will believe andaccept that the fault lies with you, whereas there (in the Kramicpath) you have to ask someone else. Besides, what competenceand aptitude does he have himself that he can show you? Youyourself must ‘feel’ that the fault is indeed yours. So there is noneed to win. ‘We’ have always maintained this. ‘We’ have neverkept the principle of winning. I would let others win and thenleave. And then I will forget about it. He too will getpreoccupied with something else. Now if I were to send himaway defeated, he will harbor the link (tanto) of kashaya andnot let go. So just let the other person win and let him go.Questioner: Yes, ‘I lose and you win, my brother.’Dadashri: You should not say this openly to him,otherwise he will think, ‘Oh ho ho! He has calmed down. Thisis great. This is how it should be.’Questioner: What happens if you say this to him openly?Dadashri: If you tell him this openly, he will start adispute (tante chaddhe), ‘I don’t want to win this way.’ Oneman did tell me this once. I said to him, ‘Sir, I sit here defeated.You have won so go home and sleep peacefully.’ He told me,‘I do not want it this way.’ I said to him, ‘Do not try to extractany sweetness out of this situation.’ This is how he enters intoa dispute (tant). If you say this, he will move that way, and ifyou say that, he will move this way. The world is full ofobjections and obstacles. Other people want to create objectionsand obstacles whereas we remove whatever objections andobstacles there may be.Now you have to make Dada’s Gnan shine. However, ifafter trying it does not shine, then so be it. If it does not, doesit mean you have to be adamant and persistent about it? Ourefforts should be positive. What can we do when circumstancesmake them negative? Do you have to be obstinate about it? Butno, people continue to have tanto – a link of kashaya - wantingto defeat others. The worldly play of win or lose! ‘We’ believeit is a grave danger to defeat anyone. The defeated person willthen make preparation to defeat you. So why not let him winand let him go? Will there be any problems then? There is noproblem from your end. Then he will look for someone else todeal with. If he wins with you, he will go somewhere else andcompete.So this Akram Vignan is very good, is it not? If you doas Dada tells you, then you will become free from this ‘furnace’of life. Remain ‘dramatic’ (superficial) from within and theworldly interactions will be solved. People will show you a ‘redflag’ (they will obstruct you) if you do not bring a solution in theworldly interactions. This (Akram Vignan) is a clear path so noone will show you a red flag. This Vignan is completely different.There is no deceit (kapat) here about taking anything fromanyone. This fact is irrefutable. And here we do not keepdifferences of ‘this is ours and that is not’; this too is anirrefutable fact. So are there any problems here for us?The Course of Akram VignanAnd this is Akram Science. It is completely different; it isabsolutely unique. How beneficial it is!Questioner: What if one were to learn and then do it?Dadashri: Yes, one will attain salvation if he learns ‘our’Aptavani-9399400Aptavani-9words and follows them accordingly. He will attain salvation ifhe learns even just one word of the Gnani Purush. Otherwise,when will you progress from the third standard to the fourth?Instead of that, Dada will place you in the first year aftermatriculation. Other people are in the fifth and the sixthstandard. One will not pass even the third standard through hisown effort. Instead, do what Dada tells you and your problemswill be solved. Otherwise, these people are such that they willdrag you down into binding new karmas by telling you, ‘do thisfor me, do that for me’. No one bothers to come here anymore.Not even the neighbors. And they even say, ‘He is a very goodman.’ No one says I am a bad person.So ours is a very good path. It is a path with solutions anda safe side. Otherwise, it is difficult to go from the third to thefourth standard if you follow other people (Kramic path) and dowhat they do. No one has the capacity to do anything in thecurrent time cycle. Instead, here we are in the first year ofDada’s Graduate College, so eat, drink and enjoy yourself.Others do not but you all do. There is nothing for them to enjoy,is there? They have to run around the whole day because theyhave to win a prize.This (college of Akram Vignan) is not something that youtake an admission into and not show up or finish up. This onecourse will need to be finished. One has not finished this coursefor infinite lives. If he had, he would become fearless (nirbhay).Talks of such a feat are extraordinary, unique and out of thisworld!* * * * *[7]Insistence (khench) : deceit (kapat) :‘point-man’ (the one who leads you astray)The Science of Akram Vignan unravels allentanglementsEverything I am saying is all through experience. If theyare not my own experiences then they are solutions that I have‘seen’ through my Gnan. People need solutions, do they not?Otherwise, without a solution one continues to suffer inentanglements (goonch). People continue to experience turmoilbecause they cannot find a solution. Everyone is in this state. Sowhat does one do when an entanglement (goonch) arises? Thisworld is nothing but a factory of entanglements and confusion.“The world is the puzzle itself”, meaning it has puzzled itself.That is why I am telling you that this is the Vignan(science) of Akram. This Vignan has been given to people whohave not reached even its peripheral boundary; they were noteven qualified to receive it. Surely, it is their merit karma thatthey have attained this Vignan. That is why ‘we’ have said, asfar as worldly interactions (vyavahar) are concerned makeChandulal (the relative self) behave in such a way that he hurtsno one in the slightest; this that must be your inner goal and Yourconstant inner intent.When one is insistent, the Gnani becomessilentQuestioner: Ordinarily what should our life be like afterattaining Dada’s Gnan?Aptavani-9399400Aptavani-9words and follows them accordingly. He will attain salvation ifhe learns even just one word of the Gnani Purush. Otherwise,when will you progress from the third standard to the fourth?Instead of that, Dada will place you in the first year aftermatriculation. Other people are in the fifth and the sixthstandard. One will not pass even the third standard through hisown effort. Instead, do what Dada tells you and your problemswill be solved. Otherwise, these people are such that they willdrag you down into binding new karmas by telling you, ‘do thisfor me, do that for me’. No one bothers to come here anymore.Not even the neighbors. And they even say, ‘He is a very goodman.’ No one says I am a bad person.So ours is a very good path. It is a path with solutions anda safe side. Otherwise, it is difficult to go from the third to thefourth standard if you follow other people (Kramic path) and dowhat they do. No one has the capacity to do anything in thecurrent time cycle. Instead, here we are in the first year ofDada’s Graduate College, so eat, drink and enjoy yourself.Others do not but you all do. There is nothing for them to enjoy,is there? They have to run around the whole day because theyhave to win a prize.This (college of Akram Vignan) is not something that youtake an admission into and not show up or finish up. This onecourse will need to be finished. One has not finished this coursefor infinite lives. If he had, he would become fearless (nirbhay).Talks of such a feat are extraordinary, unique and out of thisworld!* * * * *[7]Insistence (khench) : deceit (kapat) :‘point-man’ (the one who leads you astray)The Science of Akram Vignan unravels allentanglementsEverything I am saying is all through experience. If theyare not my own experiences then they are solutions that I have‘seen’ through my Gnan. People need solutions, do they not?Otherwise, without a solution one continues to suffer inentanglements (goonch). People continue to experience turmoilbecause they cannot find a solution. Everyone is in this state. Sowhat does one do when an entanglement (goonch) arises? Thisworld is nothing but a factory of entanglements and confusion.“The world is the puzzle itself”, meaning it has puzzled itself.That is why I am telling you that this is the Vignan(science) of Akram. This Vignan has been given to people whohave not reached even its peripheral boundary; they were noteven qualified to receive it. Surely, it is their merit karma thatthey have attained this Vignan. That is why ‘we’ have said, asfar as worldly interactions (vyavahar) are concerned makeChandulal (the relative self) behave in such a way that he hurtsno one in the slightest; this that must be your inner goal and Yourconstant inner intent.When one is insistent, the Gnani becomessilentQuestioner: Ordinarily what should our life be like afterattaining Dada’s Gnan?Aptavani-9401402Aptavani-9Dadashri: You should live a life free from any insistence(khench).Questioner: Give me an example of how one is insistent,please.Dadashri: Suppose we are talking. I give you an answerand in order to make your point correct you bring up the sametopic again. That is insistence (khench). This is what people doover and over again. If you have taken Gnan, then there shouldbe no insistence. If there is any insistence, then get rid of it,because it is a mistake. There is no problem if you try to get ridof it and it does not go away. If there is continued insistence onyour part, if Chandulal is insistent, then You have to simplyobserve it, by doing so, You are free. You are separate fromyour insistence if you remain the seer (jonaro). Then you are incompliance with ‘our’ laws.Insistence (khench) is something very different. Insistencemeans, if I say, ‘No, it is like this’ but you keep belaboring yourpoint in order to prove yourself correct, that is insistence. Thereis no truth where there is insistence; insistence is one of thebiggest negative traits. The definition of being insistence-free isif someone tells you, ‘I don’t like it’, then you say, ‘very well.I will keep quiet’, there is no botheration.Questioner: So if someone keeps arguing and tries veryhard to prove his point, does that mean he has no basis?Dadashri: But even in those situations people do notargue with awareness; people argue because they do not haveawareness. In fact, people argue because they lack awareness.Do you think someone with awareness would argue?Questioner: Is it wrong or right to argue?Dadashri: It is fine for the worldly life; it is fine if youwant to do something for the worldly life, but it is wrong if youwant liberation. In the worldly life, if you don’t argue, people willwalk away with your things. But here in satsang, it is notappropriate to argue. There is nothing to say in whatever theGnani tells you; arguing and discussions are only meant for theworldly life. In the worldly life you may even have to say, ‘Dada,do not go in this car, go in this one.’ But here in satsang?! Whatwisdom, what over-wise people there are! ‘You are being over-wise’, this is what I have to tell some people.This is a Vignan. Many people tell me; ‘make laws, dothis, do that’ You fools! What kind of people are you that inspite of attaining such a Vignan you have not become wise?What a Vignan this is! A Vignan where there is no scope ofarguments!Questioner: Rules and laws were the only way todiscipline people until now.Dadashri: That is fine for people at large but ours is thepath of liberation. People who want to wander around in thisworldly life, they need laws. Otherwise, laws cause conflicts andconflicts give rise to the worldly life.Questioner: Are there not laws on the path of liberation?Dadashri: No laws are needed on the path of liberation.There are no laws here. Everything is natural. Whatever happensnaturally is correct.Questioner: You said, ‘where there is liberation, thereare no laws; where there are laws there is no liberation.Liberation is through absolute humility (param vinay).’ Soabsolute humility encompasses everything, does it not?Dadashri: Yes. Absolute humility encompasses everything.With rules, one will be required to keep a tulsi plant (tulsi leavesare used in prayer rituals in the Kramic path, they also havemedicinal properties). If a mouse nibbles away at the tulsi, hewill have to keep a cat to keep the mice away. The cat ruins themilk and so he has to keep a dog to protect the milk. WhereAptavani-9401402Aptavani-9Dadashri: You should live a life free from any insistence(khench).Questioner: Give me an example of how one is insistent,please.Dadashri: Suppose we are talking. I give you an answerand in order to make your point correct you bring up the sametopic again. That is insistence (khench). This is what people doover and over again. If you have taken Gnan, then there shouldbe no insistence. If there is any insistence, then get rid of it,because it is a mistake. There is no problem if you try to get ridof it and it does not go away. If there is continued insistence onyour part, if Chandulal is insistent, then You have to simplyobserve it, by doing so, You are free. You are separate fromyour insistence if you remain the seer (jonaro). Then you are incompliance with ‘our’ laws.Insistence (khench) is something very different. Insistencemeans, if I say, ‘No, it is like this’ but you keep belaboring yourpoint in order to prove yourself correct, that is insistence. Thereis no truth where there is insistence; insistence is one of thebiggest negative traits. The definition of being insistence-free isif someone tells you, ‘I don’t like it’, then you say, ‘very well.I will keep quiet’, there is no botheration.Questioner: So if someone keeps arguing and tries veryhard to prove his point, does that mean he has no basis?Dadashri: But even in those situations people do notargue with awareness; people argue because they do not haveawareness. In fact, people argue because they lack awareness.Do you think someone with awareness would argue?Questioner: Is it wrong or right to argue?Dadashri: It is fine for the worldly life; it is fine if youwant to do something for the worldly life, but it is wrong if youwant liberation. In the worldly life, if you don’t argue, people willwalk away with your things. But here in satsang, it is notappropriate to argue. There is nothing to say in whatever theGnani tells you; arguing and discussions are only meant for theworldly life. In the worldly life you may even have to say, ‘Dada,do not go in this car, go in this one.’ But here in satsang?! Whatwisdom, what over-wise people there are! ‘You are being over-wise’, this is what I have to tell some people.This is a Vignan. Many people tell me; ‘make laws, dothis, do that’ You fools! What kind of people are you that inspite of attaining such a Vignan you have not become wise?What a Vignan this is! A Vignan where there is no scope ofarguments!Questioner: Rules and laws were the only way todiscipline people until now.Dadashri: That is fine for people at large but ours is thepath of liberation. People who want to wander around in thisworldly life, they need laws. Otherwise, laws cause conflicts andconflicts give rise to the worldly life.Questioner: Are there not laws on the path of liberation?Dadashri: No laws are needed on the path of liberation.There are no laws here. Everything is natural. Whatever happensnaturally is correct.Questioner: You said, ‘where there is liberation, thereare no laws; where there are laws there is no liberation.Liberation is through absolute humility (param vinay).’ Soabsolute humility encompasses everything, does it not?Dadashri: Yes. Absolute humility encompasses everything.With rules, one will be required to keep a tulsi plant (tulsi leavesare used in prayer rituals in the Kramic path, they also havemedicinal properties). If a mouse nibbles away at the tulsi, hewill have to keep a cat to keep the mice away. The cat ruins themilk and so he has to keep a dog to protect the milk. WhereAptavani-9403404Aptavani-9does it end? Therefore, here we have the law of ‘no laws’. Herewe are applying Vignan and so the slightest of interference ismadness. It is tantamount to being over wise.I will say things as they are. Then if someone were tobecome obstinate and strong headed (jakki), then I will knowthere is tremendous ignorance on his part and that he is harminghimself, so then I will not say anything more; I will remain silent.If he starts arguing, it is because he cannot understand what I amsaying. Would he argue if he did?So what is it like here in the satsang? You have to becomewise. You have to have param vinay, which means you do nothave to speak unnecessarily. Speak only when it is necessary.Do not try to show your wisdom or your cleverness here. Allyour cleverness is imitation; it is not original. Meaning you havelearnt from others, you have learnt from books. Then you getinto arguments and you do not stop. Don’t you even recognizethat you are going off on the wrong track, by doing this? Toengage in such confrontational arguments (chadasey chadhavu)is to leave your own place as the Soul – your real Self and fallall the way down; it is to lose your own place and to regress.Questioner: You caution us right away before we fall.Dadashri: I am telling you the same thing right now also.But I cannot caution everyone; I can only tell certain people.With others, I have to let things be. They have not attained theenergy (shakti) yet. The poor fellow will go away from here ifI were to say anything. I only caution those who haveunderstood what is harmful and what is beneficial to them as faras liberation is concerned. So I only caution people once theybecome strong. I will not say it to everyone. Otherwise, they willleave right away; they will say ‘I’m leaving. I have a home. Ihave a family. I am not desperate for anything. So why shouldI stay here?’ ‘Yes, agreed you are married, you have everything.You are fine as you are, but if you wander away from this‘station’, you will never encounter it again, even after a hundredthousand lifetimes.’ I have to pamper them like children in thismanner and make them sit. I even have to give them candies! Iask you this, who has taken this Gnan with his ownunderstanding? I have had to coax and entice everyone, ‘Comehere! Come see!’ I have had to sweet-talk everyone in order togive them Gnan.There should be no insistence for thatOutside of satsang when people talk, it is natural for oneto feel, ‘ours is the right path. The path we have embarked uponis the right path’. However, after attaining this Gnan, to feel thatway, the Lord has called it ahamkar - ego. That ego will haveto be rid of.If someone outside of our satsang insults you anddegrades you, you will get drawn in into a confrontation. If heinstigates you into a confrontation with him (jakka), you willeven become obstinately confrontational. Once you enter intoobstinate confrontations, which inevitably becomes an interactionof animosity (chadasey chadhavu), you become completelyimmersed by illusion (mithyatva). Then the focused awarenessas and of the Self (upayog) is gone. All this will serve to spreadthe illusion even further. This is a grave disease.There is no such thing as the truth (satya) in this relativeworld. The Real (sat) is eternal (avinashi). There is no othersat. It cannot exist in the relative realm. Everything else isrelative and prone to come to an end (vinashi). And yet lookhow people hang on to it with obstinacy!To the Lord, there is no such thing as truth and untruth(satya and asatya); these are man made concepts – they areconcepts of the human society. There are all kinds of people inthe society and so everything is dependant upon society. Thereis no duality as far as the Lord is concerned. There is no profitor loss. There are no such things as relationships either and I canAptavani-9403404Aptavani-9does it end? Therefore, here we have the law of ‘no laws’. Herewe are applying Vignan and so the slightest of interference ismadness. It is tantamount to being over wise.I will say things as they are. Then if someone were tobecome obstinate and strong headed (jakki), then I will knowthere is tremendous ignorance on his part and that he is harminghimself, so then I will not say anything more; I will remain silent.If he starts arguing, it is because he cannot understand what I amsaying. Would he argue if he did?So what is it like here in the satsang? You have to becomewise. You have to have param vinay, which means you do nothave to speak unnecessarily. Speak only when it is necessary.Do not try to show your wisdom or your cleverness here. Allyour cleverness is imitation; it is not original. Meaning you havelearnt from others, you have learnt from books. Then you getinto arguments and you do not stop. Don’t you even recognizethat you are going off on the wrong track, by doing this? Toengage in such confrontational arguments (chadasey chadhavu)is to leave your own place as the Soul – your real Self and fallall the way down; it is to lose your own place and to regress.Questioner: You caution us right away before we fall.Dadashri: I am telling you the same thing right now also.But I cannot caution everyone; I can only tell certain people.With others, I have to let things be. They have not attained theenergy (shakti) yet. The poor fellow will go away from here ifI were to say anything. I only caution those who haveunderstood what is harmful and what is beneficial to them as faras liberation is concerned. So I only caution people once theybecome strong. I will not say it to everyone. Otherwise, they willleave right away; they will say ‘I’m leaving. I have a home. Ihave a family. I am not desperate for anything. So why shouldI stay here?’ ‘Yes, agreed you are married, you have everything.You are fine as you are, but if you wander away from this‘station’, you will never encounter it again, even after a hundredthousand lifetimes.’ I have to pamper them like children in thismanner and make them sit. I even have to give them candies! Iask you this, who has taken this Gnan with his ownunderstanding? I have had to coax and entice everyone, ‘Comehere! Come see!’ I have had to sweet-talk everyone in order togive them Gnan.There should be no insistence for thatOutside of satsang when people talk, it is natural for oneto feel, ‘ours is the right path. The path we have embarked uponis the right path’. However, after attaining this Gnan, to feel thatway, the Lord has called it ahamkar - ego. That ego will haveto be rid of.If someone outside of our satsang insults you anddegrades you, you will get drawn in into a confrontation. If heinstigates you into a confrontation with him (jakka), you willeven become obstinately confrontational. Once you enter intoobstinate confrontations, which inevitably becomes an interactionof animosity (chadasey chadhavu), you become completelyimmersed by illusion (mithyatva). Then the focused awarenessas and of the Self (upayog) is gone. All this will serve to spreadthe illusion even further. This is a grave disease.There is no such thing as the truth (satya) in this relativeworld. The Real (sat) is eternal (avinashi). There is no othersat. It cannot exist in the relative realm. Everything else isrelative and prone to come to an end (vinashi). And yet lookhow people hang on to it with obstinacy!To the Lord, there is no such thing as truth and untruth(satya and asatya); these are man made concepts – they areconcepts of the human society. There are all kinds of people inthe society and so everything is dependant upon society. Thereis no duality as far as the Lord is concerned. There is no profitor loss. There are no such things as relationships either and I canAptavani-9405406Aptavani-9have to remove big rocks that come your way, otherwise youare bound to crash into them if they are lying in your path.Bring a closure by becoming straight (sarad)The one who is straight (sarad) will flex and bendaccording to the truth, will adjust promptly to the truth. Such aone will quickly turn in matters where the ‘soul’ accepts andagrees, and he will not be insistent there. The one who insists isnot sarad.So do not be rigid, inflexible and insist on anything! It isa grave liability to be persistently insistent (pakkad).Questioner: Arguments are bound to ensue where thereis misunderstanding between two people.Dadashri: Therefore you have to end the matter there.Questioner: So if there is a misunderstanding and theother person tells me ‘you are wrong’, should I not let go of it?Dadashri: Yes, you should let go of it. What objectiondo you have? If you don’t the other person will think, ‘Why ishe talking like that?’ I ask you, ‘is speaking (speech) notvyavasthit? Is it not vyavasthit that he asks something?’ ‘We’have all the solutions. Otherwise where is the end in sight? ‘We’bring about a resolution quickly.It is wrong of us to say, ‘this person is right and thisperson is wrong.’ You just have to believe that the other personis right and you are wrong and just move on. That way the otherperson will not have any problems either. No one will have apending ‘claim’ against you. You can never be free if there areany claims pending against you.The ego after Gnan is lifeless and theprakruti dissipatesWherever there is the stock of ego (ahamkar no bharelomaal), it is likely to increase. In the mahatmas the ego is‘see’ this in my Gnan too. There is no relationship whatsoever.Relationships are like the birds sitting on a tree. They fly in fromall direction; they stay together during the night and claim ‘wemust be somehow related’. So things continue this way in thename of relationship but when the morning comes, they all flyaway in different directions. So there is no such thing asrelationships. No one is really related to anyone.Questioner: The example of the passengers on a train ona long journey is better, Dada.Dadashri: On the train, one will at least realize that hisfellow passenger is suffering a lot, so he will try to help him. Hedoes not dwell on relationships and when his station comes, hegets off.It is also wrong (asatya) to hang on to the truth (satya).To hang on to the truth’s tail (insist on the truth) is in itself untruth(asatya). To become insistent is to ruin everything. People takea beating by hanging on to the tail of the truth, just as they hangon to a donkey’s tail. They will take a beating from the kicks butthey will not let go of the tail. They will insist ‘I will not let go’,no matter what.Whereas ‘we’ do not have any grasping of anything(graha) or persistence of insistence (aagraha). There is not theslightest insistence of ‘it has to be this way’ in any matter, noteven for a second. Not even for a second will ‘we’ say, ‘this isright, this is true.’ There is not the slightest insistence of even‘This Gnan has manifest.’ If you say, ‘that is incorrect’, eventhen there is no insistence on ‘our’ part. Whatever comesthrough your vision (drashti) is correct.If you do not encounter any separation with anyone dueto difference of opinion (matbhed) anywhere, then know thatYou are on the right path. And where there is separation due todifferences of opinions, know that your path is not clear yet. Youstill have to carve your road through the mountains; you willAptavani-9405406Aptavani-9have to remove big rocks that come your way, otherwise youare bound to crash into them if they are lying in your path.Bring a closure by becoming straight (sarad)The one who is straight (sarad) will flex and bendaccording to the truth, will adjust promptly to the truth. Such aone will quickly turn in matters where the ‘soul’ accepts andagrees, and he will not be insistent there. The one who insists isnot sarad.So do not be rigid, inflexible and insist on anything! It isa grave liability to be persistently insistent (pakkad).Questioner: Arguments are bound to ensue where thereis misunderstanding between two people.Dadashri: Therefore you have to end the matter there.Questioner: So if there is a misunderstanding and theother person tells me ‘you are wrong’, should I not let go of it?Dadashri: Yes, you should let go of it. What objectiondo you have? If you don’t the other person will think, ‘Why ishe talking like that?’ I ask you, ‘is speaking (speech) notvyavasthit? Is it not vyavasthit that he asks something?’ ‘We’have all the solutions. Otherwise where is the end in sight? ‘We’bring about a resolution quickly.It is wrong of us to say, ‘this person is right and thisperson is wrong.’ You just have to believe that the other personis right and you are wrong and just move on. That way the otherperson will not have any problems either. No one will have apending ‘claim’ against you. You can never be free if there areany claims pending against you.The ego after Gnan is lifeless and theprakruti dissipatesWherever there is the stock of ego (ahamkar no bharelomaal), it is likely to increase. In the mahatmas the ego is‘see’ this in my Gnan too. There is no relationship whatsoever.Relationships are like the birds sitting on a tree. They fly in fromall direction; they stay together during the night and claim ‘wemust be somehow related’. So things continue this way in thename of relationship but when the morning comes, they all flyaway in different directions. So there is no such thing asrelationships. No one is really related to anyone.Questioner: The example of the passengers on a train ona long journey is better, Dada.Dadashri: On the train, one will at least realize that hisfellow passenger is suffering a lot, so he will try to help him. Hedoes not dwell on relationships and when his station comes, hegets off.It is also wrong (asatya) to hang on to the truth (satya).To hang on to the truth’s tail (insist on the truth) is in itself untruth(asatya). To become insistent is to ruin everything. People takea beating by hanging on to the tail of the truth, just as they hangon to a donkey’s tail. They will take a beating from the kicks butthey will not let go of the tail. They will insist ‘I will not let go’,no matter what.Whereas ‘we’ do not have any grasping of anything(graha) or persistence of insistence (aagraha). There is not theslightest insistence of ‘it has to be this way’ in any matter, noteven for a second. Not even for a second will ‘we’ say, ‘this isright, this is true.’ There is not the slightest insistence of even‘This Gnan has manifest.’ If you say, ‘that is incorrect’, eventhen there is no insistence on ‘our’ part. Whatever comesthrough your vision (drashti) is correct.If you do not encounter any separation with anyone dueto difference of opinion (matbhed) anywhere, then know thatYou are on the right path. And where there is separation due todifferences of opinions, know that your path is not clear yet. Youstill have to carve your road through the mountains; you willAptavani-9407408Aptavani-9residual, it is a discharging ego (nikali ahamkar); it is not truecharge ego i.e. ego that charges new karmas. But even then onegoes on protecting and siding with it. Who are you to judgewhat is right and what is wrong? This should not be so.When one becomes adamant (jakka), it creates moreveils of ignorance over the soul. However, after this Gnan, allthat is left is the vyavahar i.e. only discharging worldlyinteractions remain. As far as nischaya (the Self) is concerned,jakka (insistence) is gone, dwesh (abhorrence) is gone, raag(attachment) is gone; everything is gone. Now after Gnan, theworldly life (vyavahar) is no longer chetan; it is no longer living(there is no more karma bondage; it is all a discharge).Vyavahar now has become achetan (it is inanimate); there is nolife in it. Achetan means that it will reignite if You instigate itagain (meaning if you become Chandulal again). Otherwise thenon-Self (prakruti) will show its traits and dissipate, nothingmore. Do you understand? It will manifest its trait; you will knowwhat it is like when it expresses. You can know and identify allits traits. So different prakruti will express in different mannerand intensity, and thus the stock within (bharelo maal) becomesevident. Then having expressed itself, it will dissipate.The ego is rendered lifeless on the basis of this AkramVignan of ours. So sooner or later it is going to leave completely.In the Kramic path the ego is alive whereas here in the Akrampath, it is lifeless; everything remains ‘dramatic’ - superficial.The kashayas of anger, pride, deceit and greed, are all‘dramatic’ also - they are superficial and lifeless. However thekashayas that remain within now need to be dealt with, withequanimity.Deceit (kapat) and craftiness (chaturai)If someone is verbally abusing one, in that too one’skashayas - inner passions of anger, pride, deceit and greed willengulf him all over during that moment.Questioner: How do these passions (kashayas) overcomeus?Dadashri: They render you unconscious in regards toawareness of Gnan. A person will not have any awareness atthat time!Questioner: How can we tell when the kashayas havearisen? What are the signs?Dadashri: Will you not know when the ego has beenhurt? Deceit (kapat) is the main culprit that does not allow youto be aware. This deceit means total darkness; completeabsence of awareness. In other forms of kashayas namelygreed, pride and anger, there would be some light; someawareness.Questioner: Please explain all these in detail. This deceit,kashaya, ego…Dadashri: These are all the obstacles in the path ofliberation.Questioner: How does deceit operate and create apuzzle in this?Dadashri: Deceit (kapat), makes everything pleasantand acceptable, and thus makes one wander (lose spiritual goal)here, there and everywhere.Questioner: Where again is the role of deceit in all thesewanderings?Dadashri: Anger, pride, greed create fewer obstructions.Deceit will create lot more obstructions. Deceit (kapat) doesnot let one remain in the normality of worldly interaction; it takesone below the level of what is normal, it is lower than the stateof worldly self (sansari). Persons without kapat are sarad; theyare straight and simple-hearted. Deceitful prakruti createsmajor problems.Aptavani-9407408Aptavani-9residual, it is a discharging ego (nikali ahamkar); it is not truecharge ego i.e. ego that charges new karmas. But even then onegoes on protecting and siding with it. Who are you to judgewhat is right and what is wrong? This should not be so.When one becomes adamant (jakka), it creates moreveils of ignorance over the soul. However, after this Gnan, allthat is left is the vyavahar i.e. only discharging worldlyinteractions remain. As far as nischaya (the Self) is concerned,jakka (insistence) is gone, dwesh (abhorrence) is gone, raag(attachment) is gone; everything is gone. Now after Gnan, theworldly life (vyavahar) is no longer chetan; it is no longer living(there is no more karma bondage; it is all a discharge).Vyavahar now has become achetan (it is inanimate); there is nolife in it. Achetan means that it will reignite if You instigate itagain (meaning if you become Chandulal again). Otherwise thenon-Self (prakruti) will show its traits and dissipate, nothingmore. Do you understand? It will manifest its trait; you will knowwhat it is like when it expresses. You can know and identify allits traits. So different prakruti will express in different mannerand intensity, and thus the stock within (bharelo maal) becomesevident. Then having expressed itself, it will dissipate.The ego is rendered lifeless on the basis of this AkramVignan of ours. So sooner or later it is going to leave completely.In the Kramic path the ego is alive whereas here in the Akrampath, it is lifeless; everything remains ‘dramatic’ - superficial.The kashayas of anger, pride, deceit and greed, are all‘dramatic’ also - they are superficial and lifeless. However thekashayas that remain within now need to be dealt with, withequanimity.Deceit (kapat) and craftiness (chaturai)If someone is verbally abusing one, in that too one’skashayas - inner passions of anger, pride, deceit and greed willengulf him all over during that moment.Questioner: How do these passions (kashayas) overcomeus?Dadashri: They render you unconscious in regards toawareness of Gnan. A person will not have any awareness atthat time!Questioner: How can we tell when the kashayas havearisen? What are the signs?Dadashri: Will you not know when the ego has beenhurt? Deceit (kapat) is the main culprit that does not allow youto be aware. This deceit means total darkness; completeabsence of awareness. In other forms of kashayas namelygreed, pride and anger, there would be some light; someawareness.Questioner: Please explain all these in detail. This deceit,kashaya, ego…Dadashri: These are all the obstacles in the path ofliberation.Questioner: How does deceit operate and create apuzzle in this?Dadashri: Deceit (kapat), makes everything pleasantand acceptable, and thus makes one wander (lose spiritual goal)here, there and everywhere.Questioner: Where again is the role of deceit in all thesewanderings?Dadashri: Anger, pride, greed create fewer obstructions.Deceit will create lot more obstructions. Deceit (kapat) doesnot let one remain in the normality of worldly interaction; it takesone below the level of what is normal, it is lower than the stateof worldly self (sansari). Persons without kapat are sarad; theyare straight and simple-hearted. Deceitful prakruti createsmajor problems.Aptavani-9409410Aptavani-9Questioner: If someone insults us, where is deceit(kapat) in that?Dadashri: There is no deceit (kapat) in that. Kapatmakes one take advantage of his own self. Deceit makes onedigs his own grave. In the four kashaya of anger-pride-illusionand greed, illusion means deceit (the illusion deceives the self).Deceit (kapat) has become an enormously dense mass within.The karmic account that is created is verily of deceit.Everywhere, deceit binds an account (new karma for whichrepayment will have to make in the next life). Otherwise nothingcan bother you.Now that I have given you this Gnan, kashayas will nolonger occur. People stray off in the direction of kashayasbecause of their old habits (prior to Gnan) of wanting to ‘taste’what’s going on. You will go and ‘taste’ it even when I tell younot to. This Gnan is such that, deceit (kapat) will not survive inanyone.Questioner: This deceit prevents the awareness (jagruti)?Dadashri: Anger-pride-greed also will not let youmaintain awareness. Deceit will make you completely unaware.The owner (the one in whom deceit takes place) himself will notknow what deceit (kapat) has taken place. The owner (personcommitting deception) himself will not know that he is employingdeceit!! However in instances of anger-pride-greed, he may besomewhat aware. This deceit (kapat) is very deep; even the onedoing kapat (deceit) will not be aware that he is doing it.Questioner: If the one doing kapat cannot tell that he isdoing kapat then how is he to recognize it? How can he be ridof this fault if he cannot identify it?Dadashri: This is hidden, not only from the doer of thekapat, but everyone else around him too.Questioner: How can one get rid of these faults of deceit(kapat)?Dadashri: It is very difficult.Questioner: How can we know the nature of this deceit?Dadashri: To pull others into your own opinion and takethem into your confidence for your worldly gains is kapat(deceit). A person who is doing this would not even know thathe is doing anything wrong. He simply is not aware of it.Questioner: What is included in the worldly gain? Is itmainly everything other than the goal of salvation (moksha)?Dadashri: There is definitely a goal of liberation after thisGnan (knowledge of the Self). The problem is with the deeplyingrained old habits (latta); they will not leave once theybecome established. They cast a veil over the self and thus makeit difficult for the owner to know that they (the kashaya ofdeceit) indeed exists within. The owner has no clue.The owner is also not aware of the other kashaya ofgreed (lobh) either. A greedy person will never know, ‘I amgreedy.’ Only the kashayas of pride (maan) and anger(krodha) are guileless (bhoda), so one can easily know theirexistence. One cannot identify maya - illusion that veils the Self;this verily is deceit (kapat). He cannot know of greed either.Questioner: So this deceit (kapat) is mainly for theworldly benefits…Dadashri: Deceit (kapat) is very tough; it is the greatestnuisance. Now how can it leave by itself? It will leave if onestops seeking advantage in worldly situations. Such a person isliberated indeed, is he not?Questioner: That verily is what we call awareness(jagruti), do we not?Dadashri: That is not jagruti; I just showed you the wayout of deceit (kapat).Questioner: Awareness is to have an inner demarcationAptavani-9409410Aptavani-9Questioner: If someone insults us, where is deceit(kapat) in that?Dadashri: There is no deceit (kapat) in that. Kapatmakes one take advantage of his own self. Deceit makes onedigs his own grave. In the four kashaya of anger-pride-illusionand greed, illusion means deceit (the illusion deceives the self).Deceit (kapat) has become an enormously dense mass within.The karmic account that is created is verily of deceit.Everywhere, deceit binds an account (new karma for whichrepayment will have to make in the next life). Otherwise nothingcan bother you.Now that I have given you this Gnan, kashayas will nolonger occur. People stray off in the direction of kashayasbecause of their old habits (prior to Gnan) of wanting to ‘taste’what’s going on. You will go and ‘taste’ it even when I tell younot to. This Gnan is such that, deceit (kapat) will not survive inanyone.Questioner: This deceit prevents the awareness (jagruti)?Dadashri: Anger-pride-greed also will not let youmaintain awareness. Deceit will make you completely unaware.The owner (the one in whom deceit takes place) himself will notknow what deceit (kapat) has taken place. The owner (personcommitting deception) himself will not know that he is employingdeceit!! However in instances of anger-pride-greed, he may besomewhat aware. This deceit (kapat) is very deep; even the onedoing kapat (deceit) will not be aware that he is doing it.Questioner: If the one doing kapat cannot tell that he isdoing kapat then how is he to recognize it? How can he be ridof this fault if he cannot identify it?Dadashri: This is hidden, not only from the doer of thekapat, but everyone else around him too.Questioner: How can one get rid of these faults of deceit(kapat)?Dadashri: It is very difficult.Questioner: How can we know the nature of this deceit?Dadashri: To pull others into your own opinion and takethem into your confidence for your worldly gains is kapat(deceit). A person who is doing this would not even know thathe is doing anything wrong. He simply is not aware of it.Questioner: What is included in the worldly gain? Is itmainly everything other than the goal of salvation (moksha)?Dadashri: There is definitely a goal of liberation after thisGnan (knowledge of the Self). The problem is with the deeplyingrained old habits (latta); they will not leave once theybecome established. They cast a veil over the self and thus makeit difficult for the owner to know that they (the kashaya ofdeceit) indeed exists within. The owner has no clue.The owner is also not aware of the other kashaya ofgreed (lobh) either. A greedy person will never know, ‘I amgreedy.’ Only the kashayas of pride (maan) and anger(krodha) are guileless (bhoda), so one can easily know theirexistence. One cannot identify maya - illusion that veils the Self;this verily is deceit (kapat). He cannot know of greed either.Questioner: So this deceit (kapat) is mainly for theworldly benefits…Dadashri: Deceit (kapat) is very tough; it is the greatestnuisance. Now how can it leave by itself? It will leave if onestops seeking advantage in worldly situations. Such a person isliberated indeed, is he not?Questioner: That verily is what we call awareness(jagruti), do we not?Dadashri: That is not jagruti; I just showed you the wayout of deceit (kapat).Questioner: Awareness is to have an inner demarcationAptavani-9411412Aptavani-9between ‘this is for the worldly life and this is beneficial forspiritual progress towards liberation’, is it not?Dadashri: That is called awareness. But that kind ofawareness will not prevail at all. It is only in the absence ofawareness that deceit (kapat) takes over. Nevertheless, thedeeply ingrained old habit (latta) has to be fractured, does itnot? The habit! The latta (habitual compulsion) to enjoy worldlypleasures!Questioner: Does one not need to turn that habitaround? How can this habit be broken?Dadashri: The compulsive habit (latta) is there for sure.Now one needs to get rid of it; settle with it.Questioner: How?Dadashri: That habit will begin to leave the moment youdecide and say, ‘I do not need anything. I have all the happinessI need.’ That latta will change the moment you decide, ‘I do notwant anything’.Questioner: What all is included in relative worldlybenefits?Dadashri: Everything! One meddles (behaves asChandulal) when he is sitting in a train; he meddles when he issitting in a bus. Everywhere you look, he is meddling.Questioner: What kinds of situations are applicable therefor the mahatmas who have taken Gnan?Dadashri: Every situation. It is exactly the same situationhe has come from (from past life). Everything (karma bondage)has become solid and that is exactly what is bearing fruits(effect) right now. If you remain in your jagruti and do not‘taste’ these fruits or even if you ‘taste’ them but remainseparate as the Self from the non-Self (Chandulal), then youhave succeeded. Those fruits are sweet, are they not? That iswhy one is not able to remain separate. He will taste it (getinvolved as Chandulal), will he not? It is very difficult to riseabove deceit (kapat). Deceit is the only dangerous thing. Thekashayas of anger-pride-greed can be rid of but it is tough toget rid of kapat (deceit).Questioner: So the worldly gains, its sweetness, kapatalways remains with us. So then the difficulty of becoming freefrom it will inevitably remain.Dadashri: Awareness (jagruti) will help. Along with thisawareness, the decision and the nischaya (firm resolve) of, ‘Ido not want anything,’ will help.Questioner: So one has to make the firm resolve(nischaya) of ‘I do not want anything except for moksha(liberation)?’Dadashri: Yes, ‘I do not want anything at all’. ‘I do notwant anything,’ whatever may come along, such a nischaya(resolution) will be necessary.Questioner: In other words, once the decision formoksha is made, the train will get on the right track?Dadashri: The decision for moksha has already comebut along with that the decision of, ‘I do not want this,’ has tocome also, does it not?That is why I have instructed everyone to recite thissentence five times every morning: ‘I do not want anything in thisworld’. The effect of it will then remain for the rest of the day.Questioner: So if we are to examine in every situation asto ‘what he (the relative self) wants and where he is at’, then wecan become free quickly, can we not?Dadashri: Yes, but how will deceit (kapat) leave with ananalysis? There is craftiness and cleverness (chaturai) within, isthere not?Aptavani-9411412Aptavani-9between ‘this is for the worldly life and this is beneficial forspiritual progress towards liberation’, is it not?Dadashri: That is called awareness. But that kind ofawareness will not prevail at all. It is only in the absence ofawareness that deceit (kapat) takes over. Nevertheless, thedeeply ingrained old habit (latta) has to be fractured, does itnot? The habit! The latta (habitual compulsion) to enjoy worldlypleasures!Questioner: Does one not need to turn that habitaround? How can this habit be broken?Dadashri: The compulsive habit (latta) is there for sure.Now one needs to get rid of it; settle with it.Questioner: How?Dadashri: That habit will begin to leave the moment youdecide and say, ‘I do not need anything. I have all the happinessI need.’ That latta will change the moment you decide, ‘I do notwant anything’.Questioner: What all is included in relative worldlybenefits?Dadashri: Everything! One meddles (behaves asChandulal) when he is sitting in a train; he meddles when he issitting in a bus. Everywhere you look, he is meddling.Questioner: What kinds of situations are applicable therefor the mahatmas who have taken Gnan?Dadashri: Every situation. It is exactly the same situationhe has come from (from past life). Everything (karma bondage)has become solid and that is exactly what is bearing fruits(effect) right now. If you remain in your jagruti and do not‘taste’ these fruits or even if you ‘taste’ them but remainseparate as the Self from the non-Self (Chandulal), then youhave succeeded. Those fruits are sweet, are they not? That iswhy one is not able to remain separate. He will taste it (getinvolved as Chandulal), will he not? It is very difficult to riseabove deceit (kapat). Deceit is the only dangerous thing. Thekashayas of anger-pride-greed can be rid of but it is tough toget rid of kapat (deceit).Questioner: So the worldly gains, its sweetness, kapatalways remains with us. So then the difficulty of becoming freefrom it will inevitably remain.Dadashri: Awareness (jagruti) will help. Along with thisawareness, the decision and the nischaya (firm resolve) of, ‘Ido not want anything,’ will help.Questioner: So one has to make the firm resolve(nischaya) of ‘I do not want anything except for moksha(liberation)?’Dadashri: Yes, ‘I do not want anything at all’. ‘I do notwant anything,’ whatever may come along, such a nischaya(resolution) will be necessary.Questioner: In other words, once the decision formoksha is made, the train will get on the right track?Dadashri: The decision for moksha has already comebut along with that the decision of, ‘I do not want this,’ has tocome also, does it not?That is why I have instructed everyone to recite thissentence five times every morning: ‘I do not want anything in thisworld’. The effect of it will then remain for the rest of the day.Questioner: So if we are to examine in every situation asto ‘what he (the relative self) wants and where he is at’, then wecan become free quickly, can we not?Dadashri: Yes, but how will deceit (kapat) leave with ananalysis? There is craftiness and cleverness (chaturai) within, isthere not?Aptavani-9413414Aptavani-9Questioner: What kind of craftiness is it? Can youplease explain this chaturai?Dadashri: There is craftiness and cleverness (chaturai)in deceit. With whomever there is interaction of deceit; one willwin over the other person through craftiness and cleverness. Hewill win over everyone through chaturai; only the Gnani will notfall under this spell. He will be able to get other people underhis control. He employs craftiness with everyone; he knows howto do all that.Questioner: What should an individual who is beingcrafty do in order to become free from it?Dadashri: How will he know this? He will not be able toknow this at all. One cannot escape from his own craftiness.You should not become a victim of that craftiness and cleverness(chaturai).Questioner: Does that mean it is the prakruti (the non-Self complex) that practices craftiness and cleverness?Dadashri: The other person’s prakruti does craftinessand cleverness because of kapat because he wants to engagehis craft of kapat to trap others. But you have to be cautiousif you do not want to be influenced by his kapat.Questioner: How?Dadashri: To begin with you should know how to listenkeeping in mind whether something is beneficial or harmful toyou. Ordinarily people accept sweet words that are harmful tothem and reject bitter one that are for their own benefit.Questioner: But whether the other person is telling mefor my benefit or my detriment…Dadashri: It is more than enough if you understand justthis much. If you are at this level, it is more than enough.Questioner: But after all, benefits or harm is applicableto the worldly life is it not? Should we not recognize whether ithas spiritual or worldly implications?Dadashri: It is always worldly; it is never for the Self, isit? It is always related to the pudgal the non-Self. It is onlywhen that (the importance of the non-Self) moves aside that onecan attain the Self.Questioner: One will not be victim of his craftiness andcleverness (chaturai) if he understands whether it is beneficialor harmful to him.Dadashri: One does understand what is beneficial andwhat is harmful but he does not understand whether craftinessand cleverness (chaturai) is present or not. He is not able toknow because to begin with, he has the habit of ‘tastingsweetness’. The minute someone calls out to him, ‘welcome!Welcome’, he loses all awareness. No matter how much you tell‘us’, ‘welcome…welcome!’ ‘we’ will not become a victim ofthis deceit (kapat).Questioner: There is no worry if there is a nischaya(strong decision) for moksha! Then his words will not affect ortouch us!Dadashri: The nischaya for moksha is there for sure, butthere is a lot of interference (dakhal – interference of becoming‘Chandulal’) in between also, is there not? ‘Keval nij swabhavnu akhand varte Gnan – Only a continuous awareness as theSelf prevails.’ The nischaya is there for sure, but will it not haveto prevail continuously? Moksha prevails, but it will have toprevail constantly, without interruption, will it not? Interruptionswill not do.Questioner: But whether something is beneficial orharmful, after all it falls in the worldly department - the relativedepartment; does it not?Dadashri: Yes, but it is verily the worldly things that oneAptavani-9413414Aptavani-9Questioner: What kind of craftiness is it? Can youplease explain this chaturai?Dadashri: There is craftiness and cleverness (chaturai)in deceit. With whomever there is interaction of deceit; one willwin over the other person through craftiness and cleverness. Hewill win over everyone through chaturai; only the Gnani will notfall under this spell. He will be able to get other people underhis control. He employs craftiness with everyone; he knows howto do all that.Questioner: What should an individual who is beingcrafty do in order to become free from it?Dadashri: How will he know this? He will not be able toknow this at all. One cannot escape from his own craftiness.You should not become a victim of that craftiness and cleverness(chaturai).Questioner: Does that mean it is the prakruti (the non-Self complex) that practices craftiness and cleverness?Dadashri: The other person’s prakruti does craftinessand cleverness because of kapat because he wants to engagehis craft of kapat to trap others. But you have to be cautiousif you do not want to be influenced by his kapat.Questioner: How?Dadashri: To begin with you should know how to listenkeeping in mind whether something is beneficial or harmful toyou. Ordinarily people accept sweet words that are harmful tothem and reject bitter one that are for their own benefit.Questioner: But whether the other person is telling mefor my benefit or my detriment…Dadashri: It is more than enough if you understand justthis much. If you are at this level, it is more than enough.Questioner: But after all, benefits or harm is applicableto the worldly life is it not? Should we not recognize whether ithas spiritual or worldly implications?Dadashri: It is always worldly; it is never for the Self, isit? It is always related to the pudgal the non-Self. It is onlywhen that (the importance of the non-Self) moves aside that onecan attain the Self.Questioner: One will not be victim of his craftiness andcleverness (chaturai) if he understands whether it is beneficialor harmful to him.Dadashri: One does understand what is beneficial andwhat is harmful but he does not understand whether craftinessand cleverness (chaturai) is present or not. He is not able toknow because to begin with, he has the habit of ‘tastingsweetness’. The minute someone calls out to him, ‘welcome!Welcome’, he loses all awareness. No matter how much you tell‘us’, ‘welcome…welcome!’ ‘we’ will not become a victim ofthis deceit (kapat).Questioner: There is no worry if there is a nischaya(strong decision) for moksha! Then his words will not affect ortouch us!Dadashri: The nischaya for moksha is there for sure, butthere is a lot of interference (dakhal – interference of becoming‘Chandulal’) in between also, is there not? ‘Keval nij swabhavnu akhand varte Gnan – Only a continuous awareness as theSelf prevails.’ The nischaya is there for sure, but will it not haveto prevail continuously? Moksha prevails, but it will have toprevail constantly, without interruption, will it not? Interruptionswill not do.Questioner: But whether something is beneficial orharmful, after all it falls in the worldly department - the relativedepartment; does it not?Dadashri: Yes, but it is verily the worldly things that oneAptavani-9415416Aptavani-9needs to let go. There is nothing like that on the path tomoksha. What else? You have to let go of all the harmfulworldly things.One will understand this if he tries to and if he does nothave a habit of ‘tasting sweet things’.Questioner: Now if one is being crafty (chatur), howcan he get rid of his own craftiness and cleverness (chaturai)?Dadashri: He is not able to recognize his craftiness andcleverness himself and he will not believe you even if you wereto tell him that he is being crafty.Questioner: It can be very difficult to follow the path ofmoksha and become free from this fault of deceit (kapat).Dadashri: It is not difficult. You will be able to reachyour goal by maintaining your intent (bhavna) to be rid of thisfault. It will not take long for the one who wants to get rid ofthese faults. It cannot be difficult, can it? Everyone has suchdeceit (kapat). In the current time cycle, where can such deceit(kapat) be absent?Questioner: Kapat is involved in dealing with anotherindividual but when it comes to one’s own prakruti and Atma(the Self), kapat is at work there too, is it not?Dadashri: No, not in that.Questioner: The other person may be being crafty(chaturai), but if he finds ‘sweetness’ in that then is kapat notat play there?Dadashri: No, that is not considered kapat. That poorman is likely to get fooled. He has a habit of ‘tasting sweetness’and that is why he gets fooled.Questioner: Awareness (jagruti) does not remain at thattime, does it?Dadashri: Awareness will not remain at that time. Whensomeone greets you with respect and says, ‘welcome, welcomeChandulal’ the effect of the sound of those words is such! Andif someone tells you, ‘you do not have any sense’ then whateffect will such words have on you?Questioner: This Akram Vignan is such that first it willnot let the effect of those words touch the Self (the soul within).There arises within the awareness as to whom the words,‘senseless’ are being addressed to.Dadashri: Yes. First such awareness arises. Then nothingwill affect You once this awareness arises. The one whobecomes aware as to who is being addressed in, ‘welcome,welcome,’ remains unaffected. (This respectful greeting is beinggiven to Chandulal, the relative self and this is the awareness—jagruti). You have to extract and attain such subtle understanding.Questioner: This is very necessary. The breakdown inthe continuity of this awareness occurs, and is that the reasonthat all such faults take over the control?Dadashri: All these faults cause the interveningbreakdown. That is why the Lord has said, ‘Keval nij swabhavnu akhand varte Gnan—the uninterrupted bliss of the Self isbeing experienced.’ But it does get interrupted. Therefore stopthe habit of tasting sweetness (of respect) and it is unlikely thatanyone will go out of his way to serve you anything bitter(insult). This is because your worldly interaction now is such thatno one will insult you, and if it does happen then know that asyour vyavasthit—scientific circumstantial evidence. The fault isof the sufferer.Questioner: The awareness prevails stronger duringbitter and unpleasant life effects.Dadashri: That is why one becomes deluded at the timeof tasting sweetness; enjoying the pleasant life effects.Aptavani-9415416Aptavani-9needs to let go. There is nothing like that on the path tomoksha. What else? You have to let go of all the harmfulworldly things.One will understand this if he tries to and if he does nothave a habit of ‘tasting sweet things’.Questioner: Now if one is being crafty (chatur), howcan he get rid of his own craftiness and cleverness (chaturai)?Dadashri: He is not able to recognize his craftiness andcleverness himself and he will not believe you even if you wereto tell him that he is being crafty.Questioner: It can be very difficult to follow the path ofmoksha and become free from this fault of deceit (kapat).Dadashri: It is not difficult. You will be able to reachyour goal by maintaining your intent (bhavna) to be rid of thisfault. It will not take long for the one who wants to get rid ofthese faults. It cannot be difficult, can it? Everyone has suchdeceit (kapat). In the current time cycle, where can such deceit(kapat) be absent?Questioner: Kapat is involved in dealing with anotherindividual but when it comes to one’s own prakruti and Atma(the Self), kapat is at work there too, is it not?Dadashri: No, not in that.Questioner: The other person may be being crafty(chaturai), but if he finds ‘sweetness’ in that then is kapat notat play there?Dadashri: No, that is not considered kapat. That poorman is likely to get fooled. He has a habit of ‘tasting sweetness’and that is why he gets fooled.Questioner: Awareness (jagruti) does not remain at thattime, does it?Dadashri: Awareness will not remain at that time. Whensomeone greets you with respect and says, ‘welcome, welcomeChandulal’ the effect of the sound of those words is such! Andif someone tells you, ‘you do not have any sense’ then whateffect will such words have on you?Questioner: This Akram Vignan is such that first it willnot let the effect of those words touch the Self (the soul within).There arises within the awareness as to whom the words,‘senseless’ are being addressed to.Dadashri: Yes. First such awareness arises. Then nothingwill affect You once this awareness arises. The one whobecomes aware as to who is being addressed in, ‘welcome,welcome,’ remains unaffected. (This respectful greeting is beinggiven to Chandulal, the relative self and this is the awareness—jagruti). You have to extract and attain such subtle understanding.Questioner: This is very necessary. The breakdown inthe continuity of this awareness occurs, and is that the reasonthat all such faults take over the control?Dadashri: All these faults cause the interveningbreakdown. That is why the Lord has said, ‘Keval nij swabhavnu akhand varte Gnan—the uninterrupted bliss of the Self isbeing experienced.’ But it does get interrupted. Therefore stopthe habit of tasting sweetness (of respect) and it is unlikely thatanyone will go out of his way to serve you anything bitter(insult). This is because your worldly interaction now is such thatno one will insult you, and if it does happen then know that asyour vyavasthit—scientific circumstantial evidence. The fault isof the sufferer.Questioner: The awareness prevails stronger duringbitter and unpleasant life effects.Dadashri: That is why one becomes deluded at the timeof tasting sweetness; enjoying the pleasant life effects.Aptavani-9417418Aptavani-9Now an uninterrupted awareness of Gnan will beexperienced when there is no objection or interference (withreference to painful or pleasant life effects) of any kind. Thispath is of uninterrupted awareness - akhand jagruti.‘Point-man’ on the path of liberationThe thing here is that there will be many ‘point-men’ (menin charge of switching railway lines) on the spiritual path. So ifwe are on the train that we think will take us to Delhi, will havebeen switched somewhere on the way and we end up at thewrong destination. Therefore adhere to the destination from our– the Gnani’s - point only. There is likely to be so many point-men here.If the train is traveling on the main line i.e. on the righttrack you will not be robbed (of the great spiritual state receivedfrom the Gnani). You will be robbed if the track changes andthereafter there is no telling where you will end up. Therefore donot ever place your trust in a point-man (the one who will throwyou off your path). If you start drinking tea with him (starttrusting him), and continue the pleasantry, he will switch yourtrack.Questioner: Who is considered a point-man on our pathof liberation (moksha)? Dadashri: A point-man is one who says things thatpleases you. If someone talks to you and makes you ‘dizzy’(makes you lose your senses) with his sweet talks, then youshould know that the point-man has arrived. He says things thatplease you and then the mind gets caught up in it and takes over.Therefore, a point-man will switch your train on to the wrongtracks with the same speed, without you being aware of theswitch. Later, if someone asks you, ‘Oh, why are you on thiswrong path?’ You will reply, ‘I can never be on the wrong path!’Questioner: Is that why the Lord has said to remaincontinuously under the shelter of the Gnani?Dadashri: Yes, that is why. Otherwise you will meet apoint-man in every situation who will change your track in notime. On top of that, what will he say? ‘Mine is the RajdhaniExpress; it is the fast track train from Mumbai to Delhi.’ Oh, butyour track has changed! Rajdhani! Who says it is not theRajdhani but if it is running on the main track only then it is the‘Rajdhani Express’ (it will reach your destination fast). If thetrack has changed then where will it take you? You will notreach Delhi.We should exercise great care to ensure that our ‘mainline’ (goal of liberation) is not switched. All these are old habits,are they not? So far we have not got rid of the old habits. Weshould know that they are old habits.Questioner: If a person is very strong and firm in hisnischaya -resolve to remain the Self after Self-realization - thenhis vyavahar (worldly interactions) of the relative self willbecome very beautiful and harmonious, will it not?Dadashri: Vyavahar must become pleasant andharmonious; the nischaya will weaken if it does not. If theworldly interactions do not improve, it would weaken one’sresolve to remain as the Self.Questioner: How does one gauge this? What is thegauge to check whether one is on the wrong track or the rightone?Dadashri: Firstly there arises the pleasure of the ego andthe sweetness of the wrong track and therein he continues tobecome emotional (expresses raag and dwesh; attachment andabhorrence), whereas on the main line, there always prevailsnirakudata - transcendence of pleasure and pain, state beyondeasiness and uneasiness; the bliss of the Self. On the other track,this nirakudata leaves and is replaced by uneasiness whichbecomes evident in one’s thoughts and facial expression. If herides on the wrong track, he will lose the bliss of the Self.Aptavani-9417418Aptavani-9Now an uninterrupted awareness of Gnan will beexperienced when there is no objection or interference (withreference to painful or pleasant life effects) of any kind. Thispath is of uninterrupted awareness - akhand jagruti.‘Point-man’ on the path of liberationThe thing here is that there will be many ‘point-men’ (menin charge of switching railway lines) on the spiritual path. So ifwe are on the train that we think will take us to Delhi, will havebeen switched somewhere on the way and we end up at thewrong destination. Therefore adhere to the destination from our– the Gnani’s - point only. There is likely to be so many point-men here.If the train is traveling on the main line i.e. on the righttrack you will not be robbed (of the great spiritual state receivedfrom the Gnani). You will be robbed if the track changes andthereafter there is no telling where you will end up. Therefore donot ever place your trust in a point-man (the one who will throwyou off your path). If you start drinking tea with him (starttrusting him), and continue the pleasantry, he will switch yourtrack.Questioner: Who is considered a point-man on our pathof liberation (moksha)? Dadashri: A point-man is one who says things thatpleases you. If someone talks to you and makes you ‘dizzy’(makes you lose your senses) with his sweet talks, then youshould know that the point-man has arrived. He says things thatplease you and then the mind gets caught up in it and takes over.Therefore, a point-man will switch your train on to the wrongtracks with the same speed, without you being aware of theswitch. Later, if someone asks you, ‘Oh, why are you on thiswrong path?’ You will reply, ‘I can never be on the wrong path!’Questioner: Is that why the Lord has said to remaincontinuously under the shelter of the Gnani?Dadashri: Yes, that is why. Otherwise you will meet apoint-man in every situation who will change your track in notime. On top of that, what will he say? ‘Mine is the RajdhaniExpress; it is the fast track train from Mumbai to Delhi.’ Oh, butyour track has changed! Rajdhani! Who says it is not theRajdhani but if it is running on the main track only then it is the‘Rajdhani Express’ (it will reach your destination fast). If thetrack has changed then where will it take you? You will notreach Delhi.We should exercise great care to ensure that our ‘mainline’ (goal of liberation) is not switched. All these are old habits,are they not? So far we have not got rid of the old habits. Weshould know that they are old habits.Questioner: If a person is very strong and firm in hisnischaya -resolve to remain the Self after Self-realization - thenhis vyavahar (worldly interactions) of the relative self willbecome very beautiful and harmonious, will it not?Dadashri: Vyavahar must become pleasant andharmonious; the nischaya will weaken if it does not. If theworldly interactions do not improve, it would weaken one’sresolve to remain as the Self.Questioner: How does one gauge this? What is thegauge to check whether one is on the wrong track or the rightone?Dadashri: Firstly there arises the pleasure of the ego andthe sweetness of the wrong track and therein he continues tobecome emotional (expresses raag and dwesh; attachment andabhorrence), whereas on the main line, there always prevailsnirakudata - transcendence of pleasure and pain, state beyondeasiness and uneasiness; the bliss of the Self. On the other track,this nirakudata leaves and is replaced by uneasiness whichbecomes evident in one’s thoughts and facial expression. If herides on the wrong track, he will lose the bliss of the Self.Aptavani-9419420Aptavani-9Dadashri: Samyak (the real and the right; the state of theSelf). I would investigate what is samyak in it. And then I wouldcancel it. After that even if someone tries to instigate it further,he will not get any response. Many people do say, ‘Dada isbhoda (guileless).’ But try me out! (Test me!) Dada is theabsolute Self; He cannot be guileless. How can He ever bebhoda? Would He be guileless? If a Gnani Purush is guilelessthen what is the difference between him and a stupid person?Do you have the ability to analyze this talk? Are you ableto critically appreciate this line of conversation that you areinvolved in?Questioner: One can realize after a lot of experience.Dadashri: The person who tells you things (the one whois instrumental in switching the tracks) would not have anydeceitful aggression (prapanch); he is simply speaking out ofidiocy (unaware of the reality of this universe). If that were tohappen to me, there would be a major problem in satsang,would it not? What is the likelihood of Dada ever believing youif you were to tell me, ‘Dada this is what happened’?Questioner: With what adjustment do you not acceptthings people tell you?Dadashri: I would know right away. It’s value andvalidity; I can understand everything. I would know from themoment he starts talking that he is being partial and is trying tomake me take sides. If the Gnani Purush were to become naïve,then all is lost. He may look guileless (bhoda) and simple. Howcan one who does not have trace of deceit (kapat) be guileless(bhoda)? Where there is guilelessness (bhodpan), there isdeceit (kapat) for sure. Where there is no deceit there is not aniota of bhodpan.Questioner: So does guilelessness (bhodpan) exist onthe foundation of deceit (kapat)?Questioner: When can we say that the mistake has beenfractured?Dadashri: If you understand it in systematic details thenit can be said that the mistake has been fractured. This meansyou understand and know the answers to, ‘how the mistakeoccurred’. What was the beginning of the wrong track? Whathappened initially? What was the underlying reason for it?’ Ifyou unearth the answers to all this from within, then know thatthe mistake has been fractured. You will know what happenedand on what basis it occurred. Where did the mistake find itssupport and where did you become emotional. From what pointdid nirakudata leave? All this can be known.Questioner: In life, when worldly interactions are takingplace, there is no aim or a persistent preference of taking oneway or the other. There is no insistence that we should go thisway or that way in whatever is unfolding in the daily life.Otherwise in nischaya - in matters of the Self - there is nodeviation or slippage.Dadashri: There is always an inevitable slippage innischaya (the state of the Self) once there is slippage invyavahar. It may seem to you that there is no slippage from theSelf. The mind may give you false impressions of, ‘nothing hasbeen disturbed in the nischaya’, but if the relative worldlyinteraction becomes unsteady (being on the wrong track), thenunderstand that nischaya has slipped and become unsteady forsure. Beware of this one critical point!When the track is never switched then it is correct. Noone dare switch it. When one is not so gullible as to beinfluenced by what others say, then it is correct. So many peoplecome and tell me all kinds of things but I remain unmoved. I donot let their talks sway me.Questioner: When you talk about not becoming swayedby anyone, what are you primarily talking about?Aptavani-9419420Aptavani-9Dadashri: Samyak (the real and the right; the state of theSelf). I would investigate what is samyak in it. And then I wouldcancel it. After that even if someone tries to instigate it further,he will not get any response. Many people do say, ‘Dada isbhoda (guileless).’ But try me out! (Test me!) Dada is theabsolute Self; He cannot be guileless. How can He ever bebhoda? Would He be guileless? If a Gnani Purush is guilelessthen what is the difference between him and a stupid person?Do you have the ability to analyze this talk? Are you ableto critically appreciate this line of conversation that you areinvolved in?Questioner: One can realize after a lot of experience.Dadashri: The person who tells you things (the one whois instrumental in switching the tracks) would not have anydeceitful aggression (prapanch); he is simply speaking out ofidiocy (unaware of the reality of this universe). If that were tohappen to me, there would be a major problem in satsang,would it not? What is the likelihood of Dada ever believing youif you were to tell me, ‘Dada this is what happened’?Questioner: With what adjustment do you not acceptthings people tell you?Dadashri: I would know right away. It’s value andvalidity; I can understand everything. I would know from themoment he starts talking that he is being partial and is trying tomake me take sides. If the Gnani Purush were to become naïve,then all is lost. He may look guileless (bhoda) and simple. Howcan one who does not have trace of deceit (kapat) be guileless(bhoda)? Where there is guilelessness (bhodpan), there isdeceit (kapat) for sure. Where there is no deceit there is not aniota of bhodpan.Questioner: So does guilelessness (bhodpan) exist onthe foundation of deceit (kapat)?Questioner: When can we say that the mistake has beenfractured?Dadashri: If you understand it in systematic details thenit can be said that the mistake has been fractured. This meansyou understand and know the answers to, ‘how the mistakeoccurred’. What was the beginning of the wrong track? Whathappened initially? What was the underlying reason for it?’ Ifyou unearth the answers to all this from within, then know thatthe mistake has been fractured. You will know what happenedand on what basis it occurred. Where did the mistake find itssupport and where did you become emotional. From what pointdid nirakudata leave? All this can be known.Questioner: In life, when worldly interactions are takingplace, there is no aim or a persistent preference of taking oneway or the other. There is no insistence that we should go thisway or that way in whatever is unfolding in the daily life.Otherwise in nischaya - in matters of the Self - there is nodeviation or slippage.Dadashri: There is always an inevitable slippage innischaya (the state of the Self) once there is slippage invyavahar. It may seem to you that there is no slippage from theSelf. The mind may give you false impressions of, ‘nothing hasbeen disturbed in the nischaya’, but if the relative worldlyinteraction becomes unsteady (being on the wrong track), thenunderstand that nischaya has slipped and become unsteady forsure. Beware of this one critical point!When the track is never switched then it is correct. Noone dare switch it. When one is not so gullible as to beinfluenced by what others say, then it is correct. So many peoplecome and tell me all kinds of things but I remain unmoved. I donot let their talks sway me.Questioner: When you talk about not becoming swayedby anyone, what are you primarily talking about?Aptavani-9421422Aptavani-9Dadashri: Foolishness prevails on the foundation ofdeceit. When deceit (kapat) leaves foolishness will not remaineither.Questioner: What is the nature of that deceit (kapat)?What kind of deceit is that?Dadashri: It is deceit of all kinds! Deceit means to keepeverything hidden from the Self, to veil the Self. All kinds ofdeceit of taking advantage of someone, to keep one’s thingssecret from others; that is also deceit!Questioner: So what is one trying to hide all this from?Dadashri: One employs deceit to hide things about himor his business from others. If he is talking in confidence with aperson, and someone enters the room, would he not stoptalking?Questioner: Yes, he would.Dadashri: What can be the reason for that?Questioner: Is that considered deceit?Dadashri: Then what else can you call it?Questioner: So where is guilelessness in this?Dadashri: Wherever there is kapat (deceit), there isbound to be bhodpan (guilelessness) also on the other side.Kapat would not arise if one does not have this muchfoolishness. Deceit is a sign of foolishness. Guilelessness existswhere deceit exists. And where there is guilelessness, youshould take it for granted that deceit is there.Questioner: You said that our track should not change.Our track has not changed, so what should be our goal of thistrack?Dadashri: The goal of moksha; liberation, salvation!What other goal is there? That is the main line!Questioner: And if the goal changes then what otherkind of goal would arise?Dadashri: One moves very quickly in the oppositedirection of moksha; it will take no time! And he would feel, ‘Iam indeed on the path of liberation.’Questioner: What kind of a mistake remains there?Dadashri: That verily is this kapat and ‘foolishness’. Canone not distinguish between what is right and what is wrong afterlistening to others? Is one not able to differentiate what is correctand what is incorrect?Questioner: How can one develop understanding ofwhat is correct and what is incorrect?Dadashri: Such understanding will not come until deceitleaves. When whatever I tell you, begins to ‘fit’ (is absorbed),then you are on the right track. We know that you will reach thegoal once this happens.Questioner: What are the signs that one is on the rightpath; on the main line?Dadashri: Deceit should go away.Questioner: Please explain more about this deceit(kapat).Dadashri: Everyone will know for sure ‘there is deceithere and elsewhere’. Guilelessness (bhodpan) also exists there.If someone tells him something and if guilelessness exists withinhim, he will take that information to be true and run with it. Ifsomeone were to tell him, ‘so and so just died’, he will believeit and start crying but he will not stop to inquire who exactlydied. Do not take even the words of your own father as the truthbecause he speaks from his perspective and level ofunderstanding. There is no deceit in that; people just say thingsfrom the lack of correct understanding.Aptavani-9421422Aptavani-9Dadashri: Foolishness prevails on the foundation ofdeceit. When deceit (kapat) leaves foolishness will not remaineither.Questioner: What is the nature of that deceit (kapat)?What kind of deceit is that?Dadashri: It is deceit of all kinds! Deceit means to keepeverything hidden from the Self, to veil the Self. All kinds ofdeceit of taking advantage of someone, to keep one’s thingssecret from others; that is also deceit!Questioner: So what is one trying to hide all this from?Dadashri: One employs deceit to hide things about himor his business from others. If he is talking in confidence with aperson, and someone enters the room, would he not stoptalking?Questioner: Yes, he would.Dadashri: What can be the reason for that?Questioner: Is that considered deceit?Dadashri: Then what else can you call it?Questioner: So where is guilelessness in this?Dadashri: Wherever there is kapat (deceit), there isbound to be bhodpan (guilelessness) also on the other side.Kapat would not arise if one does not have this muchfoolishness. Deceit is a sign of foolishness. Guilelessness existswhere deceit exists. And where there is guilelessness, youshould take it for granted that deceit is there.Questioner: You said that our track should not change.Our track has not changed, so what should be our goal of thistrack?Dadashri: The goal of moksha; liberation, salvation!What other goal is there? That is the main line!Questioner: And if the goal changes then what otherkind of goal would arise?Dadashri: One moves very quickly in the oppositedirection of moksha; it will take no time! And he would feel, ‘Iam indeed on the path of liberation.’Questioner: What kind of a mistake remains there?Dadashri: That verily is this kapat and ‘foolishness’. Canone not distinguish between what is right and what is wrong afterlistening to others? Is one not able to differentiate what is correctand what is incorrect?Questioner: How can one develop understanding ofwhat is correct and what is incorrect?Dadashri: Such understanding will not come until deceitleaves. When whatever I tell you, begins to ‘fit’ (is absorbed),then you are on the right track. We know that you will reach thegoal once this happens.Questioner: What are the signs that one is on the rightpath; on the main line?Dadashri: Deceit should go away.Questioner: Please explain more about this deceit(kapat).Dadashri: Everyone will know for sure ‘there is deceithere and elsewhere’. Guilelessness (bhodpan) also exists there.If someone tells him something and if guilelessness exists withinhim, he will take that information to be true and run with it. Ifsomeone were to tell him, ‘so and so just died’, he will believeit and start crying but he will not stop to inquire who exactlydied. Do not take even the words of your own father as the truthbecause he speaks from his perspective and level ofunderstanding. There is no deceit in that; people just say thingsfrom the lack of correct understanding.Aptavani-9423424Aptavani-9Questioner: Except for the Gnani, does everyone notsay things only according to their own viewpoints?Dadashri: Indeed. It is always through only theirviewpoint. It is all right if that viewpoint is correct. However, itis correct by his understanding only. In these situations, yousimply have to listen, agree, and pass your days! Otherwisenothing is attained, only that part which is true is attained.Questioner: I did not quite understand your statement,‘there you have to listen, agree and pass your days…’Dadashri: You should not ‘obstruct’ (oppose; challengehim) what he tells you. You have to accept and listen as if youbelieve it to be the truth. You have to listen in this manner. Therest is in your hands, is it not? Your focus and basis should beon what is real (samyak); on the right vision and understandingthat I have given you. Just keep an eye on which direction thepointer of samyak is pointing. Your sincerity is limited to theextent of your listening and not beyond that. You should notobstruct him nor create any obstacles for him.Everyone speaks in his or her own language (bhasha;viewpoint or understanding), do they not? Even I will say thatwhatever he says is correct in his own ‘language’. But it wouldnot ‘fit’ - be in concert with my language.Questioner: How is it with your bhasha (inner language)?What is that constant shuddha upayog (pure awareness as theSelf)?Dadashri: That you have never seen or heard before,have you?Questioner: Please tell us something about it…Dadashri: No, it cannot be put in words. It is the matterof experience only. That stage will arrive by itself. Currently foryou there is spiritual insight (sooj) working at the grosssuperficial (sthool) level. The other is at the subtlest(sookshmatam) level. And everyone communicates in his or herown language (bhasha), do they not? You may understand atthe subtlest level and the other person is speaking at the grosslevel. Now how will he understand the subtlest level? He will ofcourse speak at the gross level, will he not?This Gnan that you have heard from me will keep workingfor you. You are listening about the knowledge of the path thatI have taken, and that path will continue working for you. Allyou have to say is, ‘Dada we want to follow your foot steps,’and thereafter I will show you my entire path to you.There is no problem once you are on the main line, isthere? The solution is there even for the one who realizes thatthe train had taken the wrong path. The problem is when onecontinues on a path without knowing where it is leading. Sucha person simply thinks he has made no mistakes.Questioner: And he even believes it!?Dadashri: Yes, and on top of that he protects hismistakes. But it is indeed your own fault to see anyone’s fault.He has to see his own fault. What right does anyone else haveto see his fault? One becomes a judge, without any purpose.Why utter anything before even knowing whether a mistakehas been committed? It is out of self-interest that one saysanything. What is the proof that the mistake is indeed of theother person?Therefore this Vignan; this spiritual science will verilyeradicate all the mistakes. Otherwise any other science cannotget rid of the faults. This kind of an opportunity will not comeagain. Hence it is best to proceed with caution, having beenforewarned.You should not evaluate your own level of spiritualprogress within your mind as it will impede and halt yourAptavani-9423424Aptavani-9Questioner: Except for the Gnani, does everyone notsay things only according to their own viewpoints?Dadashri: Indeed. It is always through only theirviewpoint. It is all right if that viewpoint is correct. However, itis correct by his understanding only. In these situations, yousimply have to listen, agree, and pass your days! Otherwisenothing is attained, only that part which is true is attained.Questioner: I did not quite understand your statement,‘there you have to listen, agree and pass your days…’Dadashri: You should not ‘obstruct’ (oppose; challengehim) what he tells you. You have to accept and listen as if youbelieve it to be the truth. You have to listen in this manner. Therest is in your hands, is it not? Your focus and basis should beon what is real (samyak); on the right vision and understandingthat I have given you. Just keep an eye on which direction thepointer of samyak is pointing. Your sincerity is limited to theextent of your listening and not beyond that. You should notobstruct him nor create any obstacles for him.Everyone speaks in his or her own language (bhasha;viewpoint or understanding), do they not? Even I will say thatwhatever he says is correct in his own ‘language’. But it wouldnot ‘fit’ - be in concert with my language.Questioner: How is it with your bhasha (inner language)?What is that constant shuddha upayog (pure awareness as theSelf)?Dadashri: That you have never seen or heard before,have you?Questioner: Please tell us something about it…Dadashri: No, it cannot be put in words. It is the matterof experience only. That stage will arrive by itself. Currently foryou there is spiritual insight (sooj) working at the grosssuperficial (sthool) level. The other is at the subtlest(sookshmatam) level. And everyone communicates in his or herown language (bhasha), do they not? You may understand atthe subtlest level and the other person is speaking at the grosslevel. Now how will he understand the subtlest level? He will ofcourse speak at the gross level, will he not?This Gnan that you have heard from me will keep workingfor you. You are listening about the knowledge of the path thatI have taken, and that path will continue working for you. Allyou have to say is, ‘Dada we want to follow your foot steps,’and thereafter I will show you my entire path to you.There is no problem once you are on the main line, isthere? The solution is there even for the one who realizes thatthe train had taken the wrong path. The problem is when onecontinues on a path without knowing where it is leading. Sucha person simply thinks he has made no mistakes.Questioner: And he even believes it!?Dadashri: Yes, and on top of that he protects hismistakes. But it is indeed your own fault to see anyone’s fault.He has to see his own fault. What right does anyone else haveto see his fault? One becomes a judge, without any purpose.Why utter anything before even knowing whether a mistakehas been committed? It is out of self-interest that one saysanything. What is the proof that the mistake is indeed of theother person?Therefore this Vignan; this spiritual science will verilyeradicate all the mistakes. Otherwise any other science cannotget rid of the faults. This kind of an opportunity will not comeagain. Hence it is best to proceed with caution, having beenforewarned.You should not evaluate your own level of spiritualprogress within your mind as it will impede and halt yourAptavani-9425426Aptavani-9progress. One should not assess his own spiritual level. It is ofuse if others do this for him.Questioner: What kind of level in the mind are youreferring to?Dadashri: In this very path of liberation, everyone hasdeduced his or her own spiritual level. And that deduction iscompletely wrong; there is absolutely no truth in it. Once aperson makes the assessment of his or her level, they becomestuck there. There is no further spiritual progress.You are all at a stage where it will not take much todeviate from the path and slip off the main track. Amidst suchrampant weaknesses, you need full and thorough understandingin order to progress spiritually towards total enlightenment(purnatva). In all this, first deceit (kapat) must leave.All the energies are wasting away in pursuit of what is notours; in the pursuit of the relative; the non-self.Questioner: And that is the very thing, which is beingcovered up with kapat.Dadashri: Yes, that is the very thing that is covered upagain. Nothing belongs to us; the real Self, yet one takes side ofthe non-Self. Hey you! You have already decided (in GnanVidhi) that nothing is yours, but even then you become partialtowards the non-Self (Chandulal). Then he says, ‘oops, Iforgot.’Questioner: Which is it, does he forget or is he still notfree from taking the side of the relative self?Dadashri: He has not become free from taking the sideof the relative. He will just say he forgot for that moment but itis not easy to become free from being partial.So beware, beware all the time; you need to havetremendous awareness.Questioner: That is correct. Today the resolution hasbeen made to adhere to the path of liberation. However untilone understands with clarity the distinction between the supportingand the obstructing causes of liberation, it seems very difficult tomake this ‘train’ hold a steady course that will end in completeenlightenment.Dadashri: If you use the word difficult, then you will notbe able to achieve anything. Therefore, say ‘Dada you havegiven us such a Vignan – such a spiritual science that indeedthere is no difficulty at all!’‘What do I care?’ (‘Maarey shoo?’)After I gave you this Gnan, did your Atma leave? It nevergoes away on any given day, does it? What is this Atma like?There is no atma in the worldly life, because the Atma - the Selfnever experiences hurt. Whereas people get and feel hurt all thetime, therefore it cannot be the Atma. The Atma does not feelany insults. If you feel insulted, then it cannot be the Atma. Willyou not have to settle the account of your karmic files that arepending? If you walk away with the attitude, ‘What do I care?’does it mean that You have become free? Those files willcontinue the entanglements in their minds, ‘Let him go, he isalways like that’ they will say. Do you think that people will setyou free just because you say, ‘What do I care?’ So becomeagreeable and blend in.Questioner: But Dada everyone nowadays take theapproach of ‘What do I care?’Dadashri: It is very dangerous for one to say, ‘What doI care?’ ‘Maarey shoo?’ ‘What do I care?’, how can anyoneeven make such a statement? These words are very inappropriate.‘What do I care?’ what kind of a person are you to saysomething like this? These words ‘What do I care?’ should noteven exist.Aptavani-9425426Aptavani-9progress. One should not assess his own spiritual level. It is ofuse if others do this for him.Questioner: What kind of level in the mind are youreferring to?Dadashri: In this very path of liberation, everyone hasdeduced his or her own spiritual level. And that deduction iscompletely wrong; there is absolutely no truth in it. Once aperson makes the assessment of his or her level, they becomestuck there. There is no further spiritual progress.You are all at a stage where it will not take much todeviate from the path and slip off the main track. Amidst suchrampant weaknesses, you need full and thorough understandingin order to progress spiritually towards total enlightenment(purnatva). In all this, first deceit (kapat) must leave.All the energies are wasting away in pursuit of what is notours; in the pursuit of the relative; the non-self.Questioner: And that is the very thing, which is beingcovered up with kapat.Dadashri: Yes, that is the very thing that is covered upagain. Nothing belongs to us; the real Self, yet one takes side ofthe non-Self. Hey you! You have already decided (in GnanVidhi) that nothing is yours, but even then you become partialtowards the non-Self (Chandulal). Then he says, ‘oops, Iforgot.’Questioner: Which is it, does he forget or is he still notfree from taking the side of the relative self?Dadashri: He has not become free from taking the sideof the relative. He will just say he forgot for that moment but itis not easy to become free from being partial.So beware, beware all the time; you need to havetremendous awareness.Questioner: That is correct. Today the resolution hasbeen made to adhere to the path of liberation. However untilone understands with clarity the distinction between the supportingand the obstructing causes of liberation, it seems very difficult tomake this ‘train’ hold a steady course that will end in completeenlightenment.Dadashri: If you use the word difficult, then you will notbe able to achieve anything. Therefore, say ‘Dada you havegiven us such a Vignan – such a spiritual science that indeedthere is no difficulty at all!’‘What do I care?’ (‘Maarey shoo?’)After I gave you this Gnan, did your Atma leave? It nevergoes away on any given day, does it? What is this Atma like?There is no atma in the worldly life, because the Atma - the Selfnever experiences hurt. Whereas people get and feel hurt all thetime, therefore it cannot be the Atma. The Atma does not feelany insults. If you feel insulted, then it cannot be the Atma. Willyou not have to settle the account of your karmic files that arepending? If you walk away with the attitude, ‘What do I care?’does it mean that You have become free? Those files willcontinue the entanglements in their minds, ‘Let him go, he isalways like that’ they will say. Do you think that people will setyou free just because you say, ‘What do I care?’ So becomeagreeable and blend in.Questioner: But Dada everyone nowadays take theapproach of ‘What do I care?’Dadashri: It is very dangerous for one to say, ‘What doI care?’ ‘Maarey shoo?’ ‘What do I care?’, how can anyoneeven make such a statement? These words are very inappropriate.‘What do I care?’ what kind of a person are you to saysomething like this? These words ‘What do I care?’ should noteven exist.Aptavani-9427428Aptavani-9‘We’ have never said ‘What do I care?’ Even being aGnani Purush, ‘we’ cannot say that, in any situation. ‘We’cannot say it even when someone comes here under anypredicament or situation.One woman in our extended family had passed away andher son came to give me the news. He told me, ‘I had to comehere to give you the news personally.’ I told him, ‘Son, youinform me now and it is very late in the day, is it not?’ So hetold me, ‘No Dada. You do not have to come home.’ Even soI still went to his home for a few minutes, came home and alsotook a bath afterwards (a normal tradition). So the approach of‘What do I care?’ is not acceptable in the worldly life. Theworldly interactions (vyavahar) must be carried out as worldlyinteractions are meant to be. You are not going to lose your soulby doing so.It is the gravest mistake to say, ‘What do I care?’ Thesewords are never to be found in ‘our’ dictionary at all. Thesewords cannot be uttered in your home, outside or here in thesatsang. ‘What do I care?’ is this something one should evenutter? If one does, that ego will never go away. That egobecomes solid. Then it will never leave. It will not break, ever.People make the statement, ‘what do I care?’ even whenit involves their sister, brother or mother.Questioner: What does this inner intent of ‘What do Icare?’ towards anyone, indicate?Dadashri: Worthlessness! ‘What do I care?’ How cananyone even utter such a statement? You have taken birth intheir home and you say ‘What do I care?’ It is a grave fault. Youmust never say this. Not only can you not say this in your ownhome but you cannot say it elsewhere either. These are all gravefaults.Questioner: What kind of a fault is it?Dadashri: It is not even the correct ‘paper’ so what isthe point of looking for a mistake when the paper is not correctin the first place? We can consider the mistakes and faults if thepaper is correct, but when one says ‘What do I care?’ - thatpaper is not correct; it is wrong, it is one hundred percentwrong!Questioner: You have said, ‘To say, ‘What do I care?’is a violation in the eyes of God as well as nature.’Dadashri: That person is guilty all over. There is nothingelse left for him as far as mistakes and liability is concerned.When his paper is not even worth reading what is the point oflooking for mistakes? When do we consider mistakes? It iswhen one’s paper has any worth. But here the paper isworthless so what is the point in looking for mistakes? Onetakes on the gravest liability when he says, ‘What do I care?’Questioner: How can we get out of the entrenchment ofthe attitude of ‘what do I care?’ that has taken hold form within?Dadashri: ‘What do I care?’ It is the lowest degree thereis and the way to get out of it is to walk back the path that leadyou in that wrong direction; you have to use that same path inorder to come out of it.Questioner: So what did you say we had to do in turningback? What has to be done on the way back?Dadashri: The road that brought you here is the roadthat will take you back. How do I know which way you wentin? You know which path you took. Go back the way you cameand it will go away.Questioner: So what does one do in that?Dadashri: You do pratikraman over and over.Questioner: Does infatuation (aasakti) not decrease bysaying, ‘What do I care?’ Does excessive aasakti not go downby saying this?Aptavani-9427428Aptavani-9‘We’ have never said ‘What do I care?’ Even being aGnani Purush, ‘we’ cannot say that, in any situation. ‘We’cannot say it even when someone comes here under anypredicament or situation.One woman in our extended family had passed away andher son came to give me the news. He told me, ‘I had to comehere to give you the news personally.’ I told him, ‘Son, youinform me now and it is very late in the day, is it not?’ So hetold me, ‘No Dada. You do not have to come home.’ Even soI still went to his home for a few minutes, came home and alsotook a bath afterwards (a normal tradition). So the approach of‘What do I care?’ is not acceptable in the worldly life. Theworldly interactions (vyavahar) must be carried out as worldlyinteractions are meant to be. You are not going to lose your soulby doing so.It is the gravest mistake to say, ‘What do I care?’ Thesewords are never to be found in ‘our’ dictionary at all. Thesewords cannot be uttered in your home, outside or here in thesatsang. ‘What do I care?’ is this something one should evenutter? If one does, that ego will never go away. That egobecomes solid. Then it will never leave. It will not break, ever.People make the statement, ‘what do I care?’ even whenit involves their sister, brother or mother.Questioner: What does this inner intent of ‘What do Icare?’ towards anyone, indicate?Dadashri: Worthlessness! ‘What do I care?’ How cananyone even utter such a statement? You have taken birth intheir home and you say ‘What do I care?’ It is a grave fault. Youmust never say this. Not only can you not say this in your ownhome but you cannot say it elsewhere either. These are all gravefaults.Questioner: What kind of a fault is it?Dadashri: It is not even the correct ‘paper’ so what isthe point of looking for a mistake when the paper is not correctin the first place? We can consider the mistakes and faults if thepaper is correct, but when one says ‘What do I care?’ - thatpaper is not correct; it is wrong, it is one hundred percentwrong!Questioner: You have said, ‘To say, ‘What do I care?’is a violation in the eyes of God as well as nature.’Dadashri: That person is guilty all over. There is nothingelse left for him as far as mistakes and liability is concerned.When his paper is not even worth reading what is the point oflooking for mistakes? When do we consider mistakes? It iswhen one’s paper has any worth. But here the paper isworthless so what is the point in looking for mistakes? Onetakes on the gravest liability when he says, ‘What do I care?’Questioner: How can we get out of the entrenchment ofthe attitude of ‘what do I care?’ that has taken hold form within?Dadashri: ‘What do I care?’ It is the lowest degree thereis and the way to get out of it is to walk back the path that leadyou in that wrong direction; you have to use that same path inorder to come out of it.Questioner: So what did you say we had to do in turningback? What has to be done on the way back?Dadashri: The road that brought you here is the roadthat will take you back. How do I know which way you wentin? You know which path you took. Go back the way you cameand it will go away.Questioner: So what does one do in that?Dadashri: You do pratikraman over and over.Questioner: Does infatuation (aasakti) not decrease bysaying, ‘What do I care?’ Does excessive aasakti not go downby saying this?Aptavani-9429430Aptavani-9Dadashri: Oh, leave alone all talks of lowering infatuation(aasakti), this goes way beyond aasakti and it destroys people.All the ascetics (bavas) have been destroyed by their attitude of‘What is it to me?’ ‘What do I care?’ ‘What is it to me?’ Youcan never say this.‘What do I care?’ means nispruha – to be withoutinclination. You either become spruhi (with inclination) orbecome like the Gnani Purush, who is nispruhi – free frominclination where the body is concerned - but has spruha -complete inclination for the Self. So become saspruhi-nispruhi,meaning inclined towards the Self and disinclined towards thenon-Self. So remain as one or the other. But do not becomecompletely disinclined (nispruha) without realizing the Self,otherwise you will become like a stone. You cannot say, ‘Whatdo I care?’To say ‘what do I care?’ is the entrapment of the intellect(buddhi) What will the intellect not trap one in? And when onesays, ‘what do I care?’ - it is the intellect that traps him intotaking that approach. Nevertheless, for some people, thisattitude has become natural and a spontaneous (sahaj) trait andwhen they say ‘what do I care?’ they speak without theirintellect, without thinking. If they speak through the medium oftheir intellect, then it is not a spontaneous, (sahaj) statement.So what should the person for whom this has become aspontaneous trait do? He still has to get out of it. That is why‘we’ change the main line here. Thereafter ‘we’ show him whichline he should remain on. The other line is useless; it wascompletely wrong and so you have to get rid of it. ‘We’ put inanother ‘railway line’ for you so you can keep your train on thatline.Questioner: We have to remain very clear and sure fromwithin, that we do not miss this path of liberation.Dadashri: Do not lose your path. And it is not possibleto deliberately lose that path, it only happens unknowingly. Noone will deliberately lose the path of liberation.The deception that deludes and throws oneoff the track of liberationIf you get into an argument with someone in the presenceof a third person, when you meet that third person again, wouldyou not ask him what the other person you argued with wassaying about you after you left?Questioner: Yes, that happens. What is it called?Dadashri: Such a thing will completely throw you off thepath of liberation. ‘What was he saying about me?’ if such needto know remains within, it can ruin your path of liberation.Questioner: How come? Why is that so?Dadashri: It is a very treacherous and an awfully wrongpath.Questioner: But in that situation which element (tattva)is playing a role?Dadashri: Why do you have to ask such a question? Isone a thief (did something wrong) that he needs to ask, ‘whathe was talking about me?’ He has no faith in himself that is whyhe has to ask someone, ‘what was he saying about me, after Ileft?’Do I ever keep a watch behind me asking, ‘what was hesaying behind my back?’ I do not have any problems regardlessof what he says about me. I am unaffected even if he were tosay it right to my face. A person asks this because there iskapat (deceit) within.Questioner: Is that also called kapat (deceit)?Dadashri: Yes, That is why he is asking the third person,‘what was he saying after I left?’Aptavani-9429430Aptavani-9Dadashri: Oh, leave alone all talks of lowering infatuation(aasakti), this goes way beyond aasakti and it destroys people.All the ascetics (bavas) have been destroyed by their attitude of‘What is it to me?’ ‘What do I care?’ ‘What is it to me?’ Youcan never say this.‘What do I care?’ means nispruha – to be withoutinclination. You either become spruhi (with inclination) orbecome like the Gnani Purush, who is nispruhi – free frominclination where the body is concerned - but has spruha -complete inclination for the Self. So become saspruhi-nispruhi,meaning inclined towards the Self and disinclined towards thenon-Self. So remain as one or the other. But do not becomecompletely disinclined (nispruha) without realizing the Self,otherwise you will become like a stone. You cannot say, ‘Whatdo I care?’To say ‘what do I care?’ is the entrapment of the intellect(buddhi) What will the intellect not trap one in? And when onesays, ‘what do I care?’ - it is the intellect that traps him intotaking that approach. Nevertheless, for some people, thisattitude has become natural and a spontaneous (sahaj) trait andwhen they say ‘what do I care?’ they speak without theirintellect, without thinking. If they speak through the medium oftheir intellect, then it is not a spontaneous, (sahaj) statement.So what should the person for whom this has become aspontaneous trait do? He still has to get out of it. That is why‘we’ change the main line here. Thereafter ‘we’ show him whichline he should remain on. The other line is useless; it wascompletely wrong and so you have to get rid of it. ‘We’ put inanother ‘railway line’ for you so you can keep your train on thatline.Questioner: We have to remain very clear and sure fromwithin, that we do not miss this path of liberation.Dadashri: Do not lose your path. And it is not possibleto deliberately lose that path, it only happens unknowingly. Noone will deliberately lose the path of liberation.The deception that deludes and throws oneoff the track of liberationIf you get into an argument with someone in the presenceof a third person, when you meet that third person again, wouldyou not ask him what the other person you argued with wassaying about you after you left?Questioner: Yes, that happens. What is it called?Dadashri: Such a thing will completely throw you off thepath of liberation. ‘What was he saying about me?’ if such needto know remains within, it can ruin your path of liberation.Questioner: How come? Why is that so?Dadashri: It is a very treacherous and an awfully wrongpath.Questioner: But in that situation which element (tattva)is playing a role?Dadashri: Why do you have to ask such a question? Isone a thief (did something wrong) that he needs to ask, ‘whathe was talking about me?’ He has no faith in himself that is whyhe has to ask someone, ‘what was he saying about me, after Ileft?’Do I ever keep a watch behind me asking, ‘what was hesaying behind my back?’ I do not have any problems regardlessof what he says about me. I am unaffected even if he were tosay it right to my face. A person asks this because there iskapat (deceit) within.Questioner: Is that also called kapat (deceit)?Dadashri: Yes, That is why he is asking the third person,‘what was he saying after I left?’Aptavani-9431432Aptavani-9Questioner: Or is it called the ego?Dadashri: How can you say it is the ego? It is all doneto hide things about one’s self. The one who does not haveanything to hide does not care about what the world says abouthim. Do you think such a person goes around asking, ‘whatwere they saying about me?’ Say whatever you have to sayabout ‘us’, say it in ‘our’ presence. ‘We’ would worry only if‘we’ had something to hide, would ‘we’ not?Why not say it in ‘our’ presence? Therefore ‘we’ do notinquire to see what people might be saying behind ‘our’ back.People can create whatever types of ‘echoes’ they want to (saywhatever they want to). The poor man is saying so from his ownunderstanding. Does he understand all this? All he knows is howto eat, and even then he makes a mess while eating!Questioner: Indeed, when you explain with such clarity,that this is a huge stumbling block, then we understand.Dadashri: You should make yourself (your relative self)such that nothing anyone says behind your back, no matter howhurtful, will affect you even in the slightest from within.Arey! Are you aware that people even eavesdrop onconversations too! What kind of worthless people are these? Ifothers talk about you, you must be at fault somewhere, wouldyou not? If someone is talking about you, it is because there maybe some fault in you, is that not so? Otherwise, who is there toblame you? And how unworthy of you to listen in on that whichis not meant for your ears! If someone were to see youeavesdropping, how terrible would that person feel? It is aterrible fault.Let the whole world talk if they want to. Many people tellme, ‘Dada, this is what they were saying about you.’ I tell them,‘That is fine. They are saying good things.’ Then they tell me,‘They are also printing it in the newspapers.’ I tell them, ‘Somuch the better if they print it in the newspaper. On thecontrary, at least people will get to know this Dada now, willthey not?’ I would be concerned and have fear only if the faultwere to exist within me. So let the world bray; what effect canit have on the one who is strong?Questioner: How is it for the one who has made aresolute decision (nischaya) never to deviate from this path?Dadashri: That nischaya (resolution) has been made,but along with this he also has a desire for a worldly goal, doesone not? That is a fault; that is one fault. There still lie many suchfaults within. One will need to get rid of all these faults, right?Therefore, you should not care about what others saybehind your back. Otherwise it confirms that you are at fault.Why did you make the mistake of listening secretly? It isbecause you are the guilty one, is that not so? Will you not haveto understand this? How long can you go on like this? What doyou think about all this? Here one wants liberation but at thesame time, he continues being the way he was in his worldly life.How can the two exist simultaneously?Therefore, is it not critical to understand this point too?You can never predict how life will unfold in front of you,however if you have such weaknesses within, should they not bedestroyed?What can happen when forces that destroy your goal,arise? Do you know what a tiniest mistake that you cannotdetect can do? It can completely delude you. Once deluded,what huge mistakes one commits! Then the raging ego will takeover.Therefore, one should not try to listen in on someone’sprivate conversation with the intent of knowing ‘What are theysaying about me?’ And why the interest in this?! It is becauseof one’s own deceit (kapat). Deceit will never help you; notAptavani-9431432Aptavani-9Questioner: Or is it called the ego?Dadashri: How can you say it is the ego? It is all doneto hide things about one’s self. The one who does not haveanything to hide does not care about what the world says abouthim. Do you think such a person goes around asking, ‘whatwere they saying about me?’ Say whatever you have to sayabout ‘us’, say it in ‘our’ presence. ‘We’ would worry only if‘we’ had something to hide, would ‘we’ not?Why not say it in ‘our’ presence? Therefore ‘we’ do notinquire to see what people might be saying behind ‘our’ back.People can create whatever types of ‘echoes’ they want to (saywhatever they want to). The poor man is saying so from his ownunderstanding. Does he understand all this? All he knows is howto eat, and even then he makes a mess while eating!Questioner: Indeed, when you explain with such clarity,that this is a huge stumbling block, then we understand.Dadashri: You should make yourself (your relative self)such that nothing anyone says behind your back, no matter howhurtful, will affect you even in the slightest from within.Arey! Are you aware that people even eavesdrop onconversations too! What kind of worthless people are these? Ifothers talk about you, you must be at fault somewhere, wouldyou not? If someone is talking about you, it is because there maybe some fault in you, is that not so? Otherwise, who is there toblame you? And how unworthy of you to listen in on that whichis not meant for your ears! If someone were to see youeavesdropping, how terrible would that person feel? It is aterrible fault.Let the whole world talk if they want to. Many people tellme, ‘Dada, this is what they were saying about you.’ I tell them,‘That is fine. They are saying good things.’ Then they tell me,‘They are also printing it in the newspapers.’ I tell them, ‘Somuch the better if they print it in the newspaper. On thecontrary, at least people will get to know this Dada now, willthey not?’ I would be concerned and have fear only if the faultwere to exist within me. So let the world bray; what effect canit have on the one who is strong?Questioner: How is it for the one who has made aresolute decision (nischaya) never to deviate from this path?Dadashri: That nischaya (resolution) has been made,but along with this he also has a desire for a worldly goal, doesone not? That is a fault; that is one fault. There still lie many suchfaults within. One will need to get rid of all these faults, right?Therefore, you should not care about what others saybehind your back. Otherwise it confirms that you are at fault.Why did you make the mistake of listening secretly? It isbecause you are the guilty one, is that not so? Will you not haveto understand this? How long can you go on like this? What doyou think about all this? Here one wants liberation but at thesame time, he continues being the way he was in his worldly life.How can the two exist simultaneously?Therefore, is it not critical to understand this point too?You can never predict how life will unfold in front of you,however if you have such weaknesses within, should they not bedestroyed?What can happen when forces that destroy your goal,arise? Do you know what a tiniest mistake that you cannotdetect can do? It can completely delude you. Once deluded,what huge mistakes one commits! Then the raging ego will takeover.Therefore, one should not try to listen in on someone’sprivate conversation with the intent of knowing ‘What are theysaying about me?’ And why the interest in this?! It is becauseof one’s own deceit (kapat). Deceit will never help you; notAptavani-9433434Aptavani-9even a little. And if someone brings you some talk that he hasheard about you, that person becomes close and dear to you.Questioner: What can we say about the state of theperson who brings such information to us?Dadashri: You should not let him touch (affect) You atall.Questioner: No, I do not mean that. Just as we say theone who listens secretly has kapat in him, what do we call theperson who brings us such talks?Dadashri: The messenger is interested in creating a riftbetween the two parties. He is deeply rooted in the pleasure thiscreates for him.Questioner: That verily is his kapat (deceit) too, is itnot?Dadashri: Yes, it is all kapat too! He is searching for acertain pleasure in it. He has some kind of interest in it.Questioner: Is there kapat involved where one islooking for pleasure?Dadashri: Then what else would be there? One just hasto ‘smell’ it! All he needs is to get a whiff of it. He will say tohimself, ‘I have to tell him, I have to tell him about the otherperson.’ Such is this whiff!Questioner: What is the vision (drashti) of the one whois walking on the path of liberation (moksha-marg)? What is hisconstant understanding?Dadashri: You will not achieve anything by me telling youall that. One has to know about one’s own deceitful intent(kapat bhaav) and however much he becomes aware of hisdeceitfulness; that much will leave. Otherwise a great deal stillremains within him and that is what he is not aware of. What iskapat bhaav (deceitful intent)? If the owner were aware of itsexistence within, then he would have got rid of it a long time ago.Therefore, beware, beware, beware!If you listen to any talk about others, it ruins your mind.What is more, when you hear talks about you from someoneelse, it sounds sweet to you. Everyone has this disease however,there are many who do not wish to know. If one day someonecomes to tell one, he will listen for a while. He likes it becausehis wish is being fulfilled, is it not? He heard it from somewhereand brought it here! Now the person who brings the news, doesnot know the grave consequences of what he does. He is simplyabsorbed in the pleasure of it. Sooner or later you will have tounderstand all this, will you not? And what will the middle mando? Sometimes he may give misinformation, what kind of effectwill this have on your mind? It will ruin your mind; conflicts willarise creating rifts which continue to harm you. Rather than this,what if one simply rejects this ‘system’ of eavesdropping?Would it not be good to uproot it completely? What is wrongin not having such a “business” - in not having that “item”altogether?A husband will ask, ‘what was my wife saying?’ and thewife will ask, ‘what was my husband saying?’ Why on earth dothey want to know? It’s because they are both at fault, are theynot? Will they have the desire to know if they were faultless?Why such spruha (inclination and interest) for this? Thisis the greatest food for the worldly people. This is called‘holiday’ (Dadashri’s term for languishing in meaningless andharmful pleasures)! One must not have such a habit here—onthe path of liberation.Questioner: But Dada, what should one do when he hasto be deceitful out of fear of someone?Dadashri: You must not employ deceit out of fear. Whyshould you fear anything? People who steal have to fear, whyshould you? Who would experience fear, one who is guilty orAptavani-9433434Aptavani-9even a little. And if someone brings you some talk that he hasheard about you, that person becomes close and dear to you.Questioner: What can we say about the state of theperson who brings such information to us?Dadashri: You should not let him touch (affect) You atall.Questioner: No, I do not mean that. Just as we say theone who listens secretly has kapat in him, what do we call theperson who brings us such talks?Dadashri: The messenger is interested in creating a riftbetween the two parties. He is deeply rooted in the pleasure thiscreates for him.Questioner: That verily is his kapat (deceit) too, is itnot?Dadashri: Yes, it is all kapat too! He is searching for acertain pleasure in it. He has some kind of interest in it.Questioner: Is there kapat involved where one islooking for pleasure?Dadashri: Then what else would be there? One just hasto ‘smell’ it! All he needs is to get a whiff of it. He will say tohimself, ‘I have to tell him, I have to tell him about the otherperson.’ Such is this whiff!Questioner: What is the vision (drashti) of the one whois walking on the path of liberation (moksha-marg)? What is hisconstant understanding?Dadashri: You will not achieve anything by me telling youall that. One has to know about one’s own deceitful intent(kapat bhaav) and however much he becomes aware of hisdeceitfulness; that much will leave. Otherwise a great deal stillremains within him and that is what he is not aware of. What iskapat bhaav (deceitful intent)? If the owner were aware of itsexistence within, then he would have got rid of it a long time ago.Therefore, beware, beware, beware!If you listen to any talk about others, it ruins your mind.What is more, when you hear talks about you from someoneelse, it sounds sweet to you. Everyone has this disease however,there are many who do not wish to know. If one day someonecomes to tell one, he will listen for a while. He likes it becausehis wish is being fulfilled, is it not? He heard it from somewhereand brought it here! Now the person who brings the news, doesnot know the grave consequences of what he does. He is simplyabsorbed in the pleasure of it. Sooner or later you will have tounderstand all this, will you not? And what will the middle mando? Sometimes he may give misinformation, what kind of effectwill this have on your mind? It will ruin your mind; conflicts willarise creating rifts which continue to harm you. Rather than this,what if one simply rejects this ‘system’ of eavesdropping?Would it not be good to uproot it completely? What is wrongin not having such a “business” - in not having that “item”altogether?A husband will ask, ‘what was my wife saying?’ and thewife will ask, ‘what was my husband saying?’ Why on earth dothey want to know? It’s because they are both at fault, are theynot? Will they have the desire to know if they were faultless?Why such spruha (inclination and interest) for this? Thisis the greatest food for the worldly people. This is called‘holiday’ (Dadashri’s term for languishing in meaningless andharmful pleasures)! One must not have such a habit here—onthe path of liberation.Questioner: But Dada, what should one do when he hasto be deceitful out of fear of someone?Dadashri: You must not employ deceit out of fear. Whyshould you fear anything? People who steal have to fear, whyshould you? Who would experience fear, one who is guilty orAptavani-9435436Aptavani-9who is innocent? One feels fear because of guilt. Why notbecome free of all guilt?Questioner: All the puzzles will be solved if I canresolutely adhere to the goal of liberation in which I have noother desires and if I can clearly understand the obstructingcauses on the path of liberation, then all conflicts will vanish andit becomes very easy.Dadashri: Even the resolution of ‘I desire only liberationand nothing else,’ is more than enough. If that becomes a reality,then the task is accomplished, is it not? But people still haveexpectations like, ‘It will be nice if so and so says nice thingsabout me’ whereas the real traveler on the path of liberation isdesirous of knowing only the truth, desirous for only moksha.Such a one does not interfere in any matter whatsoever.The belief of ‘I know’ is spiritual suicideQuestioner: Can one say that this attitude and belief of‘I know, I understand’, is the greatest obstruction in the path ofmoksha?Dadashri: Yes, it is a very grave danger and it leads toone’s spiritual suicide (aapghati kaaran).Questioner: Please explain some more. If a personbecomes free of this belief, what kind of attribute will he have?And what kind of attributes will one have when he is filled withthis grave mistake, and how can he maintain awareness againstsuch a mistake?Dadashri: Small children have a healthy fear of adults. Achild experiences fear because of the heat of the intellect of theadult. So what should the adult do? The adult should becomelike a child; just like a child with a limited understanding. Youhave to interact with children by becoming like a child. You haveto come down to the level of the child and then the child willplay with you. Even a year and half-old child will play with ‘us’,as if we were of the same age. Should we not be able to seesome kind of result, at least? Think about this and one day youwill be able to understand. Once it comes into your understandingthen you will be able to find it. And one needs to have animpartial approach - not take sides of Chandulal (the relativeself). This ability to see from the viewpoint of the child may bedifficult for you due to a deficiency of keen internal awareness(jagruti), but it will come to you eventually.All negative worldly interactions (vyavahar) occur becauseof ‘this’ mistake. Interactions, which are labeled wrong orinappropriate, are due to ‘this’ mistake. The main mistake is themistake of having the belief ‘I know’. This, ‘I know’ is a verygrave fundamental mistake. Consequently, all other mistakesfollow. All other mistakes arise from this main mistake.Obstinacy (aadayee) persists due to this mistake only. Otherwise,one would be simple and straight. It is easy to be simple andaccepting of Dada. Here, with Dada, you are in harmony. Doesthat require any effort (purusharth) on your part? You need tohave the same kind of harmony with a person with whom youdo not get along. That is your purusharth.The disease of ‘I know something’ exists within everyperson. This Gnan increases along side this intoxication (keyf) of‘I know’. The intoxication is the obstruction (antaray). If thisobstruction of this keyf is not there, then the Gnan would fit verynicely and will grow very beautifully.Questioner: That intoxication arises many times evenwhen we do not want it.Dadashri: Yes that will happen; it will happen naturally.Questioner: How can that intoxication come to an end?Dadashri: You should not let it arise in the first place. Itwill not stop once it starts; it will not go away. Therefore, youmust not let it arise.Aptavani-9435436Aptavani-9who is innocent? One feels fear because of guilt. Why notbecome free of all guilt?Questioner: All the puzzles will be solved if I canresolutely adhere to the goal of liberation in which I have noother desires and if I can clearly understand the obstructingcauses on the path of liberation, then all conflicts will vanish andit becomes very easy.Dadashri: Even the resolution of ‘I desire only liberationand nothing else,’ is more than enough. If that becomes a reality,then the task is accomplished, is it not? But people still haveexpectations like, ‘It will be nice if so and so says nice thingsabout me’ whereas the real traveler on the path of liberation isdesirous of knowing only the truth, desirous for only moksha.Such a one does not interfere in any matter whatsoever.The belief of ‘I know’ is spiritual suicideQuestioner: Can one say that this attitude and belief of‘I know, I understand’, is the greatest obstruction in the path ofmoksha?Dadashri: Yes, it is a very grave danger and it leads toone’s spiritual suicide (aapghati kaaran).Questioner: Please explain some more. If a personbecomes free of this belief, what kind of attribute will he have?And what kind of attributes will one have when he is filled withthis grave mistake, and how can he maintain awareness againstsuch a mistake?Dadashri: Small children have a healthy fear of adults. Achild experiences fear because of the heat of the intellect of theadult. So what should the adult do? The adult should becomelike a child; just like a child with a limited understanding. Youhave to interact with children by becoming like a child. You haveto come down to the level of the child and then the child willplay with you. Even a year and half-old child will play with ‘us’,as if we were of the same age. Should we not be able to seesome kind of result, at least? Think about this and one day youwill be able to understand. Once it comes into your understandingthen you will be able to find it. And one needs to have animpartial approach - not take sides of Chandulal (the relativeself). This ability to see from the viewpoint of the child may bedifficult for you due to a deficiency of keen internal awareness(jagruti), but it will come to you eventually.All negative worldly interactions (vyavahar) occur becauseof ‘this’ mistake. Interactions, which are labeled wrong orinappropriate, are due to ‘this’ mistake. The main mistake is themistake of having the belief ‘I know’. This, ‘I know’ is a verygrave fundamental mistake. Consequently, all other mistakesfollow. All other mistakes arise from this main mistake.Obstinacy (aadayee) persists due to this mistake only. Otherwise,one would be simple and straight. It is easy to be simple andaccepting of Dada. Here, with Dada, you are in harmony. Doesthat require any effort (purusharth) on your part? You need tohave the same kind of harmony with a person with whom youdo not get along. That is your purusharth.The disease of ‘I know something’ exists within everyperson. This Gnan increases along side this intoxication (keyf) of‘I know’. The intoxication is the obstruction (antaray). If thisobstruction of this keyf is not there, then the Gnan would fit verynicely and will grow very beautifully.Questioner: That intoxication arises many times evenwhen we do not want it.Dadashri: Yes that will happen; it will happen naturally.Questioner: How can that intoxication come to an end?Dadashri: You should not let it arise in the first place. Itwill not stop once it starts; it will not go away. Therefore, youmust not let it arise.Aptavani-9437438Aptavani-9Questioner: But Dadaji, we are talking about intoxication,which is subtle (sookshma). It is not ordinarily visible.Dadashri: Everything is subtle. The owner too isunaware of it.Questioner: So how is it possible to prevent it fromarising?Dadashri: What do you do in order to prevent thekashaya of anger, pride, deceit and greed from arising? Youhave to keep awareness that prevents them from arising.Questioner: How can I know that the intoxication (keyf)has not arisen?Dadashri: Your face will look attractive. Such a personwill look very attractive. Otherwise, everyone looks unattractive.Alas, how is it possible not to know? Can you not tell whethera bunch of spinach is fresh or two days old? It is the same inthis case. There is nothing subtle about this, is there? You cantell right away by looking at it from the surface. Everyone hasthe intoxication (keyf) of ‘I know,’ to a greater or a lesserdegree. Only few people become free from it; these people haveunderstood the facts. Beauty (laavanya) will not radiate in thepresence of intoxication. It is because of the unawareness(ajagruti) that this intoxication takes place. It will not happen ifawareness is present. Wrong things arise out of unawareness(ajagruti) but not so with awareness.Questioner: Dada what kind of awareness should onemaintain when such a mistake (dosh) arises?Dadashri: It will not arise in the presence of strongawareness (jagruti). This is not awareness at all. If awarenessis present, the sapling of intoxication (keyf) of ‘I know’ willnever grow. This ‘plant’ of intoxication has sprouted after Gnan.These very plants have grown after Gnan. All those old ‘plants’were destroyed when ‘we’ gave you this Gnan, but this new‘plant’ has sprouted since then. This would not occur in thepresence of awareness. Everything has occurred because ofunawareness (ajagruti). There are truckloads and truckloads ofunawareness and not just unawareness related to one or twomistakes. Such intoxication will crop up where there istremendous ajagruti at a very gross and superficial level;otherwise it would never arise, how can it?Questioner: In this matter, what kind of things should webe aware of?Dadashri: About everything, you must make sure thatnothing sprouts.Questioner: So what kinds of things are included in that?Dadashri: Do you mean why does it arise in the firstplace? The fact that it sprouts is unawareness (ajagruti) itself.The awareness lacks by that much. Why should it arise? Whydoes awareness arise when kashaya occur? Your awarenesssurfaces even when the other person is doing kashaya. Thisintoxication (keyf) of ‘I know’ is more treacherous thankashaya. It is suicidal. It will destroy you. A person will say, ‘Iknow, but am not able to do anything.’ Intoxication of havingknowledge?! In the ignorant ‘Gnan-less’ state, there is alwaysthe intoxication of the ego of ‘I know’. But here if intoxicationarises after attaining the knowledge of the Self, then how wrongan understanding is that? The intoxication of having Gnan?!Questioner: Dadaji, kashaya occur because ofcircumstances. When the kashaya arises, so does the awarenessagainst it. It is not something that remains constantly. Whereasthis intoxication of ‘I know’ - is it something that is constantlythere within?Dadashri: It just keeps growing. You even keep wateringit; it is also being watered constantly. There is unawareness(ajagruti) day and night. That is what I call suicidal! Knowing(janyoo) is that when all kinds of intoxications leave.Aptavani-9437438Aptavani-9Questioner: But Dadaji, we are talking about intoxication,which is subtle (sookshma). It is not ordinarily visible.Dadashri: Everything is subtle. The owner too isunaware of it.Questioner: So how is it possible to prevent it fromarising?Dadashri: What do you do in order to prevent thekashaya of anger, pride, deceit and greed from arising? Youhave to keep awareness that prevents them from arising.Questioner: How can I know that the intoxication (keyf)has not arisen?Dadashri: Your face will look attractive. Such a personwill look very attractive. Otherwise, everyone looks unattractive.Alas, how is it possible not to know? Can you not tell whethera bunch of spinach is fresh or two days old? It is the same inthis case. There is nothing subtle about this, is there? You cantell right away by looking at it from the surface. Everyone hasthe intoxication (keyf) of ‘I know,’ to a greater or a lesserdegree. Only few people become free from it; these people haveunderstood the facts. Beauty (laavanya) will not radiate in thepresence of intoxication. It is because of the unawareness(ajagruti) that this intoxication takes place. It will not happen ifawareness is present. Wrong things arise out of unawareness(ajagruti) but not so with awareness.Questioner: Dada what kind of awareness should onemaintain when such a mistake (dosh) arises?Dadashri: It will not arise in the presence of strongawareness (jagruti). This is not awareness at all. If awarenessis present, the sapling of intoxication (keyf) of ‘I know’ willnever grow. This ‘plant’ of intoxication has sprouted after Gnan.These very plants have grown after Gnan. All those old ‘plants’were destroyed when ‘we’ gave you this Gnan, but this new‘plant’ has sprouted since then. This would not occur in thepresence of awareness. Everything has occurred because ofunawareness (ajagruti). There are truckloads and truckloads ofunawareness and not just unawareness related to one or twomistakes. Such intoxication will crop up where there istremendous ajagruti at a very gross and superficial level;otherwise it would never arise, how can it?Questioner: In this matter, what kind of things should webe aware of?Dadashri: About everything, you must make sure thatnothing sprouts.Questioner: So what kinds of things are included in that?Dadashri: Do you mean why does it arise in the firstplace? The fact that it sprouts is unawareness (ajagruti) itself.The awareness lacks by that much. Why should it arise? Whydoes awareness arise when kashaya occur? Your awarenesssurfaces even when the other person is doing kashaya. Thisintoxication (keyf) of ‘I know’ is more treacherous thankashaya. It is suicidal. It will destroy you. A person will say, ‘Iknow, but am not able to do anything.’ Intoxication of havingknowledge?! In the ignorant ‘Gnan-less’ state, there is alwaysthe intoxication of the ego of ‘I know’. But here if intoxicationarises after attaining the knowledge of the Self, then how wrongan understanding is that? The intoxication of having Gnan?!Questioner: Dadaji, kashaya occur because ofcircumstances. When the kashaya arises, so does the awarenessagainst it. It is not something that remains constantly. Whereasthis intoxication of ‘I know’ - is it something that is constantlythere within?Dadashri: It just keeps growing. You even keep wateringit; it is also being watered constantly. There is unawareness(ajagruti) day and night. That is what I call suicidal! Knowing(janyoo) is that when all kinds of intoxications leave.Aptavani-9439440Aptavani-9Questioner: If I am talking about Dadaji’s Gnan withsomeone, to begin with, in my mind there is the feeling of, ‘Iknow’.Dadashri: Yes, that verily is this disease.Questioner: So how should I talk to people, Dadaji?Dadashri: But those talks will not have any substanceand competence (barkat). They will not be fruitful. How will itfit the other person? ‘I know’ is a grave disease!That is why ‘we’ say, that in conversing with anyone, weapply a counter-pulley to come down to the level of thequestioner. ‘We’ do not have the disease of ‘I know’, so it iseasily applied. ‘We’ do not have that disease at all. ‘We’ arefree from all such diseases. By sitting near ‘us’, all such diseasesin you will go away. Keep asking me things and get your workdone. It is not going to do you much good if you just sit here.For that matter even this tube light just sits with me, does it not?When a conflict occurs with someone, talking to him withthe intoxication of ‘I know’ in the mind makes a mess ofeverything. You will not be able to maintain the right level! The‘level’ will not come!Questioner: Dadaji, the awareness should be such thatthe moment a wrong thought arises, it would be caughtimmediately; it would be caught the second it arises.Dadashri: Yes, it is enough if it can be caught. It must becaught the moment it sprouts. That is why ‘we’ tell you todestroy it the moment it sprouts, the moment you see anotherpart growing, destroy it. But how can this be possible withoutawareness (jagruti)? And tremendous awareness is needed.How can one even have that much expectation? Therefore, youcannot expect everything.Therefore, tackle with a solution. If someone comes andtells you ‘your knowledge is very deep and profound’, knowinstantly that this is the place where the disease is going to grow.That is the direct cause of the disease! Become very alert there!Did you ever experience sweetness in this matter before?The day the sweetness takes hold within, is the day this diseasewill arise. Then if the sweetness is experienced again in it, it willsprout long shoots, just like the shoots on the mango tree. Itreaches a certain height with two shoots, then with an additionalpair of shoots, it will grow taller; it will continue to grow in thismanner. If you drink the water of this sweetness, it will nurturethis plant. If the sweetness arises upon hearing someone say‘Wow Chandulal! You have become a Gnani’, then the diseasehas started to grow within.Now if that happens, if the sweetness is experienced, youshould apply another solution. This solution is to erase itimmediately. We do have solutions for it. It is natural for thatdisease to arise. The disease of the seed that has been sown inthe past life will manifest in this life but we do have solutions forthe diseases, here. This Vignan (science) we have is not withoutsolutions, is it?Questioner: No. Here every sentence is capable ofgetting rid of all diseases.Dadashri: Yes, we do have the solutions. The root of thisdisease lies in the sweetness that prevails when someone givesyou compliments, ‘what a great thing has happened.’ And thereis sweetness in this, is there not? It will make you forgetliberation.Questioner: But it is dangerous, very dangerous as far asliberation is concerned.Dadashri: Yes, dangerous, it is killing of the self(atmaghati)! If someone says that to you, you simply have toreply, ‘my dear fellow, only I know my situation. How wouldyou know?’ If you say this, he will calm down. Do you want tobe a guru?Aptavani-9439440Aptavani-9Questioner: If I am talking about Dadaji’s Gnan withsomeone, to begin with, in my mind there is the feeling of, ‘Iknow’.Dadashri: Yes, that verily is this disease.Questioner: So how should I talk to people, Dadaji?Dadashri: But those talks will not have any substanceand competence (barkat). They will not be fruitful. How will itfit the other person? ‘I know’ is a grave disease!That is why ‘we’ say, that in conversing with anyone, weapply a counter-pulley to come down to the level of thequestioner. ‘We’ do not have the disease of ‘I know’, so it iseasily applied. ‘We’ do not have that disease at all. ‘We’ arefree from all such diseases. By sitting near ‘us’, all such diseasesin you will go away. Keep asking me things and get your workdone. It is not going to do you much good if you just sit here.For that matter even this tube light just sits with me, does it not?When a conflict occurs with someone, talking to him withthe intoxication of ‘I know’ in the mind makes a mess ofeverything. You will not be able to maintain the right level! The‘level’ will not come!Questioner: Dadaji, the awareness should be such thatthe moment a wrong thought arises, it would be caughtimmediately; it would be caught the second it arises.Dadashri: Yes, it is enough if it can be caught. It must becaught the moment it sprouts. That is why ‘we’ tell you todestroy it the moment it sprouts, the moment you see anotherpart growing, destroy it. But how can this be possible withoutawareness (jagruti)? And tremendous awareness is needed.How can one even have that much expectation? Therefore, youcannot expect everything.Therefore, tackle with a solution. If someone comes andtells you ‘your knowledge is very deep and profound’, knowinstantly that this is the place where the disease is going to grow.That is the direct cause of the disease! Become very alert there!Did you ever experience sweetness in this matter before?The day the sweetness takes hold within, is the day this diseasewill arise. Then if the sweetness is experienced again in it, it willsprout long shoots, just like the shoots on the mango tree. Itreaches a certain height with two shoots, then with an additionalpair of shoots, it will grow taller; it will continue to grow in thismanner. If you drink the water of this sweetness, it will nurturethis plant. If the sweetness arises upon hearing someone say‘Wow Chandulal! You have become a Gnani’, then the diseasehas started to grow within.Now if that happens, if the sweetness is experienced, youshould apply another solution. This solution is to erase itimmediately. We do have solutions for it. It is natural for thatdisease to arise. The disease of the seed that has been sown inthe past life will manifest in this life but we do have solutions forthe diseases, here. This Vignan (science) we have is not withoutsolutions, is it?Questioner: No. Here every sentence is capable ofgetting rid of all diseases.Dadashri: Yes, we do have the solutions. The root of thisdisease lies in the sweetness that prevails when someone givesyou compliments, ‘what a great thing has happened.’ And thereis sweetness in this, is there not? It will make you forgetliberation.Questioner: But it is dangerous, very dangerous as far asliberation is concerned.Dadashri: Yes, dangerous, it is killing of the self(atmaghati)! If someone says that to you, you simply have toreply, ‘my dear fellow, only I know my situation. How wouldyou know?’ If you say this, he will calm down. Do you want tobe a guru?Aptavani-9441442Aptavani-9compass always point towards the north; that is its nature. Butif the compass malfunctions, what can anyone do? Furthermoreone does not know how to look for the Northern Star.Will you not have to know all these danger signals? Doyou think you can ignore them?Questioner: No, they are all very dangerous.Dadashri: It is called the suicidal element (aapghatitattva).Questioner: Besides, it does not even let us progressfurther. It will not allow the Gnan to unfold.Dadashri: It will not. It will destroy everything. It willeven bring down whatever is already in existence.Questioner: The amazing thing is that the words that areexpressing from You, ‘touches’ that within exactly, they eradicatethe disease within, they change the vision and we can exactly‘see’ it working from within. Everything appears to be veryscientific.Dadashri: Only if the talk is completely scientific, will itbring closure (nivedo) to people, otherwise it will not.“Marag sachaa meel gayaa, chhoot gayaa sandeha”“Having attained the right path, all doubts and suspicionare gone”Suspicion and doubts are gone; the true path has beenattained. You will have to walk back if you get lost. What elsewill you have to do? Those who want moksha will find that path.Simply ask Dada whether you are on the wrong path or the rightone? Ask just this much. Do not ask, ‘How is my Gnan?’ Justask, ‘Am I lost or am I on the right path?’ If Dada says, youare on the right one, then go ahead.* * * * *Questioner: Dada we need to become free from this.Dadashri: It is a very dangerous trap! Yet when theunfolding circumstances call for it, it is our duty to help people.However, it must unfold as a circumstance (udaya). There isnothing to gain from becoming a guru; it must come as result ofunfolding circumstances. The circumstances will unfold on theirown. It is a different matter if you are forced to sit on the seatyou do not want to. Therefore you should not have anyexpectations for it.Is anyone likely to fail, if he were to grade his own paper?Questioner: No one will.Dadashri: If a person examines his own paper, giveshimself a grade and fails himself, then I would consider his actionas a true judgment, but that does not happen, does it?Questioner: And here one even struggles to appearhumble on the outside.Dadashri: That is why I call it killing the Self -atmaghat! It will lead to one’s suicide. All one has to ‘see’ iswhether people are attracted. Are they? No, they are not. Thenit means that a great amount of the disease of ‘I know’ existswithin. Attraction verily is purity! Attraction will occur as puritybegins.Questioner: No, Dadaji, people do get attracted. Theyget attracted for a little while, do they not?Dadashri: No. Not at all! Not even a bit! No one willstay. The bulb will blow out on the first day. People will manageto overlook for a couple of days but not for long. This here isa Gnani Purush and that is why you are able to know the faultsand mistakes (dosh) that lie within you. Otherwise, how can youknow of their existence? The ship will start sailing south! Itheads south because the compass is malfunctioning. Thatcompass will show south as being the north. Otherwise, theAptavani-9441442Aptavani-9compass always point towards the north; that is its nature. Butif the compass malfunctions, what can anyone do? Furthermoreone does not know how to look for the Northern Star.Will you not have to know all these danger signals? Doyou think you can ignore them?Questioner: No, they are all very dangerous.Dadashri: It is called the suicidal element (aapghatitattva).Questioner: Besides, it does not even let us progressfurther. It will not allow the Gnan to unfold.Dadashri: It will not. It will destroy everything. It willeven bring down whatever is already in existence.Questioner: The amazing thing is that the words that areexpressing from You, ‘touches’ that within exactly, they eradicatethe disease within, they change the vision and we can exactly‘see’ it working from within. Everything appears to be veryscientific.Dadashri: Only if the talk is completely scientific, will itbring closure (nivedo) to people, otherwise it will not.“Marag sachaa meel gayaa, chhoot gayaa sandeha”“Having attained the right path, all doubts and suspicionare gone”Suspicion and doubts are gone; the true path has beenattained. You will have to walk back if you get lost. What elsewill you have to do? Those who want moksha will find that path.Simply ask Dada whether you are on the wrong path or the rightone? Ask just this much. Do not ask, ‘How is my Gnan?’ Justask, ‘Am I lost or am I on the right path?’ If Dada says, youare on the right one, then go ahead.* * * * *Questioner: Dada we need to become free from this.Dadashri: It is a very dangerous trap! Yet when theunfolding circumstances call for it, it is our duty to help people.However, it must unfold as a circumstance (udaya). There isnothing to gain from becoming a guru; it must come as result ofunfolding circumstances. The circumstances will unfold on theirown. It is a different matter if you are forced to sit on the seatyou do not want to. Therefore you should not have anyexpectations for it.Is anyone likely to fail, if he were to grade his own paper?Questioner: No one will.Dadashri: If a person examines his own paper, giveshimself a grade and fails himself, then I would consider his actionas a true judgment, but that does not happen, does it?Questioner: And here one even struggles to appearhumble on the outside.Dadashri: That is why I call it killing the Self -atmaghat! It will lead to one’s suicide. All one has to ‘see’ iswhether people are attracted. Are they? No, they are not. Thenit means that a great amount of the disease of ‘I know’ existswithin. Attraction verily is purity! Attraction will occur as puritybegins.Questioner: No, Dadaji, people do get attracted. Theyget attracted for a little while, do they not?Dadashri: No. Not at all! Not even a bit! No one willstay. The bulb will blow out on the first day. People will manageto overlook for a couple of days but not for long. This here isa Gnani Purush and that is why you are able to know the faultsand mistakes (dosh) that lie within you. Otherwise, how can youknow of their existence? The ship will start sailing south! Itheads south because the compass is malfunctioning. Thatcompass will show south as being the north. Otherwise, theAptavani-9443444Aptavani-9[8]Awareness (Jagruti) : The desire to beworshippedDo not rush to answer questions about GnanYou will have to attain the understanding through ‘theunderstanding (samjan) of the Gnani Purush’; “parallel toparallel”. Otherwise, the ‘railway line’ will be lost. You do nothave to apply your own understanding. There is no understandingwhatsoever within, is there? Not even an iota of understandingis within. You are not to apply your own understanding in all thisanyway. You do not have any understanding at all. You wouldhave become God if you had.Questioner: If people ask questions and we giveanswers and clarifications, what is wrong in doing that?Dadashri: To give clarification to a question is a differentthing. The awareness (jagruti) has yet to come, then thatawareness has to take hold within, as an experience (parinaam).After the awareness has taken hold, and you have gained theexperience, then a long time after that, the clarifications(khulasa) you give will be helpful. Otherwise those clarificationswill become mis-clarifications, and your Gnan will go down. Itwill become intellectual (buddhigamya) in nature.Before you even attempt to answer any questions, allforms of egoism within you must vanish. This means the‘dramatic ego’, i.e. the residual ego, also known as thedischarge ego, must also be gone. The ego should not beapparent to the world. At the moment, all the ‘functions’ are stillvery weak (one has not become free from kashaya), they arenot strong enough. Until all those functions are completed (freefrom kashaya), the speech will not be syadvaad. Syadvaadspeech is egoless speech; it does not hurt any living being.Instead, it is better that you do not say anything. Otherwise youwill incur a liability (dosh). As all these facets go down, as theintellect goes down, as the egoism starts to diminish, the speechwill become syadvaad. For the time being, do not get involvedwith answering questions. Otherwise you will be servingsomething that is ‘half cooked’. It will mislead you, your spiritualprogress will be hampered and it will be difficult to turn thingsaround once the damage is done.Therefore, there must not be the ‘taste’ of sweetness in itby the egoism and the intellect. In addition, in that process, thereshould be repulsion (abhaav) towards any involvement of theego or the intellect. And this should become an establishedinternal study (abhyaas), only then is it useful and worthy! Untilthen it is better to wait and be patient.On the path of full enlightenment…Do you ever talk and discuss things with people? Do notget into any discussions anywhere, because people will listen butwhat will become of you? People will listen with one ear and letit out the other, but You too will become sucked into its falsesweetness. This happens because the egoism, the tendency forthe intellect and ego to take over, is still present, and they (anger,pride, deceit and greed) are all just ready and hungry waitingwith anticipation, ‘when will I get something to eat...when will Iget something to eat?’ And so slowly they get the nourishmentthey need.Why do you go around discussing Gnan when the egoand all the rest within have not yet diminished? No body benefitseven two cents worth and you keep blowing your hornunnecessarily! Everyone will find the words very pleasing,people will even say ‘I really like what you said’, but during thatAptavani-9443444Aptavani-9[8]Awareness (Jagruti) : The desire to beworshippedDo not rush to answer questions about GnanYou will have to attain the understanding through ‘theunderstanding (samjan) of the Gnani Purush’; “parallel toparallel”. Otherwise, the ‘railway line’ will be lost. You do nothave to apply your own understanding. There is no understandingwhatsoever within, is there? Not even an iota of understandingis within. You are not to apply your own understanding in all thisanyway. You do not have any understanding at all. You wouldhave become God if you had.Questioner: If people ask questions and we giveanswers and clarifications, what is wrong in doing that?Dadashri: To give clarification to a question is a differentthing. The awareness (jagruti) has yet to come, then thatawareness has to take hold within, as an experience (parinaam).After the awareness has taken hold, and you have gained theexperience, then a long time after that, the clarifications(khulasa) you give will be helpful. Otherwise those clarificationswill become mis-clarifications, and your Gnan will go down. Itwill become intellectual (buddhigamya) in nature.Before you even attempt to answer any questions, allforms of egoism within you must vanish. This means the‘dramatic ego’, i.e. the residual ego, also known as thedischarge ego, must also be gone. The ego should not beapparent to the world. At the moment, all the ‘functions’ are stillvery weak (one has not become free from kashaya), they arenot strong enough. Until all those functions are completed (freefrom kashaya), the speech will not be syadvaad. Syadvaadspeech is egoless speech; it does not hurt any living being.Instead, it is better that you do not say anything. Otherwise youwill incur a liability (dosh). As all these facets go down, as theintellect goes down, as the egoism starts to diminish, the speechwill become syadvaad. For the time being, do not get involvedwith answering questions. Otherwise you will be servingsomething that is ‘half cooked’. It will mislead you, your spiritualprogress will be hampered and it will be difficult to turn thingsaround once the damage is done.Therefore, there must not be the ‘taste’ of sweetness in itby the egoism and the intellect. In addition, in that process, thereshould be repulsion (abhaav) towards any involvement of theego or the intellect. And this should become an establishedinternal study (abhyaas), only then is it useful and worthy! Untilthen it is better to wait and be patient.On the path of full enlightenment…Do you ever talk and discuss things with people? Do notget into any discussions anywhere, because people will listen butwhat will become of you? People will listen with one ear and letit out the other, but You too will become sucked into its falsesweetness. This happens because the egoism, the tendency forthe intellect and ego to take over, is still present, and they (anger,pride, deceit and greed) are all just ready and hungry waitingwith anticipation, ‘when will I get something to eat...when will Iget something to eat?’ And so slowly they get the nourishmentthey need.Why do you go around discussing Gnan when the egoand all the rest within have not yet diminished? No body benefitseven two cents worth and you keep blowing your hornunnecessarily! Everyone will find the words very pleasing,people will even say ‘I really like what you said’, but during thatAptavani-9445446Aptavani-9time your ego will increase and those people will not gain anybenefit. It simply ‘smells’ good, that is all. It is like enjoying thearoma of the jalebee (sweet delicacy), without getting a tasteof it.If You want to keep your path to liberation weak, thenthis other path, the traditional Kramic path, will be good for you.You will even get to enjoy the sweetness along the way.However, in this path of ours, with the slightest weakness, theego and everything else within are just waiting, ready to pouncethe moment they get something to eat. The ego within isconstantly looking for food and nourishment. This is the case foreveryone. Everyone has ego waiting within. When the ego takesover it will not look for just some commission. At the moment,it is simply looking for commission, but later on, it will take overthe entire wealth, including you. It is there, already presentwithin. You should always continue to be aware that thepresence of the ego is always there. And until then do not fallprey to anything. Do not give the ego any opportunity or thescope to become strong.People will readily flock after you if you speak even a littleabout our Gnan. People have never experienced peace such asthis before. They have never heard of anything like this beforeso naturally they will jump at the opportunity. And the ego sittingwithin you will be laughing, ‘Yes, great I get to eat!’ It has beenlooking for this opportunity from the very beginning. Do Youwant to attain the Absolute state or do You want to leave itunfinished? If You want to attain the Absolute state, then Youcannot afford to be weak about anything. Even if someone asksyou a question, do not fall prey to this weakness.Upsham - it is nothing but a smoldering fireFirst You will understand the Gnan through the medium ofthe intellect (buddhigamya) and that too it will come by listeningintently to the Gnani Purush for a long time. It will be of worthonly if you study it slowly and gradually.‘We’ have to seriously caution the one whose awareness(jagruti) increases significantly. He is safe if he abides by theAgnas. But it is very difficult to have a safe side.The fact that you can see your ego, it is very goodawareness (jagruti). Otherwise you will see everything but yourown ego. Everything else will be evident. That which is going toaggressively overpower you, is the only one that will not beevident.The intellect (buddhi) must come to an end, then the egoand then all the rest of the desires of the pudgal (the non-Selfcomplex). At the moment, these desires (ichchha) are notevident within, but they are there for sure, latent and smoldering(upsham) within. They are suppressed within and they must allcome to an end (kshay). At the moment one is not aware of allthese desires. As long as thoughts of sexuality (vishaya) arise,it proves that desires of the pudgal (the non-Self complex) areindeed present. As long as sexual thoughts arise within, it isevident that the physical desires are real and until then the firewithin is smoldering and latent.Therefore, be cautious. This is very dangerous, it willtopple you over and there is no telling where you will land. Notonly will the awareness (jagruti) go away but even this state ofsamkit - the right vision that you have acquired - will go awaytoo. That ego and everything else within will then take controlover you. That is why the Lord called them “upsham goon” -smoldering attributes (latent kashayas), which are likely toreignite anytime and make you fall for sure.Questioner: But since you have placed us on the twelfthgunasthanak – the twelfth spiritual stage, we will not fall willwe?Dadashri: No, You will not fall. Who is likely to fall? Theone who is in the worldly life will fall. The twelfth spiritual stageis for the nischaya; the Self, and vyavahar is on the eleventhAptavani-9445446Aptavani-9time your ego will increase and those people will not gain anybenefit. It simply ‘smells’ good, that is all. It is like enjoying thearoma of the jalebee (sweet delicacy), without getting a tasteof it.If You want to keep your path to liberation weak, thenthis other path, the traditional Kramic path, will be good for you.You will even get to enjoy the sweetness along the way.However, in this path of ours, with the slightest weakness, theego and everything else within are just waiting, ready to pouncethe moment they get something to eat. The ego within isconstantly looking for food and nourishment. This is the case foreveryone. Everyone has ego waiting within. When the ego takesover it will not look for just some commission. At the moment,it is simply looking for commission, but later on, it will take overthe entire wealth, including you. It is there, already presentwithin. You should always continue to be aware that thepresence of the ego is always there. And until then do not fallprey to anything. Do not give the ego any opportunity or thescope to become strong.People will readily flock after you if you speak even a littleabout our Gnan. People have never experienced peace such asthis before. They have never heard of anything like this beforeso naturally they will jump at the opportunity. And the ego sittingwithin you will be laughing, ‘Yes, great I get to eat!’ It has beenlooking for this opportunity from the very beginning. Do Youwant to attain the Absolute state or do You want to leave itunfinished? If You want to attain the Absolute state, then Youcannot afford to be weak about anything. Even if someone asksyou a question, do not fall prey to this weakness.Upsham - it is nothing but a smoldering fireFirst You will understand the Gnan through the medium ofthe intellect (buddhigamya) and that too it will come by listeningintently to the Gnani Purush for a long time. It will be of worthonly if you study it slowly and gradually.‘We’ have to seriously caution the one whose awareness(jagruti) increases significantly. He is safe if he abides by theAgnas. But it is very difficult to have a safe side.The fact that you can see your ego, it is very goodawareness (jagruti). Otherwise you will see everything but yourown ego. Everything else will be evident. That which is going toaggressively overpower you, is the only one that will not beevident.The intellect (buddhi) must come to an end, then the egoand then all the rest of the desires of the pudgal (the non-Selfcomplex). At the moment, these desires (ichchha) are notevident within, but they are there for sure, latent and smoldering(upsham) within. They are suppressed within and they must allcome to an end (kshay). At the moment one is not aware of allthese desires. As long as thoughts of sexuality (vishaya) arise,it proves that desires of the pudgal (the non-Self complex) areindeed present. As long as sexual thoughts arise within, it isevident that the physical desires are real and until then the firewithin is smoldering and latent.Therefore, be cautious. This is very dangerous, it willtopple you over and there is no telling where you will land. Notonly will the awareness (jagruti) go away but even this state ofsamkit - the right vision that you have acquired - will go awaytoo. That ego and everything else within will then take controlover you. That is why the Lord called them “upsham goon” -smoldering attributes (latent kashayas), which are likely toreignite anytime and make you fall for sure.Questioner: But since you have placed us on the twelfthgunasthanak – the twelfth spiritual stage, we will not fall willwe?Dadashri: No, You will not fall. Who is likely to fall? Theone who is in the worldly life will fall. The twelfth spiritual stageis for the nischaya; the Self, and vyavahar is on the eleventhAptavani-9447448Aptavani-9stage. In the vyavahar (worldly life), one falls before reachingthe eleventh stage. All of a sudden one reaches the eleventhstage and then falls again. Therefore, the eleventh gunthanu isapplicable to the worldly life and here there is upsham – theinner kashayas are latent, like the smoldering coals.So it will not work, until everything within is destroyed.Nothing will work until all the vyavahar comes to an end. Hey!One cannot even get past the ninth stage! As long as onecontinues to have sensual thoughts, he will not be able to crossthe ninth. So if he ever tries to talk about Gnan, he will findhimself in a predicament. There is grave danger in it, gravedanger, because the diseases are still latent within; they have notbeen destroyed. They will have to go. They will have to bedestroyed first. It is like a smoldering fire, there is no tellingwhen it will ignite again.Partiality towards the self veils the reign ofthe SelfOne is still partial towards the relative self. There iscomplete partiality towards the relative self. When you stopbeing partial to the self, you can discover your mistakes. Do youunderstand what is meant by partiality? The belief and theawareness of ‘I am Chandulal’ is no longer in existent, it is gone,but when karmas come into fruition, you become one with thekarma (udaya-swaroop). The moment you become udaya-swaroop, the awareness (jagruti) is shrouded and hence youcannot see the mistakes. This old tendency of becoming udaya-swaroop becomes weak when you continue attending satsangsand the awareness of the Self (upayog) becomes firm. Lack ofsatsang leads to the shrouding of the awareness as the Self.If a thief enters your home, you will be able to know rightaway because of the presence of the Soul (the Self) within. Butwhy is it that you are not able to know? Because there is apartiality and a belief within of ‘Nothing will happen to us’ andso this leads to that aspect being veiled and shrouded andtherefore it does not let You ‘know’. Otherwise it is easy to‘know’ and understand.Upon hearing the question, ‘Whose ring is beautiful?’ onewill immediately raise his hand, because there is partiality of ‘myring is beautiful’ towards his ring.Similarly one is partial to one’s self, and that partiality willinevitably render one deluded (moorchhit). The delusion is suchthat it will not allow him to know that there is partiality. ‘We’have destroyed your belief of ‘I am Chandulal’, and the Self thatyou have received remains as the Self too, but in the dizzy turnof the udayakarma i.e. karma unfolding, you lose awareness of‘what mistakes am I making and where do my mistakes lie?’Everything is governed entirely by mistakes and becauseof this, your realm and domain of the Self is veiled. ‘We’ havegiven you the Self, but its realm, power and energy (satta) iscompletely veiled. This is why the energy of speech (vachanbud)and the energy of the mind (manobud) do not blossom.Otherwise, how well the energy of speech blossoms! Even nowone is partial to sexuality (vishaya), deceit (kapat), and the ego(ahamkar). Therefore maintain upayog; maintain jagruti - theapplied awareness as the Self - and keep the force ofattendance in satsang. Then your mistakes in your worldlyinteractions (vyavahar) will become evident and the light of theSelf will travel far and wide. What happens if you do not attendsatsang? The upayog (application of awareness) will be halted.Why is that? It is because of the partiality towards the relativeself! And you will not even know that this has taken place.Awareness (jagruti) is not Gnan. Awareness is simplyawareness. Gnan is a different thing. Awareness means toawaken from sleep (to be awakened from the ignorance of whoam I? It is to awaken to the knowledge of the Self). Now Youare awake. Now there is no longer ignorance of your real Self.Gnan is a very great thing.Aptavani-9447448Aptavani-9stage. In the vyavahar (worldly life), one falls before reachingthe eleventh stage. All of a sudden one reaches the eleventhstage and then falls again. Therefore, the eleventh gunthanu isapplicable to the worldly life and here there is upsham – theinner kashayas are latent, like the smoldering coals.So it will not work, until everything within is destroyed.Nothing will work until all the vyavahar comes to an end. Hey!One cannot even get past the ninth stage! As long as onecontinues to have sensual thoughts, he will not be able to crossthe ninth. So if he ever tries to talk about Gnan, he will findhimself in a predicament. There is grave danger in it, gravedanger, because the diseases are still latent within; they have notbeen destroyed. They will have to go. They will have to bedestroyed first. It is like a smoldering fire, there is no tellingwhen it will ignite again.Partiality towards the self veils the reign ofthe SelfOne is still partial towards the relative self. There iscomplete partiality towards the relative self. When you stopbeing partial to the self, you can discover your mistakes. Do youunderstand what is meant by partiality? The belief and theawareness of ‘I am Chandulal’ is no longer in existent, it is gone,but when karmas come into fruition, you become one with thekarma (udaya-swaroop). The moment you become udaya-swaroop, the awareness (jagruti) is shrouded and hence youcannot see the mistakes. This old tendency of becoming udaya-swaroop becomes weak when you continue attending satsangsand the awareness of the Self (upayog) becomes firm. Lack ofsatsang leads to the shrouding of the awareness as the Self.If a thief enters your home, you will be able to know rightaway because of the presence of the Soul (the Self) within. Butwhy is it that you are not able to know? Because there is apartiality and a belief within of ‘Nothing will happen to us’ andso this leads to that aspect being veiled and shrouded andtherefore it does not let You ‘know’. Otherwise it is easy to‘know’ and understand.Upon hearing the question, ‘Whose ring is beautiful?’ onewill immediately raise his hand, because there is partiality of ‘myring is beautiful’ towards his ring.Similarly one is partial to one’s self, and that partiality willinevitably render one deluded (moorchhit). The delusion is suchthat it will not allow him to know that there is partiality. ‘We’have destroyed your belief of ‘I am Chandulal’, and the Self thatyou have received remains as the Self too, but in the dizzy turnof the udayakarma i.e. karma unfolding, you lose awareness of‘what mistakes am I making and where do my mistakes lie?’Everything is governed entirely by mistakes and becauseof this, your realm and domain of the Self is veiled. ‘We’ havegiven you the Self, but its realm, power and energy (satta) iscompletely veiled. This is why the energy of speech (vachanbud)and the energy of the mind (manobud) do not blossom.Otherwise, how well the energy of speech blossoms! Even nowone is partial to sexuality (vishaya), deceit (kapat), and the ego(ahamkar). Therefore maintain upayog; maintain jagruti - theapplied awareness as the Self - and keep the force ofattendance in satsang. Then your mistakes in your worldlyinteractions (vyavahar) will become evident and the light of theSelf will travel far and wide. What happens if you do not attendsatsang? The upayog (application of awareness) will be halted.Why is that? It is because of the partiality towards the relativeself! And you will not even know that this has taken place.Awareness (jagruti) is not Gnan. Awareness is simplyawareness. Gnan is a different thing. Awareness means toawaken from sleep (to be awakened from the ignorance of whoam I? It is to awaken to the knowledge of the Self). Now Youare awake. Now there is no longer ignorance of your real Self.Gnan is a very great thing.Aptavani-9449450Aptavani-9Everywhere else (in the Kramic path) Gnan manifests onlywhen all other smoldering fires (upsham kashayas) have beenput out i.e. when all the latent kashayas within have beeneradicated. Kshayo-psham – the state of partial purity - meansthat the ego is still there, but it is not visible at the moment. Thereis fire underneath but it is covered. Therefore, you cannot see itfrom the surface. You think there are only ashes there, but youwill realize it when it ignites with the slightest of air.That is when awareness leads to theexperience of GnanIt will be beneficial if You keep increasing awareness(jagruti). You will not bind karma when Your awarenessincreases. There is no karma bondage with awareness (jagruti)and so everything will become clear from within. In themeantime the ego continues to melt away.There is no deceit (kapat) in pride (maan); if there were,then awareness (jagruti) would not arise. Kapat is the curtain;it is a veil. A veil obscures whatever it covers; it renders oneblind.Questioner: What is deceit (kapat)?Dadashri: It is where one tries to hide the vastu – theelement - the Soul. All of this is nothing but deceit (kapat), isit not? Is this kapat not responsible for doing everything wrongwithin? It only happens when deceit (kapat) and ego gettogether. Who takes you on the wrong path? It is anger-pride-deceit-greed. These four will take you on the wrong path whenthey get together. The ego is the root cause. And what does onehave greed (lobh) for within? He enjoys tasting the sweetnessthat lies within.Before awareness (jagruti) can give result (parinaam) ofthe experience of Gnan, not a single percent of deceit (kapat)can remain within. There should not be any element of deceit(kapat) of any kind. There should be no thoughts of sexualitywhatsoever.So what all must leave? The ego must come to an end.The intellect (buddhi) must come to an end; it will not do if itis smoldering or appears to be dead. It has to die. When all thekarmas are destroyed (kshay), then anger-pride-deceit-greedwill also be destroyed. When all these attributes are annihilated,then speech will become syadvaad; it will not hurt any livingbeing and it will be acceptable to all. Until then there is danger.There is tremendous danger, extreme danger!Starve the kashayas for three yearsThe energies of anger, pride, deceit and greed are sittingwithin, waiting in anticipation of ‘when will he let go of Dada sothat we can grab him.’ They are always ready to entice you oneway or another and lead you away from the Self. As long asthey are present within, as long as there is evidence of theirexistence within, they cannot be eliminated. There is no merit insaying anything (speaking to others about this Gnan) unless theyare destroyed. Such speech will be blown away in the airwithout any effect. Hence, it is not worth saying anything.When the sweetness (meethash) is experienced within, itis the same as the kashayas getting nourishment. The kashayasof anger-pride-deceit-greed get nourishment and they use theirstrength and energies in full force on the other side. Theybecome weak because they remain hungry from not getting anyfood for a while. They will go away if you do not feed them,if you were to starve them for three years. But people continueto feed them a little at a time. People are compassionate aren’tthey? So they keep feeding the kashayas. However, if youwere to starve them completely, they would not remain pastthree years. Once they leave, the entire kingdom comes intoyour hands.Are you aware that these kashayas are being fed? AreAptavani-9449450Aptavani-9Everywhere else (in the Kramic path) Gnan manifests onlywhen all other smoldering fires (upsham kashayas) have beenput out i.e. when all the latent kashayas within have beeneradicated. Kshayo-psham – the state of partial purity - meansthat the ego is still there, but it is not visible at the moment. Thereis fire underneath but it is covered. Therefore, you cannot see itfrom the surface. You think there are only ashes there, but youwill realize it when it ignites with the slightest of air.That is when awareness leads to theexperience of GnanIt will be beneficial if You keep increasing awareness(jagruti). You will not bind karma when Your awarenessincreases. There is no karma bondage with awareness (jagruti)and so everything will become clear from within. In themeantime the ego continues to melt away.There is no deceit (kapat) in pride (maan); if there were,then awareness (jagruti) would not arise. Kapat is the curtain;it is a veil. A veil obscures whatever it covers; it renders oneblind.Questioner: What is deceit (kapat)?Dadashri: It is where one tries to hide the vastu – theelement - the Soul. All of this is nothing but deceit (kapat), isit not? Is this kapat not responsible for doing everything wrongwithin? It only happens when deceit (kapat) and ego gettogether. Who takes you on the wrong path? It is anger-pride-deceit-greed. These four will take you on the wrong path whenthey get together. The ego is the root cause. And what does onehave greed (lobh) for within? He enjoys tasting the sweetnessthat lies within.Before awareness (jagruti) can give result (parinaam) ofthe experience of Gnan, not a single percent of deceit (kapat)can remain within. There should not be any element of deceit(kapat) of any kind. There should be no thoughts of sexualitywhatsoever.So what all must leave? The ego must come to an end.The intellect (buddhi) must come to an end; it will not do if itis smoldering or appears to be dead. It has to die. When all thekarmas are destroyed (kshay), then anger-pride-deceit-greedwill also be destroyed. When all these attributes are annihilated,then speech will become syadvaad; it will not hurt any livingbeing and it will be acceptable to all. Until then there is danger.There is tremendous danger, extreme danger!Starve the kashayas for three yearsThe energies of anger, pride, deceit and greed are sittingwithin, waiting in anticipation of ‘when will he let go of Dada sothat we can grab him.’ They are always ready to entice you oneway or another and lead you away from the Self. As long asthey are present within, as long as there is evidence of theirexistence within, they cannot be eliminated. There is no merit insaying anything (speaking to others about this Gnan) unless theyare destroyed. Such speech will be blown away in the airwithout any effect. Hence, it is not worth saying anything.When the sweetness (meethash) is experienced within, itis the same as the kashayas getting nourishment. The kashayasof anger-pride-deceit-greed get nourishment and they use theirstrength and energies in full force on the other side. Theybecome weak because they remain hungry from not getting anyfood for a while. They will go away if you do not feed them,if you were to starve them for three years. But people continueto feed them a little at a time. People are compassionate aren’tthey? So they keep feeding the kashayas. However, if youwere to starve them completely, they would not remain pastthree years. Once they leave, the entire kingdom comes intoyour hands.Are you aware that these kashayas are being fed? AreAptavani-9451452Aptavani-9you able to tell which one of them came and ate? The kashayascome and eat in this manner. This is how they feed. If they arefed just twice a month, they become as strong as they werebefore.The kashayas have never been fed in ‘our’ home, whichis why they all left. Once it has been decided, ‘I do not want tofeed them’, then they will not feed. Awareness (jagruti) isneeded.The kashayas are still sitting there; they have not goneaway. But at the same time, ‘we’ have not killed them either.‘We’ are not himsak - violent - and that is why they have notgone away yet. ‘We’ do not have to starve them to death either.They simply remain at bay because of the aura and the ‘heat’ ofthe presence of the Gnani Purush, so what can ‘we’ do? Weshould not deliberately invite them either. Do they ever come toyou to dine?Questioner: Yes they do.Dadashri: If you feed them raw food today, thentomorrow they will dine on cooked food. Therefore, you mustnever have a relationship or the interaction of feeding them.Whereas people feed them all the time, they feed their anger;they feed their pride etc.Questioner: These kashayas eat everything so whatshould I do?Dadashri: They will come to eat. Nevertheless Dadajistands over you and through his blessings and grace (krupa) itis possible to clean everything. If you move away from thissatsang on your own, then everything will immediately latch onto you. You should never leave Dadaji’s support and protection.These kashayas of anger-pride-deceit-greed aresuppressed within and given a chance; they can still flare upsuddenly. So, if you want to bring an end to them all, then theonly way is let them die. Understand these two words: upsham- that which can re-ignite and kshayak - that which will not re-ignite.Your work will be attained when the generation of thesekashayas becomes smaller. It is a very difficult task to reducetheir numbers. It is a baggage of countless past lives. All thesekashayas within have become calm for now but some of themcan still continue to sprout. Moreover, some of them may sproutin the next life, but that is not a problem. Your next life is goingto be very systematic and orderly. It would create problems ifthey were to express here in this life. They will not let you movefrom here.Certification for doing SatsangUntil you attain the state of purnahuti – a state free ofvishaya and kashaya and the complete experience of the Self(anubhav) - do not even attempt to tackle this topic (of doingsatsang with people), because the kashaya, the faults (dosho)lie dormant and hidden, how can you even speak? One is notcertified as yet. The current state of yours is free of worries andyou are progressing slowly on the path of liberation. You shouldnot say anything unless the Gnani Purush, who is certified, tellsyou to do so. When He gives you the certificate to do so, thenyou can proceed.All the faults (the kashayas) are ready and waiting within,otherwise ‘we’ would tell you on the first day, ‘Go ahead andspeak, do satsang and I will sit leisurely.’ ‘We’ are looking forsuch help, but that state will arise automatically when all thekashaya within you become annihilated. Until then you shouldnot be in a hurry to do so.The sweetness of doer-ship (garvaras) makesone fallWhat is the definition of awareness (jagruti)? It is calledAptavani-9451452Aptavani-9you able to tell which one of them came and ate? The kashayascome and eat in this manner. This is how they feed. If they arefed just twice a month, they become as strong as they werebefore.The kashayas have never been fed in ‘our’ home, whichis why they all left. Once it has been decided, ‘I do not want tofeed them’, then they will not feed. Awareness (jagruti) isneeded.The kashayas are still sitting there; they have not goneaway. But at the same time, ‘we’ have not killed them either.‘We’ are not himsak - violent - and that is why they have notgone away yet. ‘We’ do not have to starve them to death either.They simply remain at bay because of the aura and the ‘heat’ ofthe presence of the Gnani Purush, so what can ‘we’ do? Weshould not deliberately invite them either. Do they ever come toyou to dine?Questioner: Yes they do.Dadashri: If you feed them raw food today, thentomorrow they will dine on cooked food. Therefore, you mustnever have a relationship or the interaction of feeding them.Whereas people feed them all the time, they feed their anger;they feed their pride etc.Questioner: These kashayas eat everything so whatshould I do?Dadashri: They will come to eat. Nevertheless Dadajistands over you and through his blessings and grace (krupa) itis possible to clean everything. If you move away from thissatsang on your own, then everything will immediately latch onto you. You should never leave Dadaji’s support and protection.These kashayas of anger-pride-deceit-greed aresuppressed within and given a chance; they can still flare upsuddenly. So, if you want to bring an end to them all, then theonly way is let them die. Understand these two words: upsham- that which can re-ignite and kshayak - that which will not re-ignite.Your work will be attained when the generation of thesekashayas becomes smaller. It is a very difficult task to reducetheir numbers. It is a baggage of countless past lives. All thesekashayas within have become calm for now but some of themcan still continue to sprout. Moreover, some of them may sproutin the next life, but that is not a problem. Your next life is goingto be very systematic and orderly. It would create problems ifthey were to express here in this life. They will not let you movefrom here.Certification for doing SatsangUntil you attain the state of purnahuti – a state free ofvishaya and kashaya and the complete experience of the Self(anubhav) - do not even attempt to tackle this topic (of doingsatsang with people), because the kashaya, the faults (dosho)lie dormant and hidden, how can you even speak? One is notcertified as yet. The current state of yours is free of worries andyou are progressing slowly on the path of liberation. You shouldnot say anything unless the Gnani Purush, who is certified, tellsyou to do so. When He gives you the certificate to do so, thenyou can proceed.All the faults (the kashayas) are ready and waiting within,otherwise ‘we’ would tell you on the first day, ‘Go ahead andspeak, do satsang and I will sit leisurely.’ ‘We’ are looking forsuch help, but that state will arise automatically when all thekashaya within you become annihilated. Until then you shouldnot be in a hurry to do so.The sweetness of doer-ship (garvaras) makesone fallWhat is the definition of awareness (jagruti)? It is calledAptavani-9453454Aptavani-9awareness when one is not asleep (spiritually). A robber(kashaya) will not enter if You are aware.Questioner: So we should be able to ‘see’ our ownfaults, should we not?Dadashri: Yes, they are visible.Questioner: We should also be able to see the ego(ahamkar), should we not?Dadashri: That too is visible.Questioner: So then what is the reason behind oneslipping?Dadashri: It is the ego that takes away all the ‘food’. Totake garvaras is to taste the sweetness of doer-ship. It is verilythe ego (discharge ego that exists after Gnan) that makes you doeverything and makes you slip. It traps you in the taste of doer-ship (garvaras), by telling you ‘This is very good, it is verygood; people like it.’Questioner: If one tastes too much of the ego’sgarvaras, will he fall again?Dadashri: Of course! It is all nothing but sweetness thatone experiences in doer-ship. When someone says, ‘I did allthis’ it produces garva of doer-ship. As long as a person makesmoney, the sweetness of doer-ship (garvaras) will continue toarise, but when he incurs a loss, what does he say? He will say,‘It was God’s wish!’ Let go of this foolishness! You claim to bethe doer when you were making money and now you areblaming God! When garvaras arises, there is sweetness in it.Wherever you find ‘sweetness’, know that a beating andsuffering is around the corner.When there is no difference between the bitter and thesweet (insult and praise), then know that Gnan is present. Theone who does not differentiate the bitter and the sweet is, andis not affected by either, is the one who has Gnan.You should not say even a single word to explain or clarifyany questions (about Gnan). Let there be casual conversations.Do not think that there is a difference between you and the otherperson. He talks because ‘he’ wants to show his superiority andimportance (visheshata). And ‘he’ (the discharge ego) is verilythe one who instigates and stirs up all those kashayas. Not asingle sentence of ‘ours’ is uttered with the intent of self-importance (vishesh bhaav); the words just flow naturally. Thisis because the speech is a ‘record.’ (The Gnani has noownership of the speech that comes out from him). There is noproblem once even your speech becomes a ‘record’ (when youdo not have ownership of your speech). There is no problemafter your speech becomes a record (when truly all ownershipof speech is gone), but as yet it does not come forth as a‘record’, does it?Generally, when two people are talking, you feel likeputting your ‘two cents’ worth. That is not called Gnan. Gnanis not something to be used as a weapon to compete andargue. There should not be any competition. Competitiveness(spardha) is a worldly thing and it will keep you entrenched init.Grace and awareness are differentThe kashayas that lie smoldering within will be destroyedas awareness (jagruti) increases. You have to take advantageof this awareness. These external karmas (which present throughan external nimit and ignite the kashaya) lie smoldering withinbut they die through samayik (focused application of the light ofthe Self during introspective meditation) of events of kashayasthat have occurred. However, nothing is guaranteed until onebecomes ‘tested’- devoid of any reaction to any future situationwhich would otherwise give rise to kashaya. Such ‘testexaminations’ in life are necessary.Jagruti is that which ‘sees this, that and everything.’ ThatAptavani-9453454Aptavani-9awareness when one is not asleep (spiritually). A robber(kashaya) will not enter if You are aware.Questioner: So we should be able to ‘see’ our ownfaults, should we not?Dadashri: Yes, they are visible.Questioner: We should also be able to see the ego(ahamkar), should we not?Dadashri: That too is visible.Questioner: So then what is the reason behind oneslipping?Dadashri: It is the ego that takes away all the ‘food’. Totake garvaras is to taste the sweetness of doer-ship. It is verilythe ego (discharge ego that exists after Gnan) that makes you doeverything and makes you slip. It traps you in the taste of doer-ship (garvaras), by telling you ‘This is very good, it is verygood; people like it.’Questioner: If one tastes too much of the ego’sgarvaras, will he fall again?Dadashri: Of course! It is all nothing but sweetness thatone experiences in doer-ship. When someone says, ‘I did allthis’ it produces garva of doer-ship. As long as a person makesmoney, the sweetness of doer-ship (garvaras) will continue toarise, but when he incurs a loss, what does he say? He will say,‘It was God’s wish!’ Let go of this foolishness! You claim to bethe doer when you were making money and now you areblaming God! When garvaras arises, there is sweetness in it.Wherever you find ‘sweetness’, know that a beating andsuffering is around the corner.When there is no difference between the bitter and thesweet (insult and praise), then know that Gnan is present. Theone who does not differentiate the bitter and the sweet is, andis not affected by either, is the one who has Gnan.You should not say even a single word to explain or clarifyany questions (about Gnan). Let there be casual conversations.Do not think that there is a difference between you and the otherperson. He talks because ‘he’ wants to show his superiority andimportance (visheshata). And ‘he’ (the discharge ego) is verilythe one who instigates and stirs up all those kashayas. Not asingle sentence of ‘ours’ is uttered with the intent of self-importance (vishesh bhaav); the words just flow naturally. Thisis because the speech is a ‘record.’ (The Gnani has noownership of the speech that comes out from him). There is noproblem once even your speech becomes a ‘record’ (when youdo not have ownership of your speech). There is no problemafter your speech becomes a record (when truly all ownershipof speech is gone), but as yet it does not come forth as a‘record’, does it?Generally, when two people are talking, you feel likeputting your ‘two cents’ worth. That is not called Gnan. Gnanis not something to be used as a weapon to compete andargue. There should not be any competition. Competitiveness(spardha) is a worldly thing and it will keep you entrenched init.Grace and awareness are differentThe kashayas that lie smoldering within will be destroyedas awareness (jagruti) increases. You have to take advantageof this awareness. These external karmas (which present throughan external nimit and ignite the kashaya) lie smoldering withinbut they die through samayik (focused application of the light ofthe Self during introspective meditation) of events of kashayasthat have occurred. However, nothing is guaranteed until onebecomes ‘tested’- devoid of any reaction to any future situationwhich would otherwise give rise to kashaya. Such ‘testexaminations’ in life are necessary.Jagruti is that which ‘sees this, that and everything.’ ThatAptavani-9455456Aptavani-9is jagruti. This ‘Dada’ remains in your memory all day long.This awareness of ‘I am Shuddhatma’ is there because of‘Dada’. It is called the fruit of his grace (krupa-phala),whereas, jagruti is a different thing altogether.There is no need to rush in this. This Gnan that you haveattained is so rare, that one cannot attain it even in a hundredthousand life times. Having attained it with such ease and in ashort while, one becomes embroiled in a rush and frenzy(raghavaat). This is not a line of shortcuts or impatience. Thisis the line of harmony, patience and stillness.The Lord considers the establishment of the awareness(laksha) of ‘I am Shuddhatma’ a greatest thing. In the Kramicpath, there is conviction (pratiti) of only ‘words’ that describethe attributes of the Self. One attains the conviction of thewords, which describe the attributes of the Shuddhatma as ‘I amthis’ and they place a great value on this conviction of words;they call this state samkit. However this conviction is only ofwords, whereas you have attained the conviction of the vastu –the actual Soul; the Self. It is a conviction that is natural to theSelf (swabhavik pratiti). That is why this conviction (pratiti) iscalled kshayak (eternal). This Gnan can do a great deal ofwork; it is a tremendous wonder.Subtle change of ownership when talking toothers about DadaSo if you want to achieve the absolute state ofenlightenment (The Self) then maintain a very careful vigil; bevery alert. As far as possible, do not say anything in any placewhatsoever. Do not try to explain this Gnan to anyone.Otherwise there will be contrary result. To speak even a wordof the speech of the Vitarag is a biggest spiritual liability.What do people care, they will stick around you. All theycare about is that they will get something. Do they not stickaround you if they think they are going to get something fromyou? You simply have to tell them, ‘This is not a task for me.’You cannot utter even a word; otherwise it will ruin everythingwithin you.Questioner: But can we not at least talk about our ownexperiences?Dadashri: There is no experience. The talk that comesout is really the words that ‘we’ have spoken. Those words arenow sprouting forth. The experience however, comes veryslowly.So the entire Vignan of the vitarag should be present. Noone knows even a fraction of this Vignan. It is ‘our’ speech thathad entered within, is what is coming forth. And if some strong-headed intellectual were to come along, he will destroyeverything with just a few words. Knowledge that is based onthe intellect (buddhigamya) will not work, will it? The worldalready has intellectual knowledge, does it not? Arey! Peoplehave memorized volumes and volumes of scriptures. You willbecome confused if they utter just one word.It is ‘our’ Gnan that has been given to you as a seed thathas grown and has produced the resulting (parinaam) experience.What ‘we’ have given you remains in the form of a seed withinand it will grow again to give results. At the most you may talkabout the Gnan by saying, ‘Dadaji used to say…’ But whenspeech comes forth in this manner, for a few days the listenermay feel ‘this man speaks exactly like Dadaji’ but where willthat take you? After a few days, it will make you fall hard; it willnot let you go.Become a child of The GnaniWhen someone gives you a compliment by saying, ‘Youspoke very well,’ tell him, ‘I am simply a child of Dada.’ JustAptavani-9455456Aptavani-9is jagruti. This ‘Dada’ remains in your memory all day long.This awareness of ‘I am Shuddhatma’ is there because of‘Dada’. It is called the fruit of his grace (krupa-phala),whereas, jagruti is a different thing altogether.There is no need to rush in this. This Gnan that you haveattained is so rare, that one cannot attain it even in a hundredthousand life times. Having attained it with such ease and in ashort while, one becomes embroiled in a rush and frenzy(raghavaat). This is not a line of shortcuts or impatience. Thisis the line of harmony, patience and stillness.The Lord considers the establishment of the awareness(laksha) of ‘I am Shuddhatma’ a greatest thing. In the Kramicpath, there is conviction (pratiti) of only ‘words’ that describethe attributes of the Self. One attains the conviction of thewords, which describe the attributes of the Shuddhatma as ‘I amthis’ and they place a great value on this conviction of words;they call this state samkit. However this conviction is only ofwords, whereas you have attained the conviction of the vastu –the actual Soul; the Self. It is a conviction that is natural to theSelf (swabhavik pratiti). That is why this conviction (pratiti) iscalled kshayak (eternal). This Gnan can do a great deal ofwork; it is a tremendous wonder.Subtle change of ownership when talking toothers about DadaSo if you want to achieve the absolute state ofenlightenment (The Self) then maintain a very careful vigil; bevery alert. As far as possible, do not say anything in any placewhatsoever. Do not try to explain this Gnan to anyone.Otherwise there will be contrary result. To speak even a wordof the speech of the Vitarag is a biggest spiritual liability.What do people care, they will stick around you. All theycare about is that they will get something. Do they not stickaround you if they think they are going to get something fromyou? You simply have to tell them, ‘This is not a task for me.’You cannot utter even a word; otherwise it will ruin everythingwithin you.Questioner: But can we not at least talk about our ownexperiences?Dadashri: There is no experience. The talk that comesout is really the words that ‘we’ have spoken. Those words arenow sprouting forth. The experience however, comes veryslowly.So the entire Vignan of the vitarag should be present. Noone knows even a fraction of this Vignan. It is ‘our’ speech thathad entered within, is what is coming forth. And if some strong-headed intellectual were to come along, he will destroyeverything with just a few words. Knowledge that is based onthe intellect (buddhigamya) will not work, will it? The worldalready has intellectual knowledge, does it not? Arey! Peoplehave memorized volumes and volumes of scriptures. You willbecome confused if they utter just one word.It is ‘our’ Gnan that has been given to you as a seed thathas grown and has produced the resulting (parinaam) experience.What ‘we’ have given you remains in the form of a seed withinand it will grow again to give results. At the most you may talkabout the Gnan by saying, ‘Dadaji used to say…’ But whenspeech comes forth in this manner, for a few days the listenermay feel ‘this man speaks exactly like Dadaji’ but where willthat take you? After a few days, it will make you fall hard; it willnot let you go.Become a child of The GnaniWhen someone gives you a compliment by saying, ‘Youspoke very well,’ tell him, ‘I am simply a child of Dada.’ JustAptavani-9457458Aptavani-9maintain this much awareness and alertness and do not getinvolved in any other discussions.When you digest my words, they will grow and come outin speech. That is a different thing. However the words must beas they are, without any change in tone, intent and meaning forthe listener. The speech must not be made up or fabricatedthrough imagination and intellect. What is the big hurry for youanyway, at this time? Do you want to remain as a child of Dadaor do you want to become big and famous?Questioner: I want to remain as a child of Dada.Dadashri: That is it. There is fun in remaining as a child.That way there is a safe side and no danger for you. ‘Dada’ hasto carry you. And if someone says, ‘I have grown up,’ then ‘we’tell him, ‘yes, then go out and play on your own.’ ‘We’ try tomake him understand, ‘do not become ‘big’ and take off onyour own.’ but if he insists that he wants to, then ‘we’ let himgo. ‘Go ahead! You will come back when you get hurt and learnyour lesson.’ Our Gnan is such that it will not refrain fromteaching you a lesson.‘You’ simply have to tell your relative-self, ‘Chandulal,‘we’ know what you are like. So do not trap ‘us’.’ ‘You’ shouldtalk to him this way. Tell him, “We’ are with you when youbecome learned and proficient in this matter, but if you trap ‘us’in trouble, then you will be sorry!’This is how everyone has grown up, have they not? Achild will learn to climb and if he falls, he will get up again andso on. First, he learns to push the walker around for support andthen he learns to walk on his own. So this is the way to learn.Is this not the only way?So if you want to complete the work (of your ownsalvation), then remember only one thing; if someone asks youanything, just tell them, ‘I don’t know anything, please go toDadaji.’Hold the silence to attain the ultimate stateof liberationDo not get involved in discussion (conduct satsang) withpeople until you have attained your goal of absolute liberation(purnahuti). It is not something worth getting into. Yes, you maysay this much to people, ‘Go there, over there, the satsang isvery good, this is how you may attain it, etc.’ You may say thismuch, but do not preach anything. This is not something you canpreach (updesh) to others. This is Akram Vignan; the science ofa short-cut and step-free path to Self-realization.For those who have attained Dada’s Gnan, what theyspeak comes out is solely on the basis of Dada’s Gnan andhearing such a speech, the world will surrender everything tohim. What happens when people surrender in this way? He willbe left trapped and hanging. All those kashayas of subtle pride,greed, self-validation, ego, and deception that have been layingdormant (upsham) within, will ignite. These words havetremendous appeal and attraction. This Gnan is very attractive.Therefore, remain silent. If you want to get complete benefit(liberation) then remain silent. If you want to open up a ‘shop’,then you are free to talk. But such a shop will hardly have anycustomers, and it will not last. It is because this is a ‘given Gnan- you have been given this knowledge,’ and so it will not be longbefore it vanishes. Such a shop runs for a while in the Kramic- traditional path of liberation. It lasts for two or five or even tenlife times but then, that too vanishes. Opening a shop istantamount to selling off your siddhi – stock of spiritual energyattained so far. That which has been attained is being abusedand sold off.Goshada was a disciple of Lord Mahavir. He was a veryspecial disciple of the Lord. However, towards the end hebecame an adversary of the Lord. He had spent a lot of timewith the Lord. As time went by he began to feel that heunderstood all the Gnan. He left the Lord, went off on his ownAptavani-9457458Aptavani-9maintain this much awareness and alertness and do not getinvolved in any other discussions.When you digest my words, they will grow and come outin speech. That is a different thing. However the words must beas they are, without any change in tone, intent and meaning forthe listener. The speech must not be made up or fabricatedthrough imagination and intellect. What is the big hurry for youanyway, at this time? Do you want to remain as a child of Dadaor do you want to become big and famous?Questioner: I want to remain as a child of Dada.Dadashri: That is it. There is fun in remaining as a child.That way there is a safe side and no danger for you. ‘Dada’ hasto carry you. And if someone says, ‘I have grown up,’ then ‘we’tell him, ‘yes, then go out and play on your own.’ ‘We’ try tomake him understand, ‘do not become ‘big’ and take off onyour own.’ but if he insists that he wants to, then ‘we’ let himgo. ‘Go ahead! You will come back when you get hurt and learnyour lesson.’ Our Gnan is such that it will not refrain fromteaching you a lesson.‘You’ simply have to tell your relative-self, ‘Chandulal,‘we’ know what you are like. So do not trap ‘us’.’ ‘You’ shouldtalk to him this way. Tell him, “We’ are with you when youbecome learned and proficient in this matter, but if you trap ‘us’in trouble, then you will be sorry!’This is how everyone has grown up, have they not? Achild will learn to climb and if he falls, he will get up again andso on. First, he learns to push the walker around for support andthen he learns to walk on his own. So this is the way to learn.Is this not the only way?So if you want to complete the work (of your ownsalvation), then remember only one thing; if someone asks youanything, just tell them, ‘I don’t know anything, please go toDadaji.’Hold the silence to attain the ultimate stateof liberationDo not get involved in discussion (conduct satsang) withpeople until you have attained your goal of absolute liberation(purnahuti). It is not something worth getting into. Yes, you maysay this much to people, ‘Go there, over there, the satsang isvery good, this is how you may attain it, etc.’ You may say thismuch, but do not preach anything. This is not something you canpreach (updesh) to others. This is Akram Vignan; the science ofa short-cut and step-free path to Self-realization.For those who have attained Dada’s Gnan, what theyspeak comes out is solely on the basis of Dada’s Gnan andhearing such a speech, the world will surrender everything tohim. What happens when people surrender in this way? He willbe left trapped and hanging. All those kashayas of subtle pride,greed, self-validation, ego, and deception that have been layingdormant (upsham) within, will ignite. These words havetremendous appeal and attraction. This Gnan is very attractive.Therefore, remain silent. If you want to get complete benefit(liberation) then remain silent. If you want to open up a ‘shop’,then you are free to talk. But such a shop will hardly have anycustomers, and it will not last. It is because this is a ‘given Gnan- you have been given this knowledge,’ and so it will not be longbefore it vanishes. Such a shop runs for a while in the Kramic- traditional path of liberation. It lasts for two or five or even tenlife times but then, that too vanishes. Opening a shop istantamount to selling off your siddhi – stock of spiritual energyattained so far. That which has been attained is being abusedand sold off.Goshada was a disciple of Lord Mahavir. He was a veryspecial disciple of the Lord. However, towards the end hebecame an adversary of the Lord. He had spent a lot of timewith the Lord. As time went by he began to feel that heunderstood all the Gnan. He left the Lord, went off on his ownAptavani-9459460Aptavani-9elated. The fool! These are all signs of going to hell. There isgrave danger in this. Such habits, that have taken hold, will notleave.Questioner: How can one tell whether he has an intensecraving to be worshipped (poojavani kaamna)?Dadashri: He can know everything; he knows what helikes. Does he not know that he likes ice cream? The‘thermometer’ (gauge) within, The Self, is there, hence heknows everything.The human beings of the current era are very lalachu -insatiably greedy. They create their own world of self-importance;they create situations where they get praise wherever they go.And those who covet praise and recognition will not be able toattain the truth. Everywhere you look, people have started theirown shops of worship. They have an intense inner craving to beworshipped and praised. The moment someone folds his handsand bows his head to him in a praiseful manner, the internalsweet tingling rises in a crescendo. He wallows with indulgencein such temporary pleasures.That is a completely wrong path. There is no graverdisease than this intense craving to be worshipped. Who is to beworshipped? The Self is indeed the One to be worshipped. Sowhere is the need to worship the body? But there is tremendousgreed and craving for wanting to be worshipped. What are yougoing to gain from the worship of the body that is inevitablygoing to be burnt in the funeral pyre? But alas! That lalachakashaya - the kashaya of insatiable greed is such that he seeksto be worshipped. So these are all intense cravings (lalasa) ofwanting to be recognized and worshipped. Otherwise, liberationis not difficult to attain. These tendencies (daanat) that existwithin are difficult and problematic.It is very dangerous if such cravings arise. Have you everhad such a craving or desire? Do you ever feel ‘tickled’ inside,and started proclaiming, ‘I am the tirthankara, he (meaning LordMahavir) is not a tirthankara.’ At other times he used to say, ‘heis a tirthankara, and so am I’. What can become of a persononce this disease sets in?Now when one does not behave even in the directpresence of Lord Mahavir, how likely is he to behave before‘us’ and not go astray? What happens to people if they breakbefore they have a chance of becoming strong? And thatincident with Goshada took place in the fourth era whereas thisis the fifth era, a destructive time cycle as compared to the fourthera; it will ruin countless lives to come.People have taken just this kind of beatings from timeimmemorial. They have had this very same beating over andover again. The slightest taste of the inner pleasure sends the‘monkey ego’ scrambling way up to the top.The intense greed and craving to beworshippedDo you ever have an intense craving (kaamna) to bepraised or worshipped (poojavu)? Let me know if you do, Iwill help you suppress it. That desire will stop if ‘we’ cut it offat its roots. That kaamna is very dangerous. Such kaamnadoes not arise in you, does it? It will arise some day for sure!So consider it a danger and proceed with great caution. Whenpeople praise you and welcome you, you will develop a habitfor it; it will take hold of you from within, just like the habit ofdrinking tea. Then when you don’t get it, you become perplexedand suffer. You will resort to deception (kapat) in order to getrespect and praise from others. There is great danger in this, sobeware.But what are people hungry for? What is their bheekh -beggary for? It is a beggary; the need to be worshipped. Andwhen someone even does ‘this’, give them respect by placingtheir palms together and bowing their head to him, he becomesAptavani-9459460Aptavani-9elated. The fool! These are all signs of going to hell. There isgrave danger in this. Such habits, that have taken hold, will notleave.Questioner: How can one tell whether he has an intensecraving to be worshipped (poojavani kaamna)?Dadashri: He can know everything; he knows what helikes. Does he not know that he likes ice cream? The‘thermometer’ (gauge) within, The Self, is there, hence heknows everything.The human beings of the current era are very lalachu -insatiably greedy. They create their own world of self-importance;they create situations where they get praise wherever they go.And those who covet praise and recognition will not be able toattain the truth. Everywhere you look, people have started theirown shops of worship. They have an intense inner craving to beworshipped and praised. The moment someone folds his handsand bows his head to him in a praiseful manner, the internalsweet tingling rises in a crescendo. He wallows with indulgencein such temporary pleasures.That is a completely wrong path. There is no graverdisease than this intense craving to be worshipped. Who is to beworshipped? The Self is indeed the One to be worshipped. Sowhere is the need to worship the body? But there is tremendousgreed and craving for wanting to be worshipped. What are yougoing to gain from the worship of the body that is inevitablygoing to be burnt in the funeral pyre? But alas! That lalachakashaya - the kashaya of insatiable greed is such that he seeksto be worshipped. So these are all intense cravings (lalasa) ofwanting to be recognized and worshipped. Otherwise, liberationis not difficult to attain. These tendencies (daanat) that existwithin are difficult and problematic.It is very dangerous if such cravings arise. Have you everhad such a craving or desire? Do you ever feel ‘tickled’ inside,and started proclaiming, ‘I am the tirthankara, he (meaning LordMahavir) is not a tirthankara.’ At other times he used to say, ‘heis a tirthankara, and so am I’. What can become of a persononce this disease sets in?Now when one does not behave even in the directpresence of Lord Mahavir, how likely is he to behave before‘us’ and not go astray? What happens to people if they breakbefore they have a chance of becoming strong? And thatincident with Goshada took place in the fourth era whereas thisis the fifth era, a destructive time cycle as compared to the fourthera; it will ruin countless lives to come.People have taken just this kind of beatings from timeimmemorial. They have had this very same beating over andover again. The slightest taste of the inner pleasure sends the‘monkey ego’ scrambling way up to the top.The intense greed and craving to beworshippedDo you ever have an intense craving (kaamna) to bepraised or worshipped (poojavu)? Let me know if you do, Iwill help you suppress it. That desire will stop if ‘we’ cut it offat its roots. That kaamna is very dangerous. Such kaamnadoes not arise in you, does it? It will arise some day for sure!So consider it a danger and proceed with great caution. Whenpeople praise you and welcome you, you will develop a habitfor it; it will take hold of you from within, just like the habit ofdrinking tea. Then when you don’t get it, you become perplexedand suffer. You will resort to deception (kapat) in order to getrespect and praise from others. There is great danger in this, sobeware.But what are people hungry for? What is their bheekh -beggary for? It is a beggary; the need to be worshipped. Andwhen someone even does ‘this’, give them respect by placingtheir palms together and bowing their head to him, he becomesAptavani-9461462Aptavani-9even a little? That is why ‘we’ caution everyone. People will fallif ‘we’ do not warn you of this danger. If one were to fall havingarrived at such a high and worthy place, he will become uselessand get hurt very badly. He will not get hurt so bad if he fallsfrom a lower height but he will get hurt very badly if he hasattained a very high level. So remain wherever you are and donot fall (regress) from there.Do not bring your own words into this. Take the wordsthat I speak here and use them as they are. Do not even builda new ‘station’. Or have you already built one? You have notdug holes for the foundation have you? You have not builtanything have you? Should there not be a warning sign in place?Or else where will you end up? This path is very different andyou will encounter so many enticing places and situations alongthe way. You have never encountered such enticing situationsbefore. Even highly evolved spiritual beings have fallen victim tothis, so what hope is there for you? So follow this path of ‘DadaBhagwan’ properly. It is ‘a clear and a first-class road!’ Thereis no risk or anything on it.Danger zones in the path of mokshaLeave and forsake anything that interferes in the path ofliberation and proceed forward. That is considered, as followingthe goal. You must make sure that you must not lose sight ofyour own goal (dhyeya) of moksha no matter how difficult thecircumstance you encounter.Some days, does everything work out according to yourgoal? Nothing goes off track? So it has all become natural(sahaj), has it not?Questioner: I have to keep turning the ‘handle’ within.Dadashri: Do you have to keep turning it? But do they- the kashayas of greed, pride, anger and deceit, listen to you?Right away?Questioner: Yes, right away.Dadashri: Right away? It takes no time? That is good.The hallmark of internal separation and liberation is the extent towhich ‘they’ listen to You. The more they pay attention to Yourinstructions and listen to You, the greater the freedom. You areseparate from them by that much. The Self - the absolute Soulcannot be bribed. It cannot be tempted by any bribes. When theself takes bribes and succumbs to such intense greed (lalacha),the kashayas will stop listening to You – the enlightened Self. Ifthe self if being deceitful in corruption, then it will stop listeningto You - the Self who has the goal of moving ahead on the pathof liberation. Once one tastes the fruits of intense greed(lalacha) and the bribes, those inner enemies (kashaya) will notlisten to him.Such worldly interaction (vyavahar) will indeed drag oneonly in the contrary direction, will it not? Such has been thevyavahar for infinite lives, and this has been the path, has it not?So now even when it goes towards the other side (the worldlyside), you have to steer it towards your own goal. An ox willautomatically walk on the old path it is used to, will it not? NowYou need to follow the path according to Your goal and not theother way, the old path that you were used to. You have to say,‘Not this way, walk on this one.’So the inner enemies—anger, pride, deceit and greed, willlisten if you do not take the bribe. But once you take a bribe,the suffering from all aspects will follow. Hence, you must neverdeviate or step off from the decided goal – your dhyeya.Questioner: What is that bribe like?Dadashri: One will go and taste it. And in doing so if hefinds sweetness in it, he will sit and linger there. Having tastedit once, he will return for a bottle or two of the same!All this is deceptive tendency (kapat daanat). One wantsto follow the path of moksha but also has a deceptive intent;Aptavani-9461462Aptavani-9even a little? That is why ‘we’ caution everyone. People will fallif ‘we’ do not warn you of this danger. If one were to fall havingarrived at such a high and worthy place, he will become uselessand get hurt very badly. He will not get hurt so bad if he fallsfrom a lower height but he will get hurt very badly if he hasattained a very high level. So remain wherever you are and donot fall (regress) from there.Do not bring your own words into this. Take the wordsthat I speak here and use them as they are. Do not even builda new ‘station’. Or have you already built one? You have notdug holes for the foundation have you? You have not builtanything have you? Should there not be a warning sign in place?Or else where will you end up? This path is very different andyou will encounter so many enticing places and situations alongthe way. You have never encountered such enticing situationsbefore. Even highly evolved spiritual beings have fallen victim tothis, so what hope is there for you? So follow this path of ‘DadaBhagwan’ properly. It is ‘a clear and a first-class road!’ Thereis no risk or anything on it.Danger zones in the path of mokshaLeave and forsake anything that interferes in the path ofliberation and proceed forward. That is considered, as followingthe goal. You must make sure that you must not lose sight ofyour own goal (dhyeya) of moksha no matter how difficult thecircumstance you encounter.Some days, does everything work out according to yourgoal? Nothing goes off track? So it has all become natural(sahaj), has it not?Questioner: I have to keep turning the ‘handle’ within.Dadashri: Do you have to keep turning it? But do they- the kashayas of greed, pride, anger and deceit, listen to you?Right away?Questioner: Yes, right away.Dadashri: Right away? It takes no time? That is good.The hallmark of internal separation and liberation is the extent towhich ‘they’ listen to You. The more they pay attention to Yourinstructions and listen to You, the greater the freedom. You areseparate from them by that much. The Self - the absolute Soulcannot be bribed. It cannot be tempted by any bribes. When theself takes bribes and succumbs to such intense greed (lalacha),the kashayas will stop listening to You – the enlightened Self. Ifthe self if being deceitful in corruption, then it will stop listeningto You - the Self who has the goal of moving ahead on the pathof liberation. Once one tastes the fruits of intense greed(lalacha) and the bribes, those inner enemies (kashaya) will notlisten to him.Such worldly interaction (vyavahar) will indeed drag oneonly in the contrary direction, will it not? Such has been thevyavahar for infinite lives, and this has been the path, has it not?So now even when it goes towards the other side (the worldlyside), you have to steer it towards your own goal. An ox willautomatically walk on the old path it is used to, will it not? NowYou need to follow the path according to Your goal and not theother way, the old path that you were used to. You have to say,‘Not this way, walk on this one.’So the inner enemies—anger, pride, deceit and greed, willlisten if you do not take the bribe. But once you take a bribe,the suffering from all aspects will follow. Hence, you must neverdeviate or step off from the decided goal – your dhyeya.Questioner: What is that bribe like?Dadashri: One will go and taste it. And in doing so if hefinds sweetness in it, he will sit and linger there. Having tastedit once, he will return for a bottle or two of the same!All this is deceptive tendency (kapat daanat). One wantsto follow the path of moksha but also has a deceptive intent;Aptavani-9463464Aptavani-9how can the two co-exist? He should have a pure and clearinner intent (daanat) without an iota of deception to taste anypromise or lure of pleasure. The problem is the old habit ofdelving into and tasting the pleasures of the mind and body. Indoing so one tends to linger there enjoying the temporarypleasures therein (masti).Questioner: Is the pleasure seeking behavior (masti)that of the prakruti (the non-Self complex of thoughts, speechand body)?Dadashri: Then who else’s? That is the habit he (therelative-self) has developed, has he not? So You (the enlightenedSelf) need to tell the non-Self, ‘no, I need to go this way, I don’twant any masti (transient pleasure), I wish to proceed on mypath and attain my goal.’ These mastis of the prakruti will leadyou in a web of entrapment.That which breaks Your goal is your enemy. How canYou afford to have your goal destroyed? Otherwise, suchbehavior of indulgence is analogous to entertaining sexualthoughts and ideas (abrahmacharya) while wanting to remainon the path of celibacy (brahmacharya). Pleasure will arisewithin thoughts, but what can you do? Is it not a grave fault?Then naturally, your goal is bound to become infested with the‘disease’! Putrefaction will start to invade, will it not?Here, you have to make the mind so tenacious and firmthat whatever happens in this life, even if this body were toleave, in this very life the ‘work’ needs to be finished andaccomplished. Such an unflinching and unwavering decision hasto be made. The work will then definitely be accomplished byitself. You have to make this firm, for Yourself. There must notbe any sloppiness on Your part. Thereafter, whatever happensis correct. Thereafter you must not worry if some things do notwork out. Everything will come along.What is the extent of your authority (adhikaar) in this? Itis your bhaav - the deep inner intent - of ‘I would like toaccomplish this much.’ The nischaya - the determining energyof the Self; you must use this authority of yours. And secondly,be careful that you do not allow any external disease of ‘Let megive satsang of Akram Vignan to a few people’. Care must beexercised in this regard otherwise new diseases will creep in andfeed the inner enemies of pride, and lead you astray. It will pullyou away on to the wrong path. What becomes of the one whogoes astray? There will be no one to save him and bring himback to the main path. Therefore, if You desire liberation do notindulge in ‘talking about this’. If anyone asks you anything, justsay, ‘I do not know.’‘We’ are pointing out all the danger zones and pitfalls onthe path of liberation. Things will go wrong if ‘we’ do not pointthem out. All these mahatmas listening here have come herewith tremendous merit karma and hence this speech and thistopic has expressed in such exact details. Otherwise how is oneto know? And why would ‘we’ enter into such depths? Thismatter has come forth in the course of our discussion. Otherwisewho had knowledge that such things do indeed go on?To move on inconspicuouslyAlochana—to recall and confess wrongdoing - beginsfrom the moment you tell ‘us’ what and how it has happened.Whatever has happened is immaterial. It is always forgiven. Butthe moment you tell ‘us’ exactly as it happened, that is thebeginning of alochana. That means you have turned aroundfrom that path. Then ‘we’ clean it all. This path is filled withpitfalls, so be careful. There is extreme danger in it. Do notdiscuss a word with anyone. And if you want to, come and tellme, I will then tell you, ‘Now you may speak.’ Otherwise, thereis grave danger in saying even a word.The world’s salvation will occur, whenever the timecomes. When nature makes you ready as the nimit (instrument)Aptavani-9463464Aptavani-9how can the two co-exist? He should have a pure and clearinner intent (daanat) without an iota of deception to taste anypromise or lure of pleasure. The problem is the old habit ofdelving into and tasting the pleasures of the mind and body. Indoing so one tends to linger there enjoying the temporarypleasures therein (masti).Questioner: Is the pleasure seeking behavior (masti)that of the prakruti (the non-Self complex of thoughts, speechand body)?Dadashri: Then who else’s? That is the habit he (therelative-self) has developed, has he not? So You (the enlightenedSelf) need to tell the non-Self, ‘no, I need to go this way, I don’twant any masti (transient pleasure), I wish to proceed on mypath and attain my goal.’ These mastis of the prakruti will leadyou in a web of entrapment.That which breaks Your goal is your enemy. How canYou afford to have your goal destroyed? Otherwise, suchbehavior of indulgence is analogous to entertaining sexualthoughts and ideas (abrahmacharya) while wanting to remainon the path of celibacy (brahmacharya). Pleasure will arisewithin thoughts, but what can you do? Is it not a grave fault?Then naturally, your goal is bound to become infested with the‘disease’! Putrefaction will start to invade, will it not?Here, you have to make the mind so tenacious and firmthat whatever happens in this life, even if this body were toleave, in this very life the ‘work’ needs to be finished andaccomplished. Such an unflinching and unwavering decision hasto be made. The work will then definitely be accomplished byitself. You have to make this firm, for Yourself. There must notbe any sloppiness on Your part. Thereafter, whatever happensis correct. Thereafter you must not worry if some things do notwork out. Everything will come along.What is the extent of your authority (adhikaar) in this? Itis your bhaav - the deep inner intent - of ‘I would like toaccomplish this much.’ The nischaya - the determining energyof the Self; you must use this authority of yours. And secondly,be careful that you do not allow any external disease of ‘Let megive satsang of Akram Vignan to a few people’. Care must beexercised in this regard otherwise new diseases will creep in andfeed the inner enemies of pride, and lead you astray. It will pullyou away on to the wrong path. What becomes of the one whogoes astray? There will be no one to save him and bring himback to the main path. Therefore, if You desire liberation do notindulge in ‘talking about this’. If anyone asks you anything, justsay, ‘I do not know.’‘We’ are pointing out all the danger zones and pitfalls onthe path of liberation. Things will go wrong if ‘we’ do not pointthem out. All these mahatmas listening here have come herewith tremendous merit karma and hence this speech and thistopic has expressed in such exact details. Otherwise how is oneto know? And why would ‘we’ enter into such depths? Thismatter has come forth in the course of our discussion. Otherwisewho had knowledge that such things do indeed go on?To move on inconspicuouslyAlochana—to recall and confess wrongdoing - beginsfrom the moment you tell ‘us’ what and how it has happened.Whatever has happened is immaterial. It is always forgiven. Butthe moment you tell ‘us’ exactly as it happened, that is thebeginning of alochana. That means you have turned aroundfrom that path. Then ‘we’ clean it all. This path is filled withpitfalls, so be careful. There is extreme danger in it. Do notdiscuss a word with anyone. And if you want to, come and tellme, I will then tell you, ‘Now you may speak.’ Otherwise, thereis grave danger in saying even a word.The world’s salvation will occur, whenever the timecomes. When nature makes you ready as the nimit (instrument)Aptavani-9465466Aptavani-9- of salvation, then proceed. You should not try to becomeready on your own. This is not something one can get ready for.If you try to sell the siddhis - spiritual energy - what will theworld not give you? But in the process you will lose your wealthof the human form. Not only will you lose it, but you willbecome eligible to go to hell!Ours is the path to moksha where one has to go verysilently and secretly.Subservience to the Gnani PurushDo not let go of this satsang no matter what others tellyou. You will receive the Lord’s grace - krupa - when youcome here, and everything will fall into place. It will not takelong at all. Problems and difficulties are inevitable on the way,which is why we say, ‘In the face of all kinds of obstacles onthe path to moksha, I am the one with infinite energy.’ At thesame time the non-Self complex, as an opponent with its infiniteenergy is there too, which prevents Your moksha.That is why the Lord has said, ‘Proceed with subservience(aadhinta) to the Gnani Purush; follow his instructions. Even ifhe says something that does not quite sit with you or soundscrazy, follow his instructions all the way. This is because He isvitarag. If you cannot understand through your intellect, then justmake the decision that since you have understood and acceptednine of the Gnani’s ten equations, it is immaterial if you do notunderstand the tenth one. Do not find Him at fault. Just acceptthe fact that it is your own mistake that you do not understandHim. Why is it that you cannot understand His one point whenyou can understand the rest? So do not find Him at fault here.He has destroyed all His mistakes. The intellect is bound toshow you fault even in the Gnani Purush.We can make do if it were a question of death of just onelifetime, but when you do viradhana - irreverence and negativetalk about the Gnani Purush - you will incur deaths of a hundredthousand lifetimes. Whose viradhana are you doing? Of avitarag?! You may curse this ‘Ambalal Muljibhai’ a hundredtimes over. Go ahead and do so if you don’t agree with him! Butgenerally people make this grave error without even understandinganything. That is why ‘we’ had to keep this Gnan a secret, andhad continued to keep it a secret for many years.I have said that I am taking you to a very high place. Ifyou fall from there, you will not find even a fragment of yourbones. So either do not come up with me or if you want tocome with me, then tread very gently. Moksha is simple andstraightforward; this Vignan is such that it guarantees finalliberation in one more lifetime. But do not come up with me ifyou want to misbehave. I have already told everyone this. Thisroad goes up very high and there will not be a bone left to befound if you fall from there. All the same, some who have comeup with me, often worry and tell me, ‘He is likely to instigateagain; he will do this’. However, I have built such a protectionfor him that he will not fall. Just as the authorities have installedguard barriers, I too have a protection barrier. I have notallowed anyone to fall yet.Behold the compassion of the GnaniThe Gnani Purush will show you whatever ‘disease’ theremay be within. He will not show you any other faults (dosh).This is because He wants to cure you of the disease. Do doctorscure a patient’s disease or increase it? Besides, are ‘we’ sayingall this for our own goal or benefit? ‘We’ are saying all thisespecially for you and that too with vitaragata - absolute andcomplete detachment. The disease will not be eradicatedwithout stern words. What removes this disease? Vitaragata andstern words! The sternness in those words is such that it willbreak every joint in your body. And at the same time thosewords are filled with complete vitaragata.This ‘Dada’ sits leisurely as he continues to cleanseAptavani-9465466Aptavani-9- of salvation, then proceed. You should not try to becomeready on your own. This is not something one can get ready for.If you try to sell the siddhis - spiritual energy - what will theworld not give you? But in the process you will lose your wealthof the human form. Not only will you lose it, but you willbecome eligible to go to hell!Ours is the path to moksha where one has to go verysilently and secretly.Subservience to the Gnani PurushDo not let go of this satsang no matter what others tellyou. You will receive the Lord’s grace - krupa - when youcome here, and everything will fall into place. It will not takelong at all. Problems and difficulties are inevitable on the way,which is why we say, ‘In the face of all kinds of obstacles onthe path to moksha, I am the one with infinite energy.’ At thesame time the non-Self complex, as an opponent with its infiniteenergy is there too, which prevents Your moksha.That is why the Lord has said, ‘Proceed with subservience(aadhinta) to the Gnani Purush; follow his instructions. Even ifhe says something that does not quite sit with you or soundscrazy, follow his instructions all the way. This is because He isvitarag. If you cannot understand through your intellect, then justmake the decision that since you have understood and acceptednine of the Gnani’s ten equations, it is immaterial if you do notunderstand the tenth one. Do not find Him at fault. Just acceptthe fact that it is your own mistake that you do not understandHim. Why is it that you cannot understand His one point whenyou can understand the rest? So do not find Him at fault here.He has destroyed all His mistakes. The intellect is bound toshow you fault even in the Gnani Purush.We can make do if it were a question of death of just onelifetime, but when you do viradhana - irreverence and negativetalk about the Gnani Purush - you will incur deaths of a hundredthousand lifetimes. Whose viradhana are you doing? Of avitarag?! You may curse this ‘Ambalal Muljibhai’ a hundredtimes over. Go ahead and do so if you don’t agree with him! Butgenerally people make this grave error without even understandinganything. That is why ‘we’ had to keep this Gnan a secret, andhad continued to keep it a secret for many years.I have said that I am taking you to a very high place. Ifyou fall from there, you will not find even a fragment of yourbones. So either do not come up with me or if you want tocome with me, then tread very gently. Moksha is simple andstraightforward; this Vignan is such that it guarantees finalliberation in one more lifetime. But do not come up with me ifyou want to misbehave. I have already told everyone this. Thisroad goes up very high and there will not be a bone left to befound if you fall from there. All the same, some who have comeup with me, often worry and tell me, ‘He is likely to instigateagain; he will do this’. However, I have built such a protectionfor him that he will not fall. Just as the authorities have installedguard barriers, I too have a protection barrier. I have notallowed anyone to fall yet.Behold the compassion of the GnaniThe Gnani Purush will show you whatever ‘disease’ theremay be within. He will not show you any other faults (dosh).This is because He wants to cure you of the disease. Do doctorscure a patient’s disease or increase it? Besides, are ‘we’ sayingall this for our own goal or benefit? ‘We’ are saying all thisespecially for you and that too with vitaragata - absolute andcomplete detachment. The disease will not be eradicatedwithout stern words. What removes this disease? Vitaragata andstern words! The sternness in those words is such that it willbreak every joint in your body. And at the same time thosewords are filled with complete vitaragata.This ‘Dada’ sits leisurely as he continues to cleanseAptavani-9467468Aptavani-9everyone and sort everyone out. Still how can I do this foreveryone? I would lose my mind. Don’t you think I have a lotto contend with from morning till night? How many ‘files’ mustcome to ‘us’ in a day? Some even tell me, ‘My husband did thisto me.’ Do ‘we’ have to teach even that?Questioner: There is not a single case, which has notcome before you Dada. All kinds of cases have come beforeYou.Dadashri: What else can we do then? In fact ‘We’ hadsaid ‘no’ to a couple of people but a voice from within said,‘Which ‘hospital’ will this poor man go to? If You send himaway from here, there is no ‘hospital’ out there suitable for him.’So then, I started dealing with such problems again. But, themind found it bothersome. It would often prompt ‘us’ to pushit away. Again from within that voice would say, ‘Where will thispoor man go? What other ‘hospital’ will he go to? Howevercrazy he may be, even if he does not know how to speak, orhas no manners or any redeeming qualities, no matter what heis like, let him be!’Questioner: The part that says, ‘it will be good if he goesaway’, what part is that? And which part says, ‘Where will thatpoor man go?’Dadashri: The part, ‘Where will he go?’ is that of theLord within, the Parmatma. That One is saying, ‘No matterhow crazy he is or how disrespectfully he speaks to ‘us’, wherewill he go?’ That is the Supreme Soul speaking within! No other‘hospital’ will shelter such a man. As it is, they do not even takecare of those who are good. And even if they were to keep suchpeople, they do not have any medicine to treat them with. Allthey have is some poultice of crushed powder, which will notwork here. For this, you need a special ‘glue’ that will stick themoment it is applied.Otherwise, who will stick his hand in this stinking mud?But even if just one human being is helped, he can then help somany others. And when ‘we’ scold anyone, it is with theintention to liberate. Otherwise, who would scold in this way?Who would ruin the mind? This scolding is for the salvation(kalyan) of that person. A father scolds his son to exercise hisfatherhood. More than the welfare of the son, he has the intensebeggary to be the father. If a husband is scolding his wife, hedoes it for his beggary of maintaining his superiority as ahusband (husband-hood; dhanipanu). But when the GnaniPurush scolds, He does it for the salvation of that person.The whole world is roasting like potatoes in the fire.People of this country as well as in foreign countries; everyoneis roasting in the worldly fire. When I told someone that peopleare roasting like sweet potatoes, he told me, ‘Dada, not only arethey roasting but they are now on fire! Whatever moisture therewas in the potatoes has gone and now they are on fire!’ Suchis the current predicament of everyone in the world. What mustbe the goal of ‘our’ satsang? It is to bring salvation for the world– jagat kalyan. This bhavna does not go to waste.What ‘We’ are saying is destroy all miseries. ‘We’ cannotbear to see these miseries and suffering. Still ‘we’ do notbecome emotional about it. At the same time ‘we’ remain thatmuch vitarag too. Despite this, ‘we’ cannot bear to see peoplesuffering. This is because ‘we’ know ‘our’ limits of tolerance(sahanshakti). ‘We’ know from ‘our’ own experiences andhow ‘we’ dealt with pain and suffering, so ‘we’ know whatthese people are going through. That verily is the expression of‘our’ compassion (karunyata).* * * * *Aptavani-9467468Aptavani-9everyone and sort everyone out. Still how can I do this foreveryone? I would lose my mind. Don’t you think I have a lotto contend with from morning till night? How many ‘files’ mustcome to ‘us’ in a day? Some even tell me, ‘My husband did thisto me.’ Do ‘we’ have to teach even that?Questioner: There is not a single case, which has notcome before you Dada. All kinds of cases have come beforeYou.Dadashri: What else can we do then? In fact ‘We’ hadsaid ‘no’ to a couple of people but a voice from within said,‘Which ‘hospital’ will this poor man go to? If You send himaway from here, there is no ‘hospital’ out there suitable for him.’So then, I started dealing with such problems again. But, themind found it bothersome. It would often prompt ‘us’ to pushit away. Again from within that voice would say, ‘Where will thispoor man go? What other ‘hospital’ will he go to? Howevercrazy he may be, even if he does not know how to speak, orhas no manners or any redeeming qualities, no matter what heis like, let him be!’Questioner: The part that says, ‘it will be good if he goesaway’, what part is that? And which part says, ‘Where will thatpoor man go?’Dadashri: The part, ‘Where will he go?’ is that of theLord within, the Parmatma. That One is saying, ‘No matterhow crazy he is or how disrespectfully he speaks to ‘us’, wherewill he go?’ That is the Supreme Soul speaking within! No other‘hospital’ will shelter such a man. As it is, they do not even takecare of those who are good. And even if they were to keep suchpeople, they do not have any medicine to treat them with. Allthey have is some poultice of crushed powder, which will notwork here. For this, you need a special ‘glue’ that will stick themoment it is applied.Otherwise, who will stick his hand in this stinking mud?But even if just one human being is helped, he can then help somany others. And when ‘we’ scold anyone, it is with theintention to liberate. Otherwise, who would scold in this way?Who would ruin the mind? This scolding is for the salvation(kalyan) of that person. A father scolds his son to exercise hisfatherhood. More than the welfare of the son, he has the intensebeggary to be the father. If a husband is scolding his wife, hedoes it for his beggary of maintaining his superiority as ahusband (husband-hood; dhanipanu). But when the GnaniPurush scolds, He does it for the salvation of that person.The whole world is roasting like potatoes in the fire.People of this country as well as in foreign countries; everyoneis roasting in the worldly fire. When I told someone that peopleare roasting like sweet potatoes, he told me, ‘Dada, not only arethey roasting but they are now on fire! Whatever moisture therewas in the potatoes has gone and now they are on fire!’ Suchis the current predicament of everyone in the world. What mustbe the goal of ‘our’ satsang? It is to bring salvation for the world– jagat kalyan. This bhavna does not go to waste.What ‘We’ are saying is destroy all miseries. ‘We’ cannotbear to see these miseries and suffering. Still ‘we’ do notbecome emotional about it. At the same time ‘we’ remain thatmuch vitarag too. Despite this, ‘we’ cannot bear to see peoplesuffering. This is because ‘we’ know ‘our’ limits of tolerance(sahanshakti). ‘We’ know from ‘our’ own experiences andhow ‘we’ dealt with pain and suffering, so ‘we’ know whatthese people are going through. That verily is the expression of‘our’ compassion (karunyata).* * * * *Aptavani-9469470Aptavani-9[9]I-ness (potapanu) : Supreme Soul (Parmatma)Oneness with the entire universeHere there is oneness (abheda bhaav). You and I are allone. I do not feel separate from any of you. And even with thefifty thousand people here, there is no sense of separation(judai) with anyone of them. Neither is there any separationwith the rest of the world. You are the one who has separation.So to begin with, I remain one (abheda) with all these fiftythousand mahatmas here, and secondarily I remain one with thewhole world. I do not have any separation (judai) with anyoneanywhere. Therefore, this is the primary oneness (abhedta) andthe other is the secondary oneness. I do not want anything else.I do not have any buddhi (intellect) and that is why I feeloneness with everyone. I feel like everything is mine. Separationoccurs in the presence of the intellect, so how can there be anyseparation when there is no intellect? Intellect creates separation(bheda); it shows ‘this is mine and that is yours’ and that isseparation. How can this division of ‘yours’ and ‘mine’ exist whenthere is no intellect? This divisive intellect (bheda buddhi) that hasarisen is the one that shows, ‘I am separate from this person’.Questioner: The moment one becomes separate (alag),he feels the separation (judai), does he not?Dadashri: And with that separation (alagata), one hasgone in the wrong direction. I do not have any separation withyou, but you have separation from me.Questioner: Do many people not say ‘we are all one’?Dadashri: One says that but the sense of separation(judai) remains. Until ‘that’ – the absolute state - is attained, theseparation will remain. One may say, ‘we are all one’ but as longas the precise ‘fitting’ does not occur, he will continue to feel theseparation. That is why I do not feel the separation from anyonein this world. I consider not only those who have come here, asmine but everyone else as mine too. They are all mine and I amtheirs.The experience of the Self increases as the duration andintensity of oneness prevails. Yes, the belief of separation isverily the reason for the dissipation of the energy of the Self. Allthese problems exist because of the belief of separation. Do youhave any judai - sense of separation - with anyone?Questioner: I want to remove this sense of separation,Dada.Dadashri: What are you saying? There is no other waybut to be rid of the separation. You will have to become abheda(one who has no separation with any one), will you not?Potapanu, (‘I-ness’); the last remnant of ‘I am this body’ willhave to leave. Once this potapanu leaves, the separation(judai) will go. Now, as long as there is intellect, this ‘I-ness’(potapanu) will not go away, will it? And as long as there isintellect, does it not create the separation (bheda)? Oncepotapanu leaves, one becomes abheda - the One withoutseparation.I-ness (potapanu)Look, let me tell you as it is; once and for all. A greatdeal of time, life after life, has passed in this way, for ‘us’. Thatis why I am showing you an easy way. I had to look for thepath on my own, but I am showing you the path that I havetraversed. I am giving you the key to unlock all the obstaclesalong the way.This ‘Ambalal Muljibhai Patel’, has let go of his ‘I-ness’Aptavani-9469470Aptavani-9[9]I-ness (potapanu) : Supreme Soul (Parmatma)Oneness with the entire universeHere there is oneness (abheda bhaav). You and I are allone. I do not feel separate from any of you. And even with thefifty thousand people here, there is no sense of separation(judai) with anyone of them. Neither is there any separationwith the rest of the world. You are the one who has separation.So to begin with, I remain one (abheda) with all these fiftythousand mahatmas here, and secondarily I remain one with thewhole world. I do not have any separation (judai) with anyoneanywhere. Therefore, this is the primary oneness (abhedta) andthe other is the secondary oneness. I do not want anything else.I do not have any buddhi (intellect) and that is why I feeloneness with everyone. I feel like everything is mine. Separationoccurs in the presence of the intellect, so how can there be anyseparation when there is no intellect? Intellect creates separation(bheda); it shows ‘this is mine and that is yours’ and that isseparation. How can this division of ‘yours’ and ‘mine’ exist whenthere is no intellect? This divisive intellect (bheda buddhi) that hasarisen is the one that shows, ‘I am separate from this person’.Questioner: The moment one becomes separate (alag),he feels the separation (judai), does he not?Dadashri: And with that separation (alagata), one hasgone in the wrong direction. I do not have any separation withyou, but you have separation from me.Questioner: Do many people not say ‘we are all one’?Dadashri: One says that but the sense of separation(judai) remains. Until ‘that’ – the absolute state - is attained, theseparation will remain. One may say, ‘we are all one’ but as longas the precise ‘fitting’ does not occur, he will continue to feel theseparation. That is why I do not feel the separation from anyonein this world. I consider not only those who have come here, asmine but everyone else as mine too. They are all mine and I amtheirs.The experience of the Self increases as the duration andintensity of oneness prevails. Yes, the belief of separation isverily the reason for the dissipation of the energy of the Self. Allthese problems exist because of the belief of separation. Do youhave any judai - sense of separation - with anyone?Questioner: I want to remove this sense of separation,Dada.Dadashri: What are you saying? There is no other waybut to be rid of the separation. You will have to become abheda(one who has no separation with any one), will you not?Potapanu, (‘I-ness’); the last remnant of ‘I am this body’ willhave to leave. Once this potapanu leaves, the separation(judai) will go. Now, as long as there is intellect, this ‘I-ness’(potapanu) will not go away, will it? And as long as there isintellect, does it not create the separation (bheda)? Oncepotapanu leaves, one becomes abheda - the One withoutseparation.I-ness (potapanu)Look, let me tell you as it is; once and for all. A greatdeal of time, life after life, has passed in this way, for ‘us’. Thatis why I am showing you an easy way. I had to look for thepath on my own, but I am showing you the path that I havetraversed. I am giving you the key to unlock all the obstaclesalong the way.This ‘Ambalal Muljibhai Patel’, has let go of his ‘I-ness’Aptavani-9471472Aptavani-9and surrendered everything only to the Lord. The Lord nowtakes care of everything for A. M. Patel, and He (the Lord)does take care of everything, does He not? The ‘I-ness’ thatwas there before, left with the departure of the ego. Otherwise,the ego is not such that it will leave.The separation exists only as long as there is the presenceof ‘I-ness’ (potapanu) and until then the Lord stays away. TheLord is with you as soon as you let go of the ‘I-ness’. Whydon’t you let it go? It is so easy! If you let go of the ‘I-ness’,then God Himself will take care of everything for you. You willnot have to do anything if you let go of the ‘I-ness’.Who do you know as ‘Dada Bhagwan’ in this? The oneyou see sitting in front of you is a ‘public trust’ called A. M.Patel. And people take him to satsang wherever they can,whenever the circumstance arises because there is no sense of‘I-ness’ within ‘us’.What has Shrimad Rajchandra said about a GnaniPurush? The Gnani Purush is the One who does not have eventhe slightest inclination (spruha). He has no beggary of any kind.He has no beggary for giving updesh (spiritual discourse); Hehas no beggary for disciples. He has no beggary to changeanyone for the better. He has no garva or garavata – no doer-ship or wallowing in worldly pleasures; no ‘I-ness’ (potapanu).All the above are inherent in ‘I-ness’.In this world there is not a single man that does not havea sense of ‘I-ness’. It is a different matter when we talk aboutthe universe; there we have the tirthankaras. But as far as thisworld is concerned, there is no one without ‘I-ness’. Only thosewho have fallen short of attaining the tirthankara lineage are freeof ‘I-ness’ in this world.The Gnani does not have ‘I-ness’What are the attributes and qualities of the one without ‘I-ness’? What does it mean to have no ‘I-ness’ (potapanu)? Ifyou were to tell a Gnani Purush, ‘Let us go to Mumbai today,’he will not say, ‘No’. If people take him to Mumbai, he will golike a ‘piece of baggage’ and he will return to Ahmedabad likea piece of baggage. So he does not have ‘I-ness’. If people ask‘us’ ‘Dadaji when shall we go?’ ‘We’ tell them, ‘Whenever itsuits you.’ ‘We’ do not say anything more. So when they takethis piece of baggage, there is nothing wrong in it. ‘We’ tellthem, ‘Son, take ‘us’ when it suits you’, because ‘we’ do nothave any ‘I-ness’.’ Do you think anyone who has ‘I-ness’ willgo anywhere like a piece of luggage? He will say, ‘I am notcoming today.’ Would anyone be ready to become a piece ofluggage? Would anyone say such a thing?Many people in Mumbai and Vadodara tell ‘us’, ‘Dada,it would have been nice if you had come early.’ They say suchthings, so ‘we’ tell them, ‘They bring me like a baggage and takeme away like a baggage.’ Then they understand, but they askme, ‘Why do you say ‘like a baggage’?’ Alas! If this is not likea baggage then what is it? The Lord is within for sure, but onthe outside if this is not a baggage, then what is it? Hence, thereis no ‘I-ness’.I will go wherever they carry ‘us’. Often there are manythings ‘we’ do not want to eat and yet we do, there are times‘we’ do not want to drink and yet ‘we’ do. ‘We’ even do otherthings that ‘we’ do not want to. ‘We’ do not have a say in thesematters. It is all mandatory (farajiyat). ‘We’ will drink your teato give you encouragement. Even if the tea is too strong and itdoes not suit the prakruti, ‘we’ will still drink it because it willmake you happy that ‘Dada drank my tea’. That is why ‘we’will drink it.During this journey that ‘we’ just made, ‘we’ did whatothers asked ‘us’ to. If they say, ‘You have to stay here’, ‘we’will stay there. If they say, ‘Now let us go from here,’ then ‘we’will do that.’ ‘We’ do not have any amaarapanu - ‘we-ness’.Aptavani-9471472Aptavani-9and surrendered everything only to the Lord. The Lord nowtakes care of everything for A. M. Patel, and He (the Lord)does take care of everything, does He not? The ‘I-ness’ thatwas there before, left with the departure of the ego. Otherwise,the ego is not such that it will leave.The separation exists only as long as there is the presenceof ‘I-ness’ (potapanu) and until then the Lord stays away. TheLord is with you as soon as you let go of the ‘I-ness’. Whydon’t you let it go? It is so easy! If you let go of the ‘I-ness’,then God Himself will take care of everything for you. You willnot have to do anything if you let go of the ‘I-ness’.Who do you know as ‘Dada Bhagwan’ in this? The oneyou see sitting in front of you is a ‘public trust’ called A. M.Patel. And people take him to satsang wherever they can,whenever the circumstance arises because there is no sense of‘I-ness’ within ‘us’.What has Shrimad Rajchandra said about a GnaniPurush? The Gnani Purush is the One who does not have eventhe slightest inclination (spruha). He has no beggary of any kind.He has no beggary for giving updesh (spiritual discourse); Hehas no beggary for disciples. He has no beggary to changeanyone for the better. He has no garva or garavata – no doer-ship or wallowing in worldly pleasures; no ‘I-ness’ (potapanu).All the above are inherent in ‘I-ness’.In this world there is not a single man that does not havea sense of ‘I-ness’. It is a different matter when we talk aboutthe universe; there we have the tirthankaras. But as far as thisworld is concerned, there is no one without ‘I-ness’. Only thosewho have fallen short of attaining the tirthankara lineage are freeof ‘I-ness’ in this world.The Gnani does not have ‘I-ness’What are the attributes and qualities of the one without ‘I-ness’? What does it mean to have no ‘I-ness’ (potapanu)? Ifyou were to tell a Gnani Purush, ‘Let us go to Mumbai today,’he will not say, ‘No’. If people take him to Mumbai, he will golike a ‘piece of baggage’ and he will return to Ahmedabad likea piece of baggage. So he does not have ‘I-ness’. If people ask‘us’ ‘Dadaji when shall we go?’ ‘We’ tell them, ‘Whenever itsuits you.’ ‘We’ do not say anything more. So when they takethis piece of baggage, there is nothing wrong in it. ‘We’ tellthem, ‘Son, take ‘us’ when it suits you’, because ‘we’ do nothave any ‘I-ness’.’ Do you think anyone who has ‘I-ness’ willgo anywhere like a piece of luggage? He will say, ‘I am notcoming today.’ Would anyone be ready to become a piece ofluggage? Would anyone say such a thing?Many people in Mumbai and Vadodara tell ‘us’, ‘Dada,it would have been nice if you had come early.’ They say suchthings, so ‘we’ tell them, ‘They bring me like a baggage and takeme away like a baggage.’ Then they understand, but they askme, ‘Why do you say ‘like a baggage’?’ Alas! If this is not likea baggage then what is it? The Lord is within for sure, but onthe outside if this is not a baggage, then what is it? Hence, thereis no ‘I-ness’.I will go wherever they carry ‘us’. Often there are manythings ‘we’ do not want to eat and yet we do, there are times‘we’ do not want to drink and yet ‘we’ do. ‘We’ even do otherthings that ‘we’ do not want to. ‘We’ do not have a say in thesematters. It is all mandatory (farajiyat). ‘We’ will drink your teato give you encouragement. Even if the tea is too strong and itdoes not suit the prakruti, ‘we’ will still drink it because it willmake you happy that ‘Dada drank my tea’. That is why ‘we’will drink it.During this journey that ‘we’ just made, ‘we’ did whatothers asked ‘us’ to. If they say, ‘You have to stay here’, ‘we’will stay there. If they say, ‘Now let us go from here,’ then ‘we’will do that.’ ‘We’ do not have any amaarapanu - ‘we-ness’.Aptavani-9473474Aptavani-9The ‘we-ness’ is gone completely. For too long ‘we’ have livedwith this ‘we-ness’. ‘We’ did not have any ‘my-ness’ –mamata from the beginning and therefore there was noproblem.It is like this, I am subservient (aadhin) to everyone.What is the reason behind this? It is because there is no ‘I-ness’(potapanu). Therefore, I am absolutely subservient to thecircumstances. I am also subservient to all of you. Subservientmeans a completely egoless state! To be subservient (aadhinta)is a very good thing. ‘We’ do whatever the person who is with‘us’ tells ‘us’ to do. ‘We’ do not have any opinions. If ‘we’ feelthat there is weakness in what he is saying, ‘we’ will tell him,‘brother, do it this way.’ After that, ‘we’ remain subservient.Naturalness is attained synchronously as thelast remnant of the ego leavesThis is ‘our’ naturalness (sahajikata). There is never anyproblem in the state of naturalness. There is never anyinterference, of any kind at all. If you say it is this way, then sobe it and if you say it is that way, then so be it. There is noremnant of potapanu (last traces of discharge ego). And you onthe other hand are not the kind to let go of this ‘potapanu’, areyou? To me if someone says, ‘we are going by car’ then it is fineand again tomorrow if he says, ‘we will have to go by train,’then that is fine too. There is never a ‘no’. ‘We’ (referring to theGnani Purush and the fully enlightened Lord within) have noobjection at all. ‘We’ have no opinion. This is naturalness.Naturalness is to follow the lead of the opinion of others; it is todo according to the wishes of others.‘We’ are always in the state of naturalness. Thisnaturalness is continuous. There is not a single moment out ofnaturalness. ‘We’ remain as nature keeps ‘us’, because the ego-less state has been attained. How can you become spontaneous(sahaj) with even the slightest existence of ‘I-ness’? When onegives up the last remnants of the ego (potapanu) he becomesnatural. When one attains naturalness (sahaj state) he cancontinuously remain in the awareness as the Self (atmaupayog).Drama begins when ‘I-ness’ decreasesPotapanu (‘I-ness’) is a very big word. There is not evena trace of ‘I-ness’ in ‘us’. Yet ‘we’ make Hiraba sit next to ‘us’.People ask ‘us’, ‘Who is this?’ and ‘we’ would tell them, ‘Thisis my wife.’ ‘We’ will say all that. ‘We’ will even tell Hiraba, ‘Ido not like to be without you.’ How good she must feel when‘we’ tell her that!But with ‘us’, it is all ‘dramatic’ (like acting in a play).One man tells me, ‘Can you bless my land by gracing it withyour footsteps?’ I told him, ‘Why should I have any problems?’‘We’ would also ask him about his land, such as when he madethe deal, how much he paid for it, etc. Some people may eventhink that Dada has become a land broker!If a person gets a benign white spot on his body but hekeeps showing it to me, I would gently rub my hand over it justto satisfy him.Questioner: That too is a drama, is it not?Dadashri: It is all a drama. The whole day is a drama for‘us’. All my actions of the entire day are a drama. If you take‘us’ to your home for darshan, that too is as a drama. If it werenot a drama, then the ‘I-ness’ (potapanu) would be there.Because there is no ‘I-ness’; the drama is exact. Otherwise, itwould be like, ‘I will have to go there for a visit. I will have togo there to give darshan’, but there is no such thing within.Therefore, all this is nothing but a drama. The wholedaylong I am doing a ‘drama’. When I sit in the satsang andanswer questions, that too is a drama. But the drama starts onlywhen the ‘I-ness’ (potapanu), decreases and not otherwise.Aptavani-9473474Aptavani-9The ‘we-ness’ is gone completely. For too long ‘we’ have livedwith this ‘we-ness’. ‘We’ did not have any ‘my-ness’ –mamata from the beginning and therefore there was noproblem.It is like this, I am subservient (aadhin) to everyone.What is the reason behind this? It is because there is no ‘I-ness’(potapanu). Therefore, I am absolutely subservient to thecircumstances. I am also subservient to all of you. Subservientmeans a completely egoless state! To be subservient (aadhinta)is a very good thing. ‘We’ do whatever the person who is with‘us’ tells ‘us’ to do. ‘We’ do not have any opinions. If ‘we’ feelthat there is weakness in what he is saying, ‘we’ will tell him,‘brother, do it this way.’ After that, ‘we’ remain subservient.Naturalness is attained synchronously as thelast remnant of the ego leavesThis is ‘our’ naturalness (sahajikata). There is never anyproblem in the state of naturalness. There is never anyinterference, of any kind at all. If you say it is this way, then sobe it and if you say it is that way, then so be it. There is noremnant of potapanu (last traces of discharge ego). And you onthe other hand are not the kind to let go of this ‘potapanu’, areyou? To me if someone says, ‘we are going by car’ then it is fineand again tomorrow if he says, ‘we will have to go by train,’then that is fine too. There is never a ‘no’. ‘We’ (referring to theGnani Purush and the fully enlightened Lord within) have noobjection at all. ‘We’ have no opinion. This is naturalness.Naturalness is to follow the lead of the opinion of others; it is todo according to the wishes of others.‘We’ are always in the state of naturalness. Thisnaturalness is continuous. There is not a single moment out ofnaturalness. ‘We’ remain as nature keeps ‘us’, because the ego-less state has been attained. How can you become spontaneous(sahaj) with even the slightest existence of ‘I-ness’? When onegives up the last remnants of the ego (potapanu) he becomesnatural. When one attains naturalness (sahaj state) he cancontinuously remain in the awareness as the Self (atmaupayog).Drama begins when ‘I-ness’ decreasesPotapanu (‘I-ness’) is a very big word. There is not evena trace of ‘I-ness’ in ‘us’. Yet ‘we’ make Hiraba sit next to ‘us’.People ask ‘us’, ‘Who is this?’ and ‘we’ would tell them, ‘Thisis my wife.’ ‘We’ will say all that. ‘We’ will even tell Hiraba, ‘Ido not like to be without you.’ How good she must feel when‘we’ tell her that!But with ‘us’, it is all ‘dramatic’ (like acting in a play).One man tells me, ‘Can you bless my land by gracing it withyour footsteps?’ I told him, ‘Why should I have any problems?’‘We’ would also ask him about his land, such as when he madethe deal, how much he paid for it, etc. Some people may eventhink that Dada has become a land broker!If a person gets a benign white spot on his body but hekeeps showing it to me, I would gently rub my hand over it justto satisfy him.Questioner: That too is a drama, is it not?Dadashri: It is all a drama. The whole day is a drama for‘us’. All my actions of the entire day are a drama. If you take‘us’ to your home for darshan, that too is as a drama. If it werenot a drama, then the ‘I-ness’ (potapanu) would be there.Because there is no ‘I-ness’; the drama is exact. Otherwise, itwould be like, ‘I will have to go there for a visit. I will have togo there to give darshan’, but there is no such thing within.Therefore, all this is nothing but a drama. The wholedaylong I am doing a ‘drama’. When I sit in the satsang andanswer questions, that too is a drama. But the drama starts onlywhen the ‘I-ness’ (potapanu), decreases and not otherwise.Aptavani-9475476Aptavani-9Still the ‘I-ness’ remainsSome people think to themselves, ‘Now I do not haveany ‘I-ness’ or ‘my-ness’ in me any more.’ And yet wholedaylong they live in kashaya. One claims he has no ‘I-ness’ andyet he experiences kashayas. In fact his ‘I-ness’ is the basis ofhis existence. His ‘I-ness’ does not go away. It is very difficultto get rid of.What does it mean to say that the ‘I-ness’ has goneaway? It means that one does not even have any voice in it. Doyou do according to what others tell you or do you have adifferent voice of your own within you?Questioner: It is separate.Dadashri: That is the ‘I-ness’ – the potapanu. ‘We’ donot have any voice of any kind. If someone tells ‘us’, ‘Dada, sitover there’, ‘we’ will go and sit. ‘We’ would do so even if ‘we’do not like to.Questioner: This ‘I-ness’ is also related to the intellect(buddhi) is it not?Dadashri: The intellect is the sign of ‘I-ness’. As thesense of ‘I-ness’ goes down, the proportion of the intellect goesdown too.Questioner: What is the difference between ‘I-ness’(potapanu) and ‘my-ness’ (maarapanu)?Dadashri: My-ness is mamata and I-ness (potapanu) isa big ego. It is not a nominal ego.After attaining this Gnan, You have let go of the ‘I’ (hoon)and ‘my’ (mamata), but You have not let go of potapanu - ‘I-ness’. There is no doubt that You have become free from ‘I’ and‘my’. What is the definition of mamata (my-ness)? It is toworry about something of yours when it has been lost. You donot experience any worry after something valuable is lost. Thisshows that your ‘I’ and the ‘my’ are gone. Yet the ‘I-ness’(potapanu) still remains.Questioner: Does ‘I-ness’ mean individuality? I amdifferent from others, is that what it is?Dadashri: The individuality is gone. Both ‘I’ and ‘my’are gone, but the ‘I-ness’ still remains. This is because, nomatter how angry someone gets, no matter how much someoneinsults, he will fight with that person but he will eventually bringabout resolution before he goes to bed. Therefore, this assuresus that the ego is gone; otherwise, the ego will carry on thewhole nightlong. A person without ego will fight but he will alsofind a solution whereas a person with an ego will not. He willcontinue to increase enmity. A person with mamata will hollerand complain even three days after his pocket is picked. Themoment someone reminds him of it, he will say, ‘What can Ido?’ Whereas to you once it (wallet) is gone, it is gone. Thatshows that the ego of doer-ship (ahamkar) and mamata (‘my-ness’, the feeling of ‘this is mine’) are gone. However, the ‘I-ness’ (potapanu) still remains. Just ‘see’ it.That is why Krupadudev has said, ‘The Gnani Purushdoes not have potapanu.’ Krupadudev has used the word‘potapanu’; he has written something significant. What do youthink? Has he not used a great word? Now who can explainthis? How can someone explain in the language Krupadudev hasused?Questioner: The Gnani Purush can explain that, can henot?Dadashri: Yes, because no one else can.The authority is gone, the ‘I-ness’ remainsQuestioner: Please explain the following Aptasutra ofYours, Dada:“How does the Gnani’s antahkaran (the inner componentAptavani-9475476Aptavani-9Still the ‘I-ness’ remainsSome people think to themselves, ‘Now I do not haveany ‘I-ness’ or ‘my-ness’ in me any more.’ And yet wholedaylong they live in kashaya. One claims he has no ‘I-ness’ andyet he experiences kashayas. In fact his ‘I-ness’ is the basis ofhis existence. His ‘I-ness’ does not go away. It is very difficultto get rid of.What does it mean to say that the ‘I-ness’ has goneaway? It means that one does not even have any voice in it. Doyou do according to what others tell you or do you have adifferent voice of your own within you?Questioner: It is separate.Dadashri: That is the ‘I-ness’ – the potapanu. ‘We’ donot have any voice of any kind. If someone tells ‘us’, ‘Dada, sitover there’, ‘we’ will go and sit. ‘We’ would do so even if ‘we’do not like to.Questioner: This ‘I-ness’ is also related to the intellect(buddhi) is it not?Dadashri: The intellect is the sign of ‘I-ness’. As thesense of ‘I-ness’ goes down, the proportion of the intellect goesdown too.Questioner: What is the difference between ‘I-ness’(potapanu) and ‘my-ness’ (maarapanu)?Dadashri: My-ness is mamata and I-ness (potapanu) isa big ego. It is not a nominal ego.After attaining this Gnan, You have let go of the ‘I’ (hoon)and ‘my’ (mamata), but You have not let go of potapanu - ‘I-ness’. There is no doubt that You have become free from ‘I’ and‘my’. What is the definition of mamata (my-ness)? It is toworry about something of yours when it has been lost. You donot experience any worry after something valuable is lost. Thisshows that your ‘I’ and the ‘my’ are gone. Yet the ‘I-ness’(potapanu) still remains.Questioner: Does ‘I-ness’ mean individuality? I amdifferent from others, is that what it is?Dadashri: The individuality is gone. Both ‘I’ and ‘my’are gone, but the ‘I-ness’ still remains. This is because, nomatter how angry someone gets, no matter how much someoneinsults, he will fight with that person but he will eventually bringabout resolution before he goes to bed. Therefore, this assuresus that the ego is gone; otherwise, the ego will carry on thewhole nightlong. A person without ego will fight but he will alsofind a solution whereas a person with an ego will not. He willcontinue to increase enmity. A person with mamata will hollerand complain even three days after his pocket is picked. Themoment someone reminds him of it, he will say, ‘What can Ido?’ Whereas to you once it (wallet) is gone, it is gone. Thatshows that the ego of doer-ship (ahamkar) and mamata (‘my-ness’, the feeling of ‘this is mine’) are gone. However, the ‘I-ness’ (potapanu) still remains. Just ‘see’ it.That is why Krupadudev has said, ‘The Gnani Purushdoes not have potapanu.’ Krupadudev has used the word‘potapanu’; he has written something significant. What do youthink? Has he not used a great word? Now who can explainthis? How can someone explain in the language Krupadudev hasused?Questioner: The Gnani Purush can explain that, can henot?Dadashri: Yes, because no one else can.The authority is gone, the ‘I-ness’ remainsQuestioner: Please explain the following Aptasutra ofYours, Dada:“How does the Gnani’s antahkaran (the inner componentAptavani-9477478Aptavani-9of the mind, the intellect, the chit and the ego), work? ‘Potey’the one who is the ‘I am’ moves away (from the non-Selfcomplex); then the Self is separate from the antahkaran.”Dadashri: The antahkaran carries out the worldlyactivities on the one side and the Self ‘does’ ‘it’s’ work on theother. The Gnani does not have dakho-dakhal (interference andhence it’s effect thereof).What is antahkaran? It is that from which arises thesense-intent of ‘doer-ship’ (karta bhaav) of ‘I am the doer’.The Gnani remains separate from the antahkaran. Afterattaining Gnan, Your real doer-ship does not remain, but yourrelative doer-ship does. That means the discharge doer-shipremains. But for You, there remains a slight dakhal; the effectof seemingly becoming Chandulal, whereas for the Gnani thereis no dakhal. If ‘one - potey’ (‘I am’) moves away, then theSelf is separate from the antahkaran. ‘One (potey)’ has beena resident in this antahkaran for infinite life times; that ‘one’now moves away.Questioner: Who is this ‘potey’? Please explain.Dadashri: That verily is the ‘I-ness’ (potapanu). If ‘we’tell you, ‘let us go to the park’ and you say, ‘No, I will notcome. I do not like to go there.’ That is ‘I-ness (potapanu)’.The Gnani Purush does not have this ‘I-ness’. He will gowherever you tell him to.Questioner: Who exercises the ‘I-ness’?Dadashri: That ‘one (potey)’ only! Verily the ‘one’, theoriginal one, the ‘I am’, is the one. He does not let go of theseat. The realm of his authority (satta) is gone but ‘he’ does notlet go of the seat. Therefore, You have to gradually make ‘him’let go of it. Now ‘his’ authority and realm is gone, so there isno problem. It is not easy to let go of this seat. It is not easyto let go of the ‘I-ness’ (the potapanu). Do you understand the‘I-ness’ or not? There is a continuous feeling of ‘I-ness’ ineverything that has become a discharge. It is nothing but aneffect. The entire authority (realm) is gone. The root of ‘I-ness’does not go away. It is not likely to go away suddenly. It willeventually do so gradually.‘We’ do not have any ‘I-ness’ (potapanu). So, You haveto become like that. ‘His’ authority (realm) is gone even for You,after this Gnan, so sooner or later it will happen for You too; the‘I-ness’ will go away. But You have to realize (janvoo) whatYou have become. The ‘hoonpanu (the doer I)’; the ‘I’ withweight and emphasis which is the charging ego, its authority andits realm (satta) are gone. The belief of ‘I am Chandulal’ isgone, however in discharge, you continue to have the gnan(knowledge) experience (anubhav) and conduct (charitra) of‘Chandulal’. When the realm and the authority is gone; it is allover. But ‘potey’, the ‘I am’ remains.I, the lawyer, MangaddasLet me explain this ‘potey’ (the ‘I am’) to you. Onelawyer came to see me. I asked him, ‘What’s your name?’ Hereplied, ‘Mangaddas.’ I asked him, ‘What do you do for aliving?’ He replied, ‘I am a lawyer.’ I asked him, ‘Do you say‘I am a lawyer’?’ He replied, ‘Of course! I am a lawyer.’ Iasked, ‘So then who is this Mangaddas?’ He replied, ‘I’. ThenI asked him ‘Then who is the lawyer?’ he said, ‘I’. So, I toldhim ‘So then you have to say, ‘I, the lawyer, Mangaddas’, right?’This is what a person at someone’s door was saying. Aman knocked on someone’s door at night, when everyone wasasleep. The owner asked ‘Who is knocking on the door this lateat night?’ The voice replied, ‘I’. The owner asked ‘I’ who?Identify yourself otherwise I will not open the door.’ So thereply came, ‘I am the bavo (ascetic)’. The man asked, ‘But tellme which bavo?’ So the man at the door said, ‘I, bavoMangaddas.’ Then the owner opened the door.Aptavani-9477478Aptavani-9of the mind, the intellect, the chit and the ego), work? ‘Potey’the one who is the ‘I am’ moves away (from the non-Selfcomplex); then the Self is separate from the antahkaran.”Dadashri: The antahkaran carries out the worldlyactivities on the one side and the Self ‘does’ ‘it’s’ work on theother. The Gnani does not have dakho-dakhal (interference andhence it’s effect thereof).What is antahkaran? It is that from which arises thesense-intent of ‘doer-ship’ (karta bhaav) of ‘I am the doer’.The Gnani remains separate from the antahkaran. Afterattaining Gnan, Your real doer-ship does not remain, but yourrelative doer-ship does. That means the discharge doer-shipremains. But for You, there remains a slight dakhal; the effectof seemingly becoming Chandulal, whereas for the Gnani thereis no dakhal. If ‘one - potey’ (‘I am’) moves away, then theSelf is separate from the antahkaran. ‘One (potey)’ has beena resident in this antahkaran for infinite life times; that ‘one’now moves away.Questioner: Who is this ‘potey’? Please explain.Dadashri: That verily is the ‘I-ness’ (potapanu). If ‘we’tell you, ‘let us go to the park’ and you say, ‘No, I will notcome. I do not like to go there.’ That is ‘I-ness (potapanu)’.The Gnani Purush does not have this ‘I-ness’. He will gowherever you tell him to.Questioner: Who exercises the ‘I-ness’?Dadashri: That ‘one (potey)’ only! Verily the ‘one’, theoriginal one, the ‘I am’, is the one. He does not let go of theseat. The realm of his authority (satta) is gone but ‘he’ does notlet go of the seat. Therefore, You have to gradually make ‘him’let go of it. Now ‘his’ authority and realm is gone, so there isno problem. It is not easy to let go of this seat. It is not easyto let go of the ‘I-ness’ (the potapanu). Do you understand the‘I-ness’ or not? There is a continuous feeling of ‘I-ness’ ineverything that has become a discharge. It is nothing but aneffect. The entire authority (realm) is gone. The root of ‘I-ness’does not go away. It is not likely to go away suddenly. It willeventually do so gradually.‘We’ do not have any ‘I-ness’ (potapanu). So, You haveto become like that. ‘His’ authority (realm) is gone even for You,after this Gnan, so sooner or later it will happen for You too; the‘I-ness’ will go away. But You have to realize (janvoo) whatYou have become. The ‘hoonpanu (the doer I)’; the ‘I’ withweight and emphasis which is the charging ego, its authority andits realm (satta) are gone. The belief of ‘I am Chandulal’ isgone, however in discharge, you continue to have the gnan(knowledge) experience (anubhav) and conduct (charitra) of‘Chandulal’. When the realm and the authority is gone; it is allover. But ‘potey’, the ‘I am’ remains.I, the lawyer, MangaddasLet me explain this ‘potey’ (the ‘I am’) to you. Onelawyer came to see me. I asked him, ‘What’s your name?’ Hereplied, ‘Mangaddas.’ I asked him, ‘What do you do for aliving?’ He replied, ‘I am a lawyer.’ I asked him, ‘Do you say‘I am a lawyer’?’ He replied, ‘Of course! I am a lawyer.’ Iasked, ‘So then who is this Mangaddas?’ He replied, ‘I’. ThenI asked him ‘Then who is the lawyer?’ he said, ‘I’. So, I toldhim ‘So then you have to say, ‘I, the lawyer, Mangaddas’, right?’This is what a person at someone’s door was saying. Aman knocked on someone’s door at night, when everyone wasasleep. The owner asked ‘Who is knocking on the door this lateat night?’ The voice replied, ‘I’. The owner asked ‘I’ who?Identify yourself otherwise I will not open the door.’ So thereply came, ‘I am the bavo (ascetic)’. The man asked, ‘But tellme which bavo?’ So the man at the door said, ‘I, bavoMangaddas.’ Then the owner opened the door.Aptavani-9479480Aptavani-9That is how this ‘I lawyer Mangaddas’ is. So when youtook this Gnan, the ‘Lawyer’ and ‘Mangaddas’ went away, butthe ‘potey – the ‘I’ still remains. Therefore ‘I-ness’ (potapanu)still remains for You. When the other lawyer in the court sayssomething wrong, the ‘I-ness’ (potapanu) in you will express.If someone comes here to discuss something complexregarding satsang or any other topics, it is fine if the discussioncontinues for an hour and half. There will be no dakhodakhal(interference and its effects), from ‘us’. Elsewhere when thathappens, it may even result in matbhed - separation due todifference in opinions. ‘We’ have no dakhodakhal. A task ofone hundred hours will be accomplished by ‘us’ within an hour!But there will be no dakhodakhal. This is because ‘we’ do nothave any ‘I-ness’.Protection of the prakruti is potapanuDo you have ‘I-ness’ or not?Questioner: It does arise sometimes.Dadashri: Otherwise what remains? There is constantand continuous awareness (jagruti) in the one who does nothave ‘I-ness’ (potapanu). Whatever unawareness (ajagruti)there is; is all verily ‘I-ness’ (potapanu). The ‘I-ness’ will ariseimmediately when someone tells you that you have no sense,does it not?Questioner: It does sometimes.Dadashri: Does it happen everyday or only sometimes?Tell me when it does not happen. All this is ‘I-ness’ only. That,which one protects, is potapanu ‘I-ness’. To protect thisprakruti, the non-Self, is all ‘I-ness’. The loss of ownership ofthe prakruti (the belief of ‘I am Chandulal’) has beenestablished through conviction (pratiti, shraddha – the belief of‘I am the pure Soul’), but still the ‘I-ness’(potapanu) does notleave, does it?Questioner: ‘I-ness’ is bound to be there as long as ‘Iam correct’ remains, is it not?Dadashri: There is no such thing as right or wrong. Thereis no problem with the ‘I-ness’ of that kind. There are manyother types of ‘I-ness’. One gets upset at the slightest comment.That is protection of the prakruti. Not only does one protectthe prakruti but he turns things around by employing deceit(kapat). In that situation, the ‘I-ness’ is doubled. To vehementlyprotect one’s self, is all potapanu. Not only do they protectthemselves, but they do it artfully and then dodge away. Theartful dodging is deceit.Did you understand the meaning of I-ness; the potapanu?One still continues to protect the non-Self, and that protectionis attained through artfulness and deceit (kada and kapat).Questioner: To protect one’s prakruti is considered ‘I-ness’, so when does that turn into deceit?Dadashri: All the ‘I-ness’ goes into protecting theprakruti the non-Self. The ‘I-ness’ without kapat (deceitfulness)is better; it is softer, but the other is bad.Questioner: You have said that protection of prakruti is‘I-ness’ and to protect through artfulness and deceit is doublethe ‘I-ness’.Dadashri: Yes, that is double the ‘I-ness’. Even childrenprotect themselves, but there is no deceit in it.Questioner: When a person knows that he has protectedhis prakruti artfully and deceitfully, what is that?Dadashri: He will recognize it if the deceit kapat is thinbut he will not if it is heavy and dense.Aggression is intense potapanuDo you have a desire to get rid of the ‘I-ness’(potapanu)?Aptavani-9479480Aptavani-9That is how this ‘I lawyer Mangaddas’ is. So when youtook this Gnan, the ‘Lawyer’ and ‘Mangaddas’ went away, butthe ‘potey – the ‘I’ still remains. Therefore ‘I-ness’ (potapanu)still remains for You. When the other lawyer in the court sayssomething wrong, the ‘I-ness’ (potapanu) in you will express.If someone comes here to discuss something complexregarding satsang or any other topics, it is fine if the discussioncontinues for an hour and half. There will be no dakhodakhal(interference and its effects), from ‘us’. Elsewhere when thathappens, it may even result in matbhed - separation due todifference in opinions. ‘We’ have no dakhodakhal. A task ofone hundred hours will be accomplished by ‘us’ within an hour!But there will be no dakhodakhal. This is because ‘we’ do nothave any ‘I-ness’.Protection of the prakruti is potapanuDo you have ‘I-ness’ or not?Questioner: It does arise sometimes.Dadashri: Otherwise what remains? There is constantand continuous awareness (jagruti) in the one who does nothave ‘I-ness’ (potapanu). Whatever unawareness (ajagruti)there is; is all verily ‘I-ness’ (potapanu). The ‘I-ness’ will ariseimmediately when someone tells you that you have no sense,does it not?Questioner: It does sometimes.Dadashri: Does it happen everyday or only sometimes?Tell me when it does not happen. All this is ‘I-ness’ only. That,which one protects, is potapanu ‘I-ness’. To protect thisprakruti, the non-Self, is all ‘I-ness’. The loss of ownership ofthe prakruti (the belief of ‘I am Chandulal’) has beenestablished through conviction (pratiti, shraddha – the belief of‘I am the pure Soul’), but still the ‘I-ness’(potapanu) does notleave, does it?Questioner: ‘I-ness’ is bound to be there as long as ‘Iam correct’ remains, is it not?Dadashri: There is no such thing as right or wrong. Thereis no problem with the ‘I-ness’ of that kind. There are manyother types of ‘I-ness’. One gets upset at the slightest comment.That is protection of the prakruti. Not only does one protectthe prakruti but he turns things around by employing deceit(kapat). In that situation, the ‘I-ness’ is doubled. To vehementlyprotect one’s self, is all potapanu. Not only do they protectthemselves, but they do it artfully and then dodge away. Theartful dodging is deceit.Did you understand the meaning of I-ness; the potapanu?One still continues to protect the non-Self, and that protectionis attained through artfulness and deceit (kada and kapat).Questioner: To protect one’s prakruti is considered ‘I-ness’, so when does that turn into deceit?Dadashri: All the ‘I-ness’ goes into protecting theprakruti the non-Self. The ‘I-ness’ without kapat (deceitfulness)is better; it is softer, but the other is bad.Questioner: You have said that protection of prakruti is‘I-ness’ and to protect through artfulness and deceit is doublethe ‘I-ness’.Dadashri: Yes, that is double the ‘I-ness’. Even childrenprotect themselves, but there is no deceit in it.Questioner: When a person knows that he has protectedhis prakruti artfully and deceitfully, what is that?Dadashri: He will recognize it if the deceit kapat is thinbut he will not if it is heavy and dense.Aggression is intense potapanuDo you have a desire to get rid of the ‘I-ness’(potapanu)?Aptavani-9481482Aptavani-9Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: When the hurt inflicted upon any living beingstops, then those layers will begin to shed.Questioner: What layers?Dadashri: The layers of ‘I-ness’ and all other coveringsover the Self. Not only does one have the ‘I-ness’ but it is an‘I-ness’ with an attacking nature. ‘I-ness’ with protection(rakshan) is different from the ‘I-ness’ with an attack.Questioner: This is very important information that hasjust surfaced, Dada. You said that there are two types ofpotapanu ‘I-ness’; one is with protection and the other isassociated with a tendency to attack.Dadashri: Yes. When the ‘I-ness’ associated withattacks goes away, then the ‘I-ness’ with protection will come.That is the proper ‘I-ness’, until then all the ‘I-ness’ is regardedas himsak bhaav; violence laden with violent intent. Only afterthe ‘I-ness’ associated with attacking nature leaves, will thedissolution of ‘I-ness’ associated with protection begin.Questioner: Would you please explain further what thisattacking ‘I-ness’ is?Dadashri: What good is any ‘I-ness’ that hurts others?It is a different matter if that ‘I-ness’ is for the protection ofones’ own prakruti; that is called ‘I-ness’ but the ‘I-ness’ thathurts others, cannot even be considered ‘I-ness’.What is the ‘I-ness’ in people like? Protection of theirprakruti is definitely there, but they also attack others. Theyalso strike (verbally and non-verbally) others. So do people notneed to get rid of this enormous ‘I-ness’? Protecting one’sprakruti is ‘I-ness’. Are our mahatmas doing that? Alas, thatis precisely why it, the non-Self, does not become sahaj(natural). Here, the moment one is faced with the slightest insult,he protects the prakruti. This indeed will prevent the process ofsahajata (naturalness) from occurring, will it not?The potapanu with protection may remain, but any otherkind of potapanu must leave. If someone says, ‘you don’t haveany sense’, there should not be any protection of the prakruti.Who is the sole authority in this? It is the ego (ahamkar). Theone that opposes or resists is the ego. Who opposes everythingand challenges? It is the ego. But the ego is gone, is it not? Sothe protection is being done unnecessarily, is it not?So whatever happens is correct. You will not find suchdiscussion and talks in any scriptures. Talks about protection ofthe prakruti are not to be found anywhere. Because, who willnot protect the prakruti? Everyone, except the Lord, protectshis or her prakruti. And You are protecting the prakruti eventhough it is not Yours; it is an alien. You know that it is an alienand having known that, You are still making arrangements tomarry ‘her’! Is that not a wonder?The ego (ahamkar) and ‘my-ness’ (mamata) are gone,but ‘I-ness’ (potapanu) remains. Is that not a wonder!The ‘seer’ does not have ‘I-ness’What do ‘we’ call ‘I-ness’ (potapanu)?Questioner: Protection of prakruti is ‘I-ness’.Dadashri: So should the prakruti be protected?Questioner: ‘We’ are the ‘seers’ (jonara); what needsto be done and what needs not to be done.Dadashri: The ‘seer’ (jonaro) does not have any ‘I-ness’ (potapanu). The seer can never have any ‘I-ness’. Thisdiscussion is for the one who still protects the prakruti.If you are going somewhere and on the way someone tellsyou, ‘No you have to go the other way,’ do you get irritated atthat time?Questioner: Yes.Aptavani-9481482Aptavani-9Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: When the hurt inflicted upon any living beingstops, then those layers will begin to shed.Questioner: What layers?Dadashri: The layers of ‘I-ness’ and all other coveringsover the Self. Not only does one have the ‘I-ness’ but it is an‘I-ness’ with an attacking nature. ‘I-ness’ with protection(rakshan) is different from the ‘I-ness’ with an attack.Questioner: This is very important information that hasjust surfaced, Dada. You said that there are two types ofpotapanu ‘I-ness’; one is with protection and the other isassociated with a tendency to attack.Dadashri: Yes. When the ‘I-ness’ associated withattacks goes away, then the ‘I-ness’ with protection will come.That is the proper ‘I-ness’, until then all the ‘I-ness’ is regardedas himsak bhaav; violence laden with violent intent. Only afterthe ‘I-ness’ associated with attacking nature leaves, will thedissolution of ‘I-ness’ associated with protection begin.Questioner: Would you please explain further what thisattacking ‘I-ness’ is?Dadashri: What good is any ‘I-ness’ that hurts others?It is a different matter if that ‘I-ness’ is for the protection ofones’ own prakruti; that is called ‘I-ness’ but the ‘I-ness’ thathurts others, cannot even be considered ‘I-ness’.What is the ‘I-ness’ in people like? Protection of theirprakruti is definitely there, but they also attack others. Theyalso strike (verbally and non-verbally) others. So do people notneed to get rid of this enormous ‘I-ness’? Protecting one’sprakruti is ‘I-ness’. Are our mahatmas doing that? Alas, thatis precisely why it, the non-Self, does not become sahaj(natural). Here, the moment one is faced with the slightest insult,he protects the prakruti. This indeed will prevent the process ofsahajata (naturalness) from occurring, will it not?The potapanu with protection may remain, but any otherkind of potapanu must leave. If someone says, ‘you don’t haveany sense’, there should not be any protection of the prakruti.Who is the sole authority in this? It is the ego (ahamkar). Theone that opposes or resists is the ego. Who opposes everythingand challenges? It is the ego. But the ego is gone, is it not? Sothe protection is being done unnecessarily, is it not?So whatever happens is correct. You will not find suchdiscussion and talks in any scriptures. Talks about protection ofthe prakruti are not to be found anywhere. Because, who willnot protect the prakruti? Everyone, except the Lord, protectshis or her prakruti. And You are protecting the prakruti eventhough it is not Yours; it is an alien. You know that it is an alienand having known that, You are still making arrangements tomarry ‘her’! Is that not a wonder?The ego (ahamkar) and ‘my-ness’ (mamata) are gone,but ‘I-ness’ (potapanu) remains. Is that not a wonder!The ‘seer’ does not have ‘I-ness’What do ‘we’ call ‘I-ness’ (potapanu)?Questioner: Protection of prakruti is ‘I-ness’.Dadashri: So should the prakruti be protected?Questioner: ‘We’ are the ‘seers’ (jonara); what needsto be done and what needs not to be done.Dadashri: The ‘seer’ (jonaro) does not have any ‘I-ness’ (potapanu). The seer can never have any ‘I-ness’. Thisdiscussion is for the one who still protects the prakruti.If you are going somewhere and on the way someone tellsyou, ‘No you have to go the other way,’ do you get irritated atthat time?Questioner: Yes.Aptavani-9483484Aptavani-9That is when ‘I-ness’ will go awayNow, I am not telling You that You should not protectyour prakruti but You should feel that your Gnan must attain acertain level. I am not asking for such conduct (vartan orcharitra). When will such conduct come? When this becomesestablished in your conviction (pratiti or shraddha), then it willresult in gnan (knowledge). When this knowledge increases asexperience (anubhav) then it will manifest in your conduct(vartan, charitra).If someone were to ask you to get out of the car, therewill be an initial effect (asar) but later as things calm down fromwithin, you will remember Gnan. This way it will gradually geland solidify from within and it will fit. At first, it comes asconviction pratiti, and later in the process of arriving at the levelof experience (anubhav), you will stumble in ‘fitting’ the Gnanat first, but later it will come in your conduct. Even a littleexperience anubhav is more than enough.If you are asked to get out of the car once or two timesand you come back to sit without experiencing annoyance fromwithin, or any change in the facial expression, that is very goodalso. Otherwise, are people not likely to get upset and non-communicative (risavu)? I think that would not be the case withyou, would it? Try to do that once, if such an occasion everarises. Get out of the car and sit back in it without getting upsetand non-communicative or spoiling your face.Questioner: It is not as easy as You say, Dada.Dadashri: It cannot be easy. But what is this? Why are‘we’ discussing this? As this matter comes into your faith andconviction (shraddha-pratiti), it will gradually come into yourexperience (anubhav).‘We’ are not telling you to do this. You simply have tokeep this in your awareness that you will have to stop protectingDadashri: That is the protection of the prakruti.Otherwise, one would turn back just as fast; with the samespeed, with the same tone and with the same mood. With thesame mood that was there before. This is the talk of the final state!The Test of ‘I-ness’Say you are going somewhere with someone by car, hetells you to get in the car and you do. A little later, he tells youto get out of the car because someone else is coming instead,what would you do? Would you just sit there? Would you tellhim, ‘I am not getting off?’Questioner: I would get out.Dadashri: Immediately?Questioner: Immediately! I would get off.Dadashri: Would you not say, ‘No I will not get out?’Then as you walk away, he calls you back. You would go backwould you not? And you would do so without a change ofexpression on your face, right?So what have I said? If you can do this nine times overwithout any effect at all within you, then I will tell you that youhave become ‘Dada’. If he does this to you nine times and youget on and off nine times, and during each of those nine times,You do not see the other person as the doer, and you seevyavasthit as verily the ‘doer’, then You are free from ‘I-ness’.And if when you are invited back, there is nothing in the mind,the face remains smiling as if nothing has happened, and this isthe case while getting off also, then you are free from ‘I-ness’.Then see the beauty of it all! What is this state called? It showsthat this ‘one’ is not protecting the prakruti and therefore thepotapanu is gone.Protecting your prakruti is ‘I-ness’. But here the veryprakruti one wants to be liberated from is the one he isprotecting.Aptavani-9483484Aptavani-9That is when ‘I-ness’ will go awayNow, I am not telling You that You should not protectyour prakruti but You should feel that your Gnan must attain acertain level. I am not asking for such conduct (vartan orcharitra). When will such conduct come? When this becomesestablished in your conviction (pratiti or shraddha), then it willresult in gnan (knowledge). When this knowledge increases asexperience (anubhav) then it will manifest in your conduct(vartan, charitra).If someone were to ask you to get out of the car, therewill be an initial effect (asar) but later as things calm down fromwithin, you will remember Gnan. This way it will gradually geland solidify from within and it will fit. At first, it comes asconviction pratiti, and later in the process of arriving at the levelof experience (anubhav), you will stumble in ‘fitting’ the Gnanat first, but later it will come in your conduct. Even a littleexperience anubhav is more than enough.If you are asked to get out of the car once or two timesand you come back to sit without experiencing annoyance fromwithin, or any change in the facial expression, that is very goodalso. Otherwise, are people not likely to get upset and non-communicative (risavu)? I think that would not be the case withyou, would it? Try to do that once, if such an occasion everarises. Get out of the car and sit back in it without getting upsetand non-communicative or spoiling your face.Questioner: It is not as easy as You say, Dada.Dadashri: It cannot be easy. But what is this? Why are‘we’ discussing this? As this matter comes into your faith andconviction (shraddha-pratiti), it will gradually come into yourexperience (anubhav).‘We’ are not telling you to do this. You simply have tokeep this in your awareness that you will have to stop protectingDadashri: That is the protection of the prakruti.Otherwise, one would turn back just as fast; with the samespeed, with the same tone and with the same mood. With thesame mood that was there before. This is the talk of the final state!The Test of ‘I-ness’Say you are going somewhere with someone by car, hetells you to get in the car and you do. A little later, he tells youto get out of the car because someone else is coming instead,what would you do? Would you just sit there? Would you tellhim, ‘I am not getting off?’Questioner: I would get out.Dadashri: Immediately?Questioner: Immediately! I would get off.Dadashri: Would you not say, ‘No I will not get out?’Then as you walk away, he calls you back. You would go backwould you not? And you would do so without a change ofexpression on your face, right?So what have I said? If you can do this nine times overwithout any effect at all within you, then I will tell you that youhave become ‘Dada’. If he does this to you nine times and youget on and off nine times, and during each of those nine times,You do not see the other person as the doer, and you seevyavasthit as verily the ‘doer’, then You are free from ‘I-ness’.And if when you are invited back, there is nothing in the mind,the face remains smiling as if nothing has happened, and this isthe case while getting off also, then you are free from ‘I-ness’.Then see the beauty of it all! What is this state called? It showsthat this ‘one’ is not protecting the prakruti and therefore thepotapanu is gone.Protecting your prakruti is ‘I-ness’. But here the veryprakruti one wants to be liberated from is the one he isprotecting.Aptavani-9485486Aptavani-9your prakruti in this way. Any amount of protection of theprakruti is wrong. Let the prakruti play its role with Youmeeting your obligation as the neighbor. But, how can Youprotect it in this way?If someone tells you to get out of the car, then You shouldtell your prakruti, ‘you are being told to get off, so please doso.’ If later, the same person says, ‘Come in the car,’ Youshould say, ‘Please get in, you are being invited in.’Questioner: I cannot remember ‘this is prakruti’ duringevery circumstance.Dadashri: That much awareness (jagruti) will not remainand that is why ‘we’ keep telling you this over and over again,so that You remain aware. But here when ‘we’ wake one up,he tells me he is getting up but he turns over and goes right backto ‘sleep’!We have the wonderful knowledge of vyavasthit, do wenot? Is vyavasthit not a great knowledge-tool (sadhan)?Questioner: It is a great tool. It is wonderful.Dadashri: It will all come to an end, will it not? You areconvinced of that, are You not?Questioner: But, in our Gnan, will the ‘I-ness’ go awaywhen we understand vyavasthit exactly?Dadashri: Yes it will. I have given you vyavasthit for thepurpose of becoming free from ‘I-ness’. It is a scientific thing(vastu) and that is why it is exact. It is not something that hasbeen conjured up or made up. The dependency (avlamban)that has been given to You is not wrong; it is exact.Questioner: One does not want to let go of ‘I-ness’ andyet he talks about attaining the Self, what is that all about?Dadashri: Yes that is why ‘we’ are saying that if the ‘I-ness’ goes away, everything will run on its own. Why hang onto it without any use? Just let go of it! But one is not likely todo so, is he? He will worry about, ‘This will happen or that willhappen’.‘One (potey)’ becomes the Self upon attaining Gnan.Then he says, ‘prakruti is not mine,’ and then what does he do?He protects the prakruti. He is quick to protect the prakruti,is he not?Questioner: That is exactly what one does.Dadashri: What are you saying? He protects it? Thisprotection that occurs is verily what you have to ‘see’ (jovoo).It will all shed off on its own gradually as you come to know(janvoo) this. There is nothing to be done to let go of itsuddenly. Nothing can be accomplished suddenly. Otherwiseone will have problems. It is through knowing (janvoo) that itwill dissipate gradually.‘I-ness’ in the things one likesQuestioner: Please explain with examples where ‘I-ness’is ordinarily present?Dadashri: You see your ‘I-ness’ when someone givesyou your favorite ice cream and then takes it away before youhad a chance to taste it. You will see your ‘I-ness’ whensomeone takes your favorite things away from you. In all suchinstances, you will be able to see your ‘I-ness’ very clearly.When your fondness for ‘I-ness’ goes away, so will the‘I-ness’. Is it likely to go away as long as there is fondness forit?Questioner: I did not understand that. Are you talkingabout fondness for things or fondness for the ‘I-ness’?Dadashri: Only when the fondness for ‘I-ness’ goesaway. There is no problem if fondness for all other thing doesnot go; fondness for ‘I-ness’ is very strong indeed. One will beAptavani-9485486Aptavani-9your prakruti in this way. Any amount of protection of theprakruti is wrong. Let the prakruti play its role with Youmeeting your obligation as the neighbor. But, how can Youprotect it in this way?If someone tells you to get out of the car, then You shouldtell your prakruti, ‘you are being told to get off, so please doso.’ If later, the same person says, ‘Come in the car,’ Youshould say, ‘Please get in, you are being invited in.’Questioner: I cannot remember ‘this is prakruti’ duringevery circumstance.Dadashri: That much awareness (jagruti) will not remainand that is why ‘we’ keep telling you this over and over again,so that You remain aware. But here when ‘we’ wake one up,he tells me he is getting up but he turns over and goes right backto ‘sleep’!We have the wonderful knowledge of vyavasthit, do wenot? Is vyavasthit not a great knowledge-tool (sadhan)?Questioner: It is a great tool. It is wonderful.Dadashri: It will all come to an end, will it not? You areconvinced of that, are You not?Questioner: But, in our Gnan, will the ‘I-ness’ go awaywhen we understand vyavasthit exactly?Dadashri: Yes it will. I have given you vyavasthit for thepurpose of becoming free from ‘I-ness’. It is a scientific thing(vastu) and that is why it is exact. It is not something that hasbeen conjured up or made up. The dependency (avlamban)that has been given to You is not wrong; it is exact.Questioner: One does not want to let go of ‘I-ness’ andyet he talks about attaining the Self, what is that all about?Dadashri: Yes that is why ‘we’ are saying that if the ‘I-ness’ goes away, everything will run on its own. Why hang onto it without any use? Just let go of it! But one is not likely todo so, is he? He will worry about, ‘This will happen or that willhappen’.‘One (potey)’ becomes the Self upon attaining Gnan.Then he says, ‘prakruti is not mine,’ and then what does he do?He protects the prakruti. He is quick to protect the prakruti,is he not?Questioner: That is exactly what one does.Dadashri: What are you saying? He protects it? Thisprotection that occurs is verily what you have to ‘see’ (jovoo).It will all shed off on its own gradually as you come to know(janvoo) this. There is nothing to be done to let go of itsuddenly. Nothing can be accomplished suddenly. Otherwiseone will have problems. It is through knowing (janvoo) that itwill dissipate gradually.‘I-ness’ in the things one likesQuestioner: Please explain with examples where ‘I-ness’is ordinarily present?Dadashri: You see your ‘I-ness’ when someone givesyou your favorite ice cream and then takes it away before youhad a chance to taste it. You will see your ‘I-ness’ whensomeone takes your favorite things away from you. In all suchinstances, you will be able to see your ‘I-ness’ very clearly.When your fondness for ‘I-ness’ goes away, so will the‘I-ness’. Is it likely to go away as long as there is fondness forit?Questioner: I did not understand that. Are you talkingabout fondness for things or fondness for the ‘I-ness’?Dadashri: Only when the fondness for ‘I-ness’ goesaway. There is no problem if fondness for all other thing doesnot go; fondness for ‘I-ness’ is very strong indeed. One will beAptavani-9487488Aptavani-9adamant and insist, ‘You will have to do exactly as I say.’Therefore, there is no problem if fondness for all other thingsdoes not go away.Questioner: Is fondness for ‘I-ness’ the same thing asmaking others do according to what we want (dharyukaravoo)?Dadashri: Not like that.Questioner: Then what?Dadashri: Everyone in the whole world has ‘I-ness’!One becomes God when his ‘I-ness’, his potapanu goes away.The one who has no ‘I-ness’ is a God. Although I have givenGnan to everyone, all of you still have the ‘I-ness’. You willbecome God when that ‘I-ness’ goes away. You are God atpresent (from the absolute perspective), but you (the relative-Self) have not become one because you still have the ‘I-ness’.You will become God when you no longer have the ‘I-ness’.Purusharth should begin with the right intentThe ‘I-ness’ will leave if there is Gnan, otherwise it willnot.Questioner: But we have all attained Gnan so with Gnanthe aapopu – the ‘I-ness’ - keeps increasing, because later werealize that the ‘I-ness’ has increased instead of decreasing.Dadashri: That is not aapopu. This term aapopu is fora very high spiritual level, Just prior to leaving the body, whenpurity comes in, that is the state free of all kashayas, then theresidual ‘I-ness’ is considered aapopu or potapanu.Questioner: The ‘I-ness’ may have gone but even thenone often does dakho – he interferes.Dadashri: But what is the evidence that it has even gone?You are saying that dakho occurs. It does not appear that this‘I-ness’ is gone in anyone. There would be no more interferenceonce it leaves. There will not ever be any interference again. Itis not something that increases or decreases. It is a very realthing. One will not see ‘I-ness’ (potapanu) again once it isgone; it is gone forever. Do you feel as if it is partly gone butit also partly remains? No, it is not like that. This ‘I-ness’ is notsomething that it will return, once it leaves. To begin with, this‘I-ness’ is something that is not likely to go. In fact, this is thefirst time this subject about ‘departure of I-ness’ is even beingdiscussed. ‘We’ do not have any ‘I-ness’.Questioner: What happens if one wants to bring backthe ‘I-ness’?Dadashri: It will not come, will it? How can it returnonce it is gone?Questioner: This ‘I-ness’ is bound to go away with YourGnan, that is for sure, but how can it go away faster?Dadashri: Just as we can increase the speed of a train,we can also increase this speed if we employ the right tools(sadhan). But You should look neither for haste nor for lazinesshere. To do so, is all a form of imagination. All You have to dois to maintain the bhaav - the inner intent that you want to getrid of the ‘I-ness’. Having this bhaav does so much work thatthe ‘I-ness’ will diminish constantly. But if you have the bhaavof, No, there is no need to get rid of the ‘I-ness’ as long as theworldly life is there, then that will be the case. After attainingGnan, ‘You’ have authority and realm over all these innerbhaav. You do not have any authority and realm over everythingthat is pending for discharge. There You have to let it discharge(nikal) without interference.Do you understand where Your authority and the realmis? You have the authority and realm over the inner intent of, ‘the‘I-ness’ has to go. The ‘I-ness’ is not needed anymore’, thenthat will be the case. For how long can you make somethingYours when in fact it is not? Is it not a mistake to makeAptavani-9487488Aptavani-9adamant and insist, ‘You will have to do exactly as I say.’Therefore, there is no problem if fondness for all other thingsdoes not go away.Questioner: Is fondness for ‘I-ness’ the same thing asmaking others do according to what we want (dharyukaravoo)?Dadashri: Not like that.Questioner: Then what?Dadashri: Everyone in the whole world has ‘I-ness’!One becomes God when his ‘I-ness’, his potapanu goes away.The one who has no ‘I-ness’ is a God. Although I have givenGnan to everyone, all of you still have the ‘I-ness’. You willbecome God when that ‘I-ness’ goes away. You are God atpresent (from the absolute perspective), but you (the relative-Self) have not become one because you still have the ‘I-ness’.You will become God when you no longer have the ‘I-ness’.Purusharth should begin with the right intentThe ‘I-ness’ will leave if there is Gnan, otherwise it willnot.Questioner: But we have all attained Gnan so with Gnanthe aapopu – the ‘I-ness’ - keeps increasing, because later werealize that the ‘I-ness’ has increased instead of decreasing.Dadashri: That is not aapopu. This term aapopu is fora very high spiritual level, Just prior to leaving the body, whenpurity comes in, that is the state free of all kashayas, then theresidual ‘I-ness’ is considered aapopu or potapanu.Questioner: The ‘I-ness’ may have gone but even thenone often does dakho – he interferes.Dadashri: But what is the evidence that it has even gone?You are saying that dakho occurs. It does not appear that this‘I-ness’ is gone in anyone. There would be no more interferenceonce it leaves. There will not ever be any interference again. Itis not something that increases or decreases. It is a very realthing. One will not see ‘I-ness’ (potapanu) again once it isgone; it is gone forever. Do you feel as if it is partly gone butit also partly remains? No, it is not like that. This ‘I-ness’ is notsomething that it will return, once it leaves. To begin with, this‘I-ness’ is something that is not likely to go. In fact, this is thefirst time this subject about ‘departure of I-ness’ is even beingdiscussed. ‘We’ do not have any ‘I-ness’.Questioner: What happens if one wants to bring backthe ‘I-ness’?Dadashri: It will not come, will it? How can it returnonce it is gone?Questioner: This ‘I-ness’ is bound to go away with YourGnan, that is for sure, but how can it go away faster?Dadashri: Just as we can increase the speed of a train,we can also increase this speed if we employ the right tools(sadhan). But You should look neither for haste nor for lazinesshere. To do so, is all a form of imagination. All You have to dois to maintain the bhaav - the inner intent that you want to getrid of the ‘I-ness’. Having this bhaav does so much work thatthe ‘I-ness’ will diminish constantly. But if you have the bhaavof, No, there is no need to get rid of the ‘I-ness’ as long as theworldly life is there, then that will be the case. After attainingGnan, ‘You’ have authority and realm over all these innerbhaav. You do not have any authority and realm over everythingthat is pending for discharge. There You have to let it discharge(nikal) without interference.Do you understand where Your authority and the realmis? You have the authority and realm over the inner intent of, ‘the‘I-ness’ has to go. The ‘I-ness’ is not needed anymore’, thenthat will be the case. For how long can you make somethingYours when in fact it is not? Is it not a mistake to makeAptavani-9489490Aptavani-9something that is not Yours, as yours? It is now very clear in ourGnan that this ‘I-ness’ is not ‘Ours’. Is it not a mistake tobehave otherwise? ‘We’ do not have such ‘I-ness’.‘I-ness’ melts as karmas are clearedThe actions of the Gnani Purush are constantly accordingto the unfolding of His karma (the Gnani’s actions are udayaaadhin), without any I-ness in it. The circumstances aroundarise, come together, and unfold as scientific circumstantialevidences and the Gnani follows them.Questioner: If the Gnanis follow the course of theunfolding of their karma, then how is it for others?Dadashri: Theirs too is dependent on their unfoldingkarma, but the difference is that they have ‘I-ness’ in it.Questioner: You say that every person follows theunfolding karma so is it possible for a person to maintain ‘I-ness’ in it if he wants to?Dadashri: One verily keeps, the ‘I-ness’.Questioner: What about the mahatmas who have takenthis Gnan?Dadashri: The mahatmas too have the ‘I-ness’.Questioner: So how are the mahatmas maintaining the‘I-ness’?Dadashri: It remains. It is there. One is not keeping it; itis there. One’s ‘I-ness’ dissolves to the extant of his accounts ofkarma that are cleared. The amount that has dissolved is gone.All these people do have ‘I-ness’ but their ‘I-ness’ is meltingaway because they have also attained this Gnan.Questioner: If the ‘I-ness’ remains, then one will chargekarmas, is that so?Dadashri: No. There is no charging. This ego of ‘I-ness’does not do any charging of new karmas. This ‘I-ness’ is adischarge; it is that which will melt away.Discharge ego is ‘I-ness’Your ego is now gone. The ego of doer-ship, the chargingego is gone. The ego of doer-ship (ahamkar) and ‘my-ness’(mamata) both go away when ‘we’ give you Gnan. But the ‘I-ness’, ego that is in discharge, the potapanu still remains.What does this mean? It is the ego (ahamkar), which isnot living. Basically it is the ego (I am Chandulal). For example,take the mixture of churmu (flour, ghee, and jaggery); if you rollit in a ball, it is called a ladvo. If you pat it down and cut it intopieces (chakta), it is called barfi churmu. And if you do neitherand leave it as it is, it is called churmu. All three are differentdeserts. They are all different phases of basically the same thing.In this example the churmu is the equivalent of the base ego of‘I am Chandulal’ and ‘this is mine’ is mamata. The ghee andjaggery mixed in the flour represents the coming together of theother non-Self elements to form a basic mixture. Then variousforms of the mixture can take different shapes and forms. Allthese are different expressions of the worldly ego which are allresidual, dying ego, after Gnan.The ahamkar (ego) and mamata (my-ness) have left andthat is the part we are calling potapanu (I-ness); it looks like theego.Questioner: So what is the difference between ego(ahamkar) and ‘I-ness’ (potapanu)?Dadashri: The ego will never move away; it will neverdecrease.Questioner: So does the ‘I-ness’ move away?Dadashri: ‘I-ness’ will continue to decrease. ‘I-ness’means a stock of baggage. A stock of ego; it continues toAptavani-9489490Aptavani-9something that is not Yours, as yours? It is now very clear in ourGnan that this ‘I-ness’ is not ‘Ours’. Is it not a mistake tobehave otherwise? ‘We’ do not have such ‘I-ness’.‘I-ness’ melts as karmas are clearedThe actions of the Gnani Purush are constantly accordingto the unfolding of His karma (the Gnani’s actions are udayaaadhin), without any I-ness in it. The circumstances aroundarise, come together, and unfold as scientific circumstantialevidences and the Gnani follows them.Questioner: If the Gnanis follow the course of theunfolding of their karma, then how is it for others?Dadashri: Theirs too is dependent on their unfoldingkarma, but the difference is that they have ‘I-ness’ in it.Questioner: You say that every person follows theunfolding karma so is it possible for a person to maintain ‘I-ness’ in it if he wants to?Dadashri: One verily keeps, the ‘I-ness’.Questioner: What about the mahatmas who have takenthis Gnan?Dadashri: The mahatmas too have the ‘I-ness’.Questioner: So how are the mahatmas maintaining the‘I-ness’?Dadashri: It remains. It is there. One is not keeping it; itis there. One’s ‘I-ness’ dissolves to the extant of his accounts ofkarma that are cleared. The amount that has dissolved is gone.All these people do have ‘I-ness’ but their ‘I-ness’ is meltingaway because they have also attained this Gnan.Questioner: If the ‘I-ness’ remains, then one will chargekarmas, is that so?Dadashri: No. There is no charging. This ego of ‘I-ness’does not do any charging of new karmas. This ‘I-ness’ is adischarge; it is that which will melt away.Discharge ego is ‘I-ness’Your ego is now gone. The ego of doer-ship, the chargingego is gone. The ego of doer-ship (ahamkar) and ‘my-ness’(mamata) both go away when ‘we’ give you Gnan. But the ‘I-ness’, ego that is in discharge, the potapanu still remains.What does this mean? It is the ego (ahamkar), which isnot living. Basically it is the ego (I am Chandulal). For example,take the mixture of churmu (flour, ghee, and jaggery); if you rollit in a ball, it is called a ladvo. If you pat it down and cut it intopieces (chakta), it is called barfi churmu. And if you do neitherand leave it as it is, it is called churmu. All three are differentdeserts. They are all different phases of basically the same thing.In this example the churmu is the equivalent of the base ego of‘I am Chandulal’ and ‘this is mine’ is mamata. The ghee andjaggery mixed in the flour represents the coming together of theother non-Self elements to form a basic mixture. Then variousforms of the mixture can take different shapes and forms. Allthese are different expressions of the worldly ego which are allresidual, dying ego, after Gnan.The ahamkar (ego) and mamata (my-ness) have left andthat is the part we are calling potapanu (I-ness); it looks like theego.Questioner: So what is the difference between ego(ahamkar) and ‘I-ness’ (potapanu)?Dadashri: The ego will never move away; it will neverdecrease.Questioner: So does the ‘I-ness’ move away?Dadashri: ‘I-ness’ will continue to decrease. ‘I-ness’means a stock of baggage. A stock of ego; it continues toAptavani-9491492Aptavani-9discharge. And what is this ego like? There is already a stockwithin and a new stock is also flowing in; both get togetherinside. With us (mahatma), the charging ego is gone and thestock within still remains. The pending stock of the ego withinother people (non-Self realized people) is also discharging, butthere is also a new charging, hence new filling (creation of newkarmas) is taking place simultaneously. For us it is dischargingand nothing charges anew. Therefore, the charging ego goesaway but the ‘discharge’ ego is still there. This discharge ego isthe ‘I-ness’.Relationship between karma, ‘I-ness’ andawarenessQuestioner: So after Gnan, the ‘I-ness’ part is considereda discharge?Dadashri: That is a discharge; it is the karmic stock filledin the last life (bharelo maal). As that stock goes away as itdischarges, so will the ‘I-ness’.Questioner: So does the ‘I-ness’ remain on the basis ofthis baggage?Dadashri: Yes.Questioner: So will the ‘I-ness’ go down as the baggageempties?Dadashri: Yes, the ‘I-ness’ will go down as the baggageempties. Otherwise, it will not go down by itself. The ‘I-ness’will end as the reservoir of pending karmas; karmas that remainto be discharged, empty.Whatever amount of ‘I-ness’ leaves; that much of it isgone. If only a small amount leaves, it means more of it stillremains and if a lot of it leaves then there is relatively little of itleft. The greater the awareness (jagruti), the more the I-ness(potapanu) will be removed. The degree of dissolution of I-nessis in proportion to the level of prevailing awareness (jagruti). Ifthe awareness is greater, then greater and faster is the dissolutionof ‘I-ness’. One’s I-ness is slower to go if the awareness isweak.But You have hundred percent ‘I-ness’ after attaining thisGnan. If the awareness is strong, then ten percent of ‘I-ness’ willinstantly go away and if it is weak then only two percent of itwill go away.Questioner: Then a ninety percent of the ‘I-ness’ willremain, will it not?Dadashri: Yes. Those with greater awareness haveninety percent remaining and those with lesser awareness willhave ninety-eight percent remaining.Questioner: How does the remaining ‘I-ness’ then goaway?Dadashri: It will come out the next time.Questioner: So, does the ‘I-ness’ go away as the udayakarma unfolds?Dadashri: Yes, but the speed at which it goes awaydepends on the degree, intensity and strength of the awareness(jagruti). Therefore awareness will increase proportionately bywhatever percentage the ‘I-ness’ diminishes. Also, potapanudecreases as the jagruti increases.The Exact Awareness of SeparationQuestioner: If awareness prevails as circumstancesunfold, then ten percent or two percent of the ‘I-ness’ has goneaway. So what kind of awareness is that? How does theawareness (jagruti) that makes the I-ness diminish, work?Dadashri: It is the awareness of ‘I am Shuddhatma’; itis the awareness of the five Agnas. There is awareness of ‘Whois this? Who am I?’ There is awareness that ‘the ‘one’ abusingAptavani-9491492Aptavani-9discharge. And what is this ego like? There is already a stockwithin and a new stock is also flowing in; both get togetherinside. With us (mahatma), the charging ego is gone and thestock within still remains. The pending stock of the ego withinother people (non-Self realized people) is also discharging, butthere is also a new charging, hence new filling (creation of newkarmas) is taking place simultaneously. For us it is dischargingand nothing charges anew. Therefore, the charging ego goesaway but the ‘discharge’ ego is still there. This discharge ego isthe ‘I-ness’.Relationship between karma, ‘I-ness’ andawarenessQuestioner: So after Gnan, the ‘I-ness’ part is considereda discharge?Dadashri: That is a discharge; it is the karmic stock filledin the last life (bharelo maal). As that stock goes away as itdischarges, so will the ‘I-ness’.Questioner: So does the ‘I-ness’ remain on the basis ofthis baggage?Dadashri: Yes.Questioner: So will the ‘I-ness’ go down as the baggageempties?Dadashri: Yes, the ‘I-ness’ will go down as the baggageempties. Otherwise, it will not go down by itself. The ‘I-ness’will end as the reservoir of pending karmas; karmas that remainto be discharged, empty.Whatever amount of ‘I-ness’ leaves; that much of it isgone. If only a small amount leaves, it means more of it stillremains and if a lot of it leaves then there is relatively little of itleft. The greater the awareness (jagruti), the more the I-ness(potapanu) will be removed. The degree of dissolution of I-nessis in proportion to the level of prevailing awareness (jagruti). Ifthe awareness is greater, then greater and faster is the dissolutionof ‘I-ness’. One’s I-ness is slower to go if the awareness isweak.But You have hundred percent ‘I-ness’ after attaining thisGnan. If the awareness is strong, then ten percent of ‘I-ness’ willinstantly go away and if it is weak then only two percent of itwill go away.Questioner: Then a ninety percent of the ‘I-ness’ willremain, will it not?Dadashri: Yes. Those with greater awareness haveninety percent remaining and those with lesser awareness willhave ninety-eight percent remaining.Questioner: How does the remaining ‘I-ness’ then goaway?Dadashri: It will come out the next time.Questioner: So, does the ‘I-ness’ go away as the udayakarma unfolds?Dadashri: Yes, but the speed at which it goes awaydepends on the degree, intensity and strength of the awareness(jagruti). Therefore awareness will increase proportionately bywhatever percentage the ‘I-ness’ diminishes. Also, potapanudecreases as the jagruti increases.The Exact Awareness of SeparationQuestioner: If awareness prevails as circumstancesunfold, then ten percent or two percent of the ‘I-ness’ has goneaway. So what kind of awareness is that? How does theawareness (jagruti) that makes the I-ness diminish, work?Dadashri: It is the awareness of ‘I am Shuddhatma’; itis the awareness of the five Agnas. There is awareness of ‘Whois this? Who am I?’ There is awareness that ‘the ‘one’ abusingAptavani-9493494Aptavani-9is not the abuser, he is a Shuddhatma.’The One who knows, ‘This is not ‘I’, this is ‘I”, is theSelf. There should be awareness of, ‘This is ‘I’ and not this.’Questioner: In which instances, is ‘potey’ (the Self) inand in which instances is ‘potey’ not? What does ‘one’ ‘see’ init?Dadashri: In all aspects. When ‘We’ give you Gnan,‘We’ give you Gnan of what you are and what you are not.Questioner: That separation that occurred within; youcalled it the Soul!Dadashri: That is it! That is the Atma - the Self.Questioner: Now that state should remain constantly,should it not?Dadashri: One should not forget to apply the awareness(laksha) to maintain the separation. Then later, continue to ‘do’the same, again and again. Then one becomes the Self. Whenyou fasten the buttons on your shirt, you instinctively know thatthe shirt can be removed; you have the knowledge ‘this part isthe shirt’ and ‘this part is me’, do you not? Or does it all appearto be the same?Questioner: No, one knows very well the separationthere. But the phases (avastha) of the mind, body and speecharise and change constantly. So is it not here that anuninterrupted awareness is called for, awareness of ‘this is I andall this is not I’?Dadashri: It is not all that complex and involved. Incertain circumstances there are instances where one has an‘interest’ in it and that is when he has to say, ‘This is not mine.’Otherwise, after Gnan, one has indeed been separated andremains separate as the Self. Then later there is someinterference and mixing.Questioner: So no matter what kind of results unfold,one should have the laksha (awareness) ‘this is not mine’?Dadashri: Yes, ‘this is I and this is not I’!Questioner: Here I can see that I am separate from thisshirt, but what is to be ‘seen’ there?Dadashri: That is exactly how one ‘sees’ it all separatewithin.Questioner: What does he ‘see’ in his vision (darshan)?Give us one example.Dadashri: Will you not know that, ‘This stone is separateand my hand is separate’? Will you not know that these are theattributes of the stone and these are the attributes of my hand?Questioner: Yes. I would know all the attributes of thestone, that it is heavy, it is cold, it is square…Dadashri: It is smooth.Questioner: So how can one remain in the state of ‘theseare not my attributes and these are mine’?Dadashri: You should be aware and know ‘this coldnessis not mine, this softness is not mine, this smoothness is not mine,this anger that occurred is not mine, this deceit that occurred isnot mine, the kindness that occurred is not mine and so on!When you are lying down, can you not tell you areseparate from the bedding? You understand that don’t you?Questioner: In that situation I can understand that thebed and the one sleeping on top are separate but the problemarises when it comes to maintaining awareness that the differentphases of the pudgal - the non-Self complex of thoughts,speech and actions, are separate from the Self. In other wordsthe problem is with maintaining the focused awareness (upayogjagruti).Aptavani-9493494Aptavani-9is not the abuser, he is a Shuddhatma.’The One who knows, ‘This is not ‘I’, this is ‘I”, is theSelf. There should be awareness of, ‘This is ‘I’ and not this.’Questioner: In which instances, is ‘potey’ (the Self) inand in which instances is ‘potey’ not? What does ‘one’ ‘see’ init?Dadashri: In all aspects. When ‘We’ give you Gnan,‘We’ give you Gnan of what you are and what you are not.Questioner: That separation that occurred within; youcalled it the Soul!Dadashri: That is it! That is the Atma - the Self.Questioner: Now that state should remain constantly,should it not?Dadashri: One should not forget to apply the awareness(laksha) to maintain the separation. Then later, continue to ‘do’the same, again and again. Then one becomes the Self. Whenyou fasten the buttons on your shirt, you instinctively know thatthe shirt can be removed; you have the knowledge ‘this part isthe shirt’ and ‘this part is me’, do you not? Or does it all appearto be the same?Questioner: No, one knows very well the separationthere. But the phases (avastha) of the mind, body and speecharise and change constantly. So is it not here that anuninterrupted awareness is called for, awareness of ‘this is I andall this is not I’?Dadashri: It is not all that complex and involved. Incertain circumstances there are instances where one has an‘interest’ in it and that is when he has to say, ‘This is not mine.’Otherwise, after Gnan, one has indeed been separated andremains separate as the Self. Then later there is someinterference and mixing.Questioner: So no matter what kind of results unfold,one should have the laksha (awareness) ‘this is not mine’?Dadashri: Yes, ‘this is I and this is not I’!Questioner: Here I can see that I am separate from thisshirt, but what is to be ‘seen’ there?Dadashri: That is exactly how one ‘sees’ it all separatewithin.Questioner: What does he ‘see’ in his vision (darshan)?Give us one example.Dadashri: Will you not know that, ‘This stone is separateand my hand is separate’? Will you not know that these are theattributes of the stone and these are the attributes of my hand?Questioner: Yes. I would know all the attributes of thestone, that it is heavy, it is cold, it is square…Dadashri: It is smooth.Questioner: So how can one remain in the state of ‘theseare not my attributes and these are mine’?Dadashri: You should be aware and know ‘this coldnessis not mine, this softness is not mine, this smoothness is not mine,this anger that occurred is not mine, this deceit that occurred isnot mine, the kindness that occurred is not mine and so on!When you are lying down, can you not tell you areseparate from the bedding? You understand that don’t you?Questioner: In that situation I can understand that thebed and the one sleeping on top are separate but the problemarises when it comes to maintaining awareness that the differentphases of the pudgal - the non-Self complex of thoughts,speech and actions, are separate from the Self. In other wordsthe problem is with maintaining the focused awareness (upayogjagruti).Aptavani-9495496Aptavani-9Dadashri: There is some awareness in the situation withthe bed but awareness of the Self is gone away substantially, isit not? The separation of the body from the bed is in hisawareness (khyal).Questioner: That happens when I make him take a noteof the separation, then the one within will agree ‘Yes, both areseparate.’Dadashri: He will believe when you give him the proof(purava).Questioner: So in the same token do we need to giveproof in order to understand and maintain the exact awareness,‘All the non-Self complex phases are not mine and I amShuddhatma’?Dadashri: Proof, evidence (purava) is the main thing.Questioner: What is the proof or evidences that help tounderstand this from within?Dadashri: That which takes numerous evidences to getthe work done is ‘not mine’. Even when only three things gettogether in order to get the work done; it is ‘not mine’. Even ifyou do not cut a mango with a knife but bite into it with yourteeth, because everything had to come together in order for theeating to take place, means it is ‘not mine’. You will have tounderstand at the subtle level, will you not? Do you think youcan make do with understanding at the gross level?Questioner: The main thing is at the subtlest(sookshmatam) level.Dadashri: Yes, the main thing is subtlest (at the level ofsookshmatam) and what will happen if you dissect it at thegross level (at the sthool level)?Questioner: But this is something new that you just toldus.Dadashri: No it is not new, it has always been there fromthe beginning. This knowledge was with the tirthankaras and itis here today too. What can I do when according to your ‘lawbook’ you claim it as new?‘I-ness’ melts away with real experienceOne person thought he had become absolute. I told him,‘You have become nothing, do not grope around. There are alot of things you still have to become, you have a long way togo and it is not easy to become Absolute.’ So he tells me, ‘Butthe ego is gone.’ I said to him, ‘It has not gone. It is all there.You have not checked into it.’But it goes away gradually. As one suffers in theexperiences of worldly interaction and makes internal adjustmentsthrough Gnan, then the real experience (anubhav) arises within,and when such experiences increase, the ‘I-ness’ (potapanu)leaves to that extent. To say that the ego is gone means the ‘I-ness’ is gone. The end of ego means the end of ‘I-ness’. Onewill have to go through a lot of experiences before even afraction of the ‘I-ness’ goes. (There is a lot of differencebetween worldly experiences and the real experience within thatultimately makes one the absolute Self).The main ego, the charge ego, is gone. That is preciselywhat is called the ego—ahamkar. But it is not at all easy to getrid of the discharge ego. What does it mean to claim that the egohas gone away? It means that there is no garva (doer-ship), nogaravata (wallowing and remaining stuck in worldly comforts)and no potapanu (‘I-ness’). Should all that not go? The ego isgone for sure after Gnan; the charge ego is gone, so what kindof ego remains? The discharge ego! The discharge ego willdissipate in proportion to the experience (resulting from theapplication of Gnan) and then the ‘I-ness’ will graduallydecrease. Otherwise, it will not do so, not on its own. This is notan easy thing to accomplish. One may ask, ‘Can it not beAptavani-9495496Aptavani-9Dadashri: There is some awareness in the situation withthe bed but awareness of the Self is gone away substantially, isit not? The separation of the body from the bed is in hisawareness (khyal).Questioner: That happens when I make him take a noteof the separation, then the one within will agree ‘Yes, both areseparate.’Dadashri: He will believe when you give him the proof(purava).Questioner: So in the same token do we need to giveproof in order to understand and maintain the exact awareness,‘All the non-Self complex phases are not mine and I amShuddhatma’?Dadashri: Proof, evidence (purava) is the main thing.Questioner: What is the proof or evidences that help tounderstand this from within?Dadashri: That which takes numerous evidences to getthe work done is ‘not mine’. Even when only three things gettogether in order to get the work done; it is ‘not mine’. Even ifyou do not cut a mango with a knife but bite into it with yourteeth, because everything had to come together in order for theeating to take place, means it is ‘not mine’. You will have tounderstand at the subtle level, will you not? Do you think youcan make do with understanding at the gross level?Questioner: The main thing is at the subtlest(sookshmatam) level.Dadashri: Yes, the main thing is subtlest (at the level ofsookshmatam) and what will happen if you dissect it at thegross level (at the sthool level)?Questioner: But this is something new that you just toldus.Dadashri: No it is not new, it has always been there fromthe beginning. This knowledge was with the tirthankaras and itis here today too. What can I do when according to your ‘lawbook’ you claim it as new?‘I-ness’ melts away with real experienceOne person thought he had become absolute. I told him,‘You have become nothing, do not grope around. There are alot of things you still have to become, you have a long way togo and it is not easy to become Absolute.’ So he tells me, ‘Butthe ego is gone.’ I said to him, ‘It has not gone. It is all there.You have not checked into it.’But it goes away gradually. As one suffers in theexperiences of worldly interaction and makes internal adjustmentsthrough Gnan, then the real experience (anubhav) arises within,and when such experiences increase, the ‘I-ness’ (potapanu)leaves to that extent. To say that the ego is gone means the ‘I-ness’ is gone. The end of ego means the end of ‘I-ness’. Onewill have to go through a lot of experiences before even afraction of the ‘I-ness’ goes. (There is a lot of differencebetween worldly experiences and the real experience within thatultimately makes one the absolute Self).The main ego, the charge ego, is gone. That is preciselywhat is called the ego—ahamkar. But it is not at all easy to getrid of the discharge ego. What does it mean to claim that the egohas gone away? It means that there is no garva (doer-ship), nogaravata (wallowing and remaining stuck in worldly comforts)and no potapanu (‘I-ness’). Should all that not go? The ego isgone for sure after Gnan; the charge ego is gone, so what kindof ego remains? The discharge ego! The discharge ego willdissipate in proportion to the experience (resulting from theapplication of Gnan) and then the ‘I-ness’ will graduallydecrease. Otherwise, it will not do so, not on its own. This is notan easy thing to accomplish. One may ask, ‘Can it not beAptavani-9497498Aptavani-9accomplished during the course of my life?’ I say, ‘Moksha -final liberation can be attained in one or two more life times.What is the point of expecting anything else?’ What is the benefitof wrong expectations?All this is also ‘I-ness’There will not be any more garva or garavata once the‘I-ness’ has dissolved away. Here the garva and garavata stillremain (in discharge). What are the attributes of the one without‘I-ness’? Such a person will accept whatever abuse people givehim. He will accept any beating. To side with the ego isconsidered ‘I-ness’. To lose upayog – to lose the awareness of‘I am separate from the body’- is called ‘I-ness’.Even when You lose upayog for a little while; it is called‘I-ness’. You say that you ‘become one with whatever goes oninside, you become tanmayakar (engrossed) with it but lateryou become aware of it’, all that occurs because of your ‘I-ness’.Purusharth is needed in whatever isunfolding in front of youQuestioner: Is vyavasthit formed in such a way that itmakes one remain absorbed (tanmayakar) in the unfoldingkarma (udaya)?Dadashri: That is precisely how vyavasthit is; that is thedefinition of udaya - unfolding karma. Vyavasthit is such thatone will become engrossed in the unfolding karma, he willbecome the owner of thoughts, speech and actions (tanmayakar).And that is where purusharth - independent spiritual endeavor- is to be applied. At that moment (tapa) inner penance willoccur for sure.When will one arrive at such a subtle understanding? Itwill happen only when one gets into it, with applied awareness(purusharth).Questioner: I used to become tanmayakar in myprakruti when I did not have Gnan.Dadashri: Yes, you did it customarily and happily. Whatis more; you even liked it. The moment one has a thought aboutdrinking alcohol; he becomes tanmayakar (absorbed) in it. Helikes that. But what happens now after Gnan? Now the Self(potey) remains separate from within, where situations arisewhich the Self does not like. When dislike arises, this dislike isin the form of penance (tapa).Questioner: So, does that mean that what he previouslyused to like is precisely what he does not like anymore?Dadashri: Yes. Liking binds prakruti and dislikingdissolves it.The unfolding karma (udaya karma) that has to be dealtwith according to the unfolding (vyavasthit) is very harmful. Asit is, everything is a discharge (nikali) but it is very detrimentalto the goal of exposing the full Gnan of the Self.Questioner: I did not really understand that.Dadashri: Vyavasthit should be such that it supports thepurusharth. Vyavasthit working against purusharth is negativevyavasthit; wrong vyavasthit. If it is not to your liking, let it be.Even if you do not like it, the fact that you do not like it, showsthat it is the Atma (the Self). Where there is ‘I do not like’,means that you are there as Atma.Questioner: But vyavasthit is whatever that has come,has come, but now, what should one do?Dadashri: You have to do the purusharth in whatevercomes along.There lies the strength of Pragnya - thedirect light of the SoulQuestioner: So when ‘he’ becomes absorbedAptavani-9497498Aptavani-9accomplished during the course of my life?’ I say, ‘Moksha -final liberation can be attained in one or two more life times.What is the point of expecting anything else?’ What is the benefitof wrong expectations?All this is also ‘I-ness’There will not be any more garva or garavata once the‘I-ness’ has dissolved away. Here the garva and garavata stillremain (in discharge). What are the attributes of the one without‘I-ness’? Such a person will accept whatever abuse people givehim. He will accept any beating. To side with the ego isconsidered ‘I-ness’. To lose upayog – to lose the awareness of‘I am separate from the body’- is called ‘I-ness’.Even when You lose upayog for a little while; it is called‘I-ness’. You say that you ‘become one with whatever goes oninside, you become tanmayakar (engrossed) with it but lateryou become aware of it’, all that occurs because of your ‘I-ness’.Purusharth is needed in whatever isunfolding in front of youQuestioner: Is vyavasthit formed in such a way that itmakes one remain absorbed (tanmayakar) in the unfoldingkarma (udaya)?Dadashri: That is precisely how vyavasthit is; that is thedefinition of udaya - unfolding karma. Vyavasthit is such thatone will become engrossed in the unfolding karma, he willbecome the owner of thoughts, speech and actions (tanmayakar).And that is where purusharth - independent spiritual endeavor- is to be applied. At that moment (tapa) inner penance willoccur for sure.When will one arrive at such a subtle understanding? Itwill happen only when one gets into it, with applied awareness(purusharth).Questioner: I used to become tanmayakar in myprakruti when I did not have Gnan.Dadashri: Yes, you did it customarily and happily. Whatis more; you even liked it. The moment one has a thought aboutdrinking alcohol; he becomes tanmayakar (absorbed) in it. Helikes that. But what happens now after Gnan? Now the Self(potey) remains separate from within, where situations arisewhich the Self does not like. When dislike arises, this dislike isin the form of penance (tapa).Questioner: So, does that mean that what he previouslyused to like is precisely what he does not like anymore?Dadashri: Yes. Liking binds prakruti and dislikingdissolves it.The unfolding karma (udaya karma) that has to be dealtwith according to the unfolding (vyavasthit) is very harmful. Asit is, everything is a discharge (nikali) but it is very detrimentalto the goal of exposing the full Gnan of the Self.Questioner: I did not really understand that.Dadashri: Vyavasthit should be such that it supports thepurusharth. Vyavasthit working against purusharth is negativevyavasthit; wrong vyavasthit. If it is not to your liking, let it be.Even if you do not like it, the fact that you do not like it, showsthat it is the Atma (the Self). Where there is ‘I do not like’,means that you are there as Atma.Questioner: But vyavasthit is whatever that has come,has come, but now, what should one do?Dadashri: You have to do the purusharth in whatevercomes along.There lies the strength of Pragnya - thedirect light of the SoulQuestioner: So when ‘he’ becomes absorbedAptavani-9499500Aptavani-9(tanmayakar) under the dictates of vyavasthit, we should not let‘him’ become tanmayakar. Now to maintain this separation….Dadashri: That ‘action’ is verily the purusharth.Questioner: Who keeps this separation?Dadashri: You have to do that. What do you mean whohas to do it? The one, who keeps the separation, will keep it.But You have to decide ‘I want to remain separate’. When Youare the pragnya, You will ‘do’ this; keep the separation. Whenyou remain as Chandulal (in ignorance – agnya); you willbecome tanmayakar. But You have to make a decision. If ithappens on this side, know that pragnya has done it, if ithappens on the other side; know that agnya - ignorance - hasdone it. You have to decide, ‘I want to do only purusharth. Ihave become a Purush. Dada has made me a Purush; the Soul,the Self. He has separated Purush and prakruti. Therefore, Iwant to do purusharth.’ That is what You have to decide.Otherwise, on the most part, most of the energy goes intothe prakruti the entire day; the water just goes to waste flowingthis way.This is how the experience as the Self growsQuestioner: So the ‘I-ness’ will remain as long as thereare unfolding karmas, correct?Dadashri: The karma will continue to unfold even afterthe ‘I-ness’ (potapanu) is gone, but there is no potapanu inthose unfolding karmas.Questioner: Yes, that will only happen when the ‘I-ness’goes away, right?Dadashri: Even thereafter, the karmas will continue tounfold but there will be no ‘I-ness’ in it. ‘We’ too have unfoldingkarma, but there is no ‘I-ness’. Everyone’s ‘I-ness’ is therewhere the karmas unfold. But it will continue to go down afterattaining Gnan. It will not increase. It will go down until it endscompletely.Questioner: And one sees the ‘I-ness’ when the karmaunfolds, does he not?Dadashri: Yes. That is why ‘we’ have said that theexperience of the Self will increase as the karmas unfold and theego will go down. This is how everything becomes regular. Theexperience as the Self (anubhav) then continues to increase.Specific details of ‘seeing and knowing’Questioner: So then we do not have to worry aboutgetting rid of the ego. It will happen automatically in an orderlymanner as the karmas unfold (udaya) and all we have to do issimply ‘see’ it.Dadashri: No. You still have to do purusharth. Do nottake the approach, ‘I do not have to do anything’. In fact, thereal purusharth remains to be done from this moment onwards.Questioner: But what other purusharth is there besidesjust ‘being the seer (jonaro)’?Dadashri: You have to ‘see continuously’ but such‘seeing’ does not occur. Such continuous ‘seeing’ is not easy.You have to do purusharth. If You employ purusharth, thenYou will be able to ‘see’.Questioner: So what kind of purusharth is to be done?Dadashri: Only the purusharth to ‘see’ what is ‘burning’within and how is it burning.Questioner: That is the ‘seeing’ is it not?Dadashri: But this ‘seeing’ (jovanoo) it is not easy. Mancannot ‘see’; he is not able to ‘see’. If he does purusharth thenhe will be able to ‘see’. If one becomes the Self (the Purush)and does the purusharth of not becoming absorbed(tanmayakar), then only the ‘seeing’ is possible. OtherwiseAptavani-9499500Aptavani-9(tanmayakar) under the dictates of vyavasthit, we should not let‘him’ become tanmayakar. Now to maintain this separation….Dadashri: That ‘action’ is verily the purusharth.Questioner: Who keeps this separation?Dadashri: You have to do that. What do you mean whohas to do it? The one, who keeps the separation, will keep it.But You have to decide ‘I want to remain separate’. When Youare the pragnya, You will ‘do’ this; keep the separation. Whenyou remain as Chandulal (in ignorance – agnya); you willbecome tanmayakar. But You have to make a decision. If ithappens on this side, know that pragnya has done it, if ithappens on the other side; know that agnya - ignorance - hasdone it. You have to decide, ‘I want to do only purusharth. Ihave become a Purush. Dada has made me a Purush; the Soul,the Self. He has separated Purush and prakruti. Therefore, Iwant to do purusharth.’ That is what You have to decide.Otherwise, on the most part, most of the energy goes intothe prakruti the entire day; the water just goes to waste flowingthis way.This is how the experience as the Self growsQuestioner: So the ‘I-ness’ will remain as long as thereare unfolding karmas, correct?Dadashri: The karma will continue to unfold even afterthe ‘I-ness’ (potapanu) is gone, but there is no potapanu inthose unfolding karmas.Questioner: Yes, that will only happen when the ‘I-ness’goes away, right?Dadashri: Even thereafter, the karmas will continue tounfold but there will be no ‘I-ness’ in it. ‘We’ too have unfoldingkarma, but there is no ‘I-ness’. Everyone’s ‘I-ness’ is therewhere the karmas unfold. But it will continue to go down afterattaining Gnan. It will not increase. It will go down until it endscompletely.Questioner: And one sees the ‘I-ness’ when the karmaunfolds, does he not?Dadashri: Yes. That is why ‘we’ have said that theexperience of the Self will increase as the karmas unfold and theego will go down. This is how everything becomes regular. Theexperience as the Self (anubhav) then continues to increase.Specific details of ‘seeing and knowing’Questioner: So then we do not have to worry aboutgetting rid of the ego. It will happen automatically in an orderlymanner as the karmas unfold (udaya) and all we have to do issimply ‘see’ it.Dadashri: No. You still have to do purusharth. Do nottake the approach, ‘I do not have to do anything’. In fact, thereal purusharth remains to be done from this moment onwards.Questioner: But what other purusharth is there besidesjust ‘being the seer (jonaro)’?Dadashri: You have to ‘see continuously’ but such‘seeing’ does not occur. Such continuous ‘seeing’ is not easy.You have to do purusharth. If You employ purusharth, thenYou will be able to ‘see’.Questioner: So what kind of purusharth is to be done?Dadashri: Only the purusharth to ‘see’ what is ‘burning’within and how is it burning.Questioner: That is the ‘seeing’ is it not?Dadashri: But this ‘seeing’ (jovanoo) it is not easy. Mancannot ‘see’; he is not able to ‘see’. If he does purusharth thenhe will be able to ‘see’. If one becomes the Self (the Purush)and does the purusharth of not becoming absorbed(tanmayakar), then only the ‘seeing’ is possible. OtherwiseAptavani-9501502Aptavani-9(tanmayakar), You have to know that vyavasthit is taking ‘you’in that direction, so You bring it back into the Self, and ‘see’from there the beginning of the suffering and how it began. Suchpurusharth is needed.Do you think it is easy to, ‘see and know’? But all themahatmas claim, ‘Dada, we see and know, the whole day.’ Itell them that is good because they would not understand thesubtleness of it and I will have problem explaining to them. I amdiscussing this degree of subtleness just because of you,otherwise it cannot be discussed.Questioner: But this is necessary.Dadashri: But whom should I tell? I can tell only certainpeople.The attainment in Akram VignanHaving attained this Gnan, You have become the Self(Atma), but not the Absolute Self. It is pratiti Atma - the Selfin conviction (this conviction of ‘I am the Self’ is for ever). Thenthe prakruti has become upsham – it has settled down, yet theSelf is only at the level of conviction (pratiti Atma). All ourmahatmas have the pratiti Atma.Questioner: So after attaining this Gnan, the entireprakruti has become upsham; it has quietened down.Dadashri: Yes, it is more than enough when it becomesupsham. Just to arrive at the state of upsham is the greatestpurusharth. That in itself is the greatest attainment (labdhi) andnothing compares to it.Questioner: What purusharth is there just because theprakruti has quieted down?Dadashri: That also is called purusharth. Prakruti willbecome helpful to You when it becomes upsham. So it willproduce results when You do purusharth. Your purusharth willseeing has no meaning after becoming absorbed. It is meaningless.Questioner: Ah ha! He becomes tanmayakar and thenhe tries to ‘see’!!Dadashri: Yes, that is why it is all meaningless!Questioner: So then what kind of separation do we haveto maintain in order to ‘see’?Dadashri: After doing purusharth! If on the basis ofvyavasthit, you happen to become absorbed with it, then do notlet it happen and You remain as the Self; keep that separate, and‘see’ it separate. That verily is the purusharth! Now such‘seeing and knowing (jovoo and janvoo),’ does not (generally)remain, does it?The mahatmas say that they ‘see and know’ only. Theyall say that they remain in the state of ‘seeing and knowing’.They say ‘all we have to do is see and know.’ I tell them, ‘Thatis very good!?!’ But how are they to ‘see and know’? Evenwhen they make this claim, I simply let go. I recognize andunderstand that the first standard in school is always thus.Questioner: But the karmas continue to unfold twentyfour hours a day, do they not?Dadashri: Yes, karmas continue to unfold all day. Thenalong with it, there is also the state of being absorbed(tanmayakar). But along with that the purusharth of keepingthe two separate is also at work. However, that purusharth isweak in many places. Most of the time one remains in the stateof being absorbed (tanmayakar). The whole day long, everythingpasses by in this manner without one realizing it. Then he claims,‘I saw and knew’. Arey! What did you ‘see and know’ Whatdo you consider ‘seeing and knowing’? Did you see the ghosts?What is to be ‘seen’? If vyavasthit is engaging anddragging ‘you’ in the process of becoming absorbedAptavani-9501502Aptavani-9(tanmayakar), You have to know that vyavasthit is taking ‘you’in that direction, so You bring it back into the Self, and ‘see’from there the beginning of the suffering and how it began. Suchpurusharth is needed.Do you think it is easy to, ‘see and know’? But all themahatmas claim, ‘Dada, we see and know, the whole day.’ Itell them that is good because they would not understand thesubtleness of it and I will have problem explaining to them. I amdiscussing this degree of subtleness just because of you,otherwise it cannot be discussed.Questioner: But this is necessary.Dadashri: But whom should I tell? I can tell only certainpeople.The attainment in Akram VignanHaving attained this Gnan, You have become the Self(Atma), but not the Absolute Self. It is pratiti Atma - the Selfin conviction (this conviction of ‘I am the Self’ is for ever). Thenthe prakruti has become upsham – it has settled down, yet theSelf is only at the level of conviction (pratiti Atma). All ourmahatmas have the pratiti Atma.Questioner: So after attaining this Gnan, the entireprakruti has become upsham; it has quietened down.Dadashri: Yes, it is more than enough when it becomesupsham. Just to arrive at the state of upsham is the greatestpurusharth. That in itself is the greatest attainment (labdhi) andnothing compares to it.Questioner: What purusharth is there just because theprakruti has quieted down?Dadashri: That also is called purusharth. Prakruti willbecome helpful to You when it becomes upsham. So it willproduce results when You do purusharth. Your purusharth willseeing has no meaning after becoming absorbed. It is meaningless.Questioner: Ah ha! He becomes tanmayakar and thenhe tries to ‘see’!!Dadashri: Yes, that is why it is all meaningless!Questioner: So then what kind of separation do we haveto maintain in order to ‘see’?Dadashri: After doing purusharth! If on the basis ofvyavasthit, you happen to become absorbed with it, then do notlet it happen and You remain as the Self; keep that separate, and‘see’ it separate. That verily is the purusharth! Now such‘seeing and knowing (jovoo and janvoo),’ does not (generally)remain, does it?The mahatmas say that they ‘see and know’ only. Theyall say that they remain in the state of ‘seeing and knowing’.They say ‘all we have to do is see and know.’ I tell them, ‘Thatis very good!?!’ But how are they to ‘see and know’? Evenwhen they make this claim, I simply let go. I recognize andunderstand that the first standard in school is always thus.Questioner: But the karmas continue to unfold twentyfour hours a day, do they not?Dadashri: Yes, karmas continue to unfold all day. Thenalong with it, there is also the state of being absorbed(tanmayakar). But along with that the purusharth of keepingthe two separate is also at work. However, that purusharth isweak in many places. Most of the time one remains in the stateof being absorbed (tanmayakar). The whole day long, everythingpasses by in this manner without one realizing it. Then he claims,‘I saw and knew’. Arey! What did you ‘see and know’ Whatdo you consider ‘seeing and knowing’? Did you see the ghosts?What is to be ‘seen’? If vyavasthit is engaging anddragging ‘you’ in the process of becoming absorbedAptavani-9503504Aptavani-9not be fruitful if the prakruti does not become upsham.Questioner: But that prakruti is still going to act up andoverflow, is it not?Dadashri: It may act up. But even then, sooner or laterthe purusharth of the person with upsham prakruti will befruitful. It will not overflow once it becomes upsham. The stateof upsham will not go away.The one whose prakruti has become upshamstays with the GnaniQuestioner: What is in upsham?Dadashri: Upsham means that a person will not goaway no matter how much negative pressure is put on him. Hewill go astray for a while but he will come back. He will not goaway from here, all others will. They will run away if you harassthem enough but not the one with upsham prakruti. He wouldnot leave even if he were to die.Questioner: Where will he run to?Dadashri: Wherever he can, wherever he feels safe.Questioner: So he will run away from You, Dada?Dadashri: Yes. And if I am not here and if he is sittingwith someone else, he will run away from there too but the onewith upsham will not run away even if you were to kill him.The grave danger of leaving the Gnani PurushAnd the other will start his own agenda: ‘This is yours,ours is different’. He will start a separate sect (gachha). Whenthree people get together, it is called a sect. When three asceticsor any three people get together and worship, it is considereda gachha. The Lord has called it a division; a gachha. What iswrong with divisions? You can always find three people.Questioner: But the path to liberation is not to be foundwhere there are sectarian divisions (gachha), is it?Dadashri: Yes, when there is a sect; that is the end of it.But people create such divisions: ‘this is mine, mine is differentand their’s is different’.Questioner: Then he is bound to fall.Dadashri: He has already fallen. He falls from themoment he moves away.Speech without ownership is the sign of theGnaniEntire ‘I-ness’ (potapanu) gradually melts down to zeroafter attaining Gnan. One is considered a Gnani when it goesdown to zero. Then his speech (vani) will change. Vani flowsonly after potapanu leaves. By whatever proportion the ‘I-ness’goes away, that much speech will arise, and that speech iscorrect. Until then all speech is wrong. Elsewhere, except forthose who have taken our Gnan, there is a presence of ‘I-ness’whenever people speak. Such speech will not have any effect;it will blow away in the wind. That is not speech; it is all relative.As for our mahatmas, they are to speak only after their ‘I-ness’is gone, otherwise they are not to speak.Moreover can any mahatma who has taken Gnan speakeven a single sentence that is his own and stand independently?No. This is the sign that no one has attained the ‘main’ thing yet.No one has attained the absolute state yet. He cannot speakeven a single sentence; if he did, I would be astonished. I wouldsay, ‘that is enough proof!’ I would realize that it is amazing ifI were to hear even a single sentence! But it is not possible, isit? How can he utter even a single sentence? How can vani(speech) flow? How can the speech without ownership flow?Questioner: It would be more than enough if one wereto methodically say exactly what you say.Aptavani-9503504Aptavani-9not be fruitful if the prakruti does not become upsham.Questioner: But that prakruti is still going to act up andoverflow, is it not?Dadashri: It may act up. But even then, sooner or laterthe purusharth of the person with upsham prakruti will befruitful. It will not overflow once it becomes upsham. The stateof upsham will not go away.The one whose prakruti has become upshamstays with the GnaniQuestioner: What is in upsham?Dadashri: Upsham means that a person will not goaway no matter how much negative pressure is put on him. Hewill go astray for a while but he will come back. He will not goaway from here, all others will. They will run away if you harassthem enough but not the one with upsham prakruti. He wouldnot leave even if he were to die.Questioner: Where will he run to?Dadashri: Wherever he can, wherever he feels safe.Questioner: So he will run away from You, Dada?Dadashri: Yes. And if I am not here and if he is sittingwith someone else, he will run away from there too but the onewith upsham will not run away even if you were to kill him.The grave danger of leaving the Gnani PurushAnd the other will start his own agenda: ‘This is yours,ours is different’. He will start a separate sect (gachha). Whenthree people get together, it is called a sect. When three asceticsor any three people get together and worship, it is considereda gachha. The Lord has called it a division; a gachha. What iswrong with divisions? You can always find three people.Questioner: But the path to liberation is not to be foundwhere there are sectarian divisions (gachha), is it?Dadashri: Yes, when there is a sect; that is the end of it.But people create such divisions: ‘this is mine, mine is differentand their’s is different’.Questioner: Then he is bound to fall.Dadashri: He has already fallen. He falls from themoment he moves away.Speech without ownership is the sign of theGnaniEntire ‘I-ness’ (potapanu) gradually melts down to zeroafter attaining Gnan. One is considered a Gnani when it goesdown to zero. Then his speech (vani) will change. Vani flowsonly after potapanu leaves. By whatever proportion the ‘I-ness’goes away, that much speech will arise, and that speech iscorrect. Until then all speech is wrong. Elsewhere, except forthose who have taken our Gnan, there is a presence of ‘I-ness’whenever people speak. Such speech will not have any effect;it will blow away in the wind. That is not speech; it is all relative.As for our mahatmas, they are to speak only after their ‘I-ness’is gone, otherwise they are not to speak.Moreover can any mahatma who has taken Gnan speakeven a single sentence that is his own and stand independently?No. This is the sign that no one has attained the ‘main’ thing yet.No one has attained the absolute state yet. He cannot speakeven a single sentence; if he did, I would be astonished. I wouldsay, ‘that is enough proof!’ I would realize that it is amazing ifI were to hear even a single sentence! But it is not possible, isit? How can he utter even a single sentence? How can vani(speech) flow? How can the speech without ownership flow?Questioner: It would be more than enough if one wereto methodically say exactly what you say.Aptavani-9505506Aptavani-9Dadashri: It would be like gold if they spoke methodicallyand exactly as it is.Only understand this Vignan, you need notdo anything elseQuestioner: This talk of purusharth is extremelyimportant. It is all that is left after Gnan.Dadashri: Not everyone has understood this very subtletalk. Out there it is all thoka thok futile and baseless intellectualdiscussions. How very subtle all this is, but people have neverknown about it. They have not even heard about it!!Questioner: And the absolute Self is as subtle as space.And do we not have to understand the Gnan at that level ofsubtlety?Dadashri: Yes. One has to latch on to that but there isno need to run after it. You do not have to run to the point itmakes your stomach hurt. All You need to do is understandwhat it is being said. Everything is to be done easily and naturally(sahajata). Therefore, You don’t have to do anything; You onlyhave to understand.Everyone has a desire to analyze things deeply, don’tthey? Who does not have a desire to be wealthy? Why do thesepeople run around in the market for so many years? The wholeworld runs after wealth and money, does it not?Questioner: But we can make progress through thesupport of Your words, can we not? Can we not progresstowards the main thing by hanging on to Your every word?Dadashri: Yes, at first one enters this way slowly. He willenter through this gate first then he will reach the second gate.But what happens if one has not entered even the first gate?Only the one who understands this willattainQuestioner: We are able to recognize that You are at ahighly elevated stage when such subtle talks come out, and weare awe stricken by Your great divinity and about Your Vignanof Akram.Dadashri: Not everyone recognizes through thisunderstanding. Is it easy to recognize this? The person whounderstands this state will attain this state. To gain thisunderstanding is not an easy thing to accomplish. Yes the onewho can ‘see’ that ‘our’ aapopu; the last remnant of ‘I-ness’ inthe living state - is gone, has grasped something very important.That person has understood what ‘I-ness’ is.One whose ‘I-ness’ is gone becomesParmatmaNow how does this ‘I-ness’ aapopu, potapanu goaway? By doing darshan of the person whose ‘I-ness’ is gone;this is the ‘fitness’ (qualification or degree) of spiritual readiness(paatrata), nothing else.Questioner: Does it happen merely through doingdarshan?Dadashri: Everything can happen with darshan. Thistopic has come out only today. Has the word aapopu (‘I-ness’)cropped up before? It opens up when the occasion arises.God takes care of the one whose ‘I-ness’ goes away, sothen, where is the problem. Where do I have any such problem?Let Lord Krishna ride the horses, ‘we’ simply have to ‘keepseeing’ from within. So when will God take care of everything?When You let go of your ‘I-ness’. That is why Krupadudev hassaid, ‘bhagwat, bhagwat nu sambhadi leshey - God will takecare of the one who has become God.’ To become God, onehas to leave the ‘I-ness’.It is not God’s responsibility as long as the ‘I-ness’prevails. And when the ‘I-ness’ is gone, God is completelyresponsible.Aptavani-9505506Aptavani-9Dadashri: It would be like gold if they spoke methodicallyand exactly as it is.Only understand this Vignan, you need notdo anything elseQuestioner: This talk of purusharth is extremelyimportant. It is all that is left after Gnan.Dadashri: Not everyone has understood this very subtletalk. Out there it is all thoka thok futile and baseless intellectualdiscussions. How very subtle all this is, but people have neverknown about it. They have not even heard about it!!Questioner: And the absolute Self is as subtle as space.And do we not have to understand the Gnan at that level ofsubtlety?Dadashri: Yes. One has to latch on to that but there isno need to run after it. You do not have to run to the point itmakes your stomach hurt. All You need to do is understandwhat it is being said. Everything is to be done easily and naturally(sahajata). Therefore, You don’t have to do anything; You onlyhave to understand.Everyone has a desire to analyze things deeply, don’tthey? Who does not have a desire to be wealthy? Why do thesepeople run around in the market for so many years? The wholeworld runs after wealth and money, does it not?Questioner: But we can make progress through thesupport of Your words, can we not? Can we not progresstowards the main thing by hanging on to Your every word?Dadashri: Yes, at first one enters this way slowly. He willenter through this gate first then he will reach the second gate.But what happens if one has not entered even the first gate?Only the one who understands this willattainQuestioner: We are able to recognize that You are at ahighly elevated stage when such subtle talks come out, and weare awe stricken by Your great divinity and about Your Vignanof Akram.Dadashri: Not everyone recognizes through thisunderstanding. Is it easy to recognize this? The person whounderstands this state will attain this state. To gain thisunderstanding is not an easy thing to accomplish. Yes the onewho can ‘see’ that ‘our’ aapopu; the last remnant of ‘I-ness’ inthe living state - is gone, has grasped something very important.That person has understood what ‘I-ness’ is.One whose ‘I-ness’ is gone becomesParmatmaNow how does this ‘I-ness’ aapopu, potapanu goaway? By doing darshan of the person whose ‘I-ness’ is gone;this is the ‘fitness’ (qualification or degree) of spiritual readiness(paatrata), nothing else.Questioner: Does it happen merely through doingdarshan?Dadashri: Everything can happen with darshan. Thistopic has come out only today. Has the word aapopu (‘I-ness’)cropped up before? It opens up when the occasion arises.God takes care of the one whose ‘I-ness’ goes away, sothen, where is the problem. Where do I have any such problem?Let Lord Krishna ride the horses, ‘we’ simply have to ‘keepseeing’ from within. So when will God take care of everything?When You let go of your ‘I-ness’. That is why Krupadudev hassaid, ‘bhagwat, bhagwat nu sambhadi leshey - God will takecare of the one who has become God.’ To become God, onehas to leave the ‘I-ness’.It is not God’s responsibility as long as the ‘I-ness’prevails. And when the ‘I-ness’ is gone, God is completelyresponsible.Aptavani-9507It will take a long time for the ‘I-ness’ (aapopu) todepart. To begin with, at least settle everything with equanimitywith everyone around you. There is no difference between the‘I-ness’ leaving and becoming God. God took on the responsibilitywhen ‘our’ ‘I-ness’ eventually left. ‘We’ do not have anyresponsibility anymore. He took on ‘our’ responsibility when the‘I-ness’ left. Now ‘we’ do not have any burden on ‘us’ and thatis why ‘we’ are moving about in all this leisure. And really ‘we’have attained this state after searching for many past liveswhereas You have attained it in no time and so You should takefull benefit of it. Ultimately, Your work will get done when the‘I-ness’ goes away.There is no difference between the parmatma – theabsolute Self and the departure of ‘I-ness’. Nothing remainsexcept the absolute Soul, when ‘I-ness’ goes away.Jai Sat Chit AnandGlossaryAadayeeObstinacyAagrahaInsistenceAashankaRepeated suspicionAavegaEmotional forceAbhaavDislikeAbhedaOnenessAbheda drashtiVision of onenessAbhedtaOnenessAbhimaanExcessive pride, arrogance, inDada’s words “ego with richmaterial” (the ‘My’ and ‘Mine’materials attached to ‘I’, the ego)AbhiprayaOpinionAbrahmacharyaNon-celibacyAbuddhaWithout buddhi (intellect)AcharanConductAcharyaSpiritual masterAdharmaDoing wrongAdhiMental difficultiesAdhikaarAuthorityAadhinSubservientAadhintaTotal surrenderAdhyasConstant belief of I am thebodyAgnaSpiritual directivesAhambhavEgotistic expressionAhamkarEgoAjumpoRestlessnessAkadaiEgoistic inflexibilityAkhand jagrutiUninterrupted awarenessAkkalIntellectAlochanaConfess all the mistakesAnatmaNon-SelfAntahkaranInner complex of mind-intellect-chit and egoAptavani-9507It will take a long time for the ‘I-ness’ (aapopu) todepart. To begin with, at least settle everything with equanimitywith everyone around you. There is no difference between the‘I-ness’ leaving and becoming God. God took on the responsibilitywhen ‘our’ ‘I-ness’ eventually left. ‘We’ do not have anyresponsibility anymore. He took on ‘our’ responsibility when the‘I-ness’ left. Now ‘we’ do not have any burden on ‘us’ and thatis why ‘we’ are moving about in all this leisure. And really ‘we’have attained this state after searching for many past liveswhereas You have attained it in no time and so You should takefull benefit of it. Ultimately, Your work will get done when the‘I-ness’ goes away.There is no difference between the parmatma – theabsolute Self and the departure of ‘I-ness’. Nothing remainsexcept the absolute Soul, when ‘I-ness’ goes away.Jai Sat Chit AnandGlossaryAadayeeObstinacyAagrahaInsistenceAashankaRepeated suspicionAavegaEmotional forceAbhaavDislikeAbhedaOnenessAbheda drashtiVision of onenessAbhedtaOnenessAbhimaanExcessive pride, arrogance, inDada’s words “ego with richmaterial” (the ‘My’ and ‘Mine’materials attached to ‘I’, the ego)AbhiprayaOpinionAbrahmacharyaNon-celibacyAbuddhaWithout buddhi (intellect)AcharanConductAcharyaSpiritual masterAdharmaDoing wrongAdhiMental difficultiesAdhikaarAuthorityAadhinSubservientAadhintaTotal surrenderAdhyasConstant belief of I am thebodyAgnaSpiritual directivesAhambhavEgotistic expressionAhamkarEgoAjumpoRestlessnessAkadaiEgoistic inflexibilityAkhand jagrutiUninterrupted awarenessAkkalIntellectAlochanaConfess all the mistakesAnatmaNon-SelfAntahkaranInner complex of mind-intellect-chit and egoAntarayObstaclesAntarsoojInner insightAnubhavExperienceAasaktiInfatuation; Strong Attachment;Covetous cleavageAsangWithout companyAsangataA state of being free from allassociationAsaiyamExpression of kashayaAsatyaWrongAshubhaInauspiciousAtkanIntense inner obstacleAtmahimsaViolence to the selfBarkatCompetenceBhaavInner intentBhaav karmaCharge karmaBhaav munCharging mindBhanatarEducationBhashaLanguageBhautikWorldlyBhedaSeparationBheekhBeggaryBhodpanGuilelessnessBinharifNon-competitiveBodha kadaArt of explanationBrahmacharyaCelibacyBuddhiIntellectBuddhi gnanKnowledge manifested throughthe intellectCharitraConductChaturaiCraftiness and clevernessChintavanEnvisionsDaanatTendencyDarshanVisionDehabhimaanI am this bodyDhanipanuDominate as a husbandDharmaAttain the essenceDharmastikayaThe element of motionDhyanMeditationDrashtiVisionDrashtibhedA vision of divisionDravya karmaDischarge karmaDushamkaalAka as Kaliyug, this currenttime cycle is characterized as atime of lack of unity in people’sthoughts, speech and action; anera of moral and spiritual declineEkavtariYou can achieve liberation withinone more lifetimeEkindriyaSingle-sensoryEkmataAll become unanimouslyaccepting; unified in agreementGambhirataSerenityGanatarReasoning ability, wisdomGaravataWallowing in worldly pleasuresGarvaEgo of doer-shipGaaddhaStrong; deepGhamandFalse arroganceGhamandiA fake show-offGnanSpiritual knowledgeGnan indriyasSense organsGnan kadaArt of knowledgeGnanavarniya karmaKarma that obstructs the fullexpression of the knowledge ofthe SelfGnan-avarniyaKnowledge obscuring karmaGnata-drashtaKnower-SeerGruhasthisMarried peopleGarva-ras‘Juice’ of doer-shipGurukilliSpecial keyGurutamThe highestHimsaViolenceHimsak bhaavViolent intentHoonpadI-nessAntarayObstaclesAntarsoojInner insightAnubhavExperienceAasaktiInfatuation; Strong Attachment;Covetous cleavageAsangWithout companyAsangataA state of being free from allassociationAsaiyamExpression of kashayaAsatyaWrongAshubhaInauspiciousAtkanIntense inner obstacleAtmahimsaViolence to the selfBarkatCompetenceBhaavInner intentBhaav karmaCharge karmaBhaav munCharging mindBhanatarEducationBhashaLanguageBhautikWorldlyBhedaSeparationBheekhBeggaryBhodpanGuilelessnessBinharifNon-competitiveBodha kadaArt of explanationBrahmacharyaCelibacyBuddhiIntellectBuddhi gnanKnowledge manifested throughthe intellectCharitraConductChaturaiCraftiness and clevernessChintavanEnvisionsDaanatTendencyDarshanVisionDehabhimaanI am this bodyDhanipanuDominate as a husbandDharmaAttain the essenceDharmastikayaThe element of motionDhyanMeditationDrashtiVisionDrashtibhedA vision of divisionDravya karmaDischarge karmaDushamkaalAka as Kaliyug, this currenttime cycle is characterized as atime of lack of unity in people’sthoughts, speech and action; anera of moral and spiritual declineEkavtariYou can achieve liberation withinone more lifetimeEkindriyaSingle-sensoryEkmataAll become unanimouslyaccepting; unified in agreementGambhirataSerenityGanatarReasoning ability, wisdomGaravataWallowing in worldly pleasuresGarvaEgo of doer-shipGaaddhaStrong; deepGhamandFalse arroganceGhamandiA fake show-offGnanSpiritual knowledgeGnan indriyasSense organsGnan kadaArt of knowledgeGnanavarniya karmaKarma that obstructs the fullexpression of the knowledge ofthe SelfGnan-avarniyaKnowledge obscuring karmaGnata-drashtaKnower-SeerGruhasthisMarried peopleGarva-ras‘Juice’ of doer-shipGurukilliSpecial keyGurutamThe highestHimsaViolenceHimsak bhaavViolent intentHoonpadI-nessHumI am somethingIrshaJealousJadaMatter or inanimateJagrutAlertJagrutiAwarenessJakkiStrong headedJalebeeCrisp fried sweet soaked in sugarsyrupJanvoo‘Know’Jonaar‘Seer’JudaiSeparationKaamSexualityKaamnaIntense cravingKadaArtKadhapoOutburst that hurts othersKalyanSalvationKaliyugThe current bad times, wheremorality and sincerity have brokendownKapatDeceitKaaranCauseKarmendriyasOrgans of actionKarunyataCompassionKashayasAnger, pride, deceit and greedKathorHarsh or callousKeyfIntoxicationKhandaanNobleKhandaaniNobilityKhatpatMeddlingKhenchInsistenceKhumariExtra pride with ‘my-ness’; anaura of superiorityKriyaActivitiesKrupaGraceKushankaDestructive suspicion; negativesuspicionslaachaarHelplessLafruSomething that possess a personLaghutamHe is the smallest; the lowliest andin matters of the SoulLakshaAwarenessLalachaGreed laden temptation; intenseinsatiable greedLalachuAn intensely greedy personLattHabitual compulsionLepaymaanThe state of being covered;CoatedLobhiGreedyLokasangnyaSocietal influenceLoknindyaPublic censureMaanPrideMadaPrideMamataMy-nessMamataAttachment; ‘my-ness’MastiWorldly funMatbhedSeparation due to difference ofopinionMayaIllusionMijajEndless arroganceMishra MohaniyaMixed belief deludingMishrachetanBlending of consciousness, of thePure-Self and the Non-Self;Partially pure, partially non-puresensationMithyaWrong; Contrary to one’s natureor belief ; Perverted; False;DeludedMithyabhimaaniPerson with false pride withmynessMithyabhimaanFalse pride and false my-nessMithya-gnanWrong or Perverted knowledge;Wrong assessment of values;DelusionMithyatva mohaniyaWrong belief deludingHumI am somethingIrshaJealousJadaMatter or inanimateJagrutAlertJagrutiAwarenessJakkiStrong headedJalebeeCrisp fried sweet soaked in sugarsyrupJanvoo‘Know’Jonaar‘Seer’JudaiSeparationKaamSexualityKaamnaIntense cravingKadaArtKadhapoOutburst that hurts othersKalyanSalvationKaliyugThe current bad times, wheremorality and sincerity have brokendownKapatDeceitKaaranCauseKarmendriyasOrgans of actionKarunyataCompassionKashayasAnger, pride, deceit and greedKathorHarsh or callousKeyfIntoxicationKhandaanNobleKhandaaniNobilityKhatpatMeddlingKhenchInsistenceKhumariExtra pride with ‘my-ness’; anaura of superiorityKriyaActivitiesKrupaGraceKushankaDestructive suspicion; negativesuspicionslaachaarHelplessLafruSomething that possess a personLaghutamHe is the smallest; the lowliest andin matters of the SoulLakshaAwarenessLalachaGreed laden temptation; intenseinsatiable greedLalachuAn intensely greedy personLattHabitual compulsionLepaymaanThe state of being covered;CoatedLobhiGreedyLokasangnyaSocietal influenceLoknindyaPublic censureMaanPrideMadaPrideMamataMy-nessMamataAttachment; ‘my-ness’MastiWorldly funMatbhedSeparation due to difference ofopinionMayaIllusionMijajEndless arroganceMishra MohaniyaMixed belief deludingMishrachetanBlending of consciousness, of thePure-Self and the Non-Self;Partially pure, partially non-puresensationMithyaWrong; Contrary to one’s natureor belief ; Perverted; False;DeludedMithyabhimaaniPerson with false pride withmynessMithyabhimaanFalse pride and false my-nessMithya-gnanWrong or Perverted knowledge;Wrong assessment of values;DelusionMithyatva mohaniyaWrong belief deludingMohaniya karmaKarma that is delusive andcauses attachmentMoksha margPath to liberationMoorchhaDeluded stateNaffatShamelessNamrataHumilityNapunsakBisexual; HermaphroditicNih-shankaSuspicion-less stateNikaliDischargeNimitAn apparent doer who is simplyinstrumental in the processNirahamkariEgolessNirakudataBliss of the SelfNirbhaytaFear-less-nessNirdoshWithout any faultNirleypAbsolutely unaffected; Withoutany coverings or tendency toadhere to any KarmasNirmaaniThe ego of being pride lessNirmohiIs not a state of the end of hisillusion mohaNirpekshaFree from all expectationsNisangataThere is a state of unattachmentin the presence of all attachmentsNischayaRelated to the SelfNihshank drashtiThat he sees the world withoutany faultNihshanktaCompletely suspicion-lessNishkaran karunaCompassion of the Gnani Purushfor us that has no ‘personal gain’agenda behind it. Its only‘reason’ and ‘purpose’ is to takeus to our Ultimate Freedom, orMokshaNispruhaWithout any inclination towardsneeds, or desire, of any materialthings of this worldNispruhiNon-acquisitiveNiyanuFirm inner resolutionNokarmaNeutralNondhaIntense mental notePakshapaatPartialityParam vinayUltimate humilityParmarthAbsolute meaning; the ultimateaimParmatmaThe absolute SoulParmanusSub-atomic particlesParsattaInfluence of other forcesParyayaPhasesPoojavani kaamnaIntense craving to beworshippedPoojavuWorshippedPotapanu‘I-ness’PragnyaDirect light of SoulPrakrutiThe innate nature of one’srelative Self that is, the non-selfcomplexPrarabdhaThe effect of past karma; one’sdestiny; karma effectPratibhavRetaliatingPratikramanRepentancePratitiConvictionPudgal bhaavIntent of the non-SelfPunyaMerit karmaPurnapadAbsolute statePurushMale; Self-realized personPurusharthIndependent spiritual endeavorPurvagrahaPreviously held opinionsRaag-dweshAttachment-abhorrenceRajipoPleasing the GnaniRasamPracticeRaudradhyanAdverse internal meditation thathurts the self as well as othersRisadThe one that gets upset andMohaniya karmaKarma that is delusive andcauses attachmentMoksha margPath to liberationMoorchhaDeluded stateNaffatShamelessNamrataHumilityNapunsakBisexual; HermaphroditicNih-shankaSuspicion-less stateNikaliDischargeNimitAn apparent doer who is simplyinstrumental in the processNirahamkariEgolessNirakudataBliss of the SelfNirbhaytaFear-less-nessNirdoshWithout any faultNirleypAbsolutely unaffected; Withoutany coverings or tendency toadhere to any KarmasNirmaaniThe ego of being pride lessNirmohiIs not a state of the end of hisillusion mohaNirpekshaFree from all expectationsNisangataThere is a state of unattachmentin the presence of all attachmentsNischayaRelated to the SelfNihshank drashtiThat he sees the world withoutany faultNihshanktaCompletely suspicion-lessNishkaran karunaCompassion of the Gnani Purushfor us that has no ‘personal gain’agenda behind it. Its only‘reason’ and ‘purpose’ is to takeus to our Ultimate Freedom, orMokshaNispruhaWithout any inclination towardsneeds, or desire, of any materialthings of this worldNispruhiNon-acquisitiveNiyanuFirm inner resolutionNokarmaNeutralNondhaIntense mental notePakshapaatPartialityParam vinayUltimate humilityParmarthAbsolute meaning; the ultimateaimParmatmaThe absolute SoulParmanusSub-atomic particlesParsattaInfluence of other forcesParyayaPhasesPoojavani kaamnaIntense craving to beworshippedPoojavuWorshippedPotapanu‘I-ness’PragnyaDirect light of SoulPrakrutiThe innate nature of one’srelative Self that is, the non-selfcomplexPrarabdhaThe effect of past karma; one’sdestiny; karma effectPratibhavRetaliatingPratikramanRepentancePratitiConvictionPudgal bhaavIntent of the non-SelfPunyaMerit karmaPurnapadAbsolute statePurushMale; Self-realized personPurusharthIndependent spiritual endeavorPurvagrahaPreviously held opinionsRaag-dweshAttachment-abhorrenceRajipoPleasing the GnaniRasamPracticeRaudradhyanAdverse internal meditation thathurts the self as well as othersRisadThe one that gets upset andnon-communicativeRisavuUpset & non-communicativeRofSelf-importanceRoonanubandhaPast karmic tiesSaatvikGood and worthySadhanaSpiritual endeavorSahajNatural; Spontaneity;NaturalnessSahaj kshamaNatural forgivenessSaheloEasySamadhiInternal and external harmonySamayikFocused application of the lightof the Self during introspectivemeditationSamyak darshanThe right vision.Samyaktva mohaniyaRight perception deludingSandehaDubiousSangnyaAssociationSansarWorldly lifeSansari swabhavTendency to be worldlySantaapSerious tormentSaiyamMeaning a state without inneranger, pride, deceit or greed(kashayas)SapekshaExpectationsSaradStraight-forwardSaradStraightSaradataStraightnessSaspruhaInclinedSatyaTruthSatyagrahaInsistence on what one believesto be the truthSatyugAn era of virtue and moralityShaktiEnergy; powerShankaSuspicionShankashilSuspicion-ladenShraddhaFaithShrotaListenerShubhaGoodShuddha chetanPure consciousnessShuddhatmaPure SoulShooraatanFearlessnessSiddha GatiAbode of the Absolute liberatedSoulsSiddhiSpecial energySohumI am thatSoojInsightSookshmaSubtleSpardhaCompetitionSpruhaAcquisitiveness or inclination ofanythingSthirataSteadinessSthoolGrossStreeFemaleSwachhandTo act according to one’s ownwill and intellectSwakshetraPlace of the SelfSwamaanSelf-respectSwaprashansaComplimentTanmayakarBecome engrossedTanmayakarBecome engrossed; become onewith situationTantoIntense mental note itselfTaaranA quick internal assessment, thebottom line of any situationsTeekaCriticismTiraskarContempt; scornTiryancha GatiThe animal life formTraguManipulative tantrumTumakhiHot temperTundmijajiHead strongUdayaFruitionUdayakarmaMaturity of fruition of pastdeedsUdvegaEmotional agitationnon-communicativeRisavuUpset & non-communicativeRofSelf-importanceRoonanubandhaPast karmic tiesSaatvikGood and worthySadhanaSpiritual endeavorSahajNatural; Spontaneity;NaturalnessSahaj kshamaNatural forgivenessSaheloEasySamadhiInternal and external harmonySamayikFocused application of the lightof the Self during introspectivemeditationSamyak darshanThe right vision.Samyaktva mohaniyaRight perception deludingSandehaDubiousSangnyaAssociationSansarWorldly lifeSansari swabhavTendency to be worldlySantaapSerious tormentSaiyamMeaning a state without inneranger, pride, deceit or greed(kashayas)SapekshaExpectationsSaradStraight-forwardSaradStraightSaradataStraightnessSaspruhaInclinedSatyaTruthSatyagrahaInsistence on what one believesto be the truthSatyugAn era of virtue and moralityShaktiEnergy; powerShankaSuspicionShankashilSuspicion-ladenShraddhaFaithShrotaListenerShubhaGoodShuddha chetanPure consciousnessShuddhatmaPure SoulShooraatanFearlessnessSiddha GatiAbode of the Absolute liberatedSoulsSiddhiSpecial energySohumI am thatSoojInsightSookshmaSubtleSpardhaCompetitionSpruhaAcquisitiveness or inclination ofanythingSthirataSteadinessSthoolGrossStreeFemaleSwachhandTo act according to one’s ownwill and intellectSwakshetraPlace of the SelfSwamaanSelf-respectSwaprashansaComplimentTanmayakarBecome engrossedTanmayakarBecome engrossed; become onewith situationTantoIntense mental note itselfTaaranA quick internal assessment, thebottom line of any situationsTeekaCriticismTiraskarContempt; scornTiryancha GatiThe animal life formTraguManipulative tantrumTumakhiHot temperTundmijajiHead strongUdayaFruitionUdayakarmaMaturity of fruition of pastdeedsUdvegaEmotional agitationUnmattataSense of accomplishment,Reaction of swelling with prideUpadhiExternally induced difficultiesUpariSupremeUpdeshakPreachersUpshamCovered; smolderingUpayogContinuous focused awarenessof the SelfVachanbudEnergy and power of wordVahemDoubtVairagyaDispassion towards the worldlylifeVaktaSpeakerVaniksThose who make a livingthrough their speech andintellect, mostly businessman inIndiaVartePrevailsVastuThe SelfVegaMotion; neutral stateVairVengeanceVidhiSpecial inner spiritual adjustmentVignanScience of spiritual knowledgeVinayHumilityVishayaSensual pleasures, subject matterVitaragFree from attachmentsVitaragataDetachmentVitaragataState of absolute detachmentVitarag bhaavComplete non-attachment fromwithinVyabhicharini buddhiIs misleading intellectVyadhiPhysical difficultiesVyatirekTertiaryVyavaharWorldly interactionsVyavahar gnanPractical knowledgeVyavahariktaHis ability of worldly interactionsVyavasthitScientific circumstantial evidenceYaadMemoryPersons to ContactDada Bhagwan ParivarAdalaj:Trimandir, Simandhar City,Ahmedabad-Kalol Highway, Adalaj,Dist.: Gandhinagar - 382421, Gujarat, India.Tel : (079) 39830100, Email : info@dadabhagwan.orgAhmedabad:"Dada Darshan", 5, Mamtapark Society,Behind Navgujarat College, Usmanpura,Ahmedabad- 380 014. Tel. : (079) 27540408Rajkot:Trimandir, Ahmedabad-Rajkot Highway, Nr. TarghadiyaChokdi, Maliyasan Village, Rajkot. Tel.: 9274111393Vadodara:"Dada Mandir", 17, Mama ni pol, Opp. Raopura Police Station, Salatvada, Vadodara.Tel. : (0265) 2414142, 9825032901Bhuj:"Trimandir",  B/h Hill garden, Airport Road,Near SahyogNagar, Bhuj (Kutch) Tel. : (02832) 290123Godhra:"Trimandir", Village Bhamaiya, Opp. FCI Godown,Godhra, Dist - Pachmahal Tel. : (02672) 262300Mumbai:Mobile : 9323528901Kolkata:Mobile : 9330133885Bangalore : Mobile : 9341948509U.S.A.:Dada Bhagwan Parivar (USA) +1 877-505-(DADA)3232Dada Bhagwan Vignan Institute : Dr. Bachu Amin,100, SW Redbud Lane, Topeka, Kansas 66606Tel : +1 785 271 0869, Email : bamin@cox.netU.K.:Satsang Activity Centre,College House, 15 CollegeRoad, Harrow, HA1 1BA,Tel. : +44  7956 476 253 Email : dadabhagwan_uk@yahoo.comWebsite : www.dadabhagwan.orgKenya:+254  722 722 063Australia:+61 421127947UAE: +971  557316937Singapore: +65  81129229New Zealand: +64 21 0376434Germany:+49 700 32327474UnmattataSense of accomplishment,Reaction of swelling with prideUpadhiExternally induced difficultiesUpariSupremeUpdeshakPreachersUpshamCovered; smolderingUpayogContinuous focused awarenessof the SelfVachanbudEnergy and power of wordVahemDoubtVairagyaDispassion towards the worldlylifeVaktaSpeakerVaniksThose who make a livingthrough their speech andintellect, mostly businessman inIndiaVartePrevailsVastuThe SelfVegaMotion; neutral stateVairVengeanceVidhiSpecial inner spiritual adjustmentVignanScience of spiritual knowledgeVinayHumilityVishayaSensual pleasures, subject matterVitaragFree from attachmentsVitaragataDetachmentVitaragataState of absolute detachmentVitarag bhaavComplete non-attachment fromwithinVyabhicharini buddhiIs misleading intellectVyadhiPhysical difficultiesVyatirekTertiaryVyavaharWorldly interactionsVyavahar gnanPractical knowledgeVyavahariktaHis ability of worldly interactionsVyavasthitScientific circumstantial evidenceYaadMemoryPersons to ContactDada Bhagwan ParivarAdalaj:Trimandir, Simandhar City,Ahmedabad-Kalol Highway, Adalaj,Dist.: Gandhinagar - 382421, Gujarat, India.Tel : (079) 39830100, Email : info@dadabhagwan.orgAhmedabad:"Dada Darshan", 5, Mamtapark Society,Behind Navgujarat College, Usmanpura,Ahmedabad- 380 014. Tel. : (079) 27540408Rajkot:Trimandir, Ahmedabad-Rajkot Highway, Nr. TarghadiyaChokdi, Maliyasan Village, Rajkot. Tel.: 9274111393Vadodara:"Dada Mandir", 17, Mama ni pol, Opp. Raopura Police Station, Salatvada, Vadodara.Tel. : (0265) 2414142, 9825032901Bhuj:"Trimandir",  B/h Hill garden, Airport Road,Near SahyogNagar, Bhuj (Kutch) Tel. : (02832) 290123Godhra:"Trimandir", Village Bhamaiya, Opp. FCI Godown,Godhra, Dist - Pachmahal Tel. : (02672) 262300Mumbai:Mobile : 9323528901Kolkata:Mobile : 9330133885Bangalore : Mobile : 9341948509U.S.A.:Dada Bhagwan Parivar (USA) +1 877-505-(DADA)3232Dada Bhagwan Vignan Institute : Dr. Bachu Amin,100, SW Redbud Lane, Topeka, Kansas 66606Tel : +1 785 271 0869, Email : bamin@cox.netU.K.:Satsang Activity Centre,College House, 15 CollegeRoad, Harrow, HA1 1BA,Tel. : +44  7956 476 253 Email : dadabhagwan_uk@yahoo.comWebsite : www.dadabhagwan.orgKenya:+254  722 722 063Australia:+61 421127947UAE: +971  557316937Singapore: +65  81129229New Zealand: +64 21 0376434Germany:+49 700 32327474