Publisher:Mr. Ajit C. PatelDada Bhagwan Aradhana TrustDada Darshan, 5, Mamta Park Soc,B/h. Navgujrat College, Usmanpura,Ahmedabad-380014,Gujarat, India.Tel. : +91 79 3983 0100First Edition : 1500 copies, December 2013(The Gujarati Edition was published first time in 1984.)Price: Ultimate Humility (leads to Universal oneness)  and Awareness of "I Don't Know Anything"Rs. 150.00Printer: Amba Offset Basement, Parshwanath Chambers, Near RBI, Usmanpura, Ahmedabad-380014, Gujarat, India. Tel. : +91 79 27542964Aptavani - 8As expounded by theGnani Purush "Dada Bhagwan"8765Originally Compiled in Gujarati by :Dr. Niruben Amin©All Rights reserved - Deepakbhai DesaiTrimandir, Simandhar City, Ahmedabad-Kalol Highway,Adalaj, Dist.-Gandhinagar-382421, Gujarat, India.No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any mannerwhatsoever  without written permission from the holder of the copyright.Publisher:Mr. Ajit C. PatelDada Bhagwan Aradhana TrustDada Darshan, 5, Mamta Park Soc,B/h. Navgujrat College, Usmanpura,Ahmedabad-380014,Gujarat, India.Tel. : +91 79 3983 0100First Edition : 1500 copies, December 2013(The Gujarati Edition was published first time in 1984.)Price: Ultimate Humility (leads to Universal oneness)  and Awareness of "I Don't Know Anything"Rs. 150.00Printer: Amba Offset Basement, Parshwanath Chambers, Near RBI, Usmanpura, Ahmedabad-380014, Gujarat, India. Tel. : +91 79 27542964Aptavani - 8As expounded by theGnani Purush "Dada Bhagwan"8765Originally Compiled in Gujarati by :Dr. Niruben Amin©All Rights reserved - Deepakbhai DesaiTrimandir, Simandhar City, Ahmedabad-Kalol Highway,Adalaj, Dist.-Gandhinagar-382421, Gujarat, India.No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any mannerwhatsoever  without written permission from the holder of the copyright.34SamarpanOffering of SurrenderAnantkaad vahi gayo, na thhayoo Atmadarshan,Infinite eras of time have gone by, and yet the Vision (darshan)of the Atma has not occurred,Pragat Gnani vina, kaun kholey sudarshan?Without a manifest living Gnani, who will unveil the pure Vision?Gnani tana darshaney, madi jaaya jo nijdarshan,If upon meeting the Gnani, the Vision of the Atma (the Self) isattained,Aho! Aho! Anupama abheda vishwadarshan!Amazing! Amazing! The universal Vision of oneness that isbeyond accolades!Drashti padataa ja, avadaa nu savadu bataavey,Upon the very first glance, shows He the right within the wrong,Antardaah ni avirata sindari bujhaavey.Extinguishing the relentlessly burning rope of inner turmoil.Thokaro haash atki, thhata Gnan ujaashey,Ah! The stumbling has ceased with the Light of Gnan,Sansari dukh abhaav, sanatan sukh suvaasey.Indifference towards worldly pain, eternal bliss fragrance abounds.Gnani ney pragatyoo jey, aa darshan niravaranu,The completely unveiled Vision, which has manifest within the Gnani,Anant bhedey, pradeshey, Atmatattva jhadakyoo.At infinite locations and infinite unveiling, the element of theAtma alights. Nij na dosho dekhaadey, sookshmatarey sookshmatamey,Showing the faults of the self, at subtler and subtlest level,Darshan kevad poogyu, atakyu Gnan chaar anshey.The Absolute Vision attained, lacking four degrees of AbsoluteKnowledge.Aho aa darshaney, khoolya mokshamarg dushamkaadey,Oh Wonder! With this Vision, opens the path of liberation in theage of darkness (Kaliyug),Pratyek pagley paathharyaa prakash param hitey,Kindled He the Light for the ultimate absolute salvation at every step,Bandhan todaavatu, drashti badaltu Dada Darshan!This Vision of Dada breaks shackles, changes vision!Aptavani roopey jagakalyan arthey samarpan.Is offered up for the salvation of the world through this Aptavani.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)TrimantraThe Three Mantras that Destroy All Obstacles in LifeNamo VitaragayaI bow to the One who is absolutely free from all attachmentand abhorrenceNamo ArihantanamI bow to the living One who has annihilated all internalenemies of anger, pride, deceit and greedNamo SiddhanamI bow to the Ones who have attained the state of total andfinal liberationNamo AayariyanamI bow to the Self-realized masters who impart knowledge ofliberation to othersNamo UvazzayanamI bow to those who have received the Knowledge of the Selfand are helping others attain the sameNamo Loye Savva SahunamI bow to all saints everywhere who have received theKnowledge of the SelfEso Pancha NamukkaroThese five salutationsSavva PavappanasanoDestroy all demerit karmaMangalanam cha SavvesimOf all that is auspiciousPadhamam Havai MangalamThis is the highestOm Namo Bhagavate VasudevayaI bow to all who have attained the absolute Self in human formOm Namah ShivayaI bow to all human beings who have become instruments forsalvation of the worldJai Sat Chit AnandAwareness of the Eternal is Bliss34SamarpanOffering of SurrenderAnantkaad vahi gayo, na thhayoo Atmadarshan,Infinite eras of time have gone by, and yet the Vision (darshan)of the Atma has not occurred,Pragat Gnani vina, kaun kholey sudarshan?Without a manifest living Gnani, who will unveil the pure Vision?Gnani tana darshaney, madi jaaya jo nijdarshan,If upon meeting the Gnani, the Vision of the Atma (the Self) isattained,Aho! Aho! Anupama abheda vishwadarshan!Amazing! Amazing! The universal Vision of oneness that isbeyond accolades!Drashti padataa ja, avadaa nu savadu bataavey,Upon the very first glance, shows He the right within the wrong,Antardaah ni avirata sindari bujhaavey.Extinguishing the relentlessly burning rope of inner turmoil.Thokaro haash atki, thhata Gnan ujaashey,Ah! The stumbling has ceased with the Light of Gnan,Sansari dukh abhaav, sanatan sukh suvaasey.Indifference towards worldly pain, eternal bliss fragrance abounds.Gnani ney pragatyoo jey, aa darshan niravaranu,The completely unveiled Vision, which has manifest within the Gnani,Anant bhedey, pradeshey, Atmatattva jhadakyoo.At infinite locations and infinite unveiling, the element of theAtma alights. Nij na dosho dekhaadey, sookshmatarey sookshmatamey,Showing the faults of the self, at subtler and subtlest level,Darshan kevad poogyu, atakyu Gnan chaar anshey.The Absolute Vision attained, lacking four degrees of AbsoluteKnowledge.Aho aa darshaney, khoolya mokshamarg dushamkaadey,Oh Wonder! With this Vision, opens the path of liberation in theage of darkness (Kaliyug),Pratyek pagley paathharyaa prakash param hitey,Kindled He the Light for the ultimate absolute salvation at every step,Bandhan todaavatu, drashti badaltu Dada Darshan!This Vision of Dada breaks shackles, changes vision!Aptavani roopey jagakalyan arthey samarpan.Is offered up for the salvation of the world through this Aptavani.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)TrimantraThe Three Mantras that Destroy All Obstacles in LifeNamo VitaragayaI bow to the One who is absolutely free from all attachmentand abhorrenceNamo ArihantanamI bow to the living One who has annihilated all internalenemies of anger, pride, deceit and greedNamo SiddhanamI bow to the Ones who have attained the state of total andfinal liberationNamo AayariyanamI bow to the Self-realized masters who impart knowledge ofliberation to othersNamo UvazzayanamI bow to those who have received the Knowledge of the Selfand are helping others attain the sameNamo Loye Savva SahunamI bow to all saints everywhere who have received theKnowledge of the SelfEso Pancha NamukkaroThese five salutationsSavva PavappanasanoDestroy all demerit karmaMangalanam cha SavvesimOf all that is auspiciousPadhamam Havai MangalamThis is the highestOm Namo Bhagavate VasudevayaI bow to all who have attained the absolute Self in human formOm Namah ShivayaI bow to all human beings who have become instruments forsalvation of the worldJai Sat Chit AnandAwareness of the Eternal is Bliss65Books of Akram Vignan of Dada Bhagwan1.Adjust Everywhere2.Ahimsa : Non-Violence3.Anger4.Aptavani - 15.Aptavani - 26.Aptavani - 47.Aptavani - 58.Aptavani - 69.Aptavani - 810.Aptavani - 911.Autobiography of Gnani Purush A.M.Patel12.Avoid Clashes13.Brahmacharya : Celibacy Attained With Understanding14.Death : Before, During & After...15.Flawless Vision16.Generation Gap17.Harmony In Marriage18.Life Without Conflict19.Money20.Noble Use of Money21.Pratikraman : The master key that resolves all conflicts( Abridge & Big Volume)22.Pure Love23.Right Understanding to Help Others24.Science of Karma25.Science of Speech26.Shree Simandhar Swami : The Living God27.The Essence Of All Religion28.The Fault Is Of the Sufferer29.The Guru and The Disciple30.Tri Mantra : The mantra that removes all worldly obstacles31.Whatever Happened is Justice32.Who Am I ?33.Worries'Dadavani' Magazine is published Every monthNote About This TranslationThe Gnani Purush Ambalal M. Patel, also commonly knownas Dadashri or Dada, had said that it would be impossible totranslate his satsangs and the knowledge about the Science ofSelf-realization verbatim into English because some of the mean-ings would be lost in the process. Therefore, in order to under-stand precisely the science of Akram Vignan and Self-realizationHe stressed the importance of learning Gujarati.Dadashri did however grant his blessings to translate hiswords into English and other languages so that spiritual seekerscould benefit to a certain degree and later progress through theirown efforts.This is a humble attempt to present to the world, theessence of His Knowledge. This is not a literal translation butgreat care has been taken to preserve His original words and theessence of His message. For certain Gujarati words, severalEnglish words or even sentences are needed to convey the exactmeaning; hence, many Gujarati words have been retained withinthe English text for better reading flow. At the first encounter, theGujarati word will be italicized followed by an immediate expla-nation of its meaning in brackets. Thereafter the Gujarati wordwill be used in the text that follows. This serves as a two-foldbenefit: firstly ease of translation and reading and secondly it willmake the reader more familiar with the Gujarati words criticalfor a deeper understanding of this science. A glossary of all theGujarati words is provided at the back of the book. For addi-tional glossary, visit our website at :www.dadabhagwan.orgMany people have worked diligently towards achievingthis goal and we thank them all. Please note that any errorsencountered in this translation are entirely those of the translators.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)65Books of Akram Vignan of Dada Bhagwan1.Adjust Everywhere2.Ahimsa : Non-Violence3.Anger4.Aptavani - 15.Aptavani - 26.Aptavani - 47.Aptavani - 58.Aptavani - 69.Aptavani - 810.Aptavani - 911.Autobiography of Gnani Purush A.M.Patel12.Avoid Clashes13.Brahmacharya : Celibacy Attained With Understanding14.Death : Before, During & After...15.Flawless Vision16.Generation Gap17.Harmony In Marriage18.Life Without Conflict19.Money20.Noble Use of Money21.Pratikraman : The master key that resolves all conflicts( Abridge & Big Volume)22.Pure Love23.Right Understanding to Help Others24.Science of Karma25.Science of Speech26.Shree Simandhar Swami : The Living God27.The Essence Of All Religion28.The Fault Is Of the Sufferer29.The Guru and The Disciple30.Tri Mantra : The mantra that removes all worldly obstacles31.Whatever Happened is Justice32.Who Am I ?33.Worries'Dadavani' Magazine is published Every monthNote About This TranslationThe Gnani Purush Ambalal M. Patel, also commonly knownas Dadashri or Dada, had said that it would be impossible totranslate his satsangs and the knowledge about the Science ofSelf-realization verbatim into English because some of the mean-ings would be lost in the process. Therefore, in order to under-stand precisely the science of Akram Vignan and Self-realizationHe stressed the importance of learning Gujarati.Dadashri did however grant his blessings to translate hiswords into English and other languages so that spiritual seekerscould benefit to a certain degree and later progress through theirown efforts.This is a humble attempt to present to the world, theessence of His Knowledge. This is not a literal translation butgreat care has been taken to preserve His original words and theessence of His message. For certain Gujarati words, severalEnglish words or even sentences are needed to convey the exactmeaning; hence, many Gujarati words have been retained withinthe English text for better reading flow. At the first encounter, theGujarati word will be italicized followed by an immediate expla-nation of its meaning in brackets. Thereafter the Gujarati wordwill be used in the text that follows. This serves as a two-foldbenefit: firstly ease of translation and reading and secondly it willmake the reader more familiar with the Gujarati words criticalfor a deeper understanding of this science. A glossary of all theGujarati words is provided at the back of the book. For addi-tional glossary, visit our website at :www.dadabhagwan.orgMany people have worked diligently towards achievingthis goal and we thank them all. Please note that any errorsencountered in this translation are entirely those of the translators.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)87Introduction to The GnaniOne June evening, in 1958 at around six o’clock, AmbalalMuljibhai Patel, a family man, and a contractor by profession,was sitting on a bench on the busy platform number three atSurat’s train station. Surat is a city in south Gujarat, a westernstate in India. What happened within the next forty-eight minuteswas phenomenal. Spontaneous Self-realization occurred withinAmbalal M. Patel. During this event, his ego completely meltedand from that moment onwards, he became completely detachedfrom all of Ambalal’s thoughts, speech, and actions. He becamethe Lord’s living instrument for the salvation of humankind, throughthe path of knowledge. He called this Lord, ‘Dada Bhagwan.’To everyone he met, he would say, “This Lord, Dada Bhagwanis fully manifested within me. He also resides within all livingbeings. The difference is that within me He is completely ex-pressed and in you, he has yet to manifest.”Who are we? What is God? Who runs this world? Whatis karma? What is liberation? Etc. All the world’s spiritual ques-tions were answered during this event. Thus, nature offeredabsolute vision to the world through the medium of Shree AmbalalMuljibhai Patel.Ambalal was born in Tarasali, a suburb of Baroda andwas later raised in Bhadran, Gujarat. His wife’s name was Hiraba.Although he was a contractor by profession, his life at home andhis interactions with everyone around him were exemplary, evenprior to his Self-realization. After becoming Self-realized andattaining the state of a Gnani, (The Awakened One, Jnani inHindi), his body became a ‘public charitable trust.’Throughout his entire life, he lived by the principle thatthere should not be any commerce in religion, and in all com-merce, there must be religion. He also never took money fromanyone for his own use. He used the profits from his businessto take his devotees for pilgrimages to various parts of India.His words became the foundation for the new, direct, andstep-less path to Self-realization called Akram Vignan. Throughhis divine original scientific experiment (The Gnan Vidhi), heimparted this knowledge to others within two hours. Thousandshave received his grace through this process and thousandscontinue to do so even now. ‘Akram’ means without steps; anelevator path or a shortcut, whereas ‘Kram’ means an orderly,step-by-step spiritual path. Akram is now recognized as a directshortcut to the bliss of the Self.Who is Dada Bhagwan?When he explained to others who ‘Dada Bhagwan’ is,he would say : “What you see here is not ‘Dada Bhagwan’.What you see is ‘A. M. Patel.’ I am a Gnani Purush and ‘He’that is manifested within me, is ‘Dada Bhagwan’. He is theLord within. He is within you and everyone else. He has notyet manifested within you, whereas within me he is fully mani-fested. I myself am not a Bhagwan. I too bow down to DadaBhagwan within me.”Current link for attaining the knowledge ofSelf-realization (Atma Gnan)“I am personally going to impart siddhis (special spiritualpowers) to a few people. After I leave, will there not be a needfor them? People of future generations will need this path, willthey not?”~ DadashriParam Pujya Dadashri used to go from town to town, andcountry to country, to give satsang and impart the knowledge ofthe Self as well as knowledge of harmonious worldly interactionto all who came to see him. During his final days, in the fall of1987, he gave his blessing to Dr. Niruben Amin and bestowedhis special siddhis upon her, to continue his work. “You will haveto become a mother to this whole world, Niruben” He told her87Introduction to The GnaniOne June evening, in 1958 at around six o’clock, AmbalalMuljibhai Patel, a family man, and a contractor by profession,was sitting on a bench on the busy platform number three atSurat’s train station. Surat is a city in south Gujarat, a westernstate in India. What happened within the next forty-eight minuteswas phenomenal. Spontaneous Self-realization occurred withinAmbalal M. Patel. During this event, his ego completely meltedand from that moment onwards, he became completely detachedfrom all of Ambalal’s thoughts, speech, and actions. He becamethe Lord’s living instrument for the salvation of humankind, throughthe path of knowledge. He called this Lord, ‘Dada Bhagwan.’To everyone he met, he would say, “This Lord, Dada Bhagwanis fully manifested within me. He also resides within all livingbeings. The difference is that within me He is completely ex-pressed and in you, he has yet to manifest.”Who are we? What is God? Who runs this world? Whatis karma? What is liberation? Etc. All the world’s spiritual ques-tions were answered during this event. Thus, nature offeredabsolute vision to the world through the medium of Shree AmbalalMuljibhai Patel.Ambalal was born in Tarasali, a suburb of Baroda andwas later raised in Bhadran, Gujarat. His wife’s name was Hiraba.Although he was a contractor by profession, his life at home andhis interactions with everyone around him were exemplary, evenprior to his Self-realization. After becoming Self-realized andattaining the state of a Gnani, (The Awakened One, Jnani inHindi), his body became a ‘public charitable trust.’Throughout his entire life, he lived by the principle thatthere should not be any commerce in religion, and in all com-merce, there must be religion. He also never took money fromanyone for his own use. He used the profits from his businessto take his devotees for pilgrimages to various parts of India.His words became the foundation for the new, direct, andstep-less path to Self-realization called Akram Vignan. Throughhis divine original scientific experiment (The Gnan Vidhi), heimparted this knowledge to others within two hours. Thousandshave received his grace through this process and thousandscontinue to do so even now. ‘Akram’ means without steps; anelevator path or a shortcut, whereas ‘Kram’ means an orderly,step-by-step spiritual path. Akram is now recognized as a directshortcut to the bliss of the Self.Who is Dada Bhagwan?When he explained to others who ‘Dada Bhagwan’ is,he would say : “What you see here is not ‘Dada Bhagwan’.What you see is ‘A. M. Patel.’ I am a Gnani Purush and ‘He’that is manifested within me, is ‘Dada Bhagwan’. He is theLord within. He is within you and everyone else. He has notyet manifested within you, whereas within me he is fully mani-fested. I myself am not a Bhagwan. I too bow down to DadaBhagwan within me.”Current link for attaining the knowledge ofSelf-realization (Atma Gnan)“I am personally going to impart siddhis (special spiritualpowers) to a few people. After I leave, will there not be a needfor them? People of future generations will need this path, willthey not?”~ DadashriParam Pujya Dadashri used to go from town to town, andcountry to country, to give satsang and impart the knowledge ofthe Self as well as knowledge of harmonious worldly interactionto all who came to see him. During his final days, in the fall of1987, he gave his blessing to Dr. Niruben Amin and bestowedhis special siddhis upon her, to continue his work. “You will haveto become a mother to this whole world, Niruben” He told her910as he blessed her. There was no doubt in Dadashri’s mind thatNiruben was destined to be just that. She had served him withutmost devotion day and night for over twenty years. Dadashriin turn had molded her and prepared her to take on this monu-mental task.From the time of Pujya Dadashri’s mortal departure onJanuary 2 1988 to her own mortal departure on March 19th2006, Pujya Niruma as she lovingly came to be called by thou-sands remained true to her promise to Dadashri to carry on hismission of the world’s salvation. She became Dadashri’s repre-sentative of Akram Vignan and became instrumental in spreadingthe knowledge of Akram Vignan throughout the world. She alsobecame an exemplary of pure and unconditional love. Thou-sands of people from all walks of life and from all over the worldhave attained Self-realization through her and are established inthe experience of the pure Soul, while carrying out their worldlyduties and obligations. They experience freedom here and now,while living their daily life.The link of Akram Gnanis now continues with the currentspiritual master Pujya Deepakbhai Desai whom Pujya Dadashrihad also graced with special siddhis to continue to teach theworld about Atma Gnan and Akram Vignan. He was furthermolded and trained by Pujya Niruma who blessed him to con-duct Gnan Vidhi in 2003. Dadashri had said that Deepakbhaiwill become the decorum that will add splendor to the Lord’sreign. Pujya Deepakbhai, in keeping with Dada’s and Niruma’stradition travels extensively within India and abroad, givingsatsangs and imparting the knowledge of the Self to all whocome seeking.Powerful words in scriptures help the seeker in increasinghis desire for liberation. The knowledge of the Self is the finalgoal of all one’s seeking. Without the knowledge of the Selfthere is no liberation. This knowledge of the Self (Atma Gnan)does not exist in books. It exists in the heart of a Gnani. Hence,the knowledge of the Self can only be acquired by meeting aGnani. Through the scientific approach of Akram Vignan, eventoday one can attain Atma Gnan, but it can only occur by meetinga living Atma Gnani and receiving the Atma Gnan. Only a litcandle can light another candle.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)910as he blessed her. There was no doubt in Dadashri’s mind thatNiruben was destined to be just that. She had served him withutmost devotion day and night for over twenty years. Dadashriin turn had molded her and prepared her to take on this monu-mental task.From the time of Pujya Dadashri’s mortal departure onJanuary 2 1988 to her own mortal departure on March 19th2006, Pujya Niruma as she lovingly came to be called by thou-sands remained true to her promise to Dadashri to carry on hismission of the world’s salvation. She became Dadashri’s repre-sentative of Akram Vignan and became instrumental in spreadingthe knowledge of Akram Vignan throughout the world. She alsobecame an exemplary of pure and unconditional love. Thou-sands of people from all walks of life and from all over the worldhave attained Self-realization through her and are established inthe experience of the pure Soul, while carrying out their worldlyduties and obligations. They experience freedom here and now,while living their daily life.The link of Akram Gnanis now continues with the currentspiritual master Pujya Deepakbhai Desai whom Pujya Dadashrihad also graced with special siddhis to continue to teach theworld about Atma Gnan and Akram Vignan. He was furthermolded and trained by Pujya Niruma who blessed him to con-duct Gnan Vidhi in 2003. Dadashri had said that Deepakbhaiwill become the decorum that will add splendor to the Lord’sreign. Pujya Deepakbhai, in keeping with Dada’s and Niruma’stradition travels extensively within India and abroad, givingsatsangs and imparting the knowledge of the Self to all whocome seeking.Powerful words in scriptures help the seeker in increasinghis desire for liberation. The knowledge of the Self is the finalgoal of all one’s seeking. Without the knowledge of the Selfthere is no liberation. This knowledge of the Self (Atma Gnan)does not exist in books. It exists in the heart of a Gnani. Hence,the knowledge of the Self can only be acquired by meeting aGnani. Through the scientific approach of Akram Vignan, eventoday one can attain Atma Gnan, but it can only occur by meetinga living Atma Gnani and receiving the Atma Gnan. Only a litcandle can light another candle.(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)1112FOREWORDPublished in this book is the real Vision, about the originalproperties of the Atma and other eternal elements. This Visionhas emerged from the speech of the Gnani Purush of AkramVignan, who came to be known to the world as Dadashri. Thebook is in two parts. In Part I, the seekers pose many questionslike, what is Atma? What is it like? Etc, to the Gnani Purush,who gives them complete and satisfactory answers.In Part II, the Gnani addresses the fundamental question,Who Am I?The reader-questioner, in his fervent desire to gain theKnowledge, is paving his way by asking questions like: How canI attain this Knowledge? How do I recognize the Self? How doI attain Self-realization? Etc...Starting out with the doubts about the Atma’s veryexistence, one asks, what is the Atma? What is it like? Whatdoes it do? What is birth and death? Who takes birth and dies?What is karma? What are the four gati (realms of existence)?By what means does one secure one’s place in these gatis?What is moksha? What is Siddha gati (Final Liberation)? Whatare: pratishthit atma, mishra-chetan, nischetan chetan,ahamkar (ego), and all its resultant effects (vishesh parinam)?The answers to all these intricate questions have been disclosedhere.What is jiva (living entity; an embodied self)? What isShiva (realized Atma)? What is dwaita (dualism)? What isadwaita (non-dualism)? What is Brahma (Supreme Self)? Whatis Parabrahma (Absolute Self)?The dictum, Ekoham Bahusyam, ‘I am the One, and Ibecame many.’ The omnipresence of Atma, the presence ofGod in every particle, the meaning of the Vedas and Science etc.– Are all truths of Vedanta that will open up here.This gives you the true, primary but basic, understandingof the spirituality from which one has to pave the entire path formoksha (final liberation). The slightest of misinterpretation, willchange one’s course, on the path that is parallel to the Gnani’s.Such a diversion will change the destination, so that after havingtraveled on the path for so many millions of miles, instead ofreaching the destination, one finds oneself in a forsaken place. ‘I am a part of Parmatma (Absolute Soul)’ – If such anillusory belief prevails, when will you understand that You, yourselfare the Absolute Soul (Parmatma); you are independent; not afraction, but the complete Self? And if it is not in your belief tobegin with, then how can you attain such a state? There are somany of these illusory beliefs. They have come about as a resultof secular and orthodox thought, which makes one’s conductmove away from the real Vision.The essence of all scriptures, spiritual discipline, and thepractice of spirituality is one: to secure the awareness of one’sown Atma (Self).The real Atma truly is pure, but you hold a tuber of wrongbelief, which only the living Gnani Purush can unravel. Thatwhich can never be attained even over millions of lifetimes, isfinally made possible within an hour through the Gnani.Millions of questions come from those who doubt, andfrom those who seek Self-realization. Nevertheless, the Gnani’sanswers are spot on; his core definitions provide for the exactnessto open, which gives evidence of the Gnani’s divine and perfectlyclear Vision. To put it in his own words: “I answer by seeingthrough Absolute Knowledge (Keval Gnan)”. Moreover, hedoes not even have the inner intent (bhaav) of ownership, of hisspeech. The tape-record (tape player) is doing the talking. If theself were to speak, it would come out with many mistakes. Buthow can a tape-record make mistakes? ‘He’ himself is theKnower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta) of a tape-record.1112FOREWORDPublished in this book is the real Vision, about the originalproperties of the Atma and other eternal elements. This Visionhas emerged from the speech of the Gnani Purush of AkramVignan, who came to be known to the world as Dadashri. Thebook is in two parts. In Part I, the seekers pose many questionslike, what is Atma? What is it like? Etc, to the Gnani Purush,who gives them complete and satisfactory answers.In Part II, the Gnani addresses the fundamental question,Who Am I?The reader-questioner, in his fervent desire to gain theKnowledge, is paving his way by asking questions like: How canI attain this Knowledge? How do I recognize the Self? How doI attain Self-realization? Etc...Starting out with the doubts about the Atma’s veryexistence, one asks, what is the Atma? What is it like? Whatdoes it do? What is birth and death? Who takes birth and dies?What is karma? What are the four gati (realms of existence)?By what means does one secure one’s place in these gatis?What is moksha? What is Siddha gati (Final Liberation)? Whatare: pratishthit atma, mishra-chetan, nischetan chetan,ahamkar (ego), and all its resultant effects (vishesh parinam)?The answers to all these intricate questions have been disclosedhere.What is jiva (living entity; an embodied self)? What isShiva (realized Atma)? What is dwaita (dualism)? What isadwaita (non-dualism)? What is Brahma (Supreme Self)? Whatis Parabrahma (Absolute Self)?The dictum, Ekoham Bahusyam, ‘I am the One, and Ibecame many.’ The omnipresence of Atma, the presence ofGod in every particle, the meaning of the Vedas and Science etc.– Are all truths of Vedanta that will open up here.This gives you the true, primary but basic, understandingof the spirituality from which one has to pave the entire path formoksha (final liberation). The slightest of misinterpretation, willchange one’s course, on the path that is parallel to the Gnani’s.Such a diversion will change the destination, so that after havingtraveled on the path for so many millions of miles, instead ofreaching the destination, one finds oneself in a forsaken place. ‘I am a part of Parmatma (Absolute Soul)’ – If such anillusory belief prevails, when will you understand that You, yourselfare the Absolute Soul (Parmatma); you are independent; not afraction, but the complete Self? And if it is not in your belief tobegin with, then how can you attain such a state? There are somany of these illusory beliefs. They have come about as a resultof secular and orthodox thought, which makes one’s conductmove away from the real Vision.The essence of all scriptures, spiritual discipline, and thepractice of spirituality is one: to secure the awareness of one’sown Atma (Self).The real Atma truly is pure, but you hold a tuber of wrongbelief, which only the living Gnani Purush can unravel. Thatwhich can never be attained even over millions of lifetimes, isfinally made possible within an hour through the Gnani.Millions of questions come from those who doubt, andfrom those who seek Self-realization. Nevertheless, the Gnani’sanswers are spot on; his core definitions provide for the exactnessto open, which gives evidence of the Gnani’s divine and perfectlyclear Vision. To put it in his own words: “I answer by seeingthrough Absolute Knowledge (Keval Gnan)”. Moreover, hedoes not even have the inner intent (bhaav) of ownership, of hisspeech. The tape-record (tape player) is doing the talking. If theself were to speak, it would come out with many mistakes. Buthow can a tape-record make mistakes? ‘He’ himself is theKnower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta) of a tape-record.1314For all those who are in search of Self-realization, and forall those who are deeply curious, innumerable questions relatedto the Atma and to the universe, have been compounded in thisbook. The wise aspirant will find the Eternal, elucidated for himin his own language. He will indeed experience the Eternal as itis. However, in order for him to come into this Vision andexperience, he requires a Gnani. Only the living Gnani, – whoresides in the absolute state of the Self – Dadashri, can give youthis very experience of the Atma.  As it is, the profound discussions about Atmagnan (Self-knowledge) or Keval Gnan (Absolute Knowledge) have beenfruitless when it comes to illuminating a single ray of the light ofone’s own Atma. Unless you encounter a living Gnani, andunless you receive the Gnani’s Gnan, you will only dwell inwords. The living Gnani’s single word, on the other hand, willpierce your heart, removing layers of infinite veils of dosh (faults)that have been, shrouding the supreme light of the Absolute Soul(Parmatma) that illuminates the entire universe. So that now,that same light shines within You.Only those who have known this incomparable Gnani’sunparalleled siddhi (energy that accomplishes the ultimate) haverelished its beauty. Otherwise, how would the light of the Atma,which cannot be described with words; be illuminated withwords? The compassionate Dadashri had often said, ‘The personyou see before you is not Dada Bhagwan. This is A. M. Patel.Dada Bhagwan is He that has manifested within. He (DadaBhagwan) is the Lord of the fourteen worlds! You may askfrom Him anything that you want. But you do not even knowhow to fill that tender (request)!’ And that is a fact! Rather thanasking for the domain of the whole universe, which is in Hispossession, the unfortunate seeker fills out a tender for a pieceof plot (material things) instead. If at the time, one could haveread the Gnani’s heart, it would have been overflowing withinfinite compassion!The existing wrong beliefs about the Atma (the Self),pushes one millions of miles away from the absolute truth.Regardless of not having attained Atmagnan (Self-realization),if you can manage to understand the Self, through that which theGnani Purush has himself Seen, Known and Experienced, youwill be halted from traveling in the wrong direction. In this verybook, the revered Dadashri, from his own Gnan, expresses asit is, how he has seen, known, and experienced the swaroop(nature; form) of the Atma and the swaroop of the world. Andfor those who progress on the spiritual path, it will prove veryuseful for understanding the Atma.The Gnani Purush’s speech flows naturally. It is dependenton the nimit (questioner) and on the circumstances. Should youcome across any discrepancies or shortcomings in this book, itis an error in the compilation, made entirely on our part, andnever in the words of the Gnani Purush. And for that, we prayfor your forgiveness.- Dr. Niruben Amin1314For all those who are in search of Self-realization, and forall those who are deeply curious, innumerable questions relatedto the Atma and to the universe, have been compounded in thisbook. The wise aspirant will find the Eternal, elucidated for himin his own language. He will indeed experience the Eternal as itis. However, in order for him to come into this Vision andexperience, he requires a Gnani. Only the living Gnani, – whoresides in the absolute state of the Self – Dadashri, can give youthis very experience of the Atma.  As it is, the profound discussions about Atmagnan (Self-knowledge) or Keval Gnan (Absolute Knowledge) have beenfruitless when it comes to illuminating a single ray of the light ofone’s own Atma. Unless you encounter a living Gnani, andunless you receive the Gnani’s Gnan, you will only dwell inwords. The living Gnani’s single word, on the other hand, willpierce your heart, removing layers of infinite veils of dosh (faults)that have been, shrouding the supreme light of the Absolute Soul(Parmatma) that illuminates the entire universe. So that now,that same light shines within You.Only those who have known this incomparable Gnani’sunparalleled siddhi (energy that accomplishes the ultimate) haverelished its beauty. Otherwise, how would the light of the Atma,which cannot be described with words; be illuminated withwords? The compassionate Dadashri had often said, ‘The personyou see before you is not Dada Bhagwan. This is A. M. Patel.Dada Bhagwan is He that has manifested within. He (DadaBhagwan) is the Lord of the fourteen worlds! You may askfrom Him anything that you want. But you do not even knowhow to fill that tender (request)!’ And that is a fact! Rather thanasking for the domain of the whole universe, which is in Hispossession, the unfortunate seeker fills out a tender for a pieceof plot (material things) instead. If at the time, one could haveread the Gnani’s heart, it would have been overflowing withinfinite compassion!The existing wrong beliefs about the Atma (the Self),pushes one millions of miles away from the absolute truth.Regardless of not having attained Atmagnan (Self-realization),if you can manage to understand the Self, through that which theGnani Purush has himself Seen, Known and Experienced, youwill be halted from traveling in the wrong direction. In this verybook, the revered Dadashri, from his own Gnan, expresses asit is, how he has seen, known, and experienced the swaroop(nature; form) of the Atma and the swaroop of the world. Andfor those who progress on the spiritual path, it will prove veryuseful for understanding the Atma.The Gnani Purush’s speech flows naturally. It is dependenton the nimit (questioner) and on the circumstances. Should youcome across any discrepancies or shortcomings in this book, itis an error in the compilation, made entirely on our part, andnever in the words of the Gnani Purush. And for that, we prayfor your forgiveness.- Dr. Niruben Amin1516INTRODUCTIONPart OneWhat is the Soul? What is it like?Not being able to comprehend the subtlest and the mostprofound element in the universe, which is your own real form(swaroop; the Self); what You are yourself, thinkers areconfounded by endless thoughts like: The Atma is like this, oris it like that? Is it in the form of light? And what would itsillumination be like! The true Vision (darshan), that transcendsimagination, the one that only the Gnani Purush has envisaged,can only be attained through him. For those who did not havethe opportunity to meet him in person, this particular volumecontains his spoken Knowledge (Gnan vani), which shows thereal path, and leads one further and further along it.The Self is truly who one is, and to know this is to knowthe Atma. And that is what you need to know.He that has Known, Seen, Experienced and permanentlylived in the swaroop (real form; the Self) of the Atma that isbeyond doubt and imagination of shape or form; has said that itis beyond form (aakruti) and formlessness (niraakruti). TheAtma’s real form is independent (niralumb) and illuminating(prakashak). It is not dependent on either time or place. Thatis the kind of Atma the Gnani dwells in. He is separate, thebody is separate, and he interacts with the body as a neighbor. No one, in the world is naastik (without existence). Theawareness of one’s astitva (existence); I am, is there. Everyonewith this awareness is aastik (with existence). The Atma hasexistence (astitva); it has elemental reality (vastutva) andcompleteness (purnatva). Every living being has awareness ofits existence (astitva); a rare person has the awareness of hisreality (vastutva), and completeness (purnatva) is the rewardof knowing one’s own real Self. Only the Knower of separation(Bheda-Gnani) can impart the awareness of one’s own real Self(vastutva), through his Knowledge of separation.In giving credence to the conviction (pratiti) about theAtma, the Gnani says that, just as fragrance exposes theexistence (astitva) of perfume, the Atma – although invisible(aroopi) – can be discerned by its inherent blissful nature. Thevery state of the Absolute Soul (Parmatma) is infinite (anant)Knowledge (Gnan), infinite Vision (Darshan), infinite Energy(shakti), and infinite bliss (sukh). This is the You (the Self). Butit is only after you have the realization of your own real form(swaroop), that all these qualities will be uncovered.You can recognize the difference between chetan (Atma;the Self) and jada (non-Atma; inanimate) by their intrinsicproperties (gunadharma). Knowledge-Vision (Gnan-Darshan),to See and to Know, is the real nature (swabhav) of Atma(chetan; the Self). No other eternal element shares the sameattribute (gunadharma).Those who doubt the existence of Soul (jiva) are like peoplethat would say, ‘there is no tongue in my mouth’. They are essentiallyexposing the existence of their own Atma (vastutva astitva).The one, who creates the doubt about Soul, is indeed the self.Is it possible for the nonliving (jada; non-Atma) to have doubt?Even in the darkness, the Soul (jiva) will recognize all theindividual ingredients of the spoonful of shrikhand (sweet yogurtpudding) in the mouth. The sensory nerves carry the message,but the One who knows, is the Atma. It is the soul (jiva) itselfthat has always been the one to desire and seek bliss.Where there is feeling; there is Atma (Self), and wherethere is no feeling there is no Atma. And yet, the Atma has nofeeling. It is the pudgal (the physical gross and subtle non-Selfcomplex) that has feeling. That which moves, speaks, eats anddrinks is not Atma (chetan), but where there is any knowledgeor ignorance; sympathy or feeling, there is chetan (Atma, Self).1516INTRODUCTIONPart OneWhat is the Soul? What is it like?Not being able to comprehend the subtlest and the mostprofound element in the universe, which is your own real form(swaroop; the Self); what You are yourself, thinkers areconfounded by endless thoughts like: The Atma is like this, oris it like that? Is it in the form of light? And what would itsillumination be like! The true Vision (darshan), that transcendsimagination, the one that only the Gnani Purush has envisaged,can only be attained through him. For those who did not havethe opportunity to meet him in person, this particular volumecontains his spoken Knowledge (Gnan vani), which shows thereal path, and leads one further and further along it.The Self is truly who one is, and to know this is to knowthe Atma. And that is what you need to know.He that has Known, Seen, Experienced and permanentlylived in the swaroop (real form; the Self) of the Atma that isbeyond doubt and imagination of shape or form; has said that itis beyond form (aakruti) and formlessness (niraakruti). TheAtma’s real form is independent (niralumb) and illuminating(prakashak). It is not dependent on either time or place. Thatis the kind of Atma the Gnani dwells in. He is separate, thebody is separate, and he interacts with the body as a neighbor. No one, in the world is naastik (without existence). Theawareness of one’s astitva (existence); I am, is there. Everyonewith this awareness is aastik (with existence). The Atma hasexistence (astitva); it has elemental reality (vastutva) andcompleteness (purnatva). Every living being has awareness ofits existence (astitva); a rare person has the awareness of hisreality (vastutva), and completeness (purnatva) is the rewardof knowing one’s own real Self. Only the Knower of separation(Bheda-Gnani) can impart the awareness of one’s own real Self(vastutva), through his Knowledge of separation.In giving credence to the conviction (pratiti) about theAtma, the Gnani says that, just as fragrance exposes theexistence (astitva) of perfume, the Atma – although invisible(aroopi) – can be discerned by its inherent blissful nature. Thevery state of the Absolute Soul (Parmatma) is infinite (anant)Knowledge (Gnan), infinite Vision (Darshan), infinite Energy(shakti), and infinite bliss (sukh). This is the You (the Self). Butit is only after you have the realization of your own real form(swaroop), that all these qualities will be uncovered.You can recognize the difference between chetan (Atma;the Self) and jada (non-Atma; inanimate) by their intrinsicproperties (gunadharma). Knowledge-Vision (Gnan-Darshan),to See and to Know, is the real nature (swabhav) of Atma(chetan; the Self). No other eternal element shares the sameattribute (gunadharma).Those who doubt the existence of Soul (jiva) are like peoplethat would say, ‘there is no tongue in my mouth’. They are essentiallyexposing the existence of their own Atma (vastutva astitva).The one, who creates the doubt about Soul, is indeed the self.Is it possible for the nonliving (jada; non-Atma) to have doubt?Even in the darkness, the Soul (jiva) will recognize all theindividual ingredients of the spoonful of shrikhand (sweet yogurtpudding) in the mouth. The sensory nerves carry the message,but the One who knows, is the Atma. It is the soul (jiva) itselfthat has always been the one to desire and seek bliss.Where there is feeling; there is Atma (Self), and wherethere is no feeling there is no Atma. And yet, the Atma has nofeeling. It is the pudgal (the physical gross and subtle non-Selfcomplex) that has feeling. That which moves, speaks, eats anddrinks is not Atma (chetan), but where there is any knowledgeor ignorance; sympathy or feeling, there is chetan (Atma, Self).1718The Atma is spread throughout the entire body. Wherepain is felt; the Atma is present. Only in the nails and in the hairthe Atma is absent. The abode of the gross mind (sthool mun)is in the heart. Whereas the subtle mind (sookshma mun) islocated between the two eyebrows, two and a half inches deep.Because of the Atma’s nature and capability to expandand contract (sankoch-vikaasshil), whenever a part of the bodyis severed or during anesthesia, the Atma moves away from thatarea.In all the three stages of life; Oh! In the phases of infinitelifetimes of birth and death, the Atma always remains the same:immortal. It exists in its own nature (swabhav) infinitely. Forinnumerable births the Atma has had to accompany the body-complex (pudgal). Once the wrong belief (about one’s realidentity) is gone, one becomes independent. Completelyindependent! In fact neither has the non-Self body complex(pudgal) cohered to the Atma, nor has the Atma cohered tothe body complex. The body-complex (pudgal) is the extra,unique result (vishesh parinam) of the circumstances of theelemental Atma and the elemental subatomic particle (parmanu)coming together. The subsequent result of this is the creation ofthe mind-speech-body complex (prakruti), with its respectiveconstituents of: the principle ego, anger, pride, deceit and greed,and hence the worldly life (sansar) is created. The real Atma inall this is absolutely passive (akriya). Since the body-complex(pudgal) is active (sakriya), and because of ignorance(agnanta), an illusion of the Atma as being the doer is created.This shackle of the mind-speech-body complex (prakruti) hasmade a prisoner of the Absolute Soul (Parmatma)! Even so,where there is bondage (bandhan), there is also liberation(moksha). With the intent of ignorance (agnan bhaav), and theintent of illusion (bhranti bhaav), comes bondage. And with theintent of Knowledge (Gnan bhaav), there is liberation! Whenthe illusion, about doership and about the Self, breaks one nolonger is the doer of any karma. Thereafter, the eternal awarenessof, I am myself the Absolute Soul (Parmatma) prevails, andone becomes completely free and independent in every way.The root cause of birth and death is ignorance (agnan).And with Gnan (knowledge of Atma), there is liberation; it isthe ego that undergoes the cycle of birth and death. And birthin a place of creation (yoni) is dependent on scientificcircumstantial evidence. There is no single independent entity inall this – not even God!The false attribution (aropit bhaav), of ‘I am Chandubhai’(reader to insert their own name here) together with the worldlyintent (sansari bhaav), create the causal body (karan sharira),which in turn, initiate the coming together of other parliamentarymembers (the inner working component of the mind, intellect,chit and ego), to bring about a result that creates the effectbody. After they arrive at a decision, the members leave. Thedecisions that are left behind; begin to formulate and come intoeffect one by one.When the Atma leaves the physical body, even the subtlebody or causal body, with its anger, pride, deceit and greed,also leaves with it. The causal body, in the next life, becomes theeffective body. The electrical body (tejas sharira) is only there,as far as a balance of remaining karmas exists, that is to say, itis present throughout the entire avatar (lifetime). And it will staywith the Atma all the way until it attains the final liberation(moksha).There can never be an independent power in the discharge(of karma), but even in the charging, the atma has no independentpower. Because of the push from the discharging karma of thepast, a new karma becomes charged, and this is all because ofignorance (agnanta). The charging of karma, in the previouslifetime, is in the form of an arranged plan, which in this lifetimetakes shape in the form of discharge. Only in the planning stage1718The Atma is spread throughout the entire body. Wherepain is felt; the Atma is present. Only in the nails and in the hairthe Atma is absent. The abode of the gross mind (sthool mun)is in the heart. Whereas the subtle mind (sookshma mun) islocated between the two eyebrows, two and a half inches deep.Because of the Atma’s nature and capability to expandand contract (sankoch-vikaasshil), whenever a part of the bodyis severed or during anesthesia, the Atma moves away from thatarea.In all the three stages of life; Oh! In the phases of infinitelifetimes of birth and death, the Atma always remains the same:immortal. It exists in its own nature (swabhav) infinitely. Forinnumerable births the Atma has had to accompany the body-complex (pudgal). Once the wrong belief (about one’s realidentity) is gone, one becomes independent. Completelyindependent! In fact neither has the non-Self body complex(pudgal) cohered to the Atma, nor has the Atma cohered tothe body complex. The body-complex (pudgal) is the extra,unique result (vishesh parinam) of the circumstances of theelemental Atma and the elemental subatomic particle (parmanu)coming together. The subsequent result of this is the creation ofthe mind-speech-body complex (prakruti), with its respectiveconstituents of: the principle ego, anger, pride, deceit and greed,and hence the worldly life (sansar) is created. The real Atma inall this is absolutely passive (akriya). Since the body-complex(pudgal) is active (sakriya), and because of ignorance(agnanta), an illusion of the Atma as being the doer is created.This shackle of the mind-speech-body complex (prakruti) hasmade a prisoner of the Absolute Soul (Parmatma)! Even so,where there is bondage (bandhan), there is also liberation(moksha). With the intent of ignorance (agnan bhaav), and theintent of illusion (bhranti bhaav), comes bondage. And with theintent of Knowledge (Gnan bhaav), there is liberation! Whenthe illusion, about doership and about the Self, breaks one nolonger is the doer of any karma. Thereafter, the eternal awarenessof, I am myself the Absolute Soul (Parmatma) prevails, andone becomes completely free and independent in every way.The root cause of birth and death is ignorance (agnan).And with Gnan (knowledge of Atma), there is liberation; it isthe ego that undergoes the cycle of birth and death. And birthin a place of creation (yoni) is dependent on scientificcircumstantial evidence. There is no single independent entity inall this – not even God!The false attribution (aropit bhaav), of ‘I am Chandubhai’(reader to insert their own name here) together with the worldlyintent (sansari bhaav), create the causal body (karan sharira),which in turn, initiate the coming together of other parliamentarymembers (the inner working component of the mind, intellect,chit and ego), to bring about a result that creates the effectbody. After they arrive at a decision, the members leave. Thedecisions that are left behind; begin to formulate and come intoeffect one by one.When the Atma leaves the physical body, even the subtlebody or causal body, with its anger, pride, deceit and greed,also leaves with it. The causal body, in the next life, becomes theeffective body. The electrical body (tejas sharira) is only there,as far as a balance of remaining karmas exists, that is to say, itis present throughout the entire avatar (lifetime). And it will staywith the Atma all the way until it attains the final liberation(moksha).There can never be an independent power in the discharge(of karma), but even in the charging, the atma has no independentpower. Because of the push from the discharging karma of thepast, a new karma becomes charged, and this is all because ofignorance (agnanta). The charging of karma, in the previouslifetime, is in the form of an arranged plan, which in this lifetimetakes shape in the form of discharge. Only in the planning stage1920(charging of karma) can any changes be made. Once it hastaken shape, nothing can be altered. Any changes in this lifetime,will come to fruition in the next one, and if the planning itselfcomes to a halt, then one attains final liberation (moksha).The theory of evolution has validity in the notion that asingle-sensed organism (ekendriya) evolves into a human being.However, once the human condition is reached, the ego raisesits head; becoming the doer, and goes on to do credit-debit ofmerit karma (punya) and demerit karma (paap). The tendencies(vruttis) incurred in human life, will determine the portal of entryinto any one of the four life forms (bestial, human, demonic ordivine). Upon attaining the human form, for eight lifetimes at themost, one wanders around from yoni (life-form) to yoni, payingoff the balance of karma at each place, before returning to thehuman form. The end to the roaming can only happen afterAtmagnan (Self-realization)! After Atmagnan, everything flowsin an orderly sequence. If it did not happen in a systematic way,then would it not be considered as being in the hands of fate(niyati)? The timing for the living entity (jiva; self) to enter thehuman form for the very first time is predetermined. But becausethe ego arises in the human life-form, there are complications,and as a result, it wanders around in the four realms of existence(gati): human, animal, infernal and celestial. No matter howoverwhelmed one is by the pressure of circumstances, if the egocan be steered in the direction of liberation (moksha), only thencan moksha be attained. But to turn the ego, is not an easy feat;therefore, after taking birth in the human form, the timing forliberation (moksha) remains undetermined. Only after theenlightened or right Vision (samyak drashti) arises, can the timefor liberation be determined. But here, a person conducts himselfaccording to relative worldly knowledge and societal influence(loksangnya), and is thrown into the flowing current of worldlylife (sansar). Encountering a Gnani Purush, and acting inaccordance to his knowledge, one can attain moksha. In the circumstance (saiyog) of the sun, a shadow will becast, and in the event of a mirror, there will be a reflection. Buthow much doership does the sun or the mirror possess in this?From seeing the shadow or the reflection, simply the beliefchanges as to ‘What has happened to ‘me’?’ As a result of theestablished wrong belief, the ego and the intellect (buddhi)become established. And this is the reason why the mind-speech-body complex of the non-Self (prakruti) becomes bound. Inreality, the original light illuminates the ego and the intellect, whichsubsequently begin to illumine the mind-speech-body complex.And so the Vision (drashti) towards, and the awareness of theoriginal light vanishes; a curtain of illusion is drawn over theoriginal light. And believing the mind-speech-body complex’sgestures to be one’s own, one relinquishes the seat of the AbsoluteSoul (Parmatma) and becomes and behaves as the bodycomplex. It is like a sparrow that repeatedly pecks at its ownreflection in the mirror, perceiving it to be another real sparrow.What an entrapment! How the Parmatma has been entrappedby the circumstances! In spite of it all, the Absolute Soul(Parmatma) has maintained its own true nature (swabhav), allthroughout the three time periods (past, present and future).Owing to the pressure of circumstances, a phase of theAtma’s property of knowledge has become contrary to its nature(vibhavik, unnatural). But not the real Atma (Self). In thisunnatural (vibhavik) state, whatever the whim and imagination,the non-Self body complex (pudgal) too became contrary to itsnature (vibhavik), and as a result, the mind, speech and bodywere created, and they are bound by the rules of scientificcircumstantial evidence (vyavasthit). And for that reason only,a person who comes into contact with the knower of this profoundscience – the Gnani Purush, can acquire the Vision of the Selfthrough him, which leads him to the state of liberation. The storyof Gajasukumar illustrates this: The father-in-law of Gajasukumarfixes a burning hot cauldron on Gajasukumar’s head (as he satin meditation). At that moment, Gajasukumar was able to remain1920(charging of karma) can any changes be made. Once it hastaken shape, nothing can be altered. Any changes in this lifetime,will come to fruition in the next one, and if the planning itselfcomes to a halt, then one attains final liberation (moksha).The theory of evolution has validity in the notion that asingle-sensed organism (ekendriya) evolves into a human being.However, once the human condition is reached, the ego raisesits head; becoming the doer, and goes on to do credit-debit ofmerit karma (punya) and demerit karma (paap). The tendencies(vruttis) incurred in human life, will determine the portal of entryinto any one of the four life forms (bestial, human, demonic ordivine). Upon attaining the human form, for eight lifetimes at themost, one wanders around from yoni (life-form) to yoni, payingoff the balance of karma at each place, before returning to thehuman form. The end to the roaming can only happen afterAtmagnan (Self-realization)! After Atmagnan, everything flowsin an orderly sequence. If it did not happen in a systematic way,then would it not be considered as being in the hands of fate(niyati)? The timing for the living entity (jiva; self) to enter thehuman form for the very first time is predetermined. But becausethe ego arises in the human life-form, there are complications,and as a result, it wanders around in the four realms of existence(gati): human, animal, infernal and celestial. No matter howoverwhelmed one is by the pressure of circumstances, if the egocan be steered in the direction of liberation (moksha), only thencan moksha be attained. But to turn the ego, is not an easy feat;therefore, after taking birth in the human form, the timing forliberation (moksha) remains undetermined. Only after theenlightened or right Vision (samyak drashti) arises, can the timefor liberation be determined. But here, a person conducts himselfaccording to relative worldly knowledge and societal influence(loksangnya), and is thrown into the flowing current of worldlylife (sansar). Encountering a Gnani Purush, and acting inaccordance to his knowledge, one can attain moksha. In the circumstance (saiyog) of the sun, a shadow will becast, and in the event of a mirror, there will be a reflection. Buthow much doership does the sun or the mirror possess in this?From seeing the shadow or the reflection, simply the beliefchanges as to ‘What has happened to ‘me’?’ As a result of theestablished wrong belief, the ego and the intellect (buddhi)become established. And this is the reason why the mind-speech-body complex of the non-Self (prakruti) becomes bound. Inreality, the original light illuminates the ego and the intellect, whichsubsequently begin to illumine the mind-speech-body complex.And so the Vision (drashti) towards, and the awareness of theoriginal light vanishes; a curtain of illusion is drawn over theoriginal light. And believing the mind-speech-body complex’sgestures to be one’s own, one relinquishes the seat of the AbsoluteSoul (Parmatma) and becomes and behaves as the bodycomplex. It is like a sparrow that repeatedly pecks at its ownreflection in the mirror, perceiving it to be another real sparrow.What an entrapment! How the Parmatma has been entrappedby the circumstances! In spite of it all, the Absolute Soul(Parmatma) has maintained its own true nature (swabhav), allthroughout the three time periods (past, present and future).Owing to the pressure of circumstances, a phase of theAtma’s property of knowledge has become contrary to its nature(vibhavik, unnatural). But not the real Atma (Self). In thisunnatural (vibhavik) state, whatever the whim and imagination,the non-Self body complex (pudgal) too became contrary to itsnature (vibhavik), and as a result, the mind, speech and bodywere created, and they are bound by the rules of scientificcircumstantial evidence (vyavasthit). And for that reason only,a person who comes into contact with the knower of this profoundscience – the Gnani Purush, can acquire the Vision of the Selfthrough him, which leads him to the state of liberation. The storyof Gajasukumar illustrates this: The father-in-law of Gajasukumarfixes a burning hot cauldron on Gajasukumar’s head (as he satin meditation). At that moment, Gajasukumar was able to remain2122in the original light (as the Self) that Lord Neminath (Tirthankar),had shown him. Through the Gnan, he could see that event(saiyog) as the object to be known (gneya), and consequentlyhe attained final liberation (moksha).Because of the wrong belief of the Self’s identity andabout doership; attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh) arises andconsequently the three batteries of the mind, speech and bodygo on charging for the next life, and the three old batteries,according to their nature, carry on discharging. And when throughthe Gnani’s grace, the right belief is bestowed; one attains finalliberation (moksha).To eliminate doubt and uncertainty about the Atma’sinception or end, the Gnanis have called the Atma, anaadi-anant (without begin or end). If something is eternal, then howcan it have a beginning or an end, increase or decrease? Whereinlies its origin? Where does a circle begin?Without a beginning, how is something created? Besides,the creation and the creator are both destructible and transient.Everything in the universe, functions according to its nature.And as a result, as many souls (jiva) on the path of evolution(samsaran marg) that enter Siddha kshetra (location forliberated Souls), that many will go from an undetermined state(avyavahar rashi), and enter the worldly state (vyavahar rashi),which preserves the integrity of the worldly life (vyavahar). Ifjust one single soul (jiva) goes missing, Nature’s plan wouldcome crashing down, so that today the moon, and tomorrow thesun, may be absent. The increase and decrease of population cannot gobeyond the constant of Nature’s law!The Atma, by its very nature, is moving towards finalliberation (moksha), as long as there is no interference along theway. With auspicious (shubha) thoughts, the lighter subatomicparticles (parmanu) are swept up, allowing the Atma to riseupward. Whereas, when the heavy and heavier subatomic particlesare seized up, one plunges downwards, all the way into the plantlife-form (vanaspatikay) – one enters into the form of a coconuttree, mango, or berry tree; bearing sweet fruit for people to eat;paying for one’s own deceit in the previous life, and becomingfree from the debt karma.Finally, after attaining awareness of the pure Soul(Shuddhatma) from the Gnani, and remaining in the awarenessof the Self, while fulfilling all events related to the non-Self bodycomplex (pudgal), it is possible to go to final liberation (moksha).Absolutely no one exerts any independent control over thisscientific law!The individual differences that appear in this world arebecause of illusion (bhranti), and because of assessment fromthe perspective of the intellect (buddhi). When seen through theVision of the real element; from the center, there is oneness. Thatindeed is the Vision (darshan) of the Absolute Soul (Parmatma)!The Gnani speaks after seeing it, as it is. He will not say,it is not, to it is, and he will not say it is, to when it is not.Pertaining to the properties (guna) of the eternal element, thedetached Ones (Vitarags; Enlightened ones devoid of attachmentand abhorrence) have described origin (utpaad), end (vyaya)and steadiness (dhrauv); wherein to originate and to end, arethe phases of the element. And to remain in the steady-state, isthe intrinsic quality (guna) of the element.People have ascribed a gross and tangible (sthool)representation to these, by enshrining the symbolic effigies ofBrahmaa (creator), Vishnu (preserver) and Mahesh (destroyer)!Oh! They have even placed the Gita and Gayatri in their shrines!Instead of understanding the subtlest meaning about whatLord Krishna said in the Bhagavad Gita, they worship the physicalidol. Instead of chanting the Gayatri mantra, they get more2122in the original light (as the Self) that Lord Neminath (Tirthankar),had shown him. Through the Gnan, he could see that event(saiyog) as the object to be known (gneya), and consequentlyhe attained final liberation (moksha).Because of the wrong belief of the Self’s identity andabout doership; attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh) arises andconsequently the three batteries of the mind, speech and bodygo on charging for the next life, and the three old batteries,according to their nature, carry on discharging. And when throughthe Gnani’s grace, the right belief is bestowed; one attains finalliberation (moksha).To eliminate doubt and uncertainty about the Atma’sinception or end, the Gnanis have called the Atma, anaadi-anant (without begin or end). If something is eternal, then howcan it have a beginning or an end, increase or decrease? Whereinlies its origin? Where does a circle begin?Without a beginning, how is something created? Besides,the creation and the creator are both destructible and transient.Everything in the universe, functions according to its nature.And as a result, as many souls (jiva) on the path of evolution(samsaran marg) that enter Siddha kshetra (location forliberated Souls), that many will go from an undetermined state(avyavahar rashi), and enter the worldly state (vyavahar rashi),which preserves the integrity of the worldly life (vyavahar). Ifjust one single soul (jiva) goes missing, Nature’s plan wouldcome crashing down, so that today the moon, and tomorrow thesun, may be absent. The increase and decrease of population cannot gobeyond the constant of Nature’s law!The Atma, by its very nature, is moving towards finalliberation (moksha), as long as there is no interference along theway. With auspicious (shubha) thoughts, the lighter subatomicparticles (parmanu) are swept up, allowing the Atma to riseupward. Whereas, when the heavy and heavier subatomic particlesare seized up, one plunges downwards, all the way into the plantlife-form (vanaspatikay) – one enters into the form of a coconuttree, mango, or berry tree; bearing sweet fruit for people to eat;paying for one’s own deceit in the previous life, and becomingfree from the debt karma.Finally, after attaining awareness of the pure Soul(Shuddhatma) from the Gnani, and remaining in the awarenessof the Self, while fulfilling all events related to the non-Self bodycomplex (pudgal), it is possible to go to final liberation (moksha).Absolutely no one exerts any independent control over thisscientific law!The individual differences that appear in this world arebecause of illusion (bhranti), and because of assessment fromthe perspective of the intellect (buddhi). When seen through theVision of the real element; from the center, there is oneness. Thatindeed is the Vision (darshan) of the Absolute Soul (Parmatma)!The Gnani speaks after seeing it, as it is. He will not say,it is not, to it is, and he will not say it is, to when it is not.Pertaining to the properties (guna) of the eternal element, thedetached Ones (Vitarags; Enlightened ones devoid of attachmentand abhorrence) have described origin (utpaad), end (vyaya)and steadiness (dhrauv); wherein to originate and to end, arethe phases of the element. And to remain in the steady-state, isthe intrinsic quality (guna) of the element.People have ascribed a gross and tangible (sthool)representation to these, by enshrining the symbolic effigies ofBrahmaa (creator), Vishnu (preserver) and Mahesh (destroyer)!Oh! They have even placed the Gita and Gayatri in their shrines!Instead of understanding the subtlest meaning about whatLord Krishna said in the Bhagavad Gita, they worship the physicalidol. Instead of chanting the Gayatri mantra, they get more2324satisfaction from the statue. The scientific significance is forgottenaltogether, and grossly misunderstood.The statues of Brahmaa, Vishnu and Mahesh were installedas symbols to represent the three qualities (gunas) of, piousvirtue (sattva), energy- filled worldly activities or passions (rajas),and darkness or sloth (tamas). Instead of getting lost in thealleys of metaphors about Truth, it is best to return home. TheGnani turns those who travel in the wrong direction, with greatspeed, in the right direction. He does this with the intent (bhaav)of being instrumental (a nimit) in the process and not with theintent of doership (karta bhaav). Truth can only be discoveredthrough non-insistence (niragrahata). Insistence (aagraha) isego. I am Chandubhai, I am his paternal uncle, I am her maternaluncle… etc. These relative truths prove to be non-truths in thereal realm.The Gnani always opens up the truth of the matter. If aperson does not agree with him, the Gnani does not remainsitting on the step with him to convince him. He would say, ‘Youare correct by your view point’, and would let it go. Wherethere is no insistence about one’s absolute truth, there is the fullyilluminated state of vitaragata (a state free from attachment andabhorrence) there.If ignorance is known, then Knowledge (Gnan) is foundon the other shoreline. When the Atma is known; the non-Selfbody complex (pudgal) is also known. And when the pudgal isknown; the Atma can be understood. Those who study Vedanta(Hindu scriptures) are preoccupied with bringing the pudgal toa close, and have stopped at ‘Neti (na-iti), Neti…’ (This is notThat...this is not That)! The Absolute (Keval) Gnanis, after firstattaining their own Self-form (Atma swaroop), and having saidthat what remains behind, is the non-Self body complex (pudgal),have attained their liberation. In truth, you do not have to knowSelf-realization (Atmagnan). You have to have the awareness ofyour own Self-form (Atma swaroop). You gain nothing byknowing the Atma as a word.When describing the state of oneness (abhedta), the Vedas(Hindu scriptures) employ the distinguishing intellect (bhedabuddhi), but it is only through the absence of intellect(abuddhata), that the state of oneness is gained.The Gnani Purush himself says that the Vedas aretheoretical, and spiritual science is practical. Vedanta is knowledgethrough the medium of the intellect (buddhi), an indirect light;whereas Gnan is direct light. Where the Vedas have not reached;the Gnani has reached. The four Vedas, and the four Anuyogas(scriptures in Jainism), can point out the element (tattva) ofAtma, but they cannot help one attain it. Speech that is spokento be heard (shruta vani), can purify the chit (subtle componentof vision and knowledge in the inner working complex), andmake one most worthy of Gnan (Knowledge).However, for the realization of the fundamental Truth(vastu), only the Gnani Purush as a most unique cause, throughhis extraordinary grace, can make happen through subtleassociation with his absolute consciousness! There, how can theVeda’s word-form describe the Atma which is beyond words?Veda is in the form of knowledge, and the Knower (Vetta) is inthe form of Science (Vignan). Science is effective by itself: knowledge is not! TheKnower (Vetta) knows the Vedas; the Vedas do not know theKnower. All systems of philosophy, all philosophical doctrines,and all views, are the same, and they are also different. Thereis one staircase, but the stairs are all different. Even Lord Krishnasaid the Vedas were trigunatmak (description of three properties:virtue, activity, inactivity or darkness: sattva, rajas and tamas),and told Arjun to go beyond the Vedas to attain the Atma (theSelf).Vedanta (Hindu scripture) increases the intellect (buddhi).2324satisfaction from the statue. The scientific significance is forgottenaltogether, and grossly misunderstood.The statues of Brahmaa, Vishnu and Mahesh were installedas symbols to represent the three qualities (gunas) of, piousvirtue (sattva), energy- filled worldly activities or passions (rajas),and darkness or sloth (tamas). Instead of getting lost in thealleys of metaphors about Truth, it is best to return home. TheGnani turns those who travel in the wrong direction, with greatspeed, in the right direction. He does this with the intent (bhaav)of being instrumental (a nimit) in the process and not with theintent of doership (karta bhaav). Truth can only be discoveredthrough non-insistence (niragrahata). Insistence (aagraha) isego. I am Chandubhai, I am his paternal uncle, I am her maternaluncle… etc. These relative truths prove to be non-truths in thereal realm.The Gnani always opens up the truth of the matter. If aperson does not agree with him, the Gnani does not remainsitting on the step with him to convince him. He would say, ‘Youare correct by your view point’, and would let it go. Wherethere is no insistence about one’s absolute truth, there is the fullyilluminated state of vitaragata (a state free from attachment andabhorrence) there.If ignorance is known, then Knowledge (Gnan) is foundon the other shoreline. When the Atma is known; the non-Selfbody complex (pudgal) is also known. And when the pudgal isknown; the Atma can be understood. Those who study Vedanta(Hindu scriptures) are preoccupied with bringing the pudgal toa close, and have stopped at ‘Neti (na-iti), Neti…’ (This is notThat...this is not That)! The Absolute (Keval) Gnanis, after firstattaining their own Self-form (Atma swaroop), and having saidthat what remains behind, is the non-Self body complex (pudgal),have attained their liberation. In truth, you do not have to knowSelf-realization (Atmagnan). You have to have the awareness ofyour own Self-form (Atma swaroop). You gain nothing byknowing the Atma as a word.When describing the state of oneness (abhedta), the Vedas(Hindu scriptures) employ the distinguishing intellect (bhedabuddhi), but it is only through the absence of intellect(abuddhata), that the state of oneness is gained.The Gnani Purush himself says that the Vedas aretheoretical, and spiritual science is practical. Vedanta is knowledgethrough the medium of the intellect (buddhi), an indirect light;whereas Gnan is direct light. Where the Vedas have not reached;the Gnani has reached. The four Vedas, and the four Anuyogas(scriptures in Jainism), can point out the element (tattva) ofAtma, but they cannot help one attain it. Speech that is spokento be heard (shruta vani), can purify the chit (subtle componentof vision and knowledge in the inner working complex), andmake one most worthy of Gnan (Knowledge).However, for the realization of the fundamental Truth(vastu), only the Gnani Purush as a most unique cause, throughhis extraordinary grace, can make happen through subtleassociation with his absolute consciousness! There, how can theVeda’s word-form describe the Atma which is beyond words?Veda is in the form of knowledge, and the Knower (Vetta) is inthe form of Science (Vignan). Science is effective by itself: knowledge is not! TheKnower (Vetta) knows the Vedas; the Vedas do not know theKnower. All systems of philosophy, all philosophical doctrines,and all views, are the same, and they are also different. Thereis one staircase, but the stairs are all different. Even Lord Krishnasaid the Vedas were trigunatmak (description of three properties:virtue, activity, inactivity or darkness: sattva, rajas and tamas),and told Arjun to go beyond the Vedas to attain the Atma (theSelf).Vedanta (Hindu scripture) increases the intellect (buddhi).2526But both Vedanta and Jainism, can independently bring aboutSelf-realization.The Atma is neither dwaita (dualistic), nor is it adwaita(non-dualistic). The Atma is dualistic – non-dualistic (dwaita-adwaita). Dualism and non-dualism are both ego centric states(vikalp); whereas the Atma’s state is devoid of ego (nirvikalp).Dualism and non-dualism are both two-sided phenomenon(dwandva); whereas the Atma is beyond the dualities(dwandvatita). As long as one suffers the effects of the worldlylife (sansar), it is not possible to believe: ‘I am non-dualistic(adwaita)’. Non-dualism is not support-free (niradhar), nor isit absolute (nirpeksha). It is relative to dualism (dwaita). From the relative viewpoint the atma (the self) is dualistic,and by the real viewpoint, the Atma (Self) is non-dualistic. Sotherefore, the Gnanis have called the Atma, dualistic – non-dualistic. The Self is non-dualistic (adwaita) and the non-Self isdualistic (dwaita). So that the applied awareness (upayog) canbe maintained on the Self, it has been termed non-dualistic(adwaita). Dualism – non-dualism (dwaitadwaita) only existsas long as both the body and Absolute Knowledge (Keval Gnan)are there. But in final liberation (moksha); no such adjectiveremains. Adwaita itself is an adjective.Is this world an illusion (mithya)? If you have a toothache,and you spend the entire night, turning your prayer beads andrepeating, ‘This is just an illusion’, does the pain become anillusion? If the world is indeed an illusion, then why do peoplenot throw away their money and prized possessions out onto thestreets? The world is not an illusion, and neither is Brahma(Soul) an illusion. The world is a relative truth, and Brahma isthe real truth. Deceit (maya) is that which does not allow youto fully understand the original element (Atma).Self-knowledge (Brahmagnan) is the portal of entry intoSelf-realization (Atmagnan). The practice of religion can procurefocused concentration (ekagrata) of the form of the Self (one’sswaroop), but not the attainment of the Self (swaroop) itself.Only through the Knowledge of the Atma (Atmagnan), doesone attain the Atma (Self).When faith in the temporary things of the world is removed,and placed in the eternal Self (Brahma); when one becomesestablished in the Self (Brahmanishtha), it is called Self-Knowledge (Brahmagnan). And a person who is established inthe Atma (Atmanishtha), is himself considered the AbsoluteSoul (Parmatma). The Atmanishtha person is free of intellect(abuddha); whilst the Brahmanishtha person’s intellect (buddhi)is still there.The word-Brahma (shabda-brahma) and the sound-brahma (naad-brahma) are flag stations on the way to theterminus. At the most, they allow you to maintain focusedconcentration (ekagrata). Focused concentration (ekagrata), isthe beginning of spirituality; however the Atma is infinite milesaway from it. The word is not eternal, but it is something createdas a result of the combination of two or three things; it is not anaturally occurring thing. However, the word that impartsexperience is real, but ultimately, even dependency on wordsends, and the independent state (niralumb) is attained.After attaining the state of Brahma (Self), the awarenessreaches perfection and one sees purity in every living being. In“Aham Brahmasmi (I am Brahma)” there is the ego of one’sown self. This ego means that one projects the belief of, ‘I am’where ‘I am’ is not. The result of attaining Brahma is the constantexperience of bliss of the Self (swa-samvedan). This state issimilar to that of the King Janak Videhi (a king during the SilverAge, Tretayug), who transcended body consciousness throughshabda-brahma). In all the events of the worldly life (sansar),one experiences non-attachment (asangata).In order to attain the state of Brahma (the Self), to get rid2526But both Vedanta and Jainism, can independently bring aboutSelf-realization.The Atma is neither dwaita (dualistic), nor is it adwaita(non-dualistic). The Atma is dualistic – non-dualistic (dwaita-adwaita). Dualism and non-dualism are both ego centric states(vikalp); whereas the Atma’s state is devoid of ego (nirvikalp).Dualism and non-dualism are both two-sided phenomenon(dwandva); whereas the Atma is beyond the dualities(dwandvatita). As long as one suffers the effects of the worldlylife (sansar), it is not possible to believe: ‘I am non-dualistic(adwaita)’. Non-dualism is not support-free (niradhar), nor isit absolute (nirpeksha). It is relative to dualism (dwaita). From the relative viewpoint the atma (the self) is dualistic,and by the real viewpoint, the Atma (Self) is non-dualistic. Sotherefore, the Gnanis have called the Atma, dualistic – non-dualistic. The Self is non-dualistic (adwaita) and the non-Self isdualistic (dwaita). So that the applied awareness (upayog) canbe maintained on the Self, it has been termed non-dualistic(adwaita). Dualism – non-dualism (dwaitadwaita) only existsas long as both the body and Absolute Knowledge (Keval Gnan)are there. But in final liberation (moksha); no such adjectiveremains. Adwaita itself is an adjective.Is this world an illusion (mithya)? If you have a toothache,and you spend the entire night, turning your prayer beads andrepeating, ‘This is just an illusion’, does the pain become anillusion? If the world is indeed an illusion, then why do peoplenot throw away their money and prized possessions out onto thestreets? The world is not an illusion, and neither is Brahma(Soul) an illusion. The world is a relative truth, and Brahma isthe real truth. Deceit (maya) is that which does not allow youto fully understand the original element (Atma).Self-knowledge (Brahmagnan) is the portal of entry intoSelf-realization (Atmagnan). The practice of religion can procurefocused concentration (ekagrata) of the form of the Self (one’sswaroop), but not the attainment of the Self (swaroop) itself.Only through the Knowledge of the Atma (Atmagnan), doesone attain the Atma (Self).When faith in the temporary things of the world is removed,and placed in the eternal Self (Brahma); when one becomesestablished in the Self (Brahmanishtha), it is called Self-Knowledge (Brahmagnan). And a person who is established inthe Atma (Atmanishtha), is himself considered the AbsoluteSoul (Parmatma). The Atmanishtha person is free of intellect(abuddha); whilst the Brahmanishtha person’s intellect (buddhi)is still there.The word-Brahma (shabda-brahma) and the sound-brahma (naad-brahma) are flag stations on the way to theterminus. At the most, they allow you to maintain focusedconcentration (ekagrata). Focused concentration (ekagrata), isthe beginning of spirituality; however the Atma is infinite milesaway from it. The word is not eternal, but it is something createdas a result of the combination of two or three things; it is not anaturally occurring thing. However, the word that impartsexperience is real, but ultimately, even dependency on wordsends, and the independent state (niralumb) is attained.After attaining the state of Brahma (Self), the awarenessreaches perfection and one sees purity in every living being. In“Aham Brahmasmi (I am Brahma)” there is the ego of one’sown self. This ego means that one projects the belief of, ‘I am’where ‘I am’ is not. The result of attaining Brahma is the constantexperience of bliss of the Self (swa-samvedan). This state issimilar to that of the King Janak Videhi (a king during the SilverAge, Tretayug), who transcended body consciousness throughshabda-brahma). In all the events of the worldly life (sansar),one experiences non-attachment (asangata).In order to attain the state of Brahma (the Self), to get rid2728of passions and obstructions (mudd-vikshep) or attachment andabhorrence (raag-dwesh), one has toiled in vain, life after life.But that which prevents one from attaining the Self (Brahma),is ignorance (agnan), which is the root cause. And nobody,except the Gnani Purush, is capable of removing that. That,which covers up the Atma, is ignorance: not ego (ahamkar).What is the Gnani’s inner awakened Vision (drashti) like?In the first Vision, women and men are seen as completelynaked. In the second Vision the body is seen without the skin.In the third Vision, the body is seen cut up, with exposed entrails,flesh and bones. And finally, you see the form of the Self(Brahmaswaroop) in everyone. Then is there any scope forattachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh) to occur?In every living being, there is the element of Chetan (life;Soul) which by nature is the same for all. However, in terms ofphysical matter (dravya), they differ. Each Chetan is differentby dravya, and each is completely independent. If all Soulswere one, then would they not have all gone to final liberation(moksha), when Lord Rama went to final liberation? What,Ekoham Bahusyam (I am one, appear in many), could the Self(Brahma) possibly have such a desire?The Atma does not dissolve into the Absolute Soul(Parmatma). In the process of dissolution, why should eachAtma relinquish its own independence, and sacrifice unto another?Gnanis behold the complete Vision (Darshan) of the whole andcomplete, independent Absolute Soul (Parmatma), who residesin each and every being. If all souls were one, then why wouldyou suffer pain, while Lord Rama is over there enjoying the blissof final liberation (moksha)? If the Atma was the manifestationof the Parmatma, you would not suffer any pain at all.By real viewpoint, the Atma is formless (nirakari), and bythe relative viewpoint, it has form (sakaari). In the realm of theLiberated Souls (Siddha gati) the Atma decreases by a third,according to the size of the final physical body (charam sharira),retaining two-thirds of its shape, in spite of its formless nature. In the beginning, the worship of the perfect and formlessGod (niranjan-nirakari Bhagwan) is done through the worshipof a Gnani Purush, who is manifest in the human form, andconsidered a God with form (sakaari Bhagwan). Through this,you will recognize the Lord who is formless (nirakari Bhagwan).How can you say that the Atma has no attributes(nirguna), when it is full of infinite Knowledge (anant Gnan),infinite Vision (anant Darshan), infinite Bliss (anant sukh), andinfinite Energy (anant shakti), and all infinite attributes (anantgunas), and who moreover, is the Absolute Soul (Parmatma)Himself? By saying that the Absolute Soul has no attributes,would you not be turning your face forever from the devotionand attainment of its infinite qualities (gunas)? The attainment ofthe Absolute Soul can only occur through the worship of itsattributes! The Atma has none of the qualities that the mind,speech and body complex (prakruti) possesses, but with regardto its own qualities (gunas); they are in abundance. Not a singlequality (guna), belonging to the non-Self complex (prakruti)has entered into the Atma (Self), and not a single quality (guna)of the Atma has entered the mind, speech and body complex(prakruti). The Atma has never become mixed with the propertiesof the non-Self complex (the prakruti). It has forever remainedseparate.It is not that the Atma has knowledge, but that it isKnowledge itself (Gnan swaroop). It exists in the form of light(prakash swaroop). And it is on the basis of this light, that theSelf is able to know all the objects to be known (gneya), andsee all the objects to be seen (drashya). The Atma is omnipresent (sarva vyaapi). In whatreference is this so?2728of passions and obstructions (mudd-vikshep) or attachment andabhorrence (raag-dwesh), one has toiled in vain, life after life.But that which prevents one from attaining the Self (Brahma),is ignorance (agnan), which is the root cause. And nobody,except the Gnani Purush, is capable of removing that. That,which covers up the Atma, is ignorance: not ego (ahamkar).What is the Gnani’s inner awakened Vision (drashti) like?In the first Vision, women and men are seen as completelynaked. In the second Vision the body is seen without the skin.In the third Vision, the body is seen cut up, with exposed entrails,flesh and bones. And finally, you see the form of the Self(Brahmaswaroop) in everyone. Then is there any scope forattachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh) to occur?In every living being, there is the element of Chetan (life;Soul) which by nature is the same for all. However, in terms ofphysical matter (dravya), they differ. Each Chetan is differentby dravya, and each is completely independent. If all Soulswere one, then would they not have all gone to final liberation(moksha), when Lord Rama went to final liberation? What,Ekoham Bahusyam (I am one, appear in many), could the Self(Brahma) possibly have such a desire?The Atma does not dissolve into the Absolute Soul(Parmatma). In the process of dissolution, why should eachAtma relinquish its own independence, and sacrifice unto another?Gnanis behold the complete Vision (Darshan) of the whole andcomplete, independent Absolute Soul (Parmatma), who residesin each and every being. If all souls were one, then why wouldyou suffer pain, while Lord Rama is over there enjoying the blissof final liberation (moksha)? If the Atma was the manifestationof the Parmatma, you would not suffer any pain at all.By real viewpoint, the Atma is formless (nirakari), and bythe relative viewpoint, it has form (sakaari). In the realm of theLiberated Souls (Siddha gati) the Atma decreases by a third,according to the size of the final physical body (charam sharira),retaining two-thirds of its shape, in spite of its formless nature. In the beginning, the worship of the perfect and formlessGod (niranjan-nirakari Bhagwan) is done through the worshipof a Gnani Purush, who is manifest in the human form, andconsidered a God with form (sakaari Bhagwan). Through this,you will recognize the Lord who is formless (nirakari Bhagwan).How can you say that the Atma has no attributes(nirguna), when it is full of infinite Knowledge (anant Gnan),infinite Vision (anant Darshan), infinite Bliss (anant sukh), andinfinite Energy (anant shakti), and all infinite attributes (anantgunas), and who moreover, is the Absolute Soul (Parmatma)Himself? By saying that the Absolute Soul has no attributes,would you not be turning your face forever from the devotionand attainment of its infinite qualities (gunas)? The attainment ofthe Absolute Soul can only occur through the worship of itsattributes! The Atma has none of the qualities that the mind,speech and body complex (prakruti) possesses, but with regardto its own qualities (gunas); they are in abundance. Not a singlequality (guna), belonging to the non-Self complex (prakruti)has entered into the Atma (Self), and not a single quality (guna)of the Atma has entered the mind, speech and body complex(prakruti). The Atma has never become mixed with the propertiesof the non-Self complex (the prakruti). It has forever remainedseparate.It is not that the Atma has knowledge, but that it isKnowledge itself (Gnan swaroop). It exists in the form of light(prakash swaroop). And it is on the basis of this light, that theSelf is able to know all the objects to be known (gneya), andsee all the objects to be seen (drashya). The Atma is omnipresent (sarva vyaapi). In whatreference is this so?2930The light of the Atma is omnipresent but not the Atmaitself. The light of this electric bulb illuminates the whole room;however, it is the light that spreads throughout the entire room;the bulb is not everywhere, but in its own place. Only in the finallifetime, in the final body (charam sharira), when the Atmabecomes the Absolute Soul (Parmatma); does it become fullyexposed (niravaran), and enters the state of final liberation(Siddha-pad). This is when the entire universe becomes known(prameya), and the light of the Absolute Soul spreads throughoutthe universe! What is amazing about this is that the intensity ofthe light does not decrease anywhere!If God is everywhere, in every particle, then where is theneed to find Him? Does the Atma within us go and spreadanywhere? Hence, in the form of life (chetan) the Atma is notomnipresent, but it is omnipresent by its inherent nature(swabhav).God is present in the form of light, in every jiva (livingbeing). But when a living being (jiva) becomes capable of seeingwithin, then he can see with the divine vision (divya chakshu)of the Lord, the divinity that resides within it. God is in “creature”,not in the creation (man-made). But He is covered up. Whicheverpart that becomes uncovered, is the direction the knowledgeopens up, and develops in the worldly life to form a lawyer ora doctor. A single Atma has the energy to illuminate the entireuniverse, provided that it is completely free from particles ofkarma!‘The Parmatma (the Absolute Soul) is complete, and Iam a part of Him.’ – To dispel this misconception, the Gnanigives precise elucidation, saying that there are infinite numbers ofsouls, and they are all independent. That which has form, can bebroken into pieces, but can you make pieces out of somethingthat has no form? When it becomes a piece, how can you makeit whole again? Can you make pieces out of the Lord?The sun cannot become a ray, and a ray can never becomethe sun. An eternal element is always indivisible. By howevermuch the layers of ignorance are shed, that much light ofKnowledge will be exposed. When the coverings of all the regions(pradesho) of the Atma (Self) are uncovered, the full effulgenceof the Absolute Soul (Parmatma) will illuminate the entireuniverse.Part TwoWho Am I ? How To Know This? Atma-Parmatma, Brahma-Parabrahma, Jiva-Shiva,Ishwar-Parmeshwar, are all words that describe the phases ofthe Atma. When the phase changes, the state that is felt alsochanges; however, the original element remains the same. Becauseof change in the circumstance, one is a husband at home, a bossin the shop and a lawyer in court. But he remains the sameeverywhere.What is the difference between the living being (jiva;embodied self) and the Self (Shiva)? You yourself are Shiva,but because of illusion (bhranti), you believe that you are justa living being; mortal (jiva). Once the illusion of separation breaks,the separation of jiva (self) and Shiva (Self) is broken, the livingbeing and the Self (jiva-Shiva) become one. As long as the living being (jiva; self) believes that thestate of the worldly life (sansar) is really its own, it undergoesthe cycles of birth and death. When living and dying ends, it isthen the immortal Self (Shivatma).The living being (jiva) has karma, and the Atma is withoutkarma. But the Atma in them both is the same. The living being(self) is the doer- sufferer (karta-bhokta); whereas the Atma isthe non-doer (akarta) – non-sufferer (abhokta)! As long asyou believe: ‘You are God, and I am your devotee’, the differencewill exist. When you have the awareness: ‘I am myself the2930The light of the Atma is omnipresent but not the Atmaitself. The light of this electric bulb illuminates the whole room;however, it is the light that spreads throughout the entire room;the bulb is not everywhere, but in its own place. Only in the finallifetime, in the final body (charam sharira), when the Atmabecomes the Absolute Soul (Parmatma); does it become fullyexposed (niravaran), and enters the state of final liberation(Siddha-pad). This is when the entire universe becomes known(prameya), and the light of the Absolute Soul spreads throughoutthe universe! What is amazing about this is that the intensity ofthe light does not decrease anywhere!If God is everywhere, in every particle, then where is theneed to find Him? Does the Atma within us go and spreadanywhere? Hence, in the form of life (chetan) the Atma is notomnipresent, but it is omnipresent by its inherent nature(swabhav).God is present in the form of light, in every jiva (livingbeing). But when a living being (jiva) becomes capable of seeingwithin, then he can see with the divine vision (divya chakshu)of the Lord, the divinity that resides within it. God is in “creature”,not in the creation (man-made). But He is covered up. Whicheverpart that becomes uncovered, is the direction the knowledgeopens up, and develops in the worldly life to form a lawyer ora doctor. A single Atma has the energy to illuminate the entireuniverse, provided that it is completely free from particles ofkarma!‘The Parmatma (the Absolute Soul) is complete, and Iam a part of Him.’ – To dispel this misconception, the Gnanigives precise elucidation, saying that there are infinite numbers ofsouls, and they are all independent. That which has form, can bebroken into pieces, but can you make pieces out of somethingthat has no form? When it becomes a piece, how can you makeit whole again? Can you make pieces out of the Lord?The sun cannot become a ray, and a ray can never becomethe sun. An eternal element is always indivisible. By howevermuch the layers of ignorance are shed, that much light ofKnowledge will be exposed. When the coverings of all the regions(pradesho) of the Atma (Self) are uncovered, the full effulgenceof the Absolute Soul (Parmatma) will illuminate the entireuniverse.Part TwoWho Am I ? How To Know This? Atma-Parmatma, Brahma-Parabrahma, Jiva-Shiva,Ishwar-Parmeshwar, are all words that describe the phases ofthe Atma. When the phase changes, the state that is felt alsochanges; however, the original element remains the same. Becauseof change in the circumstance, one is a husband at home, a bossin the shop and a lawyer in court. But he remains the sameeverywhere.What is the difference between the living being (jiva;embodied self) and the Self (Shiva)? You yourself are Shiva,but because of illusion (bhranti), you believe that you are justa living being; mortal (jiva). Once the illusion of separation breaks,the separation of jiva (self) and Shiva (Self) is broken, the livingbeing and the Self (jiva-Shiva) become one. As long as the living being (jiva; self) believes that thestate of the worldly life (sansar) is really its own, it undergoesthe cycles of birth and death. When living and dying ends, it isthen the immortal Self (Shivatma).The living being (jiva) has karma, and the Atma is withoutkarma. But the Atma in them both is the same. The living being(self) is the doer- sufferer (karta-bhokta); whereas the Atma isthe non-doer (akarta) – non-sufferer (abhokta)! As long asyou believe: ‘You are God, and I am your devotee’, the differencewill exist. When you have the awareness: ‘I am myself the3132Absolute Soul (Parmatma)’, you will no longer have thatseparation and you will have become free from all passions ofattachment and abhorrence (vitarag). Free from fear (nirbhaya)!And Greatly Liberated (Mahamukta)! God (Ishwar) and Absolute God (Parmeshwar) – Ishwaris the one with attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh), he has theego of doership and it is he who becomes entranced (murchhit)with temporary things; whereas the Parmeshwar is devoid ofattachment (vitarag); a non-doer, that only worships its owneternal state. Nevertheless the state of Ishwar is a sacred state(vibhuti-swaroop). The end of adverse internal meditation thathurts oneself (artadhyan), and adverse internal meditation thathurts oneself and others (raudradhyan), is the first link to thestate of detachment from attachment and abhorrence(vitaragata).There is nothing wrong in saying, “I am Chandubhai”, butit should not be so in your belief.The identification of the milestones on the way to attainingthe state of the Absolute Soul (Parmatma), gives the traveler acomplete security (reassurance) about the path.As long as there is the desire for worldly pleasures andthe propensity of the tendencies (vruttis) is to wander aroundin search of worldly pleasures, it is considered an outwardly-soul (bahirmukhi-atma) or ignorant soul (mudhatma). In theignorant state, the embodied self (jivatma) only has the awarenessof its existence (astitva). It believes that all of the attachmentsof the non-Self body complex (pudgal) are its own, which is thefirst sign. The second sign is where, from the state of ignorance,one comes into the state of the inner awakened Soul (antaratmadasha), when all the tendencies that were roaming aroundoutwardly, turn inward towards one’s home (the Self). When theGnani Purush, through an instrumental intent (nimit bhaav),gives the ignorant soul (mudhatma) the conviction that theattachments of the non-Self body complex (pudgal) are notYour, and that You are the Absolute Soul (Parmatma), then forthe first time, the conviction of the state ‘I am’, becomes onewith the Absolute Soul (Parmatma). Now, not only is thereawareness of existence (astitva), but one also has awareness ofthe elemental nature (vastutva) that is, ‘Who am I?’ This innerawakened Soul (antaratma) state means the “interim government”is established.The interim government (antaratma) has two jobs. Duringworldly interaction (vyavahar), using applied awareness(upayog), one settles matters with equanimity, and during one’sfree time, one remains in applied awareness of the Self (Atma-upayog). When entering this state of the inner awakened Soul(antaratma), one becomes independent to some degree; whileto a certain degree one becomes dependent. Nevertheless, oneis still making progress towards the state of the Absolute Soul(Parmatma); the progress always continues. By attaining theKnowledge and Vision of the Gnani Purush, who is continuallyin the state of the Absolute Soul (Parmatma), one has attainedthe state of the inner awakened Soul (antaratma; interim stateof ‘I am pure Soul’). After this happens, this inner awakenedSoul (antaratma) sees the Absolute Soul (Parmatma) andbegins to assume the same form! One, one’s self is the AbsoluteSoul, and this conviction now leads to oneness through theKnowledge. Through the worship of the original element(vastutva), one gradually reaches a state of perfection(purnatva). And when the worldly life (sansar) is completelysettled, the “full government” becomes established, and that iswhen one becomes the complete Absolute Soul – the Parmatma!In the Absolute (Kevali) state, the Atma is itself theAbsolute Soul (Parmatma). As far as being supported in worldly-form, it is the inner awakened Soul (antaratma) and in the stateof ignorance, it is un-awakened to the self (mudhatma)!“Hoo, bavo, Mangaldas!” (Hoo is the ‘I’, the absolute3132Absolute Soul (Parmatma)’, you will no longer have thatseparation and you will have become free from all passions ofattachment and abhorrence (vitarag). Free from fear (nirbhaya)!And Greatly Liberated (Mahamukta)! God (Ishwar) and Absolute God (Parmeshwar) – Ishwaris the one with attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh), he has theego of doership and it is he who becomes entranced (murchhit)with temporary things; whereas the Parmeshwar is devoid ofattachment (vitarag); a non-doer, that only worships its owneternal state. Nevertheless the state of Ishwar is a sacred state(vibhuti-swaroop). The end of adverse internal meditation thathurts oneself (artadhyan), and adverse internal meditation thathurts oneself and others (raudradhyan), is the first link to thestate of detachment from attachment and abhorrence(vitaragata).There is nothing wrong in saying, “I am Chandubhai”, butit should not be so in your belief.The identification of the milestones on the way to attainingthe state of the Absolute Soul (Parmatma), gives the traveler acomplete security (reassurance) about the path.As long as there is the desire for worldly pleasures andthe propensity of the tendencies (vruttis) is to wander aroundin search of worldly pleasures, it is considered an outwardly-soul (bahirmukhi-atma) or ignorant soul (mudhatma). In theignorant state, the embodied self (jivatma) only has the awarenessof its existence (astitva). It believes that all of the attachmentsof the non-Self body complex (pudgal) are its own, which is thefirst sign. The second sign is where, from the state of ignorance,one comes into the state of the inner awakened Soul (antaratmadasha), when all the tendencies that were roaming aroundoutwardly, turn inward towards one’s home (the Self). When theGnani Purush, through an instrumental intent (nimit bhaav),gives the ignorant soul (mudhatma) the conviction that theattachments of the non-Self body complex (pudgal) are notYour, and that You are the Absolute Soul (Parmatma), then forthe first time, the conviction of the state ‘I am’, becomes onewith the Absolute Soul (Parmatma). Now, not only is thereawareness of existence (astitva), but one also has awareness ofthe elemental nature (vastutva) that is, ‘Who am I?’ This innerawakened Soul (antaratma) state means the “interim government”is established.The interim government (antaratma) has two jobs. Duringworldly interaction (vyavahar), using applied awareness(upayog), one settles matters with equanimity, and during one’sfree time, one remains in applied awareness of the Self (Atma-upayog). When entering this state of the inner awakened Soul(antaratma), one becomes independent to some degree; whileto a certain degree one becomes dependent. Nevertheless, oneis still making progress towards the state of the Absolute Soul(Parmatma); the progress always continues. By attaining theKnowledge and Vision of the Gnani Purush, who is continuallyin the state of the Absolute Soul (Parmatma), one has attainedthe state of the inner awakened Soul (antaratma; interim stateof ‘I am pure Soul’). After this happens, this inner awakenedSoul (antaratma) sees the Absolute Soul (Parmatma) andbegins to assume the same form! One, one’s self is the AbsoluteSoul, and this conviction now leads to oneness through theKnowledge. Through the worship of the original element(vastutva), one gradually reaches a state of perfection(purnatva). And when the worldly life (sansar) is completelysettled, the “full government” becomes established, and that iswhen one becomes the complete Absolute Soul – the Parmatma!In the Absolute (Kevali) state, the Atma is itself theAbsolute Soul (Parmatma). As far as being supported in worldly-form, it is the inner awakened Soul (antaratma) and in the stateof ignorance, it is un-awakened to the self (mudhatma)!“Hoo, bavo, Mangaldas!” (Hoo is the ‘I’, the absolute3334Self and Pragnya, the direct energy of the awakened Self. Bavois the ego and all the wrong beliefs. Mangaldas is the physicalbody and the mind). The ‘I’ (hoo) is the same in all three! Theone that has become completely devoid of attachment andabhorrence (vitarag) is the Absolute Self (Parmatma)! Theone that has the vision of becoming free from attachment andabhorrence, is the inner awakened Soul (antaratma), and theone that is engrossed in worldly pleasures, and continues to haveattachment and abhorrence (raag-dwesh), is the deluded self(mudhatma)!Those who have attained the final liberation, all the LiberatedSouls (Siddhatma) who dwell in the realm of Liberation (Siddhalok), exist in their own individual, natural state of bliss. There isno superior (upari) nor subordinate over there. All liberatedbeings by nature are the same; Knowing and Seeing (Gnan-Darshan) is their nature. There is no form of conduct (charitra)over there. There is no mechanical activity, nor are there anysubatomic particles of the non-Self body complex (pudgalparmanu) over there. It (the realm of liberation) is located at theedge of the universe (brahmaand). There, they do not affectone another, and they also do not have any effect on otherplaces in the universe. The Liberated Souls (Siddha Bhagwan)cannot help us, but because our goal is to reach there, weworship their state: Namo Siddhanam - I bow down to theLiberated Absolute Souls!If this light were Chetan, it would just keep seeing all thethings in this room! That is how the Liberated Souls (Siddhatma)know everything which is to be known (gneya).Moksha means to attain the qualities (gunas) of the Self,to attain the nature of the Self, and to eternally remain in thenatural bliss of the Self! Who is the one that attains the final liberation (moksha)?The one who is bound attains liberation (moksha). Who is theone that is bound? The one who suffers. Who is the one suffering?The ego! The inner intent (bhaav) to attain liberation; belongs tothe one that is bound. It is not the Atma that has this intent,because in reality the Atma is free; it is neither the doer (karta),nor the sufferer (bhokta). It is only the ego that is looking forliberation. It goes in search of liberation (moksha), when it findsthe worldly life (sansar) insipid (joyless).The true purpose of life must be to attain final liberation(moksha). Now if that goal is extremely strong, one will surelyattain it. That, which obstructs this purpose, is illusory attachment(moha). When moha decreases, one becomes weary of theworldly life (sansar), and begins to look for the path to finalliberation (moksha).Only until the state of the Atma is attained, is it necessaryto be in a state of thinking, and that too, should only be thoughtsconcerned with Knowledge of the Self (Gnan ankshepakvant);which will help attain the Atma. Thereafter the state that followsis beyond thoughts. In the state of ignorance, one observes theAtma through the ego; whereas the Atma is beyond the ego.When every subatomic particle (parmanu) of anger, pride,deceit and greed is purified, and after the ego has attainedcomplete purification; the ego unifies with the pure Soul(Shuddhatma) – such is the Kramic path (the traditional step-by-step path to Self-realization)! In the Akram (step-less) pathhowever, the Gnani Purush directly gives one the status of thepure Soul (Shuddhatma); a state that is steady (achad), original(darasal), and one that cannot be tainted (nirlep). Shuddhatma (the pure Soul), is one’s own form; it is notthe body. When you realize this, dehadhyas (the belief of, ‘I amthe body’) ends and the ego and the ‘my-ness’ (mamata) leave.A person with the consciousness of ‘I am this body’ (dehadhyas)cannot free anyone from the same consciousness. Only the GnaniPurush, who is free from dehadhyas, can liberate one.3334Self and Pragnya, the direct energy of the awakened Self. Bavois the ego and all the wrong beliefs. Mangaldas is the physicalbody and the mind). The ‘I’ (hoo) is the same in all three! Theone that has become completely devoid of attachment andabhorrence (vitarag) is the Absolute Self (Parmatma)! Theone that has the vision of becoming free from attachment andabhorrence, is the inner awakened Soul (antaratma), and theone that is engrossed in worldly pleasures, and continues to haveattachment and abhorrence (raag-dwesh), is the deluded self(mudhatma)!Those who have attained the final liberation, all the LiberatedSouls (Siddhatma) who dwell in the realm of Liberation (Siddhalok), exist in their own individual, natural state of bliss. There isno superior (upari) nor subordinate over there. All liberatedbeings by nature are the same; Knowing and Seeing (Gnan-Darshan) is their nature. There is no form of conduct (charitra)over there. There is no mechanical activity, nor are there anysubatomic particles of the non-Self body complex (pudgalparmanu) over there. It (the realm of liberation) is located at theedge of the universe (brahmaand). There, they do not affectone another, and they also do not have any effect on otherplaces in the universe. The Liberated Souls (Siddha Bhagwan)cannot help us, but because our goal is to reach there, weworship their state: Namo Siddhanam - I bow down to theLiberated Absolute Souls!If this light were Chetan, it would just keep seeing all thethings in this room! That is how the Liberated Souls (Siddhatma)know everything which is to be known (gneya).Moksha means to attain the qualities (gunas) of the Self,to attain the nature of the Self, and to eternally remain in thenatural bliss of the Self! Who is the one that attains the final liberation (moksha)?The one who is bound attains liberation (moksha). Who is theone that is bound? The one who suffers. Who is the one suffering?The ego! The inner intent (bhaav) to attain liberation; belongs tothe one that is bound. It is not the Atma that has this intent,because in reality the Atma is free; it is neither the doer (karta),nor the sufferer (bhokta). It is only the ego that is looking forliberation. It goes in search of liberation (moksha), when it findsthe worldly life (sansar) insipid (joyless).The true purpose of life must be to attain final liberation(moksha). Now if that goal is extremely strong, one will surelyattain it. That, which obstructs this purpose, is illusory attachment(moha). When moha decreases, one becomes weary of theworldly life (sansar), and begins to look for the path to finalliberation (moksha).Only until the state of the Atma is attained, is it necessaryto be in a state of thinking, and that too, should only be thoughtsconcerned with Knowledge of the Self (Gnan ankshepakvant);which will help attain the Atma. Thereafter the state that followsis beyond thoughts. In the state of ignorance, one observes theAtma through the ego; whereas the Atma is beyond the ego.When every subatomic particle (parmanu) of anger, pride,deceit and greed is purified, and after the ego has attainedcomplete purification; the ego unifies with the pure Soul(Shuddhatma) – such is the Kramic path (the traditional step-by-step path to Self-realization)! In the Akram (step-less) pathhowever, the Gnani Purush directly gives one the status of thepure Soul (Shuddhatma); a state that is steady (achad), original(darasal), and one that cannot be tainted (nirlep). Shuddhatma (the pure Soul), is one’s own form; it is notthe body. When you realize this, dehadhyas (the belief of, ‘I amthe body’) ends and the ego and the ‘my-ness’ (mamata) leave.A person with the consciousness of ‘I am this body’ (dehadhyas)cannot free anyone from the same consciousness. Only the GnaniPurush, who is free from dehadhyas, can liberate one.3536The prevailing experience of ‘I am this body, mind, speechetc.’ is dehadhyas, and after Self-realization, this experience isgone, and there prevails the experience of the Atma (Self). That,which becomes involved (tanmayakar) with the body, is not theoriginal Atma, but the atma that one believes in; the atma thatinteracts in the world (vyavahar atma).It is not the Atma from within that says, ‘You are wrong’,but the tape- record, that is based on whatever worldlyknowledge it has assumed, that is speaking. All these: the eyes(camera), ears (receivers), speech (tape-record), mind(machine’s head); as well as, eating, drinking, talking, walking,is all mechanical.Those who believe: ‘I am a sinner’, ‘I practice penance’,or ‘I know scriptures’; or else, those conducting religious rituals,meditation, chanting and penance – these actions are all done bythe mechanical atma, the Gnani has said. The Atma, accordingto the world’s belief – the one that it tries to make still (achar)and steady – is in motion (sachar – changing); it is a mechanicalatma; whereas the real Atma is still (achar), and its nature isto Know. The belief is fundamentally wrong. While being in anunsteady state, in trying to discover the steady Atma, you wouldonly attain the unsteady atma! The mechanical atma, which isalways unsteady (chanchal) and active (kriyasheel); is what theworld is trying to make steady. How can this be possible? Thevision that is directed towards the steady (achar) will bringabout the natural state of steadiness. Who but the Gnani, canmake one understand the fact that the mechanical self, and theoriginal Atma, are so different by nature? Who would give yousuch knowledge of their separation? The original Atma is in theform of Absolute Knowledge (Keval Gnan), in the form ofAbsolute light (Keval prakash), infinite Knowledge (anantGnan), infinite Vision (anant Darshan), infinite Energy (anantshakti) and infinite Bliss (anant sukh). This chetan is full ofinfinite attributes!That which dwells in the worldly life cannot be the originalAtma. It is attachment and abhorrence (raag-dwesh). As longas its results keep occurring, the seat of the pure Soul will notbe attained.Due to close proximity with Chetan (Atma), illusoryenergy (mayavi shakti) arises and that is the deluded atma(bhrant chetan). The non-Self atma (nischetan-chetan) meansthat on the outside, it shows the qualities of chetan (Atma), butin all truth, it is not. The original chetan (Atma) remains inside,and there is a layer of non-Self atma (nischetan-chetan) overit. It is the non-Self atma, that itself is called mechanical chetan.What the Gnani’s original word mishra-chetan (‘I’ withwrong belief) - indicates, is that when one starts to becomeinvolved in situations, the mishra-chetan begins to form. Thisresults in the charging of karma, which in the next lifetime, cometo fruition and the discharge process begins – that is when it iscalled mechanical chetan (atma). The “real Atma” and “relative atma” are identified byeternal and non-eternal qualities, respectively. Until the Real isrealized, the relative atma is believed to be the real Atma,because of illusion (bhranti). It is because of scientific causesthat this illusion comes about. Under illusion (bhranti), theKnower and the doer; the eternal and the non-eternal behave asone. When the Gnani Purush breaks down this illusion, andplaces a “line of demarcation” between the real and the relative,one attains the Vision of the Self (Atma-darshan), which, beforethe realization is concealed from awareness. And compared tothis, there is no other vision as wonderful as this in the entireworld! After that, one remains in the state of the Knower of thelocation (kshetragnya) and knows every action in the non-Selffield. If one misses the location of the Self (swa-kshetra), onewill become involved in the location of the non-Self (kshetrakaar).Only the permanent can call the temporary, as temporary. Youare already permanent; but only if you have that awareness!3536The prevailing experience of ‘I am this body, mind, speechetc.’ is dehadhyas, and after Self-realization, this experience isgone, and there prevails the experience of the Atma (Self). That,which becomes involved (tanmayakar) with the body, is not theoriginal Atma, but the atma that one believes in; the atma thatinteracts in the world (vyavahar atma).It is not the Atma from within that says, ‘You are wrong’,but the tape- record, that is based on whatever worldlyknowledge it has assumed, that is speaking. All these: the eyes(camera), ears (receivers), speech (tape-record), mind(machine’s head); as well as, eating, drinking, talking, walking,is all mechanical.Those who believe: ‘I am a sinner’, ‘I practice penance’,or ‘I know scriptures’; or else, those conducting religious rituals,meditation, chanting and penance – these actions are all done bythe mechanical atma, the Gnani has said. The Atma, accordingto the world’s belief – the one that it tries to make still (achar)and steady – is in motion (sachar – changing); it is a mechanicalatma; whereas the real Atma is still (achar), and its nature isto Know. The belief is fundamentally wrong. While being in anunsteady state, in trying to discover the steady Atma, you wouldonly attain the unsteady atma! The mechanical atma, which isalways unsteady (chanchal) and active (kriyasheel); is what theworld is trying to make steady. How can this be possible? Thevision that is directed towards the steady (achar) will bringabout the natural state of steadiness. Who but the Gnani, canmake one understand the fact that the mechanical self, and theoriginal Atma, are so different by nature? Who would give yousuch knowledge of their separation? The original Atma is in theform of Absolute Knowledge (Keval Gnan), in the form ofAbsolute light (Keval prakash), infinite Knowledge (anantGnan), infinite Vision (anant Darshan), infinite Energy (anantshakti) and infinite Bliss (anant sukh). This chetan is full ofinfinite attributes!That which dwells in the worldly life cannot be the originalAtma. It is attachment and abhorrence (raag-dwesh). As longas its results keep occurring, the seat of the pure Soul will notbe attained.Due to close proximity with Chetan (Atma), illusoryenergy (mayavi shakti) arises and that is the deluded atma(bhrant chetan). The non-Self atma (nischetan-chetan) meansthat on the outside, it shows the qualities of chetan (Atma), butin all truth, it is not. The original chetan (Atma) remains inside,and there is a layer of non-Self atma (nischetan-chetan) overit. It is the non-Self atma, that itself is called mechanical chetan.What the Gnani’s original word mishra-chetan (‘I’ withwrong belief) - indicates, is that when one starts to becomeinvolved in situations, the mishra-chetan begins to form. Thisresults in the charging of karma, which in the next lifetime, cometo fruition and the discharge process begins – that is when it iscalled mechanical chetan (atma). The “real Atma” and “relative atma” are identified byeternal and non-eternal qualities, respectively. Until the Real isrealized, the relative atma is believed to be the real Atma,because of illusion (bhranti). It is because of scientific causesthat this illusion comes about. Under illusion (bhranti), theKnower and the doer; the eternal and the non-eternal behave asone. When the Gnani Purush breaks down this illusion, andplaces a “line of demarcation” between the real and the relative,one attains the Vision of the Self (Atma-darshan), which, beforethe realization is concealed from awareness. And compared tothis, there is no other vision as wonderful as this in the entireworld! After that, one remains in the state of the Knower of thelocation (kshetragnya) and knows every action in the non-Selffield. If one misses the location of the Self (swa-kshetra), onewill become involved in the location of the non-Self (kshetrakaar).Only the permanent can call the temporary, as temporary. Youare already permanent; but only if you have that awareness!3738The reason why every individual appears different, isbecause each one is dependent on matter (dravya), location(kshetra), time (kaad) and inner intent (bhaav). In this however,when the location changes or another enters one’s location, thetime will have changed, and because of that, the intent will havechanged, which means that the matter (dravya) will also havechanged. Regardless of all the external changes that happen inthe circumstances, there are no changes in the state of the Atma.The Atma is in its pure state throughout all the three time periods(past, present and future), but because of layers of coverings(avaran), its reality is obstructed from coming into one’s vision.Once the vision is purified, there is no place for impurity. As longas the ego is there, there is a reason why one’s vision (drashti)is flawed. Nevertheless the real Atma, the real Self has alwaysmaintained its state of detachment and purity throughout thesechanges and even its phases (paryaya) have remained constant.The relative self (vyavahar atma) has pure (shuddha) andimpure (ashuddha) phases. Obstinacy (insistence on one’s owntruth) in the relative self (vyavahar atma) will lead to the creationof another relative self. As long as a person does not meet aGnani, he has to carry on making his spoiled worldly interaction(vyavahar) auspicious and good (shubha). But when he meetsthe Gnani, he just has to purify his worldly interaction (vyavahar).When in worldly interaction (vyavahar), one is a relative self(vyavahar atma), and when one is in the real Self (nischay),one is the nischay Atma (the real Self)! But, in all the states theSelf is one and the same.What is the origin (adhishthan) of the world? If it hasbeen exposed in the exact way, it is by the revered Dadashri.The origin of the world is the relative self; the atma that hasbeen instilled with life (pratishthit atma). The real Atma hasalways remained here; in the state of complete non-doership(akarta bhavey) and detachment (uninvolved - udaseenbhavey). It is only because the energy of vision (darshan shakti)has been covered up, and the wrong vision (vibhavik drashti)has set in, that the world has come about!The fundamental real Atma (nischay atma) is the pureSoul (Shuddhatma), and in worldly interaction (vyavahar) it isthe believed atma, which is the relative self (pratishthit atma).I am Chandubhai, I am his maternal uncle, his paternal uncle...;this wrong belief has become instilled, and it has created aninstilled (pratishthit) persona which continually gives results. Inthe process of tasting the fruit of these results, through ignorance,one instills anew, yet again; therefore, the cycle continues.While under the influence of alcohol, a man forgets himselfand says, ‘I am the king’. In the same way, under the influenceof the ego, a person will say things like, “I am Chandubhai…Iam her husband, I am his father...”! In reality, One is the AbsoluteSoul (Parmatma); the master of the fourteen worlds. But becauseof the wrong belief, he sets himself up as the woman’s husbandand loses his own status. But when the Gnani Purush gives himthe awareness of his own Self and uproots his ego, and whenall the previous illusory effects are erased, he attains the perfectstate. Otherwise, as long as the ego is there, one sees throughthe vision of the intellect (buddhi), and believes that the atmais the doer-sufferer (karta-bhokta). When one sees throughGnan (Knowledge), that the Atma does not do anything, thenit fits (acceptable). If the wrong belief disperses, then the realitybecomes visible. It is the changed belief that has initiated theworldly life (sansar) and given rise to the relative self (prakruti).The original Atma has always remained unaccompanied (asanga)and untainted (nirlep).The relative self (prakruti) arises because of scientificcircumstantial evidence. No one has any doership in any of this.The prakruti is effective, and that is why one becomes affected.But this is only so, as long as the wrong beliefs are there.With the right belief, the wrong belief is severed and the3738The reason why every individual appears different, isbecause each one is dependent on matter (dravya), location(kshetra), time (kaad) and inner intent (bhaav). In this however,when the location changes or another enters one’s location, thetime will have changed, and because of that, the intent will havechanged, which means that the matter (dravya) will also havechanged. Regardless of all the external changes that happen inthe circumstances, there are no changes in the state of the Atma.The Atma is in its pure state throughout all the three time periods(past, present and future), but because of layers of coverings(avaran), its reality is obstructed from coming into one’s vision.Once the vision is purified, there is no place for impurity. As longas the ego is there, there is a reason why one’s vision (drashti)is flawed. Nevertheless the real Atma, the real Self has alwaysmaintained its state of detachment and purity throughout thesechanges and even its phases (paryaya) have remained constant.The relative self (vyavahar atma) has pure (shuddha) andimpure (ashuddha) phases. Obstinacy (insistence on one’s owntruth) in the relative self (vyavahar atma) will lead to the creationof another relative self. As long as a person does not meet aGnani, he has to carry on making his spoiled worldly interaction(vyavahar) auspicious and good (shubha). But when he meetsthe Gnani, he just has to purify his worldly interaction (vyavahar).When in worldly interaction (vyavahar), one is a relative self(vyavahar atma), and when one is in the real Self (nischay),one is the nischay Atma (the real Self)! But, in all the states theSelf is one and the same.What is the origin (adhishthan) of the world? If it hasbeen exposed in the exact way, it is by the revered Dadashri.The origin of the world is the relative self; the atma that hasbeen instilled with life (pratishthit atma). The real Atma hasalways remained here; in the state of complete non-doership(akarta bhavey) and detachment (uninvolved - udaseenbhavey). It is only because the energy of vision (darshan shakti)has been covered up, and the wrong vision (vibhavik drashti)has set in, that the world has come about!The fundamental real Atma (nischay atma) is the pureSoul (Shuddhatma), and in worldly interaction (vyavahar) it isthe believed atma, which is the relative self (pratishthit atma).I am Chandubhai, I am his maternal uncle, his paternal uncle...;this wrong belief has become instilled, and it has created aninstilled (pratishthit) persona which continually gives results. Inthe process of tasting the fruit of these results, through ignorance,one instills anew, yet again; therefore, the cycle continues.While under the influence of alcohol, a man forgets himselfand says, ‘I am the king’. In the same way, under the influenceof the ego, a person will say things like, “I am Chandubhai…Iam her husband, I am his father...”! In reality, One is the AbsoluteSoul (Parmatma); the master of the fourteen worlds. But becauseof the wrong belief, he sets himself up as the woman’s husbandand loses his own status. But when the Gnani Purush gives himthe awareness of his own Self and uproots his ego, and whenall the previous illusory effects are erased, he attains the perfectstate. Otherwise, as long as the ego is there, one sees throughthe vision of the intellect (buddhi), and believes that the atmais the doer-sufferer (karta-bhokta). When one sees throughGnan (Knowledge), that the Atma does not do anything, thenit fits (acceptable). If the wrong belief disperses, then the realitybecomes visible. It is the changed belief that has initiated theworldly life (sansar) and given rise to the relative self (prakruti).The original Atma has always remained unaccompanied (asanga)and untainted (nirlep).The relative self (prakruti) arises because of scientificcircumstantial evidence. No one has any doership in any of this.The prakruti is effective, and that is why one becomes affected.But this is only so, as long as the wrong beliefs are there.With the right belief, the wrong belief is severed and the3940right belief gradually and naturally cuts itself (wrong belief part)off and this occurs even in this very age of the current time cycle(Kaliyug) through the present Akram Vignan due to thephenomenal exploration to impart liberation by the Gnani Purushof our times! If one prevails in the right belief, one is within the domainof the Self and if one prevails in the wrong belief, one is withinthe domain of the non-Self. Illusory vision (mithya drashti)shows everything the wrong way. When you meet the GnaniPurush, and you come to hear his satsang (spiritual talks); fromthat moment on, your vision will begin to rectify. Or you canchange your vision by praying to the Gnani Purush. Once yourvision changes, you continue on to become Bhagwan (God).In the shubha-ashubha (auspicious-inauspicious) religions,both truth and untruth have a place. Their way to attainment, isattachment to truth and contempt for untruth. There is no place forthat in the pure religion, in the religion of the Self (Atma dharma).The religion of the Self is about being beyond attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh); it is about absolute absence ofattachment and abhorrence (vitaragata). It is the poisoned visionthat causes attachment and abhorrence. The Gnani Purush turnsthe vision that was directed towards temporary things; towardsthe permanent. He changes the direction of the vision. Then thevision of, “I am in all that lives” (Atmavat sarva bhuteshu) arises.There is a big difference between the experience of theAtma (Atma anubhav) and Self-realization (Atma sakshatkar).Experience is the final stage, and it is permanent; whereas withSelf-realization, only the conviction (pratiti) has set in. After theexperience of the Atma, one enters the conduct (charitra) stage,which is considered prevailing as the Self.The Atma is invisible (aroopi) and even the one that realizesit, is invisible, so that both natures blend, and the vrutti (tendenciestowards the worldly life) return home to the Self.When one knows what Atma is and what the Atma isnot, one is said to have known the Atma. In the state of ignorance,one should not say, ‘the Atma is pure perfect knowledge(shuddha-buddha)’. At the most, one can say, from theperspective of the body, the Atma is impure but from theperspective of the Atma, it is pure. Once tasted, the bliss of the Atma never goes away. Itis the joy of the mind which is fleeting, so that once it comes,it will go away. As long as the chit (inner functioning componentcomprised of knowledge and vision) stays involved with thekashays (inner weakness of anger, pride, deceit and greed), itis not possible to experience the Atma. A state of eternal blissis itself the experience of the Atma.The Gnani gives you the awareness that worry and angeris something that happens in the non-Self, and not in the Self;thereafter, the conviction that nothing can happen to the Atmasets in.After attaining the Atma in the exact manner, only thedischarge karmas remain. In that state there is only samvarpurvak nirjara, meaning there is blockage of new binding karma(samvar) while the effects of past causes are unfolding.Thereafter, no further karmas are bound.The karma exerts control, as long as it receives one’ssupport. Once the support is removed, the karma becomesneutral. The support is given during the unfolding of the karma,when because of ignorance one says, ‘I did this’ when in realitythe doer is the unfolding effects of past causes!Although the Gnani Purush does all the activity involvedin sansar (worldly life), firmly embedded in his consciousnessthere is always the awareness, ‘I do not do anything’, and thatis how he remains as the Atma. The agnani (one without Self-awareness), on the other hand, never steps out of theconsciousness of ‘I am the doer’, not even momentarily!3940right belief gradually and naturally cuts itself (wrong belief part)off and this occurs even in this very age of the current time cycle(Kaliyug) through the present Akram Vignan due to thephenomenal exploration to impart liberation by the Gnani Purushof our times! If one prevails in the right belief, one is within the domainof the Self and if one prevails in the wrong belief, one is withinthe domain of the non-Self. Illusory vision (mithya drashti)shows everything the wrong way. When you meet the GnaniPurush, and you come to hear his satsang (spiritual talks); fromthat moment on, your vision will begin to rectify. Or you canchange your vision by praying to the Gnani Purush. Once yourvision changes, you continue on to become Bhagwan (God).In the shubha-ashubha (auspicious-inauspicious) religions,both truth and untruth have a place. Their way to attainment, isattachment to truth and contempt for untruth. There is no place forthat in the pure religion, in the religion of the Self (Atma dharma).The religion of the Self is about being beyond attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh); it is about absolute absence ofattachment and abhorrence (vitaragata). It is the poisoned visionthat causes attachment and abhorrence. The Gnani Purush turnsthe vision that was directed towards temporary things; towardsthe permanent. He changes the direction of the vision. Then thevision of, “I am in all that lives” (Atmavat sarva bhuteshu) arises.There is a big difference between the experience of theAtma (Atma anubhav) and Self-realization (Atma sakshatkar).Experience is the final stage, and it is permanent; whereas withSelf-realization, only the conviction (pratiti) has set in. After theexperience of the Atma, one enters the conduct (charitra) stage,which is considered prevailing as the Self.The Atma is invisible (aroopi) and even the one that realizesit, is invisible, so that both natures blend, and the vrutti (tendenciestowards the worldly life) return home to the Self.When one knows what Atma is and what the Atma isnot, one is said to have known the Atma. In the state of ignorance,one should not say, ‘the Atma is pure perfect knowledge(shuddha-buddha)’. At the most, one can say, from theperspective of the body, the Atma is impure but from theperspective of the Atma, it is pure. Once tasted, the bliss of the Atma never goes away. Itis the joy of the mind which is fleeting, so that once it comes,it will go away. As long as the chit (inner functioning componentcomprised of knowledge and vision) stays involved with thekashays (inner weakness of anger, pride, deceit and greed), itis not possible to experience the Atma. A state of eternal blissis itself the experience of the Atma.The Gnani gives you the awareness that worry and angeris something that happens in the non-Self, and not in the Self;thereafter, the conviction that nothing can happen to the Atmasets in.After attaining the Atma in the exact manner, only thedischarge karmas remain. In that state there is only samvarpurvak nirjara, meaning there is blockage of new binding karma(samvar) while the effects of past causes are unfolding.Thereafter, no further karmas are bound.The karma exerts control, as long as it receives one’ssupport. Once the support is removed, the karma becomesneutral. The support is given during the unfolding of the karma,when because of ignorance one says, ‘I did this’ when in realitythe doer is the unfolding effects of past causes!Although the Gnani Purush does all the activity involvedin sansar (worldly life), firmly embedded in his consciousnessthere is always the awareness, ‘I do not do anything’, and thatis how he remains as the Atma. The agnani (one without Self-awareness), on the other hand, never steps out of theconsciousness of ‘I am the doer’, not even momentarily!4142 “He who knows the Atma has known everything”. Hewho has known the Atma is karan sarvagnya (one whocreates causes to become Knower of all elements); he is calledkaran Keval Gnani (he creates causes to become fullyenlightened). The Knower of the Soul (Atmagnani) is withoutobstinacy or insistence (niragrahi), and without ego(nirahamkari). Nothing is gained by repeatedly saying, ‘I am not thebody, I am not the body; I am the Atma, I am the Atma’. Here,one has to have the experience of the Atma. Whatever disciplines(sadhano) for the attainment of Self knowledge (Atmagnan)one has implemented until today, have all become binding. Thetrue sadhan (means; instrument) is where one employs the manifestGnani Purush, and only there, lies liberation! The disciplines(sadhano) only lead you up to Knowledge (Gnan); whereas theAtma is in the form of science (vignan swaroop). The Atmacan pass all the way through this body, the houses and a thousandwalls; it is the subtlest of all! So how can it be found? No matterhow much religious discipline or penance one undertakes in orderto attain Self-realization, it is extremely difficult to achieve. If thestation is just half a mile away, but you go twenty-two miles inthe wrong direction, whose fault would it be? When it was youwho forgot the way, why would it be the body’s fault? It isentirely the fault of ignorance.The Gnani does not just give you the knowledge of theAtma, but he also gives you answers to all the complexities ofthe universe. If an obstacle arises in your attaining Self-realization,you can break it with a strong resolution: ‘I want to get thisGnan from the Gnani’, or it can also be broken with a requestto the Gnani, ‘Please destroy my obstacle’. Otherwise, anyonewho desires Self-realization will not come across any kind ofadversity. One faces adversity because of one’s own weakness.How could there be any adversity, when you are going to yourown home?If you want to experience the Atma on your own, then ifsomeone picks your pocket or shouts obscenities at you, oreven beats you, you should say to yourself, ‘This is the result ofmy own karma, the other person is just instrumental (a nimit),he is freeing me from my karma’. By doing this, you will perceivehim as nirdosh (innocent), and moreover, it will allow you tobless him. And if it stays this way all the time, you will attainSelf-realization for sure. But people are spineless when it comesto looking at things this way; therefore, if just once, one goes tothe Gnani to awaken the Atma, the Atma, even in dreams, cannever be forgotten.How does the salvation of the Atma happen? The salvationof the original Atma has already happened. It is just the relativeself that needs salvation. How is that done? When theunderstanding sets in that, ‘My real nature (swaroop) is AbsoluteKnowledge (Keval Gnan), Absolute Vision (Keval Darshan),and Absolute Conduct (Keval Charitra)’, even then it will occur.And who but the Gnani Purush can fit (provide) us with this?The Atma is the subtlest (sookshmatam), and the regions(pradesho) around it, is subtler (sookshmatar). But becausespeech is not subtler, it cannot describe the region; it halts.There, only experience can resolve this.How can you find the real Atma, when you are lookingfor it through the vision of the perceived atma? How can yousee what lies beyond the senses, when you see through the eyesof the senses themselves? You need a Gnani Purush, in themiddle, who can change your vision so that you can see! Thesenses themselves will not turn inwards; you cannot fence themin! The Gnani will put you in the same state that he himself hasattained. Once you meet the Gnani, it is worth asking him formoksha (liberation). The spiritual science of Akram Vignan that has manifestedthrough the revered Dadashri; steers you away from the illusory4142 “He who knows the Atma has known everything”. Hewho has known the Atma is karan sarvagnya (one whocreates causes to become Knower of all elements); he is calledkaran Keval Gnani (he creates causes to become fullyenlightened). The Knower of the Soul (Atmagnani) is withoutobstinacy or insistence (niragrahi), and without ego(nirahamkari). Nothing is gained by repeatedly saying, ‘I am not thebody, I am not the body; I am the Atma, I am the Atma’. Here,one has to have the experience of the Atma. Whatever disciplines(sadhano) for the attainment of Self knowledge (Atmagnan)one has implemented until today, have all become binding. Thetrue sadhan (means; instrument) is where one employs the manifestGnani Purush, and only there, lies liberation! The disciplines(sadhano) only lead you up to Knowledge (Gnan); whereas theAtma is in the form of science (vignan swaroop). The Atmacan pass all the way through this body, the houses and a thousandwalls; it is the subtlest of all! So how can it be found? No matterhow much religious discipline or penance one undertakes in orderto attain Self-realization, it is extremely difficult to achieve. If thestation is just half a mile away, but you go twenty-two miles inthe wrong direction, whose fault would it be? When it was youwho forgot the way, why would it be the body’s fault? It isentirely the fault of ignorance.The Gnani does not just give you the knowledge of theAtma, but he also gives you answers to all the complexities ofthe universe. If an obstacle arises in your attaining Self-realization,you can break it with a strong resolution: ‘I want to get thisGnan from the Gnani’, or it can also be broken with a requestto the Gnani, ‘Please destroy my obstacle’. Otherwise, anyonewho desires Self-realization will not come across any kind ofadversity. One faces adversity because of one’s own weakness.How could there be any adversity, when you are going to yourown home?If you want to experience the Atma on your own, then ifsomeone picks your pocket or shouts obscenities at you, oreven beats you, you should say to yourself, ‘This is the result ofmy own karma, the other person is just instrumental (a nimit),he is freeing me from my karma’. By doing this, you will perceivehim as nirdosh (innocent), and moreover, it will allow you tobless him. And if it stays this way all the time, you will attainSelf-realization for sure. But people are spineless when it comesto looking at things this way; therefore, if just once, one goes tothe Gnani to awaken the Atma, the Atma, even in dreams, cannever be forgotten.How does the salvation of the Atma happen? The salvationof the original Atma has already happened. It is just the relativeself that needs salvation. How is that done? When theunderstanding sets in that, ‘My real nature (swaroop) is AbsoluteKnowledge (Keval Gnan), Absolute Vision (Keval Darshan),and Absolute Conduct (Keval Charitra)’, even then it will occur.And who but the Gnani Purush can fit (provide) us with this?The Atma is the subtlest (sookshmatam), and the regions(pradesho) around it, is subtler (sookshmatar). But becausespeech is not subtler, it cannot describe the region; it halts.There, only experience can resolve this.How can you find the real Atma, when you are lookingfor it through the vision of the perceived atma? How can yousee what lies beyond the senses, when you see through the eyesof the senses themselves? You need a Gnani Purush, in themiddle, who can change your vision so that you can see! Thesenses themselves will not turn inwards; you cannot fence themin! The Gnani will put you in the same state that he himself hasattained. Once you meet the Gnani, it is worth asking him formoksha (liberation). The spiritual science of Akram Vignan that has manifestedthrough the revered Dadashri; steers you away from the illusory4344CONTENTSPart : OneWhat Is the Atma? What Must It Be Like?What Is the Atma?1What Could the Atma Be?1Know the Atma from the Gnani2Who Has Doubts About the Existence of the Soul?3Existence of the Soul! Based on Which Qualities?5…But Whose Qualities Are They?7And What Are the Attributes of Atma?7The Jiva Even Likes Pleasure9Where There Is Feeling, There Is Chetan (Life)10…But the One That Feels Is the Pudgal(the Non-Self Complex)11To Continuously Know Is the Nature of the Soul11The Atma Is the Abode of Infinite Properties12When Will These Attributes of the Atma Manifest?13How Can You Recognize The Soul?13Familiarity With The Gnani Brings Infinite Energies14Patel Is the Neighbor and the Self Is in the Parmatma16Atma: Sakaari (With Form) or Nirakari (Without Form)16Where in the Body Is the Soul Not Present?19Belief Versus Fact22The Soul Expands and Contracts According to the Receptacle23Does the Soul Re-enter the Same Body After Death?24What Is Death? What Happens After Death?25So Many Adjustments of Nature27The Balance Sheet of the Current Life Dictates the NextLife- Form28Moksha Is Needed by Those Who…31These Are the Laws of Nature31How Long Will the Process of Rebirth Take?32The Same Old Routine Life After Life33The Planning Is the Origin of Karma35Planning in the Past Life; Effect in This Life36...And the Decisions Remain38path and makes you fully achieve the path to final liberation(moksha). That is to say, that it is a complete full stop path, andnot a comma. Akram Vignan says that if the worldly life (sansar)were an obstacle towards final liberation, it would not allowanyone to go to the final liberation! Because of Akram Vignan,today the final liberation can be very easily attained. For that,you must present yourself to the Akram Gnani, with the highesthumility (param vinaya), the inner intent of ‘I do not knowanything’; and the deep desire (bhavna) of ‘How do I attainthis?’ This itself, will make it attainable.No other forms of eligibility are taken into considerationin this age, and besides, there is no such eligibility anyway! Thefact that you have reached the Akram Gnani itself proves youreligibility.Gnani Purush, the most revered Dadashri has not beenable to keep his bhavna (deep inner intent) a secret. So withwords filled with compassion, he expresses this desire: My ideais that the message of this vignan (science), reaches every cornerof the world, and that peace should prevail everywhere. Myinner intent (bhavna), my wish or desire, call it what you may;is just this!- Dr. Niruben Amin4344CONTENTSPart : OneWhat Is the Atma? What Must It Be Like?What Is the Atma?1What Could the Atma Be?1Know the Atma from the Gnani2Who Has Doubts About the Existence of the Soul?3Existence of the Soul! Based on Which Qualities?5…But Whose Qualities Are They?7And What Are the Attributes of Atma?7The Jiva Even Likes Pleasure9Where There Is Feeling, There Is Chetan (Life)10…But the One That Feels Is the Pudgal(the Non-Self Complex)11To Continuously Know Is the Nature of the Soul11The Atma Is the Abode of Infinite Properties12When Will These Attributes of the Atma Manifest?13How Can You Recognize The Soul?13Familiarity With The Gnani Brings Infinite Energies14Patel Is the Neighbor and the Self Is in the Parmatma16Atma: Sakaari (With Form) or Nirakari (Without Form)16Where in the Body Is the Soul Not Present?19Belief Versus Fact22The Soul Expands and Contracts According to the Receptacle23Does the Soul Re-enter the Same Body After Death?24What Is Death? What Happens After Death?25So Many Adjustments of Nature27The Balance Sheet of the Current Life Dictates the NextLife- Form28Moksha Is Needed by Those Who…31These Are the Laws of Nature31How Long Will the Process of Rebirth Take?32The Same Old Routine Life After Life33The Planning Is the Origin of Karma35Planning in the Past Life; Effect in This Life36...And the Decisions Remain38path and makes you fully achieve the path to final liberation(moksha). That is to say, that it is a complete full stop path, andnot a comma. Akram Vignan says that if the worldly life (sansar)were an obstacle towards final liberation, it would not allowanyone to go to the final liberation! Because of Akram Vignan,today the final liberation can be very easily attained. For that,you must present yourself to the Akram Gnani, with the highesthumility (param vinaya), the inner intent of ‘I do not knowanything’; and the deep desire (bhavna) of ‘How do I attainthis?’ This itself, will make it attainable.No other forms of eligibility are taken into considerationin this age, and besides, there is no such eligibility anyway! Thefact that you have reached the Akram Gnani itself proves youreligibility.Gnani Purush, the most revered Dadashri has not beenable to keep his bhavna (deep inner intent) a secret. So withwords filled with compassion, he expresses this desire: My ideais that the message of this vignan (science), reaches every cornerof the world, and that peace should prevail everywhere. Myinner intent (bhavna), my wish or desire, call it what you may;is just this!- Dr. Niruben Amin4546With the Atma...39Here, a Guarantee of Just One More Life!39Illusion Is the Cause of Birth and Death40Forces of Discharge Cause Charging in Ignorance42Causes Result in the Cycles of Birth and Death43The Gnani Destroys the Cycle of Birth and Death44Five Senses Only for One More Life!46How Long Does the Relationship With the Subtle Body Last?46Who Is Stuck onto Whom?49The Atma Is Pure; Only the Belief Is Wrong51How Can There Be a Coming and Going for ThatWhich Is Eternal?53The First in the World…?54Who Will Remove the Tangled Belief inCircumstances?56That Is Why Gnanis Call It ‘No Beginning, No End’!59How Can There Be a Beginning for the Eternal?60The Integrity of Arrangement of the WorldlyLife Forms61The Puzzle of the Creation and Dissolutionof the World64That Creation Is Itself Science66The Elements With Form Are Visible in This Universe67It Is the Same, Whenever You Look at It...68From the State of No Beginning With an End to aBeginning of Eternity69Changing of Circumstances Is the Nature of the World70Nature’s Mysterious Planning72Ultimately the Solution Will Come Through the Gnani78Moksha Is Certain: the Time for Moksha Is Not80Bringing an End to the Ego, The Vitarag Way82Regularity After Self-Realization84It Is One’s Nature to Ascend Higher, but When?85Downwards Because of the Ego86From Human to Lower Life-Form87Thereafter It Goes to Moksha91To Wander from Realm to Realm Is Nature’s Law93Illusion Creates Differences94The Divine and Extraordinary Intent of Jagat Kalyan97That Is When the Light of Gnan Shines99Only The Gnani Sheds Light on the Realityof the World99The Atma the World Understands102In the Vitarags’ Vision, the Atma Is...105Mishra Chetan Then Becomes Mechanical109Egoism, but Still in the Form of a Tool!109What Is ‘I’ as an Element?110Should You Know Atmagnan? Or...112...Which Is the Easier Method?112Even With Complete Ignorance, One CanFind the Atma!114The World - As It Is114Veda Is Theoretical, Science Is Practical115The Gnani Is Evidence of Moksha118Even the Word Is Temporary120Even the Means to Attain the Self Is Vikalp121Vikalp Foils the Final Opportunity122When One Becomes Intellect-Free, One CanBecome One With All124Sa-iti, Only Through Vignan – the Scienceof Separation125From Whom Do We Attain the Atma?126Just One Staircase but Different Steps128Neither Dualistic, Nor Non-Dualistic, The AtmaIs Dualistic – Non-Dualistic128Dualism – Non-Dualism; Both Are Dualities133When Does the Experience of Non-Dualism Occur?134Become Non-Dualistic: Rise Above Duality!135What Compassion Towards Understanding the Truth!136Insistence on a Single Viewpoint Obstructs Atmagnan137Brahma Is Satya, the World Is Also Satya, but...140You Will Have to Understand the Facts142Having Attained the Eternal Truth, the RelativeTruth Remains1444546With the Atma...39Here, a Guarantee of Just One More Life!39Illusion Is the Cause of Birth and Death40Forces of Discharge Cause Charging in Ignorance42Causes Result in the Cycles of Birth and Death43The Gnani Destroys the Cycle of Birth and Death44Five Senses Only for One More Life!46How Long Does the Relationship With the Subtle Body Last?46Who Is Stuck onto Whom?49The Atma Is Pure; Only the Belief Is Wrong51How Can There Be a Coming and Going for ThatWhich Is Eternal?53The First in the World…?54Who Will Remove the Tangled Belief inCircumstances?56That Is Why Gnanis Call It ‘No Beginning, No End’!59How Can There Be a Beginning for the Eternal?60The Integrity of Arrangement of the WorldlyLife Forms61The Puzzle of the Creation and Dissolutionof the World64That Creation Is Itself Science66The Elements With Form Are Visible in This Universe67It Is the Same, Whenever You Look at It...68From the State of No Beginning With an End to aBeginning of Eternity69Changing of Circumstances Is the Nature of the World70Nature’s Mysterious Planning72Ultimately the Solution Will Come Through the Gnani78Moksha Is Certain: the Time for Moksha Is Not80Bringing an End to the Ego, The Vitarag Way82Regularity After Self-Realization84It Is One’s Nature to Ascend Higher, but When?85Downwards Because of the Ego86From Human to Lower Life-Form87Thereafter It Goes to Moksha91To Wander from Realm to Realm Is Nature’s Law93Illusion Creates Differences94The Divine and Extraordinary Intent of Jagat Kalyan97That Is When the Light of Gnan Shines99Only The Gnani Sheds Light on the Realityof the World99The Atma the World Understands102In the Vitarags’ Vision, the Atma Is...105Mishra Chetan Then Becomes Mechanical109Egoism, but Still in the Form of a Tool!109What Is ‘I’ as an Element?110Should You Know Atmagnan? Or...112...Which Is the Easier Method?112Even With Complete Ignorance, One CanFind the Atma!114The World - As It Is114Veda Is Theoretical, Science Is Practical115The Gnani Is Evidence of Moksha118Even the Word Is Temporary120Even the Means to Attain the Self Is Vikalp121Vikalp Foils the Final Opportunity122When One Becomes Intellect-Free, One CanBecome One With All124Sa-iti, Only Through Vignan – the Scienceof Separation125From Whom Do We Attain the Atma?126Just One Staircase but Different Steps128Neither Dualistic, Nor Non-Dualistic, The AtmaIs Dualistic – Non-Dualistic128Dualism – Non-Dualism; Both Are Dualities133When Does the Experience of Non-Dualism Occur?134Become Non-Dualistic: Rise Above Duality!135What Compassion Towards Understanding the Truth!136Insistence on a Single Viewpoint Obstructs Atmagnan137Brahma Is Satya, the World Is Also Satya, but...140You Will Have to Understand the Facts142Having Attained the Eternal Truth, the RelativeTruth Remains1444748Ignorance Shrouds the Brahma146The Difference between the Vision of God andthe Vision of the Self147First Comes Brahmanishtha, Then Atmanishtha!147Brahma Is Even Beyond Words149Praise to Such a Vision!150The Self Is Attained at the Feet of the Gnani Purush151Change of Vision Leads to the Experience of One’sChanged State152One Is Shiva, but Because of Illusion, One Is Jiva153Only the Expert Can Cause the Separation154Jiva and Atma: Neither Separate Nor Connected156‘I’, ‘Bavo’, ‘Mangaldas’158Only That Awareness Is Needed158After Atmagnan, One Is Immortal160The Separation Disappears When Illusion Leaves161Keeping Separation of I-You With God Does NotLead to Self-Realization163…But the Path Is Indeed the Same164Doing-Suffering Is the State of the Jiva166When Does the Contradictory Worldly Life End?167Only The Gnani Can Free You from Wrong Beliefs168So Many Consequences of the Illusion170One Element: Many States171Worship The Liberated Purush, For Liberation175Attributes of the New Changed State175‘You’ Attain Your Own Completion, Through theNimit of the Gnani177Conviction of Parmatma Leads to the Absolute178Every Soul Is a Separate Entity Even in SiddhaKshetra179It Will Have to Be Scientific181There Is No Merging of Souls182If Light Merges With Light, What Is Left of You?184Constant Immersion in Eternal Bliss – That Is Moksha!185The Experience of the Bliss of the Self in Siddha-Gati186One by Nature but Separate in Existence188The Soul Cannot Be Divided189Can You Ever Make a Rupee from a Pai?191The Real Understanding of the Omnipresent193The Atma Fills the Space It is in196When The Prameya is The Universe, The Pramaata isParmatma!196Omnipresent, by Relative Viewpoint197Is There Atma Everywhere in the World?198Original Revelation Through the Exact Vision199Is the Atma Without Attributes or With Infinite Attributes?202In This World, Nothing Is Without Attributes203Ultimately, Only the Prakruti’s Gunas Afforded205Symbols from the Perspective of Worldly andNon-Worldly Vision207Moksha Means to Remain and Grow in the Attributeof the Self214Understanding Correctness from the Gnani214The Atma’s Bondage215When You Find the Giver of Moksha, You Find Moksha218Whose Intention Is to Attain Moksha?219….Even the Coming and Going Belong to the Ego220There Is No Pain for Atma Swaroop222Dualities Perpetuate Bondage224It Is Worth it, If Moksha Is Procured225Is Moksha Possible for Every ‘atma’?225Namo Siddhanam – The Goal of Worship227No Activity for Siddha; Nevertheless There Is Action228Siddha Kshetra – What a Marvel!229The Wondrous Seat of the Siddhas – The Ultimate Goal230Part TwoWho Am I? How Can I Know That?Now How Can the Cycle End?233The One That Sees the Temporary, Is the Permanent236What Are Your Qualities? Mistakes Even in That238The Hidden Self, Wondrous, Wondrous!240The Fundamental Mistake Is the Belief240Who Destroys This Illusion?2424748Ignorance Shrouds the Brahma146The Difference between the Vision of God andthe Vision of the Self147First Comes Brahmanishtha, Then Atmanishtha!147Brahma Is Even Beyond Words149Praise to Such a Vision!150The Self Is Attained at the Feet of the Gnani Purush151Change of Vision Leads to the Experience of One’sChanged State152One Is Shiva, but Because of Illusion, One Is Jiva153Only the Expert Can Cause the Separation154Jiva and Atma: Neither Separate Nor Connected156‘I’, ‘Bavo’, ‘Mangaldas’158Only That Awareness Is Needed158After Atmagnan, One Is Immortal160The Separation Disappears When Illusion Leaves161Keeping Separation of I-You With God Does NotLead to Self-Realization163…But the Path Is Indeed the Same164Doing-Suffering Is the State of the Jiva166When Does the Contradictory Worldly Life End?167Only The Gnani Can Free You from Wrong Beliefs168So Many Consequences of the Illusion170One Element: Many States171Worship The Liberated Purush, For Liberation175Attributes of the New Changed State175‘You’ Attain Your Own Completion, Through theNimit of the Gnani177Conviction of Parmatma Leads to the Absolute178Every Soul Is a Separate Entity Even in SiddhaKshetra179It Will Have to Be Scientific181There Is No Merging of Souls182If Light Merges With Light, What Is Left of You?184Constant Immersion in Eternal Bliss – That Is Moksha!185The Experience of the Bliss of the Self in Siddha-Gati186One by Nature but Separate in Existence188The Soul Cannot Be Divided189Can You Ever Make a Rupee from a Pai?191The Real Understanding of the Omnipresent193The Atma Fills the Space It is in196When The Prameya is The Universe, The Pramaata isParmatma!196Omnipresent, by Relative Viewpoint197Is There Atma Everywhere in the World?198Original Revelation Through the Exact Vision199Is the Atma Without Attributes or With Infinite Attributes?202In This World, Nothing Is Without Attributes203Ultimately, Only the Prakruti’s Gunas Afforded205Symbols from the Perspective of Worldly andNon-Worldly Vision207Moksha Means to Remain and Grow in the Attributeof the Self214Understanding Correctness from the Gnani214The Atma’s Bondage215When You Find the Giver of Moksha, You Find Moksha218Whose Intention Is to Attain Moksha?219….Even the Coming and Going Belong to the Ego220There Is No Pain for Atma Swaroop222Dualities Perpetuate Bondage224It Is Worth it, If Moksha Is Procured225Is Moksha Possible for Every ‘atma’?225Namo Siddhanam – The Goal of Worship227No Activity for Siddha; Nevertheless There Is Action228Siddha Kshetra – What a Marvel!229The Wondrous Seat of the Siddhas – The Ultimate Goal230Part TwoWho Am I? How Can I Know That?Now How Can the Cycle End?233The One That Sees the Temporary, Is the Permanent236What Are Your Qualities? Mistakes Even in That238The Hidden Self, Wondrous, Wondrous!240The Fundamental Mistake Is the Belief240Who Destroys This Illusion?2424950The Difference between Temporary and Permanent242Illusion of the Permanent in the State of the Temporary245The Absolute Soul Sends Light and Eternal Bliss246Worship of the Nature of the Self Procures Bliss of the Self247So Stands the Nature of the World 249Doership Itself Is Illusion249Not Heard, Not Believed, Not Known the Atma, Then...250The Gnani Dissolves Spiritual Darkness251The Gnani Gives the Experience of the Atma252Constant Uninterrupted Thoughts About the Atma Are Useful253He Cannot Be A Giver of Moksha If He DoesNot Give Moksha255Relentless Mistake in the Definition of the SelfThrough the Ages256All Instruments of Freedom Have Become a Bondage257‘I-ness’ Cannot End Through Your Efforts259Will the Endeavor to Understand be Fruitful?260Have You Received Another’s Mail?261Detachment to the Worldly Life Attained With Grace261Confusion Disperses With Complete Explanations263Forgetting the Self in Relation264The Belief About Atma Changed264Liberation Demands Siddhantik Understanding265A State of Bliss Prevails in the State of the Self267In This Time, Do Efforts Pay Off?268Not Action, but Awareness Needs to Be Changed268No Adversity in Development Towards the Atma269Take Advantage of the Living Gnani Purush269Seeking Without Understanding, To What Avail?270Obstructive Causes in Spirituality271Where Is the Spiritual Path in This World?272When Demerit Karma Is Destroyed, Your Awareness Increases275Zero Has No Value Without the One276The Atma Is Way Beyond the Observer of Thoughts279The Tangled State of Experience279Not the Believed but the Known Is Needed281Without The Gnani, Endless Efforts Are Futile284When Can You See Chetan in the World?285As the Belief of ‘I am this body’ Dispels, the Experienceof the Atma Is Attained288Wow! How Wonderful Is Atmagnan!289How Powerful the Knower Is!291The Invisible Realizes The Invisible292Experience Is Different; Self-Realization Is Different293Only the Experienced Gives One the Experience of the Atma293If It Does Not Last, It Is Not the Experience294Experience, Then Comes Conduct294The ‘I’ Attains the Pure Form of the Self295The Ego Exists As Long As There Is Ignorance295The Experience of the Atma; Completely Differentfrom All Other Experiences296That Is When the Facts Are Understood297Atmagnan from The Gnani298The Conviction of Attaining the Atma300Bound Through Belief…300Ultimately, Liberation Only Attained Through BecomingAtmaroop302The Body Goes, but Not The Belief305When the Belief Changes, the Karma Leave306Destruction of Belief With Belief307The Principle of Self-Realization Through anIndependent Vision307Atma and Non-Atma Separated Through The Gnani’s Vidhi308Attainment of Gnan Results Through Deep Intent308…Then Obstacles to Gnan Are Destroyed309That Is When the Atma Is Experienced in Conduct309Understanding the Word ‘Shuddhatma’311Shuddhatma Cannot Be Attained Through Saying ‘Sohum’312After Becoming Pure, One Can Say ‘Pure Soul’313Can You Light with a Real Lamp or a Picture of a Lamp?314Shuddhatma Cannot Be Attained Through Chanting315Factionalism Is the Unnatural State316When the Wrong Belief Goes, There Is Oneness With God317Say Shuddhatma – Pure Soul, for Purity to Prevail318The Intent of Doership Leads to Bondage of Karma320Pure: Impure – From Which Perspective?3214950The Difference between Temporary and Permanent242Illusion of the Permanent in the State of the Temporary245The Absolute Soul Sends Light and Eternal Bliss246Worship of the Nature of the Self Procures Bliss of the Self247So Stands the Nature of the World 249Doership Itself Is Illusion249Not Heard, Not Believed, Not Known the Atma, Then...250The Gnani Dissolves Spiritual Darkness251The Gnani Gives the Experience of the Atma252Constant Uninterrupted Thoughts About the Atma Are Useful253He Cannot Be A Giver of Moksha If He DoesNot Give Moksha255Relentless Mistake in the Definition of the SelfThrough the Ages256All Instruments of Freedom Have Become a Bondage257‘I-ness’ Cannot End Through Your Efforts259Will the Endeavor to Understand be Fruitful?260Have You Received Another’s Mail?261Detachment to the Worldly Life Attained With Grace261Confusion Disperses With Complete Explanations263Forgetting the Self in Relation264The Belief About Atma Changed264Liberation Demands Siddhantik Understanding265A State of Bliss Prevails in the State of the Self267In This Time, Do Efforts Pay Off?268Not Action, but Awareness Needs to Be Changed268No Adversity in Development Towards the Atma269Take Advantage of the Living Gnani Purush269Seeking Without Understanding, To What Avail?270Obstructive Causes in Spirituality271Where Is the Spiritual Path in This World?272When Demerit Karma Is Destroyed, Your Awareness Increases275Zero Has No Value Without the One276The Atma Is Way Beyond the Observer of Thoughts279The Tangled State of Experience279Not the Believed but the Known Is Needed281Without The Gnani, Endless Efforts Are Futile284When Can You See Chetan in the World?285As the Belief of ‘I am this body’ Dispels, the Experienceof the Atma Is Attained288Wow! How Wonderful Is Atmagnan!289How Powerful the Knower Is!291The Invisible Realizes The Invisible292Experience Is Different; Self-Realization Is Different293Only the Experienced Gives One the Experience of the Atma293If It Does Not Last, It Is Not the Experience294Experience, Then Comes Conduct294The ‘I’ Attains the Pure Form of the Self295The Ego Exists As Long As There Is Ignorance295The Experience of the Atma; Completely Differentfrom All Other Experiences296That Is When the Facts Are Understood297Atmagnan from The Gnani298The Conviction of Attaining the Atma300Bound Through Belief…300Ultimately, Liberation Only Attained Through BecomingAtmaroop302The Body Goes, but Not The Belief305When the Belief Changes, the Karma Leave306Destruction of Belief With Belief307The Principle of Self-Realization Through anIndependent Vision307Atma and Non-Atma Separated Through The Gnani’s Vidhi308Attainment of Gnan Results Through Deep Intent308…Then Obstacles to Gnan Are Destroyed309That Is When the Atma Is Experienced in Conduct309Understanding the Word ‘Shuddhatma’311Shuddhatma Cannot Be Attained Through Saying ‘Sohum’312After Becoming Pure, One Can Say ‘Pure Soul’313Can You Light with a Real Lamp or a Picture of a Lamp?314Shuddhatma Cannot Be Attained Through Chanting315Factionalism Is the Unnatural State316When the Wrong Belief Goes, There Is Oneness With God317Say Shuddhatma – Pure Soul, for Purity to Prevail318The Intent of Doership Leads to Bondage of Karma320Pure: Impure – From Which Perspective?32151Special note to the reader(cid:79) To facilitate reading and comprehension, the reader isasked to familiarize himself with some changes to keywords. Capitalized words and lowercase words are usedto denote two different states of being. Here are someexamples:(cid:79)  The word Self, with ‘S’, refers to the awakened Self orSoul, which is separate from the worldly soul (nonawakened self), written with ‘s’. The term Shuddhatma(pure Soul) is used for the awakened Self, after the GnanVidhi given by the Gnani Purush.Similarly, any word in the middle of a sentence, with aninitial capital or words in inverted commas, e.g. ‘You’,‘Your’, at the beginning of a sentence, refers to theawakened Self or Pragnya. This is an important distinctionfor the correct understanding of the difference between theawakened Self or the Self and the non-awakened self orthe worldly self.(cid:79)Wherever the name ‘Chandubhai’ is mentioned, thereader should substitute it with his or her name.(cid:79)   Dadashri uses the term ‘We’, ‘us’ or ‘our’ - meaning theGnani Purush.(cid:79)We welcome your comments, suggestions, correctionsand any constructive criticism of this translation so futureeditions can be improved. Please e-mail them to:engtranslation@dadabhagwan.org(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)‘What Is’ – That You Must Know (!) But...323‘What Is Not’- How Do We Know This?324One Attains Moksha Leisurely in the Lift of the Akram Path326Meeting the Gnani Is Itself the Required Qualification327The Desire to Know Gives the Ultimate Thing327The Incomparable Powers of the Akram Path330Oh! To Know The Atma Is To...331It Can Be Known Through the Gnani’s Gnan of Separation331The Worldly Life Ends Through Vitarag Vision333Without a Change in Vision, Everything Is Meaningless335Through the Grace of the Gnani, the Vision Will Change337Internalize the Senses or Become the Atma?338They Are All Mechanical Adjustments339The Ego Is the Cause of All Effects341How Can Doubts About the Pure Soul Be Dispelled?342The Vision Changes; Not the Atma343The Method for the Final Solution Is Different344Gnan Opens Up the Truth345Only Ignorance Influences the Entire Worldly Life347Who Is the Doer of Karma?352In Whom Does the Impurity Arise?354Worldly Atma Mistaken for The Absolute Atma355Discharge of Tangible Effects but Bondage Through Belief357Only the Living Gnani Can Illuminate the Truth360The Inexpressible Experience of the Original Element361The Atma Through the Vision of the Atma362The Goldsmith’s Vision Is Always on the Gold362The Scientific Differences between the Real and the Relative363The Gnani Illuminates the Siddhant Naturally365The Beginning and the End of the World in the Gnani’sKnowledge366When the Vision Becomes Pure, It Becomes Absorbedin the Pure367One’s Salvation Is Through the Awareness of theMain Self Form368(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)5251Special note to the reader(cid:79) To facilitate reading and comprehension, the reader isasked to familiarize himself with some changes to keywords. Capitalized words and lowercase words are usedto denote two different states of being. Here are someexamples:(cid:79)  The word Self, with ‘S’, refers to the awakened Self orSoul, which is separate from the worldly soul (nonawakened self), written with ‘s’. The term Shuddhatma(pure Soul) is used for the awakened Self, after the GnanVidhi given by the Gnani Purush.Similarly, any word in the middle of a sentence, with aninitial capital or words in inverted commas, e.g. ‘You’,‘Your’, at the beginning of a sentence, refers to theawakened Self or Pragnya. This is an important distinctionfor the correct understanding of the difference between theawakened Self or the Self and the non-awakened self orthe worldly self.(cid:79)Wherever the name ‘Chandubhai’ is mentioned, thereader should substitute it with his or her name.(cid:79)   Dadashri uses the term ‘We’, ‘us’ or ‘our’ - meaning theGnani Purush.(cid:79)We welcome your comments, suggestions, correctionsand any constructive criticism of this translation so futureeditions can be improved. Please e-mail them to:engtranslation@dadabhagwan.org(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)‘What Is’ – That You Must Know (!) But...323‘What Is Not’- How Do We Know This?324One Attains Moksha Leisurely in the Lift of the Akram Path326Meeting the Gnani Is Itself the Required Qualification327The Desire to Know Gives the Ultimate Thing327The Incomparable Powers of the Akram Path330Oh! To Know The Atma Is To...331It Can Be Known Through the Gnani’s Gnan of Separation331The Worldly Life Ends Through Vitarag Vision333Without a Change in Vision, Everything Is Meaningless335Through the Grace of the Gnani, the Vision Will Change337Internalize the Senses or Become the Atma?338They Are All Mechanical Adjustments339The Ego Is the Cause of All Effects341How Can Doubts About the Pure Soul Be Dispelled?342The Vision Changes; Not the Atma343The Method for the Final Solution Is Different344Gnan Opens Up the Truth345Only Ignorance Influences the Entire Worldly Life347Who Is the Doer of Karma?352In Whom Does the Impurity Arise?354Worldly Atma Mistaken for The Absolute Atma355Discharge of Tangible Effects but Bondage Through Belief357Only the Living Gnani Can Illuminate the Truth360The Inexpressible Experience of the Original Element361The Atma Through the Vision of the Atma362The Goldsmith’s Vision Is Always on the Gold362The Scientific Differences between the Real and the Relative363The Gnani Illuminates the Siddhant Naturally365The Beginning and the End of the World in the Gnani’sKnowledge366When the Vision Becomes Pure, It Becomes Absorbedin the Pure367One’s Salvation Is Through the Awareness of theMain Self Form368(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)52Aptavani-812Aptavani-8Aptavani - 8Part : OneWhat Is the Atma? What Must It BeLike?What Is the Atma?Questioner: What is the Atma (Soul)?Dadashri: The Atma means life energy (chetan).Questioner: So does life energy (chetan) mean Atmaand Atma means life energy (chetan)?Dadashri: No. Atma is just a word, and even chetan isjust a word, but we have to use these words for people torecognize them. Otherwise it is beyond words. Does one nothave to point them out? Or else you would not even recognizethem. How else could you recognize them? Is that not whypeople say, ‘go look for your Atma?! The Atma means the Self.To know, ‘Who you are’ is called Atma (Self). And it is that Selfwhich you need to recognize. When the wrong belief (of ‘I amChandubhai’) goes away and the right belief (‘I am the Self’) isestablished, this will be resolved. How else would this comeabout?What Could the Atma Be?Dadashri: Is the Atma an element (vastu), or is it non-element (avastu)?Questioner: Avastu.Dadashri: And what you see, is it element (vastu) ornon-element (avastu)?Questioner: The Atma is not visible, so it is non-matter(avastu); but matter or element (vastu) is visible, is it not?Dadashri: No. Let me explain vastu and avastu to you.Anything that is eternal (avinashi) is called a real element (vastu),and anything that is destructible and transient (vinashi) is calleda non-element (avastu). The Atma is in the form of Atma. TheAtma in the form of a real element (vastu) is the abode ofinfinite properties (guna)! Each real element (vastu) has its ownmatter (dravya), property (guna), and phases (paryaya). Anythingthat has matter-property-phase (dravya-guna-paryaya) isconsidered an eternal element (vastu). Vastu can be called eternal.Even Atma itself is an eternal element (vastu): it has itsown matter (dravya), its own properties (guna) and its ownphases (paryaya). And those phases come with origin (utpaad),a steady state (dhruva) and an end (vyaya). And all that isvisible to the eyes is not an eternal element (avastu), and isdestructible (vinashi). And the Atma (the Self) is eternal(avinashi); an eternal element (vastu). There are six such elements (tattva), and the world ismade up of these six elements. These six eternal elements areconstantly interacting with one another and undergoing changesthat give rise to circumstances and states of things (avastha). Itis through these circumstances that we see this world. Only thecircumstances are visible in this world.Know the Atma from the GnaniSo if there is anything worth knowing in this world, thenit is the Atma – the Self. And there may be only one or twopeople in this world who know the Atma. So no one can knowthe Atma. People can know everything, but they cannot knowthe Atma! And he who knows the Atma; will not take long toattain Keval Gnan (Absolute Knowledge).Aptavani-812Aptavani-8Aptavani - 8Part : OneWhat Is the Atma? What Must It BeLike?What Is the Atma?Questioner: What is the Atma (Soul)?Dadashri: The Atma means life energy (chetan).Questioner: So does life energy (chetan) mean Atmaand Atma means life energy (chetan)?Dadashri: No. Atma is just a word, and even chetan isjust a word, but we have to use these words for people torecognize them. Otherwise it is beyond words. Does one nothave to point them out? Or else you would not even recognizethem. How else could you recognize them? Is that not whypeople say, ‘go look for your Atma?! The Atma means the Self.To know, ‘Who you are’ is called Atma (Self). And it is that Selfwhich you need to recognize. When the wrong belief (of ‘I amChandubhai’) goes away and the right belief (‘I am the Self’) isestablished, this will be resolved. How else would this comeabout?What Could the Atma Be?Dadashri: Is the Atma an element (vastu), or is it non-element (avastu)?Questioner: Avastu.Dadashri: And what you see, is it element (vastu) ornon-element (avastu)?Questioner: The Atma is not visible, so it is non-matter(avastu); but matter or element (vastu) is visible, is it not?Dadashri: No. Let me explain vastu and avastu to you.Anything that is eternal (avinashi) is called a real element (vastu),and anything that is destructible and transient (vinashi) is calleda non-element (avastu). The Atma is in the form of Atma. TheAtma in the form of a real element (vastu) is the abode ofinfinite properties (guna)! Each real element (vastu) has its ownmatter (dravya), property (guna), and phases (paryaya). Anythingthat has matter-property-phase (dravya-guna-paryaya) isconsidered an eternal element (vastu). Vastu can be called eternal.Even Atma itself is an eternal element (vastu): it has itsown matter (dravya), its own properties (guna) and its ownphases (paryaya). And those phases come with origin (utpaad),a steady state (dhruva) and an end (vyaya). And all that isvisible to the eyes is not an eternal element (avastu), and isdestructible (vinashi). And the Atma (the Self) is eternal(avinashi); an eternal element (vastu). There are six such elements (tattva), and the world ismade up of these six elements. These six eternal elements areconstantly interacting with one another and undergoing changesthat give rise to circumstances and states of things (avastha). Itis through these circumstances that we see this world. Only thecircumstances are visible in this world.Know the Atma from the GnaniSo if there is anything worth knowing in this world, thenit is the Atma – the Self. And there may be only one or twopeople in this world who know the Atma. So no one can knowthe Atma. People can know everything, but they cannot knowthe Atma! And he who knows the Atma; will not take long toattain Keval Gnan (Absolute Knowledge).Aptavani-834Aptavani-8Now, if a person comes to know that Atma from theGnani Purush, he will attain the Atma; otherwise, it is notpossible to attain the Atma in any time period. The GnaniPurush has seen, known and experienced the Atma, andhimself lives in the Atma’s own natural state (swaroop)! So ifyou yourself know the Atma through such a Gnani Purush,you will get somewhere. When you sit with the Gnani Purushto know such an Atma, through the Gnan Vidhi (samayik) ofthe Gnani Purush, all your demerit karmas (paap) are burntto ashes. And only when your demerit karmas are destroyed,will the Atma come into your awareness (laksha); otherwiseit will not!That awareness will be there forever; whereas nothingelse in the world can be remembered forever, perhaps it will beremembered for a while, but will soon be forgotten. Here, yourdemerit karmas (paap) are cleansed by the Gnani Purush, soyou attain the awareness of the Atma!Who Has Doubts About the Existence of theSoul?Questioner: ‘Is there an Atma or not?’ Such doubts doarise.Dadashri: The Atma definitely does exist!Questioner: The foreign scientists have done all kinds ofresearch to determine whether or not there is an Atma, byputting a dying man in a glass case, to see if they could figureout how and from where, the soul (jiva; living being) leaves thebody. It did not seem that way to them. Their conclusion wasthat there is no such thing as soul (jiva) at all.Dadashri: No. But do they not make statements like,‘this is non-living’ (ajiva)? Is this table non-living or not? It isnon-living, right? So then, are the table and the man thesamething?Questioner: No. What they meant, was that there is nosuch thing as soul (jiva), that leaves – that is what they meant.Dadashri: Those scientists make a man; they do buildnew hearts, and they make everything, do they not? So if theymade a new man altogether, will that man be able to interact andfunction in the same way we do?Questioner: No, he would not.Dadashri: So then on what basis can they say that thereis no such thing as soul or living being (jiva)?Questioner: They just placed a dying man in a glasscase, but when the soul (jiva) was leaving, they did not seeanything so they concluded that there is no such thing as soul(jiva).Dadashri: It is like this: either someone with anunderstanding will deny it, or someone without an understandingwill deny it. Not every person will have doubts, will he! Andthose who do have doubts about whether there is a soul (jiva)or not, are souls themselves! The very person that doubts, ishimself a living being (soul), or else he would not have doubts!And none of all these other non-living (jada) things will havedoubts. If there is any doubting going on, it is the soul (jiva) thatdoes it; moreover, there is no other thing that can have doubts.Do you understand this?Will a person have any doubts after he dies? No, thenwhat is it that leaves? Does the heart stop? What must behappening?Questioner: A person dies because his heart stops.Dadashri: Yes, a person will die. He lives because hebreathes. The soul (jiva) within; lives because of the breathing.It will live as long as there is breath.Aptavani-834Aptavani-8Now, if a person comes to know that Atma from theGnani Purush, he will attain the Atma; otherwise, it is notpossible to attain the Atma in any time period. The GnaniPurush has seen, known and experienced the Atma, andhimself lives in the Atma’s own natural state (swaroop)! So ifyou yourself know the Atma through such a Gnani Purush,you will get somewhere. When you sit with the Gnani Purushto know such an Atma, through the Gnan Vidhi (samayik) ofthe Gnani Purush, all your demerit karmas (paap) are burntto ashes. And only when your demerit karmas are destroyed,will the Atma come into your awareness (laksha); otherwiseit will not!That awareness will be there forever; whereas nothingelse in the world can be remembered forever, perhaps it will beremembered for a while, but will soon be forgotten. Here, yourdemerit karmas (paap) are cleansed by the Gnani Purush, soyou attain the awareness of the Atma!Who Has Doubts About the Existence of theSoul?Questioner: ‘Is there an Atma or not?’ Such doubts doarise.Dadashri: The Atma definitely does exist!Questioner: The foreign scientists have done all kinds ofresearch to determine whether or not there is an Atma, byputting a dying man in a glass case, to see if they could figureout how and from where, the soul (jiva; living being) leaves thebody. It did not seem that way to them. Their conclusion wasthat there is no such thing as soul (jiva) at all.Dadashri: No. But do they not make statements like,‘this is non-living’ (ajiva)? Is this table non-living or not? It isnon-living, right? So then, are the table and the man thesamething?Questioner: No. What they meant, was that there is nosuch thing as soul (jiva), that leaves – that is what they meant.Dadashri: Those scientists make a man; they do buildnew hearts, and they make everything, do they not? So if theymade a new man altogether, will that man be able to interact andfunction in the same way we do?Questioner: No, he would not.Dadashri: So then on what basis can they say that thereis no such thing as soul or living being (jiva)?Questioner: They just placed a dying man in a glasscase, but when the soul (jiva) was leaving, they did not seeanything so they concluded that there is no such thing as soul(jiva).Dadashri: It is like this: either someone with anunderstanding will deny it, or someone without an understandingwill deny it. Not every person will have doubts, will he! Andthose who do have doubts about whether there is a soul (jiva)or not, are souls themselves! The very person that doubts, ishimself a living being (soul), or else he would not have doubts!And none of all these other non-living (jada) things will havedoubts. If there is any doubting going on, it is the soul (jiva) thatdoes it; moreover, there is no other thing that can have doubts.Do you understand this?Will a person have any doubts after he dies? No, thenwhat is it that leaves? Does the heart stop? What must behappening?Questioner: A person dies because his heart stops.Dadashri: Yes, a person will die. He lives because hebreathes. The soul (jiva) within; lives because of the breathing.It will live as long as there is breath.Aptavani-856Aptavani-8Questioner: A person dies when the essential body partsstop functioning. If that is true, then there is no such thing as anembodied soul (jiva).Dadashri: There is such a thing as soul (jiva)! A personis a soul (jiva), yet he has doubts about his own self. The one,having the doubt, is the soul (jiva) itself. The one, who has thedoubt about there not being life in the body, is himself the soul(jiva). If a person without a tongue in his mouth, says, ‘I do nothave a tongue in my mouth’, that itself proves that there is atongue in his mouth. Do you understand? That is why thestatement that there is doubt, is a contradiction. People say thatwhen a man dies, there is no such thing as the soul (jiva)! Theword itself raises doubt; a person has doubt. The doubt itselfproves that there is soul (jiva) there.If I sat down with the scientists, I would explain to themright away that it is the soul (jiva) that is speaking. Are youhaving a new kind of doubt? So there is definitely soul (jiva) inevery living entity! And do we not give examples like, ‘the jivagoes away’?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: And why do they have to numb an area whenthey give an injection? Why do they have to make it numb?Questioner: So that we do not feel any pain or sensation.Dadashri: They have to give an “injection” (anesthetic),to move the soul (jiva) away from that area. As long as the jivais there, one could not tolerate the pain of the “operation”(surgery). Do you understand?Existence of the Soul! Based on Which Qualities?Dadashri: Is there a difference between chetan (Soul,Self, life energy) and jada (non-living matter; non-Self) do youthink?Questioner: Of course.Dadashri: What sorts of intrinsic properties(gunadharma) do they have?Questioner: Chetan can move about and it has feelings.Dadashri: Even machines can move about. Scooters,engines and cars all move around, do they not? These fabricatedmechanical dolls, do they not also move? You cannot callsomething a living being (jiva), just because it moves around. Ifyou could recognize the Atma through its ability to move, theneven machines move as well. How else can you tell if somethinghas Atma?Questioner: We do all kinds of activities (kriya).Dadashri: All kinds of activities, even that is not helpful.Machines can do all sorts of activities (kriya).Questioner: Machines carry out activity, but they cannotdisplay sympathy (daya) or love (prem), can they?Dadashri: Yes, that is the difference. So, wherever thereis knowledge (gnan) and ignorance (agnan); if it is ignorance,it is ignorance, and if it is knowledge it is knowledge, but whereverthere is any knowledge or any ignorance or any kindness, thereis Atma there. You would call that the confirmation. Otherwise,even machines have motion and move about, do they not? Now if there is no kindness (daya), and the person cursesand swears, is the Atma present there?Questioner: The Atma is always there.Dadashri: So even when there is no mercy (daya), wouldthere be Atma there?Questioner: Yes, machines would not show feelings ofkindness or anger!Aptavani-856Aptavani-8Questioner: A person dies when the essential body partsstop functioning. If that is true, then there is no such thing as anembodied soul (jiva).Dadashri: There is such a thing as soul (jiva)! A personis a soul (jiva), yet he has doubts about his own self. The one,having the doubt, is the soul (jiva) itself. The one, who has thedoubt about there not being life in the body, is himself the soul(jiva). If a person without a tongue in his mouth, says, ‘I do nothave a tongue in my mouth’, that itself proves that there is atongue in his mouth. Do you understand? That is why thestatement that there is doubt, is a contradiction. People say thatwhen a man dies, there is no such thing as the soul (jiva)! Theword itself raises doubt; a person has doubt. The doubt itselfproves that there is soul (jiva) there.If I sat down with the scientists, I would explain to themright away that it is the soul (jiva) that is speaking. Are youhaving a new kind of doubt? So there is definitely soul (jiva) inevery living entity! And do we not give examples like, ‘the jivagoes away’?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: And why do they have to numb an area whenthey give an injection? Why do they have to make it numb?Questioner: So that we do not feel any pain or sensation.Dadashri: They have to give an “injection” (anesthetic),to move the soul (jiva) away from that area. As long as the jivais there, one could not tolerate the pain of the “operation”(surgery). Do you understand?Existence of the Soul! Based on Which Qualities?Dadashri: Is there a difference between chetan (Soul,Self, life energy) and jada (non-living matter; non-Self) do youthink?Questioner: Of course.Dadashri: What sorts of intrinsic properties(gunadharma) do they have?Questioner: Chetan can move about and it has feelings.Dadashri: Even machines can move about. Scooters,engines and cars all move around, do they not? These fabricatedmechanical dolls, do they not also move? You cannot callsomething a living being (jiva), just because it moves around. Ifyou could recognize the Atma through its ability to move, theneven machines move as well. How else can you tell if somethinghas Atma?Questioner: We do all kinds of activities (kriya).Dadashri: All kinds of activities, even that is not helpful.Machines can do all sorts of activities (kriya).Questioner: Machines carry out activity, but they cannotdisplay sympathy (daya) or love (prem), can they?Dadashri: Yes, that is the difference. So, wherever thereis knowledge (gnan) and ignorance (agnan); if it is ignorance,it is ignorance, and if it is knowledge it is knowledge, but whereverthere is any knowledge or any ignorance or any kindness, thereis Atma there. You would call that the confirmation. Otherwise,even machines have motion and move about, do they not? Now if there is no kindness (daya), and the person cursesand swears, is the Atma present there?Questioner: The Atma is always there.Dadashri: So even when there is no mercy (daya), wouldthere be Atma there?Questioner: Yes, machines would not show feelings ofkindness or anger!Aptavani-878Aptavani-8Dadashri: Yes, therefore it confirms that wherever theseexist, there is Atma. This tape-record may be speaking, but itdoes not possess any anger or greed, now does it?! It does noteven have feelings (laagani). So wherever there is feeling; thereis Atma.…But Whose Qualities Are They?Are feelings an attribute of the Atma or the body?Questioner: Of the Atma.Dadashri: Is that so?! So are anger-pride-deceit-greed(krodh-maan-maya-lobh), all qualities of the Atma?Questioner: Yes, the Atma must be the doer of all these.Dadashri: But people are trying to get rid of anger-pride-deceit-greed. If they are qualities of the Atma, then those qualitieswould never leave! And are people not trying to get rid ofanger-pride-deceit-greed?Questioner: They all try to get rid of them.Dadashri: But if they are qualities of the Atma, then noone can get rid of them, can they! If they did get rid of them,even the Atma would go away; therefore they are not the Atma’squalities.Questioner: Are they the body’s qualities?Dadashri: They are neither qualities of the body nor ofthe Atma. If you say they are qualities of the Atma, then anger-pride-deceit-greed would be considered weaknesses, and theAtma is the Parmatma (Absolute Soul). It does not have asingle quality of weakness whatsoever!And What Are the Attributes of Atma?Many people say, ‘the one that speaks within, is the Atma’.But the speaker cannot be living (jiva), nor can it even beBhagwan (God). It is a record that speaks. Even the speechthat is coming from me right now, is a record that is talking; ‘I’am not the one speaking. These are all records that are talking–tape-record! The original tape-record plays, and from that,another gets recorded, and another. So this is the first record, and then from that you canrecord as many as you want. Hence, this speech – this wholemachine that is running, eating, drinking, circulating blood –cannot be called jiva (soul). It is all mechanical. The soul (jiva)is a form of knowledge (gnan swaroop); knowledge is a formof light (prakash swaroop). The form of light that is presenthere does not exist anywhere else in any other form.If at night, someone gives you shrikhand (yoghurt pudding)in the dark, where would you put the shrikhand? Will it get intoyour eyes when you put it in your mouth? Or will it only go intoyour mouth?What do you think? Why are you not saying anything?Even if you were given shrikhand in pitch darkness, youwould only put it in your mouth, would you not? Then if someoneasks you what you ate, what will you tell him?Questioner: Shrikhand.Dadashri: And if someone asks you what is in theshrikhand, what will you tell him?Questioner: Yogurt and sugar.Dadashri: Yes, and if the yogurt was slightly off, wouldyou be able to tell?Questioner: Certainly.Dadashri: And you would know even if it is good?Questioner: Yes.Aptavani-878Aptavani-8Dadashri: Yes, therefore it confirms that wherever theseexist, there is Atma. This tape-record may be speaking, but itdoes not possess any anger or greed, now does it?! It does noteven have feelings (laagani). So wherever there is feeling; thereis Atma.…But Whose Qualities Are They?Are feelings an attribute of the Atma or the body?Questioner: Of the Atma.Dadashri: Is that so?! So are anger-pride-deceit-greed(krodh-maan-maya-lobh), all qualities of the Atma?Questioner: Yes, the Atma must be the doer of all these.Dadashri: But people are trying to get rid of anger-pride-deceit-greed. If they are qualities of the Atma, then those qualitieswould never leave! And are people not trying to get rid ofanger-pride-deceit-greed?Questioner: They all try to get rid of them.Dadashri: But if they are qualities of the Atma, then noone can get rid of them, can they! If they did get rid of them,even the Atma would go away; therefore they are not the Atma’squalities.Questioner: Are they the body’s qualities?Dadashri: They are neither qualities of the body nor ofthe Atma. If you say they are qualities of the Atma, then anger-pride-deceit-greed would be considered weaknesses, and theAtma is the Parmatma (Absolute Soul). It does not have asingle quality of weakness whatsoever!And What Are the Attributes of Atma?Many people say, ‘the one that speaks within, is the Atma’.But the speaker cannot be living (jiva), nor can it even beBhagwan (God). It is a record that speaks. Even the speechthat is coming from me right now, is a record that is talking; ‘I’am not the one speaking. These are all records that are talking–tape-record! The original tape-record plays, and from that,another gets recorded, and another. So this is the first record, and then from that you canrecord as many as you want. Hence, this speech – this wholemachine that is running, eating, drinking, circulating blood –cannot be called jiva (soul). It is all mechanical. The soul (jiva)is a form of knowledge (gnan swaroop); knowledge is a formof light (prakash swaroop). The form of light that is presenthere does not exist anywhere else in any other form.If at night, someone gives you shrikhand (yoghurt pudding)in the dark, where would you put the shrikhand? Will it get intoyour eyes when you put it in your mouth? Or will it only go intoyour mouth?What do you think? Why are you not saying anything?Even if you were given shrikhand in pitch darkness, youwould only put it in your mouth, would you not? Then if someoneasks you what you ate, what will you tell him?Questioner: Shrikhand.Dadashri: And if someone asks you what is in theshrikhand, what will you tell him?Questioner: Yogurt and sugar.Dadashri: Yes, and if the yogurt was slightly off, wouldyou be able to tell?Questioner: Certainly.Dadashri: And you would know even if it is good?Questioner: Yes.Aptavani-8910Aptavani-8Dadashri: Would you know if there was less sugar in it?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Would you also know if there was too muchsugar?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: How can you know all that in the dark ofnight? Could you tell in the dark? And then would you know ifthere were raisins and nuts in it? If there were a small cardamomseed in it, would you know?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: So everything that knows all this; is the soul(jiva).Questioner: People say that it is because of the sensorynerves that we perceive, and if there were not any sensorynerves, then we would not perceive.Dadashri: Yes, and if you did not have sensory nerves,you would not perceive things. But the soul (jiva) is the one thatknows. And if the connections between the nerves and the braincells are not functioning, then the soul will not know. But theone, who knows, is the jiva (living being). Do you understand?That which moves and walks, is machinery that movesand walks. Those properties are not in chetan (soul). What areits properties? It has infinite light of Knowledge (Gnan prakash),infinite light of Vision (Darshan prakash), infinite energy (anantshakti), and it is the abode of infinite bliss (anant sukh nudham).The Jiva Even Likes PleasureNow, who is looking for pleasure? Who does not likepain? Why does one not like pain? If this body were withoutjiva (soul) then pleasure and pain would be the same. Whywould that be? Have you ever thought about this? What haveyou thought?  No living being (jiva) likes pain, is that not a fact? Doesany living being like pain? If you put a lump of sugar out here,the ants will scurry around with excitement and take it away, butwhat if you put some gravel there instead? They would run off.Why is that? What do they like? Pleasure. Therefore, that whichdoes not like pain and looks for pleasure, is the jiva. The onethat moves around, walks about is not jiva.Where There Is Feeling, There Is Chetan(Life)Then that which feels, does it have feelings or not? Thatwhich has feelings is a jiva (living being). And the jiva (livingentity) itself is Atma; it is chetan itself, and it can also becomethe Absolute Soul (Parmatma)! When it becomes full andperfect, it becomes Parmatma (Absolute Soul).Do you understand? That, wherever there are any feelingsof any kind, therein lies the Atma, and decidedly there is chetan(life) present. Therefore, you should know that where there arefeelings, there is life (chetan) present. And if something does notshow feelings, then it has no life and therefore, it is anatma(without Atma). Even trees and leaves have feelings.Questioner: But a tree is a one-sensed organism(ekendriya).Dadashri: One-sensed (ekendriya) means it only has thefeeling of touch (sparsha), and it can display the feeling of touch.Every living entity (jiva) has feelings. Those that have feelings,clearly show the presence of Atma. It is not that the entity inwhich the feelings arise is itself the Atma, but that whereverthere are feelings, there is Atma. And where no feelings arise;there is no Atma.Aptavani-8910Aptavani-8Dadashri: Would you know if there was less sugar in it?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Would you also know if there was too muchsugar?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: How can you know all that in the dark ofnight? Could you tell in the dark? And then would you know ifthere were raisins and nuts in it? If there were a small cardamomseed in it, would you know?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: So everything that knows all this; is the soul(jiva).Questioner: People say that it is because of the sensorynerves that we perceive, and if there were not any sensorynerves, then we would not perceive.Dadashri: Yes, and if you did not have sensory nerves,you would not perceive things. But the soul (jiva) is the one thatknows. And if the connections between the nerves and the braincells are not functioning, then the soul will not know. But theone, who knows, is the jiva (living being). Do you understand?That which moves and walks, is machinery that movesand walks. Those properties are not in chetan (soul). What areits properties? It has infinite light of Knowledge (Gnan prakash),infinite light of Vision (Darshan prakash), infinite energy (anantshakti), and it is the abode of infinite bliss (anant sukh nudham).The Jiva Even Likes PleasureNow, who is looking for pleasure? Who does not likepain? Why does one not like pain? If this body were withoutjiva (soul) then pleasure and pain would be the same. Whywould that be? Have you ever thought about this? What haveyou thought?  No living being (jiva) likes pain, is that not a fact? Doesany living being like pain? If you put a lump of sugar out here,the ants will scurry around with excitement and take it away, butwhat if you put some gravel there instead? They would run off.Why is that? What do they like? Pleasure. Therefore, that whichdoes not like pain and looks for pleasure, is the jiva. The onethat moves around, walks about is not jiva.Where There Is Feeling, There Is Chetan(Life)Then that which feels, does it have feelings or not? Thatwhich has feelings is a jiva (living being). And the jiva (livingentity) itself is Atma; it is chetan itself, and it can also becomethe Absolute Soul (Parmatma)! When it becomes full andperfect, it becomes Parmatma (Absolute Soul).Do you understand? That, wherever there are any feelingsof any kind, therein lies the Atma, and decidedly there is chetan(life) present. Therefore, you should know that where there arefeelings, there is life (chetan) present. And if something does notshow feelings, then it has no life and therefore, it is anatma(without Atma). Even trees and leaves have feelings.Questioner: But a tree is a one-sensed organism(ekendriya).Dadashri: One-sensed (ekendriya) means it only has thefeeling of touch (sparsha), and it can display the feeling of touch.Every living entity (jiva) has feelings. Those that have feelings,clearly show the presence of Atma. It is not that the entity inwhich the feelings arise is itself the Atma, but that whereverthere are feelings, there is Atma. And where no feelings arise;there is no Atma.Aptavani-81112Aptavani-8…But the One That Feels Is the Pudgal (theNon-Self Complex)Now, what is Atma? It has no feelings or anything likethat. The Atma is only in the form of light! But from whereverthere are feelings, we can find the Atma.Questioner: So does it mean that chetan is the basis offeeling, or that chetan lies where the feelings arise?Dadashri: If we say that the basis of feelings is chetan(life energy), it creates another problem. The feelings arise becauseof the presence of chetan! So wherever there is feeling, thereis chetan.Questioner: The feeling that arises and manifests itself; isnot chetan that manifests, is it?Dadashri: It is the non-Self complex (pudgal) thatexpresses feelings, but because there is the presence of chetanthere, the feelings arise and pain is felt. So if you want to makea distinction between the chetan (soul, atma) and jada(inanimate, matter), then no feelings arise in this tape-record,therefore, there is no chetan (soul) in it.To Continuously Know Is the Nature of the SoulQuestioner: So is there a difference between chetan(soul) and matter?Dadashri: An enormous one! Chetan is invisible (aroopi);whereas matter is roopi, it is visible. Matter will decay, fall apart,dissipate and after a long time it will start to decompose. It issomething that you can see with your eyes, taste with yourtongue and hear with your ears; whereas chetan is the AbsoluteSoul (Parmatma)!Questioner: So what is the difference between the Self(Atma) and the non-Self (anatma)?Dadashri: They are different by their inherent properties(gunadharma). Does everything not have its own property?This gold has its own property; copper has its own property. Donot we recognize things by their properties?Questioner: Yes, we do.Dadashri: That is how the properties of the Atma andthe non-Self (anatma) are. They do have some of the sameproperties, however, in certain cases, some of their propertiesdiffer. The inherent nature (chaitanya swabhav) of the Self isnot found in anything else. Chaitanya swabhav meansKnowledge (Gnan) and Vision (Darshan).So, Knowledge and Vision are the innate qualities (guna)of the Atma (the Self). The inherent nature (swabhav) of theAtma is to continually know. That inherent nature of Knowingis not present in any inanimate (jada) thing. This attribute ofKnowing does not exist in this body. The inherent attribute(swabhav) of Knowing is that of the Atma, and that itself is theParmatma (Absolute Soul)!The Atma Is the Abode of Infinite PropertiesQuestioner: Does the Atma not possess Knowledge(Gnanvado) anyways?Dadashri: It is itself Knowledge. Not that it hasKnowledge; it is Knowledge itself! If we call it “Gnanvado(with Knowledge)”, it would mean that with (vado) andKnowledge (Gnan), are two separate things. Therefore, theAtma itself is Knowledge; it is light (prakash) itself! And it isbecause of this light that you are able to see all this. It is becauseof this light that all this is ‘seen’ (understood) everything, and‘known’ (experienced). It is because of this light, that one canunderstand everything and know everything.So the Atma is the Absolute Soul (Parmatma); the abodeAptavani-81112Aptavani-8…But the One That Feels Is the Pudgal (theNon-Self Complex)Now, what is Atma? It has no feelings or anything likethat. The Atma is only in the form of light! But from whereverthere are feelings, we can find the Atma.Questioner: So does it mean that chetan is the basis offeeling, or that chetan lies where the feelings arise?Dadashri: If we say that the basis of feelings is chetan(life energy), it creates another problem. The feelings arise becauseof the presence of chetan! So wherever there is feeling, thereis chetan.Questioner: The feeling that arises and manifests itself; isnot chetan that manifests, is it?Dadashri: It is the non-Self complex (pudgal) thatexpresses feelings, but because there is the presence of chetanthere, the feelings arise and pain is felt. So if you want to makea distinction between the chetan (soul, atma) and jada(inanimate, matter), then no feelings arise in this tape-record,therefore, there is no chetan (soul) in it.To Continuously Know Is the Nature of the SoulQuestioner: So is there a difference between chetan(soul) and matter?Dadashri: An enormous one! Chetan is invisible (aroopi);whereas matter is roopi, it is visible. Matter will decay, fall apart,dissipate and after a long time it will start to decompose. It issomething that you can see with your eyes, taste with yourtongue and hear with your ears; whereas chetan is the AbsoluteSoul (Parmatma)!Questioner: So what is the difference between the Self(Atma) and the non-Self (anatma)?Dadashri: They are different by their inherent properties(gunadharma). Does everything not have its own property?This gold has its own property; copper has its own property. Donot we recognize things by their properties?Questioner: Yes, we do.Dadashri: That is how the properties of the Atma andthe non-Self (anatma) are. They do have some of the sameproperties, however, in certain cases, some of their propertiesdiffer. The inherent nature (chaitanya swabhav) of the Self isnot found in anything else. Chaitanya swabhav meansKnowledge (Gnan) and Vision (Darshan).So, Knowledge and Vision are the innate qualities (guna)of the Atma (the Self). The inherent nature (swabhav) of theAtma is to continually know. That inherent nature of Knowingis not present in any inanimate (jada) thing. This attribute ofKnowing does not exist in this body. The inherent attribute(swabhav) of Knowing is that of the Atma, and that itself is theParmatma (Absolute Soul)!The Atma Is the Abode of Infinite PropertiesQuestioner: Does the Atma not possess Knowledge(Gnanvado) anyways?Dadashri: It is itself Knowledge. Not that it hasKnowledge; it is Knowledge itself! If we call it “Gnanvado(with Knowledge)”, it would mean that with (vado) andKnowledge (Gnan), are two separate things. Therefore, theAtma itself is Knowledge; it is light (prakash) itself! And it isbecause of this light that you are able to see all this. It is becauseof this light that all this is ‘seen’ (understood) everything, and‘known’ (experienced). It is because of this light, that one canunderstand everything and know everything.So the Atma is the Absolute Soul (Parmatma); the abodeAptavani-81314Aptavani-8of infinite qualities (guna). It has so many qualities that youcannot even begin to describe them! The Atma is the abode ofits innate natural qualities (swabhavik guna), so that those qualities(guna) are such that they will never ever change. There is infiniteKnowledge (anant Gnan), there is infinite Vision (anantDarshan), infinite energy (anant shakti), it is the abode ofinfinite bliss (anant sukh), its nature is that nothing can ever hurtit, nor does it ever hurt anything (avyabaadh swaroop). Itpossesses all kinds of such innate qualities.When Will These Attributes of the AtmaManifest?Not even for a second have you attained a single one. Atthe moment, you are experiencing the innate qualities (guna) ofthe mind-speech-body complex (the prakruti). You will attainthe innate qualities according to your belief. If you remain asChandubhai, you will attain the qualities of the prakruti, and if‘You’ become the pure Self (shuddha chaitanya), then ‘Your’own natural qualities (swabhavik guna) will arise. So sit whereveryou want to.Where there is no presence of the Atma’s innate qualities(guna); there is no Atma. As long as this gold maintains its owninnate property (guna), it is gold, and it does not assume theproperty of anything else. All the properties (guna) that you seein the world, belong to something else; there is no Self (Atma)there. There, the Self remains the Knower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta), but it is not a part of it. The Atma has not becomeintegrated in this. The Atma is not mixed; the Atma is immiscible(nirbhedda)!How Can You Recognize The Soul?Questioner: Can we see the Atma? Or is it just animagination (kalpana)?Dadashri: You cannot see air, and yet do you not knowthat it is air? You can smell perfume, but can you see the fragrance?But even then, are you not convinced that it is perfume? That ishow you can be convinced that there is Atma. Just as yourecognize perfume by its fragrance; from the Atma’s bliss youcan recognize the Atma, and then you will see this world as itis. And from that, you will be convinced that the Atma hasinfinite qualities: infinite Knowledge, infinite Vision, infinite Energy,infinite bliss, so many qualities! The Atma itself is the AbsoluteSoul (Parmatma), but one has to have the awareness of this.Once you have this awareness, all the qualities (guna) will becomeapparent. The Atma has infinite viewpoints (anant bhed) and isthe abode of infinite qualities! Until now, you have not evenknown a single one of its innate qualities!The Atma is an element that spans throughout past, presentand future time. Although it is the abode of infinite bliss, peopleare out looking for pleasure in mangoes (petty things); outshopping for mangoes and “market material” (things that have novalue). What you can see with your eyes, hear with your ears,smell with your nose, taste with your tongue, all that you cantouch, is all “market material”.Familiarity With The Gnani Brings InfiniteEnergiesQuestioner: Does the Atma have infinite energy(shakti)?Dadashri: Yes, but that energy should manifest through aGnani Purush. Just as when you went to school to learn. Yourknowledge was already there within you, but they brought it tolight. In the same way, from the Gnani Purush, your energieswill arise. There is infinite energy, but it lies “undermine” (underthe surface); deep within. ‘We’ expose those energies for you.There is tremendous energy lying within. Not just in you, butsuch energy lies in every living being, but what can one do?There are layers and layers that cover it up.Aptavani-81314Aptavani-8of infinite qualities (guna). It has so many qualities that youcannot even begin to describe them! The Atma is the abode ofits innate natural qualities (swabhavik guna), so that those qualities(guna) are such that they will never ever change. There is infiniteKnowledge (anant Gnan), there is infinite Vision (anantDarshan), infinite energy (anant shakti), it is the abode ofinfinite bliss (anant sukh), its nature is that nothing can ever hurtit, nor does it ever hurt anything (avyabaadh swaroop). Itpossesses all kinds of such innate qualities.When Will These Attributes of the AtmaManifest?Not even for a second have you attained a single one. Atthe moment, you are experiencing the innate qualities (guna) ofthe mind-speech-body complex (the prakruti). You will attainthe innate qualities according to your belief. If you remain asChandubhai, you will attain the qualities of the prakruti, and if‘You’ become the pure Self (shuddha chaitanya), then ‘Your’own natural qualities (swabhavik guna) will arise. So sit whereveryou want to.Where there is no presence of the Atma’s innate qualities(guna); there is no Atma. As long as this gold maintains its owninnate property (guna), it is gold, and it does not assume theproperty of anything else. All the properties (guna) that you seein the world, belong to something else; there is no Self (Atma)there. There, the Self remains the Knower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta), but it is not a part of it. The Atma has not becomeintegrated in this. The Atma is not mixed; the Atma is immiscible(nirbhedda)!How Can You Recognize The Soul?Questioner: Can we see the Atma? Or is it just animagination (kalpana)?Dadashri: You cannot see air, and yet do you not knowthat it is air? You can smell perfume, but can you see the fragrance?But even then, are you not convinced that it is perfume? That ishow you can be convinced that there is Atma. Just as yourecognize perfume by its fragrance; from the Atma’s bliss youcan recognize the Atma, and then you will see this world as itis. And from that, you will be convinced that the Atma hasinfinite qualities: infinite Knowledge, infinite Vision, infinite Energy,infinite bliss, so many qualities! The Atma itself is the AbsoluteSoul (Parmatma), but one has to have the awareness of this.Once you have this awareness, all the qualities (guna) will becomeapparent. The Atma has infinite viewpoints (anant bhed) and isthe abode of infinite qualities! Until now, you have not evenknown a single one of its innate qualities!The Atma is an element that spans throughout past, presentand future time. Although it is the abode of infinite bliss, peopleare out looking for pleasure in mangoes (petty things); outshopping for mangoes and “market material” (things that have novalue). What you can see with your eyes, hear with your ears,smell with your nose, taste with your tongue, all that you cantouch, is all “market material”.Familiarity With The Gnani Brings InfiniteEnergiesQuestioner: Does the Atma have infinite energy(shakti)?Dadashri: Yes, but that energy should manifest through aGnani Purush. Just as when you went to school to learn. Yourknowledge was already there within you, but they brought it tolight. In the same way, from the Gnani Purush, your energieswill arise. There is infinite energy, but it lies “undermine” (underthe surface); deep within. ‘We’ expose those energies for you.There is tremendous energy lying within. Not just in you, butsuch energy lies in every living being, but what can one do?There are layers and layers that cover it up.Aptavani-81516Aptavani-8Questioner: Is there any relation between the Atma’senergies (shakti) and the energies of the body?Dadashri: The two energies are different.Questioner: Do they affect each other?Dadashri: Yes, of course they do! The energies of thebody complex have put a stop to the energy of the Atma. Whenthe energy of body complex is in excess, one’s bestial qualitiesincrease.Questioner: And what if the energy of the Atma is greater?Dadashri: Bestiality decreases and humanity increases.Questioner: Then what do we do to try and get theenergy (shakti) of the Atma?Dadashri: The energy (shakti) of the Atma is alreadythere inside! The energy (shakti) of the Atma is the energy ofthe Absolute Soul (Parmatma). And yet the Absolute Soul doesnot even have a speck of energy to break a single wafer (paapad),in spite of being the owner of infinite energy!Questioner: It does not make any sense to me.Dadashri: It has to make sense. Because if it does notmake sense, it means that there is a slight misunderstanding. Ifit does not make sense, then it is not Gnan at all, and as longas there is ignorance (agnan) it will not make sense. Otherwise,it has to make sense, but for that, it requires you to take sometime and become familiar with it.Questioner: In what way?Dadashri: By coming here and taking some time outespecially to sit with the Gnani Purush, who will familiarize you.The Self has infinite energy of Knowledge (Gnan shakti),it is not as though it just has one or two energies (shakti). It ison account of the Atma’s infinite energy of Knowledge, thatknowledge of astrology, law, medicine, and all other knowledgehas been discovered. The energy of Knowledge is so astounding,that it has the ability to expose all the subjects inherent in eachknowledge. Therefore, the Atma is the owner of infinite energy.It has infinite energy of Knowledge (Gnan shakti), and infiniteenergy of the Self (virya shakti). Such a magnificent array ofenergies that the Parmatma displays!Patel Is the Neighbor and the Self Is in theParmatmaQuestioner: What does the Atma look like? Does itappear as a brilliant light (tejasvi), or is it in some other formor shape (aakruti)?Dadashri: It is neither with form (aakruti), nor is itformless (niraakruti). Formless and form are all man’simagination; an intellectual subject. The Atma is nothing but theAtma; it is in the form of light (prakash swaroop). It is a kindof light that needs no origin or support. That is the radiance ofthe Atma’s light! It can even travel through mountains; that ishow the Atma is! And that is the kind of Atma in which ‘I’reside! That is why, should someone verbally abuse or beat thisA. M. Patel (Dada’s worldly name); it would not affect ‘me’. Iam separate; Patel is separate! Patel is the neighbor and the onecarrying out interactions in the world (vyavahar) is Patel.Atma: Sakaari (With Form) or Nirakari(Without Form)Questioner: It is said that God is the abode of light(tejtej na ambaar); faultless, free from ignorance and darkness;free of karma (niranjan) and shapeless (nirakari).Dadashri: And God also has a shape (sakaari).Questioner: You say it like this and you also say it likethat.Aptavani-81516Aptavani-8Questioner: Is there any relation between the Atma’senergies (shakti) and the energies of the body?Dadashri: The two energies are different.Questioner: Do they affect each other?Dadashri: Yes, of course they do! The energies of thebody complex have put a stop to the energy of the Atma. Whenthe energy of body complex is in excess, one’s bestial qualitiesincrease.Questioner: And what if the energy of the Atma is greater?Dadashri: Bestiality decreases and humanity increases.Questioner: Then what do we do to try and get theenergy (shakti) of the Atma?Dadashri: The energy (shakti) of the Atma is alreadythere inside! The energy (shakti) of the Atma is the energy ofthe Absolute Soul (Parmatma). And yet the Absolute Soul doesnot even have a speck of energy to break a single wafer (paapad),in spite of being the owner of infinite energy!Questioner: It does not make any sense to me.Dadashri: It has to make sense. Because if it does notmake sense, it means that there is a slight misunderstanding. Ifit does not make sense, then it is not Gnan at all, and as longas there is ignorance (agnan) it will not make sense. Otherwise,it has to make sense, but for that, it requires you to take sometime and become familiar with it.Questioner: In what way?Dadashri: By coming here and taking some time outespecially to sit with the Gnani Purush, who will familiarize you.The Self has infinite energy of Knowledge (Gnan shakti),it is not as though it just has one or two energies (shakti). It ison account of the Atma’s infinite energy of Knowledge, thatknowledge of astrology, law, medicine, and all other knowledgehas been discovered. The energy of Knowledge is so astounding,that it has the ability to expose all the subjects inherent in eachknowledge. Therefore, the Atma is the owner of infinite energy.It has infinite energy of Knowledge (Gnan shakti), and infiniteenergy of the Self (virya shakti). Such a magnificent array ofenergies that the Parmatma displays!Patel Is the Neighbor and the Self Is in theParmatmaQuestioner: What does the Atma look like? Does itappear as a brilliant light (tejasvi), or is it in some other formor shape (aakruti)?Dadashri: It is neither with form (aakruti), nor is itformless (niraakruti). Formless and form are all man’simagination; an intellectual subject. The Atma is nothing but theAtma; it is in the form of light (prakash swaroop). It is a kindof light that needs no origin or support. That is the radiance ofthe Atma’s light! It can even travel through mountains; that ishow the Atma is! And that is the kind of Atma in which ‘I’reside! That is why, should someone verbally abuse or beat thisA. M. Patel (Dada’s worldly name); it would not affect ‘me’. Iam separate; Patel is separate! Patel is the neighbor and the onecarrying out interactions in the world (vyavahar) is Patel.Atma: Sakaari (With Form) or Nirakari(Without Form)Questioner: It is said that God is the abode of light(tejtej na ambaar); faultless, free from ignorance and darkness;free of karma (niranjan) and shapeless (nirakari).Dadashri: And God also has a shape (sakaari).Questioner: You say it like this and you also say it likethat.Aptavani-81718Aptavani-8Dadashri: “By relative viewpoint”, God has a form(sakaari), and “by real viewpoint”, God is formless (nirakari).Questioner: Where do we go to learn this beyond-the-world (alaukik) language?Dadashri: You learn it right here!Your name is Chandubhai, even when you were little, it wasChandubhai, and after you got married, is it still not Chandubhai?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Then whose husband did you become? Basedon what? Were you a husband before?Questioner: No, I was not before.Dadashri: But are you not one and the same? That isexactly what I am saying, that when you meet a nimit (a personinstrumental in an event), it is because of that relationship thatyou are called husband. This is relative talk. That is how Godbecomes with form (sakaar), on account of this relationship;whereas without any relationship, God is formless (nirakari).So if you want to worship the formless God and if youwant to know the formless, then you should go to a God thathas form. The formless God is not visible to the eyes, and youwill not be able to understand him with your intellect (buddhi).There is no way that you will be able to understand the formless,but you should go to the God that has form, in whom the formlessGod is manifest.Here amongst humans, whom can you consider God inhuman form? The Gnani Purush! In whose human form ismanifest the flawless and the formless? He is called the manifestGod (sakaar Bhagwan)!Questioner: But if I want to imagine the Atma’s form,how should I imagine it?Dadashri: You do not have to imagine its form. Instead,you just have to sit with a God who has shape and form (theOne in whom God has manifested). The God with form is himselfthe form of the Atma! The Atmagnani, who has a body, iscalled a God with form (sakaari Bhagwan). That is how youshould imagine it, and with that you worship his entire temple(his body in which God has manifested). Otherwise, the Atmahas no form whatsoever. Its formless nature, you will have todiscover from the Gnani Purush! Thereafter, you willcomprehend its nature and it will fit (make sense), so that youwill never forget it.So the Atma has no form; it is formless. Nevertheless, bynature what is the Atma like? Whichever body it is in, it willassume its form; it is in the form of the body it occupies. Butthere in the realm of Liberated Souls (Siddha gati), in the laststage of its form, a third of its form is reduced. Therefore, onlytwo-thirds of its form remains in the final life before liberation(charam deha).So the body coming from the fifth ara (present age of thetime-cycle) is vastly different to the body that comes from thethird ara (age of the time cycle). The height there is differentfrom the height of this era. But the form that arrives at the realmof the Liberated Souls (Siddha gati) will be according to thefinal body through which moksha is attained (charam sharira).But the Atma is formless (nirakar)!Questioner: Is there anything like a shadow over there?What is over there?Dadashri: No, there is nothing like shadow over there.There is nothing like that out there. Shadow is the non-Self bodycomplex (pudgal).Questioner: If we move our hands about in the air andcatch nothing, when we do the same in final liberation (moksha),would we hit anything?Aptavani-81718Aptavani-8Dadashri: “By relative viewpoint”, God has a form(sakaari), and “by real viewpoint”, God is formless (nirakari).Questioner: Where do we go to learn this beyond-the-world (alaukik) language?Dadashri: You learn it right here!Your name is Chandubhai, even when you were little, it wasChandubhai, and after you got married, is it still not Chandubhai?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Then whose husband did you become? Basedon what? Were you a husband before?Questioner: No, I was not before.Dadashri: But are you not one and the same? That isexactly what I am saying, that when you meet a nimit (a personinstrumental in an event), it is because of that relationship thatyou are called husband. This is relative talk. That is how Godbecomes with form (sakaar), on account of this relationship;whereas without any relationship, God is formless (nirakari).So if you want to worship the formless God and if youwant to know the formless, then you should go to a God thathas form. The formless God is not visible to the eyes, and youwill not be able to understand him with your intellect (buddhi).There is no way that you will be able to understand the formless,but you should go to the God that has form, in whom the formlessGod is manifest.Here amongst humans, whom can you consider God inhuman form? The Gnani Purush! In whose human form ismanifest the flawless and the formless? He is called the manifestGod (sakaar Bhagwan)!Questioner: But if I want to imagine the Atma’s form,how should I imagine it?Dadashri: You do not have to imagine its form. Instead,you just have to sit with a God who has shape and form (theOne in whom God has manifested). The God with form is himselfthe form of the Atma! The Atmagnani, who has a body, iscalled a God with form (sakaari Bhagwan). That is how youshould imagine it, and with that you worship his entire temple(his body in which God has manifested). Otherwise, the Atmahas no form whatsoever. Its formless nature, you will have todiscover from the Gnani Purush! Thereafter, you willcomprehend its nature and it will fit (make sense), so that youwill never forget it.So the Atma has no form; it is formless. Nevertheless, bynature what is the Atma like? Whichever body it is in, it willassume its form; it is in the form of the body it occupies. Butthere in the realm of Liberated Souls (Siddha gati), in the laststage of its form, a third of its form is reduced. Therefore, onlytwo-thirds of its form remains in the final life before liberation(charam deha).So the body coming from the fifth ara (present age of thetime-cycle) is vastly different to the body that comes from thethird ara (age of the time cycle). The height there is differentfrom the height of this era. But the form that arrives at the realmof the Liberated Souls (Siddha gati) will be according to thefinal body through which moksha is attained (charam sharira).But the Atma is formless (nirakar)!Questioner: Is there anything like a shadow over there?What is over there?Dadashri: No, there is nothing like shadow over there.There is nothing like that out there. Shadow is the non-Self bodycomplex (pudgal).Questioner: If we move our hands about in the air andcatch nothing, when we do the same in final liberation (moksha),would we hit anything?Aptavani-81920Aptavani-8Dadashri: No. If you move your hands around like this,you would not catch anything in your hand. Even if you wave aburning torch through it, it will not burn the Atma. And if youmove your hand through it, the Atma does not touch your hand.That is what the Atma is like. If you rubbed ice over that Atma,it would not turn cold, and if you put a sword through it, it willnot be cut.Questioner: Should it not have some sort of form eventhen?Dadashri: It is a formless form (nirakari aakaar), aflawless, formless form (niranjan nirakari-aakaar). Its form isnot what you imagine it to be. It has its own natural form.Where in the Body Is the Soul Not Present?Questioner: The Atma does not appear on an x-ray, norcan it be captured in photography or any other way.Dadashri: Yes, the Atma is very subtle (sookshma);therefore it is not palpable! It cannot be caught on camera, noris it visible to the eyes. You cannot even see it through amicroscope, binoculars or any other instrument. You cannot seeit with anything; that is how subtle it is.Questioner: So I wonder where the Atma could be.Dadashri: Even if it were surrounded by flames, the flameswould not touch it. That is how subtle it is.Questioner: But where is it located in the body?Dadashri: The question is, where is the Atma not locatedin the body? The Atma is not in the hair, and in the nails; it isnot in the part of the nail that we clip. Everywhere else in thebody, there is Atma. So you do not have to ask, where theAtma is in the body, but you need to ask, where in the body theAtma is not.There is no Atma in the part of hair we cut off. If someonecut your hair in your sleep, you would not know it, becausethere is no Atma there. But in the places where there is Atma,you would feel the prick of a pin right away.Questioner: Generally, is Atma not in the brain? And isit not because of the nerves that we feel the pin prick?Dadashri: No. The Atma is in the entire body. There isonly the brain in the head, which is machinery. It is a tool thatprovides internal information. The Atma exists throughout thebody. If a thorn slightly pricked you on the foot, would you notimmediately feel it?So what you see is indeed a “photo” (image) of theAtma. The only thing is, that it is covered up with layers.Otherwise it is the same photo. The Atma’s photo then, remainsthe same.So you know that the Atma is present, in whichever partof the body you poke a pin and you feel it. Would you not evenfeel it, if someone poked you with a pin in the night? When youfeel pain anywhere on the body, from a pin prick, it is the Atmathat knows it. Or else, if the Atma has gone, no matter howmany times you poked the body with a pin, Chandubhai wouldnot utter a word or flinch at all.Questioner: Can we say that the Atma feels pain?Dadashri: The Atma can never feel pain. If you put aburning flame on ice, will it burn the ice?Questioner: It does not hurt when we cut our hair, sodoes that mean the Atma is not there?Dadashri: No, it is not there.Questioner: So where we feel pain, the Atma is there?Dadashri: Yes, there is Atma there.Aptavani-81920Aptavani-8Dadashri: No. If you move your hands around like this,you would not catch anything in your hand. Even if you wave aburning torch through it, it will not burn the Atma. And if youmove your hand through it, the Atma does not touch your hand.That is what the Atma is like. If you rubbed ice over that Atma,it would not turn cold, and if you put a sword through it, it willnot be cut.Questioner: Should it not have some sort of form eventhen?Dadashri: It is a formless form (nirakari aakaar), aflawless, formless form (niranjan nirakari-aakaar). Its form isnot what you imagine it to be. It has its own natural form.Where in the Body Is the Soul Not Present?Questioner: The Atma does not appear on an x-ray, norcan it be captured in photography or any other way.Dadashri: Yes, the Atma is very subtle (sookshma);therefore it is not palpable! It cannot be caught on camera, noris it visible to the eyes. You cannot even see it through amicroscope, binoculars or any other instrument. You cannot seeit with anything; that is how subtle it is.Questioner: So I wonder where the Atma could be.Dadashri: Even if it were surrounded by flames, the flameswould not touch it. That is how subtle it is.Questioner: But where is it located in the body?Dadashri: The question is, where is the Atma not locatedin the body? The Atma is not in the hair, and in the nails; it isnot in the part of the nail that we clip. Everywhere else in thebody, there is Atma. So you do not have to ask, where theAtma is in the body, but you need to ask, where in the body theAtma is not.There is no Atma in the part of hair we cut off. If someonecut your hair in your sleep, you would not know it, becausethere is no Atma there. But in the places where there is Atma,you would feel the prick of a pin right away.Questioner: Generally, is Atma not in the brain? And isit not because of the nerves that we feel the pin prick?Dadashri: No. The Atma is in the entire body. There isonly the brain in the head, which is machinery. It is a tool thatprovides internal information. The Atma exists throughout thebody. If a thorn slightly pricked you on the foot, would you notimmediately feel it?So what you see is indeed a “photo” (image) of theAtma. The only thing is, that it is covered up with layers.Otherwise it is the same photo. The Atma’s photo then, remainsthe same.So you know that the Atma is present, in whichever partof the body you poke a pin and you feel it. Would you not evenfeel it, if someone poked you with a pin in the night? When youfeel pain anywhere on the body, from a pin prick, it is the Atmathat knows it. Or else, if the Atma has gone, no matter howmany times you poked the body with a pin, Chandubhai wouldnot utter a word or flinch at all.Questioner: Can we say that the Atma feels pain?Dadashri: The Atma can never feel pain. If you put aburning flame on ice, will it burn the ice?Questioner: It does not hurt when we cut our hair, sodoes that mean the Atma is not there?Dadashri: No, it is not there.Questioner: So where we feel pain, the Atma is there?Dadashri: Yes, there is Atma there.Aptavani-82122 Aptavani-8Questioner: So if it is affected by pain and pleasure, thendoes it not become worldly (sansari)?Dadashri: No. The Atma does not become worldly(sansari). It remains in its original state. It is the atma that youunderstand, that has become worldly. What you consider to bethe Atma, is that which has become worldly (sansari), and it isthis atma that is mechanical. So as long as you put petrol (fuel)in it, it will work; otherwise it stops. Within half an hour to anhour, if you kept your nose pinched, the machine would stop.That is why people believe that the mechanical atma is theAtma. They have never seen the real Atma, nor have they evenheard about the real Atma, so they try to still (sthir) themechanical atma. But the mechanical can never be stilled.So there is no Atma in the hair that we cut, and the extranail that we clip. When you cut your nail, in the area that stings,there is Atma. Moreover, the Atma is present throughout theentire body.Questioner: But in yogic scriptures, it says that the Atmais in the brahmarandhra (the aperture at the crown of head).Dadashri: All that is fine for yogic scripture. Do you wantto know the truth? Do you want to know about that which isworldly (laukik) or about that which is not of this world(alaukik)? There are two kinds of knowledge: one that worksin the world and the other is the knowledge of reality (vaastavik).Do you wish to know the real or the worldly?Questioner: I want to know both of them.Dadashri: If you want to know the worldly (laukik)knowledge; then the Atma is located in the heart, and if youwantto know the real (alaukik) knowledge, then the Atma is foundthroughout the body. If you want to know the worldly (laukik),then this world has been created by God, and if you want toknow the real (alaukik), then God has not created this world.Questioner: It is also said that the Atma in the heart, isthe size of a thumb.Dadashri: No. There is no substance whatsoever in allthose conceptions.Belief Versus FactQuestioner: But there is a statement in the Upanishad:Angushtha maatra praman –If you want to see the Atma’simage in your heart, meditate so that you can see it as the sizeof your thumb.Dadashri: It is not a scientific statement. If it was scientific,I would go on. It is just a way of making still and steady, aperson who is at a certain spiritual level. It is not entirely wrong,how can you say it is wrong? If something can make a personstill, you cannot say that it is wrong! So the heart is where thegross mind (stool mun) is located, and it progresses from there.If you take this to heart, you can progress further. And whatprevents you from moving ahead? The intellect (buddhi) doesnot allow you to progress, but what you hold in your heart willlet you move ahead. If you want to go to final liberation(moksha), then you can do it with the help of your heart. Soyour heart will be needed. The intellect will not do.They have only managed to scare people by saying thatthe Atma is the size of the thumb. The Atma is in relation to thebody. The entire Atma is in proportion to the body, and all thekarmas cling to it and are stuck on. And how is this? Does theresin not stick to the branches of trees? That is just how all thekarmas have become stuck all over the Atma; in infinite locations(pradesh), infinite karmas are adhered. Whatever locationbecomes free of karma, is where the knowledge of that particularlocation arises. If the location (pradesh) of all the medicalknowledge opens up, you would gain medical knowledge, whilesome would gain knowledge of law. Whichever location thatAptavani-82122 Aptavani-8Questioner: So if it is affected by pain and pleasure, thendoes it not become worldly (sansari)?Dadashri: No. The Atma does not become worldly(sansari). It remains in its original state. It is the atma that youunderstand, that has become worldly. What you consider to bethe Atma, is that which has become worldly (sansari), and it isthis atma that is mechanical. So as long as you put petrol (fuel)in it, it will work; otherwise it stops. Within half an hour to anhour, if you kept your nose pinched, the machine would stop.That is why people believe that the mechanical atma is theAtma. They have never seen the real Atma, nor have they evenheard about the real Atma, so they try to still (sthir) themechanical atma. But the mechanical can never be stilled.So there is no Atma in the hair that we cut, and the extranail that we clip. When you cut your nail, in the area that stings,there is Atma. Moreover, the Atma is present throughout theentire body.Questioner: But in yogic scriptures, it says that the Atmais in the brahmarandhra (the aperture at the crown of head).Dadashri: All that is fine for yogic scripture. Do you wantto know the truth? Do you want to know about that which isworldly (laukik) or about that which is not of this world(alaukik)? There are two kinds of knowledge: one that worksin the world and the other is the knowledge of reality (vaastavik).Do you wish to know the real or the worldly?Questioner: I want to know both of them.Dadashri: If you want to know the worldly (laukik)knowledge; then the Atma is located in the heart, and if youwantto know the real (alaukik) knowledge, then the Atma is foundthroughout the body. If you want to know the worldly (laukik),then this world has been created by God, and if you want toknow the real (alaukik), then God has not created this world.Questioner: It is also said that the Atma in the heart, isthe size of a thumb.Dadashri: No. There is no substance whatsoever in allthose conceptions.Belief Versus FactQuestioner: But there is a statement in the Upanishad:Angushtha maatra praman –If you want to see the Atma’simage in your heart, meditate so that you can see it as the sizeof your thumb.Dadashri: It is not a scientific statement. If it was scientific,I would go on. It is just a way of making still and steady, aperson who is at a certain spiritual level. It is not entirely wrong,how can you say it is wrong? If something can make a personstill, you cannot say that it is wrong! So the heart is where thegross mind (stool mun) is located, and it progresses from there.If you take this to heart, you can progress further. And whatprevents you from moving ahead? The intellect (buddhi) doesnot allow you to progress, but what you hold in your heart willlet you move ahead. If you want to go to final liberation(moksha), then you can do it with the help of your heart. Soyour heart will be needed. The intellect will not do.They have only managed to scare people by saying thatthe Atma is the size of the thumb. The Atma is in relation to thebody. The entire Atma is in proportion to the body, and all thekarmas cling to it and are stuck on. And how is this? Does theresin not stick to the branches of trees? That is just how all thekarmas have become stuck all over the Atma; in infinite locations(pradesh), infinite karmas are adhered. Whatever locationbecomes free of karma, is where the knowledge of that particularlocation arises. If the location (pradesh) of all the medicalknowledge opens up, you would gain medical knowledge, whilesome would gain knowledge of law. Whichever location thatAptavani-82324Aptavani-8opens up for whomsoever; the knowledge pertaining to thatlocation (pradesh) will arise.Now the Atma is whole. But only when a person loses alimb or any other organ, does the Atma shorten by that much.However, the mind is situated in the heart, which is the gross(sthool) location of the mind. The mind exists in the heart. Nowthe location of the subtle mind (sookshma mun) is here on theforehead, two and a half inches in. And the gross mind (sthoolmun) is situated in the heart.The Soul Expands and Contracts According tothe ReceptacleQuestioner: Can the Atma ever be cut?Dadashri: You cannot cut the Atma, split it or do anythingto it.Questioner: What if my hand is cut off from here?Dadashri: The Atma will shrink by that much. The Atma’snatural property is to expand and contract, but even then, onlyin its state of worldly life (sansar). But that is not the case in theAbsolutely Liberated state (Siddha). In the worldly state (sansar),it can both contract and expand. Even in an ant, the Atma iswhole. And in an elephant, there is only one whole Atma aswell. But in the latter, it is expanded. When an arm or leg is cutoff, the Atma contracts, and even then, only when a certain partis cut, does it contract. Then it does not contract any further! Questioner: Just as it is throughout the human body, isit the same in an ant’s body or an elephant’s?Dadashri: Yes, the Atma is in the entire body. That isbecause the Atma is a receptacle (bhaajan) of contraction-expansion. The Atma will expand according to the size of thevessel. If the vessel is small, the Atma will contract to fit into it.Questioner: When it leaves the body here, they say thatone end of the Atma is here, while the other end can besomewhere in Punjab (province). How is that? Can you explain?Dadashri: The Atma is a receptacle of expansion andcontraction, so it can stretch as far as it wants to. Therefore, ithas to go where it has karmic ties (roonanubandha), does itnot? Do you think it is going to walk all the way there? It doesnot have legs and a gross (sthool) body!Questioner: So can it live in two places at one time?Dadashri: Yes. It can stretch as far as it has to go. Sowhen it begins to enter the new body over there, simultaneouslyit is leaving the body over here. Just as a snake leaves its burrow;part of it is outside and the other part is inside. It is similar to that!Questioner: But even when they cut the body or split itopen, you still cannot see the Atma. Dadashri: The Atma is not something that you can see!But does it not leave when the body is cut up? When a persondies, who is it that leaves?Questioner: The Atma leaves.Dadashri: Yes, it leaves and yet you still cannot see it.But it is there for sure. It is a light; it is in the form of a light. Allthis is its light! If it is not there, then everything would end. Haveyou seen the body once the Atma has gone out of it? Have youseen death process (nanami)? Does the body still have light in it?Questioner: No.Dadashri: Then the Atma has left the body. So the Atmais itself in the form of light.Does the Soul Re-enter the Same Body AfterDeath?Questioner: When the heart stops beating, we say thatthe person is dead.Aptavani-82324Aptavani-8opens up for whomsoever; the knowledge pertaining to thatlocation (pradesh) will arise.Now the Atma is whole. But only when a person loses alimb or any other organ, does the Atma shorten by that much.However, the mind is situated in the heart, which is the gross(sthool) location of the mind. The mind exists in the heart. Nowthe location of the subtle mind (sookshma mun) is here on theforehead, two and a half inches in. And the gross mind (sthoolmun) is situated in the heart.The Soul Expands and Contracts According tothe ReceptacleQuestioner: Can the Atma ever be cut?Dadashri: You cannot cut the Atma, split it or do anythingto it.Questioner: What if my hand is cut off from here?Dadashri: The Atma will shrink by that much. The Atma’snatural property is to expand and contract, but even then, onlyin its state of worldly life (sansar). But that is not the case in theAbsolutely Liberated state (Siddha). In the worldly state (sansar),it can both contract and expand. Even in an ant, the Atma iswhole. And in an elephant, there is only one whole Atma aswell. But in the latter, it is expanded. When an arm or leg is cutoff, the Atma contracts, and even then, only when a certain partis cut, does it contract. Then it does not contract any further! Questioner: Just as it is throughout the human body, isit the same in an ant’s body or an elephant’s?Dadashri: Yes, the Atma is in the entire body. That isbecause the Atma is a receptacle (bhaajan) of contraction-expansion. The Atma will expand according to the size of thevessel. If the vessel is small, the Atma will contract to fit into it.Questioner: When it leaves the body here, they say thatone end of the Atma is here, while the other end can besomewhere in Punjab (province). How is that? Can you explain?Dadashri: The Atma is a receptacle of expansion andcontraction, so it can stretch as far as it wants to. Therefore, ithas to go where it has karmic ties (roonanubandha), does itnot? Do you think it is going to walk all the way there? It doesnot have legs and a gross (sthool) body!Questioner: So can it live in two places at one time?Dadashri: Yes. It can stretch as far as it has to go. Sowhen it begins to enter the new body over there, simultaneouslyit is leaving the body over here. Just as a snake leaves its burrow;part of it is outside and the other part is inside. It is similar to that!Questioner: But even when they cut the body or split itopen, you still cannot see the Atma. Dadashri: The Atma is not something that you can see!But does it not leave when the body is cut up? When a persondies, who is it that leaves?Questioner: The Atma leaves.Dadashri: Yes, it leaves and yet you still cannot see it.But it is there for sure. It is a light; it is in the form of a light. Allthis is its light! If it is not there, then everything would end. Haveyou seen the body once the Atma has gone out of it? Have youseen death process (nanami)? Does the body still have light in it?Questioner: No.Dadashri: Then the Atma has left the body. So the Atmais itself in the form of light.Does the Soul Re-enter the Same Body AfterDeath?Questioner: When the heart stops beating, we say thatthe person is dead.Aptavani-82526Aptavani-8Dadashri: And even the doctors say, ‘The man is gone.’As long as the heart is beating, there is a pulse. And when thereis no pulse, the doctors know that people cannot live without apulse and so they tell us, ‘he is gone’.Questioner: I have read about certain cases where peoplethat have died, have come back to life. What can we make ofthat? Did the living soul (jiva) return to the body? Or did theAtma re-enter the body?Dadashri: You are right; there are exceptions, where thepulse comes back. So what do the doctors think? They thinkthat the jiva (living being) has returned. But that only happensin certain circumstances. That is when the jiva rises up to thecrown of the head. It does not matter if the heart stops, but thesoul (jiva) has risen all the way to the top of the head. So whenit comes back down, the heart starts to beat again. That canhappen. Even the doctors become perplexed. But the jiva thatreappears, is not a new jiva. The jiva does not come again intothe body, nor does another Atma enter the body. It is the sameAtma that has not completely left the body. It has risen to thepart above the heart. Here at the top of the head isbrahmarandhra, known as the crown of the head, which iswhere it rises to. So if the soul (jiva) still remains in the body,then it is possible that it could happen. It happens sometimes,not very often, but you do get exceptions. If someone gets bittenby a snake or if someone suddenly falls into the water, then thesoul (jiva) will rise up to the crown of the head(brahmarandhra). Then it becomes difficult to bring it backdown. In this age, they do not know how to bring it down again.If it comes down naturally by itself then it is fine, and you wouldthink that jiva has returned to the corpse. But normally thatwould not happen.What Is Death? What Happens After Death?Questioner: What is death?Dadashri: Death is like this: say a shirt is stitched, thenit would mean that the shirt is born. Once it is born, then it isinevitable that it will die! Anything that is born is bound to die.And the Atma is without birth and death (ajanma-amar); itnever dies. Whatever is born, will one day die, and becausethere is death, it will be born. That is why birth is joined todeath. Where there is birth there is bound to be death!Questioner: But what in fact is death?Dadashri: When you sleep at night, where do you go?And in the morning, where do you come from?Questioner: I do not know that.Dadashri: That is how birth and death are. During theinterim you are asleep, and when you are born, you wake up.From the time you die, until the time you are born, you aresleeping. ‘You’ (the Self) are eternal; therefore birth and deathdo not happen for You! This birth and death is because ofcircumstances (avastha). There may only be one person, butdoes he not have three circumstances (avastha)? Does he nothave his circumstance of childhood, his circumstance of youth,and then the circumstance of old age? They are all circumstances,but is ‘he’ (the Self), not the same in all three? Those are thebody’s circumstances (avastha). That birth and death is for thebody; it is not the Atma’s birth and death. The Atma does nothave birth and death. Your own Self does not have birth ordeath.Questioner: So why does death occur?Dadashri: What it is, is that when you are born, there isthe mind, the speech and the body; these three batteries becomeeffective in the womb. So once the effect runs out, your accountwith those batteries ends, but until that happens, the batteriesremain. Once they are completely finished, is when they call itdeath. But then for the next life, new batteries continue to chargeAptavani-82526Aptavani-8Dadashri: And even the doctors say, ‘The man is gone.’As long as the heart is beating, there is a pulse. And when thereis no pulse, the doctors know that people cannot live without apulse and so they tell us, ‘he is gone’.Questioner: I have read about certain cases where peoplethat have died, have come back to life. What can we make ofthat? Did the living soul (jiva) return to the body? Or did theAtma re-enter the body?Dadashri: You are right; there are exceptions, where thepulse comes back. So what do the doctors think? They thinkthat the jiva (living being) has returned. But that only happensin certain circumstances. That is when the jiva rises up to thecrown of the head. It does not matter if the heart stops, but thesoul (jiva) has risen all the way to the top of the head. So whenit comes back down, the heart starts to beat again. That canhappen. Even the doctors become perplexed. But the jiva thatreappears, is not a new jiva. The jiva does not come again intothe body, nor does another Atma enter the body. It is the sameAtma that has not completely left the body. It has risen to thepart above the heart. Here at the top of the head isbrahmarandhra, known as the crown of the head, which iswhere it rises to. So if the soul (jiva) still remains in the body,then it is possible that it could happen. It happens sometimes,not very often, but you do get exceptions. If someone gets bittenby a snake or if someone suddenly falls into the water, then thesoul (jiva) will rise up to the crown of the head(brahmarandhra). Then it becomes difficult to bring it backdown. In this age, they do not know how to bring it down again.If it comes down naturally by itself then it is fine, and you wouldthink that jiva has returned to the corpse. But normally thatwould not happen.What Is Death? What Happens After Death?Questioner: What is death?Dadashri: Death is like this: say a shirt is stitched, thenit would mean that the shirt is born. Once it is born, then it isinevitable that it will die! Anything that is born is bound to die.And the Atma is without birth and death (ajanma-amar); itnever dies. Whatever is born, will one day die, and becausethere is death, it will be born. That is why birth is joined todeath. Where there is birth there is bound to be death!Questioner: But what in fact is death?Dadashri: When you sleep at night, where do you go?And in the morning, where do you come from?Questioner: I do not know that.Dadashri: That is how birth and death are. During theinterim you are asleep, and when you are born, you wake up.From the time you die, until the time you are born, you aresleeping. ‘You’ (the Self) are eternal; therefore birth and deathdo not happen for You! This birth and death is because ofcircumstances (avastha). There may only be one person, butdoes he not have three circumstances (avastha)? Does he nothave his circumstance of childhood, his circumstance of youth,and then the circumstance of old age? They are all circumstances,but is ‘he’ (the Self), not the same in all three? Those are thebody’s circumstances (avastha). That birth and death is for thebody; it is not the Atma’s birth and death. The Atma does nothave birth and death. Your own Self does not have birth ordeath.Questioner: So why does death occur?Dadashri: What it is, is that when you are born, there isthe mind, the speech and the body; these three batteries becomeeffective in the womb. So once the effect runs out, your accountwith those batteries ends, but until that happens, the batteriesremain. Once they are completely finished, is when they call itdeath. But then for the next life, new batteries continue to chargeAptavani-82728Aptavani-8within, while the old batteries are discharging. That is because ofone’s wrong belief. And so causes arise. As long as the wrongbelief exists, there will be attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh),and causes will occur. And if the wrong belief changes and theright belief is instilled, attachment and abhorrence and causeswill no longer arise.Questioner: When the body dies, where does the Atmago?Dadashri: The way it is, is that the Atma is eternal, it ispermanent, it is forever. It does not have to come and goanywhere. And when the body dies, the Atma does not have achoice about where to go. Even that is in the control of scientificcircumstantial evidence (vyavasthit shakti). So wherever theevidence takes it, it has to go. The only permanent thing in allthis is the Atma, everything else is temporary. The mind, intellect,chit and ego are all temporary. And the Atma is such, that it iscompletely separate from this body. Just as this cloth and mybody are separate, are they not? That is just how separate thebody and the Atma are; completely and utterly separate.So Many Adjustments of NatureQuestioner: At the time of death, while leaving one bodyand before entering another body, where and for how long andhow, does it exist? How long does it take the soul (jiva) to entera new body?Dadashri: It hardly takes any time (samaya). It is herein the body, while it is leaving this body; it is already present ina womb (yoni) there. If the dying person is here in Baroda andthe womb is in Delhi, then it is in that womb (yoni), and it is alsohere in the body. So there is no time lag in this. It cannot bewithout a body even for an instant.Questioner: So how much time does it take to leave onebody and acquire another body?Dadashri: No time at all. It is here as well. Even whileit is still leaving the body, it is over there in the womb (yoni).That is because there is timing involved, when the sperm and theovum unite. When it is about to leave the body, first the unionoccurs over there, and once all that comes together, it leaves. Ifnot, then it would not leave from here, because if it did leave,what would it eat over there? It may have gone there to thewomb, but how would it sustain itself there? There is only theman’s sperm and the mother’s ovum, which it consumes out ofhunger, the moment it arrives. Once it has eaten, it develops intoan embryo. Is this not all scientific circumstantial evidence?!So it does not even take long to leave from here. Now ifover there, the time is not yet right for it, over here the dying willlinger on, moaning from suffering. You would say, ‘Why are younot leaving yet? Hurry up and go’. And it would say, ‘No, theyare still not ready for me over there!’ Do they not go on moaningat the last moment? When the adjustments are made over there,is when it starts to leave from here. And once it leaves fromhere, everything is methodical over there.The Balance Sheet of the Current LifeDictates the Next Life- FormQuestioner: Is a person’s next birth based on the wishes(vaasna) of his life, before he dies?Dadashri: Yes, according to the wishes (vaasna). Dothey not say things like, before the person’s death, he had suchand such a wish (vaasna)? But that vaasna is not somethingnewly created by him. That is a balance sheet of one’s wholelife. The balance sheet of whatever karma you did throughoutyour life, draws up during the final hour of your death. And it isthis balance sheet that determines the next state of existence(gati).Questioner: After death, not everyone is born again as ahuman being. Some become dogs or cows.Aptavani-82728Aptavani-8within, while the old batteries are discharging. That is because ofone’s wrong belief. And so causes arise. As long as the wrongbelief exists, there will be attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh),and causes will occur. And if the wrong belief changes and theright belief is instilled, attachment and abhorrence and causeswill no longer arise.Questioner: When the body dies, where does the Atmago?Dadashri: The way it is, is that the Atma is eternal, it ispermanent, it is forever. It does not have to come and goanywhere. And when the body dies, the Atma does not have achoice about where to go. Even that is in the control of scientificcircumstantial evidence (vyavasthit shakti). So wherever theevidence takes it, it has to go. The only permanent thing in allthis is the Atma, everything else is temporary. The mind, intellect,chit and ego are all temporary. And the Atma is such, that it iscompletely separate from this body. Just as this cloth and mybody are separate, are they not? That is just how separate thebody and the Atma are; completely and utterly separate.So Many Adjustments of NatureQuestioner: At the time of death, while leaving one bodyand before entering another body, where and for how long andhow, does it exist? How long does it take the soul (jiva) to entera new body?Dadashri: It hardly takes any time (samaya). It is herein the body, while it is leaving this body; it is already present ina womb (yoni) there. If the dying person is here in Baroda andthe womb is in Delhi, then it is in that womb (yoni), and it is alsohere in the body. So there is no time lag in this. It cannot bewithout a body even for an instant.Questioner: So how much time does it take to leave onebody and acquire another body?Dadashri: No time at all. It is here as well. Even whileit is still leaving the body, it is over there in the womb (yoni).That is because there is timing involved, when the sperm and theovum unite. When it is about to leave the body, first the unionoccurs over there, and once all that comes together, it leaves. Ifnot, then it would not leave from here, because if it did leave,what would it eat over there? It may have gone there to thewomb, but how would it sustain itself there? There is only theman’s sperm and the mother’s ovum, which it consumes out ofhunger, the moment it arrives. Once it has eaten, it develops intoan embryo. Is this not all scientific circumstantial evidence?!So it does not even take long to leave from here. Now ifover there, the time is not yet right for it, over here the dying willlinger on, moaning from suffering. You would say, ‘Why are younot leaving yet? Hurry up and go’. And it would say, ‘No, theyare still not ready for me over there!’ Do they not go on moaningat the last moment? When the adjustments are made over there,is when it starts to leave from here. And once it leaves fromhere, everything is methodical over there.The Balance Sheet of the Current LifeDictates the Next Life- FormQuestioner: Is a person’s next birth based on the wishes(vaasna) of his life, before he dies?Dadashri: Yes, according to the wishes (vaasna). Dothey not say things like, before the person’s death, he had suchand such a wish (vaasna)? But that vaasna is not somethingnewly created by him. That is a balance sheet of one’s wholelife. The balance sheet of whatever karma you did throughoutyour life, draws up during the final hour of your death. And it isthis balance sheet that determines the next state of existence(gati).Questioner: After death, not everyone is born again as ahuman being. Some become dogs or cows.Aptavani-82930Aptavani-8Dadashri: Yes, there is scientific circumstantial evidencebehind that, many scientific causes come together. No one is adoer in any of this; neither God has done this, nor have youdone any of it. You only believe that, ‘I did this’, which gives riseto the next life. When this belief of yours breaks, when thewrong belief and awareness of ‘I am the doer’ is destroyed, andyou realize the Self, then indeed You are not the doer.Questioner: But to realize this, do we have to leave allthis behind and go to the Himalayas?Dadashri: No, you do not have to go to the Himalayas.‘We’ (Dadashri the Gnani Purush) can make you realize theSelf within an hour. You do not have to become an ascetic(bava) and go off to the Himalayas. Hey, here you can just eat,drink and enjoy life, and realize the Self at the same time.Questioner: But is it not said that the Atma acquires ahuman body every time?Dadashri: No, no, no. That is what people have said,that it goes from a human body only to a human body. That wasa kind of consolation, that just as wheat begets wheat, so doeshuman begets human. So people think that everything is just fine,and all is well since they are going to be human again anyway!So why not take as many bribes as possible, and steal as muchas they can? But that is not how it is.There is a rule here: he that takes that which is not rightfullyhis, goes from having two legs (human life-form) to four legs(animal life-form). But even that does not go on forever either.At the very most, it will be for about two hundred years, perhapsseven to eight lifetimes at least, in the animal form, and the veryleast amount of time will be five minutes in the animal form,before returning to the human form. There are some living beings(jiva) that can go through seventeen lifetimes in just one minute.So there are even living beings like that. Just because they go tothe animal life-form, does not mean that they are all going therefor a couple of hundred years.Questioner: The living entities (jivas) from the humanlife-form, take their causal body (karan sharira) with them,along with the anger-pride-deceit-greed (kashays). But what dothe living beings of the lower life-form bring with them?Dadashri: They go there to relieve the load. Whateverload was gathered, whatever debt was incurred, they have to gothere to pay off the debt. And if you have accrued credit, thenyou have to go and redeem that. If you have incurred credit, youhave to go to the celestial realm (deva gati), or else stay in thehuman form and live like a king. And if you have incurred debt,you have to redeem it by becoming a bullock. It will have to beredeemed in a life as a buffalo, or a dog.For many, it may not be possible for this debt to be paidoff in just one lifetime, so that even when the life as a dog ends,because the debt remains pending, they assume the life of adonkey. And if the debt still remains even after that, then theymay receive the avatar (birth; reincarnation) of a fox. But thereare only eight of these avatars. There is no ninth avatar. Thedebt is paid off in eight avatars before one returns to the humanform.When a person dies over here, there are usually four orfive people who are impartial, that carry him away. Listen tothem talk. Those who are partial, would mean his family, andeven his enemies would be considered partial. His enemies wouldsay negative things about him, while his family would speakpositively about him. And the person who is impartial will saysomething like, ‘This dear man was like a deva (celestial being)’.That itself would speak for his next life-form (gati). And somepeople will say, ‘Goodness, the man was like a monster!’Whatever the opinions people create about him in this life, is asign of which realm of existence (gati) he is heading for.Aptavani-82930Aptavani-8Dadashri: Yes, there is scientific circumstantial evidencebehind that, many scientific causes come together. No one is adoer in any of this; neither God has done this, nor have youdone any of it. You only believe that, ‘I did this’, which gives riseto the next life. When this belief of yours breaks, when thewrong belief and awareness of ‘I am the doer’ is destroyed, andyou realize the Self, then indeed You are not the doer.Questioner: But to realize this, do we have to leave allthis behind and go to the Himalayas?Dadashri: No, you do not have to go to the Himalayas.‘We’ (Dadashri the Gnani Purush) can make you realize theSelf within an hour. You do not have to become an ascetic(bava) and go off to the Himalayas. Hey, here you can just eat,drink and enjoy life, and realize the Self at the same time.Questioner: But is it not said that the Atma acquires ahuman body every time?Dadashri: No, no, no. That is what people have said,that it goes from a human body only to a human body. That wasa kind of consolation, that just as wheat begets wheat, so doeshuman begets human. So people think that everything is just fine,and all is well since they are going to be human again anyway!So why not take as many bribes as possible, and steal as muchas they can? But that is not how it is.There is a rule here: he that takes that which is not rightfullyhis, goes from having two legs (human life-form) to four legs(animal life-form). But even that does not go on forever either.At the very most, it will be for about two hundred years, perhapsseven to eight lifetimes at least, in the animal form, and the veryleast amount of time will be five minutes in the animal form,before returning to the human form. There are some living beings(jiva) that can go through seventeen lifetimes in just one minute.So there are even living beings like that. Just because they go tothe animal life-form, does not mean that they are all going therefor a couple of hundred years.Questioner: The living entities (jivas) from the humanlife-form, take their causal body (karan sharira) with them,along with the anger-pride-deceit-greed (kashays). But what dothe living beings of the lower life-form bring with them?Dadashri: They go there to relieve the load. Whateverload was gathered, whatever debt was incurred, they have to gothere to pay off the debt. And if you have accrued credit, thenyou have to go and redeem that. If you have incurred credit, youhave to go to the celestial realm (deva gati), or else stay in thehuman form and live like a king. And if you have incurred debt,you have to redeem it by becoming a bullock. It will have to beredeemed in a life as a buffalo, or a dog.For many, it may not be possible for this debt to be paidoff in just one lifetime, so that even when the life as a dog ends,because the debt remains pending, they assume the life of adonkey. And if the debt still remains even after that, then theymay receive the avatar (birth; reincarnation) of a fox. But thereare only eight of these avatars. There is no ninth avatar. Thedebt is paid off in eight avatars before one returns to the humanform.When a person dies over here, there are usually four orfive people who are impartial, that carry him away. Listen tothem talk. Those who are partial, would mean his family, andeven his enemies would be considered partial. His enemies wouldsay negative things about him, while his family would speakpositively about him. And the person who is impartial will saysomething like, ‘This dear man was like a deva (celestial being)’.That itself would speak for his next life-form (gati). And somepeople will say, ‘Goodness, the man was like a monster!’Whatever the opinions people create about him in this life, is asign of which realm of existence (gati) he is heading for.Aptavani-83132Aptavani-8Moksha Is Needed by Those Who…Questioner: When a person dies, he immediately gainsanother body, so why are people trying to attain final liberation(moksha)?Dadashri: Those who have worries in the worldly life(sansar), who do not like those worries, who cannot endure theworries, are those that need liberation (moksha). And thosewho like these worries would not need liberation at all! Soeveryone does not need liberation. Most foreigners (peopleoutside India) can endure worry, so even they have no need forliberation. Even here, there are some people who can tolerateworry, so they do not need liberation either. Otherwise, thosewho cannot tolerate worry, and want to escape from this worldlylife (sansar), are the ones who need liberation (moksha).These Are the Laws of NatureQuestioner: Does every living being (jiva) have life afterdeath?Dadashri: Any living being after death, has life. Onlycertain living beings, who are Gnani Purush and who in activity(pravrutti) are non-doer (nivrut), have liberation!Questioner: After liberation, is there rebirth?Dadashri: No. After liberation, there is no birth.Questioner: And after death?Dadashri: After death, there is definitely rebirth for everyliving being (jiva).Questioner: After death, is it the same soul (jiva) that isborn or is it another soul (jiva) that takes birth?Dadashri: The same jiva takes birth.Questioner: So then why does the population increase?Dadashri: It increases and then later, it decreases. It is arule for the population to increase and decrease. The world issuch that it just goes on increasing and decreasing! Now thepopulation will decrease again.Questioner: Will those living beings (jiva) live again?Dadashri: After living, are those living beings going todie? They all went back to the animal form, to the same placethey had come from.After death, the Atma of the one heading for the celestialrealm (deva gati), goes to the celestial realm, and the one thatis heading towards the infernal realm (nark gati), travels to theinfernal realm. Some go into the animal kingdom (jaanvar gati),and if it is to be reborn as a human, it will go into the humanrealm (manushya gati). And there are many souls (jiva), whoreceive a punishment, as a result of their unfolding karma,whereby for two or three years, they are doomed to wanderaround in a form without a body; as evil spirit (pretayoni).  So death is just like changing one’s clothes. Whateveris physical just disappears, or else it gets left behind, while theAtma receives another yoni (womb).Questioner: How can one prove that after death, theAtma went somewhere else? Is there any evidence?Dadashri: Of reincarnation (punarjanma)!Questioner: Yes. And is it something a person can believe?Dadashri: Yes, ‘we’ (the Gnani Purush) will give youproof so that you can believe that there is such a thing as rebirth(punarjanma). It is quite a long evidence. People are bound toask for proof of whether there is rebirth, are they not?How Long Will the Process of Rebirth Take?Questioner: Who takes rebirth? Is it the living being (jiva)or the Atma?Aptavani-83132Aptavani-8Moksha Is Needed by Those Who…Questioner: When a person dies, he immediately gainsanother body, so why are people trying to attain final liberation(moksha)?Dadashri: Those who have worries in the worldly life(sansar), who do not like those worries, who cannot endure theworries, are those that need liberation (moksha). And thosewho like these worries would not need liberation at all! Soeveryone does not need liberation. Most foreigners (peopleoutside India) can endure worry, so even they have no need forliberation. Even here, there are some people who can tolerateworry, so they do not need liberation either. Otherwise, thosewho cannot tolerate worry, and want to escape from this worldlylife (sansar), are the ones who need liberation (moksha).These Are the Laws of NatureQuestioner: Does every living being (jiva) have life afterdeath?Dadashri: Any living being after death, has life. Onlycertain living beings, who are Gnani Purush and who in activity(pravrutti) are non-doer (nivrut), have liberation!Questioner: After liberation, is there rebirth?Dadashri: No. After liberation, there is no birth.Questioner: And after death?Dadashri: After death, there is definitely rebirth for everyliving being (jiva).Questioner: After death, is it the same soul (jiva) that isborn or is it another soul (jiva) that takes birth?Dadashri: The same jiva takes birth.Questioner: So then why does the population increase?Dadashri: It increases and then later, it decreases. It is arule for the population to increase and decrease. The world issuch that it just goes on increasing and decreasing! Now thepopulation will decrease again.Questioner: Will those living beings (jiva) live again?Dadashri: After living, are those living beings going todie? They all went back to the animal form, to the same placethey had come from.After death, the Atma of the one heading for the celestialrealm (deva gati), goes to the celestial realm, and the one thatis heading towards the infernal realm (nark gati), travels to theinfernal realm. Some go into the animal kingdom (jaanvar gati),and if it is to be reborn as a human, it will go into the humanrealm (manushya gati). And there are many souls (jiva), whoreceive a punishment, as a result of their unfolding karma,whereby for two or three years, they are doomed to wanderaround in a form without a body; as evil spirit (pretayoni).  So death is just like changing one’s clothes. Whateveris physical just disappears, or else it gets left behind, while theAtma receives another yoni (womb).Questioner: How can one prove that after death, theAtma went somewhere else? Is there any evidence?Dadashri: Of reincarnation (punarjanma)!Questioner: Yes. And is it something a person can believe?Dadashri: Yes, ‘we’ (the Gnani Purush) will give youproof so that you can believe that there is such a thing as rebirth(punarjanma). It is quite a long evidence. People are bound toask for proof of whether there is rebirth, are they not?How Long Will the Process of Rebirth Take?Questioner: Who takes rebirth? Is it the living being (jiva)or the Atma?Aptavani-83334Aptavani-8Dadashri: No, no one has to take it, it just happens. Thiswhole world is “It happens”.Questioner: Yes, but who makes it happen? Does ithappen through the jiva or the Atma?Dadashri: No, the Atma has nothing to do with it. It allhappens with the jiva. The one who wants worldly pleasureshas the right to enter a womb (yoni). And the one who does notwant worldly pleasures, loses the right to enter a womb.This is how it is. If you look at a sugar factory, at one end,they will be buying sugarcane, and at the other end you will seepeople stacking sacks of sugar in the stockpiles. Do you knowwhat the steps are in between? At this end, they import thesugarcane, and first the sugarcane is cut, then it gets crushed, soin its second avatar (lifetime) it is crushed. From there it goesto its third avatar, then on to its fourth avatar and so on, untilit is sugar. Sugar cannot be made in just one stage, or oneavatar. So everything undergoes several stages of developmentuntil it arrives at its final stage.The Atma is fully developed anyway. But this outsidepart, the part which is the clothing also needs to develop. Thosein foreign countries are less “developed” (spiritually evolved), asthey still do not understand reincarnation (punarjanma). Whereasthose here, are developed (spiritually evolved), so that whetheror not they understand reincarnation, there is still the belief in it.Even a little child will say that in the next life, such and such willhappen. Therefore, whether you understand it or not, it is adifferent matter, you still believe in reincarnationThe Same Old Routine Life After LifeQuestioner: Is every human being’s life related to hisprevious life (purvajanma)?Dadashri: Every birth is itself a previous birth(purvajanma). So the connection of every birth begins with theprevious life.Questioner: But what does the past life have to do withthis life?Dadashri: Alas, for the next life, this life has become theprevious life (purvajanma). The last avatar (birth) is the previouslife (purvajanma), and that is why you have this life. And thislife is considered the past life (purvajanma) for the next life(avatar).Questioner: Yes, that is true. But does something occurin purvajanma (past life), so that it has some connection withthis life?Dadashri: It is full of connections! The seeds are sownin the past life, and in this life, they sprout. So is there not adifference between the seed and an ear of corn (doondoo)? Isthere not a relationship? When you sow a millet seed, it isprevious life, and when it sprouts, it is this life. And if from thisplant another seed falls, it is previous life (purvajanma), and theseedling that sprouts from it will be the new birth. Did youunderstand that or not?Questioner: A man is walking on a road and there aremany other people on the same road, but a snake only bites thatparticular man. Is rebirth (punarjanma) the reason for that?Dadashri: Yes, That is exactly what I am trying to tellyou, that there is indeed another life (punarjanma). That is whythe snake bites you. If there was not a life after, then the snakewould not have bitten you. There is reincarnation and it is youraccount that you are paying off. All these are just karmicaccounts that are being settled. Just as the accounts in book-keeping are settled, that is how all the accounts of karma aresettled. And it is because of development that you are able tounderstand these accounts. That is why people are beginning toAptavani-83334Aptavani-8Dadashri: No, no one has to take it, it just happens. Thiswhole world is “It happens”.Questioner: Yes, but who makes it happen? Does ithappen through the jiva or the Atma?Dadashri: No, the Atma has nothing to do with it. It allhappens with the jiva. The one who wants worldly pleasureshas the right to enter a womb (yoni). And the one who does notwant worldly pleasures, loses the right to enter a womb.This is how it is. If you look at a sugar factory, at one end,they will be buying sugarcane, and at the other end you will seepeople stacking sacks of sugar in the stockpiles. Do you knowwhat the steps are in between? At this end, they import thesugarcane, and first the sugarcane is cut, then it gets crushed, soin its second avatar (lifetime) it is crushed. From there it goesto its third avatar, then on to its fourth avatar and so on, untilit is sugar. Sugar cannot be made in just one stage, or oneavatar. So everything undergoes several stages of developmentuntil it arrives at its final stage.The Atma is fully developed anyway. But this outsidepart, the part which is the clothing also needs to develop. Thosein foreign countries are less “developed” (spiritually evolved), asthey still do not understand reincarnation (punarjanma). Whereasthose here, are developed (spiritually evolved), so that whetheror not they understand reincarnation, there is still the belief in it.Even a little child will say that in the next life, such and such willhappen. Therefore, whether you understand it or not, it is adifferent matter, you still believe in reincarnationThe Same Old Routine Life After LifeQuestioner: Is every human being’s life related to hisprevious life (purvajanma)?Dadashri: Every birth is itself a previous birth(purvajanma). So the connection of every birth begins with theprevious life.Questioner: But what does the past life have to do withthis life?Dadashri: Alas, for the next life, this life has become theprevious life (purvajanma). The last avatar (birth) is the previouslife (purvajanma), and that is why you have this life. And thislife is considered the past life (purvajanma) for the next life(avatar).Questioner: Yes, that is true. But does something occurin purvajanma (past life), so that it has some connection withthis life?Dadashri: It is full of connections! The seeds are sownin the past life, and in this life, they sprout. So is there not adifference between the seed and an ear of corn (doondoo)? Isthere not a relationship? When you sow a millet seed, it isprevious life, and when it sprouts, it is this life. And if from thisplant another seed falls, it is previous life (purvajanma), and theseedling that sprouts from it will be the new birth. Did youunderstand that or not?Questioner: A man is walking on a road and there aremany other people on the same road, but a snake only bites thatparticular man. Is rebirth (punarjanma) the reason for that?Dadashri: Yes, That is exactly what I am trying to tellyou, that there is indeed another life (punarjanma). That is whythe snake bites you. If there was not a life after, then the snakewould not have bitten you. There is reincarnation and it is youraccount that you are paying off. All these are just karmicaccounts that are being settled. Just as the accounts in book-keeping are settled, that is how all the accounts of karma aresettled. And it is because of development that you are able tounderstand these accounts. That is why people are beginning toAptavani-83536Aptavani-8feel, ‘we have rebirth (punarjanma)’ and they have started tobelieve in it! But they cannot say for sure that there is reincarnation(punarjanma). No one can give them definite proof that it isthere. However, because they have seen many of these examples,that reincarnation does in fact exist, it has become established intheir faith.This lady will ask why the other lady is blessed with sucha nice mother-in-law, and why she is unfortunate to have hers!So you will come across all sorts of different circumstances.The Planning Is the Origin of KarmaQuestioner: Does one receive the good or bad result ofkarma in this life or the next?Dadashri: The karma that is done is in the form of a plan(yojana). Just as the government makes plans, like building adam on the Narmada River. Now at this time, would the planstop the water from flowing here? That will only happen whenthe plan materializes over here, and the dam is constructed.Otherwise, in the planning, everything is mapped out completely,including the dam, but it is still just on paper! That is how all thekarma occur in the form of a plan, which we call causes. Andthen when those very causes take form, then it is called effect.But they take shape in the next life (avatar; birth), which meansthat you are experiencing the karma of the previous life, and thekarma of this life, you will experience in the next life. But thesekarmas are in the form of a plan, that you will experience in thenext life.Do you not find that right now, although you may not wishit, the karma still happens anyway?Questioner: Yes, it does.Dadashri: Why is that? It is because it was already in theform of a plan. And today it has materialized (come into effect),so that if you were actually doing it today, you could still makesome changes to it. Do you not find that you cannot make anychanges? Do you not come across that?Planning in the Past Life; Effect in This LifeQuestioner: So is there such a thing as fate (kismat)?Dadashri: That which is fate (kismat), is effect(prarabdha); the stock brought from the previous life, that isbeing used (unfolding) today.Questioner: So if we committed any bad deeds (paap),in the last life, would we face its consequences in this life, orwould we have already dealt with it in the past life?Dadashri: No. The results of transgressions (paap) donein the past life are rendered in this life only. It is that thetransgressions you did in the last life; occurred as a plan. If youhad to build a dam on the Narmada River, what would happenfirst? Would they not draw out a plan first? That is how they(karmas) happen first, as a plan (cause), and then now, theymaterialize (effect) in this life. They do the planning for thedam, then it is mapped out on paper, and if at the time, themap tears at the spot where the dam is, would the water comegushing out? No, it would not. So you will be able to makechanges on the map, but you would not be able to do that lateron. You could have made changes during the planning stage inyour past life, but how can you make any changes to it now?Therefore, any changes that you make now, will be changesfor the next life. If not, then in the next life, the stamp will begiven and sealed according to destiny (vidhata) and it cannotbe turned around.Questioner: If the planning is done in the past life, thenwhen will I do the planning in this life?Dadashri: The internal planning goes on in each and everybirth, and without the planning nothing can progress.Aptavani-83536Aptavani-8feel, ‘we have rebirth (punarjanma)’ and they have started tobelieve in it! But they cannot say for sure that there is reincarnation(punarjanma). No one can give them definite proof that it isthere. However, because they have seen many of these examples,that reincarnation does in fact exist, it has become established intheir faith.This lady will ask why the other lady is blessed with sucha nice mother-in-law, and why she is unfortunate to have hers!So you will come across all sorts of different circumstances.The Planning Is the Origin of KarmaQuestioner: Does one receive the good or bad result ofkarma in this life or the next?Dadashri: The karma that is done is in the form of a plan(yojana). Just as the government makes plans, like building adam on the Narmada River. Now at this time, would the planstop the water from flowing here? That will only happen whenthe plan materializes over here, and the dam is constructed.Otherwise, in the planning, everything is mapped out completely,including the dam, but it is still just on paper! That is how all thekarma occur in the form of a plan, which we call causes. Andthen when those very causes take form, then it is called effect.But they take shape in the next life (avatar; birth), which meansthat you are experiencing the karma of the previous life, and thekarma of this life, you will experience in the next life. But thesekarmas are in the form of a plan, that you will experience in thenext life.Do you not find that right now, although you may not wishit, the karma still happens anyway?Questioner: Yes, it does.Dadashri: Why is that? It is because it was already in theform of a plan. And today it has materialized (come into effect),so that if you were actually doing it today, you could still makesome changes to it. Do you not find that you cannot make anychanges? Do you not come across that?Planning in the Past Life; Effect in This LifeQuestioner: So is there such a thing as fate (kismat)?Dadashri: That which is fate (kismat), is effect(prarabdha); the stock brought from the previous life, that isbeing used (unfolding) today.Questioner: So if we committed any bad deeds (paap),in the last life, would we face its consequences in this life, orwould we have already dealt with it in the past life?Dadashri: No. The results of transgressions (paap) donein the past life are rendered in this life only. It is that thetransgressions you did in the last life; occurred as a plan. If youhad to build a dam on the Narmada River, what would happenfirst? Would they not draw out a plan first? That is how they(karmas) happen first, as a plan (cause), and then now, theymaterialize (effect) in this life. They do the planning for thedam, then it is mapped out on paper, and if at the time, themap tears at the spot where the dam is, would the water comegushing out? No, it would not. So you will be able to makechanges on the map, but you would not be able to do that lateron. You could have made changes during the planning stage inyour past life, but how can you make any changes to it now?Therefore, any changes that you make now, will be changesfor the next life. If not, then in the next life, the stamp will begiven and sealed according to destiny (vidhata) and it cannotbe turned around.Questioner: If the planning is done in the past life, thenwhen will I do the planning in this life?Dadashri: The internal planning goes on in each and everybirth, and without the planning nothing can progress.Aptavani-83738 Aptavani-8Questioner: If all the things in this life happen accordingto the planning in the past life, then how can I do the planningfor my next life?Dadashri: Let me tell you how the planning happens. Ifin this life, the planning does not happen at all, then final liberation(moksha) will occur.Now, planning means to charge karma. While the oldkarma is being discharged, a new one is being charged within.How is it charged? How does the planning occur? Right now,someone might tell you, ‘I donated twenty-thousand rupees toa charity.’ And when you ask him, ‘sheth (boss), you wouldnever give away twenty-thousand rupees to anyone, so how didyou manage to give it in this case?’ He would reply, ‘I wasforced into it by so and so person.’ Therefore, although he gavetwenty-thousand (as his karmic effect from past life), but hisplanning (cause of next life) is negative. If he had given themoney with a higher inner intent (bhaav), as far as the planning,the seed would have been sown accordingly and he would havereaped a greater reward (in his next life).Now if a person commits any kind of violence (himsa),and he feels what he did was wrong and is truly remorseful, thenthe planning happens according to that. Also, if you tell a lie andin your mind your inner intent (bhaav) is that it is a wrong thing,then that is how the planning will go.Now there is only one cause for birth and death, and thatis the lack of awareness of ‘who You are’, which is the onlycause. In Jainism it is said that it is because of attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh) and ignorance (agnanta), that onebecomes bound; whereas in Vedanta, it says that one is boundbecause of mudd (impurity), projection through illusion (vikshep)and ignorance of the Self (agnanta). They both agree onignorance (agnan). Therefore, a person is bound throughignorance of the Self (agnan), and is set free through Knowledgeof the Self (Gnan). When you realize your own Self, is then youbecome free....And the Decisions RemainOver here, however many falsely ascribed intents (aropitbhaav), you have made, they are all worldly intents (sansaribhaav). And because of those worldly intents (sansari bhaav),other parliamentary members (mind, intellect, chit and ego) cometogether. All these members, having come together, collectivelycome to a decision, and effective (karya) body is made. Then,effect and causes, causes and effect, effect and causes ...justcontinually go on and on.Is this name ‘Chandubhai’ effective or not? If someonesaid, ‘That Chandubhai that owns the cinema is a bad person!’just saying that, will have an effect on you. Is this body effectiveor not? Even this speech is effective too. Does your speech nothave an effect on some people? And even the mind is effective.If the mind becomes restless, it will not let you sleep. One getsready for bed at ten-thirty at night. Everyone says, ‘Chandubhai,go to bed’, so he goes to bed. He then remembers that he has lentsomeone twenty-five thousand rupees, but he still has not got it inwriting. As soon as he has this thought, his mind becomes restlessand it will not let him sleep. So is the mind not ‘effective’also?Therefore, the mind, speech and body are all effective.They give rise to causes. From the attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh), that occur through them; causes arise, which is thecausal body, that will become the effective body, in the next life.The causal body is referred to as karan sharira, and effectivebody as the karya sharira (the active body giving effects).Therefore, after it becomes a causal body (karan sharira),the parliamentary process comes together. After the parliamentaryprocess (interaction of mind, intellect, chit and ego) has occurred,only the decisions of the parliament remain, while the membersof the parliament all leave. Each of those decisions, continue toAptavani-83738 Aptavani-8Questioner: If all the things in this life happen accordingto the planning in the past life, then how can I do the planningfor my next life?Dadashri: Let me tell you how the planning happens. Ifin this life, the planning does not happen at all, then final liberation(moksha) will occur.Now, planning means to charge karma. While the oldkarma is being discharged, a new one is being charged within.How is it charged? How does the planning occur? Right now,someone might tell you, ‘I donated twenty-thousand rupees toa charity.’ And when you ask him, ‘sheth (boss), you wouldnever give away twenty-thousand rupees to anyone, so how didyou manage to give it in this case?’ He would reply, ‘I wasforced into it by so and so person.’ Therefore, although he gavetwenty-thousand (as his karmic effect from past life), but hisplanning (cause of next life) is negative. If he had given themoney with a higher inner intent (bhaav), as far as the planning,the seed would have been sown accordingly and he would havereaped a greater reward (in his next life).Now if a person commits any kind of violence (himsa),and he feels what he did was wrong and is truly remorseful, thenthe planning happens according to that. Also, if you tell a lie andin your mind your inner intent (bhaav) is that it is a wrong thing,then that is how the planning will go.Now there is only one cause for birth and death, and thatis the lack of awareness of ‘who You are’, which is the onlycause. In Jainism it is said that it is because of attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh) and ignorance (agnanta), that onebecomes bound; whereas in Vedanta, it says that one is boundbecause of mudd (impurity), projection through illusion (vikshep)and ignorance of the Self (agnanta). They both agree onignorance (agnan). Therefore, a person is bound throughignorance of the Self (agnan), and is set free through Knowledgeof the Self (Gnan). When you realize your own Self, is then youbecome free....And the Decisions RemainOver here, however many falsely ascribed intents (aropitbhaav), you have made, they are all worldly intents (sansaribhaav). And because of those worldly intents (sansari bhaav),other parliamentary members (mind, intellect, chit and ego) cometogether. All these members, having come together, collectivelycome to a decision, and effective (karya) body is made. Then,effect and causes, causes and effect, effect and causes ...justcontinually go on and on.Is this name ‘Chandubhai’ effective or not? If someonesaid, ‘That Chandubhai that owns the cinema is a bad person!’just saying that, will have an effect on you. Is this body effectiveor not? Even this speech is effective too. Does your speech nothave an effect on some people? And even the mind is effective.If the mind becomes restless, it will not let you sleep. One getsready for bed at ten-thirty at night. Everyone says, ‘Chandubhai,go to bed’, so he goes to bed. He then remembers that he has lentsomeone twenty-five thousand rupees, but he still has not got it inwriting. As soon as he has this thought, his mind becomes restlessand it will not let him sleep. So is the mind not ‘effective’also?Therefore, the mind, speech and body are all effective.They give rise to causes. From the attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh), that occur through them; causes arise, which is thecausal body, that will become the effective body, in the next life.The causal body is referred to as karan sharira, and effectivebody as the karya sharira (the active body giving effects).Therefore, after it becomes a causal body (karan sharira),the parliamentary process comes together. After the parliamentaryprocess (interaction of mind, intellect, chit and ego) has occurred,only the decisions of the parliament remain, while the membersof the parliament all leave. Each of those decisions, continue toAptavani-83940Aptavani-8be passed one by one. All the decisions made during the planning,keep passing and come into effect (rupak). You will have tounderstand this, will you not?With the Atma...Questioner: If I am going to have another birth(punarjanma), then my Atma will go with me, will it not?Dadashri: It comes with you! The Atma leaves fromhere. At that time, the kashays (anger-pride-deceit-greed) ofthe body and whatever else; is all swept up! That is because ofthe wrong belief you have, that ‘I am this’. And when you say‘I am’, it would mean that everything then becomes mine;therefore anger-pride-deceit-greed, occur. When the Atmaleaves, the anger-pride-deceit-greed, are swept up and it leaves.And it leaves the body in such a way, making sure that nothingis left behind.Now with the Atma, what else goes along? Along with itgo the karan sharira, which is the causal body and the subtlebody (sookshma sharira), which is referred to as the electricalbody. As long as this gross body exists, and as long as it issansari (involved in worldly life interaction), there is an electricalbody in every soul (jiva). And when you go to the final liberation(moksha), that electrical body is released, and the real form(swaroop) of the Atma alone goes.Here, a Guarantee of Just One More Life!Questioner: Once the vision (darshan) of the Atma’sreal form (swaroop) is attained, the living being (jiva) remainsconstantly in the form of the Atma, so does the living being stillhave to go through another birth (punarjanma)?Dadashri: No. However, one more avatar (lifetime) stillremains before final liberation (moksha). That is because this isaccording to my Agnas (directives). To follow the Agnas isconsidered the absence of adverse meditation (dharma dhyan).And you have to stay for one avatar (lifetime) to reap therewards for that, and it would feel as though you already haveliberation (moksha) right here! What would be the point if youdid not experience liberation (moksha) here and now? Otherwiseyou would only get conned by everyone in this Kaliyug (Currentera of the time cycle characterized by lack of unity in thought,speech and action). If you sent someone you know, out to buyvegetables, he would take out a commission, is there any tellingabout Kaliyug? So it (moksha) has to be guaranteed. This is theguarantee ‘we’ give you. Then, the amount of benefit you receive;will depend on how much You abide by ‘our’ Agnas. Besides, theawareness of your own Self will be with you all the time, it willbe there continuously. Even when you are at work in the office,that awareness will be there. If the work is a bit sticky (demanding),then after you finish that work, the awareness will come back.If the deed is sticky (difficult), it would be like watercoming out of a half-inch pipe, and if you put your hand underthe tap, it would not move under its stream. But if you held yourhand out, under a one and a half inch pipe where the water isgushing out with force, your hand will move away. There aremany heavy sticky karmas like that, then they can really shakeyou up. We do not have any problem with that either. Becausedo you not want to clear your accounts in just one lifetime? Youcannot go to final liberation (moksha) without clearing yourkarmic accounts (hisaab)!Questioner: If we do not clear our accounts (hisaab),does it mean we have to go through rebirth (punarjanma)? Dadashri: Yes, that is precisely why there is rebirth(punarjanma). So the karmic account (hisaab) has to becompletely cleared and then you can get somewhere.Illusion Is the Cause of Birth and DeathQuestioner: So that would mean that if there is anotherbirth, then it is the same Atma that goes there?Aptavani-83940Aptavani-8be passed one by one. All the decisions made during the planning,keep passing and come into effect (rupak). You will have tounderstand this, will you not?With the Atma...Questioner: If I am going to have another birth(punarjanma), then my Atma will go with me, will it not?Dadashri: It comes with you! The Atma leaves fromhere. At that time, the kashays (anger-pride-deceit-greed) ofthe body and whatever else; is all swept up! That is because ofthe wrong belief you have, that ‘I am this’. And when you say‘I am’, it would mean that everything then becomes mine;therefore anger-pride-deceit-greed, occur. When the Atmaleaves, the anger-pride-deceit-greed, are swept up and it leaves.And it leaves the body in such a way, making sure that nothingis left behind.Now with the Atma, what else goes along? Along with itgo the karan sharira, which is the causal body and the subtlebody (sookshma sharira), which is referred to as the electricalbody. As long as this gross body exists, and as long as it issansari (involved in worldly life interaction), there is an electricalbody in every soul (jiva). And when you go to the final liberation(moksha), that electrical body is released, and the real form(swaroop) of the Atma alone goes.Here, a Guarantee of Just One More Life!Questioner: Once the vision (darshan) of the Atma’sreal form (swaroop) is attained, the living being (jiva) remainsconstantly in the form of the Atma, so does the living being stillhave to go through another birth (punarjanma)?Dadashri: No. However, one more avatar (lifetime) stillremains before final liberation (moksha). That is because this isaccording to my Agnas (directives). To follow the Agnas isconsidered the absence of adverse meditation (dharma dhyan).And you have to stay for one avatar (lifetime) to reap therewards for that, and it would feel as though you already haveliberation (moksha) right here! What would be the point if youdid not experience liberation (moksha) here and now? Otherwiseyou would only get conned by everyone in this Kaliyug (Currentera of the time cycle characterized by lack of unity in thought,speech and action). If you sent someone you know, out to buyvegetables, he would take out a commission, is there any tellingabout Kaliyug? So it (moksha) has to be guaranteed. This is theguarantee ‘we’ give you. Then, the amount of benefit you receive;will depend on how much You abide by ‘our’ Agnas. Besides, theawareness of your own Self will be with you all the time, it willbe there continuously. Even when you are at work in the office,that awareness will be there. If the work is a bit sticky (demanding),then after you finish that work, the awareness will come back.If the deed is sticky (difficult), it would be like watercoming out of a half-inch pipe, and if you put your hand underthe tap, it would not move under its stream. But if you held yourhand out, under a one and a half inch pipe where the water isgushing out with force, your hand will move away. There aremany heavy sticky karmas like that, then they can really shakeyou up. We do not have any problem with that either. Becausedo you not want to clear your accounts in just one lifetime? Youcannot go to final liberation (moksha) without clearing yourkarmic accounts (hisaab)!Questioner: If we do not clear our accounts (hisaab),does it mean we have to go through rebirth (punarjanma)? Dadashri: Yes, that is precisely why there is rebirth(punarjanma). So the karmic account (hisaab) has to becompletely cleared and then you can get somewhere.Illusion Is the Cause of Birth and DeathQuestioner: So that would mean that if there is anotherbirth, then it is the same Atma that goes there?Aptavani-84142Aptavani-8Dadashri: Yes, that very Atma, no other.Questioner: So then can we not say that even the Atmatakes birth again?Dadashri: No. The Atma can never be born. It is not theAtma’s nature (swabhav) to take birth. Birth happens to thenon-Self complex (pudgal), and death also happens to the non-Self complex. But because it has this belief that ‘I am this(Chandubhai)’, it has to be dragged along. Otherwise, in this itis the non-Self complex that takes birth and it is the non-Selfcomplex that dies!Questioner: But is the Atma not with the non-Selfcomplex (pudgal)?Dadashri: It is because of illusion (bhranti) that it is withthe non-Self complex; otherwise, when the illusion goes away,the Atma and the non-Self complex have nothing to do witheach other. Once the illusion (bhranti) has gone, whatever wascharged becomes discharged, which means that it is all finished,and nothing new will be charged.In any of the karmas that take place right now, if you say,‘I am the owner’ of those karmas, and if you say, ‘I did them’,then a new account (hisaab) is created. And if you understandthat it was all done by scientific circumstantial evidence(vyavasthit), and that ‘I am the pure Soul (Shuddhatma)’, thenyou have nothing to do with karma.Questioner: Then there would not be another birth?Dadashri: Yes, then you are free. But in this age (kaad),it is not possible to have a complete discharge. It means that theforce of the karma is so overwhelming that it takes one or twolifetimes. Once the intent (bhaav) of doership ends, then that isit, it is finished, no more karma are bound.Questioner: I want to know your thoughts about pastkarma. For example, what kind of karma do these minisculeinsects do that would help them in their future lives?Dadashri: Unlike humans, any other beings that do karmado not have consequences. They just do their karma and thenthey are freed.Questioner: So what life-form do insects have in the nextlife? Will an insect stay an insect?Dadashri: No. From being an insect, they will have asecond avatar (birth) and a third avatar. It goes into anotherplace of creation (yoni) and day by day it sheds its karma. Itcan only suffer the karma that it had bound, it cannot bind newkarma. Only humans can bind new karma. Even the celestialbeings (devas) are enduring their karma. The celestial beingsendure credit (merit karma), and animals suffer debit (demeritkarma), while humans suffer both credit and debit. However,although humans suffer them, they also become doers and sothey bind new karma.Questioner: Is this body not the result of karma?Dadashri: Yes, it is indeed the result of karma.Questioner: Does karma not have to be completelydischarged?Dadashri: If there is complete discharge of karma(nirjara) then one goes to the abode of Liberated Souls (Siddhakshetra). However, when the chit (inner component ofknowledge and vision) becomes pure (shuddha), you can saythat the discharge of karma (nirjara) has occurred.Forces of Discharge Cause Charging in IgnoranceJust as the cells of a battery are charged (with energy),that is how the body has also been charged. There is no life(chetan) in the body. The life lies within; the life is in the Atma.The body is chetan that has been charged!Aptavani-84142Aptavani-8Dadashri: Yes, that very Atma, no other.Questioner: So then can we not say that even the Atmatakes birth again?Dadashri: No. The Atma can never be born. It is not theAtma’s nature (swabhav) to take birth. Birth happens to thenon-Self complex (pudgal), and death also happens to the non-Self complex. But because it has this belief that ‘I am this(Chandubhai)’, it has to be dragged along. Otherwise, in this itis the non-Self complex that takes birth and it is the non-Selfcomplex that dies!Questioner: But is the Atma not with the non-Selfcomplex (pudgal)?Dadashri: It is because of illusion (bhranti) that it is withthe non-Self complex; otherwise, when the illusion goes away,the Atma and the non-Self complex have nothing to do witheach other. Once the illusion (bhranti) has gone, whatever wascharged becomes discharged, which means that it is all finished,and nothing new will be charged.In any of the karmas that take place right now, if you say,‘I am the owner’ of those karmas, and if you say, ‘I did them’,then a new account (hisaab) is created. And if you understandthat it was all done by scientific circumstantial evidence(vyavasthit), and that ‘I am the pure Soul (Shuddhatma)’, thenyou have nothing to do with karma.Questioner: Then there would not be another birth?Dadashri: Yes, then you are free. But in this age (kaad),it is not possible to have a complete discharge. It means that theforce of the karma is so overwhelming that it takes one or twolifetimes. Once the intent (bhaav) of doership ends, then that isit, it is finished, no more karma are bound.Questioner: I want to know your thoughts about pastkarma. For example, what kind of karma do these minisculeinsects do that would help them in their future lives?Dadashri: Unlike humans, any other beings that do karmado not have consequences. They just do their karma and thenthey are freed.Questioner: So what life-form do insects have in the nextlife? Will an insect stay an insect?Dadashri: No. From being an insect, they will have asecond avatar (birth) and a third avatar. It goes into anotherplace of creation (yoni) and day by day it sheds its karma. Itcan only suffer the karma that it had bound, it cannot bind newkarma. Only humans can bind new karma. Even the celestialbeings (devas) are enduring their karma. The celestial beingsendure credit (merit karma), and animals suffer debit (demeritkarma), while humans suffer both credit and debit. However,although humans suffer them, they also become doers and sothey bind new karma.Questioner: Is this body not the result of karma?Dadashri: Yes, it is indeed the result of karma.Questioner: Does karma not have to be completelydischarged?Dadashri: If there is complete discharge of karma(nirjara) then one goes to the abode of Liberated Souls (Siddhakshetra). However, when the chit (inner component ofknowledge and vision) becomes pure (shuddha), you can saythat the discharge of karma (nirjara) has occurred.Forces of Discharge Cause Charging in IgnoranceJust as the cells of a battery are charged (with energy),that is how the body has also been charged. There is no life(chetan) in the body. The life lies within; the life is in the Atma.The body is chetan that has been charged!Aptavani-84344Aptavani-8Man does not have the power (shakti) to sleep, he doesnot have the power to wake up, the power to go, or the powerto come; he has absolutely no power whatsoever in him. Humansonly have the power to charge, and even that is not their ownindependent power (shakti), but it is the result of force exertedby the discharge that incites the charging! If man had theindependent power (shakti) to charge, he would never havebeen able to go to final liberation (moksha). That is because hewould be considered liable and if he becomes liable, then hecould never go to moksha.You simply believe, ‘I am doing this’! But it happensbecause of the force of discharge (of karma), and when thereis too much pressure, the charging just happens. So it is primarilyignorance of the Self that hinders you. Once the ignorance leaves,liberation is at arm’s length.Causes Result in the Cycles of Birth and DeathQuestioner: At death, what sort of state is the Atma in?Dadashri: It is in the same state as it is in right now.There will be no change to its state. Only that upon death, itleaves the physical (sthool) body behind; it does not leaveanything else behind. It only takes other circumstances alongwith it. Which other circumstances? The karmas that are bound,anger-pride-deceit-greed (krodh-maan-maya-lobh) and thesubtle body (sookshma sharira), are all the things that goes withit. The only thing that stays behind is the physical body (sthoolsharira). The clothing (body) is useless now, so it is discarded.Questioner: And it acquires a new body?Dadashri: Yes. All it does is change clothing, but nothingelse changes. Because, as long as ignorance (of the Self) prevails,seeds are constantly being sown, and only after they are sown,does it move ahead, but once it has Gnan, it is freed. When onebecomes aware of ‘Who am I?’ one becomes free.After death, there is birth and after birth there is death.That is all that continually goes on. Now why do births anddeaths occur? It is because of, causes and effects, effects andcauses; however, if in this cycle of cause and effect, the causesare destroyed, all the effects will end, and then one will not haveto take another birth.If you have created causes throughout your entire life;where would these causes of yours, go? And if you have createdcauses, they will not hold back from giving you the results oftheir effects. Do you understand that you had created causes?Every deed (karya) gives rise to causes. If someone saysyou are worthless, causes of retaliation will arise within you, thatwould say, ‘Your father must be worthless’. That would beconsidered your cause. The person who calls you worthless isclearly within the law (of karma); whereas do you not understandthat you are indeed the one who has stepped out of the law?Why are you not saying anything?Questioner: That is right.Dadashri: So causes occur in this life and their effectswill have to be experienced in the next life.Here, effective moha (illusory attachment) is consideredcausal moha. You only believe, ‘I am getting angry’. But it isonly because of illusion (bhranti), that this anger is there.Otherwise, it is not anger at all; it is an effect (of past life). Andwhen all the causes have been stopped, all that remains is theeffect, and since the causes have stopped; he is not responsiblefor the effect. Effect will not stop showing its outcome.The Gnani Destroys the Cycle of Birth andDeathWhat is the real nature of the Self? The original Atma, theexact Atma, is pure Self (shuddha chetan) and is itself theAptavani-84344Aptavani-8Man does not have the power (shakti) to sleep, he doesnot have the power to wake up, the power to go, or the powerto come; he has absolutely no power whatsoever in him. Humansonly have the power to charge, and even that is not their ownindependent power (shakti), but it is the result of force exertedby the discharge that incites the charging! If man had theindependent power (shakti) to charge, he would never havebeen able to go to final liberation (moksha). That is because hewould be considered liable and if he becomes liable, then hecould never go to moksha.You simply believe, ‘I am doing this’! But it happensbecause of the force of discharge (of karma), and when thereis too much pressure, the charging just happens. So it is primarilyignorance of the Self that hinders you. Once the ignorance leaves,liberation is at arm’s length.Causes Result in the Cycles of Birth and DeathQuestioner: At death, what sort of state is the Atma in?Dadashri: It is in the same state as it is in right now.There will be no change to its state. Only that upon death, itleaves the physical (sthool) body behind; it does not leaveanything else behind. It only takes other circumstances alongwith it. Which other circumstances? The karmas that are bound,anger-pride-deceit-greed (krodh-maan-maya-lobh) and thesubtle body (sookshma sharira), are all the things that goes withit. The only thing that stays behind is the physical body (sthoolsharira). The clothing (body) is useless now, so it is discarded.Questioner: And it acquires a new body?Dadashri: Yes. All it does is change clothing, but nothingelse changes. Because, as long as ignorance (of the Self) prevails,seeds are constantly being sown, and only after they are sown,does it move ahead, but once it has Gnan, it is freed. When onebecomes aware of ‘Who am I?’ one becomes free.After death, there is birth and after birth there is death.That is all that continually goes on. Now why do births anddeaths occur? It is because of, causes and effects, effects andcauses; however, if in this cycle of cause and effect, the causesare destroyed, all the effects will end, and then one will not haveto take another birth.If you have created causes throughout your entire life;where would these causes of yours, go? And if you have createdcauses, they will not hold back from giving you the results oftheir effects. Do you understand that you had created causes?Every deed (karya) gives rise to causes. If someone saysyou are worthless, causes of retaliation will arise within you, thatwould say, ‘Your father must be worthless’. That would beconsidered your cause. The person who calls you worthless isclearly within the law (of karma); whereas do you not understandthat you are indeed the one who has stepped out of the law?Why are you not saying anything?Questioner: That is right.Dadashri: So causes occur in this life and their effectswill have to be experienced in the next life.Here, effective moha (illusory attachment) is consideredcausal moha. You only believe, ‘I am getting angry’. But it isonly because of illusion (bhranti), that this anger is there.Otherwise, it is not anger at all; it is an effect (of past life). Andwhen all the causes have been stopped, all that remains is theeffect, and since the causes have stopped; he is not responsiblefor the effect. Effect will not stop showing its outcome.The Gnani Destroys the Cycle of Birth andDeathWhat is the real nature of the Self? The original Atma, theexact Atma, is pure Self (shuddha chetan) and is itself theAptavani-84546Aptavani-8Absolute Soul (Parmatma); however, that which the worldconsiders to be soul (chetan) is actually lifeless life (nischetanchetan). If you heat a ball of iron, it becomes like fire (redhot), which is just how lifeless life (nischetan chetan) is. (Itappears alive, but it is not. It appears to be Atma, but it isnot).What is lifeless life (nischetan chetan)? Something thatis being charged in the presence of the original Self (mudachetan), which then continues to discharge, is referred to asnischetan chetan. The components (parmanus; subatomicparticles) have been charged and the charged parmanus arecalled karan or causes. These causes accumulate throughouta person’s life and when he dies, these causes or the causalbody (karan sharira), will in the next life become the effectivebody (karya sharira).The effective body means that the three batteries of themind, speech and body are ready, and from them, new causescontinue to arise. So in this life, the mind, speech and bodycontinue to discharge, while on the other hand, a new chargingis occurring within. The batteries of the mind, speech and bodythat are being charged, are for the next life, while these are fromthe past life, that are discharging in this life. The Gnani Purushstops the new charging and so the old ones continue to onlydischarge.So after death, the soul migrates to another yoni (place ofbirth). Until a person realizes the Self, the soul wanders aroundfrom one yoni to another. As long as one becomes engrossed(tanmayakar – to become one with) with the mind, engrossedwith the intellect (buddhi), the worldly life (sansar) exists. Thatis because, to become engrossed (tanmayakar), means to sowa seed in the place of creation (yoni), and Lord Krishna has toldus that the worldly life exists because the seed is sown in theplace of creation. Once the seed is no longer sown in the placeof creation, one’s worldly life ends.Five Senses Only for One More Life!Questioner: When a living being (jiva) takes anotherbirth, do all the five senses and the mind go with it?Dadashri: No, no, nothing at all. All the senses areexhausted and they end. The senses have died. So, none of thesenses or anything else goes along with the Atma. Only anger-pride-deceit-greed goes along with it. In the causal body (karansharira), anger-pride-deceit-greed everything, is included. Andthe subtle body (sookshma sharira), what is that like? It staystogether with the Atma, until it attains final liberation (moksha).No matter where the birth occurs, this subtle body (sookshmasharira) is always with it.Nevertheless, all the senses and everything else, dies. Andfrom the causal body, a new one arises. The senses have onlyarisen for the sake of being exhausted, so they are constantlybeing exhausted. And as they become exhausted, they finish. Sowhen you ask a dying man, ‘say something! Uncle say something’,he would just utter, ‘le, le, le...’, that is because the tongue hasgone and he cannot speak anymore, his speech is exhausted andfinished. The same thing happens to the eyes. Even the ears areaffected; therefore everything becomes exhausted. So these sensesor anything else do not go with it. It will receive new and freshsenses. The eyes will be first class, the ears will be first class.Then just keep listening to the radio with your earplugs!How Long Does the Relationship With theSubtle Body Last?So the Atma alone does not leave the body after death.The Atma is accompanied by the karmas, referred to as thecausal body (karan sharira). And thirdly, the electrical bodygoes with it too. The three leave together. As long as the worldlylife (sansar) exists, every living being (jiva) certainly has anelectrical body within it! When the causal body (karan sharira)is created, the electrical body is definitely there with it. TheAptavani-84546Aptavani-8Absolute Soul (Parmatma); however, that which the worldconsiders to be soul (chetan) is actually lifeless life (nischetanchetan). If you heat a ball of iron, it becomes like fire (redhot), which is just how lifeless life (nischetan chetan) is. (Itappears alive, but it is not. It appears to be Atma, but it isnot).What is lifeless life (nischetan chetan)? Something thatis being charged in the presence of the original Self (mudachetan), which then continues to discharge, is referred to asnischetan chetan. The components (parmanus; subatomicparticles) have been charged and the charged parmanus arecalled karan or causes. These causes accumulate throughouta person’s life and when he dies, these causes or the causalbody (karan sharira), will in the next life become the effectivebody (karya sharira).The effective body means that the three batteries of themind, speech and body are ready, and from them, new causescontinue to arise. So in this life, the mind, speech and bodycontinue to discharge, while on the other hand, a new chargingis occurring within. The batteries of the mind, speech and bodythat are being charged, are for the next life, while these are fromthe past life, that are discharging in this life. The Gnani Purushstops the new charging and so the old ones continue to onlydischarge.So after death, the soul migrates to another yoni (place ofbirth). Until a person realizes the Self, the soul wanders aroundfrom one yoni to another. As long as one becomes engrossed(tanmayakar – to become one with) with the mind, engrossedwith the intellect (buddhi), the worldly life (sansar) exists. Thatis because, to become engrossed (tanmayakar), means to sowa seed in the place of creation (yoni), and Lord Krishna has toldus that the worldly life exists because the seed is sown in theplace of creation. Once the seed is no longer sown in the placeof creation, one’s worldly life ends.Five Senses Only for One More Life!Questioner: When a living being (jiva) takes anotherbirth, do all the five senses and the mind go with it?Dadashri: No, no, nothing at all. All the senses areexhausted and they end. The senses have died. So, none of thesenses or anything else goes along with the Atma. Only anger-pride-deceit-greed goes along with it. In the causal body (karansharira), anger-pride-deceit-greed everything, is included. Andthe subtle body (sookshma sharira), what is that like? It staystogether with the Atma, until it attains final liberation (moksha).No matter where the birth occurs, this subtle body (sookshmasharira) is always with it.Nevertheless, all the senses and everything else, dies. Andfrom the causal body, a new one arises. The senses have onlyarisen for the sake of being exhausted, so they are constantlybeing exhausted. And as they become exhausted, they finish. Sowhen you ask a dying man, ‘say something! Uncle say something’,he would just utter, ‘le, le, le...’, that is because the tongue hasgone and he cannot speak anymore, his speech is exhausted andfinished. The same thing happens to the eyes. Even the ears areaffected; therefore everything becomes exhausted. So these sensesor anything else do not go with it. It will receive new and freshsenses. The eyes will be first class, the ears will be first class.Then just keep listening to the radio with your earplugs!How Long Does the Relationship With theSubtle Body Last?So the Atma alone does not leave the body after death.The Atma is accompanied by the karmas, referred to as thecausal body (karan sharira). And thirdly, the electrical bodygoes with it too. The three leave together. As long as the worldlylife (sansar) exists, every living being (jiva) certainly has anelectrical body within it! When the causal body (karan sharira)is created, the electrical body is definitely there with it. TheAptavani-84748Aptavani-8electrical body forms a natural part of the existence of everyliving being (jiva), and is always there. It is because of it, thatyou function. When you eat, it is the electrical body that carriesout the digestion. It is involved in the production of blood, thecirculation of blood which is all done internally. It is the electricalbody that is responsible for the light that allows your eyes to see.Even anger-pride-deceit-greed, happens because of the electricalbody. The Atma does not have anger-pride-deceit-greed at all.All this anger and everything, is attributed to the electrical body.Questioner: So during charging, is it the electrical bodythat is at work?Dadashri: Only when there is an electrical body, cancharging take place, and unless the electrical body is there, nothinghappens. And even if the electrical body is there, but the Atmais not there, nothing will happen. These are all collective causes.Questioner: When a living being (jiva) dies, how doesthe electrical body (tejas sharira) go with it?Dadashri: For how long does the electrical body (tejassharira) remain? It is there as long as a balance of karmaremains. Once the balance of karma is finished, there will be nomore electrical body. So it remains until the lifetimes end (oneattains moksha). In every living being, in trees and everything,there is an electrical body, and if that electrical body was notthere, how would they function? In English, the tejas sharira iscalled the electrical body. And without electricity, nothing wouldwork in the home, and you would not be able to see anything.If electricity stops, then that is it, everything ends!It is just like, if you light the stove to heat water, no matterhow many gallons of water you have, it will eventually all disappear,will it not?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: The water itself has a gross (sthool) form, andthat which evaporates away, has a subtle (sookshma) form. Inthe same way, the body has a gross (sthool) form which youcan see, but the other subtle (sookshma) form is one you cannotsee. But the subtle body (sookshma sharira) is very much likethis one, there is nothing different in it. The subtle body meansthe electrical body itself!Questioner: But at the time when the soul (jiva) leaves,how does the causal body (karan sharira), and the electricalbody (tejas sharira) go with it? Why does anything else notleave with it?Dadashri: If you boil water, the hydrogen and oxygen inthe water, will evaporate together! And later, even they separate.But when they evaporate, they evaporate together. They separateand then come back together. That is an account (hisaab). It isbecause of the karmic account that the electrical body staysbound to the Atma. That is why there is no other mixing. Thatelectrical body remains the same, life after life, throughout itsexistence, and nothing on the outside can touch it. Just as thisphysical body does not allow another physical body to fuse withit, the same is true for the subtle body (sookshma sharira). Theonly difference is that the gross and tangible (sthool) body isvisible to the eyes; whereas the subtle body is not. There is evena form to it, and everything else, except you can see the physicalbody and you cannot see the subtle body; that is all. So thereis no mixing of any kind. The subtle body does not mix withanything else. There is the ‘my-ness’ (mamata) in this physicalbody and there is the ‘my-ness’ in the subtle body as well.It is like this: as long as there is the state of worldly life(sansar avastha), the subtle body stays with it. The state ofworldly life (sansar avastha) means the state of illusion(bhranti). It is there, as long as the subtle body is there.Questioner: So within the subtle body, is the Atmaseparate, or is it bound?Aptavani-84748Aptavani-8electrical body forms a natural part of the existence of everyliving being (jiva), and is always there. It is because of it, thatyou function. When you eat, it is the electrical body that carriesout the digestion. It is involved in the production of blood, thecirculation of blood which is all done internally. It is the electricalbody that is responsible for the light that allows your eyes to see.Even anger-pride-deceit-greed, happens because of the electricalbody. The Atma does not have anger-pride-deceit-greed at all.All this anger and everything, is attributed to the electrical body.Questioner: So during charging, is it the electrical bodythat is at work?Dadashri: Only when there is an electrical body, cancharging take place, and unless the electrical body is there, nothinghappens. And even if the electrical body is there, but the Atmais not there, nothing will happen. These are all collective causes.Questioner: When a living being (jiva) dies, how doesthe electrical body (tejas sharira) go with it?Dadashri: For how long does the electrical body (tejassharira) remain? It is there as long as a balance of karmaremains. Once the balance of karma is finished, there will be nomore electrical body. So it remains until the lifetimes end (oneattains moksha). In every living being, in trees and everything,there is an electrical body, and if that electrical body was notthere, how would they function? In English, the tejas sharira iscalled the electrical body. And without electricity, nothing wouldwork in the home, and you would not be able to see anything.If electricity stops, then that is it, everything ends!It is just like, if you light the stove to heat water, no matterhow many gallons of water you have, it will eventually all disappear,will it not?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: The water itself has a gross (sthool) form, andthat which evaporates away, has a subtle (sookshma) form. Inthe same way, the body has a gross (sthool) form which youcan see, but the other subtle (sookshma) form is one you cannotsee. But the subtle body (sookshma sharira) is very much likethis one, there is nothing different in it. The subtle body meansthe electrical body itself!Questioner: But at the time when the soul (jiva) leaves,how does the causal body (karan sharira), and the electricalbody (tejas sharira) go with it? Why does anything else notleave with it?Dadashri: If you boil water, the hydrogen and oxygen inthe water, will evaporate together! And later, even they separate.But when they evaporate, they evaporate together. They separateand then come back together. That is an account (hisaab). It isbecause of the karmic account that the electrical body staysbound to the Atma. That is why there is no other mixing. Thatelectrical body remains the same, life after life, throughout itsexistence, and nothing on the outside can touch it. Just as thisphysical body does not allow another physical body to fuse withit, the same is true for the subtle body (sookshma sharira). Theonly difference is that the gross and tangible (sthool) body isvisible to the eyes; whereas the subtle body is not. There is evena form to it, and everything else, except you can see the physicalbody and you cannot see the subtle body; that is all. So thereis no mixing of any kind. The subtle body does not mix withanything else. There is the ‘my-ness’ (mamata) in this physicalbody and there is the ‘my-ness’ in the subtle body as well.It is like this: as long as there is the state of worldly life(sansar avastha), the subtle body stays with it. The state ofworldly life (sansar avastha) means the state of illusion(bhranti). It is there, as long as the subtle body is there.Questioner: So within the subtle body, is the Atmaseparate, or is it bound?Aptavani-84950Aptavani-8Dadashri: It is separate, it is not bound. It is the vyavaharatma (the atma which interacts with the world), that is bound,but the real Atma is not bound. The word atma that you usein worldly interaction (vyavahar) is the one which is bound.Questioner: When another birth is taken, is it the subtlebody that takes birth?Dadashri: Yes, why not just say that it is the ego thattakes birth! We do not know the subtle body, nor have we everseen the subtle body. You learned how to say the word, sookshmasharira, but even that is just from reading in a book. So it is theego itself that takes birth, just say that! Do you know the egoor not? It is the ego that acquires a new body, again and again.There is the atma of worldly interaction (vyavahar atma) andthere is the real Atma. The real Atma is unbound and indeedpure. All these problems are the problems of the ego. If theego goes away, you attain liberation (moksha). That is all thereis to it. You will be able to understand this in short, will you not?The subtle body (sookshma deha) that we talk about iswhat goes into the next life. You understand that fact, do younot? Otherwise how else can the subtle be known? The subtleis something different; only the Gnanis can understand it. Peoplemerely say subtle body, subtle body, because they have read itin books. But when they do not understand even the sthool(gross), how are they going to understand the sookshma (subtle)?Who Is Stuck onto Whom?Questioner: Is the Atma stuck to the body (pudgal) oris the body (pudgal) stuck to the Atma?Dadashri: The fact is; nothing is stuck to anything.Everything is instrumental (naimitik). Only in worldly interaction(vyavahar) do people say, ‘the soul has stuck to it’. That is whypeople say things like, ‘why don’t you just let go of this tree youare holding on to!’ But is it so easy to let go? These are allscientific circumstantial evidences.Questioner: But it seems as though the Atma is stuck tothe pudgal. It happens because the Atma becomes involved(tanmayakar) with the non-Self complex (pudgal).Dadashri: That is mandatory for the soul.Questioner: Why is it mandatory for the soul? Who madeit mandatory?Dadashri: The way it is, is that the Atma (Soul) ischaitanya (has attribute of knowledge and vision) and the pudgalis jada (matter), so when you put the two together, visheshbhaav (meaning ego, ‘I am Chandubhai’) arises. No one isactually doing anything, but because the two come together, theextra intent (vishesh bhaav) arises, and because of the visheshbhaav, worldly life (sansar) is created. But as the soul comesinto its real form and realizes, ‘Who am I?’; it is released, andthat is also when the body (pudgal) leaves!Questioner: How did the two get so close to one another?Dadashri: That indeed is this evidence! All this comestogether upon entering worldly interaction (vyavahar). Hereworldly interaction (vyavahar) is full of circumstances (saiyogo),and we have to go where there are no circumstances, to theSiddha pad (state of Absolute Liberation). And for that, youfind help from scriptures or the Gnani Purush, so you realizeyour own form (swaroop; the Self), and from that point onwardsbegins the liberation. Therefore, after one lifetime, two lifetimesor even fifteen lifetimes, you achieve your goal!So the chetan (Atma) itself does not fall into the cycle ofthe pudgal (body; non-Self complex) at all. The mere fact thatyou feel that it has, is illusion (bhranti). When the illusion movesfurther away, there is only separation!Aptavani-84950Aptavani-8Dadashri: It is separate, it is not bound. It is the vyavaharatma (the atma which interacts with the world), that is bound,but the real Atma is not bound. The word atma that you usein worldly interaction (vyavahar) is the one which is bound.Questioner: When another birth is taken, is it the subtlebody that takes birth?Dadashri: Yes, why not just say that it is the ego thattakes birth! We do not know the subtle body, nor have we everseen the subtle body. You learned how to say the word, sookshmasharira, but even that is just from reading in a book. So it is theego itself that takes birth, just say that! Do you know the egoor not? It is the ego that acquires a new body, again and again.There is the atma of worldly interaction (vyavahar atma) andthere is the real Atma. The real Atma is unbound and indeedpure. All these problems are the problems of the ego. If theego goes away, you attain liberation (moksha). That is all thereis to it. You will be able to understand this in short, will you not?The subtle body (sookshma deha) that we talk about iswhat goes into the next life. You understand that fact, do younot? Otherwise how else can the subtle be known? The subtleis something different; only the Gnanis can understand it. Peoplemerely say subtle body, subtle body, because they have read itin books. But when they do not understand even the sthool(gross), how are they going to understand the sookshma (subtle)?Who Is Stuck onto Whom?Questioner: Is the Atma stuck to the body (pudgal) oris the body (pudgal) stuck to the Atma?Dadashri: The fact is; nothing is stuck to anything.Everything is instrumental (naimitik). Only in worldly interaction(vyavahar) do people say, ‘the soul has stuck to it’. That is whypeople say things like, ‘why don’t you just let go of this tree youare holding on to!’ But is it so easy to let go? These are allscientific circumstantial evidences.Questioner: But it seems as though the Atma is stuck tothe pudgal. It happens because the Atma becomes involved(tanmayakar) with the non-Self complex (pudgal).Dadashri: That is mandatory for the soul.Questioner: Why is it mandatory for the soul? Who madeit mandatory?Dadashri: The way it is, is that the Atma (Soul) ischaitanya (has attribute of knowledge and vision) and the pudgalis jada (matter), so when you put the two together, visheshbhaav (meaning ego, ‘I am Chandubhai’) arises. No one isactually doing anything, but because the two come together, theextra intent (vishesh bhaav) arises, and because of the visheshbhaav, worldly life (sansar) is created. But as the soul comesinto its real form and realizes, ‘Who am I?’; it is released, andthat is also when the body (pudgal) leaves!Questioner: How did the two get so close to one another?Dadashri: That indeed is this evidence! All this comestogether upon entering worldly interaction (vyavahar). Hereworldly interaction (vyavahar) is full of circumstances (saiyogo),and we have to go where there are no circumstances, to theSiddha pad (state of Absolute Liberation). And for that, youfind help from scriptures or the Gnani Purush, so you realizeyour own form (swaroop; the Self), and from that point onwardsbegins the liberation. Therefore, after one lifetime, two lifetimesor even fifteen lifetimes, you achieve your goal!So the chetan (Atma) itself does not fall into the cycle ofthe pudgal (body; non-Self complex) at all. The mere fact thatyou feel that it has, is illusion (bhranti). When the illusion movesfurther away, there is only separation!Aptavani-85152Aptavani-8The Atma Is Pure; Only the Belief Is WrongQuestioner: The Atma, in its original nature (swabhav)is pure, so how have these kashays (anger, pride, deceit andgreed) affected it? How have the karmas come to be bound?Dadashri: That is a science! If we keep a piece of ironhere, and if that iron were living, it would say, ‘Do not let merust’. But the rule of science is that if it comes into contact withother circumstances (saiyogo), it is bound to rust. In the sameway, the Atma’s fundamental nature is pure, but because of thepressure from circumstances, it has picked up rust.Questioner: Right now, the Atma is covered by karma,but once the Atma has shed all the karma, will it pick up rustagain?Dadashri: Until one comes into awareness of the Self, itgoes on picking up the rust, and the rust continues to form.Because you have lost awareness, and you have a falsely ascribedintent (aropit bhaav), the rust still carries on. ‘I am Chandubhai’is the false attribution (aropit bhaav), and therefore the rust isconstantly building up. Once the false attribution goes away andyou enter your own nature (swabhav; the Self), the rust will nolonger form!Questioner: In the very beginning, what must Atma beas its main substance that it picked up this rust?Dadashri: All these elements are present in the universe(lok). And as long as they are in the universe, they will continuallybe affected by other elements. That is called scientificcircumstantial evidence. When the Atma transcends beyond thelok (plains of existence; the universe), when it ascends to theSiddha gati (realm for Liberated Souls); there it will no longerpick up any rust.This is how it is. No other karmas have affected it. Onlythe karma, where awareness is lost, have adhered around it.Otherwise, the Self is pure. Even now your Atma is pure.Everyone’s Atma is pure, but because the external form(swaroop) has come about, it is in that form, your wrong beliefhas arisen. From birth, you are given ignorance (agnan) in thatform.It is the worldly life (sansar), so from the moment thebaby boy is born, he is presented with the ignorance. And theywill say, ‘Oh, it is a boy, a boy, a baby boy!’ Then he is giventhe name Chandu, so they all start calling him ‘Chandu, Chandu’,so he starts believing, ‘I am Chandu’. Then they introduce himto his daddy, and they introduce him to his mummy, and all thatignorance is presented to him. Because then he is told, ‘You areChandu, this is your mummy, this is your daddy’. He now hasa wrong belief, which he cannot get rid of. Only when the GnaniPurush breaks that wrong belief, does the right belief set in, andit is then that things will be solved! So the Atma is really pure,but this is only a matter of the difference in the vision (belief).Questioner: But how did this begin?Dadashri: It is because of all the eternal elements comingtogether, that these situations arise! This worldly life (sansar)means the path of evolution (samsaran marg), and evolution(samsaran) means that it is constantly changing. And it is becauseof these changes that you feel that your Atma is impure; howeverI see your Atma as only being pure. It is only because of yourwrong belief that you perceive it as being impure. I will fracturethat wrong belief and replace it with the right belief, so even youwill see it as pure.This is just a deluded vision (mithya darshan) that has setin; where there is no happiness (sukh), you believe there ishappiness there. When ‘we’ (Gnani Purush) give Gnan, a personfinds the road in the right direction. And once he finds the path,things will fall into place. When ‘we’ change his deluded visionAptavani-85152Aptavani-8The Atma Is Pure; Only the Belief Is WrongQuestioner: The Atma, in its original nature (swabhav)is pure, so how have these kashays (anger, pride, deceit andgreed) affected it? How have the karmas come to be bound?Dadashri: That is a science! If we keep a piece of ironhere, and if that iron were living, it would say, ‘Do not let merust’. But the rule of science is that if it comes into contact withother circumstances (saiyogo), it is bound to rust. In the sameway, the Atma’s fundamental nature is pure, but because of thepressure from circumstances, it has picked up rust.Questioner: Right now, the Atma is covered by karma,but once the Atma has shed all the karma, will it pick up rustagain?Dadashri: Until one comes into awareness of the Self, itgoes on picking up the rust, and the rust continues to form.Because you have lost awareness, and you have a falsely ascribedintent (aropit bhaav), the rust still carries on. ‘I am Chandubhai’is the false attribution (aropit bhaav), and therefore the rust isconstantly building up. Once the false attribution goes away andyou enter your own nature (swabhav; the Self), the rust will nolonger form!Questioner: In the very beginning, what must Atma beas its main substance that it picked up this rust?Dadashri: All these elements are present in the universe(lok). And as long as they are in the universe, they will continuallybe affected by other elements. That is called scientificcircumstantial evidence. When the Atma transcends beyond thelok (plains of existence; the universe), when it ascends to theSiddha gati (realm for Liberated Souls); there it will no longerpick up any rust.This is how it is. No other karmas have affected it. Onlythe karma, where awareness is lost, have adhered around it.Otherwise, the Self is pure. Even now your Atma is pure.Everyone’s Atma is pure, but because the external form(swaroop) has come about, it is in that form, your wrong beliefhas arisen. From birth, you are given ignorance (agnan) in thatform.It is the worldly life (sansar), so from the moment thebaby boy is born, he is presented with the ignorance. And theywill say, ‘Oh, it is a boy, a boy, a baby boy!’ Then he is giventhe name Chandu, so they all start calling him ‘Chandu, Chandu’,so he starts believing, ‘I am Chandu’. Then they introduce himto his daddy, and they introduce him to his mummy, and all thatignorance is presented to him. Because then he is told, ‘You areChandu, this is your mummy, this is your daddy’. He now hasa wrong belief, which he cannot get rid of. Only when the GnaniPurush breaks that wrong belief, does the right belief set in, andit is then that things will be solved! So the Atma is really pure,but this is only a matter of the difference in the vision (belief).Questioner: But how did this begin?Dadashri: It is because of all the eternal elements comingtogether, that these situations arise! This worldly life (sansar)means the path of evolution (samsaran marg), and evolution(samsaran) means that it is constantly changing. And it is becauseof these changes that you feel that your Atma is impure; howeverI see your Atma as only being pure. It is only because of yourwrong belief that you perceive it as being impure. I will fracturethat wrong belief and replace it with the right belief, so even youwill see it as pure.This is just a deluded vision (mithya darshan) that has setin; where there is no happiness (sukh), you believe there ishappiness there. When ‘we’ (Gnani Purush) give Gnan, a personfinds the road in the right direction. And once he finds the path,things will fall into place. When ‘we’ change his deluded visionAptavani-85354Aptavani-8(mithya darshan) and give him the right belief (samyak darshan),things will be solved for him, but until then he will not have asolution.The Atma is pure indeed. Your Atma is pure right now,but for the beliefs that are wrong, which have taken hold withinyou. And because of that, you believe that happiness (sukh) liesin temporary things. Whatever you see with your eyes, hear withyour ears, taste with your tongue, “are all temporary adjustments”,so you believe that there is happiness (sukh) in those temporarythings. At present you are under the influence of this wrongbelief. When the wrong belief is fractured, you will no longer findhappiness (sukh) from temporary things; you will find happinessin the permanent. Permanent happiness is eternal happiness; onceit comes, it never leaves. That itself is regarded as attainment ofthe Atma, and the experience of the Self (swanubhav) state.With the experience of this state of the Self, one gradually moveson to the Absolute state (purnahuti).How Can There Be a Coming and Going forThat Which Is Eternal?Questioner: Where did all these living beings (jiva), theseSouls in this world, come from?Dadashri: No one has come. This entire world itself is adisplay of the six eternal elements (tattva). All the six elementsmake up the world which you see. It is just scientific circumstantialevidence! So no one has made this; no one has had to doanything. It has no beginning and it has no end. I am saying itas it is, that the world has no beginning, and no end. Only thingis that from one perspective you see the world, while the otherperspective shows you liberation (moksha)! It is all a matter ofchanging one’s perception, that is all!That which comes, can never be eternal, and the Atma isan eternal thing; therefore, it cannot have a coming and going.The Atma is not like that.The First in the World…?Questioner: So where were all the living entities (jivas)created?Dadashri: These living entities have not been created.The Atma is indestructible (avinashi), and that which isindestructible can never be created. It is there forever. It cannotbe created, nor can it be destroyed. No one has been creatednor destroyed. All that you see is just an illusion (bhranti). It isthe circumstance (avastha) that comes to an end. Thecircumstance (avastha) of old age, the circumstance of youth;are all slowly destroyed, but the Self has always remained thesame. So it is the phase that comes to an end.Questioner: But there were no living beings (jivas) onour Earth before, were there? So where did they all come from?Dadashri: Who said that they were not here?Questioner: Science says so.Dadashri: Science does not say that at all. Science acceptseverything. This earth has never been without living entities(jivas).Questioner: Vignan (science) also says that first cameliving entity (jiva srushti), and then came human beings(manushya srushti).Dadashri: This Vignan was not around in those days.This world has been around since time immemorial. It has nothad a beginning and it is not going to come to an end.Questioner: I often wonder who the first ancestor (purvaj)was to be born? But I have not found an answer.Dadashri: If there were a first ascendant, it would meanthat he had a beginning, and once there is a beginning, there isan end, so the world would end. But the world is not going toAptavani-85354Aptavani-8(mithya darshan) and give him the right belief (samyak darshan),things will be solved for him, but until then he will not have asolution.The Atma is pure indeed. Your Atma is pure right now,but for the beliefs that are wrong, which have taken hold withinyou. And because of that, you believe that happiness (sukh) liesin temporary things. Whatever you see with your eyes, hear withyour ears, taste with your tongue, “are all temporary adjustments”,so you believe that there is happiness (sukh) in those temporarythings. At present you are under the influence of this wrongbelief. When the wrong belief is fractured, you will no longer findhappiness (sukh) from temporary things; you will find happinessin the permanent. Permanent happiness is eternal happiness; onceit comes, it never leaves. That itself is regarded as attainment ofthe Atma, and the experience of the Self (swanubhav) state.With the experience of this state of the Self, one gradually moveson to the Absolute state (purnahuti).How Can There Be a Coming and Going forThat Which Is Eternal?Questioner: Where did all these living beings (jiva), theseSouls in this world, come from?Dadashri: No one has come. This entire world itself is adisplay of the six eternal elements (tattva). All the six elementsmake up the world which you see. It is just scientific circumstantialevidence! So no one has made this; no one has had to doanything. It has no beginning and it has no end. I am saying itas it is, that the world has no beginning, and no end. Only thingis that from one perspective you see the world, while the otherperspective shows you liberation (moksha)! It is all a matter ofchanging one’s perception, that is all!That which comes, can never be eternal, and the Atma isan eternal thing; therefore, it cannot have a coming and going.The Atma is not like that.The First in the World…?Questioner: So where were all the living entities (jivas)created?Dadashri: These living entities have not been created.The Atma is indestructible (avinashi), and that which isindestructible can never be created. It is there forever. It cannotbe created, nor can it be destroyed. No one has been creatednor destroyed. All that you see is just an illusion (bhranti). It isthe circumstance (avastha) that comes to an end. Thecircumstance (avastha) of old age, the circumstance of youth;are all slowly destroyed, but the Self has always remained thesame. So it is the phase that comes to an end.Questioner: But there were no living beings (jivas) onour Earth before, were there? So where did they all come from?Dadashri: Who said that they were not here?Questioner: Science says so.Dadashri: Science does not say that at all. Science acceptseverything. This earth has never been without living entities(jivas).Questioner: Vignan (science) also says that first cameliving entity (jiva srushti), and then came human beings(manushya srushti).Dadashri: This Vignan was not around in those days.This world has been around since time immemorial. It has nothad a beginning and it is not going to come to an end.Questioner: I often wonder who the first ancestor (purvaj)was to be born? But I have not found an answer.Dadashri: If there were a first ascendant, it would meanthat he had a beginning, and once there is a beginning, there isan end, so the world would end. But the world is not going toAptavani-85556Aptavani-8end, and has never had a beginning. So there is never any firstascendant at all. It is how it is, it is as it always was; it is as itis. It has been this way for aeons and it will be this way and itwill stay this way forever! It means that it will carry on in thesame way as it has gone on for time immemorial. It will go onforever.Questioner: But scientists say the ape was here first.Dadashri: There was no such ape. Call it an ape oranything else, but fundamentally, is it not Atma? And it is theAtma, that is in all yonis (place of creations), as is the non-Self(anatma). There is the body; the non-Self complex (pudgal)and there is also the Atma. So there is no such thing as the firstape. Out of all the innumerable places of birth (yoni), thoseliving entities (jivas) only enter the particular place of creationthey hold a karmic account (hisaab) with. Otherwise, the Atmahas been in existence from time immemorial, as has the non-Self(anatma).Questioner: It is said that a human being is bound to theworldly life (sansar), because of his past karma. So what kindof previous bondage did the first humans born on the planet,bring with them?Dadashri: There is no first human being to be born.This world was never born. Anything that has a beginningcertainly has an end. This world is not going to end and in thesame way, it did not come into existence. The world has nobeginning, nor does it have an end (anaadi anant). And allthese humans and every living being in it; are all withoutbeginning or end (anaadi anant). The living entity (jiva) in thetree or the minutest organisms are all forever in existence(anaadi anant- no beginning-no end)! There has never beenan increase or decrease in their number; they are the same innumber as they have always been! Not a single soul (jiva) has increased and not a singlesoul has decreased, is how the world is. Not a single subatomicparticle (parmanu) has increased or decreased. Whether youburn them or do anything else to them, even then, from timeimmemorial, not a single subatomic particle (parmanu) has beenlost or gained. That is how this world is.So, the Atma has neither come, nor gone. This coming-going is just the language of the intellect (buddhi). When youcome into the language of Gnan, you will understand that nothinglike that has happened. It is because of the intellect that thingsappear that way to you. Once the intellect goes away and theego goes away, you are indeed free. It is the intellect (buddhi)and the ego that have caused all this, and that is why you perceivethings in this way.Who Will Remove the Tangled Belief inCircumstances?When a person goes outside, where does his shadowcome from? From all the circumstances (saiyogo)! When thecircumstance (saiyog) of the sun comes around, the shadowarises, and when a circumstance of a mirror comes about, thereis a reflection. So all this has come about because of circumstance(saiyog), and it has completely altered your belief. The Self(swaroop) has remained the same, but it is the belief of ‘whathas happened here?’ that changes. A little bird pecks at a mirror, does it not? Does a littlesparrow not peck at its own reflection in the mirror? Now a manwould not do that. That is because he knows that it is his ownphoto (image/reflection) in the mirror. But the sparrow’s belief isaltered, so that it perceives it as another bird and keeps peckingaway at it. But when the experience is prolonged for severaldays, the belief breaks. That is just how the belief has altered.The entire belief has become wrong, which is why the ego(ahamkar) has arisen, and also why the intellect (buddhi) hasarisen. As the light of the intellect (buddhi) is turned on, theAptavani-85556Aptavani-8end, and has never had a beginning. So there is never any firstascendant at all. It is how it is, it is as it always was; it is as itis. It has been this way for aeons and it will be this way and itwill stay this way forever! It means that it will carry on in thesame way as it has gone on for time immemorial. It will go onforever.Questioner: But scientists say the ape was here first.Dadashri: There was no such ape. Call it an ape oranything else, but fundamentally, is it not Atma? And it is theAtma, that is in all yonis (place of creations), as is the non-Self(anatma). There is the body; the non-Self complex (pudgal)and there is also the Atma. So there is no such thing as the firstape. Out of all the innumerable places of birth (yoni), thoseliving entities (jivas) only enter the particular place of creationthey hold a karmic account (hisaab) with. Otherwise, the Atmahas been in existence from time immemorial, as has the non-Self(anatma).Questioner: It is said that a human being is bound to theworldly life (sansar), because of his past karma. So what kindof previous bondage did the first humans born on the planet,bring with them?Dadashri: There is no first human being to be born.This world was never born. Anything that has a beginningcertainly has an end. This world is not going to end and in thesame way, it did not come into existence. The world has nobeginning, nor does it have an end (anaadi anant). And allthese humans and every living being in it; are all withoutbeginning or end (anaadi anant). The living entity (jiva) in thetree or the minutest organisms are all forever in existence(anaadi anant- no beginning-no end)! There has never beenan increase or decrease in their number; they are the same innumber as they have always been! Not a single soul (jiva) has increased and not a singlesoul has decreased, is how the world is. Not a single subatomicparticle (parmanu) has increased or decreased. Whether youburn them or do anything else to them, even then, from timeimmemorial, not a single subatomic particle (parmanu) has beenlost or gained. That is how this world is.So, the Atma has neither come, nor gone. This coming-going is just the language of the intellect (buddhi). When youcome into the language of Gnan, you will understand that nothinglike that has happened. It is because of the intellect that thingsappear that way to you. Once the intellect goes away and theego goes away, you are indeed free. It is the intellect (buddhi)and the ego that have caused all this, and that is why you perceivethings in this way.Who Will Remove the Tangled Belief inCircumstances?When a person goes outside, where does his shadowcome from? From all the circumstances (saiyogo)! When thecircumstance (saiyog) of the sun comes around, the shadowarises, and when a circumstance of a mirror comes about, thereis a reflection. So all this has come about because of circumstance(saiyog), and it has completely altered your belief. The Self(swaroop) has remained the same, but it is the belief of ‘whathas happened here?’ that changes. A little bird pecks at a mirror, does it not? Does a littlesparrow not peck at its own reflection in the mirror? Now a manwould not do that. That is because he knows that it is his ownphoto (image/reflection) in the mirror. But the sparrow’s belief isaltered, so that it perceives it as another bird and keeps peckingaway at it. But when the experience is prolonged for severaldays, the belief breaks. That is just how the belief has altered.The entire belief has become wrong, which is why the ego(ahamkar) has arisen, and also why the intellect (buddhi) hasarisen. As the light of the intellect (buddhi) is turned on, theAptavani-85758 Aptavani-8intellect is now the support and guide, while the main light of theAtma gets turned off. That is why there is so much confusion!The Atma had not changed at all. Nothing about the Atma hasbeen spoiled and neither has anything affected it.When a person goes out, does his shadow not keepfollowing him around? All this is just like a shadow. If someonegesticulates like this in the shadow, raises a finger in the air,raises two fingers in the air, turns to look this way and that way,and all that, would not you think that he had gone mad? In thesame way, when a person attains the awareness of his own Self,it is as though nothing has happened, as he becomes free fromcircumstances. This is only a coming together of circumstancesand nothing else. And if someone ran around in the street, tryingto shirk off his shadow, would the shadow go away? If he ranthis way, he would see it behind him, and if he turned around,he would still see it. So no matter which way he turned, wouldhe not still see something? So the shadow will not leave him.Now if someone said to him, ‘Go inside your home’, the shadowwould finish.So it is just that the belief has become wrong, and nothingelse. The Atma has not bound any karma, and all that is goneon, is just a load of perpetuated inaccuracies. If it did bindkarma, then it (the binding of karma) would become itspermanent swabhav (nature; tendency), and a permanentswabhav would never leave. These are just misconceptions thathave been knocked into people. The Lord said somethingdifferent and people understood it differently. They cannotunderstand a single word of what the Lord had said, in thesetimes! They cannot let go of anything, and they are affected withendless worries and external problems (upadhi). The GnaniPurush knows what all this is! Lord Mahavir knew this, buthow could He say anything? You cannot speak openly. I mayspeak freely amongst this small group of people, but I could notbe so open in front of five-hundred people. If you told someone,who was bound, ‘you are really free’, what would happen to thepoor man? He would not be able to experience it and wouldonly do the wrong things.Does this bird have to do anything in front of a mirror?The moment the circumstance of a mirror comes before,‘another bird’ instantly comes in front of it. It will have exactlythe same eyes, the beak etc., and whatever the bird on theoutside does; the bird inside the mirror does exactly the same.In the same way, the Atma is surrounded by circumstances.Just as the circumstance (saiyog) of the sun casts a shadow,it is because of the circumstances that one sees one’s own truenature (the Self) as being distorted. Only the One who hasbecome free from all these circumstances, can free us, no oneelse can free us. If the one who he is himself bound, how canhe free others?Where did the Atma come from? It is only in the relativethat I have had to say that the Atma is in the path of evolution(samsaran marg). On the path, it encounters all kinds ofcircumstances (saiyogo), and it is because of the pressure fromthese circumstances, that the knowledge has become vibhavik(wrong knowledge, false attribution, ‘I am Chandubhai’). TheAtma has done nothing else. Because the knowledge has becomevibhavik, whatever intent (bhaav) arose, that is how the bodybecame molded. The Atma did not have to do anything in it. Sothen, whatever one imagines, one becomes; one becomeswhatever one imagines, and there lies the confusion! Theneverything pans out as per natural laws; it is now regulated bythe laws of vyavasthit. Thereafter the cycle of the battery (thecharging of mind, speech and body) from battery, battery frombattery, carries on. Only when the Gnani Purush releases youfrom the battery, can freedom be attained. When he separatesthe three batteries of the mind, speech and body from you, nomore such batteries will be charged, and the old batteries will goon discharging.Aptavani-85758 Aptavani-8intellect is now the support and guide, while the main light of theAtma gets turned off. That is why there is so much confusion!The Atma had not changed at all. Nothing about the Atma hasbeen spoiled and neither has anything affected it.When a person goes out, does his shadow not keepfollowing him around? All this is just like a shadow. If someonegesticulates like this in the shadow, raises a finger in the air,raises two fingers in the air, turns to look this way and that way,and all that, would not you think that he had gone mad? In thesame way, when a person attains the awareness of his own Self,it is as though nothing has happened, as he becomes free fromcircumstances. This is only a coming together of circumstancesand nothing else. And if someone ran around in the street, tryingto shirk off his shadow, would the shadow go away? If he ranthis way, he would see it behind him, and if he turned around,he would still see it. So no matter which way he turned, wouldhe not still see something? So the shadow will not leave him.Now if someone said to him, ‘Go inside your home’, the shadowwould finish.So it is just that the belief has become wrong, and nothingelse. The Atma has not bound any karma, and all that is goneon, is just a load of perpetuated inaccuracies. If it did bindkarma, then it (the binding of karma) would become itspermanent swabhav (nature; tendency), and a permanentswabhav would never leave. These are just misconceptions thathave been knocked into people. The Lord said somethingdifferent and people understood it differently. They cannotunderstand a single word of what the Lord had said, in thesetimes! They cannot let go of anything, and they are affected withendless worries and external problems (upadhi). The GnaniPurush knows what all this is! Lord Mahavir knew this, buthow could He say anything? You cannot speak openly. I mayspeak freely amongst this small group of people, but I could notbe so open in front of five-hundred people. If you told someone,who was bound, ‘you are really free’, what would happen to thepoor man? He would not be able to experience it and wouldonly do the wrong things.Does this bird have to do anything in front of a mirror?The moment the circumstance of a mirror comes before,‘another bird’ instantly comes in front of it. It will have exactlythe same eyes, the beak etc., and whatever the bird on theoutside does; the bird inside the mirror does exactly the same.In the same way, the Atma is surrounded by circumstances.Just as the circumstance (saiyog) of the sun casts a shadow,it is because of the circumstances that one sees one’s own truenature (the Self) as being distorted. Only the One who hasbecome free from all these circumstances, can free us, no oneelse can free us. If the one who he is himself bound, how canhe free others?Where did the Atma come from? It is only in the relativethat I have had to say that the Atma is in the path of evolution(samsaran marg). On the path, it encounters all kinds ofcircumstances (saiyogo), and it is because of the pressure fromthese circumstances, that the knowledge has become vibhavik(wrong knowledge, false attribution, ‘I am Chandubhai’). TheAtma has done nothing else. Because the knowledge has becomevibhavik, whatever intent (bhaav) arose, that is how the bodybecame molded. The Atma did not have to do anything in it. Sothen, whatever one imagines, one becomes; one becomeswhatever one imagines, and there lies the confusion! Theneverything pans out as per natural laws; it is now regulated bythe laws of vyavasthit. Thereafter the cycle of the battery (thecharging of mind, speech and body) from battery, battery frombattery, carries on. Only when the Gnani Purush releases youfrom the battery, can freedom be attained. When he separatesthe three batteries of the mind, speech and body from you, nomore such batteries will be charged, and the old batteries will goon discharging.Aptavani-85960Aptavani-8That Is Why Gnanis Call It ‘No Beginning, NoEnd’!These are all circumstances that the Atma has accrued!You are sitting here right now, but if you venture outside andsuddenly there is a dense fog, you and I would not be able tosee each other face to face. Is that not possible?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Yes, so when the fog appears, you cannot see.That is the same for the Atma which has become shrouded ina fog of circumstances; so many circumstances arise! And likethe other fog (atmospheric), this one has infinite kinds of layers(veils of illusion). These veils are so grave, that they do not allowyou to attain the awareness of Atma; your Self. The Atma,however, has never come, nor has it ever gone. The Atma itselfis Parmatma (Absolute Soul)! But what is incredible, is that it(layers of circumstances) will not allow the awareness to comethrough. That is what the Gnani has seen. The Gnani who hasbecome free, has seen this. All these are the questions of the intellect (buddhi). Theyare all just the intellect’s questions, and it is possible that whenthe intellect is finished, that this Gnan can come forth. Peopleask, ‘What is its beginning?’ Hey! Where did you learn the wordbeginning? That is all an intellectual interference (vikalp). Just tosatisfy people’s curiosity, the Gnanis have said that it has nobeginning or end (anaadi anant).Questioner: I did not understand the meaning of nobeginning and no end (anaadi anant).Dadashri: What is never-ending (anaadi anant)? Youwill not find the beginning or even the end of something whichis round. Would you be able to find the end of this necklace?You would not even be able to find its beginning either, wouldyou? That is why it is called never beginning-never ending (anaadianant). Would you not have to explain it to people, in their ownlanguage?But that never happens. Even at this very moment, one isin the state of the Absolute Soul (Parmatma), but one is notaware of this. The awareness has been lost because of thepressure of circumstances. If there was a collector here rightnow, who had lost his awareness, and you ask him, ‘Who areyou?’ Since he is not even aware of himself, what answer willhe give you? Do living people often not lose their consciousness?In the same way, they have completely lost this awareness. Peoplehave become affected more and more by whatever they havebeen told, and that is what they have come to believe!How Can There Be a Beginning for the Eternal?Questioner: Who created the Atma?Dadashri: No one has created it. If it was created, thenit would have an end. The Atma is something that is constantlythere; it is an eternal element. It has never had a beginning. Noone has made it. If it did have a creator, then even the creatorwould come to an end, as would his creation.Questioner: Why does a thing like Atma come intoexistence?Dadashri: It has not come into existence or anything likethat. In this world, there are six eternal elements (tattva), andthese elements are constantly undergoing changes. And it isbecause of these changes that you see all the circumstances(avastha). People consider the circumstance (avastha) as: ‘Thisis my natural form (swaroop)’. The circumstances (avastha) aretemporary, whereas the elements (tattva) are permanent.Therefore the Self (Atma) does not have to ‘arise’ (come intocreation) at all.Questioner: So only the Atma has to go to moksha, itdoes not affect the others?Aptavani-85960Aptavani-8That Is Why Gnanis Call It ‘No Beginning, NoEnd’!These are all circumstances that the Atma has accrued!You are sitting here right now, but if you venture outside andsuddenly there is a dense fog, you and I would not be able tosee each other face to face. Is that not possible?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Yes, so when the fog appears, you cannot see.That is the same for the Atma which has become shrouded ina fog of circumstances; so many circumstances arise! And likethe other fog (atmospheric), this one has infinite kinds of layers(veils of illusion). These veils are so grave, that they do not allowyou to attain the awareness of Atma; your Self. The Atma,however, has never come, nor has it ever gone. The Atma itselfis Parmatma (Absolute Soul)! But what is incredible, is that it(layers of circumstances) will not allow the awareness to comethrough. That is what the Gnani has seen. The Gnani who hasbecome free, has seen this. All these are the questions of the intellect (buddhi). Theyare all just the intellect’s questions, and it is possible that whenthe intellect is finished, that this Gnan can come forth. Peopleask, ‘What is its beginning?’ Hey! Where did you learn the wordbeginning? That is all an intellectual interference (vikalp). Just tosatisfy people’s curiosity, the Gnanis have said that it has nobeginning or end (anaadi anant).Questioner: I did not understand the meaning of nobeginning and no end (anaadi anant).Dadashri: What is never-ending (anaadi anant)? Youwill not find the beginning or even the end of something whichis round. Would you be able to find the end of this necklace?You would not even be able to find its beginning either, wouldyou? That is why it is called never beginning-never ending (anaadianant). Would you not have to explain it to people, in their ownlanguage?But that never happens. Even at this very moment, one isin the state of the Absolute Soul (Parmatma), but one is notaware of this. The awareness has been lost because of thepressure of circumstances. If there was a collector here rightnow, who had lost his awareness, and you ask him, ‘Who areyou?’ Since he is not even aware of himself, what answer willhe give you? Do living people often not lose their consciousness?In the same way, they have completely lost this awareness. Peoplehave become affected more and more by whatever they havebeen told, and that is what they have come to believe!How Can There Be a Beginning for the Eternal?Questioner: Who created the Atma?Dadashri: No one has created it. If it was created, thenit would have an end. The Atma is something that is constantlythere; it is an eternal element. It has never had a beginning. Noone has made it. If it did have a creator, then even the creatorwould come to an end, as would his creation.Questioner: Why does a thing like Atma come intoexistence?Dadashri: It has not come into existence or anything likethat. In this world, there are six eternal elements (tattva), andthese elements are constantly undergoing changes. And it isbecause of these changes that you see all the circumstances(avastha). People consider the circumstance (avastha) as: ‘Thisis my natural form (swaroop)’. The circumstances (avastha) aretemporary, whereas the elements (tattva) are permanent.Therefore the Self (Atma) does not have to ‘arise’ (come intocreation) at all.Questioner: So only the Atma has to go to moksha, itdoes not affect the others?Aptavani-86162Aptavani-8Dadashri: The Atma itself is a state of liberation (mokshaswaroop), but it comes under pressure of the other elements. Ifit is released from those elements, it can attain liberation(moksha). It is itself the state of liberation (moksha swaroop).But through ignorance (agnan), one continues to believe, ‘I amthis, I am this,’ and with that, one continues to become trappedin the wrong belief! And through Gnan (knowledge of the Self),one is freed.The Integrity of Arrangement of the WorldlyLife FormsQuestioner: Do new souls keep coming into the worldor do their numbers stay the same as they are in the world rightnow?Dadashri: Are you asking me, that because there is anincrease in the human population, where the new ones havecome from?Questioner: No, not that. As the first ara (era of timecycle), the second ara, the third ara all occur, do they eachhave the same number of souls as there are right now in thecurrent era, or has there been an increase or a decrease inthem?Dadashri: There is no increase or decrease of a singlesoul. However many that, attain liberation from here; that manysouls come here from other places, into sansar vyavahar (worldlyinteraction). Vyavahar means that those living entities (jivas)that have an identification (name and form), have entered theworldly life. You would say that this rosebush has enteredinteraction in the worldly life (vyavahar). And anything that hasnot yet acquired an identity has not entered worldly interaction(vyavahar) at all. There are infinite living entities like that, whichhave not come into worldly interaction (vyavahar), so do noteven bother to count them. As many that go to moksha fromhere, that many, from other places come here. So the number ofliving entities that there are in worldly interaction (vyavahar),remain the same. Nothing ever increases or decreases in that.That is called the worldly life (sansar); no increase and nodecrease by one. Did you understand that?There are infinite living entities (jivas) that have not yetbeen named, and that is where they all come from. As soon asall those go to final liberation (moksha) from here, the others areimmediately admitted over here. All this is a natural law. Sohowever many there are now, remain the same. When you countthem, they are always the same in number.Vyavahar means any name that is given; whether it isnamed rose, or named potato, or named vayukaya (air-bodiedjiva); they have all come into worldly interaction (vyavahar).But all those without a name, have not yet entered worldlyinteraction!Questioner: Where are those living entities?Dadashri: They are somewhere else. That is somethingvery important to understand, and it is very deep. But you donot need to get too involved in all the minute complexity; otherwiseyou will forgo the Atma. Leave all that to the Gnani Purush!You only have to understand what is factual! If you try andremember all the minute detail, you will forget to do what isfundamentally more important. Try and understand it on yourown and you will see it for yourself. If you continue to followwhat ‘we’ show you, ‘You’ too will reach that station. ‘You’ willstart ‘seeing’ everything on the way. So do not go on askingabout that right now. If Bharooch (railway station) has just nowarrived and you say, ‘Dada, what does Mumbai’s Marine Drivelook like?’, I would say, ‘Why don’t you wait till you get toBombay and then see for yourself?’ So what happens here isthat at Surat station, when a ghaari (sweet pastry, delicacy ofSurat) is served, you do not appreciate it, because you are toopreoccupied with thoughts about Marine Drive. That is why weAptavani-86162Aptavani-8Dadashri: The Atma itself is a state of liberation (mokshaswaroop), but it comes under pressure of the other elements. Ifit is released from those elements, it can attain liberation(moksha). It is itself the state of liberation (moksha swaroop).But through ignorance (agnan), one continues to believe, ‘I amthis, I am this,’ and with that, one continues to become trappedin the wrong belief! And through Gnan (knowledge of the Self),one is freed.The Integrity of Arrangement of the WorldlyLife FormsQuestioner: Do new souls keep coming into the worldor do their numbers stay the same as they are in the world rightnow?Dadashri: Are you asking me, that because there is anincrease in the human population, where the new ones havecome from?Questioner: No, not that. As the first ara (era of timecycle), the second ara, the third ara all occur, do they eachhave the same number of souls as there are right now in thecurrent era, or has there been an increase or a decrease inthem?Dadashri: There is no increase or decrease of a singlesoul. However many that, attain liberation from here; that manysouls come here from other places, into sansar vyavahar (worldlyinteraction). Vyavahar means that those living entities (jivas)that have an identification (name and form), have entered theworldly life. You would say that this rosebush has enteredinteraction in the worldly life (vyavahar). And anything that hasnot yet acquired an identity has not entered worldly interaction(vyavahar) at all. There are infinite living entities like that, whichhave not come into worldly interaction (vyavahar), so do noteven bother to count them. As many that go to moksha fromhere, that many, from other places come here. So the number ofliving entities that there are in worldly interaction (vyavahar),remain the same. Nothing ever increases or decreases in that.That is called the worldly life (sansar); no increase and nodecrease by one. Did you understand that?There are infinite living entities (jivas) that have not yetbeen named, and that is where they all come from. As soon asall those go to final liberation (moksha) from here, the others areimmediately admitted over here. All this is a natural law. Sohowever many there are now, remain the same. When you countthem, they are always the same in number.Vyavahar means any name that is given; whether it isnamed rose, or named potato, or named vayukaya (air-bodiedjiva); they have all come into worldly interaction (vyavahar).But all those without a name, have not yet entered worldlyinteraction!Questioner: Where are those living entities?Dadashri: They are somewhere else. That is somethingvery important to understand, and it is very deep. But you donot need to get too involved in all the minute complexity; otherwiseyou will forgo the Atma. Leave all that to the Gnani Purush!You only have to understand what is factual! If you try andremember all the minute detail, you will forget to do what isfundamentally more important. Try and understand it on yourown and you will see it for yourself. If you continue to followwhat ‘we’ show you, ‘You’ too will reach that station. ‘You’ willstart ‘seeing’ everything on the way. So do not go on askingabout that right now. If Bharooch (railway station) has just nowarrived and you say, ‘Dada, what does Mumbai’s Marine Drivelook like?’, I would say, ‘Why don’t you wait till you get toBombay and then see for yourself?’ So what happens here isthat at Surat station, when a ghaari (sweet pastry, delicacy ofSurat) is served, you do not appreciate it, because you are toopreoccupied with thoughts about Marine Drive. That is why weAptavani-86364Aptavani-8tell you to just carry on enjoying your food and drink for thetime being! If you cannot see it right now, there is no need toworry about it.Questioner: So that would mean, the number of souls donot increase or decrease, is that right?Dadashri: It does not increase or decrease; it is what itis. There is never an increase, or even a decrease. In this world,not just the Atma’s, but even the non-Self’s (anatma’s) singlesubatomic particle (parmanu) does not increase or decrease.Even amidst all these wars and catastrophes, and so many peopledying; not a single subatomic particle decreases and not a singlesubatomic particle (parmanu) increases. The numbers of soulsdoes not change. The world remains as it is, and nothing canchange that.Questioner: So how do we identify the energy that runsall this?Dadashri: What runs all this? The energy is like, say fivepeople are harassing you, so which one out of the five wouldyou name, is harassing you?Questioner: I would say, all five of them.Dadashri: Yes, the same happens here; you cannot givethe name of just one, because they all do it collectively. It is allscientific circumstantial evidence (vyavasthit shakti). So if theyall get together and do it, whose name would you give? Couldyou name just one? Besides, all of this is mandatory (farajiyat).This is a path of the worldly life (sansar), and the Atma ispassing through the path of the worldly life, and this is its effect.There is nothing else, except for this effect.So the souls do not increase, nor do they decrease. Eventhe non-Self complex (pudgal) does not increase or decrease.Neither do these inanimate subatomic particles (jada parmanu),decrease or increase. No matter how many you burn or cutdown, even then not a single parmanu (subatomic particle) willbe gained or lost! Everything will stay the same.Questioner: So how did the new ones appear? Has notthe population of humans increased?Dadashri: Those that decreased by numbers in the animallife-form, have all come into the human life-form. But they havealso come here with a return ticket. They have come with areturn ticket from wherever they have come. If we ask, ‘Butwhat will you do, once you are here?’ And they will say, ‘Wewill enjoy everything that belongs to others; anything that wehave no right to. We will have houses built, roads built, bridgesbuilt, and after all the hard work, we will die.’ However manythere were, are all heading back to where they came from!Those who corrupt things are only gaining marks to return backthere. When they earn so many marks, they go back there again.The Puzzle of the Creation and Dissolutionof the WorldQuestioner: When will God wind up this living world?And when he does, what sort of state will it be in then?Dadashri: God does not have the power (shakti) towind up this world. On the contrary, God himself is trapped inthis world, and keeps trying to break free! And when the GnaniPurush shows the way, he can get out of it. No one in thisworld has the energy to wrap up the world.Therefore God has not created this world. There is nosuch thing like creator God in this world; this is only scientificcircumstantial evidence. And, “the world is the puzzle itself.” Ithas become itself puzzled. How it has become puzzled, is what‘we’ (Gnani), having seen it, are telling you. When those elementsall come together like this, this (the illusion; the ego) arises fromtwo of the elements. And through Gnan, it can be destroyed.It is because of ignorance (agnan), that this has comeAptavani-86364Aptavani-8tell you to just carry on enjoying your food and drink for thetime being! If you cannot see it right now, there is no need toworry about it.Questioner: So that would mean, the number of souls donot increase or decrease, is that right?Dadashri: It does not increase or decrease; it is what itis. There is never an increase, or even a decrease. In this world,not just the Atma’s, but even the non-Self’s (anatma’s) singlesubatomic particle (parmanu) does not increase or decrease.Even amidst all these wars and catastrophes, and so many peopledying; not a single subatomic particle decreases and not a singlesubatomic particle (parmanu) increases. The numbers of soulsdoes not change. The world remains as it is, and nothing canchange that.Questioner: So how do we identify the energy that runsall this?Dadashri: What runs all this? The energy is like, say fivepeople are harassing you, so which one out of the five wouldyou name, is harassing you?Questioner: I would say, all five of them.Dadashri: Yes, the same happens here; you cannot givethe name of just one, because they all do it collectively. It is allscientific circumstantial evidence (vyavasthit shakti). So if theyall get together and do it, whose name would you give? Couldyou name just one? Besides, all of this is mandatory (farajiyat).This is a path of the worldly life (sansar), and the Atma ispassing through the path of the worldly life, and this is its effect.There is nothing else, except for this effect.So the souls do not increase, nor do they decrease. Eventhe non-Self complex (pudgal) does not increase or decrease.Neither do these inanimate subatomic particles (jada parmanu),decrease or increase. No matter how many you burn or cutdown, even then not a single parmanu (subatomic particle) willbe gained or lost! Everything will stay the same.Questioner: So how did the new ones appear? Has notthe population of humans increased?Dadashri: Those that decreased by numbers in the animallife-form, have all come into the human life-form. But they havealso come here with a return ticket. They have come with areturn ticket from wherever they have come. If we ask, ‘Butwhat will you do, once you are here?’ And they will say, ‘Wewill enjoy everything that belongs to others; anything that wehave no right to. We will have houses built, roads built, bridgesbuilt, and after all the hard work, we will die.’ However manythere were, are all heading back to where they came from!Those who corrupt things are only gaining marks to return backthere. When they earn so many marks, they go back there again.The Puzzle of the Creation and Dissolutionof the WorldQuestioner: When will God wind up this living world?And when he does, what sort of state will it be in then?Dadashri: God does not have the power (shakti) towind up this world. On the contrary, God himself is trapped inthis world, and keeps trying to break free! And when the GnaniPurush shows the way, he can get out of it. No one in thisworld has the energy to wrap up the world.Therefore God has not created this world. There is nosuch thing like creator God in this world; this is only scientificcircumstantial evidence. And, “the world is the puzzle itself.” Ithas become itself puzzled. How it has become puzzled, is what‘we’ (Gnani), having seen it, are telling you. When those elementsall come together like this, this (the illusion; the ego) arises fromtwo of the elements. And through Gnan, it can be destroyed.It is because of ignorance (agnan), that this has comeAptavani-86566Aptavani-8about. Ignorance means vishesh bhaav (‘I am Chandubhai’),and so the worldly life has come about because of this extraintent (vishesh bhaav). It can be destroyed through Gnan;Knowledge of the Self.No one has created this world. There is no creator. Whobuilds all these homes and everything around here? Does Patelmake them? Patel just pays money for them. The housesthemselves are constructed by the bricklayers, carpenters andblacksmiths. So is God a blacksmith or a mason? He is God.Everything happens, because of His presence. Just as the housegets built in Patel’s presence, the world runs because of thepresence of God, and nothing needs to be done!These subatomic particles (parmanu) possess so manyproperties (guna), in this non-Self complex (pudgal); in thematter (jada) part of the non-Self (anatma), there areinnumerable properties (guna) that the eyes and everything alloccur by themselves. Nobody has to do anything. Do you seehow bright the eyes of cows, buffaloes, and goats are?! Andwhat are monkeys’ eyes like? That all happens; by itself. Thenon-Self (prakruti) happens on its own.What science is behind all this, ‘we’ (the Gnani Purush)have ‘seen’ it, and ‘known’ it but cannot describe it. It cannotbe described in words. It has not been explained in the scriptures.Otherwise the original revelation of this is very different.So the world will remain like this forever. And if you wantto understand it in a scientific way, then come to me. It is notpossible to measure this world with your intellect (buddhi),because even from this world, there are souls (jivas) that go tofinal liberation (moksha), and yet the world will still remainunchanged. There is no one to wind up this world.God has not created this world. These foreign scientistswere saying to me, ‘God is creator. This is what our Christ hassaid, so why are you saying no to that?’ So I told them, ‘Godis the creator, is correct by the Christian viewpoint, by the Indianviewpoint, by the Muslim viewpoint; not by fact.’The Parmatma (Absolute Soul) has not created this worldat all. This world came into existence by itself, and the puzzlehas occurred by itself. And it is through science that the puzzlehas come about. The extra – not of the Self – intent (visheshbhaav) arises when two of the six eternal elements (tattva),come together. When the two elements come together; neitherof them relinquish their individual inherent properties (guna), andan extra property (vishesh gunadharma) is created. They havecalled it vyatirek guna (when two elements come together, athird new component of completely new property arises). Justas the anger-pride-deceit-greed is not a quality (guna) of theAtma, these are (also) not the qualities of the non-Self (anatma).They are extra properties (vyatirek guna). So it is becausethese added properties (guna) have arisen, that the world hascome about, that is all, there is no one else in the universe thatdoes anything!These people also say that God had a desire to create theworld! But he that has desires, is considered a beggar. Godwould not have any kinds of desires. How can there be desire,where there is absolute satisfaction and absolute bliss? Therefore,God never has desires! It is just that people have been so misledinto believing that God had a desire and created the world. Butit is not like that. This is entirely science (vignan)! And it cameabout through science; the entire world is itself science (vignan)!That Creation Is Itself ScienceQuestioner: The world did not originate through the energyof activity (kriya shakti), but through the energy of desire(ichchha shakti)?Dadashri: No, it is not even energy of desire (ichchhaAptavani-86566Aptavani-8about. Ignorance means vishesh bhaav (‘I am Chandubhai’),and so the worldly life has come about because of this extraintent (vishesh bhaav). It can be destroyed through Gnan;Knowledge of the Self.No one has created this world. There is no creator. Whobuilds all these homes and everything around here? Does Patelmake them? Patel just pays money for them. The housesthemselves are constructed by the bricklayers, carpenters andblacksmiths. So is God a blacksmith or a mason? He is God.Everything happens, because of His presence. Just as the housegets built in Patel’s presence, the world runs because of thepresence of God, and nothing needs to be done!These subatomic particles (parmanu) possess so manyproperties (guna), in this non-Self complex (pudgal); in thematter (jada) part of the non-Self (anatma), there areinnumerable properties (guna) that the eyes and everything alloccur by themselves. Nobody has to do anything. Do you seehow bright the eyes of cows, buffaloes, and goats are?! Andwhat are monkeys’ eyes like? That all happens; by itself. Thenon-Self (prakruti) happens on its own.What science is behind all this, ‘we’ (the Gnani Purush)have ‘seen’ it, and ‘known’ it but cannot describe it. It cannotbe described in words. It has not been explained in the scriptures.Otherwise the original revelation of this is very different.So the world will remain like this forever. And if you wantto understand it in a scientific way, then come to me. It is notpossible to measure this world with your intellect (buddhi),because even from this world, there are souls (jivas) that go tofinal liberation (moksha), and yet the world will still remainunchanged. There is no one to wind up this world.God has not created this world. These foreign scientistswere saying to me, ‘God is creator. This is what our Christ hassaid, so why are you saying no to that?’ So I told them, ‘Godis the creator, is correct by the Christian viewpoint, by the Indianviewpoint, by the Muslim viewpoint; not by fact.’The Parmatma (Absolute Soul) has not created this worldat all. This world came into existence by itself, and the puzzlehas occurred by itself. And it is through science that the puzzlehas come about. The extra – not of the Self – intent (visheshbhaav) arises when two of the six eternal elements (tattva),come together. When the two elements come together; neitherof them relinquish their individual inherent properties (guna), andan extra property (vishesh gunadharma) is created. They havecalled it vyatirek guna (when two elements come together, athird new component of completely new property arises). Justas the anger-pride-deceit-greed is not a quality (guna) of theAtma, these are (also) not the qualities of the non-Self (anatma).They are extra properties (vyatirek guna). So it is becausethese added properties (guna) have arisen, that the world hascome about, that is all, there is no one else in the universe thatdoes anything!These people also say that God had a desire to create theworld! But he that has desires, is considered a beggar. Godwould not have any kinds of desires. How can there be desire,where there is absolute satisfaction and absolute bliss? Therefore,God never has desires! It is just that people have been so misledinto believing that God had a desire and created the world. Butit is not like that. This is entirely science (vignan)! And it cameabout through science; the entire world is itself science (vignan)!That Creation Is Itself ScienceQuestioner: The world did not originate through the energyof activity (kriya shakti), but through the energy of desire(ichchha shakti)?Dadashri: No, it is not even energy of desire (ichchhaAptavani-86768Aptavani-8shakti). Someone with desire would be considered a beggar. IfGod had a desire, then they would have called him a beggar.Questioner: Whoever is the Supreme Lord (purnabrahma); it is only through his energy of desire (ichchha shakti).He has not had to do anything himself.Dadashri: No, not at all, there is not even any such thingas ichchha shakti. If there was such a thing, then he would beconsidered a beggar. God is desire-free (nirichchhak)! This hasall come about only because of science (vignan)!Questioner: Is it because of the extra intent (visheshbhaav) that it is called energy of desire (ichchha shakti)?Dadashri: No, there is a great difference between thetwo. Vishesha bhaav (extra intent) means that which happenswhen two eternal elements come together. When the Sun andthe ocean come together, evaporation of water happens, but itis not the desire of the Sun or the ocean. Similarly, vyatirekguna –an extra attribute such as anger-pride-deceit-greed arise.They are called extra properties (vishesha guna), and this worldhas arisen out of it.The Elements With Form Are Visible in ThisUniverse These are all six permanent elements. The five elementsthat there are: earth (pruthvi), fire (tej), air (vayu), water(paani) and space (aakash). Out of these, only the element ofspace is permanent, while the other four elements are temporary(vinashi). The earth, light, air and water are all temporary(vinashi) things.Questioner: Did not they all originate from space?Dadashri: No, no. Nothing in this world has originatedfrom space. It is from the subatomic particle (parmanu) element,which they call anu (atom). The subatomic particle (parmanu)is the only element that has form. And it is from this elementalform that everything has materialized.These subatomic particles (parmanu) are always therethroughout the entire world. And when there is a concentrationof them in any particular place, they are called atoms (anu). Thesubatomic particles are not visible, from any aspect! Only theKeval Gnani (one with Absolute Knowledge) can see them, butno one else can see them!This is how it is – subatomic particles (parmanu) haveform (roopi), and space (aakash) has no form (aroopi). Andthe four elements of earth-light-air-water all have form (roopi),so form (roop) is created from that which has form (roopi).It Is the Same, Whenever You Look at It...Questioner: Can a world that has shape and form(sakaar), be created from something that is formless (nirakar)? Dadashri: This world that has shape and form (sakaar)has not sprung from something that has no shape or form(nirakar). Having form (sakaar) is something completelydifferent. This shape and form (sakaar) notion is very differentfrom how you understand it; this is not the same shape or formyou refer to. These are all phases (paryaya). And all the phasesare transient (vinashi), they arise and they come to an end.Then they arise again. And again they end. Whereas things thatare permanent always remain forever. The permanent things cannever be created, nor can they ever be destroyed. Therefore,the things which are permanent stay forever, but the phases(paryaya) they incite, are always continually arising and ending,and arising. Only the one who is born will die. Therefore, theAtma has nothing to do with it. That is how differently this worldruns! So you need not be afraid that, someday the world mayfall apart. There is no reason for that. It will stay exactly as it is.The sun, the moon and the stars will always appear the same,whenever you take birth.Aptavani-86768Aptavani-8shakti). Someone with desire would be considered a beggar. IfGod had a desire, then they would have called him a beggar.Questioner: Whoever is the Supreme Lord (purnabrahma); it is only through his energy of desire (ichchha shakti).He has not had to do anything himself.Dadashri: No, not at all, there is not even any such thingas ichchha shakti. If there was such a thing, then he would beconsidered a beggar. God is desire-free (nirichchhak)! This hasall come about only because of science (vignan)!Questioner: Is it because of the extra intent (visheshbhaav) that it is called energy of desire (ichchha shakti)?Dadashri: No, there is a great difference between thetwo. Vishesha bhaav (extra intent) means that which happenswhen two eternal elements come together. When the Sun andthe ocean come together, evaporation of water happens, but itis not the desire of the Sun or the ocean. Similarly, vyatirekguna –an extra attribute such as anger-pride-deceit-greed arise.They are called extra properties (vishesha guna), and this worldhas arisen out of it.The Elements With Form Are Visible in ThisUniverse These are all six permanent elements. The five elementsthat there are: earth (pruthvi), fire (tej), air (vayu), water(paani) and space (aakash). Out of these, only the element ofspace is permanent, while the other four elements are temporary(vinashi). The earth, light, air and water are all temporary(vinashi) things.Questioner: Did not they all originate from space?Dadashri: No, no. Nothing in this world has originatedfrom space. It is from the subatomic particle (parmanu) element,which they call anu (atom). The subatomic particle (parmanu)is the only element that has form. And it is from this elementalform that everything has materialized.These subatomic particles (parmanu) are always therethroughout the entire world. And when there is a concentrationof them in any particular place, they are called atoms (anu). Thesubatomic particles are not visible, from any aspect! Only theKeval Gnani (one with Absolute Knowledge) can see them, butno one else can see them!This is how it is – subatomic particles (parmanu) haveform (roopi), and space (aakash) has no form (aroopi). Andthe four elements of earth-light-air-water all have form (roopi),so form (roop) is created from that which has form (roopi).It Is the Same, Whenever You Look at It...Questioner: Can a world that has shape and form(sakaar), be created from something that is formless (nirakar)? Dadashri: This world that has shape and form (sakaar)has not sprung from something that has no shape or form(nirakar). Having form (sakaar) is something completelydifferent. This shape and form (sakaar) notion is very differentfrom how you understand it; this is not the same shape or formyou refer to. These are all phases (paryaya). And all the phasesare transient (vinashi), they arise and they come to an end.Then they arise again. And again they end. Whereas things thatare permanent always remain forever. The permanent things cannever be created, nor can they ever be destroyed. Therefore,the things which are permanent stay forever, but the phases(paryaya) they incite, are always continually arising and ending,and arising. Only the one who is born will die. Therefore, theAtma has nothing to do with it. That is how differently this worldruns! So you need not be afraid that, someday the world mayfall apart. There is no reason for that. It will stay exactly as it is.The sun, the moon and the stars will always appear the same,whenever you take birth.Aptavani-86970Aptavani-8Questioner: There are many people who interpret it as,‘it was God’s wish’. But actually He was in a state of non-dualism (adwaita), He felt lonely, and so he made the decisionto enter into duality (dwaita) and that resulted in the creation ofthe world.Dadashri: If he makes decisions (sankalp), then he isnot God.Questioner: No, not decision. But the dualistic intent(dwaita bhaav) occurred.Dadashri: No, God cannot have dualistic intent (dwaitabhaav), nor can He have non-dualistic intent (adwaita bhaav).Dualism (dwaita) and non-dualism (adwaita), are dualities(dwandva), and God is above duality (dwandvatita); Hetranscends duality.Questioner: But is it not because there is duality(dwandva) that there is creation of the worldly life (srushti)?Dadashri: Yes, duality (dwandva) is creation (srushti)itself. Creation (srushti) is duality itself. And when you rise aboveduality (dwandvatita), your work is done.From the State of No Beginning With an Endto a Beginning of EternityThis is how it is: there is no such thing as the beginning ofthe world, and neither is there such a thing as an end. Peopleonly go on asking, ‘When did it begin?’ with their intellect(buddhi). It is because they believe that since they themselveshad a beginning, so too must the world.There is no such word as beginning (aadi), as in thebeginning of the world and neither does the word end (anta)exist. The flow of worldly life (sansar) has been in existenceforever (anaadi), and yet it does have an end (anta). And theyask, ‘From which perspective does it have an end?’ The answerwould be: All the living beings (jiva) are drifting along in thestream of worldly life (sansar), in a state of illusion (bhranti);however, if they were to encounter a Gnani Purush, at thatpoint in time, their illusion comes to an end.So the illusion (bhranti) that has carried on forever comesto an end, and gives rise to the right vision (samyaktva). Sa-aadi means the onset of Sa (samyaktva – right vision). Howlong will the right vision (samyaktva) last? It will not come toan end, until Absolute Knowledge (Keval Gnan) is attained.That sa-aadi (beginning of right vision) is considered sa-anta(the end of the right vision). The beginning of right vision (sa-aadi) and the end of right vision (sa-anta) – the beginning andend of samyaktva (right vision)! While in moksha, there will bea beginning of right vision (sa-aadi), which will remain throughoutinfinity (anant). And that is why it is called saadi-anant. So thefirst part is of anaadi-saant, the second is of saadi-saant andthe last part is of saadi-anant!Therefore there is no such thing as a beginning (aadi) inthis world, and there is also no such thing as an end (anta).There will be no end if you were to wonder or imagine aboutit.Changing of Circumstances Is the Nature ofthe WorldQuestioner: But even so, what would be the instrumentalcause (naimitik karan) behind the origin (utpatti), existence(sthiti) and extinction (laya) of the world?Dadashri: But what are you calling origin?Questioner: We know that it is because of the continualchange in the pudgal (body) that the world is there. But atwhichever time the world originated, that beginning (utpatti) isfollowed by a steady state (sthiti) which then comes to an end(laya). So what is the instrumental cause (naimitik karan) behindthis?Aptavani-86970Aptavani-8Questioner: There are many people who interpret it as,‘it was God’s wish’. But actually He was in a state of non-dualism (adwaita), He felt lonely, and so he made the decisionto enter into duality (dwaita) and that resulted in the creation ofthe world.Dadashri: If he makes decisions (sankalp), then he isnot God.Questioner: No, not decision. But the dualistic intent(dwaita bhaav) occurred.Dadashri: No, God cannot have dualistic intent (dwaitabhaav), nor can He have non-dualistic intent (adwaita bhaav).Dualism (dwaita) and non-dualism (adwaita), are dualities(dwandva), and God is above duality (dwandvatita); Hetranscends duality.Questioner: But is it not because there is duality(dwandva) that there is creation of the worldly life (srushti)?Dadashri: Yes, duality (dwandva) is creation (srushti)itself. Creation (srushti) is duality itself. And when you rise aboveduality (dwandvatita), your work is done.From the State of No Beginning With an Endto a Beginning of EternityThis is how it is: there is no such thing as the beginning ofthe world, and neither is there such a thing as an end. Peopleonly go on asking, ‘When did it begin?’ with their intellect(buddhi). It is because they believe that since they themselveshad a beginning, so too must the world.There is no such word as beginning (aadi), as in thebeginning of the world and neither does the word end (anta)exist. The flow of worldly life (sansar) has been in existenceforever (anaadi), and yet it does have an end (anta). And theyask, ‘From which perspective does it have an end?’ The answerwould be: All the living beings (jiva) are drifting along in thestream of worldly life (sansar), in a state of illusion (bhranti);however, if they were to encounter a Gnani Purush, at thatpoint in time, their illusion comes to an end.So the illusion (bhranti) that has carried on forever comesto an end, and gives rise to the right vision (samyaktva). Sa-aadi means the onset of Sa (samyaktva – right vision). Howlong will the right vision (samyaktva) last? It will not come toan end, until Absolute Knowledge (Keval Gnan) is attained.That sa-aadi (beginning of right vision) is considered sa-anta(the end of the right vision). The beginning of right vision (sa-aadi) and the end of right vision (sa-anta) – the beginning andend of samyaktva (right vision)! While in moksha, there will bea beginning of right vision (sa-aadi), which will remain throughoutinfinity (anant). And that is why it is called saadi-anant. So thefirst part is of anaadi-saant, the second is of saadi-saant andthe last part is of saadi-anant!Therefore there is no such thing as a beginning (aadi) inthis world, and there is also no such thing as an end (anta).There will be no end if you were to wonder or imagine aboutit.Changing of Circumstances Is the Nature ofthe WorldQuestioner: But even so, what would be the instrumentalcause (naimitik karan) behind the origin (utpatti), existence(sthiti) and extinction (laya) of the world?Dadashri: But what are you calling origin?Questioner: We know that it is because of the continualchange in the pudgal (body) that the world is there. But atwhichever time the world originated, that beginning (utpatti) isfollowed by a steady state (sthiti) which then comes to an end(laya). So what is the instrumental cause (naimitik karan) behindthis?Aptavani-87172Aptavani-8Dadashri: But where did you see the world originating?Questioner: I have not seen it, but nevertheless, does itnot go through change?Dadashri: Change itself means, that it originates, staysstill, and goes through destruction. That is precisely what changemeans! So in its elemental form (vastu swaroop), this worlddoes not have any origin, nor does it get destroyed; nothinghappens at all. Changes only occur in the condition or state(avastha) of things!Questioner: Is the energy (shakti) of the Atma also aninstrumental cause (naimitik karan)?Dadashri: It has nothing to do with it. Why would theAtma have anything to do with that? Do these pharmacists notwrite down the date the medicine bottle was sealed, say in1977, and it also tells you that if you have not used it by 1979,that you should discard the contents?Questioner: Because it has lost its efficacy.Dadashri: Why would you need the Atma in that? Thatis how it all is. Time (kaad) is something that devours everything.Time ages everything, but it also renews things.Change incorporates everything. What is roopantar(change in form)? It means to come into existence, to exist fora while and then to disappear.Questioner: I still do not understand one thing. The originof the world is said to be since time immemorial, but should notthere be a reason for the origin?Dadashri: The main reason behind it is this puzzle.Questioner: But should not there be some kind of energy(shakti) to solve the puzzle?Dadashri: No, there is no need for energy (shakti) inthis. Once you know this science, the puzzle will be solved.The entire world is made up of six eternal elements(tattva). Tattva means that they are eternal, and those eternalelements perpetually maintain their own nature (swabhav). Butthese elements (tattva) interact around each other, which is whywe see all this varied display.Questioner: What are these six eternal elements (tattva)?Dadashri: One is chetan (the Self). The second is jada(matter; non-Self), which has form (roopi). The chetan tattvais invisible (aroopi). The third is one that gives motion to jada(matter) and chetan (Self), and it is called the element of motionor momentum (gatisahayak tattva). Now if only the motionelement were there, everything would be in constant motion! Soto make jada and chetan still, there is the element of inertia orimmobility (sthitisahayak tattva), which keeps a body at rest!That makes four of the elements (tattva); the fifth is space(aakash), and the sixth is the element of time (kaad)! It isbecause of these six elements that the world has arisen. All thesix elements are eternal.Nature’s Mysterious PlanningThis world runs naturally. Everything is in its own naturalstate (swabhav), and nothing has ever left its own nature. Only,the worldly interaction (vyavahar) which is the entire path ofevolution (samsaran marg), and it is in this path of evolution,that all these life-forms (jiva) have entered. So three divisionshave been made: first the life-form (jiva) that has no identity(avyavahar rashi); it is awaiting entry into the worldly life;second, the life-form that has identity (vyavahar rashi) andenters the worldly life; and the third is the ultimate liberation ofthe Atma in Siddha kshetra (realm of all Liberated Souls).The life-forms (jiva) that exist without identity (avyavaharAptavani-87172Aptavani-8Dadashri: But where did you see the world originating?Questioner: I have not seen it, but nevertheless, does itnot go through change?Dadashri: Change itself means, that it originates, staysstill, and goes through destruction. That is precisely what changemeans! So in its elemental form (vastu swaroop), this worlddoes not have any origin, nor does it get destroyed; nothinghappens at all. Changes only occur in the condition or state(avastha) of things!Questioner: Is the energy (shakti) of the Atma also aninstrumental cause (naimitik karan)?Dadashri: It has nothing to do with it. Why would theAtma have anything to do with that? Do these pharmacists notwrite down the date the medicine bottle was sealed, say in1977, and it also tells you that if you have not used it by 1979,that you should discard the contents?Questioner: Because it has lost its efficacy.Dadashri: Why would you need the Atma in that? Thatis how it all is. Time (kaad) is something that devours everything.Time ages everything, but it also renews things.Change incorporates everything. What is roopantar(change in form)? It means to come into existence, to exist fora while and then to disappear.Questioner: I still do not understand one thing. The originof the world is said to be since time immemorial, but should notthere be a reason for the origin?Dadashri: The main reason behind it is this puzzle.Questioner: But should not there be some kind of energy(shakti) to solve the puzzle?Dadashri: No, there is no need for energy (shakti) inthis. Once you know this science, the puzzle will be solved.The entire world is made up of six eternal elements(tattva). Tattva means that they are eternal, and those eternalelements perpetually maintain their own nature (swabhav). Butthese elements (tattva) interact around each other, which is whywe see all this varied display.Questioner: What are these six eternal elements (tattva)?Dadashri: One is chetan (the Self). The second is jada(matter; non-Self), which has form (roopi). The chetan tattvais invisible (aroopi). The third is one that gives motion to jada(matter) and chetan (Self), and it is called the element of motionor momentum (gatisahayak tattva). Now if only the motionelement were there, everything would be in constant motion! Soto make jada and chetan still, there is the element of inertia orimmobility (sthitisahayak tattva), which keeps a body at rest!That makes four of the elements (tattva); the fifth is space(aakash), and the sixth is the element of time (kaad)! It isbecause of these six elements that the world has arisen. All thesix elements are eternal.Nature’s Mysterious PlanningThis world runs naturally. Everything is in its own naturalstate (swabhav), and nothing has ever left its own nature. Only,the worldly interaction (vyavahar) which is the entire path ofevolution (samsaran marg), and it is in this path of evolution,that all these life-forms (jiva) have entered. So three divisionshave been made: first the life-form (jiva) that has no identity(avyavahar rashi); it is awaiting entry into the worldly life;second, the life-form that has identity (vyavahar rashi) andenters the worldly life; and the third is the ultimate liberation ofthe Atma in Siddha kshetra (realm of all Liberated Souls).The life-forms (jiva) that exist without identity (avyavaharAptavani-87374Aptavani-8rashi) are infinite in number, and even the life-forms that haveentered worldly interaction (vyavahar) are infinite. However, ifyou wanted to count the number of human beings that are inworldly interaction, then it is possible. And those who have beenliberated from the worldly interaction (vyavahar); who havegone on to the location of ultimate liberation (Siddha gati), arealso infinite in number!The living entities (jiva) that have no identity (avyavaharrashi) come over here into worldly interaction (vyavahar). Justbelieve that, fifty-thousand living entities (jiva) go to final liberation(moksha), and fifty-thousand living entities come from theunidentified state (avyavahar rashi) and make entry into worldlyinteraction (vyavahar), which is why the worldly interaction staysthe same all the time.What is considered worldly interaction (vyavahar)? Thoselife-forms (jivas), that have been gradually evolving in the pathof evolution (samsaran marg), who have been given a name;that is, that they can be identified by a name; means that theyhave now entered into the interaction of the world (vyavahar).So you could say, ‘Man, this is an onion, this is a rose, this isa grain of rice, this is algae.’ So all the way to final liberation(moksha), the circumstances and state (avastha) are constantlychanging, and the life-form is gradually developing further andfurther, from a single-sensed organism (ekendriya), all the wayuntil it develops five senses (panchindriya).After attaining five senses (panchindriya), the life-formbecomes human in foreign countries, where it develops furtherand further along in the human form, before it takes birth inHindustan (India). Those living beings (jiva) that come to enterHindustan, have the highest spiritual development, which givesthem a greater right to final liberation (moksha). Those in foreignlands are not yet entitled to moksha, as they are still in thestages of development! He that has developed fully, then goesto final liberation from here!As many living beings that go to final liberation (moksha);that go to the location of final liberation (Siddha gati), the samenumber of living beings enter worldly interaction (vyavahar),from the non-interactive form (avyavahar). So, what would youcall worldly interaction (vyavahar)? It is, that in worldlyinteraction, not a single life-form, ever decreases, or increases –that is called vyavahar! If a single living entity were to increaseor decrease; the entire order (or arrangement) would collapse. Questioner: What would happen if one single living entity(jiva) decreased, or one single living entity increased?Dadashri: Nature’s entire planning would break down! Ifthe sun does not appear today, then the moon will not appeartomorrow or else so many stars would be missing, or perhapsa certain planet will not be there. So they will say, ‘They haveall gone to final liberation (moksha)’, while here there would bea pitch darkness! But all this, the entire design, is all going tostay the same.The sun-moon-stars, even after billions of years will stillappear the same. You would see the very same planet of Saturn,and the same planet of Venus, but the living entities (jiva) withinwill always be changing. The external packing stay the same,they will still be reflecting; whereas the living entity within fallsand moves to another location. Even the sun will fall, as too willother living entities.But no sooner does it fall and disappear, another livingbeing (jiva) takes its place. And that is called vyavasthit(scientific circumstantial evidence). What a beautiful arrangementit is! If one living being (jiva) arrives at 3:03, the other oneleaves at that precise moment. Otherwise we would be able totell, ‘why did it become dark?’ But nothing like that happens.Therefore, not a single jiva is misplaced, and each and everyjiva, remains in its own service (to serve its existence)!However many souls (jiva) that go to final liberationAptavani-87374Aptavani-8rashi) are infinite in number, and even the life-forms that haveentered worldly interaction (vyavahar) are infinite. However, ifyou wanted to count the number of human beings that are inworldly interaction, then it is possible. And those who have beenliberated from the worldly interaction (vyavahar); who havegone on to the location of ultimate liberation (Siddha gati), arealso infinite in number!The living entities (jiva) that have no identity (avyavaharrashi) come over here into worldly interaction (vyavahar). Justbelieve that, fifty-thousand living entities (jiva) go to final liberation(moksha), and fifty-thousand living entities come from theunidentified state (avyavahar rashi) and make entry into worldlyinteraction (vyavahar), which is why the worldly interaction staysthe same all the time.What is considered worldly interaction (vyavahar)? Thoselife-forms (jivas), that have been gradually evolving in the pathof evolution (samsaran marg), who have been given a name;that is, that they can be identified by a name; means that theyhave now entered into the interaction of the world (vyavahar).So you could say, ‘Man, this is an onion, this is a rose, this isa grain of rice, this is algae.’ So all the way to final liberation(moksha), the circumstances and state (avastha) are constantlychanging, and the life-form is gradually developing further andfurther, from a single-sensed organism (ekendriya), all the wayuntil it develops five senses (panchindriya).After attaining five senses (panchindriya), the life-formbecomes human in foreign countries, where it develops furtherand further along in the human form, before it takes birth inHindustan (India). Those living beings (jiva) that come to enterHindustan, have the highest spiritual development, which givesthem a greater right to final liberation (moksha). Those in foreignlands are not yet entitled to moksha, as they are still in thestages of development! He that has developed fully, then goesto final liberation from here!As many living beings that go to final liberation (moksha);that go to the location of final liberation (Siddha gati), the samenumber of living beings enter worldly interaction (vyavahar),from the non-interactive form (avyavahar). So, what would youcall worldly interaction (vyavahar)? It is, that in worldlyinteraction, not a single life-form, ever decreases, or increases –that is called vyavahar! If a single living entity were to increaseor decrease; the entire order (or arrangement) would collapse. Questioner: What would happen if one single living entity(jiva) decreased, or one single living entity increased?Dadashri: Nature’s entire planning would break down! Ifthe sun does not appear today, then the moon will not appeartomorrow or else so many stars would be missing, or perhapsa certain planet will not be there. So they will say, ‘They haveall gone to final liberation (moksha)’, while here there would bea pitch darkness! But all this, the entire design, is all going tostay the same.The sun-moon-stars, even after billions of years will stillappear the same. You would see the very same planet of Saturn,and the same planet of Venus, but the living entities (jiva) withinwill always be changing. The external packing stay the same,they will still be reflecting; whereas the living entity within fallsand moves to another location. Even the sun will fall, as too willother living entities.But no sooner does it fall and disappear, another livingbeing (jiva) takes its place. And that is called vyavasthit(scientific circumstantial evidence). What a beautiful arrangementit is! If one living being (jiva) arrives at 3:03, the other oneleaves at that precise moment. Otherwise we would be able totell, ‘why did it become dark?’ But nothing like that happens.Therefore, not a single jiva is misplaced, and each and everyjiva, remains in its own service (to serve its existence)!However many souls (jiva) that go to final liberation76Aptavani-8Aptavani-875(moksha) from here, that many souls come from the unnamedstate (avyavahar rashi) and enter worldly interaction(vyavahar). There is no increase or decrease in worldlyinteraction. The worldly interaction remains the same and as it is.So there is no need to worry that certain particular types of fruitmay become extinct. When some types of fruit disappear, anothertype will come along, but that the worldly interaction (vyavahar)will remain all the way!Questioner: They say that the Atma comes from thelowest life-form (nigod). That first all the atmas are in a stateof dormancy awaiting development (nigod), so what is nigod?Dadashri: Nigod means that in one body there areinnumerable living entities (jivas). Like in a single potato, thereare so many of them, are there not? In the same way, in nigodthere is an excessive number of living entities. Those living entitieshave not yet been given a name. The potato has been given aname.Questioner: So does the beginning commence from thetime the living entity (jiva) has been given a name?Dadashri: No, the beginning starts even before that. Thatis called an unnamed state (avyavahar rashi), meaning theseliving entities have not yet entered into the interactive worldlystate (vyavahar).Questioner: Where is the location of the souls of nigod?Dadashri: This is the entire location! It is everywhere inspace. The entire space in this universe is filled with nigod(infinitesimal, imperceptible dormant living entities, awaking andentering the path of evolution)!Questioner: Is there not a beginning for living entities inthe unnamed state (avyavahar rashi), as well?Dadashri: No. There is no origin (utpatti) over there.There are infinite living entities (jivas) there. So no matter howmany living entities decrease from the infinite number, its infinitynever goes. It is not worth gauging with your intellect (buddhi),because where this is concerned, the intellect will not reachthere. Nothing can ever diminish from infinity. No matter howmuch you take out of infinity, it still stays as infinity, and that iswhat you would call infinite. So there is never a loss over there!Even in the location of ultimate liberation (Siddha gati) there isinfinity, so that even when innumerable amounts increase overthere, they still remain infinitely infinite.Humans are the only beings in the universe that aresankhyat (can be counted; enumerable). All other life-forms areasankhyat (cannot be counted; innumerable). Enumerable(sankhyat) means that they decrease and increase, and thereare certain laws that govern this fluctuation (increase anddecrease). The fluctuation is its normality. When there is anincrease in a certain number, the population increases to a certaindegree, and again, when there is a decline in numbers, thepopulation decreases up to a certain degree; that is its normality(norm).Now when it is time for it to start decreasing, the partwhich is infinite (anant) will decrease first, then the part whichis innumerable (asankhyat) will decrease, then the part which isenumerable (sankhyat) will decrease, and then the enumerableproperties (sankhyat guna) will decrease. Then the innumerableproperties (asankhyat guna) will decrease, and then the infiniteproperties (anant guna) will decrease, and then it will becomeincreasing (vardhaman) once again. And after increasing, itdecreases (heeyamaan). Questioner: What does numerable (sankhyat) andinnumerable (asankhyat) mean?Dadashri: Sankhyat (numerable) means that it is somethingwhich you can count. The human population is numerable76Aptavani-8Aptavani-875(moksha) from here, that many souls come from the unnamedstate (avyavahar rashi) and enter worldly interaction(vyavahar). There is no increase or decrease in worldlyinteraction. The worldly interaction remains the same and as it is.So there is no need to worry that certain particular types of fruitmay become extinct. When some types of fruit disappear, anothertype will come along, but that the worldly interaction (vyavahar)will remain all the way!Questioner: They say that the Atma comes from thelowest life-form (nigod). That first all the atmas are in a stateof dormancy awaiting development (nigod), so what is nigod?Dadashri: Nigod means that in one body there areinnumerable living entities (jivas). Like in a single potato, thereare so many of them, are there not? In the same way, in nigodthere is an excessive number of living entities. Those living entitieshave not yet been given a name. The potato has been given aname.Questioner: So does the beginning commence from thetime the living entity (jiva) has been given a name?Dadashri: No, the beginning starts even before that. Thatis called an unnamed state (avyavahar rashi), meaning theseliving entities have not yet entered into the interactive worldlystate (vyavahar).Questioner: Where is the location of the souls of nigod?Dadashri: This is the entire location! It is everywhere inspace. The entire space in this universe is filled with nigod(infinitesimal, imperceptible dormant living entities, awaking andentering the path of evolution)!Questioner: Is there not a beginning for living entities inthe unnamed state (avyavahar rashi), as well?Dadashri: No. There is no origin (utpatti) over there.There are infinite living entities (jivas) there. So no matter howmany living entities decrease from the infinite number, its infinitynever goes. It is not worth gauging with your intellect (buddhi),because where this is concerned, the intellect will not reachthere. Nothing can ever diminish from infinity. No matter howmuch you take out of infinity, it still stays as infinity, and that iswhat you would call infinite. So there is never a loss over there!Even in the location of ultimate liberation (Siddha gati) there isinfinity, so that even when innumerable amounts increase overthere, they still remain infinitely infinite.Humans are the only beings in the universe that aresankhyat (can be counted; enumerable). All other life-forms areasankhyat (cannot be counted; innumerable). Enumerable(sankhyat) means that they decrease and increase, and thereare certain laws that govern this fluctuation (increase anddecrease). The fluctuation is its normality. When there is anincrease in a certain number, the population increases to a certaindegree, and again, when there is a decline in numbers, thepopulation decreases up to a certain degree; that is its normality(norm).Now when it is time for it to start decreasing, the partwhich is infinite (anant) will decrease first, then the part whichis innumerable (asankhyat) will decrease, then the part which isenumerable (sankhyat) will decrease, and then the enumerableproperties (sankhyat guna) will decrease. Then the innumerableproperties (asankhyat guna) will decrease, and then the infiniteproperties (anant guna) will decrease, and then it will becomeincreasing (vardhaman) once again. And after increasing, itdecreases (heeyamaan). Questioner: What does numerable (sankhyat) andinnumerable (asankhyat) mean?Dadashri: Sankhyat (numerable) means that it is somethingwhich you can count. The human population is numerableAptavani-87778Aptavani-8(sankhyat) and the animals and plants (tiryancha); lower life-form population is innumerable (asankhyat). Asankhyat(innumerable) means that it cannot be counted; you will run outof numbers. Even when they count over a billion, they can go oncounting, but it will never end. That is called innumerable(asankhyat); it will not end even when you run out of numbers.Human beings alone are numerable (sankhyat); you couldcount perhaps four or five billion, and that would be a goodestimate. However, the animals and plants (tiryancha), areinnumerable (asankhyat), and even the celestial beings (deva)are innumerable. The living beings in the infernal realm (narkgati) are innumerable; with the exception of human beings, allother living beings (jivas) in the worldly interaction (vyavahar)are innumerable (asankhyat).The living entities of the unnamed state (avyavahar rashi)are infinite (anant), and even in the realm of Liberated Souls(Siddha gati) there are infinite liberated Souls (Siddhas). Infinite(anant), means beyond innumerable (asankhyat), limitless, never-ending; so it would be futile to count them. You can try andcount the numerable (sankhyat), but what do you do, when theinnumerable (asankhyat), has no number (sankhya)? Ten million,a hundred million, a billion..., however much further you go oncounting, this account (hisaab) will still not come to an end. Thatis why it has been categorized as innumerable (asankhyat);because it does not come into counting (sankhya) – it cannot beallocated a number!This world has puzzled itself. Why is that? It is becausethese jivas (living beings) are forever moving in the flowingcurrent of an eternal (anaadi) stream. Just like the flowing watersof the Narmada (river), these living entities (jivas) are constantlyflowing along.Matter (dravya), location (kshetra), time (kaad) and innerintent (bhaav) are constantly changing. Even their location keepschanging. So if in the past life, we were at the tenth milestone,in this lifetime, we come to the eleventh milestone. Now on thetenth milestone, there were wonderful gardens and wonderfulpeople, and having seen all that, when we get to the eleventhmilestone, we encounter desert. So you think to yourself, ‘Howon earth can I live like this?’ You recall all that you had seen atthe tenth milestone. You are in a predicament because of yourinternal conflict. All you keep feeling is, ‘this is terrible, this isterrible’. The knowledge of today is what is bothering you within.Is that not where all the conflict stems from? Until you attainAtmagnan (Self-realization), the conflict will continually go onand on.So the world will remain the way it is forever. And fromit, as a rule, the living beings will constantly be going to finalliberation (moksha).Ultimately the Solution Will Come Throughthe GnaniQuestioner: Once a living entity (jiva) comes into a statewhere it has an identity (vyavahar rashi) and enters life in theworld, is it bound to go to final liberation (moksha)? So eventhe time would have been decided, that after so many births, itwill go to final liberation? Would the timing of going to finalliberation be already determined?Dadashri: The living entity (jiva) is ready to go to finalliberation (moksha) from the time it enters into the named state(vyavahar rashi).Questioner: But will its time be decided?Dadashri: The time is indeed decided, but after cominginto the human life-form, provided one does not do egoism(ahamkar), then the time is definite. If he does egoism, he againfalls from there, and then there is no telling what happens fromthere on. Once he turns backward into egoism (ahamkar), thereAptavani-87778Aptavani-8(sankhyat) and the animals and plants (tiryancha); lower life-form population is innumerable (asankhyat). Asankhyat(innumerable) means that it cannot be counted; you will run outof numbers. Even when they count over a billion, they can go oncounting, but it will never end. That is called innumerable(asankhyat); it will not end even when you run out of numbers.Human beings alone are numerable (sankhyat); you couldcount perhaps four or five billion, and that would be a goodestimate. However, the animals and plants (tiryancha), areinnumerable (asankhyat), and even the celestial beings (deva)are innumerable. The living beings in the infernal realm (narkgati) are innumerable; with the exception of human beings, allother living beings (jivas) in the worldly interaction (vyavahar)are innumerable (asankhyat).The living entities of the unnamed state (avyavahar rashi)are infinite (anant), and even in the realm of Liberated Souls(Siddha gati) there are infinite liberated Souls (Siddhas). Infinite(anant), means beyond innumerable (asankhyat), limitless, never-ending; so it would be futile to count them. You can try andcount the numerable (sankhyat), but what do you do, when theinnumerable (asankhyat), has no number (sankhya)? Ten million,a hundred million, a billion..., however much further you go oncounting, this account (hisaab) will still not come to an end. Thatis why it has been categorized as innumerable (asankhyat);because it does not come into counting (sankhya) – it cannot beallocated a number!This world has puzzled itself. Why is that? It is becausethese jivas (living beings) are forever moving in the flowingcurrent of an eternal (anaadi) stream. Just like the flowing watersof the Narmada (river), these living entities (jivas) are constantlyflowing along.Matter (dravya), location (kshetra), time (kaad) and innerintent (bhaav) are constantly changing. Even their location keepschanging. So if in the past life, we were at the tenth milestone,in this lifetime, we come to the eleventh milestone. Now on thetenth milestone, there were wonderful gardens and wonderfulpeople, and having seen all that, when we get to the eleventhmilestone, we encounter desert. So you think to yourself, ‘Howon earth can I live like this?’ You recall all that you had seen atthe tenth milestone. You are in a predicament because of yourinternal conflict. All you keep feeling is, ‘this is terrible, this isterrible’. The knowledge of today is what is bothering you within.Is that not where all the conflict stems from? Until you attainAtmagnan (Self-realization), the conflict will continually go onand on.So the world will remain the way it is forever. And fromit, as a rule, the living beings will constantly be going to finalliberation (moksha).Ultimately the Solution Will Come Throughthe GnaniQuestioner: Once a living entity (jiva) comes into a statewhere it has an identity (vyavahar rashi) and enters life in theworld, is it bound to go to final liberation (moksha)? So eventhe time would have been decided, that after so many births, itwill go to final liberation? Would the timing of going to finalliberation be already determined?Dadashri: The living entity (jiva) is ready to go to finalliberation (moksha) from the time it enters into the named state(vyavahar rashi).Questioner: But will its time be decided?Dadashri: The time is indeed decided, but after cominginto the human life-form, provided one does not do egoism(ahamkar), then the time is definite. If he does egoism, he againfalls from there, and then there is no telling what happens fromthere on. Once he turns backward into egoism (ahamkar), thereAptavani-87980Aptavani-8is no certainty; then it will roam around for countless lifetimes.So as long as he does not do egoism, the time is secured.If one lives in the same manner as the animals, living theway the animals do with others; without the hassle of pride(maan), the hassle of ego (ahamkar), without the hassle ofgreed (lobh), he would go directly to final liberation (moksha).But these people do not live the same way as animals!Questioner: After becoming human, how can one livelike animals? Dadashri: What I am saying, is that if a being (jiva),lives the way animals do, then it can go off to moksha. But bywatching others one becomes just like them. ‘They did this andI am like this’, perpetually doing this, everything goes wrong.Then if he finds spiritual company (satsang), and meets a GnaniPurush, only then there is freedom; otherwise, there is nofreedom.Questioner: Is it decided that one will meet a GnaniPurush only at a certain time?Dadashri: No. That is not decided. It depends on whenone encounters that circumstance. If anyone should receive sucha push, he would become egotistical (ahamkari)! When hebecomes egotistical (ahamkari), it means he becomesindependent (nirashrit). Except for human beings, all other livingbeings (jivas) are dependent (aashrit) on God. But these humansare the only ones who are independent (nirashrit)!So this is all man’s ego; ‘I will do this’ and ‘I will do that’!Moreover, he has heaps and heaps of all kinds of desires; ‘Iwant to do this!’ So human beings become independent andthen they claim, ‘I can do this’. So God says, ‘Fine then, go doyour thing!’ It means that God has become free from anyresponsibility.What does the doctor say? He would say, ‘I am doing thetreatment. I cured him this way, and I did that...’ Then wouldGod not move away from there?Therefore, the whole problem is to do with knowledgearising from association with worldly people (loksangnya).People have learned from what they saw, and we learned fromwhat people learned. With a worldly view (loksangnya) youcan never go to final liberation (moksha). Do you understandloksangnya? If you follow the ways of others’ beliefs, aboutwhere happiness (sukh) lies, you will never attain final liberation.Only if one follows the Gnani’s sangnya (association), will hefind a solution.Questioner: But the moment you are born, all you findis worldly influence (loksangnya) and nothing else.Dadashri: Yes, but what can you do? Since you are livingwith others, it has to be that way.Otherwise if a person is natural and spontaneous (sahajik),he will go straight to moksha. Just look at how natural (sahajik)animals are. They have no anger-pride-deceit-greed (krodh-maan-maya-lobh). Even when an animal butts you with its head,it has no anger (krodh); it is natural and spontaneous (sahajik).And when it devours its food quickly, it has no avarice (lobh),because that is natural to them.Moksha Is Certain: the Time for Moksha Is Not Questioner: So are we to understand, that for everyAtma, the time to go to its final liberation has been decided;whereas for some it is not?Dadashri: Each Atma is going to go to its final liberation(moksha); that much is true. But its time to go to final liberationis not decided. That is dependent upon what one does in humanbirth. It depends upon whether as a human being, he createsentanglements, reduces entanglements or whether he stops themaltogether.Aptavani-87980Aptavani-8is no certainty; then it will roam around for countless lifetimes.So as long as he does not do egoism, the time is secured.If one lives in the same manner as the animals, living theway the animals do with others; without the hassle of pride(maan), the hassle of ego (ahamkar), without the hassle ofgreed (lobh), he would go directly to final liberation (moksha).But these people do not live the same way as animals!Questioner: After becoming human, how can one livelike animals? Dadashri: What I am saying, is that if a being (jiva),lives the way animals do, then it can go off to moksha. But bywatching others one becomes just like them. ‘They did this andI am like this’, perpetually doing this, everything goes wrong.Then if he finds spiritual company (satsang), and meets a GnaniPurush, only then there is freedom; otherwise, there is nofreedom.Questioner: Is it decided that one will meet a GnaniPurush only at a certain time?Dadashri: No. That is not decided. It depends on whenone encounters that circumstance. If anyone should receive sucha push, he would become egotistical (ahamkari)! When hebecomes egotistical (ahamkari), it means he becomesindependent (nirashrit). Except for human beings, all other livingbeings (jivas) are dependent (aashrit) on God. But these humansare the only ones who are independent (nirashrit)!So this is all man’s ego; ‘I will do this’ and ‘I will do that’!Moreover, he has heaps and heaps of all kinds of desires; ‘Iwant to do this!’ So human beings become independent andthen they claim, ‘I can do this’. So God says, ‘Fine then, go doyour thing!’ It means that God has become free from anyresponsibility.What does the doctor say? He would say, ‘I am doing thetreatment. I cured him this way, and I did that...’ Then wouldGod not move away from there?Therefore, the whole problem is to do with knowledgearising from association with worldly people (loksangnya).People have learned from what they saw, and we learned fromwhat people learned. With a worldly view (loksangnya) youcan never go to final liberation (moksha). Do you understandloksangnya? If you follow the ways of others’ beliefs, aboutwhere happiness (sukh) lies, you will never attain final liberation.Only if one follows the Gnani’s sangnya (association), will hefind a solution.Questioner: But the moment you are born, all you findis worldly influence (loksangnya) and nothing else.Dadashri: Yes, but what can you do? Since you are livingwith others, it has to be that way.Otherwise if a person is natural and spontaneous (sahajik),he will go straight to moksha. Just look at how natural (sahajik)animals are. They have no anger-pride-deceit-greed (krodh-maan-maya-lobh). Even when an animal butts you with its head,it has no anger (krodh); it is natural and spontaneous (sahajik).And when it devours its food quickly, it has no avarice (lobh),because that is natural to them.Moksha Is Certain: the Time for Moksha Is Not Questioner: So are we to understand, that for everyAtma, the time to go to its final liberation has been decided;whereas for some it is not?Dadashri: Each Atma is going to go to its final liberation(moksha); that much is true. But its time to go to final liberationis not decided. That is dependent upon what one does in humanbirth. It depends upon whether as a human being, he createsentanglements, reduces entanglements or whether he stops themaltogether.Aptavani-88182Aptavani-8Questioner: Does every Atma attain the human life atthe same time? Does it attain it at a designated time?Dadashri: Every Atma has to receive a human life.Questioner: But does it receive it at a time that ispredetermined?Dadashri: Yes, it receives it at a decided time; the beginningof the time of the human life (avatar) is determined. Once itattains the human life, it is then free to roam around independently!That is because whether to create entanglements or not, is nowin its hands. After that, nothing is for certain. But the road untilthere, is definitely there, and it is clear-cut. It is absolutely regularfor a living being (jiva) to receive an initial human birth (avatar)and it happens precisely on time. But later, it encounters theentanglements! And when it becomes embroiled in it, it becomesso embroiled, that you would not believe. So many lifetimes arelost in this! This is because in the human birth, doership(kartapanu) arises in the living being, and in doership(kartapanu) there is all kinds of freedom; freedom to go intoany life-form. The living being can do the things that would sendit to the infernal realm (nark gati), or it can do things that willsend it to the animal realm (jaanvar gati); it can even performgracious deeds and superhuman feats in the human form; dodeeds that would return it to the human life-form, or even deedsfor it to enter the realm of celestial beings (deva gati)!And if ever the soul (jiva) encounters a Gnani Purush,or a vitarag (who is absolutely free from attachment andabhorrence), it no longer does deeds that are related to theworldly life (sansar), and starts on the vitarag path; its deeds(karya) become related to the Atma; therefore, it goes on toliberation. So even liberation happens only in the human life-form.Nowhere else, not even in the celestial realm (deva gati), can youattain liberation. In other realms of existence (gatis), there is nodoership (karta); whereas in the human life-form, there is doership.Bringing an End to the Ego, The Vitarag WayQuestioner: So when the Atma enters the human life-form for the very first time, it needs to be very alert at the time.Dadashri: But to stay alert, that power is not in its hands.It encounters all the circumstances (saiyogo), and according tothe circumstance, it then becomes entangled itself. Everyone hasthe same entanglements. But, if a person were to know his ownego (ahamkar), himself, and still he did nothing to reduce it,then you should know that he is deliberately trying to becomeentangled.Questioner: I used to think that every Atma does nothave the same scope, so that one Atma would go to final liberation(moksha) quickly, while another would go to final liberationmuch later. So then, does it all depend on luck?Dadashri: No. That is not luck. When one takes birth inthe human form; it happens due to circumstances. When it takesbirth for the first time, here in the human form, that birth will beone that, nothing will hurt it on its way to final liberation. But thatall depends upon, in which way it turns the ego (ahamkar).If one takes birth in a family of thieves, and if he does notturn the ego around himself, then nothing is accomplished. Thatis because being born human, gives one the right! So he hasbecome the doer (karta) of ego (ahamkar). But, if he does notturn the ego around on his own, then there is nothing. Birth cantake place anywhere, and under any circumstance, but in whichdirection do we guide the ego (ahamkar); just as a ship woulduse a compass to navigate with, even in this, you need to employa compass. This means that the way to keep the ego would beto say, ‘I have to run this now, so I must be careful. I have totake this direction very slowly’. From the time of birth into thehuman life-form, you yourself have to steer the ego. Once humanbirth is attained, this is how you have to guide the ego.Aptavani-88182Aptavani-8Questioner: Does every Atma attain the human life atthe same time? Does it attain it at a designated time?Dadashri: Every Atma has to receive a human life.Questioner: But does it receive it at a time that ispredetermined?Dadashri: Yes, it receives it at a decided time; the beginningof the time of the human life (avatar) is determined. Once itattains the human life, it is then free to roam around independently!That is because whether to create entanglements or not, is nowin its hands. After that, nothing is for certain. But the road untilthere, is definitely there, and it is clear-cut. It is absolutely regularfor a living being (jiva) to receive an initial human birth (avatar)and it happens precisely on time. But later, it encounters theentanglements! And when it becomes embroiled in it, it becomesso embroiled, that you would not believe. So many lifetimes arelost in this! This is because in the human birth, doership(kartapanu) arises in the living being, and in doership(kartapanu) there is all kinds of freedom; freedom to go intoany life-form. The living being can do the things that would sendit to the infernal realm (nark gati), or it can do things that willsend it to the animal realm (jaanvar gati); it can even performgracious deeds and superhuman feats in the human form; dodeeds that would return it to the human life-form, or even deedsfor it to enter the realm of celestial beings (deva gati)!And if ever the soul (jiva) encounters a Gnani Purush,or a vitarag (who is absolutely free from attachment andabhorrence), it no longer does deeds that are related to theworldly life (sansar), and starts on the vitarag path; its deeds(karya) become related to the Atma; therefore, it goes on toliberation. So even liberation happens only in the human life-form.Nowhere else, not even in the celestial realm (deva gati), can youattain liberation. In other realms of existence (gatis), there is nodoership (karta); whereas in the human life-form, there is doership.Bringing an End to the Ego, The Vitarag WayQuestioner: So when the Atma enters the human life-form for the very first time, it needs to be very alert at the time.Dadashri: But to stay alert, that power is not in its hands.It encounters all the circumstances (saiyogo), and according tothe circumstance, it then becomes entangled itself. Everyone hasthe same entanglements. But, if a person were to know his ownego (ahamkar), himself, and still he did nothing to reduce it,then you should know that he is deliberately trying to becomeentangled.Questioner: I used to think that every Atma does nothave the same scope, so that one Atma would go to final liberation(moksha) quickly, while another would go to final liberationmuch later. So then, does it all depend on luck?Dadashri: No. That is not luck. When one takes birth inthe human form; it happens due to circumstances. When it takesbirth for the first time, here in the human form, that birth will beone that, nothing will hurt it on its way to final liberation. But thatall depends upon, in which way it turns the ego (ahamkar).If one takes birth in a family of thieves, and if he does notturn the ego around himself, then nothing is accomplished. Thatis because being born human, gives one the right! So he hasbecome the doer (karta) of ego (ahamkar). But, if he does notturn the ego around on his own, then there is nothing. Birth cantake place anywhere, and under any circumstance, but in whichdirection do we guide the ego (ahamkar); just as a ship woulduse a compass to navigate with, even in this, you need to employa compass. This means that the way to keep the ego would beto say, ‘I have to run this now, so I must be careful. I have totake this direction very slowly’. From the time of birth into thehuman life-form, you yourself have to steer the ego. Once humanbirth is attained, this is how you have to guide the ego.Aptavani-88384Aptavani-8Questioner: And that is not easy.Dadashri: If it was easy then everyone would have doneit. It is itself difficult, it is not easy. It is extremely difficult. Becauseit is so difficult, just to understand this much, so many scriptureshave been written. But that in itself is very difficult.There are certain things that you like and sometimes thingsyou do not. ‘One’ (the Self) comes across agreeablecircumstances, and disagreeable circumstances. When a likeablecircumstance (saiyog) comes along, the Vitarag says: that nothingis worth liking, nor is it worth disliking, You (the Self) shouldremain free from this. That is because there is no such thing tonot like. Besides, You bind yourself when you consider somethingto be good. When you call something good, you will be callingsomething else bad. Since you say one thing is good, you willundoubtedly say the other thing is bad.So what does the Vitarag (one without attachment andabhorrence) say? That it is all circumstances (saiyogo). And thatit is you, who have created the differences; that this circumstance(saiyog) is good, and that circumstance is bad. All that theVitarags have said about circumstances is that they are allcircumstances. And moreover, that the nature of thesecircumstances is that they dissipate (viyogi); therefore, do notallow any circumstance to become likable to you, so that you donot have to push away any circumstance that you may not like.If you try to push it away, then you forgo your final liberation(moksha). If any disagreeable circumstance (saiyog) should comealong, and you push that circumstance away, you will again getcaught up in the entanglement. Therefore, instead of pushing thecircumstance away, end it with intent of equanimity (samatabhaav). Circumstances by their own nature, are transient(viyogi). The circumstance will disperse on its own, so you donot have to become fretful. And in spite of that, if you areconfronted with circumstances you dislike, and you try to avoidthem by going the wrong way, even then, time will not spareyou; for that length of time, you will have to suffer a beating.Therefore, the circumstance is by nature, transient (viyogi); withthis support, and with patience, you must move on.Did Gajasukumar not, have his head covered with a clayturban (pot), by his father-in-law? He had filled the pot withburning coal. At that moment, Gajasukumar understood that hewas encountering this saiyog (circumstance), in which his father-in-law had bound – what was according to his belief – a turbanfor moksha, filled with burning coal, over his head.Now, Lord Neminath (The 22nd Tirthankar), had toldGajasukumar, ‘This is Your nature and form (swaroop), andthese circumstances (saiyogo), are not Yours. ‘You’ are theKnower (Gnata) of the circumstances. Circumstances are allsomething to be known (gneya).’ So he was, as the Self, ableto remain the Knower, amidst those circumstances (gneya). Sincehe had become the Knower, he remained separate in thatcircumstance and he even attained final liberation. Otherwise, inspite of all their lamentations and grief (kalpant), people dieanyway! If you are about to die, and you die lamenting, you willhave to suffer the consequences of that lamentation (kalpant -endless grief).Regularity After Self-RealizationQuestioner: Can we not say that religion (dharma) is thesame as a child learning his numbers, beginning with numberone, and progresses step by step in order (kramsar)?Dadashri: It is all just like that in religion (dharma). Butas far as dharma goes, it all changes after one enters the humanlife. It all becomes distorted. Here from human life one eithergoes on to a lower life-form, or a higher life-form.Questioner: So, after coming into the human life, there isno more order (kram)?Dadashri: No. But after Atmagnan (Self-realization) itAptavani-88384Aptavani-8Questioner: And that is not easy.Dadashri: If it was easy then everyone would have doneit. It is itself difficult, it is not easy. It is extremely difficult. Becauseit is so difficult, just to understand this much, so many scriptureshave been written. But that in itself is very difficult.There are certain things that you like and sometimes thingsyou do not. ‘One’ (the Self) comes across agreeablecircumstances, and disagreeable circumstances. When a likeablecircumstance (saiyog) comes along, the Vitarag says: that nothingis worth liking, nor is it worth disliking, You (the Self) shouldremain free from this. That is because there is no such thing tonot like. Besides, You bind yourself when you consider somethingto be good. When you call something good, you will be callingsomething else bad. Since you say one thing is good, you willundoubtedly say the other thing is bad.So what does the Vitarag (one without attachment andabhorrence) say? That it is all circumstances (saiyogo). And thatit is you, who have created the differences; that this circumstance(saiyog) is good, and that circumstance is bad. All that theVitarags have said about circumstances is that they are allcircumstances. And moreover, that the nature of thesecircumstances is that they dissipate (viyogi); therefore, do notallow any circumstance to become likable to you, so that you donot have to push away any circumstance that you may not like.If you try to push it away, then you forgo your final liberation(moksha). If any disagreeable circumstance (saiyog) should comealong, and you push that circumstance away, you will again getcaught up in the entanglement. Therefore, instead of pushing thecircumstance away, end it with intent of equanimity (samatabhaav). Circumstances by their own nature, are transient(viyogi). The circumstance will disperse on its own, so you donot have to become fretful. And in spite of that, if you areconfronted with circumstances you dislike, and you try to avoidthem by going the wrong way, even then, time will not spareyou; for that length of time, you will have to suffer a beating.Therefore, the circumstance is by nature, transient (viyogi); withthis support, and with patience, you must move on.Did Gajasukumar not, have his head covered with a clayturban (pot), by his father-in-law? He had filled the pot withburning coal. At that moment, Gajasukumar understood that hewas encountering this saiyog (circumstance), in which his father-in-law had bound – what was according to his belief – a turbanfor moksha, filled with burning coal, over his head.Now, Lord Neminath (The 22nd Tirthankar), had toldGajasukumar, ‘This is Your nature and form (swaroop), andthese circumstances (saiyogo), are not Yours. ‘You’ are theKnower (Gnata) of the circumstances. Circumstances are allsomething to be known (gneya).’ So he was, as the Self, ableto remain the Knower, amidst those circumstances (gneya). Sincehe had become the Knower, he remained separate in thatcircumstance and he even attained final liberation. Otherwise, inspite of all their lamentations and grief (kalpant), people dieanyway! If you are about to die, and you die lamenting, you willhave to suffer the consequences of that lamentation (kalpant -endless grief).Regularity After Self-RealizationQuestioner: Can we not say that religion (dharma) is thesame as a child learning his numbers, beginning with numberone, and progresses step by step in order (kramsar)?Dadashri: It is all just like that in religion (dharma). Butas far as dharma goes, it all changes after one enters the humanlife. It all becomes distorted. Here from human life one eithergoes on to a lower life-form, or a higher life-form.Questioner: So, after coming into the human life, there isno more order (kram)?Dadashri: No. But after Atmagnan (Self-realization) itAptavani-88586Aptavani-8returns to order (kram) again. So after Self-realization, it becomesorderly (kramvaar) again. As long as you have human birth, ifyou do not attain Self-realization, you will be wandering around,and all rule or order (kram-bram) will just disappear. However,if this were not to occur in the middle of human life, then Godwould say that everything is dependent upon niyati, a fixedprecise track towards liberation.It Is One’s Nature to Ascend Higher, but When?Questioner: The fundamental nature of the Atma is torise upwards (urdhvagami). They say that we have receivedthis human body, on account of this nature. Now, the results ofsome of the karmas done in the human life, sends one to theplant and animal realm of existence (Tiryancha gati). And afterhaving spent time in the Tiryancha gati, one returns to thehuman body, so what is the law that governs this?Dadashri: The fact is, that when one binds karma here,it means that the paudgalik (pertaining to the non-Self complex)weight increases, and when the weight of the pudgal (the non-Self complex) increases, it descends to lower realms of existence(gati). Then, when the pudgal becomes expended in the lowerlife-form, it means that the load of the non-Self complex haslessened, and so he comes back to human life!Once he is back as a human being, if his human intent ofhuman life (dharma) breaks, and the intent of celestial life (devadharma) arises in him, he becomes lighter and ascends to thecelestial realm (deva gati). When the load increases, onedescends, to where there are seven abysses; seven lower regions(lokas) into which he sinks. And if one becomes lighter, oneascends upwards, all the way to where there are six locations(lokas). That is how the universe comprises the fourteenlocations!The non-Self complex (pudgal) is darkness, and the Atmais light. If you are pulled into darkness, you will go downwards,and if you are pulled into the light, you will go upwards. Downwards Because of the EgoQuestioner: But is the nature of the Atma, not naturaland spontaneous (sahaj)? So why do we have to do sadhana(spiritual endeavor) for spiritual bliss (shreya)?Dadashri: The Atma has no spiritual happiness (shreya),nor does it have worldly happiness (preya). The Atma’s innatenature (swabhav) is to ascend (urdhvagami). The Atma is ina constant state of ascending. The nature of the non-Self complex(pudgal), on the other hand, is to descend (adhogami).Questioner: So define urdhvagami.Dadashri: Urdhvagami means that one’s nature alonewill carry him to moksha. As long as you do not interfere, theAtma, through its own nature (swabhav), is capable of going tomoksha by itself, and you would not have to do a single thing!And the non-Self complex (pudgal), by its very nature is falling(adhogami). The more strength the non-Self complex gains, thelower it gets pushed, and the lesser its strength becomes, it rises;however, when the Atma is free of the non-Self complexaltogether, is when it ascends to final liberation (moksha).Questioner: But the Atma’s nature is to rise(urdhvagami), so why does it descend lower again (adhogami)?Dadashri: If one has any harmful thoughts towards anyhuman being or any other soul (jiva), or has thoughts abouthurting anyone in anyway, then heavy subatomic particles(parmanu) will have attached themselves, which means that itbecomes heavier and he will be pulled downwards. But if youhave altruistic thoughts about doing good for the world, thenlighter subatomic particles will stick to it, which will take youhigher up.Aptavani-88586Aptavani-8returns to order (kram) again. So after Self-realization, it becomesorderly (kramvaar) again. As long as you have human birth, ifyou do not attain Self-realization, you will be wandering around,and all rule or order (kram-bram) will just disappear. However,if this were not to occur in the middle of human life, then Godwould say that everything is dependent upon niyati, a fixedprecise track towards liberation.It Is One’s Nature to Ascend Higher, but When?Questioner: The fundamental nature of the Atma is torise upwards (urdhvagami). They say that we have receivedthis human body, on account of this nature. Now, the results ofsome of the karmas done in the human life, sends one to theplant and animal realm of existence (Tiryancha gati). And afterhaving spent time in the Tiryancha gati, one returns to thehuman body, so what is the law that governs this?Dadashri: The fact is, that when one binds karma here,it means that the paudgalik (pertaining to the non-Self complex)weight increases, and when the weight of the pudgal (the non-Self complex) increases, it descends to lower realms of existence(gati). Then, when the pudgal becomes expended in the lowerlife-form, it means that the load of the non-Self complex haslessened, and so he comes back to human life!Once he is back as a human being, if his human intent ofhuman life (dharma) breaks, and the intent of celestial life (devadharma) arises in him, he becomes lighter and ascends to thecelestial realm (deva gati). When the load increases, onedescends, to where there are seven abysses; seven lower regions(lokas) into which he sinks. And if one becomes lighter, oneascends upwards, all the way to where there are six locations(lokas). That is how the universe comprises the fourteenlocations!The non-Self complex (pudgal) is darkness, and the Atmais light. If you are pulled into darkness, you will go downwards,and if you are pulled into the light, you will go upwards. Downwards Because of the EgoQuestioner: But is the nature of the Atma, not naturaland spontaneous (sahaj)? So why do we have to do sadhana(spiritual endeavor) for spiritual bliss (shreya)?Dadashri: The Atma has no spiritual happiness (shreya),nor does it have worldly happiness (preya). The Atma’s innatenature (swabhav) is to ascend (urdhvagami). The Atma is ina constant state of ascending. The nature of the non-Self complex(pudgal), on the other hand, is to descend (adhogami).Questioner: So define urdhvagami.Dadashri: Urdhvagami means that one’s nature alonewill carry him to moksha. As long as you do not interfere, theAtma, through its own nature (swabhav), is capable of going tomoksha by itself, and you would not have to do a single thing!And the non-Self complex (pudgal), by its very nature is falling(adhogami). The more strength the non-Self complex gains, thelower it gets pushed, and the lesser its strength becomes, it rises;however, when the Atma is free of the non-Self complexaltogether, is when it ascends to final liberation (moksha).Questioner: But the Atma’s nature is to rise(urdhvagami), so why does it descend lower again (adhogami)?Dadashri: If one has any harmful thoughts towards anyhuman being or any other soul (jiva), or has thoughts abouthurting anyone in anyway, then heavy subatomic particles(parmanu) will have attached themselves, which means that itbecomes heavier and he will be pulled downwards. But if youhave altruistic thoughts about doing good for the world, thenlighter subatomic particles will stick to it, which will take youhigher up.Aptavani-88788Aptavani-8Questioner: But is it not said that the Atma is constantlyheading towards moksha?Dadashri: Absolutely. It is indeed going upwards, butwhen it gathers heavy subatomic particles (parmanu), it willstart going downwards. Its own nature is to rise (urdhvagami),but it is the non-Self complex (pudgal), that pulls it down. Andso this tug of war has started. It is for this reason that I tell you;become free from karma! That is why, when you attain the stateof Shuddhatma (the pure Soul), the pull from the non-Selfcomplex (pudgal) will lessen. Otherwise, until then; time, karma,illusory attachment (maya), will all hinder you. Therefore, whenthe entire matter (prasang - added association) of the non-Selfcomplex is settled, the Atma, while remaining in its own nature,will then go off to final liberation.Now, the nature of the non-Self complex (pudgal) is todescend (adhogami). But how does the non-Self complex’snature become even more descending? The answer would bethat, it is not based on one’s body (sharira) being too fat, noris it based on one’s body being too heavy, but it depends onhow big, how long, and how wide, one’s ego (ahamkar) is. Aperson’s body may be skinny, but his ego could be as huge asthe universe; whereas, someone who has a strong body andweighs two-hundred and fifty kilos, but has no ego; will not sink.Ahamkar (ego) means weight. The very meaning of ego, isweight.Therefore, this world is boundless, but it exists withinprescribed laws. That is because the nature of the Atma is torise upwards; its nature is to ascend towards Siddha gati(location of Liberated Souls).From Human to Lower Life-FormQuestioner: How can one reconcile the concept ofevolution in the Theory of Evolution, in terms of worldly science,with the notion of the world’s existence as being eternal? Wouldyou please explain this?Dadashri: This world is without a beginning and withoutan end (anaadi-anant). The living entities (jivas) within it areconstantly evolving. The living entities have been divided intothree parts. Out of the three, there is one part, where absolutelyno evolution occurs. Those living entities are just stored in astockpile. They are called avyavahar rashi (without identity).They come here from that stock, into worldly interaction(vyavahar), where the living entities (jivas) in worldlyinteraction are continually evolving. The souls (jivas) carry onevolving all the way to final liberation (moksha). While theyare evolving, they acquire all kinds of experiences and proceedto moksha.There were four senses (indriya) initially, and the last tocome are the ears. The very last to develop is ear. The jivasdevelopment prior to this, would be just holes where the earswould be; otherwise there would only be four senses.The fourth sense (indriya) are, the eyes, so it becomes awinged insect, like a moth. As soon as its eyes open, it has anillusory attachment (moha) to light. So it dies from chasing thelight. When the ear opens up, it dies from hearing. All day long,it searches for things to listen to, so it listens to the radio, or itgoes to listen to songs. It is always like this for anything that hasnewly opened up.As for these ants, because of their newly developed sense(sense of smell), they scurry around here and there. And if thereis a pot suspended three feet from the ceiling, they would sensethrough the nose, from here on the ground, that there is ghee(clarified butter) in it. Now they know how to get to it. So theyclimb up the wall, then climb down and lick the ghee. They runaround all day due to this newly developed sense they are bornwith.Aptavani-88788Aptavani-8Questioner: But is it not said that the Atma is constantlyheading towards moksha?Dadashri: Absolutely. It is indeed going upwards, butwhen it gathers heavy subatomic particles (parmanu), it willstart going downwards. Its own nature is to rise (urdhvagami),but it is the non-Self complex (pudgal), that pulls it down. Andso this tug of war has started. It is for this reason that I tell you;become free from karma! That is why, when you attain the stateof Shuddhatma (the pure Soul), the pull from the non-Selfcomplex (pudgal) will lessen. Otherwise, until then; time, karma,illusory attachment (maya), will all hinder you. Therefore, whenthe entire matter (prasang - added association) of the non-Selfcomplex is settled, the Atma, while remaining in its own nature,will then go off to final liberation.Now, the nature of the non-Self complex (pudgal) is todescend (adhogami). But how does the non-Self complex’snature become even more descending? The answer would bethat, it is not based on one’s body (sharira) being too fat, noris it based on one’s body being too heavy, but it depends onhow big, how long, and how wide, one’s ego (ahamkar) is. Aperson’s body may be skinny, but his ego could be as huge asthe universe; whereas, someone who has a strong body andweighs two-hundred and fifty kilos, but has no ego; will not sink.Ahamkar (ego) means weight. The very meaning of ego, isweight.Therefore, this world is boundless, but it exists withinprescribed laws. That is because the nature of the Atma is torise upwards; its nature is to ascend towards Siddha gati(location of Liberated Souls).From Human to Lower Life-FormQuestioner: How can one reconcile the concept ofevolution in the Theory of Evolution, in terms of worldly science,with the notion of the world’s existence as being eternal? Wouldyou please explain this?Dadashri: This world is without a beginning and withoutan end (anaadi-anant). The living entities (jivas) within it areconstantly evolving. The living entities have been divided intothree parts. Out of the three, there is one part, where absolutelyno evolution occurs. Those living entities are just stored in astockpile. They are called avyavahar rashi (without identity).They come here from that stock, into worldly interaction(vyavahar), where the living entities (jivas) in worldlyinteraction are continually evolving. The souls (jivas) carry onevolving all the way to final liberation (moksha). While theyare evolving, they acquire all kinds of experiences and proceedto moksha.There were four senses (indriya) initially, and the last tocome are the ears. The very last to develop is ear. The jivasdevelopment prior to this, would be just holes where the earswould be; otherwise there would only be four senses.The fourth sense (indriya) are, the eyes, so it becomes awinged insect, like a moth. As soon as its eyes open, it has anillusory attachment (moha) to light. So it dies from chasing thelight. When the ear opens up, it dies from hearing. All day long,it searches for things to listen to, so it listens to the radio, or itgoes to listen to songs. It is always like this for anything that hasnewly opened up.As for these ants, because of their newly developed sense(sense of smell), they scurry around here and there. And if thereis a pot suspended three feet from the ceiling, they would sensethrough the nose, from here on the ground, that there is ghee(clarified butter) in it. Now they know how to get to it. So theyclimb up the wall, then climb down and lick the ghee. They runaround all day due to this newly developed sense they are bornwith.Aptavani-88990Aptavani-8When they talk about there being 8,400,000 yoni (placesof inception; birth), it means total sum of all the yonis of thedifferent types of life-forms (jivas). If it had to go through all the8,400,000 again, you would never see it again! How wouldyou? However, it is not like that. It only has to wander aroundover here. If the living entity goes from human life into animal life,it stays there for eight lives (lifetimes), before returning to humanlife again.Questioner: But according to the theory of evolution(utkranti), it cannot go from being a human, to the lower life-form, can it?Dadashri: This is how it is: it is only in the human realm(gati), where both charging and discharging occur; whereas thecelestial realm (deva gati) is in the form (swaroop) of discharge;the plant and animal realm (tiryancha gati), is in the form ofdischarge, and the infernal realm or Hell (nark gati) is in theform of discharge. Therefore, those who have gone to animallife-form, celestial life-form, or infernal life-form, they have onlygone there from the human life-form. Darwin’s theory is notentirely wrong. It is ten or fifteen percent correct. But there arethree hundred and sixty degrees to complete knowledge! He didnot have complete knowledge of this. He discovered it throughhis intellect (buddhi), which is fine and correct. But he did notknow, that afterwards, the entire path takes on a curve, wherehumans can even devolve into cows and buffaloes, whose realm(gati) is not one of development. For they only come from thehuman life-form.And so the theory of evolution is only right, up to aboutten percent. The other ninety percent, he did not know about.After all, his ten percent discovery is only up until the humanrealm (gati)! He did not know about the devolution (vakragati)that occurs for the human being; how did the human end up asan elephant? How did the bull appear? How did the horseappear? How did fish appear? How did the whale appear? Thatis what they do not understand. However, today his theory ofevolution, the theory according to Darwin, is right. But it is tenpercent true. There is much more to come further on. How doesa whale come into existence? What rule of evolution appliesthere? That is devolution (vakragati), whereby it has revertedback from human life. Where did the rhino come from? It toohas come back from the human life. Where have the lions andthe tigers returned from? They have turned back from the humanlife-form.So lions and tigers, and even their cubs, begin to eat fleshfrom the time they are cubs, do they not? And what about thecalves of the cows and the buffaloes? Even while they grow,they do not eat flesh. Why is that? The reason would be, thatthese are “vegetarian” (herbivores), while the rest are “non-vegetarian” (carnivores). You can apply the same notion here,and appreciate that it was the humans who were vegetariansthemselves, that are now here in the form of cows and buffaloes.You can appreciate all that.Questioner: After human birth, do they ever go into earth-bodied life-forms (pruthvikaya) or fire-bodied life-forms(teukaya)?Dadashri: They do not go into the earth-bodied or thefire-bodied life-forms. At most, they can go to immoveablebodies (sthavarkaya); into trees. From the human life, theycan go to plant and animal (tiryancha) for a maximum of eightlifetimes.Therefore, the whole of the celestial realm (deva gati),the entire infernal realm (nark gati), and some part of the animaland plant realm (tiryancha gati) have all come from the humanbeing (manushya). Humans do both, they charge and discharge(karmas) and they can also, remain beyond charging anddischarging. So humans do have the energy to go to moksha!Aptavani-88990Aptavani-8When they talk about there being 8,400,000 yoni (placesof inception; birth), it means total sum of all the yonis of thedifferent types of life-forms (jivas). If it had to go through all the8,400,000 again, you would never see it again! How wouldyou? However, it is not like that. It only has to wander aroundover here. If the living entity goes from human life into animal life,it stays there for eight lives (lifetimes), before returning to humanlife again.Questioner: But according to the theory of evolution(utkranti), it cannot go from being a human, to the lower life-form, can it?Dadashri: This is how it is: it is only in the human realm(gati), where both charging and discharging occur; whereas thecelestial realm (deva gati) is in the form (swaroop) of discharge;the plant and animal realm (tiryancha gati), is in the form ofdischarge, and the infernal realm or Hell (nark gati) is in theform of discharge. Therefore, those who have gone to animallife-form, celestial life-form, or infernal life-form, they have onlygone there from the human life-form. Darwin’s theory is notentirely wrong. It is ten or fifteen percent correct. But there arethree hundred and sixty degrees to complete knowledge! He didnot have complete knowledge of this. He discovered it throughhis intellect (buddhi), which is fine and correct. But he did notknow, that afterwards, the entire path takes on a curve, wherehumans can even devolve into cows and buffaloes, whose realm(gati) is not one of development. For they only come from thehuman life-form.And so the theory of evolution is only right, up to aboutten percent. The other ninety percent, he did not know about.After all, his ten percent discovery is only up until the humanrealm (gati)! He did not know about the devolution (vakragati)that occurs for the human being; how did the human end up asan elephant? How did the bull appear? How did the horseappear? How did fish appear? How did the whale appear? Thatis what they do not understand. However, today his theory ofevolution, the theory according to Darwin, is right. But it is tenpercent true. There is much more to come further on. How doesa whale come into existence? What rule of evolution appliesthere? That is devolution (vakragati), whereby it has revertedback from human life. Where did the rhino come from? It toohas come back from the human life. Where have the lions andthe tigers returned from? They have turned back from the humanlife-form.So lions and tigers, and even their cubs, begin to eat fleshfrom the time they are cubs, do they not? And what about thecalves of the cows and the buffaloes? Even while they grow,they do not eat flesh. Why is that? The reason would be, thatthese are “vegetarian” (herbivores), while the rest are “non-vegetarian” (carnivores). You can apply the same notion here,and appreciate that it was the humans who were vegetariansthemselves, that are now here in the form of cows and buffaloes.You can appreciate all that.Questioner: After human birth, do they ever go into earth-bodied life-forms (pruthvikaya) or fire-bodied life-forms(teukaya)?Dadashri: They do not go into the earth-bodied or thefire-bodied life-forms. At most, they can go to immoveablebodies (sthavarkaya); into trees. From the human life, theycan go to plant and animal (tiryancha) for a maximum of eightlifetimes.Therefore, the whole of the celestial realm (deva gati),the entire infernal realm (nark gati), and some part of the animaland plant realm (tiryancha gati) have all come from the humanbeing (manushya). Humans do both, they charge and discharge(karmas) and they can also, remain beyond charging anddischarging. So humans do have the energy to go to moksha!Aptavani-89192Aptavani-8If human virtue is not lost; the human form is not lost. Andif one has bestial thoughts all the time, they will take him to intoplant and animal life (tiryancha). There is a limit to suffering. Ifsomething belongs to you, then you can enjoy it, but if it doesnot belong to you, then do not even think about it. The fact thatone enjoys things that he does not rightfully own, is preciselywhat transports him to the plant and animal life-form (tiryancha);therefore it is our own thoughts that send us to other realms ofexistence (gati).There are some sthavar (immobile), fruit-bearing trees,which humans who have carried out deceit and such immorality,enter into and become coconut trees, mango and other fruittrees. Their entire lifetime is spent on giving fruit to others, sothat they can pay off their karmic accounts and become freefrom their ties to people. No matter how enticing its mangoesare, it would not be able to enjoy its own wonderful fruit, willit? So by providing such mangoes to others, it becomes freefrom the karma. Which is why all this is scientific and no onecan do anything in that.Thereafter It Goes to MokshaQuestioner: In the Theory of Evolution, a living entity(jiva) evolves into a single-sensed (ekendriya), a two-sensed(beindriya) organism, and develops all the way into a humanbeing. And then from human, it can return to animal, so thereseems to be a bit of a contradiction to the evolution theory. Canyou clarify this?Dadashri: No. There is no contradiction. The entireTheory of Evolution is fine. However, it is only correct up to thepoint of human beings, but they do not know anything beyondthat.Questioner: Does the human being really return to animallife-form? That is my question.Dadashri: This is how it is: first, according to Darwin’stheory, by the process of evolution, the living entity (jiva)develops more and more, until it reaches human life, and onceit becomes a human being, because of the ego (“egoism”), itbecomes a doer (karta). And when it becomes the doer ofkarma, then according to the karmas it has to go and endurethem. If it creates a debit (paap; demerit karma), it has to goto the animal realm, or even to Hell (nark gati). And if it createscredit (punya; merit karma), it has to go to celestial realm(deva gati) or live a royal, and noble life as a human being. Soit all depends on the credit and debit after it has entered thehuman realm.So are there not people here who create credit-debit?These days, they do more debit, do they not? They have no ideawhere they are heading, and even then, do they not go oncreating debit? So from two legs, they receive four legs and atail! They again have to return here to the human realm; but theydo not have to go any lower. If they attain the human form once,they have to endure a period of one or two hundred years,before returning to the human realm again. Then they do notleave this human place. They retain their human form, all the wayuntil final liberation (moksha). If there is a debit, they end upspending one or two hundred years in the animal realm, and ahundred thousand years in the infernal realm. And if there is acredit, they spend a hundred thousand years in the celestialrealm. But when the embodied soul’s (jiva’s) suffering ends overthere, it is back here again. And when it is ready for final liberation(moksha), it will then go to final liberation, but until then it willhave to keep wandering around.Questioner: When it enters the human life-form, its mindis also developed, so does it mean that when it returns to theanimal life-form, that being loses the developed mind again?Dadashri: No. But the mind becomes covered by a veilAptavani-89192Aptavani-8If human virtue is not lost; the human form is not lost. Andif one has bestial thoughts all the time, they will take him to intoplant and animal life (tiryancha). There is a limit to suffering. Ifsomething belongs to you, then you can enjoy it, but if it doesnot belong to you, then do not even think about it. The fact thatone enjoys things that he does not rightfully own, is preciselywhat transports him to the plant and animal life-form (tiryancha);therefore it is our own thoughts that send us to other realms ofexistence (gati).There are some sthavar (immobile), fruit-bearing trees,which humans who have carried out deceit and such immorality,enter into and become coconut trees, mango and other fruittrees. Their entire lifetime is spent on giving fruit to others, sothat they can pay off their karmic accounts and become freefrom their ties to people. No matter how enticing its mangoesare, it would not be able to enjoy its own wonderful fruit, willit? So by providing such mangoes to others, it becomes freefrom the karma. Which is why all this is scientific and no onecan do anything in that.Thereafter It Goes to MokshaQuestioner: In the Theory of Evolution, a living entity(jiva) evolves into a single-sensed (ekendriya), a two-sensed(beindriya) organism, and develops all the way into a humanbeing. And then from human, it can return to animal, so thereseems to be a bit of a contradiction to the evolution theory. Canyou clarify this?Dadashri: No. There is no contradiction. The entireTheory of Evolution is fine. However, it is only correct up to thepoint of human beings, but they do not know anything beyondthat.Questioner: Does the human being really return to animallife-form? That is my question.Dadashri: This is how it is: first, according to Darwin’stheory, by the process of evolution, the living entity (jiva)develops more and more, until it reaches human life, and onceit becomes a human being, because of the ego (“egoism”), itbecomes a doer (karta). And when it becomes the doer ofkarma, then according to the karmas it has to go and endurethem. If it creates a debit (paap; demerit karma), it has to goto the animal realm, or even to Hell (nark gati). And if it createscredit (punya; merit karma), it has to go to celestial realm(deva gati) or live a royal, and noble life as a human being. Soit all depends on the credit and debit after it has entered thehuman realm.So are there not people here who create credit-debit?These days, they do more debit, do they not? They have no ideawhere they are heading, and even then, do they not go oncreating debit? So from two legs, they receive four legs and atail! They again have to return here to the human realm; but theydo not have to go any lower. If they attain the human form once,they have to endure a period of one or two hundred years,before returning to the human realm again. Then they do notleave this human place. They retain their human form, all the wayuntil final liberation (moksha). If there is a debit, they end upspending one or two hundred years in the animal realm, and ahundred thousand years in the infernal realm. And if there is acredit, they spend a hundred thousand years in the celestialrealm. But when the embodied soul’s (jiva’s) suffering ends overthere, it is back here again. And when it is ready for final liberation(moksha), it will then go to final liberation, but until then it willhave to keep wandering around.Questioner: When it enters the human life-form, its mindis also developed, so does it mean that when it returns to theanimal life-form, that being loses the developed mind again?Dadashri: No. But the mind becomes covered by a veilAptavani-89394Aptavani-8(of ignorance). The embodied soul (jiva) does have a mind inthe animal realm, but its mind is limited, its food will becorresponding to that; its blood and everything else will be animal-like. But it has to go to that location in order to suffer everything.If it were not like that, then people would not work for a living,but instead just steal and eat! But in the next life (birth), oneimmediately reaps the fruit of all this.Now here, one eats what is not rightfully his to eat.Adulterates goods and then sells them; enjoys things that are notrightfully his. That is all bestial thinking, which is preparing himfor life in the animal realm. You should realize that such thoughtsonly leads one to the animal realm; while virtuous thoughts(thoughts of sajjanta), will return him back to human life. Andif one gives to others, that which rightfully belongs to him, andhas magnanimous superhuman thoughts; then he will go to thecelestial realm of existence (deva gati).Questioner: In the animal yoni (birth), does one havegood and bad thoughts?Dadashri: No. There are no thoughts or anything of thekind over there. The animal birth is a birth which is only meantto suffer effects (discharge) of karma. The celestial realm too,is only one that has to be suffered, as is the infernal realm. Onlyhumans bind karma and suffer them as well, at the same time.Questioner: What if the credit and the debit, both stop?Dadashri: If credit and debit, merit karma (punya) anddemerit karma (paap) both come to an end, then one goes tomoksha.To Wander from Realm to Realm Is Nature’sLawQuestioner: But they say that one only attains humanbirth after he wanders around for 8,400,000 lifetimes, so doesit mean that he has to wander around for that many times again,before he receives another human birth?Dadashri: No, it is not like that. Once you attain a humanbirth, you do not have to go through the cycle of 8,400,000births again. However, if one’s thoughts are bestial, then he willhave to go take birth in the animal place of creation (yoni) foreight lifetimes, and even they will last one or two hundred years.One only returns back here again after that time. After becominghuman just once, one does not have to wander around toomuch.Questioner: Is it the same Atma, that goes around8,400,000 births? Dadashri: Yes, just the one Atma.Questioner: But the Atma is pure, is it not?Dadashri: The Atma is pure even now. It has stayedpure in spite of its wanderings through 8,400,000 births (yoni)!It has always remained pure and it will always remain pure.Questioner: So then, what is the reason for itswanderings?Dadashri: The Atma has no reason; it is only in bliss.The one who is in pain has the desire to get rid of the pain.However, the Atma is blissful!Illusion Creates DifferencesQuestioner: Why have differences (bhinnatva) arisen inthe world? If there were no differences, the Atma’s onenesswould have spread throughout the world. There is a differencebetween happiness (sukh) and unhappiness (dukh), there is evena difference between wealth and poverty. Why did this differencecome about?Dadashri: Nothing like that has arisen, and nothing hasAptavani-89394Aptavani-8(of ignorance). The embodied soul (jiva) does have a mind inthe animal realm, but its mind is limited, its food will becorresponding to that; its blood and everything else will be animal-like. But it has to go to that location in order to suffer everything.If it were not like that, then people would not work for a living,but instead just steal and eat! But in the next life (birth), oneimmediately reaps the fruit of all this.Now here, one eats what is not rightfully his to eat.Adulterates goods and then sells them; enjoys things that are notrightfully his. That is all bestial thinking, which is preparing himfor life in the animal realm. You should realize that such thoughtsonly leads one to the animal realm; while virtuous thoughts(thoughts of sajjanta), will return him back to human life. Andif one gives to others, that which rightfully belongs to him, andhas magnanimous superhuman thoughts; then he will go to thecelestial realm of existence (deva gati).Questioner: In the animal yoni (birth), does one havegood and bad thoughts?Dadashri: No. There are no thoughts or anything of thekind over there. The animal birth is a birth which is only meantto suffer effects (discharge) of karma. The celestial realm too,is only one that has to be suffered, as is the infernal realm. Onlyhumans bind karma and suffer them as well, at the same time.Questioner: What if the credit and the debit, both stop?Dadashri: If credit and debit, merit karma (punya) anddemerit karma (paap) both come to an end, then one goes tomoksha.To Wander from Realm to Realm Is Nature’sLawQuestioner: But they say that one only attains humanbirth after he wanders around for 8,400,000 lifetimes, so doesit mean that he has to wander around for that many times again,before he receives another human birth?Dadashri: No, it is not like that. Once you attain a humanbirth, you do not have to go through the cycle of 8,400,000births again. However, if one’s thoughts are bestial, then he willhave to go take birth in the animal place of creation (yoni) foreight lifetimes, and even they will last one or two hundred years.One only returns back here again after that time. After becominghuman just once, one does not have to wander around toomuch.Questioner: Is it the same Atma, that goes around8,400,000 births? Dadashri: Yes, just the one Atma.Questioner: But the Atma is pure, is it not?Dadashri: The Atma is pure even now. It has stayedpure in spite of its wanderings through 8,400,000 births (yoni)!It has always remained pure and it will always remain pure.Questioner: So then, what is the reason for itswanderings?Dadashri: The Atma has no reason; it is only in bliss.The one who is in pain has the desire to get rid of the pain.However, the Atma is blissful!Illusion Creates DifferencesQuestioner: Why have differences (bhinnatva) arisen inthe world? If there were no differences, the Atma’s onenesswould have spread throughout the world. There is a differencebetween happiness (sukh) and unhappiness (dukh), there is evena difference between wealth and poverty. Why did this differencecome about?Dadashri: Nothing like that has arisen, and nothing hasAptavani-89596Aptavani-8been destroyed. Creation and destruction are just circumstances(avastha) that you see. Nothing happens to the main element.Those with illusion (bhranti), see the differences in the phases.The main element does not change.It is the deluded intellect (viparit buddhi), that shows youall that. The intellect (buddhi) has been born. Until the end, theintellect will keep you trapped in all this. Now if the intellect everretired, your work would be done. But it will not retire, even atthe age of eighty.Questioner: There is a difference between water andtaady (toddy; fermented palm juice).Dadashri: Of course, there is a difference between allthese things! They are different by nature. Taady looks white,but when you drink it, it goes to your head (inebriates), andwater will not go to your head. Each one cannot be preventedfrom displaying its effects, now can it?Questioner: Amongst every kind of living beings (jiva),including humans, there are differences in their diet.Dadashri: There is a difference! There are differences ineach and every thing. There is a difference even between twomustard seeds.Questioner: Why did that difference arise? If it was notthere, then there would only be happiness (sukh).Dadashri: Yes, but they are all just imaginings! It is thisintellect (buddhi) which is responsible for making you imagine,‘if this was not there, it would have been like this, and this wouldhave happened’, but you should just take those words out of thedictionary. ‘If it was like this, then this would have happened’are words that should not be there, and you should never keepthem in your dictionary.Questioner: So has the Atma Parmatma (Absolute Soul)created this difference? Did it do it purposefully or did it happennaturally?Dadashri: No, there is no difference whatsoever.Whatever one perceives is just one’s own wrong belief. It is likea man who reads a book during the daytime, and comes acrossa passage about ghosts, and when he is alone at night and hegoes into his room to sleep, as soon as he hears the mice rattlea cup in the other room, he gets shaken up right away! Nowfrom the time the ghost entered his mind, it will carry on affectinghim unless it leaves altogether.Questioner: Even within this entire universe, there existdifferences among every living being (jiva).Dadashri: There are no differences in any living being. Allliving beings are one by nature. The differences only exist throughone’s drashti bhed (different perception). And these differencesare governed by Nature. Moreover, the differences are external;they are differences in the clothing but not at the main levelwithin.Questioner: There is a difference in behavior. In the waycows, goats, buffaloes are all vegetarian, and lions and tigers arecarnivores. Who created these differences? Why are theredifferences? Is it because the embodied soul (jiva) is different?Is it because their physical bodies are different? Or is it a worldlydifference? Is it because of their different life-form (jiva), thatthere is a difference in the way they live?Dadashri: No. It is not like that. Listen to what I amgoing to say! There are so many casts and communities, but theydo not all eat meat, do they? So if they had to go into the animalrealm, where would they go? They would go into communitieswhere there is no eating flesh. It means they would go into non-carnivorous species such as cows and buffaloes. Whereas meat-eating kings, aristocrats and such, will all go to the animal realm.And where do you think they go? They do not become cowsAptavani-89596Aptavani-8been destroyed. Creation and destruction are just circumstances(avastha) that you see. Nothing happens to the main element.Those with illusion (bhranti), see the differences in the phases.The main element does not change.It is the deluded intellect (viparit buddhi), that shows youall that. The intellect (buddhi) has been born. Until the end, theintellect will keep you trapped in all this. Now if the intellect everretired, your work would be done. But it will not retire, even atthe age of eighty.Questioner: There is a difference between water andtaady (toddy; fermented palm juice).Dadashri: Of course, there is a difference between allthese things! They are different by nature. Taady looks white,but when you drink it, it goes to your head (inebriates), andwater will not go to your head. Each one cannot be preventedfrom displaying its effects, now can it?Questioner: Amongst every kind of living beings (jiva),including humans, there are differences in their diet.Dadashri: There is a difference! There are differences ineach and every thing. There is a difference even between twomustard seeds.Questioner: Why did that difference arise? If it was notthere, then there would only be happiness (sukh).Dadashri: Yes, but they are all just imaginings! It is thisintellect (buddhi) which is responsible for making you imagine,‘if this was not there, it would have been like this, and this wouldhave happened’, but you should just take those words out of thedictionary. ‘If it was like this, then this would have happened’are words that should not be there, and you should never keepthem in your dictionary.Questioner: So has the Atma Parmatma (Absolute Soul)created this difference? Did it do it purposefully or did it happennaturally?Dadashri: No, there is no difference whatsoever.Whatever one perceives is just one’s own wrong belief. It is likea man who reads a book during the daytime, and comes acrossa passage about ghosts, and when he is alone at night and hegoes into his room to sleep, as soon as he hears the mice rattlea cup in the other room, he gets shaken up right away! Nowfrom the time the ghost entered his mind, it will carry on affectinghim unless it leaves altogether.Questioner: Even within this entire universe, there existdifferences among every living being (jiva).Dadashri: There are no differences in any living being. Allliving beings are one by nature. The differences only exist throughone’s drashti bhed (different perception). And these differencesare governed by Nature. Moreover, the differences are external;they are differences in the clothing but not at the main levelwithin.Questioner: There is a difference in behavior. In the waycows, goats, buffaloes are all vegetarian, and lions and tigers arecarnivores. Who created these differences? Why are theredifferences? Is it because the embodied soul (jiva) is different?Is it because their physical bodies are different? Or is it a worldlydifference? Is it because of their different life-form (jiva), thatthere is a difference in the way they live?Dadashri: No. It is not like that. Listen to what I amgoing to say! There are so many casts and communities, but theydo not all eat meat, do they? So if they had to go into the animalrealm, where would they go? They would go into communitieswhere there is no eating flesh. It means they would go into non-carnivorous species such as cows and buffaloes. Whereas meat-eating kings, aristocrats and such, will all go to the animal realm.And where do you think they go? They do not become cowsAptavani-89798Aptavani-8and buffaloes. They become lions and tigers. Therefore, all thesearrangements are very systematic! In every country, warriors areborn as a rule!In this world, each human of the same race, thinksdifferently to another. Why is that? This is round, it is a circle;do you see that? Humans are living within a 360 degreesboundary. This means that at whatever point or degree onestands on, he will only tell you about what he sees from wherehe is standing. He is not at fault. All the differences in opinionrely on the degree. That is because the degrees vary. But whenone comes to the center, one realizes what the Absolute Soul(Parmatma) is! What the world is and how the world runs.The Divine and Extraordinary Intent of JagatKalyanQuestioner: That ‘the Atma exists’; the Jain, and theVedantis have all said that. But why do they not universallyaccept the scientific thought of today?Dadashri: They will not. They will not be able tounderstand it! Every faith in Hindustan (India), accepts the Atma’sexistence (astitva). Foreign (non-native) people do not believein the Atma’s existence. That is because they do not yetunderstand reincarnation (punarjanma). It is only those whounderstand reincarnation; that believe the Atma exists.Questioner: So if this is the universal truth, then why isit not accepted universally?Dadashri: This is how it is: the truths may be universal;however, they are relative (sapeksha) truths. Although I amspeaking to you, this other man sitting here will not understandwhat I am trying to say; whereas you will understand instantly.Therefore, everyone has differing viewpoints, and no one otherthan those from Hindustan, will understand anything that pertainsto the Atma. If foreign scientists came to me, I would explaineverything to them. Scientists alone can understand this, but onlyto a certain extent. That is because they have yet to develop(evolve)! Where spirituality is concerned, foreign (non-native)people are still under-developed.Questioner: Why can someone from Hindustan not makean effort to spread this message universally so that it reacheseveryone?Dadashri: This message can reach. But at the presenttime, the light of the Vitarag Lords; their message, has beencovered over! I am the only Gnani Purush at the present time.I am ready to give detailed explanations to all the questions ofthe entire world. I am ready to give complete explanations to allthe four billion people in the world. But first, they need to gettogether with me. Otherwise, what can I do? How would Ireach them all? The fact that you have encountered me is scientificcircumstantial evidence, and it is because we have met, that yourwork gets done. If not, those who do not encounter me; will notaccomplish their work. Everything will be resolved for the personwho comes to me, or else he will not resolve anything!However, I am thinking of bringing all the scientists togetherone day – in fact, all the scientists of the whole world! And atthat time, I will openly show them the truth about: what the bodyis made of? What the mind is? How the mind is born? Howdoes the mind come to an end? What is intellect? What isAtma? How does this world run? This is all a science (vignan),and if it reaches people, they will greatly benefit from it!Questioner: That is exactly what I was trying to say, thatif they receive from you the knowledge, ‘I am Atma, I amasang (free from all material association)’ and all that, then justlike one and one make two, it touches them. ‘I do not have theenergy (shakti) to stir anything.’ And if they can experience thatall the time, imagine how much it would help them! That woulddo the greatest good!Aptavani-89798Aptavani-8and buffaloes. They become lions and tigers. Therefore, all thesearrangements are very systematic! In every country, warriors areborn as a rule!In this world, each human of the same race, thinksdifferently to another. Why is that? This is round, it is a circle;do you see that? Humans are living within a 360 degreesboundary. This means that at whatever point or degree onestands on, he will only tell you about what he sees from wherehe is standing. He is not at fault. All the differences in opinionrely on the degree. That is because the degrees vary. But whenone comes to the center, one realizes what the Absolute Soul(Parmatma) is! What the world is and how the world runs.The Divine and Extraordinary Intent of JagatKalyanQuestioner: That ‘the Atma exists’; the Jain, and theVedantis have all said that. But why do they not universallyaccept the scientific thought of today?Dadashri: They will not. They will not be able tounderstand it! Every faith in Hindustan (India), accepts the Atma’sexistence (astitva). Foreign (non-native) people do not believein the Atma’s existence. That is because they do not yetunderstand reincarnation (punarjanma). It is only those whounderstand reincarnation; that believe the Atma exists.Questioner: So if this is the universal truth, then why isit not accepted universally?Dadashri: This is how it is: the truths may be universal;however, they are relative (sapeksha) truths. Although I amspeaking to you, this other man sitting here will not understandwhat I am trying to say; whereas you will understand instantly.Therefore, everyone has differing viewpoints, and no one otherthan those from Hindustan, will understand anything that pertainsto the Atma. If foreign scientists came to me, I would explaineverything to them. Scientists alone can understand this, but onlyto a certain extent. That is because they have yet to develop(evolve)! Where spirituality is concerned, foreign (non-native)people are still under-developed.Questioner: Why can someone from Hindustan not makean effort to spread this message universally so that it reacheseveryone?Dadashri: This message can reach. But at the presenttime, the light of the Vitarag Lords; their message, has beencovered over! I am the only Gnani Purush at the present time.I am ready to give detailed explanations to all the questions ofthe entire world. I am ready to give complete explanations to allthe four billion people in the world. But first, they need to gettogether with me. Otherwise, what can I do? How would Ireach them all? The fact that you have encountered me is scientificcircumstantial evidence, and it is because we have met, that yourwork gets done. If not, those who do not encounter me; will notaccomplish their work. Everything will be resolved for the personwho comes to me, or else he will not resolve anything!However, I am thinking of bringing all the scientists togetherone day – in fact, all the scientists of the whole world! And atthat time, I will openly show them the truth about: what the bodyis made of? What the mind is? How the mind is born? Howdoes the mind come to an end? What is intellect? What isAtma? How does this world run? This is all a science (vignan),and if it reaches people, they will greatly benefit from it!Questioner: That is exactly what I was trying to say, thatif they receive from you the knowledge, ‘I am Atma, I amasang (free from all material association)’ and all that, then justlike one and one make two, it touches them. ‘I do not have theenergy (shakti) to stir anything.’ And if they can experience thatall the time, imagine how much it would help them! That woulddo the greatest good!Aptavani-899100Aptavani-8Dadashri: This is how it is: the world does not see thingsin just one way. That is because everyone’s viewpoint is different,so not everyone needs this. All I can do is say that, I will explainthe Atma to them. But the next day, they would not have retaineda thing. This vision (darshan) will not reach, and all the effortwill be wasted! This effort can only be fruitful, if it is made forthose in Hindustan! Can you imagine how beneficial would it befor those in foreign countries? We can guide those scientistsabout this path, so that they can explain it to their people in theirlanguage. Only then will it reach every home. My idea is that themessage of this vignan (science), reaches every corner of theworld, and that peace should prevail everywhere. My inner intent(bhavna), my wish or desire, call it what you may; is just this!That Is When the Light of Gnan ShinesThe real knowledge in the world; the universal truth issomething that the intellect (buddhi) cannot reach. It is beyondthe intellect. That is where the intellect comes to a halt. Whenyou cross the last layer of the intellect, you enter the light ofKnowledge (Gnan); you have entered into the universal truth.So when all the layers of the mind end; the layers of the intellect(buddhi) then begin. And after the intellect’s layers come to anend; one enters the light of Knowledge (Gnan prakash). But noone can reach there. Alas, they have not even managed to reachthe layers of intellect (buddhi) yet! So they dwell in the layersof the mind.Only The Gnani Sheds Light on the Realityof the WorldThe Gnani Purush can show you everything in the world.The Gnani Purush can show you all the things that are not inthe Vedas, nor in the scriptures. That is because the GnaniPurush is your medium and through this medium you can knoweverything. Besides, the Truth is something that cannot be recordedin books, because it is inexpressible and indescribable; so howcan you blame the Vedas? Of course, I can explain things toyou, using examples and association (sangnya), but how muchof the sangnya would the Veda do? The Vedas will not give youany answers to this. What the Vedas have not given, is the taskfor the Gnani Purush!What people consider as chetan (the Self; Atma), is reallyall worldly; there is no spirituality in it. The Atma is the mainthing and that which you consider, Atma; all that is also worldly(bhautik). There is not even a hair’s worth of Atma in it, onlythat you mistakenly believe that. This is because the main Atmais not mechanical. And you believe the mechanical atma to bethe main Atma. However, the mechanical atma is the worldlyatma.Dadashri: Do all these people have chetan (the Self) orare they without it?Questioner: They have chetan.Dadashri: How can you tell that they have chetan?Through what characteristics?Questioner: By the movements of the body! It enters thebody and it only makes it move.Dadashri: Does it make it move? The body? The Atmadoes not do any of that. That, which makes the body move, isthe mechanical atma. What you consider as Atma at the presenttime; is really the mechanical atma. No one, except for theGnani, can know the real Atma. The real Atma lies on theother side of the mechanical atma, and it is that Atma whichstays in this body. Besides, the real Atma is not in a position tocarry out any kind of movement (halan-chalan); it is not capableof doing any kind of activity (kriya).When a part of a lizard’s tail is cut off, it still carries onmoving. Does the tail have any soul (jiva) in it? Then why doesit thrash around?Aptavani-899100Aptavani-8Dadashri: This is how it is: the world does not see thingsin just one way. That is because everyone’s viewpoint is different,so not everyone needs this. All I can do is say that, I will explainthe Atma to them. But the next day, they would not have retaineda thing. This vision (darshan) will not reach, and all the effortwill be wasted! This effort can only be fruitful, if it is made forthose in Hindustan! Can you imagine how beneficial would it befor those in foreign countries? We can guide those scientistsabout this path, so that they can explain it to their people in theirlanguage. Only then will it reach every home. My idea is that themessage of this vignan (science), reaches every corner of theworld, and that peace should prevail everywhere. My inner intent(bhavna), my wish or desire, call it what you may; is just this!That Is When the Light of Gnan ShinesThe real knowledge in the world; the universal truth issomething that the intellect (buddhi) cannot reach. It is beyondthe intellect. That is where the intellect comes to a halt. Whenyou cross the last layer of the intellect, you enter the light ofKnowledge (Gnan); you have entered into the universal truth.So when all the layers of the mind end; the layers of the intellect(buddhi) then begin. And after the intellect’s layers come to anend; one enters the light of Knowledge (Gnan prakash). But noone can reach there. Alas, they have not even managed to reachthe layers of intellect (buddhi) yet! So they dwell in the layersof the mind.Only The Gnani Sheds Light on the Realityof the WorldThe Gnani Purush can show you everything in the world.The Gnani Purush can show you all the things that are not inthe Vedas, nor in the scriptures. That is because the GnaniPurush is your medium and through this medium you can knoweverything. Besides, the Truth is something that cannot be recordedin books, because it is inexpressible and indescribable; so howcan you blame the Vedas? Of course, I can explain things toyou, using examples and association (sangnya), but how muchof the sangnya would the Veda do? The Vedas will not give youany answers to this. What the Vedas have not given, is the taskfor the Gnani Purush!What people consider as chetan (the Self; Atma), is reallyall worldly; there is no spirituality in it. The Atma is the mainthing and that which you consider, Atma; all that is also worldly(bhautik). There is not even a hair’s worth of Atma in it, onlythat you mistakenly believe that. This is because the main Atmais not mechanical. And you believe the mechanical atma to bethe main Atma. However, the mechanical atma is the worldlyatma.Dadashri: Do all these people have chetan (the Self) orare they without it?Questioner: They have chetan.Dadashri: How can you tell that they have chetan?Through what characteristics?Questioner: By the movements of the body! It enters thebody and it only makes it move.Dadashri: Does it make it move? The body? The Atmadoes not do any of that. That, which makes the body move, isthe mechanical atma. What you consider as Atma at the presenttime; is really the mechanical atma. No one, except for theGnani, can know the real Atma. The real Atma lies on theother side of the mechanical atma, and it is that Atma whichstays in this body. Besides, the real Atma is not in a position tocarry out any kind of movement (halan-chalan); it is not capableof doing any kind of activity (kriya).When a part of a lizard’s tail is cut off, it still carries onmoving. Does the tail have any soul (jiva) in it? Then why doesit thrash around?Aptavani-8101102Aptavani-8Questioner: In that sense, it is an independent attributeof the prakruti.Dadashri: Therefore, anything that moves about, is notchetan (Atma). Then what is the distinguishing characteristic(lakshan) of chetan (Atma)? You could say, ‘That where thereis Knowledge (Gnan) and Vision (Darshan), you can be certain,that chetan (Atma) is present’. The knowledge-vision (gnan-darshan) that you see in the world today, is not chetan (Atma).That knowledge-vision is the distinguishing sign (lakshan) of theintellect (buddhi). So really, even that is not chetan, but the factthat there is chetan there, is certain.In this tape-record, there is no knowledge (gnan) andthere is no feeling; therefore there is no chetan in it. It doesspeak (produce sound), but it has no chetan in it. Who is talkingto you at the moment? You do agree, that someone is talking toyou, do not you? Should you not have to determine, who isdoing the talking? Who is talking to you?Questioner: The pudgal (non-Self complex) is.Dadashri: Yes, it is the pudgal that does the talking, andit says, ‘I am talking’. Chetan does not possess the attribute(gunadharma) of speech. If speech were the attribute of theAtma, then is it not possible that sometimes a person could stoptalking? So speech is not one of the Atma’s attributes.All the attributes of the Self are those of the Absolute Soul(Parmatma). If it had to speak or move about like this, it wouldbecome tired. Would it not get tired? Therefore the Atma doesnot possess a single attribute that could come to an end.If movement was indeed one of its traits (guna), then itwould get tired by the evening, and you would have to go tosleep. Therefore, movement is not an attribute of the Self (Atma).All the attributes of the Atma are permanent. The onesthat you are talking about are all temporary attributes; they arerelative attributes, and relative attributes belong to the relative-atma. At the moment, what you consider to be your own Atma,is really the relative-atma, and the real Atma is inside of that.When you have the realization of that real Soul (Atma), is whenyou can get your work accomplished. Do they not talk aboutrealizing the Self? You have heard the word Self-realization,have you not?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: You can realize the Self, when you have therealization of the real Atma, the Self!The Atma the World UnderstandsHave you ever seen chetan (Atma) in this world?Questioner: All this that we see, is chetan.Dadashri: No. You cannot see chetan with your eyes,you cannot hear it with your ears, nor can you taste with yourtongue. Chetan is not something you will ever be able toexperience through your five senses. The world has never seenchetan (the Self); nor has it ever heard it, and it has never comein the conviction and faith. That which people refer to as chetan,is in fact, mechanical chetan, which they are calling chetan(Atma)! The mechanical chetan is the one that eats, drinks andbreathes. How long would this chetan last if you pinched yournose and stopped breathing?Questioner: A quarter of an hour.Dadashri: So then, it cannot be chetan (Soul). This isthe chetan’s mayavi shakti (illusory energy), which has arisen.The chetan has been touched (sparsha) by the Atma within,and thus it appears in the form of chetan, but in truth, that is notchetan. It is an illusory chetan.That, which the world considers to be chetan, is the chetanAptavani-8101102Aptavani-8Questioner: In that sense, it is an independent attributeof the prakruti.Dadashri: Therefore, anything that moves about, is notchetan (Atma). Then what is the distinguishing characteristic(lakshan) of chetan (Atma)? You could say, ‘That where thereis Knowledge (Gnan) and Vision (Darshan), you can be certain,that chetan (Atma) is present’. The knowledge-vision (gnan-darshan) that you see in the world today, is not chetan (Atma).That knowledge-vision is the distinguishing sign (lakshan) of theintellect (buddhi). So really, even that is not chetan, but the factthat there is chetan there, is certain.In this tape-record, there is no knowledge (gnan) andthere is no feeling; therefore there is no chetan in it. It doesspeak (produce sound), but it has no chetan in it. Who is talkingto you at the moment? You do agree, that someone is talking toyou, do not you? Should you not have to determine, who isdoing the talking? Who is talking to you?Questioner: The pudgal (non-Self complex) is.Dadashri: Yes, it is the pudgal that does the talking, andit says, ‘I am talking’. Chetan does not possess the attribute(gunadharma) of speech. If speech were the attribute of theAtma, then is it not possible that sometimes a person could stoptalking? So speech is not one of the Atma’s attributes.All the attributes of the Self are those of the Absolute Soul(Parmatma). If it had to speak or move about like this, it wouldbecome tired. Would it not get tired? Therefore the Atma doesnot possess a single attribute that could come to an end.If movement was indeed one of its traits (guna), then itwould get tired by the evening, and you would have to go tosleep. Therefore, movement is not an attribute of the Self (Atma).All the attributes of the Atma are permanent. The onesthat you are talking about are all temporary attributes; they arerelative attributes, and relative attributes belong to the relative-atma. At the moment, what you consider to be your own Atma,is really the relative-atma, and the real Atma is inside of that.When you have the realization of that real Soul (Atma), is whenyou can get your work accomplished. Do they not talk aboutrealizing the Self? You have heard the word Self-realization,have you not?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: You can realize the Self, when you have therealization of the real Atma, the Self!The Atma the World UnderstandsHave you ever seen chetan (Atma) in this world?Questioner: All this that we see, is chetan.Dadashri: No. You cannot see chetan with your eyes,you cannot hear it with your ears, nor can you taste with yourtongue. Chetan is not something you will ever be able toexperience through your five senses. The world has never seenchetan (the Self); nor has it ever heard it, and it has never comein the conviction and faith. That which people refer to as chetan,is in fact, mechanical chetan, which they are calling chetan(Atma)! The mechanical chetan is the one that eats, drinks andbreathes. How long would this chetan last if you pinched yournose and stopped breathing?Questioner: A quarter of an hour.Dadashri: So then, it cannot be chetan (Soul). This isthe chetan’s mayavi shakti (illusory energy), which has arisen.The chetan has been touched (sparsha) by the Atma within,and thus it appears in the form of chetan, but in truth, that is notchetan. It is an illusory chetan.That, which the world considers to be chetan, is the chetanAptavani-8103104Aptavani-8of their perception (drashti); it is not exactly chetan. That chetanis referred to as nischetan chetan (energized self; mechanicalchetan). So it is a discharging thing. When it is discharging, it isnischetan chetan. All that humans do; walking, moving about,and everything else, is all nischetan chetan. It is only becauseof the presence of the Atma, that this entire machine is running.If the Atma were not present, then this machine would not workat all; it would stop.What would happen if you closed your mouth and keptyour nose pinched? The one who resides within, will empty theentire room and leave. How can you call that chetan? That isthe mechanical chetan. If the world had ever come to know thereal chetan, then today, it would have been blessed! It is noteven in a state, that it would know it. This mechanical chetanis said to be in motion (sachar; movable), and the real chetanis said to be still (achar; immovable); therefore the world issacharachar (movable-immovable).There is indeed chetan in the body. But it is an effectivechetan. What kind of chetan is it? It is a charged chetan(charged soul). Now, if it is a charged chetan, then you cannotcall it the original chetan (muda chetan- main Soul) at all! Isthere a mistake here or not? Do you realize that it has beenmisconceived up until this time? All the beliefs were filled witherrors. Should there not be exactness to it?Questioner: So, is it the mechanical chetan that isthroughout the body?Dadashri: Yes, the mechanical chetan.Questioner: So then, where is the real chetan?Dadashri: The real chetan is all throughout the body!And the mechanical chetan is just the outer layer.In truth, the Atma which people consider as Atma, is inall actuality, the mechanical atma. ‘We’ are not giving you themechanical atma. ‘We’ are giving you the still (achad) Atma.In the Kramic marg (Traditional step-by-step path ofspiritual progress; Self-realization), the mechanical atma itself, isbelieved to be the real Atma, and the mechanical chetan isconsidered to be the Atma itself. When the ego (ahamkar)becomes pure (shuddha), meaning that there is no longer anyroom for anger (krodh), pride (maan), deceit (maya), greed(lobh); when the ego becomes pure in that way; completelypure, that is when the pure Soul (Shuddhatma) and the pureego (shuddha ahamkar), become one. So this is how it is in theKramic marg!Whereas, this is Akram Vignan (the spiritual science ofthe step-less path to Self-realization)! Here, the Gnani Purushplaces the pure Soul directly into one’s hands, the still (achad)Atma itself, it would not be mechanical even by name. That isthe kind of untainted and pure (nirlep) Atma he gives you!Questioner: Is the state of consciousness (sabhaanavastha) that we have within us; which shows us the good andthe bad, what we would call chetan?Dadashri: No. That is all nischetan chetan (energizedself); it is not the soul (chetan) at all. That is why I am tellingyou that to know chetan, is an extremely, extremely difficulttask. All along, what people have known, is nischetan chetan.If you wanted to say it in English, then it would be mechanicalchetan. Anything which has: anger-pride-deceit-greed (krodh-maan-maya-lobh); attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh), mind-intellect-chit-ego (mun-buddhi-chit-ahamkar), is all mechanicalchetan.If the Atma were to do anger-pride-deceit-greed (krodh-maan-maya-lobh), speak, or do anything, then its habit of doingall that, would never go away. What people believe in, is themechanical atma. The mechanical atma, speaks, walks andAptavani-8103104Aptavani-8of their perception (drashti); it is not exactly chetan. That chetanis referred to as nischetan chetan (energized self; mechanicalchetan). So it is a discharging thing. When it is discharging, it isnischetan chetan. All that humans do; walking, moving about,and everything else, is all nischetan chetan. It is only becauseof the presence of the Atma, that this entire machine is running.If the Atma were not present, then this machine would not workat all; it would stop.What would happen if you closed your mouth and keptyour nose pinched? The one who resides within, will empty theentire room and leave. How can you call that chetan? That isthe mechanical chetan. If the world had ever come to know thereal chetan, then today, it would have been blessed! It is noteven in a state, that it would know it. This mechanical chetanis said to be in motion (sachar; movable), and the real chetanis said to be still (achar; immovable); therefore the world issacharachar (movable-immovable).There is indeed chetan in the body. But it is an effectivechetan. What kind of chetan is it? It is a charged chetan(charged soul). Now, if it is a charged chetan, then you cannotcall it the original chetan (muda chetan- main Soul) at all! Isthere a mistake here or not? Do you realize that it has beenmisconceived up until this time? All the beliefs were filled witherrors. Should there not be exactness to it?Questioner: So, is it the mechanical chetan that isthroughout the body?Dadashri: Yes, the mechanical chetan.Questioner: So then, where is the real chetan?Dadashri: The real chetan is all throughout the body!And the mechanical chetan is just the outer layer.In truth, the Atma which people consider as Atma, is inall actuality, the mechanical atma. ‘We’ are not giving you themechanical atma. ‘We’ are giving you the still (achad) Atma.In the Kramic marg (Traditional step-by-step path ofspiritual progress; Self-realization), the mechanical atma itself, isbelieved to be the real Atma, and the mechanical chetan isconsidered to be the Atma itself. When the ego (ahamkar)becomes pure (shuddha), meaning that there is no longer anyroom for anger (krodh), pride (maan), deceit (maya), greed(lobh); when the ego becomes pure in that way; completelypure, that is when the pure Soul (Shuddhatma) and the pureego (shuddha ahamkar), become one. So this is how it is in theKramic marg!Whereas, this is Akram Vignan (the spiritual science ofthe step-less path to Self-realization)! Here, the Gnani Purushplaces the pure Soul directly into one’s hands, the still (achad)Atma itself, it would not be mechanical even by name. That isthe kind of untainted and pure (nirlep) Atma he gives you!Questioner: Is the state of consciousness (sabhaanavastha) that we have within us; which shows us the good andthe bad, what we would call chetan?Dadashri: No. That is all nischetan chetan (energizedself); it is not the soul (chetan) at all. That is why I am tellingyou that to know chetan, is an extremely, extremely difficulttask. All along, what people have known, is nischetan chetan.If you wanted to say it in English, then it would be mechanicalchetan. Anything which has: anger-pride-deceit-greed (krodh-maan-maya-lobh); attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh), mind-intellect-chit-ego (mun-buddhi-chit-ahamkar), is all mechanicalchetan.If the Atma were to do anger-pride-deceit-greed (krodh-maan-maya-lobh), speak, or do anything, then its habit of doingall that, would never go away. What people believe in, is themechanical atma. The mechanical atma, speaks, walks andAptavani-8105106Aptavani-8does everything; it is an illusory (bhrant) atma. The real Atmaitself is the Absolute Soul (Parmatma)! When you come toknow it, your work will get done; otherwise, until then you willnot get your work done.Now if you believe that the mechanical atma is your ownAtma, then when will you come to your senses? That is preciselywhy I say that the world has never known what the Atma reallyis. Moreover, what is not Atma, is precisely where they attribute:this, that is thinking is the Atma; that is moving, walking, talking,doing, jumping, laughing, singing, eating, drinking, earning, fighting,sleeping – is all Atma!Doing introspective meditation (samayik), repeatingmantra (japa), penance (tapa), religious meditation (dharmadhyan), is Atma – that is what people say, and so what I wouldsay to that is – there is absolutely no Atma there at all. Now ifyou have so many huge errors in the calculation alone, thenwould you ever be able to come up with a daily balance?So the businesses they run, the daughters they marry off,the sons they get married, is all done by the mechanical atma,while the achad (still) Atma, just sees it all. They both havedifferent natures (dharma). This mechanical atma may appearas though it is alive; in your mind it may seem to you that it isindeed chetan, but in truth, it is not chetan.In the Vitarags’ Vision, the Atma Is...What you see, is all machinery; it is not the Atma. Thatwhich others call Atma, is not what ‘we’ (the Gnani Purush)call Atma. Even the Vitarags - do not call it Atma. The Vitaragscalled the real Atma (the Self), Atma; whereas these people calleverything that is non-Self (anatma), as Atma. If you went andasked all of them, ‘Sir, have you yet to attain Self-realization(Atmagnan)?’ and the person would reply, ‘Of course, I willhave to know Self-realization!’ So you would say, ‘Is it not theAtma that you are talking about, the real Atma?’ Then he wouldsay, ‘Yes, that is right, this is also an Atma; nevertheless, I willstill have to know Self-realization!’ So what does that mean?That the Atma that the Vitarags have seen; that Atma has neverentered the awareness (laksha) of these people. Alas! It has noteven occurred to them in their thoughts. That Atma is still (achad)Atma, whereas these people call the mechanical atma, as theAtma.The mechanical atma is not the real Atma; it is in the formof a discharge. It is called as discharge chetan. One is thecharge chetan and the other is the discharge chetan. It is Atma,but it constantly charges and discharges. Do you more or lessunderstand what I am telling you?So the Atma is not what the world believes it is. Once aperson knows the Atma, there is nothing more in the world thathe needs to know. So only the One who has nothing more leftto know in this world, ‘knows’ the Self, the Atma.That is why we have called it pratishthit atma (the beliefof ‘I am Chandubhai’, relative or charged self). People go onbelieving that this is the Atma, and it is this, that they try to makestill and steady (sthir). Do they not try to make it still? However,its fundamental nature is to be restless and active (chanchal); itsvery nature (swabhav) is to be active; it is mechanical. Whenyou attempt to make it still, it is a “waste of time and energy”.The entire world considers it as Atma, and believes that only ifit is made still, will the work get done. But this pratishthit atmais ever moving (sachar); whereas the real Atma is immoveable(achad).Questioner: This is mechanical and the ‘switch’ has beenturned on, is that not so? Dadashri: Its mechanical (part) has already been done,so you do not need to bother too much about that. It hasAptavani-8105106Aptavani-8does everything; it is an illusory (bhrant) atma. The real Atmaitself is the Absolute Soul (Parmatma)! When you come toknow it, your work will get done; otherwise, until then you willnot get your work done.Now if you believe that the mechanical atma is your ownAtma, then when will you come to your senses? That is preciselywhy I say that the world has never known what the Atma reallyis. Moreover, what is not Atma, is precisely where they attribute:this, that is thinking is the Atma; that is moving, walking, talking,doing, jumping, laughing, singing, eating, drinking, earning, fighting,sleeping – is all Atma!Doing introspective meditation (samayik), repeatingmantra (japa), penance (tapa), religious meditation (dharmadhyan), is Atma – that is what people say, and so what I wouldsay to that is – there is absolutely no Atma there at all. Now ifyou have so many huge errors in the calculation alone, thenwould you ever be able to come up with a daily balance?So the businesses they run, the daughters they marry off,the sons they get married, is all done by the mechanical atma,while the achad (still) Atma, just sees it all. They both havedifferent natures (dharma). This mechanical atma may appearas though it is alive; in your mind it may seem to you that it isindeed chetan, but in truth, it is not chetan.In the Vitarags’ Vision, the Atma Is...What you see, is all machinery; it is not the Atma. Thatwhich others call Atma, is not what ‘we’ (the Gnani Purush)call Atma. Even the Vitarags - do not call it Atma. The Vitaragscalled the real Atma (the Self), Atma; whereas these people calleverything that is non-Self (anatma), as Atma. If you went andasked all of them, ‘Sir, have you yet to attain Self-realization(Atmagnan)?’ and the person would reply, ‘Of course, I willhave to know Self-realization!’ So you would say, ‘Is it not theAtma that you are talking about, the real Atma?’ Then he wouldsay, ‘Yes, that is right, this is also an Atma; nevertheless, I willstill have to know Self-realization!’ So what does that mean?That the Atma that the Vitarags have seen; that Atma has neverentered the awareness (laksha) of these people. Alas! It has noteven occurred to them in their thoughts. That Atma is still (achad)Atma, whereas these people call the mechanical atma, as theAtma.The mechanical atma is not the real Atma; it is in the formof a discharge. It is called as discharge chetan. One is thecharge chetan and the other is the discharge chetan. It is Atma,but it constantly charges and discharges. Do you more or lessunderstand what I am telling you?So the Atma is not what the world believes it is. Once aperson knows the Atma, there is nothing more in the world thathe needs to know. So only the One who has nothing more leftto know in this world, ‘knows’ the Self, the Atma.That is why we have called it pratishthit atma (the beliefof ‘I am Chandubhai’, relative or charged self). People go onbelieving that this is the Atma, and it is this, that they try to makestill and steady (sthir). Do they not try to make it still? However,its fundamental nature is to be restless and active (chanchal); itsvery nature (swabhav) is to be active; it is mechanical. Whenyou attempt to make it still, it is a “waste of time and energy”.The entire world considers it as Atma, and believes that only ifit is made still, will the work get done. But this pratishthit atmais ever moving (sachar); whereas the real Atma is immoveable(achad).Questioner: This is mechanical and the ‘switch’ has beenturned on, is that not so? Dadashri: Its mechanical (part) has already been done,so you do not need to bother too much about that. It hasAptavani-8107108Aptavani-8already been filled with the right amount of petrol (fuel), so it willcarry on working, and you will not have to put any more fuelinto it; you will not have to do anything. You have to keep seeingthis mechanical (thing). To See and to Know is the nature(swabhav) of the Atma.Questioner: Do we not have to do anything?Dadashri: You do not have to do a thing. Wherever youhave to do anything, that itself is mechanical atma!That is why people keep chasing after the mechanicalatma. They even proclaim, ‘This is the Atma! Who else, otherthan the Atma can do all this?’ That is what they know. This isall really happening because of the presence of the Atma, andits own real guna (properties; qualities; traits) remain in theirown nature (swabhav). But because of the wrong belief, a non-Self complex (prakruti) with different properties (vyatirek guna)has arisen, and everything is then run by the prakruti! But thewrong belief stays the same; ‘I am this, and I am that.’ A personhas no concept of the real thing. That is because from birth, hereceives those kinds of impressions (sanskar). First they callhim a baby, then he is given a name. Once the name is given,it is with that name that he becomes known as nephew, paternaluncle, maternal uncle, and this is how all impressions of terribleignorance (agnanta) are instilled.The worldly life (sansar) means to plunge deeper anddeeper into ignorance (agnanta). If a person were a Gnani inhis past life, even he would hear the echoes of ignorance(agnanta), again in this life. But when the karma unfolds again,he would regain awareness (jagruti). But the very rule of thisworldly life is that people will fit a person with wrong belief.If a man is not married, we may ask him, ‘Do you have awife?’ and he would say, ‘No. I have not been married.’ But whenhe marries, he then becomes a husband. When the wife dies, heeven becomes a widower! So this is how the world is. The phases(avastha) in this world are all temporary, and You (the Self;Atma) yourself, are permanent! But one is not aware of this.One believes, ‘I am a sinner (paapi)’ and even that is themechanical atma; it is the part which is agitated (chanchal).That, which runs this worldly life (sansar) only remains absorbedin the worldly life; is the atma which is all mechanical atma.Even if you did not want to run it yourself, the machinery wouldgo on running. The original, real Atma is still (achad); not evenslightly agitated (chanchal). Because of not knowing this Atma,it has been said, ‘Know Atmagnan (Self-realization)’. Even the most prominent saints and spiritual leaders (santpurush) all say, ‘Know Atmagnan’. We may ask one, ‘You area sant purush, and you do not even know yourself?’ and theywill say, ‘No. Only Atmagnan is really worth knowing!’Therefore, knowledge of the Self, Atmagnan is a task for onlythe Gnani Purush and no one else. No one had ever knownAtmagnan. Whatever they all refer to, is what they haveunderstood from the perspective of the mechanical atma. Afterknowing the Atma, one’s state would be quite unique indeed!The entire world could not taste a single fraction of theAtma, is how the Atma is; it is still (achad), and it is truly theParmatma (the Absolute Soul)!By just uttering the word Atma, people have latched onto it saying, ‘I am Atma, I am Shuddhatma (pure Soul).’ Heynow! You cannot be the pure Soul. Do you see Shuddhatma inothers? When someone does any harm, why do you becomeannoyed? So therefore, all this is nothing but mechanical atma.So far, what the entire world has discovered; has been themechanical atma.Or, when they do discover the atma they are looking for,they will only have found the mechanical atma! So, except forAptavani-8107108Aptavani-8already been filled with the right amount of petrol (fuel), so it willcarry on working, and you will not have to put any more fuelinto it; you will not have to do anything. You have to keep seeingthis mechanical (thing). To See and to Know is the nature(swabhav) of the Atma.Questioner: Do we not have to do anything?Dadashri: You do not have to do a thing. Wherever youhave to do anything, that itself is mechanical atma!That is why people keep chasing after the mechanicalatma. They even proclaim, ‘This is the Atma! Who else, otherthan the Atma can do all this?’ That is what they know. This isall really happening because of the presence of the Atma, andits own real guna (properties; qualities; traits) remain in theirown nature (swabhav). But because of the wrong belief, a non-Self complex (prakruti) with different properties (vyatirek guna)has arisen, and everything is then run by the prakruti! But thewrong belief stays the same; ‘I am this, and I am that.’ A personhas no concept of the real thing. That is because from birth, hereceives those kinds of impressions (sanskar). First they callhim a baby, then he is given a name. Once the name is given,it is with that name that he becomes known as nephew, paternaluncle, maternal uncle, and this is how all impressions of terribleignorance (agnanta) are instilled.The worldly life (sansar) means to plunge deeper anddeeper into ignorance (agnanta). If a person were a Gnani inhis past life, even he would hear the echoes of ignorance(agnanta), again in this life. But when the karma unfolds again,he would regain awareness (jagruti). But the very rule of thisworldly life is that people will fit a person with wrong belief.If a man is not married, we may ask him, ‘Do you have awife?’ and he would say, ‘No. I have not been married.’ But whenhe marries, he then becomes a husband. When the wife dies, heeven becomes a widower! So this is how the world is. The phases(avastha) in this world are all temporary, and You (the Self;Atma) yourself, are permanent! But one is not aware of this.One believes, ‘I am a sinner (paapi)’ and even that is themechanical atma; it is the part which is agitated (chanchal).That, which runs this worldly life (sansar) only remains absorbedin the worldly life; is the atma which is all mechanical atma.Even if you did not want to run it yourself, the machinery wouldgo on running. The original, real Atma is still (achad); not evenslightly agitated (chanchal). Because of not knowing this Atma,it has been said, ‘Know Atmagnan (Self-realization)’. Even the most prominent saints and spiritual leaders (santpurush) all say, ‘Know Atmagnan’. We may ask one, ‘You area sant purush, and you do not even know yourself?’ and theywill say, ‘No. Only Atmagnan is really worth knowing!’Therefore, knowledge of the Self, Atmagnan is a task for onlythe Gnani Purush and no one else. No one had ever knownAtmagnan. Whatever they all refer to, is what they haveunderstood from the perspective of the mechanical atma. Afterknowing the Atma, one’s state would be quite unique indeed!The entire world could not taste a single fraction of theAtma, is how the Atma is; it is still (achad), and it is truly theParmatma (the Absolute Soul)!By just uttering the word Atma, people have latched onto it saying, ‘I am Atma, I am Shuddhatma (pure Soul).’ Heynow! You cannot be the pure Soul. Do you see Shuddhatma inothers? When someone does any harm, why do you becomeannoyed? So therefore, all this is nothing but mechanical atma.So far, what the entire world has discovered; has been themechanical atma.Or, when they do discover the atma they are looking for,they will only have found the mechanical atma! So, except forAptavani-8109110Aptavani-8the main Shuddhatma (pure Soul), the rest is a moving (sachar)part; it is mechanical. And the pure Soul is the still (achad) part.The nature of the pure Soul is Knowing (Gnayak). But this ismoving, meaning that it is prone to be mechanical and carry outactivity. So they are two separate and different things. Theywork differently. However, it is possible to experience theseparateness, except that one does not have that awareness,and it is to bring about that awareness, that ‘we’ give you thisGnan (Atmagnan: the Knowledge of the Atma; the Self).Mishra Chetan Then Becomes MechanicalQuestioner: Somewhere, you have used the word mishrachetan, so what is the difference between that mishra chetanand this mechanical chetan?Dadashri: It is all one thing. But you can call it mishrachetan (‘I’ with wrong belief) in the beginning; at that time, it isnot mechanical. But when it starts to discharge, that is when itbecomes mechanical. When it becomes firmly established, itbecomes a discharge form, and that is when it becomesmechanical. It is not mechanical at first.As soon as you start having negative thoughts from here,that mishra chetan begins to form. It then becomes firmlyestablished, and when in the next life it yields results, it will beconsidered mechanical. At the present time, you cannot call itmechanical. After a period of time, mishra chetan is consideredmechanical. It is not called mechanical at first. It is calledmechanical when it begins to discharge; it is a discharging chetan.Egoism, but Still in the Form of a Tool!Questioner: The part that you call nischetan chetan (lifewithout Life; Energized self), whose manifestation we seeeverywhere in the world, is the nischetan chetan that believesit will be able to understand the chetan, grasp it, and bring itwithin the reach of the intellect. To what extent is this claim true?Dadashri: What other resource (sadhan) do they havebesides this? There may be nischetan chetan in it, but there isthe egoism (presence of ego) in it. It is that egoism which isworking here. And because that egoism is there, they willdefinitely succeed; otherwise, one cannot attain chetan (Self)with simply the nischetan chetan alone.What Is ‘I’ as an Element?Every living entity in the world has awareness of itsexistence (astitva): ‘I am’, but it does not have awareness of itselemental essence (vastutva): ‘What am I?’ And this is whyillusion (bhranti) prevails in the world. When the awareness of‘What am I?’ arises, it would then be regarded as the awarenessof one’s Self (vastutva). And once the awareness of one’s Selfis attained, complete (purnatva) awareness, happens naturallyon its own. The awareness of vastutva (the Self), happensthrough bheda vignan (the science that separates the Self fromthe non-Self). When the separation of the non-Self (jada) andthe Self (chetan) occurs, it is then that the awareness of the Self(vastutva) occurs.And in this world, you cannot call anyone naastik (whobelieves that God does not exist; atheist; without existence). Canyou call anyone naastik? Who can be called a naastik? No onein the world is born a naastik. And when one says, ‘I amnaastik’, it is only his wrong belief (vikalp). Otherwise, no oneis born a naastik. What does naastik mean? It is that whichdoes not have existence (astitva). But you yourself are theproof of existence (astitva)! The fact that one says, ‘I am anaastik’ itself proves one’s existence! Just saying this, is itselfconsidered existence. Besides, the word naastik is wrong belief.Wrong belief (vikalp) means that it is a kind of ego (ahamkar)like, ‘I am an atheist (naastik) and he is a theist (aastik; believingin existence of God)’!Questioner: Right now, it is as if a person cannot establishAptavani-8109110Aptavani-8the main Shuddhatma (pure Soul), the rest is a moving (sachar)part; it is mechanical. And the pure Soul is the still (achad) part.The nature of the pure Soul is Knowing (Gnayak). But this ismoving, meaning that it is prone to be mechanical and carry outactivity. So they are two separate and different things. Theywork differently. However, it is possible to experience theseparateness, except that one does not have that awareness,and it is to bring about that awareness, that ‘we’ give you thisGnan (Atmagnan: the Knowledge of the Atma; the Self).Mishra Chetan Then Becomes MechanicalQuestioner: Somewhere, you have used the word mishrachetan, so what is the difference between that mishra chetanand this mechanical chetan?Dadashri: It is all one thing. But you can call it mishrachetan (‘I’ with wrong belief) in the beginning; at that time, it isnot mechanical. But when it starts to discharge, that is when itbecomes mechanical. When it becomes firmly established, itbecomes a discharge form, and that is when it becomesmechanical. It is not mechanical at first.As soon as you start having negative thoughts from here,that mishra chetan begins to form. It then becomes firmlyestablished, and when in the next life it yields results, it will beconsidered mechanical. At the present time, you cannot call itmechanical. After a period of time, mishra chetan is consideredmechanical. It is not called mechanical at first. It is calledmechanical when it begins to discharge; it is a discharging chetan.Egoism, but Still in the Form of a Tool!Questioner: The part that you call nischetan chetan (lifewithout Life; Energized self), whose manifestation we seeeverywhere in the world, is the nischetan chetan that believesit will be able to understand the chetan, grasp it, and bring itwithin the reach of the intellect. To what extent is this claim true?Dadashri: What other resource (sadhan) do they havebesides this? There may be nischetan chetan in it, but there isthe egoism (presence of ego) in it. It is that egoism which isworking here. And because that egoism is there, they willdefinitely succeed; otherwise, one cannot attain chetan (Self)with simply the nischetan chetan alone.What Is ‘I’ as an Element?Every living entity in the world has awareness of itsexistence (astitva): ‘I am’, but it does not have awareness of itselemental essence (vastutva): ‘What am I?’ And this is whyillusion (bhranti) prevails in the world. When the awareness of‘What am I?’ arises, it would then be regarded as the awarenessof one’s Self (vastutva). And once the awareness of one’s Selfis attained, complete (purnatva) awareness, happens naturallyon its own. The awareness of vastutva (the Self), happensthrough bheda vignan (the science that separates the Self fromthe non-Self). When the separation of the non-Self (jada) andthe Self (chetan) occurs, it is then that the awareness of the Self(vastutva) occurs.And in this world, you cannot call anyone naastik (whobelieves that God does not exist; atheist; without existence). Canyou call anyone naastik? Who can be called a naastik? No onein the world is born a naastik. And when one says, ‘I amnaastik’, it is only his wrong belief (vikalp). Otherwise, no oneis born a naastik. What does naastik mean? It is that whichdoes not have existence (astitva). But you yourself are theproof of existence (astitva)! The fact that one says, ‘I am anaastik’ itself proves one’s existence! Just saying this, is itselfconsidered existence. Besides, the word naastik is wrong belief.Wrong belief (vikalp) means that it is a kind of ego (ahamkar)like, ‘I am an atheist (naastik) and he is a theist (aastik; believingin existence of God)’!Questioner: Right now, it is as if a person cannot establishAptavani-8111112Aptavani-8his existence (astitva), and he cannot feel (experience) his ownexistence, so although the existence (astitva) is there, he doesnot have a conviction about it. Is that not right?Dadashri: No. There can never be any such person whodoes not feel the sense of ‘I am’ (existence). Everyone has thefeeling, ‘I am’. The words ‘I am’, themselves proclaim one’sexistence.This is how it is: every living being (jiva) has its existence,and it is aware of that existence (astitva). So it has some kindof awareness of ‘I am’, and that awareness never leaves. Evenat night, while asleep, one is aware of ‘I am’. So, one definitelyhas the awareness of existence. However, one does not have theawareness of vastutva (the Self); ‘Who am I?’ Now, if a GnaniPurush were to give him the knowledge (Gnan) and it manifests,then he would advance.What we are saying is that every living being has awarenessof its existence (astitva), but it does not have awareness of itsSelf (vastutva). If one realizes ‘Who he is’ (vastutva), then onecontinues onwards towards the absolute state (purnatva). Andthe absolute state is independent (niralumb); it happens on itsown, naturally and spontaneously (sahaj swabhav). Just as afterthe second day of a lunar fortnight (beej) there is the third lunarday (treej), and then the fourth lunar day (choth), it all happensnaturally on its own accord, does it not? As long as you do notbecome obstinate, there is no problem. But if you uproot thesapling (of Gnan) in this way, then it becomes a problem. Andif it ever gets uprooted, then you should know how to replantit!When everything is explained to you, you will see that theAtma stays the same. However many kinds of human beingsthere are, and however many types of living entities (jivas) thatthere are, there are that many kinds of Atma. However, thereis no true (darasal) Atma in that. All these are mechanicalatmas - do you understand that fact?Should You Know Atmagnan? Or...Questioner: Can we say that if someone knowsAtmagnan (Self-realization), that he also has knowledge of thenon-Self complex (paudgalik)?Dadashri: In truth, you do not have to know Atmagnan(Self-realization); you just have to have the awareness of yourown nature (swaroop; the Self). A person is in a state ofunconsciousness (bebhaan); he has no awareness (bhaan) ofhis own nature (swaroop). That is the awareness (bhaan) whichhe must get. One can use words to say that he has to know it,but he has yet to attain his own Self awareness. That is why ourshastra gnani (experts of scriptural knowledge), all know aboutAtmagnan, but cannot get the awareness (bhaan). They knoweverything; they can recite all the scriptures by heart that, ‘Thisis how the Atma is; it is exactly like this’; they know all that, butthey cannot get the awareness (bhaan) of it....Which Is the Easier Method?There are only two things in all this: the Atma (Self) andthe pudgal (non-Self complex). He that knows the Atma; hasunderstood the pudgal, and he that knows the pudgal; hasunderstood the Atma. However, it is not possible to understandthe pudgal; it is not a very simple thing. With the help of theGnani Purush, it is possible to know the Atma.The Vedantis (those involved in Vedanta; Hindu scripture),have endeavored to know the non-Self complex (pudgal), forwhich they had written the four Vedas. That is because it ispossible to know the Atma, after having known the pudgal. Butthey became worn out from trying. Therefore, the four Vedassaid, ‘This is not That. This is not That. This is not That.’ So theVedantis tried to examine it by way of the pudgal; whereasthose with absolute Knowledge (Keval Gnanis) took a differentapproach of inquiry: ‘Who we are in fact.’ Examine that, and therest is all pudgal (non-Self complex)!Aptavani-8111112Aptavani-8his existence (astitva), and he cannot feel (experience) his ownexistence, so although the existence (astitva) is there, he doesnot have a conviction about it. Is that not right?Dadashri: No. There can never be any such person whodoes not feel the sense of ‘I am’ (existence). Everyone has thefeeling, ‘I am’. The words ‘I am’, themselves proclaim one’sexistence.This is how it is: every living being (jiva) has its existence,and it is aware of that existence (astitva). So it has some kindof awareness of ‘I am’, and that awareness never leaves. Evenat night, while asleep, one is aware of ‘I am’. So, one definitelyhas the awareness of existence. However, one does not have theawareness of vastutva (the Self); ‘Who am I?’ Now, if a GnaniPurush were to give him the knowledge (Gnan) and it manifests,then he would advance.What we are saying is that every living being has awarenessof its existence (astitva), but it does not have awareness of itsSelf (vastutva). If one realizes ‘Who he is’ (vastutva), then onecontinues onwards towards the absolute state (purnatva). Andthe absolute state is independent (niralumb); it happens on itsown, naturally and spontaneously (sahaj swabhav). Just as afterthe second day of a lunar fortnight (beej) there is the third lunarday (treej), and then the fourth lunar day (choth), it all happensnaturally on its own accord, does it not? As long as you do notbecome obstinate, there is no problem. But if you uproot thesapling (of Gnan) in this way, then it becomes a problem. Andif it ever gets uprooted, then you should know how to replantit!When everything is explained to you, you will see that theAtma stays the same. However many kinds of human beingsthere are, and however many types of living entities (jivas) thatthere are, there are that many kinds of Atma. However, thereis no true (darasal) Atma in that. All these are mechanicalatmas - do you understand that fact?Should You Know Atmagnan? Or...Questioner: Can we say that if someone knowsAtmagnan (Self-realization), that he also has knowledge of thenon-Self complex (paudgalik)?Dadashri: In truth, you do not have to know Atmagnan(Self-realization); you just have to have the awareness of yourown nature (swaroop; the Self). A person is in a state ofunconsciousness (bebhaan); he has no awareness (bhaan) ofhis own nature (swaroop). That is the awareness (bhaan) whichhe must get. One can use words to say that he has to know it,but he has yet to attain his own Self awareness. That is why ourshastra gnani (experts of scriptural knowledge), all know aboutAtmagnan, but cannot get the awareness (bhaan). They knoweverything; they can recite all the scriptures by heart that, ‘Thisis how the Atma is; it is exactly like this’; they know all that, butthey cannot get the awareness (bhaan) of it....Which Is the Easier Method?There are only two things in all this: the Atma (Self) andthe pudgal (non-Self complex). He that knows the Atma; hasunderstood the pudgal, and he that knows the pudgal; hasunderstood the Atma. However, it is not possible to understandthe pudgal; it is not a very simple thing. With the help of theGnani Purush, it is possible to know the Atma.The Vedantis (those involved in Vedanta; Hindu scripture),have endeavored to know the non-Self complex (pudgal), forwhich they had written the four Vedas. That is because it ispossible to know the Atma, after having known the pudgal. Butthey became worn out from trying. Therefore, the four Vedassaid, ‘This is not That. This is not That. This is not That.’ So theVedantis tried to examine it by way of the pudgal; whereasthose with absolute Knowledge (Keval Gnanis) took a differentapproach of inquiry: ‘Who we are in fact.’ Examine that, and therest is all pudgal (non-Self complex)!Aptavani-8113114Aptavani-8So the pudgal (non-Self complex) alone, is not an easything to understand; it is something extremely profound. Andwithout the Gnani Purush, no one will be able to understandit. It has such a profound significance, and this pudgal’s karamat(special qualities; skills) are extraordinary, that it is somethingaltogether different. The world itself has become perplexed.Just look at how one pudgal has managed to confuse theentire world! Even though one does not like to quarrel, one stillhas to.If one knows the non-Self complex (pudgal) completely,then one knows chetan (Atma; Self), or if one knows the Self(chetan) completely, then one knows the non-Self complex. Justas if you know what wheat is, then you would recognize the bitsof grit in it, and if you know the bits of grit, then you willrecognize the wheat.Questioner: So you can go by any of the two ways?Dadashri: Yes. You can reach by any path. It will workeven if you have a preference towards a certain path. That iswhy I tell all these people, because so many of them come andsay, ‘Sir, I’m just in ignorance (agnanta).’ You silly man, howcan you even be in ignorance (agnan)? Even if you werecompletely in ignorance, you would recognize knowledge (gnan).You do not even have complete ignorance here. This is neitherhere nor there. What does that mean? That one half of the logis charcoal, and the other half is wood. What do people callthat?Questioner: Half-burnt (ardhadagdha).Dadashri: Yes. So you tell the timber merchant, ‘Takethis away, sir’. And he would say, ‘No, what would we do withthat?’ And when you ask the coal seller, he would say, ‘Whywould we want a piece of wood?’ So no one would take it. Noone even wants to purchase it. The wood man does not wantto take it and neither does the coal man.Even With Complete Ignorance, One Can Findthe Atma!And the whole day is just spent in worry. While gnan(scriptural knowledge) sits on the shelf. Alas! Even if there wereignorance (agnan), it would still be good. Find me one suchman in Hindustan (India), who has attained ignorance (agnan).Even if he has attained ignorance, I would say to him, ‘son, youhave understood this shoreline (kinaro), so you will understandthe other shoreline as well.’ But he has not even understood thatside. Whichever side he is standing on; even there he has noawareness (bhaan) of where he stands. So he has not evenbecome one who is ignorant (agnani). He should know eitherthe ‘wheat’ or the ‘grit’; then he will know both.The four Vedas (Hindu scripture) have said, ‘This is notThat, this is not That, na iti, na iti’. However, they have noteven completed the ignorance (agnan). If they had completedit, there would be no reason to say, ‘this is not That (na iti)’,and then the other knowledge would have come forth. But fromthere, they became weary of saying, ‘this is not That (na iti, naiti)’. The Veda of course, gives an explanation of knowledge(gnan) and ignorance (agnan). However, if ignorance (agnan)were allowed to be completed, then the Atma would havepresented itself. But they did not allow it to complete. The World - As It IsDiscuss whatever you want openly. Here, we will talkabout the world, as it is. ‘We’ will say ‘no’ to ‘that which is not’,and ‘yes’ to ‘that which is’. ‘We’ cannot say ‘yes’ to ‘what isnot’ and ‘no’ to ‘what is’. ‘We’ are responsible for each andevery word. We have all the information needed to get youthere. Because not for a single second, have I become the ownerof this body, nor have I become the owner of this mind.This speech, is the original tape-record that is speaking; IAptavani-8113114Aptavani-8So the pudgal (non-Self complex) alone, is not an easything to understand; it is something extremely profound. Andwithout the Gnani Purush, no one will be able to understandit. It has such a profound significance, and this pudgal’s karamat(special qualities; skills) are extraordinary, that it is somethingaltogether different. The world itself has become perplexed.Just look at how one pudgal has managed to confuse theentire world! Even though one does not like to quarrel, one stillhas to.If one knows the non-Self complex (pudgal) completely,then one knows chetan (Atma; Self), or if one knows the Self(chetan) completely, then one knows the non-Self complex. Justas if you know what wheat is, then you would recognize the bitsof grit in it, and if you know the bits of grit, then you willrecognize the wheat.Questioner: So you can go by any of the two ways?Dadashri: Yes. You can reach by any path. It will workeven if you have a preference towards a certain path. That iswhy I tell all these people, because so many of them come andsay, ‘Sir, I’m just in ignorance (agnanta).’ You silly man, howcan you even be in ignorance (agnan)? Even if you werecompletely in ignorance, you would recognize knowledge (gnan).You do not even have complete ignorance here. This is neitherhere nor there. What does that mean? That one half of the logis charcoal, and the other half is wood. What do people callthat?Questioner: Half-burnt (ardhadagdha).Dadashri: Yes. So you tell the timber merchant, ‘Takethis away, sir’. And he would say, ‘No, what would we do withthat?’ And when you ask the coal seller, he would say, ‘Whywould we want a piece of wood?’ So no one would take it. Noone even wants to purchase it. The wood man does not wantto take it and neither does the coal man.Even With Complete Ignorance, One Can Findthe Atma!And the whole day is just spent in worry. While gnan(scriptural knowledge) sits on the shelf. Alas! Even if there wereignorance (agnan), it would still be good. Find me one suchman in Hindustan (India), who has attained ignorance (agnan).Even if he has attained ignorance, I would say to him, ‘son, youhave understood this shoreline (kinaro), so you will understandthe other shoreline as well.’ But he has not even understood thatside. Whichever side he is standing on; even there he has noawareness (bhaan) of where he stands. So he has not evenbecome one who is ignorant (agnani). He should know eitherthe ‘wheat’ or the ‘grit’; then he will know both.The four Vedas (Hindu scripture) have said, ‘This is notThat, this is not That, na iti, na iti’. However, they have noteven completed the ignorance (agnan). If they had completedit, there would be no reason to say, ‘this is not That (na iti)’,and then the other knowledge would have come forth. But fromthere, they became weary of saying, ‘this is not That (na iti, naiti)’. The Veda of course, gives an explanation of knowledge(gnan) and ignorance (agnan). However, if ignorance (agnan)were allowed to be completed, then the Atma would havepresented itself. But they did not allow it to complete. The World - As It IsDiscuss whatever you want openly. Here, we will talkabout the world, as it is. ‘We’ will say ‘no’ to ‘that which is not’,and ‘yes’ to ‘that which is’. ‘We’ cannot say ‘yes’ to ‘what isnot’ and ‘no’ to ‘what is’. ‘We’ are responsible for each andevery word. We have all the information needed to get youthere. Because not for a single second, have I become the ownerof this body, nor have I become the owner of this mind.This speech, is the original tape-record that is speaking; IAptavani-8115116Aptavani-8am not speaking. That original tape-record is the speaker (vakta)and you are the listener (shrota), while I am the Knower-Seer(Gnata-Drashta), and that makes this a unique sort ofinteraction.That is why every solution arrives. And when there is nota single solution left, you should know that Gnan has indeedmanifested. There is just inner satisfaction (samadhan); there isalways constant inner satisfaction, and that is called Gnan(Knowledge). Anything that gives you inner satisfaction andclosure (samadhan), in whatever state, in whatever circumstance,and whatever time, is called Gnan. So talk about whatever youwant to. The Gnani Purush is considered higher than the fourVeda.You can ask any question, because we see, and then ‘we’speak. I do not utter a single word; that has been read frombooks! I say it as I see it, which is why it is helpful to others.And even then, I am not the speaker. It is a tape-record thatdoes the talking; I am the Knower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta).Veda Is Theoretical, Science Is PracticalWe (the Gnani Purush) are above the four Vedas. Whenone has finished learning the four Veda, it is then that the Vedassay, ‘this is not That’.Questioner: Why are Vedas and Gnan, two separatewords?Dadashri: The Vedas are based on the intellect(buddhijanya), they involve activity (kriya), and they compriseaspects of the three qualities (trigunatmak: rajas – passion anddesire, sattva – goodness and awareness and tamas –unawareness and darkness). And Knowledge (Gnan) cannot betrigunatmak, it cannot be based on the intellect (buddhijanya),and by nature it can only be chetan (the Self). Gnan is alwayschetan.Questioner: So is the Veda also not full of knowledge?Dadashri: That knowledge is not useful for final liberation(moksha).It is a means to attain knowledge (sadhan gnan). Thereis no knowledge of the goal, the Self (sadhya gnan) in it. Becauseit contains the means to attain knowledge (sadhan gnan), itmeans that it is based on the intellect (buddhijanya). And thisis why the Veda itself says, ‘this is not That’. The Atma that youare searching for, cannot be here; it is indescribable (avarniya),it is inexpressible (avaktavya), and it is not found in words. Andthe Veda is in the form of words (shabdaroop). Therefore “Goto Gnani”, where the Atma can come into your hands. He willsay, “This is That!”Veda is knowledge that is based on the intellect. And thisGnan is knowledge of the Self (chetan Gnan). Knowledgebased on the intellect (buddhijanya gnan) means: what is thedifference between the intellect and knowledge? That directknowledge is called Gnan. Indirect knowledge is called intellect(buddhi). Veda is knowledge in the form of words, and so it isunderstandable through the intellect (buddhigamya). Veda istheoretical and Gnan is practical.Questioner: Does that mean it can be experienced(anubhavgamya)?Dadashri: Yes. It is something that can be experienced(anubhavgamya), and that is the real knowledge. Everythingelse however, is theoretical. That theoretical is in the form ofwords. And knowledge of Atma (chetan Gnan) lies ahead,much further ahead of words. It is inexpressible (avaktavya),and indescribable (avarniya). It is impossible to describe theAtma; the Vedas could not do it at all!Nevertheless, the Veda is one kind of guiding tool(sadhan). It is not something that helps you attain the ultimateAptavani-8115116Aptavani-8am not speaking. That original tape-record is the speaker (vakta)and you are the listener (shrota), while I am the Knower-Seer(Gnata-Drashta), and that makes this a unique sort ofinteraction.That is why every solution arrives. And when there is nota single solution left, you should know that Gnan has indeedmanifested. There is just inner satisfaction (samadhan); there isalways constant inner satisfaction, and that is called Gnan(Knowledge). Anything that gives you inner satisfaction andclosure (samadhan), in whatever state, in whatever circumstance,and whatever time, is called Gnan. So talk about whatever youwant to. The Gnani Purush is considered higher than the fourVeda.You can ask any question, because we see, and then ‘we’speak. I do not utter a single word; that has been read frombooks! I say it as I see it, which is why it is helpful to others.And even then, I am not the speaker. It is a tape-record thatdoes the talking; I am the Knower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta).Veda Is Theoretical, Science Is PracticalWe (the Gnani Purush) are above the four Vedas. Whenone has finished learning the four Veda, it is then that the Vedassay, ‘this is not That’.Questioner: Why are Vedas and Gnan, two separatewords?Dadashri: The Vedas are based on the intellect(buddhijanya), they involve activity (kriya), and they compriseaspects of the three qualities (trigunatmak: rajas – passion anddesire, sattva – goodness and awareness and tamas –unawareness and darkness). And Knowledge (Gnan) cannot betrigunatmak, it cannot be based on the intellect (buddhijanya),and by nature it can only be chetan (the Self). Gnan is alwayschetan.Questioner: So is the Veda also not full of knowledge?Dadashri: That knowledge is not useful for final liberation(moksha).It is a means to attain knowledge (sadhan gnan). Thereis no knowledge of the goal, the Self (sadhya gnan) in it. Becauseit contains the means to attain knowledge (sadhan gnan), itmeans that it is based on the intellect (buddhijanya). And thisis why the Veda itself says, ‘this is not That’. The Atma that youare searching for, cannot be here; it is indescribable (avarniya),it is inexpressible (avaktavya), and it is not found in words. Andthe Veda is in the form of words (shabdaroop). Therefore “Goto Gnani”, where the Atma can come into your hands. He willsay, “This is That!”Veda is knowledge that is based on the intellect. And thisGnan is knowledge of the Self (chetan Gnan). Knowledgebased on the intellect (buddhijanya gnan) means: what is thedifference between the intellect and knowledge? That directknowledge is called Gnan. Indirect knowledge is called intellect(buddhi). Veda is knowledge in the form of words, and so it isunderstandable through the intellect (buddhigamya). Veda istheoretical and Gnan is practical.Questioner: Does that mean it can be experienced(anubhavgamya)?Dadashri: Yes. It is something that can be experienced(anubhavgamya), and that is the real knowledge. Everythingelse however, is theoretical. That theoretical is in the form ofwords. And knowledge of Atma (chetan Gnan) lies ahead,much further ahead of words. It is inexpressible (avaktavya),and indescribable (avarniya). It is impossible to describe theAtma; the Vedas could not do it at all!Nevertheless, the Veda is one kind of guiding tool(sadhan). It is not something that helps you attain the ultimateAptavani-8117118Aptavani-8thing. Unless you meet a Gnani Purush, you will neveraccomplish your work.Questioner: Is the difference that exists between Gnanand Veda, just a verbal difference? Is there some kind ofintellectual exercise involved?Dadashri: It is only intellectual.Veda itself is intellectual, it is trigunatmak (possessingthree qualities: sattva, rajas and tamas). And the real Gnancannot be trigunatmak; it is science (vignan) itself. Vignan(Science) is real knowledge, and this knowledge (Veda) is itsmeans (sadhan vastu).Question: That is correct. But both the words ‘Gnan’and ‘vignan’ (science) have been used in one place in the Vedas.Dadashri: You cannot use the word science (vignan) inthat context. The Vedas guide you in the direction of science(vignan); they point it out. But the science itself cannot bedescribed and it cannot be expressed. Moreover, you will notfind it in books.Questioner: Knowledge is Truth (Satyam Gnanam), itis said! Do not they also say, ‘I am the infinite Soul’ (AnantamBrahma)?Dadashri: Whatever the words are, they are correct!However, Veda is trigunatmak (possessing three qualities ofthe prakruti: passion-rajas, virtue-sattva and darkness-tamas);it has nothing to do with anything else!Questioner: But Gnan possesses the qualities of passion,virtue and darkness (trigunatmak: rajas, sattva, tamas), doesit not!Dadashri: The knowledge that pertains to these threequalities (trigunatmak) is called the intellect (buddhi). Vedaonly does one thing, and that is, it develops the worldly life(sansar). It slowly and gradually develops anything that is basedon the intellect (buddhijanya), and together with that, shouldyou meet a Gnani Purush, then your work would be done: youneed to find an instrumental person (a nimit), that is all. If youdo not find a nimit, then your work will not get done.What does the Veda say? It says that this encompasses allthe intellectually based knowledge (buddhijanya gnan), and soit has come to be known as Vedanta. Now Gnanjanya Gnan(experiential Knowledge of the Self, that arises from Gnan) meansscience (vignan). You have to enter it to become familiar with it.The Gnani Is Evidence of MokshaQuestioner: The Vedas have mentioned twelve steps that,lead one from human happiness (manushya anand) to bliss ofthe Self (brahmaanand), they have described how you can gofrom one step to the next.Dadashri: And even at the final step, which is the twelfthstep, they only know that sugar is sweet, that is all they know,but what is meant by sweet, they do not know.But upon reaching the twelfth step, where they becomeconvinced that, this is the sweetest of all things, and that they donot need anything more other than this. But what does sweetmean? That is what they are looking for, there. Then, if theperson meets a Gnani Purush there, that nimit (instrumentalperson), who then would put into his mouth that, ‘This is That’.Questioner: Now, are you telling me that Gnan is aninternal thing, or that Veda is an internal knowledge? So, isGnan in Veda, or is Veda in Gnan?Dadashri: Gnan is in the Veda and the Veda is in Gnan,but science (Vignan) is outside the Veda.Questioner: Gnan (knowledge) and science (vignan)are both given in the Veda.Aptavani-8117118Aptavani-8thing. Unless you meet a Gnani Purush, you will neveraccomplish your work.Questioner: Is the difference that exists between Gnanand Veda, just a verbal difference? Is there some kind ofintellectual exercise involved?Dadashri: It is only intellectual.Veda itself is intellectual, it is trigunatmak (possessingthree qualities: sattva, rajas and tamas). And the real Gnancannot be trigunatmak; it is science (vignan) itself. Vignan(Science) is real knowledge, and this knowledge (Veda) is itsmeans (sadhan vastu).Question: That is correct. But both the words ‘Gnan’and ‘vignan’ (science) have been used in one place in the Vedas.Dadashri: You cannot use the word science (vignan) inthat context. The Vedas guide you in the direction of science(vignan); they point it out. But the science itself cannot bedescribed and it cannot be expressed. Moreover, you will notfind it in books.Questioner: Knowledge is Truth (Satyam Gnanam), itis said! Do not they also say, ‘I am the infinite Soul’ (AnantamBrahma)?Dadashri: Whatever the words are, they are correct!However, Veda is trigunatmak (possessing three qualities ofthe prakruti: passion-rajas, virtue-sattva and darkness-tamas);it has nothing to do with anything else!Questioner: But Gnan possesses the qualities of passion,virtue and darkness (trigunatmak: rajas, sattva, tamas), doesit not!Dadashri: The knowledge that pertains to these threequalities (trigunatmak) is called the intellect (buddhi). Vedaonly does one thing, and that is, it develops the worldly life(sansar). It slowly and gradually develops anything that is basedon the intellect (buddhijanya), and together with that, shouldyou meet a Gnani Purush, then your work would be done: youneed to find an instrumental person (a nimit), that is all. If youdo not find a nimit, then your work will not get done.What does the Veda say? It says that this encompasses allthe intellectually based knowledge (buddhijanya gnan), and soit has come to be known as Vedanta. Now Gnanjanya Gnan(experiential Knowledge of the Self, that arises from Gnan) meansscience (vignan). You have to enter it to become familiar with it.The Gnani Is Evidence of MokshaQuestioner: The Vedas have mentioned twelve steps that,lead one from human happiness (manushya anand) to bliss ofthe Self (brahmaanand), they have described how you can gofrom one step to the next.Dadashri: And even at the final step, which is the twelfthstep, they only know that sugar is sweet, that is all they know,but what is meant by sweet, they do not know.But upon reaching the twelfth step, where they becomeconvinced that, this is the sweetest of all things, and that they donot need anything more other than this. But what does sweetmean? That is what they are looking for, there. Then, if theperson meets a Gnani Purush there, that nimit (instrumentalperson), who then would put into his mouth that, ‘This is That’.Questioner: Now, are you telling me that Gnan is aninternal thing, or that Veda is an internal knowledge? So, isGnan in Veda, or is Veda in Gnan?Dadashri: Gnan is in the Veda and the Veda is in Gnan,but science (Vignan) is outside the Veda.Questioner: Gnan (knowledge) and science (vignan)are both given in the Veda.Aptavani-8119120Aptavani-8Dadashri: They are all words that have been given. Theyare not the real thing. It is sweet, is what they have written;however, they have not written the experience. There is noexperience in the theoretical.Questioner: Ancient sages (rushi-munis) experienced it.Dadashri: Yes, but that experience is not so easily attained.Such an experience is only attained by way of an experiencedperson (purush), who is a nimit (instrumental in the process);otherwise it does not happen. Not everyone can do that; theGnani Purush stands in the middle, as the instrument!Questioner: Even in the Veda it says, that one cannot dowithout a guru (spiritual teacher).Dadashri: Any talk that invalidates the guru; is all crazytalk.Questioner: For this established (siddha) fact, the sagesand the ascetics who are proof of this established fact; are nolonger around.Dadashri: What is the thing, that has been madeestablished (siddha), like? It is natural (sahaj), it is easy tounderstand (sugam), but it is very difficult to attain (durlabh).This is because you have to meet the one who has attained it (aprapta purush), and then you can attain it. What is a praptapurush like? He is someone who is himself liberated (mukta);who is independent (swatantra); who never has a single thoughtabout the worldly life (sansar); who has no thoughts related towomen (sexuality), nor does he have thoughts about his existence(astitva), and in whom there is no ‘I-ness’ (potapanu). Wherethere is no ‘I-ness’ (potapanu), that is where your work can bedone.Someone like you comes and asks me, ‘sugar is sweet, sogive me a taste of it.’ So I would put it in his mouth, saying ‘Thisis That’. Thereafter, he will constantly be in the Atma (in theSelf), and not budge from there afterward, even for a moment.Constantly in the Atma, twenty-four hours in complete awareness(jagruti)! Here, the entire world sleeps with eyes open. We areonly excluding the real thinkers from this; however the rest of theworld is sleeping with its eyes open.Even the Word Is TemporaryQuestioner: Now word (shabda) is eternal (nitya), butmany say that word is transitory (anitya), so which one is true?Dadashri: Word (shabda) is transient (anitya).Questioner: Some say that word is eternal.Dadashri: However many are saying so; nevertheless Iwill give you the truth once and for all. And whatever they tellus after that is fine; there is no insistence (aagraha) on our part.Even the truth (satya) that there is in the world, is nottruth; even it is untruth (asatya). Truth is always eternal (avinashi),and of its own nature (swabhavik). And this word (shabda) isnot natural. Words come out when there is friction. Therefore,words are circumstance. They happen due to two or threecircumstances, and therefore it is not a natural thing.Questioner: What is said about words being transient(anitya), is correct. Now Veda is composed of words, and yetthe Veda is believed to be eternal (nitya).Dadashri: There is nothing in those accepted beliefs. Whatwould you call eternal (nitya)? It is something which is alwayseternal (avinashi), and which is itself in an eternal form (vastuswaroop). There is no change in it; it only has one single nature(swabhav), and that nature never changes. The Atma is eternal(avinashi). This element of space (aakash tattva) is eternal(avinashi).The non-Self complex (pudgal), this element of subatomicAptavani-8119120Aptavani-8Dadashri: They are all words that have been given. Theyare not the real thing. It is sweet, is what they have written;however, they have not written the experience. There is noexperience in the theoretical.Questioner: Ancient sages (rushi-munis) experienced it.Dadashri: Yes, but that experience is not so easily attained.Such an experience is only attained by way of an experiencedperson (purush), who is a nimit (instrumental in the process);otherwise it does not happen. Not everyone can do that; theGnani Purush stands in the middle, as the instrument!Questioner: Even in the Veda it says, that one cannot dowithout a guru (spiritual teacher).Dadashri: Any talk that invalidates the guru; is all crazytalk.Questioner: For this established (siddha) fact, the sagesand the ascetics who are proof of this established fact; are nolonger around.Dadashri: What is the thing, that has been madeestablished (siddha), like? It is natural (sahaj), it is easy tounderstand (sugam), but it is very difficult to attain (durlabh).This is because you have to meet the one who has attained it (aprapta purush), and then you can attain it. What is a praptapurush like? He is someone who is himself liberated (mukta);who is independent (swatantra); who never has a single thoughtabout the worldly life (sansar); who has no thoughts related towomen (sexuality), nor does he have thoughts about his existence(astitva), and in whom there is no ‘I-ness’ (potapanu). Wherethere is no ‘I-ness’ (potapanu), that is where your work can bedone.Someone like you comes and asks me, ‘sugar is sweet, sogive me a taste of it.’ So I would put it in his mouth, saying ‘Thisis That’. Thereafter, he will constantly be in the Atma (in theSelf), and not budge from there afterward, even for a moment.Constantly in the Atma, twenty-four hours in complete awareness(jagruti)! Here, the entire world sleeps with eyes open. We areonly excluding the real thinkers from this; however the rest of theworld is sleeping with its eyes open.Even the Word Is TemporaryQuestioner: Now word (shabda) is eternal (nitya), butmany say that word is transitory (anitya), so which one is true?Dadashri: Word (shabda) is transient (anitya).Questioner: Some say that word is eternal.Dadashri: However many are saying so; nevertheless Iwill give you the truth once and for all. And whatever they tellus after that is fine; there is no insistence (aagraha) on our part.Even the truth (satya) that there is in the world, is nottruth; even it is untruth (asatya). Truth is always eternal (avinashi),and of its own nature (swabhavik). And this word (shabda) isnot natural. Words come out when there is friction. Therefore,words are circumstance. They happen due to two or threecircumstances, and therefore it is not a natural thing.Questioner: What is said about words being transient(anitya), is correct. Now Veda is composed of words, and yetthe Veda is believed to be eternal (nitya).Dadashri: There is nothing in those accepted beliefs. Whatwould you call eternal (nitya)? It is something which is alwayseternal (avinashi), and which is itself in an eternal form (vastuswaroop). There is no change in it; it only has one single nature(swabhav), and that nature never changes. The Atma is eternal(avinashi). This element of space (aakash tattva) is eternal(avinashi).The non-Self complex (pudgal), this element of subatomicAptavani-8121122Aptavani-8particles (parmanu), which are the smallest part of an atom(anu), the indivisible part (parmanu); that is an eternal element(avinashi tattva). The element of motion (gatisahayak tattva)that gives motion to all these things, is eternal (avinashi). Andthat which helps maintain the stationary (static) state, that elementis called inertia (sthitisahayak tattva), and it is eternal. Eventime (kaad), is an eternal element. Therefore that, which doesnot deviate from its nature (nirvikalpi); the nirvikalpi truth(satya) in this world, are these six things (eternal elements).Only six things (eternal elements) are the truth (nirvikalpi satya),in which no change occurs, and that possess their own nature(swabhavik).Even the Means to Attain the Self Is VikalpQuestioner: The technology of the Vedas, that show usan approach, is that truth?Dadashri: It is helping to you. You have taken the wrongpath, so it is helping to bring you back. If you had not gone thewrong way, then the helping would not have been there.These Vedas, whatever name people ascribe to them,originate from the very mouth of Lord Rushabhdev (the firstTirthankar of this time cycle).Questioner: That is true. Now in this Omkar, what truthis there in it?Dadashri: There is a lot of truth in the Omkar. But eventhen, what truth would that be? It is a truth through the ego(vikalpi satya). Even so, that false (vikalpi) truth can take youtowards the eternal (nirvikalpi). That is the path, that is thatroad-way!Questioner: Now the goal (sadhya) is complete (purna),brahma (Atma) is complete (purna). The means (sadhan) isuncertain and incomplete (vikalpi), but regarding time and place,is it possible to support the intent to attain the ultimate goal(purna bhaav)?Dadashri: If other circumstances (saiyogo) come together,then it is possible. But in the end, there has to be a circumstance(saiyog) of a nirvikalpi guru (a guide who has attained theAtma), which has to be the Gnani Purush, who has nothingmore in the world left to know. In this world, there is not a singlething left for him to know!Questioner: What is an egoless being (nirvikalp purush)like?Dadashri: In an egoless being (nirvikalp purush), thereis not a single drop of intellect (buddhi). There is not a singledrop of intellect, which is why he is called an egoless being.Questioner: Then in the Gita, they give a description ofboth the kshar purush and the akshar purush, so does aksharpurush mean an egoless person (nirvikalp purush)?Dadashri: Kshar (perishable) is this body itself. Aksharis vikalpi (bavo -is the ego and all the wrong beliefs). The Self,the egoless (nirvikalpi) is beyond kshar-akshar.Vikalp Foils the Final OpportunityOtherwise, I know the Atma. If you tell me to give youthe Atma, then I would give you the Atma.Questioner: But I want to live in the interaction of theworldly life (vyavahar).Dadashri: But when you live in worldly interaction(vyavahar), the interaction (vyavahar) ought to be ideal(aadarsha). When can you say that you have attained the Atma?Only when the interaction (vyavahar) in your own home isperfect and ideal (aadarsha) will you be able to attain the Atma.If not, then it is not just a matter of running away into a cave,like they all talk about! Atma is not something that entails caves.Aptavani-8121122Aptavani-8particles (parmanu), which are the smallest part of an atom(anu), the indivisible part (parmanu); that is an eternal element(avinashi tattva). The element of motion (gatisahayak tattva)that gives motion to all these things, is eternal (avinashi). Andthat which helps maintain the stationary (static) state, that elementis called inertia (sthitisahayak tattva), and it is eternal. Eventime (kaad), is an eternal element. Therefore that, which doesnot deviate from its nature (nirvikalpi); the nirvikalpi truth(satya) in this world, are these six things (eternal elements).Only six things (eternal elements) are the truth (nirvikalpi satya),in which no change occurs, and that possess their own nature(swabhavik).Even the Means to Attain the Self Is VikalpQuestioner: The technology of the Vedas, that show usan approach, is that truth?Dadashri: It is helping to you. You have taken the wrongpath, so it is helping to bring you back. If you had not gone thewrong way, then the helping would not have been there.These Vedas, whatever name people ascribe to them,originate from the very mouth of Lord Rushabhdev (the firstTirthankar of this time cycle).Questioner: That is true. Now in this Omkar, what truthis there in it?Dadashri: There is a lot of truth in the Omkar. But eventhen, what truth would that be? It is a truth through the ego(vikalpi satya). Even so, that false (vikalpi) truth can take youtowards the eternal (nirvikalpi). That is the path, that is thatroad-way!Questioner: Now the goal (sadhya) is complete (purna),brahma (Atma) is complete (purna). The means (sadhan) isuncertain and incomplete (vikalpi), but regarding time and place,is it possible to support the intent to attain the ultimate goal(purna bhaav)?Dadashri: If other circumstances (saiyogo) come together,then it is possible. But in the end, there has to be a circumstance(saiyog) of a nirvikalpi guru (a guide who has attained theAtma), which has to be the Gnani Purush, who has nothingmore in the world left to know. In this world, there is not a singlething left for him to know!Questioner: What is an egoless being (nirvikalp purush)like?Dadashri: In an egoless being (nirvikalp purush), thereis not a single drop of intellect (buddhi). There is not a singledrop of intellect, which is why he is called an egoless being.Questioner: Then in the Gita, they give a description ofboth the kshar purush and the akshar purush, so does aksharpurush mean an egoless person (nirvikalp purush)?Dadashri: Kshar (perishable) is this body itself. Aksharis vikalpi (bavo -is the ego and all the wrong beliefs). The Self,the egoless (nirvikalpi) is beyond kshar-akshar.Vikalp Foils the Final OpportunityOtherwise, I know the Atma. If you tell me to give youthe Atma, then I would give you the Atma.Questioner: But I want to live in the interaction of theworldly life (vyavahar).Dadashri: But when you live in worldly interaction(vyavahar), the interaction (vyavahar) ought to be ideal(aadarsha). When can you say that you have attained the Atma?Only when the interaction (vyavahar) in your own home isperfect and ideal (aadarsha) will you be able to attain the Atma.If not, then it is not just a matter of running away into a cave,like they all talk about! Atma is not something that entails caves.Aptavani-8123124Aptavani-8The caves are something which is on trial basis. Otherwise, ifone’s worldly interaction is beautiful and ideal (aadarsha), thenthere is no anger-pride-deceit-greed (krodh-maan-maya-lobh)in it. There are good relations with neighbors, and one has agood relationship at home with his wife.Questioner: But you do not have to look for the Atma,does the darshan not happen on its own?Dadashri: What has happened is that where the path hasbroken down, these people have laid down paths that are allornamental. The main path, after periods of dozens of droughtand famine (dukaad), was completely destroyed, and so theycreated ornamental paths. Therefore, it came to be said that,‘Truth can only be discovered through one’s own effort!’ Justlook at this! For everything else, you have to go to college;whereas one can discover this Truth (satya), in one’s own home!Otherwise, a person with ego (vikalpi) can never becomean egoless person (nirvikalpi). A seed that is vikalpi, neverbecomes nirvikalpi; one just gropes about in vain. Aninstrumental person (nimit) is needed. Vikalpi and nirvikalpiare both, just two differing viewpoints (drashtipher). If a person’svision (drashti) becomes nirvikalpi (with Self knowledge); ifsomeone does it for him, then he becomes established in theabsolute truth (nirvikalp). Only the vision (drashti) needs to bechanged. This is not possible through study (abhyas). If it couldbe managed through study, then they would be studying. But infact, the whole viewpoint (drashti) is different.Therefore, when a person realizes his own true nature(swaroop; the Self), he then becomes established in the Truth(nirvikalp). When he becomes established in the Truth(nirvikalp), the ego (ahamkar) and the ‘my-ness’ (mamata)disappear, that is all! The ego and the ‘my-ness’ go away; it isall the extraneous properties (vyatirek guna) which disappear.The ‘my-ness’ (mamata) is greed (lobh) and deceit (kapat).And the ego (ahamkar) is anger (krodh) and pride (maan).This is how these four qualities (gunas) have arisen, thus theGnani Purush separates two things: he makes a division, a lineof demarcation between the Atma (Self) and the non-Self(anatma), so that they are separated! Furthermore, it is separate!It is indeed separate.When One Becomes Intellect-Free, One CanBecome One With AllQuestioner: But Veda gives us a description of oneness(abhedta), does it not?Dadashri: Yes. But has everyone not given us a descriptionof abheda (absence of difference or distinction; non duality;oneness)? But to attain oneness (abheda) is difficult. Unless youdissolve the Veda and drink it, you will not have oneness. Thatis because as long as the intellect (buddhi) does not leave,oneness will not arise. The intellect creates a division (bhed).Who creates division (bhed)? It is those with intellect; they arethe ones that create division.Now, if you wanted to make your whole village free ofintellect (abuddha), then how long would it take? How longwould it take to make a man without any intellect? Could it bedone instantly?Questioner: No, it cannot.Dadashri: So until then, there cannot be oneness (abheda).You will have oneness, when the intellect (buddhi) goes. It is theintellect that creates differences: this is mine and this is yours; itmakes a person emotional.Questioner: Is it the intellect that makes you emotional,or is it the heart which makes you emotional?Dadashri: No, only the intellect (buddhi). Even someonewithout intellect (an abuddha) has a heart.Aptavani-8123124Aptavani-8The caves are something which is on trial basis. Otherwise, ifone’s worldly interaction is beautiful and ideal (aadarsha), thenthere is no anger-pride-deceit-greed (krodh-maan-maya-lobh)in it. There are good relations with neighbors, and one has agood relationship at home with his wife.Questioner: But you do not have to look for the Atma,does the darshan not happen on its own?Dadashri: What has happened is that where the path hasbroken down, these people have laid down paths that are allornamental. The main path, after periods of dozens of droughtand famine (dukaad), was completely destroyed, and so theycreated ornamental paths. Therefore, it came to be said that,‘Truth can only be discovered through one’s own effort!’ Justlook at this! For everything else, you have to go to college;whereas one can discover this Truth (satya), in one’s own home!Otherwise, a person with ego (vikalpi) can never becomean egoless person (nirvikalpi). A seed that is vikalpi, neverbecomes nirvikalpi; one just gropes about in vain. Aninstrumental person (nimit) is needed. Vikalpi and nirvikalpiare both, just two differing viewpoints (drashtipher). If a person’svision (drashti) becomes nirvikalpi (with Self knowledge); ifsomeone does it for him, then he becomes established in theabsolute truth (nirvikalp). Only the vision (drashti) needs to bechanged. This is not possible through study (abhyas). If it couldbe managed through study, then they would be studying. But infact, the whole viewpoint (drashti) is different.Therefore, when a person realizes his own true nature(swaroop; the Self), he then becomes established in the Truth(nirvikalp). When he becomes established in the Truth(nirvikalp), the ego (ahamkar) and the ‘my-ness’ (mamata)disappear, that is all! The ego and the ‘my-ness’ go away; it isall the extraneous properties (vyatirek guna) which disappear.The ‘my-ness’ (mamata) is greed (lobh) and deceit (kapat).And the ego (ahamkar) is anger (krodh) and pride (maan).This is how these four qualities (gunas) have arisen, thus theGnani Purush separates two things: he makes a division, a lineof demarcation between the Atma (Self) and the non-Self(anatma), so that they are separated! Furthermore, it is separate!It is indeed separate.When One Becomes Intellect-Free, One CanBecome One With AllQuestioner: But Veda gives us a description of oneness(abhedta), does it not?Dadashri: Yes. But has everyone not given us a descriptionof abheda (absence of difference or distinction; non duality;oneness)? But to attain oneness (abheda) is difficult. Unless youdissolve the Veda and drink it, you will not have oneness. Thatis because as long as the intellect (buddhi) does not leave,oneness will not arise. The intellect creates a division (bhed).Who creates division (bhed)? It is those with intellect; they arethe ones that create division.Now, if you wanted to make your whole village free ofintellect (abuddha), then how long would it take? How longwould it take to make a man without any intellect? Could it bedone instantly?Questioner: No, it cannot.Dadashri: So until then, there cannot be oneness (abheda).You will have oneness, when the intellect (buddhi) goes. It is theintellect that creates differences: this is mine and this is yours; itmakes a person emotional.Questioner: Is it the intellect that makes you emotional,or is it the heart which makes you emotional?Dadashri: No, only the intellect (buddhi). Even someonewithout intellect (an abuddha) has a heart.Aptavani-8125126Aptavani-8Questioner: Have the scriptures not called the intellectnischayatmika - the one that makes resolutions and decisions(nischay)?Dadashri: Yes. The intellect (buddhi) makes decisions(does nirnaya), yet it even makes one emotional.Sa-iti, Only Through Vignan – the Science ofSeparationThe Atma is not something that can be contained in theVedas. The words in the Vedas, pertain to a gross and overt(sthool) language; whereas the Atma is extremely subtle(sookshmatam). How can the two agree? One is gross (sthool)and the other is subtle (sookshma); how can the Veda possiblydescribe that? The Atma is inexpressible (avaktavya) andindescribable (avarnaniya); there are no words for it, so itwould never go down in the Veda. And so they may say, ‘IsVeda not the only knower of all things in this world? So whowould know beyond the limits of the Veda?’ And we would say,‘No one below the Vedas can know that. Even the Veda wouldnot know. But he, that is above the Veda; is the Gnani Purushwho is the only one who knows what the Atma is!’ The GnaniPurush may even say to you, ‘This is That, This is That.’Questioner: How can one go from, ‘this is not That’, to‘This is That’?Dadashri: To go from ‘this is not That, to ‘This is That’,requires the science of separation (bhed vignan): that the Atmais not this; It is This; it is not this; It is This. And no one, otherthan the Gnani Purush, has this science of separation.Whenever Gnanis do arise, they only take a few peoplealong with them. But this is Akram Vignan. Science (vignan)means that this is chetan. Which means, that you do not have todo anything. The Gnan itself will guide and caution you. This Gnanitself will continue doing the work. This is why it is Akram Vignan.Veda is in the form of knowledge (gnan) and the Knower(Vetta) is in the form of science (vignan). Gnan cannot procureresults on its own (kriyakari), and science produces results(kriyakari).Questioner: Even the Vedas were exhausted when it cameto describing the one who is in the form of science (vignanswaroop; absolute knowledge form)!Dadashri: Yes, they got tired! Because how is the Vedaable to understand the Knower (Vetta)? The Knower canunderstand the Veda, but how could it be possible for the Vedato understand the Knower? What does Vetta mean? TheKnower. He is the Knower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta). The wordVetta itself seems really small in appearance, does it not?From Whom Do We Attain the Atma?You can ask everything here, you can ask about the fourVedas (Hindu scripture) and you can also ask about the fourAnuyogas (of Jain literature). Here, you can ask anything aboutJainism, Vedanta or the Quran. That is because you can asksomeone who has gone beyond the Veda!Questioner: How can one go higher than the Vedas?Dadashri: When the Light of Knowledge (Gnan Prakash)occurs, one can rise above the Vedas.Questioner: So it is not something that is comprehendedthrough the intellect (buddhigamya)?Dadashri: No. It is not something which is understoodthrough the intellect (buddhigamya). All the things that wereunderstood through the intellect are found in the Vedas. And togo beyond intellectual understanding (buddhigamya): go to theGnani; who has absolutely no intellect (buddhi). Go to a GnaniPurush, who is considered abuddha (state in which intellect isnot utilized; intellect free), then you can attain the Atma fromAptavani-8125126Aptavani-8Questioner: Have the scriptures not called the intellectnischayatmika - the one that makes resolutions and decisions(nischay)?Dadashri: Yes. The intellect (buddhi) makes decisions(does nirnaya), yet it even makes one emotional.Sa-iti, Only Through Vignan – the Science ofSeparationThe Atma is not something that can be contained in theVedas. The words in the Vedas, pertain to a gross and overt(sthool) language; whereas the Atma is extremely subtle(sookshmatam). How can the two agree? One is gross (sthool)and the other is subtle (sookshma); how can the Veda possiblydescribe that? The Atma is inexpressible (avaktavya) andindescribable (avarnaniya); there are no words for it, so itwould never go down in the Veda. And so they may say, ‘IsVeda not the only knower of all things in this world? So whowould know beyond the limits of the Veda?’ And we would say,‘No one below the Vedas can know that. Even the Veda wouldnot know. But he, that is above the Veda; is the Gnani Purushwho is the only one who knows what the Atma is!’ The GnaniPurush may even say to you, ‘This is That, This is That.’Questioner: How can one go from, ‘this is not That’, to‘This is That’?Dadashri: To go from ‘this is not That, to ‘This is That’,requires the science of separation (bhed vignan): that the Atmais not this; It is This; it is not this; It is This. And no one, otherthan the Gnani Purush, has this science of separation.Whenever Gnanis do arise, they only take a few peoplealong with them. But this is Akram Vignan. Science (vignan)means that this is chetan. Which means, that you do not have todo anything. The Gnan itself will guide and caution you. This Gnanitself will continue doing the work. This is why it is Akram Vignan.Veda is in the form of knowledge (gnan) and the Knower(Vetta) is in the form of science (vignan). Gnan cannot procureresults on its own (kriyakari), and science produces results(kriyakari).Questioner: Even the Vedas were exhausted when it cameto describing the one who is in the form of science (vignanswaroop; absolute knowledge form)!Dadashri: Yes, they got tired! Because how is the Vedaable to understand the Knower (Vetta)? The Knower canunderstand the Veda, but how could it be possible for the Vedato understand the Knower? What does Vetta mean? TheKnower. He is the Knower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta). The wordVetta itself seems really small in appearance, does it not?From Whom Do We Attain the Atma?You can ask everything here, you can ask about the fourVedas (Hindu scripture) and you can also ask about the fourAnuyogas (of Jain literature). Here, you can ask anything aboutJainism, Vedanta or the Quran. That is because you can asksomeone who has gone beyond the Veda!Questioner: How can one go higher than the Vedas?Dadashri: When the Light of Knowledge (Gnan Prakash)occurs, one can rise above the Vedas.Questioner: So it is not something that is comprehendedthrough the intellect (buddhigamya)?Dadashri: No. It is not something which is understoodthrough the intellect (buddhigamya). All the things that wereunderstood through the intellect are found in the Vedas. And togo beyond intellectual understanding (buddhigamya): go to theGnani; who has absolutely no intellect (buddhi). Go to a GnaniPurush, who is considered abuddha (state in which intellect isnot utilized; intellect free), then you can attain the Atma fromAptavani-8127128Aptavani-8him. If not, then you will not attain the Atma. Where there isAtma, there is no intellect (buddhi), and where there is intellectthere cannot be Atma!Questioner: Are you saying, that by studying the Jainreligion, one can attain Knowledge of the Self (Atmagnan)?Dadashri: No. And even from reading the four Vedas ofVedanta (Ancient Hindu scripture), it is not possible to attain theAtmagnan. When all the four Vedas come to an end, theythemselves say, ‘this is not That’. The Atma you are looking foris not found in these. Therefore, “Go to the Gnani”. You cannotput the Atma down in books. The Atma is indescribable(avarnaniya), it is inexpressible (avaktavya), and therefore itcannot be placed in books. Therefore it is the Gnani Purush’swork. Only he, who has attained the Atma, can show us theAtma. It is not the work for anyone else in the world.Questioner: They may not be able to show us, but canthey not help us study that?Dadashri: They only give you a direction; they point thingsout to you. So you can get some sort of rough idea about it. Butthey do not give you the experience of the real thing.Questioner: But you can experience your own Atma byyourself, can you not?Dadashri: No, it is not like that. Without the GnaniPurush, you cannot get the experience; it has not happened toanyone. Only he that is free can, free others. If one is oneself,caught up in all these entanglements, how is he supposed to freeothers? That is why you need a savior (tarantaaran purush).He has himself gone across (the ocean of life), and he is able todo the same for everyone, and that is where your solution lies.Questioner: So can you attain Atmagnan through thestudy of shruta vani (knowledge from hearing the speech ofenlightened beings)?Dadashri: Shruta vani and everything are helping aids.Through shruta vani, the chit (inner component comprised ofknowledge and vision) strengthens, and day by day the chitbecomes clean and pure (nirmal). And with a clean chit, if youmeet a Gnani Purush, then you would grasp the knowledge(Gnan) more and more quickly and very well.Questioner: You attain knowledge (gnan) through a guru(teacher), but you can only receive Gnan from a guru who hashimself experienced the Atma, is that not right?Dadashri: He has to be a Gnani Purush, and moreover,just giving you the experience of the Atma alone, is not enough.You only accomplish your work when the Gnani Purush givesyou the answers to, ‘Who am I?’ ‘How does this world run?’‘Who are You yourself?’ ‘Who is this?’Nevertheless, you can carry on reading books, but theyare helpers. They are not the principal thing. They are just ordinarycauses, they are not extraordinary causes. What is anextraordinary cause? The Gnani Purush!Just One Staircase but Different StepsQuestioner: Jain darshan, Vedanta, Adwaita vaad,Sohum, Aham Brahmasmi, Ekoham Bahusyam, Sarva IdamBrahma; are they all the same? Dadashri: Just as a staircase and a ladder, are the samething, all these are the same thing. But as far as the steppinggoes, they are all considered different.Neither Dualistic, Nor Non-Dualistic, TheAtma Is Dualistic – Non-DualisticQuestioner: I want to understand dwaita and adwaita.Please explain them.Dadashri: Tell me what you understand about adwaita.Aptavani-8127128Aptavani-8him. If not, then you will not attain the Atma. Where there isAtma, there is no intellect (buddhi), and where there is intellectthere cannot be Atma!Questioner: Are you saying, that by studying the Jainreligion, one can attain Knowledge of the Self (Atmagnan)?Dadashri: No. And even from reading the four Vedas ofVedanta (Ancient Hindu scripture), it is not possible to attain theAtmagnan. When all the four Vedas come to an end, theythemselves say, ‘this is not That’. The Atma you are looking foris not found in these. Therefore, “Go to the Gnani”. You cannotput the Atma down in books. The Atma is indescribable(avarnaniya), it is inexpressible (avaktavya), and therefore itcannot be placed in books. Therefore it is the Gnani Purush’swork. Only he, who has attained the Atma, can show us theAtma. It is not the work for anyone else in the world.Questioner: They may not be able to show us, but canthey not help us study that?Dadashri: They only give you a direction; they point thingsout to you. So you can get some sort of rough idea about it. Butthey do not give you the experience of the real thing.Questioner: But you can experience your own Atma byyourself, can you not?Dadashri: No, it is not like that. Without the GnaniPurush, you cannot get the experience; it has not happened toanyone. Only he that is free can, free others. If one is oneself,caught up in all these entanglements, how is he supposed to freeothers? That is why you need a savior (tarantaaran purush).He has himself gone across (the ocean of life), and he is able todo the same for everyone, and that is where your solution lies.Questioner: So can you attain Atmagnan through thestudy of shruta vani (knowledge from hearing the speech ofenlightened beings)?Dadashri: Shruta vani and everything are helping aids.Through shruta vani, the chit (inner component comprised ofknowledge and vision) strengthens, and day by day the chitbecomes clean and pure (nirmal). And with a clean chit, if youmeet a Gnani Purush, then you would grasp the knowledge(Gnan) more and more quickly and very well.Questioner: You attain knowledge (gnan) through a guru(teacher), but you can only receive Gnan from a guru who hashimself experienced the Atma, is that not right?Dadashri: He has to be a Gnani Purush, and moreover,just giving you the experience of the Atma alone, is not enough.You only accomplish your work when the Gnani Purush givesyou the answers to, ‘Who am I?’ ‘How does this world run?’‘Who are You yourself?’ ‘Who is this?’Nevertheless, you can carry on reading books, but theyare helpers. They are not the principal thing. They are just ordinarycauses, they are not extraordinary causes. What is anextraordinary cause? The Gnani Purush!Just One Staircase but Different StepsQuestioner: Jain darshan, Vedanta, Adwaita vaad,Sohum, Aham Brahmasmi, Ekoham Bahusyam, Sarva IdamBrahma; are they all the same? Dadashri: Just as a staircase and a ladder, are the samething, all these are the same thing. But as far as the steppinggoes, they are all considered different.Neither Dualistic, Nor Non-Dualistic, TheAtma Is Dualistic – Non-DualisticQuestioner: I want to understand dwaita and adwaita.Please explain them.Dadashri: Tell me what you understand about adwaita.Aptavani-8129130Aptavani-8Questioner: That I am the only truth (satya), and besidesmyself, there is no other truth. What I am, is itself the truth, andwhatever else that seems to be the truth, is not the truth. I callthat non-duality (adwaita).Dadashri: So then, is there a need at all, to look for thetruth (satya)? So if, I am myself the truth (satya), then there isno need to look for the truth. So then why do you read books?Does your spiritual doctrine (siddhant) not say exactly this,‘Only I am the truth (satya)’?Questioner: In order to have faith and devotion (nishtha)in the spiritual doctrine, and strengthen the spiritual principle thataccomplishes the ultimate goal (siddhant), you have to read thebook, do you not?Dadashri: But this doctrine (siddhant) cannot be correct.What is your name?Questioner: Chandubhai.Dadashri: So is Chandubhai the truth?Questioner: Chandubhai is the name, and the name isnot the truth.Dadashri: Then what is the truth? Become the truth(satya), and then speak.Questioner: Truth cannot be conveyed through words,can it?Dadashri: Even so, who are you then? If we say,‘Chandubhai has no sense’, it would offend you. It affects you;therefore you really are Chandubhai.Questioner: So as long as it affects me, I am Chandubhai,is that it?Dadashri: Yes. And even when someone insults me; itdoes not affect me, or if they hurt me; it does not affect me, andeven when someone picks my pocket; it does not affect me,because then I know that I have entered the corner of adwaita(non-duality). As yet, you do not understand adwaita at all.Now, I will explain duality (dwaita) and non-duality(adwaita) to you. You do want to know, do you not?Questioner: Yes, absolutely.Dadashri: Is non-duality (adwaita), dependent or is itindependent? Does non-duality have proof, or is it unproven?Questioner: Independent (niradhari).Dadashri: And duality (dwaita)?Questioner: Once you are in non-duality, duality (dwaita)is no longer there at all.Dadashri: Now they are teaching all the wrong thingslike, ‘There is no duality (dwaita)!’ And when it comes to theworldly life (sansar), if someone picks their pocket, they starthollering! Goodness! Where do you think all this dualism (dwaita)comes from? Then he will say, ‘Call the police, he is a thief, heis the one who picked my pocket.’ You foolish man, did you notjust say, ‘there is no dualism (dwaita)’!? So where did thedualism come from? Even you are full of dualism. I am notcriticizing you here, but if you want to understand the truth, thennon-dualism (adwaita) is not like this. Until then, how can youattain the true happiness; the happiness of your own Atma, evenfor a moment? Does this enter into your understanding?Non-dualism (adwaita) is not something that is unsupported(niradhari). Non-dualism is there because of dualism. Non-dualism is there on the basis of dualism. Do you understand onwhat basis?Questioner: Dualism is required for non-dualism.Dadashri: Yes, it is on the basis of dualism (dwaita) thatAptavani-8129130Aptavani-8Questioner: That I am the only truth (satya), and besidesmyself, there is no other truth. What I am, is itself the truth, andwhatever else that seems to be the truth, is not the truth. I callthat non-duality (adwaita).Dadashri: So then, is there a need at all, to look for thetruth (satya)? So if, I am myself the truth (satya), then there isno need to look for the truth. So then why do you read books?Does your spiritual doctrine (siddhant) not say exactly this,‘Only I am the truth (satya)’?Questioner: In order to have faith and devotion (nishtha)in the spiritual doctrine, and strengthen the spiritual principle thataccomplishes the ultimate goal (siddhant), you have to read thebook, do you not?Dadashri: But this doctrine (siddhant) cannot be correct.What is your name?Questioner: Chandubhai.Dadashri: So is Chandubhai the truth?Questioner: Chandubhai is the name, and the name isnot the truth.Dadashri: Then what is the truth? Become the truth(satya), and then speak.Questioner: Truth cannot be conveyed through words,can it?Dadashri: Even so, who are you then? If we say,‘Chandubhai has no sense’, it would offend you. It affects you;therefore you really are Chandubhai.Questioner: So as long as it affects me, I am Chandubhai,is that it?Dadashri: Yes. And even when someone insults me; itdoes not affect me, or if they hurt me; it does not affect me, andeven when someone picks my pocket; it does not affect me,because then I know that I have entered the corner of adwaita(non-duality). As yet, you do not understand adwaita at all.Now, I will explain duality (dwaita) and non-duality(adwaita) to you. You do want to know, do you not?Questioner: Yes, absolutely.Dadashri: Is non-duality (adwaita), dependent or is itindependent? Does non-duality have proof, or is it unproven?Questioner: Independent (niradhari).Dadashri: And duality (dwaita)?Questioner: Once you are in non-duality, duality (dwaita)is no longer there at all.Dadashri: Now they are teaching all the wrong thingslike, ‘There is no duality (dwaita)!’ And when it comes to theworldly life (sansar), if someone picks their pocket, they starthollering! Goodness! Where do you think all this dualism (dwaita)comes from? Then he will say, ‘Call the police, he is a thief, heis the one who picked my pocket.’ You foolish man, did you notjust say, ‘there is no dualism (dwaita)’!? So where did thedualism come from? Even you are full of dualism. I am notcriticizing you here, but if you want to understand the truth, thennon-dualism (adwaita) is not like this. Until then, how can youattain the true happiness; the happiness of your own Atma, evenfor a moment? Does this enter into your understanding?Non-dualism (adwaita) is not something that is unsupported(niradhari). Non-dualism is there because of dualism. Non-dualism is there on the basis of dualism. Do you understand onwhat basis?Questioner: Dualism is required for non-dualism.Dadashri: Yes, it is on the basis of dualism (dwaita) thatAptavani-8131132Aptavani-8non-dualism (adwaita) exists. And anything that is based onanything else, is considered dependent (sapeksha). And adependent can never turn into an independent (nirpeksha).Therefore, people have defined non-dualism as independent! Ifyou could understand this fact, then you would have the solution.Questioner: But we only believe in the independent(nirpeksha).Dadashri: One should only believe in the independent(nirpeksha). But should you not have to understand theindependent?Questioner: We take non-duality (adwaita) to meanindependent (nirpeksha).Dadashri: Yes. You have done all that on your own.However, its meaning relies on what your mind accepts. Butthat cannot be accepted as the rule, can it? If you want to givea meaning to independent (nirpeksha) per what your mindaccepts, you can do it. But it would not be considered legitimate.I would legitimately say, ‘Is non-dualism (adwaita), supported(aadhari) or is it not supported (niradhari)? And the responsewould be that ‘it is supported (aadhari)’. Then on what basisis it supported? ‘On the basis of dualism (dwaita)’, they willsay. It is in relation to dwaita, that adwaita is there; adwaitais relative (sapeksha). And people call it nirpeksha (withoutdependency)! Does your Atma agree with what I am saying?Your Atma should accept what I am saying, because I am tellingyou the correct thing. I am a man who is beyond taking sides.Those who are involved in partiality can never be true. Youshould listen to those who are not involved in partiality.Do you now understand that non-dualism (adwaita) isdependent (sapeksha)?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: The non-dualism (adwaita), that you believedto be independent (nirpeksha), turned out to be dependent(sapeksha). Do you now realize where you were wrong, upuntil now?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: When those who believe in non-dualism(adwaita), ask me, ‘so, what is the Atma like?’ Then I tellthem, ‘The Atma is not in the form of non-duality (adwaita) atall, and neither is it dualistic (dwaita). The Atma is both dualismand non-dualism (dwaita-adwaita)!’What does dualistic – non-dualistic (dwaita-adwaita)mean? It means that, “by the relative viewpoint”, the Atma isdualistic (dwaita). As long as there is the body, there will alwaysbe this “relative viewpoint”. Do you not have to go toilet? Doyou not have to eat? That is through the relative viewpoint,which is why the Atma is dualistic. And “by the real viewpoint”,the Atma is non-dualistic (adwaita). But when it leaves here togo to moksha (final liberation), it will no longer have an adjectivethere. It only has an adjective, as long as there is the body. Itis because the body exists, that it has these adjectives: dualistic(dwaita), non-dualistic (adwaita). After it has gone to moksha,there is no adjective anymore. By relative viewpoint; ‘I’ amdualistic, and by real viewpoint; ‘I’ am non-dualistic. Therefore,‘I’ am beyond dualism and non-dualism (dwaita-adwaita)! Aslong as the body is there, non-dualism (adwaita) cannot exist onits own.What is the real reason for saying non-dualism (adwaita)?It is so that one does not place the applied awareness (upayog)in the “foreign department” (the non-Self). That was the realintention. But instead, it became misinterpreted. Do not placeyour applied awareness (upayog) in the ‘foreign’, and remainonly in the ‘home’. Home is non-dualistic (adwaita) and foreignis dualistic (dwaita). Whereas right now, you believe that foreignAptavani-8131132Aptavani-8non-dualism (adwaita) exists. And anything that is based onanything else, is considered dependent (sapeksha). And adependent can never turn into an independent (nirpeksha).Therefore, people have defined non-dualism as independent! Ifyou could understand this fact, then you would have the solution.Questioner: But we only believe in the independent(nirpeksha).Dadashri: One should only believe in the independent(nirpeksha). But should you not have to understand theindependent?Questioner: We take non-duality (adwaita) to meanindependent (nirpeksha).Dadashri: Yes. You have done all that on your own.However, its meaning relies on what your mind accepts. Butthat cannot be accepted as the rule, can it? If you want to givea meaning to independent (nirpeksha) per what your mindaccepts, you can do it. But it would not be considered legitimate.I would legitimately say, ‘Is non-dualism (adwaita), supported(aadhari) or is it not supported (niradhari)? And the responsewould be that ‘it is supported (aadhari)’. Then on what basisis it supported? ‘On the basis of dualism (dwaita)’, they willsay. It is in relation to dwaita, that adwaita is there; adwaitais relative (sapeksha). And people call it nirpeksha (withoutdependency)! Does your Atma agree with what I am saying?Your Atma should accept what I am saying, because I am tellingyou the correct thing. I am a man who is beyond taking sides.Those who are involved in partiality can never be true. Youshould listen to those who are not involved in partiality.Do you now understand that non-dualism (adwaita) isdependent (sapeksha)?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: The non-dualism (adwaita), that you believedto be independent (nirpeksha), turned out to be dependent(sapeksha). Do you now realize where you were wrong, upuntil now?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: When those who believe in non-dualism(adwaita), ask me, ‘so, what is the Atma like?’ Then I tellthem, ‘The Atma is not in the form of non-duality (adwaita) atall, and neither is it dualistic (dwaita). The Atma is both dualismand non-dualism (dwaita-adwaita)!’What does dualistic – non-dualistic (dwaita-adwaita)mean? It means that, “by the relative viewpoint”, the Atma isdualistic (dwaita). As long as there is the body, there will alwaysbe this “relative viewpoint”. Do you not have to go toilet? Doyou not have to eat? That is through the relative viewpoint,which is why the Atma is dualistic. And “by the real viewpoint”,the Atma is non-dualistic (adwaita). But when it leaves here togo to moksha (final liberation), it will no longer have an adjectivethere. It only has an adjective, as long as there is the body. Itis because the body exists, that it has these adjectives: dualistic(dwaita), non-dualistic (adwaita). After it has gone to moksha,there is no adjective anymore. By relative viewpoint; ‘I’ amdualistic, and by real viewpoint; ‘I’ am non-dualistic. Therefore,‘I’ am beyond dualism and non-dualism (dwaita-adwaita)! Aslong as the body is there, non-dualism (adwaita) cannot exist onits own.What is the real reason for saying non-dualism (adwaita)?It is so that one does not place the applied awareness (upayog)in the “foreign department” (the non-Self). That was the realintention. But instead, it became misinterpreted. Do not placeyour applied awareness (upayog) in the ‘foreign’, and remainonly in the ‘home’. Home is non-dualistic (adwaita) and foreignis dualistic (dwaita). Whereas right now, you believe that foreignAptavani-8133134Aptavani-8is home. ‘I am this Chandubhai’, is what you say. You have noteven seen ‘home’ yet. When you see ‘home’, there would notbe any worry, frustration and amidst all the externally inducedproblems that cause suffering (upadhi), you will experienceoneness with your Self (samadhi)!Dualism – Non-Dualism; Both Are DualitiesOne man came to me and told me, ‘I have become non-dualistic (adwaita)’. And I said to him, ‘Where did you comeup with that word? What are you calling non-dualistic?’ So hesays, ‘I do not live in the dualism (dwaita)’. ‘Then what do youstay in?’ I asked. Then he says, ‘I only stay in the Atma’.Goodness! How did he become like that? You cannot just staynon-dualistic (adwaita). Non-dualism (adwaita) is supported(aadhari). What is it supported by? It is supported by dualism(dwaita); otherwise it would fall. It is because it is supported bydualism (dwaita), that non-dualism (adwaita) has persisted.When you say that you have become non-dualistic (adwaita),you are essentially casting abhorrence (dwesh) on dualism(dwaita). So what will happen? You will both end up fighting.Then he says, ‘That is correct. But according to our belief non-dualism (adwaita) was independent (nirpeksha)’. Hey! Howcan you call something that which requires support (aadharik),independent (nirpeksha)? Non-dualism is dependent (sapeksha).There are so many words that transcend dualities. Certainwords like compassion (karuna) transcend duality. Whereas theword adwaita (non-dualism), is adwaita, because dwaita(dualism) is there, which is why, it is thought to possess duality(dwandva). Just like profit and loss, and all the two words thatcontradict one another (antonyms), are all considered dualities(dwandva). So because we have dualism (dwaita), we havenon-dualism (adwaita). Therefore, he has not gone beyond duality(dwandva) yet, he is still in duality. Even non-dualism isconsidered duality (dwandva), do you understand that? Just likeprofit-loss is considered a duality; good-bad, happiness-unhappiness, are also considered dualities, and in the same way,this dualism – non-dualism (dwaita-adwaita) is a pair which isalso a duality (dwandva). Just as there is kindness, there willundoubtedly be cruelty as well! So if there is a kind person, youshould also know, ‘O ho ho! There is also cruelty in him’! Andso dualism (dwaita) and non-dualism (adwaita) exist as duality.It is not a state that is beyond duality (dwandvatita). Sosomeone who says, ‘I am non-dualistic (adwaita)’, is still in astate of duality (dwandva). Then how much upadhi (trouble) isthere in that duality (dwandva)?! The person who is non-dualistic(adwaita) will continually be having notions about duality (dwaita)day and night, that this is dualism, this is dualism, this is dualism,and this is what he does throughout his entire day. As if dualismis going to eat him alive?! Therefore this dualism and non-dualismare dualities (dwandva). One has to go even beyond that.You can call it as dwaita if you say, ‘Karma and I; bothare there’. That is called dualism. What those who are non-dualistic (adwaita) say is, ‘It is only I: there is no such thing askarma.’ Therefore, dualism and non-dualism do not exist ontheir own. That is because the Atma is dualistic – non-dualistic(dwaita-adwaita). The Atma cannot only be non-dualistic, andneither can it be just dualistic alone. With respect to the worldlylife (sansar), when it has a connection with worldly interaction(vyavahar), it is dualistic (dwaita); however, if it remains in itsfundamental state; its real form (swaroop), then it is non-dualistic(adwaita). Therefore, when ‘we’ remain in our own Self, ‘we’are completely non-dualistic.When Does the Experience of Non-DualismOccur?Questioner: Can non-dualism (adwaita) be experienced?Who experiences it?Dadashri: Non-dualism can be experienced. Once theexperience of dualism (dwaita) occurs, then comes the experienceAptavani-8133134Aptavani-8is home. ‘I am this Chandubhai’, is what you say. You have noteven seen ‘home’ yet. When you see ‘home’, there would notbe any worry, frustration and amidst all the externally inducedproblems that cause suffering (upadhi), you will experienceoneness with your Self (samadhi)!Dualism – Non-Dualism; Both Are DualitiesOne man came to me and told me, ‘I have become non-dualistic (adwaita)’. And I said to him, ‘Where did you comeup with that word? What are you calling non-dualistic?’ So hesays, ‘I do not live in the dualism (dwaita)’. ‘Then what do youstay in?’ I asked. Then he says, ‘I only stay in the Atma’.Goodness! How did he become like that? You cannot just staynon-dualistic (adwaita). Non-dualism (adwaita) is supported(aadhari). What is it supported by? It is supported by dualism(dwaita); otherwise it would fall. It is because it is supported bydualism (dwaita), that non-dualism (adwaita) has persisted.When you say that you have become non-dualistic (adwaita),you are essentially casting abhorrence (dwesh) on dualism(dwaita). So what will happen? You will both end up fighting.Then he says, ‘That is correct. But according to our belief non-dualism (adwaita) was independent (nirpeksha)’. Hey! Howcan you call something that which requires support (aadharik),independent (nirpeksha)? Non-dualism is dependent (sapeksha).There are so many words that transcend dualities. Certainwords like compassion (karuna) transcend duality. Whereas theword adwaita (non-dualism), is adwaita, because dwaita(dualism) is there, which is why, it is thought to possess duality(dwandva). Just like profit and loss, and all the two words thatcontradict one another (antonyms), are all considered dualities(dwandva). So because we have dualism (dwaita), we havenon-dualism (adwaita). Therefore, he has not gone beyond duality(dwandva) yet, he is still in duality. Even non-dualism isconsidered duality (dwandva), do you understand that? Just likeprofit-loss is considered a duality; good-bad, happiness-unhappiness, are also considered dualities, and in the same way,this dualism – non-dualism (dwaita-adwaita) is a pair which isalso a duality (dwandva). Just as there is kindness, there willundoubtedly be cruelty as well! So if there is a kind person, youshould also know, ‘O ho ho! There is also cruelty in him’! Andso dualism (dwaita) and non-dualism (adwaita) exist as duality.It is not a state that is beyond duality (dwandvatita). Sosomeone who says, ‘I am non-dualistic (adwaita)’, is still in astate of duality (dwandva). Then how much upadhi (trouble) isthere in that duality (dwandva)?! The person who is non-dualistic(adwaita) will continually be having notions about duality (dwaita)day and night, that this is dualism, this is dualism, this is dualism,and this is what he does throughout his entire day. As if dualismis going to eat him alive?! Therefore this dualism and non-dualismare dualities (dwandva). One has to go even beyond that.You can call it as dwaita if you say, ‘Karma and I; bothare there’. That is called dualism. What those who are non-dualistic (adwaita) say is, ‘It is only I: there is no such thing askarma.’ Therefore, dualism and non-dualism do not exist ontheir own. That is because the Atma is dualistic – non-dualistic(dwaita-adwaita). The Atma cannot only be non-dualistic, andneither can it be just dualistic alone. With respect to the worldlylife (sansar), when it has a connection with worldly interaction(vyavahar), it is dualistic (dwaita); however, if it remains in itsfundamental state; its real form (swaroop), then it is non-dualistic(adwaita). Therefore, when ‘we’ remain in our own Self, ‘we’are completely non-dualistic.When Does the Experience of Non-DualismOccur?Questioner: Can non-dualism (adwaita) be experienced?Who experiences it?Dadashri: Non-dualism can be experienced. Once theexperience of dualism (dwaita) occurs, then comes the experienceAptavani-8135136Aptavani-8of non-dualism (adwaita). This worldly life (sansar) is dualisticby nature. After you have had the experience of it, you can thenhave the experience of the non-dualism. When you no longerhave disagreements with your wife, when you do not havedisagreements with your father, and you do not have quarrelswith anyone; if you have such an experience, then you will havethe experience of non-dualism (adwaita). Only he that has theexperience of dualism (dwaita), can have the experience ofnon-dualism (adwaita).What does adwaita mean? That is what one needs toknow! All of this, is for the purpose of knowing the Atma. If youdo not know the Atma, then you will just carry on wandering!And those who exist in duality (dwandva), are all in limbo(wandering about)! Those who are in duality, cannot beconsidered non-dualistic (adwaita). What does duality mean? Itmeans that those who have good-bad, advantage-disadvantage,and that kind of duality, cannot be considered non-dualistic.Become Non-Dualistic: Rise Above Duality!Non-dualism (adwaita) is the name for someone that hasbecome dwandvatita (transcended duality). Non-dualism is notsomething fake. It is because dualism exists, that non-dualism isable to exist. On what basis does it exist?Questioner: It exists on the basis of dualism.Dadashri: Yes, so therefore it is a relative thing, and arelative thing can never become real. It is because of dualism,that it remains non-dualism, it is however, a relative thing. Anda relative thing can never become real. And the Atma is somethingthat is real. So when one talks about non-dualism (adwaita), heis just talking big, but there is no substance in what he says. Ifhe is non-dualistic (adwaita), then we should verify it by askinghim, ‘Sir, tell us whether or not you are beyond duality(dwandvatita)’, and if he says, ‘We are beyond duality’, youshould believe it as correct.He has to become beyond duality (dwandvatita). He hasto rise above these dualities of profit-loss, happiness-unhappiness;he should not be affected by them at all.So whom can you call non-dualistic (adwaita)? It is theone who has become dwandvatita; the one who is beyondduality. Then nothing like advantage or disadvantage would evertouch him. To him, it is the same, whether someone picks hispocket, or showers him with flowers. Whether someone yellsabuse at him or slaps him, it is all the same to him. Then it iscalled non-dualism (adwaita).What Compassion Towards Understandingthe Truth!So you want to understand non-dualism, do you not? Ifyou want the exact understanding, then understand it methodically.Do not compromise your stillness (sthirata). By methodical Imean that whatever ‘we’ say, holds true for the past, the presentand the future. No changes can be made to it. ‘We’ are tellingyou the ultimate thing, through which people will attain the realtruth.The entire issue of non-dualism (adwaita) has infiltratedeverything! So it needs to be said that, ‘anyone wanting tounderstand adwaita, should come here to Dada. Why are youholding on to the wrong thing?’ And if ever someone comesalong to oppose me, then it will not matter to me. It would notmatter to me even if they swore at me. I would give him a meal.And after calming him down, I would make him understandwhat I am saying. Even when he swears at me I am able tosleep; whereas if I were to swear at him, he would not be ableto sleep. So I could not hurt him and besides, I will be able tosleep! So you will have to sort it out, will you not? How longcan this go on? I do not want to do anything in it. I am aninstrumental being (nimit), and I have received this directive(aadesh).Aptavani-8135136Aptavani-8of non-dualism (adwaita). This worldly life (sansar) is dualisticby nature. After you have had the experience of it, you can thenhave the experience of the non-dualism. When you no longerhave disagreements with your wife, when you do not havedisagreements with your father, and you do not have quarrelswith anyone; if you have such an experience, then you will havethe experience of non-dualism (adwaita). Only he that has theexperience of dualism (dwaita), can have the experience ofnon-dualism (adwaita).What does adwaita mean? That is what one needs toknow! All of this, is for the purpose of knowing the Atma. If youdo not know the Atma, then you will just carry on wandering!And those who exist in duality (dwandva), are all in limbo(wandering about)! Those who are in duality, cannot beconsidered non-dualistic (adwaita). What does duality mean? Itmeans that those who have good-bad, advantage-disadvantage,and that kind of duality, cannot be considered non-dualistic.Become Non-Dualistic: Rise Above Duality!Non-dualism (adwaita) is the name for someone that hasbecome dwandvatita (transcended duality). Non-dualism is notsomething fake. It is because dualism exists, that non-dualism isable to exist. On what basis does it exist?Questioner: It exists on the basis of dualism.Dadashri: Yes, so therefore it is a relative thing, and arelative thing can never become real. It is because of dualism,that it remains non-dualism, it is however, a relative thing. Anda relative thing can never become real. And the Atma is somethingthat is real. So when one talks about non-dualism (adwaita), heis just talking big, but there is no substance in what he says. Ifhe is non-dualistic (adwaita), then we should verify it by askinghim, ‘Sir, tell us whether or not you are beyond duality(dwandvatita)’, and if he says, ‘We are beyond duality’, youshould believe it as correct.He has to become beyond duality (dwandvatita). He hasto rise above these dualities of profit-loss, happiness-unhappiness;he should not be affected by them at all.So whom can you call non-dualistic (adwaita)? It is theone who has become dwandvatita; the one who is beyondduality. Then nothing like advantage or disadvantage would evertouch him. To him, it is the same, whether someone picks hispocket, or showers him with flowers. Whether someone yellsabuse at him or slaps him, it is all the same to him. Then it iscalled non-dualism (adwaita).What Compassion Towards Understandingthe Truth!So you want to understand non-dualism, do you not? Ifyou want the exact understanding, then understand it methodically.Do not compromise your stillness (sthirata). By methodical Imean that whatever ‘we’ say, holds true for the past, the presentand the future. No changes can be made to it. ‘We’ are tellingyou the ultimate thing, through which people will attain the realtruth.The entire issue of non-dualism (adwaita) has infiltratedeverything! So it needs to be said that, ‘anyone wanting tounderstand adwaita, should come here to Dada. Why are youholding on to the wrong thing?’ And if ever someone comesalong to oppose me, then it will not matter to me. It would notmatter to me even if they swore at me. I would give him a meal.And after calming him down, I would make him understandwhat I am saying. Even when he swears at me I am able tosleep; whereas if I were to swear at him, he would not be ableto sleep. So I could not hurt him and besides, I will be able tosleep! So you will have to sort it out, will you not? How longcan this go on? I do not want to do anything in it. I am aninstrumental being (nimit), and I have received this directive(aadesh).Aptavani-8137138Aptavani-8Questioner: Whose directive (aadesh) have you received?Dadashri: I have received the directive of the presenttime and space (deshkaad)!Questioner: This talk of yours is scientific!Dadashri: Yes, it is scientific talk. That is because thereis no superior above me, to give me orders (aadesh). But I havereceived orders from time and place (deshkaad). When peoplehear the word orders, someone will always assume that I havea superior above me (upari). No, I do not have any superior atall. Moreover, in the worldly interaction (vyavahar), I amlaghuttam (the lowliest of lowliest; smallest of all), but reallyspeaking I am the most superior of all (guruttam).So where is the problem? I do not want to be superior(guruttam) in worldly interaction (vyavahar), because all thosethat were superior in worldly interaction (guruttam in vyavahar),ended up, with four legs, from having two legs. That is the rule!That is if you are above others in worldly interaction, you willundoubtedly end up with four legs. And only if you have thehumblest of intent (laghuttam bhaav) in your worldly interaction,will there be a solution.Insistence on a Single Viewpoint ObstructsAtmagnanNow, one says that the Atma is not the doer, while theother says that the Atma is the doer, so they are both stuck ina hole. That one is stuck in the non-dualism (adwaita) hole, andthis one is stuck in the dualism (dwaita) hole! The Atma is notlike that. The Atma is dualistic – non-dualistic (dwaita-adwaita).On the grounds of the body (the non-Self), it is also dualistic,and as the Self, it is also non-dualistic. So if someone takes theadwaita (non-dualistic) hole, then he cannot prove the Atma.The one who is non-dualistic (adwaita) will continually haveconfusing thoughts about the one who is dualistic (dwaita), andthe one that is dualistic, will continually have confusing thoughtsabout the one who is non-dualistic. Now, they cannot go beyondthis confusion based on ego (vikalp). When you say that theAtma is dualistic – non-dualistic (dwaita-adwaita), it meansthat you have gone beyond the confusion that is based on theego (vikalp), and that is called an egoless state (nirvikalp). Therefore, the Gnani Purush says it exactly as it is; thatthe Atma is dualistic – non-dualistic (dwaita-adwaita); it isdualistic (dwaita) and it is also non-dualistic (adwaita). Howlong will this adjective of dwaita-adwaita (dualistic – non-dualistic) apply? While it is involved in the worldly life, it isdualistic, and when it is contemplating on its own Self (Swa-dhyan), then it is non-dualistic. There is the body and there isalso Absolute Knowledge (Keval Gnan); therefore it isconsidered dualistic – non-dualistic (dwaita-adwaita). Peoplesee the man and they also see the Absolute Gnani (KevalGnani). However one sees it; that is how it will appear! Therefore,the Atma never becomes non-dualistic (adwaita). That isbecause, when it leaves the body from here, and attains finalliberation (moksha), then there in Siddha gati (abode ofLiberated Souls), it will lose its adjective. The adjective is thereas long as the body is there. Therefore we have to accept theseadjectives. Those who are stuck in the hole of non-dualism(adwaita), would be considered ekantik (adhering to a singleviewpoint, while excluding all other viewpoints), and if they arestuck in the hole of dualism (dwaita), they are also consideredas adhering to one single viewpoint (ekantik). And if you acceptany path that is ekantik, then final liberation will never come intoyour hands. If you want to attain the Truth, one has to side withnon-insistence on one’s own truth or viewpoint (niragraha).Insistence (aagraha) itself is ego.Truth (Satya) certainly exists in everyone, but onlyaccording to one’s own degree. Each one’s truth is according tohis own measure. And the truth according to the worldAptavani-8137138Aptavani-8Questioner: Whose directive (aadesh) have you received?Dadashri: I have received the directive of the presenttime and space (deshkaad)!Questioner: This talk of yours is scientific!Dadashri: Yes, it is scientific talk. That is because thereis no superior above me, to give me orders (aadesh). But I havereceived orders from time and place (deshkaad). When peoplehear the word orders, someone will always assume that I havea superior above me (upari). No, I do not have any superior atall. Moreover, in the worldly interaction (vyavahar), I amlaghuttam (the lowliest of lowliest; smallest of all), but reallyspeaking I am the most superior of all (guruttam).So where is the problem? I do not want to be superior(guruttam) in worldly interaction (vyavahar), because all thosethat were superior in worldly interaction (guruttam in vyavahar),ended up, with four legs, from having two legs. That is the rule!That is if you are above others in worldly interaction, you willundoubtedly end up with four legs. And only if you have thehumblest of intent (laghuttam bhaav) in your worldly interaction,will there be a solution.Insistence on a Single Viewpoint ObstructsAtmagnanNow, one says that the Atma is not the doer, while theother says that the Atma is the doer, so they are both stuck ina hole. That one is stuck in the non-dualism (adwaita) hole, andthis one is stuck in the dualism (dwaita) hole! The Atma is notlike that. The Atma is dualistic – non-dualistic (dwaita-adwaita).On the grounds of the body (the non-Self), it is also dualistic,and as the Self, it is also non-dualistic. So if someone takes theadwaita (non-dualistic) hole, then he cannot prove the Atma.The one who is non-dualistic (adwaita) will continually haveconfusing thoughts about the one who is dualistic (dwaita), andthe one that is dualistic, will continually have confusing thoughtsabout the one who is non-dualistic. Now, they cannot go beyondthis confusion based on ego (vikalp). When you say that theAtma is dualistic – non-dualistic (dwaita-adwaita), it meansthat you have gone beyond the confusion that is based on theego (vikalp), and that is called an egoless state (nirvikalp). Therefore, the Gnani Purush says it exactly as it is; thatthe Atma is dualistic – non-dualistic (dwaita-adwaita); it isdualistic (dwaita) and it is also non-dualistic (adwaita). Howlong will this adjective of dwaita-adwaita (dualistic – non-dualistic) apply? While it is involved in the worldly life, it isdualistic, and when it is contemplating on its own Self (Swa-dhyan), then it is non-dualistic. There is the body and there isalso Absolute Knowledge (Keval Gnan); therefore it isconsidered dualistic – non-dualistic (dwaita-adwaita). Peoplesee the man and they also see the Absolute Gnani (KevalGnani). However one sees it; that is how it will appear! Therefore,the Atma never becomes non-dualistic (adwaita). That isbecause, when it leaves the body from here, and attains finalliberation (moksha), then there in Siddha gati (abode ofLiberated Souls), it will lose its adjective. The adjective is thereas long as the body is there. Therefore we have to accept theseadjectives. Those who are stuck in the hole of non-dualism(adwaita), would be considered ekantik (adhering to a singleviewpoint, while excluding all other viewpoints), and if they arestuck in the hole of dualism (dwaita), they are also consideredas adhering to one single viewpoint (ekantik). And if you acceptany path that is ekantik, then final liberation will never come intoyour hands. If you want to attain the Truth, one has to side withnon-insistence on one’s own truth or viewpoint (niragraha).Insistence (aagraha) itself is ego.Truth (Satya) certainly exists in everyone, but onlyaccording to one’s own degree. Each one’s truth is according tohis own measure. And the truth according to the worldAptavani-8139140Aptavani-8(vyavaharik satya), in the Lord’s language, is untruth (asatya).When you say, ‘I am Chandubhai, I am his uncle’, and all that,it is untruth in the language of the Lord. It is dependent and withexpectation (sapeksha); it is not independent or void ofexpectation (nirpeksha).It is wrong to get caught up in partiality (pakshapati - onone side; to side with), partiality means standard. And to stay ina standard, would be considered adherence to one’s own truth(ekantik). Nevertheless, people should stick to their own rules.However, in the Ultimate state (aatyantik), there are no rules;it is all-encompassing and accepting of all points of view(anekant). There is no insistence or stubbornness (aagraha) init whatsoever. It carries on with exactness. With it, you canreach ultimate salvation. Otherwise, all these sects anddenominations, are just standards. When one becomes impartialand does not side with any viewpoint (nishpakshapati), then itbecomes worth it. When you become impartial, then you are outof standard. I am only here to tell you everything that is correct. Andif you say to me, ‘No, I am right.’ then I would not sit aroundwith you any longer, I do not have that sort of time. Then Iwould not get into an argument with you. I would tell you, ‘Byyour viewpoint, you are correct’, saying that, I (‘we’) would letit go. If you want to understand truth, I am here to help youunderstand; or else time would be wasted, and it would be awaste of time and energy! Many have misunderstood the Gnanbecause of their own perceptions. How can I go around modifyingeveryone? If you need help, then you should ask me.That is why you need to understand dualism (dwaita) andnon-dualism (adwaita). In this time-cycle (kaad), how can yousay non-dualism? Non-dualism did not exist even before! Besides,even I cannot say non-dualism.There is no sense in accepting anything without first puttingit to the test. If you do not know how to test it, you should notjust say, ‘this is how it is.’ Even the foreign scientists do not say,‘this is the way it is.’ They will say, ‘this is how we see it.’Brahma Is Satya, the World Is Also Satya,but...This whole concept is fundamentally wrong; the wholething is illusion (bhranti)! Even then it is not entirely wrongeither. What if you are sleeping with your mouth open andsomeone puts a little chili pepper in it? Will it feel like an illusion(mithya) then? They say, ‘Brahma satya, jagat mithya’ meaningthe Atma is real (Brahma satya) and the world is an illusion(jagat mithya), would it still appear as an illusion, then? Thisworld (jagat) is relative correct. And the Atma (Brahma) isreally (real) correct. That is the only difference. Now if you hada toothache, try saying, ‘illusion, illusion (mithya, mithya)’. Haveyou ever had a toothache? Would you say that it is mithya atthe time? Do they not say that? Therefore, the Atma is true(Brahma satya), and the world is also true (jagat satya). Youhave to get treatment for your tooth. If you do not, then it willbecome a problem.Questioner: So is this world true (satya) or is it anillusion (mithya)?Dadashri: Do you think that it is true (satya) or do youthink that it is an illusion (mithya)? How does it seem to you?What does your experience tell you?Questioner: An illusion.Dadashri: Do you feel that it is an illusion? Now whensomeone swears at you, does it not affect you? And whensomeone slaps you, does it not affect you?Questioner: It does affect me.Dadashri: So how can you call the world an illusionAptavani-8139140Aptavani-8(vyavaharik satya), in the Lord’s language, is untruth (asatya).When you say, ‘I am Chandubhai, I am his uncle’, and all that,it is untruth in the language of the Lord. It is dependent and withexpectation (sapeksha); it is not independent or void ofexpectation (nirpeksha).It is wrong to get caught up in partiality (pakshapati - onone side; to side with), partiality means standard. And to stay ina standard, would be considered adherence to one’s own truth(ekantik). Nevertheless, people should stick to their own rules.However, in the Ultimate state (aatyantik), there are no rules;it is all-encompassing and accepting of all points of view(anekant). There is no insistence or stubbornness (aagraha) init whatsoever. It carries on with exactness. With it, you canreach ultimate salvation. Otherwise, all these sects anddenominations, are just standards. When one becomes impartialand does not side with any viewpoint (nishpakshapati), then itbecomes worth it. When you become impartial, then you are outof standard. I am only here to tell you everything that is correct. Andif you say to me, ‘No, I am right.’ then I would not sit aroundwith you any longer, I do not have that sort of time. Then Iwould not get into an argument with you. I would tell you, ‘Byyour viewpoint, you are correct’, saying that, I (‘we’) would letit go. If you want to understand truth, I am here to help youunderstand; or else time would be wasted, and it would be awaste of time and energy! Many have misunderstood the Gnanbecause of their own perceptions. How can I go around modifyingeveryone? If you need help, then you should ask me.That is why you need to understand dualism (dwaita) andnon-dualism (adwaita). In this time-cycle (kaad), how can yousay non-dualism? Non-dualism did not exist even before! Besides,even I cannot say non-dualism.There is no sense in accepting anything without first puttingit to the test. If you do not know how to test it, you should notjust say, ‘this is how it is.’ Even the foreign scientists do not say,‘this is the way it is.’ They will say, ‘this is how we see it.’Brahma Is Satya, the World Is Also Satya,but...This whole concept is fundamentally wrong; the wholething is illusion (bhranti)! Even then it is not entirely wrongeither. What if you are sleeping with your mouth open andsomeone puts a little chili pepper in it? Will it feel like an illusion(mithya) then? They say, ‘Brahma satya, jagat mithya’ meaningthe Atma is real (Brahma satya) and the world is an illusion(jagat mithya), would it still appear as an illusion, then? Thisworld (jagat) is relative correct. And the Atma (Brahma) isreally (real) correct. That is the only difference. Now if you hada toothache, try saying, ‘illusion, illusion (mithya, mithya)’. Haveyou ever had a toothache? Would you say that it is mithya atthe time? Do they not say that? Therefore, the Atma is true(Brahma satya), and the world is also true (jagat satya). Youhave to get treatment for your tooth. If you do not, then it willbecome a problem.Questioner: So is this world true (satya) or is it anillusion (mithya)?Dadashri: Do you think that it is true (satya) or do youthink that it is an illusion (mithya)? How does it seem to you?What does your experience tell you?Questioner: An illusion.Dadashri: Do you feel that it is an illusion? Now whensomeone swears at you, does it not affect you? And whensomeone slaps you, does it not affect you?Questioner: It does affect me.Dadashri: So how can you call the world an illusionAptavani-8141142Aptavani-8(mithya)? How can you call something which affects you, anillusion? It has an effect; therefore the world is not an illusion! Does the mother-in-law not cry when her son-in-lawdies? Or is it not a custom in your culture?Questioner: Yes, she will cry.Dadashri: Yes, how can you say that it is an illusion(mithya)? Therefore this world is true (satya), but it is relativetruth (vinashi satya).The world is not an illusion at all! The world is not anythinglike an illusion (mithya). If the world were an illusion, then thesepeople would have taken off and abandoned it a long time ago!This world is real (satya). If it were an illusion, then if a man wassleeping with his mouth gaped open at night, like this, whatwould happen if you threw a chili pepper into it from a distance?Will he scream or not? Would you have to go and wake him upfrom his sleep? Why? Would it affect him even if you do notwake him up? How would he be able to tell? Therefore, if itwere an illusion, then this would never happen! Just look, is alsothe world not real? But the world is a relative truth: the Atma(Brahma) is real truth.Questioner: It is illuminated by the light of Brahma(Atma), is that why it is relative truth?Dadashri: Yes, it is illuminated by its light, which is whyit is a relative truth (satya). And because it is a relative truth, itis indeed a truth, however, it is an temporary (vinashi) truth;whereas the Atma (Brahma) is an eternal (avinashi) truth.If the world were really an illusion (mithya), then peoplewould have elected for the Atma. But even this world is true(satya). That is why they do not let go of the world. Doesanyone outside, speak of letting it go? Someone will say, ‘Comeon, let us go shopping.’ I would say, ‘Come I will give youmoksha (liberation).’ And he would reply, ‘Forget that! Just letme run my business happily.’Therefore, the world is real (satya). ‘My wife, my children’,does he not talk like that? And he becomes obsessed withwoman; he dies for her and even commits suicide! So if it werean illusion (mithya), would anyone do that? Illusion (mithya) –even the pesticide to kill bedbugs is not an illusion. If you drankit, would you not know whether or not it is an illusion? And ifyou did drink it, would it not cause a commotion? ThereforeBrahma (Soul) is real (satya), and the world is also real. Theworld is a relative truth (satya), and Brahma is a real truth.You Will Have to Understand the FactsQuestioner: So the interpretation of the term, ‘The worldis an illusion (mithya)’ that they give us, is completely wrongthen, is it not?Dadashri: In whichever time-cycle (kaad), that meaningwas necessary, it was interpreted in that time-cycle. But exactly(in truth), this world has never been unreal (mithya).Questioner: So is it because of maya that it appears asmithya?Dadashri: This cannot be maya! What would you say isillusion (maya)? If someone does magic, and shows you somerupees (money) in your hands, but even then it has no effect onyou at all; that is called maya. Maya as people understand it tobe - this world is not like that maya.Maya (illusion) is to not understand the vastu (The Self:it has dravya-matter, guna-property and paryaya-phases);exactly as it is. That is called maya (deceit). It is this maya thatdoes not allow you to understand anything exactly as it is: thatis what you would call maya. What do people understand aboutmaya? They will say, ‘This is all how it is, it is all just maya’:Aptavani-8141142Aptavani-8(mithya)? How can you call something which affects you, anillusion? It has an effect; therefore the world is not an illusion! Does the mother-in-law not cry when her son-in-lawdies? Or is it not a custom in your culture?Questioner: Yes, she will cry.Dadashri: Yes, how can you say that it is an illusion(mithya)? Therefore this world is true (satya), but it is relativetruth (vinashi satya).The world is not an illusion at all! The world is not anythinglike an illusion (mithya). If the world were an illusion, then thesepeople would have taken off and abandoned it a long time ago!This world is real (satya). If it were an illusion, then if a man wassleeping with his mouth gaped open at night, like this, whatwould happen if you threw a chili pepper into it from a distance?Will he scream or not? Would you have to go and wake him upfrom his sleep? Why? Would it affect him even if you do notwake him up? How would he be able to tell? Therefore, if itwere an illusion, then this would never happen! Just look, is alsothe world not real? But the world is a relative truth: the Atma(Brahma) is real truth.Questioner: It is illuminated by the light of Brahma(Atma), is that why it is relative truth?Dadashri: Yes, it is illuminated by its light, which is whyit is a relative truth (satya). And because it is a relative truth, itis indeed a truth, however, it is an temporary (vinashi) truth;whereas the Atma (Brahma) is an eternal (avinashi) truth.If the world were really an illusion (mithya), then peoplewould have elected for the Atma. But even this world is true(satya). That is why they do not let go of the world. Doesanyone outside, speak of letting it go? Someone will say, ‘Comeon, let us go shopping.’ I would say, ‘Come I will give youmoksha (liberation).’ And he would reply, ‘Forget that! Just letme run my business happily.’Therefore, the world is real (satya). ‘My wife, my children’,does he not talk like that? And he becomes obsessed withwoman; he dies for her and even commits suicide! So if it werean illusion (mithya), would anyone do that? Illusion (mithya) –even the pesticide to kill bedbugs is not an illusion. If you drankit, would you not know whether or not it is an illusion? And ifyou did drink it, would it not cause a commotion? ThereforeBrahma (Soul) is real (satya), and the world is also real. Theworld is a relative truth (satya), and Brahma is a real truth.You Will Have to Understand the FactsQuestioner: So the interpretation of the term, ‘The worldis an illusion (mithya)’ that they give us, is completely wrongthen, is it not?Dadashri: In whichever time-cycle (kaad), that meaningwas necessary, it was interpreted in that time-cycle. But exactly(in truth), this world has never been unreal (mithya).Questioner: So is it because of maya that it appears asmithya?Dadashri: This cannot be maya! What would you say isillusion (maya)? If someone does magic, and shows you somerupees (money) in your hands, but even then it has no effect onyou at all; that is called maya. Maya as people understand it tobe - this world is not like that maya.Maya (illusion) is to not understand the vastu (The Self:it has dravya-matter, guna-property and paryaya-phases);exactly as it is. That is called maya (deceit). It is this maya thatdoes not allow you to understand anything exactly as it is: thatis what you would call maya. What do people understand aboutmaya? They will say, ‘This is all how it is, it is all just maya’:Aptavani-8143144Aptavani-8it is not like that. Maya means that it does not let you understandvastu (The Self) exactly as it is – that is called maya.Otherwise, the Atma is real (Brahma satya) and the worldis unreal (jagat mithya), they said all that to make peoplerenunciate (tyaagi): ‘that my dear fellow, all this is unreal (mithya),what are you going to get out of this unreality (mithya)? Soforsake your worldly ways, become a tyaagi, renounce it andmove ahead.’ It was with this intention that they said that. Butreally one should say what the world is, as it is. So then it wouldbe easier to climb that way! Or else, not everyone would acceptillusion (mithya)! Only some people will accept unreality(mithya). They may speak it, but no one accepts illusion. If thislittle boy is given a kite in his hands, would he throw it away?We may say to him, ‘it is not real (mithya), throw it away.’Would he throw it away? He would not throw it away. Therefore,the world is a relative truth (satya). Yes, no one will say, that itis a real truth (satya). Because it can readily tear, can it not?And at that very moment the affection for it instantly goes awayby itself. Whereas with the eternal element (avinashi tattva),there is no question of it tearing.So this world is not false (mithya) either. The world isrelative correct and the Atma is real correct. Relative correctmeans it is temporary correct. It is only there for a certain periodof time. Some may last for a hundred years; some will last forfive-hundred years, some will last a thousand years, some willlast five thousand years, while some may last for five years, orthey may even last for a single year. Things that last for a certainperiod of time; are all relative correct, and things that prevailsthrough past, present and future time (trikaad), are real correct!Some people come and tell me, ‘No, but the world is justan illusion (mithya)!’ Then I would tell them, that if the world isan illusion, do they see anyone throwing money away in thestreets? If you go out and about in the streets, would you findmoney laying about? People lose their money, do they not? Theylose money and then they cannot find it. So if the world werean illusion, then no one would pick up the money! That is whythe world is not an illusion, it is indeed truth (satya). However,it is a relative truth (satya), and it is temporary (vinashi).Brahma (the Self) is real correct. And everything elsethat you see with your eyes, that you experience through thefive senses, is all relative correct! There is absolutely no wrongthing in this world, however as long as you need materialhappiness (sukh); fleeting (vinashi) happiness, then you shouldstick to the relative truth (satya) and carry on wandering aroundin the relative. And there is so much misery and externallyinduced suffering (upadhi) behind all the worldly, materialhappiness (bhautik sukh), that one only invites difficulties.When a person experiences this struggle, then he understandshow he endures it! And if you want eternal happiness (avinashisukh), then go to where there is eternal truth; truth that existsfor past, present and future time (trikaad). The relative is theforeign department and the real is the home department. So ifyou want to go home, then go home, and if you want to stayin the foreign, then stay in the foreign. But if you believe thatthe foreign is home; you will get nowhere.Having Attained the Eternal Truth, theRelative Truth RemainsSatya (true) and mithya (untrue) are really two things,right? Or is it just one thing? Now I will explain to you whatsatya is. What is your name?Questioner: Chandubhai.Dadashri: Now, are you really Chandubhai?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Yes, so that is true (satya). Even others saythat this is really Chandubhai. Your father would even say, ‘thisreally is Chandubhai.’ Therefore, that is true. However, it is aAptavani-8143144Aptavani-8it is not like that. Maya means that it does not let you understandvastu (The Self) exactly as it is – that is called maya.Otherwise, the Atma is real (Brahma satya) and the worldis unreal (jagat mithya), they said all that to make peoplerenunciate (tyaagi): ‘that my dear fellow, all this is unreal (mithya),what are you going to get out of this unreality (mithya)? Soforsake your worldly ways, become a tyaagi, renounce it andmove ahead.’ It was with this intention that they said that. Butreally one should say what the world is, as it is. So then it wouldbe easier to climb that way! Or else, not everyone would acceptillusion (mithya)! Only some people will accept unreality(mithya). They may speak it, but no one accepts illusion. If thislittle boy is given a kite in his hands, would he throw it away?We may say to him, ‘it is not real (mithya), throw it away.’Would he throw it away? He would not throw it away. Therefore,the world is a relative truth (satya). Yes, no one will say, that itis a real truth (satya). Because it can readily tear, can it not?And at that very moment the affection for it instantly goes awayby itself. Whereas with the eternal element (avinashi tattva),there is no question of it tearing.So this world is not false (mithya) either. The world isrelative correct and the Atma is real correct. Relative correctmeans it is temporary correct. It is only there for a certain periodof time. Some may last for a hundred years; some will last forfive-hundred years, some will last a thousand years, some willlast five thousand years, while some may last for five years, orthey may even last for a single year. Things that last for a certainperiod of time; are all relative correct, and things that prevailsthrough past, present and future time (trikaad), are real correct!Some people come and tell me, ‘No, but the world is justan illusion (mithya)!’ Then I would tell them, that if the world isan illusion, do they see anyone throwing money away in thestreets? If you go out and about in the streets, would you findmoney laying about? People lose their money, do they not? Theylose money and then they cannot find it. So if the world werean illusion, then no one would pick up the money! That is whythe world is not an illusion, it is indeed truth (satya). However,it is a relative truth (satya), and it is temporary (vinashi).Brahma (the Self) is real correct. And everything elsethat you see with your eyes, that you experience through thefive senses, is all relative correct! There is absolutely no wrongthing in this world, however as long as you need materialhappiness (sukh); fleeting (vinashi) happiness, then you shouldstick to the relative truth (satya) and carry on wandering aroundin the relative. And there is so much misery and externallyinduced suffering (upadhi) behind all the worldly, materialhappiness (bhautik sukh), that one only invites difficulties.When a person experiences this struggle, then he understandshow he endures it! And if you want eternal happiness (avinashisukh), then go to where there is eternal truth; truth that existsfor past, present and future time (trikaad). The relative is theforeign department and the real is the home department. So ifyou want to go home, then go home, and if you want to stayin the foreign, then stay in the foreign. But if you believe thatthe foreign is home; you will get nowhere.Having Attained the Eternal Truth, theRelative Truth RemainsSatya (true) and mithya (untrue) are really two things,right? Or is it just one thing? Now I will explain to you whatsatya is. What is your name?Questioner: Chandubhai.Dadashri: Now, are you really Chandubhai?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Yes, so that is true (satya). Even others saythat this is really Chandubhai. Your father would even say, ‘thisreally is Chandubhai.’ Therefore, that is true. However, it is aAptavani-8145146Aptavani-8temporary truth. The truth (satya) of the world will be acceptedin courts, but the Lord will not accept it.Now, really you are not Chandubhai. Chandubhai is yourname, is it not? Your name is Chandubhai, and you are Chandubhai– do you see a contradiction between the two?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: So the world’s truth, according to the Lord, isa temporary truth. This name, this form and everything else thatis considered real (satya), is all temporary (vinashi), as far asthe Lord is concerned. And the Lord’s Sat (Truth), that whichis in sat-chit-anand; that Truth (Sat) is eternal (avinashi). I willhelp you attain the eternal Truth, and thereafter, this truth (satya)will disappear!What does Sat mean? It means permanent. Then chitmeans knowledge and vision (gnan-darshan). And if knowledge-vision (gnan-darshan) stays permanent, then the bliss (anand)stays forever. Did you understand?Now do you understand truth (satya) and untruth(mithya)? Or did you not understand? There is both truth in thisand untruth in this. What you believe is truth (satya), has turnedout to be false (mithya). But that unreal (mithya) and the realtruth also happen to be separate as well! This Chandubhai whichused to be the truth, has now become false (mithya).What should the real Truth (Sat) be like? This Chandubhaiis ‘relative correct’. And who is the real correct? That issomething you still need to find out. That is what I am going toshow you, that is the real Truth (Sat); which is always the truth!Do you want to realize the eternal Truth (Sat), or not? Or atanother time, or it does not matter when it happens? Your hairis still black, so if you are not in a hurry, then you do not haveto! Those with gray hair, have worries! So, you want to get yourwork done too? Is that right?Ignorance Shrouds the BrahmaAll these scriptures have been written, for the purpose ofknowing Brahma (the Self; God). It is for the attainment ofBrahma, that they were written. And since people have notattained Brahma, they are wandering about relentlessly! Untilthe ignorance (agnanta) of one’s own Self (swaroop) goesaway, nothing will be resolved. Everything else is just imaginationor whim (kalpana). There is no end to the imaginings (kalpana)that people have drawn up.Questioner: Then who obstructs the attainment of Brahma(Self)?Dadashri: The obstruction (badhak) is ignorance (agnan)!Impurity (mudd), difficulties due to illusion (vikshep) andignorance (agnan), are the three things that are obstructions. Sowhat do these people do? They just keep on trying to get rid ofimpurity (mudd) and vikshep. But nowhere do they try to getrid of ignorance (agnan). Now, why is it that no effort is beingmade to get rid of ignorance (agnan)? That is because, thereare no Gnani Purush around. Only rarely, once in thousands ofyears does a Gnani Purush’s avatar (incarnation) occur!Otherwise, there is no Gnani. If there is a Gnani, then theignorance will go, and when the ignorance (agnan) is gone, theneverything is gone. Therefore, the biggest cause of obstruction isignorance. Once that ignorance is gone, one has the realizationof ‘Who am I?’ And when that it is realized; the awareness willnever leave.Questioner: So can you say that ego (ahamkar) is acovering (avaran) over the attainment of Brahma (Self-realization)?Dadashri: Yes, it is true that the ego (ahamkar) is acovering (avaran), but the ego is not considered a covering.There are so many other things that are coverings. It is not justthe ahamkar (ego) alone. The main covering is ignoranceAptavani-8145146Aptavani-8temporary truth. The truth (satya) of the world will be acceptedin courts, but the Lord will not accept it.Now, really you are not Chandubhai. Chandubhai is yourname, is it not? Your name is Chandubhai, and you are Chandubhai– do you see a contradiction between the two?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: So the world’s truth, according to the Lord, isa temporary truth. This name, this form and everything else thatis considered real (satya), is all temporary (vinashi), as far asthe Lord is concerned. And the Lord’s Sat (Truth), that whichis in sat-chit-anand; that Truth (Sat) is eternal (avinashi). I willhelp you attain the eternal Truth, and thereafter, this truth (satya)will disappear!What does Sat mean? It means permanent. Then chitmeans knowledge and vision (gnan-darshan). And if knowledge-vision (gnan-darshan) stays permanent, then the bliss (anand)stays forever. Did you understand?Now do you understand truth (satya) and untruth(mithya)? Or did you not understand? There is both truth in thisand untruth in this. What you believe is truth (satya), has turnedout to be false (mithya). But that unreal (mithya) and the realtruth also happen to be separate as well! This Chandubhai whichused to be the truth, has now become false (mithya).What should the real Truth (Sat) be like? This Chandubhaiis ‘relative correct’. And who is the real correct? That issomething you still need to find out. That is what I am going toshow you, that is the real Truth (Sat); which is always the truth!Do you want to realize the eternal Truth (Sat), or not? Or atanother time, or it does not matter when it happens? Your hairis still black, so if you are not in a hurry, then you do not haveto! Those with gray hair, have worries! So, you want to get yourwork done too? Is that right?Ignorance Shrouds the BrahmaAll these scriptures have been written, for the purpose ofknowing Brahma (the Self; God). It is for the attainment ofBrahma, that they were written. And since people have notattained Brahma, they are wandering about relentlessly! Untilthe ignorance (agnanta) of one’s own Self (swaroop) goesaway, nothing will be resolved. Everything else is just imaginationor whim (kalpana). There is no end to the imaginings (kalpana)that people have drawn up.Questioner: Then who obstructs the attainment of Brahma(Self)?Dadashri: The obstruction (badhak) is ignorance (agnan)!Impurity (mudd), difficulties due to illusion (vikshep) andignorance (agnan), are the three things that are obstructions. Sowhat do these people do? They just keep on trying to get rid ofimpurity (mudd) and vikshep. But nowhere do they try to getrid of ignorance (agnan). Now, why is it that no effort is beingmade to get rid of ignorance (agnan)? That is because, thereare no Gnani Purush around. Only rarely, once in thousands ofyears does a Gnani Purush’s avatar (incarnation) occur!Otherwise, there is no Gnani. If there is a Gnani, then theignorance will go, and when the ignorance (agnan) is gone, theneverything is gone. Therefore, the biggest cause of obstruction isignorance. Once that ignorance is gone, one has the realizationof ‘Who am I?’ And when that it is realized; the awareness willnever leave.Questioner: So can you say that ego (ahamkar) is acovering (avaran) over the attainment of Brahma (Self-realization)?Dadashri: Yes, it is true that the ego (ahamkar) is acovering (avaran), but the ego is not considered a covering.There are so many other things that are coverings. It is not justthe ahamkar (ego) alone. The main covering is ignoranceAptavani-8147148Aptavani-8(agnanta) of one’s own swaroop (the Self). If for just once,you come and know ‘who you are’ from ‘us’ (the GnaniPurush), then that ignorance will be dispelled. Then there shouldbe no problem whatsoever.Questioner: What is the fruit of attaining the Brahma(Self)?Dadashri: The fruit of attaining Brahma, is a state ofabsolute bliss (parmanand). Despite the body, you will enjoy astate like Janak Videhi (a Self-realized king); a godlike state!The worldly life (sansar) will no longer touch you or affect you.One would not be touched by someone placing a garland aroundhis neck, or someone throwing stones at him; even then it wouldnot touch him.The Difference between the Vision of Godand the Vision of the SelfQuestioner: What is the difference between the vision ofGod (Brahma darshan) and the vision of the Self (Atmadarshan)?Dadashri: There is a big difference, between the vision ofthe Self (Atma darshan) and the vision of God (Brahmadarshan). You will have to go beyond the vision of God. Whenyour internal intent (bhaav) transcends the past, present andfuture time (trikaadi); it is called the vision of God; trikaadi.And the Atma is the Absolute Soul (Parmatma) anyways; if aperson ever attains the fundamental nature (swaroop) of theSelf, he truly is the Absolute Self. Even God (Brahma) becomesAbsolute God (Parabrahma), for he has come into trikaadibhaav (continuous intent).First Comes Brahmanishtha, Then Atmanishtha!There is even a difference, between the knowledge ofGod (Brahmagnan) and the Knowledge of the Self(Atmagnan).The knowledge of God (Brahmagnan) is the gateway tothe Knowledge of the Self (Atmagnan). The Knowledge of theSelf occurs after one enters the Knowledge of God.Questioner: What is the difference between the two?Dadashri: When the knowledge of God occurs, it is theresult of utilizing sadhan (tools: scripture, worship, gurus, penanceetc.), in order to bring about focused concentration (ekagrata)of one’s own swaroop (the Self). But what is the Self (swaroop)?That awareness has not attained. Awareness of the Self happensonly upon the attainment of Knowledge of the Self (Atmagnan).It is considered knowledge of God (Brahmagnan) from thetime one has knowledge of the non-Self (abrahma). What otherknowledge (gnan) remains, after one has knowledge of the non-Self? The answer is Brahmagnan. Brahmagnan occurs whenfaith and devotion (nishtha) with the worldly life (sansar) leaves,after which, the devotion (nishtha) to God (Brahma) sets in.What do people have faith and devotion to at the moment? Itis only for worldly happiness; their faith and devotion (nishtha)is with the pleasures of the five senses.If a person’s devotion changes, so that he no longer findshappiness (sukh) in worldly things, and he feels that the material(bhautik) happiness is not good, and that happiness only liesjust in the Atma; happiness is only in God; when he decides this,it is then that he becomes Brahmanishtha (faith; devotionestablished in God). From the time faith is established in God,from that point onwards, it is considered knowledge of God(Brahmagnan), and one is considered to be the form of God(Brahma swaroop). And then, when Knowledge of the Self(Atmagnan) occurs, one is considered an Atmanishtha Purush(a person devoted to the Atma); he is considered Bhagwan(God; Lord). He is called Sakal Parmatma – Absolute Selffrom all aspects.There is never any intellect (buddhi) in the person who isAptavani-8147148Aptavani-8(agnanta) of one’s own swaroop (the Self). If for just once,you come and know ‘who you are’ from ‘us’ (the GnaniPurush), then that ignorance will be dispelled. Then there shouldbe no problem whatsoever.Questioner: What is the fruit of attaining the Brahma(Self)?Dadashri: The fruit of attaining Brahma, is a state ofabsolute bliss (parmanand). Despite the body, you will enjoy astate like Janak Videhi (a Self-realized king); a godlike state!The worldly life (sansar) will no longer touch you or affect you.One would not be touched by someone placing a garland aroundhis neck, or someone throwing stones at him; even then it wouldnot touch him.The Difference between the Vision of Godand the Vision of the SelfQuestioner: What is the difference between the vision ofGod (Brahma darshan) and the vision of the Self (Atmadarshan)?Dadashri: There is a big difference, between the vision ofthe Self (Atma darshan) and the vision of God (Brahmadarshan). You will have to go beyond the vision of God. Whenyour internal intent (bhaav) transcends the past, present andfuture time (trikaadi); it is called the vision of God; trikaadi.And the Atma is the Absolute Soul (Parmatma) anyways; if aperson ever attains the fundamental nature (swaroop) of theSelf, he truly is the Absolute Self. Even God (Brahma) becomesAbsolute God (Parabrahma), for he has come into trikaadibhaav (continuous intent).First Comes Brahmanishtha, Then Atmanishtha!There is even a difference, between the knowledge ofGod (Brahmagnan) and the Knowledge of the Self(Atmagnan).The knowledge of God (Brahmagnan) is the gateway tothe Knowledge of the Self (Atmagnan). The Knowledge of theSelf occurs after one enters the Knowledge of God.Questioner: What is the difference between the two?Dadashri: When the knowledge of God occurs, it is theresult of utilizing sadhan (tools: scripture, worship, gurus, penanceetc.), in order to bring about focused concentration (ekagrata)of one’s own swaroop (the Self). But what is the Self (swaroop)?That awareness has not attained. Awareness of the Self happensonly upon the attainment of Knowledge of the Self (Atmagnan).It is considered knowledge of God (Brahmagnan) from thetime one has knowledge of the non-Self (abrahma). What otherknowledge (gnan) remains, after one has knowledge of the non-Self? The answer is Brahmagnan. Brahmagnan occurs whenfaith and devotion (nishtha) with the worldly life (sansar) leaves,after which, the devotion (nishtha) to God (Brahma) sets in.What do people have faith and devotion to at the moment? Itis only for worldly happiness; their faith and devotion (nishtha)is with the pleasures of the five senses.If a person’s devotion changes, so that he no longer findshappiness (sukh) in worldly things, and he feels that the material(bhautik) happiness is not good, and that happiness only liesjust in the Atma; happiness is only in God; when he decides this,it is then that he becomes Brahmanishtha (faith; devotionestablished in God). From the time faith is established in God,from that point onwards, it is considered knowledge of God(Brahmagnan), and one is considered to be the form of God(Brahma swaroop). And then, when Knowledge of the Self(Atmagnan) occurs, one is considered an Atmanishtha Purush(a person devoted to the Atma); he is considered Bhagwan(God; Lord). He is called Sakal Parmatma – Absolute Selffrom all aspects.There is never any intellect (buddhi) in the person who isAptavani-8149150Aptavani-8devoted to the Atma (Atmanishtha). Only after the intellect hasgone, does this light (of the Self) arise. The intellect is presentin the person who is devoted to God (Brahmanishtha); therefore,he does not have this light.Brahma Is Even Beyond WordsQuestioner: There is also the word ‘shabda brahma’, isit not!Dadashri: But the word shabda brahma means that itcreates a ringing sound in the ears. What benefit do you get outof it? That is why one needs an exact Brahma. There are somany brahmas like that. Shabda brahma, naad-brahma! Butyou need the real Atma; which is incomprehensible (agamya),cannot be put down in the scriptures (shastras), is indescribable(avarniya), and inexpressible (avaktavya)! Where words cannotreach, where even vision cannot reach – is where the Atma is.And it resides in a state that is pristine and untainted (nirlepbhaav); it remains only in a state of detachment. And word(shabda) and sound (naad); are all “stations”. It is not thatimportant. It does not mean that you have attained that Atma.The Atma is something that once attained, does not go away –that is called Atma. Not even for a second does it move away– that is called Atma.Questioner: When can you hear naad brahma (soundof brahma)?Dadashri: You can hear the sound of brahma, when youstop listening to everything else. When your ears do not listen toanything else, then you can here the sound of brahma. But youalso have so many desires to listen to all kinds of other things.You want to know this, and you want to know that; you wantto listen to this and you want to listen to that! If someone startstalking about something useless, you immediately ask, ‘Whathappened?’ You can easily hear the sound of brahma (naadbrahma), once all these desires come to an end. It is a naturalquality. Nevertheless, even the naad brahma is not the Atma.It is a kind of a musical sound; a tool to bring about concentration(ekagrata). The Atma goes far beyond that.Questioner: Does the stage of hearing the sound ofbrahma (naad brahma) have any connection with spiritualdevelopment?Dadashri: Yes, of course it does! You need focusedconcentration (ekagrata) for spiritual progress, and focusedconcentration comes out of that. A very good concentrationarises in naad brahma. Spirituality begins only when ekagratahappens, otherwise spirituality will not begin, will it? But theAtma is way far away from that.Questioner: Shabda brahma is there. Everyone talks indifferent ways about this word, but the inner explosion (exactunderstanding) of the word should happen.Dadashri: The impact has occurred. A person alreadycomprehends the word (shabda). If it is true, if the One whocan grant this experience, then the word has truly made animpact. Any words that do not give you the experience are allwrong. And when even words are no longer there, that is theultimate state: absolutely independent (niralumb)! There are nowords there. However, first one attains in the form of a ‘word’and thereafter one becomes niralumb.Praise to Such a Vision!Questioner: When one attains the state of God (Brahma),then everyone appears as one to him. A woman is not seen asa woman, a man is not seen as a man; he sees everyone as God.Dadashri: Everything he sees only appears pure(shuddha). I will tell you what ‘we’ see. What is ‘our’ awareness(jagruti) like? Complete awareness! What kind of awareness(jagruti) do these people have? They do everything in a stateof unconsciousness: ‘I am this lady’s husband, I am his father-Aptavani-8149150Aptavani-8devoted to the Atma (Atmanishtha). Only after the intellect hasgone, does this light (of the Self) arise. The intellect is presentin the person who is devoted to God (Brahmanishtha); therefore,he does not have this light.Brahma Is Even Beyond WordsQuestioner: There is also the word ‘shabda brahma’, isit not!Dadashri: But the word shabda brahma means that itcreates a ringing sound in the ears. What benefit do you get outof it? That is why one needs an exact Brahma. There are somany brahmas like that. Shabda brahma, naad-brahma! Butyou need the real Atma; which is incomprehensible (agamya),cannot be put down in the scriptures (shastras), is indescribable(avarniya), and inexpressible (avaktavya)! Where words cannotreach, where even vision cannot reach – is where the Atma is.And it resides in a state that is pristine and untainted (nirlepbhaav); it remains only in a state of detachment. And word(shabda) and sound (naad); are all “stations”. It is not thatimportant. It does not mean that you have attained that Atma.The Atma is something that once attained, does not go away –that is called Atma. Not even for a second does it move away– that is called Atma.Questioner: When can you hear naad brahma (soundof brahma)?Dadashri: You can hear the sound of brahma, when youstop listening to everything else. When your ears do not listen toanything else, then you can here the sound of brahma. But youalso have so many desires to listen to all kinds of other things.You want to know this, and you want to know that; you wantto listen to this and you want to listen to that! If someone startstalking about something useless, you immediately ask, ‘Whathappened?’ You can easily hear the sound of brahma (naadbrahma), once all these desires come to an end. It is a naturalquality. Nevertheless, even the naad brahma is not the Atma.It is a kind of a musical sound; a tool to bring about concentration(ekagrata). The Atma goes far beyond that.Questioner: Does the stage of hearing the sound ofbrahma (naad brahma) have any connection with spiritualdevelopment?Dadashri: Yes, of course it does! You need focusedconcentration (ekagrata) for spiritual progress, and focusedconcentration comes out of that. A very good concentrationarises in naad brahma. Spirituality begins only when ekagratahappens, otherwise spirituality will not begin, will it? But theAtma is way far away from that.Questioner: Shabda brahma is there. Everyone talks indifferent ways about this word, but the inner explosion (exactunderstanding) of the word should happen.Dadashri: The impact has occurred. A person alreadycomprehends the word (shabda). If it is true, if the One whocan grant this experience, then the word has truly made animpact. Any words that do not give you the experience are allwrong. And when even words are no longer there, that is theultimate state: absolutely independent (niralumb)! There are nowords there. However, first one attains in the form of a ‘word’and thereafter one becomes niralumb.Praise to Such a Vision!Questioner: When one attains the state of God (Brahma),then everyone appears as one to him. A woman is not seen asa woman, a man is not seen as a man; he sees everyone as God.Dadashri: Everything he sees only appears pure(shuddha). I will tell you what ‘we’ see. What is ‘our’ awareness(jagruti) like? Complete awareness! What kind of awareness(jagruti) do these people have? They do everything in a stateof unconsciousness: ‘I am this lady’s husband, I am his father-Aptavani-8151152Aptavani-8in-law, I am her uncle, I am his employee’. Do they not say that?These are all signs of illusion. One is not even aware of his ownpowers or of his own Self.‘We’ see the Self in everything (Brahmamaya). ‘Our’awareness (jagruti) is: What would I see in my first vision,when I see a man and woman? They are not clothed; they arenaked. In the second vision, they appear as though their skin hasbeen removed. And what do I see in the third vision? I see allthe entrails (flesh, bone and intestines), “exact”, like you wouldin an X-ray. Therefore, ‘we’ do not feel any attachment orabhorrence (raag-dwesh), and then ultimately they continue tobe ‘seen’ as the Self (Brahma swaroop).Questioner: What is the difference between ego(ahamkar) and ‘I am Brahma’ (Aham Brahmasmi)?Dadashri: In ‘Aham Brahmasmi’, one is exercising one’sown ego. And ego (ahamkar) is to attribute one’s own self,where one is not.The Self Is Attained at the Feet of theGnani PurushQuestioner: I need something that would turn my innertendencies (antar vrutti) towards the Self (swa swaroop).Dadashri: Do you know what we consider one’s ownSelf (swaroop; one’s own form)?Questioner: It is to witness (sakshibhaav).Dadashri: Witnessing, but what is it like?Questioner: Everything happens under its light.Dadashri: But you have to know it. You can know Brahmaif you attain the knowledge of the Self (Atmagnan). Otherwisehow will you know God (Brahma)? Have you attainedAtmagnan?Questioner: That is something beyond my intellect(buddhi).Dadashri: You are talking about witnessing (sakshibhaav),but by coming to the Gnani Purush, you will attain the Self(swa swaroop) right here.Change of Vision Leads to the Experience ofOne’s Changed StateQuestioner: Are the words Atma-Parmatma, Brahma-Parabrahma all the same words, or do they express differentphases of the same thing (paryayvaachak)?Dadashri: They are all synonymous words. Paryayameans phases or state (avastha). In certain state (avastha), theAtma, is considered Atma, and in certain state (avastha), thesame Atma is considered the Absolute Soul (Parmatma), andthe same Atma in some state (avastha), is considered mudhatma(unaware of the Self). Mudhatma means an externalized(bahirmukhi) Atma, but even that is the same Atma. What youcall the inner awakened Soul (antaratma); even that is the verysame Atma. And what you refer to as the Absolute Soul(Parmatma), is also the same Atma! Therefore, they are onlythe different states (dasha) of the Atma!It is like the lawyer, who initially does not make money,he is in a bad situation, and so people will say, ‘this attorney isnot making any money, he is poor.’ And when the very samelawyer suddenly has a turn of fortune and starts earning lots ofmoney, they will say, ‘He is a very clever lawyer, he is a richman.’ And when the same lawyer loses all his money, they willsay, ‘He is bankrupt.’ But in essence, he himself is the same!That is how the states of the Atma are. As long as itdesires the pleasures of the worldly life (sansar), it is consideredmudhatma; it is called bahirmukhi atma – turned towards theworldly life.Aptavani-8151152Aptavani-8in-law, I am her uncle, I am his employee’. Do they not say that?These are all signs of illusion. One is not even aware of his ownpowers or of his own Self.‘We’ see the Self in everything (Brahmamaya). ‘Our’awareness (jagruti) is: What would I see in my first vision,when I see a man and woman? They are not clothed; they arenaked. In the second vision, they appear as though their skin hasbeen removed. And what do I see in the third vision? I see allthe entrails (flesh, bone and intestines), “exact”, like you wouldin an X-ray. Therefore, ‘we’ do not feel any attachment orabhorrence (raag-dwesh), and then ultimately they continue tobe ‘seen’ as the Self (Brahma swaroop).Questioner: What is the difference between ego(ahamkar) and ‘I am Brahma’ (Aham Brahmasmi)?Dadashri: In ‘Aham Brahmasmi’, one is exercising one’sown ego. And ego (ahamkar) is to attribute one’s own self,where one is not.The Self Is Attained at the Feet of theGnani PurushQuestioner: I need something that would turn my innertendencies (antar vrutti) towards the Self (swa swaroop).Dadashri: Do you know what we consider one’s ownSelf (swaroop; one’s own form)?Questioner: It is to witness (sakshibhaav).Dadashri: Witnessing, but what is it like?Questioner: Everything happens under its light.Dadashri: But you have to know it. You can know Brahmaif you attain the knowledge of the Self (Atmagnan). Otherwisehow will you know God (Brahma)? Have you attainedAtmagnan?Questioner: That is something beyond my intellect(buddhi).Dadashri: You are talking about witnessing (sakshibhaav),but by coming to the Gnani Purush, you will attain the Self(swa swaroop) right here.Change of Vision Leads to the Experience ofOne’s Changed StateQuestioner: Are the words Atma-Parmatma, Brahma-Parabrahma all the same words, or do they express differentphases of the same thing (paryayvaachak)?Dadashri: They are all synonymous words. Paryayameans phases or state (avastha). In certain state (avastha), theAtma, is considered Atma, and in certain state (avastha), thesame Atma is considered the Absolute Soul (Parmatma), andthe same Atma in some state (avastha), is considered mudhatma(unaware of the Self). Mudhatma means an externalized(bahirmukhi) Atma, but even that is the same Atma. What youcall the inner awakened Soul (antaratma); even that is the verysame Atma. And what you refer to as the Absolute Soul(Parmatma), is also the same Atma! Therefore, they are onlythe different states (dasha) of the Atma!It is like the lawyer, who initially does not make money,he is in a bad situation, and so people will say, ‘this attorney isnot making any money, he is poor.’ And when the very samelawyer suddenly has a turn of fortune and starts earning lots ofmoney, they will say, ‘He is a very clever lawyer, he is a richman.’ And when the same lawyer loses all his money, they willsay, ‘He is bankrupt.’ But in essence, he himself is the same!That is how the states of the Atma are. As long as itdesires the pleasures of the worldly life (sansar), it is consideredmudhatma; it is called bahirmukhi atma – turned towards theworldly life.Aptavani-8153154Aptavani-8Questioner: And if the veil of ignorance (avaran) is lifted,then does it become the Absolute Soul (Parmatma)?Dadashri: But the veil (avaran) will not lift on its own!First one’s vision (drashti) changes. What is the vision like rightnow? Your vision is on this side; therefore, you only see what ison this side. Is your vision (drashti) not just, ‘I am Chandubhai’?Or do you have some other vision (drashti)?Questioner: I am Atma too!Dadashri: No, but right now, you accept letters underthe name of Chandubhai, do you not? If someone were to swearat you, right now, would it affect you?Questioner: Yes, it would.Dadashri: If you were the Atma, then it would not affectyou. Therefore, you are Chandubhai. Now there is nothing wrongin saying ‘I am Chandubhai’, even I agree that, ‘I am A. M.Patel.’ However, I do not have the belief, that ‘I am A. M.Patel.’ You though, have the belief, ‘I am Chandubhai.’A man was telling me, ‘Only the Vedanta has said thatjiva and Brahma are one only. No one else knows that.’ I toldhim, ‘Everyone knows that jiva and Brahma are one for sure.’Do the elderly not say, ‘I am going to die. I will die, doctor.Save me?’ When they think that they are dying, they are jiva.Those who fear death, are all jiva. And when they no longerhave fear of dying, it means that the same living being (jiva) hasbecome God (Brahma)!One Is Shiva, but Because of Illusion, One IsJivaQuestioner: Why did God (Brahma) have to become ajiva (the self)?Dadashri: You are truly the Atma (Shiva; Self)! But youhave become convinced that ‘I am not the Atma (Shiva)’, youhave become deluded. ‘I am Chandubhai’; that is what you believe. Just becausethey gave you that name, does it mean you have to believe it?You truly are the Atma (Shiva), but only if you understand thedifference between an embodied self (the non-Self; mortal; jiva)and the Self (immortal; Shiva)!Questioner: Then does it not become non-dualism(adwaita)?Dadashri: When there is no longer a difference betweenjiva and Shiva, then it becomes non-dualism (adwaita). Whena jiva (embodied self) and Shiva (Self) appear as one form, itis non-dualism (adwaita)! And when the jiva is separate, andShiva is separate, it is illusion (bhranti)!Questioner: But the Atma was Shiva, so how did itbecome a living being (jiva)?Dadashri: It is because of wrong belief. Due to a wrongbelief it has become a jiva. The Gnani Purush “fractures”(destroys) these “wrong beliefs” and installs the right belief, sothat one oneself becomes the Atma (the Self) again; one becomesthe form of the Self (Shiva swaroop).It does not take long for a mortal (jiva) to become theAtma (Shiva; immortal). You yourself are the Atma (Shiva)!But because this illusion (bhranti) has set in, all the wrong beliefshave settled within you. When this wrong belief changes, and theright belief is established, the puzzle will be solved.Only the Expert Can Cause the SeparationQuestioner: But what is the difference in the definitionsof these three: the material world, the self and the Atma (bhautikjagat, jiva and the Self)? Why are they different?Dadashri: The jiva (the self), is itself the material worldAptavani-8153154Aptavani-8Questioner: And if the veil of ignorance (avaran) is lifted,then does it become the Absolute Soul (Parmatma)?Dadashri: But the veil (avaran) will not lift on its own!First one’s vision (drashti) changes. What is the vision like rightnow? Your vision is on this side; therefore, you only see what ison this side. Is your vision (drashti) not just, ‘I am Chandubhai’?Or do you have some other vision (drashti)?Questioner: I am Atma too!Dadashri: No, but right now, you accept letters underthe name of Chandubhai, do you not? If someone were to swearat you, right now, would it affect you?Questioner: Yes, it would.Dadashri: If you were the Atma, then it would not affectyou. Therefore, you are Chandubhai. Now there is nothing wrongin saying ‘I am Chandubhai’, even I agree that, ‘I am A. M.Patel.’ However, I do not have the belief, that ‘I am A. M.Patel.’ You though, have the belief, ‘I am Chandubhai.’A man was telling me, ‘Only the Vedanta has said thatjiva and Brahma are one only. No one else knows that.’ I toldhim, ‘Everyone knows that jiva and Brahma are one for sure.’Do the elderly not say, ‘I am going to die. I will die, doctor.Save me?’ When they think that they are dying, they are jiva.Those who fear death, are all jiva. And when they no longerhave fear of dying, it means that the same living being (jiva) hasbecome God (Brahma)!One Is Shiva, but Because of Illusion, One IsJivaQuestioner: Why did God (Brahma) have to become ajiva (the self)?Dadashri: You are truly the Atma (Shiva; Self)! But youhave become convinced that ‘I am not the Atma (Shiva)’, youhave become deluded. ‘I am Chandubhai’; that is what you believe. Just becausethey gave you that name, does it mean you have to believe it?You truly are the Atma (Shiva), but only if you understand thedifference between an embodied self (the non-Self; mortal; jiva)and the Self (immortal; Shiva)!Questioner: Then does it not become non-dualism(adwaita)?Dadashri: When there is no longer a difference betweenjiva and Shiva, then it becomes non-dualism (adwaita). Whena jiva (embodied self) and Shiva (Self) appear as one form, itis non-dualism (adwaita)! And when the jiva is separate, andShiva is separate, it is illusion (bhranti)!Questioner: But the Atma was Shiva, so how did itbecome a living being (jiva)?Dadashri: It is because of wrong belief. Due to a wrongbelief it has become a jiva. The Gnani Purush “fractures”(destroys) these “wrong beliefs” and installs the right belief, sothat one oneself becomes the Atma (the Self) again; one becomesthe form of the Self (Shiva swaroop).It does not take long for a mortal (jiva) to become theAtma (Shiva; immortal). You yourself are the Atma (Shiva)!But because this illusion (bhranti) has set in, all the wrong beliefshave settled within you. When this wrong belief changes, and theright belief is established, the puzzle will be solved.Only the Expert Can Cause the SeparationQuestioner: But what is the difference in the definitionsof these three: the material world, the self and the Atma (bhautikjagat, jiva and the Self)? Why are they different?Dadashri: The jiva (the self), is itself the material worldAptavani-8155156Aptavani-8(bhautik jagat). So there is no need for you to know thematerial world. Where does the difference occur? You tell me.Questioner: As living (jiva) and non-living (ajiva).Dadashri: But the jiva itself is worldly (bhautik). Whyis it called an embodied soul (jivatma)? It is because, its vision(drashti) is directed towards the material (bhautik) world, andit only dwells in the material world, which is why it is called anembodied soul (jivatma). It is immersed in, and basks in thehappiness and pleasures (sukh) of the material life; it is called anembodied soul (jivatma). And it is that, which we call the materialworld (bhautik jagat). Because as long as it is worldly (bhautik);its dwelling will always be in the worldly realm. Do youunderstand this? If you want separation, if you want to separatethem, I will do that for you. Nevertheless, this material world isitself the embodied soul (jivatma). That from which it (jiva)seeks temporary happiness, and from which it seeks relativehappiness, is just a material world. Where it seeks from is alsothe material world (bhautik jagat), and the seeker itself is thematerial world. If one understands this, his work will be done. Questioner: Jiva comes within the body, Atma comeswithin the body, and also the material world (bhautik jagat)comes into the body; a mixture of all the three is in it.Dadashri: It includes everything. The entire universe hascome into the body, nothing is left out.Questioner: So how are we to understand themseparately? How can I separate them and then understand them?Dadashri: To separate them, you have to become ascientist. In this ring, there is a combination of gold, copper, andtwo or three other metals, and as they have become mixed, howwould you separate them? Can any ordinary person separatethem? Only the person, who is skilled at it, can separate them.Only an expert, who knows how to separate them, can do this.No one else will be able to do it! Besides, if you meddle in ityourself, your efforts of endless lifetimes will be futile; moreover,you will just die of drinking medicine that was intended fortopical use only. How is it God’s fault if you drink medicine thatwas only made for external use (rubbing ointment)?Jiva and Atma: Neither Separate NorConnectedQuestioner: What is the difference between the jiva andthe Atma?Dadashri: As long as it is in a worldly (sansar) state,it lives and dies, and until then, it is called jiva. A worldly statemeans that, ‘I am a sansari (I am living this worldly life)’. Andwhen one believes the worldly state (sansar dasha) is his ownstate; he therefore, lives and dies, and so he is called jiva! Andfrom the time that the living and dying ends, one is consideredShiva (God; Atma), and one is called the pure Soul(Shuddhatma). The jiva is always immersed in the world(sansari); it has karma, while the Atma does not havekarma.Questioner: So then, the jiva and the Atma are separate,are they not?Dadashri: The jiva and Atma? No. The same Atma,but if it is with karma, then it is called a jiva, and if it is withoutkarma, then it is called Atma. When it is with karma, it livesand dies; that is jiva.Questioner: And Atma is eternal (amar), is it not?Dadashri: Yes, it is eternal.Questioner: And jiva is attached to it?Dadashri: No, it is not attached to it. It is like this: thereis the embodied soul (jivatma), the Atma, and the AbsoluteSoul (Parmatma). Jivatma is the state of the atma with karmaAptavani-8155156Aptavani-8(bhautik jagat). So there is no need for you to know thematerial world. Where does the difference occur? You tell me.Questioner: As living (jiva) and non-living (ajiva).Dadashri: But the jiva itself is worldly (bhautik). Whyis it called an embodied soul (jivatma)? It is because, its vision(drashti) is directed towards the material (bhautik) world, andit only dwells in the material world, which is why it is called anembodied soul (jivatma). It is immersed in, and basks in thehappiness and pleasures (sukh) of the material life; it is called anembodied soul (jivatma). And it is that, which we call the materialworld (bhautik jagat). Because as long as it is worldly (bhautik);its dwelling will always be in the worldly realm. Do youunderstand this? If you want separation, if you want to separatethem, I will do that for you. Nevertheless, this material world isitself the embodied soul (jivatma). That from which it (jiva)seeks temporary happiness, and from which it seeks relativehappiness, is just a material world. Where it seeks from is alsothe material world (bhautik jagat), and the seeker itself is thematerial world. If one understands this, his work will be done. Questioner: Jiva comes within the body, Atma comeswithin the body, and also the material world (bhautik jagat)comes into the body; a mixture of all the three is in it.Dadashri: It includes everything. The entire universe hascome into the body, nothing is left out.Questioner: So how are we to understand themseparately? How can I separate them and then understand them?Dadashri: To separate them, you have to become ascientist. In this ring, there is a combination of gold, copper, andtwo or three other metals, and as they have become mixed, howwould you separate them? Can any ordinary person separatethem? Only the person, who is skilled at it, can separate them.Only an expert, who knows how to separate them, can do this.No one else will be able to do it! Besides, if you meddle in ityourself, your efforts of endless lifetimes will be futile; moreover,you will just die of drinking medicine that was intended fortopical use only. How is it God’s fault if you drink medicine thatwas only made for external use (rubbing ointment)?Jiva and Atma: Neither Separate NorConnectedQuestioner: What is the difference between the jiva andthe Atma?Dadashri: As long as it is in a worldly (sansar) state,it lives and dies, and until then, it is called jiva. A worldly statemeans that, ‘I am a sansari (I am living this worldly life)’. Andwhen one believes the worldly state (sansar dasha) is his ownstate; he therefore, lives and dies, and so he is called jiva! Andfrom the time that the living and dying ends, one is consideredShiva (God; Atma), and one is called the pure Soul(Shuddhatma). The jiva is always immersed in the world(sansari); it has karma, while the Atma does not havekarma.Questioner: So then, the jiva and the Atma are separate,are they not?Dadashri: The jiva and Atma? No. The same Atma,but if it is with karma, then it is called a jiva, and if it is withoutkarma, then it is called Atma. When it is with karma, it livesand dies; that is jiva.Questioner: And Atma is eternal (amar), is it not?Dadashri: Yes, it is eternal.Questioner: And jiva is attached to it?Dadashri: No, it is not attached to it. It is like this: thereis the embodied soul (jivatma), the Atma, and the AbsoluteSoul (Parmatma). Jivatma is the state of the atma with karmaAptavani-8157158 Aptavani-8and it is also with ego. The one with the belief, ‘I am this body(dehadhyas)’, is considered jivatma and the one who has noego and does not live or die, that it the Atma.Questioner: So, where is the stage of the Absolute Soul(Parmatma)?Dadashri: The Absolute Soul is when one attains theawareness of one’s own Self (swaroop), and therefore onebecomes the form of the Atma (Atmaroop). Then, the state ofthe Absolute Soul (Parmatma) continues to manifest. And onceit has manifested fully, that is when he has become the AbsoluteSoul. Therefore, when the thirteenth gunthanu (or gunasthanakdescribed as a set of fourteen steps in the spiritual developmentof the Self) ends, then Absolute Knowledge (Keval Gnan)happens, and one has become complete Parmatma (AbsoluteSoul).So this embodied soul (jiva) is the Atma’s own state(avastha), but it is an illusory state, and why is it called jiva?Whatever undergoes the states (avastha) of living and dying, isreferred to as jiva. And the Atma is by nature pure Self (shuddhachetan), it is the Absolute Soul (Parmatma) itself. But thatawareness should happen. As long as one does not have thisawareness, one does not even know that ‘I am Atma’. One stillhas the awareness of, ‘I am jiva’. It is in the illusory state of theself (jiva, atma), that there is the belief of ‘I am’, that ‘I amliving, I will die.’Do you understand this? The jiva and the Atma, areneither one and nor are they separate. When you say ‘separate’,then it becomes a separate part, it is not like that. When you saythey are one, it creates impurity in the Atma, and it would meanthat the Atma is tainted with illusion (bhranti); however eventhat has not happened. That is because one has never becomethe Atma. This is just an illusory state of the Atma that hasarisen, and that is the jiva.Therefore, the jiva and the Atma, are indeed one thing.When she is cooking, she is considered a cook, and when shegoes out dancing, she is considered a dancer. But the woman isone and the same.‘I’, ‘Bavo’, ‘Mangaldas’When someone comes to our door, we would ask, ‘Whois there?’ And he would say, ‘I have come.’ Then you wouldask, ‘I, but who? Speak up!’ He will reply, ‘I am the mendicant(bavo - beggar monk)’, so you ask, ‘Which mendicant?’ Andhe would say, ‘It is I, the beggar monk (bavo) Mangaldas!’Then, you would recognize him. Otherwise, if he just said I, noone would recognize him. If he said “I, the beggar monk (bavo)”,even then you would wonder, ‘Was it this beggar monk (bavo)or the other one?’ Therefore when he says all three – I, thebeggar monk (bavo), Mangaldas – then you would recognize,that it is indeed that Mangaldas (bavo). You even visualize him.So then you open the door. And if there happens to be two orthree Mangaldas (individuals), he has to tell you, ‘I am the bavoMangaldas of Mahadevji (Lord Shiva’s follower).’ That is whenyou recognize him. Therefore, ‘I’, ‘bavo’, ‘Mangaldas’. Nowtell me, how many people are there? And in all this, who is the‘I’? Who is the bavo? Who is Mangaldas? Have you not heardthat before? But it was not useful to you. And when I heard it,?itbecame instantly useful to me. Each and every sentence I hear isuseful to me. Even if I found it in the streets it would still help me.So you will have to know who the ‘I’ is, will you not? Anddo you not have to become convinced about who the ‘I’ is? Inthe same way, the ‘I’ here is the Atma, and if you know (realize)the ‘I’, you will end up with a solution.Only That Awareness Is NeededQuestioner: So one only becomes the Absolute Soul(Parmatma) from the Atma?Aptavani-8157158 Aptavani-8and it is also with ego. The one with the belief, ‘I am this body(dehadhyas)’, is considered jivatma and the one who has noego and does not live or die, that it the Atma.Questioner: So, where is the stage of the Absolute Soul(Parmatma)?Dadashri: The Absolute Soul is when one attains theawareness of one’s own Self (swaroop), and therefore onebecomes the form of the Atma (Atmaroop). Then, the state ofthe Absolute Soul (Parmatma) continues to manifest. And onceit has manifested fully, that is when he has become the AbsoluteSoul. Therefore, when the thirteenth gunthanu (or gunasthanakdescribed as a set of fourteen steps in the spiritual developmentof the Self) ends, then Absolute Knowledge (Keval Gnan)happens, and one has become complete Parmatma (AbsoluteSoul).So this embodied soul (jiva) is the Atma’s own state(avastha), but it is an illusory state, and why is it called jiva?Whatever undergoes the states (avastha) of living and dying, isreferred to as jiva. And the Atma is by nature pure Self (shuddhachetan), it is the Absolute Soul (Parmatma) itself. But thatawareness should happen. As long as one does not have thisawareness, one does not even know that ‘I am Atma’. One stillhas the awareness of, ‘I am jiva’. It is in the illusory state of theself (jiva, atma), that there is the belief of ‘I am’, that ‘I amliving, I will die.’Do you understand this? The jiva and the Atma, areneither one and nor are they separate. When you say ‘separate’,then it becomes a separate part, it is not like that. When you saythey are one, it creates impurity in the Atma, and it would meanthat the Atma is tainted with illusion (bhranti); however eventhat has not happened. That is because one has never becomethe Atma. This is just an illusory state of the Atma that hasarisen, and that is the jiva.Therefore, the jiva and the Atma, are indeed one thing.When she is cooking, she is considered a cook, and when shegoes out dancing, she is considered a dancer. But the woman isone and the same.‘I’, ‘Bavo’, ‘Mangaldas’When someone comes to our door, we would ask, ‘Whois there?’ And he would say, ‘I have come.’ Then you wouldask, ‘I, but who? Speak up!’ He will reply, ‘I am the mendicant(bavo - beggar monk)’, so you ask, ‘Which mendicant?’ Andhe would say, ‘It is I, the beggar monk (bavo) Mangaldas!’Then, you would recognize him. Otherwise, if he just said I, noone would recognize him. If he said “I, the beggar monk (bavo)”,even then you would wonder, ‘Was it this beggar monk (bavo)or the other one?’ Therefore when he says all three – I, thebeggar monk (bavo), Mangaldas – then you would recognize,that it is indeed that Mangaldas (bavo). You even visualize him.So then you open the door. And if there happens to be two orthree Mangaldas (individuals), he has to tell you, ‘I am the bavoMangaldas of Mahadevji (Lord Shiva’s follower).’ That is whenyou recognize him. Therefore, ‘I’, ‘bavo’, ‘Mangaldas’. Nowtell me, how many people are there? And in all this, who is the‘I’? Who is the bavo? Who is Mangaldas? Have you not heardthat before? But it was not useful to you. And when I heard it,?itbecame instantly useful to me. Each and every sentence I hear isuseful to me. Even if I found it in the streets it would still help me.So you will have to know who the ‘I’ is, will you not? Anddo you not have to become convinced about who the ‘I’ is? Inthe same way, the ‘I’ here is the Atma, and if you know (realize)the ‘I’, you will end up with a solution.Only That Awareness Is NeededQuestioner: So one only becomes the Absolute Soul(Parmatma) from the Atma?Aptavani-8159160Aptavani-8Dadashri: The Atma is itself the Absolute Soul(Parmatma). One only has to realize this. When you realize that,even for a single minute, you have the realization of, ‘I am theAbsolute Soul’, and then you start to become the Absolute Soul.Questioner: So can we say, ‘I am the Absolute Soul’?Dadashri: If you say, ‘I am the Absolute Soul’, peoplewill rebuke you, swear at you and ridicule you. And when theydo not ridicule you, and they do not swear at you, then you cansay, ‘I am the Absolute Soul (Parmatma)’. If you take anartificial mango, will you get any juice out of it? No, it will notcome out! You understand that, do you not? That is why you areindeed the Absolute Soul (Parmatma). But you have not becomethe Absolute Soul. You have not realized that state (swaroop).At the moment, your awareness is, ‘I am Chandubhai’. Youshould have the awareness of, ‘I am the Absolute Soul(Parmatma)’. So now, can you say, ‘I am Parmatma’?Questioner: No, I cannot say that.Dadashri: Yes, otherwise people will ridicule you. Thesepeople will even make fun of something that is true, or someonewho is right. This is the world. You cannot grapple with it.Now are you convinced that you are Atma? What haveyou experienced from, ‘you are Atma’? How did you becomeconvinced?Questioner: That at least I am certain that there is Atmawithin.Dadashri: But what makes you so sure? Is there notsome sort of thermometer you can put in place, that immediatelytells you that there is an Atma inside? Is there such athermometer?Questioner: When a man dies, his hands become useless,everything is useless.Dadashri: It is the embodied soul (jivatma; mortal) thatdies. Have you known your Atma in all this? Do you have theexperience of ‘I am Atma’?Questioner: I say that I do have the experience of theAtma, and you say that I do not have the experience. So youtell me, what do I have experience of?Dadashri: What it is, is that right now, you are experiencingthe embodied soul (jivatma). However, that is not the original,fundamental (muda) Atma. The original Atma is chetan (Self;living), and the embodied soul (jivatma) is living-non-living(nischetan-chetan). The entire world perceives the living-non-living (nischetan-chetan) as living (Self; chetan), which is whyit is perplexed. Living-non-living (nischetan-chetan), means thatits characteristics resemble those of chetan (Self), it appears tohave movement. But it is not chetan (living).After Atmagnan, One Is ImmortalQuestioner: People say that a man dies because the soul(jiva) has left his body. So are the embodied soul (jiva) and theAtma (Soul) here, the same or are they different? And if theyare just one, then in what state is it called embodied soul (jiva)?In what state is it called Atma?Dadashri: That which lives and dies, is called a jiva(embodied soul), and that which neither lives nor dies, is Atma.Embodies soul (jiva) is just a temporary adjustment; it is just astate (avastha).Questioner: Until they attain final liberation (moksha),does the embodied soul (jiva) and the Atma go from one bodyinto another?Dadashri: It is not the embodied soul (jivatma) alone;everything else goes along with it. Karma and everything else gowith it. Until it finds freedom, and becomes free of karma,everything tags along with it, wherever it goes. Even all theAptavani-8159160Aptavani-8Dadashri: The Atma is itself the Absolute Soul(Parmatma). One only has to realize this. When you realize that,even for a single minute, you have the realization of, ‘I am theAbsolute Soul’, and then you start to become the Absolute Soul.Questioner: So can we say, ‘I am the Absolute Soul’?Dadashri: If you say, ‘I am the Absolute Soul’, peoplewill rebuke you, swear at you and ridicule you. And when theydo not ridicule you, and they do not swear at you, then you cansay, ‘I am the Absolute Soul (Parmatma)’. If you take anartificial mango, will you get any juice out of it? No, it will notcome out! You understand that, do you not? That is why you areindeed the Absolute Soul (Parmatma). But you have not becomethe Absolute Soul. You have not realized that state (swaroop).At the moment, your awareness is, ‘I am Chandubhai’. Youshould have the awareness of, ‘I am the Absolute Soul(Parmatma)’. So now, can you say, ‘I am Parmatma’?Questioner: No, I cannot say that.Dadashri: Yes, otherwise people will ridicule you. Thesepeople will even make fun of something that is true, or someonewho is right. This is the world. You cannot grapple with it.Now are you convinced that you are Atma? What haveyou experienced from, ‘you are Atma’? How did you becomeconvinced?Questioner: That at least I am certain that there is Atmawithin.Dadashri: But what makes you so sure? Is there notsome sort of thermometer you can put in place, that immediatelytells you that there is an Atma inside? Is there such athermometer?Questioner: When a man dies, his hands become useless,everything is useless.Dadashri: It is the embodied soul (jivatma; mortal) thatdies. Have you known your Atma in all this? Do you have theexperience of ‘I am Atma’?Questioner: I say that I do have the experience of theAtma, and you say that I do not have the experience. So youtell me, what do I have experience of?Dadashri: What it is, is that right now, you are experiencingthe embodied soul (jivatma). However, that is not the original,fundamental (muda) Atma. The original Atma is chetan (Self;living), and the embodied soul (jivatma) is living-non-living(nischetan-chetan). The entire world perceives the living-non-living (nischetan-chetan) as living (Self; chetan), which is whyit is perplexed. Living-non-living (nischetan-chetan), means thatits characteristics resemble those of chetan (Self), it appears tohave movement. But it is not chetan (living).After Atmagnan, One Is ImmortalQuestioner: People say that a man dies because the soul(jiva) has left his body. So are the embodied soul (jiva) and theAtma (Soul) here, the same or are they different? And if theyare just one, then in what state is it called embodied soul (jiva)?In what state is it called Atma?Dadashri: That which lives and dies, is called a jiva(embodied soul), and that which neither lives nor dies, is Atma.Embodies soul (jiva) is just a temporary adjustment; it is just astate (avastha).Questioner: Until they attain final liberation (moksha),does the embodied soul (jiva) and the Atma go from one bodyinto another?Dadashri: It is not the embodied soul (jivatma) alone;everything else goes along with it. Karma and everything else gowith it. Until it finds freedom, and becomes free of karma,everything tags along with it, wherever it goes. Even all theAptavani-8161162Aptavani-8karmas one has created, will remain with the embodied soul(jivatma).All one has to do, is realize, ‘Who am I?’ That is all youhave to know. You are jiva (embodied soul) and you are living;therefore you will die. And if you are Atma, you are immortal.Living is a state (avastha), and whatever lives and dies, is calleda living being (jiva). The living being is in the state (avastha) ofworldly life (sansar). Bad deeds (paap) and good deeds (punya),are all included in it, as well as all the things related to the body(paudgalik), and together with karma; that is called jiva.Questioner: So what would you call the mind (mun)?Dadashri: The mind is where thoughts occur. That iscalled the mind. The mind-intellect-chit-ego (mun-buddhi-chit-ahamkar), comprise the internal functioning mechanism(antahkaran) in every human being. And the jiva is the head(upari) of all these. The self is verily the jiva, and the Atma issomething different. The Atma is different from the embodiedsoul (jiva). The jiva is the one that lives and dies. The Atmadoes not die. The Atma is immortal, and it is indeed your veryown form (swaroop)!Questioner: So can you say that the embodied soul (jiva)is the non-Self complex (pudgal)?Dadashri: Yes, you can certainly say that the jiva is thenon-Self complex. But to us, it appears to be living. It moves,it talks, and it does everything. But in fact it is pudgal. The jivais just a statue that has come alive!The Separation Disappears When Illusion LeavesQuestioner: How can you call the living being (jiva), theAbsolute God (Parmeshwar)? The living being is a delusion ofone kind.Dadashri: Through the intellect that differentiates (bhedbuddhi), it is called a living being (jiva). It is this bhed buddhiwhich says that, ‘I am separate and God is separate’, and thatis when you can say it is a living being (jiva). And when theintellect (buddhi) stops seeing differences and there is the oneness(becomes abheda) that, ‘I am the Bhagwan (Lord; God)’, itthen becomes enlightened intellect (Shiva buddhi).Questioner: With the vision (drashti) ‘I am Atma’, isthere not a separation of the Atma in that?Dadashri: When you have the awareness of ‘I am Atma’,then the separation between jiva and Shiva has been broken.Questioner: That is right, but what is the differencebetween jiva and Parmeshwar (the Absolute God)?Dadashri: The living being (jiva) asks for enjoyment fromimpermanent and perishable (vinashi) things, and its faith andbelief (shraddha) lies in the temporary things. The Absolute Self(Parmeshwar) only has faith and belief in the permanent andindestructible (avinashi), and the Absolute Self (Parmeshwar)only believes in its own state. The Absolute Self believes only inits own eternal state. It has no value for the things that aredestructible and impermanent (vinashi). That is the onlydifference. Jiva (living entity) means that it is itself immersed inillusion (bhranti), and when that illusion leaves, the delirium andobsession (murchha) over impermanent (vinashi) things willdisappear, and it itself becomes the Absolute Self (Parmeshwar)!To become devoid of attachment and abhorrence(vitarag), first your artadhyan (adverse internal meditation thathurts the self), and raudradhyan (adverse internal meditationthat hurts the self and others) must stop altogether. Whenartadhyan and raudradhyan both stop, you will no longer haveworries, and in spite of living in the worldly life (sansar), eventhen you will not have worries. If you still have worries, thenwhat good is that? Lord Mahavir’s principle doctrine (siddhant– incontrovertible principle that accomplishes the ultimate) is thisAptavani-8161162Aptavani-8karmas one has created, will remain with the embodied soul(jivatma).All one has to do, is realize, ‘Who am I?’ That is all youhave to know. You are jiva (embodied soul) and you are living;therefore you will die. And if you are Atma, you are immortal.Living is a state (avastha), and whatever lives and dies, is calleda living being (jiva). The living being is in the state (avastha) ofworldly life (sansar). Bad deeds (paap) and good deeds (punya),are all included in it, as well as all the things related to the body(paudgalik), and together with karma; that is called jiva.Questioner: So what would you call the mind (mun)?Dadashri: The mind is where thoughts occur. That iscalled the mind. The mind-intellect-chit-ego (mun-buddhi-chit-ahamkar), comprise the internal functioning mechanism(antahkaran) in every human being. And the jiva is the head(upari) of all these. The self is verily the jiva, and the Atma issomething different. The Atma is different from the embodiedsoul (jiva). The jiva is the one that lives and dies. The Atmadoes not die. The Atma is immortal, and it is indeed your veryown form (swaroop)!Questioner: So can you say that the embodied soul (jiva)is the non-Self complex (pudgal)?Dadashri: Yes, you can certainly say that the jiva is thenon-Self complex. But to us, it appears to be living. It moves,it talks, and it does everything. But in fact it is pudgal. The jivais just a statue that has come alive!The Separation Disappears When Illusion LeavesQuestioner: How can you call the living being (jiva), theAbsolute God (Parmeshwar)? The living being is a delusion ofone kind.Dadashri: Through the intellect that differentiates (bhedbuddhi), it is called a living being (jiva). It is this bhed buddhiwhich says that, ‘I am separate and God is separate’, and thatis when you can say it is a living being (jiva). And when theintellect (buddhi) stops seeing differences and there is the oneness(becomes abheda) that, ‘I am the Bhagwan (Lord; God)’, itthen becomes enlightened intellect (Shiva buddhi).Questioner: With the vision (drashti) ‘I am Atma’, isthere not a separation of the Atma in that?Dadashri: When you have the awareness of ‘I am Atma’,then the separation between jiva and Shiva has been broken.Questioner: That is right, but what is the differencebetween jiva and Parmeshwar (the Absolute God)?Dadashri: The living being (jiva) asks for enjoyment fromimpermanent and perishable (vinashi) things, and its faith andbelief (shraddha) lies in the temporary things. The Absolute Self(Parmeshwar) only has faith and belief in the permanent andindestructible (avinashi), and the Absolute Self (Parmeshwar)only believes in its own state. The Absolute Self believes only inits own eternal state. It has no value for the things that aredestructible and impermanent (vinashi). That is the onlydifference. Jiva (living entity) means that it is itself immersed inillusion (bhranti), and when that illusion leaves, the delirium andobsession (murchha) over impermanent (vinashi) things willdisappear, and it itself becomes the Absolute Self (Parmeshwar)!To become devoid of attachment and abhorrence(vitarag), first your artadhyan (adverse internal meditation thathurts the self), and raudradhyan (adverse internal meditationthat hurts the self and others) must stop altogether. Whenartadhyan and raudradhyan both stop, you will no longer haveworries, and in spite of living in the worldly life (sansar), eventhen you will not have worries. If you still have worries, thenwhat good is that? Lord Mahavir’s principle doctrine (siddhant– incontrovertible principle that accomplishes the ultimate) is thisAptavani-8163164Aptavani-8straightforward, provided that the Gnani is there. And if thereis no Gnani around, then even with thousands of efforts, youwill not attain even a fraction of the Lord’s siddhant.Keeping Separation of I-You With God DoesNot Lead to Self-RealizationTherefore, it is a good thing, to do the Lord’s worship(bhakti). From that, you will receive worldly happiness (bhautiksukh) and find the path ahead! You progress on a spiritual path,find the company of good people, and you even find satsang(spiritual company). But you will not find the experience of theSelf (anubhuti) over there. The experience of the Self onlyoccurs, when the differentiating intellect (bhed buddhi) whichseparates embodies soul and Atma (jiva-Shiva), comes to anend. And that is when you can call it experience of the Self(anubhuti).Did you like anything that I have told you about theembodied soul (worldly being) and Atma differentiating intellect(jiva-Shiva bhed buddhi)? Only then can you call it theexperience of the Self (anubhuti)! Otherwise, is the experienceof the Self that you believe in, not all wrong? People have hungon to so many of these experiences of the Self, which they haveeven picked up from the Friday weekly market. They buy goodsthat others have discarded and that are now being sold! That iswhy the differentiating intellect (bhed buddhi) that separates theself (jiva; living being) and Atma (Shiva) has to go. That is whyAkha Bhagat (17th century Gujarati spiritual poet) had said:“Jo tu Jiva toh karta Hari; jo tu Shiva toh vastu khari”“If you are a living being (jiva), then God (Hari) is thedoer. If you are Atma (Shiva); then that is the real thing.”Is it not true what Akho says? So therefore, once thisliving being and Atma differentiating intellect (jiva-Shiva bhedbuddhi) leaves, you are the pure Soul (Shuddhatma), and afterthat, you alone are the Absolute Soul (Parmatma)! They say,‘God is separate, and I am separate’. However, when one comesto understand the differentiating intellect (bhed buddhi) thatseparates living being and Atma (jiva-Shiva), and that there isno difference between the two, he will become free!You will have to understand this someday, will you not?Besides, will you not eventually have to understand the Atma?When one knows the Atma, the differentiating intellect thatseparates the jiva and the Atma, disappears and once thedifferentiating intellect (bhed buddhi) that separates living beingand Atma (jiva-Shiva) breaks, the fear breaks, and a state ofdetachment from attachment and abhorrence (vitaragata)prevails.If they go on saying that God is separate and I am separate,then when will it ever end? Has it not been this way for infinitelifetimes? Then you and ‘I’ are there anyways! They have beenchanting ‘Thou art, Thou art’ for countless lifetimes.You yourself are the owner of this world! But this entireownership has been lost! What is all this?! That is why oneneeds to realize that, ‘I am Shiva (Atma)’ and that is called theexperience of the Self (anubhuti). When you have attained theawareness of, ‘I am Shuddhatma (the pure Soul)’, that is whenyou can call it the experience of the Self (anubhuti)! Besides,every living being (jiva) has the awareness of ‘I am living being(jiva)’.…But the Path Is Indeed the SameQuestioner: Can the separation between living being (jiva)and Atma (Shiva) be broken through any other body, besidesthe human body?Dadashri: No. It cannot be done through any other body.Questioner: Can penance be done through the subtlebody (sookshma deha)?Aptavani-8163164Aptavani-8straightforward, provided that the Gnani is there. And if thereis no Gnani around, then even with thousands of efforts, youwill not attain even a fraction of the Lord’s siddhant.Keeping Separation of I-You With God DoesNot Lead to Self-RealizationTherefore, it is a good thing, to do the Lord’s worship(bhakti). From that, you will receive worldly happiness (bhautiksukh) and find the path ahead! You progress on a spiritual path,find the company of good people, and you even find satsang(spiritual company). But you will not find the experience of theSelf (anubhuti) over there. The experience of the Self onlyoccurs, when the differentiating intellect (bhed buddhi) whichseparates embodies soul and Atma (jiva-Shiva), comes to anend. And that is when you can call it experience of the Self(anubhuti).Did you like anything that I have told you about theembodied soul (worldly being) and Atma differentiating intellect(jiva-Shiva bhed buddhi)? Only then can you call it theexperience of the Self (anubhuti)! Otherwise, is the experienceof the Self that you believe in, not all wrong? People have hungon to so many of these experiences of the Self, which they haveeven picked up from the Friday weekly market. They buy goodsthat others have discarded and that are now being sold! That iswhy the differentiating intellect (bhed buddhi) that separates theself (jiva; living being) and Atma (Shiva) has to go. That is whyAkha Bhagat (17th century Gujarati spiritual poet) had said:“Jo tu Jiva toh karta Hari; jo tu Shiva toh vastu khari”“If you are a living being (jiva), then God (Hari) is thedoer. If you are Atma (Shiva); then that is the real thing.”Is it not true what Akho says? So therefore, once thisliving being and Atma differentiating intellect (jiva-Shiva bhedbuddhi) leaves, you are the pure Soul (Shuddhatma), and afterthat, you alone are the Absolute Soul (Parmatma)! They say,‘God is separate, and I am separate’. However, when one comesto understand the differentiating intellect (bhed buddhi) thatseparates living being and Atma (jiva-Shiva), and that there isno difference between the two, he will become free!You will have to understand this someday, will you not?Besides, will you not eventually have to understand the Atma?When one knows the Atma, the differentiating intellect thatseparates the jiva and the Atma, disappears and once thedifferentiating intellect (bhed buddhi) that separates living beingand Atma (jiva-Shiva) breaks, the fear breaks, and a state ofdetachment from attachment and abhorrence (vitaragata)prevails.If they go on saying that God is separate and I am separate,then when will it ever end? Has it not been this way for infinitelifetimes? Then you and ‘I’ are there anyways! They have beenchanting ‘Thou art, Thou art’ for countless lifetimes.You yourself are the owner of this world! But this entireownership has been lost! What is all this?! That is why oneneeds to realize that, ‘I am Shiva (Atma)’ and that is called theexperience of the Self (anubhuti). When you have attained theawareness of, ‘I am Shuddhatma (the pure Soul)’, that is whenyou can call it the experience of the Self (anubhuti)! Besides,every living being (jiva) has the awareness of ‘I am living being(jiva)’.…But the Path Is Indeed the SameQuestioner: Can the separation between living being (jiva)and Atma (Shiva) be broken through any other body, besidesthe human body?Dadashri: No. It cannot be done through any other body.Questioner: Can penance be done through the subtlebody (sookshma deha)?Aptavani-8165166Aptavani-8Dadashri: Penance? To know this? No. Penance cannoteliminate the separation. Even that cannot do it.Questioner: Are there any subtle rituals for destroyingthis separation? Can one know it through the subtle body?Dadashri: The Gnani Purush himself can do all the thingsfor further progress. For the Gnani Purush, the living being-Atma (jiva-Shiva) separation is already gone. And if he wantsto know even more than that, he can know everything throughother subtle means. Someone who practices penance (tapa)however, cannot know anything.Questioner: But is it possible to remove the separationbetween embodied soul and Atma (jiva-Shiva) through thesubtle body?Dadashri: No. One removes it, but it is only according toone’s belief. The “psychological” will not do! It has to bemethodically done through Gnan (Knowledge), and it has to bethe proper way. But the path is the same, whether you call itVedanta, Jainism or anything else. It is only one kind of knowledge.Questioner: So the embodies soul and Atma (jiva-Shiva)separation can only be broken in the human form?Dadashri: This cannot happen in any other life-form, otherthan the human life-form.Questioner: In the celestial realm (deva gati)?Dadashri: No. Even there, nothing can happen. It is notpossible in the celestial realm. The most that those in the celestialrealm do, is while living there, if they wish to do a visit to dodarshan, they can come here. So those in the celestial realm(deva gati) can come here to do darshan.Questioner: Can anyone who is in a videhi (one whohas attained the Self despite having a physical body) state, breakthe separation of living being and Atma (jiva-Shiva)?Dadashri: Videhi? Videhi has become the Atma (Shiva)himself! One whose living being-Atma (jiva-Shiva) separationis gone, and moreover, who has become the embodiment of theAtma (Shiva swaroop), is called videhi. For us, it was KingJanak who became one.Doing-Suffering Is the State of the JivaIt is a living being’s ignorant belief that ‘I am going to die’.So the living being (jiva) lives as long as it is there; otherwiseit dies. The condition or state (avastha) of living and dying iscalled a living being (jiva). The never-born and immortal (ajanmaamar), is called the Atma; it is called Shiva. The pure Soul(Shuddhatma) is Shiva. When one understands, ‘I am Shiva’,one attains salvation!As long as one’s awareness is that of, ‘I am doing, I amsuffering’, one is a living being (jiva). The living being (jiva) isa doer-sufferer (karta- bhokta). And when the awareness of, ‘Iam the non-doer and the non-sufferer (akarta-abhokta)’,becomes established in his belief (shraddha), one becomesAtma. Once it becomes established into his conviction (pratiti),he has become Atma. And after that, whether it manifests ornot, is a different matter. That is because its manifestation (rupak)will come later.Questioner: I did not understand which condition or state(avastha) of the living being (jiva) you were referring to?Dadashri: Doing-suffering (karta-bhokta) is the conditionor state (avastha) of the living being (jiva)! ‘I am doing this, Iam suffering this’; that is the living being’s condition. ‘I am sufferingthis’, is a temporary (vinashi) state. Does one not say, ‘I willdie’? He may even say, ‘I am still going to live another fifteenyears’. They say that, do they not?Questioner: Yes, they say that.Dadashri: That is the living being (jiva).Aptavani-8165166Aptavani-8Dadashri: Penance? To know this? No. Penance cannoteliminate the separation. Even that cannot do it.Questioner: Are there any subtle rituals for destroyingthis separation? Can one know it through the subtle body?Dadashri: The Gnani Purush himself can do all the thingsfor further progress. For the Gnani Purush, the living being-Atma (jiva-Shiva) separation is already gone. And if he wantsto know even more than that, he can know everything throughother subtle means. Someone who practices penance (tapa)however, cannot know anything.Questioner: But is it possible to remove the separationbetween embodied soul and Atma (jiva-Shiva) through thesubtle body?Dadashri: No. One removes it, but it is only according toone’s belief. The “psychological” will not do! It has to bemethodically done through Gnan (Knowledge), and it has to bethe proper way. But the path is the same, whether you call itVedanta, Jainism or anything else. It is only one kind of knowledge.Questioner: So the embodies soul and Atma (jiva-Shiva)separation can only be broken in the human form?Dadashri: This cannot happen in any other life-form, otherthan the human life-form.Questioner: In the celestial realm (deva gati)?Dadashri: No. Even there, nothing can happen. It is notpossible in the celestial realm. The most that those in the celestialrealm do, is while living there, if they wish to do a visit to dodarshan, they can come here. So those in the celestial realm(deva gati) can come here to do darshan.Questioner: Can anyone who is in a videhi (one whohas attained the Self despite having a physical body) state, breakthe separation of living being and Atma (jiva-Shiva)?Dadashri: Videhi? Videhi has become the Atma (Shiva)himself! One whose living being-Atma (jiva-Shiva) separationis gone, and moreover, who has become the embodiment of theAtma (Shiva swaroop), is called videhi. For us, it was KingJanak who became one.Doing-Suffering Is the State of the JivaIt is a living being’s ignorant belief that ‘I am going to die’.So the living being (jiva) lives as long as it is there; otherwiseit dies. The condition or state (avastha) of living and dying iscalled a living being (jiva). The never-born and immortal (ajanmaamar), is called the Atma; it is called Shiva. The pure Soul(Shuddhatma) is Shiva. When one understands, ‘I am Shiva’,one attains salvation!As long as one’s awareness is that of, ‘I am doing, I amsuffering’, one is a living being (jiva). The living being (jiva) isa doer-sufferer (karta- bhokta). And when the awareness of, ‘Iam the non-doer and the non-sufferer (akarta-abhokta)’,becomes established in his belief (shraddha), one becomesAtma. Once it becomes established into his conviction (pratiti),he has become Atma. And after that, whether it manifests ornot, is a different matter. That is because its manifestation (rupak)will come later.Questioner: I did not understand which condition or state(avastha) of the living being (jiva) you were referring to?Dadashri: Doing-suffering (karta-bhokta) is the conditionor state (avastha) of the living being (jiva)! ‘I am doing this, Iam suffering this’; that is the living being’s condition. ‘I am sufferingthis’, is a temporary (vinashi) state. Does one not say, ‘I willdie’? He may even say, ‘I am still going to live another fifteenyears’. They say that, do they not?Questioner: Yes, they say that.Dadashri: That is the living being (jiva).Aptavani-8167168Aptavani-8Questioner: Is the living being itself the doer?Dadashri: Its awareness is that, ‘I am the doer, I am thesufferer.’ It is soul (jiva) that desires to live, and that does notdesire to die. The Atma is the non-doer and the non-sufferer. Did you understand the self and the Self (jiva-Shiva)difference?When Does the Contradictory Worldly Life End? That is why it has been said:“Jo tu Jiva toh karta Hari;Jo tu Shiva, toh vastu khari” “If you are a living being (jiva), then God (Hari) is thedoer. If you are Atma (Shiva); then that is the real thing.”If you become the Shiva, then there is nothing else left;there is no one superior to you (upari). As long as you are aliving being (jiva) however, you like all the worldly (bhautik)pleasures and you like all your relatives. ‘Here comes mydaughter’s father-in-law.’ Even when his daughter’s father-in-law comes, he loses himself. Whatever one becomes lost in; thatis what one becomes. When the daughter’s father-in-law comes,he even gets lost in the daughter’s father-in-law. That is what ourpeople are like!Then it says:“karta meetey toh chhootey karma;aey chhey mahabhajan no marma”“One becomes free from the bondage of karma when thedoer is gone – this is the essence of the ultimate devotionaloffering of liberation.” What is the essence of the mahabhajan? If you do notbecome free of karma, then karma is subject to doer, the doeris subject to karma; karma is subject to doer; doer is subjectto karma. Is that not a wheel? Causes and effects, effects andcauses, causes and effects, effects and causes. And in it, they allteach you doership, and make you a doer: ‘Relinquish that; Dogood.’ On one hand, they want to get rid of their karma, whileon the other hand, they want to do this.Questioner: Contradictory.Dadashri: Yes, and therefore, this train will never reachKashi (holy place of salvation for Hindus). For countless lifetimes,their trains have not reached there. Hey! Who knowswhereabouts it may be idling, but no one’s train ever reachesKashi. I am giving you a passport for Kashi! The passport alonewill take you to Kashi. The wheels of the train will not take you,but this passport will. That is because your doership will goaway. Will there be anything else left in the world after that?Only The Gnani Can Free You from Wrong BeliefsQuestioner: I believe that it is the living being (jiva) thatmakes us do all this.Dadashri: But who is the doer? If it is the living being(jiva) that makes you do this, then who is the doer? In fact, itis not even the living being that is making you do it.Questioner: No, it is the living being that makes youdoit.Dadashri: It appears to you that the jiva is the one thatmakes you do it.Questioner: That is why I feel that you have to takecontrol of the jiva first, before you can move forward.Dadashri: Oh, the living being does not make you doanything, the poor thing! The jiva does not even have the capabilityto go to the toilet. It is when one becomes constipated, that onewill realize it is not in his power (shakti). Only when the doctorgives him something for it, he will be able to go to the toilet.Aptavani-8167168Aptavani-8Questioner: Is the living being itself the doer?Dadashri: Its awareness is that, ‘I am the doer, I am thesufferer.’ It is soul (jiva) that desires to live, and that does notdesire to die. The Atma is the non-doer and the non-sufferer. Did you understand the self and the Self (jiva-Shiva)difference?When Does the Contradictory Worldly Life End? That is why it has been said:“Jo tu Jiva toh karta Hari;Jo tu Shiva, toh vastu khari” “If you are a living being (jiva), then God (Hari) is thedoer. If you are Atma (Shiva); then that is the real thing.”If you become the Shiva, then there is nothing else left;there is no one superior to you (upari). As long as you are aliving being (jiva) however, you like all the worldly (bhautik)pleasures and you like all your relatives. ‘Here comes mydaughter’s father-in-law.’ Even when his daughter’s father-in-law comes, he loses himself. Whatever one becomes lost in; thatis what one becomes. When the daughter’s father-in-law comes,he even gets lost in the daughter’s father-in-law. That is what ourpeople are like!Then it says:“karta meetey toh chhootey karma;aey chhey mahabhajan no marma”“One becomes free from the bondage of karma when thedoer is gone – this is the essence of the ultimate devotionaloffering of liberation.” What is the essence of the mahabhajan? If you do notbecome free of karma, then karma is subject to doer, the doeris subject to karma; karma is subject to doer; doer is subjectto karma. Is that not a wheel? Causes and effects, effects andcauses, causes and effects, effects and causes. And in it, they allteach you doership, and make you a doer: ‘Relinquish that; Dogood.’ On one hand, they want to get rid of their karma, whileon the other hand, they want to do this.Questioner: Contradictory.Dadashri: Yes, and therefore, this train will never reachKashi (holy place of salvation for Hindus). For countless lifetimes,their trains have not reached there. Hey! Who knowswhereabouts it may be idling, but no one’s train ever reachesKashi. I am giving you a passport for Kashi! The passport alonewill take you to Kashi. The wheels of the train will not take you,but this passport will. That is because your doership will goaway. Will there be anything else left in the world after that?Only The Gnani Can Free You from Wrong BeliefsQuestioner: I believe that it is the living being (jiva) thatmakes us do all this.Dadashri: But who is the doer? If it is the living being(jiva) that makes you do this, then who is the doer? In fact, itis not even the living being that is making you do it.Questioner: No, it is the living being that makes youdoit.Dadashri: It appears to you that the jiva is the one thatmakes you do it.Questioner: That is why I feel that you have to takecontrol of the jiva first, before you can move forward.Dadashri: Oh, the living being does not make you doanything, the poor thing! The jiva does not even have the capabilityto go to the toilet. It is when one becomes constipated, that onewill realize it is not in his power (shakti). Only when the doctorgives him something for it, he will be able to go to the toilet.Aptavani-8169170Aptavani-8Questioner: But does it not tell you to go to the toiletfrom within, so you go to the toilet?Dadashri: That is true. The urging only comes from within.However, the living being (jiva) does not have its own power(satta) to go to the toilet. The jiva functions through anotherpower. It is not even the Atma’s power. It is true though, thatit does tell you from within. What does it mean to tell you?When the urging starts from within, the mind immediately tellsthe sense organs (indriya) what it wants to do. And so all thesense organs get ready. Thus everything works through the internalurging or energy of command (prerana shakti).Questioner: But is it not true, that you will only be ableto move ahead, if you take control of the jiva?Dadashri: Try taking control of the jiva! You do noteven have the energy (shakti) to go to the toilet. You do nothave the energy (shakti) to live, and you do not have the energyto die. If one did have the energy to die, then one would neverdie. But there is no energy of the sort.Questioner: Who has that energy?Dadashri: It is that very energy (shakti) that I am showingyou, and it is through this energy, that this world runs.Questioner: We call that the energy of God.Dadashri: Yes, the world calls it God. But that energy isan inanimate energy (jada shakti). It is an inanimate energy,which is why we do not call it God. People of the world do notunderstand that, do they? And that is why they believe that it isGod. Who, other than God, does that? But it is another energy(shakti) that does it. That is what I am going to show you!Questioner: I also believed that a living being (jiva) issomething which has all the coverings (avaran). And as thecoverings continue to break away, then from the embodied soul(jivatma), it becomes Atma.Dadashri: This is what so many people believe; that youshould call it an embodied soul (jiva), if it has layers of karma(avaran) over it, and that if it does not have the coverings(niravaran), you can call it Atma. But what am I trying to tellyou? That despite having the coverings (avaran), the Atma isstill attainable; therefore is this not something new!Questioner: This is something new. Otherwise we havebeen led to understand it as: whenever the water in the oceanis turned into waves, by the wind, it is the waves that are theAtma, and the ocean is the Absolute Soul (Parmatma).Dadashri: You can call all that a confusion caused by theego (vikalp). Mad misconception (vikalp)! Yes, you can saythat the one with coverings (avaran) is the living being (jiva),and the one without the coverings (niravaran) you should callAtma. We can put up with such a misconception (vikalp). Butany other projected beliefs (vikalp) like these, are useless. TheAtma is not something you can know. Rarely is there ever –even in a thousand or so years – one who has known the Atma(Atmagnani), and there may only be one, but no one else; thatis how unique it is. Unique means something you cannot competewith (binharif).So Many Consequences of the IllusionQuestioner: Living being (Jiva) is Atma (Shiva) and theAtma is itself the Absolute Soul (Parmatma), then why dopeople kill each other, murder, and hurt one another?Dadashri: That is a fight between the non-Self complexes(prakrutis); it is not a fight between Atmas. The prakruti fights.It is just like puppets fighting. As long as illusion (bhranti) existsit will be, ‘My son’s son (grandson) has died’. But oh! TheAtma has stayed as it is. However when the packing (khokha)dies, they grieve intensely! ‘He was my son’s only child!’ Hecries as if he himself is going to die!Aptavani-8169170Aptavani-8Questioner: But does it not tell you to go to the toiletfrom within, so you go to the toilet?Dadashri: That is true. The urging only comes from within.However, the living being (jiva) does not have its own power(satta) to go to the toilet. The jiva functions through anotherpower. It is not even the Atma’s power. It is true though, thatit does tell you from within. What does it mean to tell you?When the urging starts from within, the mind immediately tellsthe sense organs (indriya) what it wants to do. And so all thesense organs get ready. Thus everything works through the internalurging or energy of command (prerana shakti).Questioner: But is it not true, that you will only be ableto move ahead, if you take control of the jiva?Dadashri: Try taking control of the jiva! You do noteven have the energy (shakti) to go to the toilet. You do nothave the energy (shakti) to live, and you do not have the energyto die. If one did have the energy to die, then one would neverdie. But there is no energy of the sort.Questioner: Who has that energy?Dadashri: It is that very energy (shakti) that I am showingyou, and it is through this energy, that this world runs.Questioner: We call that the energy of God.Dadashri: Yes, the world calls it God. But that energy isan inanimate energy (jada shakti). It is an inanimate energy,which is why we do not call it God. People of the world do notunderstand that, do they? And that is why they believe that it isGod. Who, other than God, does that? But it is another energy(shakti) that does it. That is what I am going to show you!Questioner: I also believed that a living being (jiva) issomething which has all the coverings (avaran). And as thecoverings continue to break away, then from the embodied soul(jivatma), it becomes Atma.Dadashri: This is what so many people believe; that youshould call it an embodied soul (jiva), if it has layers of karma(avaran) over it, and that if it does not have the coverings(niravaran), you can call it Atma. But what am I trying to tellyou? That despite having the coverings (avaran), the Atma isstill attainable; therefore is this not something new!Questioner: This is something new. Otherwise we havebeen led to understand it as: whenever the water in the oceanis turned into waves, by the wind, it is the waves that are theAtma, and the ocean is the Absolute Soul (Parmatma).Dadashri: You can call all that a confusion caused by theego (vikalp). Mad misconception (vikalp)! Yes, you can saythat the one with coverings (avaran) is the living being (jiva),and the one without the coverings (niravaran) you should callAtma. We can put up with such a misconception (vikalp). Butany other projected beliefs (vikalp) like these, are useless. TheAtma is not something you can know. Rarely is there ever –even in a thousand or so years – one who has known the Atma(Atmagnani), and there may only be one, but no one else; thatis how unique it is. Unique means something you cannot competewith (binharif).So Many Consequences of the IllusionQuestioner: Living being (Jiva) is Atma (Shiva) and theAtma is itself the Absolute Soul (Parmatma), then why dopeople kill each other, murder, and hurt one another?Dadashri: That is a fight between the non-Self complexes(prakrutis); it is not a fight between Atmas. The prakruti fights.It is just like puppets fighting. As long as illusion (bhranti) existsit will be, ‘My son’s son (grandson) has died’. But oh! TheAtma has stayed as it is. However when the packing (khokha)dies, they grieve intensely! ‘He was my son’s only child!’ Hecries as if he himself is going to die!Aptavani-8171172Aptavani-8One Element: Many StatesThere are infinite Atmas, and they are all worthy ofbecoming God, but for now, they are in a state of mudhatma(unaware of the Self), which is bahirmukhi atma (externalizedvision of the self).A soul whose vision is directed towards the external(bahirmukhi atma) itself means that it is unaware of the Self(mudhatma). Vision, that is directed towards the external(bahirmukhi) means that one looks for happiness in temporarythings; ‘this is mine, this will give me happiness (sukh), this ishow I will be happy’, and he wanders for infinite lifetimes; butnothing gives him happiness. And so he becomes weary. Eventhen he will say that ‘this will bring happiness’. But there are somany things like that, infinite things, where one pushes one thingaside and picks up another, moves this one and then another! Ashe continues to do that, the time is passing, and happiness isnowhere to be found.All worldly pleasures are temporary, and they are imagined(kalpit); they are not real happiness. Imagined (kalpit) meansthat you may like rice-pudding, while someone else dislikes it.Does that not ever happen?Questioner: Yes, it does.Dadashri: Then everyone likes real happiness (sukh).Happiness that is eternal and true, is something that everyonelikes. This is imaginary happiness (kalpit sukh). Everyone’s isdifferent. These Hindus eat vegetarian food, while Muslims preferthe other. So everyone has different imaginings and notions(kalpit). This means that as long as one desires enjoyment ofimaginary pleasures, as long as one has passion for it, one livesas an embodied soul (jivatma). Until then, one is considered anembodied soul (jivatma). When one meets the Gnani Purush,he becomes antaratma (inner awakened Self; the interim stateSoul beginning with the conviction of ‘I am pure Soul’ endingwith absolute experience). And here, to become this innerawakened Soul (antaratma; interim state of the Self), even aSelf-realized person (sat purush) will not do. A Self-realizedperson can help you move forward. Once he has become theinterim state Soul (antaratma), his desire for worldly happinessand material pleasure (bhautik sukh) dissipates, and his desireturns toward attaining the happiness (sukh) of his Atma; theeternal happiness. And when the Gnani Purush lets him taste alittle bit of this happiness, he no longer relishes the other happiness.Just like the tea you drink in the morning. But while drinking thistea, if someone puts a plate of jalebi (crispy fritters soaked insweet syrup) in front of you, what would you choose? Whatwould you take first? Would you eat the jalebi, or would youdrink the tea?Questioner: Tea.Dadashri: You drink the tea first. Why? This is becauseif you eat the jalebi, the tea will taste bland. You will blame yourwife for that; why does the tea have no sugar in it? It is becauseof the jalebi that it tastes bland. That is what happens when youtaste the Atma’s happiness (sukh); all the worldly happiness andpleasures (bhautik sukh), become insipid, so that you loseinterest in it, you do not enjoy it; nevertheless you have toendure it, although you dislike it. That is when you attain theinterim state between the embodied soul (jivatma) and the pureSoul (Shuddhatma) – the antaratma.So, as long as he wants worldly pleasures, one is a soulwhose vision is directed externally (bahirmukhi atma). Andwhen he realizes his own Self (swaroop) that, ‘I am not this; Iam the pure Soul (Shuddhatma), I am immortal and I do notwant anything in the worldly life (sansar)’, is when his statebecomes the interim state of the Soul (antaratma). The state ofantaratma does two things: one is for worldly (bhautik)happiness; one has to do work for worldly interaction (vyavahar).Aptavani-8171172Aptavani-8One Element: Many StatesThere are infinite Atmas, and they are all worthy ofbecoming God, but for now, they are in a state of mudhatma(unaware of the Self), which is bahirmukhi atma (externalizedvision of the self).A soul whose vision is directed towards the external(bahirmukhi atma) itself means that it is unaware of the Self(mudhatma). Vision, that is directed towards the external(bahirmukhi) means that one looks for happiness in temporarythings; ‘this is mine, this will give me happiness (sukh), this ishow I will be happy’, and he wanders for infinite lifetimes; butnothing gives him happiness. And so he becomes weary. Eventhen he will say that ‘this will bring happiness’. But there are somany things like that, infinite things, where one pushes one thingaside and picks up another, moves this one and then another! Ashe continues to do that, the time is passing, and happiness isnowhere to be found.All worldly pleasures are temporary, and they are imagined(kalpit); they are not real happiness. Imagined (kalpit) meansthat you may like rice-pudding, while someone else dislikes it.Does that not ever happen?Questioner: Yes, it does.Dadashri: Then everyone likes real happiness (sukh).Happiness that is eternal and true, is something that everyonelikes. This is imaginary happiness (kalpit sukh). Everyone’s isdifferent. These Hindus eat vegetarian food, while Muslims preferthe other. So everyone has different imaginings and notions(kalpit). This means that as long as one desires enjoyment ofimaginary pleasures, as long as one has passion for it, one livesas an embodied soul (jivatma). Until then, one is considered anembodied soul (jivatma). When one meets the Gnani Purush,he becomes antaratma (inner awakened Self; the interim stateSoul beginning with the conviction of ‘I am pure Soul’ endingwith absolute experience). And here, to become this innerawakened Soul (antaratma; interim state of the Self), even aSelf-realized person (sat purush) will not do. A Self-realizedperson can help you move forward. Once he has become theinterim state Soul (antaratma), his desire for worldly happinessand material pleasure (bhautik sukh) dissipates, and his desireturns toward attaining the happiness (sukh) of his Atma; theeternal happiness. And when the Gnani Purush lets him taste alittle bit of this happiness, he no longer relishes the other happiness.Just like the tea you drink in the morning. But while drinking thistea, if someone puts a plate of jalebi (crispy fritters soaked insweet syrup) in front of you, what would you choose? Whatwould you take first? Would you eat the jalebi, or would youdrink the tea?Questioner: Tea.Dadashri: You drink the tea first. Why? This is becauseif you eat the jalebi, the tea will taste bland. You will blame yourwife for that; why does the tea have no sugar in it? It is becauseof the jalebi that it tastes bland. That is what happens when youtaste the Atma’s happiness (sukh); all the worldly happiness andpleasures (bhautik sukh), become insipid, so that you loseinterest in it, you do not enjoy it; nevertheless you have toendure it, although you dislike it. That is when you attain theinterim state between the embodied soul (jivatma) and the pureSoul (Shuddhatma) – the antaratma.So, as long as he wants worldly pleasures, one is a soulwhose vision is directed externally (bahirmukhi atma). Andwhen he realizes his own Self (swaroop) that, ‘I am not this; Iam the pure Soul (Shuddhatma), I am immortal and I do notwant anything in the worldly life (sansar)’, is when his statebecomes the interim state of the Soul (antaratma). The state ofantaratma does two things: one is for worldly (bhautik)happiness; one has to do work for worldly interaction (vyavahar).Aptavani-8173174Aptavani-8At times, one’s applied awareness (upayog) is drawn towardsthat direction. But when one has to do his own work, hisawareness is on this side. And so one possesses two types ofapplied awareness (upayog). There is just one applied awareness;however at whatever time, according to the particularcircumstances that come together, one’s applied awareness(upayog) is given to that side. And if these circumstances comealong, one gives applied awareness to this. Antaratma dashameans the stage of interim government. Then gradually as hegoes on to settle his external worldly life (sansar), the state ofthis interim government (antaratma) develops into fullgovernment.Now, what else do you want to ask?Questioner: That is exactly what I am trying to confirm,whether the embodied soul (jivatma), the interim state Soul(antaratma) and the Absolute Soul (Parmatma), are threedifferent names for the same thing?Dadashri: They are three adjectives for just one thing. Athome a man is considered the boy’s father. When you go to hisshop, he is known as the boss (sheth). And in court, he isknown as a lawyer; ‘hey, why do you say that when he is thesame father, the same boss, and the same lawyer?’ So the answeris: that he has an adjective according to each type of work hehas to perform. It is all determined by the types of circumstancesthat come together for him; when he comes across the shop, heis considered the boss, and when he is pleading a case in thecourtroom, he is considered a lawyer. That is how it all is.So when they say embodied soul (jivatma) and Atma, itis all the same thing. Just like everyone calls you professor, butwhat about the children at home?Questioner: They call me papa. Dadashri: Yes. And he is professor at the college. In thesame way, depending on whichever type of work you are doing,the adjectives have been given according to that. Just as you areone and the same person, but in one place you are papa, andin another you are professor. So even in this, an adjective hasbeen ascribed according to the work being done.One is an embodied soul (jivatma), as long as he believesthat there is happiness (sukh) only in transient and perishable(vinashi) things. And when that belief comes to an end, and thebelief that happiness lies only in the eternal, one has become theinterim state Soul (antaratma). He that has become devoid ofattachment and abhorrence (vitarag); that has no attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh) towards anyone, is considered theAbsolute Soul (Parmatma). So who is the interim state of theSoul (antaratma; inner awakened Soul)? The answer would bethat, he whose vision (drashti) is set on becoming devoid ofattachment and abhorrence (vitarag), is the interim state Soul(antaratma). And whoever derives enjoyment from worldly,material happiness (bhautik sukh), and continues to haveattachment and abhorrence (raag-dwesh), is the embodied soul(jivatma)! Did you understand all that?Questioner: There are so many veils (avaran) of illusion(maya)...Dadashri: They are indeed all the veils of only illusion(maya’s avaran)!Questioner: It is because of these veils of illusion, thatone is prevented from entering the interim state Soul (antaratma),or further still, make any progress even from the interim(antaratma) stage.Dadashri: No, once you become the interim state Soul(antaratma), the progress will always continue. But in the casewhere progress does not occur, one has not become the interimstate Soul (antaratma) at all. The interim state Soul (antaratma),becomes dependent-independent. If one is independent to aAptavani-8173174Aptavani-8At times, one’s applied awareness (upayog) is drawn towardsthat direction. But when one has to do his own work, hisawareness is on this side. And so one possesses two types ofapplied awareness (upayog). There is just one applied awareness;however at whatever time, according to the particularcircumstances that come together, one’s applied awareness(upayog) is given to that side. And if these circumstances comealong, one gives applied awareness to this. Antaratma dashameans the stage of interim government. Then gradually as hegoes on to settle his external worldly life (sansar), the state ofthis interim government (antaratma) develops into fullgovernment.Now, what else do you want to ask?Questioner: That is exactly what I am trying to confirm,whether the embodied soul (jivatma), the interim state Soul(antaratma) and the Absolute Soul (Parmatma), are threedifferent names for the same thing?Dadashri: They are three adjectives for just one thing. Athome a man is considered the boy’s father. When you go to hisshop, he is known as the boss (sheth). And in court, he isknown as a lawyer; ‘hey, why do you say that when he is thesame father, the same boss, and the same lawyer?’ So the answeris: that he has an adjective according to each type of work hehas to perform. It is all determined by the types of circumstancesthat come together for him; when he comes across the shop, heis considered the boss, and when he is pleading a case in thecourtroom, he is considered a lawyer. That is how it all is.So when they say embodied soul (jivatma) and Atma, itis all the same thing. Just like everyone calls you professor, butwhat about the children at home?Questioner: They call me papa. Dadashri: Yes. And he is professor at the college. In thesame way, depending on whichever type of work you are doing,the adjectives have been given according to that. Just as you areone and the same person, but in one place you are papa, andin another you are professor. So even in this, an adjective hasbeen ascribed according to the work being done.One is an embodied soul (jivatma), as long as he believesthat there is happiness (sukh) only in transient and perishable(vinashi) things. And when that belief comes to an end, and thebelief that happiness lies only in the eternal, one has become theinterim state Soul (antaratma). He that has become devoid ofattachment and abhorrence (vitarag); that has no attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh) towards anyone, is considered theAbsolute Soul (Parmatma). So who is the interim state of theSoul (antaratma; inner awakened Soul)? The answer would bethat, he whose vision (drashti) is set on becoming devoid ofattachment and abhorrence (vitarag), is the interim state Soul(antaratma). And whoever derives enjoyment from worldly,material happiness (bhautik sukh), and continues to haveattachment and abhorrence (raag-dwesh), is the embodied soul(jivatma)! Did you understand all that?Questioner: There are so many veils (avaran) of illusion(maya)...Dadashri: They are indeed all the veils of only illusion(maya’s avaran)!Questioner: It is because of these veils of illusion, thatone is prevented from entering the interim state Soul (antaratma),or further still, make any progress even from the interim(antaratma) stage.Dadashri: No, once you become the interim state Soul(antaratma), the progress will always continue. But in the casewhere progress does not occur, one has not become the interimstate Soul (antaratma) at all. The interim state Soul (antaratma),becomes dependent-independent. If one is independent to aAptavani-8175176Aptavani-8certain degree, then why can one not make progress? One cando everything. Therefore the living being (jiva) has not becomethe interim state Soul (antaratma)! One is still the embodiedsoul (jivatma). One still does not know what the difference isbetween self (jiva) and Atma (Shiva).It is just one thing: as long as one desires worldly happiness(bhautik sukh), one is a living being (jiva), and when he becomesaware of the bliss within and turns towards it, he is Atma (Shiva)!One is a living being (jiva), as long as one binds karma, andwhen he stops binding karma, he becomes Atma (Shiva)!Worship The Liberated Purush, For LiberationQuestioner: Now, the Atma is in sat chit anand swaroop(established in the blissful awareness of the eternal, the Self);whereas the living being (jiva) has five afflictions: ignorance,ego, attachment to pleasure, aversion to pain, and fear of death(panchklesha). So how can the living being (jiva) become satchit anand swaroop?Dadashri: It becomes like the one it worships. If itworships the state of eternal bliss (sat chit anand), it will becomethe embodiment of eternal bliss (sat chit anand), and if itvenerates a criminal, then it will become a criminal. The nature(swabhav) of the living being (jiva), is that it will become whateverit adores or worships. If one worships the one who is liberated(mukta Purush), one becomes free, and if one worshipssomeone who is bound, one becomes bound. Therefore, if weworship the one who has established in the blissful awareness ofthe eternal, the Self (sat chit anand swaroop), then we ourselvesbecome that form.Attributes of the New Changed StateQuestioner: When one goes from embodied soul(jivatma) to the interim state Soul (antaratma), what notablechanges happen?Dadashri: Do you mean the notable changes that occurfrom embodied soul (jivatma) to the interim state Soul(antaratma)?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: One’s tendencies (vrutti) stop going outwards.The tendencies that go outwards such as, ‘I will do this, I willdo that. We will do this, we will do that,’ will all turn around andcome back. Just like the cows that go to graze in the morning,but come evening, do they not return home? In the same way,the tendencies (vrutti) all turn around. So you should recognize,that the person is starting to become the pure Soul (Shuddhatma).The tendencies, that were roaming around outside, have stoppedtheir roaming and are returning homeward. If you look at yourown tendencies, when you examine them, they will appear as ifthey are roaming around all over, so one might be wandering offthat way, one this way, even all the way to those big snackhouses and restaurants, is that not so? The big snack houses arevery nice, and if just one day, you go and try it out, then thetendencies (vrutti) will just keep wandering off there. Thereforethe tendencies will keep roaming around, but once you becomethe interim state Soul (antaratma), the tendencies turn back.Questioner: When one progresses from the interim stateSoul (antaratma) to the Absolute Soul (Parmatma), whatnotable changes take place?Dadashri: What it is, is that, the astitva (existence),vastutva (the Self; to know ‘Who am I?’) and purnatva (thestate of being complete, the absolute Self), are three gradations.Every living being (jiva) has the awareness of its existence(astitva), ‘I am’. Does it or does it not have the awareness of‘I am’? It is not just humans, but even animals, that have theawareness of ‘I am’. Even this tree has the awareness of ‘I am’.Therefore each and every living being (jiva) is aware of itsexistence (astitva). And when it becomes the interim awakenedAptavani-8175176Aptavani-8certain degree, then why can one not make progress? One cando everything. Therefore the living being (jiva) has not becomethe interim state Soul (antaratma)! One is still the embodiedsoul (jivatma). One still does not know what the difference isbetween self (jiva) and Atma (Shiva).It is just one thing: as long as one desires worldly happiness(bhautik sukh), one is a living being (jiva), and when he becomesaware of the bliss within and turns towards it, he is Atma (Shiva)!One is a living being (jiva), as long as one binds karma, andwhen he stops binding karma, he becomes Atma (Shiva)!Worship The Liberated Purush, For LiberationQuestioner: Now, the Atma is in sat chit anand swaroop(established in the blissful awareness of the eternal, the Self);whereas the living being (jiva) has five afflictions: ignorance,ego, attachment to pleasure, aversion to pain, and fear of death(panchklesha). So how can the living being (jiva) become satchit anand swaroop?Dadashri: It becomes like the one it worships. If itworships the state of eternal bliss (sat chit anand), it will becomethe embodiment of eternal bliss (sat chit anand), and if itvenerates a criminal, then it will become a criminal. The nature(swabhav) of the living being (jiva), is that it will become whateverit adores or worships. If one worships the one who is liberated(mukta Purush), one becomes free, and if one worshipssomeone who is bound, one becomes bound. Therefore, if weworship the one who has established in the blissful awareness ofthe eternal, the Self (sat chit anand swaroop), then we ourselvesbecome that form.Attributes of the New Changed StateQuestioner: When one goes from embodied soul(jivatma) to the interim state Soul (antaratma), what notablechanges happen?Dadashri: Do you mean the notable changes that occurfrom embodied soul (jivatma) to the interim state Soul(antaratma)?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: One’s tendencies (vrutti) stop going outwards.The tendencies that go outwards such as, ‘I will do this, I willdo that. We will do this, we will do that,’ will all turn around andcome back. Just like the cows that go to graze in the morning,but come evening, do they not return home? In the same way,the tendencies (vrutti) all turn around. So you should recognize,that the person is starting to become the pure Soul (Shuddhatma).The tendencies, that were roaming around outside, have stoppedtheir roaming and are returning homeward. If you look at yourown tendencies, when you examine them, they will appear as ifthey are roaming around all over, so one might be wandering offthat way, one this way, even all the way to those big snackhouses and restaurants, is that not so? The big snack houses arevery nice, and if just one day, you go and try it out, then thetendencies (vrutti) will just keep wandering off there. Thereforethe tendencies will keep roaming around, but once you becomethe interim state Soul (antaratma), the tendencies turn back.Questioner: When one progresses from the interim stateSoul (antaratma) to the Absolute Soul (Parmatma), whatnotable changes take place?Dadashri: What it is, is that, the astitva (existence),vastutva (the Self; to know ‘Who am I?’) and purnatva (thestate of being complete, the absolute Self), are three gradations.Every living being (jiva) has the awareness of its existence(astitva), ‘I am’. Does it or does it not have the awareness of‘I am’? It is not just humans, but even animals, that have theawareness of ‘I am’. Even this tree has the awareness of ‘I am’.Therefore each and every living being (jiva) is aware of itsexistence (astitva). And when it becomes the interim awakenedAptavani-8177178Aptavani-8Soul (antaratma), then he becomes aware of the vastutva (theSelf), ‘Who am I?’ Thereafter the absolute state (purnatva)carries on naturally on its own. Spiritual effort (purusharth) isonly needed in the stages from existence (astitva) to awarenessof its Self (vastutva). And after that, it continues to ascendnaturally. This is how the change in the vision (drashti) is.Instead of going this way, one heads the other way,believing that his full completion (paripurnata) lies in that direction.When he meets a Gnani Purush, who turns him back, andchanges his vision in this direction, then the state of the embodiedsoul (jivatma) is broken. And when he comes to his originalplace (muda sthan), he attains the interim state of the Soul(antaratma). The tendencies (vrutti) then all start to return. Ashe turned around, so do the tendencies start turning around, andhe continues to be more and more natural and spontaneous(sahaj). Until the interim state of the Soul (antaratma) is attained,until the “interim government” is established, one needs to takethe Gnani’s support. Full government will continue to beestablished once the interim government is established.‘You’ Attain Your Own Completion, Throughthe Nimit of the GnaniQuestioner: You Dada, are absolute (param) Atma, andwe are living beings (jiva), that is the only ‘difference’ in us andin you!Dadashri: That is the ‘difference’. But after you dodarshan (see; visit) here and you receive Gnan, ‘you’ thenbecome the interim state Soul (antaratma). The interim stateSoul can see the Absolute Soul (Parmatma). And from ‘seeing’,that form (Parmatma), becomes your own. Then what morecould you want?Right now there are so many ‘wrong beliefs’ that have setin! We have to “fracture” these ‘wrong beliefs’, and instill the‘right belief’; therefore ‘You’ become the interim state Soul(antaratma). Then the absolute state (purnahuti) will occurnaturally.And this is not the kingdom of lawless rule of somePopabaai (‘Popabaai nu raaj’). I give you moksha (liberation)in just one hour, and it does not happen through Popabaai’srule. This has never happened. I am just an instrumental being(nimit). This is an extraordinary path. Where there is a rule,there is always an exception. This path is an exceptional one,and I have come to be its nimit.Conviction of Parmatma Leads to the AbsoluteWhen one enters the state of delusion or ignorance of theSelf (mudha dasha), one is called mudhatma (deluded self;unaware of reality; the worldly self; not awakened to the Self).What would you call, ‘I am Chandubhai, I am a collector’? Itis the state of delusion of the deluded soul (mudhatma). Hebelieves that happiness lies in destructible, perishable (nashavant)things. You are indestructible and eternal (avinashi). And theperishable (nashavant) is destructible and impermanent (vinashi),and you can never multiply the two, ever. Nevertheless, becauseof illusion (bhranti) one believes that happiness lies in worldlythings, and that is why he is called the deluded self (mudhatma).Now when the Gnani Purush gives him the conviction(pratiti) of the Absolute Soul (Parmatma): ‘This world is notall mine; I am the Absolute Soul.’ It is then that the ‘I am this’(hoo-panu) becomes one with the Absolute Soul (Parmatma).At first, it is not complete oneness; but they become one throughthe intent of conviction (pratiti bhaav). Firstly it is through theintent of conviction (pratiti bhaav), and then they become onethrough the intent of Knowledge (Gnan bhaav). So first theconviction (pratiti) of ‘I am the Absolute Soul (Parmatma)’has to set in. Right now, ‘I am Chandubhai’ is the wrong beliefthat has established itself. ‘I am a collector’ is a wrong belief.Aptavani-8177178Aptavani-8Soul (antaratma), then he becomes aware of the vastutva (theSelf), ‘Who am I?’ Thereafter the absolute state (purnatva)carries on naturally on its own. Spiritual effort (purusharth) isonly needed in the stages from existence (astitva) to awarenessof its Self (vastutva). And after that, it continues to ascendnaturally. This is how the change in the vision (drashti) is.Instead of going this way, one heads the other way,believing that his full completion (paripurnata) lies in that direction.When he meets a Gnani Purush, who turns him back, andchanges his vision in this direction, then the state of the embodiedsoul (jivatma) is broken. And when he comes to his originalplace (muda sthan), he attains the interim state of the Soul(antaratma). The tendencies (vrutti) then all start to return. Ashe turned around, so do the tendencies start turning around, andhe continues to be more and more natural and spontaneous(sahaj). Until the interim state of the Soul (antaratma) is attained,until the “interim government” is established, one needs to takethe Gnani’s support. Full government will continue to beestablished once the interim government is established.‘You’ Attain Your Own Completion, Throughthe Nimit of the GnaniQuestioner: You Dada, are absolute (param) Atma, andwe are living beings (jiva), that is the only ‘difference’ in us andin you!Dadashri: That is the ‘difference’. But after you dodarshan (see; visit) here and you receive Gnan, ‘you’ thenbecome the interim state Soul (antaratma). The interim stateSoul can see the Absolute Soul (Parmatma). And from ‘seeing’,that form (Parmatma), becomes your own. Then what morecould you want?Right now there are so many ‘wrong beliefs’ that have setin! We have to “fracture” these ‘wrong beliefs’, and instill the‘right belief’; therefore ‘You’ become the interim state Soul(antaratma). Then the absolute state (purnahuti) will occurnaturally.And this is not the kingdom of lawless rule of somePopabaai (‘Popabaai nu raaj’). I give you moksha (liberation)in just one hour, and it does not happen through Popabaai’srule. This has never happened. I am just an instrumental being(nimit). This is an extraordinary path. Where there is a rule,there is always an exception. This path is an exceptional one,and I have come to be its nimit.Conviction of Parmatma Leads to the AbsoluteWhen one enters the state of delusion or ignorance of theSelf (mudha dasha), one is called mudhatma (deluded self;unaware of reality; the worldly self; not awakened to the Self).What would you call, ‘I am Chandubhai, I am a collector’? Itis the state of delusion of the deluded soul (mudhatma). Hebelieves that happiness lies in destructible, perishable (nashavant)things. You are indestructible and eternal (avinashi). And theperishable (nashavant) is destructible and impermanent (vinashi),and you can never multiply the two, ever. Nevertheless, becauseof illusion (bhranti) one believes that happiness lies in worldlythings, and that is why he is called the deluded self (mudhatma).Now when the Gnani Purush gives him the conviction(pratiti) of the Absolute Soul (Parmatma): ‘This world is notall mine; I am the Absolute Soul.’ It is then that the ‘I am this’(hoo-panu) becomes one with the Absolute Soul (Parmatma).At first, it is not complete oneness; but they become one throughthe intent of conviction (pratiti bhaav). Firstly it is through theintent of conviction (pratiti bhaav), and then they become onethrough the intent of Knowledge (Gnan bhaav). So first theconviction (pratiti) of ‘I am the Absolute Soul (Parmatma)’has to set in. Right now, ‘I am Chandubhai’ is the wrong beliefthat has established itself. ‘I am a collector’ is a wrong belief.Aptavani-8179180 Aptavani-8Those are all the wrong beliefs that the Gnani Purush willfracture (destroy), and he will install the right belief. You yourselfwill accept it, your mind-intellect-chit-ego and everything willaccept it, so that you become free from doubt (nihshank) – thatis when your work gets done.You are filled with infinite lifetimes of doubt (sanshaya).And when the Gnani Purush fractures them all for you, you willbecome free from doubt (sanshaya), and then attain the AbsoluteSoul (Parmatma). And the belief and faith (shraddha) thatarises, is the right belief.Every Soul Is a Separate Entity Even inSiddha KshetraQuestioner: Are all the souls different, or are they differentforms of one Absolute Soul (Parmatma)?Dadashri: With respect to worldly interaction (vyavahar),they are all different. When we look at them by name andphysical form, through worldly interaction, they are all different,but really they are one. Relatively they are all different, but reallythey are the same! So what do you wish to know?Questioner: This Brahma (the Self) that there is. Whydid he have a desire to become infinitesimally divided, frombeing just one integral thing? Why did he have the desire, EkohamBahusyam (I am One, may I be many)?Dadashri: What this is, is that he is just one. He has notbecome many; he is just one. But it is because of illusion (bhranti)that there appears to be many. This is all just one nature(swabhav). No matter how many ingots of gold you have, if youput them all together, would it not all be the same gold? But ifbrass gets mixed in with it, there is damage! They are all trulyBhagwan (God); their form (swaroop) is Bhagwan. But thereason as to why they all appear different is because of illusion(bhranti).Questioner: So is the element of Atma (chetan tattva),the same in all of them?Dadashri: Yes, it is the same. But by same, we mean thatthey are the same by nature (swabhav)!Questioner: But upon death, when the Soul (chetan)goes away, does it not reunite? How can it survive a separateexistence?Dadashri: Everything in this world is separate. Theseparation that is felt over here, is the same separation that isover there! The separation over there, means that by nature(swabhav) everything seems to be as one, but by existence(astitva), they are separate. To experience one’s own (of theSelf) bliss (sukh); one is separate.By their inherent nature (swabhav), they are one, but theyappear different through the differentiating intellect (bhed buddhi).As long as you have this intellect (buddhi), there will beinterference. When the intellect comes to an end, is when youwill experience the oneness (abhedta). What does the intellectdo? It creates division. Once the intellect is gone, you will beable to understand this.If what you said was true, about there being a reunificationup above, then no one would ever go to the final liberation(moksha)! If that is what is really going to happen, and we wereall going to merge into a single light, then what would we get outof it? Instead of that, here your wife may berate you, but at leastshe will make you savory fritters (bhajiya)! So what is wrongwith that? Therefore, you do not become one over there. Thereis no kind of suffering there. You just live in eternal bliss(parmanand) over there. And moreover, each Atma isindependent. Their nature (swabhav) is the same, but they areall separate entities. So if they all became one over there, thenwhat would happen to the Atmas over here?Aptavani-8179180 Aptavani-8Those are all the wrong beliefs that the Gnani Purush willfracture (destroy), and he will install the right belief. You yourselfwill accept it, your mind-intellect-chit-ego and everything willaccept it, so that you become free from doubt (nihshank) – thatis when your work gets done.You are filled with infinite lifetimes of doubt (sanshaya).And when the Gnani Purush fractures them all for you, you willbecome free from doubt (sanshaya), and then attain the AbsoluteSoul (Parmatma). And the belief and faith (shraddha) thatarises, is the right belief.Every Soul Is a Separate Entity Even inSiddha KshetraQuestioner: Are all the souls different, or are they differentforms of one Absolute Soul (Parmatma)?Dadashri: With respect to worldly interaction (vyavahar),they are all different. When we look at them by name andphysical form, through worldly interaction, they are all different,but really they are one. Relatively they are all different, but reallythey are the same! So what do you wish to know?Questioner: This Brahma (the Self) that there is. Whydid he have a desire to become infinitesimally divided, frombeing just one integral thing? Why did he have the desire, EkohamBahusyam (I am One, may I be many)?Dadashri: What this is, is that he is just one. He has notbecome many; he is just one. But it is because of illusion (bhranti)that there appears to be many. This is all just one nature(swabhav). No matter how many ingots of gold you have, if youput them all together, would it not all be the same gold? But ifbrass gets mixed in with it, there is damage! They are all trulyBhagwan (God); their form (swaroop) is Bhagwan. But thereason as to why they all appear different is because of illusion(bhranti).Questioner: So is the element of Atma (chetan tattva),the same in all of them?Dadashri: Yes, it is the same. But by same, we mean thatthey are the same by nature (swabhav)!Questioner: But upon death, when the Soul (chetan)goes away, does it not reunite? How can it survive a separateexistence?Dadashri: Everything in this world is separate. Theseparation that is felt over here, is the same separation that isover there! The separation over there, means that by nature(swabhav) everything seems to be as one, but by existence(astitva), they are separate. To experience one’s own (of theSelf) bliss (sukh); one is separate.By their inherent nature (swabhav), they are one, but theyappear different through the differentiating intellect (bhed buddhi).As long as you have this intellect (buddhi), there will beinterference. When the intellect comes to an end, is when youwill experience the oneness (abhedta). What does the intellectdo? It creates division. Once the intellect is gone, you will beable to understand this.If what you said was true, about there being a reunificationup above, then no one would ever go to the final liberation(moksha)! If that is what is really going to happen, and we wereall going to merge into a single light, then what would we get outof it? Instead of that, here your wife may berate you, but at leastshe will make you savory fritters (bhajiya)! So what is wrongwith that? Therefore, you do not become one over there. Thereis no kind of suffering there. You just live in eternal bliss(parmanand) over there. And moreover, each Atma isindependent. Their nature (swabhav) is the same, but they areall separate entities. So if they all became one over there, thenwhat would happen to the Atmas over here?Aptavani-8181182Aptavani-8Questioner: So if there is just one kind of chetan (theSelf), how can its existence be separate?Dadashri: It does remain separate, so how can theybecome one? They can never become one. These bars of goldare all separate, but essentially it is all gold. You can say thesame for the Atma; that it is one. But just like these gold bars,they are all separate. There is no other difference in them. It isthrough the intellect (buddhi) that you see them from the wrongaspect. Otherwise, in the absolute liberated state (siddha sthiti),they are all experiencing their own bliss (sukh)!Those who have differentiating intellects (bhed buddhi),find it very difficult to understand this! Although they are many,they are one; is something worth understanding, and alsosomething very subtle! If they were to all merge in one overthere, then what do you get out of it? Even I heard the samething when I was young, that one light (deevo) melds with another,to become one. So how did that help me? You want the blissof moksha, so if they all become one, what kind of bliss wouldyou get? If you become one with Bhagwan (God), then whatis left of you? And besides, they are all Bhagwan. Ramchandrajihas gone on to moksha, and right now he himself is enjoying thebliss of moksha. Whereas we are here, and so we have toendure the problems that we have over here.Even in the worldly life (sansar), even in the universe,there is not just one Atma; there are infinite living beings (jiva),but they all have one inherent nature (swabhav). There is neverany change in their inherent properties or traits (gunadharma).It Will Have to Be ScientificQuestioner: But what I believe is that besides the elementof the Absolute Soul (Parmatma tattva), there is nothing else,and that which we call Atma, is nothing other than a manifestationof the Absolute Soul (Parmatma).Dadashri: You can believe that, but along with it, do younot also suffer unhappiness and pain (dukh)? So if the Atmawere the manifestation of the Absolute Soul (Parmatma), thenhave you experienced unhappiness?Questioner: Yes, I have experienced unhappiness (dukh).Dadashri: Since you do experience unhappiness, youwill have to believe in all the numbers from one to hundred.And if you do not experience unhappiness (dukh), then it isfine if you do not believe in them. Otherwise, you will have tobelieve in all the numbers from one to hundred: forty-five, thenforty-six should follow, and after forty-six, forty-seven shouldfollow. Everything will have to be methodical. No falsity andno discrepancies. It may work everywhere else, but in science,falsity will not work!Questioner: So does it mean that the Atma is now aseparate element, since it has separated from the Absolute Soul(Parmatma)?Dadashri: Not separated; the Atma itself is the AbsoluteSoul, and even the embodied soul (jivatma) is the AbsoluteSoul (Parmatma). The difference only lies in the understanding.When he is at home, they will say, ‘He is this woman’s husband.’And when he goes to the shop, they say, ‘He is the boss.’ Whenhe goes to court, they will say, ‘He is the lawyer.’ But he himselfis the same person. Therefore, it is the same embodied soul(jivatma); the same interim state Soul (antaratma); and thesame Absolute Soul (Parmatma)! And each one is ascribed anadjective according to the work that it performs.There Is No Merging of SoulsQuestioner: So is it true that the Atma really does mergeinto the Absolute Soul (Parmatma), if not in one avatar(lifetime), then perhaps in the next avatar or even in the thirdavatar?Aptavani-8181182Aptavani-8Questioner: So if there is just one kind of chetan (theSelf), how can its existence be separate?Dadashri: It does remain separate, so how can theybecome one? They can never become one. These bars of goldare all separate, but essentially it is all gold. You can say thesame for the Atma; that it is one. But just like these gold bars,they are all separate. There is no other difference in them. It isthrough the intellect (buddhi) that you see them from the wrongaspect. Otherwise, in the absolute liberated state (siddha sthiti),they are all experiencing their own bliss (sukh)!Those who have differentiating intellects (bhed buddhi),find it very difficult to understand this! Although they are many,they are one; is something worth understanding, and alsosomething very subtle! If they were to all merge in one overthere, then what do you get out of it? Even I heard the samething when I was young, that one light (deevo) melds with another,to become one. So how did that help me? You want the blissof moksha, so if they all become one, what kind of bliss wouldyou get? If you become one with Bhagwan (God), then whatis left of you? And besides, they are all Bhagwan. Ramchandrajihas gone on to moksha, and right now he himself is enjoying thebliss of moksha. Whereas we are here, and so we have toendure the problems that we have over here.Even in the worldly life (sansar), even in the universe,there is not just one Atma; there are infinite living beings (jiva),but they all have one inherent nature (swabhav). There is neverany change in their inherent properties or traits (gunadharma).It Will Have to Be ScientificQuestioner: But what I believe is that besides the elementof the Absolute Soul (Parmatma tattva), there is nothing else,and that which we call Atma, is nothing other than a manifestationof the Absolute Soul (Parmatma).Dadashri: You can believe that, but along with it, do younot also suffer unhappiness and pain (dukh)? So if the Atmawere the manifestation of the Absolute Soul (Parmatma), thenhave you experienced unhappiness?Questioner: Yes, I have experienced unhappiness (dukh).Dadashri: Since you do experience unhappiness, youwill have to believe in all the numbers from one to hundred.And if you do not experience unhappiness (dukh), then it isfine if you do not believe in them. Otherwise, you will have tobelieve in all the numbers from one to hundred: forty-five, thenforty-six should follow, and after forty-six, forty-seven shouldfollow. Everything will have to be methodical. No falsity andno discrepancies. It may work everywhere else, but in science,falsity will not work!Questioner: So does it mean that the Atma is now aseparate element, since it has separated from the Absolute Soul(Parmatma)?Dadashri: Not separated; the Atma itself is the AbsoluteSoul, and even the embodied soul (jivatma) is the AbsoluteSoul (Parmatma). The difference only lies in the understanding.When he is at home, they will say, ‘He is this woman’s husband.’And when he goes to the shop, they say, ‘He is the boss.’ Whenhe goes to court, they will say, ‘He is the lawyer.’ But he himselfis the same person. Therefore, it is the same embodied soul(jivatma); the same interim state Soul (antaratma); and thesame Absolute Soul (Parmatma)! And each one is ascribed anadjective according to the work that it performs.There Is No Merging of SoulsQuestioner: So is it true that the Atma really does mergeinto the Absolute Soul (Parmatma), if not in one avatar(lifetime), then perhaps in the next avatar or even in the thirdavatar?Aptavani-8183184Aptavani-8Dadashri: No, no! There is no merging over there. TheAtma itself is the Absolute Soul (Parmatma). ‘I am Chandubhai’is the awareness that you have right now. And when you havethe awareness, ‘I am Atma’, that is when you will have theawareness of the Absolute Soul. That Atma is the Absolute Soulitself. Even your Atma is the Absolute Soul, and his Atma isalso the Absolute Soul (Parmatma). But the whole conceptabout merging that people have written about; has just ruinedpeople’s minds. How can you have merging of the Atma? It isthe same Atma, but they are not aware of it yet. You are unawareof Atma at the present time. You do not have the awareness ofAtma. At the moment, ‘I am Chandubhai’ is the awareness youhave; ‘I am Desai’ is the awareness you have. But ‘I am Atma’,is not the awareness that you have!All these (mahatmas) are seeing the Atma that resideswithin you, and that itself is the Absolute Soul (Parmatma). Ifthere were any merging occurring, you would not even see theAbsolute Soul! You can even see the Absolute Soul in the goat!The entire Absolute Soul is sitting inside a goat, even inside adonkey there sits the Absolute Soul. So there is no such thingas merging. You need to put everything you have read so far, toone side.If you cannot get any butter out of it, in spite of churningit, then what good is it? Just get rid of it, pour it out. Moreover,all the effort that went into it; has gone to waste and has clottedhis head with the arrogance of, ‘I know something!’Oh hey, what do you know? All this relentless tripping andstumbling has taken a toll on you! If a person takes such abeating, would he not feel thwarted? And who knows what hethinks of himself!Questioner: But it has been said that every Atma is aseparate part of the one Atma. It is a separate part of theAbsolute (Brahma), then it merges back into it.Dadashri: Who told you that?Questioner: I have read that every Atma merges into theAbsolute (Brahma). When the Atma attains its absolute state,it merges into the Absolute (Brahma).Dadashri: So then what is there left for you?Questioner: We become one with the Absolute (Brahma)!Dadashri: But what is there in it for you?Questioner: I want to be rid of the state of I and my, thatpertains to the ego (apnapanu), and attain the state of God(Ishwarpanu).Dadashri: Yes, but how will you benefit from becomingan integrated part of God (Ishwar)? Instead of that, you dohave your own independent identity, and right now you getyour sweets and fritters (laadva and bhajiya) and everything.Is it not just a matter of putting up with a few insults?! Whatother problems do you have? Besides, what do these peoplesay over here? They say, ‘We only want to go to moksha(final liberation), if there is more happiness (sukh) over therethan there is over here, but if we have to merge over there, wedo not want to go!’If Light Merges With Light, What Is Left ofYou?Questioner: But those who say, ‘I am the Absolute’(Aham Brahmasmi), talk about merging into the light, sayingthat moksha means merging into the light, are they both thesame thing?Dadashri: What they consider as final liberation (moksha);that final liberation means merging into the light, is not the propermoksha. The moksha that those who no longer have attachmentand abhorrence (the Vitarag), have spoken of: that there in therealm of the Liberated Souls (Siddha gati), one experiencesAptavani-8183184Aptavani-8Dadashri: No, no! There is no merging over there. TheAtma itself is the Absolute Soul (Parmatma). ‘I am Chandubhai’is the awareness that you have right now. And when you havethe awareness, ‘I am Atma’, that is when you will have theawareness of the Absolute Soul. That Atma is the Absolute Soulitself. Even your Atma is the Absolute Soul, and his Atma isalso the Absolute Soul (Parmatma). But the whole conceptabout merging that people have written about; has just ruinedpeople’s minds. How can you have merging of the Atma? It isthe same Atma, but they are not aware of it yet. You are unawareof Atma at the present time. You do not have the awareness ofAtma. At the moment, ‘I am Chandubhai’ is the awareness youhave; ‘I am Desai’ is the awareness you have. But ‘I am Atma’,is not the awareness that you have!All these (mahatmas) are seeing the Atma that resideswithin you, and that itself is the Absolute Soul (Parmatma). Ifthere were any merging occurring, you would not even see theAbsolute Soul! You can even see the Absolute Soul in the goat!The entire Absolute Soul is sitting inside a goat, even inside adonkey there sits the Absolute Soul. So there is no such thingas merging. You need to put everything you have read so far, toone side.If you cannot get any butter out of it, in spite of churningit, then what good is it? Just get rid of it, pour it out. Moreover,all the effort that went into it; has gone to waste and has clottedhis head with the arrogance of, ‘I know something!’Oh hey, what do you know? All this relentless tripping andstumbling has taken a toll on you! If a person takes such abeating, would he not feel thwarted? And who knows what hethinks of himself!Questioner: But it has been said that every Atma is aseparate part of the one Atma. It is a separate part of theAbsolute (Brahma), then it merges back into it.Dadashri: Who told you that?Questioner: I have read that every Atma merges into theAbsolute (Brahma). When the Atma attains its absolute state,it merges into the Absolute (Brahma).Dadashri: So then what is there left for you?Questioner: We become one with the Absolute (Brahma)!Dadashri: But what is there in it for you?Questioner: I want to be rid of the state of I and my, thatpertains to the ego (apnapanu), and attain the state of God(Ishwarpanu).Dadashri: Yes, but how will you benefit from becomingan integrated part of God (Ishwar)? Instead of that, you dohave your own independent identity, and right now you getyour sweets and fritters (laadva and bhajiya) and everything.Is it not just a matter of putting up with a few insults?! Whatother problems do you have? Besides, what do these peoplesay over here? They say, ‘We only want to go to moksha(final liberation), if there is more happiness (sukh) over therethan there is over here, but if we have to merge over there, wedo not want to go!’If Light Merges With Light, What Is Left ofYou?Questioner: But those who say, ‘I am the Absolute’(Aham Brahmasmi), talk about merging into the light, sayingthat moksha means merging into the light, are they both thesame thing?Dadashri: What they consider as final liberation (moksha);that final liberation means merging into the light, is not the propermoksha. The moksha that those who no longer have attachmentand abhorrence (the Vitarag), have spoken of: that there in therealm of the Liberated Souls (Siddha gati), one experiencesAptavani-8185186Aptavani-8one’s own separation and independence – that is the correctthing! If we do not have the experience of separation andindependence, and in the final liberation (moksha) we have tomerge and become one, then there is no point in going to moksha,it would be meaningless. Therefore all these are just thoughtlessideas.Constant Immersion in Eternal Bliss – ThatIs Moksha!Questioner: So according to your assessment, what doyou consider moksha (the final liberation) to be?Dadashri: Moksha means, no boss, no subordinate andpermanently remaining in one’s own natural state of bliss. Andone enjoys one’s own bliss, on his own, independently. EveryLiberated Soul (Siddha) is in its own state.Questioner: So do all these many Liberated Souls(Siddha Atma) behave in their own different ways over there?Dadashri: No, not in different ways. They all have thesame nature (swabhav), which is only in one way. They haveKnowledge (Gnan), Vision (Darshan) and bliss (sukh). Theydo not have conduct (charitra). If there were a TirthankarBhagwan here, He would possess Knowledge, Vision andConduct (Gnan, Darshan and charitra), as well as a body.The Liberated Souls (Siddhas) over there, do not possess conduct(charitra). Over there, they always exist in their own naturalbliss!So there is no merging over there. There, you can enjoyyour own bliss in an independent way. In the abode of theLiberated Souls (Siddha gati), all the Liberated Souls (Siddhas)exist in an independent way. And they all experience their ownbliss. They experience constant Absolute Bliss (Parmanand). Ifjust a minute’s worth of their bliss (sukh), should ever fall toEarth, or happen to ever slip down, the entire world wouldexperience bliss (anand) for a thousand years – that is the kindof bliss they enjoy over there. And that is the kind of happiness(sukh), that these people are struggling to find. Your own bliss(sukh) is like that. For me, in spite of the hindrance of this body,from the bliss (sukh) that there is, I can tell that if the body werenot a hindrance, what kind of a bliss it would be! You are sittingwith me and even then you are all experiencing the joy and bliss(sukh)! It is my bliss that is overflowing, and you are getting ataste of it!Questioner: Without a physical body, how can weexperience bliss (sukh)?Dadashri: When you try to contemplate bliss without aphysical body, your body is with you, and so the bliss that youcontemplate, will not be like the other one. From this, you caninfer that if there is so much bliss (sukh) over here, what kindof bliss would there be over there?!The Experience of the Bliss of the Self inSiddha-GatiQuestioner: Those who are in the realm of the LiberatedSouls (Siddha gati), who have gone to moksha (final liberation),and who are experiencing the bliss without a body; who isexperiencing that bliss?Dadashri: The Self experiences the bliss of the Self. Theyexperience their own constant bliss, and they are constantly intheir own space. And what work do they do? It is the work ofKnowing (Gnan kriya) and the work of Seeing (Darshan kriya),that goes on continuously!Questioner: Then why would they need this work ofKnowing and Seeing over there?Dadashri: That is their nature! This light, would it not beconstantly seeing us? If this light were living (chetan), then wouldAptavani-8185186Aptavani-8one’s own separation and independence – that is the correctthing! If we do not have the experience of separation andindependence, and in the final liberation (moksha) we have tomerge and become one, then there is no point in going to moksha,it would be meaningless. Therefore all these are just thoughtlessideas.Constant Immersion in Eternal Bliss – ThatIs Moksha!Questioner: So according to your assessment, what doyou consider moksha (the final liberation) to be?Dadashri: Moksha means, no boss, no subordinate andpermanently remaining in one’s own natural state of bliss. Andone enjoys one’s own bliss, on his own, independently. EveryLiberated Soul (Siddha) is in its own state.Questioner: So do all these many Liberated Souls(Siddha Atma) behave in their own different ways over there?Dadashri: No, not in different ways. They all have thesame nature (swabhav), which is only in one way. They haveKnowledge (Gnan), Vision (Darshan) and bliss (sukh). Theydo not have conduct (charitra). If there were a TirthankarBhagwan here, He would possess Knowledge, Vision andConduct (Gnan, Darshan and charitra), as well as a body.The Liberated Souls (Siddhas) over there, do not possess conduct(charitra). Over there, they always exist in their own naturalbliss!So there is no merging over there. There, you can enjoyyour own bliss in an independent way. In the abode of theLiberated Souls (Siddha gati), all the Liberated Souls (Siddhas)exist in an independent way. And they all experience their ownbliss. They experience constant Absolute Bliss (Parmanand). Ifjust a minute’s worth of their bliss (sukh), should ever fall toEarth, or happen to ever slip down, the entire world wouldexperience bliss (anand) for a thousand years – that is the kindof bliss they enjoy over there. And that is the kind of happiness(sukh), that these people are struggling to find. Your own bliss(sukh) is like that. For me, in spite of the hindrance of this body,from the bliss (sukh) that there is, I can tell that if the body werenot a hindrance, what kind of a bliss it would be! You are sittingwith me and even then you are all experiencing the joy and bliss(sukh)! It is my bliss that is overflowing, and you are getting ataste of it!Questioner: Without a physical body, how can weexperience bliss (sukh)?Dadashri: When you try to contemplate bliss without aphysical body, your body is with you, and so the bliss that youcontemplate, will not be like the other one. From this, you caninfer that if there is so much bliss (sukh) over here, what kindof bliss would there be over there?!The Experience of the Bliss of the Self inSiddha-GatiQuestioner: Those who are in the realm of the LiberatedSouls (Siddha gati), who have gone to moksha (final liberation),and who are experiencing the bliss without a body; who isexperiencing that bliss?Dadashri: The Self experiences the bliss of the Self. Theyexperience their own constant bliss, and they are constantly intheir own space. And what work do they do? It is the work ofKnowing (Gnan kriya) and the work of Seeing (Darshan kriya),that goes on continuously!Questioner: Then why would they need this work ofKnowing and Seeing over there?Dadashri: That is their nature! This light, would it not beconstantly seeing us? If this light were living (chetan), then wouldAptavani-8187188Aptavani-8it not go on seeing us? That is how this Self (chetan) continuesto see.Now, what would they be seeing from over there? TheKnowledge-Vision (Gnan-Darshan) they have, is their owninfinite Knowledge (anant Gnan) and infinite Vision (anantDarshan), that is used, and the result of that is bliss (anand).So bliss does not come first. It is not bliss first, and thenKnowledge (Gnan) and Vision (Darshan). When theirKnowledge and Vision are used, the bliss is always there! Theydo not possess anything else besides Knowledge and Vision.Their entire form is one of Knowledge (Gnan swaroop) andone of Vision (Darshan swaroop). So if you raise your hand,they can see it.So even for them, the seeing increases and decreases.When night falls, this half decreases, and the other half increases.It increases and decreases like that. And when it is five in themorning for us, they can see all these people here. But when canthe increase really be seen? At ten, eleven, twelve o’clock, whenpeople are all moving about, going from here and there, they seeall that. All they want to do is to See and to Know, and not gettoo deep into it like, is this man getting ready to steal, or what?They can even see him pick someone’s pocket, but they justSee and Know; the only two things they do! They are notengaged in any subject. What is this subject? That would be ofpick pocketing. That is a subject for them to know, it has nothingto do with them!If I raise my hand, all the Liberated Souls (Siddhas)would see it in their Knowledge (Gnan). Those Liberated Soulscontinue to know the object to be known (gneya). In this world,there are just two things: that which is to be known (gneya) andthat which is to be seen (drashya). They (liberated Souls) continueto know the things to be known (gneya) and see the things tobe seen (drashya). And what is the result of that? It is boundlessbliss (sukh), a limitless bliss. That is the bliss of the Self(swabhavik).One by Nature but Separate in ExistenceNow what problem do people have? It is that, why isit not there just one thing over there? Alas! It is really just one,but in what way? If we had a stack here, of five hundred thousandgold bars all piled up, would we not have to say that it is gold?We can call it that, can we not?Questioner: You can call it gold or you can also call itgold bars.Dadashri: No. But could you just not ask if all of it isgold? Never mind that it is in the form of bars, is it still not allgold? And in the same way, the Absolute Soul (Parmatma) isalso just one. The Atma is one, and like gold, it has just oneform, but in the form of gold bars, it is separate. Each one, doesnot let go its individual inherent nature.Questioner: So does it mean that a single Atma is onewhole Atma? Can we say that?Dadashri: Pertaining to gold, every Atma itself is gold,but when it comes to gold bars, each Atma does not relinquishits own individual state.Questioner: Does it mean that each individual’s Atma isultimately, just one?Dadashri: One, meaning that it is one by nature(swabhav). There is no difference in the Atma. Just as there isno difference between the gold bars, as they are ultimately allgold, in the same way, there is no difference within each Atma.Questioner: If the Atma has only one inherent property(gunadharma), then why did they all become individuallyseparated?Dadashri: The reason why it has separated individually isbecause of the change in its time and space! Each one’s timeand space is different. Is this person sitting in the same spaceAptavani-8187188Aptavani-8it not go on seeing us? That is how this Self (chetan) continuesto see.Now, what would they be seeing from over there? TheKnowledge-Vision (Gnan-Darshan) they have, is their owninfinite Knowledge (anant Gnan) and infinite Vision (anantDarshan), that is used, and the result of that is bliss (anand).So bliss does not come first. It is not bliss first, and thenKnowledge (Gnan) and Vision (Darshan). When theirKnowledge and Vision are used, the bliss is always there! Theydo not possess anything else besides Knowledge and Vision.Their entire form is one of Knowledge (Gnan swaroop) andone of Vision (Darshan swaroop). So if you raise your hand,they can see it.So even for them, the seeing increases and decreases.When night falls, this half decreases, and the other half increases.It increases and decreases like that. And when it is five in themorning for us, they can see all these people here. But when canthe increase really be seen? At ten, eleven, twelve o’clock, whenpeople are all moving about, going from here and there, they seeall that. All they want to do is to See and to Know, and not gettoo deep into it like, is this man getting ready to steal, or what?They can even see him pick someone’s pocket, but they justSee and Know; the only two things they do! They are notengaged in any subject. What is this subject? That would be ofpick pocketing. That is a subject for them to know, it has nothingto do with them!If I raise my hand, all the Liberated Souls (Siddhas)would see it in their Knowledge (Gnan). Those Liberated Soulscontinue to know the object to be known (gneya). In this world,there are just two things: that which is to be known (gneya) andthat which is to be seen (drashya). They (liberated Souls) continueto know the things to be known (gneya) and see the things tobe seen (drashya). And what is the result of that? It is boundlessbliss (sukh), a limitless bliss. That is the bliss of the Self(swabhavik).One by Nature but Separate in ExistenceNow what problem do people have? It is that, why isit not there just one thing over there? Alas! It is really just one,but in what way? If we had a stack here, of five hundred thousandgold bars all piled up, would we not have to say that it is gold?We can call it that, can we not?Questioner: You can call it gold or you can also call itgold bars.Dadashri: No. But could you just not ask if all of it isgold? Never mind that it is in the form of bars, is it still not allgold? And in the same way, the Absolute Soul (Parmatma) isalso just one. The Atma is one, and like gold, it has just oneform, but in the form of gold bars, it is separate. Each one, doesnot let go its individual inherent nature.Questioner: So does it mean that a single Atma is onewhole Atma? Can we say that?Dadashri: Pertaining to gold, every Atma itself is gold,but when it comes to gold bars, each Atma does not relinquishits own individual state.Questioner: Does it mean that each individual’s Atma isultimately, just one?Dadashri: One, meaning that it is one by nature(swabhav). There is no difference in the Atma. Just as there isno difference between the gold bars, as they are ultimately allgold, in the same way, there is no difference within each Atma.Questioner: If the Atma has only one inherent property(gunadharma), then why did they all become individuallyseparated?Dadashri: The reason why it has separated individually isbecause of the change in its time and space! Each one’s timeand space is different. Is this person sitting in the same spaceAptavani-8189190Aptavani-8that you are sitting in? Now if he gets up from there and you goand sit in his place; you would have the same space, but thenthe time would change.So the world is like a flowing stream. This world is notstill, but flowing, in the form of the worldly life (sansar). Sansar(the worldly life) means evolving (samsaran), constantly changing,and not staying still for even a moment! Just as if there were anarmy of two hundred thousand men marching by. There wouldbe rows of five, ten or fifteen, and would they not all beassembled in a line? And as it is passing by, would you not beable to see it all? That is how the Gnanis see the world passingby. When the eyes of Knowledge (Gnan) open up, they keepseeing the world as it flows. And because it is flowing, no oneelse is occupying the space you are in, and when someonecomes and occupies your space, then the time changes. Can youunderstand that? Therefore, this body (deha), the shape(aakaar), good karma (punya) and bad karma (paap); theyare all separate. But as the Self; they are all of one nature.The Soul Cannot Be DividedQuestioner: So can we really say that all Atmas are afraction of just one Atma?Dadashri: No, no! All Atmas cannot be a portion ofjust one Atma! Anything, whatever it is, anything that has form(roop), will always have a portion; however, anything that iswithout form (aroopi), it does not have a portion. The formless(aroopi) is only in the form of one thing. If it could be madeinto portions, or broken into pieces, and divided, it wouldnever become whole again. So the Atma (the Self) is in theform of completeness.Questioner: So am I the complete pure Soul(Shuddhatma) from within?Dadashri: You are complete, you are the whole!Questioner: So the Atma cannot be divided?Dadashri: The Atma itself is the Absolute Soul(Parmatma). And it is in an elemental form (vastu swaroop).Therefore, not a single piece of it can be separated; it is entirelywhole. Division would create a portion, and it would destroy theelement (vastu), but that is not how it is. The Atma cannot bedivided.Questioner: The life-forms (jivas) that are called amoeba,they multiply systematically through division, from one into two,and from two into four, that is why I was asking about whetherthe Atma divides.Dadashri: That is true. But the Atma does not undergodivision. It is the body that goes through the division. There areinfinite jivas in the body, and they have their own divisions. Ina single potato, there are many, many life-forms (jivas). Whenyou cut it up, you could plant this small a piece, and it wouldeven grow. And there are so many other things that if you cutup, would not grow! Anything which you cut up, and whichgrows when you plant it, has many living entities (jivas) in it.Plants with milky secretions and succulents (water-retaining) likecacti, would grow if you planted a small segment. They containthe most jivas, which continue to proliferate.Questioner: So what is the difference between, whatthey call a subtle soul (sookshma atma), and the gross soul(sthool atma)?Dadashri: There are no divisions such as subtle(sookshma) Atma or gross (sthool) Atma or anything else, forthe Atma. Nevertheless, people go around saying gross Atmaand subtle Atma, and all that. All that; is the transient ordestructible (vinashi) Atma. And that which is the real, originalAtma, is eternal and indestructible (avinashi). It does not havea subtle part, nor does it have a gross part!Aptavani-8189190Aptavani-8that you are sitting in? Now if he gets up from there and you goand sit in his place; you would have the same space, but thenthe time would change.So the world is like a flowing stream. This world is notstill, but flowing, in the form of the worldly life (sansar). Sansar(the worldly life) means evolving (samsaran), constantly changing,and not staying still for even a moment! Just as if there were anarmy of two hundred thousand men marching by. There wouldbe rows of five, ten or fifteen, and would they not all beassembled in a line? And as it is passing by, would you not beable to see it all? That is how the Gnanis see the world passingby. When the eyes of Knowledge (Gnan) open up, they keepseeing the world as it flows. And because it is flowing, no oneelse is occupying the space you are in, and when someonecomes and occupies your space, then the time changes. Can youunderstand that? Therefore, this body (deha), the shape(aakaar), good karma (punya) and bad karma (paap); theyare all separate. But as the Self; they are all of one nature.The Soul Cannot Be DividedQuestioner: So can we really say that all Atmas are afraction of just one Atma?Dadashri: No, no! All Atmas cannot be a portion ofjust one Atma! Anything, whatever it is, anything that has form(roop), will always have a portion; however, anything that iswithout form (aroopi), it does not have a portion. The formless(aroopi) is only in the form of one thing. If it could be madeinto portions, or broken into pieces, and divided, it wouldnever become whole again. So the Atma (the Self) is in theform of completeness.Questioner: So am I the complete pure Soul(Shuddhatma) from within?Dadashri: You are complete, you are the whole!Questioner: So the Atma cannot be divided?Dadashri: The Atma itself is the Absolute Soul(Parmatma). And it is in an elemental form (vastu swaroop).Therefore, not a single piece of it can be separated; it is entirelywhole. Division would create a portion, and it would destroy theelement (vastu), but that is not how it is. The Atma cannot bedivided.Questioner: The life-forms (jivas) that are called amoeba,they multiply systematically through division, from one into two,and from two into four, that is why I was asking about whetherthe Atma divides.Dadashri: That is true. But the Atma does not undergodivision. It is the body that goes through the division. There areinfinite jivas in the body, and they have their own divisions. Ina single potato, there are many, many life-forms (jivas). Whenyou cut it up, you could plant this small a piece, and it wouldeven grow. And there are so many other things that if you cutup, would not grow! Anything which you cut up, and whichgrows when you plant it, has many living entities (jivas) in it.Plants with milky secretions and succulents (water-retaining) likecacti, would grow if you planted a small segment. They containthe most jivas, which continue to proliferate.Questioner: So what is the difference between, whatthey call a subtle soul (sookshma atma), and the gross soul(sthool atma)?Dadashri: There are no divisions such as subtle(sookshma) Atma or gross (sthool) Atma or anything else, forthe Atma. Nevertheless, people go around saying gross Atmaand subtle Atma, and all that. All that; is the transient ordestructible (vinashi) Atma. And that which is the real, originalAtma, is eternal and indestructible (avinashi). It does not havea subtle part, nor does it have a gross part!Aptavani-8191192Aptavani-8 The Atma that I am referring to, is one in which there isno subtle (sookshma) division, nor gross (sthool) division; it isindivisible and inseparable (avibhagi-avibhajya), which is theAbsolute Soul (Parmatma). And you are talking about an Atmathat is gross (sthool) and subtle (sookshma) which can bedivided. All this gross and subtle is impermanent and destructible(vinashi). It is a mechanical atma. It will only work if you allowair into it (body), but if you stop the air from entering, it willperish. Whereas the original and fundamental (muda) Atmaneverdies.So if the Atma were a portion of the Absolute Soul(Parmatma), it would never become absolute. And if it doesnot become absolute, then it cannot be the Atma! ‘You’ areabsolute. But you are not aware of it. Your awareness is just afraction. You are the whole Absolute Soul. The Absolute Soulcan never be a portion. You cannot make pieces out of theAbsolute Soul.Can You Ever Make a Rupee from a Pai?Do you now understand that Bhagwan (God) exists inan absolute form? You thought God existed as a fraction (ansha)?So when those people who have said that he exists as a fraction,it cannot be wrong, can it? Would that be wrong? It is notwrong, but if they drank the medicine which was supposed tobe rubbed on, what would happen? What is the fraction form(ansha swaroop)? It is that Bhagwan within you is completeand full (sarvansha), but however many coverings (avaran)break, a proportional Knowledge (Gnan) is uncovered for you.But the Bhagwan within is complete (sarvansha). And in thislifetime, it is possible that the complete Knowledge (Gnan) canmanifest for you. It has to be someone from Hindustan (India).That is because someone from here, in Hindustan, is “fullydeveloped” (spiritually evolved). This Gnan is not useful to thosein foreign countries. It is because they do not understandreincarnation (punarjanma). They have no use for thisKnowledge (Gnan)! Those who understand reincarnation;understand the complete form of God!Therefore, if they hear about such a science, the energiesof the people in Hindustan will be awakened. Otherwise thesepeople believe in their minds, ‘What were we ever going to do?We are a fraction (ansha) of God!’ This is what people havetaught, to say, ‘We are a fraction of God!’ Now, whateverknowledge that these people acquire, whatever understandingthey receive, and by whatever knowledge they live by, is thevery knowledge, the very dependent knowledge which relies on,‘I am a fraction of God.’ So when will you ever become complete(sarvansha)? This will not get you anywhere. You are not afraction of God. That which is a fraction, does not have theenergy (shakti) to become complete. A part or fraction (ansha)will always remain in the form of a fraction. And the complete(sarvansha) will never be in the form of a fraction; the complete(sarvansha) will always remain complete! One may say, ‘Whyhas so much ignorance spread? Why do they believe that this isGod’s form (swaroop)?’ That is when the Gnani Purush explains,that the God within is complete (sarvansha), a fraction of hisform has been unveiled, and that is as much as he benefits. Butone’s Self is really complete.Did you understand? If you say, ‘I am a fraction ofGod’, where will it get you? When I came across people whospoke about being a fraction of God, I thought to myself, ‘Whatsort of a thing is this!’ When I was little, I came across thosewho would say, ‘We are a fraction of God (ansha swaroop)!’That is when I became annoyed and thought, ‘you might be afraction, but why would I be a fraction?’ He is the portion(ansha swaroop)! Besides, one pai (penny) can never make arupee (dollar). If a pai hung around for thousands of years,would it ever become a rupee? Therefore, you need to understandthis!Aptavani-8191192Aptavani-8 The Atma that I am referring to, is one in which there isno subtle (sookshma) division, nor gross (sthool) division; it isindivisible and inseparable (avibhagi-avibhajya), which is theAbsolute Soul (Parmatma). And you are talking about an Atmathat is gross (sthool) and subtle (sookshma) which can bedivided. All this gross and subtle is impermanent and destructible(vinashi). It is a mechanical atma. It will only work if you allowair into it (body), but if you stop the air from entering, it willperish. Whereas the original and fundamental (muda) Atmaneverdies.So if the Atma were a portion of the Absolute Soul(Parmatma), it would never become absolute. And if it doesnot become absolute, then it cannot be the Atma! ‘You’ areabsolute. But you are not aware of it. Your awareness is just afraction. You are the whole Absolute Soul. The Absolute Soulcan never be a portion. You cannot make pieces out of theAbsolute Soul.Can You Ever Make a Rupee from a Pai?Do you now understand that Bhagwan (God) exists inan absolute form? You thought God existed as a fraction (ansha)?So when those people who have said that he exists as a fraction,it cannot be wrong, can it? Would that be wrong? It is notwrong, but if they drank the medicine which was supposed tobe rubbed on, what would happen? What is the fraction form(ansha swaroop)? It is that Bhagwan within you is completeand full (sarvansha), but however many coverings (avaran)break, a proportional Knowledge (Gnan) is uncovered for you.But the Bhagwan within is complete (sarvansha). And in thislifetime, it is possible that the complete Knowledge (Gnan) canmanifest for you. It has to be someone from Hindustan (India).That is because someone from here, in Hindustan, is “fullydeveloped” (spiritually evolved). This Gnan is not useful to thosein foreign countries. It is because they do not understandreincarnation (punarjanma). They have no use for thisKnowledge (Gnan)! Those who understand reincarnation;understand the complete form of God!Therefore, if they hear about such a science, the energiesof the people in Hindustan will be awakened. Otherwise thesepeople believe in their minds, ‘What were we ever going to do?We are a fraction (ansha) of God!’ This is what people havetaught, to say, ‘We are a fraction of God!’ Now, whateverknowledge that these people acquire, whatever understandingthey receive, and by whatever knowledge they live by, is thevery knowledge, the very dependent knowledge which relies on,‘I am a fraction of God.’ So when will you ever become complete(sarvansha)? This will not get you anywhere. You are not afraction of God. That which is a fraction, does not have theenergy (shakti) to become complete. A part or fraction (ansha)will always remain in the form of a fraction. And the complete(sarvansha) will never be in the form of a fraction; the complete(sarvansha) will always remain complete! One may say, ‘Whyhas so much ignorance spread? Why do they believe that this isGod’s form (swaroop)?’ That is when the Gnani Purush explains,that the God within is complete (sarvansha), a fraction of hisform has been unveiled, and that is as much as he benefits. Butone’s Self is really complete.Did you understand? If you say, ‘I am a fraction ofGod’, where will it get you? When I came across people whospoke about being a fraction of God, I thought to myself, ‘Whatsort of a thing is this!’ When I was little, I came across thosewho would say, ‘We are a fraction of God (ansha swaroop)!’That is when I became annoyed and thought, ‘you might be afraction, but why would I be a fraction?’ He is the portion(ansha swaroop)! Besides, one pai (penny) can never make arupee (dollar). If a pai hung around for thousands of years,would it ever become a rupee? Therefore, you need to understandthis!Aptavani-8193194Aptavani-8The Real Understanding of the OmnipresentQuestioner: The Atma is complete (sarvansha), so is italso omnipresent (sarvavyapi)?Dadashri: No. The Atma being omnipresent; is in therelative sense. However, this is not always so. The omnipresenceyou are referring to, is it from the independent perspective(nirpeksha), or the dependent perspective (sapeksha)?Questioner: The real sense.Dadashri: Does this light illuminate the entire room ornot?Questioner: Yes, it does.Dadashri: And what if you covered it up with paper orsomething?Questioner: Then it would get dark.Dadashri: Then you would not see any light here, wouldyou?Questioner: No, I would not.Dadashri: So at that time, is it omnipresent (sarvavyapi)?Questioner: At that time we feel illusion (bhranti), butnevertheless, the light is still everywhere (sarvavyapi)!Dadashri: No, it is not like that. People have misinterpretedthe meaning of omnipresence (sarvavyapi) and used it in thewrong context. You say, ‘the Atma is omnipresent’, but yourunderstanding is wrong. I will explain the meaning of omnipresent(sarvavyapi) to you.In the final avatar (birth; lifetime), when there is the finalbody (charam deha), the Atma becomes fully uncovered. Andat that time, that Atma is omnipresent (sarvavyapi) throughoutthe entire universe. However, it is not the same for all Atmas.Only the Atma, that is heading for final liberation (moksha) andthat has become completely veil-free (niravaran); is one thatbecomes omnipresent. But not all these other souls, did youunderstand that?Questioner: So is the Atma itself omnipresent as the Self(chetan)?Dadashri: No. It is not omnipresent as the Self (chetan);its inherent nature (swabhav) is omnipresent (sarvavyapi).It is in the last avatar (lifetime), when it has the final body(charam sharira), that its light spreads throughout the entireuniverse. That is why it is a dependent (sapeksha) thing. It is notthat way for everyone. Besides, people die all the time, do theynot? Do they not have funerals everyday?Therefore, it is said that the Atma is all-pervading andomnipresent (sarvavyapak); however, it is because of its lightthat it is omnipresent, it is omnipresent through its illumination; itis not everywhere itself.Therefore, it is the light of the Atma that is omnipresent(sarvavyapak). And that light illuminates other things. Are therenot both, the object to be known (gneya) and the Knower(Gnata) in this world? Or is there just the Knower (Gnata)?Questioner: There is both, Knower (Gnata) and thatwhich is to be known (gneya).Dadashri: So have you accepted what I have said?Likewise, is there not the object to be seen (drashya) and theSeer (Drashta) both? There are both, objects to be known(gneya) and the Knower (Gnata), and the object to be seen(drashya), and the Seer (Drashta). Everything except for theAtma is to be seen (drashya) and to be known (gneya). Nowthe Atma’s light is such that, its illumination reaches whereverthere is something to be known (gneya), and something to beseen (drashya).Aptavani-8193194Aptavani-8The Real Understanding of the OmnipresentQuestioner: The Atma is complete (sarvansha), so is italso omnipresent (sarvavyapi)?Dadashri: No. The Atma being omnipresent; is in therelative sense. However, this is not always so. The omnipresenceyou are referring to, is it from the independent perspective(nirpeksha), or the dependent perspective (sapeksha)?Questioner: The real sense.Dadashri: Does this light illuminate the entire room ornot?Questioner: Yes, it does.Dadashri: And what if you covered it up with paper orsomething?Questioner: Then it would get dark.Dadashri: Then you would not see any light here, wouldyou?Questioner: No, I would not.Dadashri: So at that time, is it omnipresent (sarvavyapi)?Questioner: At that time we feel illusion (bhranti), butnevertheless, the light is still everywhere (sarvavyapi)!Dadashri: No, it is not like that. People have misinterpretedthe meaning of omnipresence (sarvavyapi) and used it in thewrong context. You say, ‘the Atma is omnipresent’, but yourunderstanding is wrong. I will explain the meaning of omnipresent(sarvavyapi) to you.In the final avatar (birth; lifetime), when there is the finalbody (charam deha), the Atma becomes fully uncovered. Andat that time, that Atma is omnipresent (sarvavyapi) throughoutthe entire universe. However, it is not the same for all Atmas.Only the Atma, that is heading for final liberation (moksha) andthat has become completely veil-free (niravaran); is one thatbecomes omnipresent. But not all these other souls, did youunderstand that?Questioner: So is the Atma itself omnipresent as the Self(chetan)?Dadashri: No. It is not omnipresent as the Self (chetan);its inherent nature (swabhav) is omnipresent (sarvavyapi).It is in the last avatar (lifetime), when it has the final body(charam sharira), that its light spreads throughout the entireuniverse. That is why it is a dependent (sapeksha) thing. It is notthat way for everyone. Besides, people die all the time, do theynot? Do they not have funerals everyday?Therefore, it is said that the Atma is all-pervading andomnipresent (sarvavyapak); however, it is because of its lightthat it is omnipresent, it is omnipresent through its illumination; itis not everywhere itself.Therefore, it is the light of the Atma that is omnipresent(sarvavyapak). And that light illuminates other things. Are therenot both, the object to be known (gneya) and the Knower(Gnata) in this world? Or is there just the Knower (Gnata)?Questioner: There is both, Knower (Gnata) and thatwhich is to be known (gneya).Dadashri: So have you accepted what I have said?Likewise, is there not the object to be seen (drashya) and theSeer (Drashta) both? There are both, objects to be known(gneya) and the Knower (Gnata), and the object to be seen(drashya), and the Seer (Drashta). Everything except for theAtma is to be seen (drashya) and to be known (gneya). Nowthe Atma’s light is such that, its illumination reaches whereverthere is something to be known (gneya), and something to beseen (drashya).Aptavani-8195196Aptavani-8For instance, if you put a light inside this pot, and fix a lidover it, there would not be any light pouring out on the outside,it would only light the inside of the pot. Then if you break thepot, how far will the light go? The light will spread aroundwhatever receptacles it is placed in, and throughout whateverroom it is put in.In the same way, if the Atma becomes free of coverings(niravaran), it can pervade all the regions of the universe andbeyond (lok-alok). But the Atma only gives enough light toilluminate the worlds and planes of existence (lok). There are noobjects to be known (gneya) in the space beyond the world -the limitless space (alok); therefore the Atma’s light, that of theKnower (Gnata) does not go there. There is lok (worlds; planesof existence), which is why the other part is referred to as alok(space beyond the world; limitless space). In the space beyondthe world (alok), there are no objects to be known (gneya)whatsoever. There is only space (aakash). And because thereis no object to be known, the light of the Atma cannot illuminateanything over there, which is why it can illuminate the entireuniverse (lok). And that includes every Atma, provided that thecoverings are destroyed!Just as if you place a light inside a pot, and you piercehowever many holes in the pot, that much light would graduallycome out of it. In the same way, the light of the Atma comesout through the five senses. Now in the full and complete (purna)state, when the body disappears, this light spreads throughoutthe entire universe. That is its nature (swabhav).Right now, it is in the body. Therefore, first you have toknow the knowledge of the Self. Once you know that, it meansthat the ignorance over the Soul is lifted. Thereafter, all thekarmas will move away by themselves and gradually things willbecome more clear to you. There are infinite locations (pradesh)on the Atma that are covered by veils of layers of karma. Asthe karmas gradually begin to discharge, the veils begin to shed.The Atma Fills the Space It is inTherefore, the meaning of omnipresence (sarvavyapak)is different. It is not the way these people understand it. Themeaning of omnipresence would be like this light bulb. It is theonly bulb; there is not a bulb everywhere in the room. It is justits light that fills the room. That is how a single Atma has theenergy (shakti) to illuminate the entire universe. After becomingthe pure Soul (Shuddhatma), the remaining karmas aredischarged completely, and when it becomes free of karma, ithas the energy to illuminate the entire universe.But the way people have understood it, is that there isAtma in everything, that there is Atma in this and Atma in that.They have understood it wrongly. What would happen if youdrank the medicine instead of rubbing it on? Then neither thedisease on the outside is cured, nor the disease on the inside iscured!So when it is said that ‘this light is everywhere’, then itmeans that the bulb is in one place and its light is spread all overthe room. If you take this bulb and put it in a pot and cover itwith a lid, would you be able to see its light everywhere then?Questioner: No, you would not see it.Dadashri: Therefore, the pramaata (illuminator) casts itslight according to the prameya (contained space; receptacle) itis in. The receptacle (prameya) is about this much; if you put abulb in the pot, the amount of light will only fill the pot. Then,you would not see its light anywhere on the outside.When The Prameya is The Universe, ThePramaata is Parmatma!Questioner: Somewhere I read that you should have along spiritual discussion (satsang) with a Gnani Purush, andunderstand the meaning of pramaata, praman and prameya.So would you explain this?Aptavani-8195196Aptavani-8For instance, if you put a light inside this pot, and fix a lidover it, there would not be any light pouring out on the outside,it would only light the inside of the pot. Then if you break thepot, how far will the light go? The light will spread aroundwhatever receptacles it is placed in, and throughout whateverroom it is put in.In the same way, if the Atma becomes free of coverings(niravaran), it can pervade all the regions of the universe andbeyond (lok-alok). But the Atma only gives enough light toilluminate the worlds and planes of existence (lok). There are noobjects to be known (gneya) in the space beyond the world -the limitless space (alok); therefore the Atma’s light, that of theKnower (Gnata) does not go there. There is lok (worlds; planesof existence), which is why the other part is referred to as alok(space beyond the world; limitless space). In the space beyondthe world (alok), there are no objects to be known (gneya)whatsoever. There is only space (aakash). And because thereis no object to be known, the light of the Atma cannot illuminateanything over there, which is why it can illuminate the entireuniverse (lok). And that includes every Atma, provided that thecoverings are destroyed!Just as if you place a light inside a pot, and you piercehowever many holes in the pot, that much light would graduallycome out of it. In the same way, the light of the Atma comesout through the five senses. Now in the full and complete (purna)state, when the body disappears, this light spreads throughoutthe entire universe. That is its nature (swabhav).Right now, it is in the body. Therefore, first you have toknow the knowledge of the Self. Once you know that, it meansthat the ignorance over the Soul is lifted. Thereafter, all thekarmas will move away by themselves and gradually things willbecome more clear to you. There are infinite locations (pradesh)on the Atma that are covered by veils of layers of karma. Asthe karmas gradually begin to discharge, the veils begin to shed.The Atma Fills the Space It is inTherefore, the meaning of omnipresence (sarvavyapak)is different. It is not the way these people understand it. Themeaning of omnipresence would be like this light bulb. It is theonly bulb; there is not a bulb everywhere in the room. It is justits light that fills the room. That is how a single Atma has theenergy (shakti) to illuminate the entire universe. After becomingthe pure Soul (Shuddhatma), the remaining karmas aredischarged completely, and when it becomes free of karma, ithas the energy to illuminate the entire universe.But the way people have understood it, is that there isAtma in everything, that there is Atma in this and Atma in that.They have understood it wrongly. What would happen if youdrank the medicine instead of rubbing it on? Then neither thedisease on the outside is cured, nor the disease on the inside iscured!So when it is said that ‘this light is everywhere’, then itmeans that the bulb is in one place and its light is spread all overthe room. If you take this bulb and put it in a pot and cover itwith a lid, would you be able to see its light everywhere then?Questioner: No, you would not see it.Dadashri: Therefore, the pramaata (illuminator) casts itslight according to the prameya (contained space; receptacle) itis in. The receptacle (prameya) is about this much; if you put abulb in the pot, the amount of light will only fill the pot. Then,you would not see its light anywhere on the outside.When The Prameya is The Universe, ThePramaata is Parmatma!Questioner: Somewhere I read that you should have along spiritual discussion (satsang) with a Gnani Purush, andunderstand the meaning of pramaata, praman and prameya.So would you explain this?Aptavani-8197198Aptavani-8Dadashri: Yes. Prameya (contained space; receptacle)means, this body would be considered as prameya and even thisuniverse would be considered as prameya. The Atma itself is thepramaata (illuminator). Right now, the Atma is in the body, sowhat would be the extent of the Atma’s light at this point in time?What would be it’s extent? It is limited to the body. Now, ifAtma has full Knowledge (Gnan) and becomes free of the body,then what would the extent of the light become? That light,would illuminate the entire receptacle (prameya); the entireuniverse. The pramaata would assume the expanse of theprameya (receptacle). The light will occupy the space of whateverreceptacle it is in! So after the atma attains absolute Knowledge(Keval Gnan), if the Atma becomes free of the body, then thispramaata would spread throughout the entire prameya(receptacle). Atma’s light would spread across the entire universe.Currently, what is the extent? Then one would say, ‘Only to theextent of the body.’If you put a light inside a pot, it will have intensity, andwhen the pot is broken, the light will flood the room, and itsintensity would decrease. Therefore, the further this light spreads,the less intense it becomes. That is because it is physical(paudgalik) light. Whereas the light of the Atma never losesintensity, no matter how much it spreads, even if it spreadsthroughout the entire universe, it always remains the same.Omnipresent, by Relative ViewpointTherefore the Atma is omnipresent (sarvavyapak), andsuch statements are relative (sapeksha); however, people havetaken them literally as real fact (nirpeksha) and the belief ismisconstrued; what is meant to be rubbed on, they drink instead.That is relative (sapeksha), so what does it mean? It means thatthe Atma does not become omnipresent (sarvavyapak), whenall humans die. When those with Absolute Knowledge (Kevalis)and Tirthankars reach nirvana (moksha), their Atma which isreleased, illuminates the entire universe; it becomes omnipresent(sarvavyapak). From that perspective, from the relative(sapeksha) perspective, the Atma is omnipresent (sarvavyapak).It is not always omnipresent. For that matter, all these people goaround calling it omnipresent, omnipresent, omnipresent.Nevertheless, as long as humans have ignorance (agnan), thelight of the Atma does not come outside. Only when theKnowledge (Gnan) becomes full, does the light spread throughoutthe entire universe. Your own Atma is like that, except it iscovered with layers (of karma).When the Atma goes to moksha (final liberation), its fulllight, illuminates the entire universe. The omnipresent(sarvavyapak) light, spreads throughout the universe. From thatperspective, it is omnipresent. However, the Bhagwan (God)that you see otherwise, is what you see through the divine vision(divya chakshu). And that too, you will only see, if there is acreature before you; however, if creation is involved, then youwould not be able to see it. Hence: “God is in every creature,whether visible or invisible: not in creation!” There is no Godwithin this machine. And this lot has stuck, ‘God is everywhere’,all over the place.Is There Atma Everywhere in the World?The whole universe is fully packed with creatures; livingentities (jivas) and within those living entities, there is Soul(chetan). Yes, and so there are two components in these livingentities (jivas): non-living (jada) and eternal element, Soul(chetan). And the eternal element (chetan) is pure (shuddhachetan), which is itself the Atma; the Absolute Soul (Parmatma)itself.Questioner: So is there nothing anywhere else besidesthe Atma?Dadashri: No. The Atma is not alone. In each livingentity (jiva) there is the non-Self (anatma), and there is alsoAtma (the Self). And the meaning of omnipresence (sarvavyapi)Aptavani-8197198Aptavani-8Dadashri: Yes. Prameya (contained space; receptacle)means, this body would be considered as prameya and even thisuniverse would be considered as prameya. The Atma itself is thepramaata (illuminator). Right now, the Atma is in the body, sowhat would be the extent of the Atma’s light at this point in time?What would be it’s extent? It is limited to the body. Now, ifAtma has full Knowledge (Gnan) and becomes free of the body,then what would the extent of the light become? That light,would illuminate the entire receptacle (prameya); the entireuniverse. The pramaata would assume the expanse of theprameya (receptacle). The light will occupy the space of whateverreceptacle it is in! So after the atma attains absolute Knowledge(Keval Gnan), if the Atma becomes free of the body, then thispramaata would spread throughout the entire prameya(receptacle). Atma’s light would spread across the entire universe.Currently, what is the extent? Then one would say, ‘Only to theextent of the body.’If you put a light inside a pot, it will have intensity, andwhen the pot is broken, the light will flood the room, and itsintensity would decrease. Therefore, the further this light spreads,the less intense it becomes. That is because it is physical(paudgalik) light. Whereas the light of the Atma never losesintensity, no matter how much it spreads, even if it spreadsthroughout the entire universe, it always remains the same.Omnipresent, by Relative ViewpointTherefore the Atma is omnipresent (sarvavyapak), andsuch statements are relative (sapeksha); however, people havetaken them literally as real fact (nirpeksha) and the belief ismisconstrued; what is meant to be rubbed on, they drink instead.That is relative (sapeksha), so what does it mean? It means thatthe Atma does not become omnipresent (sarvavyapak), whenall humans die. When those with Absolute Knowledge (Kevalis)and Tirthankars reach nirvana (moksha), their Atma which isreleased, illuminates the entire universe; it becomes omnipresent(sarvavyapak). From that perspective, from the relative(sapeksha) perspective, the Atma is omnipresent (sarvavyapak).It is not always omnipresent. For that matter, all these people goaround calling it omnipresent, omnipresent, omnipresent.Nevertheless, as long as humans have ignorance (agnan), thelight of the Atma does not come outside. Only when theKnowledge (Gnan) becomes full, does the light spread throughoutthe entire universe. Your own Atma is like that, except it iscovered with layers (of karma).When the Atma goes to moksha (final liberation), its fulllight, illuminates the entire universe. The omnipresent(sarvavyapak) light, spreads throughout the universe. From thatperspective, it is omnipresent. However, the Bhagwan (God)that you see otherwise, is what you see through the divine vision(divya chakshu). And that too, you will only see, if there is acreature before you; however, if creation is involved, then youwould not be able to see it. Hence: “God is in every creature,whether visible or invisible: not in creation!” There is no Godwithin this machine. And this lot has stuck, ‘God is everywhere’,all over the place.Is There Atma Everywhere in the World?The whole universe is fully packed with creatures; livingentities (jivas) and within those living entities, there is Soul(chetan). Yes, and so there are two components in these livingentities (jivas): non-living (jada) and eternal element, Soul(chetan). And the eternal element (chetan) is pure (shuddhachetan), which is itself the Atma; the Absolute Soul (Parmatma)itself.Questioner: So is there nothing anywhere else besidesthe Atma?Dadashri: No. The Atma is not alone. In each livingentity (jiva) there is the non-Self (anatma), and there is alsoAtma (the Self). And the meaning of omnipresence (sarvavyapi)Aptavani-8199200Aptavani-8is different, but they have not understood it, and that is what theygo by. If it was omnipresent (sarvavyapi) like that, then wherewould they go to defecate? In a home, do they not normallykeep the toilet and the kitchen separate?! If God wereeverywhere, then which wood would you burn, and which woodwould you not burn? Would you not have to use your discretion?Lord Krishna has told us about both, the non-living (jada) andthe living (chetan); Atma and anatma.This living (chetan) and non-living (jada), are both twoentirely different things. Anything that is non-living (jada), youcan use; however, if you hurt anything that is living (chetan), youwill commit sin (paap). There is life, Soul (chetan) in a tree. If youcut it or burn it, you will incur paap. And if you found any kindof wood just lying around here and you burned it, then it wouldnot matter. That is because there is no Soul, life (chetan) in it.Original Revelation Through the Exact VisionTherefore, Lord Krishna gave us the clear distinction, ofthere being two things: the Atma and non-Self (anatma). If youbelieve that the non-living (jada) itself is Atma, then what wouldbecome of the Atma? If there is only wheat everywhere, thenwhy would you need to separate the grit? If the wheat and thegrit were mixed in together, and you were told that it was onlywheat, then why would you have to separate them?If you go to the grocers to buy some wheat, what wouldyou ask the merchant for? ‘Give me some grit’, is that what youwould say? Or would you say, ‘give me some wheat’?Questioner: I would just have to tell him to give mesome wheat.Dadashri: Would you not have to tell him what sort ofwheat you want?Questioner: Yes, wheat from Gwalior. Dadashri: Yes. And if you asked him to show you whatthe wheat grains look like, he would instantly pierce the sack,and take out a few grains, ‘Look, the whole sack is full of thissort of wheat grain’, he would say. He calls it a sack of wheat.Even people call it a sack of wheat. And when you bring it homewhat will your wife say? ‘They have to be separated (winnowed;remove grit or husk).’ ‘What! I have only brought you wheat,what is there to remove?’ ‘I have only brought wheat!’ you say.Then your wife will say, ‘You have no commonsense, wheat andgrit always come together. It is called wheat.’ Then you say, ‘Buteven at the store, they were all calling it wheat!’ That is whatthey say in the interaction of the worldly life (vyavahar). Inworldly interaction (vyavahar) you can call it wheat, but it comeswith grit. And so you have to bring it home and pick out the grit.Worldly interaction is like this. The interaction of the world(vyavahar) says that ‘this is a sack of wheat’. You may say,‘Now look here! There is grit in it!’ And they will say to you,‘You cannot say that, this sack contains only wheat!’ That iscalled worldly interaction (vyavahar). You have to understandworldly interaction!If I come to your home and I have to brush my teeth inthe morning, I will say, ‘Give me a toothbrush’. So what sortsof things would you provide?Questioner: A brush, toothpaste, and everything shouldbe provided.Dadashri: Yes, would you not bring a water-pitcher, awooden seat, and all of that?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: But if I only ask for a toothbrush, why wouldyou bring all these other things? Yes, so worldly interaction(vyavahar) is like this. Only so much is said, but you have tounderstand everything. That is why you need to understandvyavahar. If you just place a toothbrush in front of him, whatAptavani-8199200Aptavani-8is different, but they have not understood it, and that is what theygo by. If it was omnipresent (sarvavyapi) like that, then wherewould they go to defecate? In a home, do they not normallykeep the toilet and the kitchen separate?! If God wereeverywhere, then which wood would you burn, and which woodwould you not burn? Would you not have to use your discretion?Lord Krishna has told us about both, the non-living (jada) andthe living (chetan); Atma and anatma.This living (chetan) and non-living (jada), are both twoentirely different things. Anything that is non-living (jada), youcan use; however, if you hurt anything that is living (chetan), youwill commit sin (paap). There is life, Soul (chetan) in a tree. If youcut it or burn it, you will incur paap. And if you found any kindof wood just lying around here and you burned it, then it wouldnot matter. That is because there is no Soul, life (chetan) in it.Original Revelation Through the Exact VisionTherefore, Lord Krishna gave us the clear distinction, ofthere being two things: the Atma and non-Self (anatma). If youbelieve that the non-living (jada) itself is Atma, then what wouldbecome of the Atma? If there is only wheat everywhere, thenwhy would you need to separate the grit? If the wheat and thegrit were mixed in together, and you were told that it was onlywheat, then why would you have to separate them?If you go to the grocers to buy some wheat, what wouldyou ask the merchant for? ‘Give me some grit’, is that what youwould say? Or would you say, ‘give me some wheat’?Questioner: I would just have to tell him to give mesome wheat.Dadashri: Would you not have to tell him what sort ofwheat you want?Questioner: Yes, wheat from Gwalior. Dadashri: Yes. And if you asked him to show you whatthe wheat grains look like, he would instantly pierce the sack,and take out a few grains, ‘Look, the whole sack is full of thissort of wheat grain’, he would say. He calls it a sack of wheat.Even people call it a sack of wheat. And when you bring it homewhat will your wife say? ‘They have to be separated (winnowed;remove grit or husk).’ ‘What! I have only brought you wheat,what is there to remove?’ ‘I have only brought wheat!’ you say.Then your wife will say, ‘You have no commonsense, wheat andgrit always come together. It is called wheat.’ Then you say, ‘Buteven at the store, they were all calling it wheat!’ That is whatthey say in the interaction of the worldly life (vyavahar). Inworldly interaction (vyavahar) you can call it wheat, but it comeswith grit. And so you have to bring it home and pick out the grit.Worldly interaction is like this. The interaction of the world(vyavahar) says that ‘this is a sack of wheat’. You may say,‘Now look here! There is grit in it!’ And they will say to you,‘You cannot say that, this sack contains only wheat!’ That iscalled worldly interaction (vyavahar). You have to understandworldly interaction!If I come to your home and I have to brush my teeth inthe morning, I will say, ‘Give me a toothbrush’. So what sortsof things would you provide?Questioner: A brush, toothpaste, and everything shouldbe provided.Dadashri: Yes, would you not bring a water-pitcher, awooden seat, and all of that?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: But if I only ask for a toothbrush, why wouldyou bring all these other things? Yes, so worldly interaction(vyavahar) is like this. Only so much is said, but you have tounderstand everything. That is why you need to understandvyavahar. If you just place a toothbrush in front of him, whatAptavani-8201202Aptavani-8would he say? He will say, ‘Bring me toothpaste, bring mewater, I need this and that.’ And that would create a problem.Instead, you should just understand the worldly interaction(vyavahar).So in the worldly interaction you can certainly call it wheat,but there will also be grit in it. Similarly, in vyavahar (the worldlyinteraction) when they say, ‘The Atma is everywhere’, they havesaid it in this context. There is wheat, and there is grit with it. Inthe same way, there is the Atma (the Self), and with it, there isanatma (non-Self). That there is Atma everywhere, is really nottrue. But if you had to understand that, then things would fall intoplace.That is why people have understood this wrongly, bythinking that all is Atma, so that even in the pole there is Atma,that there is Atma even in the wall. Their understanding is allwrong. And therefore, whether it is wheat or grit, it does notmatter. It is all just wheat they say, and we do not say no to it.Because for those merchants (businessmen), it is all only wheat.But for the one who eats it, is it not both wheat and grit together?What is it to the businessmen?Questioner: It is just wheat.Dadashri: Yes, for all the businessmen there are, this iswhat it is. But even the one who eats it (consumer) needs tounderstand! Otherwise, if God is everywhere, then when arethey going to find the real God?Therefore, people have only understood that the Atma isin everything. There is no meaning in that! ‘It is all wheat’ issomething a businessman would say. Would any merchant evertell you, ‘There are both, wheat and grit’? Then we would justsay, ‘Remove the grit.’ But the merchant will maintain that, ‘It isall wheat.’ But for the one who wants to eat it, it is both wheatand grit.Therefore, you need to either know the wheat, or knowthe grit, but it is fine if you know just one of them. If you wantedto separate the grit from the wheat, would it not do just to knowthe grit?Questioner: When you know the grit, all the rest will bethe wheat.Dadashri: So what they are saying is, ‘If you know one,you will know both.’ And this is why ‘we’ make you know thepure Soul (Shuddhatma). And so you will know the rest.How do these people talk? ‘Oh hey, Ben (sister), haveyou sorted the wheat yet?’ What she is really doing is pickingout the grit! Well, just look at our language! You go there andyou say, you were saying that you were picking the wheat, butyou are picking the grit! And she will reply, ‘No, I am onlypicking the wheat!’ Nevertheless, they still manage to pick outthe grit! Why would people talk like that?Questioner: They just do not have the right understanding!Dadashri: This worldly life (sansar) is in the form ofillusion (bhranti), so even what people say is all wrong!Is the Atma Without Attributes or WithInfinite Attributes?If one could just understand the true meaning of whatLord Krishna has revealed, one could become a true devotee.Lord Krishna had uncovered the entire science, and he said thatthe four Vedas were trigunatmak (possessing three characteristicsof the prakruti, the non-Self complex: rajas, sattva, tamas).These four Vedas are for the people. However, those who wantto attain the final liberation (moksha), must go beyond the fourVedas, and come into the Gita.Questioner: You have spoken about trigunatmak, but isnot it said, that the Atma has no attributes (nirguna)?Aptavani-8201202Aptavani-8would he say? He will say, ‘Bring me toothpaste, bring mewater, I need this and that.’ And that would create a problem.Instead, you should just understand the worldly interaction(vyavahar).So in the worldly interaction you can certainly call it wheat,but there will also be grit in it. Similarly, in vyavahar (the worldlyinteraction) when they say, ‘The Atma is everywhere’, they havesaid it in this context. There is wheat, and there is grit with it. Inthe same way, there is the Atma (the Self), and with it, there isanatma (non-Self). That there is Atma everywhere, is really nottrue. But if you had to understand that, then things would fall intoplace.That is why people have understood this wrongly, bythinking that all is Atma, so that even in the pole there is Atma,that there is Atma even in the wall. Their understanding is allwrong. And therefore, whether it is wheat or grit, it does notmatter. It is all just wheat they say, and we do not say no to it.Because for those merchants (businessmen), it is all only wheat.But for the one who eats it, is it not both wheat and grit together?What is it to the businessmen?Questioner: It is just wheat.Dadashri: Yes, for all the businessmen there are, this iswhat it is. But even the one who eats it (consumer) needs tounderstand! Otherwise, if God is everywhere, then when arethey going to find the real God?Therefore, people have only understood that the Atma isin everything. There is no meaning in that! ‘It is all wheat’ issomething a businessman would say. Would any merchant evertell you, ‘There are both, wheat and grit’? Then we would justsay, ‘Remove the grit.’ But the merchant will maintain that, ‘It isall wheat.’ But for the one who wants to eat it, it is both wheatand grit.Therefore, you need to either know the wheat, or knowthe grit, but it is fine if you know just one of them. If you wantedto separate the grit from the wheat, would it not do just to knowthe grit?Questioner: When you know the grit, all the rest will bethe wheat.Dadashri: So what they are saying is, ‘If you know one,you will know both.’ And this is why ‘we’ make you know thepure Soul (Shuddhatma). And so you will know the rest.How do these people talk? ‘Oh hey, Ben (sister), haveyou sorted the wheat yet?’ What she is really doing is pickingout the grit! Well, just look at our language! You go there andyou say, you were saying that you were picking the wheat, butyou are picking the grit! And she will reply, ‘No, I am onlypicking the wheat!’ Nevertheless, they still manage to pick outthe grit! Why would people talk like that?Questioner: They just do not have the right understanding!Dadashri: This worldly life (sansar) is in the form ofillusion (bhranti), so even what people say is all wrong!Is the Atma Without Attributes or WithInfinite Attributes?If one could just understand the true meaning of whatLord Krishna has revealed, one could become a true devotee.Lord Krishna had uncovered the entire science, and he said thatthe four Vedas were trigunatmak (possessing three characteristicsof the prakruti, the non-Self complex: rajas, sattva, tamas).These four Vedas are for the people. However, those who wantto attain the final liberation (moksha), must go beyond the fourVedas, and come into the Gita.Questioner: You have spoken about trigunatmak, but isnot it said, that the Atma has no attributes (nirguna)?Aptavani-8203204Aptavani-8Dadashri: This belief about the Atma (Self), not havingany attributes (gunas), is a belief that is fraught with mistakes.Even a stone does not lack qualities in this world. That stone caneven be used in construction or for throwing (dhekhado), canit not?Therefore, the Atma is the Absolute Soul (Parmatma). Itpossesses many infinite attributes (gunas). I am going to explainto you what ‘without attributes’ (nirguna) means. The writers ofthe scriptures (shastras), had said ‘without attributes’ (nirguna),but people interpreted it in their own language. If you understandit in your own language, would you be likely to receive anybenefit?Questioner: No.Dadashri: What are they trying to say? That, with regardsto the attributes of the non-Self (gunas of the prakruti), theAtma (the Self), is without attributes (nirguna). Not a singleattribute (guna) of the non-Self complex (prakruti) is found inthe Atma. However, it has an abundance of its own naturalattributes (swabhavik gunas). Did you understand this? TheAtma (the Self) does not have a single attribute (guna) of thenon-Self complex (prakruti) in it, which is why it is called nirguna(without attributes).In This World, Nothing Is Without AttributesQuestioner: But they say that no matter how you worshipBrahma (Atma) the formless (nirakar), which is withoutattributes (nirguna); that is the way he will present himself rightin front of you. That means through the means of a vision withform (sakaar swaroop), one can have such a darshan.Dadashri: This is how it was: the Brahma (Atma) thatwas given to these people; was really the Brahma of illusion(bhramanaa). Atma (Brahma) is really not without attributes(nirguna). This is an illusion of the illusion (bhramanaa nohbrahma). This is what they, without understanding, they havehaphazardly knocked into their own language, as they pleased.Questioner: But what is Brahma? Please tell us!Dadashri: It is the original element (muda vastu). It iseternal (avinashi). It possesses innumerable, limitless attributes(gunas). Alas! By relentlessly carrying on with this nirguna,nirguna (without attributes, without attributes) appellation, theyhave indoctrinated everyone, so they too would say the samething. Therefore, I have to tell you, even using stern language,‘Hey you! There is guna (with quality) even in a stone!’ Is it notuseful for crushing chutney?Questioner: Yes, it is.Dadashri: Moreover, now tell me, you! Is it the Atmaalone that has no attributes (gunas)? To make them understand,would I not have to use strong words? How long are you goingto carry on believing this? And if this is what you believe, whenwill you attain the Atma?Therefore, in reality, even a stone possesses qualities(gunas). But these people call the Atma as being nirguna(without attributes), and because everyone said the same thing,the entire truth became distorted. Therefore, I have had to saythat it is true that the Atma is nirguna (without attributes). Butthat you interpreted, in your own language. So it means thatfrom the perspective of the non-Self complex’s attributes, it iswithout attributes (nirguna). Not a single attribute of the non-Self is in the Atma; but the Atma is full of its own attributes(gunas).Now, they have gone as far as calling the Atma, nirgunaatma! Listen here you! Not even a stone is without attributes(nirguna)! And you call the Atma nirguna (without attributes)?Even in a hundred thousand lifetimes, how will you ever veertowards the realm of the real thing (vastu; Atma)? Not even aAptavani-8203204Aptavani-8Dadashri: This belief about the Atma (Self), not havingany attributes (gunas), is a belief that is fraught with mistakes.Even a stone does not lack qualities in this world. That stone caneven be used in construction or for throwing (dhekhado), canit not?Therefore, the Atma is the Absolute Soul (Parmatma). Itpossesses many infinite attributes (gunas). I am going to explainto you what ‘without attributes’ (nirguna) means. The writers ofthe scriptures (shastras), had said ‘without attributes’ (nirguna),but people interpreted it in their own language. If you understandit in your own language, would you be likely to receive anybenefit?Questioner: No.Dadashri: What are they trying to say? That, with regardsto the attributes of the non-Self (gunas of the prakruti), theAtma (the Self), is without attributes (nirguna). Not a singleattribute (guna) of the non-Self complex (prakruti) is found inthe Atma. However, it has an abundance of its own naturalattributes (swabhavik gunas). Did you understand this? TheAtma (the Self) does not have a single attribute (guna) of thenon-Self complex (prakruti) in it, which is why it is called nirguna(without attributes).In This World, Nothing Is Without AttributesQuestioner: But they say that no matter how you worshipBrahma (Atma) the formless (nirakar), which is withoutattributes (nirguna); that is the way he will present himself rightin front of you. That means through the means of a vision withform (sakaar swaroop), one can have such a darshan.Dadashri: This is how it was: the Brahma (Atma) thatwas given to these people; was really the Brahma of illusion(bhramanaa). Atma (Brahma) is really not without attributes(nirguna). This is an illusion of the illusion (bhramanaa nohbrahma). This is what they, without understanding, they havehaphazardly knocked into their own language, as they pleased.Questioner: But what is Brahma? Please tell us!Dadashri: It is the original element (muda vastu). It iseternal (avinashi). It possesses innumerable, limitless attributes(gunas). Alas! By relentlessly carrying on with this nirguna,nirguna (without attributes, without attributes) appellation, theyhave indoctrinated everyone, so they too would say the samething. Therefore, I have to tell you, even using stern language,‘Hey you! There is guna (with quality) even in a stone!’ Is it notuseful for crushing chutney?Questioner: Yes, it is.Dadashri: Moreover, now tell me, you! Is it the Atmaalone that has no attributes (gunas)? To make them understand,would I not have to use strong words? How long are you goingto carry on believing this? And if this is what you believe, whenwill you attain the Atma?Therefore, in reality, even a stone possesses qualities(gunas). But these people call the Atma as being nirguna(without attributes), and because everyone said the same thing,the entire truth became distorted. Therefore, I have had to saythat it is true that the Atma is nirguna (without attributes). Butthat you interpreted, in your own language. So it means thatfrom the perspective of the non-Self complex’s attributes, it iswithout attributes (nirguna). Not a single attribute of the non-Self is in the Atma; but the Atma is full of its own attributes(gunas).Now, they have gone as far as calling the Atma, nirgunaatma! Listen here you! Not even a stone is without attributes(nirguna)! And you call the Atma nirguna (without attributes)?Even in a hundred thousand lifetimes, how will you ever veertowards the realm of the real thing (vastu; Atma)? Not even aAptavani-8205206Aptavani-8stone is without attributes (nirguna). When a buffalo takes adump, even its dung is not void of attributes (nirguna); it can beused for many purposes, can it not? Is it not useful as leyp (tospread on the floor, or plaster on walls)? Therefore, each andevery thing has its attributes (guna). Is it not the attribute (guna)that is useful? Is even dirt not useful?This sort of misconception has been happening throughouteternity, and that is why people have suffered so much devastationand despair. Mistakes in religion (dharma) are not acceptable!There should never be any mistakes in religion. And what happensif there are mistakes? Besides, this is vignan (science). Theslightest mistake in it, will throw it out of proportion. Did youunderstand nirguna?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Therefore, the Real (muda) itself has attributes(saguna); it is the abode of infinite attributes (gunas). It hasmany natural attributes (swabhavik gunas). However, none ofthe attributes of the non-Self are found in the Atma which is whyit is called nirguna (without attributes). Instead, people haveunderstood this to mean that, since none of these attributes (gunas)are in the Atma, it makes the Atma without attributes (nirguna).Hey you! In this world, not even a stone is void of attributes(nirguna). Whether good or bad, not a single thing is withoutattributes. If everything has attributes, then how can there be noattributes (nirguna) in the Atma?Ultimately, Only the Prakruti’s GunasAffordedQuestioner: We have the three qualities or traits (gunas):sattva, rajas, and tamas. How are they related to theelements?Dadashri: What are you going to do with those qualities(gunas) of sattva, rajas, tamas? They are impermanent(vinashi) gunas, they belong to the non-Self complex (prakruti).And the elements (tattva), are eternal (avinashi). These sattva, rajo and tamo, are the characteristics(gunas) of the head deities (adhisthata deva). So whoeverneeds these characteristics, should worship Brahmaa, Vishnuand Mahesh. That is all they are for. Nothing else!Questioner: So are they considered deities?Dadashri: Absolutely! However, for whichevercharacteristic (guna) there is, for that particular characteristic,there is a corresponding presiding deity (adhisthata deva). Thosewith dark traits (tamo guna) are Shiva, those with passionatetraits (rajo guna), are considered Vishnu, and those with virtuoustraits (sattva guna) are considered Brahmaa. So if you worshipthat specific deity, it is good, as it will increase that particulartrait (guna). But ultimately you will have to know the Atma.Questioner: But what about the description of Brahmaa,Vishnu and Mahesh, which is given in the scriptures (shastras)?Dadashri: These idols have been installed for the purposeof strengthening the non-Self (prakruti). Vishnu is characteristicof passion (rajo guna), Mahesh is characteristic of darkness orinactivity (tamo guna) and Brahmaa is characteristic of virtue(sattva guna). These people have established these three forms(murti) in order to strengthen those three qualities (guna). Soin doing the worship (puja) of one, its representative characteristic(guna) strengthens. Moreover, those qualities (gunas) eventuallydraw to an end.Questioner: Then there is no point worshiping Brahmaa,Vishnu and Mahesh, is there?Dadashri: Of course, there is a point! Does man nothave to strengthen his prakruti (non-Self)? He will progressfurther only if he strengthens his prakruti.Aptavani-8205206Aptavani-8stone is without attributes (nirguna). When a buffalo takes adump, even its dung is not void of attributes (nirguna); it can beused for many purposes, can it not? Is it not useful as leyp (tospread on the floor, or plaster on walls)? Therefore, each andevery thing has its attributes (guna). Is it not the attribute (guna)that is useful? Is even dirt not useful?This sort of misconception has been happening throughouteternity, and that is why people have suffered so much devastationand despair. Mistakes in religion (dharma) are not acceptable!There should never be any mistakes in religion. And what happensif there are mistakes? Besides, this is vignan (science). Theslightest mistake in it, will throw it out of proportion. Did youunderstand nirguna?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Therefore, the Real (muda) itself has attributes(saguna); it is the abode of infinite attributes (gunas). It hasmany natural attributes (swabhavik gunas). However, none ofthe attributes of the non-Self are found in the Atma which is whyit is called nirguna (without attributes). Instead, people haveunderstood this to mean that, since none of these attributes (gunas)are in the Atma, it makes the Atma without attributes (nirguna).Hey you! In this world, not even a stone is void of attributes(nirguna). Whether good or bad, not a single thing is withoutattributes. If everything has attributes, then how can there be noattributes (nirguna) in the Atma?Ultimately, Only the Prakruti’s GunasAffordedQuestioner: We have the three qualities or traits (gunas):sattva, rajas, and tamas. How are they related to theelements?Dadashri: What are you going to do with those qualities(gunas) of sattva, rajas, tamas? They are impermanent(vinashi) gunas, they belong to the non-Self complex (prakruti).And the elements (tattva), are eternal (avinashi). These sattva, rajo and tamo, are the characteristics(gunas) of the head deities (adhisthata deva). So whoeverneeds these characteristics, should worship Brahmaa, Vishnuand Mahesh. That is all they are for. Nothing else!Questioner: So are they considered deities?Dadashri: Absolutely! However, for whichevercharacteristic (guna) there is, for that particular characteristic,there is a corresponding presiding deity (adhisthata deva). Thosewith dark traits (tamo guna) are Shiva, those with passionatetraits (rajo guna), are considered Vishnu, and those with virtuoustraits (sattva guna) are considered Brahmaa. So if you worshipthat specific deity, it is good, as it will increase that particulartrait (guna). But ultimately you will have to know the Atma.Questioner: But what about the description of Brahmaa,Vishnu and Mahesh, which is given in the scriptures (shastras)?Dadashri: These idols have been installed for the purposeof strengthening the non-Self (prakruti). Vishnu is characteristicof passion (rajo guna), Mahesh is characteristic of darkness orinactivity (tamo guna) and Brahmaa is characteristic of virtue(sattva guna). These people have established these three forms(murti) in order to strengthen those three qualities (guna). Soin doing the worship (puja) of one, its representative characteristic(guna) strengthens. Moreover, those qualities (gunas) eventuallydraw to an end.Questioner: Then there is no point worshiping Brahmaa,Vishnu and Mahesh, is there?Dadashri: Of course, there is a point! Does man nothave to strengthen his prakruti (non-Self)? He will progressfurther only if he strengthens his prakruti.Aptavani-8207208Aptavani-8Symbols from the Perspective of Worldly andNon-Worldly VisionQuestioner: In the temple of Shiva (Shivalaya), symbolicimages of all the eight parts of Ashtangyoga, namely: yama(moral codes); niyam (discipline, self purification and study);aasan (postures; sitting place), pranayam (breath control);pratyahaar (sense control); dhyan (meditation), dhaarna(intention, upholding, supporting) and samadhi (oneness withthe pure Self), have been placed there.The tortoise symbolizes control over the senses(pratyahaar). The standing posture on the bull (nandiswar)represents the sitting or standing place (aasan). The consort ofLord Shiva (Parvatiji) represents the focusing of the chit (innercomponent of knowledge and vision) in one location (dhaarna),and Lord Shiva (Shankar Mahadev) symbolizes oneness withthe pure Self (samadhi)…Dadashri: These are symbolic representations. Howeverdeep one ventures into this, he must hurry back home as quicklyas possible. All these symbols have been instilled for the benefitof others. However, if they help, they may help; otherwise, thesymbols just remain as mere symbols. But these people havecome to regard the symbols themselves as the truth. There is nosuch thing as Brahmaa, Vishnu or Mahesh. They are just symbolicrepresentations of the three qualities (guna) of strength and virtue(sattva), passion (rajas) and darkness (tamas).Questioner: Creator, preserver and destroyer.Dadashri: Yes, and in the language of the Tirthankars,do you know what they are?Origination (utpaad), preservation (dhrauv) anddestruction (vyaya), is the language of the Tirthankars’. Thesethree words, because of all these symbols allotted to them,have caused so much confusion, and the symbols themselvesonly had significance to the people of those times. Peopleunderstand the significance in whichever time period they arein; however, when the time period changes, that is when theconfusion arises.These people have muddled everything! Now if you wentlooking for Brahmaa, where would you find him? Would youfind him anywhere in this world? And if you tried to look forVishnu, would you find Vishnu? And what about Maheshwar?We ask, ‘What work do they do? What is their business?’And they say, ‘Brahmaa creates. Vishnu runs and preserves allthis. While Maheshwar (Shiva), is given to destruction.’ Heyyou! Should you be bowing to the destroyer over here?!That is how it all is. If you want to know the truth aboutthis, then in this world there are six elements (tattva) that areconstantly evolving. And the six elements are eternal. Eternalmeans, would it have a maker (creator)? Would you needsomeone to create it? Is it wrong to say that an eternal thingcannot be made unless someone makes it? Therefore, there isno one to create it.Nevertheless, people still say, ‘does there not have to besomeone to create it? Goodness! Why don’t you understand themeaning of the word eternal! What is the nature (swabhav) ofthese six eternal elements? They possess their own qualities androles (gunadharma). That is because you can only call somethingeternal, if it comes with its own qualities (guna). It has its ownproperties (gunas), and it also has roles and traits (dharma).Dharma means condition or state (avastha); phases (paryaya)!All these six elements come with their own properties and phases.And they are regularly changing and constantly interacting withone another. Just as when there is an eclipse from the changes(parivartan) in the moon, the earth and the sun, the changes ofeach of these six elements, causes all the circumstances andconditions (avastha) to arise.Aptavani-8207208Aptavani-8Symbols from the Perspective of Worldly andNon-Worldly VisionQuestioner: In the temple of Shiva (Shivalaya), symbolicimages of all the eight parts of Ashtangyoga, namely: yama(moral codes); niyam (discipline, self purification and study);aasan (postures; sitting place), pranayam (breath control);pratyahaar (sense control); dhyan (meditation), dhaarna(intention, upholding, supporting) and samadhi (oneness withthe pure Self), have been placed there.The tortoise symbolizes control over the senses(pratyahaar). The standing posture on the bull (nandiswar)represents the sitting or standing place (aasan). The consort ofLord Shiva (Parvatiji) represents the focusing of the chit (innercomponent of knowledge and vision) in one location (dhaarna),and Lord Shiva (Shankar Mahadev) symbolizes oneness withthe pure Self (samadhi)…Dadashri: These are symbolic representations. Howeverdeep one ventures into this, he must hurry back home as quicklyas possible. All these symbols have been instilled for the benefitof others. However, if they help, they may help; otherwise, thesymbols just remain as mere symbols. But these people havecome to regard the symbols themselves as the truth. There is nosuch thing as Brahmaa, Vishnu or Mahesh. They are just symbolicrepresentations of the three qualities (guna) of strength and virtue(sattva), passion (rajas) and darkness (tamas).Questioner: Creator, preserver and destroyer.Dadashri: Yes, and in the language of the Tirthankars,do you know what they are?Origination (utpaad), preservation (dhrauv) anddestruction (vyaya), is the language of the Tirthankars’. Thesethree words, because of all these symbols allotted to them,have caused so much confusion, and the symbols themselvesonly had significance to the people of those times. Peopleunderstand the significance in whichever time period they arein; however, when the time period changes, that is when theconfusion arises.These people have muddled everything! Now if you wentlooking for Brahmaa, where would you find him? Would youfind him anywhere in this world? And if you tried to look forVishnu, would you find Vishnu? And what about Maheshwar?We ask, ‘What work do they do? What is their business?’And they say, ‘Brahmaa creates. Vishnu runs and preserves allthis. While Maheshwar (Shiva), is given to destruction.’ Heyyou! Should you be bowing to the destroyer over here?!That is how it all is. If you want to know the truth aboutthis, then in this world there are six elements (tattva) that areconstantly evolving. And the six elements are eternal. Eternalmeans, would it have a maker (creator)? Would you needsomeone to create it? Is it wrong to say that an eternal thingcannot be made unless someone makes it? Therefore, there isno one to create it.Nevertheless, people still say, ‘does there not have to besomeone to create it? Goodness! Why don’t you understand themeaning of the word eternal! What is the nature (swabhav) ofthese six eternal elements? They possess their own qualities androles (gunadharma). That is because you can only call somethingeternal, if it comes with its own qualities (guna). It has its ownproperties (gunas), and it also has roles and traits (dharma).Dharma means condition or state (avastha); phases (paryaya)!All these six elements come with their own properties and phases.And they are regularly changing and constantly interacting withone another. Just as when there is an eclipse from the changes(parivartan) in the moon, the earth and the sun, the changes ofeach of these six elements, causes all the circumstances andconditions (avastha) to arise.Aptavani-8209210Aptavani-8 Now, the properties (gunas) that are there; are constantlywith them. So there is no increase or decrease in them. However,the phases (paryaya) and circumstances (avastha) change. Whatis been said about that? That phases arise and abate, and theycarry on occurring and disappearing, and there is no departurefrom the state of permanence or a constant state (drauvata).The rising-abating occur due to circumstances (avastha) andthe constant state is due to inherent nature (swabhav).And so, these eternal elements come with their ownattributes (guna), and their own phases (paryaya). So whatwould the phases be? And the answer is, to arise and diminish,to arise and diminish. The element (vastu) itself; is alwayspermanent. It lives forever. And the circumstances (avastha)arise and dissipate. That is why they are considered, origination(utpaad), preservation (dhrauv) and destruction (vyaya). It isthese three, that people have called Brahmaa, Vishnu andMahesh. And that was for the benefit of others, however peoplemisinterpreted it, and what was meant to be rubbed on the skin,they instead ingested. What benefit will you receive if you drinkwhat was meant for rubbing?So did you understand what Brahmaa, Vishnu and Maheshare?Questioner: They are three elements (tattva).Dadashri: No, in reality they are not even elements.Therefore, people have called origination (utpaad)Brahmaa. They have called destruction (vyaya) Mahesh, andpreservation (drauvata), they have called Vishnu. People havegiven forms to these. Just consider it a kind of searching! Theytried to do good but after a long time, would it not backfire onthem? That is why people have established idols and iconicrepresentations (murtis) of Brahmaa.What is more, is that they have even installed an icon(murti) of the Gita (Bhagavad Gita) and made an idol of GayatriMata (goddess). They have not left anything alone! You foolishpeople! Stop making idols of Gayatri Mata. That is a mantra(sacred word), the best of the best mantra. And that mantrahas to be recited as a mantra, and not be worshiped in the formof an idol. The Gita is meant for reading, for studying andunderstanding. But instead of that they have made it into aniconic form (murti), and now they are praying to it. And inworshiping the Gita, they have forgotten about Lord Krishna.Lord Krishna has been left behind, and the icon has replacedhim. That is how they have botched things up!Alas! The entire significance surrounding this has beenlost; the meaning became stamped out! It was meant to liftpeople onto a good path. However, when it goes awry, shouldyou not have to uproot it and discard it? Should you not establisha new foundation?By installing these symbols, they have suppressed themasses. If they had just left it in a scientific way, as it is, whatwas wrong with that? Is there anything wrong in it? That theyhad to bring Brahmaa, Vishnu and Maheshwar into it.Questioner: But Dada, it is through imagination that theyhave been installed, and that imagination has perpetuatedthroughout the years.Dadashri: And they cannot find the real thing. And so Idiscovered it, and now I have started presenting it to people.Therefore, this is just the circumstance (avastha) of theelements (tattva) which people have symbolized in this way.And this was just so that people would not forget. So the waypeople interpreted it was that it was these three that ran everything.Vishnu runs this, so and so runs this! So how many superiors(uparis) have you placed above you?Questioner: Three.Aptavani-8209210Aptavani-8 Now, the properties (gunas) that are there; are constantlywith them. So there is no increase or decrease in them. However,the phases (paryaya) and circumstances (avastha) change. Whatis been said about that? That phases arise and abate, and theycarry on occurring and disappearing, and there is no departurefrom the state of permanence or a constant state (drauvata).The rising-abating occur due to circumstances (avastha) andthe constant state is due to inherent nature (swabhav).And so, these eternal elements come with their ownattributes (guna), and their own phases (paryaya). So whatwould the phases be? And the answer is, to arise and diminish,to arise and diminish. The element (vastu) itself; is alwayspermanent. It lives forever. And the circumstances (avastha)arise and dissipate. That is why they are considered, origination(utpaad), preservation (dhrauv) and destruction (vyaya). It isthese three, that people have called Brahmaa, Vishnu andMahesh. And that was for the benefit of others, however peoplemisinterpreted it, and what was meant to be rubbed on the skin,they instead ingested. What benefit will you receive if you drinkwhat was meant for rubbing?So did you understand what Brahmaa, Vishnu and Maheshare?Questioner: They are three elements (tattva).Dadashri: No, in reality they are not even elements.Therefore, people have called origination (utpaad)Brahmaa. They have called destruction (vyaya) Mahesh, andpreservation (drauvata), they have called Vishnu. People havegiven forms to these. Just consider it a kind of searching! Theytried to do good but after a long time, would it not backfire onthem? That is why people have established idols and iconicrepresentations (murtis) of Brahmaa.What is more, is that they have even installed an icon(murti) of the Gita (Bhagavad Gita) and made an idol of GayatriMata (goddess). They have not left anything alone! You foolishpeople! Stop making idols of Gayatri Mata. That is a mantra(sacred word), the best of the best mantra. And that mantrahas to be recited as a mantra, and not be worshiped in the formof an idol. The Gita is meant for reading, for studying andunderstanding. But instead of that they have made it into aniconic form (murti), and now they are praying to it. And inworshiping the Gita, they have forgotten about Lord Krishna.Lord Krishna has been left behind, and the icon has replacedhim. That is how they have botched things up!Alas! The entire significance surrounding this has beenlost; the meaning became stamped out! It was meant to liftpeople onto a good path. However, when it goes awry, shouldyou not have to uproot it and discard it? Should you not establisha new foundation?By installing these symbols, they have suppressed themasses. If they had just left it in a scientific way, as it is, whatwas wrong with that? Is there anything wrong in it? That theyhad to bring Brahmaa, Vishnu and Maheshwar into it.Questioner: But Dada, it is through imagination that theyhave been installed, and that imagination has perpetuatedthroughout the years.Dadashri: And they cannot find the real thing. And so Idiscovered it, and now I have started presenting it to people.Therefore, this is just the circumstance (avastha) of theelements (tattva) which people have symbolized in this way.And this was just so that people would not forget. So the waypeople interpreted it was that it was these three that ran everything.Vishnu runs this, so and so runs this! So how many superiors(uparis) have you placed above you?Questioner: Three.Aptavani-8211212Aptavani-8Dadashri: No, no, not just three, many more. Moreover,even the god of death (Yamraj) is your superior! There is asuperior (upari) everywhere. Is there any wonder that a poorman appears so frightened?That is why I say, that no father is a superior (upari). Letgo of your worries silently. Your mistakes and your blunders arethemselves your superiors (upari)! (Blunder is the belief of ‘Iam Chandubhai’ and mistakes are all karmas created in thisignorance). Since you have not understood this, what canBrahmaa, Vishnu and Mahesh do?Therefore, the nature (swabhav) of an element is beginning(utpaad), preservation (dhrauv) and end (vyaya)! There in therealm of Liberated Souls (Siddha kshetra), to all the LiberatedSouls (Siddha Bhagwan), this entire world always appears asorigin, preservation and end. It is not seen through its originalproperties (muda guna). It is seen through origination (utpaad),steady state (dhrauv), and destruction (vyaya).Now these circumstances (avastha) occur, and this iswhy they have formulated, origination (utpaad), steady state(dhrauv) and destruction (vyaya). And again they have alsowritten it in other words: utpanneva, vighneva and dhruveva.But otherwise, Brahmaa, Vishnu and Mahesh are justsymbols in this world. For a short time, these symbols provedto be very useful. And that very symbol has now becomedestructive. That is why we are trying to eliminate these symbols:brother, there is no such thing as Brahmaa, Vishnu and Mahesh.There is only you and Bhagwan (God). There is no one else.There is no god of death (Yamraj) at all. Get rid of the nonsensein your head. I am trying to tell it as it is, because right now, isthere any need for these symbols? When were the symbolsneeded? It was when they kept cows, drank the milk, and satdown to meditate! However, their intellect (buddhi) was notcultured. That was a good time, when things you wanted cameyour way on their own. So would a man’s intellect ever becomecultured? And these days, you cannot get sugar, you cannot findgood ghee, you cannot find whatever else, so look how“cultured” the intellect has become! Never before has such acultured intellect (buddhi) come about. However, this intellect ismisguided and contradictory (viparit). You need someone tomake it right (samyak). That same contradictory (viparit)intellect, is what the Gnani puts right (samyak). It is light;however, it is used in the wrong way. So that one uses it in theright way, you need someone to show you how. But right now,they are considered thinkers. Whereas before, there was notany thinking of this kind. Moreover, in the Satyug (time cycle ofunity in mind, speech and actions), there was not time to think.In Satyug, everything would come to your doorstep, so therewas no need to think! Therefore, it is in this Kaliyug (current eraof the time cycle, where there is no unity in mind, speech andactions), where you really need to think!All this is false. In this world, there is not a single personthat has been born, that would have the independent ability tovacate his bowels at will. All these are just symbols that havebeen established. So everything that has been written so far; isall wrong. If you cannot understand it with your intellect, thenyou should know that it is wrong. Why do all these people hereunderstand it through intellect (buddhi)? The answer is that ourpeople have become lihat (lost their power of critical thinking).You should ask foreign scientists, as their intellect is clean. Andwhat kind of intellect do the people here possess? Devoid ofthought (lihat)! Those in foreign countries will tell you whethersomething is possible or not. Even my intellect (buddhi) wasnever devoid of thought from the very start. I would easily figureout if someone was not being upfront. Besides, if something wastrue, I would immediately tell it like it is. And from the seatwhere I sit right now, what do I have to say? I have to say yes,to that which is, and that which is not, I have to say no to it. IfI did not say no then people would be led astray. If they do notAptavani-8211212Aptavani-8Dadashri: No, no, not just three, many more. Moreover,even the god of death (Yamraj) is your superior! There is asuperior (upari) everywhere. Is there any wonder that a poorman appears so frightened?That is why I say, that no father is a superior (upari). Letgo of your worries silently. Your mistakes and your blunders arethemselves your superiors (upari)! (Blunder is the belief of ‘Iam Chandubhai’ and mistakes are all karmas created in thisignorance). Since you have not understood this, what canBrahmaa, Vishnu and Mahesh do?Therefore, the nature (swabhav) of an element is beginning(utpaad), preservation (dhrauv) and end (vyaya)! There in therealm of Liberated Souls (Siddha kshetra), to all the LiberatedSouls (Siddha Bhagwan), this entire world always appears asorigin, preservation and end. It is not seen through its originalproperties (muda guna). It is seen through origination (utpaad),steady state (dhrauv), and destruction (vyaya).Now these circumstances (avastha) occur, and this iswhy they have formulated, origination (utpaad), steady state(dhrauv) and destruction (vyaya). And again they have alsowritten it in other words: utpanneva, vighneva and dhruveva.But otherwise, Brahmaa, Vishnu and Mahesh are justsymbols in this world. For a short time, these symbols provedto be very useful. And that very symbol has now becomedestructive. That is why we are trying to eliminate these symbols:brother, there is no such thing as Brahmaa, Vishnu and Mahesh.There is only you and Bhagwan (God). There is no one else.There is no god of death (Yamraj) at all. Get rid of the nonsensein your head. I am trying to tell it as it is, because right now, isthere any need for these symbols? When were the symbolsneeded? It was when they kept cows, drank the milk, and satdown to meditate! However, their intellect (buddhi) was notcultured. That was a good time, when things you wanted cameyour way on their own. So would a man’s intellect ever becomecultured? And these days, you cannot get sugar, you cannot findgood ghee, you cannot find whatever else, so look how“cultured” the intellect has become! Never before has such acultured intellect (buddhi) come about. However, this intellect ismisguided and contradictory (viparit). You need someone tomake it right (samyak). That same contradictory (viparit)intellect, is what the Gnani puts right (samyak). It is light;however, it is used in the wrong way. So that one uses it in theright way, you need someone to show you how. But right now,they are considered thinkers. Whereas before, there was notany thinking of this kind. Moreover, in the Satyug (time cycle ofunity in mind, speech and actions), there was not time to think.In Satyug, everything would come to your doorstep, so therewas no need to think! Therefore, it is in this Kaliyug (current eraof the time cycle, where there is no unity in mind, speech andactions), where you really need to think!All this is false. In this world, there is not a single personthat has been born, that would have the independent ability tovacate his bowels at will. All these are just symbols that havebeen established. So everything that has been written so far; isall wrong. If you cannot understand it with your intellect, thenyou should know that it is wrong. Why do all these people hereunderstand it through intellect (buddhi)? The answer is that ourpeople have become lihat (lost their power of critical thinking).You should ask foreign scientists, as their intellect is clean. Andwhat kind of intellect do the people here possess? Devoid ofthought (lihat)! Those in foreign countries will tell you whethersomething is possible or not. Even my intellect (buddhi) wasnever devoid of thought from the very start. I would easily figureout if someone was not being upfront. Besides, if something wastrue, I would immediately tell it like it is. And from the seatwhere I sit right now, what do I have to say? I have to say yes,to that which is, and that which is not, I have to say no to it. IfI did not say no then people would be led astray. If they do notAptavani-8213214Aptavani-8ask me, I do not have a problem with that. But if they ask me,I have to tell them whether it is correct or not!Just look, have they not brainwashed everyone with thegod of death; Jamraja? There is absolutely no ‘bapo’ (superior)like that. There is not even an insect that goes by the name ofJamraj. He represented death governed by Nature (Niyamraj).This is what was knocked into people.Whatever palaces we built; they have now become oldwhich is why this yields the wrong results. So demolish them.Because for how long are they going to yield good results? Forthe time that they are new. Later, the fruit that they yield will bemediocre, then less than mediocre, and after that, it will be bad.Therefore at this time, the consequences they are yielding, arebad. So do its demolition.As long as a house is new, for a short time, it will behelpful, but what happens when it becomes old? Will it notbecome a liability? The framework will deteriorate, the drainswill collapse, and the tiles will become loose. That is the stateof things right now! Where has the helpfulness gone? For somany years, this has not been helpful. But it has thrown peopleinto confusion! Besides, there is nothing in it.Now if we ask them, what is Brahmaa, Vishnu andMaheshwar? They will say, ‘Brother, they are just deities (deva)’.They do not understand this. No one, other than the GnaniPurush, can get to the bottom of this. Only if it is beyond theknowledge mediated through the intellect (buddhijanya gnan),can this be explained. Otherwise, this cannot be resolved throughknowledge based on the intellect (buddhijanya gnan), and theentire world is stuck in knowledge mediated through the intellect!   And because all this has not been understood, delusionhas set in.Questioner: My delusion has disappeared.Dadashri: Yes, is that right? If you want, you may ask meanything. You can ask anything here.Moksha Means to Remain and Grow in theAttribute of the SelfQuestioner: They talk about final liberation (moksha),what is this thing, moksha?Dadashri: Moksha means to return to the role or attributes(gunadharma) of the Self. And while staying in one’s own nature(swa-swaroop) and in constant eternal bliss (sanatan sukh) –that is called moksha!Understanding Correctness from the GnaniQuestioner: Many opinionated people ask why we wouldwant to go to moksha. There is no independent happiness (sukh)over there. They make snide remarks like that.Dadashri: They are just tossing dirt over the final place(bhumika). Just so that they can run their enterprises, they arethrowing about all this dirt. I have searched for what correctnessis! I have made all kinds of investigations and explored everythingalong the way, and I have come up with all the research.So if ever anyone claiming such a thing were to comehere, he himself would say, ‘Sir, give me moksha!’ This is becauseit will not take long at all to change his opinion and beliefs. Abelief should be an irrefutable principle (siddhantik).Questioner: That would be your powerful aura!Dadashri: No, it is not that. However, here, if it is wrong,then it will not do. If it is truth, then everyone has to embraceit. If it is true, then no one can obstruct it. His is not truth, whichis why he has to let go!Nevertheless, this is the world, so the development ofthose who are saying this, is just that way. And if there was noAptavani-8213214Aptavani-8ask me, I do not have a problem with that. But if they ask me,I have to tell them whether it is correct or not!Just look, have they not brainwashed everyone with thegod of death; Jamraja? There is absolutely no ‘bapo’ (superior)like that. There is not even an insect that goes by the name ofJamraj. He represented death governed by Nature (Niyamraj).This is what was knocked into people.Whatever palaces we built; they have now become oldwhich is why this yields the wrong results. So demolish them.Because for how long are they going to yield good results? Forthe time that they are new. Later, the fruit that they yield will bemediocre, then less than mediocre, and after that, it will be bad.Therefore at this time, the consequences they are yielding, arebad. So do its demolition.As long as a house is new, for a short time, it will behelpful, but what happens when it becomes old? Will it notbecome a liability? The framework will deteriorate, the drainswill collapse, and the tiles will become loose. That is the stateof things right now! Where has the helpfulness gone? For somany years, this has not been helpful. But it has thrown peopleinto confusion! Besides, there is nothing in it.Now if we ask them, what is Brahmaa, Vishnu andMaheshwar? They will say, ‘Brother, they are just deities (deva)’.They do not understand this. No one, other than the GnaniPurush, can get to the bottom of this. Only if it is beyond theknowledge mediated through the intellect (buddhijanya gnan),can this be explained. Otherwise, this cannot be resolved throughknowledge based on the intellect (buddhijanya gnan), and theentire world is stuck in knowledge mediated through the intellect!   And because all this has not been understood, delusionhas set in.Questioner: My delusion has disappeared.Dadashri: Yes, is that right? If you want, you may ask meanything. You can ask anything here.Moksha Means to Remain and Grow in theAttribute of the SelfQuestioner: They talk about final liberation (moksha),what is this thing, moksha?Dadashri: Moksha means to return to the role or attributes(gunadharma) of the Self. And while staying in one’s own nature(swa-swaroop) and in constant eternal bliss (sanatan sukh) –that is called moksha!Understanding Correctness from the GnaniQuestioner: Many opinionated people ask why we wouldwant to go to moksha. There is no independent happiness (sukh)over there. They make snide remarks like that.Dadashri: They are just tossing dirt over the final place(bhumika). Just so that they can run their enterprises, they arethrowing about all this dirt. I have searched for what correctnessis! I have made all kinds of investigations and explored everythingalong the way, and I have come up with all the research.So if ever anyone claiming such a thing were to comehere, he himself would say, ‘Sir, give me moksha!’ This is becauseit will not take long at all to change his opinion and beliefs. Abelief should be an irrefutable principle (siddhantik).Questioner: That would be your powerful aura!Dadashri: No, it is not that. However, here, if it is wrong,then it will not do. If it is truth, then everyone has to embraceit. If it is true, then no one can obstruct it. His is not truth, whichis why he has to let go!Nevertheless, this is the world, so the development ofthose who are saying this, is just that way. And if there was noAptavani-8215216Aptavani-8development up to that point, they would not be doing anyrituals (kriyakand) and all that, and the intellect (buddhi) wouldnot grow. The internal turmoil and suffering (badapo) continuesto grow, after the intellect has increased. And it is after theinternal suffering has increased, that one begins to need finalliberation (moksha).As a person’s intellect (buddhi) grows, his inner suffering(badapo), as a counterweight, just continues to increase. Yes, sothe Vedanta and all that is a means to increase one’s intellect.Alas, they keep on developing the intellect. And as the intellectgrows, the inner turmoil arises. That is when they say, ‘Nowwhere will I go?’ And the answer would be: ‘Go to the one whois devoid of attachment and abhorrence – the Vitarag!’ Besides,the Lord accepts them both. One can attain the right enlightenedbelief (samkit), from both paths: the path of Vedanta, and thepath of Jainism. In both the paths, one can remain on one’sindividual path, while attaining enlightenment (samkit).The Atma’s BondageQuestioner: So then, is the Atma itself independent(swatantra) and free (mukta); is it eternally blissful (sat chitanand)?Dadashri: It is not independent (swatantra). I am askingyou, who told you that the Atma is independent?Questioner: The scriptures (shastras) say that the Atmais independent.Dadashri: No, its nature is sat chit anand swaroop(established in the blissful awareness of the eternal, the Self), butit is not independent (swatantra), which is why they are in sucha predicament. If it were independent, it would have instantfreedom (mukti)! How long would that take? It is bound in sucha way, that say if it was bound with a thick, heavy iron chain,you would be able to cut the chain, with a “gas cutting” (cuttingtorch). But it is bound in such a way that the chain cannot bebroken. What sort of links these are! What has Kaviraj written? ‘Adhaatu saankadiye Parmatma bandivaan’‘The Absolute Soul (Parmatma) is bound with a non-metal chain.’The non-metal chain (adhaatu saankadiye), refers to thechain of the non-Self complex (prakruti), by which it is bound.Where did you come across independent (swatantra)?These kinds of books that you read, are they books that havebeen certified, or are you reading books which are “uncertified”?Questioner: But the scriptures (shastras) say that theAtma is independent (swatantra) and free (mukta).Dadashri: No one is saying that. If it was independent,then there would be no need for the attainment of final liberation(moksha); would the path to liberation still be there? You shouldsay to the scriptures (shastras), ‘Why did you become books?Why did we need you here? Since the Atma is not independent(swatantra), you have been born to release it from its bondage!’Besides, if it was independent, would there be any need for thescriptures (shastras)?Those who say that ‘the Atma has no bondage (bandhan)’,may just as well be saying, ‘It does not have moksha as well’.And those who say, ‘the Atma has bondage (bandhan)’, alsohave to say that, ‘It has final liberation (moksha) as well’. Thisis not something that can be contradicted. Did you understand?Those who believe that the Atma has no bondage (bandhan),means that it does not need liberation. That is because the Atmais in moksha. But they need to understand what the nature ofliberation (moksha swaroop) is.Many say that, ‘the Atma has no bondage (bandhan)’.That is true. But since the Atma has no bondage, then why doAptavani-8215216Aptavani-8development up to that point, they would not be doing anyrituals (kriyakand) and all that, and the intellect (buddhi) wouldnot grow. The internal turmoil and suffering (badapo) continuesto grow, after the intellect has increased. And it is after theinternal suffering has increased, that one begins to need finalliberation (moksha).As a person’s intellect (buddhi) grows, his inner suffering(badapo), as a counterweight, just continues to increase. Yes, sothe Vedanta and all that is a means to increase one’s intellect.Alas, they keep on developing the intellect. And as the intellectgrows, the inner turmoil arises. That is when they say, ‘Nowwhere will I go?’ And the answer would be: ‘Go to the one whois devoid of attachment and abhorrence – the Vitarag!’ Besides,the Lord accepts them both. One can attain the right enlightenedbelief (samkit), from both paths: the path of Vedanta, and thepath of Jainism. In both the paths, one can remain on one’sindividual path, while attaining enlightenment (samkit).The Atma’s BondageQuestioner: So then, is the Atma itself independent(swatantra) and free (mukta); is it eternally blissful (sat chitanand)?Dadashri: It is not independent (swatantra). I am askingyou, who told you that the Atma is independent?Questioner: The scriptures (shastras) say that the Atmais independent.Dadashri: No, its nature is sat chit anand swaroop(established in the blissful awareness of the eternal, the Self), butit is not independent (swatantra), which is why they are in sucha predicament. If it were independent, it would have instantfreedom (mukti)! How long would that take? It is bound in sucha way, that say if it was bound with a thick, heavy iron chain,you would be able to cut the chain, with a “gas cutting” (cuttingtorch). But it is bound in such a way that the chain cannot bebroken. What sort of links these are! What has Kaviraj written? ‘Adhaatu saankadiye Parmatma bandivaan’‘The Absolute Soul (Parmatma) is bound with a non-metal chain.’The non-metal chain (adhaatu saankadiye), refers to thechain of the non-Self complex (prakruti), by which it is bound.Where did you come across independent (swatantra)?These kinds of books that you read, are they books that havebeen certified, or are you reading books which are “uncertified”?Questioner: But the scriptures (shastras) say that theAtma is independent (swatantra) and free (mukta).Dadashri: No one is saying that. If it was independent,then there would be no need for the attainment of final liberation(moksha); would the path to liberation still be there? You shouldsay to the scriptures (shastras), ‘Why did you become books?Why did we need you here? Since the Atma is not independent(swatantra), you have been born to release it from its bondage!’Besides, if it was independent, would there be any need for thescriptures (shastras)?Those who say that ‘the Atma has no bondage (bandhan)’,may just as well be saying, ‘It does not have moksha as well’.And those who say, ‘the Atma has bondage (bandhan)’, alsohave to say that, ‘It has final liberation (moksha) as well’. Thisis not something that can be contradicted. Did you understand?Those who believe that the Atma has no bondage (bandhan),means that it does not need liberation. That is because the Atmais in moksha. But they need to understand what the nature ofliberation (moksha swaroop) is.Many say that, ‘the Atma has no bondage (bandhan)’.That is true. But since the Atma has no bondage, then why doAptavani-8217218Aptavani-8you go to temples? Why do you read the scriptures (shastras)?Why do you have worries? Would all that not be contradictorythen? The Atma does not have any bondage; that much is ahundred percent true. This is an independent (nirpeksha)statement. From the aspect of Knowledge (Gnan bhaav), theAtma is not bound, and from the aspect of ignorance (agnanbhaav), it is bound. When you have the aspect of Knowledgethat is, ‘I am the pure Soul (Shuddhatma)’, then You do nothave bondage (bandhan). However, as long as you have theinner intent (bhaav), ‘I am truly Chandubhai’, then there isbondage for certain.Anything that seems painful to you, you can call bondage.Otherwise, people in this world, do not even have the awarenessof being bound; they do not have the awareness that ‘I ambound’.No living entity (jiva) likes its own bondage (bandhan).Do you like being bound? Questioner: No.Dadashri: Nevertheless, what is it that you have to livein?Questioner: In bondage (bandhan).Dadashri: The entire day, you have to live in bondage(bandhan). Each and every living being (jiva) is stuck inbondage. Gnani Purush like ‘us’ is free, but rarely in any eraof the time cycle One such Gnani Purush is around. OtherwiseGnanis can never be found in the world. Gnani Purush is freeand so he is not bound by anything. Therefore he does not feela burden of any kind, he has no fear; nothing can touch him. Andthat is what you, yourself have to become. But you can onlybecome that in the presence of a Gnani Purush. For thousandsof years, Gnani Purush is not around. You can become freewhen rarely a Gnani Purush is around.When You Find the Giver of Moksha, YouFind MokshaQuestioner: Can you say that liberation (moksha) is anend to expectation?Dadashri: No, the nature (swabhav) of the Self isliberation (moksha).Questioner: So then why have so many people repeatedly,talked only about the ways to attain moksha?Dadashri: In reality, what it is, is that they talk about themoksha of their own language. But no one really cares aboutmoksha. Everyone is only interested in, ‘What about me; I amsomeone!’ That is all they want. And should they ever meet atrue Purush (Gnani), then without a doubt, they will find thepath that leads to moksha! All these are just self-serving intentions,and they are engulfed in a battle of pride (maan-taan) and hum(ego); they have not attained anything from it.I (Hum) means the ego (ahamkar); therefore, when theego ends, one becomes Bhagwan (God).Questioner: Can one attain moksha, by asking for it?Dadashri: You can get everything by asking, providedthere is a giver of moksha (mokshadata) present. He must bea giver of moksha, who himself dwells in moksha; however,you should not talk about moksha with anyone outside. Thereyou should talk about religion (dharma), and they will guide youtowards a good religion.Questioner: Where can you find someone who can giveyou liberation (moksha)?Dadashri: This here is the only one. You can comewhenever you want to. Or else you can come after your friendhas attained moksha. Once he gets a taste of it, come after youhave asked him.Aptavani-8217218Aptavani-8you go to temples? Why do you read the scriptures (shastras)?Why do you have worries? Would all that not be contradictorythen? The Atma does not have any bondage; that much is ahundred percent true. This is an independent (nirpeksha)statement. From the aspect of Knowledge (Gnan bhaav), theAtma is not bound, and from the aspect of ignorance (agnanbhaav), it is bound. When you have the aspect of Knowledgethat is, ‘I am the pure Soul (Shuddhatma)’, then You do nothave bondage (bandhan). However, as long as you have theinner intent (bhaav), ‘I am truly Chandubhai’, then there isbondage for certain.Anything that seems painful to you, you can call bondage.Otherwise, people in this world, do not even have the awarenessof being bound; they do not have the awareness that ‘I ambound’.No living entity (jiva) likes its own bondage (bandhan).Do you like being bound? Questioner: No.Dadashri: Nevertheless, what is it that you have to livein?Questioner: In bondage (bandhan).Dadashri: The entire day, you have to live in bondage(bandhan). Each and every living being (jiva) is stuck inbondage. Gnani Purush like ‘us’ is free, but rarely in any eraof the time cycle One such Gnani Purush is around. OtherwiseGnanis can never be found in the world. Gnani Purush is freeand so he is not bound by anything. Therefore he does not feela burden of any kind, he has no fear; nothing can touch him. Andthat is what you, yourself have to become. But you can onlybecome that in the presence of a Gnani Purush. For thousandsof years, Gnani Purush is not around. You can become freewhen rarely a Gnani Purush is around.When You Find the Giver of Moksha, YouFind MokshaQuestioner: Can you say that liberation (moksha) is anend to expectation?Dadashri: No, the nature (swabhav) of the Self isliberation (moksha).Questioner: So then why have so many people repeatedly,talked only about the ways to attain moksha?Dadashri: In reality, what it is, is that they talk about themoksha of their own language. But no one really cares aboutmoksha. Everyone is only interested in, ‘What about me; I amsomeone!’ That is all they want. And should they ever meet atrue Purush (Gnani), then without a doubt, they will find thepath that leads to moksha! All these are just self-serving intentions,and they are engulfed in a battle of pride (maan-taan) and hum(ego); they have not attained anything from it.I (Hum) means the ego (ahamkar); therefore, when theego ends, one becomes Bhagwan (God).Questioner: Can one attain moksha, by asking for it?Dadashri: You can get everything by asking, providedthere is a giver of moksha (mokshadata) present. He must bea giver of moksha, who himself dwells in moksha; however,you should not talk about moksha with anyone outside. Thereyou should talk about religion (dharma), and they will guide youtowards a good religion.Questioner: Where can you find someone who can giveyou liberation (moksha)?Dadashri: This here is the only one. You can comewhenever you want to. Or else you can come after your friendhas attained moksha. Once he gets a taste of it, come after youhave asked him.Aptavani-8219220Aptavani-8Whose Intention Is to Attain Moksha?Questioner: Does moksha not have to be done for theliving being (jiva)?Dadashri: It is for the one who is bound, that mokshahas to be done.Questioner: Who is the one that is bound?Dadashri: The one who is suffering! The one, who suffersin the state of bondage (bandhan), is the one who is bound.Questioner: Particularly, what is its name?Dadashri: Who suffers the state (avastha) of bondage(bandhan)?Questioner: Is it not just the living being (jiva) that suffers?Dadashri: Are you not suffering it?Questioner: Who do you mean by you?Dadashri: So then who is the one suffering? Jiva? Anddo you keep seeing that? You do utter, ‘I (hoo) am suffering’.Questioner: Hoo (I) meaning who? That question remains.Dadashri: That itself is the ego (ahamkar)!Questioner: Is the ego (ahamkar) not the jiva’s state(swaroop) anyway?Dadashri: Leave jiva (living being) aside. What does thejiva have to do with it? A jiva is not a thing (element - vastu)!It is an adjective for the Atma, the embodied soul (jivatma):that brother, as long as we have this ego, it is an embodied soul(jivatma). When the ego (ahamkar) is finished, the Atma isreleased! However, when the ego decreases, and one has theawareness of one’s own state (swaroop), it means that one hasbecome the interim state Soul (antaratma), and once he becomesantaratma, he goes on to become the Absolute Soul(Parmatma).Questioner: So whose inner intent (bhaav) is it, to attainmoksha (final liberation)?Dadashri: To attain moksha, is the inner intent of the onewho is bound. The one, who is bound, desires to be freed.Which means that it is, the intent of the ego (ahamkar). TheAtma does not possess that kind of intent (bhaav). The Atmais free anyways!Questioner: If the Atma is not the sufferer, then what isit trying to become free from?Dadashri: It does not have the intent to be free. It isalready free. It is the one who is bound that wants to be free.It is the one that is bound, who is the sufferer, and who is alsothe doer (karta). The one who is the doer, is the one who is thesufferer; he is the one who wants to be free!This is how it is: even this bondage (bandhan) has beencreated by the egoism (ahamkar), and it is also the ego that islooking for freedom (mukti). This is because the ego can nolonger endure the suffering. It thought that there may be somethingto savor here, but since there was nothing to savor, it now looksfor freedom (mukti). However, the Atma is indeed free; by itsvery nature (swabhav), it is free! ‘By nature, the Atma is free’,if one could understand just this much, one’s work is done.….Even the Coming and Going Belong to theEgoQuestioner: And is the Atma not without birth (ajanma)?Dadashri: Yes, the Atma, by nature (swabhav), is neverborn (ajanma), and You (the Self) are also never born. Howeverit is only when you become the form of Atma (Atmaroop), thatyou become without birth (ajanma). But as it is, you haveAptavani-8219220Aptavani-8Whose Intention Is to Attain Moksha?Questioner: Does moksha not have to be done for theliving being (jiva)?Dadashri: It is for the one who is bound, that mokshahas to be done.Questioner: Who is the one that is bound?Dadashri: The one who is suffering! The one, who suffersin the state of bondage (bandhan), is the one who is bound.Questioner: Particularly, what is its name?Dadashri: Who suffers the state (avastha) of bondage(bandhan)?Questioner: Is it not just the living being (jiva) that suffers?Dadashri: Are you not suffering it?Questioner: Who do you mean by you?Dadashri: So then who is the one suffering? Jiva? Anddo you keep seeing that? You do utter, ‘I (hoo) am suffering’.Questioner: Hoo (I) meaning who? That question remains.Dadashri: That itself is the ego (ahamkar)!Questioner: Is the ego (ahamkar) not the jiva’s state(swaroop) anyway?Dadashri: Leave jiva (living being) aside. What does thejiva have to do with it? A jiva is not a thing (element - vastu)!It is an adjective for the Atma, the embodied soul (jivatma):that brother, as long as we have this ego, it is an embodied soul(jivatma). When the ego (ahamkar) is finished, the Atma isreleased! However, when the ego decreases, and one has theawareness of one’s own state (swaroop), it means that one hasbecome the interim state Soul (antaratma), and once he becomesantaratma, he goes on to become the Absolute Soul(Parmatma).Questioner: So whose inner intent (bhaav) is it, to attainmoksha (final liberation)?Dadashri: To attain moksha, is the inner intent of the onewho is bound. The one, who is bound, desires to be freed.Which means that it is, the intent of the ego (ahamkar). TheAtma does not possess that kind of intent (bhaav). The Atmais free anyways!Questioner: If the Atma is not the sufferer, then what isit trying to become free from?Dadashri: It does not have the intent to be free. It isalready free. It is the one who is bound that wants to be free.It is the one that is bound, who is the sufferer, and who is alsothe doer (karta). The one who is the doer, is the one who is thesufferer; he is the one who wants to be free!This is how it is: even this bondage (bandhan) has beencreated by the egoism (ahamkar), and it is also the ego that islooking for freedom (mukti). This is because the ego can nolonger endure the suffering. It thought that there may be somethingto savor here, but since there was nothing to savor, it now looksfor freedom (mukti). However, the Atma is indeed free; by itsvery nature (swabhav), it is free! ‘By nature, the Atma is free’,if one could understand just this much, one’s work is done.….Even the Coming and Going Belong to theEgoQuestioner: And is the Atma not without birth (ajanma)?Dadashri: Yes, the Atma, by nature (swabhav), is neverborn (ajanma), and You (the Self) are also never born. Howeverit is only when you become the form of Atma (Atmaroop), thatyou become without birth (ajanma). But as it is, you haveAptavani-8221222Aptavani-8become Chandubhai, which is why this temporary adjustmenthas come about. You became the owner of the body, and youhave believed, ‘I am Chandubhai’, and ‘this body is indeed whoI am’, so when this dies, you will also have to die with it!Questioner: The Atma is without birth and death(ajanma-amar), so what is it that comes and goes (avagaman)?Dadashri: The Atma is indeed without birth and death(ajanma-amar), and it is always pure. Except that it has beenaffected by the five eternal elements (tattva); however when itbecomes free of their influence, the Atma is indeed free. It istruly without birth and death (ajanma-amar); when it comes toknow its own state (swaroop), that is when the cycles of comingsand goings (avagaman) all come to a halt.Questioner: But who undergoes the cycle of coming andgoing; birth and death (avagaman)?Dadashri: That which is the ego (ahamkar) is what goesthrough the cycle of birth and death (avagaman). The Atmaremains in its same state. The ego comes to an end, and so itscycle ends!Therefore, birth and death, do not happen to the Atma.The Atma is something permanent. Birth and death occur for theegoism. Egoism itself takes birth. And moreover, it says to thedoctor, ‘Sir, save me, save me.’ Hey you! Are you not permanent?And he will say, ‘No, I am temporary.’ So all this is nothing buta battle of egoism. Only the Gnani Purush can remove thategoism. Egoism is the result of ignorance (agnan), and it isbecause of it, that this worldly life (sansar) still stands. In ‘us’the egoism is completely gone.Questioner: Where did the ego (ahamkar) and the Atma,and all that come together? I still cannot understand.Dadashri: It is just an extra result (vishesha parinam).There Is No Pain for Atma SwaroopQuestioner: Now, whether a man goes to heaven (swarg)or into hell (nark), even then, does the Atma not still remainseparate from happiness (sukh) and unhappiness (dukh)?Dadashri: The Atma does remain separate, but whatgood does that do for us? As long as the ego (ahamkar) isthere, one experiences pleasure (sukh) and pain (dukh), andone does not like pain.Questioner: But nothing happens to the Atma, does it?That is what I am asking.Dadashri: This is how it is: If you had a gold guinea (oldBritish coin), then no matter where you put it, it would not pickup rust. But if that guinea were lost, it is not the guinea thatexperiences unhappiness (dukh), but would you not experienceunhappiness (dukh)? Similarly, the Atma does not experienceunhappiness (dukh) at all; it is the ego that suffers in pain. Whenthe ego goes away, you become Atma, and as long as the egois there, you are not Atma.Questioner: In that example, the guinea and I are separate,but in this, is it really separate like that?Dadashri: Even this is separate. But you cannot see that.Just as you perceive that the guinea is separate, that is how ‘we’see the Atma as being separate.Questioner: So can we say that despite being in thebody, the Atma is in moksha?Dadashri: Yes, it is always free (mukta). But when ‘we’give you this Gnan, it itself becomes aware of its own freedom.However, the Atma within, is indeed free; it has no unhappiness(dukh). But who experiences the unhappiness? The ego(ahamkar)! Once it is gone; the unhappiness is gone. It is theego that has given rise to all this, it has detached itself fromAptavani-8221222Aptavani-8become Chandubhai, which is why this temporary adjustmenthas come about. You became the owner of the body, and youhave believed, ‘I am Chandubhai’, and ‘this body is indeed whoI am’, so when this dies, you will also have to die with it!Questioner: The Atma is without birth and death(ajanma-amar), so what is it that comes and goes (avagaman)?Dadashri: The Atma is indeed without birth and death(ajanma-amar), and it is always pure. Except that it has beenaffected by the five eternal elements (tattva); however when itbecomes free of their influence, the Atma is indeed free. It istruly without birth and death (ajanma-amar); when it comes toknow its own state (swaroop), that is when the cycles of comingsand goings (avagaman) all come to a halt.Questioner: But who undergoes the cycle of coming andgoing; birth and death (avagaman)?Dadashri: That which is the ego (ahamkar) is what goesthrough the cycle of birth and death (avagaman). The Atmaremains in its same state. The ego comes to an end, and so itscycle ends!Therefore, birth and death, do not happen to the Atma.The Atma is something permanent. Birth and death occur for theegoism. Egoism itself takes birth. And moreover, it says to thedoctor, ‘Sir, save me, save me.’ Hey you! Are you not permanent?And he will say, ‘No, I am temporary.’ So all this is nothing buta battle of egoism. Only the Gnani Purush can remove thategoism. Egoism is the result of ignorance (agnan), and it isbecause of it, that this worldly life (sansar) still stands. In ‘us’the egoism is completely gone.Questioner: Where did the ego (ahamkar) and the Atma,and all that come together? I still cannot understand.Dadashri: It is just an extra result (vishesha parinam).There Is No Pain for Atma SwaroopQuestioner: Now, whether a man goes to heaven (swarg)or into hell (nark), even then, does the Atma not still remainseparate from happiness (sukh) and unhappiness (dukh)?Dadashri: The Atma does remain separate, but whatgood does that do for us? As long as the ego (ahamkar) isthere, one experiences pleasure (sukh) and pain (dukh), andone does not like pain.Questioner: But nothing happens to the Atma, does it?That is what I am asking.Dadashri: This is how it is: If you had a gold guinea (oldBritish coin), then no matter where you put it, it would not pickup rust. But if that guinea were lost, it is not the guinea thatexperiences unhappiness (dukh), but would you not experienceunhappiness (dukh)? Similarly, the Atma does not experienceunhappiness (dukh) at all; it is the ego that suffers in pain. Whenthe ego goes away, you become Atma, and as long as the egois there, you are not Atma.Questioner: In that example, the guinea and I are separate,but in this, is it really separate like that?Dadashri: Even this is separate. But you cannot see that.Just as you perceive that the guinea is separate, that is how ‘we’see the Atma as being separate.Questioner: So can we say that despite being in thebody, the Atma is in moksha?Dadashri: Yes, it is always free (mukta). But when ‘we’give you this Gnan, it itself becomes aware of its own freedom.However, the Atma within, is indeed free; it has no unhappiness(dukh). But who experiences the unhappiness? The ego(ahamkar)! Once it is gone; the unhappiness is gone. It is theego that has given rise to all this, it has detached itself fromAptavani-8223224 Aptavani-8Bhagwan (God), and it has created a separation (bhed). Whenthe ego leaves, there is no more unhappiness (dukh). Questioner: So where is the Atma’s place?Dadashri: The Atma itself is in the form of liberation(moksha swaroop), it has no other location. Its very nature(swabhav) is moksha. All this has come about as a result of acharacteristic that does not belong to the Self; an extra intent(vibhav – the belief that ‘I am Chandubhai’).Just like the nature (swabhav) of this gold, that even ifyou kept it for a thousand years, its nature will not change. Andif gold is put together with copper into a mixture; that is whenthere will be changes.Questioner: What does it mean to have attained moksha?Dadashri: The work of the Atma has already ended. Hethat was bound is now free. He that was suffering unhappiness(dukh) was the one who was bound and when his unhappinessis gone, he himself became free (mukta).He that had become separated from the Atma, the ego(ahamkar), is the ego that became dissolved into his own Selfform (swaroop). So the work is done. It is because it wasseparated, that it was suffering pain (dukh). It had created theseparation because of the wrong understanding, and there wasnow a division. They gave you a name ‘Chandu’, and so it wasin that name that you became embroiled. Therefore, its workhad ended. The Atma is eternal and indestructible (avinashi).Its work has already been done. But when will it ever be releasedfrom here? The answer is: when this intellect that creates division(bhed buddhi) is broken; it will be released.Questioner: After it becomes free, what does it do?Dadashri: Thereafter, it attains the abode of the LiberatedSouls (Siddha gati). And it is there that it resides in a constantstate of absolute bliss (parmanand). As long as the body remains,it has a burden.Even the body is cumbersome. The body through whichone does not experience happiness (sukh), is the body that theGnanis are encumbered with. But that cannot be avoided! Untilit has reached its discharge limit there is no escape!Dualities Perpetuate BondageQuestioner: Once the Atma goes to its final liberation(moksha), it does not assume another body, but is every Atmanot already in liberation (moksha)?Dadashri: No, it is not like that. Infinite Atmas havebecome trapped in circumstances in this way. In order to go tomoksha, they are all trying to come back to their own nature(swabhav). However, the non-Self (anatma) that there is, doesnot allow it to come into its own nature of the Self (swabhav).So not all souls, have entered liberation (moksha) yet.Questioner: So does that mean that the Atma has notseen moksha yet?Dadashri: No, it has not. Nevertheless, its own nature(swabhav) is moksha. But what are these circumstances(saiyogo) like? They are in the form of duality (dwandvaswaroop)! This matter (jada) part, the part that is the non-Self(anatma) part, is in the form of dualities (dwandva swaroop).Duality means, gain and loss, happiness-unhappiness (sukh-dukh),attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh), which are all by naturedualities that it assumes as its own; that is why it remainsperpetually bound. When the pressure of the circumstances(saiyogo) is lifted, that is when it encounters the Gnani Purush,it encounters people to facilitate the attainment of an instrument(the instrument being the Gnani Purush as a nimit), and that iswhen it finds liberation (moksha). Otherwise, moksha is notsomething that happens by itself. Nevertheless, all the Atmas areAptavani-8223224 Aptavani-8Bhagwan (God), and it has created a separation (bhed). Whenthe ego leaves, there is no more unhappiness (dukh). Questioner: So where is the Atma’s place?Dadashri: The Atma itself is in the form of liberation(moksha swaroop), it has no other location. Its very nature(swabhav) is moksha. All this has come about as a result of acharacteristic that does not belong to the Self; an extra intent(vibhav – the belief that ‘I am Chandubhai’).Just like the nature (swabhav) of this gold, that even ifyou kept it for a thousand years, its nature will not change. Andif gold is put together with copper into a mixture; that is whenthere will be changes.Questioner: What does it mean to have attained moksha?Dadashri: The work of the Atma has already ended. Hethat was bound is now free. He that was suffering unhappiness(dukh) was the one who was bound and when his unhappinessis gone, he himself became free (mukta).He that had become separated from the Atma, the ego(ahamkar), is the ego that became dissolved into his own Selfform (swaroop). So the work is done. It is because it wasseparated, that it was suffering pain (dukh). It had created theseparation because of the wrong understanding, and there wasnow a division. They gave you a name ‘Chandu’, and so it wasin that name that you became embroiled. Therefore, its workhad ended. The Atma is eternal and indestructible (avinashi).Its work has already been done. But when will it ever be releasedfrom here? The answer is: when this intellect that creates division(bhed buddhi) is broken; it will be released.Questioner: After it becomes free, what does it do?Dadashri: Thereafter, it attains the abode of the LiberatedSouls (Siddha gati). And it is there that it resides in a constantstate of absolute bliss (parmanand). As long as the body remains,it has a burden.Even the body is cumbersome. The body through whichone does not experience happiness (sukh), is the body that theGnanis are encumbered with. But that cannot be avoided! Untilit has reached its discharge limit there is no escape!Dualities Perpetuate BondageQuestioner: Once the Atma goes to its final liberation(moksha), it does not assume another body, but is every Atmanot already in liberation (moksha)?Dadashri: No, it is not like that. Infinite Atmas havebecome trapped in circumstances in this way. In order to go tomoksha, they are all trying to come back to their own nature(swabhav). However, the non-Self (anatma) that there is, doesnot allow it to come into its own nature of the Self (swabhav).So not all souls, have entered liberation (moksha) yet.Questioner: So does that mean that the Atma has notseen moksha yet?Dadashri: No, it has not. Nevertheless, its own nature(swabhav) is moksha. But what are these circumstances(saiyogo) like? They are in the form of duality (dwandvaswaroop)! This matter (jada) part, the part that is the non-Self(anatma) part, is in the form of dualities (dwandva swaroop).Duality means, gain and loss, happiness-unhappiness (sukh-dukh),attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh), which are all by naturedualities that it assumes as its own; that is why it remainsperpetually bound. When the pressure of the circumstances(saiyogo) is lifted, that is when it encounters the Gnani Purush,it encounters people to facilitate the attainment of an instrument(the instrument being the Gnani Purush as a nimit), and that iswhen it finds liberation (moksha). Otherwise, moksha is notsomething that happens by itself. Nevertheless, all the Atmas areAptavani-8225226Aptavani-8indeed moving towards moksha. However, depending on thekind of nimit (instrument) he encounters, he again roams. Thenagain, it is only here in the human form that the roaming takesplace. Or wherever else he roams, is correct. And if he shouldcome across a wrong nimit, he can even be taken to a life in hell(nark gati), or into a yoni (place of creation) in the animal realm!It Is Worth it, If Moksha Is ProcuredQuestioner: To attain moksha, is this body a necessaryinstrument?Dadashri: The human body is the greatest instrument forattaining moksha (final liberation). Even in the celestial realm(deva gati) you cannot attain it, even in the animal gati (realm)you cannot attain it; you cannot attain it in any other avatar(birth). It is only in the human avatar that all the five realms oflife-forms are open.Is Moksha Possible for Every ‘atma’?Questioner: When will all the Atmas reach the full stage?Dadashri: If all the Atmas went to their liberation(moksha), this worldly life (sansar) would no longer exist. Sodo you wish to destroy the worldly life? What is your wish?Questioner: There is Knowledge (Gnan) in the Atma,then would that stage not come when it can go to moksha?Dadashri: Yes, that stage does come. It does indeedenter that stage, and they are on their way to final liberation(moksha). But when you say that, if all the world’s Atmas wentto moksha, you have made the intention (bhavna) for thedestruction of the worldly life (sansar), that ‘let this worldly lifenot be!’ And this worldly life is something that is the developmentof the Atma! The original (muda) Atma is already developed,the Atma itself is full and complete (purna), but right now, yourprogression that has come about, is such that it is entrenched inthe non-Self complex’s (paudgalik) beliefs. Those beliefs throughshifting, shifting, shifting, move towards the fundamental intention(bhavna) of the form of the Self (chaitanya swaroop) and thatis when completion (purnahuti) occurs.Questioner: Does that mean that no Atma can reachmoksha (final liberation) at all?Dadashri: Goodness! There are so many that do indeedreach the final liberation! Even I am in moksha right now!Questioner: Could it ever happen that all the Atmas gooff to final liberation?Dadashri: Can a mother and son ever be the same age?The day that a son and mother are the same age, is the day thatthe entire world would go to moksha (!)It is like this: ‘may the entire world go to moksha’ is anintention (bhavna) that you are entitled to. However, it willnever materialize. It will only materialize when a mother andchild are both the same age (!)One man says to me, ‘Why do you not take the wholeworld to moksha?’ So I told him, ‘I will explain to you. If allthe living beings (jivas) became warriors, who would they attack?If all the world’s living beings became doctors, who would theyheal? If all the living beings in the world became barbers, thenwhose hair would they cut?’ And he says, ‘I understand, Iunderstand, I will not ask that again!’It is Nature’s arrangement, so we do not say that moreshould come together. That is its arrangement, that by way ofvyavasthit (scientific circumstantial evidence), they all cometogether. Otherwise, would we not keep sending everyone letters(invitations)? No, but these karmic accounts (hisaab) havealready been arranged. So we need not worry about it. Here wejust come and go.Aptavani-8225226Aptavani-8indeed moving towards moksha. However, depending on thekind of nimit (instrument) he encounters, he again roams. Thenagain, it is only here in the human form that the roaming takesplace. Or wherever else he roams, is correct. And if he shouldcome across a wrong nimit, he can even be taken to a life in hell(nark gati), or into a yoni (place of creation) in the animal realm!It Is Worth it, If Moksha Is ProcuredQuestioner: To attain moksha, is this body a necessaryinstrument?Dadashri: The human body is the greatest instrument forattaining moksha (final liberation). Even in the celestial realm(deva gati) you cannot attain it, even in the animal gati (realm)you cannot attain it; you cannot attain it in any other avatar(birth). It is only in the human avatar that all the five realms oflife-forms are open.Is Moksha Possible for Every ‘atma’?Questioner: When will all the Atmas reach the full stage?Dadashri: If all the Atmas went to their liberation(moksha), this worldly life (sansar) would no longer exist. Sodo you wish to destroy the worldly life? What is your wish?Questioner: There is Knowledge (Gnan) in the Atma,then would that stage not come when it can go to moksha?Dadashri: Yes, that stage does come. It does indeedenter that stage, and they are on their way to final liberation(moksha). But when you say that, if all the world’s Atmas wentto moksha, you have made the intention (bhavna) for thedestruction of the worldly life (sansar), that ‘let this worldly lifenot be!’ And this worldly life is something that is the developmentof the Atma! The original (muda) Atma is already developed,the Atma itself is full and complete (purna), but right now, yourprogression that has come about, is such that it is entrenched inthe non-Self complex’s (paudgalik) beliefs. Those beliefs throughshifting, shifting, shifting, move towards the fundamental intention(bhavna) of the form of the Self (chaitanya swaroop) and thatis when completion (purnahuti) occurs.Questioner: Does that mean that no Atma can reachmoksha (final liberation) at all?Dadashri: Goodness! There are so many that do indeedreach the final liberation! Even I am in moksha right now!Questioner: Could it ever happen that all the Atmas gooff to final liberation?Dadashri: Can a mother and son ever be the same age?The day that a son and mother are the same age, is the day thatthe entire world would go to moksha (!)It is like this: ‘may the entire world go to moksha’ is anintention (bhavna) that you are entitled to. However, it willnever materialize. It will only materialize when a mother andchild are both the same age (!)One man says to me, ‘Why do you not take the wholeworld to moksha?’ So I told him, ‘I will explain to you. If allthe living beings (jivas) became warriors, who would they attack?If all the world’s living beings became doctors, who would theyheal? If all the living beings in the world became barbers, thenwhose hair would they cut?’ And he says, ‘I understand, Iunderstand, I will not ask that again!’It is Nature’s arrangement, so we do not say that moreshould come together. That is its arrangement, that by way ofvyavasthit (scientific circumstantial evidence), they all cometogether. Otherwise, would we not keep sending everyone letters(invitations)? No, but these karmic accounts (hisaab) havealready been arranged. So we need not worry about it. Here wejust come and go.Aptavani-8227228Aptavani-8 Did you understand all that? This worldly life (sansar)itself is like a stream, that has been eternally flowing. Every livingbeing (jiva) in it, will definitely attain final liberation (moksha),sooner or later, and that is its sequential order (kram). Thesequential order means that in one smallest fraction of time(samaya), a hundred and eight living beings (jivas), are definitelygoing to moksha; in the flow of the stream!Questioner: All the one hundred and eight jivas that goto moksha, where do they all come from?Dadashri: From all the fifteen locations (kshetras) in theuniverse. A hundred and eight of them, go to moksha.Just like a parade of policemen, passing by in rows offour, one behind another, on this side we have a stream of ahundred and eight souls (jivas), going from interaction in theworld (vyavahar) to final liberation (moksha); entering the placeof the Liberated Souls (Siddha kshetra). And the same numberof souls enter into the worldly state (vyavahar rashi), from theundetermined, non-interactive state (avyavahar rashi). Therefore,in worldly interaction (vyavahar), there is no increase or decreasein the number of souls, not a single soul increases, or decreases.What would you call a soul that interacts in the world (vyavaharjiva)? All those that have been given a name are interactive inthe worldly life (vyavahar), and those who have not been givena name, have not yet come into interaction in the world(vyavahar). And those who have lost their names, have gone tothe abode of Liberated Souls (Siddha kshetra).Namo Siddhanam – The Goal of Worship Questioner: You say that there is no one above us, isthere not the location of Liberated Souls (Siddha lok) above us?Dadashri: That is the realm of the Liberated Souls(Siddha lok), that is the place of the Absolute Souls (Siddhakshetra), they are all those who have gone to the final liberation(moksha), they are done; they will not listen to you, and theywill not even say anything about anyone; they do not have anyfeelings for anyone, they do not have anything. They are justbasking in their own bliss (sukh)! They will not help us. Theyrepresent our goal. When you say Namo Siddhanam, it onlystands for a goal that says, ‘This is the state I want!’Questioner: When we say Namo Siddhanam, does thesalutation (namaskar) really reach them?Dadashri: Even if it does not reach them, at least it hasreached the Absolute Soul (Siddha) sitting within you! The Atmathat resides within you is indeed Absolute (Siddha)! We shouldonly be concerned about getting the work done! You shouldsend your salutation there. And it is your responsibility to makesure that it gets there. So you have to send a letter to them.No Activity for Siddha; Nevertheless There IsActionQuestioner: Those who have become Absolute (Siddha),does God send them here for a purpose?Dadashri: No one sends them. There is no one there tosend them here. No one has the need to send anything overhere. The world is such, that it needs no one. You do not haveany superior (upari) at all. In this world no soul (jiva) has anupari. Your own faults and blunders are your superior (upari).Questioner: So in the location of the Liberated Souls(Siddha kshetra), what are the activities of the Siddha Bhagwan(Lord)?Dadashri: That which has to carry out actions (pravrutti),is considered mechanical. They are not mechanical.Questioner: No, but once they go to final liberation(moksha), is there activity (pravrutti) or inactivity (nivrutti)over there?Aptavani-8227228Aptavani-8 Did you understand all that? This worldly life (sansar)itself is like a stream, that has been eternally flowing. Every livingbeing (jiva) in it, will definitely attain final liberation (moksha),sooner or later, and that is its sequential order (kram). Thesequential order means that in one smallest fraction of time(samaya), a hundred and eight living beings (jivas), are definitelygoing to moksha; in the flow of the stream!Questioner: All the one hundred and eight jivas that goto moksha, where do they all come from?Dadashri: From all the fifteen locations (kshetras) in theuniverse. A hundred and eight of them, go to moksha.Just like a parade of policemen, passing by in rows offour, one behind another, on this side we have a stream of ahundred and eight souls (jivas), going from interaction in theworld (vyavahar) to final liberation (moksha); entering the placeof the Liberated Souls (Siddha kshetra). And the same numberof souls enter into the worldly state (vyavahar rashi), from theundetermined, non-interactive state (avyavahar rashi). Therefore,in worldly interaction (vyavahar), there is no increase or decreasein the number of souls, not a single soul increases, or decreases.What would you call a soul that interacts in the world (vyavaharjiva)? All those that have been given a name are interactive inthe worldly life (vyavahar), and those who have not been givena name, have not yet come into interaction in the world(vyavahar). And those who have lost their names, have gone tothe abode of Liberated Souls (Siddha kshetra).Namo Siddhanam – The Goal of Worship Questioner: You say that there is no one above us, isthere not the location of Liberated Souls (Siddha lok) above us?Dadashri: That is the realm of the Liberated Souls(Siddha lok), that is the place of the Absolute Souls (Siddhakshetra), they are all those who have gone to the final liberation(moksha), they are done; they will not listen to you, and theywill not even say anything about anyone; they do not have anyfeelings for anyone, they do not have anything. They are justbasking in their own bliss (sukh)! They will not help us. Theyrepresent our goal. When you say Namo Siddhanam, it onlystands for a goal that says, ‘This is the state I want!’Questioner: When we say Namo Siddhanam, does thesalutation (namaskar) really reach them?Dadashri: Even if it does not reach them, at least it hasreached the Absolute Soul (Siddha) sitting within you! The Atmathat resides within you is indeed Absolute (Siddha)! We shouldonly be concerned about getting the work done! You shouldsend your salutation there. And it is your responsibility to makesure that it gets there. So you have to send a letter to them.No Activity for Siddha; Nevertheless There IsActionQuestioner: Those who have become Absolute (Siddha),does God send them here for a purpose?Dadashri: No one sends them. There is no one there tosend them here. No one has the need to send anything overhere. The world is such, that it needs no one. You do not haveany superior (upari) at all. In this world no soul (jiva) has anupari. Your own faults and blunders are your superior (upari).Questioner: So in the location of the Liberated Souls(Siddha kshetra), what are the activities of the Siddha Bhagwan(Lord)?Dadashri: That which has to carry out actions (pravrutti),is considered mechanical. They are not mechanical.Questioner: No, but once they go to final liberation(moksha), is there activity (pravrutti) or inactivity (nivrutti)over there?Aptavani-8229230Aptavani-8Dadashri: There is neither inactivity (nivrutti), nor anyactivity (pravrutti) over there. Nevertheless, there is still theactivity of Knowledge (Gnan kriya) and the activity of Vision(Darshan kriya). There is inactivity and there is also this action(kriya). You cannot say that it is activity, but even so, there isaction.Siddha Kshetra – What a Marvel!Questioner: So do all the Atmas in the place of theLiberated Souls (Siddha kshetra) keep to themselves?Dadashri: Yes, they have nothing to do with anyone else.It is like that in this world, that no one has anything to do withanyone else at all. And whatever there is; is just by way of aninstrument (nimit). Even I am only an instrumental person (nimit).Questioner: When we go to the place of the LiberatedSouls (Siddha kshetra), do we just have to sit there alone? Anddo we just continue to see?Dadashri: It is not the sitting around of your language.You do not have to stand around, or sit around over there; youdo not have to lay around. There it is something quite different.Questioner: Do we just see all the time?Dadashri: Yes, but it is not something that you can imagine.You are trying to see it through your imagination, but it is not thatsort of thing.Questioner: What is the place of the Liberated Souls(Siddha shila) like?Dadashri: The Siddha shila is a place where karmas donot stick to you, even if they wanted to; whereas here, karmawill stick to you, even if you did not wish it to! The subatomicparticles (parmanu) are everywhere constantly. Here, thesubatomic particle is always ready, but over there, it does notaffect them at all. God! That is the eternal state!Questioner: Are there no subatomic particles (parmanu)in the location of the Liberated Souls (Siddha kshetra)?Dadashri: There is nothing there. The Siddha Lords, areable to know all the things to be known (gneya) over here bythemselves. However, in their place, there are no things to beknown (gneya). The location of the Liberated Souls (Siddhakshetra) is a sort of place for all the liberated Souls to stay.Questioner: Is Siddha kshetra (location of the LiberatedSouls) within this universe or outside of this universe?Dadashri: It is on the edge of the universe, on the finaledge. You should understand it in your own language, and theneveryone else will interpret it in their own language. However theSiddha kshetra does not exist outside of the universe, but it isat its edge!The Wondrous Seat of the Siddhas – TheUltimate GoalQuestioner: Can the Liberated Souls (Siddhas), whohave become liberated (Siddha) in the location of LiberatedSouls (Siddha kshetra), be individually identified?Dadashri: No, they are not individuals like that. They dohowever, have an awareness of existence (astitva), elementalnature (vastutva) and the absolute state (purnatva); theawareness of ‘I am’, and that is all. Over there, there is nothinglike it, is there? Each and every one of them, dwell in theawareness (intent) of ‘I am’! There is no talk of anything else,there is not any kind of dispute or discrimination betweenindividuals and there is no mutual relationship. All these mutualrelationships are found over here, and they are relative. Whereasover there, it is real; it is absolute, in which there is nointerdependency. There they have the awareness of existence(astitva), elemental nature (vastutva), and absolute state(purnatva)!Aptavani-8229230Aptavani-8Dadashri: There is neither inactivity (nivrutti), nor anyactivity (pravrutti) over there. Nevertheless, there is still theactivity of Knowledge (Gnan kriya) and the activity of Vision(Darshan kriya). There is inactivity and there is also this action(kriya). You cannot say that it is activity, but even so, there isaction.Siddha Kshetra – What a Marvel!Questioner: So do all the Atmas in the place of theLiberated Souls (Siddha kshetra) keep to themselves?Dadashri: Yes, they have nothing to do with anyone else.It is like that in this world, that no one has anything to do withanyone else at all. And whatever there is; is just by way of aninstrument (nimit). Even I am only an instrumental person (nimit).Questioner: When we go to the place of the LiberatedSouls (Siddha kshetra), do we just have to sit there alone? Anddo we just continue to see?Dadashri: It is not the sitting around of your language.You do not have to stand around, or sit around over there; youdo not have to lay around. There it is something quite different.Questioner: Do we just see all the time?Dadashri: Yes, but it is not something that you can imagine.You are trying to see it through your imagination, but it is not thatsort of thing.Questioner: What is the place of the Liberated Souls(Siddha shila) like?Dadashri: The Siddha shila is a place where karmas donot stick to you, even if they wanted to; whereas here, karmawill stick to you, even if you did not wish it to! The subatomicparticles (parmanu) are everywhere constantly. Here, thesubatomic particle is always ready, but over there, it does notaffect them at all. God! That is the eternal state!Questioner: Are there no subatomic particles (parmanu)in the location of the Liberated Souls (Siddha kshetra)?Dadashri: There is nothing there. The Siddha Lords, areable to know all the things to be known (gneya) over here bythemselves. However, in their place, there are no things to beknown (gneya). The location of the Liberated Souls (Siddhakshetra) is a sort of place for all the liberated Souls to stay.Questioner: Is Siddha kshetra (location of the LiberatedSouls) within this universe or outside of this universe?Dadashri: It is on the edge of the universe, on the finaledge. You should understand it in your own language, and theneveryone else will interpret it in their own language. However theSiddha kshetra does not exist outside of the universe, but it isat its edge!The Wondrous Seat of the Siddhas – TheUltimate GoalQuestioner: Can the Liberated Souls (Siddhas), whohave become liberated (Siddha) in the location of LiberatedSouls (Siddha kshetra), be individually identified?Dadashri: No, they are not individuals like that. They dohowever, have an awareness of existence (astitva), elementalnature (vastutva) and the absolute state (purnatva); theawareness of ‘I am’, and that is all. Over there, there is nothinglike it, is there? Each and every one of them, dwell in theawareness (intent) of ‘I am’! There is no talk of anything else,there is not any kind of dispute or discrimination betweenindividuals and there is no mutual relationship. All these mutualrelationships are found over here, and they are relative. Whereasover there, it is real; it is absolute, in which there is nointerdependency. There they have the awareness of existence(astitva), elemental nature (vastutva), and absolute state(purnatva)!Aptavani-8231232 Aptavani-8Questioner: Everyone has bliss (sukh) over there, dothey not?Dadashri: They all experience the same bliss. In theawareness of the elemental nature (vastutva), tremendousabsolute bliss (parmanand) is always there!Questioner: Just like we get a full house at a cinematheater, is there the same kind of full house there too?Dadashri: That is your imagination (kalpana). There isso much vastness over there, that in spite of the infinite numberof Liberated Souls (Siddhas) over there, an infinite number ofSiddhas will be continually going there. Everything over there isinfinite!Questioner: In this world, the Atma can only exist ifthere is the presence of matter (jada), and if not, is the Atmaable to exist on its own?Dadashri: What you said is correct. The Atma can neverexist on its own in this world. It is only in the realm of theLiberated Ones (Siddha gati) that the Atmas can exist on theirown.Questioner: So there are no other surrounding conditions,besides the Siddha gati, where the Atmas can exist on theirown!Dadashri: Yes. That is true.Questioner: Could it also be that if we go to moksha,we may encounter all of this again?Dadashri: No. There is nothing like that. The reason ithappens like that over here, is because here, we have all thesecircumstances (saiyogo). In this location (Earth), these are thecircumstances that we have, which is why it happens this way.But over there, these circumstances do not exist. Therefore it isnot possible for this to happen, nothing like that can ever occuragain.When two things come together, neither of them, relinquishtheir own properties (gunas); however, this gives rise to an extraproperty and trait (vishesh gunadharma). Now this is an extraintent (vishesh bhaav). And it is that extra property (visheshgunadharma), that is the worldly life (sansar). Now if they hadthe non-Self complex (pudgal) in the place of the LiberatedSouls (Siddha kshetra), then even there, the extra intent (visheshbhaav) would occur. But there is no pudgal over there!Questioner: The Atma becomes bathed in the realm ofthe Liberated Souls (Siddha gati), but are there not subatomicparticles of the non-Self complex (pudgal parmanus) on theoutside?Dadashri: But they are outside the location of theLiberated Souls (Siddha kshetra), meaning that they are only inthe lower part. They are in a state which does not affect theLiberated Souls (Siddhas). The abode of the Liberated Souls(Siddha kshetra) is situated in the middle of the worlds orplanes of existence (lok) and space beyond the worlds; thelimitless space (alok).Questioner: Can the surrounding conditions orcircumstances of the abode of the Liberated Souls (Siddhakshetra), affect other worlds or planes of existence (lokas)?Dadashri: Not at all. What has effect got to do withanything? There is no relation at all. And there is no effect of anykind on the Siddhas.Questioner: They may not be affected, but do they affectthe outside or not?Dadashri: No. Nothing here is affected by them.Nevertheless, it is our goal; that it is where we want to go!(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-8231232 Aptavani-8Questioner: Everyone has bliss (sukh) over there, dothey not?Dadashri: They all experience the same bliss. In theawareness of the elemental nature (vastutva), tremendousabsolute bliss (parmanand) is always there!Questioner: Just like we get a full house at a cinematheater, is there the same kind of full house there too?Dadashri: That is your imagination (kalpana). There isso much vastness over there, that in spite of the infinite numberof Liberated Souls (Siddhas) over there, an infinite number ofSiddhas will be continually going there. Everything over there isinfinite!Questioner: In this world, the Atma can only exist ifthere is the presence of matter (jada), and if not, is the Atmaable to exist on its own?Dadashri: What you said is correct. The Atma can neverexist on its own in this world. It is only in the realm of theLiberated Ones (Siddha gati) that the Atmas can exist on theirown.Questioner: So there are no other surrounding conditions,besides the Siddha gati, where the Atmas can exist on theirown!Dadashri: Yes. That is true.Questioner: Could it also be that if we go to moksha,we may encounter all of this again?Dadashri: No. There is nothing like that. The reason ithappens like that over here, is because here, we have all thesecircumstances (saiyogo). In this location (Earth), these are thecircumstances that we have, which is why it happens this way.But over there, these circumstances do not exist. Therefore it isnot possible for this to happen, nothing like that can ever occuragain.When two things come together, neither of them, relinquishtheir own properties (gunas); however, this gives rise to an extraproperty and trait (vishesh gunadharma). Now this is an extraintent (vishesh bhaav). And it is that extra property (visheshgunadharma), that is the worldly life (sansar). Now if they hadthe non-Self complex (pudgal) in the place of the LiberatedSouls (Siddha kshetra), then even there, the extra intent (visheshbhaav) would occur. But there is no pudgal over there!Questioner: The Atma becomes bathed in the realm ofthe Liberated Souls (Siddha gati), but are there not subatomicparticles of the non-Self complex (pudgal parmanus) on theoutside?Dadashri: But they are outside the location of theLiberated Souls (Siddha kshetra), meaning that they are only inthe lower part. They are in a state which does not affect theLiberated Souls (Siddhas). The abode of the Liberated Souls(Siddha kshetra) is situated in the middle of the worlds orplanes of existence (lok) and space beyond the worlds; thelimitless space (alok).Questioner: Can the surrounding conditions orcircumstances of the abode of the Liberated Souls (Siddhakshetra), affect other worlds or planes of existence (lokas)?Dadashri: Not at all. What has effect got to do withanything? There is no relation at all. And there is no effect of anykind on the Siddhas.Questioner: They may not be affected, but do they affectthe outside or not?Dadashri: No. Nothing here is affected by them.Nevertheless, it is our goal; that it is where we want to go!(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)Aptavani-8233234Aptavani-8Part Two Who Am I? How Can I Know That?Now How Can the Cycle End?Questioner: Now, I just wanted to ask you, what do weneed to do to put an end to the cycles of birth and death?Dadashri: Now you ask the question, in the fifth era ofthe current time cycle (ara – one of the six divisions of timein one half of the time cycle. We are currently in the fifthara, which began about twenty-five hundred yeas ago)? Itwould have been possible to stop the cycle in the fourth ara, butyou failed to do that, because you were too busy “tasting chutney(savory relish)”. Just only for the chutney (material; worldlypleasures), that is all you desired, and therefore you stayedbehind. When you could have put a halt to cycle of birth anddeath back then, you did not do anything there. Now you havecome, there is no recourse left to you; you may have yourchutney, but the solution is no longer around. Now do you feelthat you can let go of the chutney?Questioner: It may go away.Dadashri: Yes, in order to stop the cycles of birth anddeath, you will have to attain the knowledge of who you are.You must attain the right vision (samkit). Questioner: Until the purpose of this life is realized, allother discussion is meaningless. One only needs to know thatpurpose. It is there, that the fundamental question lies.Dadashri: Yes. This fundamental question is indeed true.This is how it is: There is a businessman (sheth), who is a verycontent man. He owns a mill. Whenever he talks about anything,he makes all his two thousand employees, delighted. That is theway he speaks, and that is how behaves. He possesses a beautifulrespect. But what would he be like, when he is tired at the endof the day, and has a drink? He starts feeling intoxication fromthe brandy, so he becomes oblivious to his own condition. Hisown awareness grows dim, until he is enclosed in darkness.Questioner: In the intoxication from the alcohol, he losesall awareness, so how do people lose their spiritual awareness?Dadashri: In spirituality (adhyatma) it is intoxication fromillusion (moha) that does not come down. It is in this state ofintoxication, that people talk. All that you are talking about rightnow, is after you have had a swig of the alcohol; that is moha,intoxication due to illusion. I have removed the intoxication in allthese mahatmas. But yours has not been lifted, so you are ina perpetual state of intoxication when you talk. So when thisintoxication is lifted, you will understand what this life’s purposeis; you will immediately realize it.Just like the businessman who, after his state of intoxicationhas lifted, is just the same as he was before! Then he resumestalking nicely! So with him, it is the intoxication from the alcohol;whereas the world is intoxicated with infatuation due to illusion(moha); but a person’s alcoholic stupor, can be lifted by dousinga couple of bowls of cold water on him. Here, however, theintoxication of illusion (moha) can never be lifted. Then even ifyou went to the Himalayas, or anywhere else, wherever youlook, you will only come across drunks. They leave their homes,their wives and children, but they do not renounce the hum (I;the ego); their I (hum) never leaves. They are perpetually in, I,I, I. When the I (ego) goes, that is when he becomes the AbsoluteSoul (Parmatma). ‘You’ yourself are the Absolute Soul(Parmatma). However, you are not aware of this, because youdo not have the awareness (jagruti).Aptavani-8233234Aptavani-8Part Two Who Am I? How Can I Know That?Now How Can the Cycle End?Questioner: Now, I just wanted to ask you, what do weneed to do to put an end to the cycles of birth and death?Dadashri: Now you ask the question, in the fifth era ofthe current time cycle (ara – one of the six divisions of timein one half of the time cycle. We are currently in the fifthara, which began about twenty-five hundred yeas ago)? Itwould have been possible to stop the cycle in the fourth ara, butyou failed to do that, because you were too busy “tasting chutney(savory relish)”. Just only for the chutney (material; worldlypleasures), that is all you desired, and therefore you stayedbehind. When you could have put a halt to cycle of birth anddeath back then, you did not do anything there. Now you havecome, there is no recourse left to you; you may have yourchutney, but the solution is no longer around. Now do you feelthat you can let go of the chutney?Questioner: It may go away.Dadashri: Yes, in order to stop the cycles of birth anddeath, you will have to attain the knowledge of who you are.You must attain the right vision (samkit). Questioner: Until the purpose of this life is realized, allother discussion is meaningless. One only needs to know thatpurpose. It is there, that the fundamental question lies.Dadashri: Yes. This fundamental question is indeed true.This is how it is: There is a businessman (sheth), who is a verycontent man. He owns a mill. Whenever he talks about anything,he makes all his two thousand employees, delighted. That is theway he speaks, and that is how behaves. He possesses a beautifulrespect. But what would he be like, when he is tired at the endof the day, and has a drink? He starts feeling intoxication fromthe brandy, so he becomes oblivious to his own condition. Hisown awareness grows dim, until he is enclosed in darkness.Questioner: In the intoxication from the alcohol, he losesall awareness, so how do people lose their spiritual awareness?Dadashri: In spirituality (adhyatma) it is intoxication fromillusion (moha) that does not come down. It is in this state ofintoxication, that people talk. All that you are talking about rightnow, is after you have had a swig of the alcohol; that is moha,intoxication due to illusion. I have removed the intoxication in allthese mahatmas. But yours has not been lifted, so you are ina perpetual state of intoxication when you talk. So when thisintoxication is lifted, you will understand what this life’s purposeis; you will immediately realize it.Just like the businessman who, after his state of intoxicationhas lifted, is just the same as he was before! Then he resumestalking nicely! So with him, it is the intoxication from the alcohol;whereas the world is intoxicated with infatuation due to illusion(moha); but a person’s alcoholic stupor, can be lifted by dousinga couple of bowls of cold water on him. Here, however, theintoxication of illusion (moha) can never be lifted. Then even ifyou went to the Himalayas, or anywhere else, wherever youlook, you will only come across drunks. They leave their homes,their wives and children, but they do not renounce the hum (I;the ego); their I (hum) never leaves. They are perpetually in, I,I, I. When the I (ego) goes, that is when he becomes the AbsoluteSoul (Parmatma). ‘You’ yourself are the Absolute Soul(Parmatma). However, you are not aware of this, because youdo not have the awareness (jagruti).Aptavani-8235236Aptavani-8Questioner: Let us come back to the main topic, whichis, what should humans live for in this world?Dadashri: They should live for liberation (moksha).Nevertheless, if they do not have the understanding, then they alllive for women, they live for money, or they live for whateverelse. But it is all on account of wrong understanding. They donot know what the goal or the purpose (hetu) is, and so theymake anything a goal! If they knew the goal, then they wouldknow that this human birth; this human birth in Hindustan (India),is only meant for the attainment of moksha (final liberation). Butit is because they do not know of this path to liberation (moksha),they make a goal of anything that comes along, and the goalchanges.Whatever the world’s people do, is all the worldly life(sansar); no matter what they do, it is always worldly life; theynever step out of it even once. That is called being engulfed inthe non-Self (par-ramanata). Therefore, it is the purpose (hetu)that is important. Only purpose (hetu) has any value; what is thepurpose behind their action. Anything that is done for the purposeof the Atma, no matter what deed or action (kriya) it is, eventhen it is the goal (hetu) that has any worth; the deed (kriya) isnot relevant then.If your goal (hetu) is for liberation (moksha), and if youraim (hetu) is strong, then you will definitely reach that path.Besides, others have all kinds of goals inside them. They tell youthat their goal is to attain moksha. However, internally all theirgoals are for the worldly life (sansar).So many cosmic time-cycles (aras) have passed, and evenwhen this fifth time-cycle has come upon you, how can you notbe tired of it?! A soul (jiva) that is eligible (yogya), will find ittiresome. But the passionate soul, really enjoys it, and relishes it!The one who tires of it, will find the path to liberation (moksha)very quickly. And the one who never tires of it will continue towander in the bazaars (shops of enticement) all alone! There’sno telling how many more avatars (lifetimes) he will have tokeep roaming around in! This is the worldly life (sansar).The One That Sees the Temporary, Is thePermanentHow does this world work? Who runs it? Why does itrun? Who are we? – Until man attains Knowledge (Gnan),these puzzles will not be solved! Can you see how many kindsof puzzles have come about?Questioner: It is only a puzzle if we believe that it is;otherwise it is not.Dadashri: ‘If we believe’. That term has become sopopular. It is not that exactly. That is because you may believethat it is not a puzzle; however, when you experience it, it thenbecomes a puzzle. Believing does not last long! You may believethat you have two hundred thousand in your bank, so you writea check, and it will be returned. To believe is not a correct thing.Something that is believed will only stay around for a short time.It does not mean anything. Besides, believing can only apply incertain matters.Questioner: Does everything, except for the Atma, notonly remain for a short time?Dadashri: Yes, therefore everything is just believed! Allthese are just wrong beliefs, and they are all temporaryadjustments! “All these relatives are temporary adjustments, andthe Atma itself is permanent”!People have taken that which is easily broken and fragile(takalaadi), and believing that it is permanent; have engaged inbusiness with it! Has it ever occurred to you that all these thingsare fragile (takalaadi)?Questioner: The entire world is fragile!Aptavani-8235236Aptavani-8Questioner: Let us come back to the main topic, whichis, what should humans live for in this world?Dadashri: They should live for liberation (moksha).Nevertheless, if they do not have the understanding, then they alllive for women, they live for money, or they live for whateverelse. But it is all on account of wrong understanding. They donot know what the goal or the purpose (hetu) is, and so theymake anything a goal! If they knew the goal, then they wouldknow that this human birth; this human birth in Hindustan (India),is only meant for the attainment of moksha (final liberation). Butit is because they do not know of this path to liberation (moksha),they make a goal of anything that comes along, and the goalchanges.Whatever the world’s people do, is all the worldly life(sansar); no matter what they do, it is always worldly life; theynever step out of it even once. That is called being engulfed inthe non-Self (par-ramanata). Therefore, it is the purpose (hetu)that is important. Only purpose (hetu) has any value; what is thepurpose behind their action. Anything that is done for the purposeof the Atma, no matter what deed or action (kriya) it is, eventhen it is the goal (hetu) that has any worth; the deed (kriya) isnot relevant then.If your goal (hetu) is for liberation (moksha), and if youraim (hetu) is strong, then you will definitely reach that path.Besides, others have all kinds of goals inside them. They tell youthat their goal is to attain moksha. However, internally all theirgoals are for the worldly life (sansar).So many cosmic time-cycles (aras) have passed, and evenwhen this fifth time-cycle has come upon you, how can you notbe tired of it?! A soul (jiva) that is eligible (yogya), will find ittiresome. But the passionate soul, really enjoys it, and relishes it!The one who tires of it, will find the path to liberation (moksha)very quickly. And the one who never tires of it will continue towander in the bazaars (shops of enticement) all alone! There’sno telling how many more avatars (lifetimes) he will have tokeep roaming around in! This is the worldly life (sansar).The One That Sees the Temporary, Is thePermanentHow does this world work? Who runs it? Why does itrun? Who are we? – Until man attains Knowledge (Gnan),these puzzles will not be solved! Can you see how many kindsof puzzles have come about?Questioner: It is only a puzzle if we believe that it is;otherwise it is not.Dadashri: ‘If we believe’. That term has become sopopular. It is not that exactly. That is because you may believethat it is not a puzzle; however, when you experience it, it thenbecomes a puzzle. Believing does not last long! You may believethat you have two hundred thousand in your bank, so you writea check, and it will be returned. To believe is not a correct thing.Something that is believed will only stay around for a short time.It does not mean anything. Besides, believing can only apply incertain matters.Questioner: Does everything, except for the Atma, notonly remain for a short time?Dadashri: Yes, therefore everything is just believed! Allthese are just wrong beliefs, and they are all temporaryadjustments! “All these relatives are temporary adjustments, andthe Atma itself is permanent”!People have taken that which is easily broken and fragile(takalaadi), and believing that it is permanent; have engaged inbusiness with it! Has it ever occurred to you that all these thingsare fragile (takalaadi)?Questioner: The entire world is fragile!Aptavani-8237238Aptavani-8Dadashri: Yes, that is exactly what I am trying to tell you.All these relatives are temporary adjustments! And You yourselfare permanent! Now, if You yourself are permanent, and theseadjustments are all temporary, how can you reconcile the two?Are You not also permanent?Questioner: How can I tell that?Dadashri: Do you have a next life (punarjanma) or not?Have you had a past avatar (incarnation; birth; life) or not? Youare not even sure of that, are you? But if you believe inreincarnation (punarjanma), then it means that you have becomepermanent.Any kind of temporary thing cannot understand anothertemporary thing: only a permanent thing can understand atemporary thing as temporary. Would you not know that thisglass could break? Will these glasses (spectacles) break?Therefore, you are permanent. And these spectacles are only atemporary thing. Only the permanent thing can understand thetemporary as temporary. One temporary thing cannot understandanother temporary thing. How can the temporary understand thetemporary? Therefore, only if it is permanent, can it understandthe temporary as temporary. If there were no permanent thing inthis world, then would there be any point in calling temporary,temporary? You are able to say temporary, because there issomething permanent. Otherwise, would everything not have beentemporary? Can your intellect (buddhi) grasp this?Questioner: Yes, because there is a permanent thing,there is also a temporary thing.Dadashri: Yes, it is because there is a permanent thing.Based on that, all these other things are considered temporary.And one is able to understand that, this is fragile (takalaadi), thisis fragile. The glass cup is fragile. Would you not be able tounderstand that? If you dropped this copper cup, you would not betoo alarmed. But what would happen if you dropped a glass cup?Questioner: I would be afraid to break a glass cup.Dadashri: Yes. So the glass cup would be completelysmashed, while the copper cup will perhaps get a dent in it,which you will be able to fix and restore to the way it was;however, all of that is temporary. Some may last twenty-fiveyears, some fifteen years. This body may last seventy-five years.All of that is temporary. You yourself are permanent. However,you consider yourself as temporary. ‘I am Chandubhai, I am thisbody, I am her son’. Those are all misconceptions that I seekto get rid of. Do you want to get rid of your mistakes (wrongbeliefs)?When people call everything temporary, the one callingother things temporary, is himself permanent. Otherwise, the wordtemporary would not exist. Therefore, this itself proves, that incalling other things temporary, one is himself permanent. But heis not aware of that. Nevertheless, people still say, temporary!Therefore you should find out, that this person may not be awareof it, although he says temporary. And so he himself is permanent.But, him making the mistakes himself is a different matter.What Are Your Qualities? Mistakes Even in ThatThis knowledge (gnan) has not been lost. However, ifyou plus-minus, it is possible that all this knowledge can berecovered, provided that a Gnani Purush shows you the way!Otherwise, it will never enter your imagination; your mind willnot grasp it. This is all, ‘how can I earn a living? How can I dothat?’ Such issues and money have entirely preoccupied themind. Therefore, one is indeed permanent, but he himself is notaware of this! Should he not have the awareness of who he is?Questioner: He would know what his qualities (gunas)are, would he not?Dadashri: No. No one would know that. There is not asingle person who would be aware of his qualities (gunas).Aptavani-8237238Aptavani-8Dadashri: Yes, that is exactly what I am trying to tell you.All these relatives are temporary adjustments! And You yourselfare permanent! Now, if You yourself are permanent, and theseadjustments are all temporary, how can you reconcile the two?Are You not also permanent?Questioner: How can I tell that?Dadashri: Do you have a next life (punarjanma) or not?Have you had a past avatar (incarnation; birth; life) or not? Youare not even sure of that, are you? But if you believe inreincarnation (punarjanma), then it means that you have becomepermanent.Any kind of temporary thing cannot understand anothertemporary thing: only a permanent thing can understand atemporary thing as temporary. Would you not know that thisglass could break? Will these glasses (spectacles) break?Therefore, you are permanent. And these spectacles are only atemporary thing. Only the permanent thing can understand thetemporary as temporary. One temporary thing cannot understandanother temporary thing. How can the temporary understand thetemporary? Therefore, only if it is permanent, can it understandthe temporary as temporary. If there were no permanent thing inthis world, then would there be any point in calling temporary,temporary? You are able to say temporary, because there issomething permanent. Otherwise, would everything not have beentemporary? Can your intellect (buddhi) grasp this?Questioner: Yes, because there is a permanent thing,there is also a temporary thing.Dadashri: Yes, it is because there is a permanent thing.Based on that, all these other things are considered temporary.And one is able to understand that, this is fragile (takalaadi), thisis fragile. The glass cup is fragile. Would you not be able tounderstand that? If you dropped this copper cup, you would not betoo alarmed. But what would happen if you dropped a glass cup?Questioner: I would be afraid to break a glass cup.Dadashri: Yes. So the glass cup would be completelysmashed, while the copper cup will perhaps get a dent in it,which you will be able to fix and restore to the way it was;however, all of that is temporary. Some may last twenty-fiveyears, some fifteen years. This body may last seventy-five years.All of that is temporary. You yourself are permanent. However,you consider yourself as temporary. ‘I am Chandubhai, I am thisbody, I am her son’. Those are all misconceptions that I seekto get rid of. Do you want to get rid of your mistakes (wrongbeliefs)?When people call everything temporary, the one callingother things temporary, is himself permanent. Otherwise, the wordtemporary would not exist. Therefore, this itself proves, that incalling other things temporary, one is himself permanent. But heis not aware of that. Nevertheless, people still say, temporary!Therefore you should find out, that this person may not be awareof it, although he says temporary. And so he himself is permanent.But, him making the mistakes himself is a different matter.What Are Your Qualities? Mistakes Even in ThatThis knowledge (gnan) has not been lost. However, ifyou plus-minus, it is possible that all this knowledge can berecovered, provided that a Gnani Purush shows you the way!Otherwise, it will never enter your imagination; your mind willnot grasp it. This is all, ‘how can I earn a living? How can I dothat?’ Such issues and money have entirely preoccupied themind. Therefore, one is indeed permanent, but he himself is notaware of this! Should he not have the awareness of who he is?Questioner: He would know what his qualities (gunas)are, would he not?Dadashri: No. No one would know that. There is not asingle person who would be aware of his qualities (gunas).Aptavani-8239240Aptavani-8What they consider their own qualities, are in fact the qualitiesof someone else. All the qualities that you see, are not yours;they are wrongly ascribed (aropit) qualities! They are not yourqualities; nevertheless, you say that they are my qualities (gunas).Questioner: I have a few good qualities (gunas) and Ialso have some bad qualities.Dadashri: No. They are both wrongly ascribed qualities(aropit guna). And good qualities and bad qualities are bothwrong. They are both cultured qualities (gunas) and culturedthings! These good-bad qualities are not yours at all. Your qualitiesare something quite different. You have not seen or known asingle one of your qualities. Even others have not known theirown qualities (gunas). That is why all these people come here,to know their own qualities! This is because they want endlesshappiness (sukh). They do not want this temporary happiness!The qualities (gunas) that exist at the present time, are‘Chandubhai’s qualities; they are not Your qualities. Chandubhaiand You are both separate. In this body, even You are separate,and even Chandubhai is separate. ‘We’ see them both as beingseparate; ‘we’ see Chandubhai and ‘we’ also see You (the Self).So, In truth, really speaking, who you are, is the decision youmust take! In this body, Your location (kshetra), is separate. IfYou reside in Your location, then You are the Knower of yourlocation (kshetragnya). And if you do not reside in your location(kshetra), then you become one with the location (kshetrakaar;Chandubhai). By becoming the Knower (kshetragnya), Youhave to see what goes on in the location (kshetra)! What doesKnower of the location (kshetragnya) mean? It is the one whoknows the location. So all You have to do is just keep knowing,What is happening, who is speaking, and all that is what Youmust know, while remaining in your own location (kshetra) thatis all!To come to the decision, ‘I am the pure Soul(Shuddhatma)’, itself is called the experience of the Atma(Atmanubhav). And to have that experience of the Atma; is itjust any ordinary thing?The Hidden Self, Wondrous, Wondrous!So what is worth knowing in this world? What do youthink?Questioner: The form and nature of the Self (Swa-swaroop).Dadashri: That is all. Except for that, there is nothing elsein this world worth knowing. Only the form of the Self (swaroop)is worth knowing.Questioner: Yes, but what must that wondrous vision(darshan) be?Dadashri: Wonderful is the hidden form (swaroop)! Thatwhich is, completely hidden away from the world, is a hiddenform (gupta swaroop). That, which the entire world does notknow, is the hidden form which itself is wondrous. Besides,there is no other thing in this world that is wondrous (adabhoota)!Everything else, you can find. However, that which is a hiddenform (gupta swaroop), is the only thing that is wondrous in thisworld! That is why the writers of scriptures (shastras) haverepeatedly said, over and over a thousand times that it iswondrous, wondrous, wondrous! The Fundamental Mistake Is the BeliefQuestioner: But do we not have illusion (bhranti)?Dadashri: What illusion?Questioner: Is there not already illusion (bhranti) aboutthe form of the Self (Swa-swaroop)?Dadashri: But which form (swaroop) of yours has illusion(bhranti) and which form of yours is devoid of illusion? DoAptavani-8239240Aptavani-8What they consider their own qualities, are in fact the qualitiesof someone else. All the qualities that you see, are not yours;they are wrongly ascribed (aropit) qualities! They are not yourqualities; nevertheless, you say that they are my qualities (gunas).Questioner: I have a few good qualities (gunas) and Ialso have some bad qualities.Dadashri: No. They are both wrongly ascribed qualities(aropit guna). And good qualities and bad qualities are bothwrong. They are both cultured qualities (gunas) and culturedthings! These good-bad qualities are not yours at all. Your qualitiesare something quite different. You have not seen or known asingle one of your qualities. Even others have not known theirown qualities (gunas). That is why all these people come here,to know their own qualities! This is because they want endlesshappiness (sukh). They do not want this temporary happiness!The qualities (gunas) that exist at the present time, are‘Chandubhai’s qualities; they are not Your qualities. Chandubhaiand You are both separate. In this body, even You are separate,and even Chandubhai is separate. ‘We’ see them both as beingseparate; ‘we’ see Chandubhai and ‘we’ also see You (the Self).So, In truth, really speaking, who you are, is the decision youmust take! In this body, Your location (kshetra), is separate. IfYou reside in Your location, then You are the Knower of yourlocation (kshetragnya). And if you do not reside in your location(kshetra), then you become one with the location (kshetrakaar;Chandubhai). By becoming the Knower (kshetragnya), Youhave to see what goes on in the location (kshetra)! What doesKnower of the location (kshetragnya) mean? It is the one whoknows the location. So all You have to do is just keep knowing,What is happening, who is speaking, and all that is what Youmust know, while remaining in your own location (kshetra) thatis all!To come to the decision, ‘I am the pure Soul(Shuddhatma)’, itself is called the experience of the Atma(Atmanubhav). And to have that experience of the Atma; is itjust any ordinary thing?The Hidden Self, Wondrous, Wondrous!So what is worth knowing in this world? What do youthink?Questioner: The form and nature of the Self (Swa-swaroop).Dadashri: That is all. Except for that, there is nothing elsein this world worth knowing. Only the form of the Self (swaroop)is worth knowing.Questioner: Yes, but what must that wondrous vision(darshan) be?Dadashri: Wonderful is the hidden form (swaroop)! Thatwhich is, completely hidden away from the world, is a hiddenform (gupta swaroop). That, which the entire world does notknow, is the hidden form which itself is wondrous. Besides,there is no other thing in this world that is wondrous (adabhoota)!Everything else, you can find. However, that which is a hiddenform (gupta swaroop), is the only thing that is wondrous in thisworld! That is why the writers of scriptures (shastras) haverepeatedly said, over and over a thousand times that it iswondrous, wondrous, wondrous! The Fundamental Mistake Is the BeliefQuestioner: But do we not have illusion (bhranti)?Dadashri: What illusion?Questioner: Is there not already illusion (bhranti) aboutthe form of the Self (Swa-swaroop)?Dadashri: But which form (swaroop) of yours has illusion(bhranti) and which form of yours is devoid of illusion? DoAptavani-8241242Aptavani-8you not know which part has no illusion and which part hasillusion? You have not done any kind of separating them at all,have you?Questioner: What is your definition of illusion (bhranti)?What would you consider as having no illusion?Dadashri: You yourself (the Self) are eternal andindestructible (avinashi), and even the things that belong to you,are eternal. And to believe that things that are transient anddestructible (vinashi) are yours; that is called illusion (bhranti).Questioner: So would you not call it a kind of ignorance(agnan)?Dadashri: Massive ignorance! To believe that the foreigndepartment is the home department; is a lot of ignorance (agnan).If there is a foreign department, and you believe that it is thehome department, then what would you consider the homedepartment to be? Therefore, one does not know what thehome is. How do you benefit from believing that the foreigndepartment is the home department?Questioner: There is no benefit at all.Dadashri: Then what harm does it do?Questioner: If we do not know our real form (swaroop),then everything is harmful.Dadashri: It is indeed harmful. Your own Self-form(swaroop), is itself the home department. And in the foreigndepartment you have, ‘I am Chandubhai, I am a professor, I amthis woman’s husband, I am his uncle, I am fat, I am thin.’ Allthat keeps ringing in your ears, is called illusion (bhranti). It isokay to say it. But it is the one who is saying these things, inwhom you place your faith. You are mixing both, the worldlyinteraction (vyavahar) and that which is related to the Self(nischay) together, and saying, “I myself am Chandubhai!” O hoho! Just look at this great Chandubhai! He has got a hold of thecompletely wrong thing. Can you afford all that? How do youfeel?Questioner: We cannot afford to do that.Dadashri: So you need some kind of knowledge that willbring an end to this. From this ocean of worldly life (sansar),you cannot see the shore anywhere. There, every so often theywill say, ‘Let us go North!’ When you go North, you will meetsomeone that says, ‘Let us go this way.’ You fool! I have justcome from that way. And he will say, ‘never mind that, justcome back this way again.’ So that is how he goes on roaming,roaming, roaming, roaming around. But he cannot see theshoreline, the coast or anything, anywhere.Who Destroys This Illusion?Anything that disappears in a short time, is called illusion(bhranti). And every day, we make all these illusions stronger.By saying, ‘I am Chandubhai, I am Chandubhai’ each day, weare creating new illusions, while the old illusions are being erased.If we did not create new illusion, then the old ones woulddisappear. The nature of everything is that it dissipates and comesto an end (viyogi). Even the nature of illusion (bhranti) is short-lived (viyogi).Your very own Atma, is who you truly are. But at thispoint in time, you have illusion (bhranti). Which means thatwhere you yourself are not, you are falsely imputing (aarop)that, ‘I am Chandubhai.’The Difference between Temporary andPermanentWhen a person dies, the things that are temporary anddestructible (vinashi), are separated from the things that arepermanent (avinashi). The permanent (avinashi) thing in this, isAptavani-8241242Aptavani-8you not know which part has no illusion and which part hasillusion? You have not done any kind of separating them at all,have you?Questioner: What is your definition of illusion (bhranti)?What would you consider as having no illusion?Dadashri: You yourself (the Self) are eternal andindestructible (avinashi), and even the things that belong to you,are eternal. And to believe that things that are transient anddestructible (vinashi) are yours; that is called illusion (bhranti).Questioner: So would you not call it a kind of ignorance(agnan)?Dadashri: Massive ignorance! To believe that the foreigndepartment is the home department; is a lot of ignorance (agnan).If there is a foreign department, and you believe that it is thehome department, then what would you consider the homedepartment to be? Therefore, one does not know what thehome is. How do you benefit from believing that the foreigndepartment is the home department?Questioner: There is no benefit at all.Dadashri: Then what harm does it do?Questioner: If we do not know our real form (swaroop),then everything is harmful.Dadashri: It is indeed harmful. Your own Self-form(swaroop), is itself the home department. And in the foreigndepartment you have, ‘I am Chandubhai, I am a professor, I amthis woman’s husband, I am his uncle, I am fat, I am thin.’ Allthat keeps ringing in your ears, is called illusion (bhranti). It isokay to say it. But it is the one who is saying these things, inwhom you place your faith. You are mixing both, the worldlyinteraction (vyavahar) and that which is related to the Self(nischay) together, and saying, “I myself am Chandubhai!” O hoho! Just look at this great Chandubhai! He has got a hold of thecompletely wrong thing. Can you afford all that? How do youfeel?Questioner: We cannot afford to do that.Dadashri: So you need some kind of knowledge that willbring an end to this. From this ocean of worldly life (sansar),you cannot see the shore anywhere. There, every so often theywill say, ‘Let us go North!’ When you go North, you will meetsomeone that says, ‘Let us go this way.’ You fool! I have justcome from that way. And he will say, ‘never mind that, justcome back this way again.’ So that is how he goes on roaming,roaming, roaming, roaming around. But he cannot see theshoreline, the coast or anything, anywhere.Who Destroys This Illusion?Anything that disappears in a short time, is called illusion(bhranti). And every day, we make all these illusions stronger.By saying, ‘I am Chandubhai, I am Chandubhai’ each day, weare creating new illusions, while the old illusions are being erased.If we did not create new illusion, then the old ones woulddisappear. The nature of everything is that it dissipates and comesto an end (viyogi). Even the nature of illusion (bhranti) is short-lived (viyogi).Your very own Atma, is who you truly are. But at thispoint in time, you have illusion (bhranti). Which means thatwhere you yourself are not, you are falsely imputing (aarop)that, ‘I am Chandubhai.’The Difference between Temporary andPermanentWhen a person dies, the things that are temporary anddestructible (vinashi), are separated from the things that arepermanent (avinashi). The permanent (avinashi) thing in this, isAptavani-8243244Aptavani-8real, which means that it is eternal (sanatan). And all that isrelative, is temporary (vinashi).Questioner: You have said, that everything that is relative,is all temporary (vinashi), and that it is destructible. Now,according to scientists and from the perspective of Hinduism,there is not a single element in this world, which is temporary(vinashi). So what are you referring to when you say,destructible?Dadashri: That is exactly what I am saying, that no element(tattva) in this world is temporary. And that element is accordingto the perspective (drashti) of the element. You have not evenseen that element! Do you experience things that are permanent(avinashi) or things that are temporary (vinashi)?Questioner: Neither permanent nor temporary.Dadashri: When cups and saucers break, do you saythat the cups and saucers are destructible (vinashi), or do yousay they are indestructible (avinashi)?Questioner: I do not call it anything. They are the samething.Dadashri: The same? But do all these other people considerit the same? As for everyone else, because cups and saucersbreak, they consider cups and saucers to be temporary (vinashi).Questioner: But what is your opinion about the temporaryand destructible (vinashi)? Dadashri: Vinashi means that when you break cupsand saucers, you will feel anxiety, or when your clothes catchfire, you feel anxiety. That is why all these things are temporary(vinashi). What about this body, is it permanent (avinashi) oris it temporary (vinashi)?Questioner: Even the body is not temporary (vinashi).Dadashri: Is it not temporary? So, all these people donot have the same knowledge as you. All these people have adifferent kind of knowledge. They all say that the body istemporary (vinashi), and you are saying that the body is nottemporary (vinashi). If cups and saucers were to break in yourhome, would you not feel anything?Questioner: I am asking you what temporary means,from a scientific point of view.Dadashri: No. Here, you do not need a scientificviewpoint. You need the viewpoint from worldly interaction(vyavahar). Here in the interaction of the world (vyavahar),you need the viewpoint of worldly interaction (vyavahar). I can even tell you what it is from the scientific point ofview. The scientific viewpoint says that, ‘In this world, there isno decrease in a single subatomic particle (parmanu).’ No matterhow much destruction it undergoes, there is no decrease in asingle subatomic particle, and in the same way there is no increasein a single subatomic particle. But if cups and saucers break inpeople’s houses, does it not cause a commotion? Is there not afuss when clothes get burnt? If your house were burned down,would you not be distraught? That is why it is called temporaryand destructible (vinashi). The Atma does not get burnt in it.Questioner: Does temporary mean, whether it is only achange of state?Dadashri: Temporary (vinashi) means the circumstances(avastha) are destroyed. The elemental thing (vastu) itself is notdestructible (vinashi); the element (tattva) is not destructible(vinashi). But it is the circumstances that arise, which getdestroyed. Even the people in the world are caught up in thecircumstances, and that is why we have to say that they aretemporary (vinashi).If these people go to a doctor and say, ‘Doctor, I havea fever.’ and the doctor says, ‘It is permanent (avinashi).’ thenAptavani-8243244Aptavani-8real, which means that it is eternal (sanatan). And all that isrelative, is temporary (vinashi).Questioner: You have said, that everything that is relative,is all temporary (vinashi), and that it is destructible. Now,according to scientists and from the perspective of Hinduism,there is not a single element in this world, which is temporary(vinashi). So what are you referring to when you say,destructible?Dadashri: That is exactly what I am saying, that no element(tattva) in this world is temporary. And that element is accordingto the perspective (drashti) of the element. You have not evenseen that element! Do you experience things that are permanent(avinashi) or things that are temporary (vinashi)?Questioner: Neither permanent nor temporary.Dadashri: When cups and saucers break, do you saythat the cups and saucers are destructible (vinashi), or do yousay they are indestructible (avinashi)?Questioner: I do not call it anything. They are the samething.Dadashri: The same? But do all these other people considerit the same? As for everyone else, because cups and saucersbreak, they consider cups and saucers to be temporary (vinashi).Questioner: But what is your opinion about the temporaryand destructible (vinashi)? Dadashri: Vinashi means that when you break cupsand saucers, you will feel anxiety, or when your clothes catchfire, you feel anxiety. That is why all these things are temporary(vinashi). What about this body, is it permanent (avinashi) oris it temporary (vinashi)?Questioner: Even the body is not temporary (vinashi).Dadashri: Is it not temporary? So, all these people donot have the same knowledge as you. All these people have adifferent kind of knowledge. They all say that the body istemporary (vinashi), and you are saying that the body is nottemporary (vinashi). If cups and saucers were to break in yourhome, would you not feel anything?Questioner: I am asking you what temporary means,from a scientific point of view.Dadashri: No. Here, you do not need a scientificviewpoint. You need the viewpoint from worldly interaction(vyavahar). Here in the interaction of the world (vyavahar),you need the viewpoint of worldly interaction (vyavahar). I can even tell you what it is from the scientific point ofview. The scientific viewpoint says that, ‘In this world, there isno decrease in a single subatomic particle (parmanu).’ No matterhow much destruction it undergoes, there is no decrease in asingle subatomic particle, and in the same way there is no increasein a single subatomic particle. But if cups and saucers break inpeople’s houses, does it not cause a commotion? Is there not afuss when clothes get burnt? If your house were burned down,would you not be distraught? That is why it is called temporaryand destructible (vinashi). The Atma does not get burnt in it.Questioner: Does temporary mean, whether it is only achange of state?Dadashri: Temporary (vinashi) means the circumstances(avastha) are destroyed. The elemental thing (vastu) itself is notdestructible (vinashi); the element (tattva) is not destructible(vinashi). But it is the circumstances that arise, which getdestroyed. Even the people in the world are caught up in thecircumstances, and that is why we have to say that they aretemporary (vinashi).If these people go to a doctor and say, ‘Doctor, I havea fever.’ and the doctor says, ‘It is permanent (avinashi).’ thenAptavani-8245246Aptavani-8that would be it, the poor man will become very anxious. Doyou understand what I am trying to say?Questioner: Yes, now I understand.Dadashri: Every circumstance (avastha) is temporary(vinashi). The entire world is immersed in these circumstances.Living in these circumstances, makes it restless. By dwelling inthe circumstances, ‘one’ becomes restless (asvastha). Whereas‘permanently’ dwelling in one’s own Self form (swaroop), onefinds peace and comfort.Therefore the circumstances (avastha) of things istemporary (vinashi), and the original and fundamental (muda)thing is permanent (avinashi). Only the Gnani Purush knowsabout the fundamental element (muda tattva). But people arecaught up in circumstances (avastha).Illusion of the Permanent in the State of theTemporaryNow as long as one has illusion (bhranti), the temporary(vinashi) and the permanent (avinashi) will function as oneform. When they both work together, what does one do? ‘Iknow this, and I am doing this’ is what one says. Therefore,both the states (dharmas) speak together; the state of thetemporary and the state of the permanent speak as one. And tospeak together, is called illusion (bhranti). Thereafter, ‘I amindeed Chandubhai’, is what he says.In spite of you yourself being permanent (avinashi), yousay, ‘I am Chandubhai’, in a state of unconsciousness. Why isthat? It is because both the permanent (avinashi) and theimpermanent (vinashi) have come together, and now it hasbecome one. So it is because of this oneness, that illusion(bhranti) has come about.Questioner: But is illusion not created by the impermanent(avinashi) alone?Dadashri: No one has created this; the eternal (avinashi)would not create this. Do you understand? This illusion (bhranti)has come about because of scientific causes. Moreover, no onecreates illusion (bhranti).Questioner: If there is both the temporary and thepermanent in a person, then would his behavior (vartan) notcome only from the permanent? Is it not because only thedomination of the permanent prevails?Dadashri: There is no domination at all by the permanent(avinashi). Even behavior (vartan) does not belong to the eternal(avinashi). The entire domination is of the temporary (vinashi).That is why ‘we’ separate the temporary (vinashi) and thepermanent (avinashi) into two separate parts for you. When ‘we’ destroy all the demerit karma (paap), thetwo parts come apart and then they are separated. The Atma(Self) thereafter, remains the Knower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta).Therefore, the permanent (avinashi) comes into its original(muda) nature, and that which is temporary (vinashi), remainsas actions and deeds (kriya). To know; is not in the nature ofthe temporary (vinashi). It is not its nature to have feelings oranything like that. Therefore, anything that is temporary (vinashi),remains in the activities (kriya), and the permanent (avinashi)remains the Knower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta); they both retaintheir own natures (swabhav). What does one do in illusion(bhranti)? ‘I know and I am doing’, and that is why all theseweaknesses of anger-pride-deceit-greed (krodh-maan-maya-lobh) have arisen.The Absolute Soul Sends Light and Eternal BlissQuestioner: So what function does the permanent(avinashi) perform, while staying with the temporary (vinashi)?Dadashri: It just gives the light (prakash), nothing else.It possesses infinite light; it gives light. And it also gives blissAptavani-8245246Aptavani-8that would be it, the poor man will become very anxious. Doyou understand what I am trying to say?Questioner: Yes, now I understand.Dadashri: Every circumstance (avastha) is temporary(vinashi). The entire world is immersed in these circumstances.Living in these circumstances, makes it restless. By dwelling inthe circumstances, ‘one’ becomes restless (asvastha). Whereas‘permanently’ dwelling in one’s own Self form (swaroop), onefinds peace and comfort.Therefore the circumstances (avastha) of things istemporary (vinashi), and the original and fundamental (muda)thing is permanent (avinashi). Only the Gnani Purush knowsabout the fundamental element (muda tattva). But people arecaught up in circumstances (avastha).Illusion of the Permanent in the State of theTemporaryNow as long as one has illusion (bhranti), the temporary(vinashi) and the permanent (avinashi) will function as oneform. When they both work together, what does one do? ‘Iknow this, and I am doing this’ is what one says. Therefore,both the states (dharmas) speak together; the state of thetemporary and the state of the permanent speak as one. And tospeak together, is called illusion (bhranti). Thereafter, ‘I amindeed Chandubhai’, is what he says.In spite of you yourself being permanent (avinashi), yousay, ‘I am Chandubhai’, in a state of unconsciousness. Why isthat? It is because both the permanent (avinashi) and theimpermanent (vinashi) have come together, and now it hasbecome one. So it is because of this oneness, that illusion(bhranti) has come about.Questioner: But is illusion not created by the impermanent(avinashi) alone?Dadashri: No one has created this; the eternal (avinashi)would not create this. Do you understand? This illusion (bhranti)has come about because of scientific causes. Moreover, no onecreates illusion (bhranti).Questioner: If there is both the temporary and thepermanent in a person, then would his behavior (vartan) notcome only from the permanent? Is it not because only thedomination of the permanent prevails?Dadashri: There is no domination at all by the permanent(avinashi). Even behavior (vartan) does not belong to the eternal(avinashi). The entire domination is of the temporary (vinashi).That is why ‘we’ separate the temporary (vinashi) and thepermanent (avinashi) into two separate parts for you. When ‘we’ destroy all the demerit karma (paap), thetwo parts come apart and then they are separated. The Atma(Self) thereafter, remains the Knower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta).Therefore, the permanent (avinashi) comes into its original(muda) nature, and that which is temporary (vinashi), remainsas actions and deeds (kriya). To know; is not in the nature ofthe temporary (vinashi). It is not its nature to have feelings oranything like that. Therefore, anything that is temporary (vinashi),remains in the activities (kriya), and the permanent (avinashi)remains the Knower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta); they both retaintheir own natures (swabhav). What does one do in illusion(bhranti)? ‘I know and I am doing’, and that is why all theseweaknesses of anger-pride-deceit-greed (krodh-maan-maya-lobh) have arisen.The Absolute Soul Sends Light and Eternal BlissQuestioner: So what function does the permanent(avinashi) perform, while staying with the temporary (vinashi)?Dadashri: It just gives the light (prakash), nothing else.It possesses infinite light; it gives light. And it also gives blissAptavani-8247248Aptavani-8(anand). But that bliss does not reach you, it becomes falselyprojected. And how do you use that bliss? You do not believethat that bliss is coming from within you and that is why yousay that you got the pleasure from this jalebi (dessert). You dothis false projection of the source of pleasure and that is whyyou say that you find pleasure in the jalebi. But it does notcome from the jalebi; it comes from within you, that is beingprojected. Therefore, nothing can give bliss (anand), there is nobliss in gold or anything else. If there were bliss in gold, if youmade a mattress out if it, would you be able to sleep well on it?Questioner: No, you would not.Dadashri: Therefore, happiness (anand) does not lie ingold. We create this happiness (anand) from imagination(kalpana), thinking there is joy (anand) in this and there isenjoyment in that; so it appears that way. Thus the fundamental(muda) real happiness is forfeited. For ‘us’, it is the true,direct bliss (anand) that ‘we’ experience. ‘We’ constantly dwellin the true bliss; that bliss is the very nature of the Self(swabhavik), which is natural and one’s own. And all this bliss(anand) is imaginary (kalpit), and this happiness and pleasure(sukh) is imaginary. And even unhappiness (dukh) is imaginary(kalpit). Worship of the Nature of the Self ProcuresBliss of the SelfThat is why ‘we’ separated the Atma, so that you canenter into your own natural bliss (swabhavik sukh). Thereafter,you do not have worries or anxiety. Because why do you haveworries? You have them because you say, ‘I am Chandubhai’and ‘I am the one doing this’ – that is why you have worries!Is man capable of doing anything? Is he doing it or, ‘it justhappens’?Questioner: Does, ‘it happens’ mean that you cannot doanything yourself?Dadashri: Yes, that is it. When one tries to do it himself,the illusion (bhranti) arises, and because he then becomes thedoer (karta), the worries occur. Now do you understand? Youyourself are a non-doer (akarta), but you have assumed thestate of doer (karta), and having assumed the state of the doer,you now assume the state of the sufferer (bhokta); because youwent out to do, you became the sufferer. And that is why thereis worry, anxiety and trouble, all day long. Therefore, even ifsomeone insults you, you feel hurt.The reason why, I have to give you this Gnan (Knowledge)is so that you, come into your own nature (swabhav). Thereafter,the Atma (the Self), will stay in the Atma, and the anatma (non-Self), will remain in the anatma. In every jiva (living entity), thereis chetan (Soul), and all it does, is gives light; it does nothing else.All this that is temporary (vinashi), is relative, and “Allthese relatives are temporary adjustments, and you are real andpermanent.” However, the temporary and the permanent haveboth become integrated. ‘We’ separate the two, by placing aline of demarcation between them, so you have, “This is that andthis is not that.”Questioner: What happens to the permanent (avinashi)when it separates from the temporary (vinashi)?Dadashri: Then one no longer has these miseries (dukh).A person does not have these miseries of sansar (the worldlylife) any longer of, ‘this is what happened, that is what happened.’And even when it is time to die, he is not afraid; even when hispocket is picked, he feels no grief (dukh); even if his wifeswears at him he feels no grief – he feels no unhappiness (dukh)whatsoever! Therefore, when the permanent (avinashi) separatesfrom the temporary (vinashi), they both remain in their ownnature (swabhav). What else could happen?Aptavani-8247248Aptavani-8(anand). But that bliss does not reach you, it becomes falselyprojected. And how do you use that bliss? You do not believethat that bliss is coming from within you and that is why yousay that you got the pleasure from this jalebi (dessert). You dothis false projection of the source of pleasure and that is whyyou say that you find pleasure in the jalebi. But it does notcome from the jalebi; it comes from within you, that is beingprojected. Therefore, nothing can give bliss (anand), there is nobliss in gold or anything else. If there were bliss in gold, if youmade a mattress out if it, would you be able to sleep well on it?Questioner: No, you would not.Dadashri: Therefore, happiness (anand) does not lie ingold. We create this happiness (anand) from imagination(kalpana), thinking there is joy (anand) in this and there isenjoyment in that; so it appears that way. Thus the fundamental(muda) real happiness is forfeited. For ‘us’, it is the true,direct bliss (anand) that ‘we’ experience. ‘We’ constantly dwellin the true bliss; that bliss is the very nature of the Self(swabhavik), which is natural and one’s own. And all this bliss(anand) is imaginary (kalpit), and this happiness and pleasure(sukh) is imaginary. And even unhappiness (dukh) is imaginary(kalpit). Worship of the Nature of the Self ProcuresBliss of the SelfThat is why ‘we’ separated the Atma, so that you canenter into your own natural bliss (swabhavik sukh). Thereafter,you do not have worries or anxiety. Because why do you haveworries? You have them because you say, ‘I am Chandubhai’and ‘I am the one doing this’ – that is why you have worries!Is man capable of doing anything? Is he doing it or, ‘it justhappens’?Questioner: Does, ‘it happens’ mean that you cannot doanything yourself?Dadashri: Yes, that is it. When one tries to do it himself,the illusion (bhranti) arises, and because he then becomes thedoer (karta), the worries occur. Now do you understand? Youyourself are a non-doer (akarta), but you have assumed thestate of doer (karta), and having assumed the state of the doer,you now assume the state of the sufferer (bhokta); because youwent out to do, you became the sufferer. And that is why thereis worry, anxiety and trouble, all day long. Therefore, even ifsomeone insults you, you feel hurt.The reason why, I have to give you this Gnan (Knowledge)is so that you, come into your own nature (swabhav). Thereafter,the Atma (the Self), will stay in the Atma, and the anatma (non-Self), will remain in the anatma. In every jiva (living entity), thereis chetan (Soul), and all it does, is gives light; it does nothing else.All this that is temporary (vinashi), is relative, and “Allthese relatives are temporary adjustments, and you are real andpermanent.” However, the temporary and the permanent haveboth become integrated. ‘We’ separate the two, by placing aline of demarcation between them, so you have, “This is that andthis is not that.”Questioner: What happens to the permanent (avinashi)when it separates from the temporary (vinashi)?Dadashri: Then one no longer has these miseries (dukh).A person does not have these miseries of sansar (the worldlylife) any longer of, ‘this is what happened, that is what happened.’And even when it is time to die, he is not afraid; even when hispocket is picked, he feels no grief (dukh); even if his wifeswears at him he feels no grief – he feels no unhappiness (dukh)whatsoever! Therefore, when the permanent (avinashi) separatesfrom the temporary (vinashi), they both remain in their ownnature (swabhav). What else could happen?Aptavani-8249250Aptavani-8Questioner: For someone who has had this separation,what happens to him after death?Dadashri: After death, he still has one more avatar (birth;lifetime) left. That is because, if he abides by the Five Agnas‘we’ give him, there is one avatar still left for him.So Stands the Nature of the WorldQuestioner: There are so many things about the workingsof this world I do not understand, such as those who have comeand received Atmagnan (Self-realization) from you, so whydoes it not happen to others?Dadashri: This is not for everyone.This is how it is: the whole world is like a flowing stream.So however much joins the sea, that much water becomes free(mukti), while the rest of it will find freedom, as it gets there.Therefore, this entire world is in the form of a flowing stream,which is why not everyone will attain this immediately.Questioner: Why is it that some pebbles reach the ocean,while some stay in the middle?Dadashri: It all depends on scientific circumstantialevidences. So as long as there is illusion (bhranti), it does notfind freedom (mukti).Doership Itself Is IllusionQuestioner: All these people have illusion (bhranti), sohow do we get rid of this illusion? Show us.Dadashri: What is the illusion about? Do you understandthat?Questioner: One has not known oneself.Dadashri: That is all; just that much of an illusion hasarisen. One has become unconscious of oneself, and that is whyone has illusion (bhranti), there is no other illusion.Questioner: By what means can we get rid of this illusion(bhranti) that exists? Bless us with that understanding.Dadashri: One is the doer (karta) of karma, so thereforehe is the sufferer (bhokta) of that karma. What is that? It meansthat one gives support to the karma by saying, ‘I did this.’ Inthis world, it is not possible at all for any living being (jiva) todo anything. To say, ‘I am doing’, is illusion (bhranti) itself, andthat itself is egoism (ahamkar). This is the ego showing itself.Otherwise, all of this is, ‘it happens’. Everything just happens.While this is happening one says, ‘I did it. I am doing it.’ Thisis all just happening. Even if he does not do a thing, he will stillget a nice breakfast and everything, when he wakes up in themorning.Now, by what means do we remove this illusion (bhranti)?If a Gnani Purush makes him know, ‘who he himself is’, thenthat illusion will go away, that is all. Therefore, if one finds aGnani Purush, then the illusion (bhranti) will leave.In this world, when the two intents (bhaav) of, ‘I amdoing’ and ‘I know’, are made together, it is called illusion(bhranti). ‘We’ (the Gnani Purush) do not have the awarenessof, ‘I am doing’ at all. Ever since ‘we’ attained the awarenessof the Atma (Self), the awareness of ‘I am doing’ has neveroccurred. Moreover, ‘I’ am no longer the owner of this body.For the last twenty-five years, ‘I’ have not had the ownership ofthis mind, speech and body.Not Heard, Not Believed, Not Known theAtma, Then...Therefore, the Atma is something different. To know theAtma, would be to know the Absolute Soul (Parmatma), andhe that has known the Parmatma, has indeed attained liberation(moksha)!All this is in order to know the Atma. And if you have notAptavani-8249250Aptavani-8Questioner: For someone who has had this separation,what happens to him after death?Dadashri: After death, he still has one more avatar (birth;lifetime) left. That is because, if he abides by the Five Agnas‘we’ give him, there is one avatar still left for him.So Stands the Nature of the WorldQuestioner: There are so many things about the workingsof this world I do not understand, such as those who have comeand received Atmagnan (Self-realization) from you, so whydoes it not happen to others?Dadashri: This is not for everyone.This is how it is: the whole world is like a flowing stream.So however much joins the sea, that much water becomes free(mukti), while the rest of it will find freedom, as it gets there.Therefore, this entire world is in the form of a flowing stream,which is why not everyone will attain this immediately.Questioner: Why is it that some pebbles reach the ocean,while some stay in the middle?Dadashri: It all depends on scientific circumstantialevidences. So as long as there is illusion (bhranti), it does notfind freedom (mukti).Doership Itself Is IllusionQuestioner: All these people have illusion (bhranti), sohow do we get rid of this illusion? Show us.Dadashri: What is the illusion about? Do you understandthat?Questioner: One has not known oneself.Dadashri: That is all; just that much of an illusion hasarisen. One has become unconscious of oneself, and that is whyone has illusion (bhranti), there is no other illusion.Questioner: By what means can we get rid of this illusion(bhranti) that exists? Bless us with that understanding.Dadashri: One is the doer (karta) of karma, so thereforehe is the sufferer (bhokta) of that karma. What is that? It meansthat one gives support to the karma by saying, ‘I did this.’ Inthis world, it is not possible at all for any living being (jiva) todo anything. To say, ‘I am doing’, is illusion (bhranti) itself, andthat itself is egoism (ahamkar). This is the ego showing itself.Otherwise, all of this is, ‘it happens’. Everything just happens.While this is happening one says, ‘I did it. I am doing it.’ Thisis all just happening. Even if he does not do a thing, he will stillget a nice breakfast and everything, when he wakes up in themorning.Now, by what means do we remove this illusion (bhranti)?If a Gnani Purush makes him know, ‘who he himself is’, thenthat illusion will go away, that is all. Therefore, if one finds aGnani Purush, then the illusion (bhranti) will leave.In this world, when the two intents (bhaav) of, ‘I amdoing’ and ‘I know’, are made together, it is called illusion(bhranti). ‘We’ (the Gnani Purush) do not have the awarenessof, ‘I am doing’ at all. Ever since ‘we’ attained the awarenessof the Atma (Self), the awareness of ‘I am doing’ has neveroccurred. Moreover, ‘I’ am no longer the owner of this body.For the last twenty-five years, ‘I’ have not had the ownership ofthis mind, speech and body.Not Heard, Not Believed, Not Known theAtma, Then...Therefore, the Atma is something different. To know theAtma, would be to know the Absolute Soul (Parmatma), andhe that has known the Parmatma, has indeed attained liberation(moksha)!All this is in order to know the Atma. And if you have notAptavani-8251252Aptavani-8known the Atma, then the Atma is there for you to believe in(faith). You should believe in the Atma; ‘I am Atma’, is theconviction (pratiti) that you should have. And if you fail to attainthat, then the Atma is there to be heard or listened, so thateveryday you should keep listening to talk or discussions aboutthe Atma. Therefore, the writers of scriptures (shastras) have written,that ‘he that has not heard, believed or known the Atma, is notat all worthy for the path of liberation.’ So if you understand this,you will find a solution; otherwise, you will not find a solution.The Gnani Dissolves Spiritual DarknessFor the last twenty-five hundred years, this country hasbeen in darkness. One or two Gnanis have appeared in thattime but all that light (Gnan - Knowledge) cannot reacheverywhere. Whereas this light reaches you, having crossed allthe layers of the mind and all the layers of the intellect (buddhi).Those in foreign countries have not even scratched the surfaceof (entered the layers) of the mind. They are still involved inactivities at the level of the effect or discharging mind (nischetan-mun). They have not even discovered the charging or the livingmind (chetan-mun). They have not heard about it, nor do theyhave a need for it. If you told these foreigners today, that thereis Atma inside, they might be able to understand more or less,that there is some kind of element (tattva) present. But theywould not believe that it is the Atma; however, they wouldconcede that there is something else there. If you tell them thatthere is reincarnation (punarjanma); they will not accept it.So you only have to know the Atma. In Hindustan (India),what do all the religions say? That you should know that Atma.There is no talk about the Atma in foreign countries. In foreigncountries they say, ‘I am William; I myself am William’, they willsay. As long as they do not believe in reincarnation(punarjanma), they will not have the awareness of the Atma.Those that do believe in reincarnation would know about theAtma; that ‘my Atma is separate and I am separate’.And the Atma is one of those things that no one has everfound. Only those with Absolute Knowledge (Keval Gnanis)have found it; if you say that, it would be fine. And those whobecame Absolutely Enlightened (the Kevalis), did so by doingthe devotional worship (darshan) of those with AbsoluteKnowledge (Keval Gnanis). However the real discovery wasmade by the One is with Absolute Knowledge (the KevalGnanis) – the Tirthankars.Therefore, the Atma is something that is not possible tofind. How can one find the Atma in this body? The Atma issuch a thing that it can pass through houses; it can even passthrough thousands of walls. So how is it possible for one to findthe Atma inside this body?The Gnani Gives the Experience of the AtmaQuestioner: So then worldly people can never attain theAtma?Dadashri: It is nothing like that. You yourself are Atma.But you yourself do not have the awareness of how I am theAtma! Otherwise, you are yourself the Atma. When the Gnani Purush gives you Atmagnan (Self-realization), how does he give it? He places a “line ofdemarcation” between illusory knowledge (bhrant-gnan) andthis Knowledge of the Self (Atmagnan); between thisknowledge of the non-Self (jada gnan) and knowledge of theSelf (chetan Gnan). Thereafter, there is no likelihood of themistake ever occurring again. And the Atma will continue toremain in one’s awareness; not even for a moment will thatawareness disappear.Even at this very moment, both the natures and functions(dharmas) of the Atma (Self) and the non-Atma (anatma -Aptavani-8251252Aptavani-8known the Atma, then the Atma is there for you to believe in(faith). You should believe in the Atma; ‘I am Atma’, is theconviction (pratiti) that you should have. And if you fail to attainthat, then the Atma is there to be heard or listened, so thateveryday you should keep listening to talk or discussions aboutthe Atma. Therefore, the writers of scriptures (shastras) have written,that ‘he that has not heard, believed or known the Atma, is notat all worthy for the path of liberation.’ So if you understand this,you will find a solution; otherwise, you will not find a solution.The Gnani Dissolves Spiritual DarknessFor the last twenty-five hundred years, this country hasbeen in darkness. One or two Gnanis have appeared in thattime but all that light (Gnan - Knowledge) cannot reacheverywhere. Whereas this light reaches you, having crossed allthe layers of the mind and all the layers of the intellect (buddhi).Those in foreign countries have not even scratched the surfaceof (entered the layers) of the mind. They are still involved inactivities at the level of the effect or discharging mind (nischetan-mun). They have not even discovered the charging or the livingmind (chetan-mun). They have not heard about it, nor do theyhave a need for it. If you told these foreigners today, that thereis Atma inside, they might be able to understand more or less,that there is some kind of element (tattva) present. But theywould not believe that it is the Atma; however, they wouldconcede that there is something else there. If you tell them thatthere is reincarnation (punarjanma); they will not accept it.So you only have to know the Atma. In Hindustan (India),what do all the religions say? That you should know that Atma.There is no talk about the Atma in foreign countries. In foreigncountries they say, ‘I am William; I myself am William’, they willsay. As long as they do not believe in reincarnation(punarjanma), they will not have the awareness of the Atma.Those that do believe in reincarnation would know about theAtma; that ‘my Atma is separate and I am separate’.And the Atma is one of those things that no one has everfound. Only those with Absolute Knowledge (Keval Gnanis)have found it; if you say that, it would be fine. And those whobecame Absolutely Enlightened (the Kevalis), did so by doingthe devotional worship (darshan) of those with AbsoluteKnowledge (Keval Gnanis). However the real discovery wasmade by the One is with Absolute Knowledge (the KevalGnanis) – the Tirthankars.Therefore, the Atma is something that is not possible tofind. How can one find the Atma in this body? The Atma issuch a thing that it can pass through houses; it can even passthrough thousands of walls. So how is it possible for one to findthe Atma inside this body?The Gnani Gives the Experience of the AtmaQuestioner: So then worldly people can never attain theAtma?Dadashri: It is nothing like that. You yourself are Atma.But you yourself do not have the awareness of how I am theAtma! Otherwise, you are yourself the Atma. When the Gnani Purush gives you Atmagnan (Self-realization), how does he give it? He places a “line ofdemarcation” between illusory knowledge (bhrant-gnan) andthis Knowledge of the Self (Atmagnan); between thisknowledge of the non-Self (jada gnan) and knowledge of theSelf (chetan Gnan). Thereafter, there is no likelihood of themistake ever occurring again. And the Atma will continue toremain in one’s awareness; not even for a moment will thatawareness disappear.Even at this very moment, both the natures and functions(dharmas) of the Atma (Self) and the non-Atma (anatma -Aptavani-8253254Aptavani-8non-Self) are very separate. But for you, both their results comeout together, that is why you find it tasteless. The end mixture ofthe functions (dharmas) of both, renders it tasteless. And for theGnani Purush, the results of the Self (chetan) remain separate,and the results of the non-Self (anatma) remain separate; bothstreams, run separately, which is why he constantly remains inabsolute bliss (parmanand).It is like this: eating, drinking, bathing, getting up, sleeping,waking; are all the functions or roles (dharma) of the body. Andpeople are all enmeshed in the functions of the body. Not evenonce, has one entered into the true nature (dharma) of theAtma (Self). And if one had entered into the true nature of theAtma, just even for a second, he would never have movedaway from Bhagwan’s side, ever.Constant Uninterrupted Thoughts About theAtma Are UsefulQuestioner: Should a living being (jiva) do thinking?Dadashri: About what?Questioner: Should one think about what he has heardfrom you or what he may have read?Dadashri: Yes. By thinking, you would have to extractthe meaning.Questioner: So is thinking necessary?Dadashri: Yes, there is a need; but only to a certainextent.The way it is, is that this thinking only needs to be doneuntil one attains the Atma, and after that, there is no morethinking. That is because thinking is the function (dharma) of themind. Therefore, after you have attained the true nature of theSoul (Atmadharma), you no longer need the nature of the mind(manodharma). Thereafter, you no longer need: the nature ofthe body (dehadharma), the nature of the mind (manodharma),the nature (dharma) of the intellect (buddhi), the nature of theinner working complex comprised of the mind, intellect, chit andego (antahkaran); or any kind of dharma (states of nature orreligion). And that is because you have attained your own truenature of the Self (swadharma).Questioner: So after entering the nature of the Self(swadharma) do we need anything?Dadashri: After entering the nature of the Self, you haveno need for anything else. All these mahatmas have come intothe nature of the Self (swadharma). Therefore, they have noneed for thought. As long as one has not come into the natureof the Self, there is a need for thinking.Questioner: Because Krupadudev (Kramic Gnani) hassaid, ‘Kar vichaar toh paam (if you think, you will attain)’.Dadashri: Yes, ‘if you think, you will attain’ he said.However, those thoughts are all layers of coverings (avaran).Nevertheless, what Krupadudev has said, is correct. Those arevery elevated thoughts; they are not like the thoughts worldlypeople think about.Questioner: No, no. Not those thoughts; only thoughtsabout the Atma. Dadashri: That is all, only thoughts related to the Atma.And even so, what kind of thoughts? Those whose link does notget broken. So the thinking process is uninterrupted. Only whenyour thoughts are like that, do you understand perhaps some ofwhat the Atma is all about. Otherwise, the Atma is very difficultto understand. And if you find a Gnani Purush, it is possible toattain the Atma very easily.All these mahatmas have already attained the Atma. Andthey can all see your Atma. Through a divine vision (divyachakshu), they can all see your Atma.Aptavani-8253254Aptavani-8non-Self) are very separate. But for you, both their results comeout together, that is why you find it tasteless. The end mixture ofthe functions (dharmas) of both, renders it tasteless. And for theGnani Purush, the results of the Self (chetan) remain separate,and the results of the non-Self (anatma) remain separate; bothstreams, run separately, which is why he constantly remains inabsolute bliss (parmanand).It is like this: eating, drinking, bathing, getting up, sleeping,waking; are all the functions or roles (dharma) of the body. Andpeople are all enmeshed in the functions of the body. Not evenonce, has one entered into the true nature (dharma) of theAtma (Self). And if one had entered into the true nature of theAtma, just even for a second, he would never have movedaway from Bhagwan’s side, ever.Constant Uninterrupted Thoughts About theAtma Are UsefulQuestioner: Should a living being (jiva) do thinking?Dadashri: About what?Questioner: Should one think about what he has heardfrom you or what he may have read?Dadashri: Yes. By thinking, you would have to extractthe meaning.Questioner: So is thinking necessary?Dadashri: Yes, there is a need; but only to a certainextent.The way it is, is that this thinking only needs to be doneuntil one attains the Atma, and after that, there is no morethinking. That is because thinking is the function (dharma) of themind. Therefore, after you have attained the true nature of theSoul (Atmadharma), you no longer need the nature of the mind(manodharma). Thereafter, you no longer need: the nature ofthe body (dehadharma), the nature of the mind (manodharma),the nature (dharma) of the intellect (buddhi), the nature of theinner working complex comprised of the mind, intellect, chit andego (antahkaran); or any kind of dharma (states of nature orreligion). And that is because you have attained your own truenature of the Self (swadharma).Questioner: So after entering the nature of the Self(swadharma) do we need anything?Dadashri: After entering the nature of the Self, you haveno need for anything else. All these mahatmas have come intothe nature of the Self (swadharma). Therefore, they have noneed for thought. As long as one has not come into the natureof the Self, there is a need for thinking.Questioner: Because Krupadudev (Kramic Gnani) hassaid, ‘Kar vichaar toh paam (if you think, you will attain)’.Dadashri: Yes, ‘if you think, you will attain’ he said.However, those thoughts are all layers of coverings (avaran).Nevertheless, what Krupadudev has said, is correct. Those arevery elevated thoughts; they are not like the thoughts worldlypeople think about.Questioner: No, no. Not those thoughts; only thoughtsabout the Atma. Dadashri: That is all, only thoughts related to the Atma.And even so, what kind of thoughts? Those whose link does notget broken. So the thinking process is uninterrupted. Only whenyour thoughts are like that, do you understand perhaps some ofwhat the Atma is all about. Otherwise, the Atma is very difficultto understand. And if you find a Gnani Purush, it is possible toattain the Atma very easily.All these mahatmas have already attained the Atma. Andthey can all see your Atma. Through a divine vision (divyachakshu), they can all see your Atma.Aptavani-8255256Aptavani-8Once the nature of the Self (swadharma) has beenattained, there is no need for the nature of the mind(manodharma), so there is no need for any kind of religion(dharma); therefore, there is no association or identification withthe body (dehadhyas).Questioner: We still cannot get rid of our connectionwith the body (dehadhyas).Dadashri: How can you get rid of the connection withthe body (dehadhyas) through identification with the body(dehadhyas)? You want to release your connection to the body(dehadhyas), yet you are involved with the body (dehadhyas),so how can that happen? Dehadhyas cannot be removed withdehadhyas. Krupadudev had said to go to such a Gnani, whohas become a savior (tarantaaran), and you will find the solution.He Cannot Be A Giver of Moksha If He DoesNot Give MokshaQuestioner: Must there not be some keys to know theAtma?Dadashri: There are no keys or anything. All you have todo is go to a Gnani Purush and say to him, ‘I have no senseat all, I am a fool. I have been wandering for endless lives, butI have not known even a fraction’s worth, or even a hair’s worthof the Atma. So bestow upon me, at least this much.’ Then thatis all, your work is done. That is because the Gnani Purush hascome to give you the gift of liberation – moksha.Then people complain, ‘so what will become of our worldlyinteraction (vyavahar)?’ After knowing the Atma, the rest isconsidered worldly interaction (vyavahar). And even for theinteraction in the world, the Gnani Purush gives you Five Agnas(special directives) telling you, ‘son, follow these Five Agnas ofmine. Go, your worldly interaction is now pure (shuddha), andyour resolve (nischay; the Self) is pure (shuddha), and all theresponsibility is ‘ours’ (the Gnani’s).’And you should experience liberation (moksha) right here.If you cannot experience it from here, then it is not real moksha.After meeting ‘us’ here, if you do not experience moksha afterthat, then that Gnani is not real, and neither is the mokshareal. You should experience moksha, here in this very fifth ara(age of the time cycle). Right here, in your coat and hat, youshould experience moksha. There is no telling what you mayexperience over there (the next life). Therefore, you need toascertain from the Gnani Purush, how you yourself are theAtma. Relentless Mistake in the Definition of theSelf Through the AgesQuestioner: I feel, what is the hurry in trying to determinewhat the form (swaroop) of the Atma is?Dadashri: Yes, there is no need to rush. Here, you canask however many questions you want to. ‘We’ are ready togive you explanations. Whatever decision you wish to make,you can make here. However before you make the decision,only at that time, you must be certain. Once you have made thedecision, there is no need for certainty. So there is no need foryou to rush into making any decisions. That is because it is amistake of endless lifetimes that needs to be destroyed. This isa mistake that has not been destroyed for infinite lifetimes, andit is this mistake that needs to be destroyed. And what is themistake that has been made for countless avatars? For infinitepast lives, you have made the mistake in determining, what thenature of the Atma is, and that mistake needs to be destroyed.So there is no need to rush into it, is there?This nature (swaroop) of the Atma is something that willnot come into your vision (drashti). Now, your own knowledgeknows it to a certain extent; however, the nature of the Atma ismuch further than that. Therefore even your own knowledgecannot reach there. Where your vision does not reach; whereAptavani-8255256Aptavani-8Once the nature of the Self (swadharma) has beenattained, there is no need for the nature of the mind(manodharma), so there is no need for any kind of religion(dharma); therefore, there is no association or identification withthe body (dehadhyas).Questioner: We still cannot get rid of our connectionwith the body (dehadhyas).Dadashri: How can you get rid of the connection withthe body (dehadhyas) through identification with the body(dehadhyas)? You want to release your connection to the body(dehadhyas), yet you are involved with the body (dehadhyas),so how can that happen? Dehadhyas cannot be removed withdehadhyas. Krupadudev had said to go to such a Gnani, whohas become a savior (tarantaaran), and you will find the solution.He Cannot Be A Giver of Moksha If He DoesNot Give MokshaQuestioner: Must there not be some keys to know theAtma?Dadashri: There are no keys or anything. All you have todo is go to a Gnani Purush and say to him, ‘I have no senseat all, I am a fool. I have been wandering for endless lives, butI have not known even a fraction’s worth, or even a hair’s worthof the Atma. So bestow upon me, at least this much.’ Then thatis all, your work is done. That is because the Gnani Purush hascome to give you the gift of liberation – moksha.Then people complain, ‘so what will become of our worldlyinteraction (vyavahar)?’ After knowing the Atma, the rest isconsidered worldly interaction (vyavahar). And even for theinteraction in the world, the Gnani Purush gives you Five Agnas(special directives) telling you, ‘son, follow these Five Agnas ofmine. Go, your worldly interaction is now pure (shuddha), andyour resolve (nischay; the Self) is pure (shuddha), and all theresponsibility is ‘ours’ (the Gnani’s).’And you should experience liberation (moksha) right here.If you cannot experience it from here, then it is not real moksha.After meeting ‘us’ here, if you do not experience moksha afterthat, then that Gnani is not real, and neither is the mokshareal. You should experience moksha, here in this very fifth ara(age of the time cycle). Right here, in your coat and hat, youshould experience moksha. There is no telling what you mayexperience over there (the next life). Therefore, you need toascertain from the Gnani Purush, how you yourself are theAtma. Relentless Mistake in the Definition of theSelf Through the AgesQuestioner: I feel, what is the hurry in trying to determinewhat the form (swaroop) of the Atma is?Dadashri: Yes, there is no need to rush. Here, you canask however many questions you want to. ‘We’ are ready togive you explanations. Whatever decision you wish to make,you can make here. However before you make the decision,only at that time, you must be certain. Once you have made thedecision, there is no need for certainty. So there is no need foryou to rush into making any decisions. That is because it is amistake of endless lifetimes that needs to be destroyed. This isa mistake that has not been destroyed for infinite lifetimes, andit is this mistake that needs to be destroyed. And what is themistake that has been made for countless avatars? For infinitepast lives, you have made the mistake in determining, what thenature of the Atma is, and that mistake needs to be destroyed.So there is no need to rush into it, is there?This nature (swaroop) of the Atma is something that willnot come into your vision (drashti). Now, your own knowledgeknows it to a certain extent; however, the nature of the Atma ismuch further than that. Therefore even your own knowledgecannot reach there. Where your vision does not reach; whereAptavani-8257258Aptavani-8your own knowledge does not reach – that is your own Selfform (swaroop); that is the form of the Atma – Atma swaroop.Therefore, to know, ‘Who am I?’ is indeed one’s ownSelf form (swaroop). And that, only the Gnani Purush alone,can make you realize. Then there can be no dying or takingbirth. After that, the dying; it is the body that dies; the Self doesnot die. And within one or two lives (avatar) there is finalliberation (moksha).All Instruments of Freedom Have Become aBondageQuestioner: Can you show us the means (sadhan) withwhich we can attain Atmagnan (Self-realization)?Dadashri: There are many ways (sadhano). But the soul(jiva) has itself become trapped in the ways. People becomedogmatic and stuck on a single viewpoint (abhinivesh) in thevery instrument (sadhan) that they have. As long as a person isaware and alert enough, not to let any kind of disease set in,then he might make some progress. However, people are justtrapped in sadhano (instruments; means; tools, i.e. scriptures,rituals), and they become dogmatic. Therefore, if you meet aGnani Purush, who has become liberated, he will help free youas well. Or else, if until then, you can remain with a sant purush(saint), then there is no other better merit karma (punya) thanthat. Otherwise, how is one to escape from the heat of thethree-fold sufferings (trividh taap): mental suffering (aadhi),physical suffering (vyadhi) and affliction from external sources(upadhi) in the worldly life (sansar)? Nevertheless you will findsome cooling comfort, when the saints sprinkle water on you.Questioner: Then how can you move forward withoutthe support of any sadhan (instrument; means, i.e. scriptures,rituals)? Would you not need some sort of sadhan?Dadashri: All the sadhano (instruments; means, i.e.scriptures, rituals) have become a bondage (bandhan). Whohas bound you? The sadhano themselves have bound you. Allthe sadhano that people have created, are the sadhano thathave bound them.Questioner: So to move forward, what sort of thoughtsshould we have? And how can we get out of this mess?Dadashri: This is how it is: if someone says, ‘Did you seethe flower in the sky?’ Then what would you say?Questioner: ‘That is an illusion’, is what I would say.Dadashri: Then this here is the Atma, how can you findit? It is not a thing of the imagination.Therefore, how will you know the Atma? The Atma itselfis science (vignan). And all the sadhano (means; tools;instruments, i.e. scriptures, rituals) that you come up with, theinstruments of knowledge that you resort to; even that knowledgehas dried up and it does not give results (shushka gnan). So,there you have to do everything in it. Whereas, science itselfworks on its own and produces results (kriyakari), and it doesall the work; you do not have to do anything. And throughscience, it is possible to find the Atma. There is no other way(sadhan) through which you can find the Atma. I have shownyou the way (sadhan). Now will you do this science?Questioner: I did not understand. What science?Dadashri: The science of Self-realization (Atmavignan).Atmavignan means the science (vignan) of attaining the Atma.You can only attain the Atma, if you have this science. Otherwise,there is always the knowledge about how to attain the Atma inthe scriptures; however, with that knowledge it is not possiblefor you to attain the Atma. That is because the Atma is not inthe form of words, that it can be recorded in the scriptures. Itis wordless (nihshabda), inexpressible (avaktavya), andindescribable (avarniya). It is nothing like the way people haveAptavani-8257258Aptavani-8your own knowledge does not reach – that is your own Selfform (swaroop); that is the form of the Atma – Atma swaroop.Therefore, to know, ‘Who am I?’ is indeed one’s ownSelf form (swaroop). And that, only the Gnani Purush alone,can make you realize. Then there can be no dying or takingbirth. After that, the dying; it is the body that dies; the Self doesnot die. And within one or two lives (avatar) there is finalliberation (moksha).All Instruments of Freedom Have Become aBondageQuestioner: Can you show us the means (sadhan) withwhich we can attain Atmagnan (Self-realization)?Dadashri: There are many ways (sadhano). But the soul(jiva) has itself become trapped in the ways. People becomedogmatic and stuck on a single viewpoint (abhinivesh) in thevery instrument (sadhan) that they have. As long as a person isaware and alert enough, not to let any kind of disease set in,then he might make some progress. However, people are justtrapped in sadhano (instruments; means; tools, i.e. scriptures,rituals), and they become dogmatic. Therefore, if you meet aGnani Purush, who has become liberated, he will help free youas well. Or else, if until then, you can remain with a sant purush(saint), then there is no other better merit karma (punya) thanthat. Otherwise, how is one to escape from the heat of thethree-fold sufferings (trividh taap): mental suffering (aadhi),physical suffering (vyadhi) and affliction from external sources(upadhi) in the worldly life (sansar)? Nevertheless you will findsome cooling comfort, when the saints sprinkle water on you.Questioner: Then how can you move forward withoutthe support of any sadhan (instrument; means, i.e. scriptures,rituals)? Would you not need some sort of sadhan?Dadashri: All the sadhano (instruments; means, i.e.scriptures, rituals) have become a bondage (bandhan). Whohas bound you? The sadhano themselves have bound you. Allthe sadhano that people have created, are the sadhano thathave bound them.Questioner: So to move forward, what sort of thoughtsshould we have? And how can we get out of this mess?Dadashri: This is how it is: if someone says, ‘Did you seethe flower in the sky?’ Then what would you say?Questioner: ‘That is an illusion’, is what I would say.Dadashri: Then this here is the Atma, how can you findit? It is not a thing of the imagination.Therefore, how will you know the Atma? The Atma itselfis science (vignan). And all the sadhano (means; tools;instruments, i.e. scriptures, rituals) that you come up with, theinstruments of knowledge that you resort to; even that knowledgehas dried up and it does not give results (shushka gnan). So,there you have to do everything in it. Whereas, science itselfworks on its own and produces results (kriyakari), and it doesall the work; you do not have to do anything. And throughscience, it is possible to find the Atma. There is no other way(sadhan) through which you can find the Atma. I have shownyou the way (sadhan). Now will you do this science?Questioner: I did not understand. What science?Dadashri: The science of Self-realization (Atmavignan).Atmavignan means the science (vignan) of attaining the Atma.You can only attain the Atma, if you have this science. Otherwise,there is always the knowledge about how to attain the Atma inthe scriptures; however, with that knowledge it is not possiblefor you to attain the Atma. That is because the Atma is not inthe form of words, that it can be recorded in the scriptures. Itis wordless (nihshabda), inexpressible (avaktavya), andindescribable (avarniya). It is nothing like the way people haveAptavani-8259260Aptavani-8imagined it to be. They just go on believing it in their minds, andthat is how they carry on the whole day and night, driftingaimlessly, and wandering around for infinite lifetimes, withouteven losing a single avatar (lifetime).‘I-ness’ Cannot End Through Your EffortsDadashri: What is your name?Questioner: Chandubhai.Dadashri: Are you convinced that you are reallyChandubhai?Questioner: People have given me my name.Dadashri: So then, what are you really? Do you not say,‘My name is Chandubhai’? Then who is the one that says ‘my’?Questioner: That is what I am searching for. ‘Who amI?’ is what I search for.Dadashri: How long have you been searching for that?Questioner: For two years.Dadashri: Were you not searching before? Why?Questioner: I did not need to, and I did not have thatkind of understanding.Dadashri: Goodness! You didn’t understand that youneeded to know this knowledge! That is fine. That is why thisknowledge, ‘Who am I’, is what you need to know. If youknow that, then everything will be resolved. Now in this,Chandubhai is your name. But who are you? Questioner: I am actually a human being.Dadashri: Human, because that is what the body lookslike; therefore you can only call it human. The form of the bodyis truly human. But you would not be considered human. Is thisyour body?Questioner: The body is not mine.Dadashri: Does this body not affect you? Do you feelcold? Or do you feel warm?Questioner: It is the body that experiences that.Dadashri: The body experiences it, but you do notexperience it, do you? You do experience the effects of thisbody, do you not? What are you affected by? You can feel theeffects of whatever is yours. Anything that is not yours, will notaffect you. Can you comprehend this? Therefore, what is it thataffects you? It is something that you believe is yours. You areaffected by it when you say, ‘this body is mine’. Even in sleep,you have this awareness. Even in your sleep, you say, ‘this bodyis mine. This name is mine’. So, when it is yours, is it somethingwe can just let go?Therefore, this I (hoo) is not something that you are likelyto be free of. The ‘I’ is the biggest ghost. Many say, ‘this bodyis not mine, this is not my son, this is not my wife; no one ismine.’ This is the kind of fruitless hassle they do. Nevertheless,ultimately you are there of course, are you not? Now where willyou go? And where do you throw this mind, speech and body?Where will you throw this body? All other forms of materialthings can be discarded, but how are you going to discard thisone? If one goes to the Gnani Purush, the Gnani Purush willfree him.Will the Endeavor to Understand be Fruitful?Questioner: I am also actually trying to understand theAtma.Dadashri: When will that attempt to understand occur?If you are Chandubhai, how will you try to understand? Andreally, you are not Chandubhai at all. Chandubhai is your name.You are this boy’s father; that too is a worldly interaction(vyavahar). Besides, we accept all that anyway. What is newAptavani-8259260Aptavani-8imagined it to be. They just go on believing it in their minds, andthat is how they carry on the whole day and night, driftingaimlessly, and wandering around for infinite lifetimes, withouteven losing a single avatar (lifetime).‘I-ness’ Cannot End Through Your EffortsDadashri: What is your name?Questioner: Chandubhai.Dadashri: Are you convinced that you are reallyChandubhai?Questioner: People have given me my name.Dadashri: So then, what are you really? Do you not say,‘My name is Chandubhai’? Then who is the one that says ‘my’?Questioner: That is what I am searching for. ‘Who amI?’ is what I search for.Dadashri: How long have you been searching for that?Questioner: For two years.Dadashri: Were you not searching before? Why?Questioner: I did not need to, and I did not have thatkind of understanding.Dadashri: Goodness! You didn’t understand that youneeded to know this knowledge! That is fine. That is why thisknowledge, ‘Who am I’, is what you need to know. If youknow that, then everything will be resolved. Now in this,Chandubhai is your name. But who are you? Questioner: I am actually a human being.Dadashri: Human, because that is what the body lookslike; therefore you can only call it human. The form of the bodyis truly human. But you would not be considered human. Is thisyour body?Questioner: The body is not mine.Dadashri: Does this body not affect you? Do you feelcold? Or do you feel warm?Questioner: It is the body that experiences that.Dadashri: The body experiences it, but you do notexperience it, do you? You do experience the effects of thisbody, do you not? What are you affected by? You can feel theeffects of whatever is yours. Anything that is not yours, will notaffect you. Can you comprehend this? Therefore, what is it thataffects you? It is something that you believe is yours. You areaffected by it when you say, ‘this body is mine’. Even in sleep,you have this awareness. Even in your sleep, you say, ‘this bodyis mine. This name is mine’. So, when it is yours, is it somethingwe can just let go?Therefore, this I (hoo) is not something that you are likelyto be free of. The ‘I’ is the biggest ghost. Many say, ‘this bodyis not mine, this is not my son, this is not my wife; no one ismine.’ This is the kind of fruitless hassle they do. Nevertheless,ultimately you are there of course, are you not? Now where willyou go? And where do you throw this mind, speech and body?Where will you throw this body? All other forms of materialthings can be discarded, but how are you going to discard thisone? If one goes to the Gnani Purush, the Gnani Purush willfree him.Will the Endeavor to Understand be Fruitful?Questioner: I am also actually trying to understand theAtma.Dadashri: When will that attempt to understand occur?If you are Chandubhai, how will you try to understand? Andreally, you are not Chandubhai at all. Chandubhai is your name.You are this boy’s father; that too is a worldly interaction(vyavahar). Besides, we accept all that anyway. What is newAptavani-8261262Aptavani-8in that? It is a tool (sadhan) for identification. Therefore, whoyou are, is something you need to find out from the GnaniPurush; it is something you must realize.Have You Received Another’s Mail?Dadashri: You certainly are convinced that, ‘I amChandubhai’!Questioner: No, that is a name people commonly use.However, ‘I am Atma’, that is all, nothing else.Dadashri: Yes, you are Atma. But if someone swearsat Chandubhai, do you not accept his ‘mail’? If you do, thenyou are Chandubhai. Then you cannot say that it is just whatpeople call you. When it is Chandubhai who gets sworn at,why do you accept the mail? Therefore, you have becomeChandubhai.Questioner: To live in interaction with the world(vyavahar) you have to do everything.Dadashri: No. You have to live in worldly interaction(vyavahar). However, you are not supposed to acceptChandubhai’s mail. You can say, ‘Dear man, this is Chandubhai’smail. I have no problems. You can swear as much as you like.’But as it is, you live as Chandubhai. You take all of Chandubhai’swinnings, and then you say, ‘I am Atma’. So would it be possibleto become the Atma, just like that?Detachment to the Worldly Life AttainedWith GraceDadashri: How can you become certain that you areAtma?Questioner: For that, we would go to a guru, such asyourself, where we can discover how the body and the Atmaare separate, from the spiritual discourses that we have heard.Besides, is there not a big difference between us and you? We,being the worldly people (sansari), who are immersed in illusoryattachment (moha-maya)....Dadashri: And are ‘we’ (the Gnani) not worldly people(sansari)? Even ‘we’ are worldly people (sansari). Whoever inthis world uses the lavatory, is a worldly being (sansari).Everyone needing to use the toilet, and who goes to look forone, are all considered worldly people (sansari).Questioner: But is it possible for anyone like us who livein the worldly life (sansar) to attain Knowledge of the Soul(Atmagnan)? Dadashri: This is how it is: there are two kinds of worldlylife (sansar). The one who renounces worldly life (tyaagi) isalso the worldly life (sansar), and a family man’s world(grahasthi) is also the worldly life. Both are a type of worldlylife. The one who renounces (tyaagi), lives by the knowledge,‘I have renounced this, I have renounced that’. And the familyman (grahasthi – those living worldly life), lives by theknowledge, ‘I am taking this, I am giving this, I have to acquirethat’. However if they know the Atma, they will then haveliberation (moksha).Questioner: But in spite of living in the worldly life(sansar), and fulfilling the duties of the worldly life, is it stillpossible to remain detached from it?Dadashri: That is precisely what the Gnani Purush has.The Gnani Purush gives you the science that he has andthereafter, you are able to do things for the worldly life (sansar),as well as things for the Atma. That is the kind of science thatthe Gnani Purush has.I am able to carry on a conversation with you. Therefore,I can live in the worldly life (sansar), and I can also live in myown Self (the Atma). I can do both. I can even perform all thekriya (activities) that I need to, in the worldly life (sansar). It isAptavani-8261262Aptavani-8in that? It is a tool (sadhan) for identification. Therefore, whoyou are, is something you need to find out from the GnaniPurush; it is something you must realize.Have You Received Another’s Mail?Dadashri: You certainly are convinced that, ‘I amChandubhai’!Questioner: No, that is a name people commonly use.However, ‘I am Atma’, that is all, nothing else.Dadashri: Yes, you are Atma. But if someone swearsat Chandubhai, do you not accept his ‘mail’? If you do, thenyou are Chandubhai. Then you cannot say that it is just whatpeople call you. When it is Chandubhai who gets sworn at,why do you accept the mail? Therefore, you have becomeChandubhai.Questioner: To live in interaction with the world(vyavahar) you have to do everything.Dadashri: No. You have to live in worldly interaction(vyavahar). However, you are not supposed to acceptChandubhai’s mail. You can say, ‘Dear man, this is Chandubhai’smail. I have no problems. You can swear as much as you like.’But as it is, you live as Chandubhai. You take all of Chandubhai’swinnings, and then you say, ‘I am Atma’. So would it be possibleto become the Atma, just like that?Detachment to the Worldly Life AttainedWith GraceDadashri: How can you become certain that you areAtma?Questioner: For that, we would go to a guru, such asyourself, where we can discover how the body and the Atmaare separate, from the spiritual discourses that we have heard.Besides, is there not a big difference between us and you? We,being the worldly people (sansari), who are immersed in illusoryattachment (moha-maya)....Dadashri: And are ‘we’ (the Gnani) not worldly people(sansari)? Even ‘we’ are worldly people (sansari). Whoever inthis world uses the lavatory, is a worldly being (sansari).Everyone needing to use the toilet, and who goes to look forone, are all considered worldly people (sansari).Questioner: But is it possible for anyone like us who livein the worldly life (sansar) to attain Knowledge of the Soul(Atmagnan)? Dadashri: This is how it is: there are two kinds of worldlylife (sansar). The one who renounces worldly life (tyaagi) isalso the worldly life (sansar), and a family man’s world(grahasthi) is also the worldly life. Both are a type of worldlylife. The one who renounces (tyaagi), lives by the knowledge,‘I have renounced this, I have renounced that’. And the familyman (grahasthi – those living worldly life), lives by theknowledge, ‘I am taking this, I am giving this, I have to acquirethat’. However if they know the Atma, they will then haveliberation (moksha).Questioner: But in spite of living in the worldly life(sansar), and fulfilling the duties of the worldly life, is it stillpossible to remain detached from it?Dadashri: That is precisely what the Gnani Purush has.The Gnani Purush gives you the science that he has andthereafter, you are able to do things for the worldly life (sansar),as well as things for the Atma. That is the kind of science thatthe Gnani Purush has.I am able to carry on a conversation with you. Therefore,I can live in the worldly life (sansar), and I can also live in myown Self (the Atma). I can do both. I can even perform all thekriya (activities) that I need to, in the worldly life (sansar). It isAptavani-8263264Aptavani-8possible to live in the worldly life and to also live in the Atma.The Gnani Purush has all the science (vignan) that you cannotfind in the scriptures (shastras). As far as the shastras areconcerned, you can only become free, if you renounce everything.How can people live with one another, pass their days,and live in such a way that they do not bind karma? I will teachyou all the ways. With the knowledge that I will give you, youwill no longer have karmas that attach (lepayman) on to you.Just like the lotus remains untouched (nirlep) on the water, I willshow you the same state of being untouchable (nirlepta).So from where do you learn about the Atma? From theGnani Purush. The gnanis of the scriptures (shastras) do nothave this Atma. If they have attained the Atma, then theywould have enlightenment and the right belief and vision(samkit), and to have the right belief means that the worldlylife (sansar) does not touch you, in spite of your living in theworldly life, and such a state is attainable by the grace (krupa)of the Gnani Purush.Confusion Disperses With CompleteExplanationsMany only include the Atma in their spiritual teachings(updesha). They blow in your ear and make you say, ‘I amAtma’. Hey you! But what does the Atma mean? Moreover, if‘I am the Atma’, then what is everything else? Would that sortof question not ever arise? Here however, we say, “By relativeviewpoint, it is this, and by real viewpoint, it is this. You shouldsay both.” According to them, there is no such thing as viewpoint,so they are in a rut on both sides. The blowing in the ear, maylast a short while. But later, one becomes confused again. Shoulda railway line not be parallel? Or would it do if it were crooked?You can turn it crookedly if you want to, you can turn it aroundin a circle, but make sure that you keep both the real and therelative lines parallel. Forgetting the Self in RelationSo this Chandubhai is only meant to be employed forworldly interaction (vyavahar). ‘You’ yourself have always beenreal, but you became relative. Because so many relations cameabout, illusion (bhranti) has set in for you. And then you say, ‘Iam Chandubhai’, and that is called egoism.The Belief About Atma ChangedQuestioner: What is real and relative? How are they related?Dadashri: Everything that is relative (sapeksha), istemporary (vinashi). In English, sapeksha is translated as relative.And all these relatives are temporary adjustments, and the realis the permanent. They call the absolute and independent(nirpeksha), permanent. Relative (sapeksha) means that it relieson something else; it lives with the support of other things.There is light because there is darkness. Otherwise, whocalls the light, light? If there was always light, then who wouldcall it light? Therefore, it is in relation to darkness that we havelight. And why do we have darkness? It is in relation to light thatwe have darkness. And that is called relative (sapeksha).Anything that has expectation (apeksha), is called relative(sapeksha). And that relative is temporary; always changing. Areal is a permanent thing.In this world, there are six eternal elements that arepermanent. Out of the six eternal elements, the pure Self, theAtma (chetan), is permanent, and the rest of them do not havethe Self (chetan). Nevertheless, those five are still permanent,and they possess infinite kinds of intrinsic properties(gunadharma). Only this relative intent (bhaav) has come aboutdue to the intrinsic properties of all of them. The Atma alwaysremains as the Atma; it always remains in the form of Atma(chetan). It has never changed, not even for a moment has itever changed. Only the belief is wrong.Aptavani-8263264Aptavani-8possible to live in the worldly life and to also live in the Atma.The Gnani Purush has all the science (vignan) that you cannotfind in the scriptures (shastras). As far as the shastras areconcerned, you can only become free, if you renounce everything.How can people live with one another, pass their days,and live in such a way that they do not bind karma? I will teachyou all the ways. With the knowledge that I will give you, youwill no longer have karmas that attach (lepayman) on to you.Just like the lotus remains untouched (nirlep) on the water, I willshow you the same state of being untouchable (nirlepta).So from where do you learn about the Atma? From theGnani Purush. The gnanis of the scriptures (shastras) do nothave this Atma. If they have attained the Atma, then theywould have enlightenment and the right belief and vision(samkit), and to have the right belief means that the worldlylife (sansar) does not touch you, in spite of your living in theworldly life, and such a state is attainable by the grace (krupa)of the Gnani Purush.Confusion Disperses With CompleteExplanationsMany only include the Atma in their spiritual teachings(updesha). They blow in your ear and make you say, ‘I amAtma’. Hey you! But what does the Atma mean? Moreover, if‘I am the Atma’, then what is everything else? Would that sortof question not ever arise? Here however, we say, “By relativeviewpoint, it is this, and by real viewpoint, it is this. You shouldsay both.” According to them, there is no such thing as viewpoint,so they are in a rut on both sides. The blowing in the ear, maylast a short while. But later, one becomes confused again. Shoulda railway line not be parallel? Or would it do if it were crooked?You can turn it crookedly if you want to, you can turn it aroundin a circle, but make sure that you keep both the real and therelative lines parallel. Forgetting the Self in RelationSo this Chandubhai is only meant to be employed forworldly interaction (vyavahar). ‘You’ yourself have always beenreal, but you became relative. Because so many relations cameabout, illusion (bhranti) has set in for you. And then you say, ‘Iam Chandubhai’, and that is called egoism.The Belief About Atma ChangedQuestioner: What is real and relative? How are they related?Dadashri: Everything that is relative (sapeksha), istemporary (vinashi). In English, sapeksha is translated as relative.And all these relatives are temporary adjustments, and the realis the permanent. They call the absolute and independent(nirpeksha), permanent. Relative (sapeksha) means that it relieson something else; it lives with the support of other things.There is light because there is darkness. Otherwise, whocalls the light, light? If there was always light, then who wouldcall it light? Therefore, it is in relation to darkness that we havelight. And why do we have darkness? It is in relation to light thatwe have darkness. And that is called relative (sapeksha).Anything that has expectation (apeksha), is called relative(sapeksha). And that relative is temporary; always changing. Areal is a permanent thing.In this world, there are six eternal elements that arepermanent. Out of the six eternal elements, the pure Self, theAtma (chetan), is permanent, and the rest of them do not havethe Self (chetan). Nevertheless, those five are still permanent,and they possess infinite kinds of intrinsic properties(gunadharma). Only this relative intent (bhaav) has come aboutdue to the intrinsic properties of all of them. The Atma alwaysremains as the Atma; it always remains in the form of Atma(chetan). It has never changed, not even for a moment has itever changed. Only the belief is wrong.Aptavani-8265266Aptavani-8What you are, is not the belief you have, and what youare not, is the belief that has set in. They are all wrong beliefs.And all these beliefs are relative, not real.Questioner: To get to the real stage, what does one haveto do?Dadashri: You have to realize the real. When ‘we’ giveyou this Gnan; that is when you realize the real.Liberation Demands Siddhantik UnderstandingQuestioner: But in the book it tells you to apply yourmind to the Atma, and you will find liberation.Dadashri: Yes, but only after you know the Atma, canyou apply it. Unless you realize the Atma, who would you callAtma? Isn’t it also written that the Atma cannot be burned, orthat it cannot be drenched with water?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Then nowadays, there are even watches whichare, waterproof and fireproof. So what I am trying to say is thatdo you not get watches like that now? The Atma is not like that.The Atma is an abode of infinite attributes (gunas), and it isitself the Absolute Soul (Parmatma). When it comes into thestate of the Kevali (the Ones with Absolute Knowledge), it isconsidered the Absolute Soul; however, when it is not in thestate of Absolute Knowledge, and it is in the form of words, itis then called the interim stage (antaratma; the awakened Self).If it has dependency on words, it is called the interim state Soul(antaratma). But there is not a lot of difference between theinterim state of the Soul and the Absolute Soul. The interim Soul(antaratma) is on its way to becoming the Absolute Soul(Parmatma), whereas the other has already become the AbsoluteSoul – that is the only difference.Questioner: In many of the verses in the scriptures(shastras), it is said that by making it a daily practice to readspecific verses, you can enjoy all the pleasures of the worldly life(sansar), and attain the Absolute Soul (Parmatma). If that isthe case, why even make an effort to attain Atmagnan (Self-realization)?Dadashri: It is like this: it shows you a way, that if youhave bound merit karma (punya), you will climb higher, so thatone day you may find a path towards attaining Self-realization(Atmagnan). But if all one has bound, is demerit karma (paap),how will he find this path? So it was to encourage people, thatthis was said. However, this is not the exact reason.Religion (dharma) should always be siddhantik.Siddhantik means that it never gives rise to any controversy,and it gives results. It is siddhant (irrefutable Truth), if it givesimmediate results. If not, if it does not yield immediate results,how can you call it siddhant (an irrefutable doctrine)? Anythingthat becomes (siddha) accomplished, means that it has come toan end, and it will not have to be made siddha again. Foralways, it remains siddha (accomplished); throughout past,present and future times (trikaad) – that is referred to assiddhant.The Atma is the Self. If you have realized the Self, thenyou have realized the world. When you know the Atma, the ego(ahamkar) and the ‘my-ness’ (mamata), both disappeartogether. They leave at a time.Say you have your own home, which you like very much.But you are in debt and you have to sell it. After you have soldit and taken the money for it, will the ‘my-ness’ (mamata), notbe gone the following day?Questioner: Yes, it will be gone.Dadashri: Why? It was your house for forty years. Whatif after selling it, it burns down, would you feel any grief (dukh)?Aptavani-8265266Aptavani-8What you are, is not the belief you have, and what youare not, is the belief that has set in. They are all wrong beliefs.And all these beliefs are relative, not real.Questioner: To get to the real stage, what does one haveto do?Dadashri: You have to realize the real. When ‘we’ giveyou this Gnan; that is when you realize the real.Liberation Demands Siddhantik UnderstandingQuestioner: But in the book it tells you to apply yourmind to the Atma, and you will find liberation.Dadashri: Yes, but only after you know the Atma, canyou apply it. Unless you realize the Atma, who would you callAtma? Isn’t it also written that the Atma cannot be burned, orthat it cannot be drenched with water?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Then nowadays, there are even watches whichare, waterproof and fireproof. So what I am trying to say is thatdo you not get watches like that now? The Atma is not like that.The Atma is an abode of infinite attributes (gunas), and it isitself the Absolute Soul (Parmatma). When it comes into thestate of the Kevali (the Ones with Absolute Knowledge), it isconsidered the Absolute Soul; however, when it is not in thestate of Absolute Knowledge, and it is in the form of words, itis then called the interim stage (antaratma; the awakened Self).If it has dependency on words, it is called the interim state Soul(antaratma). But there is not a lot of difference between theinterim state of the Soul and the Absolute Soul. The interim Soul(antaratma) is on its way to becoming the Absolute Soul(Parmatma), whereas the other has already become the AbsoluteSoul – that is the only difference.Questioner: In many of the verses in the scriptures(shastras), it is said that by making it a daily practice to readspecific verses, you can enjoy all the pleasures of the worldly life(sansar), and attain the Absolute Soul (Parmatma). If that isthe case, why even make an effort to attain Atmagnan (Self-realization)?Dadashri: It is like this: it shows you a way, that if youhave bound merit karma (punya), you will climb higher, so thatone day you may find a path towards attaining Self-realization(Atmagnan). But if all one has bound, is demerit karma (paap),how will he find this path? So it was to encourage people, thatthis was said. However, this is not the exact reason.Religion (dharma) should always be siddhantik.Siddhantik means that it never gives rise to any controversy,and it gives results. It is siddhant (irrefutable Truth), if it givesimmediate results. If not, if it does not yield immediate results,how can you call it siddhant (an irrefutable doctrine)? Anythingthat becomes (siddha) accomplished, means that it has come toan end, and it will not have to be made siddha again. Foralways, it remains siddha (accomplished); throughout past,present and future times (trikaad) – that is referred to assiddhant.The Atma is the Self. If you have realized the Self, thenyou have realized the world. When you know the Atma, the ego(ahamkar) and the ‘my-ness’ (mamata), both disappeartogether. They leave at a time.Say you have your own home, which you like very much.But you are in debt and you have to sell it. After you have soldit and taken the money for it, will the ‘my-ness’ (mamata), notbe gone the following day?Questioner: Yes, it will be gone.Dadashri: Why? It was your house for forty years. Whatif after selling it, it burns down, would you feel any grief (dukh)?Aptavani-8267268Aptavani-8Questioner: No, I would not.Dadashri: That is because your ‘my-ness’ (mamata) isgone. In the same way, the moment you know the Atma, theego (ahamkar) and the ‘my-ness’ (mamata) disappearsimultaneously.A State of Bliss Prevails in the State of theSelfYou yourself are the Absolute Soul (Parmatma), but sinceyou do not have the awareness, what can you do? Until then,you behave in the awareness that you have. ‘I am Chandubhai’is the only belief you have; ‘I am Chandubhai, I am this woman’shusband’. And it is these kinds of wrong beliefs that you dwellin.Questioner: Is that not how all the living beings (jivas)in the worldly life (sansar) recognize each other? That is whyeveryone calls me Chandubhai.Dadashri: Chandubhai is just a way for identifying you inworldly interaction (vyavahar), and there is nothing wrong withthat. If someone asks me, ‘What is your name?’ I would say,‘Ambalal.’ But ‘I’, not even in my dreams would believe that, ‘Iam Ambalal’. Whereas you, not just in your dreams, but evenwhile awake, go around believing that, ‘I am Chandubhai’. Now,‘I am Chandubhai’, is the wrong belief that gives you problems.And I remain in the awareness of the Self (swa-bhaan), in myown Self form (swa-swaroop), so I am constantly in a state ofbliss (samadhi); maintaining oneness with the Self. When I enterthe state of the Self (swa-swaroop), the constant state of theAbsolute Soul (Parmatma) occurs with it, and the energy (shakti)of the Absolute Soul, manifests. Right now it is Chandubhai’senergy (shakti) that is being expressed. Since you have comeinto the human form, Chandubhai’s energies have manifested;however, more of the energies of human beings have not yetmanifested. They are being dissipated in the ordinary human life.In This Time, Do Efforts Pay Off?Questioner: Does one have to make any effort for that? Dadashri: You will not be able to make that effort. Thatis because you yourself lack unity in your thoughts, speech andactions; you have become unsteady (vyagra; lack of unity inmind, speech and actions), so you will not be able to try. Onlyif you have absolute unity of thought, speech and action (ekagra),will I be able to show you. But in this age (kaad), a personcannot maintain that kind of unity (ekagra). Besides how can aperson maintain unity of thought, speech and body (ekagra) inthis era of the time-cycle; in such tumult, in such a time ofupheaval? Therefore, I destroy your demerit karma (paap) first,and then I instill the right belief in you.Questioner: Is it necessary to practice focused attentionand concentration (ekagrata) to make progress?Dadashri: The way it is, is that there are remedies thatdo involve focused attention (ekagrata), which are helping.Nothing in this world is wrong. All these things are helping. Butif you want to become completely independent, there should beintense desire to experience the Self. Sugar is sweet – whatdoes sweet mean? Your focus and awareness should be only onthis. To realize the ultimate, one will have to come here (to theGnani Purush). Otherwise there are all these other things youcanresort to, and they are stepping (gradual ascent towards theSelf).Not Action, but Awareness Needs to Be ChangedQuestioner: How can people who are caught up in theresponsibilities of the worldly life (sansar), attain the Atma?Dadashri: Chandubhai and the Atma are both completelyseparate. And they display their own different qualities andfunctions (gunadharma). If one comes to understand this fromthe Gnani Purush, then all his responsibilities in the worldly life(sansar) will be carried out nicely, and even this too will carryAptavani-8267268Aptavani-8Questioner: No, I would not.Dadashri: That is because your ‘my-ness’ (mamata) isgone. In the same way, the moment you know the Atma, theego (ahamkar) and the ‘my-ness’ (mamata) disappearsimultaneously.A State of Bliss Prevails in the State of theSelfYou yourself are the Absolute Soul (Parmatma), but sinceyou do not have the awareness, what can you do? Until then,you behave in the awareness that you have. ‘I am Chandubhai’is the only belief you have; ‘I am Chandubhai, I am this woman’shusband’. And it is these kinds of wrong beliefs that you dwellin.Questioner: Is that not how all the living beings (jivas)in the worldly life (sansar) recognize each other? That is whyeveryone calls me Chandubhai.Dadashri: Chandubhai is just a way for identifying you inworldly interaction (vyavahar), and there is nothing wrong withthat. If someone asks me, ‘What is your name?’ I would say,‘Ambalal.’ But ‘I’, not even in my dreams would believe that, ‘Iam Ambalal’. Whereas you, not just in your dreams, but evenwhile awake, go around believing that, ‘I am Chandubhai’. Now,‘I am Chandubhai’, is the wrong belief that gives you problems.And I remain in the awareness of the Self (swa-bhaan), in myown Self form (swa-swaroop), so I am constantly in a state ofbliss (samadhi); maintaining oneness with the Self. When I enterthe state of the Self (swa-swaroop), the constant state of theAbsolute Soul (Parmatma) occurs with it, and the energy (shakti)of the Absolute Soul, manifests. Right now it is Chandubhai’senergy (shakti) that is being expressed. Since you have comeinto the human form, Chandubhai’s energies have manifested;however, more of the energies of human beings have not yetmanifested. They are being dissipated in the ordinary human life.In This Time, Do Efforts Pay Off?Questioner: Does one have to make any effort for that? Dadashri: You will not be able to make that effort. Thatis because you yourself lack unity in your thoughts, speech andactions; you have become unsteady (vyagra; lack of unity inmind, speech and actions), so you will not be able to try. Onlyif you have absolute unity of thought, speech and action (ekagra),will I be able to show you. But in this age (kaad), a personcannot maintain that kind of unity (ekagra). Besides how can aperson maintain unity of thought, speech and body (ekagra) inthis era of the time-cycle; in such tumult, in such a time ofupheaval? Therefore, I destroy your demerit karma (paap) first,and then I instill the right belief in you.Questioner: Is it necessary to practice focused attentionand concentration (ekagrata) to make progress?Dadashri: The way it is, is that there are remedies thatdo involve focused attention (ekagrata), which are helping.Nothing in this world is wrong. All these things are helping. Butif you want to become completely independent, there should beintense desire to experience the Self. Sugar is sweet – whatdoes sweet mean? Your focus and awareness should be only onthis. To realize the ultimate, one will have to come here (to theGnani Purush). Otherwise there are all these other things youcanresort to, and they are stepping (gradual ascent towards theSelf).Not Action, but Awareness Needs to Be ChangedQuestioner: How can people who are caught up in theresponsibilities of the worldly life (sansar), attain the Atma?Dadashri: Chandubhai and the Atma are both completelyseparate. And they display their own different qualities andfunctions (gunadharma). If one comes to understand this fromthe Gnani Purush, then all his responsibilities in the worldly life(sansar) will be carried out nicely, and even this too will carryAptavani-8269270Aptavani-8on well. Even Gnanis, eat, drink, bathe, and do everything.They do the same kind of activities (kriya) that you do; however,they have the awareness (bhaan) of ‘I am not the doer’. Whereas,in the state of ignorance (agnan) the awareness (bhaan) thatprevails, is ‘I am the doer’. So the difference is only in theawareness (bhaan).No Adversity in Development Towards theAtmaQuestioner: Why does it seem that although I have aninternal desire, the difficulties I face in the work related to progresstowards the Atma (Self), are greater?Dadashri: There is never any difficulty in work related toprogress towards the Atma. Only that one does not have theinternal desire. If there is an internal desire, then there is neverany difficulty in the work of progression towards the Atma. Thisis really because one has more love towards the worldly life;there is attraction there. That is why you feel the difficulty. Besides,attaining the Atma is natural, easy and simple. How long can ittake for the Atma to turn homeward?I asked a farmer, ‘When you take your buffalo from hereto the farm, what kind of temperament does he have?’ And hereplied, ‘When we take him to the farm, he walks very slowly.’‘And on the way back home?’ So he says, ‘Home? Heunderstands that he is going home, so he walks ever so fast!’ Inthe same way, when the Atma knows that it is going to the finalliberation (moksha), it moves really fast. It is going to its ownhome! And everywhere else, it moves slowly, as though it isbeing goaded there.Take Advantage of the Living Gnani PurushQuestioner: How much strong endeavor (purusharth) isrequired to attain the state that is beyond the body (deha)? Andhow much of it is God’s grace (krupa)?Dadashri: God’s grace will bring all the circumstancestogether. When there is God’s grace (krupa), in order to attainthe state that is beyond the body (dehatita), one will comeacross someone whose state is beyond the body (dehatitapurush), who will help him attain the state that is beyond thebody. However, even though he may be in a state that is beyondthe body, he will not be able to help you attain the state of beingbeyond the body. Only rarely, will you come across such aGnani Purush who can make you attain the state that is beyondthe body (dehatita). Otherwise to become dehatita, is not aneasy thing!Questioner: So that you can attain God’s grace (krupa),to attain the state that is beyond the body (dehatita), what sortof strong self-effort (purusharth) do we do, and how much ofthat effort must we make?Dadashri: It is because of your strong endeavor(purusharth), that you have met me. Whatever strong endeavor(purusharth) you had made; you must have made a good strongendeavor for us to have come together. Now that we have met,you should know how to reap some kind of benefit. Here, youwill receive whatever you ask for. People look for things in theirown language; they look for things that they can understand. Youare asking for the attainment of the state which is beyond thebody (dehatita), and that state of beyond the body can beattained right here. People are not even aware that there is sucha state as a state beyond the body. There are very few peoplethat seek the state of dehatita. They are not around.Seeking Without Understanding, To What Avail?Questioner: But is the direct experience not of the Atmaonly attained after you have undergone many, many penancesand other rituals?Dadashri: No. Even if you accomplished a lot of penance,Aptavani-8269270Aptavani-8on well. Even Gnanis, eat, drink, bathe, and do everything.They do the same kind of activities (kriya) that you do; however,they have the awareness (bhaan) of ‘I am not the doer’. Whereas,in the state of ignorance (agnan) the awareness (bhaan) thatprevails, is ‘I am the doer’. So the difference is only in theawareness (bhaan).No Adversity in Development Towards theAtmaQuestioner: Why does it seem that although I have aninternal desire, the difficulties I face in the work related to progresstowards the Atma (Self), are greater?Dadashri: There is never any difficulty in work related toprogress towards the Atma. Only that one does not have theinternal desire. If there is an internal desire, then there is neverany difficulty in the work of progression towards the Atma. Thisis really because one has more love towards the worldly life;there is attraction there. That is why you feel the difficulty. Besides,attaining the Atma is natural, easy and simple. How long can ittake for the Atma to turn homeward?I asked a farmer, ‘When you take your buffalo from hereto the farm, what kind of temperament does he have?’ And hereplied, ‘When we take him to the farm, he walks very slowly.’‘And on the way back home?’ So he says, ‘Home? Heunderstands that he is going home, so he walks ever so fast!’ Inthe same way, when the Atma knows that it is going to the finalliberation (moksha), it moves really fast. It is going to its ownhome! And everywhere else, it moves slowly, as though it isbeing goaded there.Take Advantage of the Living Gnani PurushQuestioner: How much strong endeavor (purusharth) isrequired to attain the state that is beyond the body (deha)? Andhow much of it is God’s grace (krupa)?Dadashri: God’s grace will bring all the circumstancestogether. When there is God’s grace (krupa), in order to attainthe state that is beyond the body (dehatita), one will comeacross someone whose state is beyond the body (dehatitapurush), who will help him attain the state that is beyond thebody. However, even though he may be in a state that is beyondthe body, he will not be able to help you attain the state of beingbeyond the body. Only rarely, will you come across such aGnani Purush who can make you attain the state that is beyondthe body (dehatita). Otherwise to become dehatita, is not aneasy thing!Questioner: So that you can attain God’s grace (krupa),to attain the state that is beyond the body (dehatita), what sortof strong self-effort (purusharth) do we do, and how much ofthat effort must we make?Dadashri: It is because of your strong endeavor(purusharth), that you have met me. Whatever strong endeavor(purusharth) you had made; you must have made a good strongendeavor for us to have come together. Now that we have met,you should know how to reap some kind of benefit. Here, youwill receive whatever you ask for. People look for things in theirown language; they look for things that they can understand. Youare asking for the attainment of the state which is beyond thebody (dehatita), and that state of beyond the body can beattained right here. People are not even aware that there is sucha state as a state beyond the body. There are very few peoplethat seek the state of dehatita. They are not around.Seeking Without Understanding, To What Avail?Questioner: But is the direct experience not of the Atmaonly attained after you have undergone many, many penancesand other rituals?Dadashri: No. Even if you accomplished a lot of penance,Aptavani-8271272Aptavani-8you can still take birth as a donkey. Because Dadar station wasonly half a mile away, why did you roam for twenty-two miles?You ruined the road. So go become a donkey! It was only halfa mile away, but you traveled twenty-two miles, and even thenDadar did not arrive, but some other town came instead. Thenone will say, ‘I did travel for twenty-two miles, so at least Igained the benefit of the twenty-one and a half miles!’ But theresponse will be, ‘No, you are the one who traveled, and so youhave to pay for the wear and tear of our road.’ Therefore youhave to pay a penalty. So this is how it is! The Atma is not easyto attain, and no one has ever found the Atma. Everyone willsay, ‘I am the Atma (Brahmaswaroop). I am the Atma.’ Butyou will know, as soon as you insult him. He will immediatelystrike back.Obstructive Causes in SpiritualityQuestioner: Does race, caste, religious sects (pantha)and all that, create an obstruction to the direct experience of theAtma (Atma-sakshatkar)?Dadashri: Nothing obstructs it. Anyone can attain thedirect experience of the Atma (Atma-sakshatkar).Questioner: No, but surely would all these religioussects (pantha), and race or caste (jaati) not present anobstacle?Dadashri: They are an obstruction as long as the egoism(ahamkar) of race or caste (jaati) exists. The egoism of belongingto a religious sect, and the egoism of belonging to a particularrace or caste, is all obstructive. And if one manages to extricatehimself, and finds himself a Gnani Purush, then his problemswill be resolved. Besides, these dogmatic people in religioussects still have a lot of wandering to do. That is because in therealm of the Lord, there is no need for opinion (matt), race(jaat), or anything else. There is no need for any religious sect,or even attire.Questioner: Do the karmic layers of coverings (avaran),starting from clothes to children; present an obstacle to spirituality?Dadashri: None of those things are really an obstacle.But since there is so much pressure from them, they are obstructiveto a certain degree. And to a certain degree, they are notobstructive; there are some such limits. There is nothing thatobstructs me. Whatever I wear, and all that I possess, none ofthem hinder me. Besides, even if they took away my clothingand pulled off my clothes, it would not bother me, and later ifyou put them back on me, I still would not have a problem. Ido not have any kind of problem with anything. This body behavesaccording to the circumstances that surround it. And I am theKnower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta) of it. This body is my neighbor,only a neighbor!Questioner: So does that mean, that there is only anobstruction in spirituality as long as there is egoism (ahamkar)and ‘my-ness’ (mamata)?Dadashri: Only egoism (ahamkar) is an obstacle. The‘my-ness’ (mamata) is only there, as long as the ego (ahamkar)is there. Otherwise, if the ego is not there, there is no ‘my-ness’(mamata) at all. Now ‘I-ness’ is not egoism (ahamkar). ‘I am’is one’s existence (astitva) anyway. However, not having theawareness of ‘What am I?’ is the reason why the ego (ahamkar)remains in existence.Where Is the Spiritual Path in This World?Therefore, even if there is a mahatma or Self-realizedbeing (sat purush), whose anger-pride-deceit-greed (krodh-maan-maya-lobh), have diminished, you can make do with him.There would be some spirituality there, some, meaning that itwould all be at a primary level. However, real spirituality doesnot exist in this world. People only chant about spirituality, andthat is all. But there is no spirituality in the world: what doesspirituality mean? What is spirituality?Aptavani-8271272Aptavani-8you can still take birth as a donkey. Because Dadar station wasonly half a mile away, why did you roam for twenty-two miles?You ruined the road. So go become a donkey! It was only halfa mile away, but you traveled twenty-two miles, and even thenDadar did not arrive, but some other town came instead. Thenone will say, ‘I did travel for twenty-two miles, so at least Igained the benefit of the twenty-one and a half miles!’ But theresponse will be, ‘No, you are the one who traveled, and so youhave to pay for the wear and tear of our road.’ Therefore youhave to pay a penalty. So this is how it is! The Atma is not easyto attain, and no one has ever found the Atma. Everyone willsay, ‘I am the Atma (Brahmaswaroop). I am the Atma.’ Butyou will know, as soon as you insult him. He will immediatelystrike back.Obstructive Causes in SpiritualityQuestioner: Does race, caste, religious sects (pantha)and all that, create an obstruction to the direct experience of theAtma (Atma-sakshatkar)?Dadashri: Nothing obstructs it. Anyone can attain thedirect experience of the Atma (Atma-sakshatkar).Questioner: No, but surely would all these religioussects (pantha), and race or caste (jaati) not present anobstacle?Dadashri: They are an obstruction as long as the egoism(ahamkar) of race or caste (jaati) exists. The egoism of belongingto a religious sect, and the egoism of belonging to a particularrace or caste, is all obstructive. And if one manages to extricatehimself, and finds himself a Gnani Purush, then his problemswill be resolved. Besides, these dogmatic people in religioussects still have a lot of wandering to do. That is because in therealm of the Lord, there is no need for opinion (matt), race(jaat), or anything else. There is no need for any religious sect,or even attire.Questioner: Do the karmic layers of coverings (avaran),starting from clothes to children; present an obstacle to spirituality?Dadashri: None of those things are really an obstacle.But since there is so much pressure from them, they are obstructiveto a certain degree. And to a certain degree, they are notobstructive; there are some such limits. There is nothing thatobstructs me. Whatever I wear, and all that I possess, none ofthem hinder me. Besides, even if they took away my clothingand pulled off my clothes, it would not bother me, and later ifyou put them back on me, I still would not have a problem. Ido not have any kind of problem with anything. This body behavesaccording to the circumstances that surround it. And I am theKnower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta) of it. This body is my neighbor,only a neighbor!Questioner: So does that mean, that there is only anobstruction in spirituality as long as there is egoism (ahamkar)and ‘my-ness’ (mamata)?Dadashri: Only egoism (ahamkar) is an obstacle. The‘my-ness’ (mamata) is only there, as long as the ego (ahamkar)is there. Otherwise, if the ego is not there, there is no ‘my-ness’(mamata) at all. Now ‘I-ness’ is not egoism (ahamkar). ‘I am’is one’s existence (astitva) anyway. However, not having theawareness of ‘What am I?’ is the reason why the ego (ahamkar)remains in existence.Where Is the Spiritual Path in This World?Therefore, even if there is a mahatma or Self-realizedbeing (sat purush), whose anger-pride-deceit-greed (krodh-maan-maya-lobh), have diminished, you can make do with him.There would be some spirituality there, some, meaning that itwould all be at a primary level. However, real spirituality doesnot exist in this world. People only chant about spirituality, andthat is all. But there is no spirituality in the world: what doesspirituality mean? What is spirituality?Aptavani-8273274Aptavani-8The road of spirituality is one that if you take that road, youcan see no other worldly road. That road is very different. Sowhere does spirituality (adhyatma) begin? It is when you stopseeing the things on this side (the worldly life). Nevertheless it willstay on your mind. Those phases (paryaya) and circumstances(avastha) that there are, will be stuck in your mind, but you willstop seeing that road. So it is called spirituality (adhyatma) whenit stays on your mind, but you no longer see it with your eyes.That is how it is. In the spiritual path, you must firstdistinguish between what is good and beneficial for you, andwhat is not beneficial. You must seize whatever is beneficial. Andyou must steer away from that which is not beneficial. That is thedistinction you have to make first.This Chandubhai is just a name, in order to remain in theinteraction in the worldly life (vyavahar). You are not justChandubhai, you are also this lady’s husband. You are this boy’sfather, you are his maternal uncle (mama), you are his paternaluncle (kaka). How many of these entanglements possess (lafra)you? Spirituality (adhyatma) and worldly entanglements (lafra)are very far apart. Only when there are no entanglements, canspirituality surface. Now, to get rid of these entanglements is notan easy thing. Will they ever go, just by your giving them up?Even if you come here, those entanglements will even come andfetch you from here. Are those entanglements likely to ever leaveyou alone?So, ‘I am Chandubhai’ is fine, as far as the worldlyinteractions (vyavahar) are concerned, but it is not so in reality.So do we not need to know what we really are? The real wayis what will come with us, and worldly interaction will be leftbehind. Your name and everything else will be left behind, will itnot? You are nameless (anami).Now you are considered to have entered spirituality, whenyou have the enlightened vision of the Self (samyak darshan).Otherwise, you have not entered spirituality (adhyatma) at all.Then no matter how many books one reads, the spirituality willnot occur, even then. When one attains the enlightened vision(samyak darshan), and one attains the vision (darshan) of asit is; one enters spirituality. Therefore, when all those wrongbeliefs are “fractured”, the right belief sets in.Questioner: What do I have to do for the right belief?Do I have to keep saying, ‘I am not this body, I am not thisbody’, for that?Dadashri: No; that will not get you anywhere! If you didthat, you will go mad, and people will say, ‘If you are not thebody, then what are you?’ You do not have to do that. So manypeople do that, and they have become crazy!Questioner: So do I say, ‘I am an Atma’ then?Dadashri: No, you cannot say that either. If a person, inhis sleep, says to you, ‘Wait a while, I want to come to thecinema with you also.’ then would you not figure out, that afterhalf an hour, an hour of sitting there waiting, that he has not gotup. So would you not understand that he was talking in hissleep? In the same way, what good is it if one says, ‘I am Atma,I am Atma’, in one’s sleep?Questioner: Should one not have the experience, ‘I amAtma’?Dadashri: Yes, you can have the experience! It is whenthe Gnani Purush does it for you, that you will have theexperience.Questioner: But if I wanted to have the experience of theAtma by myself, how could I do it?Dadashri: If I tell you how it is done, although it is fairlysimple, you will not be able to do it. At the present time, people’spower of the mind (manobud) has broken down.Aptavani-8273274Aptavani-8The road of spirituality is one that if you take that road, youcan see no other worldly road. That road is very different. Sowhere does spirituality (adhyatma) begin? It is when you stopseeing the things on this side (the worldly life). Nevertheless it willstay on your mind. Those phases (paryaya) and circumstances(avastha) that there are, will be stuck in your mind, but you willstop seeing that road. So it is called spirituality (adhyatma) whenit stays on your mind, but you no longer see it with your eyes.That is how it is. In the spiritual path, you must firstdistinguish between what is good and beneficial for you, andwhat is not beneficial. You must seize whatever is beneficial. Andyou must steer away from that which is not beneficial. That is thedistinction you have to make first.This Chandubhai is just a name, in order to remain in theinteraction in the worldly life (vyavahar). You are not justChandubhai, you are also this lady’s husband. You are this boy’sfather, you are his maternal uncle (mama), you are his paternaluncle (kaka). How many of these entanglements possess (lafra)you? Spirituality (adhyatma) and worldly entanglements (lafra)are very far apart. Only when there are no entanglements, canspirituality surface. Now, to get rid of these entanglements is notan easy thing. Will they ever go, just by your giving them up?Even if you come here, those entanglements will even come andfetch you from here. Are those entanglements likely to ever leaveyou alone?So, ‘I am Chandubhai’ is fine, as far as the worldlyinteractions (vyavahar) are concerned, but it is not so in reality.So do we not need to know what we really are? The real wayis what will come with us, and worldly interaction will be leftbehind. Your name and everything else will be left behind, will itnot? You are nameless (anami).Now you are considered to have entered spirituality, whenyou have the enlightened vision of the Self (samyak darshan).Otherwise, you have not entered spirituality (adhyatma) at all.Then no matter how many books one reads, the spirituality willnot occur, even then. When one attains the enlightened vision(samyak darshan), and one attains the vision (darshan) of asit is; one enters spirituality. Therefore, when all those wrongbeliefs are “fractured”, the right belief sets in.Questioner: What do I have to do for the right belief?Do I have to keep saying, ‘I am not this body, I am not thisbody’, for that?Dadashri: No; that will not get you anywhere! If you didthat, you will go mad, and people will say, ‘If you are not thebody, then what are you?’ You do not have to do that. So manypeople do that, and they have become crazy!Questioner: So do I say, ‘I am an Atma’ then?Dadashri: No, you cannot say that either. If a person, inhis sleep, says to you, ‘Wait a while, I want to come to thecinema with you also.’ then would you not figure out, that afterhalf an hour, an hour of sitting there waiting, that he has not gotup. So would you not understand that he was talking in hissleep? In the same way, what good is it if one says, ‘I am Atma,I am Atma’, in one’s sleep?Questioner: Should one not have the experience, ‘I amAtma’?Dadashri: Yes, you can have the experience! It is whenthe Gnani Purush does it for you, that you will have theexperience.Questioner: But if I wanted to have the experience of theAtma by myself, how could I do it?Dadashri: If I tell you how it is done, although it is fairlysimple, you will not be able to do it. At the present time, people’spower of the mind (manobud) has broken down.Aptavani-8275276Aptavani-8Nevertheless, I will show you one way: If you have hadyour pocket picked and lost five thousand rupees, then whatdoes the justice of God say to you? It would say – ‘son, this isthe consequence of your own karma, which is why you haveencountered this pickpocket’. Did you understand? This is thefruit of your karma, and he is an instrumental being (nimit). Butwhat do these people do? They bite (attack) the nimit instead.They should not bite him. They should give him blessings(ashirwad) – ‘it was you who freed me from my karma’. Canyou manage to stay that way?Even if you can understand just this much, then it wouldbe more than enough! First you must believe that thepickpocket’s action has freed you from your karma. Or elseif someone insults you, at that time, you should have theawareness that, ‘it is because of my unfolding karma and thisman is an instrument (nimit)’. At least this much awarenessshould be present. Then if someone beats you, or cuts off yourhands: this is the unfolding of my karma; he is just aninstrumental (nimit) – if this much knowledge (gnan) prevails– then go! You will attain the Atma. But this knowledge doesnot prevail due to the current time cycle of dushamkaal (thetime cycle wherein there is no unity of mind, speech and action).Moreover, a person’s mind cannot remain so strong! In thisage it would not, would it? The mind has become verilyfractured! That is why, once ‘we’ give you that awareness, itwill never go away.When Demerit Karma Is Destroyed, YourAwareness IncreasesNow, when will the awareness (jagruti) come? Theawareness will come, when your demerit karma (paap) arecompletely destroyed. What Lord Krishna said, was that theGnani Purush completely destroys your demerit karma (paap),and once the demerit karma are destroyed, a constant awarenessprevails. However, to remain constantly aware is the ultimatestate. So the main thing is that one needs the awareness (jagruti).Do you have less awareness?Questioner: Yes, Dada. So we have to attain thecontinuous experience of the Atma.Dadashri: Yes. Continuous, meaning constant; that youdo not forget even at night – then know that you have attainedsomething. If not, then nothing else will be of any use! Formany avatars (births; lifetimes) one has attained this kind ofmixed-up (bhelvaado) Atma. Bhel (savory snack mixture) istwelve rupees a kilo, and even the mixed-up Atma is twelverupees a kilo, and so all the people yelling about the Atma, areall referring to the Atma which is also twelve rupees to thekilo. No one is saying, ‘Here, I am giving you the real Atma,come and take it!’Or else, they give you a recitation (smaran), a name torecite (naam smaran), saying keep reciting this! Hey you, onecan only do recitation (smaran), if one acquires an attachment(raag) for it. And where there is attachment, everything there, isthe worldly life (sansar), and where there is the worldly life,there is recitation (smaran). There should be no recitationwhatsoever. Recitation should be the last resort. In a way, itdoes keep you in focused concentration (ekagrata); however itis a last resort. Besides, that which constantly remains in one’sawareness, is the Atma. Anything else is the mixed-up(bhelvaado) Atma.Zero Has No Value Without the OneQuestioner: Does Self-realization (Atmagnan) mean, toknow your Self?Dadashri: Yes, to know the Self, that is all, nothing else.Questioner: Now, in order to know something, you haveto delve deep into it. So in the same way, if we want to knowthe Atma, do we have to go deep within ourselves?Aptavani-8275276Aptavani-8Nevertheless, I will show you one way: If you have hadyour pocket picked and lost five thousand rupees, then whatdoes the justice of God say to you? It would say – ‘son, this isthe consequence of your own karma, which is why you haveencountered this pickpocket’. Did you understand? This is thefruit of your karma, and he is an instrumental being (nimit). Butwhat do these people do? They bite (attack) the nimit instead.They should not bite him. They should give him blessings(ashirwad) – ‘it was you who freed me from my karma’. Canyou manage to stay that way?Even if you can understand just this much, then it wouldbe more than enough! First you must believe that thepickpocket’s action has freed you from your karma. Or elseif someone insults you, at that time, you should have theawareness that, ‘it is because of my unfolding karma and thisman is an instrument (nimit)’. At least this much awarenessshould be present. Then if someone beats you, or cuts off yourhands: this is the unfolding of my karma; he is just aninstrumental (nimit) – if this much knowledge (gnan) prevails– then go! You will attain the Atma. But this knowledge doesnot prevail due to the current time cycle of dushamkaal (thetime cycle wherein there is no unity of mind, speech and action).Moreover, a person’s mind cannot remain so strong! In thisage it would not, would it? The mind has become verilyfractured! That is why, once ‘we’ give you that awareness, itwill never go away.When Demerit Karma Is Destroyed, YourAwareness IncreasesNow, when will the awareness (jagruti) come? Theawareness will come, when your demerit karma (paap) arecompletely destroyed. What Lord Krishna said, was that theGnani Purush completely destroys your demerit karma (paap),and once the demerit karma are destroyed, a constant awarenessprevails. However, to remain constantly aware is the ultimatestate. So the main thing is that one needs the awareness (jagruti).Do you have less awareness?Questioner: Yes, Dada. So we have to attain thecontinuous experience of the Atma.Dadashri: Yes. Continuous, meaning constant; that youdo not forget even at night – then know that you have attainedsomething. If not, then nothing else will be of any use! Formany avatars (births; lifetimes) one has attained this kind ofmixed-up (bhelvaado) Atma. Bhel (savory snack mixture) istwelve rupees a kilo, and even the mixed-up Atma is twelverupees a kilo, and so all the people yelling about the Atma, areall referring to the Atma which is also twelve rupees to thekilo. No one is saying, ‘Here, I am giving you the real Atma,come and take it!’Or else, they give you a recitation (smaran), a name torecite (naam smaran), saying keep reciting this! Hey you, onecan only do recitation (smaran), if one acquires an attachment(raag) for it. And where there is attachment, everything there, isthe worldly life (sansar), and where there is the worldly life,there is recitation (smaran). There should be no recitationwhatsoever. Recitation should be the last resort. In a way, itdoes keep you in focused concentration (ekagrata); however itis a last resort. Besides, that which constantly remains in one’sawareness, is the Atma. Anything else is the mixed-up(bhelvaado) Atma.Zero Has No Value Without the OneQuestioner: Does Self-realization (Atmagnan) mean, toknow your Self?Dadashri: Yes, to know the Self, that is all, nothing else.Questioner: Now, in order to know something, you haveto delve deep into it. So in the same way, if we want to knowthe Atma, do we have to go deep within ourselves?Aptavani-8277278Aptavani-8Dadashri: They all do that on their own anyway! That ishow all those that composed Vedanta (Hindu scripture) arrivedat it. Ultimately, after creating the four Vedas, they said, ‘This isnot that. This is not that. This is not that.’ You cannot find theAtma, through the Vedas.Questioner: If the Atma cannot be found, then what isit like?Dadashri: It cannot be found, and it cannot be described.Even talking about it is a great liability. These four Vedasthemselves have said no to that! It cannot be described thoughspeech and it is not possible to express it.Questioner: So then can one experience the Atma?Dadashri: What do you have the experience of rightnow?Questioner: Right now I am trying to attain a state ofzero, which is devoid of thought (shunyavastha).Dadashri: Shunya meaning?Questioner: When you do not have desires and contrarythoughts (sankalp-vikalp), it is called shunya.Dadashri: If there are two engines coming towards eachother at full speed, one from this direction and one from theother direction, what would happen?Questioner: There would be a huge accident.Dadashri: They will collide in such a way, that even theengines will end up standing upright. When these people domeditation (dhyan) of the Atma, and whatever else they continueto do, it is just like a state that is devoid of thought(shunyavastha). Without even understanding what the state ofzero (shunyavastha) means, they have embarked on attainingthe state of zero (shunya). Zeroes without ones, are all useless.Only if there is a one, a zero is useful. So how are you tryingto attain the state of zero (shunyavastha) then?Questioner: We sit in silence, and then try to stop anydesires (sankalp) and contrary thoughts and agitation (vikalp)from arising.Dadashri: And even then, the desires and agitation(sankalp-vikalp) keeps occurring, does it not? Yes, but whodoes that, when it is not your wish? Has someone puzzling notmanaged to enter in?Questioner: That is the non-Self complex (prakruti).Dadashri: Tell me, are you in the non-Self (prakruti), orare you in the Self (Purush)?Questioner: In the Self (Purush).Dadashri: Who made you into the Purush?Questioner: That is the knowledge we do not have.Dadashri: If someone tells you, ‘Chandubhai has spoiledthis’, will it affect you?Questioner: If I had indeed ruined it, then I would haveto own up to it.Dadashri: But say you have not ruined anything, andsomeone says, ‘Chandubhai has spoiled this’, would it botheryou?Questioner: They can keep saying that.Dadashri: Is that so? So, nothing in the name ofChandubhai affects you?Questioner: No.Dadashri: And if someone steals five thousand rupeesfrom your pocket, it still would not affect you?Aptavani-8277278Aptavani-8Dadashri: They all do that on their own anyway! That ishow all those that composed Vedanta (Hindu scripture) arrivedat it. Ultimately, after creating the four Vedas, they said, ‘This isnot that. This is not that. This is not that.’ You cannot find theAtma, through the Vedas.Questioner: If the Atma cannot be found, then what isit like?Dadashri: It cannot be found, and it cannot be described.Even talking about it is a great liability. These four Vedasthemselves have said no to that! It cannot be described thoughspeech and it is not possible to express it.Questioner: So then can one experience the Atma?Dadashri: What do you have the experience of rightnow?Questioner: Right now I am trying to attain a state ofzero, which is devoid of thought (shunyavastha).Dadashri: Shunya meaning?Questioner: When you do not have desires and contrarythoughts (sankalp-vikalp), it is called shunya.Dadashri: If there are two engines coming towards eachother at full speed, one from this direction and one from theother direction, what would happen?Questioner: There would be a huge accident.Dadashri: They will collide in such a way, that even theengines will end up standing upright. When these people domeditation (dhyan) of the Atma, and whatever else they continueto do, it is just like a state that is devoid of thought(shunyavastha). Without even understanding what the state ofzero (shunyavastha) means, they have embarked on attainingthe state of zero (shunya). Zeroes without ones, are all useless.Only if there is a one, a zero is useful. So how are you tryingto attain the state of zero (shunyavastha) then?Questioner: We sit in silence, and then try to stop anydesires (sankalp) and contrary thoughts and agitation (vikalp)from arising.Dadashri: And even then, the desires and agitation(sankalp-vikalp) keeps occurring, does it not? Yes, but whodoes that, when it is not your wish? Has someone puzzling notmanaged to enter in?Questioner: That is the non-Self complex (prakruti).Dadashri: Tell me, are you in the non-Self (prakruti), orare you in the Self (Purush)?Questioner: In the Self (Purush).Dadashri: Who made you into the Purush?Questioner: That is the knowledge we do not have.Dadashri: If someone tells you, ‘Chandubhai has spoiledthis’, will it affect you?Questioner: If I had indeed ruined it, then I would haveto own up to it.Dadashri: But say you have not ruined anything, andsomeone says, ‘Chandubhai has spoiled this’, would it botheryou?Questioner: They can keep saying that.Dadashri: Is that so? So, nothing in the name ofChandubhai affects you?Questioner: No.Dadashri: And if someone steals five thousand rupeesfrom your pocket, it still would not affect you?Aptavani-8279280Aptavani-8Questioner: It would, that is my livelihood there.Dadashri: Now where did the zero (shunya) go then?Nevertheless, it is a good thing that you can stay calm in this way;it is not a bad thing. But all that, cannot be the path of shunya.For shunya, you have to attain the Atma; you have to know theAtma. After you know the Atma; then comes the state of shunya.The Atma Is Way Beyond the Observer ofThoughtsQuestioner: Then what is the best way to experience theAtma?Dadashri: Do you have any other means (sadhan) to dothat? You are trying to become the object to be attained (sadhya),but is there another way (sadhan) according to you?Questioner: We do atma observing (atma-nirikshan)for half an hour.Dadashri: Are you doing the observing, after you haveknown the Atma, or are you doing it without knowing it first?Questioner: After we have known the Atma, then whatelse is left?Dadashri: Then whose observation of the Atma are youdoing?Questioner: Of whatever thoughts that arise.Dadashri: Goodness, of thoughts! Thoughts arise fromthe mind, and the mind itself is non-living (jada). It is “completelyphysical”. So it is the mind’s thoughts that you are studying.That, which is doing the study, is egoism. And beyond egoism,lies the Atma.The Tangled State of ExperienceQuestioner: I am relating my experience of the Atma;that the joy I feel inside, is like gushing water fountains.Dadashri: Yes, some may feel a sensation like waterfountains, or even see a kind of light or other such things, justupon hearing about the Atma.Questioner: It is not about the gushing fountains, but youfeel so much joy within.Dadashri: Yes, but they are a kind of imagining (kalpana),that happens inside. But when you think about things on thatside, you feel so much joy, so can you imagine how much joyyou would feel if you reached that side?One man who was simple and pure at heart, goes to aholy man. Then he comes to me and says, ‘I have had theexperience.’ I asked, ‘An experience of what?’ So he says, ‘Ihave had the experience of the Atma.’ I said: no one has everseen even the Atma’s shadow. No matter that one does notreach the Atma, however, just like the shadows that followpeople around, which you can put your foot on; the Atma’sshadow, once reached, will bring you the enlightened vision(samkit).Many in India claim that they have attained the experience.Now if a person had the experience, then it would definitelymake him Bhagwan (God); he would be considered LordKrishna! And all this experience they have come proclaiming; isfilled with controversy, and nothing has come out of it.I said to that man, ‘What are you calling experience(anubhuti)?’ So he says, ‘I do not know about that. But I dofeel that when I feel this bliss (anand), that it has to be the blissof the Atma.’ Then I said, ‘It cannot be the Atma’s bliss (anand)!You have not attained the Atma yet. You have not even heardabout the Atma. Hey, you have not seen its shadow. This is allthe joy (anand) of the mind. When the circumstances (saiyogo)come together, the joy (anand) of the mind arises.’ And hereplies, ‘Whenever I feel joy (anand), all I know is that it is theAtma’s bliss (anand) which is coming out.’ ‘Goodness, thisAptavani-8279280Aptavani-8Questioner: It would, that is my livelihood there.Dadashri: Now where did the zero (shunya) go then?Nevertheless, it is a good thing that you can stay calm in this way;it is not a bad thing. But all that, cannot be the path of shunya.For shunya, you have to attain the Atma; you have to know theAtma. After you know the Atma; then comes the state of shunya.The Atma Is Way Beyond the Observer ofThoughtsQuestioner: Then what is the best way to experience theAtma?Dadashri: Do you have any other means (sadhan) to dothat? You are trying to become the object to be attained (sadhya),but is there another way (sadhan) according to you?Questioner: We do atma observing (atma-nirikshan)for half an hour.Dadashri: Are you doing the observing, after you haveknown the Atma, or are you doing it without knowing it first?Questioner: After we have known the Atma, then whatelse is left?Dadashri: Then whose observation of the Atma are youdoing?Questioner: Of whatever thoughts that arise.Dadashri: Goodness, of thoughts! Thoughts arise fromthe mind, and the mind itself is non-living (jada). It is “completelyphysical”. So it is the mind’s thoughts that you are studying.That, which is doing the study, is egoism. And beyond egoism,lies the Atma.The Tangled State of ExperienceQuestioner: I am relating my experience of the Atma;that the joy I feel inside, is like gushing water fountains.Dadashri: Yes, some may feel a sensation like waterfountains, or even see a kind of light or other such things, justupon hearing about the Atma.Questioner: It is not about the gushing fountains, but youfeel so much joy within.Dadashri: Yes, but they are a kind of imagining (kalpana),that happens inside. But when you think about things on thatside, you feel so much joy, so can you imagine how much joyyou would feel if you reached that side?One man who was simple and pure at heart, goes to aholy man. Then he comes to me and says, ‘I have had theexperience.’ I asked, ‘An experience of what?’ So he says, ‘Ihave had the experience of the Atma.’ I said: no one has everseen even the Atma’s shadow. No matter that one does notreach the Atma, however, just like the shadows that followpeople around, which you can put your foot on; the Atma’sshadow, once reached, will bring you the enlightened vision(samkit).Many in India claim that they have attained the experience.Now if a person had the experience, then it would definitelymake him Bhagwan (God); he would be considered LordKrishna! And all this experience they have come proclaiming; isfilled with controversy, and nothing has come out of it.I said to that man, ‘What are you calling experience(anubhuti)?’ So he says, ‘I do not know about that. But I dofeel that when I feel this bliss (anand), that it has to be the blissof the Atma.’ Then I said, ‘It cannot be the Atma’s bliss (anand)!You have not attained the Atma yet. You have not even heardabout the Atma. Hey, you have not seen its shadow. This is allthe joy (anand) of the mind. When the circumstances (saiyogo)come together, the joy (anand) of the mind arises.’ And hereplies, ‘Whenever I feel joy (anand), all I know is that it is theAtma’s bliss (anand) which is coming out.’ ‘Goodness, thisAptavani-8281282Aptavani-8cannot be the bliss of the Atma. This is the joy of the mind!Once you have the bliss of the Atma, that bliss will never leave.’Then he says, ‘Now it makes sense. But our gurus were alltelling us that this was the bliss of the Atma. This is the onlyexperience (anubhuti) I have.’ ‘No, with this kind of experience,you will go from having two legs into four legs!’ These are thekinds of wrong things they have taught these poor people! Toenjoy the joy (anand) of the mind, in the ignorant state, is itselfcalled the cause of the realm of lower life-forms (adhogati).Really, you should only take pleasure from the bliss of Gnan!Therefore, if you enjoy mental pleasure out of ignorance(agnan), all that will be a cause (karan) for a life in the lowerrealms of existence (adhogati). People in the world, will alwaysdwell in that mental happiness (maansik anand). They mayhave some suffering from the outside (upadhi), but again, theywill find a way back into the mind’s happiness (maansik anand),so then it all starts up again!Not the Believed but the Known Is NeededAll you have to know is, whether or not the disease of theworldly life (sansar) has abated. If you have doctors, and yourdisease does not subside, then it is your own fault.Questioner: It has decreased.Dadashri: What has decreased?Questioner: If it decreases with the mind, then everythingdecreases. Through the mind, you have renounced everything;so everything is done.Dadashri: Yes, but what have you acquired (grahan)?Renunciation (tyaag) means that you have become empty. Sothere is nothing left for you, is there? Then you are poor, andpoverty will set in!Questioner: You are asking about the worldly life (sansar),are you not? For the worldly life, only renunciation (tyaag) isneeded! Whatever acquisition (grahan) we have to do, we doanyways.Dadashri: Acquisition (grahan) itself is difficult. Whereas renunciation (tyaag) is quite possible to do.Questioner: Even renunciation (tyaag) is impossible. Howcan renunciation be possible? The outer renunciation is different,and the inner renunciation is different. Does renunciation nothave to come from within?Dadashri: You need the inner renunciation (tyaag) for itall to be possible. There are many people that do that. You needto look at what kind of acquisition (grahan) you have done.With renunciation, a vacuum is created, so what will you putthere instead?Questioner: What else could there be, other than, all thisis truly the Absolute Self (sarva khalvidam Brahma)?Dadashri: But what is Brahma?Questioner: Brahma means the Atma.Dadashri: How does one become the Atma (Brahma)?The Atma (Brahma) does not manifest! That is because, whendoes the Atma (Brahma) manifest? When anger-pride-deceit-greed (krodh-maan-maya-lobh) and the ‘my-ness’ (mamata)disappear, that is when the Atma (Brahma) will manifest;otherwise, it will not manifest! Until then the consciousness of,‘I am this body (dehadhyas)’, will not leave!Questioner: Now you can see my shortcomings, howcan I do that?Dadashri: No, why would ‘we’ look at yourshortcomings? You should be able to see your own shortcomings:‘I still have greed (lobh), or I have anger (krodh)’; that issomething only you can see. You (the Self) do not have anyAptavani-8281282Aptavani-8cannot be the bliss of the Atma. This is the joy of the mind!Once you have the bliss of the Atma, that bliss will never leave.’Then he says, ‘Now it makes sense. But our gurus were alltelling us that this was the bliss of the Atma. This is the onlyexperience (anubhuti) I have.’ ‘No, with this kind of experience,you will go from having two legs into four legs!’ These are thekinds of wrong things they have taught these poor people! Toenjoy the joy (anand) of the mind, in the ignorant state, is itselfcalled the cause of the realm of lower life-forms (adhogati).Really, you should only take pleasure from the bliss of Gnan!Therefore, if you enjoy mental pleasure out of ignorance(agnan), all that will be a cause (karan) for a life in the lowerrealms of existence (adhogati). People in the world, will alwaysdwell in that mental happiness (maansik anand). They mayhave some suffering from the outside (upadhi), but again, theywill find a way back into the mind’s happiness (maansik anand),so then it all starts up again!Not the Believed but the Known Is NeededAll you have to know is, whether or not the disease of theworldly life (sansar) has abated. If you have doctors, and yourdisease does not subside, then it is your own fault.Questioner: It has decreased.Dadashri: What has decreased?Questioner: If it decreases with the mind, then everythingdecreases. Through the mind, you have renounced everything;so everything is done.Dadashri: Yes, but what have you acquired (grahan)?Renunciation (tyaag) means that you have become empty. Sothere is nothing left for you, is there? Then you are poor, andpoverty will set in!Questioner: You are asking about the worldly life (sansar),are you not? For the worldly life, only renunciation (tyaag) isneeded! Whatever acquisition (grahan) we have to do, we doanyways.Dadashri: Acquisition (grahan) itself is difficult. Whereas renunciation (tyaag) is quite possible to do.Questioner: Even renunciation (tyaag) is impossible. Howcan renunciation be possible? The outer renunciation is different,and the inner renunciation is different. Does renunciation nothave to come from within?Dadashri: You need the inner renunciation (tyaag) for itall to be possible. There are many people that do that. You needto look at what kind of acquisition (grahan) you have done.With renunciation, a vacuum is created, so what will you putthere instead?Questioner: What else could there be, other than, all thisis truly the Absolute Self (sarva khalvidam Brahma)?Dadashri: But what is Brahma?Questioner: Brahma means the Atma.Dadashri: How does one become the Atma (Brahma)?The Atma (Brahma) does not manifest! That is because, whendoes the Atma (Brahma) manifest? When anger-pride-deceit-greed (krodh-maan-maya-lobh) and the ‘my-ness’ (mamata)disappear, that is when the Atma (Brahma) will manifest;otherwise, it will not manifest! Until then the consciousness of,‘I am this body (dehadhyas)’, will not leave!Questioner: Now you can see my shortcomings, howcan I do that?Dadashri: No, why would ‘we’ look at yourshortcomings? You should be able to see your own shortcomings:‘I still have greed (lobh), or I have anger (krodh)’; that issomething only you can see. You (the Self) do not have anyAptavani-8283284Aptavani-8anger-pride-deceit-greed (krodh-maan-maya-lobh), do you?What if someone were to provoke you?It is like this: if a man is sitting at Udhana railway stationand he says, ‘I wanted to get to the last station on the Westernrailway, and I have reached there’, I would say to him, ‘son, donot sit here. You have to go much further ahead.’ ‘Get on thetrain, without further ado!’ I would tell him. So what is my job?It is that I would get them up, from wherever they might besitting around, and settle them down. That is my business. Nothingcan come out of believing everything in your own mind.Questioner: Now I feel like I want to be free from theworldly life (nivrutti). So help me become steadfast on thatpath. I do not want anything else.Dadashri: That is fine. ‘We’ will do that for you. You areright. It is only good if the disease of the worldly life (sansar)goes! The thing is that the disease of the worldly life is not easyto get rid of! This worldly life disease is not something that goesaway! If the disease on this side decreases, then it augments onthe other side.Questioner: That goes on anyway in life.Dadashri: Yes, it will go on. That is precisely what I amsaying! Therefore, neither the name goes, nor the ‘my-ness’(mamata) goes. If you put something somewhere, you willcontinue to remember it. What is the reason for remembering it?Have you placed a link (taar), a connection there? Have youmade a connection (taar)? But no! Even without a link (taar),it remains in your consciousness: ‘I have put it down. I have leftit in such and such a place’.Questioner: But if one has put it somewhere, he is boundto remember it. What is there to remember if he does not putit there in the first place?Dadashri: No, that is not what I am saying to you. Theseare all natural (sahajik) things I am talking about. ‘We’ cannotjust refer to a single person. But you have to consider thesethings. Besides, if you keep sitting at the Udhana railway station,thinking that it is the last station in the western railway line, andyou believe that it has come to an end, are you likely to getanywhere?Questioner: But should you not have already decidedwhere you want to go?Dadashri: Everyone knows that they want freedom(mukti), and that they want liberation (moksha). They know itas words. People know that they want to become the Atma.But they have no idea where they are sitting! Should they notknow that or not? Would they not know where they are sitting?That is why I have to be quite clear! If I did not say it clearly,they would not get rid of their baggage, would they?Therefore, we have to get to the bottom of this.Furthermore, a person would not know by himself, which stationhe is at. That only happens when the Gnani Purush tells him,‘son, there are still many stations to go, do not just sit aroundhere needlessly, come and sit on any of these trains.’Questioner: But Dada, what happens here, is that thereare many who tell you to sit on this train. So one sits on one andthen gets off again. This is the only problem that occurs.Dadashri: That is the very business people have started.They get on and get off, get on and get off!Without The Gnani, Endless Efforts Are FutileIn order to cure the disease of the worldly life (sansar),the entire world removes the leaves on the tree, or they cut theleaves. In their minds, they believe that the tree will now dry up.But after two months, it sprouts again, and they start frettingonce more. So many people cut the leaves off the trees. Somany people cut off large sprigs, and even then they get into aAptavani-8283284Aptavani-8anger-pride-deceit-greed (krodh-maan-maya-lobh), do you?What if someone were to provoke you?It is like this: if a man is sitting at Udhana railway stationand he says, ‘I wanted to get to the last station on the Westernrailway, and I have reached there’, I would say to him, ‘son, donot sit here. You have to go much further ahead.’ ‘Get on thetrain, without further ado!’ I would tell him. So what is my job?It is that I would get them up, from wherever they might besitting around, and settle them down. That is my business. Nothingcan come out of believing everything in your own mind.Questioner: Now I feel like I want to be free from theworldly life (nivrutti). So help me become steadfast on thatpath. I do not want anything else.Dadashri: That is fine. ‘We’ will do that for you. You areright. It is only good if the disease of the worldly life (sansar)goes! The thing is that the disease of the worldly life is not easyto get rid of! This worldly life disease is not something that goesaway! If the disease on this side decreases, then it augments onthe other side.Questioner: That goes on anyway in life.Dadashri: Yes, it will go on. That is precisely what I amsaying! Therefore, neither the name goes, nor the ‘my-ness’(mamata) goes. If you put something somewhere, you willcontinue to remember it. What is the reason for remembering it?Have you placed a link (taar), a connection there? Have youmade a connection (taar)? But no! Even without a link (taar),it remains in your consciousness: ‘I have put it down. I have leftit in such and such a place’.Questioner: But if one has put it somewhere, he is boundto remember it. What is there to remember if he does not putit there in the first place?Dadashri: No, that is not what I am saying to you. Theseare all natural (sahajik) things I am talking about. ‘We’ cannotjust refer to a single person. But you have to consider thesethings. Besides, if you keep sitting at the Udhana railway station,thinking that it is the last station in the western railway line, andyou believe that it has come to an end, are you likely to getanywhere?Questioner: But should you not have already decidedwhere you want to go?Dadashri: Everyone knows that they want freedom(mukti), and that they want liberation (moksha). They know itas words. People know that they want to become the Atma.But they have no idea where they are sitting! Should they notknow that or not? Would they not know where they are sitting?That is why I have to be quite clear! If I did not say it clearly,they would not get rid of their baggage, would they?Therefore, we have to get to the bottom of this.Furthermore, a person would not know by himself, which stationhe is at. That only happens when the Gnani Purush tells him,‘son, there are still many stations to go, do not just sit aroundhere needlessly, come and sit on any of these trains.’Questioner: But Dada, what happens here, is that thereare many who tell you to sit on this train. So one sits on one andthen gets off again. This is the only problem that occurs.Dadashri: That is the very business people have started.They get on and get off, get on and get off!Without The Gnani, Endless Efforts Are FutileIn order to cure the disease of the worldly life (sansar),the entire world removes the leaves on the tree, or they cut theleaves. In their minds, they believe that the tree will now dry up.But after two months, it sprouts again, and they start frettingonce more. So many people cut the leaves off the trees. Somany people cut off large sprigs, and even then they get into aAptavani-8285286Aptavani-8rut, as nothing seems to work. It just sprouts all over again. Andso many people chop off large branches. Even they get stuck.And many people cut the trunk. Alas, the tree sprouts yet again.People are so weary from trying so hard to find a cure for thisdisease of the worldly life (sansar).That is why the Lord has said, ‘Just once, in the entireworld, there may be a rare Gnani. It does not happen everyday,nor moment to moment (saike saike), but if there happens to beone at any time, then that is where your work can be done.’Otherwise, all these shopkeepers here would say, that their shopis good. In our shop, we have the best. The ultimate kind ofware is only in our shop. And these poor people are so naive– naive and easily tempted – that they become trapped. Otherwise,if they did not have temptation within them, they would find outthe truth. He that does not covet pride (maan), physicalimportance (taan) or possess any other kind of yearning, besidesto know the Atma, and has no other desire, is the one who willfind it!If ever, the people of this world could manage to staycalm, and even through egoism (ahamkar) refrain from doinganger-pride-deceit-greed (krodh-maan-maya-lobh), theirknowledge would increase so much. That is because they wouldexperience for a day, a state that is free of anger-pride-deceit-greed (kashays). All these humans have not even had an hour’sworth of that experience. Why do they not get that experience?It is because their chit (subtle component of knowledge andvision), is always dwelling in anger-pride-deceit-greed (krodh-maan-maya-lobh). Is it possible to have that experience then?For you to be able to have that experience, you have to knowthe chetan (the Atma, the Self)!When Can You See Chetan in the World?Questioner: How do you define chetan (Soul; Atma)?Dadashri: Bhagwan (God). And God Himself is chetan.That would only mean one thing. There can never be twomeanings ever. If one takes it another way, then that would bea different thing. Otherwise, in reality, there is only one meaning!Then it will not do, to believe copper to be gold. You wouldsoon realize it, if you went to sell it in the market.Questioner: How can one see chetan? What tools(sadhano) do we need, to allow us to see chetan?Dadashri: You need that vision (drashti). You need thatknowledge (Gnan).Questioner: Where do we get that from?Dadashri: That, you will get from someone who is out togive the gift of liberation (moksha), such as the Gnani Purush.It is from there that you attain the vision (drashti), and you willreceive that knowledge (Gnan). And that only happens once ina while; once every thousands of years.Questioner: So is the experience (anubhuti) that othershave, right or wrong?Dadashri: Experience? That experience is the same asbelieving copper as gold. And you get nowhere in that. Even ifone were to take a hundred thousand rebirths, he would not getanywhere.Questioner: Is there not anyone in this world who wouldhave such an experience?Dadashri: There can never be such a person. Those whohave had the experience (anubhuti) have themselves becomethe Absolute Soul (Parmatma). Is there any Absolute Soul likethat here?Questioner: If by chance there is, we would not be ableto recognize him, would we?Dadashri: No, you would immediately recognize him.Aptavani-8285286Aptavani-8rut, as nothing seems to work. It just sprouts all over again. Andso many people chop off large branches. Even they get stuck.And many people cut the trunk. Alas, the tree sprouts yet again.People are so weary from trying so hard to find a cure for thisdisease of the worldly life (sansar).That is why the Lord has said, ‘Just once, in the entireworld, there may be a rare Gnani. It does not happen everyday,nor moment to moment (saike saike), but if there happens to beone at any time, then that is where your work can be done.’Otherwise, all these shopkeepers here would say, that their shopis good. In our shop, we have the best. The ultimate kind ofware is only in our shop. And these poor people are so naive– naive and easily tempted – that they become trapped. Otherwise,if they did not have temptation within them, they would find outthe truth. He that does not covet pride (maan), physicalimportance (taan) or possess any other kind of yearning, besidesto know the Atma, and has no other desire, is the one who willfind it!If ever, the people of this world could manage to staycalm, and even through egoism (ahamkar) refrain from doinganger-pride-deceit-greed (krodh-maan-maya-lobh), theirknowledge would increase so much. That is because they wouldexperience for a day, a state that is free of anger-pride-deceit-greed (kashays). All these humans have not even had an hour’sworth of that experience. Why do they not get that experience?It is because their chit (subtle component of knowledge andvision), is always dwelling in anger-pride-deceit-greed (krodh-maan-maya-lobh). Is it possible to have that experience then?For you to be able to have that experience, you have to knowthe chetan (the Atma, the Self)!When Can You See Chetan in the World?Questioner: How do you define chetan (Soul; Atma)?Dadashri: Bhagwan (God). And God Himself is chetan.That would only mean one thing. There can never be twomeanings ever. If one takes it another way, then that would bea different thing. Otherwise, in reality, there is only one meaning!Then it will not do, to believe copper to be gold. You wouldsoon realize it, if you went to sell it in the market.Questioner: How can one see chetan? What tools(sadhano) do we need, to allow us to see chetan?Dadashri: You need that vision (drashti). You need thatknowledge (Gnan).Questioner: Where do we get that from?Dadashri: That, you will get from someone who is out togive the gift of liberation (moksha), such as the Gnani Purush.It is from there that you attain the vision (drashti), and you willreceive that knowledge (Gnan). And that only happens once ina while; once every thousands of years.Questioner: So is the experience (anubhuti) that othershave, right or wrong?Dadashri: Experience? That experience is the same asbelieving copper as gold. And you get nowhere in that. Even ifone were to take a hundred thousand rebirths, he would not getanywhere.Questioner: Is there not anyone in this world who wouldhave such an experience?Dadashri: There can never be such a person. Those whohave had the experience (anubhuti) have themselves becomethe Absolute Soul (Parmatma). Is there any Absolute Soul likethat here?Questioner: If by chance there is, we would not be ableto recognize him, would we?Dadashri: No, you would immediately recognize him.Aptavani-8287288Aptavani-8Even if some day, he spoke just two words, you would knowinstantly. And he would even have calmed five of his disciples;his difference of opinion (matbhed) would be gone.The fact is that the Atma cannot be easily found. Mandoes not have the tools (sadhan) to know chetan!Questioner: So should a person not make an effort toknow it?Dadashri: The one trying, has no power whatsoever inhis hands! To you, it seems that ‘I am running everything. I amthe one who goes to sleep. I am the one who gets up’. You feel,‘I am the one who makes these efforts’, when all of it is controlledby something else (par-satta). And you believe that it is in yourcontrol (satta).You can only find chetan through divine vision (divyachakshu), and divine vision can only be attained through thegrace of the Gnani Purush!The fact is that right now you have a deluded vision (mithyadrashti). A deluded vision (mithya darshan) means that it onlyshows you the things that are impermanent (vinashi), and notthe things that are permanent (avinashi). So you would not beable to see the chetan at all! Do you understand that?Questioner: Is the experience (anubhav) of the Atma,the enlightened view (samyak darshan) itself?Dadashri: Kashays (anger, pride, deceit and greed)become suppressed (upsham). There are absolutely no kashays,and for forty-eight minutes, you see (experience) bliss (anand),and that is called the enlightened vision (samyak darshan). Anger-pride-deceit-greed (kashays) will be suppressed, and that too,for forty-eight minutes, and not for forty-nine minutes.Questioner: What is the suppression (upsham) of anger-pride-deceit-greed (kashays) dependent on?Dadashri: It depends upon the surrounding circumstances(saiyogo). It is not dependent on just one cause (karan). Itcould be any cause; just from seeing something one’s anger-pride-deceit-greed can become suppressed (upsham).As the Belief of ‘I am this body’ Dispels, theExperience of the Atma Is AttainedQuestioner: How would one know that he has attainedthe vision of the Self (Atma darshan)?Dadashri: Are you able to recognize that this is dehadhyas(the belief of ‘I am this body’)? Do you not have the realizationof ‘I am Chandubhai’? Have you not realized that, ‘I am thiswoman’s husband’? When you see your son, do you notimmediately know that, ‘I am his father’, or do you forget?Questioner: No.Dadashri: All this comes about, because of the belief of‘I am this body’ (dehadhyas). So when you have the vision ofthe Self (Atma darshan), all of that (Gnan) will come forth. Inignorance (agnan) all this surfaces, and in Gnan, all that surfaces.The experience (anubhuti) of the Atma, lies with the onewhose belief of ‘I am this body’ (dehadhyas) has gone. InHindustan (India), even if you went around with a lamp, lookingfor someone whose belief of ‘I am this body’ has gone, youwould not find him. If you kept searching around with a lamp,even if you looked in caves, you will still not find him. Therewould not be anyone like that in the caves anyway. All they doin caves is practice penances and austerities (tapa)! You willnever find knowledge (Gnan) in caves!Therefore, you should realize, that when a person’s beliefof ‘I am this body’ (dehadhyas) is gone, that there is experience(anubhuti); otherwise, there is no experience. Now if one’sbelief of ‘I am this body’ is gone, then with it, what else of hishas gone? And that too will only be to a certain degree, not fully.Aptavani-8287288Aptavani-8Even if some day, he spoke just two words, you would knowinstantly. And he would even have calmed five of his disciples;his difference of opinion (matbhed) would be gone.The fact is that the Atma cannot be easily found. Mandoes not have the tools (sadhan) to know chetan!Questioner: So should a person not make an effort toknow it?Dadashri: The one trying, has no power whatsoever inhis hands! To you, it seems that ‘I am running everything. I amthe one who goes to sleep. I am the one who gets up’. You feel,‘I am the one who makes these efforts’, when all of it is controlledby something else (par-satta). And you believe that it is in yourcontrol (satta).You can only find chetan through divine vision (divyachakshu), and divine vision can only be attained through thegrace of the Gnani Purush!The fact is that right now you have a deluded vision (mithyadrashti). A deluded vision (mithya darshan) means that it onlyshows you the things that are impermanent (vinashi), and notthe things that are permanent (avinashi). So you would not beable to see the chetan at all! Do you understand that?Questioner: Is the experience (anubhav) of the Atma,the enlightened view (samyak darshan) itself?Dadashri: Kashays (anger, pride, deceit and greed)become suppressed (upsham). There are absolutely no kashays,and for forty-eight minutes, you see (experience) bliss (anand),and that is called the enlightened vision (samyak darshan). Anger-pride-deceit-greed (kashays) will be suppressed, and that too,for forty-eight minutes, and not for forty-nine minutes.Questioner: What is the suppression (upsham) of anger-pride-deceit-greed (kashays) dependent on?Dadashri: It depends upon the surrounding circumstances(saiyogo). It is not dependent on just one cause (karan). Itcould be any cause; just from seeing something one’s anger-pride-deceit-greed can become suppressed (upsham).As the Belief of ‘I am this body’ Dispels, theExperience of the Atma Is AttainedQuestioner: How would one know that he has attainedthe vision of the Self (Atma darshan)?Dadashri: Are you able to recognize that this is dehadhyas(the belief of ‘I am this body’)? Do you not have the realizationof ‘I am Chandubhai’? Have you not realized that, ‘I am thiswoman’s husband’? When you see your son, do you notimmediately know that, ‘I am his father’, or do you forget?Questioner: No.Dadashri: All this comes about, because of the belief of‘I am this body’ (dehadhyas). So when you have the vision ofthe Self (Atma darshan), all of that (Gnan) will come forth. Inignorance (agnan) all this surfaces, and in Gnan, all that surfaces.The experience (anubhuti) of the Atma, lies with the onewhose belief of ‘I am this body’ (dehadhyas) has gone. InHindustan (India), even if you went around with a lamp, lookingfor someone whose belief of ‘I am this body’ has gone, youwould not find him. If you kept searching around with a lamp,even if you looked in caves, you will still not find him. Therewould not be anyone like that in the caves anyway. All they doin caves is practice penances and austerities (tapa)! You willnever find knowledge (Gnan) in caves!Therefore, you should realize, that when a person’s beliefof ‘I am this body’ (dehadhyas) is gone, that there is experience(anubhuti); otherwise, there is no experience. Now if one’sbelief of ‘I am this body’ is gone, then with it, what else of hishas gone? And that too will only be to a certain degree, not fully.Aptavani-8289290Aptavani-8From time to time, you may see someone who has decreasedhis egoism (ahamkar). But no one’s ‘my-ness’ (mamata) hasgone.And if there is a dinner plate in front of one, when youlook, they all have the belief ‘I am this body’ (dehadhyas),whether it is a maharaj (religious teacher or guru), or anyoneelse, they always protect (look out for) their own plate! Howcan you say that their belief of ‘I am this body’ is gone, whenthere is nothing like, ‘Let me give it away to someone else’?How are they supposed to rise above the identification with thebody (dehadhyas)?!Wow! How Wonderful Is Atmagnan!Questioner: When Atmagnan (Self-realization) occurs,what changes occur in the body that tells us that Self-realization(Atmagnan) has occurred?Dadashri: After Self-realization has happened, even ifsomeone insults you it would not reach inside, and in your mind,you would feel that he is an instrumental person (nimit) in theunfolding of your karma. How is it the poor man’s fault? Eventhe one insulting you appears as an instrumental being (nimit) toyou. Even the pickpocket appears to you as a nimit.To speak the wrong way is ignorance (agnan), and tospeak the right way is knowledge (gnan). The Atmagnani(Knower of the Atma) always says things the right way! Whereasthe ignorant person (agnani) will always speak the wrong way.They catch the pickpocket and bite (attack) the one who isinstrumental (nimit).Questioner: So can you say that you have Atmagnan(Self-realization) if you are devoid of excessive pride(nirabhimaani), and you do not blame anyone?Dadashri: Yes, when one becomes free of excessive pride(nirabhimaani) and sees no faults in anyone, and takes uponhimself the suffering of other people, then you can say that hehas become free. The unhappiness of the worldly life does notaffect the Self-realized being (Atmagnani).After attaining the Atma, even if your fever goes up byfive degrees, the Atma remains separate. As your fever increases,the Atma stays separate, and you will continue to experiencethat separation for days.A man who had been paralyzed was saying, ‘They allcome to see me, but I myself am seeing the one who has beenparalyzed, that this is what has happened to my legs, this is whathas happened to my arms. Even I keep observing all that!’Therefore he is himself the seer, and even those who came tovisit were also seers! That is the effect of this Gnan. The effectof Gnan is like this in spite of the paralysis. And if the Gnanwas not there, it would be, ‘I am paralyzed, I have a fever’ andthat would be a sign of dying!If you say, ‘It is happening to me’, then who would do therepairing? And if the I becomes freed from that, it is possiblethat it can repair on its own. It is one of Nature’s rules, that itwould get repaired immediately.So when can you say that the Atma has been attained?I will show you the signs, that after attaining the Atma, if yourbody is aching or your head is hurting, even then you willexperience a state of well-being, unaffected by external sources(samadhi) within. If someone is verbally abusing you from theoutside, even then you experience samadhi. When even in themidst of pain and sorrow (dukh), you experience a blissful state(samadhi) – that is the mark of Self-realization (Atmagnan).This would not be found in this present age (kaad); butnevertheless, it has happened!After attaining the Atma, the experiences that you have atAptavani-8289290Aptavani-8From time to time, you may see someone who has decreasedhis egoism (ahamkar). But no one’s ‘my-ness’ (mamata) hasgone.And if there is a dinner plate in front of one, when youlook, they all have the belief ‘I am this body’ (dehadhyas),whether it is a maharaj (religious teacher or guru), or anyoneelse, they always protect (look out for) their own plate! Howcan you say that their belief of ‘I am this body’ is gone, whenthere is nothing like, ‘Let me give it away to someone else’?How are they supposed to rise above the identification with thebody (dehadhyas)?!Wow! How Wonderful Is Atmagnan!Questioner: When Atmagnan (Self-realization) occurs,what changes occur in the body that tells us that Self-realization(Atmagnan) has occurred?Dadashri: After Self-realization has happened, even ifsomeone insults you it would not reach inside, and in your mind,you would feel that he is an instrumental person (nimit) in theunfolding of your karma. How is it the poor man’s fault? Eventhe one insulting you appears as an instrumental being (nimit) toyou. Even the pickpocket appears to you as a nimit.To speak the wrong way is ignorance (agnan), and tospeak the right way is knowledge (gnan). The Atmagnani(Knower of the Atma) always says things the right way! Whereasthe ignorant person (agnani) will always speak the wrong way.They catch the pickpocket and bite (attack) the one who isinstrumental (nimit).Questioner: So can you say that you have Atmagnan(Self-realization) if you are devoid of excessive pride(nirabhimaani), and you do not blame anyone?Dadashri: Yes, when one becomes free of excessive pride(nirabhimaani) and sees no faults in anyone, and takes uponhimself the suffering of other people, then you can say that hehas become free. The unhappiness of the worldly life does notaffect the Self-realized being (Atmagnani).After attaining the Atma, even if your fever goes up byfive degrees, the Atma remains separate. As your fever increases,the Atma stays separate, and you will continue to experiencethat separation for days.A man who had been paralyzed was saying, ‘They allcome to see me, but I myself am seeing the one who has beenparalyzed, that this is what has happened to my legs, this is whathas happened to my arms. Even I keep observing all that!’Therefore he is himself the seer, and even those who came tovisit were also seers! That is the effect of this Gnan. The effectof Gnan is like this in spite of the paralysis. And if the Gnanwas not there, it would be, ‘I am paralyzed, I have a fever’ andthat would be a sign of dying!If you say, ‘It is happening to me’, then who would do therepairing? And if the I becomes freed from that, it is possiblethat it can repair on its own. It is one of Nature’s rules, that itwould get repaired immediately.So when can you say that the Atma has been attained?I will show you the signs, that after attaining the Atma, if yourbody is aching or your head is hurting, even then you willexperience a state of well-being, unaffected by external sources(samadhi) within. If someone is verbally abusing you from theoutside, even then you experience samadhi. When even in themidst of pain and sorrow (dukh), you experience a blissful state(samadhi) – that is the mark of Self-realization (Atmagnan).This would not be found in this present age (kaad); butnevertheless, it has happened!After attaining the Atma, the experiences that you have atAptavani-8291292Aptavani-8the present time, will all disappear. All the experiences such as,‘This is my son, and this is my uncle’, will disappear. Even allthe experiences like, ‘I did this and I did that’, will disappear.All the experiences you are having right now; will all disappear!You yourself will have the experience of the Absolute Soul(Parmatma) that, ‘I am Parmatma.’ Then there is no moreworry or unhappiness (dukh). There will be nothing of what youare experiencing right now, over there. There is no worry. Thereis no affliction from external causes (upadhi), no physical suffering(vyadhi), no mental suffering (aadhi); nothing whatsoever. Couldyou understand this? Many things will not be there. Despite allthat is there right now, you will not have pain or suffering fromoutside (upadhi), there.How Powerful the Knower Is!Dadashri: Right now you are really experiencing, ‘I amthis body’ (dehadhyas)!Questioner: Right now, the Atma is one with the body.Dadashri: Yes, that itself is called dehadhyas. And whenthe dehadhyas is finished, there is freedom.Questioner: You asked him if he was still experiencingthe belief of ‘I am this body’ (dehadhyas), and he said that thebody (deha) had become one with the Atma. How could heknow that his body and Atma had become one (ekatmata)?Dadashri: It is because the real (muda) Atma is separate,and that is why he is able to know. The fundamental Atma isseparate from that. Your believed Atma is a mechanical atma.Many have called it the atma that is interactive in the world(vyavahar atma). And now we have called it the relative self(pratishthit atma). But you believe that Atma as, ‘This is I’?This that eats, this that drinks, this that sleeps, all that is whatyou believe as, ‘I went to sleep.’ And it is that which has cometo be called Atma; however, it is the atma that interacts in theworld (vyavahar atma). The real Atma does not get involvedwith the things of the worldly life (sansar). The real Atma justgoes on knowing all this, and it is because It knows, that you,sense from within, that ‘I am under the influence of dehadhyas(the belief of ‘I am this body’). I am experiencing the results ofbeing involved (tanmayakar) in the body and mind complex.Who has known all this? It is the Knower that has known! Theresults of being involved (tanmayakar) have been suffered bythe sufferer! So imagine how powerful the Knower must be! Ifyou know that Knower, just once, then it is all finished! If onlyjust once you come to Know, then your work is done.The Invisible Realizes The InvisibleQuestioner: If the Atma is invisible (aroopi), how canwe get a direct experience (sakshatkar) of it?Dadashri: The fact is, that the one doing the directexperiencing (sakshatkar) is himself invisible (aroopi). The onedoing the direct experiencing is not visible (roopi). Therefore,through their intrinsic nature (swabhav), they come together.Questioner: What happens when the direct experienceof the Atma (sakshatkar) occurs?Dadashri: The awareness (jagruti) greatly increases. Thisis what Krupadudev says:‘Vartey nij swabhavnu, anubhav-laksha-pratita,‘When the experience-awareness-conviction, that I am theSelf (Atma) remainsVrutti vahey nij bhaavma, parmarthey samkit’The tendencies (vrutti) come home to the Self (the Atma),and this is the eternal Vision’Therefore, when direct realization of the Atma (sakshatkar)occurs; all tendencies (vruttis) then come back and remain in theAptavani-8291292Aptavani-8the present time, will all disappear. All the experiences such as,‘This is my son, and this is my uncle’, will disappear. Even allthe experiences like, ‘I did this and I did that’, will disappear.All the experiences you are having right now; will all disappear!You yourself will have the experience of the Absolute Soul(Parmatma) that, ‘I am Parmatma.’ Then there is no moreworry or unhappiness (dukh). There will be nothing of what youare experiencing right now, over there. There is no worry. Thereis no affliction from external causes (upadhi), no physical suffering(vyadhi), no mental suffering (aadhi); nothing whatsoever. Couldyou understand this? Many things will not be there. Despite allthat is there right now, you will not have pain or suffering fromoutside (upadhi), there.How Powerful the Knower Is!Dadashri: Right now you are really experiencing, ‘I amthis body’ (dehadhyas)!Questioner: Right now, the Atma is one with the body.Dadashri: Yes, that itself is called dehadhyas. And whenthe dehadhyas is finished, there is freedom.Questioner: You asked him if he was still experiencingthe belief of ‘I am this body’ (dehadhyas), and he said that thebody (deha) had become one with the Atma. How could heknow that his body and Atma had become one (ekatmata)?Dadashri: It is because the real (muda) Atma is separate,and that is why he is able to know. The fundamental Atma isseparate from that. Your believed Atma is a mechanical atma.Many have called it the atma that is interactive in the world(vyavahar atma). And now we have called it the relative self(pratishthit atma). But you believe that Atma as, ‘This is I’?This that eats, this that drinks, this that sleeps, all that is whatyou believe as, ‘I went to sleep.’ And it is that which has cometo be called Atma; however, it is the atma that interacts in theworld (vyavahar atma). The real Atma does not get involvedwith the things of the worldly life (sansar). The real Atma justgoes on knowing all this, and it is because It knows, that you,sense from within, that ‘I am under the influence of dehadhyas(the belief of ‘I am this body’). I am experiencing the results ofbeing involved (tanmayakar) in the body and mind complex.Who has known all this? It is the Knower that has known! Theresults of being involved (tanmayakar) have been suffered bythe sufferer! So imagine how powerful the Knower must be! Ifyou know that Knower, just once, then it is all finished! If onlyjust once you come to Know, then your work is done.The Invisible Realizes The InvisibleQuestioner: If the Atma is invisible (aroopi), how canwe get a direct experience (sakshatkar) of it?Dadashri: The fact is, that the one doing the directexperiencing (sakshatkar) is himself invisible (aroopi). The onedoing the direct experiencing is not visible (roopi). Therefore,through their intrinsic nature (swabhav), they come together.Questioner: What happens when the direct experienceof the Atma (sakshatkar) occurs?Dadashri: The awareness (jagruti) greatly increases. Thisis what Krupadudev says:‘Vartey nij swabhavnu, anubhav-laksha-pratita,‘When the experience-awareness-conviction, that I am theSelf (Atma) remainsVrutti vahey nij bhaavma, parmarthey samkit’The tendencies (vrutti) come home to the Self (the Atma),and this is the eternal Vision’Therefore, when direct realization of the Atma (sakshatkar)occurs; all tendencies (vruttis) then come back and remain in theAptavani-8293294Aptavani-8nature (swabhav) of the Self! Even if the tendencies have goneoutside, they immediately return. Whereas here, if you wanted tocall the tendencies back, they will not come, and so many ofthem will be laying around outside their home!Experience Is Different; Self-Realization IsDifferentQuestioner: Atma-anubhav and Atma-sakshatkar, whatis the difference between the two words?Dadashri: Sakshatkar (direct realization of the Self) is adifferent thing and anubhav (experience) comes, when youprogress further.Questioner: So what do people consider as the directexperience of the Atma (sakshatkar)?Dadashri: This Knowledge (Gnan) that ‘we’ give you, isconsidered the direct experience of the Atma (sakshatkar).Questioner: So is direct realization of the Atma(sakshatkar) lower than conviction (pratiti)?Dadashri: When the direct realization of the Self(sakshatkar) happens to a person, the conviction (pratiti) setsin. Otherwise, his conviction (pratiti) of, ‘I am Chandubhai’ willnot go away!Only the Experienced Gives One theExperience of the AtmaQuestioner: At which stage of spiritual development(gunthanu: there are fourteen stages of spiritual development, asoul gradually passes through, before it attains final liberation)does one experience the Atma (Self)?Dadashri: The experience (anubhav) of the Atma, caneven happen at the fourth stage (gunthanu), it can happen at thefifth, or the sixth.Questioner: Is it possible for a person to attain theexperience of the Atma in this kaad (era of the time cycle)?Dadashri: You can have the experience of the Atma inthis age (kaad); moreover, there are almost ten to twelvethousand people that have experienced this! All these peoplesitting here; have all had the experience of the Atma. You mustfind someone who has had the experience (anubhavi Purush).Only then will you be able to experience the Atma; otherwiseit will not happen. It is not an easy thing. Therefore, unless youmeet an experienced person (anubhavi Purush); you will notget your work done.If It Does Not Last, It Is Not the ExperienceQuestioner: How long will the experience of the Atma(Atma-anubhav) last?Dadashri: It will last forever. Not just for a minute ortwo. There are things in the world that last one or two minutesanyways. All these things we eat and drink, only last as longas they are on the tongue, and then they are gone. Does thatexperience (anubhav) last? How long does the experiencelast, when you eat sweets? Or when you use a drop ofperfume? It may last about ten or twelve hours, but the Atma,however, even if you have experienced it just once, will lastforever. If not, it would not mean a thing! Then it is somethingmeaningless!Experience, Then Comes ConductQuestioner: What is the difference between conduct asthe Atma, and the experience of the Atma?Dadashri: You can say that the Atma has entered yourconduct, when it enters your vartan.Questioner: And experience (anubhav)?Aptavani-8293294Aptavani-8nature (swabhav) of the Self! Even if the tendencies have goneoutside, they immediately return. Whereas here, if you wanted tocall the tendencies back, they will not come, and so many ofthem will be laying around outside their home!Experience Is Different; Self-Realization IsDifferentQuestioner: Atma-anubhav and Atma-sakshatkar, whatis the difference between the two words?Dadashri: Sakshatkar (direct realization of the Self) is adifferent thing and anubhav (experience) comes, when youprogress further.Questioner: So what do people consider as the directexperience of the Atma (sakshatkar)?Dadashri: This Knowledge (Gnan) that ‘we’ give you, isconsidered the direct experience of the Atma (sakshatkar).Questioner: So is direct realization of the Atma(sakshatkar) lower than conviction (pratiti)?Dadashri: When the direct realization of the Self(sakshatkar) happens to a person, the conviction (pratiti) setsin. Otherwise, his conviction (pratiti) of, ‘I am Chandubhai’ willnot go away!Only the Experienced Gives One theExperience of the AtmaQuestioner: At which stage of spiritual development(gunthanu: there are fourteen stages of spiritual development, asoul gradually passes through, before it attains final liberation)does one experience the Atma (Self)?Dadashri: The experience (anubhav) of the Atma, caneven happen at the fourth stage (gunthanu), it can happen at thefifth, or the sixth.Questioner: Is it possible for a person to attain theexperience of the Atma in this kaad (era of the time cycle)?Dadashri: You can have the experience of the Atma inthis age (kaad); moreover, there are almost ten to twelvethousand people that have experienced this! All these peoplesitting here; have all had the experience of the Atma. You mustfind someone who has had the experience (anubhavi Purush).Only then will you be able to experience the Atma; otherwiseit will not happen. It is not an easy thing. Therefore, unless youmeet an experienced person (anubhavi Purush); you will notget your work done.If It Does Not Last, It Is Not the ExperienceQuestioner: How long will the experience of the Atma(Atma-anubhav) last?Dadashri: It will last forever. Not just for a minute ortwo. There are things in the world that last one or two minutesanyways. All these things we eat and drink, only last as longas they are on the tongue, and then they are gone. Does thatexperience (anubhav) last? How long does the experiencelast, when you eat sweets? Or when you use a drop ofperfume? It may last about ten or twelve hours, but the Atma,however, even if you have experienced it just once, will lastforever. If not, it would not mean a thing! Then it is somethingmeaningless!Experience, Then Comes ConductQuestioner: What is the difference between conduct asthe Atma, and the experience of the Atma?Dadashri: You can say that the Atma has entered yourconduct, when it enters your vartan.Questioner: And experience (anubhav)?Aptavani-8295296Aptavani-8Dadashri: The experience has already happened first forthe person.Questioner: Does it come into one’s conduct (vartan)after experience (anubhav)?Dadashri: Yes. That experience (anubhav) has alreadyhappened before, and then it is evinced in one’s conduct.The ‘I’ Attains the Pure Form of the SelfQuestioner: Who makes the decision to attain the pureSelf (shuddha swaroop)? Is it the Atma that makes it?Dadashri: The Atma is itself pure (shuddha). The onewho has the itch, is the one who scratches it! Besides, who elsewould scratch it? He that has an itch, scratches it. And it is theego (ahamkar) that does all that. It is the ‘I’ who does it. Whois the one doing all the thinking, about wanting to make this formpure (shuddha)? It is the ego (ahamkar) that does this.We are done and tired of dealing with the business of thisworldly life. So it wants to start doing business on this side now.And in so doing, it gradually ends up losing its own existence(astitva). And it ends up as the main form of the Self (mudaswaroop).The Ego Exists As Long As There Is IgnoranceQuestioner: Unless you start thinking about the Atma,there will not be any movement towards the Atma, will there?Dadashri: Yes, of course there will not be!Questioner: So initially, will there not be the ego(ahamkar) involved in the thinking? Such as now, ‘I will do this,I will do that.’Dadashri: Yes, the ego (ahamkar) will remain right untilthe end. It will stay as long as the ignorance (agnan) is there.The Experience of the Atma; CompletelyDifferent from All Other ExperiencesQuestioner: On one hand we say, that there is nothingexcept for the Atma, and on the other hand, you employ theword Atmanubhav (experience of the Self, Atma), which createsuncertainty. If there is nothing other than the Atma, then couldsomething called experience (anubhav), be inserted into thoughts,or inserted in the mind, or is it just an interference?Dadashri: No, it is nothing like that.Questioner: I am just asking, because we have to usethe word Atmanubhav.Dadashri: The only reason that word has to be used isbecause until the Atma is realized, one needs a ladder. It is fromwhere you are standing, that ‘we’ (the Gnani) – in order tomake you understand – need to show you the stepping (pave away). And what is the meaning of Atmanubhav (experience ofthe Atma)? Right now, you have the belief that you are the body(dehadhyas), so what kind of experience (anubhav) are youhaving? The kind of experience you have is, ‘I am the body’, ‘Iam even this name’, ‘I am also this mind’. Therefore through theexperience of the Atma (Atmanubhav), what ‘we’ are trying tosay, is that this experience is very different to the experience ofthe body (dehadhyas). Therefore, you can say that after havinghad such an experience, that you have attained the Atma.Otherwise, how can you say that you have attained the Atma,if you have not even had the experience (anubhav)? Which iswhy, you have to include the word experience (anubhav), inorder to help one understand. It is because you cannot directlysay Atma. If you have new kinds of experiences, other than theexperience that you have right now, of ‘I am this body’(dehadhyas), you will feel in your mind, that this experience(anubhav) is different to that one, and you will feel certain thatthis is indeed the experience of the Self, (Atmanubhav). OnlyAptavani-8295296Aptavani-8Dadashri: The experience has already happened first forthe person.Questioner: Does it come into one’s conduct (vartan)after experience (anubhav)?Dadashri: Yes. That experience (anubhav) has alreadyhappened before, and then it is evinced in one’s conduct.The ‘I’ Attains the Pure Form of the SelfQuestioner: Who makes the decision to attain the pureSelf (shuddha swaroop)? Is it the Atma that makes it?Dadashri: The Atma is itself pure (shuddha). The onewho has the itch, is the one who scratches it! Besides, who elsewould scratch it? He that has an itch, scratches it. And it is theego (ahamkar) that does all that. It is the ‘I’ who does it. Whois the one doing all the thinking, about wanting to make this formpure (shuddha)? It is the ego (ahamkar) that does this.We are done and tired of dealing with the business of thisworldly life. So it wants to start doing business on this side now.And in so doing, it gradually ends up losing its own existence(astitva). And it ends up as the main form of the Self (mudaswaroop).The Ego Exists As Long As There Is IgnoranceQuestioner: Unless you start thinking about the Atma,there will not be any movement towards the Atma, will there?Dadashri: Yes, of course there will not be!Questioner: So initially, will there not be the ego(ahamkar) involved in the thinking? Such as now, ‘I will do this,I will do that.’Dadashri: Yes, the ego (ahamkar) will remain right untilthe end. It will stay as long as the ignorance (agnan) is there.The Experience of the Atma; CompletelyDifferent from All Other ExperiencesQuestioner: On one hand we say, that there is nothingexcept for the Atma, and on the other hand, you employ theword Atmanubhav (experience of the Self, Atma), which createsuncertainty. If there is nothing other than the Atma, then couldsomething called experience (anubhav), be inserted into thoughts,or inserted in the mind, or is it just an interference?Dadashri: No, it is nothing like that.Questioner: I am just asking, because we have to usethe word Atmanubhav.Dadashri: The only reason that word has to be used isbecause until the Atma is realized, one needs a ladder. It is fromwhere you are standing, that ‘we’ (the Gnani) – in order tomake you understand – need to show you the stepping (pave away). And what is the meaning of Atmanubhav (experience ofthe Atma)? Right now, you have the belief that you are the body(dehadhyas), so what kind of experience (anubhav) are youhaving? The kind of experience you have is, ‘I am the body’, ‘Iam even this name’, ‘I am also this mind’. Therefore through theexperience of the Atma (Atmanubhav), what ‘we’ are trying tosay, is that this experience is very different to the experience ofthe body (dehadhyas). Therefore, you can say that after havinghad such an experience, that you have attained the Atma.Otherwise, how can you say that you have attained the Atma,if you have not even had the experience (anubhav)? Which iswhy, you have to include the word experience (anubhav), inorder to help one understand. It is because you cannot directlysay Atma. If you have new kinds of experiences, other than theexperience that you have right now, of ‘I am this body’(dehadhyas), you will feel in your mind, that this experience(anubhav) is different to that one, and you will feel certain thatthis is indeed the experience of the Self, (Atmanubhav). OnlyAptavani-8297298Aptavani-8then will the conviction (pratiti) set in; otherwise even theconviction is not established.Questioner: We experience thoughts and feelings, butshould the experience of the Self (Atmanubhav) not be a statethat surpasses all these other experiences?Dadashri: This is a state that surpasses all otherexperiences. Just as this experience (anubhav) happens on thisside, the other experience happens on the other side. Therefore,not even a fraction of this; is in that, and not even a fraction ofthat, is in this. The experience of the Atma is always different.It is completely separate, and without any change. Nevertheless,the experience (anubhav) must come first. The only reason thisis said, is so that one finds a cause to establish the conviction(pratiti), and he is convinced that there is such a thing as theAtma, and that there is something different other than this.Otherwise, he will not even believe its existence (astitva). Hence,the experience has to have occurred!That Is When the Facts Are UnderstoodYou will be in agreement (ged) with whatever I am tryingto tell you, meaning you will come to understand it fully (gedbesi). It will reach you “to the point”. That is what I consideras being able to grasp. Do people not say, ‘I still do not getit’?Therefore, the person will understand exactly what I amtrying to explain, and that is called, ged bethi (fits; sits well;agrees). Since my viewpoint is different and his viewpoint isdifferent, it takes longer to digest! So it takes time to grasp it!But it will only work, if you can grasp it.Questioner: That is why you are using the words; themessage should reach.Dadashri: Yes. The message should reach you. That iswhy we say, ‘he is not getting the message’! When his levelcomes up a bit, and my level goes down a bit, that is when themessage will fit him. Otherwise if I kept talking from above,even then it would be senseless; therefore, in order to make themessage fit, you have to establish a level.Nothing can be done unless you are able to understand.Everyone is in agreement about that! Once it fits, everythingmoves forward!Atmagnan from The GnaniQuestioner: How does one attain Atmagnan (Self-realization)?Dadashri: Atmagnan is attained from the one whoKnows the Atma (Atmagnani). You have to meet him directly(pratyaksh) in order for you to attain Self-realization(Atmagnan).Questioner: Yes, but how can we recognize a real Gnani?Dadashri: If you provoked him, his ego (ahamkar) wouldnot be stirred, or his ‘my-ness’ (mamata) would not arise, thenhe would be a true Gnani.Or else, you ask the Gnani Purush, ‘Have you attainedliberation (moksha) yet?’ You should ask him that. That is howyou will know! When you go to buy vegetables, if you do notknow whether they are two or three days old, or if they arefresh; would you not say to the grocer, ‘Tell me, if this is freshor stale.’? In the same way, you should say to the Gnani Purush,‘If you have attained liberation (moksha), then we will sit withyou, or else we will leave and find another shop! Rather thanwaste our whole life sitting in one shop, it would be better tochange the shop!’ Is there any harm in asking?However, the easier way would be for you to attend theGnani Purush’s satsang (gathering of Self-realized beings).Or else, you could insult him just once, and you would knowAptavani-8297298Aptavani-8then will the conviction (pratiti) set in; otherwise even theconviction is not established.Questioner: We experience thoughts and feelings, butshould the experience of the Self (Atmanubhav) not be a statethat surpasses all these other experiences?Dadashri: This is a state that surpasses all otherexperiences. Just as this experience (anubhav) happens on thisside, the other experience happens on the other side. Therefore,not even a fraction of this; is in that, and not even a fraction ofthat, is in this. The experience of the Atma is always different.It is completely separate, and without any change. Nevertheless,the experience (anubhav) must come first. The only reason thisis said, is so that one finds a cause to establish the conviction(pratiti), and he is convinced that there is such a thing as theAtma, and that there is something different other than this.Otherwise, he will not even believe its existence (astitva). Hence,the experience has to have occurred!That Is When the Facts Are UnderstoodYou will be in agreement (ged) with whatever I am tryingto tell you, meaning you will come to understand it fully (gedbesi). It will reach you “to the point”. That is what I consideras being able to grasp. Do people not say, ‘I still do not getit’?Therefore, the person will understand exactly what I amtrying to explain, and that is called, ged bethi (fits; sits well;agrees). Since my viewpoint is different and his viewpoint isdifferent, it takes longer to digest! So it takes time to grasp it!But it will only work, if you can grasp it.Questioner: That is why you are using the words; themessage should reach.Dadashri: Yes. The message should reach you. That iswhy we say, ‘he is not getting the message’! When his levelcomes up a bit, and my level goes down a bit, that is when themessage will fit him. Otherwise if I kept talking from above,even then it would be senseless; therefore, in order to make themessage fit, you have to establish a level.Nothing can be done unless you are able to understand.Everyone is in agreement about that! Once it fits, everythingmoves forward!Atmagnan from The GnaniQuestioner: How does one attain Atmagnan (Self-realization)?Dadashri: Atmagnan is attained from the one whoKnows the Atma (Atmagnani). You have to meet him directly(pratyaksh) in order for you to attain Self-realization(Atmagnan).Questioner: Yes, but how can we recognize a real Gnani?Dadashri: If you provoked him, his ego (ahamkar) wouldnot be stirred, or his ‘my-ness’ (mamata) would not arise, thenhe would be a true Gnani.Or else, you ask the Gnani Purush, ‘Have you attainedliberation (moksha) yet?’ You should ask him that. That is howyou will know! When you go to buy vegetables, if you do notknow whether they are two or three days old, or if they arefresh; would you not say to the grocer, ‘Tell me, if this is freshor stale.’? In the same way, you should say to the Gnani Purush,‘If you have attained liberation (moksha), then we will sit withyou, or else we will leave and find another shop! Rather thanwaste our whole life sitting in one shop, it would be better tochange the shop!’ Is there any harm in asking?However, the easier way would be for you to attend theGnani Purush’s satsang (gathering of Self-realized beings).Or else, you could insult him just once, and you would knowAptavani-8299300Aptavani-8whether or not this rupee is genuine or fake. Do we not insultthe rupee when we tap it and knock it (to authenticate it)? Weimmediately know that it is not worth discarding, so would wenot put it in the cupboard? And if it is worthless, then we candiscard it.Questioner: When we try testing, do we bind karma?Dadashri: No. ‘We’ protect the one that does the testing.How else are you going to test him? Here, with ‘us’, if you wantto test ‘us’, ‘we’ will protect you. ‘We’ will not let you fall, andyou will pass your test.Questioner: You will protect us, but what if we went totest someone else?Dadashri: Do not do that anywhere else, and if you do,keep a hundred rupees ready, on you. Massage his feet, andsay, ‘Sir, I am a bit mad’, by doing such things, you can turn itaround. And if you buy him something for a hundred rupees, andmassage his feet, he will be very happy. That is because it doesnot take long to make an egoistic person (ahamkari) happy.Even if you tickle (flatter) him, he will be happy.Questioner: How is an ordinary person to know, withoutdoing all this testing?Dadashri: His speech (vani) is syadvaad (speech thatdoes not hurt the ego of any living being); it does not go against,even in the slightest, any religion; his speech is not hurtful toanyone. And his speech, conduct and humility are appealing;they can even conquer our minds.“This is the cash bank of Divine Solution” – there is never‘on credit’ (udhaar); there is only cash (gives instant results).Whatever you want, you will receive as cash here.If he gives you Knowledge of the Self (Atmagnan)immediately (in cash), then he is a manifest (pratyaksh) GnaniPurush. However, if it is protracted and on credit (udhaar);then he could not be a manifest (pratyaksh) Gnani. He wouldgive it to you immediately in cash. Then you would not have toput him to the test! Would you put to the test a bank that givesyou cash payment? Any bank that tells you that it can only giveyou money after six months, you have to examine it or askaround. Therefore where there is only going to be cash(immediately), why would you have to examine it?Questioner: How can a living being recognize whether ornot it is cash?Dadashri: One can know it right away. If one cannot tellthat it is cash (immediate), then there is no Atma within. If thereis Atma in the body, one will definitely know. Otherwise, if onewants to be awkward, he will be. He has the freedom to dothat! No one says no to him! When one understands what cashis, he would not throw it away!The Conviction of Attaining the AtmaQuestioner: How will I have the conviction (pratiti) thatI have attained the Atma (vastu) or not?Dadashri: Of course you will have the conviction (pratiti)of the Atma! You will indeed have the conviction of what youare! At the present time, the very illusion (bhranti) that existswithin you will disappear! ‘I am Chandubhai’, is illusion (bhranti).‘You’ become the very Atma that you truly are, so the illusiondoes not remain. And thereafter, nothing remains to be asked!‘Chandubhai’ goes away. Chandubhai goes back to his home!This Chandubhai is full of doubts, and he himself goes away. ‘Iam Chandubhai’ is a wrong belief.Bound Through Belief…Now, even after ten million avatars (lifetimes; births), theright belief would not be established. Where not a single wrongbelief goes away, how can a single right belief be instilled?Aptavani-8299300Aptavani-8whether or not this rupee is genuine or fake. Do we not insultthe rupee when we tap it and knock it (to authenticate it)? Weimmediately know that it is not worth discarding, so would wenot put it in the cupboard? And if it is worthless, then we candiscard it.Questioner: When we try testing, do we bind karma?Dadashri: No. ‘We’ protect the one that does the testing.How else are you going to test him? Here, with ‘us’, if you wantto test ‘us’, ‘we’ will protect you. ‘We’ will not let you fall, andyou will pass your test.Questioner: You will protect us, but what if we went totest someone else?Dadashri: Do not do that anywhere else, and if you do,keep a hundred rupees ready, on you. Massage his feet, andsay, ‘Sir, I am a bit mad’, by doing such things, you can turn itaround. And if you buy him something for a hundred rupees, andmassage his feet, he will be very happy. That is because it doesnot take long to make an egoistic person (ahamkari) happy.Even if you tickle (flatter) him, he will be happy.Questioner: How is an ordinary person to know, withoutdoing all this testing?Dadashri: His speech (vani) is syadvaad (speech thatdoes not hurt the ego of any living being); it does not go against,even in the slightest, any religion; his speech is not hurtful toanyone. And his speech, conduct and humility are appealing;they can even conquer our minds.“This is the cash bank of Divine Solution” – there is never‘on credit’ (udhaar); there is only cash (gives instant results).Whatever you want, you will receive as cash here.If he gives you Knowledge of the Self (Atmagnan)immediately (in cash), then he is a manifest (pratyaksh) GnaniPurush. However, if it is protracted and on credit (udhaar);then he could not be a manifest (pratyaksh) Gnani. He wouldgive it to you immediately in cash. Then you would not have toput him to the test! Would you put to the test a bank that givesyou cash payment? Any bank that tells you that it can only giveyou money after six months, you have to examine it or askaround. Therefore where there is only going to be cash(immediately), why would you have to examine it?Questioner: How can a living being recognize whether ornot it is cash?Dadashri: One can know it right away. If one cannot tellthat it is cash (immediate), then there is no Atma within. If thereis Atma in the body, one will definitely know. Otherwise, if onewants to be awkward, he will be. He has the freedom to dothat! No one says no to him! When one understands what cashis, he would not throw it away!The Conviction of Attaining the AtmaQuestioner: How will I have the conviction (pratiti) thatI have attained the Atma (vastu) or not?Dadashri: Of course you will have the conviction (pratiti)of the Atma! You will indeed have the conviction of what youare! At the present time, the very illusion (bhranti) that existswithin you will disappear! ‘I am Chandubhai’, is illusion (bhranti).‘You’ become the very Atma that you truly are, so the illusiondoes not remain. And thereafter, nothing remains to be asked!‘Chandubhai’ goes away. Chandubhai goes back to his home!This Chandubhai is full of doubts, and he himself goes away. ‘Iam Chandubhai’ is a wrong belief.Bound Through Belief…Now, even after ten million avatars (lifetimes; births), theright belief would not be established. Where not a single wrongbelief goes away, how can a single right belief be instilled?Aptavani-8301302Aptavani-8Therefore not a single wrong belief budges. And the right beliefdoes not set in! In the entire world, not a single person’s wrongbelief budges. For countless avatars they have been readingLord Mahavir’s scriptures (shastras), but not a single wrongbelief shifts, and they get nowhere with it; they find some solacefrom reading the scriptures (shastras), but their belief does notchange. Only the Gnani Purush, who gives moksha, can changethe belief.Questioner: If you want to attain liberation (moksha),you must go to a Gnani Purush!Dadashri: And moreover, that Gnani Purush has to bea Self-realized person (Purush) who is a giver of liberation(mokshadata). Who gives the gift of liberation (moksha)? Itis he who himself, constantly remains in a state of moksha, thatcan give you the gift of moksha. As you are already in wrongbelief, then no matter what you do, even if you read thescriptures (shastras), or anything else, that wrong belief willstrengthen, and the wrong belief will only continue to benurtured!And in this worldly life (sansar), they give one the gift ofignorance (agnan) from the time of his birth: ‘This baby boy.Son, this here is your daddy, this is your mummy’, and in sodoing, the gift of ignorance comes to be given, and then thewhole wrong belief becomes established within him. No one isable to fracture that wrong belief. Besides, if someone were tosay ‘You are pure’, just like that, how would that work? Itshould fit into (ged beswi) your understanding, and only then willthe wrong belief be fractured. Otherwise the wrong belief cannotbe fractured, and until then, no one will ever be able to accept,‘I am the pure Soul (Shuddhatma)’. So far, your entire life hasbeen ‘I am Chandubhai, I am Chandubhai.’ And that way, it haspermeated each and every subatomic particle (parmanu). Now,to remove that, and to fracture that wrong belief, is somethingthat can only be done by the Gnani Purush.Ultimately, Liberation Only Attained ThroughBecoming AtmaroopQuestioner: It is also said that even if you think about theAtma for just a minute, you can become free from the worldlylife (sansar).Dadashri: If one becomes the form of the Self(Atmaroop), it is possible to become free from the worldly life(sansar). However, if one thinks about things related to theAtma, there can be no Atma there. Thinking is a way to go tothe Atma.Questioner: But when the state of becoming the form ofthe Self (Atmaroop) arises, can the illusion (bhrama) of theworldly life (sansar) really break?Dadashri: The illusion will go away gradually. But sinceone has the old karmic account (hisaab), one will indeed beovercome with illusion without fail. It will only work if a newstate of blocking the influx of karmic matter (samvar) occurs.So if one becomes the Atma for just a minute, it would lastforever.Questioner: Never mind a minute, it does not even lastforty-eight seconds.Dadashri: It will not do, if it does not last!Questioner: After forty-eight seconds, it disappears.Dadashri: But if it flees, then it cannot be the Atma. TheAtma is something that does not go away. The Atma maintainsthe same form, whenever you see it; it is always the same form.Therefore, the Atma should appear as separate and all the restof this should appear as separate.Questioner: I understand that, and I also experience it,however the net of illusory attachment (mayavi jaad) is soAptavani-8301302Aptavani-8Therefore not a single wrong belief budges. And the right beliefdoes not set in! In the entire world, not a single person’s wrongbelief budges. For countless avatars they have been readingLord Mahavir’s scriptures (shastras), but not a single wrongbelief shifts, and they get nowhere with it; they find some solacefrom reading the scriptures (shastras), but their belief does notchange. Only the Gnani Purush, who gives moksha, can changethe belief.Questioner: If you want to attain liberation (moksha),you must go to a Gnani Purush!Dadashri: And moreover, that Gnani Purush has to bea Self-realized person (Purush) who is a giver of liberation(mokshadata). Who gives the gift of liberation (moksha)? Itis he who himself, constantly remains in a state of moksha, thatcan give you the gift of moksha. As you are already in wrongbelief, then no matter what you do, even if you read thescriptures (shastras), or anything else, that wrong belief willstrengthen, and the wrong belief will only continue to benurtured!And in this worldly life (sansar), they give one the gift ofignorance (agnan) from the time of his birth: ‘This baby boy.Son, this here is your daddy, this is your mummy’, and in sodoing, the gift of ignorance comes to be given, and then thewhole wrong belief becomes established within him. No one isable to fracture that wrong belief. Besides, if someone were tosay ‘You are pure’, just like that, how would that work? Itshould fit into (ged beswi) your understanding, and only then willthe wrong belief be fractured. Otherwise the wrong belief cannotbe fractured, and until then, no one will ever be able to accept,‘I am the pure Soul (Shuddhatma)’. So far, your entire life hasbeen ‘I am Chandubhai, I am Chandubhai.’ And that way, it haspermeated each and every subatomic particle (parmanu). Now,to remove that, and to fracture that wrong belief, is somethingthat can only be done by the Gnani Purush.Ultimately, Liberation Only Attained ThroughBecoming AtmaroopQuestioner: It is also said that even if you think about theAtma for just a minute, you can become free from the worldlylife (sansar).Dadashri: If one becomes the form of the Self(Atmaroop), it is possible to become free from the worldly life(sansar). However, if one thinks about things related to theAtma, there can be no Atma there. Thinking is a way to go tothe Atma.Questioner: But when the state of becoming the form ofthe Self (Atmaroop) arises, can the illusion (bhrama) of theworldly life (sansar) really break?Dadashri: The illusion will go away gradually. But sinceone has the old karmic account (hisaab), one will indeed beovercome with illusion without fail. It will only work if a newstate of blocking the influx of karmic matter (samvar) occurs.So if one becomes the Atma for just a minute, it would lastforever.Questioner: Never mind a minute, it does not even lastforty-eight seconds.Dadashri: It will not do, if it does not last!Questioner: After forty-eight seconds, it disappears.Dadashri: But if it flees, then it cannot be the Atma. TheAtma is something that does not go away. The Atma maintainsthe same form, whenever you see it; it is always the same form.Therefore, the Atma should appear as separate and all the restof this should appear as separate.Questioner: I understand that, and I also experience it,however the net of illusory attachment (mayavi jaad) is soAptavani-8303304Aptavani-8strong, that at the time it arises, I get dragged away in thatdirection.Dadashri: In reality, nothing can drag you away. It hasnot come into exactness, the fact that you have realized theAtma. If it has come into exactness, then nothing can touch you.That is because afterward, only the discharge karmas remain,so only the enduring of karmas (bhogavato) remains. Newkarmas are not being bound at all. If the Atma has indeed beenrealized, then the blocking off of inflowing karma (samvar)remains, and where there is a blocking off of karma (samvar),the binding of karma (bandh) does not occur. Both the personwho is ignorant of the Self (agnani) and the Self-realized person(Gnani) alike, definitely have influx of karmic matter (aashrav)and discharge of karmic matter (nirjara). However the onlydifference here is that, the person who is not Self-realized(agnani), has binding of karma (bandh); whereas for the Self-realized person (Gnani), because of the power of Gnan,blockage against the influx of karmic matter (samvar) prevails.Questioner: The influx of karmic matter (aashrav), thedischarge of karmic matter (nirjara) and the blockage of theinflux of karma (samvar). When one quickly jumps back andforth between these three states, is it the influence of karma?Dadashri: The force of karma is very very strong. Despitethis, karmas are neutral, so they are of a neuter gender (napunsak).This means that they are unable to do anything. As long as theydo not have your support, they cannot do anything. Only when wegive it support, it enables them to do something; otherwise theyjust come to an end. When they are no longer supported, theycannot do anything to us. However if we give them support bysaying, ‘I did it’; from there they can shake you up!Questioner: Is the support we give, because of pastkarmas?Dadashri: That is called ignorance of the Self (agnanta).Karmas are discharging (nirjara) anyway, but you are givingthe support with, ‘I am doing it.’ The karmas that come intoeffect; will play out their part, but in this, we say, ‘I did it’.Questioner: So we are to suffer our karmas without anyexpectation of reward (nishkaam bhaav), and since we do notsuffer them, the tendencies (vruttis) enter into them, is that notwhat happens?Dadashri: Without Gnan, it is very difficult to get rid ofthe intent of doership (karta bhaav). If there is Gnan, therewould not be the intent of doership (karta bhaav). When nomore intent (bhaav) of doership remains, it means that there isa blockage of influx of karmic matter (samvar), and wherethere is a blockage of karmic matter (samvar), there is the stateof being unaffected by all external turmoil (samadhi).Questioner: I can reach the state of samvar, but I cannotstay still and steady (sthir).Dadashri: No, if you have blockage of influx of karma(samvar), you would definitely have a state that is unaffected byexternal turmoil (samadhi). Where there is samadhi, know thata man has samvar.Questioner: But if for some reason there is binding ofkarmic matter (bandh), then what do we do?Dadashri: Nothing needs to be done. You need to becomethe Atma.Questioner: Do we not have to mentally figure out whatthe solution to this would be?Dadashri: Once you have become the Atma, you do nothave to think about anything. How far does the thinking go? Youcan carry on thinking for as long as you have doubts like, ‘Is thisAtma, or is this Atma?’ You have to keep on thinking, as longas there is uncertainty about the Atma.Aptavani-8303304Aptavani-8strong, that at the time it arises, I get dragged away in thatdirection.Dadashri: In reality, nothing can drag you away. It hasnot come into exactness, the fact that you have realized theAtma. If it has come into exactness, then nothing can touch you.That is because afterward, only the discharge karmas remain,so only the enduring of karmas (bhogavato) remains. Newkarmas are not being bound at all. If the Atma has indeed beenrealized, then the blocking off of inflowing karma (samvar)remains, and where there is a blocking off of karma (samvar),the binding of karma (bandh) does not occur. Both the personwho is ignorant of the Self (agnani) and the Self-realized person(Gnani) alike, definitely have influx of karmic matter (aashrav)and discharge of karmic matter (nirjara). However the onlydifference here is that, the person who is not Self-realized(agnani), has binding of karma (bandh); whereas for the Self-realized person (Gnani), because of the power of Gnan,blockage against the influx of karmic matter (samvar) prevails.Questioner: The influx of karmic matter (aashrav), thedischarge of karmic matter (nirjara) and the blockage of theinflux of karma (samvar). When one quickly jumps back andforth between these three states, is it the influence of karma?Dadashri: The force of karma is very very strong. Despitethis, karmas are neutral, so they are of a neuter gender (napunsak).This means that they are unable to do anything. As long as theydo not have your support, they cannot do anything. Only when wegive it support, it enables them to do something; otherwise theyjust come to an end. When they are no longer supported, theycannot do anything to us. However if we give them support bysaying, ‘I did it’; from there they can shake you up!Questioner: Is the support we give, because of pastkarmas?Dadashri: That is called ignorance of the Self (agnanta).Karmas are discharging (nirjara) anyway, but you are givingthe support with, ‘I am doing it.’ The karmas that come intoeffect; will play out their part, but in this, we say, ‘I did it’.Questioner: So we are to suffer our karmas without anyexpectation of reward (nishkaam bhaav), and since we do notsuffer them, the tendencies (vruttis) enter into them, is that notwhat happens?Dadashri: Without Gnan, it is very difficult to get rid ofthe intent of doership (karta bhaav). If there is Gnan, therewould not be the intent of doership (karta bhaav). When nomore intent (bhaav) of doership remains, it means that there isa blockage of influx of karmic matter (samvar), and wherethere is a blockage of karmic matter (samvar), there is the stateof being unaffected by all external turmoil (samadhi).Questioner: I can reach the state of samvar, but I cannotstay still and steady (sthir).Dadashri: No, if you have blockage of influx of karma(samvar), you would definitely have a state that is unaffected byexternal turmoil (samadhi). Where there is samadhi, know thata man has samvar.Questioner: But if for some reason there is binding ofkarmic matter (bandh), then what do we do?Dadashri: Nothing needs to be done. You need to becomethe Atma.Questioner: Do we not have to mentally figure out whatthe solution to this would be?Dadashri: Once you have become the Atma, you do nothave to think about anything. How far does the thinking go? Youcan carry on thinking for as long as you have doubts like, ‘Is thisAtma, or is this Atma?’ You have to keep on thinking, as longas there is uncertainty about the Atma.Aptavani-8305306Aptavani-8Questioner: Where the Atma is concerned, as long asthere is the worldly life (sansar), is there not always going to bea place for speculation and argument?Dadashri: That is why you have to attain the Atma fromthe Gnani Purush, and that Atma must remain in the Knowledge(Gnan), and follow his Agnas (special directives).Questioner: I am trying to do that, but even then I amconfounded with doubts and speculation.Dadashri: You have to receive this Gnan from here, justonce, then you have to stay in the Agna (the directive). Thenyou must come to the satsang (gathering of enlightened people)and ask questions. Besides, this Gnan is a state that is free of‘my-ness’ and ‘I-ness’ (nirvikalp)! How can you have the ego‘I am Chandubhai’ (vikalp) in this egoless (nirvikalp) Gnan? Ifyou have ‘my-ness’ or ‘this is mine’ (sankalp), and the ego of‘I am Chandubhai’ (vikalp), it means that you still have notattained the Atma. The one who has ‘my-ness’ – ‘I-ness’(sankalp-vikalp), can never become free from ‘my-ness’ and‘I-ness’ (nirvikalp).The Body Goes, but Not The BeliefQuestioner: When one gives up his body, do these wrongbeliefs go away on their own?Dadashri: You mean when a person dies?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: No, those wrong beliefs arise again. Justbecause a person dies, it does not mean he goes to final liberation(moksha). The person dies, so he takes with him, all the stockhe accumulated while he was here. The anger-pride-deceit-greed(krodh-maan-maya-lobh), and everything that is in the stock,he takes with him; he leaves nothing behind. The whole familygoes along with him, and wherever his new life starts again, iswhere it all begins anew.Questioner: But do we not say that a person leaveseverything behind when he dies? So how can everything remainin the stock?Dadashri: That is all the physical things (sthool) that wehave to leave behind. This subtle (sookshma), along with theentire family, will go along! This physical and gross (sthool) iseverything that you see with your eyes; they can be physical(sthool) even if you cannot see them with your eyes, or undera microscope. He will leave all those things behind, and takewith him, the part which is subtle (sookshma). He has to takealong his karmas with him.When the Belief Changes, the Karma LeaveQuestioner: So how do the wrong beliefs becomefractured?Dadashri: It is not something you have to do, butsomething ‘we’ have to do for you. You would not be able todo it. If you were able to do it, you would not have been aroundfor infinite avatars (lifetimes)! So that is a ‘doctor’s’ (GnaniPurush) work. You just have to submit the body (deha) to the‘doctor’ for just one hour, and say to him, ‘Go ahead and dowhatever operation you need to on me, and bring me a result.’And so the work is done.Questioner: There is karma and there is a belief, whatis the relationship between the two? Because when any one ofthe wrong beliefs is broken, you feel such lightness. At that timecould you say that you have become free from karma?Dadashri: It is from the wrong beliefs that one becomesfree!Questioner: So are that many karma destroyed or notdestroyed?Dadashri: No, the same karmas change! When the beliefAptavani-8305306Aptavani-8Questioner: Where the Atma is concerned, as long asthere is the worldly life (sansar), is there not always going to bea place for speculation and argument?Dadashri: That is why you have to attain the Atma fromthe Gnani Purush, and that Atma must remain in the Knowledge(Gnan), and follow his Agnas (special directives).Questioner: I am trying to do that, but even then I amconfounded with doubts and speculation.Dadashri: You have to receive this Gnan from here, justonce, then you have to stay in the Agna (the directive). Thenyou must come to the satsang (gathering of enlightened people)and ask questions. Besides, this Gnan is a state that is free of‘my-ness’ and ‘I-ness’ (nirvikalp)! How can you have the ego‘I am Chandubhai’ (vikalp) in this egoless (nirvikalp) Gnan? Ifyou have ‘my-ness’ or ‘this is mine’ (sankalp), and the ego of‘I am Chandubhai’ (vikalp), it means that you still have notattained the Atma. The one who has ‘my-ness’ – ‘I-ness’(sankalp-vikalp), can never become free from ‘my-ness’ and‘I-ness’ (nirvikalp).The Body Goes, but Not The BeliefQuestioner: When one gives up his body, do these wrongbeliefs go away on their own?Dadashri: You mean when a person dies?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: No, those wrong beliefs arise again. Justbecause a person dies, it does not mean he goes to final liberation(moksha). The person dies, so he takes with him, all the stockhe accumulated while he was here. The anger-pride-deceit-greed(krodh-maan-maya-lobh), and everything that is in the stock,he takes with him; he leaves nothing behind. The whole familygoes along with him, and wherever his new life starts again, iswhere it all begins anew.Questioner: But do we not say that a person leaveseverything behind when he dies? So how can everything remainin the stock?Dadashri: That is all the physical things (sthool) that wehave to leave behind. This subtle (sookshma), along with theentire family, will go along! This physical and gross (sthool) iseverything that you see with your eyes; they can be physical(sthool) even if you cannot see them with your eyes, or undera microscope. He will leave all those things behind, and takewith him, the part which is subtle (sookshma). He has to takealong his karmas with him.When the Belief Changes, the Karma LeaveQuestioner: So how do the wrong beliefs becomefractured?Dadashri: It is not something you have to do, butsomething ‘we’ have to do for you. You would not be able todo it. If you were able to do it, you would not have been aroundfor infinite avatars (lifetimes)! So that is a ‘doctor’s’ (GnaniPurush) work. You just have to submit the body (deha) to the‘doctor’ for just one hour, and say to him, ‘Go ahead and dowhatever operation you need to on me, and bring me a result.’And so the work is done.Questioner: There is karma and there is a belief, whatis the relationship between the two? Because when any one ofthe wrong beliefs is broken, you feel such lightness. At that timecould you say that you have become free from karma?Dadashri: It is from the wrong beliefs that one becomesfree!Questioner: So are that many karma destroyed or notdestroyed?Dadashri: No, the same karmas change! When the beliefAptavani-8307308Aptavani-8is turned, the karmas become quiet, and that goes into pleasureexperiencing karma (shata vedaniya karma).Questioner: Is it the karmas that have been bound tous?Dadashri: When the belief changes, the karmas that arebound, all begin to break free. As the belief changes, all thekarmas start breaking free. Otherwise, if the belief does notchange, the karmas do not break free. All this is nothing butwrong beliefs. You yourself are the Absolute Soul (Parmatma),but just look at what has happened!Destruction of Belief With BeliefQuestioner: Now when we replace the wrong belief withthe right belief, would we not also benefit from the right belief?But is that not a belief as well? And as long as a belief exists,will it not yield karma, as its fruit?Dadashri: But there is no belief in the right whatsoever.It is to destroy the wrong belief; that the right belief exists.Otherwise you would not be able to destroy the wrong belief!And when one destroys the wrong belief with the right belief,then on his own, with the right belief, he himself destroys his ownself (ignorant part). Thereafter, he no longer has anything else todestroy! It is with this course of action that all this has beenarranged. It is this way, or else there would be no end to itsgrowth. This is an enlightened vision (samyak darshan), and itis the right belief, so it dissolves on its own. The right belief isdependent on the Self (swa-satta) and wrong belief is dependenton other external things (par-satta).The Principle of Self-Realization Through anIndependent VisionThe Gnani Purush will make you aware that you havetouched the world. Otherwise there is not a single thing that cantouch you. Someone may ask, ‘Do I not need anything?’ Andwe would say to him, ‘No, you do not need anything. You donot need to have any kind of dependency (avalumban) on thisworld at all.’ Therefore, when he comes to that awareness, hewill say, ‘I am the pure Soul (Shuddhatma), I am the pureSoul.’ From then on, there is no more worrying, or frustrationleft. Worry and frustration only takes place in the non-Self part,but one takes it all upon himself that ‘This is what is happeningto me.’ Goodness, this is not Yours; it is happening in the homeof someone else. How can anything happen to You? It is happeningat neighbor’s house, so what is it got to do with You? Besides,nothing can happen to the Atma (the Self)! But it is the illusion(bhranti) of infinite ages that makes him forget all these facts.Atma and Non-Atma Separated Through TheGnani’s VidhiQuestioner: You say that the ‘Atma is completely separatefrom me’, then why has it not become clear to me yet?Dadashri: It can only become separate, after it has beenseparated, or else it remains as one (tanmayakar). ‘We’ separateit for you; when ‘we’ perform the Gnanvidhi and it becomesseparated. Otherwise, it cannot happen. That is why you justhave to say that it really is separate indeed! But as long as theillusion (bhranti) is there, it remains bound. On the day ‘we’give you Gnan here, we separate the Self (Atma) and the non-Self (anatma) and from that point onwards the direct experienceof Bhagwan (the Self), will never leave you. It is then that youwill start seeing your own faults (dosh). Otherwise, until thenyou will not be able to see faults. As you begin to see the faults,they will disperse.Attainment of Gnan Results Through DeepIntentQuestioner: What lies in my fate? When will I receivethe Gnan that you talk about? Give me a time period.Aptavani-8307308Aptavani-8is turned, the karmas become quiet, and that goes into pleasureexperiencing karma (shata vedaniya karma).Questioner: Is it the karmas that have been bound tous?Dadashri: When the belief changes, the karmas that arebound, all begin to break free. As the belief changes, all thekarmas start breaking free. Otherwise, if the belief does notchange, the karmas do not break free. All this is nothing butwrong beliefs. You yourself are the Absolute Soul (Parmatma),but just look at what has happened!Destruction of Belief With BeliefQuestioner: Now when we replace the wrong belief withthe right belief, would we not also benefit from the right belief?But is that not a belief as well? And as long as a belief exists,will it not yield karma, as its fruit?Dadashri: But there is no belief in the right whatsoever.It is to destroy the wrong belief; that the right belief exists.Otherwise you would not be able to destroy the wrong belief!And when one destroys the wrong belief with the right belief,then on his own, with the right belief, he himself destroys his ownself (ignorant part). Thereafter, he no longer has anything else todestroy! It is with this course of action that all this has beenarranged. It is this way, or else there would be no end to itsgrowth. This is an enlightened vision (samyak darshan), and itis the right belief, so it dissolves on its own. The right belief isdependent on the Self (swa-satta) and wrong belief is dependenton other external things (par-satta).The Principle of Self-Realization Through anIndependent VisionThe Gnani Purush will make you aware that you havetouched the world. Otherwise there is not a single thing that cantouch you. Someone may ask, ‘Do I not need anything?’ Andwe would say to him, ‘No, you do not need anything. You donot need to have any kind of dependency (avalumban) on thisworld at all.’ Therefore, when he comes to that awareness, hewill say, ‘I am the pure Soul (Shuddhatma), I am the pureSoul.’ From then on, there is no more worrying, or frustrationleft. Worry and frustration only takes place in the non-Self part,but one takes it all upon himself that ‘This is what is happeningto me.’ Goodness, this is not Yours; it is happening in the homeof someone else. How can anything happen to You? It is happeningat neighbor’s house, so what is it got to do with You? Besides,nothing can happen to the Atma (the Self)! But it is the illusion(bhranti) of infinite ages that makes him forget all these facts.Atma and Non-Atma Separated Through TheGnani’s VidhiQuestioner: You say that the ‘Atma is completely separatefrom me’, then why has it not become clear to me yet?Dadashri: It can only become separate, after it has beenseparated, or else it remains as one (tanmayakar). ‘We’ separateit for you; when ‘we’ perform the Gnanvidhi and it becomesseparated. Otherwise, it cannot happen. That is why you justhave to say that it really is separate indeed! But as long as theillusion (bhranti) is there, it remains bound. On the day ‘we’give you Gnan here, we separate the Self (Atma) and the non-Self (anatma) and from that point onwards the direct experienceof Bhagwan (the Self), will never leave you. It is then that youwill start seeing your own faults (dosh). Otherwise, until thenyou will not be able to see faults. As you begin to see the faults,they will disperse.Attainment of Gnan Results Through DeepIntentQuestioner: What lies in my fate? When will I receivethe Gnan that you talk about? Give me a time period.Aptavani-8309310Aptavani-8Dadashri: It will come. You have made the inner intent(bhavna), so it will come! How will it come if you have notmade the bhavna?Questioner: I feel that ‘Delhi’ is very far away.Dadashri: Gosh, nothing in the world is far away. If theAtma itself is with you, then why would Delhi be so far? TheAtma is near to you. When the unattainable Self (vastu) is rightthere with you, what other thing can you say is far?…Then Obstacles to Gnan Are DestroyedQuestioner: So many people come to you here, and afew amongst them do not feel like they want to take the Gnan,why would that be?Dadashri: That is their obstacle (antaray) karma. Afterthose obstacles (antaray) come to an end, they will then feellike taking the Gnan. So what do we have to do to bring an endto the obstacle (antaray)? Either you yourself should firmlydecide that, ‘Today I definitely want to break these obstacles’,then ‘Come what may, I still want to destroy those obstacles’.Or else, you should say to the Gnani, ‘Sir, please destroy myobstacles.’ So, even the Gnani Purush can destroy them.Otherwise, even if one’s food is in front of him, it may not evenlet him eat. The food is ready and he is preparing to eat, thensomeone comes calling, ‘Come quick, you have to come now.’You may even have to leave your ready plate of food behind –that is called an obstacle karma (antaray karma).That Is When the Atma Is Experienced inConductQuestioner: How does one attain the experience of theAtma from you?Dadashri: Right now, are you experiencing anything atall? When you feel cold, do you not experience it? When youfeel hot, do you not experience it? When someone insults you,and you taste bitterness, do you not have that experience? Sowhat kind of experience do you want?Questioner: The experience of the Atma.Dadashri: What does the experience of the Atma mean?It is a state of eternal bliss (parmanand). The bliss (anand)never leaves – that is called the experience of the Atma.Questioner: How can we get it?Dadashri: What do you want with it? Why would youneed eternal bliss (anand)? Besides, do you not need a wife ormoney?Questioner: No, I do not need that.Dadashri: Then, do you need this body or not?Questioner: Except for Bhagwan (God) I do not needanything else.Dadashri: That is true! Yours is the work of a brave man.But for that, you need to know who God is – that is what youmust know. What is the world? Who created it? What is God?Who are you? How did this entire world come into existence?How can you realize God now? You need to know all that.Questioner: In what way can we do that?Dadashri: The only way, is right here. No where else inthe world is there a solution such as this. The entire path liesright here!Questioner: But is it not worthless without the experience?Dadashri: Yes, you must have the experience.Questioner: When does that happen?Dadashri: When you have no desire for anything else,Aptavani-8309310Aptavani-8Dadashri: It will come. You have made the inner intent(bhavna), so it will come! How will it come if you have notmade the bhavna?Questioner: I feel that ‘Delhi’ is very far away.Dadashri: Gosh, nothing in the world is far away. If theAtma itself is with you, then why would Delhi be so far? TheAtma is near to you. When the unattainable Self (vastu) is rightthere with you, what other thing can you say is far?…Then Obstacles to Gnan Are DestroyedQuestioner: So many people come to you here, and afew amongst them do not feel like they want to take the Gnan,why would that be?Dadashri: That is their obstacle (antaray) karma. Afterthose obstacles (antaray) come to an end, they will then feellike taking the Gnan. So what do we have to do to bring an endto the obstacle (antaray)? Either you yourself should firmlydecide that, ‘Today I definitely want to break these obstacles’,then ‘Come what may, I still want to destroy those obstacles’.Or else, you should say to the Gnani, ‘Sir, please destroy myobstacles.’ So, even the Gnani Purush can destroy them.Otherwise, even if one’s food is in front of him, it may not evenlet him eat. The food is ready and he is preparing to eat, thensomeone comes calling, ‘Come quick, you have to come now.’You may even have to leave your ready plate of food behind –that is called an obstacle karma (antaray karma).That Is When the Atma Is Experienced inConductQuestioner: How does one attain the experience of theAtma from you?Dadashri: Right now, are you experiencing anything atall? When you feel cold, do you not experience it? When youfeel hot, do you not experience it? When someone insults you,and you taste bitterness, do you not have that experience? Sowhat kind of experience do you want?Questioner: The experience of the Atma.Dadashri: What does the experience of the Atma mean?It is a state of eternal bliss (parmanand). The bliss (anand)never leaves – that is called the experience of the Atma.Questioner: How can we get it?Dadashri: What do you want with it? Why would youneed eternal bliss (anand)? Besides, do you not need a wife ormoney?Questioner: No, I do not need that.Dadashri: Then, do you need this body or not?Questioner: Except for Bhagwan (God) I do not needanything else.Dadashri: That is true! Yours is the work of a brave man.But for that, you need to know who God is – that is what youmust know. What is the world? Who created it? What is God?Who are you? How did this entire world come into existence?How can you realize God now? You need to know all that.Questioner: In what way can we do that?Dadashri: The only way, is right here. No where else inthe world is there a solution such as this. The entire path liesright here!Questioner: But is it not worthless without the experience?Dadashri: Yes, you must have the experience.Questioner: When does that happen?Dadashri: When you have no desire for anything else,Aptavani-8311312Aptavani-8except for God, and the Atma, you will then experience that.That would also mean that you would not want women, moneyand everything else. And you will get such an experience righthere. When? In this very lifetime; even so, not in two or threemonths, but it will happen within one hour.Questioner: And how will it be possible to remainconstantly absorbed (tanmayakar) in, and one with the Atmaafterward?Dadashri: When a person takes Gnan here, and thenfollows ‘our’ Agnas (Five directives), he can remain in the Atmaconstantly. But all these worldly entanglements will not allow himto remain constantly in the Atma. Even you have worldlyentanglements, do you not? Children will say, ‘Father, give memy school fees.’ Alas, you have the money at home. But wouldyou not have to go out to cash the hundred rupee note? If oneis not married, he would have work or a business. Thereforethese are all worldly entanglements, and as long as these arethere, it is not possible to remain constantly in the Atma. Butwhen your intent towards the worldly entanglements decreases,and as you begin to understand that bliss lies in the Atma, thenthese worldly entanglements will begin to decrease. Thereafteryou will be able to remain as the Atma.Understanding the Word ‘Shuddhatma’Questioner: They say that the Atma is solid awarenessof the eternal bliss (sat chit anand). Is it an imaginary idea(kalpana) or is it true?Dadashri: Why? It is true. It is true that the Atma is solidawareness of the eternal bliss (sat chit anand). There is noimagination (kalpana) in that.Questioner: What about the people who say that it is animagination (kalpana)?Dadashri: The ones who do the imaginings (kalpana),have no idea about what awareness of the eternal bliss (sat chitanand) is. If they realize that, they would always have eternalbliss. And when you attain eternal bliss, you attain the state ofawareness of the eternal bliss (sat chit anand).Questioner: If the Atma is solid awareness of the eternalbliss (sat chit anand), then how is it the pure Soul(Shuddhatma)?Dadashri: The Atma itself is the state of awareness ofthe eternal bliss (sat chit anand swaroop). But why have thesepeople not been given the word sat chit anand? It is becausesat chit anand is a term that expresses the attributes andproperties (gunavaachak) which these people will notunderstand. These people need the word Shuddhatma, whichis why they have been given the word Shuddhatma (the pureSoul). Why do we need the pure Soul (Shuddhatma)? Thesepeople say, ‘I am a sinner’. So we would say, ‘If you knowscience (vignan), then sin (paap) cannot touch you. You reallyare pure Soul (Shuddhatma). But your belief is wrong.’ It is likethe man who sleeps alone in a dark room, who during thedaytime, has heard stories about ghosts, so that when he hearsthe noise of a cup rattle in the night, right there and then, hiswrong belief that there’s a ghost in the house, sneaks in. Now,until that wrong belief is gone, he will stay in that same state;trembling with fear.Shuddhatma Cannot Be Attained ThroughSaying ‘Sohum’Questioner: What is the difference between saying, ‘Iam the pure Soul (Shuddhatma)’, and saying ‘I am That’(sohum)?Dadashri: There is no use in saying ‘I am That’ (sohum).You are really the pure Soul (Shuddhatma)! What does sohummean? It means: I am That. So what kind of salvation do youget from it? Therefore, your salvation lies in ‘I am the pure Soul’Aptavani-8311312Aptavani-8except for God, and the Atma, you will then experience that.That would also mean that you would not want women, moneyand everything else. And you will get such an experience righthere. When? In this very lifetime; even so, not in two or threemonths, but it will happen within one hour.Questioner: And how will it be possible to remainconstantly absorbed (tanmayakar) in, and one with the Atmaafterward?Dadashri: When a person takes Gnan here, and thenfollows ‘our’ Agnas (Five directives), he can remain in the Atmaconstantly. But all these worldly entanglements will not allow himto remain constantly in the Atma. Even you have worldlyentanglements, do you not? Children will say, ‘Father, give memy school fees.’ Alas, you have the money at home. But wouldyou not have to go out to cash the hundred rupee note? If oneis not married, he would have work or a business. Thereforethese are all worldly entanglements, and as long as these arethere, it is not possible to remain constantly in the Atma. Butwhen your intent towards the worldly entanglements decreases,and as you begin to understand that bliss lies in the Atma, thenthese worldly entanglements will begin to decrease. Thereafteryou will be able to remain as the Atma.Understanding the Word ‘Shuddhatma’Questioner: They say that the Atma is solid awarenessof the eternal bliss (sat chit anand). Is it an imaginary idea(kalpana) or is it true?Dadashri: Why? It is true. It is true that the Atma is solidawareness of the eternal bliss (sat chit anand). There is noimagination (kalpana) in that.Questioner: What about the people who say that it is animagination (kalpana)?Dadashri: The ones who do the imaginings (kalpana),have no idea about what awareness of the eternal bliss (sat chitanand) is. If they realize that, they would always have eternalbliss. And when you attain eternal bliss, you attain the state ofawareness of the eternal bliss (sat chit anand).Questioner: If the Atma is solid awareness of the eternalbliss (sat chit anand), then how is it the pure Soul(Shuddhatma)?Dadashri: The Atma itself is the state of awareness ofthe eternal bliss (sat chit anand swaroop). But why have thesepeople not been given the word sat chit anand? It is becausesat chit anand is a term that expresses the attributes andproperties (gunavaachak) which these people will notunderstand. These people need the word Shuddhatma, whichis why they have been given the word Shuddhatma (the pureSoul). Why do we need the pure Soul (Shuddhatma)? Thesepeople say, ‘I am a sinner’. So we would say, ‘If you knowscience (vignan), then sin (paap) cannot touch you. You reallyare pure Soul (Shuddhatma). But your belief is wrong.’ It is likethe man who sleeps alone in a dark room, who during thedaytime, has heard stories about ghosts, so that when he hearsthe noise of a cup rattle in the night, right there and then, hiswrong belief that there’s a ghost in the house, sneaks in. Now,until that wrong belief is gone, he will stay in that same state;trembling with fear.Shuddhatma Cannot Be Attained ThroughSaying ‘Sohum’Questioner: What is the difference between saying, ‘Iam the pure Soul (Shuddhatma)’, and saying ‘I am That’(sohum)?Dadashri: There is no use in saying ‘I am That’ (sohum).You are really the pure Soul (Shuddhatma)! What does sohummean? It means: I am That. So what kind of salvation do youget from it? Therefore, your salvation lies in ‘I am the pure Soul’Aptavani-8313314Aptavani-8(Shuddhatma), and that means: The pure Soul is who I am.Whereas ‘I am That’ (‘sohum’) says, ‘That is who I am’. Thereis no meaning in that! Sohum is a tool (sadhan) to attain thepure Soul (Shuddhatma). Those who attained the goal (sadhya),relinquish the tool (sadhan).After Becoming Pure, One Can Say ‘Pure Soul’Questioner: Can you become the pure Soul(Shuddhatma) by saying ‘I am the pure Soul’?Dadashri: You cannot become it like that. There are manypeople who do say, ‘I am a Shuddhatma’, but they do not getanywhere.Questioner: If we have not attained Gnan from you butwe have read about it in a book, or have been told to say ‘I amShuddhatma’ by someone; do we get any benefit from that?Dadashri: You will not get anything at all out of that!Even if you said Shuddhatma for thousands of lifetimes you stillwould not get anywhere.Just like if you have a friend, who falls asleep while talkingto you, but you think he is still awake, so you ask him to loanyou some rupees. But before you ask him again, he says, ‘I willgive you five thousand rupees.’ Then would you believe him?Would you not have to check and see whether he was sleepingor awake when he said that? If he is saying it in his sleep, hewould not give you anything, even if you sat around all night.And if he is saying it while he is awake, then he would give itto you. In the same way, they are saying ‘I am Shuddhatma’ intheir sleep. So they gain nothing from it. The awareness of ‘I am Shuddhatma’ has to be givenby the Gnani Purush, so when you are awake; then when yousay it, it is beneficial. In the same way, I first awaken you andthen make You say, ‘I am the pure Soul’ (Shuddhatma), I donot make you say it just like that! And in an hour, I give you theentire liberation (moksha). Moksha means that you will neveragain have any worries – that is the kind of moksha I give!Can You Light with a Real Lamp or a Pictureof a Lamp?Questioner: Without taking Gnan, if a person says, ‘Iam Shuddhatma (the pure Soul)’ just from reading it in books,does he derive any benefit from it?Dadashri: You do not receive any benefit whatsoever!Without taking Gnan, saying, ‘I am Shuddhatma (the pure Soul)’is futile. Besides, you would never remember Shuddhatma.Furthermore, in books it is written as, ‘The Atma is pure(shuddha) and you are the pure Soul’ (Shuddhatma). You cannotbe all this. Besides, in the worldly life (sansar), you would notbe able to do anything as Shuddhatma. That dravya (element)does its work, and this dravya (element) does its work.’ – thatis all they are trying to say. But how can people maintain theawareness of the pure Soul (Shuddhatma)? This is egoism(ahamkar), and anger-pride-deceit-greed (krodh-maan-maya-lobh) are all in it together, so how can one maintain the awarenessof Shuddhatma? He can keep saying ‘I am Shuddhatma’ byheart all day long, but the awareness (laksha) of the pure Soul(Shuddhatma) would not sink in! Only when the Gnani Purushdestroys one’s demerit karma (paap), will the awareness ofShuddhatma be established. And that awareness will staythroughout the day; otherwise, it would not stay in one’sawareness! Therefore, first the sins (paap) must be cleansed.Questioner: If your Five Agnas were written down, anda hundred or two hundred years from now if someone readsthem and thinks about them, can he attain the state ofShuddhatma (the pure Soul) or not?Dadashri: No, no! There will be some Gnanis around,for two to five hundred years. Something or other is bound toAptavani-8313314Aptavani-8(Shuddhatma), and that means: The pure Soul is who I am.Whereas ‘I am That’ (‘sohum’) says, ‘That is who I am’. Thereis no meaning in that! Sohum is a tool (sadhan) to attain thepure Soul (Shuddhatma). Those who attained the goal (sadhya),relinquish the tool (sadhan).After Becoming Pure, One Can Say ‘Pure Soul’Questioner: Can you become the pure Soul(Shuddhatma) by saying ‘I am the pure Soul’?Dadashri: You cannot become it like that. There are manypeople who do say, ‘I am a Shuddhatma’, but they do not getanywhere.Questioner: If we have not attained Gnan from you butwe have read about it in a book, or have been told to say ‘I amShuddhatma’ by someone; do we get any benefit from that?Dadashri: You will not get anything at all out of that!Even if you said Shuddhatma for thousands of lifetimes you stillwould not get anywhere.Just like if you have a friend, who falls asleep while talkingto you, but you think he is still awake, so you ask him to loanyou some rupees. But before you ask him again, he says, ‘I willgive you five thousand rupees.’ Then would you believe him?Would you not have to check and see whether he was sleepingor awake when he said that? If he is saying it in his sleep, hewould not give you anything, even if you sat around all night.And if he is saying it while he is awake, then he would give itto you. In the same way, they are saying ‘I am Shuddhatma’ intheir sleep. So they gain nothing from it. The awareness of ‘I am Shuddhatma’ has to be givenby the Gnani Purush, so when you are awake; then when yousay it, it is beneficial. In the same way, I first awaken you andthen make You say, ‘I am the pure Soul’ (Shuddhatma), I donot make you say it just like that! And in an hour, I give you theentire liberation (moksha). Moksha means that you will neveragain have any worries – that is the kind of moksha I give!Can You Light with a Real Lamp or a Pictureof a Lamp?Questioner: Without taking Gnan, if a person says, ‘Iam Shuddhatma (the pure Soul)’ just from reading it in books,does he derive any benefit from it?Dadashri: You do not receive any benefit whatsoever!Without taking Gnan, saying, ‘I am Shuddhatma (the pure Soul)’is futile. Besides, you would never remember Shuddhatma.Furthermore, in books it is written as, ‘The Atma is pure(shuddha) and you are the pure Soul’ (Shuddhatma). You cannotbe all this. Besides, in the worldly life (sansar), you would notbe able to do anything as Shuddhatma. That dravya (element)does its work, and this dravya (element) does its work.’ – thatis all they are trying to say. But how can people maintain theawareness of the pure Soul (Shuddhatma)? This is egoism(ahamkar), and anger-pride-deceit-greed (krodh-maan-maya-lobh) are all in it together, so how can one maintain the awarenessof Shuddhatma? He can keep saying ‘I am Shuddhatma’ byheart all day long, but the awareness (laksha) of the pure Soul(Shuddhatma) would not sink in! Only when the Gnani Purushdestroys one’s demerit karma (paap), will the awareness ofShuddhatma be established. And that awareness will staythroughout the day; otherwise, it would not stay in one’sawareness! Therefore, first the sins (paap) must be cleansed.Questioner: If your Five Agnas were written down, anda hundred or two hundred years from now if someone readsthem and thinks about them, can he attain the state ofShuddhatma (the pure Soul) or not?Dadashri: No, no! There will be some Gnanis around,for two to five hundred years. Something or other is bound toAptavani-8315316Aptavani-8arise. Sooner or later, the light will be kindled in everyone, soif there is someone like that around, it would benefit everyone.Otherwise, you cannot become Shuddhatma just like that.Shuddhatma Cannot Be Attained ThroughChanting One person tells me, ‘I keep remembering, I amShuddhatma.’ So I said to him, ‘Goodness, you keepremembering it and yet you still have not attained Shuddhatma?’And then he says, “No. And the next day, I had to think tomyself, what was that word? For four hours, I kept thinking,‘What was that word? What was that word?’ But I could neverrecall that word.”So a person will forget even the word. Therefore, thatreciting or chanting (samaran) could never sink into yourawareness. Instead of doing that kind of recitation (samaran),you are better off chanting your wife’s name; at least she willmake you savory fritters (bhajiya) and sweet fritters (jalebi).By giving these false chanting of mantras (samaran) over andover, one has neither attained the celestial realm (deva gati), norprosperity over here. So they were given the runaround fromboth sides. It would have been all worth it if they had foundprosperity over here.They tell you, ‘We are giving you this mantra to chant,just keep reciting it (samaran)’. You fool, what am I supposedto do if I forget that chant (samaran)? Besides, when does achant remain? It remains automatically, for things you haveattachment (raag) for. Or else, if there is someone towardswhom you have considerable abhorrence (dwesh); it will constantlyremain on your mind. So anything that you have a lot of attachment(raag) for, will remain on your mind; samaran for it will prevail.And the fruit of chanting of a mantra (samaran) is theworldly life (sansar); you have to wander-wander-wander. Canyou understand what I am telling you? Do you understand themeaning of chanting a name (samaran)? Therefore, the Atma iscontinuously present and one has to start saying it naturally onone’s own. It is not something we make him say and he repeatsit. It should come on its own.Questioner: But can the inspiration to say, ‘I amShuddhatma’ come from within or not?Dadashri: Of course it can!Questioner: Then is he saying it or is he being made tosay it?Dadashri: Here, it is not a question of saying it or makingone say it. No one is saying it, and neither is anyone making yousay it. And the one who makes you say it, the one making yousay it becomes liable.So whatever you are looking for, is ensconced in darkness.What you are looking for ahead is all in darkness. And there isnot anyone who will make you say it. It is this scientificcircumstantial evidence that is speaking, and what you are talkingabout, is all pitch darkness. Those who have ventured on thatside, are all wandering around in vain. Factionalism Is the Unnatural StateQuestioner: So does the Knowledge (Gnan) of the pureSoul (Shuddhatma) that we attain from you, not become a cultor sect?Dadashri: No, this cannot have a sect! Where there isunnaturalness (vibhavikta); there is a sect. Where there isnaturalness (swabhavikta); there naturalness arises, and therecould not be a sect there! Because, in that case, one would bedoing the worship (darshan) of the Shuddhatma in trees andleaves; cows and buffaloes, and all the living entities (jivas); sohow can there be any separation or sect? He sees God allaround, everywhere!Aptavani-8315316Aptavani-8arise. Sooner or later, the light will be kindled in everyone, soif there is someone like that around, it would benefit everyone.Otherwise, you cannot become Shuddhatma just like that.Shuddhatma Cannot Be Attained ThroughChanting One person tells me, ‘I keep remembering, I amShuddhatma.’ So I said to him, ‘Goodness, you keepremembering it and yet you still have not attained Shuddhatma?’And then he says, “No. And the next day, I had to think tomyself, what was that word? For four hours, I kept thinking,‘What was that word? What was that word?’ But I could neverrecall that word.”So a person will forget even the word. Therefore, thatreciting or chanting (samaran) could never sink into yourawareness. Instead of doing that kind of recitation (samaran),you are better off chanting your wife’s name; at least she willmake you savory fritters (bhajiya) and sweet fritters (jalebi).By giving these false chanting of mantras (samaran) over andover, one has neither attained the celestial realm (deva gati), norprosperity over here. So they were given the runaround fromboth sides. It would have been all worth it if they had foundprosperity over here.They tell you, ‘We are giving you this mantra to chant,just keep reciting it (samaran)’. You fool, what am I supposedto do if I forget that chant (samaran)? Besides, when does achant remain? It remains automatically, for things you haveattachment (raag) for. Or else, if there is someone towardswhom you have considerable abhorrence (dwesh); it will constantlyremain on your mind. So anything that you have a lot of attachment(raag) for, will remain on your mind; samaran for it will prevail.And the fruit of chanting of a mantra (samaran) is theworldly life (sansar); you have to wander-wander-wander. Canyou understand what I am telling you? Do you understand themeaning of chanting a name (samaran)? Therefore, the Atma iscontinuously present and one has to start saying it naturally onone’s own. It is not something we make him say and he repeatsit. It should come on its own.Questioner: But can the inspiration to say, ‘I amShuddhatma’ come from within or not?Dadashri: Of course it can!Questioner: Then is he saying it or is he being made tosay it?Dadashri: Here, it is not a question of saying it or makingone say it. No one is saying it, and neither is anyone making yousay it. And the one who makes you say it, the one making yousay it becomes liable.So whatever you are looking for, is ensconced in darkness.What you are looking for ahead is all in darkness. And there isnot anyone who will make you say it. It is this scientificcircumstantial evidence that is speaking, and what you are talkingabout, is all pitch darkness. Those who have ventured on thatside, are all wandering around in vain. Factionalism Is the Unnatural StateQuestioner: So does the Knowledge (Gnan) of the pureSoul (Shuddhatma) that we attain from you, not become a cultor sect?Dadashri: No, this cannot have a sect! Where there isunnaturalness (vibhavikta); there is a sect. Where there isnaturalness (swabhavikta); there naturalness arises, and therecould not be a sect there! Because, in that case, one would bedoing the worship (darshan) of the Shuddhatma in trees andleaves; cows and buffaloes, and all the living entities (jivas); sohow can there be any separation or sect? He sees God allaround, everywhere!Aptavani-8317318Aptavani-8When the Wrong Belief Goes, There IsOneness With GodQuestioner: If the pure Soul (Shuddhatma) itself isBhagwan (God); he is within us, so he cannot be somewherefar away, can he?Dadashri: Yes, that is it, the one inside you, is himselfBhagwan, there is no other Bhagwan in this world.Questioner: So you would not have a separation (bhed)with that Bhagwan, would you?Dadashri: But at this point in time, you are separate.Bhagwan (God) is able to join you, only if you become one(abheda). But you want to be Chandubhai and you want to besome woman’s husband, you want to be the boy’s father, youwant to be someone’s uncle..., so of course God could neverjoin you! When you become God’s, he will become one withyou (abheda). When you become Shuddhatma, you becomeGod’s; therefore you become one. You are the one who hascreated the division (bhed); God has not created the division(bhed). When you say, ‘I am this woman’s husband’, God says,‘Go, be a husband then.’ And this is how you have made a splitwith God. Now if you become one with God, then everythingbecomes united (abheda)! And to bring about that oneness;there is all this science (vignan). The entire world is searchingfor Bhagwan (God); searching for that oneness.You are right in asking why this separation came about. Isit not true? The division (bhed) is that Bhagwan (God) is reallyinside, but why does one not feel that oneness? One has neverreally bothered with God! One has only been concerned about,‘This is my wife and these are my children, and this is mybrother, this is my uncle’. He does not care about Bhagwan. Infact, no one really cares about Bhagwan. Even devotees do notcare about Bhagwan. Devotees are continually lost in theircymbals and all that; completely absorbed in its revelry andrapture. No one cares about Bhagwan. That Bhagwan tells meeveryday, ‘No one cares about me.’ Some are absorbed withtheir tea, some are obsessed with their drugs, someone is alwaysobsessed with something, some are intoxicated with alcohol,some are obsessed with their wives, then there are those whoare obsessed with money – Alas the entire world is wallowingin some form of absorption!Say Shuddhatma – Pure Soul, for Purity toPrevailQuestioner: Why do you say pure Soul (Shuddhatma)?Why not just say Atma, Soul? Is the Atma, not chetan (Self)as well?Dadashri: Shuddhatma means pure Soul (shuddhachetan). The reason for calling it pure (shuddha) is because,before one used to think, ‘I am a sinner, I am worthless, I amlike this, I am like that.’ All those preconceived ideas that onehad about himself, have all been erased. If one just said soul(Atma), instead of pure Soul (Shuddhatma), he would lose theawareness of his own purity (shuddhata); his awareness of beinguntainted and pristine (nirlepta) would disappear.Questioner: So what is the true meaning (marma) ofShuddhatma?Dadashri: The true meaning of pure Soul (Shuddhatma)is that it is detached (asanga); it cannot be tainted (nirlep;unsmaerable); whereas the atma (the relative self) is not likethat. The atma has been tainted, and the Shuddhatma is theAbsolute Soul (Parmatma). Do people of all religions not say,‘My Soul is sinful’? And even then, the Shuddhatma does nothave any problem.The pure Soul (Shuddhatma) itself indicates, ‘Now wehave become unsmearable (nirlep); all our sins are gone.’ So itis because of shuddha upayog (pure applied awareness of theAptavani-8317318Aptavani-8When the Wrong Belief Goes, There IsOneness With GodQuestioner: If the pure Soul (Shuddhatma) itself isBhagwan (God); he is within us, so he cannot be somewherefar away, can he?Dadashri: Yes, that is it, the one inside you, is himselfBhagwan, there is no other Bhagwan in this world.Questioner: So you would not have a separation (bhed)with that Bhagwan, would you?Dadashri: But at this point in time, you are separate.Bhagwan (God) is able to join you, only if you become one(abheda). But you want to be Chandubhai and you want to besome woman’s husband, you want to be the boy’s father, youwant to be someone’s uncle..., so of course God could neverjoin you! When you become God’s, he will become one withyou (abheda). When you become Shuddhatma, you becomeGod’s; therefore you become one. You are the one who hascreated the division (bhed); God has not created the division(bhed). When you say, ‘I am this woman’s husband’, God says,‘Go, be a husband then.’ And this is how you have made a splitwith God. Now if you become one with God, then everythingbecomes united (abheda)! And to bring about that oneness;there is all this science (vignan). The entire world is searchingfor Bhagwan (God); searching for that oneness.You are right in asking why this separation came about. Isit not true? The division (bhed) is that Bhagwan (God) is reallyinside, but why does one not feel that oneness? One has neverreally bothered with God! One has only been concerned about,‘This is my wife and these are my children, and this is mybrother, this is my uncle’. He does not care about Bhagwan. Infact, no one really cares about Bhagwan. Even devotees do notcare about Bhagwan. Devotees are continually lost in theircymbals and all that; completely absorbed in its revelry andrapture. No one cares about Bhagwan. That Bhagwan tells meeveryday, ‘No one cares about me.’ Some are absorbed withtheir tea, some are obsessed with their drugs, someone is alwaysobsessed with something, some are intoxicated with alcohol,some are obsessed with their wives, then there are those whoare obsessed with money – Alas the entire world is wallowingin some form of absorption!Say Shuddhatma – Pure Soul, for Purity toPrevailQuestioner: Why do you say pure Soul (Shuddhatma)?Why not just say Atma, Soul? Is the Atma, not chetan (Self)as well?Dadashri: Shuddhatma means pure Soul (shuddhachetan). The reason for calling it pure (shuddha) is because,before one used to think, ‘I am a sinner, I am worthless, I amlike this, I am like that.’ All those preconceived ideas that onehad about himself, have all been erased. If one just said soul(Atma), instead of pure Soul (Shuddhatma), he would lose theawareness of his own purity (shuddhata); his awareness of beinguntainted and pristine (nirlepta) would disappear.Questioner: So what is the true meaning (marma) ofShuddhatma?Dadashri: The true meaning of pure Soul (Shuddhatma)is that it is detached (asanga); it cannot be tainted (nirlep;unsmaerable); whereas the atma (the relative self) is not likethat. The atma has been tainted, and the Shuddhatma is theAbsolute Soul (Parmatma). Do people of all religions not say,‘My Soul is sinful’? And even then, the Shuddhatma does nothave any problem.The pure Soul (Shuddhatma) itself indicates, ‘Now wehave become unsmearable (nirlep); all our sins are gone.’ So itis because of shuddha upayog (pure applied awareness of theAptavani-8319320Aptavani-8Self) that we have called it Shuddhatma (the pure Soul).Otherwise, those with atma do not have pure applied awarenessof the Self (shuddha upayog). Where the Atma is concerned,everyone is an Atma! But those who have pure applied awareness(shuddha upayogi); they are called pure Soul (Shuddhatma).There are four kinds of Atma: one with impure awareness(ashuddha upayogi), one with inauspicious awareness (ashubhaupayogi), one with auspicious awareness (shubha upayogi) andone with pure applied awareness (shuddha upayogi). They areall different atmas. Therefore, when we only say Atma, whichof those are we referring to? So you would say, the pure Soul(Shuddhatma). And so the one with the pure applied awareness(shuddha upayogi), is the pure Soul. Now again, the awareness(upayog) has to be kept pure (shuddha). In order to keep theawareness pure, you have the pure Soul (Shuddhatma);otherwise, the awareness cannot remain pure.Someone asked me, ‘Dada, why are you the only onewho calls it pure Soul (Shuddhatma), when everywhere else, iscalling it Atma?’ I replied, ‘The Atma they are talking about,could never be the Atma, and the reason ‘we’ are calling it thepure Soul is different.’ What are we saying? Is that, when wemake you realize just once, that you are Shuddhatma, and thatthis Chandubhai is separate, you will have understood it evenwith your intellect (buddhi). Now if Chandubhai ends up doingthe worse thing possible, something that makes others condemnhim, you should not lose the awareness of, ‘I am Shuddhatma’,and never should you believe that, ‘I am impure (ashuddha)’.It is to say just this; that I have to call it Shuddhatma. You havenever become impure, and that is why ‘we’ have to say this. Theseat of the pure Soul (Shuddhatma pad) that we have givenyou – that Shuddhatma pad – the pure Soul state (shuddhapad), will never again change. That is why we have employedthe pure (shuddha). As far as impurity is concerned, as long asyou have this body, the impurity (ashuddhi) will continue tooccur. Some will experience more impurity and some willexperience less impurity. That will go on happening. And thismay lead one to think, ‘Dada made me pure (shuddha), butthere is still all this impurity’. And once that sets in, it gets spoiledagain.The Intent of Doership Leads to Bondage ofKarmaQuestioner: If a person has received the Knowledge ofthe pure Soul (Shuddhatma), and someone slaps him, if heslaps the person back, are we to assume the knowledge has hadno effect on him? Or that his state of being Shuddhatma is stillweak?Dadashri: You cannot say that the Knowledge ofShuddhatma is weak.Questioner: So why did he slap him back?Dadashri: When he slaps the other person back, at thatmoment, he is separate. In his mind, there is remorse that, ‘Thisshould not happen, why is this happening?’ This Gnan is such,that when you make a mistake, you would instantly know it. Andif you realize that you have made a mistake, you would immediatelyfeel regret without a doubt.And the incident that has occurred has nothing to do withGnan (Knowledge). These are all his discharge intents (bhaav).Questioner: If one has become a pure Soul(Shuddhatma), if he has taken this Gnan, and has becomeperfect, how would we be able to tell from his behavior?Dadashri: He would not have any egoism; his doershipwill have disappeared.Questioner: Say for instance according to him it is, ‘I amnot doing this’. So when I slap him, I say, ‘I am not slappinghim; it is the body that hit him, the Atma has not hit him’, then?Aptavani-8319320Aptavani-8Self) that we have called it Shuddhatma (the pure Soul).Otherwise, those with atma do not have pure applied awarenessof the Self (shuddha upayog). Where the Atma is concerned,everyone is an Atma! But those who have pure applied awareness(shuddha upayogi); they are called pure Soul (Shuddhatma).There are four kinds of Atma: one with impure awareness(ashuddha upayogi), one with inauspicious awareness (ashubhaupayogi), one with auspicious awareness (shubha upayogi) andone with pure applied awareness (shuddha upayogi). They areall different atmas. Therefore, when we only say Atma, whichof those are we referring to? So you would say, the pure Soul(Shuddhatma). And so the one with the pure applied awareness(shuddha upayogi), is the pure Soul. Now again, the awareness(upayog) has to be kept pure (shuddha). In order to keep theawareness pure, you have the pure Soul (Shuddhatma);otherwise, the awareness cannot remain pure.Someone asked me, ‘Dada, why are you the only onewho calls it pure Soul (Shuddhatma), when everywhere else, iscalling it Atma?’ I replied, ‘The Atma they are talking about,could never be the Atma, and the reason ‘we’ are calling it thepure Soul is different.’ What are we saying? Is that, when wemake you realize just once, that you are Shuddhatma, and thatthis Chandubhai is separate, you will have understood it evenwith your intellect (buddhi). Now if Chandubhai ends up doingthe worse thing possible, something that makes others condemnhim, you should not lose the awareness of, ‘I am Shuddhatma’,and never should you believe that, ‘I am impure (ashuddha)’.It is to say just this; that I have to call it Shuddhatma. You havenever become impure, and that is why ‘we’ have to say this. Theseat of the pure Soul (Shuddhatma pad) that we have givenyou – that Shuddhatma pad – the pure Soul state (shuddhapad), will never again change. That is why we have employedthe pure (shuddha). As far as impurity is concerned, as long asyou have this body, the impurity (ashuddhi) will continue tooccur. Some will experience more impurity and some willexperience less impurity. That will go on happening. And thismay lead one to think, ‘Dada made me pure (shuddha), butthere is still all this impurity’. And once that sets in, it gets spoiledagain.The Intent of Doership Leads to Bondage ofKarmaQuestioner: If a person has received the Knowledge ofthe pure Soul (Shuddhatma), and someone slaps him, if heslaps the person back, are we to assume the knowledge has hadno effect on him? Or that his state of being Shuddhatma is stillweak?Dadashri: You cannot say that the Knowledge ofShuddhatma is weak.Questioner: So why did he slap him back?Dadashri: When he slaps the other person back, at thatmoment, he is separate. In his mind, there is remorse that, ‘Thisshould not happen, why is this happening?’ This Gnan is such,that when you make a mistake, you would instantly know it. Andif you realize that you have made a mistake, you would immediatelyfeel regret without a doubt.And the incident that has occurred has nothing to do withGnan (Knowledge). These are all his discharge intents (bhaav).Questioner: If one has become a pure Soul(Shuddhatma), if he has taken this Gnan, and has becomeperfect, how would we be able to tell from his behavior?Dadashri: He would not have any egoism; his doershipwill have disappeared.Questioner: Say for instance according to him it is, ‘I amnot doing this’. So when I slap him, I say, ‘I am not slappinghim; it is the body that hit him, the Atma has not hit him’, then?Aptavani-8321322Aptavani-8Dadashri: You cannot say that! You cannot say, ‘Thebody hit him’. That is a liability. If you say, ‘It was the body thathit him: the Atma did not hit him’, and try and justify yourself inthat way, then we can say, ‘Hold on a second, let me poke yourbody with a needle.’ Therefore you cannot say ‘it was the bodythat did the slapping.’It is like this – hitting someone is a kind of discharge intent(bhaav). After this Gnan, one himself stops charging (of karma),so all that remains after that is just discharge (of karma). Oneis no longer responsible for that.“Karta meetey, toh chhootey karma”“One becomes free from the bondage of karma when thedoer is gone.”For him, the doership is gone.Questioner: The intent (bhaav) of ‘I am doing...’ shouldgo away.Dadashri: That is all. If at least that much intent (bhaav)goes away, then your work is accomplished.Pure: Impure – From Which Perspective?If a man says that he is liberated, without having attainedAtmagnan (Self-realization), it would not be true; that is whatpeople think Atmagnan is. They recite two or four sentenceslike, ‘I have infinite Knowledge, I have infinite Vision’; they taketwo to five such qualities (gunas) and go around saying them outloud. There is no Atmagnan (knowledge of the Self) in that.The ‘I am Shuddhatma’ that is found written in books is tryingto say, ‘You are not all this, you are That’. It seeks to changeone’s vision (drashti); it is telling you to adopt that intent (bhaav).But you cannot say that you have attained the Atma in that way. One can be said to have attained the Self, when heattains Atmagnan (Knowledge of the Self), which is the karanKeval Gnan (causal absolute Knowledge). Self-realization(Atmagnan) does not just happen to anyone! At this presenttime, no one has Atmagnan. If one did have Atmagnan, hisspeech would not be like it is, his conduct would not be like this,he would have no overt insistence (aagraha) whatsoever!The Self-realized being (Atmagnani) has no overt insistence(aagraha); he is without insistence (niragrahi). Moreover, wherethere is Self-realization (Atmagnan), there is no egoism(ahamkar); there is no insistence (aagraha). Besides, wherethere is egoism (ahamkar), and where there is insistence(aagraha) there; they do not know anything. Granted, they doknow scriptural knowledge (shastra gnan). If your egoism(ahamkar) does not go away, by whichever scripture it may be,then the knowledge in the scripture (shastra) has not been usefulto you.Questioner: So many who have had the vision of theAtma, say that it is shuddha-buddha.Dadashri: Yes, they do say pure and enlightened(shuddha-buddha)! Now if the Atma is pure (shuddha) andenlightened (buddha), then why do you go to temples? Andwhy do you read these scriptures? Is this not worthunderstanding? That is why over there, the talks are relativeand dependent. From certain level of expectation, it is pure.Yes, as long as you are Chandubhai, and on top of that, youare ignorant of the Self (agnani), you cannot call the Atmapure! Yes. If your ignorance of the Self (agnan) goes away,the Atma is certainly pure (shuddha)! Inside, it has alwaysbeen pure; it has never become impure (ashuddha)! But if youkeep saying, ‘It is pure (shuddha), it is enlightened (buddha)’for no reason, you will get nowhere. You should be able toexperience that purity. And if you want to say it, you can say,‘In relation to the body, I am impure (ashuddha), but in relationto the Self (Atma), I am pure (shuddha)’. That is because theAptavani-8321322Aptavani-8Dadashri: You cannot say that! You cannot say, ‘Thebody hit him’. That is a liability. If you say, ‘It was the body thathit him: the Atma did not hit him’, and try and justify yourself inthat way, then we can say, ‘Hold on a second, let me poke yourbody with a needle.’ Therefore you cannot say ‘it was the bodythat did the slapping.’It is like this – hitting someone is a kind of discharge intent(bhaav). After this Gnan, one himself stops charging (of karma),so all that remains after that is just discharge (of karma). Oneis no longer responsible for that.“Karta meetey, toh chhootey karma”“One becomes free from the bondage of karma when thedoer is gone.”For him, the doership is gone.Questioner: The intent (bhaav) of ‘I am doing...’ shouldgo away.Dadashri: That is all. If at least that much intent (bhaav)goes away, then your work is accomplished.Pure: Impure – From Which Perspective?If a man says that he is liberated, without having attainedAtmagnan (Self-realization), it would not be true; that is whatpeople think Atmagnan is. They recite two or four sentenceslike, ‘I have infinite Knowledge, I have infinite Vision’; they taketwo to five such qualities (gunas) and go around saying them outloud. There is no Atmagnan (knowledge of the Self) in that.The ‘I am Shuddhatma’ that is found written in books is tryingto say, ‘You are not all this, you are That’. It seeks to changeone’s vision (drashti); it is telling you to adopt that intent (bhaav).But you cannot say that you have attained the Atma in that way. One can be said to have attained the Self, when heattains Atmagnan (Knowledge of the Self), which is the karanKeval Gnan (causal absolute Knowledge). Self-realization(Atmagnan) does not just happen to anyone! At this presenttime, no one has Atmagnan. If one did have Atmagnan, hisspeech would not be like it is, his conduct would not be like this,he would have no overt insistence (aagraha) whatsoever!The Self-realized being (Atmagnani) has no overt insistence(aagraha); he is without insistence (niragrahi). Moreover, wherethere is Self-realization (Atmagnan), there is no egoism(ahamkar); there is no insistence (aagraha). Besides, wherethere is egoism (ahamkar), and where there is insistence(aagraha) there; they do not know anything. Granted, they doknow scriptural knowledge (shastra gnan). If your egoism(ahamkar) does not go away, by whichever scripture it may be,then the knowledge in the scripture (shastra) has not been usefulto you.Questioner: So many who have had the vision of theAtma, say that it is shuddha-buddha.Dadashri: Yes, they do say pure and enlightened(shuddha-buddha)! Now if the Atma is pure (shuddha) andenlightened (buddha), then why do you go to temples? Andwhy do you read these scriptures? Is this not worthunderstanding? That is why over there, the talks are relativeand dependent. From certain level of expectation, it is pure.Yes, as long as you are Chandubhai, and on top of that, youare ignorant of the Self (agnani), you cannot call the Atmapure! Yes. If your ignorance of the Self (agnan) goes away,the Atma is certainly pure (shuddha)! Inside, it has alwaysbeen pure; it has never become impure (ashuddha)! But if youkeep saying, ‘It is pure (shuddha), it is enlightened (buddha)’for no reason, you will get nowhere. You should be able toexperience that purity. And if you want to say it, you can say,‘In relation to the body, I am impure (ashuddha), but in relationto the Self (Atma), I am pure (shuddha)’. That is because theAptavani-8323324Aptavani-8Self is itself independent (nirpeksha)! But this should be adependent (sapeksha) thing. You cannot just make anindependent statement that ‘the Atma is indeed pure’; youcannot speak this way. If you just say, ‘The Atma is pure’,then there is no need to look for it!‘What Is’ – That You Must Know (!) But...Gurus say, ‘You are this’, and one continues to chantit repeatedly. However, they have not told you ‘What you arenot’: they need to tell you both things. All they tell you is,‘what is’. They have not told you ‘what is not’. That is whyone lives in ‘what is not’, but the words that come out areof, ‘what is’. I have come across so many people here. They tell me,‘My guru has given this to me.’ And I say to them, ‘It is correct,it is not wrong. Your guru has given it to you. But what have youachieved from it until now, tell me that. If someone provokesyou, does it not bother you?’ So the person says, ‘That does notgo away. But it will happen after some time.’ I said, ‘No, itwould not take long at all, if you had your own Self form(swaroop), in your hands.’ Then he asks, ‘What is stopping it?’That is when I told him, ‘You have not been told, what you arenot; they have told you what you are’. But they have not toldyou, what you are not. If they had told you this, it would havebeen helpful. Which guru would know what you are not? Tellme!Right now, are you not present while eating and drinking?The other person took the adjustment of ‘I am indeed pure andenlightened’. But what are you not? Why do you not find thatout, or is it all the same to you? ‘I am pure-enlightened (shuddha-buddha)’, and is the cardamom pure-enlightened (shuddha-buddha) as well? Now, what is not? So until this is analyzed,one will not get anywhere; he is wandering around. For endlesslifetimes, this same wandering has carried on.Narsinh Mehta (renowned 15th Century Gujarati poet) whowas a great thinker, did much critical analysis! Was he just anyold Nagar (a Brahmin caste)? ‘Nagar child can never be weak’(Nagar baccho kabhi na hoy kaccho) – He can never befeeble. He has done an incredible amount of analyzing. And thenhe said:“Jaha lagi Atma tattva chinhyo nahi;tyahaa lagi sadhana sarva joothi.” “Until you have attained the element that is Atma, allyour efforts will have been in vain.”So, he is telling us that his own efforts (sadhana) ofattaining the Atma were wrong! So what does it mean toknow the element that is the Atma (the Self)? It is to know‘What it is’ and it is to know ‘What it is not’ – that is calledthe element of the Atma (Atma tattva)! But if you only know,‘What is not’, then just that much would be enough for me.Because if you know ‘What is not’, then ‘What is’, isunderstood. And that which is understood, is true anyway, soif you do not know that, it is perfectly fine. However, you haveto know this, ‘What is not’. However, people have understoodthat, ‘What is’, and so they keep singing about it. Even whilethey are eating laddus (sweets)...can such thing happen? Thisis what has happened all along, which is why infinite lifetimeskeep occurring.‘What Is Not’- How Do We Know This? Questioner: Now regarding that negative side, can youexplain how we are supposed to know the negative side?Dadashri: I will explain all that to you on that day. At thattime you will learn about all that negative. You will enjoy thesetalks better after that. That is when what I am telling you willreach you.That is why I tell these people to go and find out ‘WhatAptavani-8323324Aptavani-8Self is itself independent (nirpeksha)! But this should be adependent (sapeksha) thing. You cannot just make anindependent statement that ‘the Atma is indeed pure’; youcannot speak this way. If you just say, ‘The Atma is pure’,then there is no need to look for it!‘What Is’ – That You Must Know (!) But...Gurus say, ‘You are this’, and one continues to chantit repeatedly. However, they have not told you ‘What you arenot’: they need to tell you both things. All they tell you is,‘what is’. They have not told you ‘what is not’. That is whyone lives in ‘what is not’, but the words that come out areof, ‘what is’. I have come across so many people here. They tell me,‘My guru has given this to me.’ And I say to them, ‘It is correct,it is not wrong. Your guru has given it to you. But what have youachieved from it until now, tell me that. If someone provokesyou, does it not bother you?’ So the person says, ‘That does notgo away. But it will happen after some time.’ I said, ‘No, itwould not take long at all, if you had your own Self form(swaroop), in your hands.’ Then he asks, ‘What is stopping it?’That is when I told him, ‘You have not been told, what you arenot; they have told you what you are’. But they have not toldyou, what you are not. If they had told you this, it would havebeen helpful. Which guru would know what you are not? Tellme!Right now, are you not present while eating and drinking?The other person took the adjustment of ‘I am indeed pure andenlightened’. But what are you not? Why do you not find thatout, or is it all the same to you? ‘I am pure-enlightened (shuddha-buddha)’, and is the cardamom pure-enlightened (shuddha-buddha) as well? Now, what is not? So until this is analyzed,one will not get anywhere; he is wandering around. For endlesslifetimes, this same wandering has carried on.Narsinh Mehta (renowned 15th Century Gujarati poet) whowas a great thinker, did much critical analysis! Was he just anyold Nagar (a Brahmin caste)? ‘Nagar child can never be weak’(Nagar baccho kabhi na hoy kaccho) – He can never befeeble. He has done an incredible amount of analyzing. And thenhe said:“Jaha lagi Atma tattva chinhyo nahi;tyahaa lagi sadhana sarva joothi.” “Until you have attained the element that is Atma, allyour efforts will have been in vain.”So, he is telling us that his own efforts (sadhana) ofattaining the Atma were wrong! So what does it mean toknow the element that is the Atma (the Self)? It is to know‘What it is’ and it is to know ‘What it is not’ – that is calledthe element of the Atma (Atma tattva)! But if you only know,‘What is not’, then just that much would be enough for me.Because if you know ‘What is not’, then ‘What is’, isunderstood. And that which is understood, is true anyway, soif you do not know that, it is perfectly fine. However, you haveto know this, ‘What is not’. However, people have understoodthat, ‘What is’, and so they keep singing about it. Even whilethey are eating laddus (sweets)...can such thing happen? Thisis what has happened all along, which is why infinite lifetimeskeep occurring.‘What Is Not’- How Do We Know This? Questioner: Now regarding that negative side, can youexplain how we are supposed to know the negative side?Dadashri: I will explain all that to you on that day. At thattime you will learn about all that negative. You will enjoy thesetalks better after that. That is when what I am telling you willreach you.That is why I tell these people to go and find out ‘WhatAptavani-8325326Aptavani-8is not’. That is when they say, “I want to know ‘what is not’.”So I tell them to just get rid of the ‘my’. ‘My hands’: that youare not. You are not, ‘my head’; you are not in ‘my eyes’, keeptaking all that away. My mind, my egoism, my speech; take allthat away. Then you could say, ‘I will attain my salvation; itwould immediately come and stand before me.’ So do it, buthow can the poor man take all this out? First his paap (demeritkarma; sins) must be completely destroyed.What is this whole world like? If you do it this way, youget stuck, and if you do it this way, you get stuck. That is whyeverything is relative and dependent (sapeksha); when onecomes, he still has another expectation waiting. Therefore, after‘we’ destroy your demerit karma (paap), you will understandthoroughly, ‘What is’ and ‘What is not’. Besides, I have told oneforeign scientist about, ‘What is not’.When we went to Lonawala, they had come there. Andthey said, ‘Give us something.’ So I told them, “Separate I andMy with the Gnani’s separator.” I told him, that I was notgoing to give him my separator, but I was going to show himthe way to do the separation internally. And that way, you cansubtract the ‘mine’, subtract this, and subtract that. But howcan he attain that now? Without destroying his demerit karma(paap), how was he going to attain that? It is those demeritkarmas that put layers of coverings (avaran) over thisKnowledge (Gnan). That is why the demerit karmas have tobe destroyed first. It is because of those demerit karmas thatyou are not able to remember. Why does the awareness ofShuddhatma constantly remain in this person? It is becausethe paap have been destroyed, that the awareness ofShuddhatma is constantly there.Questioner: So does that subtle covering have to beremoved?Dadashri: ‘We’ will remove that for you.One Attains Moksha Leisurely in the Lift ofthe Akram PathQuestioner: You have said that for Atmagnan(Knowledge of the Self), the step-less path of Akram is easierthan the step-by-step Kramic path.Dadashri: Yes, the Akram path means a ‘lift’ path. AndKramic means staircase; you have to climb step-by-step. AndAkram means you have to get inside a lift. You do not have todo anything and you go straight to moksha. If you had to doanything, it would mean that you have not met ‘us’. Therefore,you do not have to do a thing. We only give you the Five Agnas(directives) just so that you do not stick your hands and feet outof the elevator.Questioner: But that path is not easy to find anywhere.Dadashri: No, it is there! It is wide open, and thousandsof people have taken it. At least some twenty-five thousandpeople are on it, and you say you cannot find it, how can yousay that? The path is there, but it is only a matter of you comingacross it. But the timing has to be right. When the timing is right,you will find the path.When you find all the mind’s solutions, the timing will beright. The mind will become satisfied that the path is right.Thereafter the train will get on to the tracks; otherwise it willnever get on. And the train will keep traveling on the illusion(bhranti) line, and never come on the main line. And therewould not be anyone anywhere on the main line. They are all onthe illusory (bhrant) lines. Besides the Akram path (marg) is onthe main line. That is why this is a ‘full-stop’ line; it is not a‘comma’ path (marg).What does the Kramic path mean? It means a step-by-step path. That is, if one finds a sant purush (saint; holy man),he would have climbed five thousand steps. Then if he meets anAptavani-8325326Aptavani-8is not’. That is when they say, “I want to know ‘what is not’.”So I tell them to just get rid of the ‘my’. ‘My hands’: that youare not. You are not, ‘my head’; you are not in ‘my eyes’, keeptaking all that away. My mind, my egoism, my speech; take allthat away. Then you could say, ‘I will attain my salvation; itwould immediately come and stand before me.’ So do it, buthow can the poor man take all this out? First his paap (demeritkarma; sins) must be completely destroyed.What is this whole world like? If you do it this way, youget stuck, and if you do it this way, you get stuck. That is whyeverything is relative and dependent (sapeksha); when onecomes, he still has another expectation waiting. Therefore, after‘we’ destroy your demerit karma (paap), you will understandthoroughly, ‘What is’ and ‘What is not’. Besides, I have told oneforeign scientist about, ‘What is not’.When we went to Lonawala, they had come there. Andthey said, ‘Give us something.’ So I told them, “Separate I andMy with the Gnani’s separator.” I told him, that I was notgoing to give him my separator, but I was going to show himthe way to do the separation internally. And that way, you cansubtract the ‘mine’, subtract this, and subtract that. But howcan he attain that now? Without destroying his demerit karma(paap), how was he going to attain that? It is those demeritkarmas that put layers of coverings (avaran) over thisKnowledge (Gnan). That is why the demerit karmas have tobe destroyed first. It is because of those demerit karmas thatyou are not able to remember. Why does the awareness ofShuddhatma constantly remain in this person? It is becausethe paap have been destroyed, that the awareness ofShuddhatma is constantly there.Questioner: So does that subtle covering have to beremoved?Dadashri: ‘We’ will remove that for you.One Attains Moksha Leisurely in the Lift ofthe Akram PathQuestioner: You have said that for Atmagnan(Knowledge of the Self), the step-less path of Akram is easierthan the step-by-step Kramic path.Dadashri: Yes, the Akram path means a ‘lift’ path. AndKramic means staircase; you have to climb step-by-step. AndAkram means you have to get inside a lift. You do not have todo anything and you go straight to moksha. If you had to doanything, it would mean that you have not met ‘us’. Therefore,you do not have to do a thing. We only give you the Five Agnas(directives) just so that you do not stick your hands and feet outof the elevator.Questioner: But that path is not easy to find anywhere.Dadashri: No, it is there! It is wide open, and thousandsof people have taken it. At least some twenty-five thousandpeople are on it, and you say you cannot find it, how can yousay that? The path is there, but it is only a matter of you comingacross it. But the timing has to be right. When the timing is right,you will find the path.When you find all the mind’s solutions, the timing will beright. The mind will become satisfied that the path is right.Thereafter the train will get on to the tracks; otherwise it willnever get on. And the train will keep traveling on the illusion(bhranti) line, and never come on the main line. And therewould not be anyone anywhere on the main line. They are all onthe illusory (bhrant) lines. Besides the Akram path (marg) is onthe main line. That is why this is a ‘full-stop’ line; it is not a‘comma’ path (marg).What does the Kramic path mean? It means a step-by-step path. That is, if one finds a sant purush (saint; holy man),he would have climbed five thousand steps. Then if he meets anAptavani-8327328Aptavani-8acquaintance, he would be taken to a ‘canteen’, where again hewould descend three thousand steps. This is how he wouldclimb and fall, climb and fall, continuously, over and over again.That is why it is not a safe-side path.Questioner: What do you have to do to turn towards theAkram marg?Dadashri: You have come here, so if you say, ‘Sir, bringabout a solution for me.’ The solution will come. You can onlysay this if your obstacles (antaray) have broken. Otherwise onewill say, ‘it will happen later, we will see to it later’ and twoyears go by. And then they come again. But because they havecome, they do attain it. One or two cases may fail, out of athousand; otherwise not. All the other cases are successful.Because who would forgo such a cash reward? And on top ofthat, you do not have to do anything. You only have to get in thelift.Meeting the Gnani Is Itself the RequiredQualificationQuestioner: If anyone can attain this Gnan, are thereany special qualifications?Dadashri: No. The fact that one comes here, is itself hiseligibility; no other qualification is required. Him coming here; initself is the eligibility! Besides, when will they ever pass this kindof qualification? Whereas, here, we even accept those who havefailed. We even put those who have failed, on the path to moksha(final liberation).The Desire to Know Gives the Ultimate ThingQuestioner: Do we attain that high stage as well, afterwe attain Gnan?Dadashri: Then there will be no difference between meand you. The only difference would be that I have sold off allthe stock in my shop. And you still have to empty (nikal) yourshop. That is the only difference. You still have to sell off all yourstock; molasses, sugar and whatever is left, you have to get ridof. I have already gotten rid of everything, and now I am justsitting here. That is the only difference!That is why I make you sit right beside me, where I myselfam sitting. So when you have such a high seat, your worries willundoubtedly end. Besides, is it an easy thing to stop worrying?In this world, there is not a single person who is free fromworry; therefore, I am making you free from worry. But you canonly become free from worry, when I place you on the samelevel as me, right? You cannot achieve it just like that.Know that when your worries stop, that you will be goingto moksha in just one more lifetime. When you no longer haveworries, in spite of living in the worldly life (sansar), living withyour wife and children, despite carrying out your worldlyinteraction (vyavahar); when you do not have any worries atall, you should understand that in one more lifetime, you will begoing to final liberation (moksha), and that guarantee has alreadybeen given.Questioner: It is difficult to attain such a state.Dadashri: It is difficult. But as this Akram Vignan hascome about, moksha has turned out to be easier than makingkhichadee (rice and lentils)! So it is difficult to attain this AkramVignan; it is difficult for such merit karmas (punya) to awaken.And if you do get it, your salvation will be at hand. That isbecause once the merit karma (punya) come into effect, you donot have to do anything. You only have to get on the lift, makingsure you do not dangle your arms and legs out, which is why wehave given you the Five Agnas (directives). Those, you have toabide by.Questioner: At the moment, we are seekers of KnowledgeAptavani-8327328Aptavani-8acquaintance, he would be taken to a ‘canteen’, where again hewould descend three thousand steps. This is how he wouldclimb and fall, climb and fall, continuously, over and over again.That is why it is not a safe-side path.Questioner: What do you have to do to turn towards theAkram marg?Dadashri: You have come here, so if you say, ‘Sir, bringabout a solution for me.’ The solution will come. You can onlysay this if your obstacles (antaray) have broken. Otherwise onewill say, ‘it will happen later, we will see to it later’ and twoyears go by. And then they come again. But because they havecome, they do attain it. One or two cases may fail, out of athousand; otherwise not. All the other cases are successful.Because who would forgo such a cash reward? And on top ofthat, you do not have to do anything. You only have to get in thelift.Meeting the Gnani Is Itself the RequiredQualificationQuestioner: If anyone can attain this Gnan, are thereany special qualifications?Dadashri: No. The fact that one comes here, is itself hiseligibility; no other qualification is required. Him coming here; initself is the eligibility! Besides, when will they ever pass this kindof qualification? Whereas, here, we even accept those who havefailed. We even put those who have failed, on the path to moksha(final liberation).The Desire to Know Gives the Ultimate ThingQuestioner: Do we attain that high stage as well, afterwe attain Gnan?Dadashri: Then there will be no difference between meand you. The only difference would be that I have sold off allthe stock in my shop. And you still have to empty (nikal) yourshop. That is the only difference. You still have to sell off all yourstock; molasses, sugar and whatever is left, you have to get ridof. I have already gotten rid of everything, and now I am justsitting here. That is the only difference!That is why I make you sit right beside me, where I myselfam sitting. So when you have such a high seat, your worries willundoubtedly end. Besides, is it an easy thing to stop worrying?In this world, there is not a single person who is free fromworry; therefore, I am making you free from worry. But you canonly become free from worry, when I place you on the samelevel as me, right? You cannot achieve it just like that.Know that when your worries stop, that you will be goingto moksha in just one more lifetime. When you no longer haveworries, in spite of living in the worldly life (sansar), living withyour wife and children, despite carrying out your worldlyinteraction (vyavahar); when you do not have any worries atall, you should understand that in one more lifetime, you will begoing to final liberation (moksha), and that guarantee has alreadybeen given.Questioner: It is difficult to attain such a state.Dadashri: It is difficult. But as this Akram Vignan hascome about, moksha has turned out to be easier than makingkhichadee (rice and lentils)! So it is difficult to attain this AkramVignan; it is difficult for such merit karmas (punya) to awaken.And if you do get it, your salvation will be at hand. That isbecause once the merit karma (punya) come into effect, you donot have to do anything. You only have to get on the lift, makingsure you do not dangle your arms and legs out, which is why wehave given you the Five Agnas (directives). Those, you have toabide by.Questioner: At the moment, we are seekers of KnowledgeAptavani-8329330Aptavani-8(jignyasu); we wish to know the difference between Knowledge(Gnan) and ignorance of the Soul (agnan).Dadashri: At the moment your state is that of a seeker(jignyasu), but does this state prevail all day long?Questioner: Most of the time.Dadashri: No, you cannot be a seeker (jignyasu) theentire day! At the moment your state is that of a seeker. However,if you are in a hospital, your state becomes that of a patient.Whichever condition (avastha) you happen to be in, you acceptit; therefore, that will be your state! But should you not find out,Who you really are, until now?Questioner: We should.Dadashri: Then why have not you done so?Questioner: That search is still going on sir.Dadashri: Where have you been looking?Questioner: Through reading, spiritual gatherings(satsangs), through meeting the Gnani Purush. Our search goeson in this way.Dadashri: That search is fine. Because of your searching,today you have managed to come to a Gnani Purush. Nowyou have to tell the Gnani Purush about anything you want; askhim for whatever you want. You are free to ask him for anythingyou want. Whatever you want, you are free to ask him. You arefree to fill out a tender of however many things you want.It is like this: if you go out to buy some radishes, even theradishes are valuable; they ask ten rupees for them. Whereasthis, is something invaluable. So what do you have to buy? Thiswould not have a value, would it? You yourself should be awarethat this is something you have to get. And for that, you have tobe ready for it. If a boy is to pick up an award at school, hegoes to receive it with such readiness; he goes with such modesty,with so much respect, with so much humility to pick it up. Sofor this, would there also not be some prior preparation? Youshould have that kind of inner intent (bhavna) and awareness.How excited does a student become when he is told that he haswon an award! Whereas here we are talking about giving yousomething that is priceless.The Incomparable Powers of the Akram PathYour salvation (kalyan) has happened when no duality(dwandva) in this world affects you; nothing affects you, andyour awareness is of ‘I am the Absolute Soul (Parmatma)’! Orelse you have faith in, ‘I am the pure Soul (Shuddhatma)’. Evenif it sits in one’s conviction, one can move further. Therefore, itmust first enter one’s understanding. And when it enters one’sunderstanding, one’s behavior (vartan) may change, or it maynot change. But when can you say that he has come into Gnan(Knowledge)? You can say that he has come into Gnan, whenhis behavior (vartan) has changed. It should reflect in one’sconduct – that is called Gnan.The Gnan that ‘we’ give you, is the knowledge of AbsoluteVision (Keval Darshan); we are giving you the knowledge ofthe permanent conviction of the right belief (kshayak samkit).Then if you abide by my Agnas, you get the benefit of both. Andwhen does that become a permanent conviction of Knowledge(kshayak Gnan)? It is when that understanding manifests inyour conduct (vartan) – that is when the permanent conviction(kshayak) of Gnan occurs.I am giving you Absolute Knowledge (Keval Gnan), butbecause of this current time cycle (kaad) you are not able todigest it. Nevertheless, ‘we’ have to give you the full, completeAbsolute Knowledge (Keval Gnan). If I do not give it to youfully, it is not likely to manifest within you; however, it cannot bedigested on account of this era of the time-cycle (kaad). EvenAptavani-8329330Aptavani-8(jignyasu); we wish to know the difference between Knowledge(Gnan) and ignorance of the Soul (agnan).Dadashri: At the moment your state is that of a seeker(jignyasu), but does this state prevail all day long?Questioner: Most of the time.Dadashri: No, you cannot be a seeker (jignyasu) theentire day! At the moment your state is that of a seeker. However,if you are in a hospital, your state becomes that of a patient.Whichever condition (avastha) you happen to be in, you acceptit; therefore, that will be your state! But should you not find out,Who you really are, until now?Questioner: We should.Dadashri: Then why have not you done so?Questioner: That search is still going on sir.Dadashri: Where have you been looking?Questioner: Through reading, spiritual gatherings(satsangs), through meeting the Gnani Purush. Our search goeson in this way.Dadashri: That search is fine. Because of your searching,today you have managed to come to a Gnani Purush. Nowyou have to tell the Gnani Purush about anything you want; askhim for whatever you want. You are free to ask him for anythingyou want. Whatever you want, you are free to ask him. You arefree to fill out a tender of however many things you want.It is like this: if you go out to buy some radishes, even theradishes are valuable; they ask ten rupees for them. Whereasthis, is something invaluable. So what do you have to buy? Thiswould not have a value, would it? You yourself should be awarethat this is something you have to get. And for that, you have tobe ready for it. If a boy is to pick up an award at school, hegoes to receive it with such readiness; he goes with such modesty,with so much respect, with so much humility to pick it up. Sofor this, would there also not be some prior preparation? Youshould have that kind of inner intent (bhavna) and awareness.How excited does a student become when he is told that he haswon an award! Whereas here we are talking about giving yousomething that is priceless.The Incomparable Powers of the Akram PathYour salvation (kalyan) has happened when no duality(dwandva) in this world affects you; nothing affects you, andyour awareness is of ‘I am the Absolute Soul (Parmatma)’! Orelse you have faith in, ‘I am the pure Soul (Shuddhatma)’. Evenif it sits in one’s conviction, one can move further. Therefore, itmust first enter one’s understanding. And when it enters one’sunderstanding, one’s behavior (vartan) may change, or it maynot change. But when can you say that he has come into Gnan(Knowledge)? You can say that he has come into Gnan, whenhis behavior (vartan) has changed. It should reflect in one’sconduct – that is called Gnan.The Gnan that ‘we’ give you, is the knowledge of AbsoluteVision (Keval Darshan); we are giving you the knowledge ofthe permanent conviction of the right belief (kshayak samkit).Then if you abide by my Agnas, you get the benefit of both. Andwhen does that become a permanent conviction of Knowledge(kshayak Gnan)? It is when that understanding manifests inyour conduct (vartan) – that is when the permanent conviction(kshayak) of Gnan occurs.I am giving you Absolute Knowledge (Keval Gnan), butbecause of this current time cycle (kaad) you are not able todigest it. Nevertheless, ‘we’ have to give you the full, completeAbsolute Knowledge (Keval Gnan). If I do not give it to youfully, it is not likely to manifest within you; however, it cannot bedigested on account of this era of the time-cycle (kaad). EvenAptavani-8331332Aptavani-8though it is not digested, we do not have a problem with that.That is because when liberation (moksha) has come to us, whatmore would we need?After giving you moksha such as this, if you get your sonsand daughters married, why would that be problem? Otherwise,if you hurt any living being even slightly, are they likely to let youenter the final liberation (moksha)? Because the wife will say,‘Hold on, you cannot leave yet. You can go after we get ouryoungest daughter married.’ And would you be able to getmoksha by running away? Bhagwan says that it is not theworldly life (sansar) that hinders you, but it is ignorance (agnan)that obstructs you. Once ignorance of the Self (agnan) goes,then what is the problem?Oh! To Know The Atma Is To...Otherwise, the Atma that people refer to in general, is themechanical atma. That in itself is illusion (bhranti). And thenwhen you ask them, ‘Have you attained enlightenment or theright belief (samkit)?’ They will say, ‘No, we have not attainedenlightenment.’ What else is there, after you have known theAtma? You are considered to have gone beyond kshayak samkit,closer to Absolute Knowledge (Keval Gnan). The Atma is notsomething you can discern very easily. That is why Krupadudevhas written on the cardinal book, ‘He who has known the Atma;has known everything’.This, that needs to be said, is written on the top. And ifone does not Know (experience the Self), then he will strugglein vain. One has struggled in vain for countless past lives, andagain he continues to do the same. That is what Krupadudev hassaid. Despite this, in this way, one day he will find the true thing.It Can Be Known Through the Gnani’s Gnanof SeparationQuestioner: Is it possible to know the Atma withoutknowing the anatma (non-Soul)?Dadashri: If you know the Atma, you will know theanatma; however, that would be in terms of words. And youcannot know the Atma through that. And that is why we havesaid:“Mun-vachan-kayani tamaam sangi kriyathi ‘hoo’ taddanasang chhu.”“I am completely detached from all jointly associatedactivity of the mind, speech and body.” All those associated joint activities (sangi kriyas) are thenon-Self (anatma).“Mun-vachan-kayana tamaam lepayamaan bhavo thi‘hoo’ sarvathaa nirlep ja chhu.”“Amidst all intents of the mind, speech and body that tendto corrupt and taint, ‘I’ remain eternally untainted.”These intents that tend to taint, which arise in the mind,are all part of the non-Self (anatma). Questioner: Does that mean it is possible to know thenon-Self (anatma) and the Atma at the same time?Dadashri: It is not possible to know both at the sametime. When we give you this Gnan, everything will separate. Butwill you not have to know everything as it is?Even now, what is an element (tattva)? They do not evenknow that, and they say, ‘I am the Atma, I am the pure Soul(Shuddhatma).’ They also say things like, ‘knowledge-vision-conduct (gnan-darshan-charitra)’. But where is the Atma inall that? There is no way of knowing that.Questioner: So should I understand that I do not knowanything?Dadashri: That is all: ‘I do not know anything’, would beconsidered words of wisdom.Aptavani-8331332Aptavani-8though it is not digested, we do not have a problem with that.That is because when liberation (moksha) has come to us, whatmore would we need?After giving you moksha such as this, if you get your sonsand daughters married, why would that be problem? Otherwise,if you hurt any living being even slightly, are they likely to let youenter the final liberation (moksha)? Because the wife will say,‘Hold on, you cannot leave yet. You can go after we get ouryoungest daughter married.’ And would you be able to getmoksha by running away? Bhagwan says that it is not theworldly life (sansar) that hinders you, but it is ignorance (agnan)that obstructs you. Once ignorance of the Self (agnan) goes,then what is the problem?Oh! To Know The Atma Is To...Otherwise, the Atma that people refer to in general, is themechanical atma. That in itself is illusion (bhranti). And thenwhen you ask them, ‘Have you attained enlightenment or theright belief (samkit)?’ They will say, ‘No, we have not attainedenlightenment.’ What else is there, after you have known theAtma? You are considered to have gone beyond kshayak samkit,closer to Absolute Knowledge (Keval Gnan). The Atma is notsomething you can discern very easily. That is why Krupadudevhas written on the cardinal book, ‘He who has known the Atma;has known everything’.This, that needs to be said, is written on the top. And ifone does not Know (experience the Self), then he will strugglein vain. One has struggled in vain for countless past lives, andagain he continues to do the same. That is what Krupadudev hassaid. Despite this, in this way, one day he will find the true thing.It Can Be Known Through the Gnani’s Gnanof SeparationQuestioner: Is it possible to know the Atma withoutknowing the anatma (non-Soul)?Dadashri: If you know the Atma, you will know theanatma; however, that would be in terms of words. And youcannot know the Atma through that. And that is why we havesaid:“Mun-vachan-kayani tamaam sangi kriyathi ‘hoo’ taddanasang chhu.”“I am completely detached from all jointly associatedactivity of the mind, speech and body.” All those associated joint activities (sangi kriyas) are thenon-Self (anatma).“Mun-vachan-kayana tamaam lepayamaan bhavo thi‘hoo’ sarvathaa nirlep ja chhu.”“Amidst all intents of the mind, speech and body that tendto corrupt and taint, ‘I’ remain eternally untainted.”These intents that tend to taint, which arise in the mind,are all part of the non-Self (anatma). Questioner: Does that mean it is possible to know thenon-Self (anatma) and the Atma at the same time?Dadashri: It is not possible to know both at the sametime. When we give you this Gnan, everything will separate. Butwill you not have to know everything as it is?Even now, what is an element (tattva)? They do not evenknow that, and they say, ‘I am the Atma, I am the pure Soul(Shuddhatma).’ They also say things like, ‘knowledge-vision-conduct (gnan-darshan-charitra)’. But where is the Atma inall that? There is no way of knowing that.Questioner: So should I understand that I do not knowanything?Dadashri: That is all: ‘I do not know anything’, would beconsidered words of wisdom.Aptavani-8333334Aptavani-8  The Worldly Life Ends Through Vitarag VisionKnowledge is a vision (drashti). This vision (drashti) isthrough the physical eyes. And the other, is the vision throughKnowledge (Gnan drashti), and if you learn how to see throughit, your work will be done! And through these the physical eyes?Through them you will see, ‘He is my father-in-law, he is mymaternal uncle (mama), this is my uncle (fuva)’. Is all that true?Is this all, correct? Can anyone be a father-in-law for good? Aslong as you are not divorced, he is your father-in-law. After youget divorced, that relationship will be over, the following day.That is why all these are nothing but temporary adjustments.Moreover, it is the Gnani Purush that can change that vision(drashti).Questioner: He changes the externally directed visioninto an internally directed one.Dadashri: No. It is not that kind of internally directedvision. Right now, you certainly do have internal vision. However,we change that vision; therefore you are able to see Atma,externally as well. Is there not also Atma on the outside, just asthere is on the inside? But we change that vision (drashti) foryou. Except for that, ‘we’ do not remember the worldly life(sansar), even for a minute.Questioner: And we do not forget the worldly life(sansar), even for a minute.Dadashri: So the entire design is different. The entirevision (drashti) differs; nothing else. You are seeing this, whileI am seeing it from the other direction. There is a difference inthe whole vision. No other effort is needed here. If someonechanged your vision (drashti) for you, then even you would seeit exactly in the same way.Once the vision (drashti) changes, that vision will blossomand slowly, one becomes Bhagwan (God). But until the visionhas blossomed, your pocket will be picked and you will blamethe culprit. Through flawed vision (drashti dosh), one will seepudgal (the non-Self) as individual separate entities.Questioner: Is this considered the fault of the physicaleyes (charmachakshu)? If we are in ignorance (agnanta), howare we supposed to know that we are in ignorance (agnanta)?Dadashri: You would not know that. Then whatever one’svision (drashti), that is how he becomes. This vision (drashti)of the physical eyes; is not a vision (drashti). One’s vision isaccording to one’s knowledge (gnan). His vision is proportionateto his knowledge. A person’s vision is based on whateverknowledge (gnan) he has acquired. And whatever that vision islike; that is how he sees everything around him. ‘He is myenemy, and he is my friend’, he will say. Now in this world, thereis no friend and no enemy, but that is how his vision (drashti)has been composed, which is why he sees things in that way.Questioner: If something is wrong, we should give it up.If we make that kind of effort, then gradually things might change.Dadashri: Now if you want to go to moksha, you needto get rid of this duality (dwandva) of right-wrong. And if youwant to come into the auspicious (shubha), then you shouldhave abhorrence (dwesh) and disdain (tiraskar) towards thethings that are wrong, and attachment (raag) for the things thatare good. And for the pure (shuddha); you do not need to haveattachment (raag) or abhorrence (dwesh) for things that aregood or bad. That is because there is no such thing as good andbad; it is just impurity of vision. This looks good and this looksbad, that in itself is the impurity of the vision, and that itself is awrong vision (mithyatva).Therefore the poisoned vision must cease. That poisonedvision is what ‘we’ remove for you. Once that poisoned visionis gone, you will have the awareness of the Atma. Otherwise,it is not just any old thing, to be able to attain the awareness ofAptavani-8333334Aptavani-8  The Worldly Life Ends Through Vitarag VisionKnowledge is a vision (drashti). This vision (drashti) isthrough the physical eyes. And the other, is the vision throughKnowledge (Gnan drashti), and if you learn how to see throughit, your work will be done! And through these the physical eyes?Through them you will see, ‘He is my father-in-law, he is mymaternal uncle (mama), this is my uncle (fuva)’. Is all that true?Is this all, correct? Can anyone be a father-in-law for good? Aslong as you are not divorced, he is your father-in-law. After youget divorced, that relationship will be over, the following day.That is why all these are nothing but temporary adjustments.Moreover, it is the Gnani Purush that can change that vision(drashti).Questioner: He changes the externally directed visioninto an internally directed one.Dadashri: No. It is not that kind of internally directedvision. Right now, you certainly do have internal vision. However,we change that vision; therefore you are able to see Atma,externally as well. Is there not also Atma on the outside, just asthere is on the inside? But we change that vision (drashti) foryou. Except for that, ‘we’ do not remember the worldly life(sansar), even for a minute.Questioner: And we do not forget the worldly life(sansar), even for a minute.Dadashri: So the entire design is different. The entirevision (drashti) differs; nothing else. You are seeing this, whileI am seeing it from the other direction. There is a difference inthe whole vision. No other effort is needed here. If someonechanged your vision (drashti) for you, then even you would seeit exactly in the same way.Once the vision (drashti) changes, that vision will blossomand slowly, one becomes Bhagwan (God). But until the visionhas blossomed, your pocket will be picked and you will blamethe culprit. Through flawed vision (drashti dosh), one will seepudgal (the non-Self) as individual separate entities.Questioner: Is this considered the fault of the physicaleyes (charmachakshu)? If we are in ignorance (agnanta), howare we supposed to know that we are in ignorance (agnanta)?Dadashri: You would not know that. Then whatever one’svision (drashti), that is how he becomes. This vision (drashti)of the physical eyes; is not a vision (drashti). One’s vision isaccording to one’s knowledge (gnan). His vision is proportionateto his knowledge. A person’s vision is based on whateverknowledge (gnan) he has acquired. And whatever that vision islike; that is how he sees everything around him. ‘He is myenemy, and he is my friend’, he will say. Now in this world, thereis no friend and no enemy, but that is how his vision (drashti)has been composed, which is why he sees things in that way.Questioner: If something is wrong, we should give it up.If we make that kind of effort, then gradually things might change.Dadashri: Now if you want to go to moksha, you needto get rid of this duality (dwandva) of right-wrong. And if youwant to come into the auspicious (shubha), then you shouldhave abhorrence (dwesh) and disdain (tiraskar) towards thethings that are wrong, and attachment (raag) for the things thatare good. And for the pure (shuddha); you do not need to haveattachment (raag) or abhorrence (dwesh) for things that aregood or bad. That is because there is no such thing as good andbad; it is just impurity of vision. This looks good and this looksbad, that in itself is the impurity of the vision, and that itself is awrong vision (mithyatva).Therefore the poisoned vision must cease. That poisonedvision is what ‘we’ remove for you. Once that poisoned visionis gone, you will have the awareness of the Atma. Otherwise,it is not just any old thing, to be able to attain the awareness ofAptavani-8335336Aptavani-8the Atma. A state of detachment (vitaragata) should arise withinyou; attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh) should not occur atall. Attachment and abhorrence will not stop through practice.Even if you keep practicing to stop them, it is never possible tostop them from occurring. The state of the detached one (theVitarag) who is free from attachment and abhorrence (raag anddwesh) is a vision (drashti)! At present, your vision is filled withattachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh); whereas ‘ours’ is adetached vision (vitarag drashti). Therefore, the difference isonly a matter of vision. And the Gnani Purush can change thatvision in no time. After that, you will experience freedom (mukti).Without a Change in Vision, Everything IsMeaninglessQuestioner: So I was asking that the vision of attachment-abhorrence goes away, but what about the tendencies (vrutti)that still remain?Dadashri: How can the vision (drashti) go away? No,there is no way that the vision can go away. The tendencies andinclinations (vrutti) may go away, but the vision will not. It is onaccount of the vision (drashti) that the entire world has becomesuppressed. What vision? And the answer is: the wrong vision.It cannot see things as they are. Therefore, one becomes engulfed(tanmayakar), because he cannot see it the way it is. Thetendencies all break and new ones come up. But as long as thevision (drashti) does not change, the tendencies (vrutti) willkeep changing. You do not benefit from that. Alas! You becomea hermit; you do not even remember the sweet and sour foodyou eat. Those tendencies are broken, and even then, withoutchanging the vision, nothing is accomplished.Over here, there are so many of these saints and holy men(sant) who, if we sit next to them, ah! We feel such a sense ofjoy (anand)! You feel, gosh! Imagine what this holy person mustbe like! That is because the nature of ice, is that it always givescoolness to everyone. Now if that particular holy man emitscoolness, would you not think that there must be somethingthere? But I would tell you that there is nothing there. It isbecause all he has done is thwarted his tendencies. Because hehas beaten those tendencies, everything is stilled, and so itbecomes helpful for others; however, he will have to stir them upagain; only then will it work. Now how would the world knowall this?Questioner: But can they change the vision (drashti)?Dadashri: The vision does not change: the tendencies willchange. Except for some egos and certain tendencies, all othertendencies can be destroyed. We have many of these peopleover here, who are such experimentalists. And wherever theyhappen to be sitting, the surrounding atmosphere appears sobeautiful! I myself have witnessed this. Nevertheless I discoveredthat there is nothing of substance here. You realize that when youask them about Gnan.Questioner: Of course there would not be!Dadashri: So where there is no Gnan, there is nospirituality either. These are all paths of the material world(aadhibhautik). In times gone by, there used to be spiritualpaths. In the present age, that which is not spiritual, people callspiritual.Questioner: Dada, what if a person accepts that he is ablank piece of paper, that he is a clean slate?Dadashri: If he accepts that, then it is very good; itwould really be a wise thing.Questioner: Then would his vision (drashti) also change?Dadashri: Certainly it would change, but there should besomeone that can change it for him. This practice (vyavahar),of needing someone to change one’s vision has been going onAptavani-8335336Aptavani-8the Atma. A state of detachment (vitaragata) should arise withinyou; attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh) should not occur atall. Attachment and abhorrence will not stop through practice.Even if you keep practicing to stop them, it is never possible tostop them from occurring. The state of the detached one (theVitarag) who is free from attachment and abhorrence (raag anddwesh) is a vision (drashti)! At present, your vision is filled withattachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh); whereas ‘ours’ is adetached vision (vitarag drashti). Therefore, the difference isonly a matter of vision. And the Gnani Purush can change thatvision in no time. After that, you will experience freedom (mukti).Without a Change in Vision, Everything IsMeaninglessQuestioner: So I was asking that the vision of attachment-abhorrence goes away, but what about the tendencies (vrutti)that still remain?Dadashri: How can the vision (drashti) go away? No,there is no way that the vision can go away. The tendencies andinclinations (vrutti) may go away, but the vision will not. It is onaccount of the vision (drashti) that the entire world has becomesuppressed. What vision? And the answer is: the wrong vision.It cannot see things as they are. Therefore, one becomes engulfed(tanmayakar), because he cannot see it the way it is. Thetendencies all break and new ones come up. But as long as thevision (drashti) does not change, the tendencies (vrutti) willkeep changing. You do not benefit from that. Alas! You becomea hermit; you do not even remember the sweet and sour foodyou eat. Those tendencies are broken, and even then, withoutchanging the vision, nothing is accomplished.Over here, there are so many of these saints and holy men(sant) who, if we sit next to them, ah! We feel such a sense ofjoy (anand)! You feel, gosh! Imagine what this holy person mustbe like! That is because the nature of ice, is that it always givescoolness to everyone. Now if that particular holy man emitscoolness, would you not think that there must be somethingthere? But I would tell you that there is nothing there. It isbecause all he has done is thwarted his tendencies. Because hehas beaten those tendencies, everything is stilled, and so itbecomes helpful for others; however, he will have to stir them upagain; only then will it work. Now how would the world knowall this?Questioner: But can they change the vision (drashti)?Dadashri: The vision does not change: the tendencies willchange. Except for some egos and certain tendencies, all othertendencies can be destroyed. We have many of these peopleover here, who are such experimentalists. And wherever theyhappen to be sitting, the surrounding atmosphere appears sobeautiful! I myself have witnessed this. Nevertheless I discoveredthat there is nothing of substance here. You realize that when youask them about Gnan.Questioner: Of course there would not be!Dadashri: So where there is no Gnan, there is nospirituality either. These are all paths of the material world(aadhibhautik). In times gone by, there used to be spiritualpaths. In the present age, that which is not spiritual, people callspiritual.Questioner: Dada, what if a person accepts that he is ablank piece of paper, that he is a clean slate?Dadashri: If he accepts that, then it is very good; itwould really be a wise thing.Questioner: Then would his vision (drashti) also change?Dadashri: Certainly it would change, but there should besomeone that can change it for him. This practice (vyavahar),of needing someone to change one’s vision has been going on338Aptavani-8Aptavani-8337eternally. When your vision changes, it will seem like yourperception of the world (srushti) will have changed. And that iscalled a changing of vision (drashti). If the perception of theworld does not change, how can you say that the vision haschanged? Otherwise, it will be a case of, whatever your vision(drashti); so will be your world (srushti).Through the Grace of the Gnani, the VisionWill ChangeQuestioner: So the main thing is that your vision shouldbe antarmukha (turned inward)?Dadashri: This is how it is: there are so many peoplewho keep looking within. You fools, there is nothing inside.You will only see what is inside after the Gnani Purush showsyou. Otherwise, when you close your eyes, all you will see iswomen!Questioner: Does that mean you need someone’s support,in order to have internal vision (antarmukha)?Dadashri: Internal vision (antarmukha) can only occurwith grace (krupa). How is it possible to have internal vision,without grace? Otherwise people will just see huge factories andgrandiose images.Questioner: When does such grace (krupa) occur?Dadashri: Grace occurs when you see or meet (darshan)the Gnani Purush, when you show humility towards him, andyou abide by his Agnas (directives) – that is when grace (krupa)happens. How else do you expect to receive grace just likethat? Besides, would you be able to receive his grace by opposinghim? The Gnani Purush has no objection with someone raisingany opposition; however it would really harm the individual himself.‘We’ do not mind if someone insults ‘us’. But what sort of astate would you be in? That is why ‘we’ make you understandthe need to straighten up. When a snake enters its burrow, doesit not straighten itself out? Does it go in crooked? Does it notbecome straight at that moment?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: That is how you have to straighten up, here inthe presence of the Gnani Purush. Here crookedness will notwork. Here, you must stay in the Agna. That is because you donot ever get a chance to do this Gnani Purush’s darshan.Internalize the Senses or Become the Atma?Questioner: What is said about the five senses (indriya),that they are all involved with outside business, is it those sensesthat need to be turned inward (antarmukha)?Dadashri: No, they have been turned inward for manydays, before in the past. But by the time you turn them inwards,they instantly escape outside. It does not take them too long toescape, if they come across goods on the outside! Besides,these senses (indriya) have never settled down ever, for anybody.No one has managed to build a pool of (contain) these indriya.Nevertheless, despite eating food, that man claimed to be on aperpetual fast. Who was that man?Questioner: Durvasa (a sage known for his anger andfierce nature).Dadashri: Yes, and what has been said about LordKrishna? That He was forever a celibate (brahmachari). Thatis because after entering the main state, nothing ever toucheshim. Therefore, whether you turn the indriya towards or away,or do anything to them, all it is, is one kind of exercise. Doingthat, your body stays well and your mind stays somewhat well.But your work does not get done.It is like, if you do not know your way from here to thestation, will you reach the station if you just kept wanderingaround? So it is because of agnan (ignorance) that no work338Aptavani-8Aptavani-8337eternally. When your vision changes, it will seem like yourperception of the world (srushti) will have changed. And that iscalled a changing of vision (drashti). If the perception of theworld does not change, how can you say that the vision haschanged? Otherwise, it will be a case of, whatever your vision(drashti); so will be your world (srushti).Through the Grace of the Gnani, the VisionWill ChangeQuestioner: So the main thing is that your vision shouldbe antarmukha (turned inward)?Dadashri: This is how it is: there are so many peoplewho keep looking within. You fools, there is nothing inside.You will only see what is inside after the Gnani Purush showsyou. Otherwise, when you close your eyes, all you will see iswomen!Questioner: Does that mean you need someone’s support,in order to have internal vision (antarmukha)?Dadashri: Internal vision (antarmukha) can only occurwith grace (krupa). How is it possible to have internal vision,without grace? Otherwise people will just see huge factories andgrandiose images.Questioner: When does such grace (krupa) occur?Dadashri: Grace occurs when you see or meet (darshan)the Gnani Purush, when you show humility towards him, andyou abide by his Agnas (directives) – that is when grace (krupa)happens. How else do you expect to receive grace just likethat? Besides, would you be able to receive his grace by opposinghim? The Gnani Purush has no objection with someone raisingany opposition; however it would really harm the individual himself.‘We’ do not mind if someone insults ‘us’. But what sort of astate would you be in? That is why ‘we’ make you understandthe need to straighten up. When a snake enters its burrow, doesit not straighten itself out? Does it go in crooked? Does it notbecome straight at that moment?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: That is how you have to straighten up, here inthe presence of the Gnani Purush. Here crookedness will notwork. Here, you must stay in the Agna. That is because you donot ever get a chance to do this Gnani Purush’s darshan.Internalize the Senses or Become the Atma?Questioner: What is said about the five senses (indriya),that they are all involved with outside business, is it those sensesthat need to be turned inward (antarmukha)?Dadashri: No, they have been turned inward for manydays, before in the past. But by the time you turn them inwards,they instantly escape outside. It does not take them too long toescape, if they come across goods on the outside! Besides,these senses (indriya) have never settled down ever, for anybody.No one has managed to build a pool of (contain) these indriya.Nevertheless, despite eating food, that man claimed to be on aperpetual fast. Who was that man?Questioner: Durvasa (a sage known for his anger andfierce nature).Dadashri: Yes, and what has been said about LordKrishna? That He was forever a celibate (brahmachari). Thatis because after entering the main state, nothing ever toucheshim. Therefore, whether you turn the indriya towards or away,or do anything to them, all it is, is one kind of exercise. Doingthat, your body stays well and your mind stays somewhat well.But your work does not get done.It is like, if you do not know your way from here to thestation, will you reach the station if you just kept wanderingaround? So it is because of agnan (ignorance) that no workAptavani-8339340Aptavani-8gets done. Therefore, you need to find out from the GnaniPurush, who you are, and what is binding you.They Are All Mechanical AdjustmentsQuestioner: Now, in the state where the vision is directedinternally (antarmukha) there is a voice that says, ‘What youare doing is wrong’ and things like that. Is it Atma that is speakingto us?Dadashri: That cannot be the Atma; that is a tape record.Just as there is this tape recorder on the outside, inside there isan original tape record. Is that what you are calling the Atma?Even prominent officers say, ‘It is my Atma speaking’. Goodness,can that be the Atma? It is a tape record.Questioner: If it is not the Atma talking, then who is theone saying, ‘what you are doing is wrong’?Dadashri: That is a tape record. The knowledge ofworldly interaction (vyavahar gnan) that you know, thatknowledge of worldly interaction, is not the Atma. It isKnowledge of the Self (nischay Gnan), that is the Atma. Theworldly knowledge that you know, has been taped before andthat is the voice that you are hearing. And that is why it bothersyou that, ‘this is how it should be in the worldly interaction(vyavahar), and I am doing something wrong’. So that cannotbe the Atma.Moreover, the Atma does not speak; it does not eat. Itdoes not drink and it does not breath. That kind of worldlyinteraction (vyavahar) is not the Atma. All these are not thefunctions of the Atma. The Atma’s work is completely different.The qualities of the Atma are different.Just like the gold and copper in this ring, are mixed together,and if you wanted to separate them, who would you give thework to?Questioner: To a goldsmith.Dadashri: Yes. That is because the goldsmith has knowledgeabout it. Similarly, there are two parts to this body, the Atma(Self) and anatma (the non-Self). He that knows the intrinsicproperties of both the Atma and anatma, is able to make theseparation; by using the entire laboratory he can separate the two.This is all a mechanical adjustment. That which does allthe talking is a record. What do they call the listener? They callhim the receiver! Therefore, these are all mechanical adjustments.Even these eyes are a mechanical adjustment. The entire brainis mechanical, so when you pour cold water over it, it settlesdown. If not, the brain can even boil, and when it gets overheated,do you not have to apply cold packs on your head? There issuch a great Atma (Bhagwan) that sits within you, and yet thetime comes, when you have to apply these cold packs! However,it only cools down inside, when you apply these cold packs;otherwise, you will keep simmering on the inside.As long as there is ignorance (agnan); the Atma is asufferer (vedak), and whatever suffering that arises, one takesupon himself saying, ‘I am suffering’. These are all mechanicaladjustments. The Atma remains inside, up to a certain limit ofsuffering. However, if there is a lot of intense suffering, a personwill lose consciousness, and when the suffering is extremelyexcruciating, the Atma comes out altogether.If we ask ‘What happened to the Sheth?’ They wouldsay, ‘he failed! (his heart failed!).’ Goodness, he used to pass atschool! But he has ‘failed’ here. These are all mechanicaladjustments. And so when one feels intense suffocation, the Atmaleaves. Do they not call it a heart attack? That army attack isdifferent, and this attack is different. And in this attack, the entireAtma gets out. How can people in Hindustan (India) be in sucha state! If you go against the laws that prevail, this is how youend up.Aptavani-8339340Aptavani-8gets done. Therefore, you need to find out from the GnaniPurush, who you are, and what is binding you.They Are All Mechanical AdjustmentsQuestioner: Now, in the state where the vision is directedinternally (antarmukha) there is a voice that says, ‘What youare doing is wrong’ and things like that. Is it Atma that is speakingto us?Dadashri: That cannot be the Atma; that is a tape record.Just as there is this tape recorder on the outside, inside there isan original tape record. Is that what you are calling the Atma?Even prominent officers say, ‘It is my Atma speaking’. Goodness,can that be the Atma? It is a tape record.Questioner: If it is not the Atma talking, then who is theone saying, ‘what you are doing is wrong’?Dadashri: That is a tape record. The knowledge ofworldly interaction (vyavahar gnan) that you know, thatknowledge of worldly interaction, is not the Atma. It isKnowledge of the Self (nischay Gnan), that is the Atma. Theworldly knowledge that you know, has been taped before andthat is the voice that you are hearing. And that is why it bothersyou that, ‘this is how it should be in the worldly interaction(vyavahar), and I am doing something wrong’. So that cannotbe the Atma.Moreover, the Atma does not speak; it does not eat. Itdoes not drink and it does not breath. That kind of worldlyinteraction (vyavahar) is not the Atma. All these are not thefunctions of the Atma. The Atma’s work is completely different.The qualities of the Atma are different.Just like the gold and copper in this ring, are mixed together,and if you wanted to separate them, who would you give thework to?Questioner: To a goldsmith.Dadashri: Yes. That is because the goldsmith has knowledgeabout it. Similarly, there are two parts to this body, the Atma(Self) and anatma (the non-Self). He that knows the intrinsicproperties of both the Atma and anatma, is able to make theseparation; by using the entire laboratory he can separate the two.This is all a mechanical adjustment. That which does allthe talking is a record. What do they call the listener? They callhim the receiver! Therefore, these are all mechanical adjustments.Even these eyes are a mechanical adjustment. The entire brainis mechanical, so when you pour cold water over it, it settlesdown. If not, the brain can even boil, and when it gets overheated,do you not have to apply cold packs on your head? There issuch a great Atma (Bhagwan) that sits within you, and yet thetime comes, when you have to apply these cold packs! However,it only cools down inside, when you apply these cold packs;otherwise, you will keep simmering on the inside.As long as there is ignorance (agnan); the Atma is asufferer (vedak), and whatever suffering that arises, one takesupon himself saying, ‘I am suffering’. These are all mechanicaladjustments. The Atma remains inside, up to a certain limit ofsuffering. However, if there is a lot of intense suffering, a personwill lose consciousness, and when the suffering is extremelyexcruciating, the Atma comes out altogether.If we ask ‘What happened to the Sheth?’ They wouldsay, ‘he failed! (his heart failed!).’ Goodness, he used to pass atschool! But he has ‘failed’ here. These are all mechanicaladjustments. And so when one feels intense suffocation, the Atmaleaves. Do they not call it a heart attack? That army attack isdifferent, and this attack is different. And in this attack, the entireAtma gets out. How can people in Hindustan (India) be in sucha state! If you go against the laws that prevail, this is how youend up.Aptavani-8341342Aptavani-8The Ego Is the Cause of All EffectsQuestioner: Does the soul (jiva) suffer because the bodysuffers?Dadashri: Of course! If the body suffers, the soul (jiva)suffers as well. That is because you believe, ‘this body is mine’.Now a person, who has this Gnan, is not affected by themind and speech. Even he will be affected by the body. Rightnow, if a tooth ached, it would even let the Gnani know of it.Therefore in this body, there is effective soul (chetan). Butbecause there is Gnan, it does not allow causes to occur. Onewill settle the karmic account (hisaab) peacefully and withequanimity.Questioner: So when the Atma has left, why does thebody no longer feel any pain?Dadashri: How can the body feel pain after that? Thereis still ego (ahamkar) in it at the present time. It tells the body,‘I am’, and ‘it is mine’. And it is the one that suffers all this.Therefore, all this belongs to the ego (ahamkar) itself.Questioner: But the ego is lifeless (jada).Dadashri: The ego is not lifeless; it is mishrachetan (‘I’with the wrong belief).Questioner: What is mishrachetan, I did not understandthat.Dadashri: Mishrachetan means that it contains the intent(bhaav) of soul (chetan). That self intent (chetan bhaav) andthe non-living (jada) have come together, to form a mixture,which is why it is called mishrachetan. And the mind is non-living (jada). Everything the mind thinks is all non-living. However,the ego (ahamkar) is mishrachetan. This body is non-living(jada). But it is partially touched by the mishrachetan which iswhy it suffers the effects.Besides the main Atma, there is also another part. Theworld is not even aware of the main Atma. They believe thatwhat they see is itself atma (chetan). That which the worldconsiders soul (chetan), has no soul (chetan) in it at all, it doesnot even have a fraction of soul in it; not even enough to guildwith. And that would be called illusory attachment (maya)! Itmakes you believe, that which is not soul (chetan) is soul – thatitself is Bhagwan’s (Atma’s) illusory attachment (maya)! Andthe Gnani Purush solves that illusion (maya).Questioner: ‘It is not possible to change this illusoryattachment (maya) of mine; it is very difficult’. The Lord hassaid that.Dadashri: It is so difficult that, that illusory attachment(maya) cannot be disturbed. So how can it be removed?Therefore, the Gnani Purush can free you from that illusoryattachment (maya). That is because he himself has become freefrom that illusory attachment, so he is able to free you from it;otherwise this illusory attachment (maya) will not budge at all.How Can Doubts About the Pure Soul BeDispelled?Questioner: When the pudgal (non-Self body complex)and the Atma are separated, does one then become free?Dadashri: The pudgal has nothing at all to do with it.When the Atma understands its own nature (swaroop); whenthat awareness is realized, it then manifests. And when one getsa taste of this, the work is done. Therefore the Atma and thepudgal (non-Self) have nothing to do with one another. ThisChandubhai is outside of the Atma. It is because you havestrayed so far away from the Atma, that you say, ‘I amChandubhai’.All throughout the duration of the worldly life (sansar),the Atma has always stayed as the Atma; it has never moved.Aptavani-8341342Aptavani-8The Ego Is the Cause of All EffectsQuestioner: Does the soul (jiva) suffer because the bodysuffers?Dadashri: Of course! If the body suffers, the soul (jiva)suffers as well. That is because you believe, ‘this body is mine’.Now a person, who has this Gnan, is not affected by themind and speech. Even he will be affected by the body. Rightnow, if a tooth ached, it would even let the Gnani know of it.Therefore in this body, there is effective soul (chetan). Butbecause there is Gnan, it does not allow causes to occur. Onewill settle the karmic account (hisaab) peacefully and withequanimity.Questioner: So when the Atma has left, why does thebody no longer feel any pain?Dadashri: How can the body feel pain after that? Thereis still ego (ahamkar) in it at the present time. It tells the body,‘I am’, and ‘it is mine’. And it is the one that suffers all this.Therefore, all this belongs to the ego (ahamkar) itself.Questioner: But the ego is lifeless (jada).Dadashri: The ego is not lifeless; it is mishrachetan (‘I’with the wrong belief).Questioner: What is mishrachetan, I did not understandthat.Dadashri: Mishrachetan means that it contains the intent(bhaav) of soul (chetan). That self intent (chetan bhaav) andthe non-living (jada) have come together, to form a mixture,which is why it is called mishrachetan. And the mind is non-living (jada). Everything the mind thinks is all non-living. However,the ego (ahamkar) is mishrachetan. This body is non-living(jada). But it is partially touched by the mishrachetan which iswhy it suffers the effects.Besides the main Atma, there is also another part. Theworld is not even aware of the main Atma. They believe thatwhat they see is itself atma (chetan). That which the worldconsiders soul (chetan), has no soul (chetan) in it at all, it doesnot even have a fraction of soul in it; not even enough to guildwith. And that would be called illusory attachment (maya)! Itmakes you believe, that which is not soul (chetan) is soul – thatitself is Bhagwan’s (Atma’s) illusory attachment (maya)! Andthe Gnani Purush solves that illusion (maya).Questioner: ‘It is not possible to change this illusoryattachment (maya) of mine; it is very difficult’. The Lord hassaid that.Dadashri: It is so difficult that, that illusory attachment(maya) cannot be disturbed. So how can it be removed?Therefore, the Gnani Purush can free you from that illusoryattachment (maya). That is because he himself has become freefrom that illusory attachment, so he is able to free you from it;otherwise this illusory attachment (maya) will not budge at all.How Can Doubts About the Pure Soul BeDispelled?Questioner: When the pudgal (non-Self body complex)and the Atma are separated, does one then become free?Dadashri: The pudgal has nothing at all to do with it.When the Atma understands its own nature (swaroop); whenthat awareness is realized, it then manifests. And when one getsa taste of this, the work is done. Therefore the Atma and thepudgal (non-Self) have nothing to do with one another. ThisChandubhai is outside of the Atma. It is because you havestrayed so far away from the Atma, that you say, ‘I amChandubhai’.All throughout the duration of the worldly life (sansar),the Atma has always stayed as the Atma; it has never moved.Aptavani-8343344Aptavani-8In the very end, when it has to go to the final liberation (moksha),it is the element of motion (gati sahayak tattva) that carries itthere. Through that, the Atma remains as the Atma. What I amsaying, is that the Atma does not face any difficulty; that is whatthis time of worldly life (sansar) is like. But it is the ego(ahamkar) that arises within, which is the one who suffers; itexperiences the pleasant (shata), and it also suffers the unpleasant(ashata). And it is because of this suffering that all this has comeabout; the wrong belief has arisen. There have been no changesin the Atma; the Atma has not been spoiled. Here ‘we’ removeone’s illusion (bhranti), and ‘we’ give him the entire Atma.Someone may ask, ‘Is the Atma of a non-Self realizedperson (agnani) the same as the Atma of Lord Mahavir?’ Yes,in every way, where it concerns elements (dravya), qualities(guna) and phases (paryaya). But unless the ego (ahamkar)goes, the state of being free of doubt (nihshank) will not arise.That is because the one who has the doubts (shanka) is the egoitself. Therefore, as long as the ego is there, no living being(jiva) can become doubt-free (nihshank), and nor will his doubtsdisappear or go away. Doubt does not go away for anyone butthe Gnani Purush. When the Gnani Purush eradicates one’sdoubt (shanka), one becomes doubt-free (nihshank).The Vision Changes; Not the AtmaQuestioner: So can other elements (tattva) affect theAtma?Dadashri: Of course, they do. It is indeed all these otherelements that affect it. Therefore, when it goes to the abode ofthe Liberated Souls (Siddha kshetra); there are no other elementsthere and so, it is not affected by anything. As long as there areother elements (tattva) around, it will continuously be affected.However, when the Gnani Purush frees it from effects it goesoff to moksha. Nevertheless, through the entire extent of time ofworldly interaction (vyavahar kaad), the Atma has never beenspoiled at all. It is only a matter of the Gnani Purush, settingright, the illusion (bhranti) that has befallen, which has distortedthe vision (darshan); therefore it becomes free from effects andgoes off to moksha (final liberation).Now, how did that vision (darshan) become wrong? Whenyou go to Northern India, you will come across many monkeysthere. How do they catch them? They take a pot with a narrowopening, put some chickpeas (chana) in it and place it under atree. The monkeys then come down the trees and stick theirhands in the pots, to get the chickpeas. When they try to get tothe chickpeas, they slowly squeeze their whole hand in the potto get the chickpeas. But once they grab a fistful, because theycannot get their hand out again, they start screaming. Even then,they will not release their fist. What do they think? They keepthinking that someone inside is grabbing my hand. When I stuckmy hand in there, it was me that stuck it in there, so why is itnot coming out now? So the monkeys come under the illusion;they have the wrong understanding of ‘someone has got hold ofme from within’. And so they keep screaming, but they will notlet go of their fist. Similarly, people are crying out and screamingbut they will not let go of what is in their fist.The Method for the Final Solution Is DifferentIt is like this: what is this vision (drashti) usually like? Ifyou sit in such a way, you will see two lights instead of one. Ifyour eyes just went slightly this way, would you not see twolights? Now realistically, there is just one. But you see two.When you drink tea in a saucer, you may see the circle insideit as double circles. Why is that? It is because we have twoeyes, that we are seeing double. These eyes are seeing, and theother eyes are seeing as well. However it is a false vision (mithyadrashti). And that is why it shows you everything wrongly. Nowif it showed you what is right, you would be free of afflictionfrom external sources (upadhi), you would be free from allsuffering from the outside. The science of those who are absolutelyAptavani-8343344Aptavani-8In the very end, when it has to go to the final liberation (moksha),it is the element of motion (gati sahayak tattva) that carries itthere. Through that, the Atma remains as the Atma. What I amsaying, is that the Atma does not face any difficulty; that is whatthis time of worldly life (sansar) is like. But it is the ego(ahamkar) that arises within, which is the one who suffers; itexperiences the pleasant (shata), and it also suffers the unpleasant(ashata). And it is because of this suffering that all this has comeabout; the wrong belief has arisen. There have been no changesin the Atma; the Atma has not been spoiled. Here ‘we’ removeone’s illusion (bhranti), and ‘we’ give him the entire Atma.Someone may ask, ‘Is the Atma of a non-Self realizedperson (agnani) the same as the Atma of Lord Mahavir?’ Yes,in every way, where it concerns elements (dravya), qualities(guna) and phases (paryaya). But unless the ego (ahamkar)goes, the state of being free of doubt (nihshank) will not arise.That is because the one who has the doubts (shanka) is the egoitself. Therefore, as long as the ego is there, no living being(jiva) can become doubt-free (nihshank), and nor will his doubtsdisappear or go away. Doubt does not go away for anyone butthe Gnani Purush. When the Gnani Purush eradicates one’sdoubt (shanka), one becomes doubt-free (nihshank).The Vision Changes; Not the AtmaQuestioner: So can other elements (tattva) affect theAtma?Dadashri: Of course, they do. It is indeed all these otherelements that affect it. Therefore, when it goes to the abode ofthe Liberated Souls (Siddha kshetra); there are no other elementsthere and so, it is not affected by anything. As long as there areother elements (tattva) around, it will continuously be affected.However, when the Gnani Purush frees it from effects it goesoff to moksha. Nevertheless, through the entire extent of time ofworldly interaction (vyavahar kaad), the Atma has never beenspoiled at all. It is only a matter of the Gnani Purush, settingright, the illusion (bhranti) that has befallen, which has distortedthe vision (darshan); therefore it becomes free from effects andgoes off to moksha (final liberation).Now, how did that vision (darshan) become wrong? Whenyou go to Northern India, you will come across many monkeysthere. How do they catch them? They take a pot with a narrowopening, put some chickpeas (chana) in it and place it under atree. The monkeys then come down the trees and stick theirhands in the pots, to get the chickpeas. When they try to get tothe chickpeas, they slowly squeeze their whole hand in the potto get the chickpeas. But once they grab a fistful, because theycannot get their hand out again, they start screaming. Even then,they will not release their fist. What do they think? They keepthinking that someone inside is grabbing my hand. When I stuckmy hand in there, it was me that stuck it in there, so why is itnot coming out now? So the monkeys come under the illusion;they have the wrong understanding of ‘someone has got hold ofme from within’. And so they keep screaming, but they will notlet go of their fist. Similarly, people are crying out and screamingbut they will not let go of what is in their fist.The Method for the Final Solution Is DifferentIt is like this: what is this vision (drashti) usually like? Ifyou sit in such a way, you will see two lights instead of one. Ifyour eyes just went slightly this way, would you not see twolights? Now realistically, there is just one. But you see two.When you drink tea in a saucer, you may see the circle insideit as double circles. Why is that? It is because we have twoeyes, that we are seeing double. These eyes are seeing, and theother eyes are seeing as well. However it is a false vision (mithyadrashti). And that is why it shows you everything wrongly. Nowif it showed you what is right, you would be free of afflictionfrom external sources (upadhi), you would be free from allsuffering from the outside. The science of those who are absolutelyAptavani-8345346Aptavani-8detached from attachment and abhorrence (Vitarag vignan) issuch that, it annihilates all pain and suffering (dukh); that scienceitself is such that it frees you from all misery (dukh). Furthermore,science (vignan) is like that; science always functionsindependently to produce results (kriyakari). Therefore, onceyou know this science, the science itself picks up the work, anddoes it all; you do not have to do a thing. As long as you haveto do something, the intellect (buddhi) is there. And as long asthe intellect exists, the ego (ahamkar) will be there; and as longas the ego is around, you will not succeed in bringing an end toany of this, even if you wanted to.Questioner: How can one begin to change this vision(drashti)?Dadashri: The change in the vision (drashti) starts tohappen, when you meet a Gnani Purush, and you come to hearhis satsang, that is when your vision will gradually start changing.At this moment, while you are listening, your vision is changinga little. In doing that, as you become more familiar in one or twomonths, your vision will change. If not, then you should just sayto the Gnani Purush, ‘Sir, will you change my vision (drashti)?’,and in a matter of a day, or only just one hour, he will changeit for you.Gnan Opens Up the TruthWinding and entanglement of wrong belief (bhranti) hashappened. Nothing has happened to the Atma. The Atma hasremained as it is. Only the layers of coverings (avaran) of illusionhave wound themselves around it, and because of that, the egoism(ahamkar) has arisen. Then it is the egoism that becomes thedoer-sufferer (karta-bhokta); it suffers pain (dukh), and it isalso the one that enjoys pleasure (sukh).It is to those who excessively use their intellect(buddhishadi), that through their intellect (buddhi), the Atmaappears to be doing something; therefore it must also beexperiencing. Now the entire world is dependent on the intellect.That is because as long as there is ‘I’ (Hoo), as long as thereis the ego (ahamkar), it is dependent on the intellect, and it seesthrough the intellect. Therefore, it is not possible to observe(nirikshan) something that is real (satya). Besides, the Gnanisof the world would not reveal the exact knowledge openly;however ‘we’ openly declare to this world, that if they want tounderstand this through the exact knowledge; then the Atma hasnever done any of these things. None of what you see has everhappened. It is just that the belief is wrong. If someone changesthat wrong belief, then everything would be the way it was. Nopart of the Atma has ever been spoiled, nor has it everencountered a problem. When the wrong belief that exists, iscompletely turned, then it would become the way it was; oneenters one’s own Self form (swaroop), and one’s own energies(shakti) will thrive. Just the belief has changed. The Atma would not ‘do’any of this. The Atma is just the Absolute Soul (Parmatma). Ifthe Atma possessed any of the qualities (guna) ‘to do’ any ofthese things, it would never be freed from the worldly life(sansar). The Atma itself is untouchable (nirlep); it is detached(asang); but only if one can understand this. Otherwise, you willnot understand what Bhagwan says. It is like, the listener useshis intellect excessively (buddhishadi), and the speaker is theknower (Gnani), so how can you reconcile the two? The listeneris buddhishadi so he measures through his intellect. And the otheremploys knowledge as a measure, when he speaks. How doesthat one reach this one? So, each interprets in his own language.It is just a wrong belief that has set in. When you figurethis exactly, the Atma, all along in its state in the worldly life(sansar) has had a wrong belief and nothing else. When thewrong belief is removed, nothing else has happened. It is becauseof this wrong belief that the prakruti (non-Self complex) hasarisen.Aptavani-8345346Aptavani-8detached from attachment and abhorrence (Vitarag vignan) issuch that, it annihilates all pain and suffering (dukh); that scienceitself is such that it frees you from all misery (dukh). Furthermore,science (vignan) is like that; science always functionsindependently to produce results (kriyakari). Therefore, onceyou know this science, the science itself picks up the work, anddoes it all; you do not have to do a thing. As long as you haveto do something, the intellect (buddhi) is there. And as long asthe intellect exists, the ego (ahamkar) will be there; and as longas the ego is around, you will not succeed in bringing an end toany of this, even if you wanted to.Questioner: How can one begin to change this vision(drashti)?Dadashri: The change in the vision (drashti) starts tohappen, when you meet a Gnani Purush, and you come to hearhis satsang, that is when your vision will gradually start changing.At this moment, while you are listening, your vision is changinga little. In doing that, as you become more familiar in one or twomonths, your vision will change. If not, then you should just sayto the Gnani Purush, ‘Sir, will you change my vision (drashti)?’,and in a matter of a day, or only just one hour, he will changeit for you.Gnan Opens Up the TruthWinding and entanglement of wrong belief (bhranti) hashappened. Nothing has happened to the Atma. The Atma hasremained as it is. Only the layers of coverings (avaran) of illusionhave wound themselves around it, and because of that, the egoism(ahamkar) has arisen. Then it is the egoism that becomes thedoer-sufferer (karta-bhokta); it suffers pain (dukh), and it isalso the one that enjoys pleasure (sukh).It is to those who excessively use their intellect(buddhishadi), that through their intellect (buddhi), the Atmaappears to be doing something; therefore it must also beexperiencing. Now the entire world is dependent on the intellect.That is because as long as there is ‘I’ (Hoo), as long as thereis the ego (ahamkar), it is dependent on the intellect, and it seesthrough the intellect. Therefore, it is not possible to observe(nirikshan) something that is real (satya). Besides, the Gnanisof the world would not reveal the exact knowledge openly;however ‘we’ openly declare to this world, that if they want tounderstand this through the exact knowledge; then the Atma hasnever done any of these things. None of what you see has everhappened. It is just that the belief is wrong. If someone changesthat wrong belief, then everything would be the way it was. Nopart of the Atma has ever been spoiled, nor has it everencountered a problem. When the wrong belief that exists, iscompletely turned, then it would become the way it was; oneenters one’s own Self form (swaroop), and one’s own energies(shakti) will thrive. Just the belief has changed. The Atma would not ‘do’any of this. The Atma is just the Absolute Soul (Parmatma). Ifthe Atma possessed any of the qualities (guna) ‘to do’ any ofthese things, it would never be freed from the worldly life(sansar). The Atma itself is untouchable (nirlep); it is detached(asang); but only if one can understand this. Otherwise, you willnot understand what Bhagwan says. It is like, the listener useshis intellect excessively (buddhishadi), and the speaker is theknower (Gnani), so how can you reconcile the two? The listeneris buddhishadi so he measures through his intellect. And the otheremploys knowledge as a measure, when he speaks. How doesthat one reach this one? So, each interprets in his own language.It is just a wrong belief that has set in. When you figurethis exactly, the Atma, all along in its state in the worldly life(sansar) has had a wrong belief and nothing else. When thewrong belief is removed, nothing else has happened. It is becauseof this wrong belief that the prakruti (non-Self complex) hasarisen.Aptavani-8347348Aptavani-8Now if you go in front of a mirror, do you have to tell themirror to show you your face? You do not have to say anything,do you? Why is that? Even then, does it not show you yourexact face? Does it not show the slightest defects? Now becausethe mirror gets used everyday, it is not valued. However, it isworth understanding its great value.Right now, are you able to see your shadow, inside yourhome? No. But when you go out into the streets, you will seeyour shadow. So when you turn this way, there will be a shadow,and when you turn that way, there will be a shadow. How longdoes that shadow take to form? So therefore, this whole worldis scientific circumstantial evidence. Nothing has happened andnothing has been made. The world is nothing but scientificcircumstantial evidence. Bhagwan has not had to do anything inall this. Even this mind-speech-body complex (prakruti) thathas come about is a result of scientific circumstantial evidence;and the prakruti is effective. This mind-speech-body is effectiveand it is its effectiveness which affects the Atma. That is becausethe belief that one has, is a wrong belief. The Gnani Purushchanges that wrong belief, and thereafter, one no longer feels allthese effects.Only Ignorance Influences the Entire WorldlyLifeQuestioner: If the Soul (chetan) becomes pure(shuddha), does it ever have to come back?Dadashri: It never has to come back. Once it attainspurity, it means that the ego (ahamkar) has gone, and so itnever has to return. As long as the ego is there, it sows the seedof, ‘I did it’, and from that, the ego arises again. As long as onebelieves, ‘I did this’, the ego (ahamkar) will arise again.Questioner: So the Atma must have been impure tobegin with?Dadashri: No. The Atma is pure indeed.Questioner: So then how did the Atma become impure?Dadashri: It is people who kept calling out your name,‘Shanti. Shanti’. These people give you ignorance (agnan),through which your vision (darshan) changes. The entire visionchanges and that is its influence.Say there is a sheth (merchant; employer) who speaksnicely all day; all he talks about is justice and morality. Normallyhe is a person with great humility, but what would happen if hedrinks half a gallon of alcohol?Questioner: Then he will act crazy.Dadashri: So would that mean the sheth has becomebad? No, it is the influence of the alcohol. And in the same way,the influence of ignorance (agnan) has set in.Questioner: If we were once pure, then how did webecome soiled?Dadashri: Before that, the sheth was in a good state, sowhen he drank half a gallon alcohol, how did he become tainted?The very same sheth starts to talk all kind of nonsense. ‘I amthe Governor Sayajirao Maharaj’ he will say. Would you notunderstand from that, that he is intoxicated?Questioner: But was it not pure to begin with? Is itbecause it did not have enough energy of its own, that it becameimpure (ashuddha) again?Dadashri: It is pure, even now it is pure, nothing hashappened to it. This is just influence (amal). When the influencesubsides, then it is as if nothing happened. The day before, youwere Chandubhai, and the following day, the influence hasdiminished so you have become pure (shuddha). The followingday, within just an hour, you become pure; if the Atma didbecome impure, how is it possible for it to become pure in justAptavani-8347348Aptavani-8Now if you go in front of a mirror, do you have to tell themirror to show you your face? You do not have to say anything,do you? Why is that? Even then, does it not show you yourexact face? Does it not show the slightest defects? Now becausethe mirror gets used everyday, it is not valued. However, it isworth understanding its great value.Right now, are you able to see your shadow, inside yourhome? No. But when you go out into the streets, you will seeyour shadow. So when you turn this way, there will be a shadow,and when you turn that way, there will be a shadow. How longdoes that shadow take to form? So therefore, this whole worldis scientific circumstantial evidence. Nothing has happened andnothing has been made. The world is nothing but scientificcircumstantial evidence. Bhagwan has not had to do anything inall this. Even this mind-speech-body complex (prakruti) thathas come about is a result of scientific circumstantial evidence;and the prakruti is effective. This mind-speech-body is effectiveand it is its effectiveness which affects the Atma. That is becausethe belief that one has, is a wrong belief. The Gnani Purushchanges that wrong belief, and thereafter, one no longer feels allthese effects.Only Ignorance Influences the Entire WorldlyLifeQuestioner: If the Soul (chetan) becomes pure(shuddha), does it ever have to come back?Dadashri: It never has to come back. Once it attainspurity, it means that the ego (ahamkar) has gone, and so itnever has to return. As long as the ego is there, it sows the seedof, ‘I did it’, and from that, the ego arises again. As long as onebelieves, ‘I did this’, the ego (ahamkar) will arise again.Questioner: So the Atma must have been impure tobegin with?Dadashri: No. The Atma is pure indeed.Questioner: So then how did the Atma become impure?Dadashri: It is people who kept calling out your name,‘Shanti. Shanti’. These people give you ignorance (agnan),through which your vision (darshan) changes. The entire visionchanges and that is its influence.Say there is a sheth (merchant; employer) who speaksnicely all day; all he talks about is justice and morality. Normallyhe is a person with great humility, but what would happen if hedrinks half a gallon of alcohol?Questioner: Then he will act crazy.Dadashri: So would that mean the sheth has becomebad? No, it is the influence of the alcohol. And in the same way,the influence of ignorance (agnan) has set in.Questioner: If we were once pure, then how did webecome soiled?Dadashri: Before that, the sheth was in a good state, sowhen he drank half a gallon alcohol, how did he become tainted?The very same sheth starts to talk all kind of nonsense. ‘I amthe Governor Sayajirao Maharaj’ he will say. Would you notunderstand from that, that he is intoxicated?Questioner: But was it not pure to begin with? Is itbecause it did not have enough energy of its own, that it becameimpure (ashuddha) again?Dadashri: It is pure, even now it is pure, nothing hashappened to it. This is just influence (amal). When the influencesubsides, then it is as if nothing happened. The day before, youwere Chandubhai, and the following day, the influence hasdiminished so you have become pure (shuddha). The followingday, within just an hour, you become pure; if the Atma didbecome impure, how is it possible for it to become pure in justAptavani-8349350Aptavani-8an hour? This is the same sort of intoxication and influence as theone who speaks while inebriated. That is how one becomesintoxicated by ‘I am Chandubhai, I am Chandubhai’; the wrongbelief has set in.Questioner: You say that the Atma has always beenpure (shuddha). There must be another power (shakti) that iseven more powerful than it, so would that not be why the Atmahas become impure (ashuddha)?Dadashri: The Atma has infinite power (shakti), and sodoes the non-Self complex (pudgal). The energy of the pudgalhas bound the whole Atma and now, it will not let it go. Therefore,even the non-living matter (jada) has infinite energy. Have younot seen an atomic bomb explosion? So even matter (jada) hasinfinite energy.Questioner: If the energy of matter is considered to begreater than the energy of the Atma, then can it take away theAtma again?Dadashri: What do you mean by again?Questioner: Why? Once it has become pure (shuddha),can it be dragged back into impurity?Dadashri: No. After becoming pure, nothing touches it.Questioner: But was it not pure to start with? Did it notbecome impure (ashuddha) later?Dadashri: Its fundamental form (swaroop) is always pure.But it is this vision (darshan) that has become impure (ashuddha),that becomes pure (shuddha) again. And so the ego (ahamkar)is annihilated.Questioner: What I am trying to say, is that the Atmawas once pure; it was free from all passions (nirvikari).Dadashri: And it is free from passion (nirvikari) evennow!Questioner: That is true, but did you not say that theenergy of matter (jada shakti) has bound it?Dadashri: What it means is that the Atma’s energy(shakti) has become covered, and that energy has become mixedwith the energy of matter (jada shakti); therefore, the energy ofmatter (jada shakti) has taken over. Therefore even if youwanted to be free you could not. You can only escape from it,if you go to a Gnani. Otherwise you could never be free, evenafter a hundred thousand avatar (lifetimes). Instead you wouldbe better off, if you were bound by iron chains; at least youcould break the chain and free yourself. Alas, this chain willnever break! And just as one becomes influenced by alcohol;here a person is influenced by the ego (ahamkar). That is howthe wagon rolls.Questioner: Even though the influence (amal) is there,does the Atma still not remain pure (shuddha)?Dadashri: The Atma is completely detached and indifferent(udaseen). As long as you exist in the ego (ahamkar) the Atmais detached (udaseen). The Atma has no attachment (raag) inthis, nor does it have any abhorrence (dwesh) in this. It says,‘Come to me, when it suits you. When you have cleared all yourkarmic accounts (hisaab), and you have done everything youlike, you can come to me,’ did you understand that?Questioner: What I was trying to say is that if the Atmawas pure, then no one can make something that is pure (shuddha),impure. So how did it become impure?Dadashri: It has never become impure (ashuddha). It isjust that its one energy – the energy of vision (darshan shakti)– has been covered up. Just like the sheth (businessman) himselfis pure (shuddha), but once he drank the alcohol, one of theenergies became covered up, which is why he speaksnonsensically. So in the same way this, ‘I am Chandubhai’ isspeaking. People called you Chandubhai and you believed it, soAptavani-8349350Aptavani-8an hour? This is the same sort of intoxication and influence as theone who speaks while inebriated. That is how one becomesintoxicated by ‘I am Chandubhai, I am Chandubhai’; the wrongbelief has set in.Questioner: You say that the Atma has always beenpure (shuddha). There must be another power (shakti) that iseven more powerful than it, so would that not be why the Atmahas become impure (ashuddha)?Dadashri: The Atma has infinite power (shakti), and sodoes the non-Self complex (pudgal). The energy of the pudgalhas bound the whole Atma and now, it will not let it go. Therefore,even the non-living matter (jada) has infinite energy. Have younot seen an atomic bomb explosion? So even matter (jada) hasinfinite energy.Questioner: If the energy of matter is considered to begreater than the energy of the Atma, then can it take away theAtma again?Dadashri: What do you mean by again?Questioner: Why? Once it has become pure (shuddha),can it be dragged back into impurity?Dadashri: No. After becoming pure, nothing touches it.Questioner: But was it not pure to start with? Did it notbecome impure (ashuddha) later?Dadashri: Its fundamental form (swaroop) is always pure.But it is this vision (darshan) that has become impure (ashuddha),that becomes pure (shuddha) again. And so the ego (ahamkar)is annihilated.Questioner: What I am trying to say, is that the Atmawas once pure; it was free from all passions (nirvikari).Dadashri: And it is free from passion (nirvikari) evennow!Questioner: That is true, but did you not say that theenergy of matter (jada shakti) has bound it?Dadashri: What it means is that the Atma’s energy(shakti) has become covered, and that energy has become mixedwith the energy of matter (jada shakti); therefore, the energy ofmatter (jada shakti) has taken over. Therefore even if youwanted to be free you could not. You can only escape from it,if you go to a Gnani. Otherwise you could never be free, evenafter a hundred thousand avatar (lifetimes). Instead you wouldbe better off, if you were bound by iron chains; at least youcould break the chain and free yourself. Alas, this chain willnever break! And just as one becomes influenced by alcohol;here a person is influenced by the ego (ahamkar). That is howthe wagon rolls.Questioner: Even though the influence (amal) is there,does the Atma still not remain pure (shuddha)?Dadashri: The Atma is completely detached and indifferent(udaseen). As long as you exist in the ego (ahamkar) the Atmais detached (udaseen). The Atma has no attachment (raag) inthis, nor does it have any abhorrence (dwesh) in this. It says,‘Come to me, when it suits you. When you have cleared all yourkarmic accounts (hisaab), and you have done everything youlike, you can come to me,’ did you understand that?Questioner: What I was trying to say is that if the Atmawas pure, then no one can make something that is pure (shuddha),impure. So how did it become impure?Dadashri: It has never become impure (ashuddha). It isjust that its one energy – the energy of vision (darshan shakti)– has been covered up. Just like the sheth (businessman) himselfis pure (shuddha), but once he drank the alcohol, one of theenergies became covered up, which is why he speaksnonsensically. So in the same way this, ‘I am Chandubhai’ isspeaking. People called you Chandubhai and you believed it, soAptavani-8351352Aptavani-8one of the energies became covered. When that became covered;this became wrong. So if someone removes this intoxicant forhim, he would be cured. What else has happened here? Nothingelse has happened. The same has happened here, as what hadhappened to the sheth. Would the sheth’s (vision) becomecovered or not? Would one’s whole perception not becomecovered? That is what has happened here.Questioner: We can believe that. But if the fundamentalpure Soul (Shuddhatma) has greater energy (shakti) then whydoes it become influenced?Dadashri: But right now, does it not have that energy(shakti). At present, the fundamental Atma is completely detached(udaseen).Questioner: Has it been detached (udaseen) from thevery beginning?Dadashri: It is always detached (udaseen); it is free fromattachment and abhorrence (vitarag). What it is saying is that,as long as you like all this, you should carry on doing it. But ifyou do not like it, you should remember my name, or the GnaniPurush’s or whatever support you can find and come back tome. As long as you like it on the outside, you can wanderaround as it suits you. Otherwise, return to yourself: that is whatit is saying.If you can just understand this much: that when the shethdrinks alcohol, he changes; then all your questions will beanswered. And in this, the only alcohol one is made to drink,here is, ‘I am Chandu’, which has given rise to the ego(ahamkar). So this is all just an influence (amal), and one istalking under this influence. He just carries on with his talking,perpetually in a state of intoxication, and there is no end to histalking!However, the Atma is completely detached (udaseen) allthroughout time in worldly life (sansar kaad). How can this getthrough to people? Just half a gallon of alcohol causes changesin the sheth; whereas here it is alcohol everyday! As soon asyou wake up in the morning, people keep making you drinkalcohol. Do people not tell you, ‘Come in Chandubhai, come inChandubhai. You are my daughter’s father-in-law, you are herhusband, her uncle, his uncle’? And even you believe it. This isprecisely the ‘alcohol’ you drink, and all the while, it is makingyou intoxicated. This very alcohol has made you drunk, and youare saying, ‘How can I have drunk alcohol?’ This entire worldstaggers around from drinking this alcohol. Moreover, when aperson does drink alcohol, people blame the alcohol. Hey you!Why are you blaming the alcohol?Who Is the Doer of Karma?After you have known the reality, there is nothing more foryou to know. Thereafter, You are yourself the Knower-Seer(Gnata-Drashta), with absolute bliss (parmanandi), and theLord of eternal happiness (sanatan sukh); therefore, noownership remains. Besides, all the happiness (sukh) that yousee in the world; is all falsely laden claim (aropit) of happiness.Where the Atma is, there is nothing but bliss (sukh), but youhave falsely attributed everywhere outside, that happiness lies inthese things, or happiness lies in this. That is why you get happinessfrom those things, but there is no bliss there. Bliss is within one’sown Self.Questioner: So who stops that illusion (bhranti)?Dadashri: The Gnani Purush can stop that illusion.Questioner: Say I go back home after I take Gnan fromyou. When I wake up the next day, the illusion within will makeme do the same thing again and again, telling me, ‘No, you haveto do this. Or else you will not accomplish anything.’Dadashri: No, it is not like that. Then the light (prakash)Aptavani-8351352Aptavani-8one of the energies became covered. When that became covered;this became wrong. So if someone removes this intoxicant forhim, he would be cured. What else has happened here? Nothingelse has happened. The same has happened here, as what hadhappened to the sheth. Would the sheth’s (vision) becomecovered or not? Would one’s whole perception not becomecovered? That is what has happened here.Questioner: We can believe that. But if the fundamentalpure Soul (Shuddhatma) has greater energy (shakti) then whydoes it become influenced?Dadashri: But right now, does it not have that energy(shakti). At present, the fundamental Atma is completely detached(udaseen).Questioner: Has it been detached (udaseen) from thevery beginning?Dadashri: It is always detached (udaseen); it is free fromattachment and abhorrence (vitarag). What it is saying is that,as long as you like all this, you should carry on doing it. But ifyou do not like it, you should remember my name, or the GnaniPurush’s or whatever support you can find and come back tome. As long as you like it on the outside, you can wanderaround as it suits you. Otherwise, return to yourself: that is whatit is saying.If you can just understand this much: that when the shethdrinks alcohol, he changes; then all your questions will beanswered. And in this, the only alcohol one is made to drink,here is, ‘I am Chandu’, which has given rise to the ego(ahamkar). So this is all just an influence (amal), and one istalking under this influence. He just carries on with his talking,perpetually in a state of intoxication, and there is no end to histalking!However, the Atma is completely detached (udaseen) allthroughout time in worldly life (sansar kaad). How can this getthrough to people? Just half a gallon of alcohol causes changesin the sheth; whereas here it is alcohol everyday! As soon asyou wake up in the morning, people keep making you drinkalcohol. Do people not tell you, ‘Come in Chandubhai, come inChandubhai. You are my daughter’s father-in-law, you are herhusband, her uncle, his uncle’? And even you believe it. This isprecisely the ‘alcohol’ you drink, and all the while, it is makingyou intoxicated. This very alcohol has made you drunk, and youare saying, ‘How can I have drunk alcohol?’ This entire worldstaggers around from drinking this alcohol. Moreover, when aperson does drink alcohol, people blame the alcohol. Hey you!Why are you blaming the alcohol?Who Is the Doer of Karma?After you have known the reality, there is nothing more foryou to know. Thereafter, You are yourself the Knower-Seer(Gnata-Drashta), with absolute bliss (parmanandi), and theLord of eternal happiness (sanatan sukh); therefore, noownership remains. Besides, all the happiness (sukh) that yousee in the world; is all falsely laden claim (aropit) of happiness.Where the Atma is, there is nothing but bliss (sukh), but youhave falsely attributed everywhere outside, that happiness lies inthese things, or happiness lies in this. That is why you get happinessfrom those things, but there is no bliss there. Bliss is within one’sown Self.Questioner: So who stops that illusion (bhranti)?Dadashri: The Gnani Purush can stop that illusion.Questioner: Say I go back home after I take Gnan fromyou. When I wake up the next day, the illusion within will makeme do the same thing again and again, telling me, ‘No, you haveto do this. Or else you will not accomplish anything.’Dadashri: No, it is not like that. Then the light (prakash)Aptavani-8353354Aptavani-8will take over. It is like that sheth, after he has had a bit to drinkin the evening, what does he say? ‘I am king of so and so.’ Whydoes he talk like that? Has that sheth gone mad? No. He isunder the influence of the alcohol, which has given rise to illusion(bhranti).Questioner: What placed him in those circumstances,was it the Atma that put him there, or was it illusion (bhranti)that put him there? And can the Atma not control him?Dadashri: The Atma has nothing to do with it. This is allthe ego’s doing. The one that is suffering is the ego (ahamkar).The one that suffers the unhappiness (dukh) is the ego, and theone that enjoys happiness (sukh) is also the ego. Therefore,when the ego disappears, you become the Atma and you arethen worthy of freedom (mukti). It is because of ego that theentire worldly life (sansar) stays standing, and it is also becauseof ego that we have attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh). Andall because of ego you are the doer of karma. When there isno more ego (ahamkar), you will cease to be the doer ofkarma. Right now, you are the doer of karma. Therefore, youare also the sufferer. It is because of illusion (bhranti) that thisdoership arises within you.So the sheth was not talking gibberish, so long as he wasnot drinking alcohol. But as soon as he drinks the alcohol, hebegins his gibberish, and would even use abusive language atsomeone. You could then say that karma was done by beinginebriated; it was done through illusion (bhranti). But then wouldhe not have to suffer the consequences? The other person is notlikely to let it go, is he? Would he not berate him by saying, ‘Youwere drunk and you were swearing at me.’ So that is how thesekarmas have to be suffered. And because you yourself becomethe doer of the karma, you yourself are giving support to thekarma. ‘I am doing it.’ Goodness sakes! You do not even havethe power (shakti) to defecate, and why are you saying, ‘I amthe one doing all this.’ That is precisely why these karmas arebeing bound, and you end up wandering around in the fourrealms of existence (gati). When you understand everything fromthe Gnani Purush, the relentless wanderings will come to anend.In Whom Does the Impurity Arise?Questioner: Why would impure phases (ashuddhaparyaya) arise from the Atma, in spite of how cautious one is?Dadashri: But how does this benefit you?Questioner: Do we not bind karma?Dadashri: If the impure phases (ashuddha paryaya) ariseout of you, then of course you would bind karma! They do notcome from the Atma at all. There are no impure phases in theAtma whatsoever. So if you want to understand what exactly itis, then these impure phases (ashuddha paryaya) and purephases (shuddha paryaya) all arise within you.I will tell you the principle truth. There are two kinds ofatma: one is the original (muda) Atma, and through this mainAtma, a second one has come about; the atma that is interactivein the world (vyavahar atma). The fundamental Atma is theSelf (nischay Atma) and it has not changed at all. It is exactlyas it has always been, and from it, the atma that is interactivein the world (vyavahar atma) has been created. Just as if youlook in the mirror, would you not see two Chandubhai?Questioner: Yes, we would see two.Dadashri: In the same way, the atma that interacts in theworld (vyavahar atma) has come about. ‘We’ call it pratishthitatma. One has done one’s own instilling of life (pratishtha) init. Therefore, if you still keep doing the instilling (pratishtha) of‘I am Chandubhai, I am Chandubhai,’ then you will create a newpratishthit atma for the next life. If you believe this worldlyinteraction (vyavahar) to be true, then a new atma that interactsAptavani-8353354Aptavani-8will take over. It is like that sheth, after he has had a bit to drinkin the evening, what does he say? ‘I am king of so and so.’ Whydoes he talk like that? Has that sheth gone mad? No. He isunder the influence of the alcohol, which has given rise to illusion(bhranti).Questioner: What placed him in those circumstances,was it the Atma that put him there, or was it illusion (bhranti)that put him there? And can the Atma not control him?Dadashri: The Atma has nothing to do with it. This is allthe ego’s doing. The one that is suffering is the ego (ahamkar).The one that suffers the unhappiness (dukh) is the ego, and theone that enjoys happiness (sukh) is also the ego. Therefore,when the ego disappears, you become the Atma and you arethen worthy of freedom (mukti). It is because of ego that theentire worldly life (sansar) stays standing, and it is also becauseof ego that we have attachment-abhorrence (raag-dwesh). Andall because of ego you are the doer of karma. When there isno more ego (ahamkar), you will cease to be the doer ofkarma. Right now, you are the doer of karma. Therefore, youare also the sufferer. It is because of illusion (bhranti) that thisdoership arises within you.So the sheth was not talking gibberish, so long as he wasnot drinking alcohol. But as soon as he drinks the alcohol, hebegins his gibberish, and would even use abusive language atsomeone. You could then say that karma was done by beinginebriated; it was done through illusion (bhranti). But then wouldhe not have to suffer the consequences? The other person is notlikely to let it go, is he? Would he not berate him by saying, ‘Youwere drunk and you were swearing at me.’ So that is how thesekarmas have to be suffered. And because you yourself becomethe doer of the karma, you yourself are giving support to thekarma. ‘I am doing it.’ Goodness sakes! You do not even havethe power (shakti) to defecate, and why are you saying, ‘I amthe one doing all this.’ That is precisely why these karmas arebeing bound, and you end up wandering around in the fourrealms of existence (gati). When you understand everything fromthe Gnani Purush, the relentless wanderings will come to anend.In Whom Does the Impurity Arise?Questioner: Why would impure phases (ashuddhaparyaya) arise from the Atma, in spite of how cautious one is?Dadashri: But how does this benefit you?Questioner: Do we not bind karma?Dadashri: If the impure phases (ashuddha paryaya) ariseout of you, then of course you would bind karma! They do notcome from the Atma at all. There are no impure phases in theAtma whatsoever. So if you want to understand what exactly itis, then these impure phases (ashuddha paryaya) and purephases (shuddha paryaya) all arise within you.I will tell you the principle truth. There are two kinds ofatma: one is the original (muda) Atma, and through this mainAtma, a second one has come about; the atma that is interactivein the world (vyavahar atma). The fundamental Atma is theSelf (nischay Atma) and it has not changed at all. It is exactlyas it has always been, and from it, the atma that is interactivein the world (vyavahar atma) has been created. Just as if youlook in the mirror, would you not see two Chandubhai?Questioner: Yes, we would see two.Dadashri: In the same way, the atma that interacts in theworld (vyavahar atma) has come about. ‘We’ call it pratishthitatma. One has done one’s own instilling of life (pratishtha) init. Therefore, if you still keep doing the instilling (pratishtha) of‘I am Chandubhai, I am Chandubhai,’ then you will create a newpratishthit atma for the next life. If you believe this worldlyinteraction (vyavahar) to be true, then a new atma that interactsAptavani-8355356Aptavani-8in the world (vyavahar atma) will be created. The Self (nischayAtma) is the same as it has always been. Should you ever touchit; you will have attained your salvation! Right now, you aretouched by only the atma that interacts in the world (vyavaharatma).This is just the ego (ahamkar) that has arisen. People say,‘Pain (dukh) is being inflicted on my Atma.’ ‘My Atma is ruined.’Listen here! If your Atma is spoiled, then it will never be madebetter. Anything that has the potential energy (shakti) to spoil;can never be improved; besides, if it is spoiling right here, theneven when it gets to the abode of the Liberated Souls (Siddhakshetra), it will spoil over there. But that is the real (nischay)Atma, and the atma that interacts in the world (vyavahar atma)has become spoiled. The one which is spoiled is the vyavahar,and it is the vyavahar that needs to be made shuddha (pure).If you do not meet a Gnani, then you must make your worldlyinteraction (vyavahar) good (shubha), and if you do meet aGnani, then you must make your interaction in the world(vyavahar) pure (shuddha). That is all you have to do. Did youunderstand?So there are no impure phases (ashuddha paryaya)coming from the Atma. All the impure phases come from theatma that interacts in the world (vyavahar atma). Now thosephases (paryaya) are the most subtle (sookshma); it is thesubtler (sookshmatar) of circumstances (avastha) that we arereferring to as phases (paryaya). These are all big, bigcircumstances (avastha); they are impure circumstances(ashuddha avastha); gross circumstances (avastha). Is ‘I amChandubhai’ just any ordinary circumstance?Worldly Atma Mistaken for The Absolute AtmaQuestioner: Do the properties (gunas) of the atma thatinteracts in the world (vyavahar atma) and the real (nischay)Atma differ?Dadashri: Of course they differ! The real (nischay) Atmais the fundamental (muda) Atma.Questioner: There is just one Atma with different qualities(gunas), is that what it is?Dadashri: It is not like that. If a man is a big agent forselling dried dates, people refer to him as the, ‘dried datemerchant).’ But in court, he is considered a lawyer. If he practiceslaw, would you not call him a lawyer? In the same way if youare engrossed with your worldly life (vyavaharik) activity, youare the atma that interacts in the worldly life (vyavahar atma),and if you are absorbed in the Self (nischay), then you are thereal Atma, nischay Atma. Basically you are the same person,but it all depends on which activity you are in.So these people have believed that the atma that interactsin the world (vyavaharik atma) is the real Atma (nischayAtma). They may say that it is vyavaharik atma, but in theirknowledge and understanding, they believe it is the real (nischay)Atma. According to them, ‘This is the Atma, and if it isn’t theAtma, then how can we speak? How can we walk? All thiswalking about, chatting, studying scripture, ‘I am reading and Iam remembering it’ – they regard all that as, ‘This is the Atma;there cannot be any other Atma.’ That is what they know. Andall this is nothing but the Atma’s shadow. If you chase thisshadow, then even after hundreds of thousands of years, you willnot find the fundamental (muda) Atma. Akram Vignan hasrevealed this: why are you chasing the shadow? Despite that, theline of the Kramic marg (step-by-step path to Atmagnan) isnot altogether wrong. However, it is the shadow itself, that theybelieve as the Atma. What I am trying to say is the Atma is theAtma, and the shadow is the shadow.Questioner: It is the belief which is entirely wrong.Dadashri: If the belief is wrong to begin with, theneverything becomes wrong. Then what else is left?Aptavani-8355356Aptavani-8in the world (vyavahar atma) will be created. The Self (nischayAtma) is the same as it has always been. Should you ever touchit; you will have attained your salvation! Right now, you aretouched by only the atma that interacts in the world (vyavaharatma).This is just the ego (ahamkar) that has arisen. People say,‘Pain (dukh) is being inflicted on my Atma.’ ‘My Atma is ruined.’Listen here! If your Atma is spoiled, then it will never be madebetter. Anything that has the potential energy (shakti) to spoil;can never be improved; besides, if it is spoiling right here, theneven when it gets to the abode of the Liberated Souls (Siddhakshetra), it will spoil over there. But that is the real (nischay)Atma, and the atma that interacts in the world (vyavahar atma)has become spoiled. The one which is spoiled is the vyavahar,and it is the vyavahar that needs to be made shuddha (pure).If you do not meet a Gnani, then you must make your worldlyinteraction (vyavahar) good (shubha), and if you do meet aGnani, then you must make your interaction in the world(vyavahar) pure (shuddha). That is all you have to do. Did youunderstand?So there are no impure phases (ashuddha paryaya)coming from the Atma. All the impure phases come from theatma that interacts in the world (vyavahar atma). Now thosephases (paryaya) are the most subtle (sookshma); it is thesubtler (sookshmatar) of circumstances (avastha) that we arereferring to as phases (paryaya). These are all big, bigcircumstances (avastha); they are impure circumstances(ashuddha avastha); gross circumstances (avastha). Is ‘I amChandubhai’ just any ordinary circumstance?Worldly Atma Mistaken for The Absolute AtmaQuestioner: Do the properties (gunas) of the atma thatinteracts in the world (vyavahar atma) and the real (nischay)Atma differ?Dadashri: Of course they differ! The real (nischay) Atmais the fundamental (muda) Atma.Questioner: There is just one Atma with different qualities(gunas), is that what it is?Dadashri: It is not like that. If a man is a big agent forselling dried dates, people refer to him as the, ‘dried datemerchant).’ But in court, he is considered a lawyer. If he practiceslaw, would you not call him a lawyer? In the same way if youare engrossed with your worldly life (vyavaharik) activity, youare the atma that interacts in the worldly life (vyavahar atma),and if you are absorbed in the Self (nischay), then you are thereal Atma, nischay Atma. Basically you are the same person,but it all depends on which activity you are in.So these people have believed that the atma that interactsin the world (vyavaharik atma) is the real Atma (nischayAtma). They may say that it is vyavaharik atma, but in theirknowledge and understanding, they believe it is the real (nischay)Atma. According to them, ‘This is the Atma, and if it isn’t theAtma, then how can we speak? How can we walk? All thiswalking about, chatting, studying scripture, ‘I am reading and Iam remembering it’ – they regard all that as, ‘This is the Atma;there cannot be any other Atma.’ That is what they know. Andall this is nothing but the Atma’s shadow. If you chase thisshadow, then even after hundreds of thousands of years, you willnot find the fundamental (muda) Atma. Akram Vignan hasrevealed this: why are you chasing the shadow? Despite that, theline of the Kramic marg (step-by-step path to Atmagnan) isnot altogether wrong. However, it is the shadow itself, that theybelieve as the Atma. What I am trying to say is the Atma is theAtma, and the shadow is the shadow.Questioner: It is the belief which is entirely wrong.Dadashri: If the belief is wrong to begin with, theneverything becomes wrong. Then what else is left?Aptavani-8357358 Aptavani-8Discharge of Tangible Effects but BondageThrough BeliefQuestioner: So, is one the relative self (pratishthit atma),and the other the pure Soul (Shuddhatma)?Dadashri: The real (nischay) Atma is the pure Soul(Shuddhatma) and the one that is engaged in worldly interaction(vyavahar), is the worldly atma (vyavahar atma – the relativeself); that is the pratishthit atma. That is because you instill lifeinto it (pratishtha). Now if there is a man, whose name isChandubhai, and he has not attained Gnan, if he says, ‘I amChandubhai, I am his maternal uncle (mama), I am his paternaluncle (kaka)’, then whatever he is saying is the karma frombefore, and that karma is unfolding and it is materializing (rupak)in his speech. That which started in the form of planning (yojana),is now coming into effect (rupak). The fact that it has materialized,is not a problem, but then again, the very same thing becomesinstilled in his belief (shraddha); therefore, he sows anotherseed. So this is how he instills life into the non-Self (pratishtha);he instills life in the body itself with – this is who I am. Hence,another body arises again; another statue (murti) is formed. Sowith this successive recurring instillation of life (pratishtha), heconstructs a new statue, while the old statue disappears. Andbecause the instillation of life occurred; it continues to yield thefruit (consequences; effect).It is just the belief of the relative self (pratishthit atma);the atma in which you have instilled life in (pratishthit atma).It is a wrong belief that has come about, which is why a personkeeps continuing to instill life (pratishtha): ‘I am this, I amthis.’ And so the last instillation of life (pratishtha) disappears,and a new instillation of life appears. One that says: ‘I amChandubhai’, and ‘I am his uncle’, ‘I am having this thought.’This was the influx of karma (aashrav) of the previousinstillation of life (pratishtha). And that influx of karma(aashrav) then becomes a discharge (nirjara). Now duringthe discharge, the very same instillation is done again, whichthen discharges. Now if he has been given this Gnan; what itsays is that when he says, ‘I am Chandubhai’ and ‘I am hisuncle’; it all belongs to the previous instillation of life(pratishtha). However, because he has the Gnan today, thebelief (shraddha), ‘I am really Chandubhai’, has disappeared;therefore he does not do another instillation of life. Which iswhy this is called the blockage of influx of karma (samvar);no more binding of karma (bandh), and he constantlydischarges karma (nirjara). What do you regard as binding ofkarma (bandh)? The binding of karma (bandh) occurs in theabsence of Gnan. Therefore, whatever instillation of life(pratishtha) you do, that very same instillation arises again.Now a person may say, ‘of course you should steal’, andhe steals and takes bribes. He talks nicely to people, and tellsthem, ‘I will do this for you, do that for you, I will get all yourwork done.’ and he takes a bribe from them of a thousandrupees. That which is doing all these things is, the relative non-Self; the atma into which life was instilled (pratishthit atma).This was the planning (yojana), which has now materialized(rupak). Whatever he says, is an effect (rupak), even hisencounter with the other person is an effect, and when he takesthe thousand rupees, it is also an effect (rupak). The taking ofthe bribe; the inner intent (bhaav), all that, is decided for him,and that too he accepts it willingly. And later in his mind he hasthe inner intent – now he has not taken the Gnan – that ‘I amtaking all these bribes, but ultimately will it not be me who hasto suffer the consequences? I should not be taking these bribes.’So the planning (yojana), to not take bribes, has beenconstructed in the atma that has been instilled with life (pratishthitatma) for the next life. Therefore, in the next life, he will not takebribes. Do you understand this blue print?Now, there are many people who do not take bribes. Aman’s wife tells him, ‘All the people you studied with, all of themAptavani-8357358 Aptavani-8Discharge of Tangible Effects but BondageThrough BeliefQuestioner: So, is one the relative self (pratishthit atma),and the other the pure Soul (Shuddhatma)?Dadashri: The real (nischay) Atma is the pure Soul(Shuddhatma) and the one that is engaged in worldly interaction(vyavahar), is the worldly atma (vyavahar atma – the relativeself); that is the pratishthit atma. That is because you instill lifeinto it (pratishtha). Now if there is a man, whose name isChandubhai, and he has not attained Gnan, if he says, ‘I amChandubhai, I am his maternal uncle (mama), I am his paternaluncle (kaka)’, then whatever he is saying is the karma frombefore, and that karma is unfolding and it is materializing (rupak)in his speech. That which started in the form of planning (yojana),is now coming into effect (rupak). The fact that it has materialized,is not a problem, but then again, the very same thing becomesinstilled in his belief (shraddha); therefore, he sows anotherseed. So this is how he instills life into the non-Self (pratishtha);he instills life in the body itself with – this is who I am. Hence,another body arises again; another statue (murti) is formed. Sowith this successive recurring instillation of life (pratishtha), heconstructs a new statue, while the old statue disappears. Andbecause the instillation of life occurred; it continues to yield thefruit (consequences; effect).It is just the belief of the relative self (pratishthit atma);the atma in which you have instilled life in (pratishthit atma).It is a wrong belief that has come about, which is why a personkeeps continuing to instill life (pratishtha): ‘I am this, I amthis.’ And so the last instillation of life (pratishtha) disappears,and a new instillation of life appears. One that says: ‘I amChandubhai’, and ‘I am his uncle’, ‘I am having this thought.’This was the influx of karma (aashrav) of the previousinstillation of life (pratishtha). And that influx of karma(aashrav) then becomes a discharge (nirjara). Now duringthe discharge, the very same instillation is done again, whichthen discharges. Now if he has been given this Gnan; what itsays is that when he says, ‘I am Chandubhai’ and ‘I am hisuncle’; it all belongs to the previous instillation of life(pratishtha). However, because he has the Gnan today, thebelief (shraddha), ‘I am really Chandubhai’, has disappeared;therefore he does not do another instillation of life. Which iswhy this is called the blockage of influx of karma (samvar);no more binding of karma (bandh), and he constantlydischarges karma (nirjara). What do you regard as binding ofkarma (bandh)? The binding of karma (bandh) occurs in theabsence of Gnan. Therefore, whatever instillation of life(pratishtha) you do, that very same instillation arises again.Now a person may say, ‘of course you should steal’, andhe steals and takes bribes. He talks nicely to people, and tellsthem, ‘I will do this for you, do that for you, I will get all yourwork done.’ and he takes a bribe from them of a thousandrupees. That which is doing all these things is, the relative non-Self; the atma into which life was instilled (pratishthit atma).This was the planning (yojana), which has now materialized(rupak). Whatever he says, is an effect (rupak), even hisencounter with the other person is an effect, and when he takesthe thousand rupees, it is also an effect (rupak). The taking ofthe bribe; the inner intent (bhaav), all that, is decided for him,and that too he accepts it willingly. And later in his mind he hasthe inner intent – now he has not taken the Gnan – that ‘I amtaking all these bribes, but ultimately will it not be me who hasto suffer the consequences? I should not be taking these bribes.’So the planning (yojana), to not take bribes, has beenconstructed in the atma that has been instilled with life (pratishthitatma) for the next life. Therefore, in the next life, he will not takebribes. Do you understand this blue print?Now, there are many people who do not take bribes. Aman’s wife tells him, ‘All the people you studied with, all of themAptavani-8359360Aptavani-8have built bungalows; you are the only one who lives in a rentedroom.’ And the man starts thinking, ‘Am I the one here who isdoing something wrong?’ He really believes in his principles, hehas faith that his principle is not wrong; that the principle giveshappiness – he knows all of that. But when his wife tells him this,he thinks to himself, ‘I am making a mistake in not taking bribes.’That is when a negative intellect (buddhi) takes over and says,‘Dear man, you have to do his work anyway, so what is wrongwith accepting a bribe?’ So then he creates the inner intent(bhaav), that one should accept bribes. So he tells the otherperson, ‘I will get your work done.’ And the other person says,‘Sir, I will give you five hundred rupees.’ However, when theother person comes to give him the money, he is not able toaccept it, he feels suffocation, and suffers as a result of externalsources (upadhi). This is because in his previous life, he haddone the pratishtha (instillation) of, ‘It is wrong to accept abribe, one should not accept a bribe.’ Therefore, it does notallow him to accept the bribe. He may have told the man tobring the money. But the moment he takes the money in hishands, he trembles, and he is unable to touch it. So he cannottake a single penny; however, he has sown a new seed for thenext life of, ‘I want to take bribes.’ He has not taken anythingin this lifetime (avatar), but he has sown a seed for the nextlifetime. In this whole wide world, what kind of seed is man notplanting? And how is he to know what he is going to get trappedin? Did you understand all that? Is it not an irrefutable principle(siddhant)? Is it not a systematic principle?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Over here, their planning (yojana) lasts forfive years. Within those five years, in the first year, they decidethat in certain places they will construct dams, in some placesthey will do this, and in some places they will do this. They makethese kinds of decisions. They then put it all down on paper andthe entire drawing (blueprint) is prepared on paper. Once thispart is sanctioned, the plan (yojana) is then submitted tomaterialize (rupak); that is when it is considered as being ‘born’and from then on, the planning continues to take shape. In thesame way, this planning occurs first. So the planning takes placein one avatar (lifetime), it takes shape in the next avatar, andwhile it materializes, yet another plan (yojana) is being drawn up– this is how we should do it, this is what we want to put intoit – so the construction continues in this way. Therefore this isan absolute irrefutable principle (siddhantik).Only the Living Gnani Can Illuminate the TruthNow, this kind of information is not found in books. Sohow can a person change? What you will find in books arethings like, ‘you should put chilies in the kadhee (yoghurt soup),salt, turmeric, jaggery. But they do not tell you anything else, orhow you are supposed to measure it. So one cannot reallyunderstand this from within, can he? Therefore, the entire worldconsiders the relative non-Self; the atma that has been instilledwith life (pratishthit atma) as the Atma, and they are trying tomake it still. However, even that is not wrong; of course youhave to make it still. Besides, by stilling it, one does experiencesome happiness (anand). However long the life-instilled atma(pratishthit atma) is made still (sthir); it becomes still at nightin one’s sleep anyway, but for as long as he is able to make itstill during the daytime, he will feel contentment for that durationof time. But what is that contentment like? That when the stillnessis broken, the person reverts to the way he was. Now if hecould remember, at the same time, that the main (muda) Atmais itself steady and still (sthir), then, he himself can make theadjustment. But people do not know about the muda Atma atall. It is this life-instilled atma (pratishthit atma) that has cometo be accepted as the real Atma, and that is really not the Atma.The life-instilled atma (pratishthit atma) is the non-Self bodycomplex (pudgal), and there is no Atma (chetan) in itwhatsoever.Aptavani-8359360Aptavani-8have built bungalows; you are the only one who lives in a rentedroom.’ And the man starts thinking, ‘Am I the one here who isdoing something wrong?’ He really believes in his principles, hehas faith that his principle is not wrong; that the principle giveshappiness – he knows all of that. But when his wife tells him this,he thinks to himself, ‘I am making a mistake in not taking bribes.’That is when a negative intellect (buddhi) takes over and says,‘Dear man, you have to do his work anyway, so what is wrongwith accepting a bribe?’ So then he creates the inner intent(bhaav), that one should accept bribes. So he tells the otherperson, ‘I will get your work done.’ And the other person says,‘Sir, I will give you five hundred rupees.’ However, when theother person comes to give him the money, he is not able toaccept it, he feels suffocation, and suffers as a result of externalsources (upadhi). This is because in his previous life, he haddone the pratishtha (instillation) of, ‘It is wrong to accept abribe, one should not accept a bribe.’ Therefore, it does notallow him to accept the bribe. He may have told the man tobring the money. But the moment he takes the money in hishands, he trembles, and he is unable to touch it. So he cannottake a single penny; however, he has sown a new seed for thenext life of, ‘I want to take bribes.’ He has not taken anythingin this lifetime (avatar), but he has sown a seed for the nextlifetime. In this whole wide world, what kind of seed is man notplanting? And how is he to know what he is going to get trappedin? Did you understand all that? Is it not an irrefutable principle(siddhant)? Is it not a systematic principle?Questioner: Yes.Dadashri: Over here, their planning (yojana) lasts forfive years. Within those five years, in the first year, they decidethat in certain places they will construct dams, in some placesthey will do this, and in some places they will do this. They makethese kinds of decisions. They then put it all down on paper andthe entire drawing (blueprint) is prepared on paper. Once thispart is sanctioned, the plan (yojana) is then submitted tomaterialize (rupak); that is when it is considered as being ‘born’and from then on, the planning continues to take shape. In thesame way, this planning occurs first. So the planning takes placein one avatar (lifetime), it takes shape in the next avatar, andwhile it materializes, yet another plan (yojana) is being drawn up– this is how we should do it, this is what we want to put intoit – so the construction continues in this way. Therefore this isan absolute irrefutable principle (siddhantik).Only the Living Gnani Can Illuminate the TruthNow, this kind of information is not found in books. Sohow can a person change? What you will find in books arethings like, ‘you should put chilies in the kadhee (yoghurt soup),salt, turmeric, jaggery. But they do not tell you anything else, orhow you are supposed to measure it. So one cannot reallyunderstand this from within, can he? Therefore, the entire worldconsiders the relative non-Self; the atma that has been instilledwith life (pratishthit atma) as the Atma, and they are trying tomake it still. However, even that is not wrong; of course youhave to make it still. Besides, by stilling it, one does experiencesome happiness (anand). However long the life-instilled atma(pratishthit atma) is made still (sthir); it becomes still at nightin one’s sleep anyway, but for as long as he is able to make itstill during the daytime, he will feel contentment for that durationof time. But what is that contentment like? That when the stillnessis broken, the person reverts to the way he was. Now if hecould remember, at the same time, that the main (muda) Atmais itself steady and still (sthir), then, he himself can make theadjustment. But people do not know about the muda Atma atall. It is this life-instilled atma (pratishthit atma) that has cometo be accepted as the real Atma, and that is really not the Atma.The life-instilled atma (pratishthit atma) is the non-Self bodycomplex (pudgal), and there is no Atma (chetan) in itwhatsoever.Aptavani-8361362Aptavani-8There is no Atma (chetan) in what the world considersas possessing Atma. This is my discovery. ‘We’ are telling youas ‘we’ see it ‘ourselves’. That is not written in the scriptures(shastras). In the scriptures, they tell you to improve this (thepratishthit atma), ‘Keep on improving it’, they say. Shouldthere not be some kind of methodical way? Is there not somesort of method for improvement? The method which is shown inthe scriptures has not entered into people’s awareness; it hasbeen shown in very subtle ways. But would it not be just throughwords that it has been shown? What that means, is that it hasbeen shown through words, like if you go to Mumbai, this iswhat it is like in Mumbai, and there the shoreline of Juhu beachis like this; however, only through words. How did you benefitfrom that? So what do the scriptures (shastras) show you?They use words to show you. It would not be through experience,would it? Through the scriptures, you do not receive experience,do you? Therefore, without the presence of the Gnani Purush,none of this can be solved.The Inexpressible Experience of the OriginalElementQuestioner: Tell us about when you experienced thisGnan on the bench at Surat railway station in 1958.Dadashri: The experience is something; how much of itcan I tell you? That I experienced bliss (anand), the entire worlddisappeared into oblivion, and I saw everything: ‘what the worldis, who the doer is, how it works, who you are, who am I?’ Icame to know all the explanations. However, I am explaining allthis to you through words. You will never be able to understandthe fundamental; real (muda) thing. That is because there are nowords there. The explanation comes through speech. Howevermany words that can be said, I am telling you all that on theoutside but that cannot be the fundamental (muda) thing, can it?You can appreciate it only when you reach that state andexperience it yourself as to what it is.The Atma is a subtlest (sookshmatam) thing, and theregions outside of the Atma are subtler (sookshmatar). So ‘we’saw everything up to the subtler (sookshmatar). Now sincespeech does not exist at the subtler level (sookshmatar), that iswhere speech (vani) ends; all speech ceases. Therefore, ‘we’have to say, that you need to discern through the experience(anubhav). That is what is said about experience; it is notunderstood by knowing about it, it is understood throughexperience. The outcome (nivedo) occurs through onlyexperience.The Atma Through the Vision of the AtmaQuestioner: But Dada, it is said that see ‘the Atmathrough the Atma’ so what does it mean, to do the darshan(see) of the Atma through the Atma?Dadashri: By ‘through the Atma’ they mean that youmust see the Atma through the worldly atma (vyavaharik atma)that they believe in. But you must bring an instrumental person(nimit) into it. Bring in the instrumental person (nimit) who hasseen it. He will take care of your adjustment in such a way, thatyou will reap its rewards. Otherwise if you try and see it on yourown, you will get nothing out of it. That is because your vision(drashti) is based on the physical senses (indriya). And thereyou will need something that transcends the senses. Unless theGnani Purush releases you from the indriya gamya (mediatedthrough the senses), and gives you the part that is beyond thesenses (atindriya gamya), and changes your vision (drashti);you will not be able to see. That is why ‘we’ change your vision.The Goldsmith’s Vision Is Always on the GoldIf you have a gold ring that has been taken to the goldsmithmany times, the gold in it will become impure. People will say,‘Why do you wear that ring? The gold is impure.’ So you shouldask yourself, the gold has become impure, so what am I goingto do now? So if you take the inferior gold to the jeweler, willAptavani-8361362Aptavani-8There is no Atma (chetan) in what the world considersas possessing Atma. This is my discovery. ‘We’ are telling youas ‘we’ see it ‘ourselves’. That is not written in the scriptures(shastras). In the scriptures, they tell you to improve this (thepratishthit atma), ‘Keep on improving it’, they say. Shouldthere not be some kind of methodical way? Is there not somesort of method for improvement? The method which is shown inthe scriptures has not entered into people’s awareness; it hasbeen shown in very subtle ways. But would it not be just throughwords that it has been shown? What that means, is that it hasbeen shown through words, like if you go to Mumbai, this iswhat it is like in Mumbai, and there the shoreline of Juhu beachis like this; however, only through words. How did you benefitfrom that? So what do the scriptures (shastras) show you?They use words to show you. It would not be through experience,would it? Through the scriptures, you do not receive experience,do you? Therefore, without the presence of the Gnani Purush,none of this can be solved.The Inexpressible Experience of the OriginalElementQuestioner: Tell us about when you experienced thisGnan on the bench at Surat railway station in 1958.Dadashri: The experience is something; how much of itcan I tell you? That I experienced bliss (anand), the entire worlddisappeared into oblivion, and I saw everything: ‘what the worldis, who the doer is, how it works, who you are, who am I?’ Icame to know all the explanations. However, I am explaining allthis to you through words. You will never be able to understandthe fundamental; real (muda) thing. That is because there are nowords there. The explanation comes through speech. Howevermany words that can be said, I am telling you all that on theoutside but that cannot be the fundamental (muda) thing, can it?You can appreciate it only when you reach that state andexperience it yourself as to what it is.The Atma is a subtlest (sookshmatam) thing, and theregions outside of the Atma are subtler (sookshmatar). So ‘we’saw everything up to the subtler (sookshmatar). Now sincespeech does not exist at the subtler level (sookshmatar), that iswhere speech (vani) ends; all speech ceases. Therefore, ‘we’have to say, that you need to discern through the experience(anubhav). That is what is said about experience; it is notunderstood by knowing about it, it is understood throughexperience. The outcome (nivedo) occurs through onlyexperience.The Atma Through the Vision of the AtmaQuestioner: But Dada, it is said that see ‘the Atmathrough the Atma’ so what does it mean, to do the darshan(see) of the Atma through the Atma?Dadashri: By ‘through the Atma’ they mean that youmust see the Atma through the worldly atma (vyavaharik atma)that they believe in. But you must bring an instrumental person(nimit) into it. Bring in the instrumental person (nimit) who hasseen it. He will take care of your adjustment in such a way, thatyou will reap its rewards. Otherwise if you try and see it on yourown, you will get nothing out of it. That is because your vision(drashti) is based on the physical senses (indriya). And thereyou will need something that transcends the senses. Unless theGnani Purush releases you from the indriya gamya (mediatedthrough the senses), and gives you the part that is beyond thesenses (atindriya gamya), and changes your vision (drashti);you will not be able to see. That is why ‘we’ change your vision.The Goldsmith’s Vision Is Always on the GoldIf you have a gold ring that has been taken to the goldsmithmany times, the gold in it will become impure. People will say,‘Why do you wear that ring? The gold is impure.’ So you shouldask yourself, the gold has become impure, so what am I goingto do now? So if you take the inferior gold to the jeweler, willAptavani-8363364Aptavani-8he scold you? Will he ask you why you ruined it? Would he nottell you that you had spoiled it? No, the jeweler is not out thereto scold you. He is there to return it to its pure state. The wholeworld brings the gold that has become impure, to him.So he sits down to purify it. He will get a few rupees outof it. He then starts polishing. He does not look at how impureit has become. He does not look at the other metals that are init; however he does look at how much gold there is. ‘There’sone val (.388gm) of gold in this’ he will say. And the ring itselfis three vals. So there is two vals worth of impurity in it. So hetests it on a touchstone. Then the other person will say, ‘I do notwant to know the composition, I just want you to make a smallring for my son, out of whatever gold you can get out of it.’ Sothe jeweler throws it in acid. Will someone that has this knowledge,do this for you or not?Questioner: The one that has the knowledge will do it.Dadashri: And if there is no one who knows how to doit, would you take it to the blacksmith? The blacksmith will say,‘Take it back, and bring me some iron. Why have you broughtthis gold to me?’ And if you give it to a carpenter, even he willsay no. Now when you give it to a businessman and ask him,‘Could you do at least this much for me?’ He will say, ‘You fool,why do you not go to a goldsmith, or go to a jeweler, whywould there be anything here for you?’ Therefore, if you wantto purify the Atma that has turned impure, you have to go to aGnani Purush. He has all the tools and he knows the attributesof the Self (Atma) as well as the attributes of anatma (non-Self). Only the one who knows the attributes of the Self (Atma)can separate it from the non-Self (anatma); no one else can.The Scientific Differences between the Realand the RelativeQuestioner: Whatever the puzzles and questions that arise,do they all pertain to the life-instilled atma (pratishthit atma)?Dadashri: Yes, it all has to do with the life-instilled atma(pratishthit atma). We refer to the life-instilled atma (pratishthitatma) as the non-Self complex (prakruti). But when we justsay the non-Self complex (prakruti) by itself, people do notproperly understand it. That is why ‘we’ have called it the life-instilled atma (pratishthit atma).The pratishthit atma is the relative atma, and the otheris the pure Soul (Shuddhatma). The Shuddhatma is the realAtma. And the relative atma is a mechanical atma, which is inthe form of input-output (puran-galan). If you fill up (puran)with food here, in the morning you will have to excrete it (galan).If you fill up (puran) with water here, you have to go to the‘bathroom’ (galan), and when you take a breath (puran), youhave to exhale (galan). There is only this input-output (puran-galan) and the pure Soul (Shuddhatma); just these two things.Questioner: What is the difference between the relativeatma and the real Atma?Dadashri: The relative atma has arisen out of one’s ownwrong belief. When that wrong belief is fractured, one thenenters the real Atma. The Gnani Purush fractures all the wrongbeliefs, and he instills the right belief. That is called the enlightenedvision (samyak darshan). Therefore, one has the conviction(pratiti) of one’s own Shuddhatma (pure Soul).Questioner: Is there a difference between the ego (aham)and the life-instilled atma (pratishthit atma)?Dadashri: No. The life-instilled atma (pratishthit atma)itself is the ego (ahamkar). It was you who instilled the life(pratishtha), and therefore it came into being. And there again,you continue to instill life into it with, ‘I am the body. I amChandubhai, I am also this woman’s husband, I am even thisboy’s father, I am his brother.’ How many kinds of ‘I…I…I…I’s’are there?Aptavani-8363364Aptavani-8he scold you? Will he ask you why you ruined it? Would he nottell you that you had spoiled it? No, the jeweler is not out thereto scold you. He is there to return it to its pure state. The wholeworld brings the gold that has become impure, to him.So he sits down to purify it. He will get a few rupees outof it. He then starts polishing. He does not look at how impureit has become. He does not look at the other metals that are init; however he does look at how much gold there is. ‘There’sone val (.388gm) of gold in this’ he will say. And the ring itselfis three vals. So there is two vals worth of impurity in it. So hetests it on a touchstone. Then the other person will say, ‘I do notwant to know the composition, I just want you to make a smallring for my son, out of whatever gold you can get out of it.’ Sothe jeweler throws it in acid. Will someone that has this knowledge,do this for you or not?Questioner: The one that has the knowledge will do it.Dadashri: And if there is no one who knows how to doit, would you take it to the blacksmith? The blacksmith will say,‘Take it back, and bring me some iron. Why have you broughtthis gold to me?’ And if you give it to a carpenter, even he willsay no. Now when you give it to a businessman and ask him,‘Could you do at least this much for me?’ He will say, ‘You fool,why do you not go to a goldsmith, or go to a jeweler, whywould there be anything here for you?’ Therefore, if you wantto purify the Atma that has turned impure, you have to go to aGnani Purush. He has all the tools and he knows the attributesof the Self (Atma) as well as the attributes of anatma (non-Self). Only the one who knows the attributes of the Self (Atma)can separate it from the non-Self (anatma); no one else can.The Scientific Differences between the Realand the RelativeQuestioner: Whatever the puzzles and questions that arise,do they all pertain to the life-instilled atma (pratishthit atma)?Dadashri: Yes, it all has to do with the life-instilled atma(pratishthit atma). We refer to the life-instilled atma (pratishthitatma) as the non-Self complex (prakruti). But when we justsay the non-Self complex (prakruti) by itself, people do notproperly understand it. That is why ‘we’ have called it the life-instilled atma (pratishthit atma).The pratishthit atma is the relative atma, and the otheris the pure Soul (Shuddhatma). The Shuddhatma is the realAtma. And the relative atma is a mechanical atma, which is inthe form of input-output (puran-galan). If you fill up (puran)with food here, in the morning you will have to excrete it (galan).If you fill up (puran) with water here, you have to go to the‘bathroom’ (galan), and when you take a breath (puran), youhave to exhale (galan). There is only this input-output (puran-galan) and the pure Soul (Shuddhatma); just these two things.Questioner: What is the difference between the relativeatma and the real Atma?Dadashri: The relative atma has arisen out of one’s ownwrong belief. When that wrong belief is fractured, one thenenters the real Atma. The Gnani Purush fractures all the wrongbeliefs, and he instills the right belief. That is called the enlightenedvision (samyak darshan). Therefore, one has the conviction(pratiti) of one’s own Shuddhatma (pure Soul).Questioner: Is there a difference between the ego (aham)and the life-instilled atma (pratishthit atma)?Dadashri: No. The life-instilled atma (pratishthit atma)itself is the ego (ahamkar). It was you who instilled the life(pratishtha), and therefore it came into being. And there again,you continue to instill life into it with, ‘I am the body. I amChandubhai, I am also this woman’s husband, I am even thisboy’s father, I am his brother.’ How many kinds of ‘I…I…I…I’s’are there?Aptavani-8365366Aptavani-8The Gnani Illuminates the Siddhant NaturallyQuestioner: When people talk about the Atma, are theyreferring to the life-instilled atma (pratishthit atma)?Dadashri: Yes, they believe that the atma that has beeninstilled with life (pratishthit atma) is the Atma. However, thatis a wrong belief. Now they do not know that, do they? Theyare carrying on, believing that the pratishthit atma, ‘is itself myown Atma’. They move ahead, with this belief. To plod alongby decreasing the subatomic particles (parmanu) of illusoryattachment (moha) one by one, is the step-by-step path toliberation (the Kramic marg). In the step-by-step path toliberation, they call the, pratishthit atma (the atma which hasbeen instilled with life) as the Atma, and here, in the Akrampath (step-less marg), we call the fundamental (muda) Atma,the Atma. So, there is a difference in the vision (drashti) betweenthe Kramic path and the Akram path. In the step-by-step path(Kramic marg), they are right in saying that the Atma is proneto suffering. ‘This suffering, and all these are the qualities andtraits (gunas) of the atma’, which is what the step-by-step path(Kramic marg) says; whereas here in the Akram path (step-less marg), we say that suffering and all that, lies in the life-instilled atma (pratishthit atma). In the step-by-step path(Kramic marg), that which we refer to as the life-instilled atma(pratishthit atma); they refer to as the worldly interactive atma(vyavahar atma), and it is this atma that interacts in the world,they believe as being the fundamental (muda) Atma. And this iswhat they believe they have to make still and steady (sthir), thisis what they believe they have to make free of karma. So theybelieve that this is the atma that has been bound by karma, andit is this atma that needs to be freed of karma. But thefundamental (muda) Atma is not like that. The real (muda)Atma is free of karma. Except you are not aware of this; youneed to attain this awareness.What we are trying to tell you is that you do not have thisawareness. You have this illusion (bhranti). You believe the‘Self’ (Atma) to be where it is not and where the ‘Self’ (Atma)really is, you are not aware of that. So, realize where the Self(Atma) really is, and if you do, then ‘You’ are free fromeverything. This is the ignorance (agnan) that needs to beeradicated; otherwise even after millions of years, your ignorancewill never go away.There are twenty-five kinds of illusory attachments (moha),which get charged and discharge. As a rule, the discharge isgoing to occur, and because of the wrong belief, it will carry oncharging. After ‘we’ give you this Gnan here; the charging willstop, and only the discharge will remain.That is why ‘we’ have given this new word, pratishthitatma (the atma instilled with life). Bhagwan had told peopleabout this, but they did not understand it. Therefore, ‘we’ hadto put down the word pratishthit atma, so that people wouldbe able to understand it in their own language. And so that itdoes not do harm to the Lord’s words; this word pratishthitatma has been applied in this way. That is because you need tounderstand it in your language. What are you to do if you couldnot understand?The Beginning and the End of the World inthe Gnani’s KnowledgeThat from which the world arises and ends, is calledadhishthan. So they will say, ‘Why have they not shown us thebeginning and end (adhishthan) in the scriptures (shastras)?’No, the Tirthankars have not left anything out. But it is a differentstory that you do not come across it.So what did ‘we’ say? What has this world arisen from?It has originated from the atma into which life was instilled(pratishthit atma), and it also ends in it. The fundamental, original(muda) Atma has nothing to do with this. This is just a deludedvision (vibhavik drashti) that has arisen.Aptavani-8365366Aptavani-8The Gnani Illuminates the Siddhant NaturallyQuestioner: When people talk about the Atma, are theyreferring to the life-instilled atma (pratishthit atma)?Dadashri: Yes, they believe that the atma that has beeninstilled with life (pratishthit atma) is the Atma. However, thatis a wrong belief. Now they do not know that, do they? Theyare carrying on, believing that the pratishthit atma, ‘is itself myown Atma’. They move ahead, with this belief. To plod alongby decreasing the subatomic particles (parmanu) of illusoryattachment (moha) one by one, is the step-by-step path toliberation (the Kramic marg). In the step-by-step path toliberation, they call the, pratishthit atma (the atma which hasbeen instilled with life) as the Atma, and here, in the Akrampath (step-less marg), we call the fundamental (muda) Atma,the Atma. So, there is a difference in the vision (drashti) betweenthe Kramic path and the Akram path. In the step-by-step path(Kramic marg), they are right in saying that the Atma is proneto suffering. ‘This suffering, and all these are the qualities andtraits (gunas) of the atma’, which is what the step-by-step path(Kramic marg) says; whereas here in the Akram path (step-less marg), we say that suffering and all that, lies in the life-instilled atma (pratishthit atma). In the step-by-step path(Kramic marg), that which we refer to as the life-instilled atma(pratishthit atma); they refer to as the worldly interactive atma(vyavahar atma), and it is this atma that interacts in the world,they believe as being the fundamental (muda) Atma. And this iswhat they believe they have to make still and steady (sthir), thisis what they believe they have to make free of karma. So theybelieve that this is the atma that has been bound by karma, andit is this atma that needs to be freed of karma. But thefundamental (muda) Atma is not like that. The real (muda)Atma is free of karma. Except you are not aware of this; youneed to attain this awareness.What we are trying to tell you is that you do not have thisawareness. You have this illusion (bhranti). You believe the‘Self’ (Atma) to be where it is not and where the ‘Self’ (Atma)really is, you are not aware of that. So, realize where the Self(Atma) really is, and if you do, then ‘You’ are free fromeverything. This is the ignorance (agnan) that needs to beeradicated; otherwise even after millions of years, your ignorancewill never go away.There are twenty-five kinds of illusory attachments (moha),which get charged and discharge. As a rule, the discharge isgoing to occur, and because of the wrong belief, it will carry oncharging. After ‘we’ give you this Gnan here; the charging willstop, and only the discharge will remain.That is why ‘we’ have given this new word, pratishthitatma (the atma instilled with life). Bhagwan had told peopleabout this, but they did not understand it. Therefore, ‘we’ hadto put down the word pratishthit atma, so that people wouldbe able to understand it in their own language. And so that itdoes not do harm to the Lord’s words; this word pratishthitatma has been applied in this way. That is because you need tounderstand it in your language. What are you to do if you couldnot understand?The Beginning and the End of the World inthe Gnani’s KnowledgeThat from which the world arises and ends, is calledadhishthan. So they will say, ‘Why have they not shown us thebeginning and end (adhishthan) in the scriptures (shastras)?’No, the Tirthankars have not left anything out. But it is a differentstory that you do not come across it.So what did ‘we’ say? What has this world arisen from?It has originated from the atma into which life was instilled(pratishthit atma), and it also ends in it. The fundamental, original(muda) Atma has nothing to do with this. This is just a deludedvision (vibhavik drashti) that has arisen.Aptavani-8367368Aptavani-8When the Vision Becomes Pure, It BecomesAbsorbed in the PureOne is an atma that has been instilled with life (pratishthitatma), and the other is the real Atma. The life-instilled atma(pratishthit atma) is a mechanical atma. It can only survivewhen you eat and drink, and it will stop if you stop breathing.In whatever the life-instilled atma does, when we say, ‘I am doingit’, that is the egoism (ahamkar) that we do, and so another life-instilled atma (pratishthit atma) for the next life is constructed.The fact is, nothing has happened to the original (muda)real Atma. Others have given you this gift of ignorance (agnan),so all the impressions have cropped up; as soon as he is born,they start calling him ‘Chandu, Chandu’. Now that child doesnot understand what they are doing, does he? But these peoplekeep endowing him with these mental impressions (sanskar).So, then he starts believing that ‘I am Chandu.’ And when hegrows up he begins to say, ‘this is my paternal uncle (kaka) andthis is my maternal uncle (mama).’ This is how all this ignorance(agnan) is gifted to him, so the illusion (bhranti) arises.What happens here, is that one of the Atma’s energies(shakti) becomes covered; the energy (shakti) called vision(darshan) gets covered up. And because the energy called vision(darshan) gets covered, all this comes about. When that visionis restored again, when it becomes enlightened (samyak), oneagain returns to his original form (muda swaroop). This visionhas become deluded (mithya), and that is why he believes thathappiness (sukh) lies in worldly things; therefore when that visionis put right, even the belief in worldly happiness (sukh) disappears.There is nothing else of significance that has been spoiled. Onlythe vision (darshan) has been spoiled, only the sight (drashti)has been spoiled. ‘We’ change that sight for you.Questioner: So is it just illusion (bhranti) that hashappened to the Atma?Dadashri: The Atma does not have illusion (bhranti); itis just the vision (darshan) that has been covered up. The visionof the real, fundamental (muda) Atma, has been entirely coveredup. Because of the external gift these people on the outside givehim; the gift of ignorance (agnan) the very moment he is born.They themselves are ignorant (agnani) and they place him onthe rung of ignorance. Therefore, he too starts to believe it, andbecause he believes it, the vision (darshan) gets covered. Becausethe vision gets covered he says, ‘This is my father-in-law, and thisis my uncle.’ And I am telling you, that these are all wrong beliefs.One’s Salvation Is Through the Awareness ofthe Main Self FormQuestioner: So is that not the same as saying that theAtma has to work towards its own liberation?Dadashri: The liberation of the Atma has to be done bythe Atma itself, which means that fundamentally the Atma issomething that is already liberated. However, the atma that onebelieves in, the atma that has been instilled with life (pratishthitatma), is not really the right belief. The fundamental and real(muda) Atma is already liberated, but the atma that has beeninstilled with life (pratishthit atma) is the atma one where heconsiders his own self to be. When he himself, comes to knowthat, ‘This is indeed my own form and nature (swaroop), and Iam with Knowledge (Gnan), with Vision (Darshan), withConduct (Charitra)’, then even his liberation will happen. Sowhen one makes a real spiritual effort (purusharth) in this wayfor one’s own liberation, only then will it occur. But one has tomeet the Gnani Purush who will give him the awareness of thenature of his own Self (swaroop), and only then he will be ableto make that real spiritual effort (purusharth). And that is whenhe attains liberation.Jai Sat Chit AnandAptavani-8367368Aptavani-8When the Vision Becomes Pure, It BecomesAbsorbed in the PureOne is an atma that has been instilled with life (pratishthitatma), and the other is the real Atma. The life-instilled atma(pratishthit atma) is a mechanical atma. It can only survivewhen you eat and drink, and it will stop if you stop breathing.In whatever the life-instilled atma does, when we say, ‘I am doingit’, that is the egoism (ahamkar) that we do, and so another life-instilled atma (pratishthit atma) for the next life is constructed.The fact is, nothing has happened to the original (muda)real Atma. Others have given you this gift of ignorance (agnan),so all the impressions have cropped up; as soon as he is born,they start calling him ‘Chandu, Chandu’. Now that child doesnot understand what they are doing, does he? But these peoplekeep endowing him with these mental impressions (sanskar).So, then he starts believing that ‘I am Chandu.’ And when hegrows up he begins to say, ‘this is my paternal uncle (kaka) andthis is my maternal uncle (mama).’ This is how all this ignorance(agnan) is gifted to him, so the illusion (bhranti) arises.What happens here, is that one of the Atma’s energies(shakti) becomes covered; the energy (shakti) called vision(darshan) gets covered up. And because the energy called vision(darshan) gets covered, all this comes about. When that visionis restored again, when it becomes enlightened (samyak), oneagain returns to his original form (muda swaroop). This visionhas become deluded (mithya), and that is why he believes thathappiness (sukh) lies in worldly things; therefore when that visionis put right, even the belief in worldly happiness (sukh) disappears.There is nothing else of significance that has been spoiled. Onlythe vision (darshan) has been spoiled, only the sight (drashti)has been spoiled. ‘We’ change that sight for you.Questioner: So is it just illusion (bhranti) that hashappened to the Atma?Dadashri: The Atma does not have illusion (bhranti); itis just the vision (darshan) that has been covered up. The visionof the real, fundamental (muda) Atma, has been entirely coveredup. Because of the external gift these people on the outside givehim; the gift of ignorance (agnan) the very moment he is born.They themselves are ignorant (agnani) and they place him onthe rung of ignorance. Therefore, he too starts to believe it, andbecause he believes it, the vision (darshan) gets covered. Becausethe vision gets covered he says, ‘This is my father-in-law, and thisis my uncle.’ And I am telling you, that these are all wrong beliefs.One’s Salvation Is Through the Awareness ofthe Main Self FormQuestioner: So is that not the same as saying that theAtma has to work towards its own liberation?Dadashri: The liberation of the Atma has to be done bythe Atma itself, which means that fundamentally the Atma issomething that is already liberated. However, the atma that onebelieves in, the atma that has been instilled with life (pratishthitatma), is not really the right belief. The fundamental and real(muda) Atma is already liberated, but the atma that has beeninstilled with life (pratishthit atma) is the atma one where heconsiders his own self to be. When he himself, comes to knowthat, ‘This is indeed my own form and nature (swaroop), and Iam with Knowledge (Gnan), with Vision (Darshan), withConduct (Charitra)’, then even his liberation will happen. Sowhen one makes a real spiritual effort (purusharth) in this wayfor one’s own liberation, only then will it occur. But one has tomeet the Gnani Purush who will give him the awareness of thenature of his own Self (swaroop), and only then he will be ableto make that real spiritual effort (purusharth). And that is whenhe attains liberation.Jai Sat Chit AnandGLOSSARYAadarshaIdealAadeshDirectiveAadhariSupportedAadhiMental sufferingAadiBeginningAagrahaInsistence or stubbornnessAakaarShapeAaropFalsely imputingAasanPostures; sitting placeAashravInflux of karmic matterAashritDependentAastikBelieving in existence of GodAbhedtaOnenessAbhiniveshSingle viewpointAbhyasStudyAbrahmaNon-SelfAchadStill, immovableAcharImmovable, stillAdabhootWondrousAdhishthanThat from which the worldarises and endsAdhisthata devaPresiding deityAdhogamiDescendAdhogatiLower life-formsAdhyatmaSpiritualityAdwaitaNon-dualismAdwaita bhaavNon-dualistic intentAgamyaIncomprehensibleAhamkarEgoAhamkariEgotisticalAjanmaWithout birthAjanma-amarWithout birth and deathAkarta-abhoktaNon-doer Non-suffererAlokBeyond the worldAmalInfluenceAnaadiEternalAnamiNamelessAnandBlissAnatmaNon-SelfAnekantAll-encompassing and accepting of allpoints of viewAnityaTransitoryAnshaFractionAnsha swaroopFraction formAntaEndAntahkaranInternal functioning mechanism in everyhuman being composed of the mind, theintellect, the chit and the egoAntar vruttiInner tendenciesAntaratmaInner awakened Self; the interim stateSoul, beginning with the conviction of ‘Iam pure Soul’ ending with absoluteexperienceAntaray karmaObstructing karmaAntarmukhaInternal vision, Inward focus or visionAnubhavgamyaExperiencedAnubhutiExperienceAra, ArasCosmic time-cyclesArdhadagdhaHalf-burntAroopiInvisibleAropitFalsely laden claimAsankhyatInnumerable, countlessAshataUnpleasantAshirwadBlessingsAshubha upayogiInauspicious awarenessAshuddhaImpureAshuddha paryayaImpure phaseAshuddha upayogiImpure awarenessAtindriya gamyaBeyond the sensesAtmaBrahma (Self; The real Self or Soul)AtmagnanKnowledge of the Atma, Self-realizationGLOSSARYAadarshaIdealAadeshDirectiveAadhariSupportedAadhiMental sufferingAadiBeginningAagrahaInsistence or stubbornnessAakaarShapeAaropFalsely imputingAasanPostures; sitting placeAashravInflux of karmic matterAashritDependentAastikBelieving in existence of GodAbhedtaOnenessAbhiniveshSingle viewpointAbhyasStudyAbrahmaNon-SelfAchadStill, immovableAcharImmovable, stillAdabhootWondrousAdhishthanThat from which the worldarises and endsAdhisthata devaPresiding deityAdhogamiDescendAdhogatiLower life-formsAdhyatmaSpiritualityAdwaitaNon-dualismAdwaita bhaavNon-dualistic intentAgamyaIncomprehensibleAhamkarEgoAhamkariEgotisticalAjanmaWithout birthAjanma-amarWithout birth and deathAkarta-abhoktaNon-doer Non-suffererAlokBeyond the worldAmalInfluenceAnaadiEternalAnamiNamelessAnandBlissAnatmaNon-SelfAnekantAll-encompassing and accepting of allpoints of viewAnityaTransitoryAnshaFractionAnsha swaroopFraction formAntaEndAntahkaranInternal functioning mechanism in everyhuman being composed of the mind, theintellect, the chit and the egoAntar vruttiInner tendenciesAntaratmaInner awakened Self; the interim stateSoul, beginning with the conviction of ‘Iam pure Soul’ ending with absoluteexperienceAntaray karmaObstructing karmaAntarmukhaInternal vision, Inward focus or visionAnubhavgamyaExperiencedAnubhutiExperienceAra, ArasCosmic time-cyclesArdhadagdhaHalf-burntAroopiInvisibleAropitFalsely laden claimAsankhyatInnumerable, countlessAshataUnpleasantAshirwadBlessingsAshubha upayogiInauspicious awarenessAshuddhaImpureAshuddha paryayaImpure phaseAshuddha upayogiImpure awarenessAtindriya gamyaBeyond the sensesAtmaBrahma (Self; The real Self or Soul)AtmagnanKnowledge of the Atma, Self-realizationAtma-nirikshanatma observing, self observationAtmanishthaPerson who is devoted to the AtmaAtmanubhavExperience of the AtmaAtmaroopForm of AtmaAtma-sakshatkarDirect experience of the AtmaAvagamanThat comes and goesAvaktavyaInexpressibleAvaranCovering, veil of ignoranceAvarnaniyaIndescribableAvasthaState or Paryaya means phases or stateAvatarIncarnation; birth; lifeAvibhagi-avibhajyaIndivisible and inseparableAvinashiPermanentAvinashi sukhEternal happinessAvinashi tattvaEternal elementAvyavaharNon-interactive formAvyavahar rashiUnnamed state, unidentified stateBadhakObstructionBahirmukhiDirected towards the external,externalizedBahirmukhi atmaExternalized vision of the selfBandhBinding of karmaBandhanBondageBapoSuperiorBeejSecond day of a lunar fortnightBeindriyaTwo-sensedBhaanAwarenessBhajiyaFritters, Savory frittersBhaktiLord’s worshipBhautikWorldlyBhautik jagatMaterial worldBhautik sukhWorldly happiness, material happinessBhavnaIntentionBhedSeparationBhed buddhiIntellect that creates divisionBhed VignanThe science that separates the Self fromthe non-SelfBhelSavory snack mixtureBhelvaadoMixed-upBhinnatvaDifferencesBhogavatoEnduring of karmasBhoktaSuffererBhramaIllusionBhrant-gnanIllusory knowledgeBhumikaPlaceBinharifCannot compete withBrahmaAtma, godBrahma satyaAtma is realBrahma swaroopThe SelfBrahmaanandBliss of the SelfBrahmachariCelibateBrahmagnanKnowledge of GodBrahmaswaroopAtmaBuddhaEnlightenedBuddhigamyaUnderstandable through the intellectBuddhijanyaBased on the intellectBuddhijanya gnanIntellectually based knowledgeBuddhishadiThose who excessively use their intellectChaitanya swaroopForm of the SelfChanaChickpeasChanchalAgitated, restless and activeCharam dehaFinal bodyChetanThe SelfChetan gnanKnowledge of the SelfChetan’s mayavishaktiIllusory energyChetan-munCharging or the living mindChothFourth lunar dayDarasalTrueDarshan kriyaAct of SeeingDashaStatesDeevoLightDehaBodyDehadharmaNature of the bodyAtma-nirikshanatma observing, self observationAtmanishthaPerson who is devoted to the AtmaAtmanubhavExperience of the AtmaAtmaroopForm of AtmaAtma-sakshatkarDirect experience of the AtmaAvagamanThat comes and goesAvaktavyaInexpressibleAvaranCovering, veil of ignoranceAvarnaniyaIndescribableAvasthaState or Paryaya means phases or stateAvatarIncarnation; birth; lifeAvibhagi-avibhajyaIndivisible and inseparableAvinashiPermanentAvinashi sukhEternal happinessAvinashi tattvaEternal elementAvyavaharNon-interactive formAvyavahar rashiUnnamed state, unidentified stateBadhakObstructionBahirmukhiDirected towards the external,externalizedBahirmukhi atmaExternalized vision of the selfBandhBinding of karmaBandhanBondageBapoSuperiorBeejSecond day of a lunar fortnightBeindriyaTwo-sensedBhaanAwarenessBhajiyaFritters, Savory frittersBhaktiLord’s worshipBhautikWorldlyBhautik jagatMaterial worldBhautik sukhWorldly happiness, material happinessBhavnaIntentionBhedSeparationBhed buddhiIntellect that creates divisionBhed VignanThe science that separates the Self fromthe non-SelfBhelSavory snack mixtureBhelvaadoMixed-upBhinnatvaDifferencesBhogavatoEnduring of karmasBhoktaSuffererBhramaIllusionBhrant-gnanIllusory knowledgeBhumikaPlaceBinharifCannot compete withBrahmaAtma, godBrahma satyaAtma is realBrahma swaroopThe SelfBrahmaanandBliss of the SelfBrahmachariCelibateBrahmagnanKnowledge of GodBrahmaswaroopAtmaBuddhaEnlightenedBuddhigamyaUnderstandable through the intellectBuddhijanyaBased on the intellectBuddhijanya gnanIntellectually based knowledgeBuddhishadiThose who excessively use their intellectChaitanya swaroopForm of the SelfChanaChickpeasChanchalAgitated, restless and activeCharam dehaFinal bodyChetanThe SelfChetan gnanKnowledge of the SelfChetan’s mayavishaktiIllusory energyChetan-munCharging or the living mindChothFourth lunar dayDarasalTrueDarshan kriyaAct of SeeingDashaStatesDeevoLightDehaBodyDehadharmaNature of the bodyDehadhyasIdentification with the body, theconsciousness of, ‘I am this bodyDehatitaBeyond the bodyDeshkaadPresent time and spaceDevaCelestial beingsDeva dharmaCelestial lifeDeva gatiRealm of celestial beingsDhaarnaIntention, upholding, supportingDharmaReligion, intent of human lifeDharma dhyanReligious meditationDharmasNatures and functionsDhrauvPreservationDhyanMeditationDivya chakshuDivine visionDoshFaultsDrashtaSeerDrashtiViewpoint, visionDrashyaObject to be seenDravyaElementDukaadFamineDukhUnhappiness, pain, griefDurlabhDifficult to attainDurvasaA sage known for his anger and fiercenatureDushamkaal(The time cycle wherein there is nounity of mind, speech and actionDwaitaDuality, dualismDwaita bhaavDualistic intentDwandvaDualities, DualityDwandva swaroopForm of dualityDwandvatitaAbove duality, Beyond dualityEkagraAbsolute unity of thought, speech andactionEkagrataFocused concentrationEkantikAdherence to one’s own truthEkatmataBecome oneEkendriyaSingle-sensed organismEkoham bahusyamI am One, may I be manyGatiRealms of existenceGatisahayak tattvaElement of motion or momentumGed bethiFits; sits well; agreesGheeClarified butterGnan bhaavIntent of KnowledgeGnan kriyaAction of KnowingGnan prakashLight of KnowledgeGnan-DarshanKnowledge-VisionGnanjanya GnanExperiential Knowledge of the Self, thatarises from GnanGnataKnowerGneyaKnown; Objects to be knownGrahanAcquiredGunadharmaQualities and functionsGunavaachakAttributes and propertiesGunthanu orgunasthanakSteps in the spiritual development of the SelfGupta swaroopHidden formGuruttamSuperiorHalan-chalanAny kind of movementHeeyamaanDecreasesHetuPurpose, goal, aimHisaabAccount; Karmic accountsHoo-panuI am thisIndriyaSense organs, sensesIshwarpanuState of GodJaanvar gatiAnimal realmJaatiCasteJadaNon-Self, lifelessJada gnanKnowledge of the non-SelfJada shaktiInanimate energyJagat mithyaWorld is an illusionJagat satyaWorld is also trueJalebiCrispy fritters soaked in sweet syrupJapaRepeating mantraJignyasuSeekerDehadhyasIdentification with the body, theconsciousness of, ‘I am this bodyDehatitaBeyond the bodyDeshkaadPresent time and spaceDevaCelestial beingsDeva dharmaCelestial lifeDeva gatiRealm of celestial beingsDhaarnaIntention, upholding, supportingDharmaReligion, intent of human lifeDharma dhyanReligious meditationDharmasNatures and functionsDhrauvPreservationDhyanMeditationDivya chakshuDivine visionDoshFaultsDrashtaSeerDrashtiViewpoint, visionDrashyaObject to be seenDravyaElementDukaadFamineDukhUnhappiness, pain, griefDurlabhDifficult to attainDurvasaA sage known for his anger and fiercenatureDushamkaal(The time cycle wherein there is nounity of mind, speech and actionDwaitaDuality, dualismDwaita bhaavDualistic intentDwandvaDualities, DualityDwandva swaroopForm of dualityDwandvatitaAbove duality, Beyond dualityEkagraAbsolute unity of thought, speech andactionEkagrataFocused concentrationEkantikAdherence to one’s own truthEkatmataBecome oneEkendriyaSingle-sensed organismEkoham bahusyamI am One, may I be manyGatiRealms of existenceGatisahayak tattvaElement of motion or momentumGed bethiFits; sits well; agreesGheeClarified butterGnan bhaavIntent of KnowledgeGnan kriyaAction of KnowingGnan prakashLight of KnowledgeGnan-DarshanKnowledge-VisionGnanjanya GnanExperiential Knowledge of the Self, thatarises from GnanGnataKnowerGneyaKnown; Objects to be knownGrahanAcquiredGunadharmaQualities and functionsGunavaachakAttributes and propertiesGunthanu orgunasthanakSteps in the spiritual development of the SelfGupta swaroopHidden formGuruttamSuperiorHalan-chalanAny kind of movementHeeyamaanDecreasesHetuPurpose, goal, aimHisaabAccount; Karmic accountsHoo-panuI am thisIndriyaSense organs, sensesIshwarpanuState of GodJaanvar gatiAnimal realmJaatiCasteJadaNon-Self, lifelessJada gnanKnowledge of the non-SelfJada shaktiInanimate energyJagat mithyaWorld is an illusionJagat satyaWorld is also trueJalebiCrispy fritters soaked in sweet syrupJapaRepeating mantraJignyasuSeekerJivaLife-formsJivatmaState of the atma with karma and ego,embodied soul, mortalKakaPaternal uncleKaliyugCurrent era of the time cycle, wherethere is no unity in mind, speech and actionsKalpanaImaginationKalpantLamentations and griefKalpitImaginaryKalpit sukhImaginary happinessKalyanSalvationKapatDeceitKaranCauseKartaDoership, DoerKarta- bhoktaDoer-sufferer, Doing-sufferingKartapanuDoershipKarunaCompassionKaryaDeedsKhichadeeRice and lentilsKhokhaPackingKinaroShorelineKramSequential orderKram-bramRule or orderKramsarProgresses step by step in orderKramvaarOrderlyKriyaActivity, deedKriyakandRitualsKriyakariProcure results on its ownKrupaGraceKsharPerishableKshayak GnanPermanent conviction of KnowledgeKshayak samkitPermanent conviction of the right beliefKshetragnyaKnower of your locationKshetrakaarBecome one with the locationKshetrasLocations in the universeLafraWorldly entanglementsLaghuttam bhaavHumblest of intentLakshanCharacteristic, distinguishing signLayaExtinction, endLihatDevoid of thoughtLobhGreedLokWorlds; planes of existenceLok-alokAll the regions of the universe and beyondLoksangnyaKnowledge arising from association withworldly people; worldly viewMaanPrideMaansik anandMental happinessMamaMaternal uncleMamataMy-nessManobudPower of the mindManodharmaNature of the mindMantraSacred wordManushyaHuman beingMarmaMeaningMatbhedDifference of opinionMattOpinionMayaIllusory attachmentMohaIntoxication of illusionMokshadataGiver of liberationMudaRealMuda chetanOriginal Chetan; ‘real I’Muda sthanOriginal placeMuda tattvaFundamental elementMuda vastuOriginal elementMuddImpurityMudhatmaUnaware of the SelfMuktaLiberated, freeMukta purushOne who is liberatedMurtiStatue, idols and iconic representationsNaadSoundNaad brahmaSound of brahmaNaam smaranName to reciteNaastikWho believes that God does not exist;atheist; without existenceJivaLife-formsJivatmaState of the atma with karma and ego,embodied soul, mortalKakaPaternal uncleKaliyugCurrent era of the time cycle, wherethere is no unity in mind, speech and actionsKalpanaImaginationKalpantLamentations and griefKalpitImaginaryKalpit sukhImaginary happinessKalyanSalvationKapatDeceitKaranCauseKartaDoership, DoerKarta- bhoktaDoer-sufferer, Doing-sufferingKartapanuDoershipKarunaCompassionKaryaDeedsKhichadeeRice and lentilsKhokhaPackingKinaroShorelineKramSequential orderKram-bramRule or orderKramsarProgresses step by step in orderKramvaarOrderlyKriyaActivity, deedKriyakandRitualsKriyakariProcure results on its ownKrupaGraceKsharPerishableKshayak GnanPermanent conviction of KnowledgeKshayak samkitPermanent conviction of the right beliefKshetragnyaKnower of your locationKshetrakaarBecome one with the locationKshetrasLocations in the universeLafraWorldly entanglementsLaghuttam bhaavHumblest of intentLakshanCharacteristic, distinguishing signLayaExtinction, endLihatDevoid of thoughtLobhGreedLokWorlds; planes of existenceLok-alokAll the regions of the universe and beyondLoksangnyaKnowledge arising from association withworldly people; worldly viewMaanPrideMaansik anandMental happinessMamaMaternal uncleMamataMy-nessManobudPower of the mindManodharmaNature of the mindMantraSacred wordManushyaHuman beingMarmaMeaningMatbhedDifference of opinionMattOpinionMayaIllusory attachmentMohaIntoxication of illusionMokshadataGiver of liberationMudaRealMuda chetanOriginal Chetan; ‘real I’Muda sthanOriginal placeMuda tattvaFundamental elementMuda vastuOriginal elementMuddImpurityMudhatmaUnaware of the SelfMuktaLiberated, freeMukta purushOne who is liberatedMurtiStatue, idols and iconic representationsNaadSoundNaad brahmaSound of brahmaNaam smaranName to reciteNaastikWho believes that God does not exist;atheist; without existenceNaimitik karanInstrumental causeNandiswarStanding posture on the bullNarkHellNark gatiInfernal realmNashavantPerishableNigodInfinitesimal, imperceptible dormant livingentities, awaking and entering the pathof evolutionNihshabdaWordlessNihshankFree from doubtNirabhimaaniDevoid of excessive prideNiradhariIndependent, not supportedNiragrahaNon-insistence on one’s own truth orviewpointNiragrahiWithout insistenceNirakarFormlessNiralumbIndependentNirashritIndependentNiravaranVeil-free, free of coveringsNirgunaNo attributesNirikshanObserveNirjaraDischarge of karmic matterNirlepUntouched, unsmearable, unanointedNirlep bhaavPristine and untaintedNirnayaDecisionsNirpekshaWithout dependencyNirvikalp purushEgoless beingNirvikalpiEgoless personNirvikariFree from passionNischayResolutions and decisionsNischay atmaSelfNischay GnanKnowledge of the SelfNischetan-chetanLiving-non-livingNischetan-munEffect or discharging mindNishpakshapatiImpartial and does not side with anyviewpointNishthaFaith and devotionNityaEternalNivruttiInactivityNiyamDiscipline, self purification and studyNiyamrajGoverned by NatureNiyatiA fixed precise track towards liberation.PaiPennyPakshapatiPartialityPanchindriyaFive sensesPanchkleshaFear of deathPanthaSectsParabrahmaAbsolute godParipurnataFull completionParivartanChangesParmanandState of eternal blissParmeshwarAbsolute self, absolute godPar-ramanataEngulfed in the non-SelfPar-sattaDependent on other external things,controlled by something elseParyayaPhasesPaudgalikNon-Self complex’sPotapanu‘I-ness’PradeshLocationsPrakashLightPrakrutiMind-speech-body complexPramaataIlluminatorPramanQuantity, proportionPrameyaContained space; receptaclePranayamBreath controlPratishthaInstillation of lifePratishthit atmaThe belief of ‘I am Chandubhai’, relativeor charged self, relative selfPratitiConvictionPratiti bhaavIntent of convictionPratyahaarSense control, control over the sensesPratyakshDirectNaimitik karanInstrumental causeNandiswarStanding posture on the bullNarkHellNark gatiInfernal realmNashavantPerishableNigodInfinitesimal, imperceptible dormant livingentities, awaking and entering the pathof evolutionNihshabdaWordlessNihshankFree from doubtNirabhimaaniDevoid of excessive prideNiradhariIndependent, not supportedNiragrahaNon-insistence on one’s own truth orviewpointNiragrahiWithout insistenceNirakarFormlessNiralumbIndependentNirashritIndependentNiravaranVeil-free, free of coveringsNirgunaNo attributesNirikshanObserveNirjaraDischarge of karmic matterNirlepUntouched, unsmearable, unanointedNirlep bhaavPristine and untaintedNirnayaDecisionsNirpekshaWithout dependencyNirvikalp purushEgoless beingNirvikalpiEgoless personNirvikariFree from passionNischayResolutions and decisionsNischay atmaSelfNischay GnanKnowledge of the SelfNischetan-chetanLiving-non-livingNischetan-munEffect or discharging mindNishpakshapatiImpartial and does not side with anyviewpointNishthaFaith and devotionNityaEternalNivruttiInactivityNiyamDiscipline, self purification and studyNiyamrajGoverned by NatureNiyatiA fixed precise track towards liberation.PaiPennyPakshapatiPartialityPanchindriyaFive sensesPanchkleshaFear of deathPanthaSectsParabrahmaAbsolute godParipurnataFull completionParivartanChangesParmanandState of eternal blissParmeshwarAbsolute self, absolute godPar-ramanataEngulfed in the non-SelfPar-sattaDependent on other external things,controlled by something elseParyayaPhasesPaudgalikNon-Self complex’sPotapanu‘I-ness’PradeshLocationsPrakashLightPrakrutiMind-speech-body complexPramaataIlluminatorPramanQuantity, proportionPrameyaContained space; receptaclePranayamBreath controlPratishthaInstillation of lifePratishthit atmaThe belief of ‘I am Chandubhai’, relativeor charged self, relative selfPratitiConvictionPratiti bhaavIntent of convictionPratyahaarSense control, control over the sensesPratyakshDirectPravruttiActions, activityPrerana shaktiInternal urging or energy of commandPreyaWorldly happinessPruthvikayaEarth-bodied life-formsPudgal parmanusNon-Self complexPujaWorshipPunarjanmaNext lifePuran-galanInput-outputPurnaCompletePurna bhaavUltimate goalPurnahutiAbsolute state, CompletionPurnatvaThe state of being complete, the absoluteSelf, absolute statePurusharthSpiritual effortRajo gunaPassionate traits, characteristic of passionRoopantarChange in formRoopiVisibleRupakComing into effect, materializeRushi-munisAncient sagesSa-aadiBeginning of right visionSa-anta The end of the right visionSabhaan avasthaState of consciousnessSacharMotion, movableSacharacharMovable-immovableSadhanResource, tool, meansSadhanaSpiritual endeavorSadhyaGoalSahajNatural and spontaneousSahajikNatural and spontaneousSaiyogoCircumstancesSakal parmatmaAbsolute Self from all aspectsSakshatkarDirect experienceSakshibhaavWitnessingSamadhanInner satisfactionSamadhiOneness with the pure Self, state ofbliss, unaffected by all external turmoilSamayaSmallest fraction of timeSamayikIntrospective meditationSamkitEnlightenment, right visionSamvarBlocking the influx of karmic matterSamyakEnlightened, rightSamyaktvaRight visionSanatanEternalSanatan sukhEternal blissSangnyaAssociationSankalpDecisionsSankalp-vikalp‘My-ness’ – ‘I-ness’SankhyaNumberSankhyatCan be counted; enumerableSankhyat gunaEnumerable propertiesSansarThe worldly lifeSansariWorldly peopleSanskarImpressionsSant PurushSaints and spiritual leadersSapekshaRelative, dependentSarvanshaCompleteSarvavyapiOmnipresent, everywhereSatchitanandEmbodiment of eternal blissSat purushSelf-realized personSatsangSpiritual company, spiritual discussionSattaControlSattvaGoodness and awarenessSattva gunaCharacteristic of virtueSatyaTruthSatyugTime cycle of unity in mind, speech andactionsShabdaWordShabdaroopForm of wordsShaktiEnergyShankaDoubtsShastrasScripturesShataExperiences the pleasantShata vedaniyakarmaPleasure experiencing karmaPravruttiActions, activityPrerana shaktiInternal urging or energy of commandPreyaWorldly happinessPruthvikayaEarth-bodied life-formsPudgal parmanusNon-Self complexPujaWorshipPunarjanmaNext lifePuran-galanInput-outputPurnaCompletePurna bhaavUltimate goalPurnahutiAbsolute state, CompletionPurnatvaThe state of being complete, the absoluteSelf, absolute statePurusharthSpiritual effortRajo gunaPassionate traits, characteristic of passionRoopantarChange in formRoopiVisibleRupakComing into effect, materializeRushi-munisAncient sagesSa-aadiBeginning of right visionSa-anta The end of the right visionSabhaan avasthaState of consciousnessSacharMotion, movableSacharacharMovable-immovableSadhanResource, tool, meansSadhanaSpiritual endeavorSadhyaGoalSahajNatural and spontaneousSahajikNatural and spontaneousSaiyogoCircumstancesSakal parmatmaAbsolute Self from all aspectsSakshatkarDirect experienceSakshibhaavWitnessingSamadhanInner satisfactionSamadhiOneness with the pure Self, state ofbliss, unaffected by all external turmoilSamayaSmallest fraction of timeSamayikIntrospective meditationSamkitEnlightenment, right visionSamvarBlocking the influx of karmic matterSamyakEnlightened, rightSamyaktvaRight visionSanatanEternalSanatan sukhEternal blissSangnyaAssociationSankalpDecisionsSankalp-vikalp‘My-ness’ – ‘I-ness’SankhyaNumberSankhyatCan be counted; enumerableSankhyat gunaEnumerable propertiesSansarThe worldly lifeSansariWorldly peopleSanskarImpressionsSant PurushSaints and spiritual leadersSapekshaRelative, dependentSarvanshaCompleteSarvavyapiOmnipresent, everywhereSatchitanandEmbodiment of eternal blissSat purushSelf-realized personSatsangSpiritual company, spiritual discussionSattaControlSattvaGoodness and awarenessSattva gunaCharacteristic of virtueSatyaTruthSatyugTime cycle of unity in mind, speech andactionsShabdaWordShabdaroopForm of wordsShaktiEnergyShankaDoubtsShastrasScripturesShataExperiences the pleasantShata vedaniyakarmaPleasure experiencing karmaShethBusinessman, merchant; employerShivaAtma (Self)Shiva buddhiEnlightened intellectShivalayaTemple of ShivaShraddhaFaith, beliefShreyaSpiritual blissShrotaListenerShruta vaniKnowledge from hearing the speech ofenlightened beingsShubha upayogiAuspicious awarenessShuddhaPureShuddha paryayaPure phasesShuddha upayogiPure applied awarenessShuddha-buddhaPure and enlightenedShuddhatmaPure SoulShunyaZeroShunyavasthaDevoid of thoughtSiddhaEstablishedSiddha lokLocation of liberated soulsSiddha shilaPlace of the liberated soulsSiddha sthitiAbsolute liberated stateSiddhantIrrefutable principle, doctrineSiddhasLiberated soulsSmaranRecitationSohumI am ThatSookshmaSubtleSookshmatamSubtlestSparshaTouchedSrushtiCreation of the worldly lifeSthavarkayaImmoveable bodiesSthirSteady, stillSthirataStillnessSthitiExistenceSthitisahayak tattvaElement of inertia or immobilitySthoolOvert, grossSugamUnderstandSukhHappiness, pleasure, blissSwa-bhaanAwareness of the SelfSwabhavNatureSwabhavik sukhNatural blissSwadharmaTrue nature of the SelfSwa-dhyanContemplating on its own SelfSwargHeavenSwa-swaroopOne’s own natureSwatantraIndependentSyadvaadSpeech that does not hurt the ego ofany living beingTaadyToddy; fermented palm juiceTaanPhysical importanceTaarLink, connectionTakalaadiEasily broken and fragileTamo gunaCharacteristic of darkness or inactivityTanmayakarBeing involvedTapaPenances and austeritiesTarantaaran purushSaviourTattvaElementsTeukayaFire-bodied life-formsTiryanchaAnimals and plantsTreejThird lunar dayTrigunatmakPossessing three qualities: sattva, rajasand tamasTrikaadPast, present and futureTrikaadi bhaavContinuous intentTrividh taapThree-fold sufferingsTyaagRenunciationUdaseenDetached and indifferentUdhaar‘On credit’UpadhiAffliction from external sourcesUpariHeadUparisSuperiorsUpshamSuppressedUrdhvagamiRise upwardsShethBusinessman, merchant; employerShivaAtma (Self)Shiva buddhiEnlightened intellectShivalayaTemple of ShivaShraddhaFaith, beliefShreyaSpiritual blissShrotaListenerShruta vaniKnowledge from hearing the speech ofenlightened beingsShubha upayogiAuspicious awarenessShuddhaPureShuddha paryayaPure phasesShuddha upayogiPure applied awarenessShuddha-buddhaPure and enlightenedShuddhatmaPure SoulShunyaZeroShunyavasthaDevoid of thoughtSiddhaEstablishedSiddha lokLocation of liberated soulsSiddha shilaPlace of the liberated soulsSiddha sthitiAbsolute liberated stateSiddhantIrrefutable principle, doctrineSiddhasLiberated soulsSmaranRecitationSohumI am ThatSookshmaSubtleSookshmatamSubtlestSparshaTouchedSrushtiCreation of the worldly lifeSthavarkayaImmoveable bodiesSthirSteady, stillSthirataStillnessSthitiExistenceSthitisahayak tattvaElement of inertia or immobilitySthoolOvert, grossSugamUnderstandSukhHappiness, pleasure, blissSwa-bhaanAwareness of the SelfSwabhavNatureSwabhavik sukhNatural blissSwadharmaTrue nature of the SelfSwa-dhyanContemplating on its own SelfSwargHeavenSwa-swaroopOne’s own natureSwatantraIndependentSyadvaadSpeech that does not hurt the ego ofany living beingTaadyToddy; fermented palm juiceTaanPhysical importanceTaarLink, connectionTakalaadiEasily broken and fragileTamo gunaCharacteristic of darkness or inactivityTanmayakarBeing involvedTapaPenances and austeritiesTarantaaran purushSaviourTattvaElementsTeukayaFire-bodied life-formsTiryanchaAnimals and plantsTreejThird lunar dayTrigunatmakPossessing three qualities: sattva, rajasand tamasTrikaadPast, present and futureTrikaadi bhaavContinuous intentTrividh taapThree-fold sufferingsTyaagRenunciationUdaseenDetached and indifferentUdhaar‘On credit’UpadhiAffliction from external sourcesUpariHeadUparisSuperiorsUpshamSuppressedUrdhvagamiRise upwardsUtkrantiTheory of evolutionUtpaadOriginationUtpattiOriginVakragatiDevolutionVaktaSpeakerVaniSpeechVardhamanIncreasingVartanBehaviorVastu swaroopElemental formVastutvaElemental natureVettaKnowerVibhaviktaUnnaturalnessVignan SwaroopIn the form of scienceVikalpWrong beliefVikalpi satyaTruth through the egoVikshepIllusionVinashiPerishable, temporaryVinashi satyaRelative truthViparitIntellect is misguided and contradictoryViparit buddhiDeluded intellectVishesha parinamExtra resultVitaragDevoid of attachment and abhorrenceViyogiComes to an end, short-lived, transientVruttiTendenciesVyadhiPhysical sufferingVyatirek gunaExtraneous propertiesVyavahar atmaAtma that interacts in the worldVyavahar jivaSoul that interacts in the worldVyavahar rashiLife-form that has identityVyayaDestructionYamaMoral codesYamrajGod of deathYogyaEligibleYojanaPlanning(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)www.dadabhagwan.org, www.dadashri.orgKenya:+254 722 722 063Australia:+61 421127947UAE:+971  557316937Singapore: +65  81129229New Zealand: +64 21 0376434Germany : +49 700 32327474Persons to ContactDada Bhagwan ParivarAdalaj:Trimandir, Simandhar City,Ahmedabad-Kalol Highway, Adalaj,Dist.: Gandhinagar - 382421, Gujarat, India.Tel : (079) 39830100, Email : info@dadabhagwan.orgAhmedabad:Dada Darshan, 5, Mamtapark Society,Behind Navgujarat College, Usmanpura,Ahmedabad- 380 014. Tel. : (079) 27540408Rajkot:Trimandir, Ahmedabad-Rajkot Highway, Nr. TarghadiyaCross Road, Maliyasan Village, Rajkot. Cell.: 9274111393Bhuj:Trimandir,  Behind Hill Garden, Airport Road,Near Sahyognagar, Bhuj (Kutch). Tel. : (02832) 290123Godhra:Trimandir, Village-Bhamaiya, Opp. FCI Godown, Godhra,Dist.-Panchmahal. Tel. : (02672) 262300Morbi:Trimandir, Village-Jepur, Morbi-Navlakhi Road, Morbi,Dist.-Rajkot.Vadodara:Dada Mandir, 17, Mama ni Pol (Street),Opp. Raopura Police Station, Salatvada, Vadodara.Cell. : 9924343335Mumbai:Dada Bhagwan Parivar,  Cell. : 9323528901Bangalore:  Dada Bhagwan Parivar,  Cell. : 9590979099U.S.A. :Dada Bhagwan Vignan Institute :100, SW Redbud Lane, Topeka, Kansas 66606Tel. : +1 877-505-DADA (3232) ,Email : info@us.dadabhagwan.orgU.K.:Dada Darshan (UK), Unit 2, Columbus House,Stonefield Way, Ruislip, HA4 0JATel. :+44 330-111-DADA(3232),Email : info@uk.dadabhagwan.orgUtkrantiTheory of evolutionUtpaadOriginationUtpattiOriginVakragatiDevolutionVaktaSpeakerVaniSpeechVardhamanIncreasingVartanBehaviorVastu swaroopElemental formVastutvaElemental natureVettaKnowerVibhaviktaUnnaturalnessVignan SwaroopIn the form of scienceVikalpWrong beliefVikalpi satyaTruth through the egoVikshepIllusionVinashiPerishable, temporaryVinashi satyaRelative truthViparitIntellect is misguided and contradictoryViparit buddhiDeluded intellectVishesha parinamExtra resultVitaragDevoid of attachment and abhorrenceViyogiComes to an end, short-lived, transientVruttiTendenciesVyadhiPhysical sufferingVyatirek gunaExtraneous propertiesVyavahar atmaAtma that interacts in the worldVyavahar jivaSoul that interacts in the worldVyavahar rashiLife-form that has identityVyayaDestructionYamaMoral codesYamrajGod of deathYogyaEligibleYojanaPlanning(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)(cid:153)www.dadabhagwan.org, www.dadashri.orgKenya:+254 722 722 063Australia:+61 421127947UAE:+971  557316937Singapore: +65  81129229New Zealand: +64 21 0376434Germany : +49 700 32327474Persons to ContactDada Bhagwan ParivarAdalaj:Trimandir, Simandhar City,Ahmedabad-Kalol Highway, Adalaj,Dist.: Gandhinagar - 382421, Gujarat, India.Tel : (079) 39830100, Email : info@dadabhagwan.orgAhmedabad:Dada Darshan, 5, Mamtapark Society,Behind Navgujarat College, Usmanpura,Ahmedabad- 380 014. Tel. : (079) 27540408Rajkot:Trimandir, Ahmedabad-Rajkot Highway, Nr. TarghadiyaCross Road, Maliyasan Village, Rajkot. Cell.: 9274111393Bhuj:Trimandir,  Behind Hill Garden, Airport Road,Near Sahyognagar, Bhuj (Kutch). Tel. : (02832) 290123Godhra:Trimandir, Village-Bhamaiya, Opp. FCI Godown, Godhra,Dist.-Panchmahal. Tel. : (02672) 262300Morbi:Trimandir, Village-Jepur, Morbi-Navlakhi Road, Morbi,Dist.-Rajkot.Vadodara:Dada Mandir, 17, Mama ni Pol (Street),Opp. Raopura Police Station, Salatvada, Vadodara.Cell. : 9924343335Mumbai:Dada Bhagwan Parivar,  Cell. : 9323528901Bangalore:  Dada Bhagwan Parivar,  Cell. : 9590979099U.S.A. :Dada Bhagwan Vignan Institute :100, SW Redbud Lane, Topeka, Kansas 66606Tel. : +1 877-505-DADA (3232) ,Email : info@us.dadabhagwan.orgU.K.:Dada Darshan (UK), Unit 2, Columbus House,Stonefield Way, Ruislip, HA4 0JATel. :+44 330-111-DADA(3232),Email : info@uk.dadabhagwan.org