A 

B

As Expounded by Dada Bhagwan

Aptavani  –  14
Part  –  1

Originally  Compiled  in  Gujarati  by:
Dr.  Niruben  Amin

C 

D

Publisher 

:  Mr. Ajit C. Patel 
   Dada Bhagwan Vignan Foundation 
   1, Varun Apartment, 37, Shrimali Society, 
   Opp. Navrangpura Police Station, 
   Navrangpura, Ahmedabad: 380009.
   Gujarat, India.
    Tel. : +91 79 35002100, +91 9328661166-77

©	

		 Dada Bhagwan Foundation
   5, Mamta Park Society, B\h. Navgujarat College,
   Usmanpura, Ahmedabad - 380014, Gujarat, India.
    Email: info@dadabhagwan.org  Tel.: +91 9328661166-77
    All Rights Reserved. No part of this publication may be 
   shared, copied, translated or reproduced in any form
   (including electronic storage or audio recording) without 
   written permission from the holder of the copyright.
   This publication is licensed for your personal use only.

Web Version :  March 2023  

Price 

:  Ultimate humility and the intent that
    'I do not know anything'!

Printer 

:   Amba Multiprint   
   B - 99, Electronics GIDC, K-6 Road,
   Sector - 25, Gandhinagar-382044. 
   Gujarat, India.
   Tel. : +91 79 35002142, +91 9328660055

ISBN/eISBN : 978-93-91375-34-8

Printed in India

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
Trimantra 
The Three Mantras That Destroy All Obstacles in Life 
Namo Vitaraagaya 
I bow to the Ones who are absolutely free from all attachment and 
abhorrence 
Namo Arihantanam 
I bow to the living Ones who have annihilated all internal enemies 
of anger, pride, deceit and greed 
Namo Siddhanam 
I bow to the Ones who have attained the state of total and final 
liberation 
Namo Aayariyanam 
I bow to the Self-realized masters who impart the Knowledge of 
the Self to others 
Namo Uvazzayanam 
I bow to the Ones who have received the Knowledge of the Self 
and are helping others attain the same 
Namo Loye Savva Sahunam 
I bow to the Ones, wherever they may be, who have received the 
Knowledge of the Self 
Eso Pancha Namukkaro 
These five salutations 
Savva Pavappanasano 
Destroy all demerit karma 
Mangalanam Cha Savvesim 
Of all that is auspicious 

Padhamam Havai Mangalam 

||1|| 

This is the highest 

||2|| 
Om Namo Bhagavate Vasudevaya 
I bow to the Ones who have attained the absolute Self in human form 

 ||3|| 
Om Namah Shivaya 
I bow to all human beings who have become instruments for the 
salvation of the world 
Jai Sat Chit Anand 
Awareness of the Eternal is Bliss 

3 

Dedication 

This fourteenth Aptavani makes one ascend, the fourteen 
gunthana; 

Chaud gunthana chadaave, chaudmi Aptavani; 

The subtle-most link of the Self, the concept of ‘I’ has 
been explained! 

Sookshmatam atmasaandha, ‘hu’ samjani! 

The cycle of worldly life has arisen simply due to a 
change of belief; 

Sansaar oobhvaama, belief matra badlaani; 

Upon Knowing that, the right belief comes into One’s 
experience! 

Ae janata j, belief right anubhavani! 

Dada helps one recognize the difference between 
Swabhaav and vibhaav; 

Swabhaav-vibhaavna bhed, Dade parkhaani; 

Lo and behold! The awakened awareness of separation as 
the Self prevails! 

Aho! Aho! Chhutapanani jagruti vartani! 

In Knowing the subtle distinction between the elemental 
matter, properties and phases of the Self; 

Dravya, guna, paryayna bhed, sookshmatae jaani; 

The seal of approval for final liberation is attained, 
leading to the exaltation of the Self! 

Mokshno sikko pami, thai Atma ujaani! 

The One who dwells as the Self is always rewarded with 
composure; 

Swama rahe tene, sada swastha lhaani! 

4 

The one who dwells as the temporary state is wedded to 
restlessness and unease! 

Avasthama rahe tene aswasthata parni! 

The fourteen Aptavanis are filled with the living energy of 
the original Self; 

Chhe Chetanvanti, chaud Aptavani; 

The speech that directly liberates One can be experienced 
within these Aptavanis! 

Pratyaksh Saraswati, ahi vartani! 

Wrong beliefs are shattered upon reading this speech; 

Tute shraddha mithya, vaanchata vani; 

By proceeding as per the Gnani, One attains the right 
belief! 

Lahe samkit, chaale mujab Gnani! 

Surrendering the I at the lotus feet of the Akram Gnani; 

‘Hu’ samarpan, charane Akram Gnani; 

Offering the world, with humility, this fourteenth 
Aptavani! 

Jagne samarpan chaudmi Aptavani! 

- Dr. Niruben Amin 

5 

 
Who Is Dada Bhagwan? 

In June 1958, around 6 o'clock one evening, amidst the 
hustle and bustle of the Surat railway station while seated on 
a bench, ‘Dada Bhagwan’ manifested completely within the 
sacred  bodily  form  of  Ambalal  Muljibhai  Patel.  Nature 
revealed a remarkable phenomenon of spirituality! In the span 
of  an  hour,  the  vision  of  the  universe  was  unveiled  to  him! 
Complete clarity for all spiritual questions such as, ‘Who are 
we? Who is God? Who runs the world? What is karma? What 
is liberation?’ etc. was attained. 

What  He  attained  that  evening,  He  imparted  to  others 
through his original Scientific experiment (Gnan vidhi) in just 
two hours! This has been referred to as the Akram path. Kram 
means  to  climb  up  sequentially,  step-by-step  while  Akram 
means step-less, a shortcut, the elevator path! 

He, himself, would explain to others who Dada Bhagwan 
is  by  saying,  “The  one  visible  before  you  is  not  Dada 
Bhagwan.  I  am  the  Gnani  Purush  and  the  One  who  has 
manifested within is  Dada Bhagwan who is  the Lord of the 
fourteen worlds. He is also within you, and within everyone 
else  too.  He  resides  unmanifest  within  you,  whereas  here 
[within A. M. Patel], He has manifested completely! I, myself, 
am  not  God  (Bhagwan);  I  also  bow  down  to  the  Dada 
Bhagwan who has manifest within me.” 





6 

The Current Link to Attain Self-Realization 

After  attaining  the  Knowledge  of  the  Self  in  1958, 
absolutely  revered  Dada  Bhagwan  (Dadashri) 
traveled 
nationally and internationally to impart spiritual discourse and 
Self-realization to spiritual seekers.  

During his lifetime itself, Dadashri had given the spiritual 
power to Pujya Dr. Niruben Amin (Niruma) to bestow Self-
realization to others. In the same way, after Dadashri left his 
mortal  body,  Pujya  Niruma  conducted  spiritual  discourses 
(satsang) and imparted Self-realization to spiritual seekers, as 
an  instrumental  doer.  Dadashri  had  also  given  Pujya 
Deepakbhai Desai the spiritual power to conduct satsang. At 
present,  with 
the  blessings  of  Pujya  Niruma,  Pujya 
Deepakbhai  travels  nationally  and  internationally  to  impart 
Self-realization as an instrumental doer. 

After Self-realization, thousands of spiritual seekers prevail in 
a state free from bondage and dwell in the experience of the 
Self, whilst carrying out all their worldly responsibilities. 



7 

 
Note About This Translation 

The  Gnani  Purush,  Ambalal  M.  Patel,  also  commonly 
known  as  ‘Dadashri’  or  ‘Dada’,  gave  spiritual  discourses  that 
were  in  the  form  of  answers  to  questions  asked  by  spiritual 
aspirants.  These  discourses  were  recorded  and  compiled  into 
books by Pujya Dr. Niruben Amin in the Gujarati language. 

Dadashri had said that it would be impossible to translate 
His  satsangs  and  the  Knowledge  about  the  Science  of  Self-
realization word for word into other languages, because some of 
the meaning would be lost in the process. Therefore, in order to 
understand precisely the Akram Science of Self-realization, He 
stressed the importance of learning Gujarati.  

However, Dadashri did grant His blessings to translate His 
words into other languages so that spiritual seekers could benefit 
to a certain degree and later progress through their own efforts. 
This book is not a literal translation, but great care has been taken 
to preserve the essence of His original message. 

Spiritual discourses have been and continue to be translated 
from  Gujarati.  For  certain  Gujarati  words,  several  translated 
words  or  even  sentences  are  needed  to  convey  the  meaning, 
hence  many  Gujarati  words  have  been  retained  within  the 
translated text for better understanding. Where the Gujarati word 
is used for the first time, it is italicized, followed by a translation 
explaining  its  meaning  in  parenthesis.  Subsequently,  only  the 
Gujarati word is used in the text that follows. This serves a two-
fold  benefit;  firstly,  ease  of  translation  and  reading,  and 
secondly, make the reader more familiar with the Gujarati words, 
which  is  critical  for  a  deeper  understanding  of  this  spiritual 
Science. The content in square brackets provides further clarity 
regarding the matter, which is not present in the original Gujarati 
content.  

This is a humble attempt to present to the world, the essence 
of His Knowledge. While reading this translation, if there is any 
contradiction  or  discrepancy,  then  it  is  the  mistake  of  the 
translators  and  the  understanding  of  the  matter  should  be 
clarified with the living Gnani to avoid misinterpretation. 



8 

Special Note to the Reader 

The Self is the Soul (Atma) within all living beings.  

The term pure Soul is used by the Gnani Purush for the 
awakened Self, after the Gnan vidhi. The word Self, with an 
uppercase ‘S’, refers to the awakened Self which is separate 
from  the  worldly-interacting  self,  which  is  written  with  a 
lowercase ‘s’.  

Wherever Dadashri uses the term ‘we’, ‘us’, or ‘our’, He 

is referring to Himself, the Gnani Purush.  

Similarly,  the  use  of  You  or  Your  in  the  middle  of  a 
sentence,  with  an  uppercase  first  letter,  or  ‘You’,  ‘Your’  in 
single  quotes  at  the  beginning  of  the  sentence,  refers  to  the 
state of the awakened Self or Pragnya. This is an important 
distinction  for  the  correct  understanding  of  the  difference 
between the awakened Self and the worldly-interacting self. 

Wherever  the  name  ‘Chandubhai’  is  used,  the  reader 
should  substitute  his  or  her  name  and  read  the  matter 
accordingly. 

The masculine third person pronoun ‘he’ and likewise the 
object  pronoun  ‘him’  have  been  used  for  the  most  part 
throughout the translation. Needless to say, ‘he’ includes ‘she’ 
and ‘him’ includes ‘her’.  

At  the  time  of  charging,  the  dravya  is  the  worldly-
interacting  self  (vyavahaar  atma;  bhrant  chetan),  kshetra  is 
the location on the track of niyati, kaal is the time, and bhaav 
is the charging intent (charging bhaav). 

At the time of discharging, the dravya is the discharging 
pratishthit atma or the physical evidences (e.g. the people, the 
objects, etc.), kshetra is the physical location, kaal is the time 
during which all the evidences come together, and  bhaav is 
the discharging intent (discharging bhaav). 

9 

Pudgal  or  Parmanu  with  uppercase  ‘P’  refers  to  the 
eternal  element  of  inanimate  matter  or  the  pure  phase 
Parmanu;  whereas  pudgal  or  parmanu  with  lowercase  ‘p’ 
refers to the non-Self complex or parmanu in the charge phase 
or the discharge phase. 

Time with uppercase ‘T’ or Kaal refers to Real Time or 
the  eternal  element  of  Time  and  time  with  lowercase  ‘t’  or 
kaal refers to relative time or time used in the relative 

Space with uppercase ‘S’ or Kshetra refers to the eternal 
element of Space or aakash tattva and space with lowercase 
‘s’  or  kshetra  refers  to  the  place  occupied,  or  the  physical 
location, or the ‘mile’ or location on the track of niyati.  

For reference, a glossary of all the Gujarati words is either 
provided at the back of this book or available on our website 
at:  

http://www.dadabhagwan.org/books-media/glossary/ 



10 

 
The Aptavani Helps One Attain the Incontrovertible 
Principle! 

Questioner: I have read the entire series of the Aptavanis 
(a  series  of  fourteen  volumes  compiled  from  Dadashri’s 
speech)  three  times,  due  to  which  the  kashay  (the  inner 
enemies  of  anger,  pride,  deceit  and  greed)  have  become 
subdued. 

Dadashri: The Aptavanis are such that by reading them, 
the  kashay  get  destroyed.  This  speech  has  come  forth  after 
having Seen in keval Gnan (absolute Knowledge). People will 
use these [Aptavanis] as scriptures in the future.  

sacred 

And  never  has  any  change  occurred  in  ‘our’  siddhant 
(incontrovertible  principle  that  accomplishes  the  ultimate 
goal). Knowledge which is irrefutable in principle (siddhantik 
Gnan)  is  hardly  ever  in  existence.  The  siddhant  that  the 
vitaraag  Lords  (enlightened  Ones  absolutely  free  from 
attachment and abhorrence) had with Them, remained solely 
with Them. The siddhant was not written down in its entirety 
in the scriptures, because the siddhant is such that it cannot be 
put across in words. It has been referred to as siddhant bodha 
(the 
the 
teaching  or  explanation 
incontrovertible  principle),  the  bodha  (sacred  teaching  or 
explanation) that helps One attain the siddhant. However, that 
cannot be referred to as the siddhant, whereas this siddhant of 
‘ours’,  it  is  overt,  as  clear  as  light.  Whoever  asks  anything 
[regarding  the  siddhant],  the  siddhant  ‘fits’  [sets  in  their 
understanding] for them; and ‘our’ [Science] is mathematical, 
just like one-plus-one is equal to two, two-plus-two is equal 
to  four,  it  is  systematic,  without  any  exception,  and  it  is 
continuous.  And  it is  neither  dharma  (a  rightful  action)  nor 
adharma (a lack of a rightful action).  

regarding 

If  a  person  were  to  abide  by  ‘our’  five  Agnas  in  ‘our’ 
presence  or  else  even  if  he  were  to  take  away  any  word  of 
‘ours’,  even  just  one  word,  then  he  would  attain  moksha 
(liberation). If a person were to grasp just one of the words of 

11 

is  because  Akram  Vignan 

this Akram Vignan and if he were to ponder over it, if he were 
to  follow it devoutly, then it will help  him attain liberation. 
This 
is  a  ‘living’  Gnan 
(Knowledge),  it  is  a  Science  that  brings  results  on  its  own 
(swayam kriyakaari Vignan), and actually this is the siddhant 
in its entirety. There is not a single sentence in this from any 
other book. Therefore, if one were to understand even a single 
‘letter’ of this discussion, then it would be tantamount to him 
having understood all the ‘letters’! Now that you have come 
here, ensure that you leave only after getting your [spiritual] 
work  accomplished,  after  attaining  the  complete  state 
(purnahuti)! 





12 

 
Editorial 

The  fundamental  [original],  six  eternal  elements  in  the 
universe; the sort of instrumental effects that arise from their 
mutual interaction, as well as the most profound secrets of the 
root  cause  underlying  the  genesis  (utpatti),  permanence 
(dhruv) and dissolution (vinash) of worldly life, and the root 
cause  of  this  visible  world  have  been  compiled  in  this  14th 
Aptavani (part 1)  from the auspicious  speech that  emanated 
from  absolutely revered  Dadashri, which had been captured 
through taped recordings over twenty years.  

The root cause of this worldly life, of the visible world, is 
not any God or Brahma (the creator god of the Hindu sacred 
triad),  but  rather  it  is  the  visheshbhaav  (a  third  entity  with 
completely  new  properties  that  arises  due  to  the  coming 
together  of  the  eternal  elements  of  the  Self  and  inanimate 
matter;  also  known  as  the  first  level  of  vibhaav)  that  arises 
from  the proximity of two of the fundamental  [original] six 
eternal elements, jada tattva (the eternal element of inanimate 
matter)  and  Chetan  tattva  (the  eternal  element  of  the  Self). 
(The complete scientific understanding related to vibhaav has 
been incorporated in section 1.) It is the inherent nature of the 
element of pure Soul (shuddha Chetan) that It can remain in 
Its  own  inherent  nature  as  the  Self  and  It  can  also  have 
visheshbhaav  [same  as  vibhaav].  While  remaining  in  Its 
inherent nature as the Self, the visheshbhaav arises. Moreover, 
the  Self  does  not  intentionally  give  rise  to  visheshbhaav, 
rather,  it  arises  on  the  basis  of  scientific  circumstantial 
evidences, the pressure of circumstances. And fundamentally, 
ignorance of the Self (agnanta) definitely lies at the root of it.  

In that visheshbhaav, at first, the ‘I’ (aham) arises. That 
is the first level of visheshbhaav. From this ‘I’ [the first level 
of  visheshbhaav],  another  visheshbhaav  of  the  second  level 
arises, out of wrong belief and that is the ahamkaar (egoism). 
The belief that ‘I am Chandubhai’ is itself egoism [the second 
level  of  visheshbhaav].  Then  that  egoism  takes  over 

13 

everything. Visheshbhaav keep arising out of visheshbhaav. A 
new one is  ‘born’ and the ‘old’ one exhausts. It is from the 
visheshbhaav of the eternal element of the Self that there is a 
visheshbhaav in the eternal element of inanimate matter which 
leads to the arising of the pudgal (non-Self complex of input 
and  output).  Up  to  this  point,  there  is  no  problem.  But 
subsequently, due to the proliferation of ignorance of the Self, 
the I gets the wrong belief that ‘I am the pudgal.’ The wrong 
belief  that  ‘I  am  the  doer’  arises  and  the  vyatirek  guna 
(completely new properties of a third entity that arises when 
two  eternal  elements,  the  Self  and  inanimate  matter,  come 
together)  of  anger,  pride,  deceit  and  greed  come  into 
existence. The belief that ‘I am Chandubhai’ itself becomes a 
source  of  misery.  Once  that  belief  goes  away,  no  misery 
remains. If just this much is understood about visheshbhaav, 
then everything about it becomes clear. 

The  words  appearing  in  this  particular  volume  such  as 
vibhaav, visheshbhaav, vibhaavik bhaav (a third identity with 
completely  new  properties  that  arises  due  to  the  coming 
together  of  the  eternal  elements  of  the  Self  and  inanimate 
matter), vishesh parinaam, viparinaam, vibhaavik parinaam 
(completely new effect of a third entity that arises as a result 
of the coming together of two eternal elements of the Self and 
inanimate  matter),  etc.;  have  emanated,  dependent  upon  the 
questioner  who  was  instrumental  [in  the  unfolding  of  a 
particular discourse]. Spiritual aspirants should consider them 
to be similar in meaning. 

In  section  2  of  this  volume,  subtle  scientific  principles 
about  the  elemental  matter  (dravya),  the  properties  (guna), 
and the phases (paryay) of the Self, have been explained in 
detail.  Absolutely  revered  Dadashri  has  put  forth  the 
definitions and examples after having experienced them in His 
life,  such  that  the  elemental  matter,  the  properties  and  the 
phases  can  be  understood  precisely.  By  explaining  this 
extremely profound subject with tremendous simplicity and in 
a vernacular language, Dadashri, through His speech, which 

14 

originates  from  the  experience  of  the  Self,  provides  the 
complete clarity about what it is like at the highest possible 
degree of the state of Knowledge, what prevails at the level of 
absolute  Knowledge  (keval  Gnan).  That  is  when,  a  deep 
feeling  of  veneration  arises  in  knowing,  “The  state  that  the 
revered Knower of all eternal elements (Sarvagnya) has Seen 
in His Knowledge; it was not possible for the revered Lord to 
express that state [in words].” (“Je pad shri Sarvagnye dithu 
Gnanma, kahi shakya nahi te pad shri Bhagwan jo.”) [Part of 
a poem composed by Shrimad Rajchandra]. As much as such 
profound points can be revealed through words, Dadashri was 
able  to  describe  it  through  His  speech  and  thus  deliver  the 
innermost secrets of the eternal elements to the common folk.  

The  elemental  difference  between  the  subtlest  phase 
(paryay) and a temporary state (avastha) is provided here, as 
well as [the understanding that] worldly life has arisen due to 
hupanu (the prevalence of the I; the sense of ‘I-ness’) in the 
temporary states, which in turn keeps one aswastha (in a state 
of  restlessness;  not  steadfast  as  the  Self).  And  with  the  ‘I’ 
prevailing  as  the  eternal  element  [of  the  Self],  One  can 
become  free  from  worldly  life  and  can  constantly  remain 
Swastha (steadfast in the state as the Self). Dadashri Himself 
constantly  remained  separate  from  the  temporary  states  and 
gave others the wonderful Science to remain separate from the 
the  temporary  states.  ‘He’  Himself  prevailed  as  the  eternal 
elemental Self (tattva swaroop) and was able to bestow that 
elemental  Vision  (tattva  drashti)  to  others  as  well.  Such  an 
Akram  Vignan  (step-less  Science  of  Self-realization)  is 
blessed and blessed too is the Scientist that expounded Akram 
Vignan [Dadashri]. 

Before  reading  this  particular  volume,  the  spiritual 
aspirant should certainly read the introduction, only then will 
the inner intention of the Gnani (the enlightened One who can 
enlighten others) become clear and the link become evident. 

15 

After  attaining  the  Knowledge  of  the  Self,  Dadashri’s 
speech  has  come  forth  bit-by-bit  over  twenty  years,  on 
account  of  various  different 
individuals  who  were 
instrumental [in the unfolding of the discourses]. The entire 
principle cannot  possibly  be disclosed at  a  go with just one 
person  over  so  many  years,  can  it?  Therefore,  very  many 
spiritual  discourses  (satsangs)  have  been  collected  and 
compiled to present the established principle. If the spiritual 
aspirant completes [the reading of] one chapter in one sitting, 
only then will the link be maintained and become set in one’s 
understanding. By reading [the chapter] intermittently, there 
may be the possibility of a break in the link and subsequent 
difficulty in setting it in one’s understanding. 

The  Knowledge-laden  speech  of  the  Gnani  Purush  has 
come forth  after having  ‘touched’ the original Self and it is 
like an invaluable jewel. Various different jewels combine to 
form a ‘garland’ of each and every established principle. We 
will  go  on  reading  with  the  intention  that  we  want  to 
understand  every  point,  such  that  we  can  exactly  visualize 
what  Dadashri  saw  in  His  Vision  (Darshan),  and  keep 
collecting the jewels carefully, then eventually a ‘garland’ of 
the  established  principle  will  be  formed.  That  established 
principle  will  forever  become  assimilated  in  the  heart  and 
come into experience.  

The 14th Aptavani is at the Ph.D. level and it explains the 
Knowledge of the eternal elements (tattva Gnan) in subtlety! 
Hence, the basic material will not be available in detail here, 
or it may even not be found here at all. The spiritual aspirant 
will  only  be  able  to  understand  the  14th  Aptavani,  if  the 
aspirant  reads  it  after  having  done  a  full  study  of  the  13 
Aptavanis and all of Dadashri’s other great volumes. And it is 
a humble request, that you study the 14th Aptavani only after 
everything [else from the other volumes] becomes set in your 
understanding. 

16 

The content under each new heading is to be understood 
as a [discourse] with a new person. Therefore, it may seem as 
if  [the  questioner]  is  asking  the  question  repeatedly,  but 
because deeper insights can be gained, it has been included in 
the compilation. 

The  human  anatomy  is  described  in  grade  ten,  grade 
twelve and in medical college. The very same basic topics are 
covered in depth going forward, but that is not to say that the 
very same material is to be studied at all levels. 

The speech of the Gnani is the essence of all scriptures 
and  once  it  is  compiled,  then  that  speech  itself  becomes  a 
scripture.  Likewise,  for  one  on  the  path  to  liberation,  this 
Aptavani is a scripture of the speech narrated by One with the 
experience  of  the  Self,  which,  for  those  who  are  only 
concerned with the attainment of liberation, will be useful as 
a milestone for the condition of the inner state on the path to 
liberation.  

In the scriptures, 0.36 grams of ‘gold’ is woven into 2000 
kilograms of ‘cotton thread’, which the spiritual aspirant has 
to find and attain himself. In the Aptavani, the manifest Gnani 
has given one hundred percent of pure ‘gold’ only. 

In  this  compilation,  the  different  examples  that  have 
come forth through the speech of absolutely revered Dadashri 
have  been  presented  to  explain  the  most  profound  eternal 
element  [the  Self].  In  order  to  understand  the  avinashi 
(permanent; indestructible) eternal element [the Self], which 
the  vinashi 
can  only  be  experienced,  examples  of 
(destructible; 
limitation. 
Nevertheless, in order to explain It from different angles and 
in order to understand Its different properties, these different 
examples can be very useful. At some points, it may appear 
that there is a contradiction, but that is based on the relative 
context; therefore [really speaking], there is no contradiction. 
It is never such that it cancels out the established principle.  

temporary)  are  always  at  a 

17 

Most revered Dadashri’s discourses range from  relative 
or  worldly  knowledge  (agnan)  all  the  way  to  absolute 
Knowledge. There may be shortcomings of the editor, in the 
preface  [foreword]  or  the  introduction.  Moreover,  what  has 
been  conveyed  today  is  based  on  the  clarity  of  today’s 
understanding,  however,  through  the  grace  of  the  Gnani, 
going  forward  if  exceptional  clarity  of  understanding 
develops then the very same points will seem different. But, 
actually those would be subtle details of an advanced level. 
The exact understanding of the Knowledge [of the Self] can 
only be experienced by Those who have absolute Knowledge 
(kevali)! Therefore, we request  your forgiveness should you 
feel  like  there  is  a  mistake.  By  repeatedly  reading  the 
Knowledge-laden speech of the Gnani Purush, let the original 
material be understood on its own [naturally]. The speech of 
the  Gnani  Purush  is  itself  ‘effective’,  it  is  such  that  it  will 
definitely bring results of its own accord. 

It  is  not  worth  putting  a  ‘full  stop’  [assuming  full 
understanding] on our own [current] understanding. Always 
strive to move forward by putting a ‘comma’ [on our current 
understanding]. If the speech of the Gnani Purush is devoutly 
studied  every  day,  then  unprecedented  new  clarity  of 
understanding will develop. That understanding will advance, 
and in order to ascend the progressive states of experience as 
the  Self,  the  spiritual  Science  will  clearly  come  into 
experience. 

While reading material that is very subtle, such as that of 
vibhaav  or  paryay,  if  the  spiritual  aspirant  finds  himself 
confused,  there  is  no  need  to  be  puzzled.  If  this  is  not 
understood, then does that mean that liberation (moksha) will 
be  halted  [for  you]?  Not  at  all.  Moksha  is  easily  attained, 
simply  by  remaining  in  the  Gnani’s  five  Agnas  (five 
principles  that  preserve  the  awareness  as  the  Self  in  Akram 
Vignan), not by logical reasoning or by the application of the 
intellectual approach of scholars. If One remains in the Agnas, 
then  the  Gnani’s  grace  will  itself  free  him  from  all 

18 

shortcomings. Therefore, in order to attain moksha, which is 
the essence of all eternal elements, remaining in the Agnas of 
the Gnani is indeed the essence [bottom line]. 

Please  pardon  the  seeming  shortcomings  in  compiling 
into a book, the spectacular Knowledge-laden speech that has 
come  forth  subject  to  time,  place,  circumstances  and 
numerous different individuals who were instrumental [in the 
unfolding of these discourses]. Our ardent prayer is that may 
we understand in subtlety  and attain this wonderful Science 
regarding  vibhaav  as well as  the  elemental  matter (dravya), 
properties (guna), and phases (paryay) of the Self, so that we 
can  experience  mukti  (freedom  from  the  cycle  of  birth  and 
death).  

Jai Sat Chit Anand 

Dr. Niruben Amin 

19 

 
Introduction 
[Section 1] 

Vibhaav – Visheshbhaav - Vyatirek Guna 

[1] The Scientific Understanding Regarding Vibhaav 

Various  types  of  beliefs  regarding  the  origin  of  the 
universe prevail within people. Amongst those, people have 
given the highest priority to God’s desire itself. The reality is 
far off from this idea. If a main cause were to exist in anything, 
then  it  should  be  an  independent  one.  However,  what  if  it 
happened due to the pressure of something else? If you were 
to get hurt from being pushed around in a crowd, then whom 
would you blame. Similarly, no one has created this. God is 
the  main  cause  through  a  circumstantial  relationship,  not 
through  an independent  relationship.  Due to  the  pressure of 
circumstances, a separate entity with specific new properties 
(visheshbhaav  -  vishesh  guna)  arises  due  to  which  the 
universe has come into existence. This is completely, nothing 
but Science. The One who is completely free of desires has 
been proclaimed to be the one full of desires, and that too, the 
desires of the entire world. Nevertheless, the non-smearable 
(nirlep)  absolute  Self  has  to  remain  non-smearable  amidst 
even  the  accusations  of  doership  from  people  worldwide, 
doesn’t He? 

The  elemental  matter  (dravya),  properties  (guna)  and 
phases (paryay) of the original Self are always pure indeed; 
they are pure just like those of Lord Mahavir’s [the twenty-
fourth  Tirthankar  of  the  current  half-cycle  of  time  who 
introduced the five great vows, or Mahavrat]! It is just that the 
two eternal elements, inanimate matter and the Self, appear to 
be the same form, due to the illusion  (bhranti) arising from 
samipyabhaav  (the  engrossment  that  arises  when  the  two 
eternal elements, the Self and inanimate matter, are in close 
proximity). 

20 

(a 

third 

There is already ignorance of the Self at the foundation, 
and  then  due  to  the  pressure  of  circumstances,  the  original 
Self’s  ability  to  See  gets  veiled.  There,  the  first  level  of 
identity  with  completely  new 
visheshbhaav 
properties)  arises, which is  in  the form  of the  I.  It  acts  as  a 
representative of the original Self. Moreover, this I engages in 
visheshbhaav once again; this is known as the second level of 
visheshbhaav, in which the following arise, ‘I am something, 
I am doing, I am Chandubhai, I know, I indeed did this, who 
else  besides  me  is  the  doer?’  And  from  that,  anger,  pride, 
deceit and greed all come into existence. The first vibhaav is 
the I, and then the wrong belief of ‘I am Chandubhai’ arises 
for him; that is the second level of vibhaav. 

The wrong belief of ‘I am Chandubhai’ that arises for the 
I then densely solidifies, meaning that it is considered to have 
come into experience [‘I am Chandubhai’ is the ego and that 
itself  is  the  worldly-interacting  self].  That  is  referred  to  as 
vibhaavik gnan or vishesh gnan (specific worldly knowledge; 
relative knowledge; relative knowledge that has arisen due to 
the  coming  together  of  the  two  eternal  elements  of  the  Self 
and inanimate matter). It has been called the intellect, and on 
the  other  hand,  in  the  Pudgal  Parmanu  (smallest,  most 
indivisible  and  indestructible  particles  of  inanimate  matter) 
the prakruti arises. That itself is known as visheshbhaav! As 
a matter of fact, the original Self has both Swabhaavik bhaav 
(the state that is naturally inherent to the Self) and vibhaavik 
bhaav  (a  state  that  is  not  naturally  inherent  to  the  Self).  To 
believe  vibhaav  to  mean  ‘viruddhbhaav’  (a  state  that  is 
contrary to the state as the Self), is contrary to Reality, it is 
contrary  to  the  Science  that  prevails  through  all  three 
timespans. 

In  the  body,  the  Self  and  the  pudgal  (the  non-Self 
complex of input and output) reside in close proximity. They 
reside in close proximity (samipya), but it does not end there. 
On the contrary,  samipyabhaav arises for him [the worldly-
interacting self]! Due to samipyabhaav, the illusion of, ‘Am I 

21 

this or am I that?’ arises. The activities are only of the pudgal 
but the illusion of, ‘I am indeed the one doing it. Who else is 
the doer?’ arises. The Self Itself is not the doer at all but the 
developing I (pote) believes, ‘I, myself, did it.’ That precisely 
is the illusion. Moreover, this is the illusion of Darshan (the 
property  of  Vision;  belief;  understanding)  and  not  of  Gnan 
(Knowledge). Very few people realize that this is an illusion. 

An  illusion  is  similar  to  a  person  feeling  as  though  the 
world is spinning when he gets off a merry-go-round. Hey, it 
is not the world [that is spinning]; it is your wrong belief that 
is making you spin. Otherwise, nothing is spinning. 

To  say,  ‘It  is  due  to  the  restlessness  of  the  Pudgal 
Parmanu that the visheshbhaav has arisen,’ is tantamount to 
blaming the Pudgal to be the culprit isn’t it? In fact, it is just 
through the coming together of the two eternal elements that 
vishesh  guna  (completely  new  properties)  arise;  this  is  a 
completely  natural  process.  It  is  just  by  jada  (inanimate 
matter) and Chetan (the Self) coming close to each other that 
the visheshbhaav arises. It is not from the other four eternal 
elements coming into close proximity. It is mainly due to the 
fundamental  property  of  sakriyapanu  (activeness)  of  the 
Pudgal  Parmanu  that  the  vibhaavik  pudgal  (the  non-Self 
complex  of  input  and  output  that  arises  as  a  result  of  the 
coming  together  of  two  eternal  elements,  the  Self  and 
inanimate matter) arises. This is just parupadhi (problems that 
have  been  induced  externally  by  the  non-Self);  nothing 
happens  to  Chetan  Itself.  In  this,  due  to  the  two  eternal 
elements coming into close proximity, due to its property of 
activeness, the Pudgal [Parmanu] immediately grabs a hold 
of the effect that arises [in Chetan]. Therefore, in this case, the 
Pudgal alone cannot  be  deemed  at  fault.  If the two were to 
separate, then the eternal element of inanimate matter would 
definitely not be affected whatsoever. 

Now, the visheshbhaav arises in both eternal elements. Is 
it  that  separate  vibhaav  arise  for  each  of  the  two  eternal 

22 

elements, or do the two eternal elements combine to form one 
vibhaav? 

The Pudgal [Parmanu] is not a living thing. It does not 
have bhaav (feelings; sentience); however, it becomes ready 
such that it can acquire the visheshbhaav and fundamentally, 
due to ignorance of the Self, this visheshbhaav arises for the 
Self.  Then  the  entire  control  comes  into  the  hands  of  the 
pudgal. The Self becomes trapped in the ‘jail’ of the pudgal; 
the  ‘jail’  that  has  arisen  due  to  ignorance  of  the  Self.  One 
attains  freedom  from  it  through  the  Knowledge  of  the  Self 
(Gnan). Through the Knowledge imparted by the Gnani, the 
causes  come  to  a  stop,  thereafter  the  control  of  the  pudgal 
ceases. 

It is only if there is ignorance of the Self at the root of the 
vibhaav  state  etc.,  that  all  of  this  can  proceed  further, 
otherwise It [the Self] is completely free, isn’t It! 

As  a  result  of  the  engrossment  arising  out  of  the  close 
proximity  of  the  Self  and  the  Pudgal  Parmanu,  a  vishesh 
parinaam (a completely new effect) arises. From that, the ‘I’ 
(aham) arises.  In this,  without  any  change happening in  the 
inherent properties of the Self, without any change happening 
in the Real form as the Self (Swaroop), the vishesh parinaam 
arises. If a change were to occur in the Real form as the Self, 
then it would become viruddhbhaav (a state that is contrary to 
the state as the Self). As the Self is Itself [having] Chetan (the 
property to Know and See), the Self was the first to acquire 
the visheshbhaav. Since inanimate matter does not have any 
Chaitanyata (the property of Knowing and Seeing) within it, 
visheshbhaav cannot arise in it first. 

Due  to  the  arising  of  visheshbhaav,  both  the  eternal 
elements  lapse  from  their  original  inherent  nature  (mool 
bhaav)  and  worldly  life  keeps  proliferating.  When  the 
[worldly-interacting]  self  returns  to  Its  original  inherent 
nature, when it comes to Know ‘Who am I’, that is when It 

23 

becomes free from the Pudgal, and worldly life comes to an 
end. 

Moreover,  all  the  eternal  elements  by  their  inherent 
nature  are  such  that  they  are  constantly  bringing  about  a 
change, and that is the primary reason why worldly life has 
come into existence. The Self is nirlep (that which cannot be 
anointed;  non-smearable),  It  is  asang  (completely  free  of 
association  with  the  mind,  speech  or  body),  but  because  It 
came  together  with  the  jada  Parmanu,  vyatirek  guna 
(completely  new  properties  of  the  self  namely  anger,  pride, 
deceit and greed) arose. And from that, the cycle of cause and 
effect, effect and cause, continues on. 

Anger, pride, deceit and greed have been referred to  as 
vyatirek guna. They have arisen from aham (the ‘I’). They are 
neither  the  anvay  guna  (intrinsic  properties)  of  inanimate 
matter  nor  of  the  Self.  They  are  vyatirek  guna.  Due  to  the 
coming together of the two eternal elements, the aham arises, 
and from the aham, the ahamkaar (egoism) arises, which in 
turn gives rise to the vyatirek guna. 

In the visheshbhaav of the Self, first the ‘I’ arises and later 
the  ego  arises,  and  thereafter  in  the  visheshbhaav  of  the 
Pudgal Parmanu, the pudgal arises. Pudgal means that which 
undergoes  puran-galan  (input  and  output;  charge  and 
discharge; influx and outflux). The mind, speech and body, as 
well  as  deceit  (maya)  and  everything  else  falls  under  the 
visheshbhaav of the Pudgal Parmanu. The ‘I’ and thereafter 
the  ego  are  nothing  but  the  visheshbhaav  of  the  Self.  The 
moment the ego leaves, everything goes away automatically. 

Until the self goes from the prevalence in the state as the 
non-Self  (vimukhpanu)  to  prevailing  as  the  Self  (sanmukh), 
wrong beliefs tend to arise from all the activities that are going 
on. As these beliefs dissolve, the developing I (pote) starts to 
become  free.  The  Gnan  has  not  changed;  it  is  simply  the 
beliefs that have changed. 

24 

Like the bird that keeps pecking its beak at the mirror, at 
that time, the ego believes he is the bird pecking in the mirror 
and  the  bird  being  reflected  in  the  mirror  is  different.  It  is 
simply  its  belief  that  has  changed.  Had  the  knowledge 
changed, then even after flying  away the effect  would have 
persisted. However, once it flies away, there is nothing at all. 
Then even whilst flying, has anyone ever seen a bird pecking 
away when it is alone, even by mistake? Therefore, only the 
belief  has  changed,  not  the  knowledge!  Knowledge  is  a 
permanent property, that is why if It were to change, then the 
change would be permanent! So, nothing has been ruined in 
the elemental matter (dravya) of the Self; it is only the belief 
that  changes  and  in  that  process  of  changing,  many,  many 
profound mechanisms come to be.  

Nothing at  all of original  Self has spoiled. It  is  just the 
energy (shakti) of the Self, known as Darshan (the property 
of  Vision;  understanding),  that  gets  veiled.  That  is  why  the 
belief of ‘who I am’ changes. Since childhood, people have 
proliferated agnan (relative knowledge; ignorance of the Self) 
such  that,  ‘I  am  not  the  Self’  rather  ‘I  am  Chandubhai, 
Chandubhai.’ That is precisely what has then been believed. 
Upon attaining Gnan, with the proliferation of samyak drashti 
(the right belief of ‘I am pure Soul’), the developing ‘I’ reverts 
back to His original form as the Self (Swaroop) and this brings 
an end to all the upadhi (externally induced problems and their 
resultant suffering). 

“Due to the engrossment arising out of close proximity, 
illusion arises. Due to illusion, there appears to be a sense of 
oneness  [with  the  non-Self  complex]  and  that  verily  is  the 
reason for the existence of the entire universe.” 

The  moment  the  ego  arose  as  a  vishesh  parinaam 
(completely  new  effect)  of  the  Self,  the  charging  begins  to 
happen in the Parmanu. 

Pure Parmanu - vishrasa  

25 

The ego becomes engrossed in the Parmanu - prayogsa 

When the parmanu are ready to give effect - mishrasa  

At the time of prayogsa (charged phase of parmanu), the 
parmanu are not in a joint form, but at the time of mishrasa, 
they are. During prayogsa, the preparations are actually being 
made  for  the  parmanu  to  come  together.  From  that,  they 
become mishrasa. 

The Pudgal Parmanu takes on the very form of whatever 
the ego envisions! That  is  how  kriyakaari (‘effective’; such 
that it can procure results on its own) this Pudgal Parmanu is! 
The Pudgal Parmanu by its very inherent nature is kriyakaari, 
and due to that, the moment the two come together, the Self 
and the Pudgal, both acquire a vishesh parinaam! As the ego 
comes to an end, the vishesh parinaam of the Self comes to an 
end. Thereafter, the vishesh parinaam of the Pudgal comes to 
an  end,  of  its  own  accord  indeed!  When  the  aham  (the  ‘I’) 
envisions, the Pudgal Parmanu takes on that form. When the 
Gnani imparts the Knowledge of the Self, the envisioning of 
only  One’s  own  Real  form  as  the  Self  happens,  so  the 
envisioning  of  the  pudgal  no  longer  happens,  therefore  the 
pudgal also starts to become free. The pure ego [the ‘I’ with 
right belief] keeps envisioning Its own Self only. Thus, in a 
natural way, it inherently becomes that nature. The moment 
One’s own inherent nature as the Self is recognized, from that 
point on, the ego departs. 

The visheshbhaav of the Self is the aham (the ‘I’) and the 
visheshbhaav  of  the  Pudgal  Parmanu  is  puran-galan.  The 
visheshbhaav of the Self arises first and then the visheshbhaav 
of the Pudgal arises. That is why, if the aham leaves, then the 
pudgal  will  start  to  decrease,  it  will  start  to  separate.  The 
mishrachetan (the I with wrong belief that arises as when the 
eternal elements of the Self and inanimate matter come into 
close proximity with each other) itself has been referred to as 
the [vibhaavik] pudgal. 

26 

There  is  a  difference  between  Parmanu  and  pudgal. 
Parmanu are the pure subatomic particles of inanimate matter, 
they are known as the pure Pudgal, whereas the other is the 
pudgal  which  has  taken  on  a  completely  new  form 
(visheshbhaavi pudgal). The pure Pudgal is kriyakaari. Due 
to  the  coming  together  of  the  two  eternal  elements,  the 
visheshbhaavi  pudgal  has  formed;  this  comprises  of  blood, 
bones, flesh. 

As a result of the engrossment due to close proximity of 
the two eternal elements, the ‘I’ (aham) has come into being. 
The ‘I’ is itself the main pillar of the vyatirek guna. If it did 
not exist, then all vyatirek guna would be destroyed! 

The wrong belief is itself the ego and the right belief is 

the pure Soul. 

The  bhaav  (visheshbhaav;  the  assumed  identification 
with that which is not One’s own) that is being done is due to 
ignorance of the Self and anger, pride, deceit and greed are a 
phase  of  the  pudgal.  Once  ignorance  leaves,  the  [vishesh] 
bhaav cease to arise. 

A Gnani has Swabhaavik bhaav (the state that is naturally 
inherent  to  the  Self),  whereas  an  agnani  (one  who  has  not 
attained Self-realization) has visheshbhaav. The visheshbhaav 
arises due to ignorance of the Self. The original Self does not 
do anything in this at all.  

[2] Anger, Pride, Deceit and Greed, Whose 
Properties Are They? 

The  anvay  guna  of  the  Self  means  the  properties  that 
always  remain  with  It,  like  infinite  Knowledge,  infinite 
Vision, absolute bliss. The properties that have arisen due to 
contact with the eternal element of inanimate matter have been 
referred to as vyatirek guna; these are anger, pride, deceit and 
greed.  

Who is at fault in this? 

27 

The fault is of the one who is suffering! 

What is the fault? 

The wrong belief! 

Which wrong belief! 

The belief that ‘I am Chandubhai.’ 

No one is at fault in this, neither the Self nor inanimate 
matter. Chetan (the developing I; the worldly-interacting self) 
keeps having chetan bhaav (the beliefs of, ‘I am Chandubhai,’ 
‘This is mine,’ ‘I am the doer,’ and ‘I am the sufferer of pain 
and pleasure’) and from that, this pudgal has arisen. 

The wrong belief of the [developing] I is itself the cause 

of misery. Once that is removed, it all comes to an end.  

The fact that others appear to be a culprit is shown by the 
anger, pride, deceit and  greed that  are within  you;  and they 
have set in within by believing, ‘I am Chandubhai.’ Once the 
belief of ‘[I am] Chandubhai’ is fractured, they will vacate the 
‘home’. 

(a 

third 

Does the Self (Chetan) have Chetan bhaav (the state as 
the Self; to prevail as the Knower and Seer), or does It have 
vibhaav (assumed identification with that which is not One’s 
own)? The Self only does Chetan bhaav. The Self has both, 
Swabhaav  (the  inherently  natural  state  as  the  Self)  and 
visheshbhaav 
identity  with  completely  new 
properties).  This  world  has  come  into  existence  due  to  the 
visheshbhaav and the developing  I does not  give rise to  the 
visheshbhaav  deliberately.  It  happens  on  the  basis  of  the 
pressure  of  circumstances.  Depending  on  the  bhaav  (inner 
belief) the chetan (developing I) has, that is the kind of pudgal 
that arises. With the inner belief as a woman, the form as a 
woman is taken on and with the inner belief as a man, the form 
as  a  man  is  taken  on.  By  having  the  belief  as  a  woman,  it 
means  that  one  has  engaged  in  deceit  (kapat)  and  illusory 
attachment  (moha),  so  subsequently  the  parmanu  charged 

28 

with  the  belief  as  a  woman  arise.  By  having  the  belief  as  a 
man, it means that one has engaged in anger and pride, due to 
which the parmanu charged with the belief as a man arise.  

The  vyatirek  guna  are  neither  in  the  eternal  element  of 
inanimate matter, nor are they in the Self. Whoever accepts 
them as his own, they are then his. The aham (the ‘I’) believes 
anger, pride, deceit and greed belong to it, that is why he gains 
ownership of them. 

Due to wrong belief, the agnani (one who has not attained 
Self-realization) believes anger, pride, deceit and greed to be 
his  own.  Whereas  with  the  right  belief,  the  Gnani  believes 
them to be [the properties] of the pudgal; He says, “These are 
not my properties.”  

According  to  the  Gnani,  the  world  is  entirely  flawless 
indeed! Who makes it  appear to  be at  fault? These  vyatirek 
guna indeed. 

Due  to  wrong  belief,  the  developing  I  believes  ‘I  am 
Chandubhai.’  The  Gnani  imparts  him  the  right  belief  and 
makes firm his conviction of the belief that ‘I am pure Soul’. 
Thereafter,  the  developing  ‘I’  becomes  aware  of  both,  his 
visheshbhaav 
am 
Chandubhai’) and His Swabhaav (the inherently natural state 
as the Self),  and His  own Real  form  as the Self  comes into 
experience. This is a very profound Science, the one regarding 
the cause of the world. 

identification  with 

(assumed 

‘I 

[3] Does Vibhaav Mean Viruddhbhaav? 

The original Self has never been the inspirer in any work 

that happens. The inspirer would be considered guilty. 

Who  is  the  inspirer  in  reality?  The  effect  of  one’s  own 
karma  is  verily  the  inspirer  and  that  happens  through 
vyavasthit shakti (the natural energy that brings together the 
scientific circumstantial evidences to give result). In the past 
life,  the  intents  may  have  arisen,  the  ‘seeds’  of  becoming  a 
doctor may have been sown, which ‘sprout’ in this life upon 

29 

together.  For 

right  circumstances  coming 

the 
the 
circumstances,  the  scientific  circumstantial  evidences,  to 
come together, they are subject to vyavasthit shakti and for the 
‘seed’  to  ‘sprout’  means  that  the  past  karma  have  come  to 
unfold, the effect has come about, and so the inspiration arises 
from  within.  The  thought  arising  of  wanting  to  become  a 
doctor is considered an effect of the past karma. There is no 
doership of the Self in this.  

The Self does not do any sankalp-vikalp (all the relative 
‘I-ness’  and  ‘my-ness’  that  stem  from  the  belief  that  ‘I  am 
Chandubhai’) at all. In the same way, the Self does not do any 
bhaavkarma (charging of karma) nor does It acquire karma; 
otherwise that would become a permanent part of Its inherent 
nature.  So,  it  is  the  developing  I  (hu),  the  one  that  is  the 
visheshbhaav, it is the very one who acquires the karma, and 
it  is  also  the  very  one  who  does  the  bhaavkarma.  This  is 
because 
the  bhaavkarma  arises  based  on  whatever 
‘spectacles’ of dravyakarma (subtle discharging karma) it [the 
developing I] has acquired. Right now, understand that all the 
bhaav (inner intents; feelings; state of being) are of the ego 
only, but its fundamental beginning is through the completely 
new property (vishesh guna) which has arisen and due to that, 
the bhaavkarma begins. 

The activities are of the pudgal only and they are subject 
to  vyavasthit  shakti.  What  happens  with  this  visheshbhaav? 
The eight types of dravyakarma are bound; they in turn cause 
the bhaavkarma to arise. 

From  when  did  the  ‘blindfolds’  of  the  dravyakarma 
begin? With the visheshbhaav itself, these ‘blindfolds’ were 
bound, which in turn caused one to see incorrectly [contrary 
to the Real; the relative], and that in turn gave rise to the bhaav 
for the relative. In this, none of the activities are of the Self. It 
is due to the presence of the Self that the power has been filled 
in the eight types of karma. In this, there is no doership of the 
Self.  Power  chetan  (the  relative  self  that  has  been  powered 

30 

with  life  energy  in  the  presence  of  the  Self;  meaning  the 
developing  I)  gets  filled  in  the  pudgal.  Based  on  the  false 
attribution of the developing I, the power chetan gets filled in 
the  pudgal  and  the  pudgal  becomes  kriyakaari  (‘effective’; 
such that it can procure results on its own) like that. 

The intents of attachment etc., are not of the Self, they are 
of the vibhaavik  (unnatural; worldly-interacting)  self.  In the 
Self-realized  state,  the  Self  is  the  doer  of  Its  own  inherent 
nature [Knower and Seer] only. And in the state of ignorance 
of the Self, it is the doer of the vibhaav as well as the sufferer. 
As  this  talk  ended  up  being  taken  from  a  single  viewpoint 
only, a big fiasco has arisen on the Kramik path (the traditional 
step-by-step  path  to  attain  the  Self).  The  [original]  Self  has 
been deemed a doer and a sufferer over there.  

The [original] Self has never become unnatural (vikaari). 
Since  the  inherent  nature  of  the  Pudgal  is  sakriya  (to  be 
active), it can become unnatural. The presence of the Self is 
instrumental in this process.  

The Self can Know all this through absolute Knowledge, 

and secondly, It can also Know the visheshbhaav. 

There  are  two  kinds  of  Atma;  one  is  the  Real  Self 
(Nishchay  Atma),  the  other  is  the  worldly-interacting  self 
(vyavahaar  atma).  The  worldly-interacting  self  has  arisen 
because of the Real Self. Just as when you look in the mirror, 
you  see  two  ‘Chandubhai’s’,  don’t  you?  The  worldly-
interacting self has been referred to as the ‘pratishthit atma’ 
(the relative self). The developing I has done the instillation 
(pratishtha)  of  his  own  self.  If  the  instillation  of,  ‘I  am 
Chandubhai,’ is done once again, then the pratishthit atma for 
the next life will be created. After attaining Gnan, the belief 
of  ‘I  am  pure  Soul’  sets  in,  so  the  instillation  of  the  wrong 
belief ceases to happen. A new pratishthit atma is no longer 
bound, and the old pratishthit atma keeps discharging.  

31 

If you, the developing I, are engrossed in the relative or 
worldly  activities,  then  you  are  the  worldly-interacting  self, 
and if You, the developing ‘I’, are engrossed in the Nishchay 
(the Real), then You are the Real Self. Fundamentally, You 
are  the  very  same,  but  Your  state  is  dependent  upon  what 
activity You are engrossed in. 

The worldly-interacting self or the pratishthit atma itself 

is the ego, in which there is not even an iota of Chetan. 

There  is  no  proof  of  the  Self,  however,  there  is  indeed 
proof  of  anupcharit  vyavahaar  (worldly  interaction  that 
happens  without  any  effort).  Without  doing  any  upchaar 
(visible  effort  or  planning),  this  body  has  been  created. 
[Despite the absence of a creator,] People have forced upon 
the belief that God has made it. 

What is anupcharit vyavahaar? 

From  the  worldly  perspective,  anupcharit  vyavahaar 
refers to the worldly interactions that arise without any effort 
on our part.  

However,  from 

the  Real  perspective,  all  worldly 
interactions are really anupcharit, because they actually end 
up  happening  due 
the 
visheshbhaav tends to arise automatically the moment the two 
eternal elements come into close proximity! In principle, the 
worldly interactions are nothing but anupcharit; however, this 
is from the Gnani’s perspective! 

to  circumstances.  Hey,  even 

In the presence of the sun, the marble heats  up, energy 
(urja) is generated. Who does that? Who is the inspirer? No 
one. The inspiration is not of the Self, or else It would become 
[karmically]  bound.  The  inspiration  is  of  the  power  chetan. 
Power chetan has arisen because another eternal element has 
come close by. If it were to move away, then nothing would 
happen.  The  Gnani,  the  One  who  has  come  to  bestow 
liberation (mokshadata Purush), can separate the two [eternal 
elements] for us. 

32 

[4] The Self Got Entrapped First! 

The  world  is  without  a  beginning  and  without  an  end 
(anaadi anant). No one is its creator or its sustainer. The world 
is the puzzle itself. God has not ‘puzzled’ [created] this world 
at all, only scientific circumstantial evidences.  

If you hit hot iron with a hammer, then does the fire get 
hurt?  [Similarly,]  Since  time  immemorial,  nothing  has 
happened to the Self nor has the Self done anything. Whatever 
is happening, it is happening to the ego.  

Who has the wrong belief?  

The ego has it. 

So does the intellect not have the wrong belief? 

The intellect has no way of having the wrong belief. 

The doer of the wrong belief is also a wrong belief itself. 
Moreover, one remains within the wrong belief and does the 
wrong belief. 

All these illusions have arisen due to the intellect. Since 
the ego itself is blind, it is guided by the vision of the intellect 
and worldly life has come into existence.  

Karma has neither a beginning nor an end. In the forming 
of water, did oxygen come first or did hydrogen come first? 
Due to the eternal elements of inanimate matter and the Self 
coming  together,  the  vishesh  guna  of  a  sense  of  doership 
arose,  and  due  to  that  karma  gets  bound.  It  is  due  to  the 
gunadharma of the sense of doership that karma gets bound. 

As  inanimate  matter  and  the  Self  come  into  close 
proximity,  they  tend  to  effect  one  another.  The  Self  gets 
affected by inanimate matter and the effect of the Self is taken 
on  by  inanimate  matter.  And  actually,  the  Self  does  not 
become one with inanimate matter, however, the belief of the 
Self changes; a wrong belief gets established.  

33 

What  karma  causes  a  living  being  to  be  in  nigod  (the 
lowest  form  of  life  which  is  not  in  worldly  nomenclature)? 
The living beings of nigod refers to those that are completely 
covered with karma. With tremendous karma. They have not 
yet become free from even a single karma over there. Meaning 
that,  the  illumination  [the  Knowledge  of  the  Self]  has  not 
emerged through it at all. There, not even a single sense organ 
has  developed  yet.  It  is  only  after  the  avaran  (veils  of 
ignorance over the Self) decrease that the living being enters 
into worldly nomenclature  (vyavahaar rashi)  from  nigod;  it 
develops into a one-sensed living being. 

Therefore,  the  living  beings  of  nigod,  the  one-sensed 
living beings etc., actually have to suffer extreme karma. As 
they gradually suffer them, they ascend to a higher life-form. 
As  the  avaran  continue  to  break  and  the  illumination 
continues to increase, it further develops moving from a two-
sensed,  three-sensed,  four-sensed,  to  a  five-sensed  living 
being. Due to ignorance of the Self, people praise the animal 
life-form, they praise the tolerance that a tree has! To believe 
that one should be like that causes tremendous avaran to come 
over the Self. 

Do vyatirek guna (completely new properties of the self 
namely  anger,  pride,  deceit  and  greed)  exist  for  the  living 
beings of nigod? 

Vyatirek guna have been there from the very beginning 
for  the  living  beings  of  avyavahaar  rashi  (a  state  of 
uncategorized  souls  that  have  not  yet  entered  worldly 
interactions). Eventually, when the vyatirek guna come to an 
end  completely,  One  becomes  a  Siddha  Lord  (absolutely 
liberated Soul who has become completely free from the cycle 
of birth and death)! 

Amidst the multitude of circumstances, the vision of the 
self became skewed [the knowledge and vision deviated from 
its inherent nature], thus everything latched onto it. 

34 

If one eye were to be pressed at a certain angle, then one 
would  see  two  of  everything;  that  is  the  deluded  vision 
(mithya drashti). Similarly, this worldly life has arisen due to 
the skewed vision arising from the pressure of circumstances. 
Once the pressure is released, One comes into the form as the 
original Self. 

The  wrong  belief  has  arisen  due  to  the  pressure  of 
circumstances.  Due  to  the  wrong  belief,  the  ego  of,  ‘I  am 
doing it’ has arisen. The ego is not any particular thing; it is 
simply  just  a  wrong  belief.  Nevertheless,  a  ‘photo’  of  the 
[gross] ego can be displayed through the body. 

Did  the  Gnan  (Knowledge)  exist  within  the  Self  right 

from the beginning? 

Has it ever been the case that you cannot see yourself in 
the mirror? It is only sometimes when the mirror is affected 
by steam [fogged up] that you would be unable to see yourself. 

The entire relative part is filled with circumstances. When 
it  is  time  for  one  to  attain  liberation  (moksha),  one  comes 
across all the tools to attain liberation, such as the scriptures, 
a Gnani Purush… 

“Even a dream of ten million years comes to an end upon 
awakening, Similarly, the vibhaav, which has been there 
since time immemorial, clears away upon attaining the 
Knowledge of the Self.” 

“Koti varsh nu swapna pun, jagrat thata shamay, 

Tem vibhaav anaadino, Gnan thata door thay.” 

- Shrimad Rajchandra 

[5] Anvay Guna – Vyatirek Guna 

The properties which constantly remain with the original 
Self, the properties which are Its very own, are the anvay guna 
such  as,  Knowledge,  Vision,  bliss,  energy,  divinity 
(aishwarya).  The  properties  that  arise  in  the  state  as  the 

35 

relative self are the vyatirek guna, namely, anger, pride, deceit 
and greed. 

Virtues  are  of  no  value  when  it  comes  to  attaining 
liberation,  because  they  are  vyatirek  guna,  they  are  the 
attributes of the non-Self complex (paudgalik guna), they are 
temporary attributes. 

Vyavasthit  shakti  actually  arose  after  the  vyatirek  guna 

came into being, not before that.  

What  would  happen  if  a  businessman  named  Nagindas 
were to slug down shot after shot of alcohol? He would start 
to speak things like, “I am the president,” wouldn’t he? He is 
speaking thus due to the intoxication arising from consuming 
alcohol;  it  is  an  illusion.  In  this  situation,  the  Self  has  not 
become  spoilt.  The  businessman’s  knowledge  has  spoilt. 
Whereas in the illusion arising when inanimate matter and the 
Self come together, the [property of] Vision (Darshan) spoils, 
so then it only makes one see contrary to fact. 

Maya means ignorance of One’s Real form as the Self. 

Not knowing who You really are, that itself is maya. 

What  is  the  difference  between  egoism  and  mohaniya 

karma (karma that induces illusory attachment)? 

It is because the businessman drunk the alcohol that the 
effect of the alcohol, meaning the mohaniya karma, arose and 
due  to  the  mohaniya  karma,  the  one  saying,  “I  am  the 
president,”  is  the  ego.  In  this  case,  people  have  become 
intoxicated due to the ‘alcohol’ in the form of the pudgal (non-
Self complex), that is why instead of speaking as is, people 
are speaking contrary to fact. 

Due to  the Self  coming  across other  circumstances  and 
due  to  the  pressure  of  those  circumstances,  the  illusion  has 
arisen. Amidst the illusion, it is only the belief of the self that 
changes, not the Knowledge. Therefore, one did not actually 
have ignorance initially, but it came to be so afterwards, due 
to the pressure of the circumstances. After having drunk the 

36 

alcohol which makes him lose awareness of who he really is, 
the businessman behaves completely differently, doesn’t he! 

Ignorance  has  never  arisen  for  the  original  Self.  The 
wrong belief has simply arisen due to the vishesh parinaam (a 
completely  new  effect),  and  not  the  other  way  around,  the 
wrong belief has not given rise to the vishesh parinaam. And 
due to the wrong belief, the entire worldly life has come into 
existence. Nevertheless, amidst all this, the original Self Itself 
is free from ignorance, free from the wrong belief, free from 
all of that, even across the three time periods. 

In  a  glass  filled  with  ice,  in  just  a  short  while,  there  is 
condensation on the outer surface of the glass, then droplets 
of water form, which then start to slide down, and after that 
the  water  also  starts  to  flow  down  [from  the  surface  of  the 
table].  In  this,  the  ice  is  as  it  is,  it  is  not  doing  any  of  this. 
However,  all  of  this  tends  to  happen  due  to  circumstances. 
Who can be held responsible for that? 

[6] Visheshbhaav – Vishesh Gnan – Agnan 

The knowledge regarding worldly life is also considered 
knowledge, it is not ignorance. However, if one wants to attain 
liberation, then that knowledge is considered as ignorance of 
the Self and the exact Knowledge of the Self will have to be 
understood.  People  refer  to  vishesh  gnan  (specific  worldly 
knowledge;  relative  knowledge)  as  agnan  (ignorance  of  the 
Self). 

Vibhaav means that although the original Knowledge and 
Vision  are  in  their  inherently  natural  state,  but  this 
visheshbhaav  has  arisen,  vishesh  gnan  has  arisen.  To  know 
something that is not worth knowing is vishesh gnan. 

Ignorance is  also  one kind of knowledge. According to 
the  terminology  used  by  the  Gnanis,  it  is  not  considered  as 
ignorance in the true sense, it is considered as vishesh gnan. 
Ignorance is also illumination, not complete illumination, but 
partial (kshayopsham) illumination. 

37 

The jada Parmanu are stuck on each and every pradesh 
(spatial  unit;  the  smallest  amount  of  space  that  a  single 
Parmanu occupies on the Self) of the Self. This in turn causes 
the original properties of the Self to be veiled. In the state of 
nigod, the Self  is  veiled  one hundred percent.  As the living 
being moves ahead on the path of evolution, meaning that as 
the  veils  dissipate,  the  Knowledge  of  the  Self  continues  to 
manifest. Gradually, as the veils decrease going from 99% to 
98%  to  97%…  simultaneously  the  Knowledge  of  the  Self 
manifests at the gross level from 1% to 2% to 3% to 4%. As 
is the case when a living being from nigod evolves into a one-
sensed living being, a two-sensed living being… 

However, as long as the veils of ignorance are present, it 
[the  knowledge  that  manifests  through]  is  referred  to  as 
ignorance. Due to  ignorance of the Self and the pressure of 
circumstances,  when  these  two  [inanimate  matter  and  the 
Self] come together, the Self’s properties of Knowledge and 
Vision become vibhaavik (deviate from their inherent nature). 
Of the two properties, first the Vision becomes vibhaavik. The 
[developing]  I  (hu)  arises  as  a  result.  [The  first  level  of 
vibhaav; visheshbhaav.] Thereafter, as the wrong belief of the 
[developing]  I  advances, 
to  believe,  ‘I  am 
Chandubhai, I am doing it.’ 

it  starts 

That is the second level of visheshbhaav, when the wrong 
belief of ‘I am Chandubhai’ arises for the [developing] I. Once 
that wrong belief solidifies, it means that it has converted into 
knowledge  [come  into  experience].  That  is  considered  as 
vibhaavik gnan, which has been referred to as intellect, and on 
the other side, in the jada Parmanu, the prakruti tends to arise.  

In  worldly  language  one  has  to  say,  “An  illusion  has 
arisen for the Self.” But truly speaking, illusion cannot arise 
for the [original] Self. Otherwise,  It  would  never  be able to 
revert back to what It was. What can actually be considered as 
an illusion? When one feels hurt within, the thought arises in 
his mind, ‘Despite Knowing so much, why do I feel like this? 

38 

Therefore,  this  is  something  different,  this  is  not  my  real 
form.’ This is considered as an [awareness of] illusion arising.  

There  is  a  big  difference  between  visheshbhaav  and 
vishesh gnan. Visheshbhaav is not a phase of the Self, rather 
it arises due to the engrossment arising when the two eternal 
elements come into close proximity. In fact, visheshbhaav is 
simply the ego. It is actually a vyatirek guna. Whereas vishesh 
gnan is knowledge that is not necessary; what is the point in 
bringing that in the middle? Vishesh gnan can arise only if the 
vyatirek  guna  is  present.  The  vyatirek  guna  does  not  arise 
because of vishesh gnan. Gnan in the general sense has been 
referred  to  as  Darshan  (understanding;  the  property  of 
Vision). Darshan is the only thing of value when it comes to 
moksha,  whereas  vishesh  gnan  goes  to  see  [the  details] 
regarding  the  pudgal  (non-Self  complex)  such  as,  ‘What  is 
this? Is this a neem tree? Is this a mango tree?’ That is vishesh 
gnan.  

‘Knowledge’  is  just  one,  but  it  has  many  different 
divisions. Just as when you, the developing I, see this room, It 
illuminates the room, and when you see the sky, It illuminates 
the  sky,  but  the  Knowledge  is  the  same!  As  long  as  this 
vishesh  gnan  is  being  seen,  the  Self  cannot  be  Seen  at  all. 
After realizing the Self, both can be Seen.  

The Self is Itself nothing but Knowledge; in exactness, It 
is not the One with Knowledge, but It is Itself Knowledge. If 
you refer to  It as the One  with Knowledge, then that would 
make the Knowledge and the One having the Knowledge, two 
separate entities. However, in reality, the Self is Itself nothing 
but Knowledge, It is nothing but illumination (prakash)! It is 
verily due to that illumination that It is able to understand and 
come to Know everything. 

Have the purush (the relative self; the developing ‘I’) and 
the prakruti (the non-Self complex) arisen due to the coming 
together  of  inanimate  matter  and  the  Self?  No,  the  prakruti 

39 

came into being later. The result of the vishesh parinaam is 
the prakruti. 

As the visheshbhaav of the self fell onto the five eternal 
elements,  the  prakruti  arose  and  thereafter  it  keeps  giving 
effect constantly. Once the prakruti and the Purush (the Self) 
are separated, the real Purusharth (the Real spiritual effort to 
progress as the Self) begins. The Self in Its inherently natural 
state is the Purush, and the prakruti is the illusion. 

the 

Since 

charged] 

parmanu 

[vibhaavik; 

are 
prasavdharmi (having a potential to give rise to many more 
from one), the moment the knowledge of the eternal element 
of  the  Self  deviates  from  Its  inherent  nature,  the  prakruti 
forms. The prakruti that is overtly visible is its division that is 
undergoing dissolution. Nevertheless, the fundamentally pure 
eternal  elements,  the  pure  Self  and  pure  inanimate  matter, 
remain the way they are. 

This  prakruti  that  is  prasavdharmi,  its  energy  is  far 
greater  than  that  of  the  absolute  Self,  but  it  does  not  have 
Chaitanya  shakti  (the  energy  of  Knowing  and  Seeing).  The 
prakruti becomes charged simply upon  coming  into  contact 
with the Self.  

When the Knowledge, the experiential awareness as the 
Self (bhaan), and the Conduct as the Self become one, that is 
when One becomes the complete, absolute Self. 

Iron rusts due to the salty air of the ocean. Who is the doer 
in that? How did that happen? It is simply the scientific law of 
nature that when two things come together, a third effect,  a 
completely new effect, a vishesh parinaam arises; no one is at 
fault  in  that.  In  this  example,  the  ‘rust’  is  verily  the  ego, 
through which the prakruti is bound, and the ‘iron’ is to be 
understood as the Self. Nothing at all happens to the original 
eternal  elements.  Iron  is  functioning  as  iron  and  rust  is 
functioning as rust. 

40 

If  You  constantly  keep  Seeing  what  the  antahkaran 
(mind,  intellect,  chit  and  ego  complex)  is  doing,  then  that 
Knowledge will eventually reach absolute Knowledge.  

[7] Vibhaav Arises From the Samsaran of the Six 
Eternal Elements 

In this universe, inanimate matter and the Self have both 
been  together  right  from  the  beginning.  The  six  eternal 
elements  are  indeed  together.  If  the  six  are  separated,  only 
then  will  they  return  to  their  own  gunadharma  (intrinsic 
properties  that  have  a  specific  function).  Vidharma  (an 
additional function; deviation from the original function) has 
seeped into all six eternal elements, but of these, four have not 
become vidharmi (to display an additional function; to deviate 
from the original function). Despite remaining in close contact 
[with each other], they are able to remain in their swadharma 
(one’s original individual functions). Whereas the Self and the 
Pudgal,  with  respect  to  their  vibhaavik  states,  have  both 
become vidharmi. The other four do not become so. The Self 
being vidharmi means that it has acquired the illusion that, ‘I 
am doing this’ and the Pudgal being vidharmi refers to those 
parmanu which have become prayogsa, the ones that do not 
have blood, pus, or flesh. In this, the vidharmi pudgal and the 
vibhaavik pudgal are two different things entirely. In the state 
of  vibhaav,  first  the  aham  meaning  the  ‘I’  arises,  thereafter 
due to a sense of doership, due to the belief of, ‘I am doing it’ 
a  transformation  takes  place  in  the  pudgal  parmanu,  that  is 
referred to as the vibhaavik pudgal [mishrasa]. This vibhaavik 
pudgal is considered to have advanced a lot further into the 
gross level than the vidharmi pudgal. And that is the one that 
has blood, pus, and flesh. 

In the world, the six eternal elements come together and 
separate;  this  process  carries  on  constantly.  The  eternal 
elements  remain  in  a  mixture  form;  they  do  not  become  a 
compound. If they were to become a compound, then it would 
mean that they have borrowed [properties] from one another. 

41 

the  Pudgal  Parmanu.  Everything 

The  six  eternal  elements  are  the  reason  the  world  is  in 
existence. The fundamental cause in making all of this arise is 
really 
that  can  be 
experienced through the five sense organs is an influence of 
the  Pudgal  Parmanu.  The  visheshbhaav  arises  due  to  the 
Pudgal Parmanu’s property of having a visible form. 

The Parmanu are an eternal element. The pudgal is not 
an eternal element; it is a vishesh parinaam (a completely new 
effect). It is due to the vishesh parinaam of the Self that this 
vishesh parinaam appears to exist in the Parmanu. Similar to 
whatever actions we do in front of a mirror, the reflection in 
the mirror mimics those, does it not? 

It is only due to the two, inanimate matter and the Self, 
that  the  vibhaav  arises.  The  other  eternal  elements  come 
together but they do not help in the causing of the  vibhaav, 
they are present in a state of neutrality (udaseen bhaav).  

After the vibhaav has arisen from the coming together of 
the two eternal elements, the other four eternal elements help 
these two whilst remaining in a state of neutrality, meaning 
that  they  help  not  only  a  thief  but  also  the  one  making  a 
donation. 

Among  the  six  eternal  elements,  none  of  them  have  an 
opposing  function  to  another.  Yes,  each  one  has  its  own 
individual functions, which are unique and independent to it. 
One  eternal  element’s  individual  functions  do  not  inference 
with the other eternal element’s functions. 

All  this  is  nimit-naimittik  (based  on  evidences  that  are 
instrumental in the process). Otherwise, an obligation would 
be bound towards each another, and when would they ever be 
able to repay it? 

This Akram Gnan of Dada’s is the Knowledge of the Self 
that is ‘effective’ [such that it procures results on its own]. The 
moment  It  enters  within,  It  separates  the  two  [inanimate 
matter  and  the  Self]!  This  Knowledge  does  not  fall  under 

42 

vyatirek  guna,  this  Knowledge  is  a  guna  (property)  of  the 
original Self. 

Vyavasthit  shakti  is  encompassed  within  the  six eternal 

elements; there is nothing else besides them.  

It is due to the sansarg dosh (the fault of engrossment that 
arises when two eternal elements come into close proximity 
with  each  other)  with  a  mirror  that  one  sees  another 
‘Chandubhai’ like himself, isn’t it? When the time ripens, it 
comes to an end. The inherent nature of circumstances is to 
dissociate. 

No  one  is  at  fault  in  causing  this  wandering  around  in 
worldly life. All this has come to be due to the arising of the 
visheshbhaav. 

Is  the  samipyabhaav  (the  engrossment  that  arises  when 
the two eternal elements, the Self and inanimate matter, are in 
close proximity) also subject to niyati (natural progression of 
evolution of a soul)? It is due to niyati that all of these eternal 
elements come together. Thereafter, the visheshbhaav arises. 
Niyati  is  there  by  natural  law.  It  is  a  [natural]  track  [of 
evolution of a soul] in this world. All of mankind are moving 
ahead on this track, on this track of niyati!  

The path of evolution of a soul is actually moving along 
according  to  niyati.  No  change  can  happen  in  this.  [More 
details  on  niyati  can  be  found  in  Aptavani  11  Purvardh 
Gujarati book from page 270 onwards.] 

When  both,  the  ocean  and  the  sun,  get  together,  water 
vapor is formed. Who is the doer in that? Each one maintains 
its own individual gunadharma (intrinsic properties that have 
a specific function) and a new vyatirek guna (completely new 
properties of a third component that arise when two elements 
come together) forms. In the same way, in this world, upon 
the  coming  together  of  the  Self  and  inanimate  matter,  the 
vyatirek  guna  tend  to  arise,  the  ones  that  are  referred  to  as 
anger, pride, deceit and greed. 

43 

The world has come into being due to the presence of the 
Self.  Nothing  can  happen  without  Its  presence.  There  is  an 
entire Science behind this! The Self has not done anything in 
this! 

What role does the presence of the Self play? 

The wrong belief    Arises  only in  the presence of the 

Self 

The right belief  Arises only in the presence of the Self 

The  state  as  the  absolute  Self    Manifests  only  in  the 

presence of the Self 

[8] Anger and Pride Is to ‘I’, As Deceit and Greed Is to ‘My’ 

Inanimate matter + the Self  Visheshbhaav 

What arose in the visheshbhaav? 

1) 

[The wrong belief of] ‘I am something’ 

2)  [The wrong belief of] ‘I am the doer’ and ‘I am the 

knower’ of all this! 

Due  to  that,  the  entire  worldly  life  has  come  into 

existence… 

The root cause of the ‘I’ is ignorance of the Self. 

The  ‘I’  refers  to  the  aham,  which  then  advances  to 

become the ego (ahamkaar); all of that is the vyatirek guna. 

The vyatirek guna comprise of the anger, pride, deceit and 
greed  that  have  arisen.  From  anger  and  pride,  the  ‘I’  arose; 
and from greed and deceit, the ‘my’ arose. From those four, 
these two arose, the ‘I’ and the ‘my’. 

When the body dies, at that time the ego of that lifetime 
comes to an end and simultaneously another one for the next 
lifetime gets ready. The new one that has arisen in the form of 
causes, that ego then goes forward to the next lifetime. A tree 
forms from a seed and the tree gives rise to a new seed…  

44 

Actually, it cannot be said that the ego has a beginning. 
Everything has indeed existed from time immemorial. It is just 
to  explain  in  general  that  ‘we’  say  that  it  [the  worldly-
interacting self] believed, ‘I am this’ and ‘this is mine’, which 
were the causes, and from that, the effects started to arise. And 
due to another eternal element coming together with the Self, 
these wrong beliefs of ‘I am this’ and ‘this is mine’ arose, and 
from that the anger, pride, deceit and greed came into being. 

The light [Knowledge of the Self] of the original Self is 
there, but  people passed on the ignorant  belief of, ‘You  are 
‘I  am 
Chandubhai.’  Therefore,  you  also  believed, 
Chandubhai’; hence, the ego is said to have arisen, and that 
ego became the representative of the light of the original Self. 
And to see through the light of the representative means to see 
through the intellect. 

The kashays (the inner enemies of anger, pride, deceit and 
greed) are the production and the mind, intellect, chit, and ego 
are  the  effect  of  the  kashays.  Production  means  causes;  to 
become the form as the relative self, to become the form as 
the sufferer (upadhi swaroop). 

What came first in this? The effects [mind, intellect, chit 

and ego] or the causes [anger, pride, deceit and greed]? 

In  this,  the  first  thing  to  arise,  the  main  thing  is  the 
production  i.e.,  the  anger,  pride,  deceit  and  greed.  Through 
them, karma started to be charged; that verily is bhaavkarma. 

From the anger that arose, if it gets used, then karma get 
charged  and  if  it  remains  unused,  then  there  is  no  problem. 
Once the karma  are bound, at  the time of discharging, their 
effects  unfold.  That  verily  is  the  [discharge]  ego;  all  that 
which  is  within  the  antahkaran,  the  entire  complex  of  the 
mind, intellect, chit, and ego is encompassed in that. 

For the agnani (one who has not attained Self-realization) 
new [karma] are charged through the ‘effective’ [discharge] 
antahkaran, whereas for the Ones who have attained the state 

45 

as a Gnani (Swaroop Gnani; mahatmas), the charging comes 
to an end. In their case, the entire antahkaran is ‘effective’. 
First the effect unfolds within the antahkaran, and thereafter 
it unfolds in the bahyakaran (the external instruments of the 
mind, speech, and body). 

First  the  anger  unfolds  within  at  the  subtle  level,  and 
when it is expressed overtly, that is anger at the gross level. 
Both are nothing but ‘effective’.  

Who arose first in this? 

The ‘parents’ are the anger, pride, deceit and  greed and 

their ‘descendants’ are the mind, intellect, chit and ego. 

The  living  beings  of  avyavahaar  rashi  (a  state  of 
uncategorized  souls  that  have  not  yet  entered  worldly 
interactions) are in a state of very dense vibhaav. The karma 
that  a  living  being  has  in  the  avyavahaar  rashi  have  to  be 
endured in the vyavahaar rashi (a state where living beings 
have  worldly  nomenclature  and  have  entered  into  worldly 
interaction). Moreover, the aham (the ‘I’) of all these [souls] 
has been in existence right from the beginning. From the very 
moment the visheshbhaav arose!!! 

The Self has not taken birth. The ego takes birth and dies. 

The veils over the Self increase and decrease. 

As  long  as  you  prevail  as  the  I,  you  will  not  get  the 
experiential awareness of Your Real form as the Self, and until 
then  the  I  will  indeed  remain  separate.  The  I  is  itself  the 
vyatirek guna.  

The ego is the vibhaav of the Self.  

Chetan (the property of Knowing and Seeing) is the same 
in each person, but the inanimate matter (jada) can never be 
the same. 

The fundamental cause for the vishesh parinaam to arise 

is the coming together of the two eternal elements. 

46 

Upon  coming  into  close  proximity,  a  wrong  belief  has 
arisen for the self, and from that wrong belief, anger, pride, 
deceit and greed have arisen. As the wrong belief advances, 
the antahkaran arises. It is actually the ego that has given rise 
to the mind. The mind is it’s descendant! In the past life, the 
ego created the mind, from which the thoughts are arising in 
this life. 

The inanimate matter and the Self which when they were 
together were giving rise to causes, the Gnani separates them 
for You [mahatmas]. Therefore, the anger, pride, deceit and 
greed no longer arise for You. That is why the causes come to 
a stop. That is indeed why He is called a Gnani. The one for 
whom the two eternal elements remain together is an agnani. 
For the Gnani, the mind is a gneya (an object to be Known). 
Therefore, new effects do not arise. ‘He’ simply keeps Seeing 
the effects from the past life as separate. Before, one used to 
become  engrossed  in  the  mind,  that  is  why  thoughts  were 
arising.  If  they  are  Seen  as  separate,  then  thoughts  will  not 
arise [in the next life]. 

It is the ego that is feeling the misery, that is why it wants 
to  become  free  from  that.  Who  supports  the  hupanu  (the 
prevalence of the I; the sense of ‘I-ness’) and the sense of ‘my-
ness’ (marapanu) that have arisen?  It  is  the presence of the 
Self. 

After attaining the Knowledge of One’s Real form as the 
Self, anger, pride, deceit and  greed are considered to be the 
properties of the pudgal (the non-Self complex). In a state of 
ignorance of the Self, they were believed to be the properties 
of  the  Self,  but  actually  they  are  not.  The  ego  simply  takes 
them  on.  After  attaining  the  Knowledge  of  the  Self,  if  One 
remains  in  the  Agnas  (five  principles  that  preserve  the 
awareness as the Self in Akram Vignan), then the kashays, and 
everything else do not affect Him. 

Would the Self who is the embodiment of infinite bliss 
ever have any worries? It is just an illusory belief that the Self 

47 

has  worries.  Who  has  that  belief?  The  ego,  the  one  who 
pretends to be innocent by proving others to be guilty. 

[9] The Real Forms of Swabhaav and Vibhaav 

Each  eternal  element  is  eternal,  permanent,  and  is 
constantly  bringing  about  a  change  whilst  remaining  steady 
within its own individual inherent nature only. 

All the circumstances of the world function as per their 

inherent nature. 

Even after the vibhaav has arisen, the inherent state as the 
Self remains within Its own properties, and  completely new 
properties of its own arise for the vibhaavik self. 

This  world  is  functioning  as  per  its  inherent  nature 
whereas clashes have  arisen due to  vibhaav. Swabhaav  (the 
inherently  natural  state  as  the  Self)  takes  One  to  moksha, 
whereas vibhaav makes one wander in worldly life. 

To make an effort is vibhaav, whereas to prevail in  the 
state as a non-doer is Swabhaav. Effort is not required to come 
into Swabhaav, but it is required when coming into vibhaav. 

The Real dharma (nature) [of the Self] is Its Swabhaavik 
dharma.  The  relative  dharma  [of  the  Self]  is  its  vibhaavik 
dharma; where in, one has to engage in penance, renunciation, 
and acquisition. 

When  the  Self  comes  into  Its  inherent  nature,  that  is 

called moksha. 

The fundamental authority of the Self is to remain in the 
inherent nature as the Self only; it is not to remain in vishesh 
parinaam.  The  vishesh  parinaam  is  due  to  the  unnatural 
authority  of  the  Self,  it  is  subject  to  the  circumstantial 
authority of the Self, not Its fundamental authority. 

The Self is the doer of the karma that is inherently natural 
to Itself, not of any other karma. Just like the light (prakash) 

48 

which naturally illuminates everything, that is how it is for the 
Self. It is due to illusion that It has been referred to as a doer.  

The  state  as  the  non-Self  (par  swabhaav-bhaav)  means 
parparinati (to believe ‘I am doing’ in what are the results of 
the non-Self). Another entity is the doer yet one believes, ‘I 
am doing it’; that is parparinati! 

Absolutely  revered  Dadashri  expounds  this  spiritual 
Science after having Seen it as it is. The Self is not doer of 
anything at all, yet without an [evidentiary] doer, nothing can 
ever happen.  

The  developing  I  (pote)  ‘paints’  [charges,  causes]  the 
worldly life, and then nature brings that into effect [in the next 
life]. 

The [original] Self exists in every living being, but it is 
the external part [the worldly-interacting self] that continues 
to  develop,  that  is  the  one  that  goes  towards  the  inherent 
nature  as  the  original  Self  (Swabhaav).  The  vibhaav  goes 
towards Swabhaav. 

The one standing in front of the mirror and the reflection 
in  the  mirror,  both  appear  identical;  similarly,  when  the  I 
[worldy-interacting self] becomes just like the original Self, 
that is when One becomes free. Worldly life arose because the 
two were different. 

One will have to purify the ego and come into the state as 

the Self. 

All types of worldly knowledge come forth from the Self 

Itself.  

The  Pudgal  is  dependent  on  its  own  elemental  matter. 
Each  eternal  element  is  dependent  on  its  own  individual 
elemental  matter.  Neither  does  any  eternal  element  ever 
merge with another eternal element, nor does it ever leave its 
own inherent nature. 

49 

Vibhaav  means  the  Self’s  paudgalik  gnan  (relative 
knowledge)  and  the  other  is  the  Self’s  swabhaavik  Gnan 
(Knowledge of the Self; Real Knowledge) 

To prevail in the inherent state as the Self, to prevail as 
the Knower and Seer, that precisely is Charitra (the Conduct 
as the Self). If someone curses at you, then the Self prevails 
as the Knower and Seer of the effects that arise within. 

Vibhaav  gives  rise  to  bhaavna  (discharge  intent)  and 
bhaavna  gives  rise  to  vaasna  (subtle  desires).  The  bhaavna 
for worldly happiness, that verily is referred to as desire. 

Do the Pudgal Parmanu become unnatural (vikaari)? 

No, they do not  become unnatural  of  their own accord. 
The  Pudgal  Parmanu  have  the  inherent  nature  to  be  active 
(sakriya), meaning that they are not akriya (without activity). 
Sakriya  means  that  they  are  active  by  their  inherent  nature 
(kriyavaan);  however, 
them  becoming 
unnatural  is  that  one  has  believed  the  vyatirek  guna  (the 
completely  new  properties  of  the  self  namely  anger,  pride, 
deceit  and  greed)  to  be  his  own.  Moreover,  these  vyatirek 
guna  are  with  power  chetan  (the  relative  self  that  has  been 
powered with life energy in the presence of the Self). 

the  reason  for 

Raag-dwesh (attachment and abhorrence) arise due to the 
vibhaavik state of the self, whereas there is vitaraagata (a state 
in which there is a total absence of attachment and aborrence) 
in the inherently natural state as the Self! 

The  tracks  of  both,  the  Self  and  inanimate  matter,  are 
different,  and  on  top  of  that,  they  also  flow  in  their  own 
individual tracks. If they flow as one track, then that results in 
vibhaav. 

The final state of the Self is for It to revert to Swabhaav 

from vibhaav. 

When an eternal element goes towards its own inherent 
nature, that is its dharma (true nature of a thing). When the 

50 

Self goes towards Its own inherent nature as the Self, that is 
Atmadharma, that verily is moksha. 

Besides,  there  is  no  dharmadhyan  (a  virtuous  internal 
state of being that prevents one from hurting oneself or others) 
or  any  other  kind  of  dhyan  (internal  state  of  being)  in  the 
inherently natural state as the Self! All four internal states of 
being,  even  shukladhyan  (an  internal  state  of  being  that 
renders the constant awareness of ‘I am pure Soul’), is a state 
of vibhaav. 

Shukladhyan prepares One to attain the absolute state. It 
is the direct cause for moksha. But ultimately, even that state 
of being comes to an end. 

“Why then relish a lifestyle that involves frightful spiritual 
death in every moment.” 

“Kshan kshan bhayankar bhaav marane, kah aho raachi 
rahyo.” 

 - Shrimad Rajchandra 

The  death  of  Swabhaav  and  the  birth  of  vibhaav  (the 
wrong belief of, ‘I am Chandubhai’). When the I prevails as 
the avastha (temporary state; circumstance; situation), that is 
the  birth  of  vibhaav.  Whereas  when  the  ‘I’  prevails  as  the 
Knower and Seer of the temporary state, then that is the birth 
of Swabhaav.  

The only way to come into Swabhaav is to apply Dada’s 

five Agnas. 

[10] In Vibhaav, Who Is Chetan? Who Is Pudgal? 

The Self is permanent (avinashi), You, the developing ‘I’, 
are  permanent,  but  the  wrong  belief  of,  ‘I  am  Chandubhai’ 
gets established in you, the relative self, and that is why you 
are temporary (vinashi). 

In vibhaav, it is the aham (the ‘I’) that arises first. Puran 
(charging; influx) is being done by the aham! It says, “I am 

51 

the  one  undergoing  galan  (discharge;  outflux),  and  the  one 
doing puran,” and at the time of suffering, it also says, “I am 
the one suffering.” 

At the time of puran, by believing, ‘It is indeed I who is 
charging,’  prayogsa  (the  charging  phase  of  parmanu)  takes 
place.  And  when  one  believes,  ‘I  am  experiencing  it,’  it  is 
mishrasa (charged parmanu ready to give effect). Those who 
have  attained  Akram  Gnan  do  not  have  any  visheshbhaav 
whatsoever; it gets fractured! That which remains are akin to 
‘scars’  [effect  of  past  life  karma],  meaning,  the  discharge 
illusory attachment (charitra moha).  

After  the  visheshbhaav  has  arisen,  the  effects  of  the 
visheshbhaav continue to persist. It is only once the awakened 
awareness  as  the  Self  is  attained  that  the  continuity  of  the 
visheshbhaav ends. 

The visheshbhaav gives rise to the bhaavaks (those that 
cause  intents  to  arise).  The  krodhak  gives  rise  to  the  anger 
(krodh),  the  lobhak  gives  rise  to  the  greed  (lobh),  but  the 
pratishthit atma (the relative self) believes it is the one who 
has done that. The more the bhaavak makes one do bhaav, the 
stronger it starts to become. 

The Self remains in Its inherent nature, and the vibhaav 
has  arisen.  The  visheshbhaav  has  arisen  due  to  external 
circumstances, it has not arisen from the Self. The Self never 
goes outside of Its inherent nature. 

Both, the Self and the saiyog (the coming together of the 

circumstances and the Self), are infinite. 

The  saiyog  gave  rise  to  the  ego,  it  is  also  the  basis  for 
which it has persisted. For the one whose ego has departed, all 
the saiyog go away! 

Once all the vibhaavik pudgal (the non-Self complex of 
input and output that arises as a result of the coming together 
of  two  eternal  elements,  the  Self  and  inanimate  matter)  get 
purified  and  separate  from  the  Self,  that  is  when  the  Self 

52 

becomes  completely  free.  After  attaining  Gnan,  as  One 
continues  to  clear  the  files  with  equanimity,  He  eventually 
becomes free. 

The pure Soul  is  indeed who You  are;  that  precisely  is 
Your  Real  form  (Swaroop).  You,  the  developing  I,  had 
become  separate  from  It  [the  pure  Soul],  so  now  [after 
attaining Gnan] by Seeing the Real form as the Self, You can 
become that form. By worshiping the properties of the Self, 
You can become that form. 

[The belief of] ‘I am Chandubhai’ is itself vibhaav, and 
that itself is bhaavkarma (charge karma). [The belief of] ‘I am 
pure Soul’ is in fact One’s own Swabhaav. 

When anger arises, the [relative] self becomes engrossed 
in  the  parmanu  of  anger  that  arise  in  the  mind,  so  that  is 
referred to as anger. The moment one becomes engrossed, the 
vishesh parinaam arises. Its subsequent effects are referred to 
as  parparinaam  (the  results  of  the  non-Self).  Experiencing 
pleasure,  experiencing  pain,  this  worldly  life,  all  of  that  is 
nothing but parparinaam. 

The  vishesh  parinaam  cannot  Know  that  which  is  pure 

[the Self], however, it can recognize a Gnani. 

Can Pragnya be a vishesh parinaam of the pure Soul? No. 
Pragnya is in fact the direct energy of the original Self, that 
arises  after  Self-realization.  ‘It’  is  the  pure  Soul’s  own 
property (guna), arising directly from Its presence. Agnya (the 
energy of ignorance) is a vishesh parinaam, whereas Pragnya 
is the Self’s own parinaam. 

It is simply through a change in the belief that the vibhaav 
of millions of years goes away. The moment one has the belief 
of, ‘I did this’, all the kashays latch onto him. 

Whenever  a  vishesh  parinaam  arises, 

this 
understanding, ‘This [effect] is not Mine.’ That way, it gets 
cleared. 

set 

53 

[11] When Vishesh Parinaam Comes to an End … 

It  is  in  milk’s  inherent  nature  (swabhaav)  to  spoil,  but 

when it becomes yogurt, that is vibhaav. 

An  eternal  element  is  permanent,  its  own  effects  or 
properties  (parinaam)  are  also  permanent,  only  its  vishesh 
parinaam  are  temporary  (vinashi).  That  is  all  one  needs  to 
understand in exactness. 

Dadashri  says,  “For  ‘us’,  the  Self  remains  in  Atma 
parinaam (the properties of the Self; the  effect  as the Self). 
The mind remains in the properties of the mind or in the effect 
as the mind.” When there is engrossment with the mind, the 
vishesh  parinaam  arises.  When 
into 
Swaparinaam (One’s own individual effect or properties), that 
Itself is the absolute Self (Parmatma)! When both come into 
their own individual properties or effect and when both dwell 
in  their  own  individual  properties  or  effect,  that  is  called 
moksha! 

the  Self  comes 

When  One  Knows,  ‘This  is  a  vishesh  parinaam,’  that 
itself is Swaparinaam. That is where vishesh parinaam comes 
to an end. 

If  one 

takes  on 

the  visheshbhaav  (an  assumed 
identification  with  that  which  is  not  One’s  own),  then  he 
becomes a jeev (worldly being), whereas if He remains as the 
Knower  and  Seer  of  the  visheshbhaav,  there  is  eternal  bliss 
(parmanand).  

The  mechanical  chetan  (the  self  that  is  mechanical  but 
appears to be living) arose as a result of the vishesh parinaam. 
If you believe the pudgal which undergoes puran (influx) and 
galan  (outflux)  to  be  who  you  are,  then  you  will  become 
bound! 

The circumstances that arise due to the vishesh parinaam 
can be erased by doing pratikraman (a three step process of 
reversal  from  hurting  another  living  being  through  thought, 
speech or action by confessing the mistake to the Lord within 

54 

to  not  repeat 

[alochana],  asking  for  forgiveness  for  it  [pratikraman]  and 
that  mistake  [pratyakhyaan]). 
resolving 
Otherwise,  why  would  a 
to  do 
pratikraman? It is just that mahatmas (Self-realized Ones in 
Akram  Vignan)  make  mistakes,  that  is  why  pratikraman 
should be done. 

true  scientist  need 

There  is  no  such  thing  as  ‘good’  or  ‘bad’  in  vishesh 
parinaam.  It  is  because  one  has  partiality  that  such  things 
happen. Everything besides the state as the Self (Atmabhaav) 
is vishesh parinaam. 

To  Know  and  See  is  Swaparinaam;  however,  to  know 
and  see  through  the  intellect  is  considered  as  vishesh 
parinaam. 

It is only after One first understands or has the conviction 
(pratiti) that, ‘The aham is false knowledge,’ that it begins to 
be destroyed, and as that happens, the visheshbhaav dissolves 
gradually.  The moment the ahambhaav (the state as the ‘I’) 
comes to an end, the visheshbhaav also comes to an end! 

As the vibhaav comes to an end gradually, the Swabhaav 

increases gradually. 

Pragnya is not vibhaav. Pragnya is the One who Knows, 
‘To what extent the visheshbhaav has decreased and to what 
extent the Swabhaav has increased.’ Pragnya also increases 
and decreases. Pragnya only lasts until keval Gnan is attained, 
and the vibhaav can persist only upto that instant. 

What does Dadashri say about His own Knowledge-laden 
speech?  Despite  being such that it gives immense clarity, it 
has arisen from the vyatirek guna. It is not relative [speech]; 
it is Real-relative [speech]. 

Real-relative, relative, and the third is relative-relative. 

‘I am verily within all,’ is what prevails for the Gnani, so 

how can any divisiveness ever persist? 

What is the reason Dadashri remains ever fresh? 

55 

It is because the parbhaav (the state as the non-Self) has 
been  destroyed  and  the  awakened  awareness  as  the  Self 
prevails  constantly.  For  the  One  who  does  not  have  the 
subtlest  liking  (ruchi)  towards  parbhaav,  not  even  the 
slightest iota of subtlest liking towards it, what else could it 
possibly be besides the fact that the absolute Self (Parmatma) 
Itself has manifested in Him? 

Mahatmas should keep their vision towards bringing an 

end to parbhaav. 

Once the parbhaav comes to an end completely, One then 
clears  His  karmic  account  by  prevailing  in  Swakshetra  (the 
realm  as  the  Self)  and  thereafter  goes  to  Siddha  Kshetra 
(location  at  the  crest  of  the  universe  where  all  absolutely 
liberated Souls reside). Swakshetra is the gate to the Siddha 
Kshetra! 

Before going to Siddha Kshetra, all the parmanu over the 
Self shed off. Then  dharmastikaya  (the eternal  element that 
supports motion) drops off the Self over there. There are no 
saiyog  (the  coming  together  of  circumstances  and  the  Self) 
over there, that is why vibhaav does not ever arise. 

[12] The Awakened Awareness Towards the ‘I’ 

Agnan  (ignorance  of  the  Self)  was  there  right  from  the 
beginning;  it  is  there  at  the  subtle  level  and  the  moment 
external  circumstances  are  encountered,  it  becomes  visible 
overtly. 

In the phrase, ‘I am the Self,’ who is ‘the I’ (hu) and who 

is ‘the Self’? 

‘The  I’  is  the  ego  and  ‘the  Self’  is  the  original  eternal 

element. 

I + my = the ego, I – my = the Self. When not a single 
parmanu of ‘my’ remains,  then that ‘I’ is  referred to  as the 
Self. 

56 

The  ego  can  never  be  considered  to  be  natural 
(swabhaavik), it is  only  unnatural  (vibhaavik).  Is [the belief 
of,] ‘I am pure Soul’ considered as egoism? No. What is it, 
then?  To  believe  ‘I  am  this’  for  that  which  You  are,  is  not 
egoism. To believe, ‘I am this’ for that which You are not, is 
called  egoism.  Everyone  certainly  has  the  experiential 
awareness  (bhaan)  of  their  own  existence  (astitva),  that  ‘I 
exist’. But once the experiential awareness of ‘who am I’ is 
attained,  that  is  referred  to  as  vastutva;  precisely  the 
experiential  awareness  of,  ‘I  am  the  pure  Soul’.  After  Self-
realization, purnatva (the absolute state as the Self) is attained 
gradually, that is when the ‘I’ dissipates entirely. 

The ‘I’ (Hu) is definitely the pure Soul. But then, It had 
the illusion of ‘I am doing it’, so that gave rise to the ego. So, 
the ‘I’ gave rise to the ego of, ‘I am Chandubhai’. Now that 
ego was rendered blind due to the ignorance that was passed 
on  to  him  [through  societal  influence].  On  top  of  that,  the 
‘spectacles’ [of dravyakarma; subtle discharge karma] of the 
past  life  karma  got  added  on,  therefore  the  ego  started  to 
believe, ‘She is my wife, these are my children.’ 

For whom did the ego arise? For ignorance (agnan). How 
did  the  ignorance  come  into  being?  Due  to  the  pressure  of 
circumstances.  Just  like  an  intoxicated  person  believes 
himself to be a king [due to the circumstance of the alcohol he 
has drunk]! 

No matter how many veils of ignorance (avaran) come 
over  the  Self,  even  then  the  developing  ‘I’  remains  as  the 
illuminator  (prakashak)  only,  so  then  what  is  the  problem? 
But how does that benefit the ego?  It is only if the ego  can 
taste  [experience]  the  sweetness  that  it  will  say,  “This  is 
sugar,” and only then can final closure come about. Hence, it 
is the ego that has to be brought to a final closure, the Self is 
already settled. 

‘You’,  the  developing  ‘I’,  are  not  this  form  that  has  a 
this  worldly  form 

name  (naam-roop),  You  are  not 

57 

and  agnan 

(vyavahaar-roop),  so  then  what  are  You  really  in  terms  of 
Your  function?  ‘You’  are  only  in  the  form  as  Gnan  (Real 
Knowledge) 
(relative  knowledge).  The 
circumstances  are  in  fact  encountered  based  either  on  the 
Gnan  or  the  agnan.  The  One  with  higher  [spiritual] 
knowledge, brings forth divine karma. If one does not have a 
higher [spiritual] knowledge, then the karma bound are also 
less divine. Even this ego is not who You, the developing ‘I’, 
are;  You  are  the  entity  whose  form  is  Gnan-agnan!  The 
developing ‘I’ verily refers to Gnan or agnan. That precisely 
is  one’s  upadaan  (level  of  spiritual  development).  But 
because this extremely subtle concept cannot be understood, 
you  end  up  accepting  the  representative  of  the  Gnan  and 
agnan, meaning the ego [to be who you are]. So in the broad 
sense, we say, “The ego binds karma,” but karma are actually 
bound on the basis of this Gnan or agnan. That can also be 
referred  to  as  one’s  upadaan;  and  wherever  the  Gnan  and 
agnan  are  together,  there  the  ego  definitely  exists.  The 
moment the agnan leaves, it means the [charge] ego has come 
to an end. As long as the [charge] ego is present, the Gnan and 
the  agnan  remain  present  together.  That  is  referred  to  as 
kshayopksham (partial annihilation of karma). 

After attaining Gnan, the Purush (the Self) verily is the 
division that is Gnan, and the prakruti (the non-Self complex) 
is the division that is agnan. The Knowledge Itself is the Self 
and  when  It  comes  into  Vignan  Swaroop  (the  Real  form  as 
Science; the Real form as absolute Knowledge; the absolute 
Self), then that Itself is the absolute Self. The source of both 
the  Gnan  and  the  agnan  is  Science  (Vignan;  the  absolute 
Self)! The Self that is nothing but Science. From It, the light 
in the form of Gnan and the darkness in the form of  agnan 
have come into being. 

There is a great difference between ahamkaar and aham. 
The  ‘I’  (Hu)  and  the  aham  are  one  and  the  same.  In 
visheshbhaav, first the aham arises. The hupanu (prevalence 
of  the  I)  is  itself  the  aham,  and  to  display  that  hupanu,  to 

58 

express  it  as,  “I  am  Chandubhai,”  that  is  the  ahamkaar. 
Initially,  the  belief  arises  that  ‘I  am  something,  I  am 
something  else  besides  the  original  Self’;  that  is  considered 
the beginning of the aham, of the ‘I’. As long as the stage is 
that of aham, it is just that the awareness of its existence is 
elsewhere; the awareness of kartutva (a sense of doership) has 
not yet developed at this point. It is only to the extent of the 
belief,  meaning  that  in  the  Knowledge  and  Vision  that  is 
present,  only  the  Vision  part  has  changed.  Thereafter,  it 
advances further out of the state of the ‘I’ and believes, ‘I am 
Chandubhai.’  When  that  happens,  the  aham  turns  into 
ahamkaar.  So  that  means,  the  aham  is  being  expressed 
outwardly;  it  does  not  remain  limited  to  just  that.  It  then 
advances  further.  Even  though  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  an 
object,  yet  it  believes,  ‘This  object  is  mine,’  that  is  pride 
(maan). To believe, ‘I am the President,’ ‘I am a doctor,’ is 
considered as pride. That is to say, when malikipanu (a sense 
of  ownership)  arises,  it  is  considered  as  pride.  When  the 
outward  expression  of  the  I  is  done  without  a  sense  of 
ownership, when one makes a big deal  of something, when 
the  prevalence  of  the  I  is  expressed  excessively  through 
speech, then that it is considered as egoism (ahamkaar). It is 
only when one has a sense of ownership that pride comes into 
the  picture.  Now,  when  one  advances  further  beyond  that, 
when  ‘my-ness’  (mamata)  gets  added  to  the  sense  of 
ownership  and  one  shows  off  to  others  by  saying,  “This 
bungalow  is  mine,  this  car  is  mine,  these  are  my  wife  and 
children,” that is abhimaan (excessive pride due to material 
possessions). The point from which the I expresses outwardly 
and goes towards pride, it is considered as having come into 
[vibhaavik; relative] gnan. As long as it is the stage of egoism, 
it is just at the belief level, one simply has [vibhaavik] darshan 
(a  wrong  belief).  When  the  state  of  the  I  is  expressed 
outwardly,  it  is  pride;  that  is  when  it  has  come  into  gnan 
(relative knowledge). 

59 

[When  one  says,]  “I  came  down  from  upstairs,”  in  this 
situation, the developing I is not at all the one coming down, 
it is the body that comes down. Nevertheless, the belief of, ‘I 
came down,’ has been referred to as egoism. And when one 
goes further and states, “I came down,” that is referred to as 
pride; that means one has moved beyond the belief level, one 
has come into the knowledge level. 

What  is  the  difference  between  potapanu  (‘I-ness’  that 
has come into conduct) and ahampanu (the sense of ‘I am’)?  

The aham is just at the belief level only. Meaning that one 
simply has  a [mithya; wrong;  relative] belief only. Whereas 
with  potapanu,  it  has  come  into  conduct.  Meaning  that  one 
has advanced even further, one has gone beyond the [wrong; 
relative]  knowledge  level  and  has  come  into  the  [wrong; 
relative] conduct level. After attaining the Knowledge of the 
Self,  the  prevalence  of  the  I  that  is  at  the  belief  level,  goes 
away.  However, after that, the potapanu still remains at the 
conduct  level.  That  is  precisely  why  ‘our’  mahatmas  have 
tremendous  potapanu.  The  one  who  is  naïve  has  less 
potapanu. 

The  ‘I’  is  adjustable  everywhere.  The  ‘I’  arises,  the  ‘I’ 
then  becomes  Chandubhai,  going  further,  the  I  becomes 
someone’s son-in-law, the I becomes a nephew, the I becomes 
a doctor, and upon attaining the Knowledge of the Self, in just 
two hours, the ‘I’ becomes a pure Soul! There is not a single 
spare part in the ‘I’. ‘It’ has never changed even after having 
gone through infinite lifetimes. Whereas the potapanu cannot 
adjust to anything else besides itself. In this way, the I and the 
potapanu are two completely different things. 

The I is not the potapanu; rather, the one who assumes 

identification with everything, that verily is the potapanu. 

As a result of not understanding who the ‘I’ is, the ‘I’ is 
being falsely attributed to be something else, thus giving rise 
to  the  vikalp  (the  belief  that  ‘I  am  Chandubhai’  and  all  the 

60 

relative ‘I-ness’ that stems from it). So, the entire solid entity 
of vikalp has been referred to as potapanu. In that, the less the 
vikalp one does, that many are reduced and the more the vikalp 
one does, they increase by that much. 

The  vikalp  arises  from  the  ‘I’,  yet  the  ‘I’  remains 
completely  pure.  The  potapanu  does  arise,  but  the  ‘I’  has 
nothing to do with the vikalp, it is only the potapanu that has 
anything to do with that. 

In reality, the ‘I’ is not doing the potapanu, rather the ‘I’ 
is  being  falsely  attributed  elsewhere;  therefore,  potapanu 
arises for the one who made the false attribution. And the one 
who  makes  the  false  attribution  is  agnan  (ignorance  of  the 
Self; relative knowledge). Due to agnan, the false attribution 
of ‘I am Chandubhai’ is made; and when that very ego  gets 
the experiential awareness of, ‘I am pure Soul,’ it [the charge 
ego]  comes  to  an  end  and  thereafter,  the  jagruti  (awakened 
awareness as the Self) arises. 

After  attaining  Gnan,  who  is  the  one  that  becomes 
engrossed?  The  [subtler]  ego;  and  the  one  who  prevents 
engrossment  from  happening  is  the  jagruti,  it  helps  in 
maintaining  the  separation.  The  original  Self  never  ever 
becomes engrossed. 

So when we say, “You are becoming engrossed,” in that 
case, to whom is the ‘you’ referring? The ‘I’ has always been 
there right from the beginning. Before, that I used to prevail 
as  the  pratishthit  atma, now  after  Gnan,  that  ‘I’  prevails  as 
jagruti,  that  verily  is  the  jagrat  Atma  (the  awakened  Self). 
That is the One who does not become engrossed thereafter. 

After attaining Gnan, the pratishthit atma remains in the 
form  as  a  gneya  (object  to  be  Known),  in  the  the  form  as 
nishchetan  chetan  (an  energized  entity  that  appears  to  be 
living but is lifeless), in the form as discharge; and the jagruti 
is  the  Knower  of  that.  Before  attaining  Gnan,  one  was 
believing  that  the  pratishthit  atma  itself  was  the  Knower. 

61 

When  complete  jagruti  prevails,  there  the  ‘I’  becomes  one 
with  the  original  Self;  It  becomes  the  absolute  Self. 
Otherwise,  until  then,  It  prevails  as  a  separate  entity.  ‘It’ 
prevails  as  the  Antaratma  (an  interim  state  of  the  Self, 
beginning with the conviction of, ‘I am pure Soul’ and ending 
with the absolute experience), whilst maintaining separation 
[with the non-Self complex]. 

Where is  the I located within  this  entire body? Doesn’t 
that  I  cry  out  when  the  body  is  pricked  with  a  needle? 
Wherever there is a sensation of pain, that is where the I exists. 
The I of a driver of a huge bus, where would it be? [It would 
be spread] Throughout the entire bus! The prevalence of the I 
spreads out to that extent. 

The  Self’s  energy  of  Knowing  has  entered  into  the 
prakruti.  It  is  referred  to  as  power  chetan.  How  does  that 
power  get  filled?  In  the  visheshbhaav,  the  I  arises.  The 
moment the I believes, ‘I am doing it,’ power gets filled. The 
moment  the  I  believes,  ‘I  know  it,’  power  gets  filled.  That 
continues  happening…  the  sense  of  doership  has  arisen 
simply due to a wrong belief. 

Who is the Knower of, ‘I am pure Soul’? 

It  is  that  very  ‘I’  that  Knows  that.  The  I  who  was 
believing  ‘I  am  Chandubhai,’  the  knowledge  of  that  I 
changed, and that ‘I’ now has the Knowledge that, ‘I am pure 
Soul,’ so that ‘I’, the one that was previously being referred to 
as  the  ego,  is  the  One  who  is  the  Knower.  And  the  ego  is 
always together with the intellect. The intellect alone cannot 
Know [the Self]. 

That which remains after attaining Gnan is the discharge 
ego; the charge ego comes to an end. When Gnan is attained, 
the ego itself, the one that is together with the intellect, comes 
to understand, ‘This very existence of mine is wrong and the 
pure Soul is the fundamental inherent nature.’ Therefore, the 
ego  entrusts  everything  to  It.  Upon  attaining  Gnan,  the  ego 

62 

gets  the sudden realization, ‘Where am  I in  this? What  is it 
that belongs to me or what is my scope in this?’ It is at that 
very  moment  that  it  understands  the  line  of  demarcation 
between itself and the Self, and it then entrusts the ‘throne’ to 
the original Self. 

It is only if it is understood in this way that it can be said 
that the ego is the Knower of the Self! Out there in the world, 
this concept may be taken the wrong way that, ‘How can the 
ego  be  the  Knower  of  the  Self?’  However,  this  process 
happens only at the time of attaining Gnan. So the Gnan is not 
attained first, rather the [charge] ego leaves first, and that too, 
only because of the power and influence of the viraat Swaroop 
(the Real form of the One whose own ego has exhausted and 
can take away the ego of others; the Akram Gnani) during the 
Gnan Vidhi! 

After  attaining  Gnan,  the  developing  I,  who  previously 
had mithya drashti (the wrong belief of, ‘I am Chandubhai’), 
is the very one who acquires samyak drashti (the right belief 
of ‘I am pure Soul’). Both beliefs belong to the I, meaning the 
ego itself. Before, through the wrong belief, the developing I 
was  seeing  the  drashya  (object  to  be  Seen),  whereas  after 
Gnan,  through  the  right  belief,  the  developing  ‘I’  Sees  the 
Seer  (Drashta).  The  original  Self  does  not  have  any  belief. 
The  objects  to  be  Known  naturally  and  spontaneously  get 
illuminated  within  the  original  Self,  in  Its  Knowledge!  The 
ego is the one who attains the Gnan, it is the one whose belief 
sets in the Self and that is the very moment it becomes pure 
and it dissolves into the pure Soul. Just like a piece of sugar 
dissolves when it is put in the water; that is how this is! 

The One saying, “I am pure Soul,” is that the ego? No, 
the [discharge] ego is not the One saying that, rather it is the 
‘I’,  the  ‘I’  is  saying  that.  The  [discharge]  ego  remains 
separate;  nothing  remains  for  it  to  do  in  this.  Here,  the 
discussion is about the aham, which is the stage prior to the 
ego. Now, ‘I am pure Soul’ is not just in the form of words 

63 

but rather, a process that is taking One towards It. As the faith 
(shraddha), as the belief has changed, the veils over the Self 
start  to  clear  away.  Thereafter,  the  ego  that  remains  is  the 
discharge ego. The one who had gone the wrong way was the 
charge ego, the living ego. And now the ego that is required 
to turn back from the wrong way is the lifeless ego. How can 
one possibly turn back without the ego?  

After  attaining  Gnan,  the  [charge]  ego  becomes  pure 
[because the wrong belief gets fractured], yet the parmanu of 
anger, pride, deceit and greed remain to be emptied out. When 
they  empty  out  in  their  entirety,  then  the  [discharge]  ego 
becomes completely pure. Then it’s inherent nature matches 
the Self’s inherent nature [the ‘I’ becomes pure and becomes 
established as the pure Soul]! Until then, they remain separate. 

As  long  as  there  are  any  other  parmanu  in  the  ‘I’,  It 
remains  separate  [from  the  original  Self].  Once  all  the 
parmanu have discharged, the ‘I’ becomes established as the 
pure Soul; that itself is moksha, that indeed is charam shariri 
(the  One  having  a  final  body  before  attaining  ultimate 
liberation). On the Kramik path, the ‘I’ becomes pure right at 
the end. 

In  order  for  the  prakruti  to  discharge,  the  ‘I’  is  only 
needed in the discharge form. The ‘signature’ of the ‘I’ is not 
required;  the  presence  of  the  ‘I’  is  more  than  enough.  The 
drama that had been ‘rehearsed’ whilst being in  kartabhaav 
(the state as  the doer), has  to be  ‘acted out’  whilst  being in 
bhoktabhaav (the state as the sufferer), only then does the ego 
become pure.  In the state as the sufferer, it is  the discharge 
ego. 

If  one  recognizes  the  ego,  then  one  can  become  the 
absolute Self. When one properly recognizes the one who is 
saying “I”, it means one has recognized the entire pudgal, then 
One will have indeed become the absolute Self! 

64 

As the ego worships or goes towards that which is pure, 
it  gradually  purifies  and  becomes  completely  pure.  ‘It’ 
becomes  whatever  It  envisions.  Once  It  becomes  pure,  It 
becomes one with the absolute Self! 

[On the Kramik path] Depending on how one interacts in 
worldly  life,  that  is  the  kind  of  worship  that  he  will  go 
towards. It is only in the final lifetime, when his worship goes 
towards  ‘the  Real  is  of  use  and  the  relative  is  to  be 
discharged,’ that he becomes free.

65 

[Section - 2] 

Dravya – Guna - Paryay 

together  with 

their  own  exclusive, 

The six eternal elements that exist in the universe, all six 
exist 
independent 
elemental  matter  (dravya),  properties  (guna)  and  phases 
(paryay).  Of  these  six  eternal  elements,  the  Self  is  the  one 
eternal element that We Ourselves indeed are in the Real. In 
this  section,  specific  clarity  regarding  the  elemental  matter, 
properties and phases of the Self alone have been explained in 
detail. 

For the One concerned only with attaining the Self, before 
reading  the  current  section,  it  is  very  essential  to  clearly 
understand the following two concepts and then proceed with 
the study. 

With  respect  to  Its  elemental  matter,  properties,  and 
phases, the original Real Self (darasal Atma; Nishchay Atma) 
is  pure  throughout  all  three  timespans,  the  past,  the  present 
and  the  future;  pure  exactly  like  that  of  the  Siddha  Lords 
(absolutely liberated Souls who have become completely free 
from the cycle of birth and death). Now, nothing more remains 
to be understood about It at the present stage. 

The phases of the developing I [the vibhaavik atma; the 
worldly-interacting self] which have arisen as a result of the 
vyatirek guna of the relative self, are considered to be impure. 
After attaining the awareness of One’s Real form as the Self, 
these are the very phases that remain to be purified. Through 
the  constant  awareness  of  the  five  Agnas,  the  pure  applied 
awareness  as  the  Self,  etc.,  every  impure  phase  becomes 
purified and the absolute state as the Self arises. As the state 
becomes  akin  to  that  of  the  original  Self,  the  phases  of  the 
relative  state  gets  destroyed  completely.  Moreover,  the 
developing ‘I’ becomes the form as the original Real Self, It 
Itself becomes the Real  form  as absolute Knowledge (keval 
Gnan swaroop), and ultimately the Self remains only as the 

66 

elemental  form,  as  nothing  but  the  light  of  absolute 
Knowledge 
(keval  Gnan  prakashak)!  Here,  detailed 
explanations  have  been  given  on  how  to  purify  the  impure 
phases  of  the  relative  self  and  reach  the  ultimate  goal  of 
attaining  absolute  Knowledge.  Those  concerned  with 
attaining  the  Self  should  understand  the  matter  accordingly 
and take it up as a study. And whilst studying it, as things start 
to become clear, then lo and behold, the inherent nature as the 
Self will start to manifest, and the veils of ignorance over the 
Self will clear away very naturally and easily! Our heads bow 
innumerable 
down  with  reverence  in  our  hearts,  our 
salutations  to  the  Akram  scientist,  the  absolutely  revered 
Dadashri. So fortunate are we to have such a Gnani amidst us 
and to have access to this speech that gives the clarity all the 
way to absolute Knowledge!!! 

In this volume, wherever there is mention of the impurity 
of  the  phases  of  the  self,  the  One  doing  the  Real  effort  to 
progress  as  the  Self  [the  reader]  is  to  understand  that  the 
discussion is about the impure phases of the relative self.  

[1] The Terminology Regarding Dravya-Guna-Paryay 

Dravya  refers  to  an  indestructible,  eternal  element 
(tattva). A dravya is always inclusive of its own independent 
elemental  matter  (dravya),  properties  (guna)  and  phases 
(paryay).  A  dravya  comprises  of  the  inherent  nature 
(swabhaav)  of  the  eternal  element  and  the  properties  of  the 
eternal element; these two fall under dravya, and the rest falls 
under paryay. 

One  dravya  cannot  interfere  with  another  dravya 
whatsoever.  One  original  eternal  element  does  not  have 
anything to do with another original eternal element. Meaning 
that,  they  have  their  own  individual  elemental  matter, 
properties  and  phases  and  they  are  separate  from  the  other 
eternal elements, meaning that have no connection with each 
other. 

67 

[Suppose]  The  sun  is  akin  to  the  elemental  matter, 
meaning  the  eternal  element  (dravya;  vastu).  To  illuminate 
(prakash) is its property and the rays which project outward 
are  the  phases.  The  elemental  matter  and  the  properties  are 
indestructible;  the  phases  are  destructible.  A  phase  arises, 
remains for a specific duration of time, and then comes to an 
end.  There  is  a  great  difference  between  remaining  for  a 
specific  duration  of  time  and  having  permanence  (dhruv). 
That which exists permanently is considered dhruv. However, 
even in something that remains for a specific duration of time, 
it  definitely  has  changes  happening  within  it  from  one 
moment to the next; yet because those changes are extremely 
subtle, they are not overtly noticeable. However, the process 
of getting destroyed is certainly going on at the subtle level. 
Just as when a piece of wood is being sawed, one ultimately 
ends up with two separate pieces; but in the interim, while it 
was being cut, was it not going towards becoming separate in 
every instance? For that which prevails for a specific duration 
of time, the term ‘to last’ is used, whereas for that which is 
trikaalvarti (that which prevails in all three time periods: the 
past,  the  present,  and  the  future),  the  term  ‘permanence’  is 
used. Even though infinite phases have been changing since 
time immemorial, even though the phases arise and dissipate, 
yet the original Self has permanence at all times. Absolutely 
no change occurs in It. 

Even  the  properties  of  the  original  eternal  element  are 
indestructible,  they  are  permanent.  They  are  referred  to  as 
anvay  guna,  the  properties  which  remain  the  way  they  are 
even in Siddha Kshetra. After the two eternal elements come 
together, the vibhaavik guna that arise are known as vyatirek 
guna;  which  are  anger,  pride,  deceit  and  greed.  They  are 
destructible, they are temporary. 

The  phases  are  very  subtle;  all  those  which  are  overtly 
visible  are  temporary  states  (avastha).  When  something 
comes at the very gross or overt level, it is called a temporary 
state.  For  example,  an  hour  is  considered  a  temporary  state 

68 

and a split second is considered a phase. Having said that, a 
phase  does  not  have  as  much  overtness  as  a  split  second. 
Everything  that  can  be  perceived  through  the  five  sense 
organs are temporary states, while that which is beyond the 
five  sense  organs  is  a  phase.  Besides  a  Gnani  Purush  or  a 
keval Gnani, no one can See a phase. 

Knowledge is  a property of the Self, and that too, only 
absolute  Knowledge  (keval  Gnan),  not  the  knowledge 
regarding  the  shubha  (auspicious;  good)  and  ashubha 
(inauspicious; bad). Pure illumination, that verily is the Self, 
that verily is Knowledge! When Knowledge is in It’s absolute 
form,  only  then  can  It  be  considered  to  be  in  the  elemental 
form  (dravya),  and  as  long  as  It  has  not  become  absolute 
(keval),  It  is  considered  to  be  in  the  form  as  Knowledge  [a 
property]. The dravya is the form that is filled only with the 
properties, the properties of pure Knowledge, Vision, energy, 
bliss.  Amongst  those,  It  has  this  special  Gnayak  swabhaav 
(inherent  nature  of  being  the  continuous  Knower).  Gnayak 
swabhaav means to have the inherent nature of Knowing only. 
In  the  form  as  a  dravya  (elemental  matter),  the  Knowledge 
and  the  Self  have  an  inseparable  (avinabhaav)  relationship. 
As long as the Knowledge has not become completely pure, It 
is considered to be in the form as a property; the Knowledge 
remains  separate  from  the  Self;  and  the  moment  complete 
absolute  Knowledge  (keval  Gnan)  manifests,  the  elemental 
matter  of  the  Self  and  the  Knowledge,  become  one  and  the 
same. 

The properties of the Self and the properties of the Pudgal 
are completely different, and they are infinite. Even from the 
context of the total count of their properties, they are not the 
same. 

The  vibhaavik 

self  has  eight  main  properties, 
Gnanavaran 
veils), 
Darshanavaran  karma  (Vision  obscuring  veils),  mohaniya 
karma (veils that induce illusory attachment), etc. They have 

(Knowledge 

obscuring 

karma 

69 

arisen due to veils. Once they are purified, pure Knowledge, 
pure Vision, the bliss as the Self, etc., manifests, which then 
fall under the category of properties that are inherently natural 
to the Self. 

The properties of the [inherently natural state as the] Self 
are Knowledge, Vision, energy, and bliss. The properties of 
the vibhaavik state as the self, the ghati karma (karma that are 
destructive to the state as the Self), cause these four properties 
to be veiled. In the same manner, the aghati karma (karma that 
are  not  destructive  to  the  state  as  the  Self),  namely  naam 
karma (name-form determining  karma), gotra karma (status 
determining  karma),  vedaniya  karma  (pain  and  pleasure 
inducing karma),  and  ayushya karma  (life-span determining 
karma), all those come into being due to the phases. 

The  Siddha  Lords  prevail  as  the  Knower  and  Seer  of 
every single living being of the entire world. Knowledge and 
Vision  are  Their  properties.  However,  They  do  not  See 
outside  of  Themselves;  all  the  objects  to  be  Known  are 
illuminated or Seen within Themselves only. Just as one can 
see in the mirror, in the same way, They can See everything 
within Their own elemental matter. 

Who attains Atma Darshan (the realization that the Self 
is distinct from the body)? Is it the phase? No. The vibhaavik 
I (the I that has deviated from its inherent nature) attains the 
right  Vision.  Instead  of ‘I am  Chandubhai,’ the  experiential 
awareness of, ‘I am the pure Soul,’ gets established. With that, 
the impure phases become pure. Therefore, the ‘I’ gains the 
combined  experience  of  the  original  elemental  matter,  Its 
properties, as well as Its phases.  

As long as the impure phases exist, it is the chit; Pragyna 
(the direct light of the Self) is considered as separate from that. 
Once  all  the  phases  become  completely  pure,  that  is 
considered  as  absolute  Knowledge;  thereafter  none  of  this 
remains separate. 

70 

When all the discharge karma are exhausted by applying 
the  Gnani’s  Agnas  or  by  remaining  in  the  pure  applied 
awareness  as  the  Self,  then  that  will  result  in  purified 
properties, otherwise they will not be purified. 

The pure chit is in the form as a phase, whereas the pure 
Soul is in the form as the elemental matter and properties, but 
ultimately, they are all one and the same eternal element. 

A  phase  is  not  a  property  of  the  Self;  it  is  actually  a 
temporary  state  of  the  properties  of  the  Self.  The  elemental 
matter or the properties do not change, the phases change. 

Auspicious  and  inauspicious  [bhaav;  activities;  karma] 
cannot  be  considered  as  phases,  they  are  considered  as 
udaykarma (the unfolding of karma). 

The overtly visible temporary states such  as  childhood, 
youth,  old  age,  are  called  temporary  states;  they  cannot  be 
referred to as phases. 

The original eternal element does not have phases. The 
phases  are  of  the  properties  of  the  original  eternal  element. 
The properties of Knowledge and Vision do not change; the 
phases [of those properties] change. 

At  present,  you,  the  developing  I,  are  in  the  form  as  a 

phase. [This is because you believe, ‘I am Chandubhai.’] 

Human beings are not a part of the mishrachetan (the I 
with wrong belief that arises as when the eternal elements of 
the Self and inanimate matter come into close proximity with 
each  other).  If  that  were  the  case,  then  that  would  be 
considered their original form. However, human beings are in 
the form as a phase. As long as the developing I has this wrong 
belief of, ‘I am Chandubhai,’ his knowledge is wrong and his 
conduct is wrong, and until then, he is in the form as a phase. 
If all three become right, then One is considered to be in the 
Real form as the Self indeed. Just as when the phases of the 
moon come to an end, it results in the full moon. In the same 

71 

way, when the phases of the [vibhaavik] self come to an end, 
keval Gnan manifests.  

People say that “It is shunya as the eternal element and 

complete as the phase.” What does that mean? 

It  is  complete  with  respect  to  the  paudgalik  paryay 
(worldly phases; the phases of the non-Self complex), the ones 
that have resulted in one becoming engrossed in the form as 
the  object  to  be  Known;  and  with  respect  to  the  eternal 
element, it is shunya (zero). That is what that statement means. 

Truly speaking, the worldly-interacting self, the relative 
self, is complete with respect to the phases and it is shunya 
with respect to the elemental matter. While the original Real 
Self, is in fact neither shunya nor complete. 

Here, when any reference is being made to the phases of 
the atma, it refers to the phases of the worldly-interacting self. 
And the phases will arise for the Real Self as well, however 
those  ones  are  pure,  while  the  phases  of  the  worldly-
interacting self are impure. 

There is a difference between the phases of the non-Self 

complex and the phases of the Self. 

The phases of the non-Self complex are inanimate (jada) 
whereas  the  phases  of  the  Self  are  animate  (chetan).  The 
phases of the non-Self complex are in the form as an object to 
be Known (gneya), and the phases of the Self are in the form 
as the Knower (Gnata). 

As the object to be Seen keeps changing, the function of 
Seeing  (jovapanu)  of  the  Self  keeps  changing.  If  another 
object  to  be  Seen  appears,  then  the  Self  Sees  that.  As  the 
object to be Known and the object to be Seen change, a change 
occurs in the Knowing and Seeing. 

The  absolute  Self  also  has  phases,  Its  phases  are  pure; 
whereas the phases of the vibhaavik self are different, they are 
impure.  They  have  been  referred  to  as  phases  that  have 

72 

resulted out of sangdosh (the fault of association with the non-
Self). The moment this association is separated, those phases 
become pure. All of this has been flowing just like a stream 
since time immemorial, based on niyati.  

When speaking, one has to say ‘The world has arisen due 
to  this  fault  of  association  with  the  non-Self.’  However,  in 
reality it has not actually arisen. Do people not say that the sun 
rose and it set? But would the sun be seeing itself as rising and 
setting? That is how this world is! 

[2] The Connection of the Properties and the Phases 
With the Objects to Be Seen 

For mahatmas, the Self-realized Ones in Akram Vignan, 
the question that keeps arising within is, ‘When I am trying to 
See,  that  function  as  the  Knower  and  Seer  (Gnata-
Drashtapanu), is that Seeing happening through the intellect 
(buddhi) or as the Self?’ How can that demarcation be made? 
For the most part, it seems as though the seeing is generally 
happening through the intellect. Now in order to bring closure 
to this query, understand that when you say, “I am trying to 
See,”  there  the  word  ‘trying’  means  that  the  seeing  is 
happening through the intellect. The Seeing and Knowing as 
the Self is sahaj (natural and spontaneous). Then again, when 
You feel from within, ‘It seems like the intellect is seeing,’ in 
that  case,  You  are  Seeing  as  the  Seer  (Drashta),  not  as  the 
Knower (Gnata). When it does not seem that way to You, but 
rather it has come to be Known by You, only then can it be 
considered that You have Seen it as the Knower. 

The Knower and Seer of the intellect is the Self [the pure 
Soul];  That  Itself  is  Pragnya.  While  God,  the  original  Self, 
remains completely separate from all of this! 

The  knowing  and  seeing  that  happens  through  the 
intellect,  is  limited  only  to  that  which  can  be  perceived 
through the sense organs. Whereas the Knowing and Seeing 
of  the  Self  extends  to  Knowing  and  Seeing  the  elemental 

73 

matter  of  the  eternal  elements,  their  properties,  and  their 
phases. The intellect is able to see the phases of the mind only 
up to a certain extent. Whereas the Self actually Knows not 
only all the phases of the mind, but also all the phases of the 
intellect, as well as all the phases of the ego. ‘It’ Knows the 
things that are beyond the [reach of the] intellect. 

The  one  seeing  ‘Chandubhai’  [Mangaldas]  is  the 
intellect,  and  the  One  Seeing  the  intellect  is  the  Self;  and 
beyond the state as the Self is the state as the absolute Self. 
First,  One  attains  the  state  as  the  pure  Soul,  which  then 
progresses towards the state as the absolute Self. The One who 
becomes  the  absolute  Self,  for  Him  absolute  Knowledge 
manifests.  In  order  to  attain  that  state,  the  upayog  (applied 
awareness as the Self) of Knowing and Seeing should remain 
constantly. [Refer to Aptavani 13 (P), Chapter 7 - The Seer-
Knower  and  the  Knower  of  that  Seer-Knower,  for  a  more 
detailed satsang.] 

The Seer who can See the Self as separate from the body 
is Pragnya. There are two entities that do the Seeing; the first 
one is Pragnya, and the second one, after Pragnya’s work is 
over, is the [absolute] Self! Thereafter the developing ‘I’ will 
have become the continuous Knower (Gnayak)! Thereafter, It 
Knows all the other eternal elements, It Knows what all are 
their  gunadharma  (intrinsic  properties  that  have  a  specific 
function). 

The Knowledge that shows one his own mistakes is not 
[the  property]  Knowledge,  rather,  it  is  a  phase  of  that 
Knowledge. 

Pragnya is not a phase of the Self. 

Whatever the [vibhaavik] self sees  externally, those are 
all phases. The phases are temporary. The Self does not have 
one  phase,  countable  phases,  innumerable  phases,  rather,  It 
has infinite phases. 

There are two types of phases of the Self: 

74 

1.  The phases of the state as the inherently natural Self 

(Swabhaav):  

-  are pure, 
-  are not [wrong] beliefs, 
-  are without sankalp-vikalp (all the relative ‘I-
ness’ and ‘my-ness’ that stem from the belief 
that ‘I am Chandubhai’), 

-  are temporary. 

2.  The phases of the state as the relative self (vibhaav): 

-  are impure,  
-  are a wrong belief, 
-  are with sankalp-vikalp, 
-  are  phases  that  have  arisen  from  the  vyatirek 
guna of the self [from the I] which in turn arose 
due to the fault of the association between the 
two eternal elements, 

-  are temporary. 

‘Knowledge’  is  a  property  of  the  Self  and  to  Know 
through  that  Knowledge  is  referred  to  as  a  phase  [of  that 
property] of the Self. As the object to be Known changes, the 
phase  of  Knowledge  also  changes.  It  is  only  through  the 
phases of Knowledge that the objects to be Known, those that 
are  of  the  non-Self,  can  be  Known  by  You.  Thereafter,  the 
phase comes to an end. 

The  Self  even  has  Its  own  independent  phases,  even 
where  It  does  not  come  into  any  direct  contact  with  the 
Pudgal!  Phases  actually  exist  in  Siddha  Kshetra  as  well. 
Wherever the Self exists, there Its phases will definitely exist. 
The  properties,  the  phases,  and  the  elemental  matter,  all  of 
them exist together. 

There  are  two  divisions  of  the  Seer  (Drashta)  and  two 
divisions of the object to be Seen (drashya). In this way, there 
are a total of four divisions. 

75 

Two kinds of Seers: 

1.  Pragnya or the pure Soul. 

2.  The  phase  of  the  vibhaavik  self  or  the  vibhaavik  I, 

namely, the intellect. 

Two kinds of objects to be Seen: 

1.  The pratishthit atma [Chandubhai]. 

2.  The  activities  of  the  pratishthit  atma  [that  which 

Chandubhai is doing]. 

The  object  to  be  Known  and  the  object  to  be  Seen  is 
actually  the  same  thing;  however,  when  You  feel,  ‘it  is 
something like this,’ You are the Seer and when You come to 
Know  what  it  is,  then  You  are  in  the  state  as  the  Knower 
(Gnatapad). Whereas the original Self, God Himself, remains 
vitaraag (absolutely free from attachment and abhorrence); It 
does not See the phases of the pratishthit atma, rather, It Sees 
and Knows only the eternal elements, It Sees and Knows their 
properties and phases only. 

The  phases  of  the  Self  are  also  vitaraag;  the  ones  that 
Know, ‘this is attachment’ and ‘this is abhorrence’. Therefore, 
as  the  attachment  and  abhorrence  is  merely  being  Known, 
there is no ‘living’ ego in this, [after attaining this Knowledge 
of the Self, the ‘living’ ego is destroyed] that is why although 
it is the intellect that is Seeing, but attachment and abhorrence 
do not arise for it, and it prevails only as the Seer. Whereas 
God, meaning the original Self, remains vitaraag amidst all of 
this. ‘It’ has neither attachment nor abhorrence.  

The Knowledge of the original Self is pure, Its phases are 
pure, whereas the Knowledge of vibhaavik self is pure, but its 
phases are impure. 

[After Gnan] As an impure phase of the vibhaavik self, it 
is the intellect without the ‘living’ [charge] ego, therefore, it 
does  not  have  attachment  and  abhorrence.  However,  in  the 
stage lower than that, where the intellect is with the ‘living’ 

76 

ego,  it  has  attachment  and  abhorrence.  If  the  ego  does  not 
become engrossed, the intellect will See, ‘This is attachment 
and this is abhorrence,’ however, attachment or abhorrence do 
not arise for it. 

So here, the intellect, which is a phase of the vibhaavik 

self, is of two types: 

1. The intellect 
without the ego: 

It Sees and Knows, ‘This is attachment 
and  this  is  abhorrence,’  however, 
attachment and abhorrence do not arise 
for it. 

2. The intellect 
with the ego: 

It  sees  and  knows,  ‘This  is  good  and 
this  is  bad,’  and  attachment  and 
abhorrence arise for it. 

When purity is attained with respect to the objects to be 
Known,  then  One  will  have  become  completely  pure,  with 
respect to the phases as well as the object to be Known. [As 
One becomes free of the state of engrossment in the objects to 
be Known, as One prevails as the Knower of the object to be 
Known  with  vitaraagata,  the  developing  ‘I’  continues  to 
become purified with respect to the objects to be Known.] 

From where did the intellect arise? It arises as a phase of 
the  vibhaavik  self.  When  You  can  See  the  pure  even  in  the 
phases, that is when You will be considered to have become 
the original pure Soul. 

Regarding  ‘his’  own  phases,  Dadashri  says,  “However 
much the shortcomings ‘we’ have, only those many phases of 
‘ours’ are spoilt. If all those phases become pure, then ‘our’ 
Knowledge  will  have  become  completely  pure.  After  that, 
ultimate liberation will come about.” 

When would One have vitaraagata in the phases? When 
One will have become completely pure. When all the karma 
have been cleared [with equanimity]. First, One becomes pure 

77 

internally, then after a long time, that purity is reflected on the 
outside. 

The  Real  form  of  the  elemental  matter  as  the  Self  is 

Knowledge [the property] and the phases [of that property]. 

the  Gnanantaray  (obstructions 

The phase is the one seeing the form as a temporary state. 
However  many 
the 
Knowledge  of  the  Self)  that  are  still  left,  [in  those  many 
situations,]  One  Sees  through  the  phases.  And  when  the 
developing ‘I’ Sees in His Knowledge, at that time only the 
entire Real form as absolute Knowledge is Seen. 

to 

Absolute  Knowledge  is  never  in  the  form  as  a  phase. 
‘Knowledge’ has been referred to as a property [of the Self] 
from  the  context  of  worldly  life.  The  original  property  [of 
Knowledge] of the Self extends all the way to Seeing Vignan 
(absolute Knowledge; Science). 

Can the intellect be referred to as matiGnan (Knowledge 
regarding the Self that has digested and is in experience)? No. 
The intellect definitely cannot be considered as being a part of 
Knowledge of the Self! 

Intellect  means  egoistic  knowledge  (ahamkaari  gnan), 
therefore  the  phase  as  the  vibhaavik  self  is  egoistic 
knowledge. 

In short, the vibhaavik self [meaning the developing ‘I’] 
is  destructible  in  the  form  as  a  phase,  while  in  the  form  as 
Knowledge,  It  is  indestructible.  After  absolute  Knowledge 
[manifests], the developing ‘I’ does not exist in the form as a 
phase. 

‘Even  with  respect  to  the  phases,  I  am  completely  and 
totally  pure.’  Here,  the  reference  is  to  the  phases  of  the 
inherently natural Self; moreover, the original Self can never 
have any  unnatural phases  at  all.  Only the unnatural  phases 
are impure and those need to be purified in order to attain the 
absolute state. 

78 

Dadashri  says,  “Even  ‘we’  have  four  degrees  of  the 
intellect  remaining to  be exhausted. Those many phases are 
still  impure.  Once  those  phases  become  pure,  absolute 
Knowledge (keval Gnan) will manifest for ‘us’.” 

After  absolute  Knowledge  manifests,  the  body  and  the 
speech  remain;  however,  they  remain  in  their  own  inherent 
nature.  Therefore,  the  [absolute]  Self  has  no  ‘touch’ 
[impurity] with the external, whereas in the relative self, the 
‘touch’ is there one hundred percent.  

Absolute  Knowledge  Sees  everything,  It  Sees  all  the 
phases  of  the  Pudgal,  but  It  does  not  have  attachment  or 
abhorrence; [only] vitaraagata (a state in which there is a total 
absence of attachment and abhorrence). 

After  attaining  the  Knowledge  of  the  Self,  You  have 
definitely become the pure Soul, however the phases remain 
to be purified. From the moment the belief of the I [the first 
level of vibhaav] became impure, the I became the worldly-
interacting  self.  Until  absolute  Knowledge  manifests,  the  I 
remains just in the form as a phase, in the form as a phase of 
Knowledge  and  Vision,  and  until  then  the  kashays  remain. 
The  moment  absolute  Knowledge  manifests,  a  kashay  free 
state results. Thereafter, the ‘I’ no longer exists in the form as 
a phase. Thereafter, the ‘I’ is actually in the form as absolute 
Knowledge. Until absolute Knowledge manifests, the phases 
of kashay and kashay free phases do remain. However many 
phases become pure, however much the ‘I’ becomes vitaraag, 
that much is considered as One’s upadaan (level of spiritual 
development);  that  itself  is  the  Purusharth  (Real  spiritual 
effort to progress as the Self). 

Even  the  absolutely  liberated  Souls  have  elemental 
matter, properties and phases. The vibhaavik gnan phases see 
external to the Self, whereas the property of Knowledge is not 
separate  from  the  elemental  matter.  The  pure  [Knowledge] 
liberated  Souls  See  within 
phases  of 

the  absolutely 

79 

Themselves, not externally; everything is illuminated within 
Their own elemental matter. 

The temporary states [phases in this context] of the Self 
keep changing within Its boundary; at that time, because the 
pudgal is in Its close proximity, it [the pudgal] imitates those 
[the  phases  of  the  Self].  Even  the  temporary  states  of  the 
pudgal continue to change naturally; amidst them, the [wrong] 
belief of, ‘It is I who is changing,’ arises for the developing I. 
The  vyatirek  guna  which  have  arisen  due  to  samipyabhaav 
(the engrossment  that arises when the two eternal elements, 
the Self and inanimate matter, are in close proximity) become 
a nimit (active evidence) for the temporary states of the pudgal 
to change. 

Due  to  the  pressure  of  jada  (the  eternal  element  of 
inanimate matter), the state as the vibhaavik self arises, and 
that is precisely where the I arose, that itself has been referred 
to as the ego of the bhrant bhaav (illusory state). Then as the 
I further developed the belief of, ‘I am Chandubhai,’ that has 
been referred to as the ego of the paudgalik bhaav (worldly 
state). 

The  results  of  the  non-Self,  otherwise  known  as  the 

phases of the pudgal, whose are they? 

From  the  Pudgal  (the  eternal  element  of  inanimate 
matter)  only  phases  of  the  pudgal  will  arise,  and  from  the 
Chetan  (the  Self),  only  phases  of  Chetan  (the  property  to 
Know and See) will arise. The entire world is functioning due 
to  nothing  but  the  inanimate  phases.  Those  phases  do  not 
affect the Gnani whatsoever, but they do affect the agnani (the 
one who has not attained Self-realization). 

As the ultimate essence of everything, absolutely revered 
Dadashri says, “If a mahatma cannot understand [the concept 
of] phases, will He not be able to attain liberation? He will be 
able  to.  The  reason  being,  liberation  will  be  attained  by 
applying the five Agnas of the Gnani.” 

80 

This ‘phase’ is very subtle concept. There is no need to 
delve too deep into this. We want to ‘spin’ it [look at it in the 
broad  sense],  the  ‘weaving’  [minute  details]  can  be  looked 
into later. 

You [mahatmas] should say, “I am completely pure with 
respect to the elemental matter, the properties and the phases.” 
Nonethelsess, You may not even understand any of them, and 
the One who  can understand them, will have  come into the 
form as absolute Knowledge! 

[3] The Beginning and the End of a Temporary State 

The phases of the Self keep changing whilst remaining in 
their own pradesh (region; location). The Self in Its inherently 
natural state is the same as ever, It is immiscible (tankotkirna). 

The Pudgal has temporary states and the [vibhaavik] self 
has  temporary  states  as  well.  By  combining  the  two,  the 
developing I labors in vain. 

In  reality,  to  whom  do  the  karmic  particles  adhere  and 
how  do  they  adhere?  In  reality,  the  karmic  particles  do  not 
adhere to the elemental matter, the properties or the phases of 
the Self. If they were to adhere, then they would never detach 
afterwards! So, in actuality, one says, “I did this and this is 
mine,”  due  to  bhrantiras  (the  wrong  belief  of  ‘I  am 
Chandubhai’  that  perpetuates  the  illusion  of,  ‘This  is  mine, 
and I am the doer’). So bhrantiras sets in between the Self and 
the Pudgal. The adherence is  simply due to  that, that is  all. 
Once the Gnani Purush dissolves the bhrantiras for you, then 
the [experiential] awareness of, ‘I have not done it and this is 
not mine,’ arises; and thereafter the eternal elements separate. 
Temporary states have a beginning and an end. [The life-
form as] A human being, a woman, a man, a donkey, a cow, a 
buffalo, these all are phases of the [worldly-interacting] self. 
Just  like  the  second  day,  the  third  day  etc.,  of  the  lunar 
calendar are the phases of the moon! One’s next life-form is 

81 

based on the attribute that is developed to a specific extent in 
this life as a human. 

In all this, the Self remains exactly the same. 

In  Hinduism,  they  describe  the  panch  mahabhoot  (the 
five elements namely earth, water, fire, air and space) and the 
sixth  element  as  being  the  Self;  whereas  Lord  Mahavir  has 
talked  about  the  six  eternal  elements  (tattva),  which  are 
completely different. 

1) In Hinduism: 

The  five  elements  include  earth,  air, 
space, water, fire (these do not include 
the Self). 

2) Lord Mahavir:  The  six  eternal  elements  include  the 
Self, inanimate matter, dharmastikaya 
(that  which 
supports  motion), 
adharmastikaya  (that  which  supports 
inertia), aakash (Space), Kaal (Time). 

In the five elements, earth, air, fire, water, these four are 
not  at  all  the  original  eternal  elements,  they  are  just  the 
temporary  states  of  just  one  eternal  element,  the  original 
eternal  element  of  inanimate  matter.  Whereas  Space  is 
different; it is considered an entirely separate eternal element. 

If the body is made up of just these five elements, then 
how  does  movement  take  place  in  it?  Which  element  is 
responsible for that? Hence, there is some misunderstanding 
here. What all does the body consist of? Earth, water, air, fire, 
the eternal element of Space, the eternal element that supports 
motion, the eternal  element that supports inertia, the eternal 
element of Time and the ninth one is the Self, Itself.  

The body, the mind, the ego, all of them are made up of 
the eternal element of Space, and the other four out of the five 
elements [panch mahabhoot; which are the temporary states 
of  the  inanimate  matter],  as  well  as  the  eternal  elements  of 

82 

Time, gatisahayak (the eternal element that supports motion) 
and sthitisahayak (the eternal element that supports  inertia). 
The  ego  gets  destroyed.  The  Self  is  not  merged  in  the  ego, 
rather Its influence falls upon it. 

In  human  beings,  an  imbalance  of  five  elements  has 
occurred. Due to the unfolding of karma, one ends up eating 
more or less food, which in turn gives rise to the imbalance! 

Why is it that after death, the body is surrendered to [the 

element of] fire?  

It is because fire is the only element that destroys it the 
most speedily. Nonetheless, even earth or water do destroy it 
gradually.  

Since  time  immemorial,  one  has  repeatedly  labored  in 

vain with this very same ‘earth’ again and again! 

Water, air, earth as well as fire, they comprise not only of 
the  eternal  element  of  inanimate  matter,  rather  they  all  are 
living beings. The red and blue color of the fire that is seen, 
those  are  all  living  beings.  They  have  been  referred  to  as 
teukaya living beings, whose bodies are in the form as fire. In 
the same way, the other elements [air, water, earth] are also 
nothing but the bodies of those living beings.  

These two eternal elements, the Self and animate matter, 

have given rise to what a colossal worldly life!  

keeps 

Every 

eternal 

element 

undergoing 
transformation.  Transformation  means  genesis  (utpaat), 
dissipation (vyay), and permanence (dhruv). The arising and 
the  dissipation  is  from  the  perspective  of  the  phases  and  to 
remain steady is from the perspective of the eternal element’s 
inherent nature. 

on 

For example, You Yourself are the pure Soul, You have 
permanence  and  You  are  eternal,  whereas  the  temporary 
states,  meaning 
the  circumstances  (saiyog),  arise  and 
dissipate. The arising and the dissipation [of circumstances] 

83 

are  both  nothing  but  temporary  states,  whereas  the  Self  is 
steady indeed, at all times. 

(naturally 

Gnanprakash 

The gross and the subtle temporary states can be Known 
only  through  the  Swabhaav  (inherently  natural  state  as  the 
Self).  The  Self  is  in  the  form  as  Knowledge.  Through  It’s 
swabhaavik 
illuminating 
Knowledge),  It  keeps  Seeing  the  temporary  states  arising 
outside. The temporary states arise, they last for a while and 
then they  come to  an end.  In  ‘a  temporary  states  lasts’, the 
meaning of the word ‘last’ is not in the sense of permanence. 
Because even when the temporary state is lasting, yet at the 
subtle  level,  the  process  of  it  coming  to  an  end  is  certainly 
ongoing.  The  word  ‘permanence’  (dhruv)  means  that  it 
remains the very same form as it is. In the Gita, it has been 
mentioned, “I create, maintain and destroy the universe.” The 
subtle meaning of this statement is this, ‘The ‘I’ refers to the 
Self and Its phases arise and come to an end, whilst the Self 
Itself has permanence.’ 

Neither  the  properties  of  the  Self  nor  Its  original 
elemental  matter  changes,  however,  the  phases  of  the 
properties  do  change;  that  is  referred  to  as  the  dharma 
(function) of the properties. Gnata-Drashtapanu (the function 
as the Knower and Seer) is the dharma [of the properties of 
Knowledge  and  Vision].  How  does  this  start?  From  anant 
bhaag  vruddhi  (the  least  divisional  increase),  meaning  the 
increase is in the least proportion. [Then] Asankhyaat bhaag 
vruddhi (a small divisional increase) means increase by a very 
small proportion. [Then with] Sankhyaat bhaag [vruddhi], the 
increase  is  in  a  higher  proportion  than  that.  Similarly,  the 
reverse should be understood for the decrease.  

The decrease or increase happens in the phases.  

84 

 
 
When the increase takes place: 

Anant bhaag 
vruddhi 

the least 
divisional 
increase 

Sankhyaat guna 
vruddhi 

An increase by 
a big factor 

 

 

Asankhyaat bhaag 
vruddhi 

a small divisional 
increase 

 

Asankhyaat guna 
vruddhi 

An increase by an 
even greater factor 

 

Sankhyaat 
bhaag vruddhi 

the greatest 
divisional 
increase 

Anant guna 
vruddhi 

An increase 
by the greatest 
factor 

When the decrease takes place: 

Anant guna haani 

A 

decrease by the 
greatest factor 

 

Asankhyaat guna 
haani 

A decrease by a 
small factor 

 

Asankhyaat bhaag 
haani 

a smaller 
divisional 
decrease 

Sankhyaat bhaag 
haani 

the greatest 
divisional 
decrease 

Anant bhaag 
vruddhi… 

the least 
divisional 
increase… 

 

 

Sankhyaat 
guna haani 

A decrease 
by the least 
factor 

Anant guna 
haani 

the least 
divisional 
decrease 

 

 

 

 

Here, the movement amongst people initially starts with 
anant bhaag vruddhi (the least divisional increase). So that is 
illuminated within in the elemental matter of the Siddha Lords 
(absolutely liberated Souls who have become completely free 
from the cycle of birth and death). 

85 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
At the time of increase 

Anant bhaag vruddhi 

The least divisional 
increase 

3 to 4 o’clock in 
the morning 

Out of one lakh people, 
10 to 20 people are 
Seen moving around. 

Asankhyaat bhaag 
vruddhi 

5 to 6 o’clock in 
the morning 

A small divisional 
increase 

Sankhyaat bhaag 
vruddhi 

7 to 8 o’clock in 
the morning 

The greatest divisional 
increase 

Sankhyaat guna 
vruddhi 

9 to 10 o’clock in 
the morning 

An increase by a big 
factor 

Asankhyaat guna 
vruddhi 

10 to11 o’clock in 
the morning 

An increase by an 
even greater factor 

Anant guna vruddhi 

An increase by the 
greatest factor 

11 to 12 o’clock in 
the morning 

Out of one lakh people, 
the movement of 50 to 
100 people is Seen to 
increase. 

Out of one lakh people, 
the movement of 500 to 
700 people is Seen to 
increase. 

Out of one lakh people, 
the movement of 2 to 3 
thousand people is Seen 
to increase. 

Out of one lakh people, 
the movement of 12 to 
15 thousand people is 
Seen to increase. 

Out of one lakh people, 
the movement of 60 to 
70 thousand people is 
Seen to increase. 

(At the most, the increase in the movement will be up to 70 to 80 
thousand.) 

86 

 
 
At the time of decrease (when the time of decreasing arrives) 

Anant guna haani 

A decrease by the 
greatest factor 

5 to 6 o’clock in the 
afternoon 

Out of one lakh 
people, 60 to 70 
thousand people will 
be Seen to decrease. 

(When people start to go home from work, the roads start to empty.) 

Asankhyaat guna 
haani 

6 to 7 o’clock in the 
evening 

A decrease by a small 
factor 

Sankhyaat guna haani 

A decrease by the 
least factor 

7 to 8 o’clock in the 
evening 

Sankhyaat bhaag 
haani 

9 to 10 o’clock at 
night 

The greatest divisional 
decrease 

Asankhyaat bhaag 
haani 

10 to 11 o’clock at 
night 

A smaller divisional 
decrease 

Anant bhaag haani 

The least divisional 
decrease 

12 to 1 o’clock at 
night 

Out of one lakh 
people, 12 to 15 
thousand people will 
be Seen to decrease. 

Out of one lakh 
people, 2 to 3 
thousand people will 
be Seen to decrease. 

Out of one lakh 
people, 500 to 700 
people will be Seen to 
decrease. 

Out of one lakh 
people, 50 to 100 
people will be Seen to 
decrease. 

Out of one lakh 
people, 10 to 20 
people will be Seen to 
decrease. 

This decrease [in movement] keeps on happening in this way, but at 3 to 
4 o’clock in the morning, it starts to increase. The whole cycle repeats as 
per the above order. (The proportion of people given here is just used as 
an example to help us understand.) 

87 

 
 
 
Nothing remains for the Self Itself to ‘do’. The function 
[of  Its  properties]  keeps  changing.  Everything  simply  gets 
illuminated within Itself. What burden would It have in this? 
If someone makes silly gestures in front of the mirror, then out 
of the two, who would incur a loss? 

[4] The Developing ‘I’ Is the Seer of the Temporary States 

In reality, it is  not  the temporary state (avastha)  that is 
entangling the developing I. You believe the temporary state 
to be Your own inherent nature; it is verily due to this belief 
of yours that the entanglement persists. Swabhaav means the 
state as the Self. You believe, ‘I am definitely this temporary 
state,’ that is why worldly life persists. The inherent nature of 
the Self is to See and Know. ‘You’ are to just keep Seeing the 
temporary states [as being separate from the Self]. 

It is due to believing the temporary state to be unchanging 
(nitya), that all the miseries exist. Why should one get scared 
when fog appears? It will clear away after a while. An eternal 
element  is  unchanging;  a  state  is  temporary  (anitya). 
Everything that is overtly visible, all of those are nothing but 
the temporary states of the original eternal elements, those are 
not the original eternal elements. If one could See that, then 
his [spiritual] work would certainly be done.  

Everyone  in  the  world  has  avastha  drashti  (the  wrong 
belief of ‘I am Chandubhai’; the relative viewpoint). Here [in 
the  Gnanvidhi],  after  attaining  the  Knowledge  of  the  Self, 
tattva drashti (the right  belief of ‘I am pure Soul’; the Real 
viewpoint) gets established. The Real Self Sees only the real 
eternal elements, whereas the worldly self sees the temporary 
states [of the eternal elements]. 

After  attaining the  Knowledge of the Self,  even if You 
were to get engrossed in an object to be Known (gneya), as 
You  have  the  right  belief  of  ‘I  am  pure  Soul’,  You  will 
immediately understand, ‘This belongs to Chandubhai, this is 
not mine.’ 

88 

The presence of an eternal element ‘radiates’ through the 
temporary states. Just as when the sun is behind the clouds, 
yet its presence still radiates through its temporary state [the 
rays of sunlight]. 

If you see with avastha drashti, you will get influenced 
by  it,  attraction  and  repulsion  will  occur;  but  that  will  not 
happen with tattva drashti. 

The  moment  the  belief  of  ‘I  am  this’  sets  in  for  a 
temporary  state,  the  property  of  magnetism  immediately 
arises  in  it.  Liberation  (moksha)  can  be  attained  with  tattva 
drashti. The One who Sees with tattva drashti benefits. ‘You’ 
will be able to See the Self in others. Whereas the one seeing 
through avastha drashti, will become lost in whatever he is 
seeing.  The  One  with  tattva  drashti  can  See  the  ‘ghee’ 
(clarified butter) inside the milk, He can See the ‘oil’ within 
the sesame seeds [He can extract the essence from what He 
has Known]! 

Without  attaining  tattva  drashti,  ‘Gnan  kriya  bhyam 
moksha’ (the activity of Knowing and Seeing as the Self leads 
to liberation) can never happen. This is because without tattva 
drashti,  the  temporary  states  themselves  are  believed  to  be 
Gnan  kriya  (the  activity  of  the  Self  to  Know  and  See), 
however, all of those are actually agnan kriya (the activity of 
the non-Self). 

Whichever  temporary  state  one  gets  involved  in,  it  is 
named accordingly. The one whose leg is fractured is called 
lame,  the  one  who  types  is  a  typist,  the  one  who  drives  is 
called a driver. All this is from the relative viewpoint; from 
the  Real  viewpoint, 
is  without  substance 
the  world 
(polumpol). 

Being born is the beginning (aadi) and dying is the end 
(ant)  whereas  the  Self  is  without  a  beginning  or  an  end 
(anaadi anant). The one who lives and dies is a living being. 

89 

Birth and death are illusions. In reality, it is a change in the 
temporary states. 

The Gnani’s language is completely different from that 

of this world. 

The Self is not a Gnani, the [temporary state as a] Gnani 
is a phase, You have to keep Seeing that phase [as separate]. 

Causes and effects are present in the temporary states, not 

in the eternal elements.  

When  the  intellect  tries  to  make  You  believe  the 
temporary state is Your Real form as the Self (Swaroop), at 
that time, recall Dada and say, “I am vitaraag (absolutely free 
from attachment and abhorrence),” then ‘Mrs. Intellect’ will 
back off! 

After  attaining  the  Knowledge  of  the  Self,  You  simply 
have to Know the relationship between the Knower and the 
object to be Known. Any thought that arises for the [worldly-
interacting] self on account of illusion, will go away only by 
Knowing the relationship of the Knower and the object to be 
Known;  it  will  not  go  without  that.  This  is  because  these 
thoughts  had  been  ‘stamped’  [charged]  by  becoming 
engrossed in the presence of the [worldly-interacting] self [in 
the past life]. 

The  moment  one  dwells  as  the  I  (hu),  it  means  he  is 
dwelling in the temporary state, so he becomes aswastha (in a 
state of restlessness; not steadfast as the Self) and if He were 
to dwell steadfastly in the state as the Self (Swastha), then He 
is the absolute Self (Parmatma). 

If  the  Himalayas  were  to  be  reflected  in  a  mirror,  does 
that actually mean the mirror would feel its weight? When the 
Gnani is not affected at all by any temporary state of worldly 
life, then how would He ever feel its weight? 

90 

The moment all the phases, all the subtle circumstances 
become purified, One will have become the anant Gnani (One 
who has infinite Knowledge). 

In short, understand, ‘I am the Self’  and all the rest are 
just  phases.  Then  You  will  be  able  to  traverse  this  journey 
quickly. 

With  respect  to  the  temporary  state  as  the  relative  self 
(vibhaavik  avastha),  attachment  and  abhorrence  exist  and 
with  respect  to  Its  inherently  natural  state  as  the  Real  Self 
(Swabhaavik avastha), It is vitaraag. 

By  becoming established in  the temporary states of the 
mind,  speech  and  body,  one  becomes  restless;  the  inner 
suffering keeps burning constantly. The temporary states are 
in fact evolving constantly, so how can there be any happiness 
and  peace  for  the  one  who  is  established  in  them?  The 
temporary states that we come across today are a result of the 
mistakes made in the past life! 

Oh  living  being,  let  go  of  worshipping  (bhajana)  the 
temporary state and relish in the worship  of the state as the 
Self! 

Even the blink of an eye is a temporary state, that too, it 
happens  automatically!  If  you  had  to  do  it  yourself,  then 
would the rhythm or the count be maintained? 

Temporary states can be encompassed within an incident, 
because  a  temporary  state  is  one  circumstance  (saiyog). 
However,  an  incident  cannot  be  encompassed  within  a 
temporary state.  

Whichever temporary states you liked [in the past life], 

you will come across those circumstances [in this life]. 

Due to the coming together of the eternal elements, the 
‘I’  (aham)  arises;  can  that  be  changed?  The  ‘I’  can  be 
destroyed only when absolute Knowledge manifests. All the 
other temporary states can be destroyed immediately.  

91 

By natural law, no temporary state lasts longer than forty-

eight minutes. 

Dadashri  says,  “Not  a  single  worldly  temporary  state 

remains to be ‘tasted’ by ‘us’.” 

If one becomes engrossed in something he likes, then he 
binds [karma of] that which he likes. And even if he does not 
become  engrossed  in  something  he  dislikes,  he  still  binds 
[karma of] that which he dislikes [for those who do not have 
Self-realization]. 

If the laksh (awakened awareness) delves in a temporary 
state, a ‘wound’ [cause; charge] is inflicted there, and if the 
awakened awareness does not delve in a temporary state, then 
that temporary state is obliterated in the yagna (a Hindu ritual 
in which things are offered into a sacrificial fire) of awakened 
awareness as the Self (jagruti)!  

In  whichever  phases  you  have  greatly  suffered  pain  or 
pleasure  (vedan)  in  the  past  life,  those  phases  will  come  in 
greater  amounts  in  this  life,  and  the  chit  will  remain  stuck 
there  for  hours  on  end.  That  has  been  referred  to  as  dakho 
(interference). One can become free only if He does not deem 
the temporary  state to  be His, as in  ‘This  is  not  mine.’ The 
Gnani does not remain stuck in any temporary state, not even 
for a fraction of a second! 

Prevail  in  the  present.  The  temporary  states  are  a 

discharge; they will never come back again. 

When will the temporary states be obliterated? When the 
Knower  Knows  the  temporary  states  as  the  object  to  be 
Known, as being separate from Him. If the mind spoils, and 
that is erased by doing pratikraman innumerable times, then 
the Self will become free from the phases that are stuck to It! 

Even if You do not hold on to a temporary state, it will 
still go away, and if You try to hold on to it, even then it will 
go away. So, say goodbye to it. 

92 

Those without Self-realization believe a temporary state 
to be their own, they believe, ‘I am definitely that.’ The Gnani 
Purush only Sees and Knows it! 

The medicine that cures the disease is the correct one. The 
Knowledge that frees You from this worldly life is considered 
as the authentic Knowledge of the Self (Atma Gnan). When 
the Knowledge is being applied, that is referred to as Pragnya.  

“The state that the Omniscient One Saw in His Knowledge, 

The absolutely detached Lord was not able to describe such a 
state. 

How can any speech describe that form? 

That Gnan can only be experienced! 

When will such an unprecedented occasion ever arise?” 

“Je pad shri Sarvagnye dithu Gnanma, 

kahi shakya nahi te pad shri vitaraag jo. 

Teha swaroopne anya vani te shu kahe? 

Anubhav gochar matra rahyu e Gnan jo. 

Apoorva avsar evo kyare aavshe?” 

- Shrimad Rajchandra 

Dadashri has repeatedly said, “Get Your [spiritual] work 
done,  get  Your  [spiritual]  work  done,  get  Your  [spiritual] 
work  done,  before  this  ‘bubble’  bursts  [before  Dada  leaves 
this physical body]!!!  

- Dr. Niruben Amin 

93 

 
 
Table of Contents 

Section 1 

Vibhaav – Visheshbhaav - Vyatirek Guna 

[1] The Scientific Understanding Regarding Vibhaav 

The Main Cause of the Origin of the Universe ............................... 1 

The Fiasco of Illusion, Due to Samipyabhaav! .............................. 3 

Not the Knowledge, Only the Belief Has Changed! ....................... 9 

First Marry the Absolute Self ....................................................... 12 

First Vibhaav, Then Vyatirek ....................................................... 14 

Swabhaavik and Vibhaavik Pudgal .............................................. 14 

The Egoism Envisions and the Pudgal Takes on… ...................... 17 

The Main Thing in Vyatirek Is the Aham .................................... 19 

[2] Anger, Pride, Deceit and Greed, Whose Properties Are They? 

They Are Vyatirek Guna .............................................................. 22 

To Call It an Illusion Is Itself an Illusion! .................................... 27 

The Difference in Speaking, With Reference to a … ................... 28 

[3] Does Vibhaav Mean Viruddhbhaav? 

The Definition of Vibhaav ............................................................ 30 

Is My Soul a Sinner? .................................................................... 32 

The Intents of Attachment and All Else Are Not… ..................... 40 

With a Sense of Doership, Worldly Life Began ........................... 42 

Completely Created by Instillation… ........................................... 44 

The Worldly-Interacting Self Is Itself the Ego ............................. 45 

Worldly Life Arises From Worldly Interaction … ....................... 46 

Specific Clarity Regarding the State of Vibhaav .......................... 48 

The Inspiration in This Is of the Power! ....................................... 50 

94 

[4] The Self Got Entrapped First 

The World, a Puzzle Itself ............................................................ 52 

Ignorance Has No Beginning ....................................................... 52 

The Illusions Are All of the Intellect ............................................ 54 

Karma Has an End but No Beginning .......................................... 56 

The Journey, From Nigod to Siddha ............................................ 57 

Worldly Life Has Arisen Due to the Pressure of … ..................... 60 

Skewed Vision Led to the Latching On ........................................ 62 

Does the Mirror Ever Not Show the Face? ................................... 64 

[5] Anvay Guna - Vyatirek Guna 

The Visheshbhaav Occurred in the Gunadharma ......................... 67 

Those Are Known as Anvay Guna ............................................... 68 

Virtues Have No Value There ...................................................... 70 

Ultimately, You Do Not Have to Conquer, You Have… ............. 71 

Intoxication Is Itself the Mohaniya! ............................................. 74 

There Is No Lineage of the Self .................................................... 78 

Ignorance, in Fact, Arose! ............................................................ 79 

The Wrong Belief Arose Because of the Vishesh… .................... 80 

[6] Visheshbhaav - Vishesh Gnan – Agnan 

Agnan Is in Fact Gnan as Well! .................................................... 85 

In Reality, It Is Not an Illusion! .................................................... 88 

The Difference Between Visheshbhaav and Vishesh     ............... 90 

After Vibhaav, the Prakruti and the Purush Arises ....................... 93 

The Prakruti Has Become Prasavdharmi Because of … .............. 94 

Further Analysis of Vibhaav......................................................... 95 

The Rust Is Akin to the Ego ......................................................... 98 

‘I am the One Experiencing,’ Is Just a Belief ............................. 100 

95 

[7] Vibhaav Arises From the Samsaran of the Six Elements 

On the Samsaran Marg… ........................................................... 102 

Only Two Became Vidharmi ...................................................... 102 

The Six Eternal Elements Are Not in the Form of a … .............. 104 

The Pudgal Is Itself a Vishesh Parinaam .................................... 105 

The Gnani Speaks After Having Seen It Himself ....................... 106 

Thereafter, in the Binding of Karma, There are Six… ............... 107 

None of Them Are in Opposition to the Other ........................... 109 

Akram Gnan, It Belongs to Chetan ............................................ 110 

Vibhaav Exists Since Time Immemorial .................................... 111 

No One Is at Fault in This .......................................................... 111 

The Role of Niyati ...................................................................... 113 

Vibhaav, in Greater Detail .......................................................... 114 

There Is No Doer in This World ................................................. 120 

The World Has Arisen Due to the Presence of God ................... 121 

[8] Anger and Pride Is to ‘I’, as Deceit and Greed Is to ‘My’ 

The ‘I’ Advanced Further… ....................................................... 123 

The Kashays Are the Cause of Karma and the … ...................... 125 

Dense Vibhaav in Avyavahaar Rashi ......................................... 127 

Vyavasthit and Rebirth ............................................................... 129 

Vibhaav Is the Ego ..................................................................... 130 

The One Who Remains Separate in This, Is the Gnani .............. 133 

The Cause of Becoming a Doer .................................................. 136 

After Gnan, the Kashays Belong to the Non-Self ....................... 137 

[9] The Real Forms of Swabhaav and Vibhaav 

The World Functions as per Its Inherent Nature Indeed ............. 139 

There Is No Sense of Doership in Swabhaav ............................. 142 

96 

Swabhaav, Satta and Parinaam ................................................... 144 

The Doer of the Karma That Is Inherently Natural … ............... 145 

Who Is the One Who Develops? ................................................ 147 

Infinite Energy Even in Vishesh Parinaam! ............................... 148 

Each Eternal Element Is Dependent on Its Own … ................... 149 

From Bhaavna to Vaasna… ........................................................ 151 

The Pudgal Is Not Unnatural by Its Inherent Nature .................. 152 

Eventually, One Has to Come into Swabhaav ............................ 154 

By Supposing, You Get the Answer ........................................... 154 

Even Shukladhyan Is Vibhaav! .................................................. 155 

Death of Swabhaav Is Itself Bhaav Maran! 

156 

[10] In Vibhaav, Who Is Chetan? Who Is Pudgal? 

‘You’ Are Chetan, ‘Chandubhai’ Is Pudgal ............................... 158 

‘I am Chandu’, That Is Visheshbhaav ........................................ 159 

The Succession of Results… ...................................................... 162 

While Remaining in Swabhaav, Vibhaav Occurs! ..................... 163 

Circumstances Themselves Are in the Foundation … ............... 164 

The ‘I’ Is to Be Purified… .......................................................... 165 

Even Bhaav Is Under the Control of the Non-Self! .................... 166 

Anger, After Gnan … ................................................................. 167 

The Gnani’s Roar Awakens the Self .......................................... 168 

The Kashays Are Vyatirek, They Are Not ‘Yours’! ................... 170 

Upon Attaining Gnan, the Vibhaav of Time … ......................... 171 

The Difference, for a Gnani and an Agnani… ........................... 171 

[11] When Vishesh Parinaam Comes to an End 

Permanent, the Eternal Elements as Well as the … .................... 173 

The One Who Knows Viparinaam Is in Swaparinaam ............... 176 

97 

Aham and Vibhaav ..................................................................... 179 

After Keval Gnan There Is No Vibhaav ..................................... 182 

Swakshetra Is the Gate to Siddha Kshetra .................................. 185 

[12] The Awakened Awareness Towards the ‘I’ 

The Ego Arose in This Way… ................................................... 189 

‘I am Pure Soul’, Is That the Ego? ............................................. 190 

The Blind Ego, and on Top of That, It Has Spectacles! ............. 192 

For Whom Did the Ego Arise? ................................................... 193 

Who Are We Ourselves? ............................................................ 195 

The Birth and Development of the Ego… .................................. 198 

The Conduct of the ‘I’ Changes This Way… ............................. 205 

The Location of the ‘I’ in the Body ............................................ 206 

That Is When the Ego Entrusts the Throne to the … .................. 211 

What Belief? Whose Belief? ...................................................... 217 

That Is Not the Ego, but Rather the ‘I’! ...................................... 218 

The Real Is of Use, the Relative Is to be Discharged... .............. 220 

The I Remains in the Form of a Discharge Effect ...................... 223 

The One Who Comes to Recognize the I Becomes… ................ 227 

The One Searching for Liberation and the … ............................ 230 

Section 2 

Dravya – Guna – Paryay! 

[1] The Terminology Regarding Dravya-Guna-Paryay! 

What Is Dravya? ......................................................................... 232 

The Difference Between a Phase and a Temporary … ............... 235 

Knowledge Is Itself the Self, in the Form as the … .................... 238 

The Total Count of the Properties of the Eternal … ................... 239 

Ghati Karma Arise From the Properties, Aghati … ................... 241 

98 

The Pure Chit Is as a Phase, the Pure Soul Is as the … .............. 245 

Only the Phases Change, Not the Knowledge and … ................ 247 

Shunya as the Eternal Element, Complete as the Phase ............. 249 

The Difference Between Phases of the Real Self and  ............... 251 

The Phases of Both, the Sangdosh and the Absolute…  ............. 255 

[2] The Connection of the Properties and the Phases 
With the Objects to Be Seen 

The Difference Between Seeing Through the … ....................... 258 

The Difference Between Pragnya and a Phase ........................... 261 

The Existence of the Self Cannot Be Without Phases ................ 262 

Two Kinds of Seers And Two Kinds of Objects to…... ............. 266 

The Intellect, Is It Inanimate or Living? ..................................... 274 

In the State as Pure Knowledge, Saw Only the Pure! ................. 276 

Purity Helps One Attain the Absolute State ............................... 277 

Even the Absolutely Liberated Souls Have Phases! ................... 282 

The Temporary States Are of the Self and the … ...................... 284 

The Illusory State and the Worldly State .................................... 287 

What Is Necessary, the Phase or the Five Agnas? ...................... 288 

[3] The Beginning and the End of a Temporary State 

The Terminology Regarding Phases ........................................... 292 

The Particles of Karma Adhere Due to Bhrantiras ..................... 293 

The Eternal Elements Are Indestructible, the … ........................ 295 

The Difference Between the Five Elements and …... ................ 297 

Oxygen Is Not an Original Eternal Element ............................... 299 

There Are Four Other Eternal Elements in the Ego... ................ 300 

Imbalance of the Five in Humans! ............................................. 302 

In That Lie Innumerable Living Beings! .................................... 304 

99 

The Transformation Is Caused by Time ..................................... 305 

Those Which Arise and Dissipate Are Phases ............................ 306 

Genesis, Dissipation, Permanence .............................................. 307 

The Exact Subtle Insights of the Gita… ..................................... 309 

Those Are Metaphors… ............................................................. 311 

The Rule Behind the Decreasing and the Increasing .................. 314 

[4] The Developing ‘I’ Is the Seer of the Temporary States 

The Entanglement Is Simply Due to Wrong Belief! .................. 317 

The State Is Temporary, the Eternal Element Is … .................... 320 

Tattva Drashti, Avastha Drashti ................................................. 321 

The World, Without Substance! ................................................. 324 

As Declared in Absolute Knowledge… ..................................... 326 

Ultimately, the Temporary State Comes to an End... ................. 327 

The Language of the Lord Is Unique... ....................................... 328 

Steadiness Attained Simply Upon Seeing That … ..................... 330 

Dwell Steadfastly as the Self, Restless as the …… .................... 331 

Where Are ‘You’ Dwelling? ...................................................... 333 

Even a Blink Is an Avastha! ....................................................... 335 

Is the Aham Temporary? ............................................................ 336 

The Temporary States Keep Changing From … ........................ 337 

‘We’ Have Experienced the Temporary States of … ................. 339 

The Chit Gets Stuck in the Temporary State… .......................... 341 

Each and Every Temporary State, Offered in the …… .............. 343 

Inner Satisfaction and Closure, Without a Shadow … ............... 345 

Hey, Get Your Spiritual Work Done! ......................................... 347 

Spiritual Glossary ....................................................................... 349 

100 

Aptavani 14  
Part 1 

Section 1 
Vibhaav – Visheshbhaav - Vyatirek 
Guna 
[1]  

The Scientific Understanding Regarding 
Vibhaav 

The Main Cause of the Origin of the Universe 

Questioner:  The  Parmatma  (the  absolute  Self)  is  also 

said to be the cause of the origin of the universe, is He not? 

Dadashri: ‘He’ is said to be the main cause. ‘He’ is the 
main cause indeed, isn’t He! However, He is the main cause 
through  a  circumstantial  relationship,  not 
through  an 
independent relationship. 

Questioner: Please explain that. 

Dadashri: God is not the independent cause. If you want 
to say, if you look for a cause, you will definitely find Him to 
be the one, but He has not been the independent cause in this. 
If  He  were  the  independent  cause,  then  He  would  be 

 
 
 
 
 
2 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

considered the main cause. But what if He became the cause 
due to pressure from something else? 

There is no other cause, but we have to give a reason, do 
we not? Right now, if someone were to ask, “What is the main 
cause behind this?” Then, it is Him. Therefore, you have to 
say that He is the main cause. 

So, in reality, the main cause of the universe is that He 
[the absolute Self] too  has acquired  a  visheshbhaav (a third 
entity with  completely new properties that  arises due to  the 
coming  together  of  the  eternal  elements  of  the  Self  and 
inanimate matter). The scientists of today can understand this. 
In the presence of the two eternal elements, jada (inanimate 
matter) and Chetan (the Self), a third entity with specific new 
properties (visheshbhaav - vishesh guna) arises, due to which 
this universe has come into existence.  

Science  has  given  rise  to  this  universe,  and  science  is 
verily the doer of this. That is why ‘we’ use the term ‘scientific 
circumstantial evidence’, and ‘we’ say that after having Seen 
it;  this point is  not  from any book, nor is  it baseless.  It  is  a 
completely new and clear point. 

Questioner: What is the first cause? What is the greatest 

cause? 

Dadashri: The fact  that  the  two  eternal  elements came 
into  close  proximity  is  indeed  the  cause.  All  these  eternal 
elements come into close proximity with each other and bring 
about a change; their inherent nature is such that they bring 
about  a change. Hence, that  indeed is  the cause,  there is  no 
other cause in this. 

Nevertheless, the [original] Self (Atma) remains just the 
way It is. There is nothing that can affect It. ‘It’ is an eternal 
element  that  is  completely  nirlep  (that  which  cannot  be 
anointed;  non-smearable),  It  is  completely  asang  (free  of 

 
[1.1] The Understanding Regarding Vibhaav 

 3 

association with the mind, speech or body). It is just because 
of  these  two  eternal  elements  coming  together  that  these 
vyatirek guna (completely new properties of the third entity 
which  arises  when  the  eternal  elements  of  the  Self  and 
inanimate  matter  come  together;  anger,  pride,  deceit  and 
greed)  have  arisen.  And  from  that  point  on,  from  that,  the 
cycle of cause and effect, cause and effect, continues. 

There  are  six  eternal  elements  (vastu;  tattva)  in  this 
universe.  The  six  elements  that  exist,  they  are  eternal 
elements,  and 
they  are  constantly  undergoing  change 
(samsaran).  Samsaran  means  one  eternal  element  comes 
together  with  another  eternal  element;  wherein  when  the 
eternal  elements  of  jada  and  Chetan  come  into  close 
proximity with each other, vyatirek guna [vishesh guna] tend 
to arise. The prevalence of the I (hupanu) sets in this, where 
the self believes, ‘I am this, I am the doer.’  

There  are  two  things  in  this  world;  You  [the  Self]  and 
circumstances.  The  [original]  Self  is  not  bound  but  It  is 
surrounded by circumstances, and as the circumstance is very 
close, an illusion arises for you [the I]. 

The Fiasco of Illusion, Due to Samipyabhaav! 

Questioner: Now Dada, please can You explain this in 
detail,  ‘The  illusion  arises  due  to  samipyabhaav  (the 
engrossment  that  arises  when  the  two  eternal  elements,  the 
Self and inanimate matter, are in close proximity)’?  

Dadashri: In this body, because of very close proximity 
of  the  two,  the  Pudgal  Parmanu  (smallest,  most  indivisible 
and indestructible particles of inanimate matter) and the Atma 
(the Self), the pressure that arises due to that, gives rise to the 
illusion of, ‘Am I this or am I that?’ It is due to the pressure 
arising from the close proximity of the two eternal elements 
that this happens. When any action happens, the developing I 
(pote) thinks, ‘Did I do it or did someone else do it? Who else 

 
 
4 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

is the doer?’ Hence, such an illusion arises. The developing I 
has not done anything at all. The Self (Atma) is not the doer at 
all, but the developing I believes, ‘Who else is the doer? I am 
the very one, I am indeed the one who did it?’ As they are in 
close proximity, that is why that illusion arises. And there is 
[actually]  no  one  else  who  is  the  doer.  Although  the 
developing I, himself, is not the doer either, yet he claims, “I 
did it”; that is the illusion. That is the equation for bondage; 
so, when ‘we’ separate the two [by giving the understanding 
that], ‘You are not this,’ with that, the separation occurs. 

Questioner:  Does  the  element  of  the  Self  acquire  the 

illusion because of the restlessness of the Pudgal Parmanu? 

Dadashri: No. If that were the case, then the fault would 
be applicable to the other eternal element. Why should it affect 
You? It is just that vishesh guna (completely new properties) 
arise when the two eternal elements come together.  

Questioner:  That  is  fine,  but  why  do  the  two  eternal 

elements come together? 

Dadashri:  The  six  eternal  elements  have  indeed  been 
together,  right  from  the  beginning.  But  these  two  eternal 
elements, jada and Chetan, are such that they cause vishesh 
guna to arise. Even if the other [four] eternal elements come 
together, vishesh guna does not arise. By the coming together 
of the eternal elements of jada and Chetan, the ‘I’ (hu; aham) 
arises  as  the  first  [level  of]  vibhaav  (a  third  entity  with 
completely new properties). 

Questioner: Does that happen with just these two [jada 

and Chetan]? 

Dadashri: These two are the only eternal elements that 

are like that.  

Questioner:  These  two  eternal  elements  must  indeed 
have  such  fundamental  properties,  mustn’t  they?  This  must 

 
[1.1] The Understanding Regarding Vibhaav 

 5 

indeed  be  happening  as  a  result  of  their  mutual  properties, 
right? 

Dadashri:  No,  no.  Visheshbhaav  verily  means  the 
properties  that  are  not  One’s  own,  such  properties  tend  to 
arise,  due  to  the  two  eternal  elements  coming  into  close 
proximity.  

Questioner: Yes, that is fine, but fundamentally, do the 
new properties tend to arise based on the properties that are 
within the Self and the properties that are within the Pudgal 
Parmanu (jada)? 

Dadashri:  They  have  their  own  original  properties. 
Sakriyapanu  (activeness)  is  the  [original]  property  of  the 
Pudgal Parmanu. Thus, this vibhaavik pudgal (parmanu that 
have deviated from its inherent nature) has arisen. In addition, 
this  Chetan  Itself does  not  have  any [problem],  but  there is 
parupadhi (problems that have been induced externally by the 
non-Self).  Hence,  such  a  vibhaav  (a  third  entity  with 
completely  new  properties;  the  wrong  belief  of  ‘I  am 
Chandubhai’) has arisen. It is not as per the wishes of the Self. 
When these two eternal elements are placed next to each other, 
visheshbhaav arises for both of them. Now, if the two eternal 
elements  are  ‘effective’  [such  that  they  take  on  the  effect], 
then they grab a hold of the effect [visheshbhaav arises] and 
if they are not ‘effective’, then they will not grab a hold of the 
effect. However, visheshbhaav definitely arises. And as this 
one  [Pudgal  Parmanu]  has  this  [property  of]  activeness,  it 
grabs a hold of the effect immediately. 

Questioner:  As  it  is  the  Pudgal  Parmanu  that  grabs  a 
hold of it, so this commotion is due to the Pudgal; that is how 
it appears. 

Dadashri:  It  may actually appear to  be the  fault of the 
Pudgal  Parmanu,  but  the  Pudgal  Parmanu  alone  is  not 
specifically at fault. If these two are together, only then this 

 
 
6 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

[visheshbhaav]  exists.  However,  if  these  two  become 
separate, then in that case, there is definitely no effect at all. 

Questioner:  Vibhaav  is  actually  a  different  thing  from 

Swabhaav (inherently natural state as the Self), isn’t it?  

Dadashri: No, vibhaav has been referred to as the new 
effect, the third identity with completely new properties that 
arises as a result of the two eternal elements, jada and Chetan, 
coming into close proximity. 

Questioner: But there is no vibhaav in the Self, there is 
no  vibhaav  from  the  perspective  of  the  elemental  matter 
(dravya drashti), but when the self comes into paryay drashti 
(wrong belief; to believe that You [the Self] are the phase that 
has  arisen),  that  is  when  vibhaav  arises;  isn’t  that  point 
actually correct? 

Dadashri: Paryay drashti (the wrong belief) cannot arise 
without vibhaav. Paryay drashti arises later on, after [the first 
level  of]  vibhaav  has  occurred.  Hence,  the  main  cause  is 
vibhaav. They have been referred to as vibhaavik paryay (the 
unnatural phases). The natural phases (swabhaavik paryay) of 
the original eternal elements are indeed different from these. 
[paryay  or  phases  are  natural,  paryay  drashti  is  the  wrong 
belief].1  

The vitaraag Lords have referred to this visheshbhaav as 
vibhaav. Instead, worldly people have understood this to be, 
‘The very vision of the Self has changed to worldly life [they 
believe the relative self to be the Real Self].’ Hey mortal one, 
it has not changed. That can never be so.  

1 Further details regarding the phases that arise after vibhaav occurs is in section 2 of this 
book. 

 
                                                 
[1.1] The Understanding Regarding Vibhaav 

 7 

One’s own elemental matter (dravya), properties (guna) 
and phases (paryay) are indeed pure; they are pure just like 
those of Lord Mahavir’s [the twenty-fourth Tirthankar of the 
current half-cycle of time who introduced the five great vows, 
or  Mahavrat].  The  Gnani  Purush  has  given  You  this  Gnan 
(Knowledge of the Self), after having Seen that. 

The Self has Its inherent nature; One’s own nature means 
that  It  remains  in  Its  own  gunadharma  (intrinsic  properties 
that  have  a  specific  function)  and  within  Its  own  boundary 
only.  The  Self  does  not  go  outside  Its  gunadharma  and 
boundary.  And  that  verily  is  Its  inherent  nature;  moreover, 
whilst remaining within Its inherent nature, this visheshbhaav 
has arisen. 

Questioner:  Dada,  swabhaav  (inherent  nature)  and 

vibhaav, are they both opposite to each other? 

Dadashri:  No,  vibhaav  is  referred  to  as  visheshbhaav. 
The visheshbhaav has arisen in the form of the ‘I’ (hu). ‘I am 
something and I indeed did this; who else besides me is the 
doer?’ That is visheshbhaav. It is not a viruddhbhaav (a state 
that  is  contrary  to  the  state  as  the  Self).  If  both  states,  the 
swabhaavik  (inherently  natural)  state  as  the  Self  and  the 
viruddhbhaav state, were to exist at the same time within the 
Self, then It cannot be referred to as the Self at all! 

Questioner: Does visheshbhaav arise in both? 

Dadashri:  In  both  of  them.  Visheshbhaav  arises  in  the 
Pudgal Parmanu  (jada) and  visheshbhaav arises  in  the Self 
too. 

It’s like this, the Pudgal Parmanu is not a living thing. It 
does  not  have  bhaav  (inner  intents;  beliefs;  feelings; 
sentience; states of being), but it becomes ready such that it 
can  acquire  the  visheshbhaav.  Hence,  a  change  occurs  in  it 
too, and a change also occurs in the self [developing I; pote]. 

 
 
8 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Now, the Self does not do anything in this at all, the Pudgal 
does not do anything either, [it is just that] the visheshbhaav 
arises.  

Questioner: Due to the circumstance of the two being in 

close proximity with each other? 

Dadashri:  The  moment  the  two  come  together,  the 

visheshbhaav arises immediately. 

Questioner: Is it merely due to them coming together or 

what is its cause? 

Dadashri:  It  is  due  to  them  coming  together,  and  the 
other reason is that of agnanta (the state of ignorance of the 
Self);  that  point  is  something  that  you  have  to  just  take  for 
granted. This is because, this discussion that we are having, it 
is  a  discussion  of  that  which  is  within  the  boundary  of 
ignorance of the Self; we are not talking about that which is 
in  the  boundary  of  Gnan.  Meaning  that,  in  the  state  of 
ignorance  of  the  Self,  this  visheshbhaav  arises  for  the  self 
[developing I; pote]. 

Then  the  control  comes  into  the  hands  of  the  pudgal. 
Thereafter,  the  Self  is  trapped  in  the  ‘jail’  and  the  entire 
control is of the pudgal. Nevertheless, if the causes come to 
be stopped, then that control of the pudgal will cease. When 
‘we’  give  you  Gnan,  the  causes  come  to  a  stop.  The 
visheshbhaav,  which  is  the  root  cause,  stops  arising.  The 
moment the causes stop, everything is done; it all comes to an 
end. The developing ‘I’ comes into the awakened awareness 
(jagruti) of who He really is. This has arisen out of ajagruti (a 
lack of awakened awareness as the Self). If you want to say it 
in  pure  Gujarati,  then  ajagruti  has  been  referred  to  as 
bebhaanpanu (a state of gross unawareness). 

 
[1.1] The Understanding Regarding Vibhaav 

 9 

Questioner: Do the two eternal elements have separate 
visheshbhaav  arising,  or  do  the  visheshbhaav  of  the  two, 
combine to form one visheshbhaav? 

Dadashri:  Fundamentally,  visheshbhaav  first  arose  for 
the  Self,  because  It  has  Chetan  (the  property  to  Know  and 
See), doesn’t It? Those others [the five other eternal elements] 
do  not  have  the  property  to  Know  and  See  and  so 
visheshbhaav  cannot  arise  in  them  first.  Whilst  maintaining 
Its own form as it is, a visheshbhaav is taken on. As there is 
no change in One’s Real form as the Self (Swaroop), that is 
indeed why it has been called visheshbhaav! Had there been a 
change  in  Its  Real  form,  it  would  have  been  called 
viruddhbhaav.  Whereas  here,  a  visheshbhaav  has  arisen, 
meaning that the [worldly-interacting] self [or the developing 
I]  lapses  from  Its  original  inherent  nature  (mool  bhaav; 
Swabhaav;  state).  Even  this  [jada]  lapses  from  its  original 
inherent  nature.  The  visheshbhaav  simply  arises  because  of 
the two coming together. No one is the doer, they both lapse 
from  their  original  inherent  nature  [scientifically],  and 
worldly life begins. Later, when the [worldly-interacting] self 
comes  back  into  Its  original  inherent  nature,  when  the 
developing  I  comes  to  Know  ‘Who  am  I’,  It  becomes  free. 
Thereafter, even the Pudgal becomes free. 

Not the Knowledge, Only the Belief Has Changed! 

All these activities will keep going on until the Self goes 
from the prevalence in the state as the non-Self (vimukhpanu) 
to  prevailing  as  the  Self  (sanmukh).  [For  mahatmas,]  The 
[wrong] beliefs regarding some matters have been broken and 
for other matters, the beliefs still remain; whereas for worldly 
people  [those  not  Self-realized],  as  they  gather  specific 
experiences, their beliefs break a bit at a time. For ‘us’, all the 
[wrong]  beliefs  have  gone  in  their  entirety.  Hence,  if  One 
becomes  free  of  these  beliefs,  One  is  indeed  free.  The 
Knowledge (Gnan) has not changed, the belief has changed. 

 
 
10 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

For example, if the knowledge (gnan) of this bird were to 
have  changed,  then  it  would  have  died  pecking  [at  its  own 
reflection  in  a  mirror].  However,  its  knowledge  has  not 
changed; its belief has changed. Once it flies away, then there 
is nothing at all. When it returns, the belief arises once again 
that, ‘Hey, it is verily the same one [as before].’ But, after it 
flies away, there is no further ado. Whereas in the case where 
the knowledge has changed, then even after it has flown away, 
as the knowledge has changed, so that’s the end of it. But the 
knowledge does not change. 

Hence, the illusion is of Darshan (belief; understanding; 
the property of Vision) and not of Gnan. Illusion of Darshan 
means  that  although  there  is  the  awareness  of  ‘I  am’,  but 
secondly, one does not know ‘what the ‘I’ actually is’. Just as, 
before a person gets on a merry-go-round, he knows that he is 
fine, and his health is fine too. However, after he gets off the 
merry-go-round, he throws up, he feels dizzy and everything 
around him appears to be revolving. At that time, he tells us, 
“Hey! Everything is revolving around; all of this is revolving 
around.” So, we have to support him by holding him. To say, 
“All this is revolving around,” is known as an illusion. A bit 
later, he realizes, ‘I was fine earlier on, and in everything that 
appears to be revolving, I am not revolving.’ He attains that 
much awareness of the illusion. However, all these people still 
believe, ‘I am indeed the one doing it.’ Hence, they are not 
even  aware  of  the  illusion.  In  India,  there  are  at  least  such 
people who are aware of the illusion. 

Questioner: All  the disputes and dualities  in the world 

have arisen only because of beliefs, haven’t they?  

Dadashri: Yes, it is indeed the belief that has spoilt, due 
to which worldly life (sansaar) has come into existence. The 
entire worldly life remains in existence due to the spoiling of 
the belief. The coming together of the two eternal  elements 
gave rise to the visheshbhaav, thereafter, the belief got spoilt. 

 
[1.1] The Understanding Regarding Vibhaav 

 11 

It’s like the bird pecking away repeatedly at the mirror, at that 
time, the ego is at work. It is verily the one who is pecking 
away, but  who is  it pecking at? It  believes, ‘The  one in  the 
mirror is  different  from  me.’ Hence, it is  the belief that has 
changed.  

Questioner:  Does  one  have  to  go  through  many 

processes before this [wrong] belief is bound? 

Dadashri:  Yes,  the  belief  can  only  change  after  the 
process  arises,  isn’t  it!  The  belief  is  bound.  The  process 
actually goes on all the time, hidden within. There is always a 
process  in  the  middle,  but  You  should  Know  what  is  being 
bound. 

Hence, fundamentally, nothing else of Yours has spoilt at 
present, it is just your [developing I’s] belief that has changed. 
All that needs to happen is for the belief to become right, then 
everything will be set right; there is nothing else. 

Would You not experience that a wrong belief has set in? 
Like when you believe, ‘Why is such misery befalling me?’ If 
that wrong belief is removed, then the right belief is indeed 
there. Nothing else has been ruined at all. The Self is the same 
as It has always been. And That Itself is Lord Mahavir, and 
the  Tirthankars  (the  absolutely  enlightened  Lords  who  can 
liberate others) are verily That. Call It what you want to, but 
It is the same.  

The change is occurring in the belief, there is no change 
in other things, no change in the dravya (elemental matter) of 
the Self, no change in the vastu (eternal element; the Self). Say 
there is a Brahmin who has this belief established within that, 
‘There is nothing wrong in eating meat.’ Now, that does not 
mean that his prevalence as a Brahmin has gone away. It is 
just a belief that has changed over here. However, if the Gnan 
had  changed,  then  he  would  not  have  become  a  Brahmin 

 
 
12 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

again. As it is only the belief that has changed, he attains his 
original status once again, otherwise he would not attain it. 

Actually, nothing has happened to the original Real Self. 
It is just that people have proliferated agnan (ignorance of the 
Self;  relative  knowledge)  which  has  given  rise  to  all  these 
[wrong] karmic impressions (sanskaar). The moment one is 
born, people start calling him, “Chandu, Chandu.” Now, that 
little  boy  has  no  clue  at  all  about  what  they  are  doing! 
Nonetheless,  these  people  keep  giving  him  [various  such 
wrong]  impressions.  Therefore,  he  begins  to  believe,  ‘I  am 
Chandu.’ Then as he grows up, he says, “This is my maternal 
uncle,  and  this  is  my  paternal  uncle.”  This  is  how  all  such 
ignorance is being proliferated, which then gives rise to the 
illusion. What actually happens in this case is that one energy 
(shakti)  of  the  Self,  known  as  Darshan  (the  property  of 
Vision; understanding), becomes veiled. All of this has arisen 
because of the veiling of that energy named Darshan. When 
that darshan is corrected once again, when it becomes samyak 
(right; towards the Real), that is when He [the developing ‘I’] 
will revert back to His original Swaroop (One’s Real form as 
the Self). This darshan has become deluded (mithya) and that 
is  why  one  has  come  to  believe,  ‘Happiness  lies  only  in 
worldly  things.’  When  that  darshan  is  corrected,  this  belief 
about worldly happiness will also go away. Nothing else, no 
other thing has become spoilt to a great extent. It is only the 
belief  (drashti)  that  has  spoilt.  ‘We’  are  turning  that  belief 
around for you.  

First Marry the Absolute Self 

As a result of the engrossment arising when the Self and 
the  Pudgal  Parmanu  come  into  close  proximity,  a  vishesh 
parinaam (a completely new effect) has arisen; that being, the 
ego  has  arisen.  The  Pudgal  Parmanu  that  were  originally 
swabhaavik (natural) no longer remain so.  

 
[1.1] The Understanding Regarding Vibhaav 

 13 

Questioner: Is that how the egoism has arisen? 

Dadashri: The egoism has arisen through that [process]. 
That  does  not  mean  that  the  Self  has  changed.  The  Self 
actually remains the way It already is. The eternal element [of 
the Self] remains in Its inherent nature. 

Questioner: In the case of the body, I have understood; 
however, in the world that has arisen, what is jada and what 
is Chetan? 

Dadashri:  Chetan  (the  Self)  is  the  very  same,  the  One 
which is there today. This [body] is not  jada. The jada that 
exists right now, is  vikrut (unnatural; distorted) jada. Vikrut 
means  that  it  is  not  as  it  should  be  in  the  original  form. 
Actually, the original form is that of anu-Parmanu (an atom – 
the  smallest,  most  indivisible,  indestructible  particle  of 
inanimate  matter).  The  Parmanu  come  together  to  form  an 
anu (an atom). The atoms come together to form a skandha 
(an  aggregate  of  two  or  more  Parmanu).  Now,  the  original 
form is considered as pure jada, whereas this is vikrut. Blood 
and  pus  come  out  of  this  [vikrut  form]  and  it  decomposes. 
Nothing of that sort, blood or pus, comes out of the other [pure 
jada]. Hence, these two eternal elements are pure, the Self, the 
very One which is the Real, and the jada Parmanu. Due to the 
coming together of the two, vishesh guna tend to arise. Both 
the eternal elements do not let go of their own gunadharma, 
completely new properties tend to arise. They are known as 
vyatirek  guna  which  comprise  of  anger,  pride,  deceit  and 
greed; and that point denotes the beginning of the ahamkaar 
(egoism). 

Now, even though the Self does not ‘do’ anything, yet it 
is  simply  a  vibhaav  (a  third  identity  with  completely  new 
properties)  that  has  arisen.  One’s  own  Swabhaav  refers  to 
One’s  [the  Self’s]  inherent  state  as  the  Self,  and  vibhaav  is 
considered  bahirbhaav  (a  state  that  is  not  inherently  One’s 

 
 
14 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

own; a state that is external to the Self). This bahirbhaav is 
such that by merely looking this way [outside the Self], these 
murtis  (physical  representations)  have  arisen.  Merely  by 
turning One’s vision this way, no other thing besides that has 
been done. If the Self had done anything, then It would be held 
liable; however, by Its inherent nature, It is akriya (in the state 
as a non-doer). 

First Vibhaav, Then Vyatirek 

Questioner: Is it because one had done the visheshbhaav 
in  the  past  that  these  anger,  pride,  deceit  and  greed  keep 
arising, or do they arise on their own? How do they arise? 

Dadashri:  From  the  very  moment  the  two  eternal 
elements, the Self and the Pudgal Parmanu, come together, 
such intents tend to keep arising automatically; anger, pride, 
deceit and greed keep on arising and subsequently, the series 
[of cause and effect] is triggered off. Then a ‘seed’ [cause] is 
sown and later, it bears ‘fruit’ [gives effect]. That fruit then 
sows a seed again and that seed then bears fruit once again; it 
has continued going on in this way. 

Anger, pride, deceit and  greed  are the vyatirek guna  of 
the self, they are not the [intrinsic] properties of the Self. They 
arise  because  of  the  presence  of  others  [Pudgal  Parmanu]. 
These properties are neither of jada, nor of Chetan. They are 
vyatirek  guna.  Whereas  Knowledge 
(Gnan),  Vision 
(Darshan), energy (shakti), bliss (anand) and akriyata (being 
in the state as the non-doer); these are all anvay guna (intrinsic 
properties;  the  properties  that  constantly  remains  with  the 
eternal element) of the Self.  

Swabhaavik and Vibhaavik Pudgal 

Questioner: In one of the satsangs, it was asked, “What 
happened as a result of visheshbhaav?” The answer was, “The 
is 
mechanical  chetan  (mechanical  self; 

the  self 

that 

 
[1.1] The Understanding Regarding Vibhaav 

 15 

mechanical but appears to be living) arose, the pudgal arose, 
the one that undergoes puran-galan (influx and outflux). As 
long as that form is our form, ‘we’ [as the Self] cannot become 
free.”  So,  in  this,  after  visheshbhaav  arises,  do  these  three 
things - the mechanical chetan, the pudgal and puran-galan 
arise? 

Dadashri:  All  three  are  the  same.  All  of  that  is 
mechanical. The very meaning of pudgal is mechanical. What 
does mechanical mean? It works on its own, it remains active 
(chanchal); that is known as mechanical. That which remains 
active constantly is called pudgal. 

Questioner:  But  isn’t  the  original  form  of  the  Pudgal, 

vishrasa (Parmanu that exist in the pure phase)?  

Dadashri: Yes, in its original form, it is vishrasa.  

Questioner:  So 

the 
visheshbhaav arising in the Self, does the pudgal arise on the 
other side [in jada]? 

this  side,  due 

then,  on 

to 

Dadashri:  The  visheshbhaav  of 

the 
ahambhaav (the state as the ‘I’) and the visheshbhaav of the 
Pudgal Parmanu is puran-galan. As the aham goes away, the 
puran-galan also go away. Fundamentally, even the parmanu 
becoming pure, that too is a natural process of puran-galan. 

the  Self 

is 

Questioner: So, as long as one’s ego is present, when it 
comes to an end, then in that [jada] part, do the karma that are 
bound in the pudgal also continue to discharge? 

Dadashri: By however much this visheshbhaav reduces, 
by  that  much  the  pudgal  also  reduces,  everything  starts  to 
reduce. As soon as the ego reduces and comes to an end, all 
those  others  will  also  start  to  dissolve.  Fundamentally,  the 
visheshbhaav of the Self arises first and then the visheshbhaav 
of the Pudgal arises. 

 
 
16 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Questioner: So, does that mean that the pure  Parmanu 
that are there, the ones which are in the form of vishrasa, do 
they  not  have  such  a  pudgal?  Do  they  not  undergo  puran-
galan? 

Dadashri: No such thing like that can exist in them, can 
it!  Yet,  by  their  very  inherent  nature,  they  are  kriyakaari 
(‘effective’; such that they take on the effect and give result).  

Questioner: So, they are sakriya (active)? 

Dadashri:  Yes,  they  are  sakriya,  but  that  is  indeed 
referred to as puran-galan. What can be referred to as pudgal? 
The mishrachetan (the I with wrong belief that arises as when 
the  eternal  elements  of  the  Self  and  inanimate  matter  come 
into close proximity with each other) alone can be considered 
as pudgal; the rest cannot be referred to as pudgal. The rest is 
actually considered puran-galan.  

Questioner:  So  then,  is  there  a  difference  between 

Parmanu and pudgal? 

Dadashri: Yes,  there is  a difference between  Parmanu 
and pudgal. In fact, the first one is the pure Pudgal and the 
second one is the pudgal which has taken on a completely new 
form (visheshbhaavi pudgal). The pure Pudgal is in the form 
as Parmanu, yet those Parmanu by their inherent nature are 
kriyakaari. What that means is, if snow is falling over here, it 
becomes like a huge statue of Lord Mahavir. Then again, it 
melts,  meaning  that  it  undergoes  puran,  and  thereafter  it 
undergoes  galan.  That  is  known  as  pure  Pudgal.  The  other 
pudgal is the one that has arisen from the coming together of 
the Self and the  Pudgal  Parmanu, that is  the  visheshbhaavi 
pudgal; the one that has blood, bones, flesh etc., all that is the 
visheshbhaavi pudgal. 

Questioner:  Is  the  mind,  speech  and  body  included  in 

that? 

 
[1.1] The Understanding Regarding Vibhaav 

 17 

Dadashri: Yes, not only the mind, speech and body, but 
also  deceit  (maya)  and  everything  else  comes  into  it. 
Everything,  besides  the  ego,  is  the  pudgal’s  visheshbhaav. 
The  moment  the  ego  leaves,  everything  goes  away.  Hence, 
everything is based on the ego.  

As the vishesh parinaam of the Self, the ego has arisen, 
and as the vishesh parinaam of the Pudgal, the original form 
of the swabhaavik Pudgal (pure Pudgal Parmanu) does not 
remain as is. 

Questioner: What was the swabhaavik Pudgal like? 

Dadashri: The swabhaavik Pudgal is always pure; there 

is no blood, pus or any filth in it. 

Questioner:  What  is  the  cause  behind  the  existence  of 

the swabhaavik Pudgal? 

Dadashri:  It  fundamentally  exists;  it  naturally  has  an 

existence. 

The Egoism Envisions and the Pudgal Takes on That 
Form 

Vishrasa are indeed the pure Parmanu and although they 
are  considered  to  be  in  the  form  as  Parmanu  but  by  their 
inherent  nature,  they  are  paudgalik  (such  that  they  undergo 
puran-galan), they are kriyakaari. As they have an inherent 
nature  of  puran-galan,  therefore,  when  two  or  three  anu 
(atoms) come together, they join together. They form a large, 
life-like  statue,  and  then  they  start  falling  off  again.  They 
come together and take on a large form,  and then when the 
time is over, they start to separate; they undergo puran-galan, 
puran-galan. Therefore, that from which blood, pus, or such 
things  do  not  come  out,  that  is  puran-galan,  all  of  that  is 
natural  (swabhaavik)  puran-galan;  that  which  is  pure  is 
vishrasa. And what do we call this other one? 

 
 
18 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Questioner: Mishrasa?  

Dadashri:  Mishrasa  and  prayogsa.  Meaning that when 
the two [eternal elements] come together, the ego arose out of 
the  Self,  and  consequently  over  here  [in  the  jada  tattva] 
prayogsa arises. Prayogsa means normal Parmanu, they are 
not in joint form.  Later, when they turn into  mishrasa, they 
come  into  the  joint  form.  Prayogsa  is  actually  all  the 
preparations being made for the Parmanu to come together. 
Thereafter they become mishrasa. Those which have become 
mishrasa are the bodies of all these humans, the bodies of all 
living beings. And later on, once the effect of pleasure or pain 
has been suffered, they become vishrasa; thereafter they begin 
to move around freely once again. The [discharge] ego suffers 
the effect of pleasure or pain. After that the pudgal continues 
to change.  

Questioner: Depending upon how the effect of pleasure 
or  pain  is  suffered  by  the  ego,  does  the  change  happen  in 
accordance to that? 

Dadashri: Yes, it changes. The Pudgal Parmanu take on 
the very form of whatever that ego envisions. ‘You’ [the Self] 
do not have to ‘do’ anything. The moment the ego envisions, 
this takes on its form, that is how it is, kriyakaari. The Pudgal 
by its very inherent nature is kriyakaari, and it is due to that, 
that the two got joint tightly. Both [eternal elements] acquired 
a completely new effect. Now, how can this completely new 
effect  be prevented from  arising? The answer is,  as the ego 
comes to an end, it means that the completely new effect of 
the  Self  has  come  to  an  end.  And  that  is  indeed  why,  the 
completely new effect of the Pudgal comes to an end, of its 
own accord indeed. As long as the ego exists, the completely 
new effect of the Pudgal also exists; meaning that the Pudgal 
takes on whatever form the ego envisions. Therefore, as the 
envisioning of only One’s own Real form as the Self happens, 

 
[1.1] The Understanding Regarding Vibhaav 

 19 

as One no longer does the envisioning of the pudgal, it means 
that One has become free from everything. 

Questioner: So, as the ego does the envisioning  of the 
pudgal, it takes on the form as the pudgal; similarly, if the ego 
does the envisioning of One’s own inherent nature, of One’s 
own Self… 

Dadashri: The envisioning of  One’s inherent  nature as 
the Self; the one that does that cannot be considered the ego. 
For as long as the ego exists, it will always do the envisioning 
of the pudgal. There is a certain amount of the ego, a pure ego, 
that is such that it keeps envisioning its own Self only; in a 
natural way. So then, it becomes inherently that nature. The 
moment One’s own inherent nature as the Self is recognized, 
from that point on, the ego does not remain at all. 

The Main Thing in Vyatirek Is the Aham 

Questioner: So, isn’t it that the ahambhaav (the state as 
the ‘I’) arises in the vyatirek guna (completely new properties 
of a third entity that arises when two eternal elements, the Self 
and inanimate matter, come together)? 

Dadashri: No, the ahambhaav is  itself a  vyatirek guna 
[primarily of the first level]. As long as there is engrossment 
due  to  close  proximity  of  the  two  eternal  elements,  and  the 
ahambhaav is still in existence, until then all the vyatirek guna 
remain. Primarily, the ahambhaav verily is the main pillar of 
the vyatirek guna. If it is not there, then there is nothing. All 
the vyatirek guna will flee, the poor things! 

Questioner: The wrong belief that we talk about, is that 

the same as the aham (the ‘I’)? 

Dadashri: That  is  the egoism  (ahamkaar)  indeed, isn’t 
it! The wrong belief is itself the ego, and the right belief is the 
pure Soul (Shuddhatma). 

 
 
20 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Questioner:  The  kashay  (the  inner  enemies  of  anger, 
pride, deceit and greed) that exist, they are the phases of which 
property? 

Dadashri: They are a phase of the pudgal. 

Questioner: The bhaav that we do, is that an effect of the 

pudgal? 

Dadashri:  The  bhaav  (visheshbhaav;  the  assumed 
identification with that which is not One’s own) is [due to] the 
ignorance of the Self and anger, pride, deceit and greed are a 
phase of the pudgal. 

One does bhaav as long as there is ignorance of the Self. 
If  ignorance  were  to  leave,  then  One  is  not  the  doer  of  the 
bhaav at all. 

Questioner: Do Gnanis not do bhaav? 

Dadashri: No, They do not do bhaav; thereafter, there is 
only Swabhaavik bhaav (the state that is inherently natural to 
the  Self).  This  world  has  arisen  verily  because  of  your 
visheshbhaav,  and  Swabhaavik  bhaav  means  your  moksha 
(liberation).  

Now,  the  original  Self  (mool  Atma)  does  not  actually 
assume a false identity. The completely new effect has arisen 
out of ignorance of the Self. 

Questioner: Does that mean that the Self Itself is doing 

this? Does the Self assume a false identity? 

Dadashri:  The  original  Self  does  not  assume  a  false 
identity. It is just that one of the properties of the original Self, 
the property of Darshan, assumes an identity which is not Its 
own, due to  the pressure of these circumstances.  And all of 
this  has  arisen  due  to  the  fact  that  it  has  assumed  a  false 
identity.  If  it  were  to  come  into  the  state  that  is  inherently 

 
[1.1] The Understanding Regarding Vibhaav 

 21 

natural  to  the  Self,  then  there  is  no  problem;  but  it  actually 
assumes an identity which is not One’s own.  



 
 
 
[2]  

Anger, Pride, Deceit and Greed, Whose 
Properties Are They? 

They Are Vyatirek Guna 

Are you getting any satisfactory answers or is it just so-
so? If you are getting puzzled, then ask again. There is no need 
to hold back [from asking]. 

Do anger, pride, deceit and greed exist within you or not? 

Questioner: Of course, they are there! 

Dadashri: Are they Your [the Self’s] own properties or 
are  they  the  properties  of  jada  (the  eternal  element  of 
inanimate matter)?  

Now, all the monks and ascetics believe that these cannot 
be  in  jada,  so  anger,  pride,  deceit  and  greed  cannot  be  in 
anything other than the Self (Chetan). That is why everything 
is entangled. Nothing but confusion! If you were to ask, “Are 
these properties of the Self or of inanimate matter?” They will 
say, “Of the Self.” They will say it so clearly. Actually, these 
are not the properties of the Self. Now, what happens when 
one  believes  the  properties  to  be  contrary  [to  what  they 
actually are]? The Self (Atma) can never be attained. 

Even great scholars and the like say, “Anger, pride, deceit 
and greed are indeed the dharma (functional properties) of the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[1.2] Anger, Pride, Deceit and Greed, Whose Properties Are They? 

 23 

Self.” ‘We’ said, “What a relief, then! Which means, they will 
even come with you all the way to Siddha gati (realm of the 
absolutely  liberated  Souls).  Actually,  these  are  not  the 
functional properties of the Self.” Then, they asked, “Are they 
the functional properties of inanimate matter?” To which ‘we’ 
said, “No, they are not of inanimate matter either, oh mortal 
ones.” At which point they asked, “Then did they fall from up 
above?” Then, ‘we’ said, “Yes, it is akin to them falling from 
up  above.  Understand  all  of  this,  this  is  in  fact  a  Vignan 
(spiritual  Science).”  And,  without  Science,  no  matter  how 
much one strives, does yoga and all that, but the Self can never 
be attained. This  entire Science is different. People have no 
idea about what the Science [behind all this] is.  

Questioner:  Whose  property  is  it  when  anger  has 

emerged? 

Dadashri:  Anger  is  not  an  anvay  guna  (intrinsic 
property; a property that constantly remains with the element) 
of Pudgal Parmanu (inanimate matter), neither is it an anvay 
guna of the Self, it is a vyatirek guna [also known as vishesh 
guna] (completely new properties of a third entity that arises 
when  two  eternal  elements,  the  Self  and  inanimate  matter, 
come  together).  And  when  the  two  [eternal  elements]  are 
separated, the vyatirek guna cease to exist. 

Questioner: Please explain that in detail. 

Dadashri:  As  many  gunadharma  (intrinsic  properties 
that have a specific function) as there are in an eternal element 
(vastu), they are all permanently within the element. If anger, 
pride, deceit and greed were the properties of the Self, then 
they should remain permanently within the Self. If they were 
properties  of  Pudgal  Parmanu,  then  they  should  remain 
within the Pudgal Parmanu permanently. They are neither the 
properties of the Self, nor are they the properties of the Pudgal 
Parmanu. Completely new properties have arisen by putting 

 
24 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

those  two  eternal  elements  together.  Nevertheless,  scripture 
writers have given it a different name. The scripture writers 
have referred to it as vyatirek guna.  

Vyatirek means that they are not anvay guna. Anvay guna 
means one’s own properties, the kind that do not leave. The 
properties  of  the  Pudgal Parmanu  and the properties of the 
Self are their anvay guna.  

What a wonder it is that the vyatirek guna cling to One’s 
Self!  The  properties  of  One’s  own  Self  are  intrinsic  to  It 
(anvay guna). 

Even now, the Self is indeed pure, it is just this Pudgal 
that  has  become  vikrut 

Parmanu  (inanimate  matter) 
(unnatural). 

Questioner: Why did it become unnatural? 

Dadashri:  It  is  because  You  [the  Self]  and  this 
[inanimate matter] came together that the vyatirek guna arose 
within you [the ego, the developing I]. With the emergence of 
the  vyatirek  guna,  the  Pudgal  Parmanu  began  to  become 
unnatural.  The  one  with  the  completely  new  properties  will 
indeed  have  bhaav  (inner  intents).  The  Self  does  not  have 
inner intents. The ego will indeed have the inner intent, ‘I want 
to hit this man,’ so he will come across those very kinds of 
pudgals (non-Self complex of input and output). Since he had 
that inner intent to hit, in the next life he will certainly have to 
hit a man. And subsequently, there will be a reaction to that, 
so then, that man will hit him. Worldly life will continue  in 
this way. 

Who is at fault in this? It is the one who suffers. What is 
the fault? The belief that ‘I am Chandubhai’ is your mistake. 
This is because no one is at fault at all. So, it proves that no 
one is a culprit. Since no one is a culprit, it proves that no one 
is  committing  a  fault,  isn’t  it?  Then  one  may  ask,  “What 

 
[1.2] Anger, Pride, Deceit and Greed, Whose Properties Are They? 

 25 

[understanding]  is  behind  this?”  Then  one  would  say,  there 
would be a problem if the Self commits a fault. However, the 
Self  does  not  commit  any  faults.  Chetan  (the  developing  I) 
keeps having chetan bhaav (the beliefs of, ‘I am Chandubhai,’ 
‘This is mine,’ ‘I am the doer,’ and ‘I am the sufferer of pain 
and  pleasure’)  and  this  pudgal  arises  from  that.  All  these 
problems ensue from the pudgal that arises, but that too is not 
the source of misery. That is simply like going to a museum; 
one meets others face-to-face and the like. [The belief of] ‘I 
am this’ is indeed the cause of misery. [The belief of] ‘I am 
Chandubhai’ is actually the cause of misery; once that belief 
moves aside, it is all over. There is no such thing like a culprit 
in this world. 

The fact that others appear to be a culprit, is shown by the 
vyatirek  guna,  the  anger,  pride,  deceit  and  greed  that  are 
within you. The Self [the developing ‘I’] is not seeing others 
as a  culprit through His  own  inner belief (drashti).  It is  the 
anger, pride, deceit and greed that make it appear that way. 
Those who do not have any anger, pride, deceit and greed, do 
not have anyone that makes them see that way and They don’t 
even See others to be a culprit. In reality, it is not like that at 
all  [meaning  that,  no  one  is  a  culprit  at  all].  Anger,  pride, 
deceit and greed have set in and they have set in by believing, 
‘I am Chandubhai.’ Once the belief of ‘[I am] Chandubhai’ is 
fractured, they will leave. It takes a while for them to vacate 
the ‘home’, because they had settled in quite a long time ago, 
isn’t it? 

Questioner: Does this pudgal arise because the Self has 
Chetan bhaav (the state as the Self; to prevail as the Knower 
and  Seer),  or  does  it  arise  because  the  Self  has  vibhaav 
(assumed identification with that which is not One’s own)? 

Dadashri:  The  Self  only  does  Chetan  bhaav.  The  Self 
has  both,  Swabhaav  (the  inherent  nature  as  the  Self)  and 
identity  with  completely  new 
visheshbhaav 

third 

(a 

 
26 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

properties).  This  [the  world]  has  arisen  because  of  the 
visheshbhaav. One does not have visheshbhaav deliberately. 
the  basis  of  circumstances,  scientific 
It  happens  on 
circumstantial evidences. This pudgal arises simply because 
the Self has visheshbhaav.  

No one is at fault whatsoever. [The belief of] ‘I am this,’ 
meaning the realization that, ‘I am this  pudgal,’ is itself the 
cause  of  misery.  Nothing  else  causes  misery.  The  Self  has 
Chetan  bhaav.  The  pudgal  has  pudgal  bhaav  (the  inherent 
nature  as  the  pudgal).  Both  have  their  own  bhaav  (inherent 
nature) indeed. 

Questioner:  The  Self  keeps  having  Chetan  bhaav,  and 

this pudgal arises from that? 

Dadashri:  Yes,  the  pudgal  arises  due  to  its  [the 

developing I’s] influence. 

Questioner: [Due to the influence] Of the Self? In that 
case, the word ‘[arises] out  of that’ is  wrong;  [it should be, 
arises] ‘due to that’. 

Dadashri:  Chetan  (the  developing  I;  the  worldly-
interacting  self)  has  an  inner  belief  (bhaav)  and  whatever 
inner belief (bhaav) the self has, that form starts to [visibly] 
materialize. If it has the inner belief (bhaav) as a woman, then 
the pudgal takes on the form of a woman. If it has the inner 
belief (bhaav) as a man, then the pudgal takes on the form of 
a  man.  As  such,  it  does  not  [directly]  have  the  belief  as  a 
woman,  but  when  one  engages  in  more  deceit  (kapat)  and 
illusory  attachment  (moha),  then  subsequently  the  parmanu 
charged with the belief as a woman will arise.  

‘[Arises] out of that’ and ‘[arises] due to that,’ both are 
considered  one  and  the  same.  The  intention  is  just  that  the 
main  point  be  understood,  word-for-word.  One  cannot  See 
that exactness. Only the Ones who have Seen that, can See it, 

 
[1.2] Anger, Pride, Deceit and Greed, Whose Properties Are They? 

 27 

and it is not such that it can be conveyed through words. It has 
been explained in whatever ways it is possible to explain it, 
using words. However, the exactness cannot be conveyed. 

To Call It an Illusion Is Itself an Illusion! 

Now,  what  properties  are  a  part  of  the  vishesh  guna 
(completely new properties)? They are the I, the ego, anger, 
pride,  deceit  and  greed,  attachment  and  abhorrence  (raag-
dwesh);  these  are  the  completely  new  properties  that  have 
arisen.  Besides,  the  original  inherent  nature  of  the  Self  is 
vitaraag (absolutely free from all attachment and abhorrence). 
The  eternal  element  of  inanimate  matter  does  not  have  any 
attachment  or  abhorrence  at  all  either,  it  is  also  completely 
vitaraag. So from where did the attachment and  abhorrence 
arise?  From  the  completely  new  properties  that  arose.  The 
inherent nature of anger, pride, deceit and greed is to increase 
and decrease (guru-laghu). The inherent nature of the Self is 
such that It does not increase or decrease (aguru-laghu). Even 
the eternal element of inanimate matter by its inherent nature 
does  not  increase  or  decrease.  There  is  a  difference  in  the 
gunadharma  (intrinsic  functional  properties)  of  the  two,  is 
there not? The Self has never shifted out of Its gunadharma. 
The Self constantly remains within Its own gunadharma. The 
properties of the Self are inherent to Itself. 

Just  as  stainless  [steel]  does  not  rust;  it  remains 
unaffected by rain or muck, similarly in spite of living in the 
muck [of worldly life], ‘rust’ does not form on Us [the Self]. 

The Self has not become vibhaavik [viruddhbhaavi in this 
context;  having  a  state  contrary  to  One’s  own  state  as  the 
Self], but this is a vishesh parinaam (a completely new effect 
that  arises  as  a  result  of  two  eternal  elements,  the  Self  and 
inanimate  matter,  coming  together)  that  has  arisen,  nothing 
else; it is merely akin to being possessed by ‘ghosts’ [wrong 
beliefs] and that too for a limited period of time. So, for those 

 
28 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

whose term is about to end, ‘we’ can release them from the 
‘ghosts’.  ‘We’  can  shift  the  time  a  little  for  them.  But  if 
foreigners [those who do not believe in reincarnation] were to 
ask us to do that, then ‘we’ cannot release them. 

That is why this is known as a puzzle, isn’t it! And how 
is it that it has become a puzzle, ‘we’ speak [about that] after 
having Seen it. It is not baseless; it is exact, as it is. It is not 
even  an  illusion  (bhranti).  As  a  matter  of  fact,  people  have 
given it the name ‘illusion’. When they could make no sense 
of it, that is when they referred to it as an illusion. 

The Difference in Speaking, With Reference to a 
Gnani and an Agnani! 

These vishesh guna are  known as  vyatirek guna, which 
are neither in this [element of inanimate matter], nor are they 
in this [the Self]. Whoever accepts them as his own, they are 
then his. Whoever accepts ownership of ‘This is happening to 
me,’ they are his. 

Questioner: If these vyatirek guna are neither of the Self, 
nor  are  they  of  the  Pudgal  (eternal  element  of  inanimate 
matter; swabhaavik Pudgal), then as long as both, the Self and 
the  Pudgal  are  together,  to  whom  do  they  apply?  Whose 
vyatirek guna are they considered to be? 

Dadashri: Oh yes! Until then whose are they considered 
to be? Yes, until then, if one has to say who do they belong to, 
then  it  has  to  be  said  that,  ultimately,  they  belong  to  the 
[vibhaavik] pudgal. Yes, but who is in a position to say that? 
All the people cannot say that. The agnani (one who has not 
attained  Self-realization)  has  to  say,  “They  are  indeed  my 
properties  (guna).”  Only  a  Gnani  can  say,  “These  are  the 
properties of the pudgal, they are not mine.” 

Questioner:  So,  does  the  agnani  have  to  say,  “I  am 

angry, I am greedy?” 

 
[1.2] Anger, Pride, Deceit and Greed, Whose Properties Are They? 

 29 

Dadashri:  Yes,  he  has  to  say,  “I  am  the  one  who  is 
greedy, and I am the one who is angry.” Whereas, the Gnani 
says,  “This  is  the  inherent  nature  of  the  pudgal.”  The 
gunadharma  of  the  two  [the  Self  and  inanimate  matter]  are 
different.  The  Gnani  has  become  free  from  them,  from  the 
wrong beliefs, whereas the wrong beliefs have not gone for 
the agnani. ‘I am Chandubhai’ is the first wrong belief. ‘I am 
an attorney’ is the second wrong belief. ‘I am his brother, his 
uncle, etc.,’ so many wrong beliefs have set in! 

The world has arisen scientifically; the way Lord Krishna 
(one of the most widely revered of all Indian divinities, He has 
evolved  from  being  an  ordinary  human  into  becoming  God 
[the absolute Self]) has said! This has happened incidentally 
through  evidences  (naimittik).  This  is  a  vishesh  swaroop 
(completely new form) of the Self, it is not the original form 
as 
the  Self.  That  completely  new  form  has  arisen 
scientifically.  When  that  comes  into  One’s  understanding, 
then One’s own energies will manifest and subsequently that 
assumed  identification  with  ‘I  am  Chandubhai’  will  be 
dispelled. Once this One (the developing ‘I’) is aware of both, 
his  visheshbhaav  (assumed 
identification  with  ‘I  am 
Chandubhai’) and His Swabhaav (the inherently natural state 
as the Self), then His own Real form as the Self comes into 
experience. 



 
 
[3] 

Does Vibhaav Mean Viruddhbhaav? 

The Definition of Vibhaav 

Questioner:  Do  these  kashays  (the  inner  enemies  of 
anger, pride, deceit and greed) arise because of vibhaav? Do 
all the intents filled with anger, pride, deceit and greed arise 
because one does not remain in One’s Real form as the Self 
(Swaroop), because of all the vibhaav-bhaavs, the intents that 
displace one from One’s Real form as the Self? 

Dadashri:  To  whom  does  the  vibhaav-bhaav  belong? 

What does vibhaav mean? 

Questioner:  It  means  to  go  contrary  to  One’s  own 

inherent nature (Swabhaav). 

Dadashri:  No,  actually  people  have  deduced  such  a 
meaning  of  vibhaav,  that  of  going  contrary  to  One’s  own 
inherent nature. If a person has formed a bad habit, then he 
will  not  even  be  able  to  remain  in  moksha.  He  will  come 
running back over here, from there. The meaning of vibhaav 
is  actually  not  that.  If  the  Soul  (Atma;  the  Self)  were  to  be 
vibhaavi [going contrary to one’s own inherent nature, in this 
context], then no Soul would ever be able to remain in moksha 
at all. So many little mistakes like this have been made such 
that  the  entire  world  has  suffered  death  on  account  of  such 
indiscreet remarks! Should one understand vibhaav or not? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[1.3] Does Vibhaav Mean Viruddhbhaav? 

 31 

Questioner:  The  scriptures  say,  “The  Soul  has  done 

vibhaav.”  

Dadashri: What have you understood by the phrase ‘has 

done vibhaav’? 

Questioner: That the Soul has done the nurturing of such 

a vibhaav! 

Dadashri:  Now,  if  the  Soul  were  to  nurture  such  a 
vibhaav,  then  that  [vibhaav]  would  become  the  Soul’s  very 
own inherent nature. 

Questioner: So then, how did vibhaav occur?  

Dadashri: ‘We’ will show you how vibhaav has arisen. 
However, the meaning of vibhaav that is currently in use, that 
which people have understood as ‘viruddhbhaav’ (a state that 
is contrary to the state as the Self), where ‘one keeps doing 
contrary to what he is supposed to be doing, and believes that 
such a viruddhbhaav will indeed have to be gotten rid of.’ But 
this  is  not  a  viruddhbhaav,  this  is  a  visheshbhaav  (a  third 
identity with completely new properties that arises due to the 
coming  together  of  the  eternal  elements  of  the  Self  and 
inanimate matter). If it were a viruddhbhaav, then you would 
have  to  remove  it.  If  one  goes  against  one’s  own  inherent 
nature, then that becomes one’s inherent nature; if it were a 
viruddhbhaav,  then  that  would  actually  represent  one’s 
permanent  property, and so it would actually  go  along with 
him even to  moksha. Hence, to  have understood  vibhaav as 
viruddhbhaav, is all, entirely, completely, a hundred percent 
incorrect. The Soul does not have the energy to do vibhaav [a 
viruddhbhaav in this context] at all. The Soul remains in Its 
inherent  nature  indeed  and  It  never  goes  against  Its  own 
inherent nature at all. Please speak up if you understand this, 
say ‘yes’ [if you understand]. 

 
 
32 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Questioner:  This  vibhaav  arose  at  the  very  moment 
when the circumstances came about for the Self to come into 
close proximity with the Pudgal [Parmanu], right? 

Dadashri: The visheshbhaav occurred. 

Questioner:  Yes,  what  arose  cannot  be  considered  as 
being a part of one’s inherent nature. So, vibhaav is an effect 
(parinaam) of the Self Itself, isn’t it? 

Dadashri:  Listen  to  what  ‘we’  are  telling  you.  If  you 
refer  to  that  as  an  effect  of  the  Self,  then  just  imagine  how 
grave  a  fault  you  would  incur,  similar  to  when  you  blame 
someone baselessly? 

Questioner:  It  is  not  in the inherent  nature of the Self, 
but it is indeed because the Self transforms into that effect that 
It has been ensnared, isn’t it? 

Dadashri:  No,  that  is  exactly  what  you  have  to 
understand. What ‘we’ are saying is that, if you refer to that 
as an effect of the Self, then you will incur a grave fault. If 
you refer to it as an effect of the Pudgal [Parmanu], then it is 
not actually of the Pudgal [Parmanu]. So then, what is it [in 
actuality]?  The  Pudgal  [Parmanu]  says,  “These  are  not  my 
gunadharma  (intrinsic  properties 
that  have  a  specific 
function).” The Self says, “These are not my gunadharma.” 
Whereas, in religions [out there], what do the the ascetics and 
high-ranking Jain monks say? They say that this vibhaav is a 
gunadharma of the Self. With that, a grave karmic liability is 
incurred, a grave obstruction sets in. The Self does not have 
any such property. 

Is My Soul a Sinner? 

Actually,  people  are  saying,  “The  Soul  has  become 
vibhaavik (unnatural) like this, so now we have to straighten 
it out.” Hey, who is the one who will straighten it out? Who is 
the one saying that the Soul has become vibhaavik? Who must 

 
[1.3] Does Vibhaav Mean Viruddhbhaav? 

 33 

be the one saying that? And who must be the one saying, “My 
Soul is a sinner?” At least analyze that. Who must be the one 
speaking thus? 

He himself, the one who is not a sinner, only  he would 
speak thus, wouldn’t he? Who would say that? He says, “My 
Soul is a sinner, but I am not a sinner.” Now, a lawyer would 
definitely  ask,  “Then  what  about  you?”  Then  the  person 
would answer, “My Soul is a sinner, I am not.” Well then, the 
meaning of this statement is verily that; this is what a lawyer 
would decipher! To which people would reply, “Yes.” Now 
imagine  that!  People  have  gone  as  far  as  calling  the  Soul  a 
sinner.  What  can  they  gain  from  that?  Why  would  they  be 
saying such a thing in some religions?  

Questioner: They  are still  in  the deluded  awareness  of 

the belief of ‘I am Chandubhai’ (mithyatva bhaan). 

Dadashri:  No,  they  do  not  have  any  awareness  at  all. 
Even  if  they  had  deluded  awareness,  it  would  still  be 
considered very good. Then too, they would realize, ‘How can 
the Soul be a sinner? In reality, I am the sinner; how can I call 
the Soul a sinner?’ The one who has deluded awareness would 
at least say this much, wouldn’t he? “Actually, I am the sinner; 
why  [blame]  the  Soul?”  Now,  why  would  this  mistake  [of 
calling the Soul a sinner] have occurred? 

In the past, the Sadgurus (Self-realized spiritual teachers) 
had said, the Lord had said, “The pratishthit atma (the relative 
self)  is  the  sinner.  Speak  in  this  way.”  Instead,  the  word 
‘pratishthit’ disappeared and the insinuation ended up on the 
original Self. That is indeed why Krupaludev said,  

“The original Self Itself has been surrendered.” 

“Sachodo Atma j vosravi didho.” 

 
 
34 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

The pudgal had to be surrendered, instead of that, what 
did  one  surrender?  One  surrendered  the  Self  and  kept  the 
pudgal to himself.  

Now,  some  monks  have  this  belief  that  the  Soul  has 
become impure. Hey mortal one, then how will you purify It? 
How can the Soul which has become impure be purified? 

The  Soul  has  never  become  impure,  not  even  for  a 
second. And had It become impure, then no one in this world 
would ever be able to purify It. This is because It is a naturally 
existing  eternal  element;  ‘no  plaster  can  touch’  a  naturally 
existing eternal element [no impurity can stick on It]. 

In  some  scriptures,  it  has  been  written  that  the  Soul 
becomes  moorchhit  (a  state  of  gross  unawareness  due  to 
illusory  attachment).  If  the  Soul  were  to  become  moorchhit 
then It cannot be the Soul at all. And who is there to cure the 
one who has become moorchhit? There is no one superior to 
Him [the original Self]. 

Questioner:  The  inspiration  of  the  Self  is  actually 

present in this, isn’t it? 

Dadashri: If there is any inspiration from the Self, then 
the Self would actually have become a beggar. The one doing 
the inspiring is  the  guilty  one;  and such a person can never 
become free again. The Self has not done any inspiring at all. 
‘It’  is  Bhagwan  swaroop  (the  Real  form  as  God;  an 
embodiment of divinity). Impurity has never arisen in It at all. 

However, this has arisen out of Science. If the Soul were 
to  do  any  inspiring,  then  Its  inherent  nature  would  become 
bound  like  that  permanently  and  that  would  bring  forth  a 
liability;  there  is  a  liability  on  the  inspirer.  Hence,  even 
regarding this inspirer; it is actually the effect of one’s own 
karma  that  is  verily  the  inspirer.  And  that  happens  through 

 
[1.3] Does Vibhaav Mean Viruddhbhaav? 

 35 

vyavasthit shakti (the natural energy that brings together the 
scientific circumstantial evidences to give result). 

A  third,  additional  identity  with  specific  properties  has 
arisen  by  the  coming  together  of  these  two  [the  eternal 
elements of the Self and inanimate matter], and that indeed is 
the  one  who  continues  acquiring  karma.  These  two  [eternal 
elements]  remain  in  their  own  [natural]  state,  of  their  own 
accord. The original Self remains in Its very same state, it is 
only the vibhaavik pudgal (the non-Self complex of input and 
output  that  arises  as  a  result  of  the  coming  together  of  two 
eternal elements, the Self and inanimate matter) that becomes 
unnatural (vikaari). Hence, if the Self were to do the inspiring 
then It would never be able to become free. The Self does not 
do any sankalp-vikalp (all the relative ‘I-ness’ and ‘my-ness’ 
that stem from the belief that ‘I am Chandubhai’) at all. If It 
were  to  do  any  sankalp-vikalp,  only  then  would  It  be 
considered  as  the  inspirer.  So,  the  Self  does  not  do 
bhaavkarma (charging of karma), nor does It acquire karma; 
it is verily the developing I (hu) that does all that. If the Self 
were to do bhaavkarma, then that would become a permanent 
part of Its inherent nature.  

Questioner:  So 

then, 

this  bhaavkarma,  who 

is 

responsible for that? 

Dadashri: The bhaav (inner intent; belief; state of being) 
[of 
arises  based  on  whatever  kind  of 
‘spectacles’ 
dravyakarma;  subtle  discharging  karma]  such  as 
the 
Knowledge obscuring karma (Gnanavaran karma), the Vision 
obscuring  karma  (Darshanavaran  karma),  that  it  [the 
developing I] has acquired.  

Questioner: Does the Self not do this [bhaavkarma]? 

Dadashri:  The  Self  will  never  do  this.  This  is  a 
visheshbhaav, it is not the Self’s Swabhaav-bhaav (inherently 
natural state as the Self). 

 
 
36 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Right now, understand that all the bhaav are of the ego 
only,  but  from  where  did  it  all  fundamentally  begin? 
Completely new properties tend to arise and due to that, the 
bhaav arise; the bhaavkarma begin. And the Self’s inherent 
nature is a different thing altogether. This  visheshbhaav has 
arisen in the presence of the two [the eternal elements of the 
Self and inanimate matter]; this is ‘our’ scientific discovery, 
and this was indeed the belief of the twenty-four Tirthankar 
Lords  (the  absolutely  enlightened  Lords  who  can  liberate 
others). However, as this change in understanding [believing 
the relative self to be the original Self] happened, that is why 
one is not able to benefit from it. The very reason that this is 
not beneficial is the fact that a few such mistakes have kept on 
happening [since time immemorial]! 

Questioner: Are You saying that, this happens because 
of the engrossment that arises out of the two eternal elements, 
inanimate  matter  and  the  Self,  coming  into  close  proximity 
with each other? 

Dadashri: Yes, that’s it. A visheshbhaav has arisen due 
to  that.  The  Self  is  within  Its  own  inherent  nature;  it  is  the 
pudgal  that  has  become  unnatural.  The  pudgal  has  become 
unnatural due to the completely new gunadharma of the two, 
and it is due to that unnaturalness that these futile efforts are 
going on; action and reaction, action and reaction, charge and 
discharge, charge and discharge continues to go on. 

This visheshbhaav has arisen and ‘we’ are telling you this 
after  having  Seen  it  personally.  That  is  indeed  why  it  is 
possible to become free, otherwise it is not possible to become 
free in this current era of the time cycle. Can one ever become 
free in Dushamkaal (also known as Kaliyug; the current era of 
time cycle characterized by lack of unity in thought, speech 
and action)? Not a single day will pass by without a worry. In 
Dushamkaal, aartadhyan (the adverse internal state of being 
that hurts the self) and raudradhyan (the adverse internal state 

 
[1.3] Does Vibhaav Mean Viruddhbhaav? 

 37 

of being that hurts the self and others) do not stop. As this is 
Akram Vignan (the spiritual Science of the step-less path to 
Self-realization), that is why these come to an end. 

What happens with this visheshbhaav is that these eight 
dravyakarma are bound, because of the ‘blindfolds’ [veil of 
ignorance] over the ‘eyes’ [Vision of the Self]. And thereafter, 
due  to  the  presence  of  these  eight  dravyakarma,  the 
bhaavkarma tend to arise. What causes these bhaavkarma to 
arise?  It  is  the  ‘blindfolds’  over  the  ‘eyes’  that  causes  the 
bhaavkarma to arise.  

Questioner: But those karma occurred later; however, in 
the beginning, when the visheshbhaav arose, at that time, from 
where did these ‘blindfolds’ come? 

Dadashri: The visheshbhaav arose as a consequence of 
the  pressure  of  circumstances,  and  with  the  visheshbhaav 
itself, these ‘blindfolds’ were bound, and as the ‘blindfolds’ 
were tied, one started to see incorrectly [contrary to the Real; 
the relative], which in turn gave rise to bhaav (inner intents) 
towards the relative. So, those [bhaavkarma] arise subject to 
the ‘blindfolds’, they do not arise subject to the Self. 

These  eight  dravyakarma  that  are  present,  Gnanavaran 
karma, Darshanavaran karma…, power has been instilled in 
them  because  of  the  presence  of  the  Self;  the  Self  has  not 
entered into them. And it is indeed this power that is at work 
over  here.  Moreover,  that  power,  is  itself  insentient  (jada). 
Hence, these are all activities of the inanimate (jada kriya); 
none of these are activities of the Self. 

Questioner: Is the inspiration verily of the power that has 
arisen due to samipyabhaav (the engrossment that arises when 
the two eternal elements, the Self and inanimate matter, are in 
close proximity)? 

Dadashri: Yes, that is correct. 

 
 
38 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

The Self is made up of Its own unique intrinsic properties, 
of Its own independent properties. No other properties arise in 
It.  There  is  simply  a  change  in  the  awareness,  in  the  belief 
itself. He himself [the I] gains the awareness that, ‘I am doing 
this.’ This change in the awareness, to whom does it occur? 
To the power chetan (the relative self that has been powered 
with  life  energy  in  the  presence  of  the  Self;  meaning  the 
developing I). Now when does that awareness get destroyed? 
The  answer  is,  that  awareness  is  destroyed  when  the  Gnani 
Purush separates the prakruti (the non-Self complex) and the 
Purush (the Self) for us; otherwise that awareness cannot be 
destroyed, can it! 

Hence,  there  is  power  instilled  in  it.  Just  like  in  the 
batteries, in a cell, when power is filled in the batteries, they 
give  effect,  they  function,  don’t  they?  How  long  do  they 
function? As long as there is  ‘filled stock’, until  that which 
has been charged (puran) discharges (galan), that power gives 
effect. Once they have discharged, they should be discarded. 
Whatever  discharge  is  taking  place,  has  previously  been 
charged. Galan is discharge, and puran is charge. Discharge 
is  taking  place  from  that  which  has  been  charged,  and  then 
during the discharge, one himself [the developing I] gives rise 
to the pudgal once again by doing egoism; he charges [karma] 
once again. And thus, the ‘tank’ [filled stock of karma] does 
not  empty  out.  Even  before  it  can  empty  out,  one  keeps  on 
adding ‘water’ to the ‘tank’ and thereafter he says, “I want to 
attain liberation.” Hey mortal one, how can  you attain that? 
You have started this very business of bondage! 

Therefore,  it  is  not  easy  to  understand  this  Self.  This 
Knowledge of the Self (Atma Gnan) that ‘we’ have is a very 
exalted  thing.  There  is  hardly  any  difference  between  keval 
Gnan  (absolute  Knowledge)  and  This;  there  is  only  a 
difference of four degrees. And what kind of Self-realization 
should it be? It should be such that One has experienced It [the 

 
[1.3] Does Vibhaav Mean Viruddhbhaav? 

 39 

Self].  The  Self  should  prevail  as  separate,  completely 
separate,  and  that  too,  the  Self  should  be  the  absolutely 
independent  Self  (niralamb  Atma).  This  kind  of  self  [the 
power atma] will not do. What people have talked about is the 
power atma (the relative self that has been powered with life 
energy  in  the  presence  of  the  Self;  energized  self;  power 
chetan). Now, if it is referred to as power atma, then people 
will understand; otherwise, if it is simply referred to as  ‘the 
Self’ (Chetan), then how would they understand? Just like the 
power that has been filled in the batteries, in that, the batteries 
and the power are separate things. And the battery that is there, 
continues doing its work. These are in fact batteries; the three 
batteries of the mind, the speech and the body. These batteries 
will last as long as there is power filled in them, and once that 
power comes to an end, they will fall away. ‘We’ refer to that 
as ‘discharge’. ‘You’ [the Self] do not have to ‘do’ anything, 
they  continue to  discharge on their own. ‘You’ just  have to 
keep Seeing how the discharge is going on, that is all, and if 
you try to be overly wise, then your finger will get burnt. 

This is a very profound phenomenon; this is all a Science 
that  is  filled  with  many  unrevealed  revelations;  it  is  the 
collective  Science  of  the  twenty-four  Tirthankar  Lords. 
Otherwise,  attaining  the  Knowledge  that  separates  the  Self 
from the non-Self (bhed Gnan) within just one hour has never 
occurred, and that too, whilst living in this worldly life. Even 
the renunciates were not able to attain that. Whereas here, one 
has attained it even whilst living worldly life; one plays with 
his children, eats and drinks, enjoys himself, yet he does not 
face  any  problem.  This  is  because  this  is  a  Science  as 
expounded by the Tirthankar Lords; this is Akram Vignan.  

Whereas, this [relative self] is nothing else but that which 
is  filled  with  power.  There  is  no  Chetan  (Self;  property  to 
Know and See) in it at all. That is why ‘we’ do not refer to it 
as ‘power chetan’ but instead, ‘we’ call it ‘nishchetan chetan’ 

 
 
40 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

(a  non-living  entity;  an  energized  entity  that  appears  to  be 
living but is in fact lifeless).  

The inspiration is  not  of God, it is  not  of the Self. The 
inspirer is himself considered the guilty one. The inspirer is 
the guiltiest one by far; karma indeed applies to him only. And 
the Self is clean, It is in a pure form and It cannot be touched 
by karma at all. Karma is at the gross level whereas the Self is 
at  the  subtlest  level;  the  very  One  that  ‘we’  have  Seen  and 
experienced, is the very One ‘we’ are prevailing as. ‘We’ have 
Seen the absolutely independent Self. 

The Intents of Attachment and All Else Are Not of 
the Self 

Questioner: Please explain the statement, ‘From the Real 
viewpoint, the Self’s intents of attachment, etc., are the cause 
of  binding  of  karma.  And  the  binding  of  karma  has  been 
considered the cause of worldly life.’ 

Dadashri: Now, the intents of attachment etc., are not of 
the Self Itself. This has not been explicitly written down for 
these people [on the Kramik path]. The intents of attachment 
etc., are not of the Self Itself, they are parupadhi (problems 
that have been induced externally by the non-Self). They are 
like an upadhi (an externally induced problem and its resultant 
suffering).  Just  like  if  a  person  has  become  entangled  in  a 
problem that is induced externally, and due to that he appears 
as  if  he  is  entrenched  in  the  upadhi;  that  is  because  of  the 
upadhi. If there were no upadhi, then he would not be affected 
whatsoever. Hence, the properties such as attachment, etc., are 
not One’s [the Self’s] own properties. A third identity arises 
from  the  coming  together  of  the  two  eternal  elements;  one 
with  completely  different  properties  that  have  a  specific 
function.  This  attachment  and  abhorrence,  they  are  vyatirek 
guna. So, for these people on the Kramik path (the traditional 
step-by-step  path  to  attain  the  Self),  this  is  the  system,  and 

 
[1.3] Does Vibhaav Mean Viruddhbhaav? 

 41 

only then  will it work for them; otherwise it will not  work, 
will it! Whereas ‘our’ Akram path states it explicitly. 

Questioner:  Now,  [it  is  stated  that,]  “The  resulting 
attachment (raag parinaam) is a part of One’s [the Self’s] own 
phase, therefore the Self is a doer of it.” Now, is the resulting 
attachment actually a phase of the Self? 

Dadashri:  No,  it  is  not  like  that.  Whatever  we 
[mahatmas] have understood here [on the Akram path], all the 
people on the Kramik path do not know that at all.  

Questioner: So, is it completely contrary to fact? 

Dadashri:  They  believe  the  Self  to  be  where  It  is  not 

present at all. 

Questioner: Yes. They believe It to be present where It 

is not. And that is why these difficulties tend to arise. 

Dadashri: When ‘we’ say, “There is no Self present there 
at  all,  everything  is  functioning  without  Chetan  (the  Self),” 
how is it possible for them to believe that? 

Questioner:  I  read  that  the  Pudgal  [Parmanu]  and  the 
Self exist together in an avgaahanroop (a form where they are 
living in the same space without becoming a compound) and 
that is why this unnatural intent (vibhaavik bhaav) arises. In 
reality,  neither  the  Self,  nor  the  Pudgal  [Parmanu]  are  the 
doers,  that  is  what  Kundkundacharya  [a  Self-realized 
Digambara Jain monk who lived around 600 years after Lord 
Mahavir attained nirvana and who authored many Jain texts 
such as Samaysaar and Niyamsaar] has said. That is what You 
have said in a simple language. So then, how can the scriptures 
refer to the Self as a doer? 

Dadashri:  ‘We’  are  not  saying  that  anyone  is  wrong. 
Moreover, they have clearly written that with  respect to the 
Self-realized  state,  the  Self  is  indeed  the  doer  of  Its  own 

 
 
42 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

inherent  nature  [Knower  and  Seer].  With  respect  to  the 
ignorant state, the self is the doer of this [the vibhaav; assumed 
identification  with  that  which  is  not  One’s  own].  However, 
that talk adheres to a single viewpoint, so the sense of doership 
(kartapanu)  does  not  go  away.  And  people  are  not  able  to 
understand this scientific point. Even in other religions, it is 
stated  that  this  cannot  happen  without  God’s  wish.  Hence, 
they have implicated God in this. So then how can one attain 
Gnan? They  contradict each other. As a matter of fact,  it is 
‘our’  Akram  Vignan  that  has  destroyed  all  these  [incorrect] 
links. 

With a Sense of Doership, Worldly Life Began  

Now, what these people said was, “The Self is the doer.” 
Hey, they have gone to the extent of saying, “The Self is the 
doer of the bhaavkarma.” So, they have implicated the Self to 
be the doer of the bhaavkarma. If It were to be the doer of the 
vibhaav, then It would remain a doer even in moksha. Why is 
that not the case, over there? Hence, it is only when a Gnani 
Purush comes along, that He can reveal everything as it is. 

[This  belief  of,]  ‘I  am  the  one  who  is  having  the 
bhaavkarma,’  is  itself  bondage;  that  is  parbhaav  (a  state 
which is not one’s own; an intent that is not one’s own). To 
believe the parbhaav to be One’s inherent nature as the Self 
(Swabhaav) is bondage. Why is it parbhaav? It is subject to 
parsatta  (the  authority  of  another  entity;  subject  to  external 
circumstances). In the scriptures it is written that, the Self is a 
non-doer  by  Its  inherent  nature.  Due  to  vibhaav,  due  to 
visheshbhaav,  it  [the  relative  self]  is  a  doer,  and  thus  it 
becomes the sufferer. Now, all of that has been left behind just 
like that, and the Self has been taken into the relative. People 
have begun to believe the worldly-interacting self (vyavahaar 
atma) to be the [original] Self.  

Questioner: It is from that viewpoint, is it not? 

 
[1.3] Does Vibhaav Mean Viruddhbhaav? 

 43 

Dadashri: Yes. If You understand the self to be the doer 
from the relative viewpoint, then Your [spiritual] work will be 
done.  However,  one  tends  to  forget  that  viewpoint,  isn’t  it! 
And hence, you cannot see any results? What is the reason for 
that? There are many mistakes at the fundamental level, too 
many mistakes. [And due to that,] On the contrary, not only 
can one not see any results but on top of that there are a lot of 
externally  induced  problems,  there  are  endless  kashay  (the 
inner  enemies  of  anger,  pride,  deceit  and  greed).  This  is 
always the case; wherever the kashay are being entertained, 
there,  the  vitaraag  dharma  (the  religion  prescribed  by  the 
absolutely  detached  Lords,  which  is  at  360  degrees,  is 
impartial,  incorporates  all  viewpoints,  and  does  not  hurt 
anyone else’s viewpoint or religion) cannot exist. Do You feel 
that to be so?  

Now tell me, if one goes around with such swachchhand 
(following  one’s  own  intellect  in  spiritual  matters)  for  a 
hundred thousand lifetimes, then will he ever attain his goal? 
One  acts  according  to  his  own  intellect  in  spiritual  matters, 
and on top of that he tells others, “All these people are fools.” 
Furthermore, he calls other people fools. 

By visheshbhaav, what They [the vitaraag Lords] mean 
to  say  is  that,  the  Self  can  Know  all  this  through  absolute 
Knowledge,  and  It  can  also  Know  this  visheshbhaav.  If  the 
circumstances are such, then One Himself [the Self] can also 
Know  the  visheshbhaav.  Therefore,  the  visheshbhaav  arises 
subject  to  circumstances  and  time.  If  the  circumstances 
[ignorance of the Self] are separated, then the  visheshbhaav 
will go away. Hence, the Self and the Pudgal [Parmanu] that 
have come together, if ‘we’ separate them, then their resultant 
visheshbhaav will dissipate. 

 
 
44 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Completely Created by Instillation… 

Let  me  tell  you  the  fundamental  facts.  There  are  two 
kinds of Atma; one is the original Self, and in the presence of 
this original Self, the other self that has arisen is the worldly-
interacting self. The original Self is the Nishchay Atma (Real 
Self),  no  change  has  occurred  in  It  whatsoever.  ‘It’  has 
remained the same as It always has been, and due to that, the 
worldly-interacting self has arisen. Just as when you look in 
the mirror, do you see two ‘Chandubhai’s’ or not?  

Questioner: Yes, two are seen. 

Dadashri: In the same way, this worldly-interacting self 
has arisen. ‘We’ have referred to it as the ‘pratishthit atma’. 
One has done his own instillation (pratishtha) in it. Therefore, 
if  you  still  continue  doing  the  instillation  of,  ‘I  am 
Chandubhai, I am Chandubhai,’ then a pratishthit atma for the 
next life will arise once again. If you believe the relative to be 
real,  then  the  worldly-interacting  self  will  arise  once  again. 
The Real Self actually remains the very same as It has been. 
If  you  by  chance  get  to  ‘touch’  [experience]  It,  then  your 
salvation is guaranteed! At present, you only have the ‘touch’ 
of the worldly-interacting self.  

There  is  a  man  who  is  a  big  distributor  of  dried  dates. 
Everyone refers to him as, “He is the dried dates merchant.” 
But in court, he is considered an attorney. If he argues cases, 
then he would be called an attorney, wouldn’t he? Similarly, 
if  you,  the  developing  I,  are  engrossed  in  the  relative  or 
worldly  activities,  then  you  are  the  worldly-interacting  self, 
and if You, the developing ‘I’, are engrossed in the Real, then 
You are the Real Self. Fundamentally, You are the very same, 
but  Your  state  is  dependent  upon  what  activity  You  are 
engrossed in.  

 
[1.3] Does Vibhaav Mean Viruddhbhaav? 

 45 

The Worldly-Interacting Self Is Itself the Ego 

Questioner: Now, because the developing I applies his 
awareness in the vibhaav state, that is why karma get bound 
onto the Self. Therefore, it is verily the applied awareness of 
the Self that goes into the  vibhaav  state.  If  the Self  were to 
remain in Its Swabhaav (inherently natural state as the Self), 
then no karma would get bound onto It; is that correct? 

Dadashri: No, that is wrong. The Self constantly remains 
in Its Swabhaav only, that verily is the original Self. And the 
one  that  oscillates  between  Swabhaav  and  vibhaav  is  the 
worldly-interacting self.  The original Self is  actually free  at 
all  times,  It  is  free  since  time  immemorial.  Moreover,  It  is 
residing within you. The worldly-interacting self refers to the 
self  that  one  has  believed  oneself  to  be,  the  one  that  is 
vibhaavik, and there is not an iota of Chetan in it. 

Questioner:  Is  this  worldly-interacting  self  itself  the 

ego? 

Dadashri: Yes, that indeed is the ego. And there is not 
even  an  iota  of  Chetan  in  it.  Just  imagine,  how  the  world 
continues to function without any Chetan in it! This is the first 
time  that  ‘we’  are  declaring  in  this  world  that  there  is  no 
Chetan in it.  

Questioner:  Before  You  gave  us  Gnan,  we  were 

prevailing as the worldly-interacting self, isn’t it? 

Dadashri:  Yes,  what  else  was  there  then?  Whilst 
prevailing  as  the  worldly-interacting  self,  You  Saw  the 
original  Self.  And  from  the  moment  You  saw  It,  You  were 
blown away, ‘Wow! There is so much bliss!’ And thereafter, 
You  started  to  dwell  only  as  the  Self.  Before  [Gnan],  the 
dwelling was in worldly life, in worldly things. 

 
 
46 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Worldly Life Arises From Worldly Interaction That 
Happens Without Any Effort 

There is no proof of the Self in this world. However, there 
is 
(worldly 
indeed  proof  of  anupchaarik  vyavahaar 
interaction that happens without any effort); such that without 
doing any upchaar (visible effort or planning), this body has 
been created, despite the absence of a creator. Instead, people 
have  forced  upon  the  belief  that,  ‘God  exists,  and  God  has 
created all these statues in his factory.’ Meaning that the very 
opportunity to think beyond this has been shut off completely! 
Whereas, what ‘we’ are saying is that, “God has not created 
them.”  And  just  take  a  look  at  this  worldly  interaction  that 
happens  without  any  effort!  This  worldly  interaction  is  not 
such that any visible effort or planning needs to be done for it. 
Upchaarik vyavahaar (worldly interactions for which visible 
effort or planning is needed) is really the interactions that go 
on within when you believe you are making the tea. To say, 
“I  made  the  tea,”  that  too  is  an  illusion.  Even  this  world  is 
actually  nothing  but  a  worldly  interaction  that  happens 
without any effort. But just because one feels, ‘I am the one 
doing  this,’  worldly  life  has  come  into  being.  That  too  is 
worldly interaction that happens without any effort. If it was 
not worldly interaction that happens without any effort, then 
no  one  would  ever  die!  If  it  was  worldly  interaction  that 
requires  visible  effort  or  planning,  then  no  one  would  die, 
would  they!  That  is  also  worldly  interaction  that  happens 
without  any  effort  indeed.  If  there  was  work  to  be  done  at 
night, then a person would not go to sleep at all, would he! So 
that  is  worldly  interaction  that  happens  without  any  effort! 
However,  because  the  intellect  of  many  people  becomes  so 
sharp that when they do all this work, the awareness of ‘I am 
doing  it’  tends  to  arise  over  there.  And  how  does  such 
awareness come into being? It is because of the vyatirek guna 
that have arisen. 

 
[1.3] Does Vibhaav Mean Viruddhbhaav? 

 47 

Therefore,  these  vyatirek  guna  have  arisen  due  to  the 
presence  of  both,  the  Self  and  the  non-Self  [being  in  close 
proximity]. The Self alone cannot make this happen, the non-
Self  alone  cannot  make  this  happen.  Hence,  over  here  [in 
Akram], one of them is moved away. And thereafter, they [the 
vyatirek guna] will not arise. 

Questioner: But even in their presence, they [the vyatirek 
guna] arose because one considered them to be ‘his own’, isn’t 
it? 

Dadashri:  Who  is  the  one  considering  them  to  be  ‘his 
own’? Neither the Self nor the Pudgal [Parmanu] are saying, 
“They are mine.” 

Questioner:  But,  right  now,  they  [the  two  eternal 

elements] are in close proximity, are they not? 

Dadashri: It is because they are in close proximity with 
each  other  that  the  entire  awakened  awareness  as  the  Self 
(jagruti)  dissipated.  With  the  attainment  of  the  awakened 
awareness as the Self, the two [eternal elements] separate, the 
vyatirek guna stop from arising.  

Questioner: Now that very thing, what awareness arose 

due to the close proximity of the two? 

Dadashri: As the two came close to each other, a veil of 
ignorance  (avaran)  came  over  the  Self,  the  awakened 
awareness  as  the  Self  dissipated.  Thereafter,  by  destroying 
that veil of ignorance which arose due to close proximity, the 
separation occurred. The veil of ignorance has to be destroyed, 
does it not? 

Questioner:  So,  if  both  the  eternal  elements  are 
completely  separate,  then  had  that  arisen  because  of  them 
coming close to each other? 

 
 
48 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Dadashri: They are completely separate indeed, neither 
of the two have done anything at all. Neither of the two have 
helped or caused any harm to the other. There is nothing there. 
This is all your mistake. Moreover, even those people [on the 
Kramik path] accept that no eternal element can help or harm 
another eternal element. Hey mortal one, so then, why don’t 
you figure out who did all this? Did the Self do it or did the 
non-Self do it? But these people are not able to understand the 
answer to that. This is a scientific point of discussion. 

Specific Clarity Regarding the State of Vibhaav  

Have you understood vishesh guna? These are the vishesh 
guna  of  the  eternal  elements;  they  are  exact.  But  ‘we’  will 
show you with a simile the vishesh guna that arise in a avastha 
(situation; temporary state) here [in worldly life]. You cannot 
see the vishesh guna of an eternal element, therefore ‘we’ will 
show  you,  through  a  situation  in  worldly  life,  how  this 
[vishesh guna] has come into being! 

Questioner:  Can  you  please  explain  with  an  example, 
what the main cause is  behind the coming together of these 
two? 

Dadashri: There is no simile that can be given regarding 
the eternal elements, yet ‘we’ are giving you this simile; see 
if  you  can  find  the  cause  behind  it.  Just  as,  when  a  house 
owner installs marble tiles in the garden, say a marble pathway 
has been installed. The owner walks back and forth on it every 
day, whilst wearing shoes. At that time, what would he know 
about  the  nature  of  the  marble?  Then  one  day,  on  a  hot 
summer day, at about two in the afternoon, his child, who was 
playing  in  the  garden,  fell  down,  so  he  ran  barefoot  on  the 
marble pathway to get to the child. Now, what kind of effect 
would the marble have given him at that time? 

Questioner: Heat, heat. 

 
[1.3] Does Vibhaav Mean Viruddhbhaav? 

 49 

Dadashri: No, but he would feel the heat [from the sun] 
on the upper part of his body too. But, what effect would arise 
for the feet? 

Questioner: They would get burnt. 

Dadashri: They would get burnt. So, the owner may have 
a doubt arise that, ‘What did the contractor do? Why did he 
install such marble that heats up?’ So, he scolds the contractor, 
“Hey, as you installed marble that heats up, I will not pay your 
full invoice.” Then, the  contractor reasons  with  him, “Sir,  I 
have not installed marble that heats up, I have laid marble that 
is cool, but it has heated up because of the circumstance of the 
sun.  As  soon  as  the  sun  sets,  the  marble  will  immediately 
return  to  its  inherent  nature.”  Therefore,  the  marble  has 
become hot because of the presence of the sun. Meaning that 
a vishesh guna (a specific new property) has arisen and when 
the sun goes away, the vishesh guna will dissipate. 

In  the  same  way,  this  ego  has  arisen.  Now,  such  a 
clarification  has  not  been  made  in  the  scriptures!  And  who 
would give such examples? If there is an example, then one 
can understand, isn’t it! Did ‘we’ not explain it? It is a third 
property that has arisen.  

Questioner: So that means that the marble acquired the 

property of the sun. It is not a third property, is it? 

Dadashri:  No,  the  marble  does  not  acquire  the  sun’s 
property. An effect arises in  it; it is  affected by the sun.  Its 
inherent  nature  is  indeed  to  be  cool,  but  this  effect  [of 
becoming hot] tends to arise in it. 

Questioner: So, this heat and coolness, is that an effect 

of the environment? 

Dadashri:  It  is  scientific  circumstantial  evidence.  The 
rays of the sun touch the ground and that in turn gives rise to 
heat. 

 
 
50 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Can your intellect fathom this or not? 

The Inspiration in This Is of the Power! 

If something is  placed here, in  the presence of the sun, 

will energy be generated or will it not? 

Questioner: It will. 

Dadashri: So, the sun itself is not the doer in this. When 
these two things come together, the energy tends to arise. In 
the same way, this has come into being. Now, how can this be 
comprehended? How can one understand this? They will ask, 
“How  can  this  happen  without  someone  doing  it?”  This 
cannot be comprehended, can it? 

Questioner: No, it can’t. 

Dadashri: And there definitely is inspiration. Who is the 
inspirer? The inspiration is of the power; it is not of the Self. 
If  the  inspiration  was  of  the  Self,  then  It  would  become 
[karmically] bound.  

Therefore,  it  is  not  easy  to  understand  this,  it  is  very 
difficult.  And  that  is  indeed  why,  one  keeps  falling  behind. 
That  is  indeed  why,  one  has  to  renounce;  otherwise,  would 
there even be a need to renounce? If You have understood the 
Self, then You do not have to renounce, and if you have not 
understood  the  Self,  then  keep  on  renouncing  of  your  own 
accord,  keep  on  renouncing  for  infinite  lifetimes!  The 
renunciate and the Self are both separate. The renunciate is a 
trader of the pudgal [the ego; the bavo].  

Questioner: Are the power and Chaitanya (the Self; the 

Knower and Seer) both separate? 

Dadashri: Just as the sun and the energy that arises over 
here are separate, that is  how separate they are. The energy 
arises because of the sun, that is how separate they are. There 
is no doership of the sun in causing the power to arise. The 

 
[1.3] Does Vibhaav Mean Viruddhbhaav? 

 51 

energy arises because another thing has come into the picture. 
See,  if  you  were  to  place  a  big,  thick  glass  over  here,  then 
because  of  this  glass,  when  another  thing  comes  into  the 
picture,  there  is  a  big  spark  and  because  of  that  everything 
starts to burn below the glass. The sun has nothing to do with 
this. It is because these other things are present all together, 
that this tends to happen. If you move them away, then nothing 
will happen. Now, how can they be moved away? 

Questioner:  If  we  can  find  a  person  who  can  move  it 

aside, then he will move it away. 

Dadashri:  He  will  move  it  away.  That  is  why 
Krupaludev has said, “You will attain liberation once you find 
the  One  who  has  come  to  bestow  liberation  (mokshadata 
Purush).”  The  One  who  has  come  here  to  grant  liberation! 
What must such a benefactor be like? Krupaludev himself has 
written this word ‘mokshadata’ (the bestower of liberation)! 
Besides that, nowhere else has this word ‘mokshadata’ been 
written! 



 
 
 
[4] 

The Self Got Entrapped First 

The World, a Puzzle Itself 

This vishesh guna (a completely new property of a third 
entity that arises with the coming together of the two eternal 
elements  of  the  Self  and  inanimate  matter)  has  arisen  by 
coming into contact with this worldly life. This vishesh guna 
will come to an end when the time is right. Its influence will 
wear  off.  The  influence  of  this  worldly  life  means  illusion. 
Once that influence wears off, everything will fall into place. 
One (pote; the developing ‘I’) will end up becoming what He 
really is [the Self]. So, where such a thing has not happened 
at  all,  then  where  is  the  need  to  give  rise  to  anything?  The 
world  has  not  arisen  at  all,  it  is  eternal.  It  never  had  a 
beginning, so is there any need to look for it? Based on that, 
there is even no need to say, “There is a creator.” The world 
is the puzzle itself; it has ‘become puzzled’ [arisen] by itself. 
God has not ‘puzzled’ [created] this world at all. 

Ignorance Has No Beginning 

Questioner:  Dada,  then  how  did  ignorance  of  the  Self 

first arise in the entire world? 

Dadashri: It was actually already there. It does not have 
a  beginning.  [However,  after  attaining  Gnan  from  a  Gnani 
Purush,] It comes to an end. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[1.4] The Self Got Entrapped First 

53 

Questioner: If it has an end, then when did it begin? 

Dadashri:  All  of  this  was  already  in  existence,  it  was 
definitely there. This is because, the six eternal elements exist 
together, and the moment they [the Self and inanimate matter] 
are  separated,  One  [the  Self]  becomes  separate  [free] 
immediately. All the other eternal elements are free indeed, it 
is only this Chetan (the Self) that has become bound. This is 
because the Self felt, ‘Who is doing this?’ But with that, the 
ego arose, due to the scientific circumstantial evidences. 

Questioner:  But  why  would 

the  vyatirek  guna 
(completely  new  properties  of  the  self  namely  anger,  pride, 
deceit and greed that arises when two eternal elements of the 
Self  and  inanimate  matter  come  together)  even  arise  in  the 
Self that is pure? 

Dadashri: Those properties are not of the Self. They have 

arisen separately. 

Questioner: So, that means that this energy of doing has 

been there with the Self since time immemorial, right? 

Dadashri: No, it is not like that either. 

Questioner: One thing is that, we do indeed consider the 

Self to be a non-doer. 

Dadashri: ‘It’ definitely is a non-doer. 

Questioner: ‘It’ is indeed. Just as fire is unaffected when 
you  strike  a  hammer  on  hot  iron,  similarly  nothing  at  all 
happens to the Self. 

Dadashri: That is indeed what ‘we’ are saying; nothing 
happens to the Self. Everything is actually happening to the 
ego. If the ego were to leave, then there would be no problem 
at all. 

It  is  only  the  ego  that  is  doing  everything.  The  ego  is 
blind,  the  poor  thing  cannot  see  at  all,  and  it  is  acting  in 

 
 
54 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

accordance  with  the  ‘eyes’  [vision]  of  the  intellect.  Now, 
when the intellect says, ‘That person is our maternal uncle-in-
law,’ the ego says, ‘Okay then!’ 

The Illusions Are All of the Intellect 

Questioner:  So,  all  these  problems  must  be  of  the 

intellect only, right? 

Dadashri:  It  is  indeed because of the intellect  that this 

worldly life has arisen. 

Questioner: So then, wouldn’t the belief also come under 

the intellect? 

Dadashri:  No,  no,  the  wrong  belief  is  of  the  ego.  The 

intellect does not have any way at all of having a belief. 

As it is, the ego and everything else is a wrong belief. The 
one  having  wrong  beliefs  is  himself  a  wrong  belief.  While 
being in the wrong belief, he has wrong beliefs. He does not 
have wrong beliefs whilst being in the right belief. 

Questioner:  It  is  not  possible  to  have  a  wrong  belief 

whilst being in the right belief. 

Dadashri: Then it cannot happen at all. 

Questioner: That means that the Self acquires the wrong 
belief due to the circumstance of the intellect, or else the Self 
does such a thing with support from the intellect. 

Dadashri: No, the Self does not ‘do’ any such thing at 

all, does It! The Self is actually a non-doer. 

Questioner: On what basis does the intellect do all this? 

Dadashri: On the basis of the ego. 

Questioner: Is the ego also inanimate? 

Dadashri: Yes, everything is inanimate indeed, but this 
[ego]  is  not  completely  inanimate.  The  ego  is  actually 

 
[1.4] The Self Got Entrapped First 

55 

mishrachetan (the I with wrong belief that arises as when the 
eternal elements of the Self and inanimate matter come into 
close proximity with each other), the intellect is mishrachetan, 
it is just the mind alone that is inanimate [nishchetan chetan; 
non-living entity]. Even the chit (subtle component of vision 
and  knowledge  in  the  inner  functioning  instrument  called 
antahkaran)  is  mishrachetan.  The  mind  is  completely 
physical. 

So, the Self is in the Real form as eternal bliss. If the Self 
were to come into Its own inherent nature, then that would be 
it. ‘It’ has not yet come into Its inherent nature because of this 
upadhibhaav  (to  believe  ‘I  am  the  sufferer’  of  the  effects 
arising in another entity). 

Questioner: The illusion has arisen for the Self because 
of the intellect, but if the intellect and the Self were to not be 
together,  then  there  would  be  no  reason  for  this  illusion  to 
arise at all. Therefore, it is indeed the intellect that is doing all 
this, and the Self is affected by it. If the Self is indeed in the 
Real form as liberation (moksha swaroop), then why does all 
this confusion continue to arise? 

Dadashri: No, It [the Self] has not been affected, nothing 

has happened. 

Questioner: So then, these impure karma that the self has 
become bound with, how did they come to be bound? I want 
to understand that. 

Dadashri: You have to keep coming here if you want to 
understand that. This concept is so vast that you have to keep 
coming here again and again. Even if ‘we’ were to explain it 
to you in one day, you would not be able to understand it in 
its entirety. If you understand it a bit at a time, then you will 
be able to [eventually] grasp it. Can one pack up all of one’s 
things and leave, in just one day? Hence, you have to come to 
satsang. ‘We’ are still here for another two to four days; do 

 
 
56 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

come again! Did you like this? If you ask something, then all 
of it will fall into place. 

Karma Has an End but No Beginning 

Questioner:  From  when  did  the  binding  of  karma 

primarily begin? 

Dadashri: There is no beginning to the binding of karma. 
There  is  eventually  an  end  to  the  binding  of  karma,  but  no 
beginning, because this is actually a scientific process. Which 
one is first in water; oxygen or hydrogen? Which of the two 
was first so that water was formed? All of this happens at-a-
time  [in  the  same  instance].  It  is  scientific  circumstantial 
evidence, so then there is no such thing as first or second. As 
the pure Self  and pure inanimate matter  came together, this 
vishesh  guna  arose,  hence  the  reference  is  to  the  vishesh 
gunadharma  (the  completely  new  properties  with  specific 
functions).  The  gunadharma  of  a  sense  of  doership 
(kartapanu) arose in that, and the binding of karma occurs due 
to  that.  Now,  that  is  at  the  gross  level,  whereas  the  Self  is 
subtle. How long does this visheshbhaav (a third identity with 
completely  new  properties)  last?  It  lasts  as  long  as  the 
circumstance  of  the  Pudgal  is  present.  It’s  not  like  the 
circumstance is everlasting. 

This  world  changes  but  God  [the  absolute  Self]  has 
always  remained  in  the  form  as  God,  His  form  does  not 
change! 

The Self has never become impure at all, because the Self 
is  a  naturally  existing  eternal  element.  Plaster  cannot  be 
applied to a naturally existing eternal element. ‘It’ cannot be 
cut into pieces. The Self cannot be divided up. However many 
‘holes’  form  within  the  veil  of  ignorance  (avaran)  over  the 
Self, to that degree, the Self will manifest.  

 
[1.4] The Self Got Entrapped First 

57 

The Journey, From Nigod to Siddha 

Questioner: Is a human being also a visheshbhaav of the 

Self? 

Dadashri: Everything is a visheshbhaav indeed!  

Questioner:  So  then,  all  of  this,  Chetan  (the  Self)  and 

jada (inanimate matter), are they both the same? 

Dadashri:  No,  how  can  they  be  the  same?  Inanimate 
matter  has  affected  the  Self  and  effect  of  the  Self  has  been 
taken on by the inanimate matter. So, the inanimate matter has 
become filled with life energy, and the Self has become one 
with inanimate matter. 

Questioner:  Can  the  Self  become  one  with  inanimate 

matter? 

Dadashri: To become one with inanimate matter simply 
means that such an effect has arisen, but in reality, the Self has 
not become one with inanimate matter.  In reality, the effect 
has  happened  to  inanimate  matter.  The  effect  has  actually 
happened  in  inanimate  matter;  the  effect  has  not  really 
happened to the Self. However, the effect remains in the belief 
of the [worldly-interacting] self. Only the belief has changed, 
a wrong belief has been established. 

Questioner: The human body has been considered to be 
the  best,  so  when  the  Self  takes  on  the  body  of  animal,  an 
insect or a microorganism, then wouldn’t that be considered a 
painful occurrence for the Self? 

Dadashri:  Can  ice  really  cool  down  fire?  Or  else,  if  a 
man  touched  ice,  would  he  get  burnt?  What  if  you  were  to 
hold this candle flame close to a block of ice? Would the ice 
get burnt? [Similarly,] Nothing ever happens to the Self. ‘It’ 
is  actually  eternally  blissful,  whereas  this  is  another  thing; 
‘rust’ has formed over It.  

 
 
58 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Questioner:  Based  on  what  karma  does  an  embodied 
soul come to be in nigod (the lowest form of life which is not 
yet in worldly nomenclature)? 

Dadashri: There are extreme karma in nigod. Not even a 
single  karma  has  been  shed  (discharged)  from  it,  and  not  a 
single  sense  organ  has  developed  in  it.  As  long  as  light 
(prakash), as long as illumination does not come out of it, until 
then  a  living  being  remains  in  nigod.  Nigod  means  [a  state 
where the Soul is] completely covered with karma. 

Questioner: But what is the reason for it to be in nigod? 

Dadashri: It is actually already in nigod based on the law 
of nature. From there, it comes into this worldly nomenclature 
(vyavahaar  rashi).  The  veils  of  ignorance  over  the  Self 
continue to reduce and later on, It becomes free. And the very 
reason  for  this  is  scientific  circumstantial  evidence.  These 
vyatirek  guna  have  arisen,  and  due  to  that,  this  [realm  as] 
nigod has also arisen. From nigod, gradually it develops into 
a one-sensed living being, a two-sensed living being, a three-
sensed living being; as the circumstances change, it continues 
to develop. 

Questioner:  When  the  living  being  came  into  worldly 
nomenclature,  at  that  moment,  it  met  with  kaal  (time)  and 
Pudgal Parmanu; without that, the vyatirek guna would not 
arise, would they? 

Dadashri: No, the vyatirek [guna] have actually already 

arisen. 

Questioner: How did that come to be? That is when the 

living being came into the flow of time… 

Dadashri:  The  living  beings  that  exist  in  avyavahaar 
rashi (a state of uncategorized souls that have not yet entered 
worldly interactions), those very ones are with vyatirek guna. 

 
[1.4] The Self Got Entrapped First 

59 

Questioner: Is that so Dada? So, all those properties are 
already there right from the beginning in the living beings that 
are not in worldly nomenclature? 

Dadashri: Yes. Everywhere, every living being on this 
side  [not  in  worldly  nomenclature]  is  with  vyatirek  guna 
indeed;  whereas  these  Siddha  Lords  (absolutely  liberated 
Souls  who  have  completely  ended  the  cycle  of  birth  and 
death),  They  have  gone  to  Siddha  Kshetra  (location  at  the 
crest  of  the  universe  where  all  absolutely  liberated  Souls 
reside) after the vyatirek guna have been exhausted. 

Questioner: Dada, does that mean the One for whom this 
[vyatirek] guna do not  arise [charge] anew, is  the only One 
who can become Siddha?  

Dadashri: When the old [vyatirek] guna that were there, 
shed  off  completely  [get  discharged;  come  to  an  end],  One 
becomes Siddha. When the vyatirek guna cease to exist, One 
can become Siddha.  

Questioner:  How  do  they  exist  within  a  one-sensed 

living being? This anger, pride, deceit and greed … 

Dadashri: They are existent in their fundamental state. 
What  is  the  fundamental  state  of  anger,  pride,  deceit  and 
greed? It is attachment or abhorrence. It is from attachment or 
abhorrence that these unnatural ones have arisen. Greed and 
deceit came from attachment, whereas pride and anger came 
from  abhorrence.  In  this  way,  their  fundamental  state  is 
attachment  and  abhorrence;  and  what  is  the  main  cause  of 
attachment and abhorrence? It is ruchi and aruchi (inclination 
and disinclination). Even trees have ruchi and aruchi. Every 
living  being,  even  a  one-sensed  living  being  has  ruchi  and 
aruchi. Even though it may not like something, what can it do; 
there  is  no  choice!  The  sentiment  of  not  liking  definitely 
exists, doesn’t it? The awareness  that, ‘This  is  painful,’ has 
come  forth,  hasn’t  it?  There  is  disinclination  where  it  is 

 
 
60 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

painful; then again, one also experiences pleasure. When there 
is a nice breeze and the rain has fallen, then not only the trees 
but also the plants are delighted. However, when it is intensely 
sunny, or it is snowing, then all the plants become miserable. 
Therefore, no matter where you look, it is this very same, this 
anger, pride, deceit and greed. 

Questioner:  These  animals, 

the  creation,  which 
comprises  of  8,400,000  life-forms  (yoni),  the  ones  that 
became  humans;  have  they  all  verily  arisen  through  these 
vyatirek guna or what? 

Dadashri:  Yes,  all  of  that  has  indeed  come  into  being 

because of the vyatirek guna only. 

Questioner: So then, what about these shapes, all kinds 

of shapes, all of that… 

Dadashri:  Yes,  just  like  when  a  waterfall  flows  down, 

the bubbles that tend to form, are they all of the same kind? 

Questioner: No, they are all different. Some are small, 

others are large. 

Dadashri: Some are this big, some are that size, that is 
how  all  this  is.  Did  God  come  there  and  sit  down  to  make 
them?  That  is  how  these  ‘bubbles’  [life-forms]  form  and 
‘burst’ [die], they form, and they ‘burst’. 

Questioner: But every animal has different attributes, a 
different inherent nature that comes along with it, doesn’t it?  

Dadashri:  Yes,  actually  each  living  being  has  its  own 
individual space, so they are all different; on top of that, their 
inherent nature is also different. Depending on the evidences 
they encounter, that is how they become. The moment another 
set of circumstances are encountered, they become like that. 
‘Your’  [the  Self’s]  form  is  beyond  [outside  of]  those 
circumstances. 

 
[1.4] The Self Got Entrapped First 

61 

Worldly Life Has Arisen Due to the Pressure of 
Circumstances 

Questioner:  Suppose  we  believe  that  there  is  some 
energy beyond this world, and we are on the other side. We 
are a part of it…. 

Dadashri:  ‘You’  [the  Self]  are  not  a  part  of  anything, 

You are not a part. 

Questioner: Are we one and the same? 

Dadashri: No, no, You are not the same either. ‘You’ are 
independent. ‘You’ do not have any superior [God] over You. 
If You were to be a part of Him, then He would trouble you to 
the extent of tiring You out. But that is not how You [the Self] 
are; You are completely independent. 

Questioner:  If  all  of  us  are  independent,  then  the  fact 
remains  that  each  unit  is  different,  so  in  that  case,  how  are 
circumstances arranged? 

Dadashri: This has all been arranged entirely through a 

regulator [vyavasthit; scientific circumstantial evidence].  

Questioner: You have shared the conclusion that this is 

how it has been arranged, but what is the cause behind it? 

Dadashri:  There  is  no  cause  behind  it.  These  living 
beings  are  constantly  progressing  forward  and  are  trying  to 
regain  their  inherently  natural  state!  They  have  become 
visheshbhaavi (taken on a completely new form), and they are 
now looking to regain their inherently natural state. Why did 
this  visheshbhaav  arise?  The  answer  is  because  of  upadhi 
swabhaav  (the  tendency  to  assume  that  which  has  been 
induced externally to be One’s own state). As You [the Self] 
came across all the evidences, so You experience the pressure 
from  these  evidences,  which  gives  rise  to  upadhibhaav 
(visheshbhaav;  to  believe  ‘I  am  the  sufferer’  of  the  effects 

 
 
62 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

arising in another entity; to believe that which is happening to 
another entity to be happening to oneself).  

In all this, only the Self is moving ahead towards moksha, 
nothing else is happening in this; the rest is just the same, all 
the time. But just imagine what the intellect has sought out, [a 
question  like,]  ‘How  can  that  happen  without  a  beginning? 
Hey, if there is a beginning only then will it come to an end.’ 
You,  yourself  will  look  like  a  fool.  Does  a  circle  have  a 
beginning? One may ask, ‘Hey, the sun rises, from when did 
the sun begin to rise?’ 

If one were to say, “God has created it,” then he will never 
find  the  connection.  Hence,  ‘we’  are  telling  you  that  this 
[world]  has  arisen  scientifically,  that  is  the  only  way  the 
connection can be found. 

Skewed Vision Led to the Latching On 

In  the  Self,  there  is  both,  swabhaavik  Gnan-Darshan 
(Knowledge  and  Vision  that  is  natural  to  the  Self)  and 
vibhaavik  gnan-darshan  (knowledge  and  vision  that  has 
deviated  from  its  inherent  nature).  Just  because  one  [the 
worldly-interacting self; chetan; the relative self] saw it [the 
world] with a skewed vision, does that mean that it has latched 
on? The answer is, “Yes, that is indeed why this entire world 
has definitely latched on.” The question is, “Why did you see 
it with a skewed vision?” 

Yes, that is how this world has latched on [to you]. There 
is an entire multitude of circumstances which are endless; the 
moment  you  saw  this  multitude  of  circumstances  with  a 
skewed  vision,  you  were  done  for.  After  that  it  all  went  on 
from there, one after another, one leading to another, and then 
it kept on increasing infinitely. Now, that chetan (the relative 
self),  it  wants  to  become  free,  yet  it  cannot  do  so.  So  think 
about  it,  whose  force  is  greater,  the  pudgal’s  or  the  Self’s? 
Well, at present, in the state as the body he says, “I am the one 

 
[1.4] The Self Got Entrapped First 

63 

who is trapped,” doesn’t he? If this [wrong belief] was made 
of iron, then one could have welded it and cut it a long time 
ago, but this is not made of iron, is it? Not even its border can 
be broken. This is a web of illusory attachment (mayajaal)! 
Therefore, this mind, intellect, chit and ego, the ones who are 
saying, “I am doing it, I am doing it”; all of them are actually 
weapons.  Why did  these weapons start functioning? Due to 
deluded  vision  (mithyatva  darshan).  The  moment  samyak 
Darshan  (the  right  Vision  of  ‘I  am  pure  Soul’;  the 
understanding  that  takes  one  towards  the  Real)  is  attained, 
these weapons will be subjugated once again. 

It’s like this, what is this vision like, most of the time? If 
you are sitting like this [applying pressure on your eyes], then 
you will see two lights instead of only one. If your eye were 
to become like this [due to pressure being applied on it], then 
would  you see double or not? Now, in reality, there is only 
one, yet you end up seeing two. If you are drinking tea from a 
saucer, then many-a-times, the circle that is in the saucer, you 
will see two of them. Why is that? It is because you have two 
eyes; that is why you see double of everything. These physical 
eyes are seeing and those internal eyes are also seeing, but one 
has deluded vision (mithya drashti). That is why it is making 
you see everything contrary to fact. If it were to show you as 
it is, then You would be entirely free of upadhi (any externally 
induced problem and its resultant suffering), completely free 
of upadhi.  

The  Self  has  not  experienced  [suffered]  the  karma,  the 
ego has not experienced the karma. The ego has actually not 
indulged in sensual pleasures (vishay) at all, nevertheless the 
ego simply believes, ‘I indulged [in sensual pleasures].’ Lord 
Krishna says, “When the sensual pleasures are prevailing in 
their  subject  of  enjoyment,  that  is  all  happening  naturally. 
However, in that, the ego says, “I am doing it,” that is why it 
has to suffer later on.” The ego is a wrong bhaav, or an aaropit 

 
 
64 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

bhaav  (a  false  attribution  of  the  belief  ‘I  am  Chandubhai’), 
and that is  why karma is  bound. Karma is  bound when one 
says,  “I  am  doing  it.”  The  moment  the  awareness  of  ‘I  am 
doing  it’  goes  away,  One  becomes  free  from  karma. 
Thereafter, there is samvarpurvak nirjara (the discharging of 
karma goes on constantly without the inflow of new karmic 
matter). 

Questioner: How did the belief of doership arise? 

Dadashri: A wrong belief came about, the ego of ‘I am 
doing it’ arose. In this, the ego is not a physical thing at all, 
despite that, a snapshot of the ego can be taken from the body, 
that is how it is. When it is in a physical form, in the body, it 
is possible to take a picture of the ego. As a matter of fact, the 
ego does not actually ‘do’ anything at all, yet it believes, ‘I am 
doing it’; that is all. Only the belief is wrong. The moment the 
belief  improves  everything  will  change.  The  Self  has  not 
spoilt, nothing has spoilt, the belief has spoilt slightly. 

Questioner:  Once  the  ego  is  destroyed,  on  what  basis 

does the living being exist? 

Dadashri: Once the wrong belief is overturned, the ego 
gets destroyed. As long as your vision is towards this [worldly 
life], until then the ego exists and the moment that vision turns 
around, the ego gets destroyed completely. The moment the 
Vision of One’s Real form as the Self is attained, the ego gets 
destroyed.  Thereafter,  the  original  Self  does  not  need  any 
support; It is absolutely independent! 

Does the Mirror Ever Not Show the Face? 

Questioner:  Agnanta  (ignorance)  came  over  my  Self 

later on, so then, was my Self a Gnani, originally? 

Dadashri: That is exactly what ‘we’ are telling you. That 
[original] Self is fundamentally full of complete illumination 
(sampurna prakash). There is no such day where you cannot 

 
[1.4] The Self Got Entrapped First 

65 

see  yourself  in  the  mirror,  is  there?  But  the  moment  the 
environment on the outside of the mirror becomes polluted, if 
the surface becomes dirty, then it may not be possible to see 
yourself in the mirror; that can happen right? 

Questioner:  That  can  happen  if  there  is  steam  or 

something like that. 

Dadashri:  So  at  that  time,  the  environment  around  it 

affects the way it functions. 

Questioner:  But  if  the  Self  is  Itself  the  absolute  Self 
(Parmatma), then why would all this happen to It? Why would 
It slip into illusory attachment (moha)? 

Dadashri:  Nothing  has  happened  at  all.  ‘It’  has  not 
slipped  into  illusory  attachment,  It  has  become  trapped.  No 
one would slip into that on their own. 

is 

is 

All 

that 

relative 

(vyavahaar) 

filled  with 
circumstances.  When  the  time  has  come  for  the  Self  to  go 
where  there  are  no  circumstances,  to  the  Siddha  state 
(absolutely  liberated  state),  at  that  time,  It  will  find  all  the 
tools (sadhan) to attain that state. The scriptures, the Gnani 
Purush, all kinds of tools will be found; which is when One 
will  realize  His  own  Real  form  as  the  Self  (Swaroop),  and 
from then on, One begins to become free. A solution will be 
found in one, two or fifteen lifetimes at the most. 

“Even  a  dream  of  millions  of  years  comes  to  an  end  upon 
awakening, similarly, the vibhaav which has been there since 
time immemorial, clears away upon attaining the Knowledge 
of the Self.” 

“Koti varsh nu swapna pun, jagrat thata shamay, 

Tem vibhaav anaadino, Gnan thata door thay.” 

-  Shrimad Rajchandra 

 
 
66 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

‘Even  a  dream  of  millions  of  years’,  people  are  having 
dreams in which they are seeing all the way back to their seven 
previous lifetimes, such are the dreams that they are having! 
The dream may be of ten million years, but the moment one 
wakes up [becomes aware], it comes to an end. It dissipates as 
soon as one wakes up, doesn’t it? 

Questioner: Yes. 

Dadashri: Do you have anything to do with it after that? 
Just as ‘Even a dream of ten million  years comes to an end 
upon  awakening, 
time 
immemorial’; the visheshbhaav (assumed identification with 
that which is not One’s own) which has been there since time 
immemorial,  ‘clears  away  upon  attaining  the  Knowledge  of 
the Self.’ That is what Krupaludev says. 

the  vibhaav 

similarly 

since 

This Akram Vignan is so unprecedented, it has never been 
heard of before in any era of the time cycle. Therefore, it is 
only if one understands this that a solution can come about. 



 
 
[5] 

Anvay Guna - Vyatirek Guna 

The Visheshbhaav Occurred in the Gunadharma 

Questioner:  This  vibhaav  avastha  (the  temporary  state 
that has arisen as a result of the two eternal elements of the 
Self  and  inanimate  matter  coming  together)  has  arisen,  but 
what  was  the  primary  cause  for  the  Self  to  go  from  Its 
inherently  natural  state  as  the  Self  to  vibhaav  (an  assumed 
identification with that which is not One’s own)?  

Dadashri: There is no such thing as the primary cause. 
There is a law in this world that when two eternal elements 
are separate, their individual gunadharma (intrinsic properties 
that  have  a  specific  function)  are  different.  Whereas,  when 
they  both  come  together,  a  visheshbhaav  arises  in  their 
gunadharma. That is because they have both come together. 
If they do not come together, then the visheshbhaav does not 
arise. 

Questioner:  The  gunadharma  of  the  two  eternal 
elements versus the gunadharma of the visheshbhaav that has 
arisen due to samipyabhaav (the engrossment that arises when 
the two eternal elements, the Self and inanimate matter, are in 
close proximity), are they different? 

Dadashri: They are different. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
68 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Whether it is light from the sun or light from a light bulb, 
however when a man is standing under it, a shadow will tend 
to arise in the same instant. In the midst of two things, a third 
presence tends to arise. 

Just as when you simply look into a mirror, the reflection 
appears to be exactly like you, doesn’t it? In the same way, 
this has arisen. 

is 

This 

the  visheshbhaav, 

the  vishesh  swaroop 
(completely new form), the vibhaav swaroop (unnatural form) 
of the Self, which does not exist in It forever. It has arisen due 
to  the  circumstance  of  another,  whereas  the  Self  actually 
remains in Its inherently natural state only. This visheshbhaav 
has  possessed  It,  just  the  way  a  ghost  possesses  one.  Just 
because a person is possessed by a ghost, it does not mean that 
he  is  dead.  The  effect  persists  for  as  long  as  it  [the  ghost] 
remains, nothing further than that. Similarly, this worldly life 
has possessed You like a ghost does, there is nothing besides 
that. 

Rice  is  considered  a  natural  item,  whereas  khichdee  (a 
staple Indian dish made from rice and lentils) is considered as 
visheshbhaav.  The  rice  from  the  paddy  is  considered  to  be 
natural,  like  something  which  occurs  naturally.  However, 
when one makes khichdee from it, then a visheshbhaav arises. 
The [rice in the] khichdee mixture is in visheshbhaav whereas 
the Self is in the natural state (sahaj bhaav). 

Those Are Known as Anvay Guna 

As a matter of fact, ‘we’ have personally Seen how this 
puzzle has come to be. Anger, pride, deceit and greed are the 
vyatirek guna (completely new properties of a third entity that 
arises  when  two  eternal  elements,  the  Self  and  inanimate 
matter,  come  together)  [of  the  self],  they  are  not  the  anvay 
guna [of the Self].  

 
[1.5] Anvay Guna-Vyatirek Guna 

69 

Questioner: What is the meaning of anvay guna? 

Dadashri:  Anvay  guna  means  the  properties  that  are 
inherently  natural  (swabhaavik  guna)  [to  the  Self].  They 
remain with It not only in moksha but here too. They always 
remain with the Self no matter where It is. Whereas vyatirek 
means that they remain as long as certain circumstances are 
together. Hence, they are temporary, they are time-dependent. 
Otherwise,  the  moment  the  circumstances  separate,  the 
vyatirek guna will dissipate. 

Questioner: What are the anvay guna of the Self? And 

why have they been called anvay guna? 

Dadashri: The Self’s own properties are It’s anvay guna. 

Questioner: Why has the word ‘anvay’ been used? 

Dadashri: They are One’s own, anvay, those that have 
been  ingrained  within,  the  properties  of  the  Self.  Vyatirek 
guna,  meaning  the  anger,  pride,  deceit  and  greed,  they  are 
different;  they  have  nothing  to  do  with  You  [the  Self].  The 
anvay guna are the Self’s own properties. In fact, the Self is 
an  abode  of  infinite  properties.  Infinite  Knowledge,  infinite 
Vision,  infinite  energy,  infinite  bliss;  there  are  so  many 
properties of the Self! 

Questioner: But Dada, it is necessary to understand that 

more clearly. What is this intrinsic (anvay) relationship? 

Dadashri:  They  belong  to  It.  The  [properties  of] 
Knowledge (Gnan) and Vision (Darshan), all of that belongs 
to  It;  they  belong  to  It  alone.  The  rest  of  them,  those  that 
undergo influx (puran) and outflux (galan), they do not have 
an intrinsic relationship to It. They will go away after a while. 
The entire world is trapped in this. 

Whatever has been stated in the scriptures about vyatirek 

[guna], are people actually able to comprehend that? 

 
 
70 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Questioner: People have memorized over and over again 
that these many properties belong to the Self and these many 
are the vyatirek guna; but they simply do not understand any 
of it, do they! 

Dadashri: That is not acceptable, is it! Of what use is that 
which  has  been  memorized?  [People  say,]  “Anvay  guna, 
anvay guna,” but mortal one, what does anvay guna mean? [If 
asked,] “What will you refer to a property which is opposite 
to  that?”  Then  they  will  answer,  “Vyatirek.”  So  then,  what 
does  vyatirek  mean?  Can  anything  be  gained  from  simply 
reciting  the  words?  Upon  saying  the  word,  you  should 
immediately understand which one it is. The moment you say 
it,  the  viewpoint  should  reach  there,  the  vision  (drashti) 
should reach there. 

Questioner: What is the difference between bhaav (state 
of being) and guna (property)? The bhaav of the Self and the 
guna of the Self, what is the difference between the two?  

Dadashri: There are two kinds of bhaavs [of the Self]; 
one is Swabhaav (the inherently natural state as the Self) and 
the  other  is  vibhaav  (a  third  entity  with  completely  new 
properties; the state as the relative self). The properties that 
belong to the Self in Its inherently natural state are referred to 
as [anvay] guna, they are considered as the properties of the 
Self and secondly, when there is visheshbhaav, it has vyatirek 
guna meaning that those properties do not inherently belong 
to the Self. 

Questioner:  Have  they  arisen  from  the  mixture  of  the 

Self with another eternal element? 

Dadashri: Yes. Yesterday when the sun, the moon and 
the earth aligned together, how many different kinds of bhaav 
[states;  phases  in  this  context]  must  have  arisen?  So  many 
changes  such  as  the  solar  and  lunar  eclipses  have  occurred, 
due  to  the  three  aligning  together!  Those  are  known  as 

 
[1.5] Anvay Guna-Vyatirek Guna 

71 

visheshbhaav! If it were the gunadharma of the sun, then the 
very  same  eclipse  would  occur  every  day.  If  it  were  the 
gunadharma of the moon, then such an eclipse would occur 
daily. However, it is only when they become aligned, that a 
completely new thing happens, that is all.  In the same way, 
the very moment the eternal elements of inanimate matter and 
the Self come together, something completely new arises. 

Virtues Have No Value There  

‘You’  do  not  want  to  enter  your  ‘pony’  [the  non-Self 
complex]  in  the  race.  In  fact,  You  have  to  get  the  work  of 
attaining moksha accomplished from your ‘pony’. So, do not 
enter it into the racecourse of this world. 

On the path of moksha [on the Kramik path], people are 
seeking  for  virtues,  however,  those  attributes  are  vyatirek 
guna. They are not properties that belong to the Self, they are 
the attributes of the non-Self complex. People  believe  these 
virtues  to  be  the  properties  of  the  Self.  They  even  believe 
anger, pride, deceit and greed to be properties of the Self. 

There was a story about Dradhprahari [a barbaric attacker 
mentioned  in  the  scriptures],  wasn’t  there!  People  used  to 
speak of Dradhprahari, didn’t they? He used to kill cows, and 
after  that  he  became  extremely  cruel.  He  started  to  kill 
Brahmins [a member of  the highest  class of the four Hindu 
castes,  spiritually  and  socially,  comprising  the  priests, 
religious  teachers and scholars]. Thereafter, he  also  killed a 
pregnant Brahmin woman. Upon doing so, the vyatirek guna 
of  sympathy,  tremendous  sympathy  arose  immediately;  the 
moment he saw the baby suffering, sympathy arose. That is 
considered a vyatirek guna, [a property that arises] when two 
things  come  together.  No  one  had  gone  to  teach  him  that 
vyatirek guna. On the contrary, he was a tremendously cruel 
person. He would not have sympathy arise in any situation at 
all. 

 
 
72 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Questioner:  So  then,  just  due  to  the  arising  of  the 
vyatirek guna, people have become miserable to this extent? 

Dadashri:  They  indeed  have!  There  is  no  misery 
whatsoever  in  Swabhaav  (the  inherently  natural  state  as  the 
Self), it is only vibhaav (the state as the relative self) that is 
filled with nothing but misery.  

Just  like,  if  a  piece  of  steam  coal  were  to  complain, 
“Look, I’m feeling cold. Look I’m feeling cold!” What would 
you say in that instance? “Hey, on the contrary, everyone else 
is not feeling cold because of  you! How can  you be feeling 
cold?” The sun may complain, “I’m feeling cold, I’m feeling 
cold!”  Well,  that  is  only  one  sun,  but  the  Self  is  Itself 
tantamount  to  a  thousand  suns,  yet  one  himself  says,  “I’m 
feeling cold! Please cover me up, cover me up.” Does one not 
say so during the freezing winter? On top of that, he will say, 
“It has snowed!” Hey, how can the snow fall on You? Would 
snow fall on that which is hot or on that which is cold? ‘You’ 
are neither hot, nor cold, so how can it fall on You? But just 
look  at  what  one  has  come  to  believe!  There  are  so  many 
wrong beliefs that have been filled within that there is no end 
to it! 

This  vibhaavik  state  of  the  self  is  in  fact  nothing  but 
relative. The unfolding karma keeps changing from moment 
to  moment.  Moreover,  it  [the  vibhaavik  state]  is  full  of 
contradictions. There are no contradictions in the Swabhaav 
(the  inherently  natural  state  as  the  Self),  it  is  without 
contradiction. The Self is not affected by any misery. Even if 
an atom bomb goes off, it will not affect the Self, such is that 
inherently natural state as the Real Self. On the contrary, the 
Self does not cause any harm to the atom bomb. 

 
[1.5] Anvay Guna-Vyatirek Guna 

73 

Ultimately, You Do Not Have to Conquer, You Have 
to Maintain Separation 

Questioner: Dada, here in this book it says ‘Conquer the 
association  between  the  Self  and  the  non-Self’  (‘jeet 
sangdosha’); did they say ‘it has to be conquered’? 

Dadashri: Yes. 

Questioner:  What  You  are  saying 

is 

to  ‘keep 

separation’? 

Dadashri:  Yes,  the  conquering  is  done  in  a  lower 
spiritual stage; as long as  you are at  a lower  spiritual stage, 
you need to conquer. Even in the lower standards, ultimately 
You will have to keep separation indeed. On what basis did 
the sangdosh occur? On what basis does the sangdosh come 
to an end? The sangdosh comes to an end after a long time. 
After  the  sangdosh  happens,  not  only  does  birth  occur  in 
8,400,000 life-forms, but one will also wander around many 
times in those very life-forms; so, on what basis is that? The 
answer  is,  it  is  on  the  basis  of  niyati  (the  level  of  spiritual 
development of a soul as it progresses naturally on the track 
of evolution). 

“The vyatirek guna come to an end, in the satsang of the Self.” 

“Vyatireki guna taadha, nij satsang me.” 

The vyatirek guna of anger, pride, deceit and greed, they 
come to an end in the satsang of the Self [when One prevails 
as the Self].  

Here [in Akram], when does one become free from those 
vyatirek  guna?  It  is  from  the  moment  one’s  belief  turns 
towards One’s inherent nature as the Self. Currently, the belief 
is  ‘I  am  Chandubhai’,  that  is  why  anger,  pride,  deceit  and 
greed arise. The moment the Gnani turns that belief around 

 
 
74 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

for you, and the belief of ‘I am pure Soul’ sets in, from that 
moment on, You become free! 

Now, the moment  the  vyatirek fault arises, this body is 
created. The Self has to reside within that body, there is simply 
no choice, is there! And how can the vyatirek fault come to an 
end?  When  ‘we’  give  you  this  Gnan,  the  two  [eternal 
elements]  separate, 
the  vyatirek  fault  dissipates. 
Thereafter, the body will not arise. 

then 

Questioner:  These  vyatirek  guna  that  arise  due  to  [the 
proximity of] the eternal elements of inanimate matter and the 
Self, it is because of vyavasthit shakti that this happens, isn’t 
it? 

Dadashri: Vyavasthit shakti; actually, that is something 
that  arises  later  on.  ‘We’  in  fact  refer  to  its  design  as 
vyavasthit,  however  this  arises  just  on  its  own  due  to  the 
presence of the two, it just happens by natural law. 

Questioner:  The  vyatirek  guna  that  arise  due  to  the 
circumstance  of  the  Self  and  inanimate  matter  coming 
together, what should we control so that those vyatirek guna 
do not arise and the two remain separate? How should we do 
it? 

Dadashri:  Nothing  remains  to  be  done.  They  have 
become separate, the two have parted. The One for whom the 
circumstance has moved away, He has become separate. It is 
not possible to separate them yourself, therefore the liberated 
One  (mukta  Purush)  will  help  you  separate  them.  The  One 
who has become free from it can help you become free; this is 
the law.  

Intoxication Is Itself the Mohaniya! 

Say there is a man named Nagindas who is a businessman 
in  a  village  and  the  entire  village  praises  him  saying, 
“Nagindas,  the  businessman,  is  truly  unique.”  He  helps 

 
[1.5] Anvay Guna-Vyatirek Guna 

75 

everyone,  he  does  all  kinds  of  things,  but  at  eight-thirty  at 
night, he drinks this much [alcohol]; he drinks, but there is no 
problem with that, it does not cause any harm, but he surely 
drinks.  However,  one  day,  his  friend  visited  him  and  said, 
“You will have to drink another glass.” So, he had another one 
and became intoxicated. Would he have become intoxicated 
or not? Now, would he remain as Nagindas, or would some 
change take place? 

Questioner: There would be a problem. 

Dadashri: Then what he would say is, “I am the Prime 
Minister.” Would you not realize that he is under the effect of 
something else? Something has happened to him. By what has 
he been  affected? The [alcoholic] drink. Similarly, all these 
effects  are  from  the  pressure  of  the  Pudgal  Parmanu 
(inanimate matter). The vyatirek guna have arisen from that. 
These guna are neither of the Self, nor of the inanimate matter. 
They are anger, pride, deceit and greed and if you try to write 
it in shorthand, then the I and marapanu (the sense of ‘my-
ness’)  have  arisen.  The  Self  is  also  the  Knower  and  Seer 
(Gnata-Drashta) of this whole process that is going on. The 
Self is the Knower and Seer right now too, but your belief has 
not  yet  changed,  has  it!  When  the  belief  changes,  then  this 
problem that exists right now will go away. Just as, once the 
intoxication wears off, Nagindas reverts back to the way he 
was  before.  Will  he  not  become  Nagindas  once  the 
intoxication wears off? Until then, he will keep saying, “I am 
the Prime Minister” and all sorts of things. This is an upadhi 
(an  externally-induced  problem  and  its  resultant  suffering), 
this  is  a  parupadhi  (a  problem  that  has  been  induced 
externally by the non-Self). Have you ever seen this type of 
upadhi? 

Questioner: I have seen it; I have experienced it. 

Dadashri: Is that so? 

 
 
76 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Once  the  circumstances  come  together  to  bring  the 
intoxication down, that is when the intoxication will wear off. 
This  too,  is  an  intoxication,  isn’t  it!  The  former  is  an 
intoxication  from  alcohol;  whereas 
latter,  as 
intoxication keeps arising daily from what one eats and drinks, 
one keeps wandering around intoxicated. It is the very same 
intoxication, but this is an illusion (bhranti), and the former is 
also considered an illusion. The businessman speaks absurdly, 
doesn’t he? 

the 

in 

Questioner: He indeed speaks absurdly. 

Dadashri: And what about after it wears off? 

Questioner: He speaks properly. 

Dadashri: When you tell him, “Do you know this is what 
you  said?”  He  will  say,  “It  was  because  I  was  intoxicated, 
otherwise would I say such a thing! I cannot say such a thing.” 
This is the very state of the Self. Nothing of the Self has been 
spoilt,  the  Self  remains  as  It  is.  Even  for  the  businessman, 
nothing had been spoilt. The businessman was also the way 
he was. It was his knowledge that had spoilt. In his case, it is 
the knowledge that became spoilt, and in the other case [of the 
Self], it is  the Vision that  becomes spoilt.  It  keeps  showing 
things contrary to fact. Then he would indeed speak as he sees 
it, wouldn’t he! 

Questioner: Therefore, it is the coming together of the 
Purush (the Self) and the prakruti (non-Self complex), isn’t 
it? 

Dadashri: The developing I (pote) is actually the Purush, 
His Real form is the Self, He Himself is God, but it is due to 
the pressure [of circumstances] that this prakruti has arisen. 
Just  as  when  that  businessman  says,  “I  am  the  Prime 
Minister,” everyone around him will be shocked thinking, ‘Is 
this what the businessman is saying!’ In the same way, the self 

 
[1.5] Anvay Guna-Vyatirek Guna 

77 

[the developing I; pote; worldly-interacting self] takes on the 
visheshbhaav  as  a 
tremendous  pressure. 
result  of 
Visheshbhaav  means,  ‘Who  did  all  of  this?  I  only  am  the 
doer,’  such  awareness  arises,  and  that  is  indeed  why  the 
prakruti arises automatically. There is no need for anyone to 
the  prakruti  arises 
create 
automatically. ‘We’ say this after having Seen this prakruti. 
And  that  is  precisely  why  this  Science  can  be  revealed, 
otherwise it could never be revealed, could it? No one is the 
doer of anything at all.  

it.  ‘We’  have  Seen  how 

Questioner: This illusion that has arisen, the maya that 

has arisen, is that this visheshbhaav itself? 

Dadashri: Maya means agnanta (ignorance of the Self), 
that 
ignorance  of  ‘who  One  Himself 

the 
visheshbhaav, the I (hu) and the ‘I am doing it’ arose. 

is’.  With 

Questioner:  Please  explain  these  two,  the  ego  and  the 
mohaniya  karma  (karma  that  induces  illusory  attachment), 
with some analysis.  

Dadashri:  Both  mohaniya  karma  and  the  ego  are 
separate. It is because he drank the ‘alcohol’ that the mohaniya 
karma (illusory attachment; intoxication in this context) arose. 
Therefore, because of the mohaniya karma, the ego that was 
already there says things such as, “I am the king.” Before he 
used to say, “I am Nagindas, a businessman,” and now he says 
all these convoluted things because he has drunk alcohol. The 
‘alcohol’ of this pudgal is just like that. 

Questioner:  The  circumstances  arose  such  that  he 
became  intoxicated  with  ‘alcohol’,  so  then  how  are  the 
circumstances  for  birth  and  death?  Please  clarify  that  in 
further detail. 

Dadashri:  The  Self  actually  does  not  have  to  wander 
around. The Self is in Its own inherent nature indeed. It is the 

 
 
78 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

foolish  one [the ego] that wanders. Who is  it that  wanders? 
[The  one  who  says,]  “I  incurred  demerit  karma  (paap),  I 
bound  merit  karma  (punya).”  It  [the  ego]  keeps  wandering. 
[The one who says,] ‘I did it, I suffered it.’ Do you recognize 
who that is? 

It  is  simply  egoism  only.  The  One  whose  egoism  gets 
destroyed, attains the Self. This egoism is a ‘lafru’ (something 
that possesses a person; an affair) that has arisen. 

There Is No Lineage of the Self 

Questioner:  You  say  that  you  are  Chandubhai,  her 
husband,  his  father,  his  maternal  uncle,  aren’t  these  all  the 
lineage [family tree] of just one pure Soul? As too many atmas 
have come about, it has put me in confusion. There is actually 
only one pure Soul, then there is the  Antaratma (an interim 
state of the Self, beginning with the conviction of, ‘I am pure 
the 
Soul’  and  ending  with 
bahirmukhi  atma  (worldly-interacting  self;  the  self  that  is 
going towards the relative), the pratishthit atma (relative self) 
etc., in this way the confusion keeps increasing. 

the  absolute  experience), 

Dadashri: This is just so that we can recognize, ‘Which 
self  is  this?’  So,  the  bahirmukhi  atma  is  the  moodhatma 
(deluded self; the one with the belief, ‘I am Chandubhai’). As 
long as one desires the pleasures of worldly life, until then he 
is in the state as a moodhatma, as a jeevatma (mortal being; 
the self that possesses karma). 

Questioner:  But  aren’t  all  of  these  the  lineage  of  the 

original Self Itself? 

Dadashri:  There  is  no  lineage  at  all.  There,  no  one  is 

anyone’s child.  

Questioner: Does any of this not affect the pure Soul? 

Dadashri: No. 

 
[1.5] Anvay Guna-Vyatirek Guna 

79 

Questioner: All this seems complicated to me. There is 
the moodhatma and this atma and that atma, however there is 
only one original element; that of the pure Soul. 

Dadashri:  Yes,  but  from  the  moment  One  Knows  that 
nothing affects the pure Soul [original Self], from that point 
on, the ‘I’ (Hu) starts to become the pure Soul. But as long as 
he feels that it affects the pure Soul, he remains in the state as 
a jeevatma. Now, after becoming the pure Soul, the pure Soul 
indeed remains pure constantly, forever. ‘You’ can See that 
state on the basis of Your surroundings that, ‘Oh ho ho! No 
one feels hurt, no one feels that way. Therefore, I have become 
pure.’ However much impurity there is, that much difficulty 
there  is,  not  just  for  the  other  person,  but  also  for  oneself. 
When does one’s own difficulty come to an end? It is when 
this Gnan is attained. And when the other person’s difficulty 
comes  to  an  end  because  of  You,  then  You  have  become 
complete (purna).  

Ignorance, in Fact, Arose! 

The inherent nature of the eternal elements is such that, 
each  one  has  its  own  results  (parinaam),  but  when  the  two 
eternal elements are brought close together, then an altogether 
different, a third result arises. 

Questioner: Dada, doesn’t that mean that the Gnan was 
present and the ignorance (agnan) was present, and when the 
two [eternal elements] came close to each other… 

Dadashri:  [As  far  as  the  original  Self  is  concerned,] 
There  was  no  ignorance  at  all.  There  was  no  such  thing  as 
ignorance  whatsoever.  Ignorance  is  actually  something  that 
has arisen. Just like that businessman who drank alcohol. Was 
there anything before he drank alcohol?  

Questioner: There wasn’t. 

 
 
80 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Dadashri: Similarly, the effect [of ignorance] has arisen. 
It [the developing I] has been affected by the circumstances.  

Questioner: Nothing happens without a cause, does it? 

Dadashri: No, the cause is that it happened because the 
circumstances came together. Now, once It [the Self] becomes 
free from the circumstances, It will be free. 

Questioner: So, did the Gnan encounter a circumstance?  

Dadashri:  Yes,  the  Self  and  other  circumstances. 
Knowledge [in its inherent nature] (swabhaavik Gnan) is the 
[original] Self, and It encountered other circumstances, thus 
illusion arose. 

Questioner: So, did the circumstances affect It? 

Dadashri: ‘It’ came under the pressure of circumstances. 
[Meaning that, the visheshbhaav, the I, the worldly-interacting 
self arose.] 

Questioner: If the Self cannot be affected by anything, 

then how did It get affected? 

Dadashri:  It  did  get  affected.  It  [developing  I]  can 
certainly  not 
it! 
Nevertheless, the [original] Self remains precisely as It was. 
There is only a change in the belief.  

from  getting  affected,  can 

refrain 

Questioner: In whose belief has the change occurred? In 

the belief of the Gnan? 

Dadashri: Yes, [as the vibhaav arose due to the pressure 
of circumstances, the Gnan deviated from its inherent nature] 
the change has occurred only in the belief of the Gnan. Just as 
that businessman who says. “I am Nagindas, a businessman.” 
Then  later  on,  after  drinking  alcohol,  he  says,  “I  am  King 
Sayajirao” [a famous king of the Baroda state]. We are able to 
envision the example in this case. What happens in that other 

 
[1.5] Anvay Guna-Vyatirek Guna 

81 

situation [regarding the Self] is difficult to comprehend. Once 
those circumstances separate, that is when One becomes free.  

Questioner:  But  Gnan  is  such  a  thing  that  nothing 

touches It, It is not affected by anything. 

Dadashri: ‘It’ [Knowledge in its inherent nature and the 
original Self] has not been affected. It is just at the belief level 
that you [as the worldly-interacting self, meaning the I] have 
become separate.  

Questioner: But then, whose belief is it? 

Dadashri: Your belief; this is just a wrong belief only. It 
is nothing else. Nothing has happened to the [original] Self. It 
is  just  the  belief  that  has  become  wrong.  Once  that  wrong 
belief goes away, then it is fine. 

Questioner:  So,  who  is  responsible  for  doing  such  a 

wrong belief? 

Dadashri:  There  can  never  be  a  doer;  it  is  just  the 
pressure.  Two  eternal  elements  exhibit  only  their  own 
inherent  nature.  On  account  of  putting  the  two  eternal 
elements together, a completely different, a third result arises. 
Scientists would understand this. 

The Wrong Belief Arose Because of the Vishesh 
Parinaam  

Questioner: If the Self has Its own properties, then who 
is the one suffering the effects of the circumstances? And if 
the Self has the function of Seeing (jovapanu) and all that, so 
then how did It come to lose that property? 

Dadashri:  It  has not  happened to  You [the Self] at  all, 
but as you have believed that, and you have believed it to such 
an extent, such a psychological effect has taken  a hold over 
you, that you have taken on that form.  

 
 
82 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Questioner:  Who  has  believed  this?  Has  the  eternal 

element of the Self believed it? 

Dadashri: No, not the eternal element of the Self. 

Questioner: So then, when you say ‘you’, who is that? 

Dadashri:  It  is  the  vishesh  guna  (a  completely  new 
property  of  a  third  entity  that  arises  when  two  eternal 
elements, the Self and inanimate matter, come together) which 
has  arisen,  it  is  the  one  believing  that.  And  you  [the 
developing I] have come into [the state of] vishesh guna, you 
have  become  separate  from  [deviated  from]  Your  own 
inherent nature as the Self. 

Questioner:  So  does  the  Self  really  become  separate 
from Its inherent nature? Does It actually separate from that?  

Dadashri:  All  of  this  has  certainly  become  separate. 
Nevertheless, the [original] Self is not at fault. The [original] 
Self is precisely the same as before. 

Questioner: In whom has this wrong belief arisen? 

Dadashri:  In  the  one  who  suffers.  The  one  who  is 
suffering the wrong belief is the one in whom the wrong belief 
has arisen.  

Questioner: Right now, I am the one who is suffering. 

Dadashri: That one has the interest, and that is why he is 
suffering all this. The interest that he feels in all such wrong 
beliefs like, ‘This is my wife, I am his father-in-law, I am his 
maternal uncle, I am his paternal uncle,’ it is verily due to that 
wrong  belief  that  this  world  has  arisen.  Whereas,  with  the 
right belief, the world will dissolve. It is indeed because of the 
wrong belief that one gets married, one becomes a widow, a 
father, a grandfather; all of that is due to the wrong belief.  

 
[1.5] Anvay Guna-Vyatirek Guna 

83 

Questioner:  Is  the  wrong  belief  itself  the  vishesh 
parinaam (a completely new effect), or has the wrong belief 
arisen from the vishesh parinaam? 

Dadashri: The wrong belief has indeed arisen from the 

vishesh parinaam.  

Questioner: Or is the vishesh parinaam itself the wrong 

belief? 

Dadashri: No, it is not the wrong belief. 

Questioner: So, it has arisen from the vishesh parinaam? 

Dadashri: Yes. 

Questioner:  So  that  means  that  the  vishesh  parinaam 
arises initially, at that time there is no wrong belief. But the 
wrong belief arises thereafter? 

Dadashri: The arising of the vishesh parinaam is not the 
cause  for  the  wrong  belief  to  arise,  rather  It  [the  Self] 
experiences  a  lot  of  pressure.  Therefore,  the  wrong  belief 
arises [in the I (hu)] that, ‘Hey, who is the one doing all this?’ 
He will say, ‘I am indeed the one doing it.’ Such an illusion 
arises;  that  is  why  the  belief  spoils.  Worldly  life  (sansaar) 
perpetuates because of the belief becoming spoilt; and when 
this belief gets corrected, worldly life comes to an end.  

Questioner: So that means that the vishesh parinaam that 
arises  due  to  the  two  eternal  elements  coming  into  close 
proximity, that also happens but naturally, isn’t that right?  

Dadashri: It happens but naturally. 

Questioner:  Meaning  that,  there  is  no  question  of  any 

wrong belief at all in that.  

Dadashri: If in pitch darkness, you were to drink a glass 
of  alcohol  instead  of  a  glass  of  water,  then  wouldn’t  the 
vishesh parinaam arise?  

 
 
84 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Questioner:  It  would;  it  would  definitely  give  effect! 

That cannot refrain from giving result.  

Dadashri: Similarly, this entire vishesh parinaam arises 

in this case.  

Questioner:  So,  what  takes  place  at  the  level  of  the 
elemental Science (tattvik Vignan) in this case? Just like the 
example you gave about drinking a glass of alcohol instead of 
a glass of water in the dark, what happens in the case of the 
six eternal elements? 

Dadashri: With the constant interaction of the other five 
eternal elements, pressure arises, and because of that pressure, 
the developing I wonders, ‘Am I doing this or who is doing 
this?’ That [extra result] is not a natural property.  

Questioner: But in the beginning, the Self was in a pure 

state, so why would It come under such effects? 

Dadashri: ‘It’ is pure even now. ‘It’ was pure back then, 
It is pure right now and It will indeed be pure whenever you 
look at it.  

Questioner: But It was free from ignorance, in the initial 

state... 

Dadashri: ‘It’ is free from ignorance even right now. ‘It’ 

has never become filled with ignorance.  

Questioner:  Therefore,  this  vibhaav  is  scientific.  Now, 

everything has become clear. 

Dadashri:  The  mind  will  not  attain  closure  and  inner 
satisfaction without becoming clear, will it! It should set well, 
shouldn’t it! 



 
 
[6] 

Visheshbhaav - Vishesh Gnan – Agnan 

Agnan Is in Fact Gnan as Well! 

The  Gnan  (Knowledge  of  the  Self)  is  indeed  present, 
however vibhaav does not refer to the original Gnan, but to 
this  vishesh  gnan  (relative  knowledge;  specific  worldly 
knowledge;  knowledge  that  is  not  worth  knowing)  that  has 
arisen. 

Questioner: So then why should we raise an objection to 

it, to this vishesh gnan? 

Dadashri: What objection? 

Questioner: There is Gnan, and a development (vruddhi) 

has occurred in it; vishesh gnan. 

Dadashri:  No,  no,  not  a  development.  Vishesh  gnan 
refers to the knowledge that one does not need to know; such 
knowledge has arisen. It is the kind of knowledge which is not 
necessary.  

Why did the developing I become impure? It is because 
he  became  trapped  in  the  vishesh  gnan,  so  he  gradually 
became  impure.  And  from  the  moment  He  came  into 
swabhaavik  Gnan  (the  Knowledge  of  the  Self;  the  original 
Knowledge),  He  began  to  become  pure.  Vishesh  gnan  is 
known as vibhaav gnan. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
86 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Questioner:  Does  it  arise  through  visheshbhaav  (an 

assumed identification with that which is not One’s own)? 

Dadashri:  Yes,  vishesh  gnan  refers  to  agnan  (worldly 
knowledge; ignorance of the Self), which, is also considered 
as knowledge (gnan). Meaning that, a worldly belief tends to 
arise. One gets married, becomes a father-in-law, becomes a 
mother-in-law, becomes an aunt-in-law. And actually, we are 
referring  to  it  as  ‘agnan’  ourselves  in  order  to  differentiate 
between the two; however, it is vishesh gnan.  

We  can  understand  that  this  is  ignorance,  and  that  is 
Gnan. Generally, ignorance is always darkness, however this 
ignorance is actually illumination, it is partial (kshayopsham) 
illumination. It is not complete illumination, but rather partial 
illumination! Therefore, this is a visheshbhaav. When will one 
become  free  from  this  state?  It  is  only  when  one  becomes 
aware of His Real form as the Self that he will revert back to 
His  original  properties;  then  everything  will  dissipate  once 
again. 

If  it  does  not  revert  back  to  its  inherent  nature,  then  it 
cannot  be  an  eternal  element  (vastu)  at  all.  One  does  not 
remain  in  parbhaav  (the  state  as  the  non-Self)  forever. 
Parbhaav  happens  only  to  the  self,  and  that  is  a  result  of 
ignorance.  ‘We’  refer  to  that  as  vishesh  parinaam.  Suppose 
while  walking  along,  a  man  who  has  very  good  eyesight,  a 
man who is not blind, suddenly comes across fog, where he is 
not even able to see a man walking just five feet ahead of him. 
Could that happen or not? That is how all these effects are. 
They are a result of scientific circumstantial evidences. ‘We’ 
have said this after having Seen the world as it is. 

There  is  pressure  from  all  the  circumstances.  In  this, 
when the slightest of pressure comes on the Self, it gives rise 
to  an  effect.  ‘It’  is  affected  in  spite  of  being  ineffective. 
Nevertheless,  the  [original]  Self  has  never  strayed  from  Its 

 
[1.6] Vibhaav - Vishesh Gnan - Agnan 

87 

inherent  Knowledge,  It  has  never  entered  into  any  kriya 
(activity) at  all. However,  Its  own inherent  nature is  that of 
Knowledge and Vision, and it is this Vision that has become 
vibhaavik (deviated from its inherent nature).  

Do  you  not  become  dizzy  sometimes  and 
lose 
consciousness? Your eyes may be open but if someone asks, 
“What is your name? What is your name?” you do not answer. 
At that time, people will say, “He is not conscious.” So, if that 
causes so much of an effect, then just imagine how immense 
an effect this actually is! So much pressure has come over the 
Self,  this  pressure  from  the  circumstances  is  so  tremendous 
that it brings so many veils of ignorance over  It. Moreover, 
what  are  all  those  circumstances  like?  The  moment  the 
Knowledge of the Self deviates from Its inherent nature, in the 
same instance, such is the form that is taken on over there [by 
the Parmanu].  

If a mere change in the drashti (belief; vision) gives rise 
to such a huge world, then how many other energies are there!  

Although this is knowledge regarding worldly life, it is 

vishesh gnan. That vishesh gnan is itself the intellect. 

It is not as though one is worshiping ignorance. It is a kind 
of  vishesh  gnan.  This  knowledge  regarding  worldly  life  is 
complete ignorance [of the Self]. We may ask people, “Are 
you  all  practicing 
ignorance?”  However,  from  which 
perspective can it be deemed as ignorance? From the spiritual 
perspective. Otherwise, is it knowledge or ignorance? 

Questioner: It is knowledge. 

Dadashri: Now, those following spirituality refer to it as 
‘ignorance’. ‘We’ do not say so. ‘We’ tell them, “Hey mortal 
one,  why  are  you  unnecessarily  binding  karma?”  [But  they 
say,]  “This  is  definitely  considered  ignorance.  This  is 
Knowledge and that is ignorance.” Hey mortal one, the entire 

 
 
88 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

world  openly  refers  to  this  as  ‘knowledge’,  yet  you  are 
referring to it as ‘ignorance’? This is vishesh gnan. It is indeed 
the  Knowledge  of  the  Self,  but  it  is  vishesh  gnan.  Meaning 
that, due to the [pressure of] circumstances, a completely new 
property (vishesh guna) has arisen. Due to which, everything 
started  to  happen,  you  started  to  see  this  worldly  life.  This 
knowledge  regarding  worldly  life  is  knowledge,  it  is  not 
ignorance.  But  if  you  want  to  go  to  moksha,  then  it  is 
ignorance of the Self. And you should understand this Gnan 
(Knowledge of the Self). 

Questioner: So, it arose with respect to something? 

Dadashri:  Yes,  with  respect  to  something,  and  that  is 

indeed how it is; this vishesh gnan has actually arisen. 

In Reality, It Is Not an Illusion! 

So, this form as a living being has arisen out of ignorance 
of the Self. Just like if you are alone at home and you go to 
sleep at night, then if you were to hear the sound of glasses 
clinking  in  the  adjoining  room,  suddenly  in  your  mind,  an 
illusion may arise, ‘I wonder if that’s the ghost that I had heard 
about  previously,  or  what?’  Such  a  fear  may  creep  in. 
Wouldn’t it creep in? So, from the moment it enters, the fear 
remains all night long. The birth of this living being has taken 
place  in  the  very  same  way.  The  entanglement  of,  ‘This  is 
indeed who I am, I am indeed the one doing this,’ has arisen 
due to illusion. From that moment on, the illusion has arisen, 
and so what is its end point? It is when one realizes the original 
illusion, the original entanglement that had occurred; that is 
when he becomes free! 

What  is  keval  Gnan  (absolute  Knowledge)?  The  One 
sitting within, the pure Soul, just keeps Seeing this  prakruti 
(non-Self complex). ‘He’ has not lapsed from His function as 
the  Knower  and  Seer  (Gnata-Drashtapanu)  even  for  a 
moment. ‘He’ has been Knowing and Seeing ever since the 

 
[1.6] Vibhaav - Vishesh Gnan - Agnan 

89 

beginning of worldly life. However, just this one illusion has 
arisen that, ‘Am I this or am I that?’ And since then, this world 
came into existence. Even if you were to get rid of that illusion 
for someone by explaining it to him, but that illusion would 
certainly  perpetuate,  because  it  is  something  that  has  been 
charged in the past life, so it will put him back into that cycle. 
That is why the Lord has said, “One’s work will be done when 
He  attains  samkit  (the  right  belief  of,  ‘I  am  pure  Soul’), 
otherwise he will go back to the same cycle...” 

Questioner:  The  Self  is  an  indivisible,  solid  entity  of 

Knowledge, yet why did It fall into illusion? 

Dadashri: What does an indivisible solid entity mean? It 
means infinite Knowledge. Nonetheless, why did It fall into 
illusion? That is to say, we have to refer to it as an illusion for 
the world to understand; in reality, it is not an illusion. This is 
the knowledge of the Self that has deviated from its inherent 
nature (vibhaavik gnan). This too is a type of knowledge; it is 
not an illusion. But to clarify what an illusion is, ‘we’ will give 
you an explanation. This is the self that has entered into a state 
of vibhaav. For the laymen, in relative terms, in illusory terms, 
it  is  considered  an  illusion.  Actually,  illusion  means  when 
pain arises within, One feels, ‘In spite of Knowing so much, 
what is this [happening] within? Therefore, this is something 
different.  This  cannot  be  my  form.’  That  is  known  as 
[awareness  of]  illusion.  Some  form  of  entanglement  has 
arisen. ‘This is not my form, I am not this.’ Meaning that, an 
illusion has arisen. 

The Self has not become spoilt. Had an illusion occurred, 
then it would not be possible to repair the Self again. But in 
the world, we have to say, “It is an illusion.” This is in worldly 
language, in laymans term. 

If  you  happen  to  be  standing  at  the  station  and  a  train 
passes close by, you will tend to feel dizzy. Then after a while, 

 
 
90 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

that  dizziness  will  go  away.  But  after  you  become 
experienced,  you  will  not  feel  dizzy.  In  the  same  way,  this 
dizziness  has  occurred,  yet  nothing  has  actually  happened. 
That other one is a dizziness due to illusion, whereas this is 
actual dizziness. Therefore, a Gnani Purush is needed. That 
other dizziness can be removed by making one smell an onion, 
similarly a Gnani makes you ‘smell’ something [gives you the 
Knowledge of the Self], so that the dizziness goes away. There 
are only two, the Self (Atma) and circumstances (sanjog). The 
circumstances make the Self happen to stand near the train, 
which 
the 
circumstances  are  akin  to  the  train.  However,  people  keep 
complaining,  “It  is  our  karma  that  have  bound  us.”  Hey, 
nothing  has  happened.  It  is  just  dizziness  [ignorance  of  the 
Self]  that  has  arisen;  when  that  subsides,  [You  will  realize 
that] nothing has actually happened. Instead, whilst sitting on 
a  merry-go-round,  one  says,  “Everything  is  spinning.”  No, 
nothing  is  actually  spinning  on  the  outside,  only  you  are 
spinning. This is how it is! The Gnani Purush is in that state 
[as the Gnani] after having Seen all of this. 

the  dizziness.  Hence, 

then  give 

rise 

to 

The Difference Between Visheshbhaav and Vishesh 
Gnan 

The steady bhaav (states of being of the Self) have been 
referred to as the properties (guna) of Knowledge and Vision. 
The unsteady bhaav have been referred to as phases (paryay). 
When a mango comes before  You, You keep Knowing and 
Seeing it, through Your own phases. When another object to 
be Known (gneya) comes before You, then You keep Seeing 
that. 

Questioner: The visheshbhaav is actually in the form of 
a phase, isn’t it? It is not a steady bhaav, that is why it is in 
the form of a phase, right? 

 
[1.6] Vibhaav - Vishesh Gnan - Agnan 

91 

Dadashri:  No,  the  visheshbhaav  is  not  a  phase. 
Visheshbhaav  refers  to  the  bhaav  that  arises  due  to  the 
influence  of  other  things.  The  bhaav  that  arises  due  to  the 
influence  of  other 
the  samipyabhaav 
(engrossment that arises out of close proximity) with another 
eternal element, that bhaav is referred to as visheshbhaav. If 
that proximity were to not be there, then nothing would arise. 

things,  due 

to 

Our  mahatmas  still  do  not  understand  visheshbhaav. 
‘We’ have actually mentioned it often, but they are not able to 
understand what visheshbhaav is. 

Questioner:  What 

is 
vishesh 

the  difference  between 
(specific  worldly 
gnan 

visheshbhaav 
knowledge)? 

and 

Dadashri: The two words themselves are different, don’t 

you think?  

Visheshbhaav is simply the ego, the I. There is no relation 
whatsoever between it and vishesh gnan; they are not of the 
same  ancestry,  nor  even  of  the  same  family,  there  is  no 
relation at all.  

Questioner:  Do  the  vyatirek  guna  arise  only  after  the 

vishesh gnan has arisen? Is that how it is? 

Dadashri: It is only if the vyatirek guna are present that 
the vishesh gnan can arise. It is not the case that vyatirek guna 
arise when the vishesh gnan is present. Vyatirek is the ‘father’ 
[the main or the fundamental thing]. The visheshbhaav refers 
to the vyatirek guna that arise, whereas this is vishesh gnan. 
What is the point of bringing the gnan that is not necessary 
into the picture? ‘We’ do not  delve into  vishesh gnan, such 
that this is a neem tree or a mango tree or a guava tree; and 
really, when would that end? And when you say they are all 
trees, that gnan, the gnan in the general sense is better, isn’t 
it? 

 
 
92 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Gnan  in  the  general  sense  has  been  referred  to  as 
Darshan. Therefore, Darshan is the only thing of value when 
it  comes  to  moksha.  One  should  maintain  a  generalized 
outlook. It is this vishesh gnan that goes to see [the details] 
regarding  the  pudgal  (non-Self  complex)  such  as,  ‘What  is 
this? What is that?’ 

Questioner: When there is a difference in the vision of 

the one seeing, that is when partiality is seen, isn’t it? 

Dadashri: When the developing I has a desire to see the 
vishesh gnan, only then will he see a difference. Vishesh gnan 
will  go  as  far  as  [seeing],  ‘He  is  dark-skinned,  he  is  fair-
skinned, he is tall, he is short, he is fat, and he is skinny.’ There 
is no end to the vishesh gnan, is there! That is why You should 
See through Darshan, have a generalized outlook. Therefore, 
‘we’  do  not  have  any  other  applied  awareness  besides 
Darshan, ‘we’ are in that applied awareness constantly. ‘We’ 
do  not  prevail  outside  of  that  applied  awareness  even  for  a 
moment, not even for a minute. The applied awareness as the 
Self is always there. When ‘we’ are doing vidhi (prayers that 
increase  the  awareness  of  the  Self),  ‘we’  are  in  the  applied 
awareness as the Self.  

The Knowledge (Gnan) is of one kind only, however, all 
Its  divisions are different.  When  You, the developing  I, see 
this room, It illuminates the room, and when you see the sky, 
It illuminates the sky, but the Knowledge is the same! As long 
as this vishesh gnan is being seen, the worldly gnan is being 
seen, until then, the Self cannot be Seen at all. Whereas after 
Knowing [realizing] the Self, both can be Seen. If the Self is 
not Known, then nothing will be seen; all those [people] are 
blind like a bat! 

Questioner:  The  Self 

is  actually 

the  One  with 

Knowledge, isn’t it? 

 
[1.6] Vibhaav - Vishesh Gnan - Agnan 

93 

Dadashri:  ‘It’  Itself  is  Knowledge.  ‘It’  is  not  the  One 
with Knowledge, It is Knowledge Itself! If you refer to It as 
the  One  with  Knowledge,  then  that  would  make  the 
Knowledge and the One having the Knowledge, two separate 
entities.  Therefore,  the  Self  is  Itself  Knowledge;  It  Itself  is 
nothing  but  illumination  (prakash)!  It  is  on  account  of  that 
illumination  that  all  of  this  is  Seen.  It  is  on  account  of  that 
illumination that It is able to not only understand all of this 
but also Know it. It comes into Its Knowledge, as well as into 
Its understanding! 

After Vibhaav, the Prakruti and the Purush Arises 

Due to the coming together of inanimate matter and the 
Self,  the  vishesh  gunadharma  (completely  new  properties 
with  specific functions)  of these two  have  arisen.  It  is  from 
that, that this entire ‘factory’ [of worldly life] has come into 
existence. 

Questioner:  That  is  indeed  what  is  referred  to  as  the 
prakruti (the non-Self complex) and the purush (the relative 
self; the developing ‘I’), isn’t it? 

Dadashri: No, the prakruti and the purush formed later 
on  from  that.  The  prakruti  is  inanimate,  but  it  comes  into 
existence after the purush has come into effect. The result of 
its vishesh parinaam, that became the prakruti. In the vishesh 
parinaam, first the ‘I’ arose, and from that the prakruti came 
into being. 

As  both,  inanimate  matter  and  the  Self  have  become 
entangled with each other, that is why the form as the prakruti 
has come about. 

Questioner:  These  five  eternal  elements,  they  are 

dependent on the prakruti, aren’t they? 

Dadashri: All of them comprise the prakruti. That which 
is made up of the five eternal elements is the prakruti. Now in 

 
 
94 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

this,  the  visheshbhaav  of  the  Self  has  arisen.  As  its 
visheshbhaav fell on this [on the jada Parmanu], the prakruti 
came into being. And then, it constantly keeps giving effect. 
Now, only after the two, the prakruti and the Purush (the Self) 
are  separated,  does  the  real  Purusharth  (spiritual  effort  to 
progress  as  the  Self)  begin.  Otherwise,  as  long  as  one  is 
[engrossed] in the prakruti, until then, the bhrant purusharth 
(illusory effort; relative effort) is definitely ongoing. Illusory 
effort! After ‘we’ impart this Knowledge of the Self (Gnan), 
the Purusharth of the real Purush begins.  

The Prakruti Has Become Prasavdharmi Because of 
the Parmanu 

This  world  is  constantly  undergoing  change.  All  this 
tends to happen due to the coming together of these six eternal 
elements.  This  world  has  arisen  without  anyone  doing 
anything.  It  has  arisen  due  to  scientific  circumstantial 
evidence. The Knowledge and Vision of the Self that were in 
their  inherent  nature,  deviated  from  there  inherent  nature 
whilst  on  the  samsaran  marg  (path  of  natural  and  spiritual 
evolution), and it is only that very part which is being seen as 
worldly creation. Aside from that, the pure Self and the pure 
Pudgal Parmanu, they both indeed remain the way they are. 
The  [vibhaavik  or  charged]  parmanu  are  prasavdharmi 
(having a potential to give rise to many more from one), that 
is  why  the  moment  the  eternal  element  of  the  Self  deviates 
from its inherent nature, the prakruti comes into being. This 
means  that,  in  the  world  that  is  visible  externally,  only  the 
division of the prakruti, the division of the prakruti that was 
formed,  is  visible  as  it  undergoes  dissolution;  whereas  the 
pure Self and the pure Pudgal Parmanu indeed remain as they 
are. In this world, even the belief of, ‘I am the creator,’ is an 
awareness arising out of illusion. Creation and dissolution are 
a  natural  phenomenon;  they  are  a  result  of  scientific 
circumstantial evidence.  

 
[1.6] Vibhaav - Vishesh Gnan - Agnan 

95 

This  prakruti  that  is  prasavdharmi,  its  energy  is  far 
greater  than  that  of  God  [the  absolute  Self],  but  it  is  not 
Chaitanya shakti (the energy of Knowing and Seeing). There 
is  such an attribute  in the prakruti, that it becomes  charged 
just  upon  coming  into  contact  with  the  Self.  However,  the 
gunadharma of the Self never change. Due to the Knowledge 
deviating from Its inherent nature as well as the prakruti being 
prasavdharmi, it gets charged.  

Further Analysis of Vibhaav 

Questioner: ‘You’ say that You have definitely spoken 
about  visheshbhaav  many  times,  however  ‘our’  mahatmas 
still do not understand what visheshbhaav is. Please can You 
explain vishesh parinaam with more examples, so that it can 
set in everyone’s understanding. 

Dadashri: Sure. Say in order to enjoy the fresh air  you 
have  built  a  house  by  the  seashore,  about  half  a  mile  away 
from the sea, and you drop off a couple of truckloads of pure 
iron over there. Thereafter, you tell the security guard, “Keep 
an  eye  on  the  iron.”  Then  say  you  go  away  abroad  for  two 
years. When  you  return  after two  years, would  you see any 
difference in the iron? Would the iron have been affected in 
any way? 

Questioner: It would have rusted. 

Dadashri: Why? Even if it were lying in a place with a 

roof, where it would not get wet from the rain? 

Questioner: It would still have rusted. 

Dadashri: Is that so! How were you able to predict what 
will happen, about the rusting? Before the iron is delivered, 
you are able to predict what will happen, because  you have 
experienced it, haven’t you! 

 
 
96 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Well, now it has rusted; so tell me, who caused the rust. 
Prove it. Whose rust is it, and with whose wish did it occur? 
The layer of rust formed would be this thick! You may say, 
“My iron was not like this. Who ruined my iron? Who entered 
the place where it was stored?” What would people say if you 
were to complain like this? 

Questioner: [It happened] Due to the salty air of the sea. 

Dadashri: Yes, but who did it, tell me that! Did the sea 

breeze do it, or did the sea do it, or did the iron do it?  

Questioner: The one who put it there. 

Dadashri: Did he do this? 

Questioner: Had the iron not been put there, it would not 

have happened. 

Dadashri:  The  people  of  the  world  will  blame  him 
[saying], “You fool, why did you put it there? That is why it 
rusted.” It is not like that. What if these people of the world, 
those who have illusion, want to find out who the guilty one 
is exactly; what then? 

Questioner: Isn’t the person who left it there the guilty 

one? 

Dadashri: That is certainly [the belief] of these people. 
Whatever  has  been  seen,  is  visible  evidence,  it  is  visual 
evidence.  Visual  evidence  will  not  do.  The  actual  scientific 
evidence, the exact evidence, is necessary. People in worldly 
life or the court require visual evidence. Whereas exactness is 
required here. You would immediately fire the worker. That 
is  not  acceptable.  You  should  investigate  scientifically,  you 
should investigate properly that, ‘Who did this? Who caused 
the rust? Who is responsible?’ Tell me! I do not even know 
whether it will definitely rust if you leave it at the seashore. 

 
[1.6] Vibhaav - Vishesh Gnan - Agnan 

97 

So then, you reprimand the security guard saying, “Hey, 
what  did  you do to  all of this iron? This  iron was so clean, 
such that it would not even spoil these hands at all, so how did 
this  happen?  What  have  you  stuck  on  it?”  So,  the  security 
guard  would  respond,  “What  can  I  do  sir?  I  did  not  do 
anything. Why are you reprimanding me? It was left here so 
it is bound to rust.” Hey, but who put the rust on it? Therefore, 
when  you  go  to  investigate  who  is  guilty  of  doing  that,  the 
people from the neighborhood will tell you, “It rusted because 
it was left near the seashore.” 

So then, you tell the salty air, “Why did you ruin my iron? 
What  harm  have  I  caused  you?”  So  the  salty  air  will  say, 
“Where  have  I  ruined  it?  Why  are  you  accusing  me 
unnecessarily?  I  do  not  even  have  the  attribute  of  ruining 
anything. I just remain in my intrinsic nature. What do I have 
to do with it? If it were in my nature to spoil things, then I am 
constantly  flowing,  but  nothing  happens  to  wood  or  other 
objects. The iron must be like that, that is why it happened. So 
how am I at fault in that?” The salty air too answered like the 
sea, “Your iron alone is the one complaining like this, no one 
else is complaining. What can I do if your iron itself is like 
that?  No  one  else  is  being  affected  like  that.  This  effect  is 
arising because of your iron. So that means it is not my fault. 
It must be the fault of your iron. Why are you unnecessarily 
accusing me!” So then, the salty air does not prove to be the 
culprit. So, thereafter you also say that it seems as if no one 
from outside is the culprit. 

Therefore,  it  is  [a  result  of]  scientific  circumstantial 
evidence. The iron has not caused this rust. Besides, iron does 
not have the intrinsic nature of rusting. If it were its intrinsic 
nature to rust, then there are iron rods in the RCC [reinforced 
cement concrete], which even if they were to be removed after 
a hundred years, they would still be exactly the same. Hence, 
iron’s  intrinsic  nature  is  not  such.  What  if  the  iron  were  to 

 
 
98 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

come  across  other  elements?  It  is  present  within  the  RCC. 
Have you ever broken RCC? ‘We’ have broken it. ‘We’ have 
broken the iron rods put in fifty years ago. They are exactly in 
the same state as the new ones you would buy today. Yes …so 
from this example, did you understand what ‘we’ are trying to 
tell you? Does anyone appear to be the culprit? 

Questioner: No one appears to be the culprit. 

Dadashri:  Nevertheless,  the  rust  can  be  seen  on  iron. 

That is how the world has arisen. 

The Rust Is Akin to the Ego 

This Self is actually the absolute Self (Parmatma). Just 
as  rust forms  on the iron, no one has caused it, similarly in 
this, the illusion that ‘I am the doer’ has arisen. This Self is in 
the  very  same  state.  The  Self  that  is  within  you  is  in  the 
liberated  state  indeed.  ‘It’  does  not  have  any  ignorance 
(agnanta).  However,  a  completely  new  property  (vishesh 
guna) has arisen. Despite that, no change has taken place in 
the Self.  

Questioner:  This  example  that  You  have  given,  how 

does it correlate with the Self?  

Dadashri: It is because of the coming together of the two, 
the eternal element of inanimate matter with the Self, that this 
ego has arisen.  

Questioner: Is that what is known as the rust? 

Dadashri: Yes, the way that rust has arisen, similarly this 
ego  has  arisen.  When  ‘we’  remove  that  ego  for  you, 
everything falls into place. ‘We’ remove the ego by applying 
the ‘medicine’ [by imparting the Knowledge of the Self], so it 
is done, it comes to an end; thereafter You will not have any 
worries.  

 
[1.6] Vibhaav - Vishesh Gnan - Agnan 

99 

Questioner:  In  this  example,  iron  is  symbolizing  the 

Self, right?  

Dadashri: Yes, so that which has formed on It, that is the 

visheshbhaav which has arisen. 

Questioner:  The  visheshbhaav  which  is  [the  cause  of] 
this entire worldly life; so the associated understanding should 
at  the  very  least  exist  that,  ‘‘I’  Myself  am  not  this.  The 
visheshbhaav is not My Real form, My pure form is that other 
One.’  

Dadashri:  Nothing  has  touched  It  at  all.  When  ‘we’ 
impart  the  Knowledge  of  the  Self,  It  becomes  pure. 
Thereafter,  neither  is  rust  My  Real  form,  nor  are  these 
circumstances  My  Real  form.  The  ego  has  stopped  causing 
problems, hasn’t it! The world has arisen because of the ego, 
and after attaining the Knowledge of the Self, the ego comes 
to an end; that ego goes away. In fact, your filled [discharge] 
ego is speaking up; however, you believe that to be the real 
[charge] ego.  

The ego arose as a result of the visheshbhaav, and then 
from  that,  the  prakruti  arises.  The  ‘iron’  is  in  the  state  as 
‘iron’,  the  prakruti  is  in  the  state  as  the  prakruti.  If  you 
separate  these  two,  then  ‘iron’  is  in  ‘iron’s’  place  and  the 
prakruti is in the prakruti’s place. As long as they are one, rust 
will certainly keep on increasing day-by-day.  

Similarly,  nothing  happens  to  the  original  Self.  The 
developing I has forgotten his intrinsic nature, he has lost his 
awareness as the Self (bhaan). As long as he does not come 
back into the awakened awareness as the Self, he continues to 
remain  in  the  state  as  the  prakruti.  Prakruti  means  lack  of 
awareness of one’s own inherent nature as the Self or lack of 
awareness that this is an illusion; that is called the prakruti. 

 
 
100 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

‘I am the One Experiencing,’ Is Just a Belief 

Questioner:  Dada,  iron  is  a  physical  item.  It  has  no 
energy, whereas the Self has all-encompassing energy;  how 
can rust ever form on It?  

Dadashri: ‘It’ has not yet come into Its full manifestation 
as  the  all-encompassing  energized  state.  ‘It’  is  under  the 
pressure of other circumstances, isn’t It! That does not mean 
that  It  has  lost  Its  own  gunadharma.  An  additional 
gunadharma  has  arisen,  and  from  that  something  called 
egoism has arisen. Who experiences pain (dukh)? The egoism 
experiences it. Who experiences pleasure (sukh)? The egoism 
experiences it. The Self does not interfere in any of this at all. 
Everything  is  experienced  by  the  egoism.  The  egoism  is 
functioning on the advice of the intellect.  

Now,  in  the  true  sense,  the  ego  experiences  neither 

pleasure nor pain, it just continues to do egoism.  

Questioner: Just as rust formed on the iron, in that way… 

Dadashri: The ‘rust’ that formed, it [the ego] formed on 
the  Self.  It  has  to  do  with  the  Self.  If  the  Self  were  to  be 
considered as iron, then the ego would be the rust. Now, when 
the  ego  says,  “I  experienced  it,”  well  really,  it  has  not 
experienced it at all. In fact, it is the sense organs that have 
experienced it, yet one does the egoism of, “I experienced it.” 
That is why Lord Krishna said, “The sense organs are the ones 
functioning  as  the  sense  organs,  why  are  you  doing  egoism 
unnecessarily?”  Moreover,  the  sense  organs  are  functioning 
so  as  per  their  intrinsic  nature.  One  is  unnecessarily  taking 
beatings  due  to  not  understanding  this.  One  does  not 
understand what Lord Krishna meant, nor does he understand 
what Lord Mahavir meant. What He is saying is true, isn’t it! 
Therefore, it is necessary to understand the point. 

 
[1.6] Vibhaav - Vishesh Gnan - Agnan 

101 

After rust forms, iron does its own work and rust does its 
own work. Iron does not interfere with rust, and rust does not 
interfere with iron. Similarly, in the case of the Self what ‘rust’ 
has formed on It? The answer is, the ego [the original aham; 
the initial ‘I’ that arose] and the mind, intellect, chit and ego. 
‘Rust’ in the form of the antahkaran (the mind, intellect, chit 
and ego complex) is formed. It continues doing its own work. 
The Self continues doing Its own work. As long as this [the 
antahkaran] is active, the Self keeps giving off illumination 
idly  [with  indifference].  When  all  the  activity  of  the 
antahkaran comes to an end, the work of the Self begins. Or 
else, if the antahkaran is active and one meets a Gnani who 
says, “Hey, You are not this,  You just  have to See this  one 
[Chandubhai]  as  separate,”  then  the  Seeing  begins.  ‘It’  [the 
Self] becomes separate. If You keep Seeing what Chandubhai 
is doing, then that Gnan will reach absolute Knowledge (keval 
Gnan). 



 
 
 
[7] 

Vibhaav Arises From the Samsaran of the 
Six Elements 

On the Samsaran Marg… 

There are six eternal  elements  in  this world.  Moreover, 
those eternal  elements  are  undergoing  samsaran  (constantly 
revolving  around  each  other;  constantly  bringing  about  a 
change).  Samsaran  means  that  they  are  constantly  bringing 
about change. By constantly bringing about a change it means 
that when the eternal elements come into close proximity with 
each  other,  all  kinds  of  avastha  (temporary  states; 
circumstances; situations) tend to arise, and when they come 
together [when the Self becomes engrossed in the Pudgal], the 
visheshbhaav  arises.  They  constantly  keep  revolving  from 
here  to  there,  and  based  on  that,  all  the  visheshbhaav  keep 
changing, and thus, one keeps seeing all sorts of new things. 
The  original  eternal  elements  of  this  world  are  natural 
(swabhaavik). When they come into the relative or in worldly 
interactions, they become unnatural (vibhaavik). One eternal 
element does not merge into another; they all remain separate. 

Only Two Became Vidharmi 

Questioner:  Were  the  eternal  elements  of  inanimate 
matter  and  the  Self  separate  before  they  came  together  and 
gave rise to the visheshbhaav? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
[1.7] Vibhaav Arises From the Samsaran of the Six Elements 

103 

Dadashri: They were together from the beginning. It was 
not as if they were separate before. This is the way it has been 
from the beginning. Inanimate matter and the Self are already 
in contact with each other. All these six eternal elements are 
indeed  together.  From  that,  if  you  separate  them,  then  each 
will return to its own gunadharma (intrinsic property that has 
a specific function), otherwise they will not come into their 
gunadharma.  The  six  of  them  are  together.  In  addition, 
vidharma  (an  additional  function;  deviation  from  their 
original  function)  has  seeped  into  all  six  [they  display  a 
vishesh  dharma,  an  additional  function],  but  of  these,  four 
have  not  become  vidharmi  (display  an  additional  function; 
deviated  from  their  original  function).  Despite  remaining  in 
close contact with each other, they are able to remain in their 
swadharma  (one’s  original  individual  function).  Only  two, 
inanimate  matter  and  the  Self,  become  vidharmi.  The  other 
four do not become vidharmi [vikrut; unnatural] at all.  

Questioner: So, how is the Self vidharmi? 

Dadashri: The Self being vidharmi means it has acquired 
the  illusion  that,  ‘I  am  doing  this.’  Moreover,  the  Pudgal 
Parmanu  have  become  vidharmi  [prayogsa  parmanu;  the 
charging  phase  of  parmanu]  means  that  blood  does  not 
normally come out of Pudgal Parmanu, nor does pus form in 
it. However, the color of the Pudgal Parmanu changes. Red, 
yellow, green, these are all the [vidharmi] gunadharma of the 
Pudgal Parmanu. But those that are outside of its [original] 
gunadharma  are  [considered]  vibhaavik  guna  [mishrasa 
parmanu]. Things like the pus that forms and becomes septic 
and all such other things that arise. [The vidharmi pudgal and 
the vibhaavik pudgal are completely different]. 

 
104 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

The Six Eternal Elements Are Not in the Form of a 
Compound 

Questioner: One eternal element cannot do anything to 
another  eternal  element,  so  when  those  two  elements  come 
into  compound  form,  do  they  both  maintain  their  original 
gunadharma? 

Dadashri: It is indeed because the original gunadharma 
prevails  that  they  are  not  able  to  do  anything  to  the  other! 
Moreover, they do not take on the form of a compound; they 
are  in  the  form  of  a  mixture.  Their  own  individual 
gunadharma do not change. They come together, they keep 
coming into contact with each other, they become a mixture, 
but  they  do  not  form  a  compound.  If  they  were  to  form  a 
compound, then it would mean that I loaned you mine and you 
loaned me yours. No one can borrow or loan to another. There 
is no such interference. They simply come together and then 
separate.  If  they  were  to  form  a  compound,  then  their 
gunadharma  would  change.  There  is  no  possibility  of  the 
others  forming  into  a  compound  at  all,  is  there!  It  is  in  the 
vibhaavik  pudgal  alone  [within  itself]  that  a  compound  is 
formed. If anything were to affect You [the Self] at all, then 
You would never  find God  [the absolute Self], would You! 
[The vibhaavik pudgal is not an eternal element]. 

Questioner:  Does  anaadi  anant  mean  that  it  not  only 
does not have a beginning but it also does not have an end; [it 
is] eternal? 

Dadashri:  Yes,  eternal.  From  the  context  of  their 
swabhaav (inherent nature), all the naturally existing elements 
are eternal, and from the context of vibhaav (unnatural state), 
all the elements that have deviated from their inherent nature 
are temporary. 

The cause of the world, the reason it persists, is because 
of the six eternal elements, otherwise it would not have come 

 
[1.7] Vibhaav Arises From the Samsaran of the Six Elements 

105 

to  be.  Moreover,  amongst  the  six  eternal  elements,  if  the 
Pudgal did not exist, then the world would never have arisen. 
Everything in the world that can be experienced through the 
five sense organs is all an influence of the Pudgal, otherwise 
the Self was not going to spoil at all. 

Questioner: Did the Pudgal do all this? 

Dadashri:  It  is  because  the  Pudgal  Parmanu  have  a 
visible form that the visheshbhaav (an assumed identification 
with that which is not One’s own) arose [for the Self]. 

The Pudgal Is Itself a Vishesh Parinaam 

Questioner:  Now,  if  the  Self  is  nirlep  (absolutely 
unaffected; unanointed), if It is asang (free from association), 
then  can  It  actually  be  affected  by  the  eternal  element  of 
inanimate matter? 

Dadashri:  Yes,  It  is  indeed  asang.  The  Self  that  you 
possess  is  indeed  nirlep.  Everyone’s  Self,  the  Self  of  every 
living  being  is  indeed  nirlep.  In  addition,  all  this  that  has 
happened, is a scientific effect. 

Questioner:  When  the  Self  becomes  separate  from  the 
pudgal, in which one of the other five elements do the anger, 
pride, deceit and greed merge? 

Dadashri: They do not merge into any eternal element. 

That is indeed what God has referred to as pudgal. 

Questioner:  Is  that  what  is  referred  to  as  vishesh 

parinaam (a completely new effect)? 

Dadashri:  Yes,  vishesh  parinaam.  However,  they  are 
considered to be that of the pudgal, they are not considered to 
be of the Self. This pudgal is actually not an eternal element 
at all; the Parmanu are the eternal element. 

 
106 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Questioner: So then, does that make the pudgal a vishesh 

parinaam? 

Dadashri: The pudgal is actually a vishesh parinaam that 
has come into effect. From the parmanu, the pudgal has been 
filled;  influx  took  place.  They  will  undergo  outflux  once 
again.  What  has  been  outfluxed  will  be  influxed.  What  has 
been  influxed  will  be  outfluxed  once  again.  It  is  due  to  the 
vishesh parinaam  of the Self that this  vishesh parinaam [of 
the pudgal] appears to exist. Whatever [action] you do in front 
of  a  mirror,  the  reflection  mimics  that  to  the  same  extent, 
doesn’t it! In the same way, all these vishesh parinaam have 
come into being. 

The Gnani Speaks After Having Seen It Himself 

Questioner: The Self does not actually have any bhaav 

(inner intent; belief; state of being), does It? 

Dadashri: ‘It’ does not have bhaav, yet It is considered 
to have one, isn’t it! It is indeed because of upadhibhaav (the 
belief that ‘I am the sufferer’) that it is considered to have one, 
isn’t it! That tends to arise. Anger, pride, deceit and greed are 
not  normally  there,  yet  they  do  arise.  Upadhibhaav  is  a 
vyatirek guna (a completely new property of a third entity that 
arises  when  two  eternal  elements,  the  Self  and  inanimate 
matter, come together).  

Questioner: So that means they are attached to the Self. 
This discussion is with reference to or in connection to that, 
right? 

Dadashri: It is a vishesh guna. 

When two [eternal elements] came together, a third guna 
(property) arose. ‘We’ have seen through ‘our’ very own eyes 
that this has arisen through visheshbhaav, and the scientists of 
today can understand that what ‘we’ are saying is correct. 

 
[1.7] Vibhaav Arises From the Samsaran of the Six Elements 

107 

Questioner: Have today’s scientists  really become that 

smart? 

Dadashri: By smart, it means that they are saying it from 
this  context,  from  the  paudgalik  or  worldly  point  of  view. 
They do not know this [spiritual] system.  From the worldly 
point of view, zinc remains in its own gunadharma and iron 
remains  in  its  own  gunadharma,  but  by  putting  the  two 
together, a third new gunadharma arises.  

First the rain falls on the ground and then the scent of the 
soil  arises.  This  is  because,  as  two  things  came  together,  a 
third  thing  arose,  a  vishesh  parinaam.  Similarly,  this  is  a 
vishesh parinaam that has arisen. 

Thereafter, in the Binding of Karma, There are Six 
Elements 

Questioner: We say that this visheshbhaav arises due to 
the close proximity of  inanimate matter  and  the Self, right? 
Then  truly  speaking,  can  we  not  say  that  the  visheshbhaav 
arises because of the proximity of the six eternal elements?  

Dadashri: No, it is not like that. It is only due to these 
two that this illusion arises, but the other four eternal elements 
help it. 

Questioner: Yes, but when the visheshbhaav arises, are 

the other eternal elements needed at that time?  

Dadashri: Vibhaav (a third identity with completely new 
properties)  begins  with  these  two,  and  then  as  the  karma 
gradually  form,  all  six  eternal  elements  come  together. 
Therefore,  it  is  like  that,  once  the  karma  are  formed, 
everything that is necessary for them then comes together. 

Questioner: But are only those two required to give rise 

to the visheshbhaav? 

 
108 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Dadashri: Only those two are necessary. It is more than 

enough if those two are present. 

Questioner: Are all six not necessary for that? 

Dadashri: All the rest are not necessary; all the rest end 
up coming together. The one with form and the other without 
form. The Self is without form, whereas inanimate matter is 
with form; and it is due to the circumstance of these two that 
it [the visheshbhaav] arises. 

Questioner: Yes, it does indeed arise immediately. 

Dadashri:  And  thereafter  the  other  eternal  elements 
come together. But they do not help in causing the vibhaav. 
They are present, but they are present in a state of neutrality 
(udaseen bhaav). Whereas these two eternal elements, both of 
them become unnatural. Both of them give rise to the prakruti. 
This pudgal, the one ‘we’ refer to as ‘filled with power’, the 
one ‘we’ refer to as ‘mishrachetan’, that is all vikrut pudgal 
(parmanu that have deviated from their original form; same 
as vikaari pudgal, vikaari parmanu, vibhaavik parmanu and 
vibhaavik  pudgal)  and  this  worldly-interacting  self  is  the 
vikrut atma. This has happened due to the coming together of 
all of this. In reality, the Self is not like that and truly speaking, 
the Pudgal is not like that either. This unnaturalness has come 
to arise. 

There is no need for any doer in this world. The eternal 
elements that exist in this world are constantly bringing about 
a change. Based on that, all the bhaav continue to change and 
everything is seen in a completely new way. Among the six 
fundamental  eternal  elements,  it  is  when  the  Self  and 
inanimate matter come in close proximity with each other, that 
the vishesh parinaam arises. The other four eternal elements, 
regardless of where or how they come in proximity with each 
other, do not give rise to such an effect at all.  

 
[1.7] Vibhaav Arises From the Samsaran of the Six Elements 

109 

The four of them are in a state of neutrality. Whatever one 
wants  to  do,  even  if  he  wants  to  steal,  they  will  help  him 
neutrally, and if one wants to make a donation, they will help 
him as well. So they do not want to do it themselves. The four 
of  them  are  helpful,  but  only  these  two  are  the  main  ones, 
inanimate matter and the Self.  

None of Them Are in Opposition to the Other 

Questioner: Both of the eternal elements have opposing 

functions, despite that how can they come together? 

Dadashri:  They  do  not  have  opposing  functions,  each 
one has its own individual functions. Neither of them are in 
an  opposing  function.  They  do  not  have  any  opposition 
towards each other. They can co-exist and do everything, but 
each one has its own functions. Each one has its independent 
functions.  The  functions  [of  each  one]  are  such  that  they 
cannot cause a hindrance to the other. Neither can they help 
the other, nor can they interfere with one another; such are the 
functions they possess.  

Questioner:  Now  the  other  question  here  is  that,  can 

these two eternal elements help each other? 

Dadashri: They cannot do anything at all. They do not 
have any relationship with each other whatsoever, so how can 
they do that? 

Questioner: They exist together as a mixture, don’t they, 

or else, in what way are they co-existing? 

Dadashri: No, none of them helps [the other]. They do 
not  do  anything  for  one  another;  they  are  just  a  nimit 
(evidentiary  doer).  It  is  because  of  their  evidence  that  this 
problem  has  arisen.  No  one  has  created  the  problem. 
Otherwise, an obligation would be bound, and if an obligation 
were to be bound, then when would one come back to repay 
such  an  obligation?  Their  relationship  is  in  the  form  of  a 

 
110 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

circumstance. Moreover, the circumstances tend to dissociate 
by their inherent nature. 

Akram Gnan, It Belongs to Chetan 

Questioner:  The  vyatirek  guna  that  come  to  unfold  as 
karma,  when  the  two  [eternal  elements]  separate,  do  the 
Pudgal Parmanu merge back into the Pudgal? What happens 
to  the  Pudgal  Parmanu  when  the  Self  prevails  as  separate 
from the pudgal (non-Self complex)? 

Dadashri:  Then  the  Pudgal  prevails  as  the  Pudgal. 
Thereafter, the Pudgal is considered vyavasthit (reverts to its 
natural form), and the Self prevails as the Self; both prevail in 
their own intrinsic nature. 

Questioner: So then this Gnan of Dada’s, what property 
(guna) is It considered to be? Is It considered a vyatirek guna? 

Dadashri: The two eternal elements which gave rise to 
the vyatirek guna when they came into close proximity, those 
two  are  separated  upon  attaining  this  Gnan,  and  so  it  [the 
vyatirek guna] dissipates. The ego (ahamkaar) and the ‘my-
ness’ (mamata), both dissolve. 

Questioner: But does this Gnan fall under the category 

of vyatirek guna or of the Self? What does It fall under? 

Dadashri:  This  Gnan  does  not  fall  under  any  of  them. 

This Gnan reverts everything back to the way it was before. 

Questioner: The Gnan that You give us, does It belong 
to inanimate matter or to the Self? Where did the Gnan come 
from? 

Dadashri: ‘It’ belongs completely to the Self. 

Questioner: But as vyatirek, right? ‘It’ is the Gnan of the 

Self, but is It a vyatirek guna? 

 
[1.7] Vibhaav Arises From the Samsaran of the Six Elements 

111 

Dadashri:  No,  It  can’t  be.  ‘This’  cannot  be  vyatirek. 
‘This’ is a property of the Self!!! The Gnan given by Dada is 
considered to be an [intrinsic; anvay] property of the Self. The 
moment It enters, all these things dissipate immediately. 

Vibhaav Exists Since Time Immemorial 

Questioner:  Are  the  eternal  elements  present  in  the 

visheshbhaav?  

Dadashri: Yes, the eternal elements are present, but the 

eternal elements are separate. They remain separate from it. 

Questioner: So when the  visheshbhaav of the Self and 
inanimate  matter  arises,  do  the  rest  of  the  eternal  elements 
remain together with them? 

Dadashri: The original visheshbhaav is the one that had 
occurred, it is from that point on that everything moves ahead.  

Questioner: Are the other eternal elements also together 

since then? 

Dadashri:  They  have  indeed  been  together  all  along; 
there has not been any change in them at all. So then, the cycle 
simply continues. 

Questioner:  And  there  must  be  a  start  time  when  the 
visheshbhaav entered in the Pudgal, must there not? If there 
is a start time, then can’t it be sought out; a hundred thousand, 
a million, a billion… years ago? 

Dadashri: ‘We’ are saying this to explain visheshbhaav. 

However, that state has been there since time immemorial. 

No One Is at Fault in This 

Questioner: Dada, these six eternal elements that exist, 
and  this  energy  called  ‘vyavasthit  shakti’,  is  this  energy 
outside of the six eternal elements or is it within them? 

 
112 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Dadashri:  It  is  indeed  within  the  six  eternal  elements, 
there  are  no  other  eternal  elements  besides  the  six  eternal 
elements. 

Questioner:  Under  which  eternal  element  does  the 

energy called ‘vyavasthit’ fall? 

Dadashri:  It  is  not  an  eternal  element.  It  is  within  the 
eternal  elements.  It  is  not  any  particular  eternal  element. 
However, if someone wants to call it an eternal element, then 
it will have to be called ‘pudgal’. The pudgal is not considered 
an  eternal  element.  The  Parmanu  are  considered  an  eternal 
element; the Self is an eternal element. The pudgal is not an 
eternal  element.  The  pudgal  is  the  unnatural  result  of  the 
Parmanu; it is a vishesh parinaam. The pudgal is nothing but 
a  vishesh  parinaam.  Even  vyavasthit  [shakti]  is  a  vishesh 
parinaam. 

Questioner: So is this vyavasthit [shakti] a play between 

the six eternal elements? 

Dadashri: Just as when 2H and O come together, it is not 
anyone’s  play.  The  moment  the  two  come  together,  their 
nature  just  becomes  like  that.  Similarly,  when  the  eternal 
elements come into mutual contact they take on this particular 
form. It is not such that it requires anyone to do anything. 

Questioner: Does it keep happening? It happens? 

Dadashri: The world has arisen scientifically, all of it. 

The worldly life that is filled with faults, is in existence 
due to sansarg dosh (the fault of engrossment that arises when 
the two eternal elements come into close proximity with each 
other)! The Gnani Purush separates the two from this sansarg 
dosh.  Thereafter  the  two  [eternal  elements]  ‘worship’  [go 
towards]  their  own  properties  (guna).  Just  as  this  sparrow 
keeps pecking at a mirror, but when the time comes about, it 
stops. Similarly, due to the fault of coming into close contact 

 
[1.7] Vibhaav Arises From the Samsaran of the Six Elements 

113 

with  the  mirror,  don’t  you  see  another  professor  just  like 
yourself! 

This  sansaar  bhaav  (worldly  state;  the  state  as  the 
worldly self) is not a gunadharma of the Self, and nor is it a 
gunadharma  of  the  Pudgal  Parmanu.  Even  the  Pudgal 
Parmanu do not like this sansaar bhaav. It is of no use to them 
at all! Nor is it of use to the Self. However, because the two 
of them came together, this visheshbhaav arose. The Self is 
not at fault in that, and nor are the Pudgal Parmanu at fault. 
No one is at fault. 

The Role of Niyati 

Questioner: In spite of One being the Self, the other five 
eternal  elements  have  influence  over  It,  is  that  why  the 
vyatirek guna arise?  

Dadashri: No, it is not possible for any one of them to 
have any sort of influence on the other. Had one been able to 
influence  the  other,  then  it  would  be  considered  more 
powerful, but they are all equal. It is not possible for them to 
disturb one another. It is not possible for them to interfere with 
one another.  

Questioner: Is the samipyabhaav (the engrossment that 
arises when the two eternal elements, the Self and inanimate 
matter, are in close proximity) also subject to niyati (natural 
progression of evolution of a soul)?  

Dadashri:  Samipyabhaav?  This  itself  is  referred  to  as 
niyati  2; this entire part is considered  niyati. What is this or 
what  is  it  based  on?  The  answer  is  niyati.  [If  you  ask,]  “Is 
niyati  partial  towards  a  particular  religion?”  The  answer  is, 
“No, it is impartial.” That which is vitaraag (absolutely free 

2 More details on niyati can be found in Aptavani 11 Purvardh Gujarati book page numbers 
270 to 330 

 
                                                 
114 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

from attachment and abhorrence) cannot be at fault. If it were 
partial  towards  a  particular  religion,  you  would  feel,  ‘It  is 
siding with that one,’ however, it is vitaraag. What a puzzle 
this is, isn’t it? 

indeed.  Therefore, 

In addition, this world is constantly changing. Even for a 
single Parmanu itself, the time or the moment, all of that is 
ever  changing 
inquired 
extensively  regarding  niyati  as  to,  ‘Does  this  really  follow 
niyati  exactly?’  On  the  contrary,  it  will  make  One  take  a 
beating within. This is because niyati says, “All of this is my 
form,” so instead it makes You take a beating! Yet, no one is 
superior to the other; that is how the world is. 

‘we’  had 

Questioner: The vyatirek guna that arose, are they a part 
of scientific circumstantial evidence, or are they a completely 
separate part? 

Dadashri: All of this has certainly arisen on the basis of 
scientific circumstantial evidences. Then, as the water vapor 
formed,  the  clouds  formed,  and  because  the  clouds  formed, 
the rain formed. Moreover, as the rain formed, the water vapor 
formed once again. This entire cycle simply continues to carry 
on. 

Vibhaav, in Greater Detail 

Now ‘we’ will give you an example of what is considered 
vyatirek  guna.  ‘We’  will  tell  you  how  this  vyatirek  guna 
arises.  So  water  becomes  rain,  the  H2O  that  is  formed  up 
above, from where did it come? The answer is, water vapor 
forms from the ocean and rises up. So who formed that water 
vapor? The ocean is so  vast; everyone will  assume that this 
ocean created the water vapor, right? If one were to look at it 
subtly with binoculars or some such instrument, then he would 
see that water vapor is slowly being formed from the ocean all 
day long. That is because the moment the sun’s rays fall on 

 
[1.7] Vibhaav Arises From the Samsaran of the Six Elements 

115 

the  ocean,  water  vapor  begins  to  form.  Once  the  sun  sets, 
nothing happens. 

The  moment  the  ocean  and  the  sun,  both  get  together, 
water vapor is formed; does that happen or not? When the sun 
is  present,  water  vapor  is  formed,  isn’t  it?  That  is  why  the 
scientists say that there is an endless amount of water vapor 
being  formed  from  the  ocean.  Therefore,  when  we  ask  the 
ocean, “Why are  you forming the water vapor?” Then what 
will the ocean say? 

Questioner: “It happened on its own.” 

Dadashri: How can it happen on its own? Now, who is 
the culprit for that? Is the ocean the culprit or is the sun the 
culprit? Through whose fault did the water vapor form? Is the 
water vapor being formed due to the water in the ocean? So 
one day you scold the ocean saying, “Why are you creating 
the water vapor here? You are interfering unnecessarily. Do 
not form any water vapor here anymore. You are not to form 
any  water  vapor  whatsoever  anymore,  otherwise  you  will 
have  to  deal  with  the  consequences.”  The  water  vapor  that 
comes from the ocean is the reason that all these clouds are 
formed.  So  if  you  blame  the  ocean  saying,  “Stop  forming 
water vapor,” then what will the ocean say to you? “Hey, don’t 
be arrogant with me. I am not doing that and you are accusing 
me unnecessarily. I am simply a nimit (evidentiary doer), I am 
not  giving  rise  to  anything.”  Yet  you  say,  “Hey,  nothing 
besides water vapor is being formed, isn’t it?” 

Questioner:  We  should  investigate,  ‘Who  caused  it  to 

happen?’ 

Dadashri:  So  you  are  confounded,  ‘This  ocean  is  not 
doing it, so there should be some other reason.’ So mortal one, 
who is doing this? Who is responsible? 

 
116 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

So you come to the realization that, ‘Oh! This is not an 
attribute of the ocean. This is all a problem created by the sun 
itself.’ Isn’t that what you would understand? So who would 
you consider the culprit to be? You would consider the sun. 
‘The ocean is not creating it, so the sun must be somewhat at 
fault. If the sun is present, then the ocean is forming the water 
vapor. This is not an attribute of the ocean.’ Therefore,  you 
suspect, ‘This is indeed the work of the sun.’ However, it is 
when the sun and the ocean both come together that the water 
vapor  is  formed;  so  then  through  whose  energy  does  that 
happen? 

Questioner: The water vapor arises due to the heat of the 
sun as well as the water, so we can say that the water vapor is 
formed through the energy of both of them. 

Dadashri: But who is the one doing in this? 

Questioner: In one way, we can say it is nature, and in 

another sense, we can say it is due to the sun’s heat. 

Dadashri: The sun  is  doing it, isn’t  it? Can the sun be 
called the doer? So you come to the understanding that the one 
responsible in this is definitely the sun. It is definitely the sun 
who  is  doing  this.  It  must  be  the  sun  who  is  responsible. 
Therefore,  you  blame  the  sun.  If  you  were  to  ask  the  sun, 
“Why  are  you  creating  water  vapor  over  here  from  our 
ocean?” Then it too, would fearlessly respond, “I am actually 
not doing it, do not accuse me.” You tell him, “Why not, you 
are  indeed  the  one  creating  water  vapor  from  this  ocean.” 
Then sun would say, “That is not my attribute either. I may 
seem to be the nimit, but that is not my attribute.” [You say,] 
“Then  whose  attribute  is  that?  Who  else,  other  than  you, 
would  do  such  a  thing?  So  why  did  you  form  the  water 
vapor?” Then it would say, “Look here, do not talk to me like 
that, I am not doing it.” So, then you ask, “Then who else is 
doing this, when you are not present near the ocean, the water 

 
[1.7] Vibhaav Arises From the Samsaran of the Six Elements 

117 

vapor  does  not  form,  but  the  moment  you  are  present,  the 
water vapor immediately starts to form.” So it would say, “If 
I  were  creating  the  water  vapor,  then  it  would  also  happen 
over land. However, nothing happens above land, therefore, I 
am not the doer of this. If I were the doer, then even though 
my rays fall over this stone, yet nothing happens over there. If 
I  were  the  doer,  then  the  water  vapor  should  form  over  the 
roads and over the mountains, shouldn’t it? Hence, it is not I 
who is creating this water vapor.” 

The sun rises and sets in its respective direction; it does 
not  have  anything  to  do  with  this.  Hence,  this  attribute  of 
forming  water  vapor  is  neither  of  the  sun  nor  of  the  ocean. 
Water vapor is a vyatirek guna that has arisen. The sun is not 
doing it, nor is the ocean doing it. However, when these two 
come  together,  each  one  maintains  its  own  individual 
gunadharma  within,  and  a  new  vyatirek  guna  comes  about. 
That is how all of this has manifested. The sun is a nimit; the 
ocean is a nimit. [In the same way] The Self does not have to 
do anything. 

It is scientific, isn’t it! You cannot say that water vapor is 
an attribute of the sun,  but  you also  cannot  say that it is  an 
attribute of the ocean, can you? 

The examples are not fitting exactly, but ‘we’ are saying 
this to give you an idea. These do not match exactly. They are 
not matching without contradiction. But it is not possible to 
give  you  any  other  example.  This  is  how  the  vishesh  guna 
arises in that. 

As  both,  the  sun  and  the  ocean,  came  together,  the 
visheshbhaav  of  water  vapor  arose.  When  the  two  separate, 
the visheshbhaav will come to an end. It is a simple concept, 
isn’t it! 

This is the original concept, the one that was in the hearts 
of  all  the  twenty-four  Tirthankar  Lords  (the  absolutely 

 
118 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

enlightened Lords who can liberate others) combined. So, this 
may or may not be in the scriptures; meaning that, it may not 
even be easy to transcribe it in the scriptures. There needs to 
be a method to transcribe it. Whereas, ‘we’ are explaining this 
to you through examples. 

Questioner:  ‘Your’  examples  are  very  extraordinary. 
This  example  of  the  ocean  forming  the  water  vapor  is  an 
extraordinary  example  to  understand  this  incontrovertible 
principle. 

Dadashri:  That  is  where  people  are  getting  stuck. 
Peoples’ principles are falling short over here. These people 
say, “God had this desire of wanting to create.” While some 
others say, “No, no, He did not have the desire.” People are 
believing, ‘God has become ‘Ekoham bahusyam’ (‘I was the 
only  one,  and  then  all  these  forms  arose’),’  however, 
scientifically this is all a vishesh parinaam. 

Questioner:  Dada,  is  it  not  possible  that  in  order  to 
prevent  people  from  falling  into  this  maze,  they  closed  this 
path, this gate, by telling them, “Do not to go any further than 
this. God has created this, so do not go any further than this.” 

Dadashri: Who was  going there anyway? They  do not 
have  the  energy  whatsoever.  Hence,  it  became  blocked 
automatically, and thereafter, they could not go further. The 
monks and saints progressed a little further and then they said, 
“This is done, God has created this, all this is being governed 
by God.” Hence the business for the monks and priests started. 
As  if  the  monks  and  priests  knew  everything  about  God’s 
abode.  ‘Whether  it  is  functioning  or  not?  Whether  God’s 
expenses are operational or not? Whether God can meet the 
expenses  or  not?’  Thereafter,  all  those  topics  remained 
entangled completely. 

Here, 

siddhant 
(incontrovertible  principle  that  accomplishes  the  ultimate 

in  Akram  Vignan, 

entire 

the 

 
[1.7] Vibhaav Arises From the Samsaran of the Six Elements 

119 

goal)  has  been  revealed.  The  entire  siddhant  has  been 
disclosed in a scientific language, without contradiction. All 
these people have mentioned this ‘vibhaav’, but ‘we’ gave it 
a great deal of thought. ‘Hey, how does the vibhaav come into 
being? On one hand, they say, “It is the vibhaav of the Self,” 
and then on the other hand, they say, “The scriptures say that 
these are the vyatirek guna of the Self.” That had stirred up a 
lot of controversy. 

Questioner: Now it is becoming clear, Dada. 

Dadashri: It is becoming clear, isn’t it? One should have 

closure and inner satisfaction (samadhan). 

Questioner:  We  are  getting  closure  and 

inner 

satisfaction, Dada. 

Dadashri:  [People  believe  that,]  ‘God  has  created 
everything.’  How  was  it  made  and  who  made  it?  It  is 
[actually]  anupchaarik  (that  which  happens  without  any 
effort). 

Questioner:  Meaning 

that,  everything  would  be 

anupchaarik only wouldn’t it! 

Dadashri: Yes. 

Questioner: Is everything anupchaarik? 

Dadashri: It is anupchaarik. 

Questioner:  And 

that 
everything is anupchaarik becomes natural and spontaneous 
(sahaj), doesn’t he? 

the  one  who  understands 

Dadashri: Is there a choice? If he wants to get out of this, 
then  that  is  the  way.  However,  the  whole  world  indeed 
understands  only  this.  Even  a  young  child  understands 
upchaar  (visible  effort  or  planning),  he  too  says,  “Today,  I 
played cricket, I won.” 

 
120 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

There Is No Doer in This World 

That  which  arose  from  the  Self  and  this  Pudgal  (the 
eternal  element  of  inanimate  matter)  coming  together,  the 
scripture writers have referred to it as, ‘A problematic form 
has arisen.’ ‘We’ have referred to it as ‘visheshbhaav’. ‘We’ 
say it as it is, in its true form. So that it can be understood, 
‘we’ have said that this is ‘vishesh gnan’. ‘It’ (the Self) indeed 
has  Its  own  Gnan,  in  addition  to  that,  there  is  this  vishesh 
gnan; due to which this worldly life has arisen. The cycle of 
worldly life then continues. But now, if you are getting fed up 
of it, then do something so that you become free of the vishesh 
gnan. So, You indeed have Your Gnan. The balance has not 
decreased in Your Gnan, not even a dime’s worth. 

This world has arisen in a way just like [the formation of 
water vapor in] the case of the ocean and the sun. No one has 
created  it.  There  is  just  a  naimittik  bhaav  (the  state  as  an 
evidentiary doer). The ocean is also an evidentiary doer and 
the sun is also an evidentiary doer. This has arisen due to the 
inherent  nature  of  all  the  circumstances  [that  have  come 
together]. This [water vapor forming] happens when both, the 
ocean  and  the  sun,  come  together,  but  they  are  evidentiary 
doers; no one is an actual doer in this world. If you understand 
that,  then  all  the  miseries  of  the  world  will  go  away. 
Otherwise, how would the misery go away? Would happiness 
arise,  if  you  were  to  understand  foolish  things  [as  being 
correct]? If you were to call your aunt, “Mom, Mom,” your 
mother  would  be  left  aside.  What  pleasure  would  you  gain 
from that? Would you feel happiness from that? That is what 
is  happening  in  this  case.  If  you  recognize  your  mother  as 
‘mother’,  and  your  aunt  as  ‘aunt’,  then  you  will  find  some 
pleasure! That is when you will say, “She is not mine.” Should 
you not recognize everything? So  ‘we’  are saying this  after 
having  Seen  the  truth  scientifically,  after  having  Seen  the 
entire result. Here, the reference is not just to the concepts in 

 
[1.7] Vibhaav Arises From the Samsaran of the Six Elements 

121 

the  scriptures  alone,  ‘we’  are  saying  this  after  having  Seen 
everything, the entire result; and this is a concept that is pure 
and exact for all three timespans [the past, the present and the 
future]. Meaning that, it is such a concept that no one can say 
it is incorrect, even in the future. All these concepts have been 
printed in these books. All the books have been printed for this 
very reason, and the world should attain salvation. 

What  do ‘we’ do? ‘We’ separate both,  the Self and the 
Pudgal, and so that property [the vishesh guna] comes to an 
end. This is in fact a Science; it is the Science. It is the Science 
of Lord Mahavir, the Science of the twenty-four Tirthankars. 

The World Has Arisen Due to the Presence of God 

Can  this  body,  this  entire  machine,  actually  function 

without the Self? 

Questioner: No, it cannot. It functions only because the 

Self is present within! Otherwise, it would be lifeless! 

Dadashri: Now the Self does not have such a property to 
function like this. It is because of the presence of the Self that 
all of this functions; it is not because of Its authority. Just like 
the tiger and the goat who were drinking water alongside each 
other, in the presence of Lord Mahavir. Would a tiger and a 
goat  really  ever  drink  water  together  in  anyone  else’s 
presence? 

Questioner: No, they would not. 

Dadashri: There, in the presence of the Lord, they forget 
their inherent nature. The goat forgets its inherent nature of 
being scared and the tiger forgets its violent nature. 

Therefore,  this  world  has  arisen  due  to  the  presence  of 
God [the original Self; the absolute Self]. God has not done 
anything. It is through His nimit. ‘Presence’ means what? Say, 
‘we’ are sitting here right now, and a man comes in from over 

 
122 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

there, and another man is chasing him to beat him up. When 
the one who has come to beat him, the one with the intent of 
wanting to beat the other person, enters over here, upon seeing 
‘Dada’ he will forget about his violent nature for a moment, 
he  will  forget  about  this  intent  to  beat,  he  will  become 
pacified. Now, ‘we’ have not told him anything. He does not 
know anything. It [the intent to beat] stops of its own accord, 
automatically.  However,  if  he  were  to  be  outside,  then  he 
would definitely beat the other person up. 

Here, the one who has come to beat would not touch the 
other man at all. ‘We’ have not told him not to do that, yet due 
to  ‘our’  presence,  all 
these  changes  come  about,  a 
transformation happens in what is going on in his mind. 

Questioner: His intent changes. 

Dadashri:  Did  ‘we’  do  anything  in  that?  Even  though 
‘we’ do not say a word, the work will be done. That is all; this 
Science has come about due to the presence of God, hasn’t it! 
This world has arisen out of [vishesh] gnan and it continues 
functioning,  and  ‘we’  are  saying  this  after  having  Seen  it 
‘ourselves’. There is not even the slightest bit of falsehood in 
it. 

Only  the  Tirthankar  Lords  Knew  this  art.  God  has  not 
done anything at all in creating this world; He is simply a nimit 
(the  one  who  is  instrumental  in  the  process).  All  this,  the 
Science is going on entirely due to the presence of God! 

What is the scientific principle? Due to the presence of 
God,  the  wrong  belief  arises.  Due  to  the  presence  of  God, 
worldly life comes to an end. Due to the presence of God, the 
state as the absolute Self (Parmatma pad) manifests.  



 
 
[8] 

Anger and Pride Is to ‘I’, as Deceit and 
Greed Is to ‘My’ 

The ‘I’ Advanced Further… 

What 

took  place 

in  visheshbhaav 

(an  assumed 
identification with that which is not One’s own)? The beliefs 
of, ‘I am something’, and ‘I know’ and ‘I am doing’; all of this 
[arose].  That  visheshbhaav  came  into  being,  which  is  why 
worldly life came into existence. Thereafter, one started doing 
what  he  saw  others  doing.  People  get  married,  so  he  gets 
married. The entire problem has carried on due to the societal 
arrangement in the world. Would they let go of the ‘wooden 
apples’ [wrong beliefs]? One indeed says, “You’ll be damned 
if you do and you’ll be damned if you don’t…”  

Questioner:  Therefore,  the  ego  that  arose  from  the 
vishesh parinaam, it is the same one for this entire lifetime, 
isn’t it? 

Dadashri: It comes to an end and then it arises again, it 
comes to an end and then arises. Meaning that, a seed falls and 
a  tree  grows,  a  seed  falls  and  a  tree  grows;  that  [cycle]  is 
certainly going to carry on. 

Questioner:  Meaning,  it  becomes  a  tree  in  the  next 

lifetime, doesn’t it? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
124 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Dadashri:  All  those  causes  [seeds]  then  give  rise  to  a 
‘tree’ [effects], don’t they! Then, from the ‘tree’, the causes 
arise. It is a straightforward concept, causes and effect, that is 
all, the cycle simply continues on. 

Questioner:  Is  it  one  and  the  same  ego  that  works 

throughout the entire lifetime? 

Dadashri: Then what else? Would there be another five 
to seven? The ego dies along with the body; that is all. The 
rest  goes  ahead  in  the  form  of  causes,  and  based  on  that,  a 
subsequent ego arises in the next lifetime. 

Now let ‘us’ explain to you about the Self. ‘We’ are also 
telling  you  that  God  has  not  created  [the  ego].  Yet  the  ego 
exists, that point is also true, as clear as daylight. So, you may 
ask, “Who is that ego in the middle?” And you may also ask, 
“When did the ego start?” If it had actually begun, then that 
would mean that the world has a beginning. But there is no 
beginning to this. The ego arises and the ego comes to an end, 
the ego arises, and the ego comes to an end. But at the time of 
coming to an end, it sows a seed and then it ends. So, it is not 
as though this has [ever] begun. Yet how does the ego arise? 
The  original  one  that  had  arisen,  how  must  that  ego  have 
originated the first time? So, from the beginning, there is no 
original beginning, but in a general sense we are asking, “Why 
did the ego arise? How did it arise?” 

Questioner: How did the very first effect start? 

Dadashri:  An  effect  can  never  happen  without  the 
causes.  The  causes  one  created  were,  ‘I  am  this  and  this  is 
mine;’ that is why the effect began thereafter.  

Questioner:  But  how  did  the  cause  start  the  very  first 

time? 

Dadashri:  That’s  it!  The  Self  met  another  eternal 
element [Pudgal Parmanu]. The Self Itself felt, ‘Truly, I am 

 
[1.8] Anger and Pride Is to ‘I’, as Deceit and Greed Is to ‘My’ 

125 

this [the non-Self].’ With that, the ‘I’ and ‘my’ arose, and the 
anger, pride, deceit and greed came into being.  

This  One  [You,  the  Self]  is  the  original  light,  but  the 
people of the world said, “You are Chandubhai,” and you too 
believed, ‘I am Chandubhai!’ Therefore, egoism arose. That 
egoism became the representative of the original light! And 
then, one began seeing through that representative’s light; that 
being the intellect (buddhi)! 

The Kashays Are the Cause of Karma and the 
Antahkaran Is the Effect 

Questioner:  Due  to  the  proximity  of  the  Self  and  the 
Pudgal Parmanu,  the four kashays,  anger, pride, deceit and 
greed arose, is that correct? 

Dadashri: Yes. 

Questioner: So then, is that also how the mind, intellect, 

chit and ego came into existence? 

Dadashri:  It is  like this,  anger, pride, deceit and greed 
are actually productions, whereas the mind, intellect, chit and 
ego are actually effects. 

Questioner:  They  are  effects,  but  doesn’t  production 

mean effect? Besides that, what else can it be? 

Dadashri: Production means  causes.  Production means 
that  it  arises  by  certain  things  coming  together.  Upadhi 
swaroop (to become the form as the sufferer)! To take on a 
vishesh swaroop (a completely new form).  

Questioner: As the Self and inanimate matter came into 
close proximity with each other, anger, pride, deceit and greed 
arose. Similarly, the mind, intellect, chit and ego also arose. 
Therefore,  did 
the  causes  and  effects  both  arise 
simultaneously? 

 
126 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Dadashri: No. 

Questioner: So then how did they arise? 

is 

thing 

the  first 

Dadashri:  Fundamentally, 

the 
production; the anger, pride, deceit and greed arose first. It is 
because they arose that karma began to be charged. Had they 
not existed, then charging would not have taken place. If they 
exist, then the charging [of karma] takes place. That itself is 
bhaavkarma (charge karma). It is because one became angry. 
It [the anger] has arisen, but [the problem arises] if it is used. 
If it remains without being used, then there is no problem. But 
it cannot  remain without being used,  can it! When would it 
remain without being used? It is when One has the Knowledge 
of the Self. That is when all the parmanu get discharged. This 
is because the ‘live’ part has gone from it [anger]! 

Questioner: Yes, so what happens when it is used? 

Dadashri: When it is used, karma is bound. And because 
karma is bound, this effect is felt when it discharges, and that 
indeed is this antahkaran that is within, the entire complex of 
the mind, intellect, chit and ego. 

Questioner: The mind that remains after attaining Gnan, 

is it ‘effective’? 

Dadashri: Thereafter it is ‘effective’ [such that it comes 
into effect on its own], that is all. Even for an agnani (one who 
has not attained Self-realization), the mind is ‘effective’, but 
even  the  ‘effective’  is  such  that  it  creates  causes  within, 
whereas  for  this  One  [who  has  attained  Gnan],  it  does  not 
create causes, the causes come to an end. 

Questioner: Is it the same way with the chit? 

Dadashri: For the mind, intellect, chit and ego, for all of 
them. The entire antahkaran itself, it is all just an effect. And 
not just the antahkaran, but even the bahyakaran (the external 

 
[1.8] Anger and Pride Is to ‘I’, as Deceit and Greed Is to ‘My’ 

127 

instruments of the mind, speech and body) is an effect. Both 
the karans (mechanisms; activities) are merely effects. 

Depending on what happens in the antahkaran, after that, 
anger  comes  forth  on  the  outside.  It  happens  within  the 
antahkaran  first.  He  quarrels  with  his  father  within  the 
antahkaran first, and then he quarrels externally. 

Questioner: But the antahkaran is an effect, so then how 

can this happen? 

Dadashri:  Yes,  but  this  is  an  effect,  and  that  too  is  an 
effect.  However,  the  former  is  a  subtle  effect,  whereas  the 
latter  is  a  gross  effect;  like  in  the  case  of  anger,  because  it 
comes out. 

Questioner:  If  there  were  no  antahkaran,  then  would 

anger, pride, deceit and greed actually arise? 

Dadashri: No, then there would be nothing. 

Questioner: So then, what is first? Before You said that 
the anger, pride, deceit and greed come first, and thereafter all 
this comes, the [external] effect. 

Dadashri:  Anger,  pride,  deceit  and  greed  are  the 
‘parents’ and all these are their ‘children’; the descendants of 
the mind, intellect, chit and ego arise later. 

Dense Vibhaav in Avyavahaar Rashi 

Questioner:  This  evolution  theory  that  we  talk  about, 
where  a  living  being  continues  developing  and  through  the 
process of evolution, it will come into the human life-form, it 
will go into the life-form as a celestial being, it will undergo 
these things; all of that is indeed due to vibhaav, isn’t it? 

Dadashri:  That  is  indeed  due  to  vibhaav.  All  this  that 

exists, it is all vibhaav indeed. 

 
128 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Questioner: So did the first wrong belief arise while in 

the state as a one-sensed living being?  

Dadashri:  No,  not  in  the  state  as  a  one-sensed  living 
being.  Prior  to  that  state,  all  the  living  beings  are  in 
avyavahaar rashi (a state of uncategorized souls that have not 
yet entered worldly interaction). They have gelled, they have 
not yet been named, they have not yet entered into vyavahaar 
(worldly interaction). 

Questioner:  But  do  they  actually  have  vibhaav  at  that 

time? 

Dadashri: Very dense, they have a very strong vibhaav. 
All  the  karma  that  are  in  the  avyavahaar  rashi  are  to  be 
endured in worldly interactions later on. 

Questioner: If karma continue to be created based on the 
physical evidences (dravya), the location (kshetra), the time 
(kaal) and the intent (bhaav), then when does the ego arise? 

Dadashri: Fundamentally, the aham (the ‘I’) has actually 
been  in  existence  right  from  the  beginning!  It  has  been  in 
existence from the beginning; since time immemorial. It exists 
from the moment the [fundamental, the initial] visheshbhaav 
arises.  The  aham  arises  with  the  initial  visheshbhaav,  and 
from  that  aham, the second  visheshbhaav arises,  and that is 
the  ego  (ahamkaar).  Then  that  ego  is  destroyed.  Thereafter 
[another]  visheshbhaav  arises  and  [another]  ego  arises.  The 
visheshbhaav gives rise to the ego, and the ego gives rise to 
the [next] visheshbhaav. [The aham remains constantly until 
keval  Gnan  (absolute  Knowledge)  is  attained;  it  is  the 
ahamkaar that takes birth and dies.] 

Questioner:  So,  is  it  from  the  moment  it  comes  into 

worldly interactions from avyavahaar rashi? 

Dadashri: Everywhere, whether in avyavahaar rashi or 
in  worldly  interactions,  everywhere  indeed,  wherever  you 

 
[1.8] Anger and Pride Is to ‘I’, as Deceit and Greed Is to ‘My’ 

129 

look, it exists. It is not as if it [the ego] was not the sufferer 
(bhokta) in avyavahaar rashi. It was the sufferer there too, it 
was  suffering  a  terrible  sensation  of  pain  (vedana),  the 
sensation of pain was such that it could not even be tolerated. 

Questioner: Meaning that, it was verily that ego who was 

the sufferer of that sensation of pain? 

Dadashri: Then who else? This One [the Self] is not the 

doer. The doer cannot exist without the intellect. 

Questioner: Does the ego actually suffer? 

Dadashri: Yes, it suffers. 

Questioner: Does that mean that the ego has come into 
existence  right  from  the  beginning  due  to  the  vishesh 
parinaam?  

Dadashri:  Not  just  the  vishesh  parinaam.  Once  one 
vishesh parinaam dissipates, the ego dissipates, but only after 
having given rise to another vishesh parinaam. This is because 
they  are  together;  due  to  the  two  eternal  elements  being  in 
close proximity to each other, the vishesh parinaam continues 
to  arise,  and  once  they  separate,  the  vishesh  parinaam 
dissipates. [At that time, the initial visheshbhaav and due to 
that, the aham, they indeed remain in existence at all times.] 

Vyavasthit and Rebirth 

Questioner: So what kind of relationship do both, rebirth 
(punarjanma)  and  scientific  circumstantial  evidence,  have 
with each other. Please explain that. 

Dadashri:  That  scientific  circumstantial  evidence  is 
itself  the  main  cause  of  rebirth.  Scientific  circumstantial 
evidence proves rebirth. 

Questioner: So then, is it the Self that undergoes rebirth? 

 
130 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Dadashri: The Self does not undergo rebirth. It is only 
the ego that keeps undergoing rebirth. The Self remains as It 
is. The veils of ignorance (avaran) keep coming over the Self 
and  the  veils  keep  shedding  off.  The  veils  of  ignorance 
continue to come over It and continue to shed off. 

Questioner: Does the whole world function according to 
its own gunadharma (intrinsic properties that have a specific 
function)? 

Dadashri: That is all; the world is functioning based on 
its inherent nature indeed. The inherent nature is doing all of 
this. 

Questioner:  But  isn’t  our  inherent  nature  spoilt?  It  is 
because  our  inherent  nature  is  spoilt  that  we  keep  doing  all 
these bad things, isn’t it? 

Dadashri:  ‘You’  are  actually  the  Self,  You  are  the 
absolute Self (Parmatma). So how can Your inherent nature 
be spoilt? 

Questioner: No, but the pudgal that is together with... 

Dadashri: No, that pudgal is something that has arisen in 
accordance  with  the  circumstances.  Pudgal  means  ‘I’  and 
‘my’, both have arisen. As long as you prevail in the state of, 
‘I am Chandubhai,’ you will not attain the awareness of Your 
Real  form  as  the  Self,  and  until  then,  the  I  will  continue  to 
remain  separate  [from  the  Self].  It  is  a  vyatirek  guna 
(completely  new  property  of  a  third  entity  that  arises  when 
two  eternal  elements,  the  Self  and  inanimate  matter,  come 
together), it is not an anvay guna (intrinsic property).  

Vibhaav Is the Ego 

Questioner: The vibhaav that was produced due to  the 
circumstance of the six eternal elements coming together, that 

 
[1.8] Anger and Pride Is to ‘I’, as Deceit and Greed Is to ‘My’ 

131 

vibhaav  happens  to  the  pratishthit  atma  (the  relative  self), 
right?  

Dadashri: Yes, the pratishthit atma is itself the ego. The 
ego that is doing the pratishtha (instillation of the life energy 
which in turn gives rise to a new causal body), that ego is itself 
the visheshbhaav. The visheshbhaav is itself the ego. 

Questioner: Is it the Self’s inherent nature to be egoless? 

Dadashri: Yes, that is the Self’s inherent nature, and the 
ego is the Self’s vibhaav (a third identity with completely new 
properties; the state as the relative self). 

Questioner: Besides the Self, would anything else that is 

visible be considered as vibhaav? 

Dadashri:  All  of  that  is  the  effect  of  the  vibhaav, 
moreover all of that is temporary. That which has been mixed 
together will not last. No matter how much one accumulates, 
even  if  you  try  to  make  the  body  yours,  yet  that  will  never 
happen. 

Questioner: The Self and inanimate matter are the same 
in  everyone,  so  then  why  do  the  vyatirek  guna  exist  to  a 
greater or lesser extent in each person? 

Dadashri: Chetan (the property to Know and See) is the 
same  in  everyone.  Jada  (inanimate  matter)  cannot  be  the 
same.  Had  the  inanimate  matter  been  the  same,  then  you 
would not be able to recognize anyone at all. Everyone would 
have the same type of faces and the same type of everything. 

Questioner: But fundamentally, everyone’s anu (atoms) 
and  Parmanu 
indivisible  and 
smallest,  most 
indestructible  particle  of  inanimate  matter)  are  the  same, 
aren’t they? 

(the 

 
132 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Dadashri: Yes, but do not look at the anu and Parmanu. 
At present, for us, the body and all that has been formed, is 
not identical. 

Questioner: Amongst those who have not attained Gnan, 
why  is  it  that  some  have  more  egoism  and  others  have  less 
egoism? 

Dadashri: All of that would actually be so. It would be 
there  to  a  greater  or  lesser  extent.  All  that  is  not  under  his 
control at all. He himself believes, ‘I am this’, but he is not 
really  that.  ‘I  am  this’  is  an  illusory  belief.  And  it  may  be 
present  to  a  greater  or  lesser  extent,  but  it  does  not  leave. 
Without the two becoming separate, it cannot leave. 

Questioner: But when the circumstances come together 

for that, then it would dissipate, wouldn’t it? 

Dadashri: Yes, only if the circumstances come together, 
otherwise  that  cannot  happen,  can  it!  Even  over  here,  it  is 
subject  to  vyavasthit  (the  result  of  scientific  circumstantial 
evidences) indeed. But what ‘we’ are trying to say in this case 
is, ‘How did this arise?’ It has arisen because of the coming 
together  of  these  two.  Thereafter,  one  comes  across  all  the 
karmic  accounts  as  per  vyavasthit.  Each  person  will  come 
across  all 
that  are  necessary.  However, 
fundamentally,  the  property  of  vibhaav  is  not  One’s  own. 
Visheshbhaav means  the Self’s  [inherently  natural] energies 
definitely exist, but there are also vishesh (extra; additional) 
energies.  Therefore,  One  Himself  does  not  give  rise  to  this 
[vibhaav].  The  vibhaav  arises  due  to  the  pressure  of  other 
circumstances, and then the energies of this [vibhaavik state] 
arise. 

things 

the 

 
[1.8] Anger and Pride Is to ‘I’, as Deceit and Greed Is to ‘My’ 

133 

The One Who Remains Separate in This, Is the 
Gnani 

Questioner:  What  is  the  relationship  between  the  two, 
this  entire  antahkaran  that  has  arisen  and  the  vishesh 
parinaam? 

Dadashri:  Anger,  pride,  deceit  and  greed,  all  of  them 
arise due to the vishesh parinaam, and then because of them, 
the antahkaran came into being, didn’t it! 

Questioner: Now, even for an agnani (one who has not 
attained Self-realization), the Self and inanimate matter exist 
together, and the same applies for the Gnani Purush. So then, 
does the vishesh parinaam not exist in the Gnani? 

Dadashri: For Him, they are not together; such a One is 

called a Gnani indeed! For Him, they have separated. 

Questioner: I did not understand that. 

Dadashri: If they [inanimate matter and the Self] were 
together, then the vishesh parinaam would remain, wouldn’t 
it? That would mean the vishesh parinaam is indeed there. But 
He  (pote;  the  Self-realized  One)  separates  those  that  are 
together, doesn’t He!  

Questioner:  So  in  the  case  of  the  agnani,  the  vishesh 

parinaam has to be separated, is that correct? 

Dadashri: Those two are together, side by side, touching 
each  other.  That  is  why  this  vishesh  parinaam  occurs.  But 
thereafter, the developing ‘I’ [in the state as the Gnani] stops 
them from ‘touching’ [believing something that is not One’s 
own  to  be  his  own];  once  they  separate,  then  there  is  no 
problem. 

Questioner: That is correct. So as long as one believes 
the pudgal parinaam (the effect as the non-Self) to be his own, 
is that the original cause of the vishesh parinaam? 

 
134 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

together, 

them  coming 

Dadashri:  Yes,  upon 

the 
developing  I  considers  the  pudgal  parinaam  to  be  his  own, 
thus the anger, pride, deceit and greed arise. And as a result of 
that, all this can be seen. Thereafter, worldly life came into 
existence. The developing I’s belief and everything else arises 
because of that. The entire antahkaran arose because of that. 
Whereas  the  ego has  actually  given  rise to  the mind.  It  is  a 
descendant of the ego, its heirs.  

Questioner: So, is the mind a creation of the ego? 

Dadashri: The mind is not anyone else’s creation; it is 

the ego’s. 

Questioner:  Would  a  thought  that  arises  today  be 

considered a creation of today’s ego? 

Dadashri:  That  is  considered  to  be  from  the  past. 
Everything that arises today is all an effect. In that, if a ‘seed’ 
is sown once again, then it becomes ‘effective’ in the next life. 
One experiences the old effect  [of the past  life] and sows a 
new ‘seed’. Just like if one were to eat a mango right now, he 
eats its pulp and all that, and then ‘throws’ [sows] the seed; 
therefore, the seed then grows. 

Questioner:  This  ‘throwing’  of  the  ‘seed’,  is  that 

considered as vishesh parinaam? 

Dadashri:  The  vishesh  parinaam  occurs  when  the  two 
are together; it arises automatically. It is a belief (drashti) of 
a  kind.  Thereafter,  anger,  pride,  deceit  and  greed  arise. 
Whereas one actually sows the ‘seed’ once again after that due 
to  illusion.  One  does  not  know  what  to  do  with  the  mango 
seed, so he ‘throws’ it [on the ground] again, so it grows again. 
And if he were to roast the seed, then it would not grow again. 
But only if he has such Gnan (Knowledge). Similarly, if One 
were to become a non-doer in this, then it [the new ‘seed’] will 

 
[1.8] Anger and Pride Is to ‘I’, as Deceit and Greed Is to ‘My’ 

135 

not  grow.  As  One  becomes  akriya  (disconnected  from  any 
activity; in the state as the non-doer), it does not grow. 

Questioner:  Due  to  the  coming  together  of  inanimate 
matter and the Self, the vyatirek guna of anger, pride, deceit 
and greed arise. But only if there is agnanta (ignorance of the 
Self); they have said that, that has to be there along with them. 
Anger, pride, deceit and greed do not arise for the Gnani. 

Dadashri: If it [agnanta] was together, then they would 
arise  for  the  Gnani  too.  However,  if  it  were  to  be  there 
together, then He would definitely not remain a Gnani! 

Questioner: I did not understand that. 

Dadashri: As the two eternal elements remain together, 
those results would indeed arise, wouldn’t they! Then once it 
[agnanta] has been removed, they will not arise. Once the two 
eternal  elements  have  been  separated,  have  parted,  have 
disconnected,  One  becomes  a  Gnani.  Whereas  if  they  are 
close to each other, one is an agnani. 

Questioner:  But  You  are  engaged  in  discussions,  You 
engage in all this worldly interaction, people can see that, so 
this  worldly  interaction  would  actually  be  that  of  the 
inanimate part, wouldn’t it? 

Dadashri: That would continue to happen, what then? 

Questioner:  So  then  how  can  I  tell  that  the  vishesh 

parinaam is not occurring in this? 

Dadashri: Before, the effect  of becoming engrossed in 
the  mind  used  to  arise  for  the  developing  I;  [now]  He  has 
become separate. The mind is separate and the ‘I’ is separate, 
and  thus,  You  were  able  to  See  the  result  of  the  separation 
having happened over there. 

Questioner: As He became separate, what did You say 

[happened]?  

 
136 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Dadashri:  ‘You’  were  able  to  See  the  result  of  them 
becoming  separate.  The  mind  and  the  awakened  Self;  both 
became separate. The Gnani has no use for the mind. For the 
Gnani, the mind is in the form as an object to be Known. For 
Him, the mind is not in working order [does not charge; only 
discharges].  

Questioner: Meaning that, would the mind actually keep 

doing its function? 

Dadashri: That is its past result. Nothing new arises. The 
Gnani  keeps  Seeing  the  mind,  such  as  what  thoughts  are 
arising  in  the  mind!  ‘He’  keeps  Seeing  what  all  the  effects 
from the past life are arising. Previously, one was not Seeing 
[them as separate], he was dwelling in them. And when one 
dwells in them, that itself is referred to as ‘thoughts’.  

Questioner: But right now, the Gnani Purush takes part 
in worldly interactions, so the other eternal elements are also 
connected, aren’t they?  

Dadashri: Of course, they would be! 

Questioner:  Then  those  eternal  elements  would  be 

considered as having come together, wouldn’t they? 

Dadashri: They are actually subject to time. They cannot 
be considered as having come together. They are parinaamik 
(in the resultant state; ‘effective’ such that they will procure 
results on their own). To come together means that they are in 
the form of a cause, whereas the result is actually an effect. 

The Cause of Becoming a Doer 

Questioner:  Since  no  one  has  created  the  ego,  then  it 
means  no  one  is  responsible  for  it,  either;  that  point  is  also 
true, isn’t it? 

Dadashri: How can anyone be responsible at all! They 
have come together naturally and that is why it has arisen, and 

 
[1.8] Anger and Pride Is to ‘I’, as Deceit and Greed Is to ‘My’ 

137 

after having arisen, it has not even influenced the Self. It does 
not bother the Self, and the Self does not bother it. This ego 
that has arisen, that ego now has misery (dukh), the Self does 
not  have  misery.  The  Self  does  not  understand  misery 
whatsoever.  Therefore,  it  is  the  ego  who  has  the  desire  to 
become free from this, from this state. 

From that, this hupanu (the prevalence of the I) and this 
sense  of  ‘my-ness’  (marapanu)  has  arisen.  So  who  would 
sustain  them? Who would  overlook their maintenance? The 
answer is the presence of the Self. If the Self were not present 
in the body, then all of that would come to an end entirely. 

After Gnan, the Kashays Belong to the Non-Self 

Questioner: Once One  comes into One’s  Real  form as 
the Self (Swaroop), then anger does not arise, pride does not 
arise, deceit does not arise, nothing arises, right? 

Dadashri: Anger, pride, deceit and greed are properties 
of the pudgal (the non-Self complex); the Self does not have 
such properties. Meaning that, they are not Our properties. So 
why  should  We  take  on  the  responsibility  for  them?  That 
which increases and decreases are all simply properties of the 
pudgal.  

Here,  if  one  attains  Gnan  from  ‘us’,  then  for  Him,  the 
anger, pride, deceit and greed are the properties of the pudgal; 
and  for  those  who  have  not  attained  Gnan,  those  properties 
belong to the [worldly-interacting] self. In reality, they are not 
the Self’s properties. Then again, the developing I, says, “I am 
Chandubhai.”  He  claims  to  be  what  he  is  not,  in  the  same 
manner,  even  though  these  properties  are  not  His  own,  he 
takes them on as belonging to himself.  

That  is  how  it  is.  If  one  attains  Gnan  from  ‘us’  and 
remains in ‘our’ Agnas, then even if anger, pride, deceit and 
greed happen, they still do not touch You [the Self]; nothing 

 
138 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

happens and samadhi (a blissful state that comes about when 
One  becomes  free  from  mental,  physical  and  externally 
induced suffering) never leaves.  

The  Self  never  has  worries.  The  Self  is  an  abode  of 
infinite bliss. ‘It’ is Itself an abode of infinite bliss. ‘It’ even 
makes anyone who ‘touches’ It blissful. Yet these people have 
come to believe, ‘It is indeed the Self that worries, and it is 
indeed  the  Self  that  suffers,  and  all  this  externally  induced 
suffering  belongs  only  to  the  Self.’  The  one  saying  this 
remains at a distance from that. Who must be the one saying 
this?  

Questioner: That very one, this ego. 

Dadashri:  It  remains  at  a  distance.  Therefore,  it  has 
proved itself innocent, and it proves everyone else to be guilty. 
The one who is primarily guilty, proves others to be guilty. It 
is itself guilty. So then, the mithyatva (the wrong belief of ‘I 
am  Chandubhai’)  continues  to  increase,  the  wrong  beliefs 
continue to increase. 

The  Self  is  in  Its  realm  as  the  Self.  This  is  in  fact  a 
scientific effect. No one has done anything. It is nothing at all 
like what these people of various religions believe. This was 
what was in the heart of the Tirthankar Lords! Whatever ‘we’ 
are telling you is the direct Gnan of the Tirthankar Lords, it is 
beyond the scriptures. 



 
 
[9] 

The Real Forms of Swabhaav and Vibhaav 

The World Functions as per Its Inherent Nature 
Indeed 

This  entire  world  functions  as  per  its  own  swabhaav 

(inherent nature). 

Questioner: What could this thing called swabhaav be? 

Dadashri:  Each  eternal  element  exhibits  its  own 
swabhaav. The dravya (eternal elements) are eternal, meaning 
that they are permanent. They are constantly bringing about a 
change (parivartansheel), whilst remaining within their own 
individual swabhaav only. 

Questioner:  Just  as  when  night  falls,  You  said  that  it 
happens naturally, and  even daytime occurs naturally.  Then 
this antahkaran, the speech, all that...? 

Dadashri: Everything happens as per its inherent nature. 
All the eternal elements, if it is Pudgal (the eternal element of 
inanimate matter), then it functions as per Pudgal’s inherent 
nature, and if it is Chetan (the Self), then it functions as per 
Chetan’s  inherent  nature.  Now,  all  these  discussions  are 
neither in the scriptures nor in the books, right?  

Questioner: They are not, Dada. They are only in Dada’s 
‘computer’.  This  Pudgal  functions  as  per  its  own  inherent 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
140 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

nature,  so  is  there  any  connection  of  the  Self  in  that?  Any 
interference? 

Dadashri:  That  which  interferes  cannot  be  considered 

the Self at all.  

It  functions  as  per  its  inherent  nature,  and  scientific 

circumstantial evidences are what makes it function. 

Questioner: Whose inherent nature? 

Dadashri: The Pudgal has its inherent nature and the Self 
has  Its  inherent  nature.  Then,  dharmastikaya  (the  eternal 
element  that  supports  motion)  has  its  inherent  nature,  [the 
eternal element of] Time has its inherent nature; each one has 
its own inherent nature. 

Questioner: A seed grows naturally; water, air, and soil, 

all these circumstances help it grow. 

Dadashri: All those circumstances function naturally. 

The whole world is continuing to exist naturally indeed. 
Who runs this world? The answer is, it is indeed the inherent 
nature  that  runs  it.  How  did  it  arise?  The  answer  is,  it  has 
arisen naturally. How did the vibhaav (the state as the relative 
self) arise from Swabhaav (the inherently natural state as the 
Self)? The answer is, when these [the two eternal elements of 
the Self and inanimate matter] come together, their inherent 
natures are indeed such that this vibhaav tends to arise. 

Questioner: But the properties that where illuminated in 
the  state  of  vibhaav,  were  they  illuminated  by  the  light  of 
Swabhaav (the inherently natural state as the Self)? 

Dadashri: The Swabhaav has nothing to do with it, the 
inherent  state  of  the  Self  remains  within  Its  own  inherent 
nature. ‘It’ has nothing to do with all the others [the five other 
eternal elements]; and completely new properties of its own 
have arisen for  vibhaav. This  world  is functioning naturally 

 
[1.9] The Real Forms of Swabhaav and Vibhaav 

141 

[as per its inherent nature] whereas clashes have arisen due to 
vibhaav  (an  assumed  identification  with  that  which  is  not 
One’s own). 

The  self  [developing  I]  can  either  have  vibhaav-bhaav 
(the state as the relative self) or it can have Swabhaav-bhaav 
(inherently natural state as the Self), it can only do these two 
[bhaavs]. The Self cannot do anything else. The Self has never 
done any activity, nor does It do any, nor will It ever do any. 
Swabhaav-bhaav  means  One  remains  as  the  Self,  and 
vibhaav-bhaav means [one has] dehadhyaas (the belief of ‘I 
am the body’). It [the worldly-interacting self] can also prevail 
in visheshbhaav (an assumed identification with that which is 
not One’s own). 

Questioner:  Meaning  that,  it’s  like  the  people  acting 

wrongly? 

Dadashri: No, not like that. The Self has Swabhaav and 
vibhaav; it is through this vibhaav that the world has arisen, it 
is  an  unnatural  state  (vibhaav  dasha).  This  Swabhaav  (the 
inherently  natural  state  as  the  Self)  is  something  that  takes 
One to His own moksha, whereas vibhaav is something that 
makes  one  wander  in  the  worldly  life.  If  one  were  to 
understand this vishesh parinaam (a completely new effect), 
then this puzzle can be solved, otherwise it is not such that it 
can be solved. 

Questioner:  The  Self  always  goes  towards  urdhvagati 

(rises to a higher life-form), doesn’t It? 

Dadashri: It’s not that It rises to a higher life-form, rather 
Its inherent nature is urdhvagami (proclivity to ascend or rise 
to a higher life-form). 

Questioner: If Its inherent nature is to ascend to a higher 
life-form, then why does It go towards adhogati (regress to a 
lower life-form)? 

 
 
142 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Dadashri:  ‘Its’  inherent  nature  is  to  ascend,  but  other 
things latch on to  It, and if they are heavy, then It becomes 
adhogami  (proclivity  to  descend  or  regress  to  a  lower  life-
form). 

If one were to understand this vishesh parinaam, then this 
puzzle could be solved, otherwise it is not such that it can be 
solved. People have [wrongly] understood the ‘vi’ of vibhaav 
to mean viruddhbhaav (a state that is contrary to the state as 
the Self).  

There Is No Sense of Doership in Swabhaav 

Say there is this much water and all these people still have 
to  bathe;  and  the  electricity  goes  out.  You  start  to  heat  the 
water on a kerosene stove or with something else, what would 
happen then? Would it take time? 

Questioner: Yes. 

Dadashri: Vibhaav means to give rise to worldly life, it 
is  something  that  requires  effort,  like  the  effort  required  in 
heating  up  the  water.  Whereas  to  go  into  Swabhaav  (the 
inherently  natural  state  as  the  Self)  is  like  removing  the 
burning wooden logs [from under the water pot] and letting 
the water cool down once again; only then will One be able to 
go  to  moksha.  In  Swabhaav  there  is  no  activity,  there  is  no 
effort.  Swabhaav  has  to  be  understood.  Are  you  able  to 
understand the example of water that ‘we’ gave you? 

For each and every eternal element, no effort is required 
for it to revert back to its inherent nature. For all of them, when 
they come into visheshbhaav (an assumed identification with 
that which is not One’s own), that is when effort is required. 

Whether  one  renounces  things  or  acquires  things,  it  is 
referred to as dharma (religion), the Self’s relative dharma. 
Whereas  the  Real  dharma  of  the  Self  is  Its  swabhaavik 
dharma  (the  true  nature).  There  is  no  ‘doing’  in  that;  it 

 
[1.9] The Real Forms of Swabhaav and Vibhaav 

143 

continues  to  happen  naturally.  If  the  Self  comes  into  Its 
inherent nature as the Self, then that’s more than enough. At 
present, it is in visheshbhaav.  

To bring the Self into Its inherent nature as the Self, that 
is called moksha. Instead these people have moved ahead in 
‘doing’; ‘do chanting’ and ‘do penance’. Hey mortal one, why 
are  you doing this? Why don’t  you figure out how to come 
into Your Swabhaav! Why have you gotten involved in this 
confusion? 

Questioner:  Does  one  not  need  to  make  any  effort  in 

order to go into One’s Swabhaav? 

Dadashri: He does not know how, so how can he? All he 
knows  is  that,  ‘I  will  have  to  do  something.  I  should  do 
something.’ Hey, if your guru has not figured it out, then you 
will definitely not be able figure it out! He remained that way, 
and his guru also remained that way.  

You are wandering around aimlessly, aren’t you! You eat 
desserts and then rub  your hand on  your stomach, and after 
belching, you go to sleep! Hey mortal one, you should only 
belch and go to sleep if your work is done! 

As long as one does not come into Swabhaav, he cannot 
attain the natural bliss of the Self (swabhaavik sukh). All these 
are vibhaavik sukh (pleasures that are not inherent to the Self), 
and that is why they seem tasteless. The bliss of the Self is the 
bliss that is inherently natural to the Self; that itself is moksha. 

The  [original]  Self  has  neither  bhaav  (belief  of  I  like 
‘something’) nor abhaav (belief of I dislike ‘something’). The 
Self is Swabhaavmay (within Its own inherent nature). Each 
element is within its own inherent nature. Gold remains within 
the inherent properties of gold; it does not display any other 
gunadharma  (intrinsic  properties 
that  have  a  specific 
function).  Similarly,  the  Self  has  never  let  gone  of  Its  own 

 
 
144 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

gunadharma, nor does It let go of them, nor will It ever let go 
of them.  

Questioner: What does ‘anaadi swabhaav’ mean?  

Dadashri: It is the inherent nature that is present forever, 

that is permanent. It is considered eternal. 

Swabhaav, Satta and Parinaam 

Questioner: The viparinaam (completely new effect that 
arises  as  a  result  of  the  coming  together  of  two  eternal 
elements  of  the  Self  and  inanimate  matter;  also known  as 
vishesh parinaam) of the Self, is that viparinaam based on Its 
inherent nature? Is the viparinaam based on the fundamental 
authority (satta) of the Self or is it based on the circumstantial 
authority of the Self? And which eternal element is the main 
cause of that authority? 

Dadashri: The Self comes together with all these eternal 
elements. That is why this vibhaav has arisen; that is why this 
worldly  life  has  arisen.  [One  may  ask,]  “Is  the  viparinaam 
existing as a result of the inherent nature of the Self?” ‘We’ 
say no. “No, viparinaam cannot arise as a result of the inherent 
nature  of  the  Self.  The  Self  has  Its  own  inherent  nature; 
viparinaam, vibhaav can never occur in Its inherent nature.” 
“Is  viparinaam  based  on  the  fundamental  authority  of  the 
Self?” The answer is, “No, the fundamental authority [of the 
Self] is to remain in the inherent nature as the Self itself. It is 
Swaparinaam (the effect as the Self), It is not viparinaam!” 
Therefore, this [viparinaam] is not based on the fundamental 
authority of the Self. It is based on the unnatural (vibhaavi) 
authority of the Self; it is not the inherently natural authority 
of  the  Self.  But  [with  regards  to  your  question],  “Is 
viparinaam based on the fundamental authority of the Self or 
is  it based on the circumstantial authority of the  Self?” The 
answer is, “It is based on the circumstantial authority of the 
Self.” 

 
[1.9] The Real Forms of Swabhaav and Vibhaav 

145 

Questioner:  Meaning  that  viparinaam  is  based  on  the 

circumstantial authority of the Self? 

Dadashri: Yes. It arose because this [eternal element of] 
inanimate  matter  came  into  close  proximity  [with  the  Self]. 
‘Which eternal element is the main cause of that authority?’ 
The main cause is that this eternal element of inanimate matter 
came  into  close  proximity  [with  the  eternal  element  of  the 
Self], that is why this viparinaam arose, that’s all. 

The Doer of the Karma That Is Inherently Natural 
to Itself… 

Questioner:  ‘The  Self  is  the  doer  of  the  karma  that  is 
inherently natural to Itself, otherwise It is a non-doer.’ How is 
this so? I did not understand that. 

Dadashri: ‘It’ is the doer of the karma that is inherently 
natural to Itself [that of Knowing and Seeing]. The Self is not 
the  doer  of  any  other  karma.  The  Self  is  like  this  light. 
Suppose there is this light, it exhibits its own inherent nature; 
it is the doer of the karma that is inherently natural to itself. 
At the most, it gives off light. It is not as if it can come help 
put food in your mouth or fan you, can it? A fan will do that 
when it is turned on. This light will not fan you; why is that? 

Questioner:  That  is  because  its  inherent  nature  is  like 

that. 

Dadashri: That is how This is. The Self does not do such 

things as eat or drink; It does not do any such thing at all. 

Questioner: In this, what does ‘the doer of the karma that 

is inherently natural to Itself’ mean? 

Dadashri: The Self is the doer of only Its own inherent 
nature  [that  of  being  the  Knower  and  Seer],  of  Its  original 
inherent nature, of Its naturally existing inherent nature. It has 
actually been called a doer in worldly life, that is in terms of 

 
 
146 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

vibhaav karma (the karma that is not inherently natural to the 
Self). It seems very subtle, doesn’t it? ‘It’ has been referred to 
as  a  doer  in  worldly  life,  but  that  has  actually  been  said 
through illusion (bhranti). As long as illusion exists, until then 
it  [the  worldly-interacting  self]  is  the  doer  of  worldly  life. 
When the illusion leaves, then It is the doer of the Real form 
as the Self (Swaroop; the Knower and Seer). ‘It’ is the doer of 
Its own inherent nature as the Self, otherwise It is a non-doer. 
‘It’ is not a doer in any other aspect whatsoever. ‘It’ does not 
do any such thing like this, like the things we do, like when 
we say, “I did this and I did that.” The Self does not do such 
things. 

Questioner: It is not possible to understand this without 

experiencing it. 

Dadashri: If you want to experience it, then you have to 

come here. 

Questioner: Does that mean that the intents that inclined 
towards  the  non-Self,  are  all  intents  that  do  not  naturally 
belong to the Self (aswabhaav-bhaav), and the intents that are 
towards  the  Self  are  the  intents  that  naturally  belong  to  the 
Self (Swabhaav-bhaav)?  

Dadashri: Yes, there is the inherent nature that is of the 
non-Self (par swabhaav); as long as the self is prevailing as 
the  non-Self,  until  then  this  worldly  life  definitely  exists, 
doesn’t  it!  Once  It  comes  into  the  state  as  the  inherently 
natural  Self  in  which  there  is  full  manifestation  of  all  Its 
properties  (Swa  swabhaav-bhaav),  It  will become free from 
worldly  life.  And  the  state  as  the  non-Self  (par  swabhaav-
bhaav) means parparinati (to believe ‘I am doing’ in what are 
results  of  the  non-Self).  Another  entity  is  the  doer  and  one 
himself claims, “I am doing it.” 

What is this visheshbhaav? How does the prakruti arise 
on  its  own?  ‘We’  [the  Gnani]  have  Seen  all  this.  ‘We’  are 

 
[1.9] The Real Forms of Swabhaav and Vibhaav 

147 

saying  this  after  having  Seen  all  that.  That  is  why  ‘we’  are 
disclosing this spiritual Science. No one is an [independent] 
doer  of  anything  at  all,  and  without  an  [evidentiary]  doer 
nothing can be done!!!  

The  developing  I  himself  ‘paints  the  picture’  [charges, 
causes] of worldly life, and then it is in the hands of nature to 
bring this into effect [in the next life]. It is nature’s job to bring 
into  effect  [in  the  next  life]  the  vishesh  parinaam  of  the 
‘picture’ [the causes, the charged parmanu]. After that, no one 
can stick his or her hand into that; no one can interfere in that! 

Who Is the One Who Develops? 

Questioner: The Self is the same in everyone, but there 
is Gnan in one and agnan in another, so due to which creation 
of the universe is this happening? 

Dadashri:  The  creation  of  the  universe  is  simply  like 
that. Hey, it [the worldly-interacting self; knowledge] keeps 
developing  from  one  degree,  and  reaches  two  degrees,  four 
degrees; everyone has the [original] Self, but the external part 
[the worldly-interacting self] is the one that develops. The part 
that is not the Self is in the process of developing. 

Questioner: Meaning the vibhaav? 

Dadashri: The vibhaav is in the process of developing. 
As it continues to develop, it goes towards the inherent nature 
as the Self (Swabhaav).  

Questioner: Does that vibhaav go towards Swabhaav? 

Dadashri: Yes. 

Questioner:  Why?  Is  there  a  relation  between  vibhaav 

and Swabhaav? 

Dadashri: [Just like,] The one in the mirror and the one 
standing in front of it, when the two [the developing ‘I’ and 

 
 
148 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

the original Self] appear identical, that is when One becomes 
separate, that is when One becomes free, not until then. 

Questioner: So does the ego have to come into the state 

as the Self? 

Dadashri: It has to come into the state as the Self. The 
ego will have to be made pure (shuddha). Until that point, the 
development continues. 

Questioner:  What  is  the  mutual  relationship  between 

both, vibhaav and Swabhaav? 

Dadashri:  They  do  not  have  a  cause  and  effect 

relationship at all. [Vibhaav is a state of development.] 

Infinite Energy Even in Vishesh Parinaam! 

Questioner: The knowledge that all these living beings 
possess,  that  is  mostly  related  only  to  the  relative  and  the 
pudgal, isn’t it?  

Dadashri:  Yes,  that  too  is  pudgal  but  it  manifests  like 
this. This which has manifested, this has indeed come from a 
single Self only. Hence, the knowledge that comes out from 
all these living beings has indeed come forth  from the Self. 
They are the completely new effects (vishesh parinaam) of the 
Self.  The  vishesh  parinaam  possess  so  much  energy  of  the 
Self. They possess infinite energy of Gnan (Knowledge of the 
Self). So all this infinite energy is indeed the result of just a 
single Self. For some, the avaran (veil of ignorance over the 
Self)  has  broken  from  here,  for  others,  it  has  broken  from 
there, for some it has broken from over there. That is how it is 
for  everyone,  from  wherever  the  avaran  has  broken,  from 
there the Gnan manifests. However, that is only if it is broken 
through and through. Otherwise it comes forth in the form of 
vishesh parinaam. But in actuality, the Gnan, in Its entirety, 
is in a single Self!  

 
[1.9] The Real Forms of Swabhaav and Vibhaav 

149 

Each Eternal Element Is Dependent on Its Own 
Elemental Matter 

Questioner: For all these pudgals (non-Self complexes) 

that exist, on what external factors is the pudgal dependent? 

Dadashri: It is dependent on the one who is experiencing 
restlessness (ajampo). For the One who does not experience 
restlessness, where is the question of Him being dependent on 
external factors? 

Questioner: Who is the pudgal dependent on? 

Dadashri:  It  is  dependent  on  its  own  elemental  matter 
(dravya). Each eternal element is itself dependent on its own 
elemental matter. The fritters say, “Eat us if it suits you; don’t 
eat us if it doesn’t suit you. Even though we enter in you, we 
will still remain within our own elemental matter. We are not 
going to become one with your elemental matter at all.” It is 
actually  due  to  ignorance  that  one  believes,  ‘I  ate  this  and 
drank this.’ He thinks, ‘This elemental matter has come into 
my elemental matter.’ All of that is wrong. By believing that, 
by believing that which is incorrect to be correct, he becomes 
bound. Nothing else can happen. 

Questioner:  So  then,  that  means  that  the  fritter  that 
entered the mouth, it also entered due to the pudgal, not due 
to the Self; that is what this means, right? 

Dadashri: Yes. It is all nothing but pudgal. There may 
be all kinds of fritters, about ten or twenty kinds, yet if you eat 
the one made from pumpkin, then ‘we’ would Know, ‘Why 
you are eating the one made from pumpkin!’ You may say, “I 
have a liking for pumpkin,” you may make all sorts of false 
excuses, but it is because the parmanu of pumpkin [brought 
forth from the past life] have unfolded within you, that is why 
it is being eaten.  

 
 
150 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Each eternal element can be differentiated by its inherent 
nature, and eternal elements that are different by their inherent 
nature cannot become one.  

The Self and inanimate matter are free from association 
with  each  other  (asangi).  The  inherent  nature  of  both  are 
different. They do not help one another; they do not harm one 
another. That which does not help, cannot cause harm either. 
You yourself are the one harming your own Self, because you 
are dependent on the pudgal.  

Questioner:  The  developing 

is  prevailing  as 
Chandubhai,  so  when  would  it  revert  back  to  the  inherent 
nature as the Self (Swabhaav)? 

I 

in  paudgalik  gnan 

Dadashri:  The  one  who  has  gone  into  vibhaav  cannot 
immediately come back into Swabhaav right now, can he! It 
is  when  that  vibhaav  comes  to  an  end  that  He  comes  into 
Swabhaav.  There  is  no  problem  after  One  comes  into 
Swabhaav. However, ‘in vibhaav’ means that one has become 
established 
(relative  knowledge). 
‘Swabhaav’ means [to be in] swabhaavik Gnan (Knowledge 
of the Self; real Knowledge) and ‘vibhaav’ means paudgalik 
gnan. Now, that decreases gradually, a step at a time. It does 
not leave suddenly, in just one instance. Who is at fault? The 
fault is of the one who suffers. Yes, in this case, the [worldly-
interacting] self has to suffer and it is the fault of the [worldly-
interacting] self; what is the pudgal going to lose in this? 

Questioner:  And  if  the  [worldly-interacting]  self  does 

not suffer, then is there no problem? 

Dadashri: But  how can it not  suffer?  It  will not  suffer 
only  if  it  comes  into  the  inherent  nature  as  the  Self 
(Swabhaav). Once  It  becomes the Knower and  Seer, then it 
doesn’t matter even if the pudgal makes a fuss! 

 
[1.9] The Real Forms of Swabhaav and Vibhaav 

151 

Questioner:  Infinite  Knowledge  (anant  Gnan),  infinite 
Vision (anant Darshan) and Charitra (Conduct as the Self), 
so what is Charitra? 

Dadashri: To prevail in the inherent nature as the Self, 
that precisely is Charitra. To prevail as the Knower and Seer. 
If you curse at me, then ‘we’ would prevail as the Knower and 
Seer of how this Ambalal is reacting. 

From Bhaavna to Vaasna… 

Questioner:  Please  explain  the  difference  between 
bhaavna  (discharge  intent;  intention)  and  vaasna  (subtle 
desire). 

Dadashri:  Now,  the  vaasna  actually  arises  from  the 
bhaavna.  If  the  bhaavna  were  to  not  exist,  then  the  vaasna 
would simply not arise. It is only if one does vibhaav, that the 
vaasna would arise! And if One were to come into One’s own 
Swabhaav, He would become desireless (nirvaasnik). When 
One comes into the inherent nature as the Self, then it is over, 
it  comes  to  an  end.  Instead,  one  does  vibhaav,  one  has  the 
[discharge] intent for worldly happiness, therefore that goes 
in the category of vaasna. The bhaavna for worldly happiness 
is  itself  vaasna.  Hence,  there  is  no  difference  between 
bhaavna and vaasna. 

Questioner:  The  bhaavna  that  one  has  for  worldly 

happiness, that itself is the vibhaav, right? 

Dadashri: That itself is the vibhaav, that itself is vaasna. 

That is indeed why this Akram Vignan is such that it does 
not stick its hand into anything external to the Self at all. On 
the  contrary,  it  says,  ‘‘You’  come  into  Your  own  bhaav 
(state), come into Your Swabhaav (inherently natural state as 
the Self).’ 

 
 
152 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

It is due to the vibhaavik phases of the self that one has 
raag-dwesh (attachment and abhorrence, whereas through the 
Swabhaavik phase [of the Self], One is vitaraag! 

The One who comes into His own Swabhaav, for Him, 
on this side [the relative side], it is nothing but vyavasthit (the 
result of scientific circumstantial evidences). 

The  track  of  the  Self  (Chetandhara)  is  in  Its  inherent 
nature, and the track of inanimate matter (jadadhara) is in its 
inherent  nature;  the two  individual tracks flow in their own 
respective tracks as per their inherent nature. Before [Gnan], 
they  were  both  were  flowing  as  one  track,  thus  resulting  in 
vibhaav. 

The Pudgal Is Not Unnatural by Its Inherent Nature 

Questioner: Is it the Pudgal’s inherent nature to become 

unnatural (vikaari)? 

Dadashri:  No,  it  does  not  have  the  inherent  nature  to 

become unnatural of its own accord.  

Questioner: Then why does it become unnatural? 

Dadashri: It is because it has the inherent nature of being 
active (sakriya), it is not without activity (akriya). Inanimate 
matter is itself active, meaning that it is itself kriyavaan (to be 
active by its inherent nature), it has an active nature! All other 
eternal  elements  are  without  activity,  whereas  this  one  is 
active.  However,  this  [vikaari,  unnatural]  state  has  arisen 
because of the vyatirek guna (the completely new properties 
of anger, pride, deceit and greed) of the pratishthit atma (the 
relative  self).  Otherwise  the  Pudgal  [Parmanu]  are  not  like 
this. They do not bleed or ooze pus. Those that do are vyatirek 
guna, moreover they are with the power chetan (the relative 
self that has been powered with life energy in the presence of 
the Self). 

 
[1.9] The Real Forms of Swabhaav and Vibhaav 

153 

You believe the vyatirek guna to be your own. It is those 

very guna that affect you, otherwise the Self is not like that. 

Questioner:  So  then,  Dada,  the  pudgal  which  has 
become  unnatural  (vikrut)  due  to  vibhaav.  Now,  when  You 
give  us  Gnan,  the  awakened  awareness  of  the  pure  Soul  is 
established, but we will still have to purify the pudgal that has 
become unnatural, won’t we?  

Dadashri: It is like this; You will certainly have to find 
a solution for the entrapment that You have come into! Now, 
in  matters  where  You  Yourself  have  understood  that,  ‘One 
should listen about Atma Gnan (Knowledge of the Self), about 
bhed  Vignan  (Science  that  separates  the  Self  from  the  non-
Self)  from  the  Gnani,’  there,  all  the  difficulties  that  you 
previously  had  [ignorance  of  the  Self],  all  of  them  have 
disappeared. Now, You [the developing ‘I’] have to discharge 
(nikaal)  that  [discharge  karma].  The  other  difficulties  that 
would have normally been bothering you [due to ignorance of 
the  Self],  have  dissipated.  And  those  that  are  no  longer 
confusing You, those You have to settle. Fundamentally, the 
confusing  ones  that  were  not  dissipating  [ignorance  of  the 
Self], those have dissipated through bhed Vignan and You, the 
developing ‘I’, have become free. ‘You’ have become free of 
the  assumed  bond  [of  identification  with  that  which  is  not 
One’s own]. 

And truly speaking, even this bond is something that has 
been assumed and everything has indeed been assumed. What 
do  ‘we’  say?  The  very  beliefs  are  wrong.  Nothing  else  has 
spoilt. The moment the right belief is attained, that is it. One 
is functioning on the basis of worldly influence, on the basis 
of societal influence. Even if the wrong belief were to not set, 
they would still cause it to be established. And if One were to 
function  according  to  the  Gnani’s  influence,  then  even  the 
beliefs that are wrong, they would go away. The main thing 
‘we’ are showing You is, ‘This belief of yours is wrong. This 

 
 
154 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

is wrong, that is wrong.’ Nowhere else will they show you this 
point. 

Eventually, One Has to Come into Swabhaav 

Questioner:  What  is  the  final  state  with  regards  to  the 

Self? 

Dadashri: It is indeed this, eternal bliss! Permanent bliss, 
that is all. To come back into One’s own inherent nature as the 
Self (Swabhaav), that is the final state. Right now, one is in 
vibhaav, in visheshbhaav. The [developing] self takes all the 
experiences of its own vishesh parinaam and moves forward.  

Questioner:  The  Self  is  present  within  every  human 

being; so then, what is the goal of that Self? 

Dadashri:  ‘It’  has  a  state  that  is  inherently  natural  to 
Itself; Its goal is to come into Its inherently natural state. Right 
now, it has this state of visheshbhaav. 

By Supposing, You Get the Answer 

Questioner:  I  have  not  found  the  technique  that  You 
showed us. Please shed some light on that technique. You said 
that, “Suppose it is hundred percent,” You have the answer, 
but I do not know the technique. You have an answer without 
a technique, what kind of technique is that? 

Dadashri:  There  is  one  figure  that  is  permanent,  and 
another figure that is temporary. One has been multiplying the 
two from time immemorial. The moment he tries to multiply, 
the temporary one goes away. Then he resets the temporary 
and just as he tries to multiply them again, it disappears. Both 
need  to  be  permanent.  One  is  temporary  and  the  other  is 
permanent. ‘One’ [as the Self] is permanent by One’s inherent 
nature (Swabhaav), but with respect to the visheshbhaav, one 
is  temporary.  Whereas  if  one  were  to  understand  through 
visheshbhaav that, ‘I am permanent,’ then everything will be 

 
[1.9] The Real Forms of Swabhaav and Vibhaav 

155 

solved.  That  is  the  technique,  otherwise  there  is  no  other 
technique. 

Questioner: With respect  to  the  visheshbhaav,  one has 

been referred to as temporary; which visheshbhaav is that?  

Dadashri:  The  Self  has  a  state  (bhaav)  that  is 
Swabhaavik [inherently natural; that of Knowing and Seeing], 
and the effort made to know something extra such as, ‘What 
is all this? He is a father-in-law and he is a maternal uncle;’ 
the self went to know that visheshbhaav and that gave rise to 
this  entanglement.  When  One  stops 
that 
visheshbhaav, He comes into Swabhaav. 

to  know 

Even Shukladhyan Is Vibhaav! 

When an eternal element goes towards its own inherent 
nature, that is called dharma (true nature of a thing). Whereas, 
these people believe dharma to be ‘taking on the nature of that 
which is not inherently natural to the eternal element.’ Moksha 
is actually the inherent nature of the Self Itself, so where is the 
need to attain it? 

Questioner: 

‘Vastu  sahao  dharmo.’  The  eternal 
element’s inherent nature, the inherent nature of the Self is Its 
dharma. 

Dadashri:  Yes.  Besides,  there  is  no  dharmadhyan  (a 
virtuous internal state of being that prevents one from hurting 
oneself  or  others)  in  the  inherent  nature  of  the  Self 
is  not 
inherent  nature  of 
(Swabhaav).  The 
dharmadhyan.  The  visheshbhaav  of 
is 
that 
dharmadhyan.  The  vibhaav  is  dharmadhyan.  The  inherent 
nature of the Self is  moksha.  There are no kinds of  internal 
states of being (dhyan), there cannot be any dhyan or any such 
thing in Swabhaav. It is actually in the vibhaavik state of the 
self  that  there  is  dharmadhyan  (a  virtuous  internal  state  of 
being  that  prevents  one  from  hurting  oneself  or  others), 

the  Self 
the  self, 

 
 
156 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

shukladhyan  (an  internal  state  of  being  that  renders  the 
constant  awareness  of  ‘I  am  pure  Soul’),  aartadhyan  (an 
the  self), 
adverse 
raudradhyan  (an  adverse  internal  state  of  being  that  hurts 
others); all the dhyans are states of vibhaav. 

internal  state  of  being 

that  hurts 

Questioner: Is shukladhyan also vibhaav? 

Dadashri: Yes. Shukladhyan is also vibhaavik. 

Questioner: Is it because One is still climbing the steps 

of shukladhyan? 

long  as  He  remains 

Dadashri:  Yes,  for  as 

in 
shukladhyan, until then He has not attained the absolute state 
(purnahuti). Preparations for [attaining] the absolute state are 
going  on.  Shukladhyan  prepares  One  to  attain  the  absolute 
state. But, sooner or later, One will have to become free from 
that  dhyan.  That  which  goes  away  is  all  considered 
visheshbhaav,  vibhaav.  Shukladhyan  is  the  direct  cause  for 
moksha, and dharmadhyan is the indirect cause for moksha. 

Death of Swabhaav Is Itself Bhaav Maran! 

If one meets a Gnani and attains Gnan, then the state that 
is  free  from  the  bondage  of  rebirth  (ajanma  swabhaav) 
manifests,  and  the  state  of  the  incessant  cycle  of  birth  after 
birth (janmajanma) comes to an end. 

That is why Shrimad Rajchandra has said,  

“Why then relish a lifestyle that involves frightful bhaav 
maran in every moment.” 

“Kshane kshane bhayankar bhaav marane kah aho raachi 
rahyo.” 

What  does  bhaav  maran  mean?  It  means  the  death  of 
Swabhaav and the birth of vibhaav (the wrong belief of, ‘I am 
Chandubhai’). When the I dwells in the avastha (temporary 

 
[1.9] The Real Forms of Swabhaav and Vibhaav 

157 

state; circumstances), that is the birth of vibhaav. Whereas if 
the ‘I’ Sees the avastha [as separate], then that is the birth of 
Swabhaav.  

That is why ‘we’ have placed You in the inherent nature 
as the Self. Now, do not let it be overturned. The Self has been 
placed in Its own Swabhaav, and the Swabhaav Itself takes It 
to  moksha.  ‘Its’  inherent  nature  Itself  is  moksha.  However, 
because  you  went  the  other  way,  in  accordance  to  the  way 
people told you, that is why you are in this current state. So 
now beware, ensure that You do not fall back in the slightest 
ever again. ‘You’ will not come across such an opportunity 
again and again! 

Questioner:  These  five  Agnas  (five  principles  that 
preserve the awareness as the Self in Akram Vignan) of Yours; 
as One remains within those five Agnas, then One will come 
into Swabhaav, will One not? 

Dadashri: But of course, this is the way for One to come 
into  Swabhaav.  And  when  One  comes  into  Swabhaav 
completely, that is called moksha; the [kind of] moksha which 
is experienced right here, in this very life. Moksha should not 
be over there. What good is it if it doesn’t happen here? 

Questioner: Even though a lotus grows in water, it does 

not get wet. 

Dadashri: The water does not even touch it; such is its 
inherent nature. The inherent nature of the Self within is such 
that  worldly  life  cannot  affect  It  at  all  and all the work  can 
keep going on. However, One does not come into Swabhaav. 
How can One come into Swabhaav? The Gnani Purush, the 
One who is liberated, He can make One do so. Otherwise, any 
other person who is  himself bound, cannot  actually do that, 
can he! 



 
 
[10] 

In Vibhaav, Who Is Chetan? Who Is 
Pudgal? 

‘You’ Are Chetan, ‘Chandubhai’ Is Pudgal 

The  Self  is  Itself  avinashi  (permanent;  indestructible). 
‘You’,  the  developing  ‘I’,  are  permanent,  but  you  have  the 
wrong belief that, ‘I am Chandubhai’, and that is why you are 
vinashi  (temporary;  destructible).  ‘I  am  Chandubhai’  is 
temporary, and you have believed yourself to be that. ‘You’, 
the  developing  ‘I’,  are  in  fact  eternal,  but  such  experiential 
awareness (bhaan) does not arise. As soon as that experiential 
awareness  arises,  One  is  free!  Therefore,  until  you  do  not 
attain the experiential awareness as the Self, the vishesh guna 
(completely new properties of a third entity that arises when 
two  eternal  elements,  the  Self  and  inanimate  matter  come 
together)  remain.  But  once  such  experiential  awareness  is 
attained, the vishesh guna go away. 

Visheshbhaav (an assumed identification with that which 
is not One’s own) is not Your true property, it is a  vyatirek 
guna (completely new properties of a third entity that arises 
when  two  eternal  elements,  the  Self  and  inanimate  matter, 
come together), that is why it will go away. Its circumstance 
has arisen and it will dissipate. But when will that happen? It 
will  happen  when  this  visheshbhaav  is  destroyed  and  when 
someone helps you attain the Swabhaavik bhaav (the state that 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[1.10] In Vibhaav, Who Is Chetan? Who Is Pudgal? 

159 

is naturally inherent to the Self). That is when You come into 
Your  original  inherent  nature  as  the  Self  (Swabhaav). 
Otherwise  all  that,  the  very  same  continues.  After  attaining 
this  Gnan,  You,  the  developing  ‘I’,  come  into  Your 
Swabhaav-bhaav (inherently natural state as the Self), that is 
when everything gets settled. Now for You, [the belief of] ‘I 
am  pure  Soul’  is  considered  Swabhaav-bhaav.  Before,  [the 
belief  of]  ‘I  am  Chandubhai’  was  considered 
to  be 
visheshbhaav. 

It is because another eternal element [is encountered] that 
the I (hu; the ego) arises, otherwise it would not arise. After 
attaining  this  Gnan,  the  Self  does  not  get  engrossed  in  that 
other  eternal  element,  therefore,  vibhaav  does  not  arise.  As 
long as one is in worldly life [in the state of ignorance of the 
Self],  all  the  eternal  elements  are  going  to  reside  together. 
Once this Gnan is attained, He understands [who He really is] 
and from that point on, He does not pay any attention to the 
other eternal elements. 

‘I am Chandu’, That Is Visheshbhaav 

Questioner: That which arises from the coming together 
of the Self and the inanimate matter, is it the aham (the ‘I’) 
that arises first?  

Dadashri: It is indeed the aham that arises! 

Questioner:  Does  the  aham  arise  first,  and  then  puran 

(charging) takes place? 

Dadashri:  Puran  is  precisely  what  is  considered  as 

aham! I am indeed the one! 

Questioner: Is puran the same as aham? 

Dadashri: It is indeed the one who says, ‘I am’! That is 
just  one’s  belief,  isn’t  it!  He  not  only  refers  to  the  one 
undergoing galan (discharge) as ‘I’, but he also refers to the 

 
 
160 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

one undergoing puran (charge) as ‘I’. He also refers to the one 
experiencing it as ‘I’ and he also refers to the one doing it as 
‘I’. 

Questioner: So the one who believes the puran-galan to 

be his own, that is the I (hu)? 

Dadashri: When one believes, ‘The puran that is being 
done is indeed being done by me,’ at that time, prayogsa (the 
charging phase of parmanu) continues to take place, and when 
one is experiencing karma, at that time mishrasa (the giving 
off effect of prayogsa) continues to take place. 

Questioner: The one who believes all these effects to be 

his own, is that the aham itself? 

Dadashri: That indeed is the aham. 

Questioner:  So,  for  us  on  the  Akram  path,  the 
visheshbhaav  will  still  arise,  won’t  it?  The  visheshbhaav 
prevails for us, doesn’t it? 

Dadashri:  No,  if  the  visheshbhaav  prevails,  then  that 
cannot  be  considered  Akram  Gnan  at  all!  In  Akram  Gnan, 
there  cannot  be  any  visheshbhaav  whatsoever!  That  which 
destroys  visheshbhaav  is  known as  Akram Gnan! This  is  in 
fact Akram Vignan!! 

Questioner:  When  One  comes  into  the  belief  of  ‘I  am 
pure Soul’, and when the experiential awareness (bhaan) of, 
‘I am pure Soul’ is attained, then the entire aham, the one that 
was doing the visheshbhaav, that itself vanishes, doesn’t it? 

Dadashri:  Yes,  when  the  experiential  awareness  of,  ‘I 
am pure Soul’ is attained, that itself means that visheshbhaav 
has been destroyed. 

Questioner: So what about the awareness of, ‘I am his 

paternal uncle,’ ‘I am his maternal uncle’? 

 
[1.10] In Vibhaav, Who Is Chetan? Who Is Pudgal? 

161 

Dadashri:  But  actually,  the  visheshbhaav  no  longer 

remains in the foundation whatsoever! 

Questioner: Then what about for an agnani? For the one 

who does not have awareness of the Self? 

Dadashri:  For  him,  everything  is  visheshbhaav  only, 

isn’t it! 

Questioner:  So  then,  this  verily  is  the  visheshbhaav, 
where in the experiential awareness of One’s Real form as the 
Self does not prevail, and because of that, the intent that, ‘I am 
Chandubhai, I am this’ arises. Is that the actual visheshbhaav?  

Dadashri:  Yes,  those  are  all  visheshbhaav  indeed. 
Wherever  egoism  (ahamkaar)  is  exercised,  those  are  all 
visheshbhaav.  Actually,  the  ego  itself  is  the  visheshbhaav. 
Thereafter,  all  its  phases  continue  to  arise  all  day  long. 
the 
Whereas  for  us  here,  after  attaining 
visheshbhaav does not remain whatsoever. 

this  Gnan, 

Questioner:  Then  does  only  discharge 
attachment (charitra moha) remain in Akram Vignan? 

illusory 

Dadashri: Yes, the ‘ghost’ [wrong belief; ego] has been 
excised and only the scars [effect of past life karma] remain 
[on the body]. So one keeps having the experience of those 
scars! 

Questioner: When the two come close to each other, do 

they come together according to the law of nature? 

Dadashri:  That  precisely  is  the  law  of  nature!  As  the 
eternal  elements  are  such  that  they  bring  about  a  change 
(parivartansheel), all of this keeps changing. This is all due to 
nature.  Nature  is  not  superior  over  anyone.  The  coming 
together of all these circumstances is verily called ‘nature’. 

 
 
162 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

The Succession of Results… 

Questioner:  After  the  visheshbhaav  arises,  what  is  its 

continuity based on? 

Dadashri:  It  is  actually  from  the  visheshbhaav  that 
[other] visheshbhaav continue arising thereafter. Then one’s 
belief has become entirely different, hasn’t it; it has changed, 
hasn’t it! Now, when He once again  attains the  experiential 
awareness  of,  ‘Who  I  am  and  what  is  my  inherent  nature,’ 
when He is taken out of the visheshbhaav such that, ‘You are 
not  this,  You  are  not  that,  You  are  not  the  other,  You  are 
‘this’,’  that  is  when  everything  will  dissipate.  When  the 
awakened awareness as the Self (Swaroop jagruti) is absent, 
that is when the continuity [of the visheshbhaav] persists. And 
when  the  awakened  awareness  as  the  Self  is  attained,  then 
everything goes back to what it was; the continuity ends. One 
[the Self] has not changed at all. It is just a wrong belief that 
has become ingrained due to this visheshbhaav. 

Questioner: Is it from this visheshbhaav that the bhaavak 

(that which causes intents to arise) has arisen? 

Dadashri: Yes, the bhaavak has arisen. 

Questioner: Now, the bhaavak and the bhaav, are they 

the same or are they different? 

Dadashri: They are both different. Bhaavak means that 
it will make you do bhaav (inner intent; belief; state of being) 
even if You don’t want to; that is called bhaavak. Bhaavak is 
what causes one to do bhaav.  

In the body, there are many such bhaavaks. The krodhak 
causes  one  to  get  angry  (krodh),  the  lobhak  causes  greed 
(lobh)  to  arise.  There  are  many  such  ‘k’s  within  one.  Their 
population has increased exponentially, so just imagine what 
would be the state of the original ‘king’? The other population 
is endless! 

 
[1.10] In Vibhaav, Who Is Chetan? Who Is Pudgal? 

163 

Questioner: The bhaavak made one do the bhaav from 
which  other  bhaav  arose;  now  is  that  why  this  continuity 
persisted? 

Dadashri: Then the bhaavak continues to become strong. 
As  the  bhaavak  causes  one  to  do  bhaav,  and  as  one  does 
accordingly, the bhaavak continues to become stronger, and 
its  authoritative  control  continues  to  increase!  So  the 
continuity of bhaav arose, but then he became fed up within. 

Those vyatirek guna are temporary. However, the entire 
world  is  subject  to  them.  There  has  become  so  much 
entanglement  due  to  illusion,  that  living  beings  continue  to 
conduct themselves in accordance with those guna only. That 
indeed is what they believe the Self to be. ‘I am indeed the one 
who becomes angry, who else does it happen to? I am indeed 
the one who is being greedy.’ Even if only twenty-five rupees 
were to be lost from one’s wallet, then a greedy person would 
recall it all day long; that is the attribute of greed. He would 
recall it the next day as well. If he is not greedy, then he will 
not feel anything. 

While Remaining in Swabhaav, Vibhaav Occurs! 

Questioner: It is only the eternal element of the Self that 
has the energy to engage in Swabhaav and the energy to do 
vibhaav; that is what You had said. 

Dadashri: Yes, so? 

Questioner:  If  the  eternal  element  of  the  Self  were  to 
engage in  vibhaav, then  It  cannot  come into  Swabhaav  (the 
inherently natural state as the Self), right? 

Dadashri: No, It is always in Swabhaav. The Self never 
goes outside of Its  Swabhaav, moreover, it is due to certain 
circumstances  that  the  visheshbhaav  arises.  When  those 
circumstances move away, it comes to an end. 

 
 
164 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Questioner: Is it not possible for the pure Self to have 

visheshbhaav? 

Dadashri:  Actually,  It  is  always  in  Swabhaav.  The 
visheshbhaav has simply arisen due to external circumstances. 
The visheshbhaav had arisen because of the coming together 
of those circumstances, and when ‘we’ give that entity Gnan, 
He [the Self] separates; therefore, the visheshbhaav dissipates. 
This [belief of] ‘I am Chandubhai’ was the visheshbhaav, and 
the  moment  [the  belief  of],  ‘I  am  pure  Soul’  sets  in,  the 
visheshbhaav dissipates. 

Questioner: Thereafter, does one not have desires again? 

Does he not do visheshbhaav? 

Dadashri: He does not do it; but if he were to do so, then 

it would stick to him. 

Questioner:  Meaning  that,  he  is  able  to  do  it;  he  does 

have the power to do it, doesn’t he? 

Dadashri: Yes. But if you do not follow the Agnas, then 
visheshbhaav  will  indeed  occur.  Everything  can  happen  for 
the one who does not follow the Agnas. Nothing happens for 
the One who follows the Agnas.  

Questioner:  So  the  Self  actually  has  the  power  to  do 

visheshbhaav, does It not? 

Dadashri: No, that is actually an effect of circumstances. 

Circumstances Themselves Are in the Foundation 
Everywhere 

Questioner: So then are both, the circumstances (sanjog) 

and the Self, infinite? 

Dadashri: Yes, they are infinite. 

 
[1.10] In Vibhaav, Who Is Chetan? Who Is Pudgal? 

165 

Questioner:  So  then,  along  with  that,  the  saiyog  (the 
coming  together  of  the  circumstances  and  the  Self)  is  also 
infinite, isn’t it? 

Dadashri: Yes, the saiyog is infinite. It is so since time 
immemorial, it will be so until time immemorial, but if they 
are separated, then nothing at all will be there. All of this will 
dissipate and each one will return to its own inherent nature. 
The influence that they had on each other will dissipate. As 
soon as You say, “I am not this,” it all separates immediately. 

Questioner:  But  even  after  becoming  separate,  the 

saiyog will still persist, won’t it? 

Dadashri:  It  is  not  a question of  saiyog.  It  is  precisely 
from saiyog that ignorance arose. Once that ignorance leaves, 
the saiyog will gradually separate on its own and will come to 
an end. 

The  ego  has  arisen  on  the  basis  of  the  saiyog,  and  the 
saiyog has persisted on the basis of the ego. For the one whose 
ego has departed, for him, the saiyog has gone. Everything is 
persisting due to wrong belief. 

The ‘I’ Is to Be Purified… 

Questioner:  The  eternal  element  of  the  Self  separates 
after becoming pure, so then this eternal element of inanimate 
matter that remains, does it become separate in the pure form? 

Dadashri: It indeed becomes pure; it does not take long 
at all to become pure. It is only when it becomes pure that the 
Self can separate from it, otherwise It cannot do so. The extent 
to which the visheshbhaavi pudgal (pudgal that has deviated 
from  its  original  inherent  nature;  the  non-Self  complex  of 
input  and  output)  has  become  vibhaavik,  when  all  of  that 
becomes pure, that is when the Self separates. That is indeed 
why ‘we’ say, “Settle your files.” As One continues to settle 
the files with equanimity, He continues to separate. 

 
 
166 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Questioner: Those other eternal elements that exist, they 
are all in their own inherent nature (swabhaav), but You come 
back into Your own inherent nature as the Self (Swabhaav). 
Meaning  that,  if  You  come  out  of  the  sense  of  doership 
(kartapanu), only then will that happen? 

Dadashri: This ‘pure Soul’ [original Self] that exists, that 
Itself is indeed who You are, and that precisely is Your Real 
form (Swaroop). Presently, You have become separate from 
that, so now become that Real form by Seeing It. ‘‘It’ is akriya 
(not connected with any activity), It is like this, It is like that,’ 
so, by thinking in  this  manner, You become that form.  It  is 
just  that  this  vyatirek  guna  has  arisen,  and  your  belief  has 
become established that you are that. So, You have to See It 
[the form as the original Self] and become that. 

Even Bhaav Is Under the Control of the Non-Self! 

Questioner:  Sometimes  the  question  arises  that,  for 
anything, one only has to keep the bhaav and then keep Seeing 
whatever happens?  

Dadashri: Even bhaav is not in one’s hands. ‘We’ have 
removed bhaav. Bhaav exists on the Kramik path. ‘We’ have 
completely  removed  bhaav!  Bhaav  has  been  dismissed 
entirely. Actually, the desires that arise in you right now, they 
are not bhaav. Just because there is food that you like or the 
mango that  you like, that  is  not  bhaav.  Bhaav is  a different 
thing altogether. If you believe, ‘I am Chandubhai,’ only then 
does bhaav exist; otherwise, there is no bhaav. Since You are 
not ‘Chandubhai’, it means that bhaav no longer exists. Now, 
[the belief of] ‘I am Chandubhai’ was vibhaav. The world has 
referred to that as ‘bhaavkarma’, whereas, ‘I am pure Soul’ is 
One’s  Swabhaav  (inherently  natural  state  as  the  Self).  This 
vibhaav has been referred to as bhaavkarma (karma which is 
charged through wrong belief). If that goes, then everything 
goes.  What  a  beautiful,  natural  and  spontaneous  path! 

 
[1.10] In Vibhaav, Who Is Chetan? Who Is Pudgal? 

167 

Effortless! Was there any effort on your part? And the bliss 
does not deplete, does it? 

Questioner:  The  bliss  does  not  deplete.  Immense  bliss 

remains. 

Dadashri: After attaining this Gnan, the Self never enters 

vibhaav. 

Anger, After Gnan … 

Questioner:  Dada,  when  You  ask  any  mahatma  after 
they have received Gnan, “Now does anger, pride, deceit and 
greed remain?” Then some say, “A little remains,” or some 
may also say, “No Dada, the awakened awareness remains.” 
So now for them, it is due to Pragnya (the direct light of the 
Self) that the vishesh parinaam does not arise anymore, isn’t 
it? 

Dadashri: It is like this, when can it be considered anger? 
When  the  parmanu  of  anger  arise  in  the  mind  and  the 
[relative] self immediately becomes engrossed (tanmayakaar) 
in it, that is when it is considered as anger. 

Questioner:  But  that  does  remain  for  him  for  a  little 
while, doesn’t it? Suppose that much awakened awareness did 
not prevail for that time period, so for that duration, for that 
much  time,  he  becomes  engrossed;  so  if  he  were  to  repent 
afterwards, then would it go away? 

Dadashri: After  attaining  Gnan, He can  actually never 
become  engrossed  (tanmayakaar).  It  is  just  that  he  himself 
feels, ‘I have become engrossed’. Since He Knows it, it means 
that He cannot be engrossed. 

Questioner: If he were to become engrossed, then would 

the vishesh parinaam definitely arise for him? 

Dadashri:  The  moment  one  becomes  engrossed,  the 
vishesh parinaam definitely arises. Thereafter it is considered 

 
 
168 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

parparinaam (the results of the non-Self). Vishesh parinaam 
is  actually  referred  to  that  which  happens  in  the  beginning, 
when  two  eternal  elements  come  into  close  proximity  with 
each other… 

Questioner:  Meaning  that,  when  that  saiyog  was 

encountered, that is when it all began? 

Dadashri: Yes, and thereafter it is called parparinaam. 

Questioner:  Is  experiencing  (bhogavavu)  considered 

parparinaam? 

Dadashri: 

Experiencing, 

indeed. 
Experiencing  pain,  experiencing  pleasure,  all  of  that.  This 
world is nothing but parparinaam. That is indeed why ‘we’ 
say that You have no control in Your hands. 

everything 

That  is  why  ‘we’  tell  these  people,  “Dear  fellow, 
vyavasthit  is  doing  everything,  You  are  not  the  doer  any 
longer.  ‘You’  were  not  doing  it  before  either,  but  this 
awareness was not prevailing at that time.” It couldn’t prevail, 
could  it!  But  now  [after  attaining  Gnan],  this  awakened 
awareness  has  manifested  nicely.  Therefore,  now 
the 
experiential  awareness  (bhaan)  remains.  And  thereafter,  as 
You remain in the Agnas for two to four days, the conviction 
about  vyavasthit  starts  setting  in,  so  then  that  conviction 
strengthens day-by-day, it multiplies. Whereas in the former 
case [before Gnan], one is told today yet he has forgotten by 
tomorrow,  he  has  bebhaanpanu 
(a  state  of  gross 
unawareness). Now [after Gnan], it is not forgotten, isn’t it! 
What a wonderful spiritual Science it is! 

The Gnani’s Roar Awakens the Self 

Questioner: Who has the perception that something like 
the  pure  Soul  exists?  Is  it  the  pratishthit  atma  (the  relative 
self)? 

 
[1.10] In Vibhaav, Who Is Chetan? Who Is Pudgal? 

169 

Dadashri: When a lion roars, a lion cub who has been 
wandering  amongst  goats  will  immediately  come  into  its 
intrinsic  nature,  and  it  too  will  start  roaring.  It  has  such  an 
attribute  within,  does  it  not!  Similarly,  when  the  Gnani 
Purush  gives  you  Gnan,  at  that  time  It  [the  Self]  comes 
entirely into Its inherent nature. 

Questioner: But does that vishesh parinaam move away? 

Dadashri: It comes to an end entirely, it is fractured. 

Questioner:  So  it  is  not  that  one  is  able  to  Know  the 
Shuddha  (pure;  the  Self)  through  the  vishesh  parinaam  that 
had arisen? 

Dadashri: No, on the contrary, the vishesh parinaam is 
actually  darkness.  It  is  in  fact  a  veil  of  ignorance  (avaran). 
Through the  vishesh parinaam  you  can definitely  recognize 
that this  person is  a  Gnani. You are able to  understand that 
this person is a Gnani due to the intellect.  

Questioner: Due to the intellect. But the intellect is also 

a vishesh parinaam, isn’t it? 

Dadashri:  Everything  turned  out  to  be  a  vishesh 

parinaam, didn’t it! 

Questioner:  So,  it  is  not  that  the  Self  can  be  attained 

through the pratishthit atma? 

Dadashri: No, it is not like that. One can recognize the 

Gnani through the intellect. 

Questioner: But this [awareness of] separation that One 
is able to maintain, through the energy to understand, One is 
able to settle the files with equanimity, One is able to maintain 
the awakened awareness, who makes One do all this? 

Dadashri: Pragnya makes One do all that. 

 
 
170 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Questioner: So then isn’t  Pragnya  a vishesh parinaam 

of the pure Soul? 

Dadashri:  No,  It  is  not  a  vishesh  parinaam.  ‘It’  is  the 
pure  Soul’s  own  property  (guna),  arising  directly  from  Its 
presence.  But  for  how  long?  Until  It  gets  this  work  done, 
thereafter  It  becomes  one  with  the  pure  Soul.  Agnya  (the 
energy of ignorance) is a vishesh parinaam, whereas Pragnya 
is the Self’s own parinaam. Anger, pride, deceit and greed are 
actually considered  vishesh parinaam. The ‘I’, the ego,  and 
anger, pride, deceit and greed, they are all considered vishesh 
parinaam. 

The Kashays Are Vyatirek, They Are Not ‘Yours’! 

Questioner:  I  still  become  upset  sometimes.  I  do 

recognize that it is wrong but I still end up becoming upset. 

Dadashri: What do being upset and You have to do with 
one another? It happens because it is a visheshbhaav. And it 
is  temporary  by  its  inherent  nature.  It  will  come  and  then 
leave. 

Due to visheshbhaav, the anger, pride, deceit and greed 
have  become  excessive  [and  that  is  why  they  are  vyatirek]. 
They have neither arisen through the Self, nor have they arisen 
through inanimate matter; these are vyatirek guna which have 
arisen. So if one were to understand just this much, then the 
awareness that one has of, ‘The anger, pride, deceit and greed 
are happening to me,’ will go away. 

This is a vyatirek guna that has arisen. Moreover, due to 
that everyone has become confused that, ‘These anger, pride, 
deceit and greed of mine are not going away.’ Oh mortal one! 
This  property  is  not  Yours  whatsoever,  why  don’t  You  just 
become separate from this [vyatirek guna]. Come to this Dada 
and  You  just  become  separate!  They  will  go  away  on  their 
own;  they  will  go  far  away!  After  all,  they  are  the  vyatirek 

 
[1.10] In Vibhaav, Who Is Chetan? Who Is Pudgal? 

171 

guna! They are not the intrinsic properties (anvay guna) [of 
the Self]. 

Upon Attaining Gnan, the Vibhaav of Time 
Immemorial… 

Questioner:  But  how  can  One  become  free  from  the 

vibhaav that has been accumulated over millions of years? 

Dadashri: There is no need to take into consideration the 
vibhaav of millions of years. It is simply due to a change in 
the vision that this appears as such. If the vision turns this way 
[towards  the  Self],  then  there  is  nothing.  When  you  turn 
around this way, you will not at all be able to see anything that 
was in  front  of  you previously! You indeed become free of 
that; it will not remain at all. 

Anger, pride, deceit and greed arose and that is why [in 
the  state  of  ignorance]  the  developing  I  turned  the  vision 
towards the pudgal and believed, ‘I did this’, therefore it [the 
pudgal] latched onto it [the developing I]. In reality, it is not 
the doer, but it merely feels, ‘I am doing it.’ However, there is 
not  even  an  iota  that  anyone  can  ‘do’  in  all  this.  One  is 
unnecessarily doing egoism. Egoism means to assert, ‘I did it’ 
where one is not the doer at all, not even a cent’s worth; that 
is called egoism.  

The Difference, for a Gnani and an Agnani… 

Questioner:  You  had  once  said  that  even  a  Gnani  has 
circumstances. Now although the Gnani is in close proximity 
with them, why doesn’t vishesh parinaam arise for Him? 

Dadashri: The Gnani also has circumstances. Everyone 
indeed has circumstances! The Gnani’s circumstances are not 
all harsh, they are mild. Even if a sword were to come at Him, 
it will hit Him by the blunt end, not by the sharp end.  

Questioner: Are [His] karmas mild or smooth? 

 
 
172 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Dadashri: Mild. Whatever would hit you, it will hurt you 

so much, however it would hardly touch ‘us’. 

Questioner:  Even 

comes 
circumstances; does vishesh parinaam arise for him? 

agnani 

an 

across 

Dadashri: Yes. 

Questioner:  Whereas  a  Gnani  also  comes  across 
circumstances  and  yet  vishesh  parinaam  does  not  arise  for 
Him; why is that? 

Dadashri: It does not arise. ‘We’ actually have to settle 

(nikaal), not create anew. Now, ‘we’ have come to settle. 

Questioner: But the vishesh parinaam actually arises for 

both, doesn’t it?  

Dadashri:  It  does,  but  ‘we’  have  not  come  to  create 
anew; that is definitely in ‘our’ awakened awareness! So ‘we’ 
settle it. All kinds of effects will arise, but You [mahatmas] 
have to understand, ‘This [effect] is not mine.’ [The original 
vishesh parinaam, the I (hu), goes away forever after attaining 
Gnan, but the vishesh parinaam of the ego that has arisen from 
the I, keep on arising; the Gnani keeps settling these.] 



 
 
[11] 

When Vishesh Parinaam Comes to an 
End… 

Permanent, the Eternal Elements as Well as the 
Effects of the Eternal Elements 

The  eternal  elements  that  are  ‘effective’  take  on  a 
viparinaam  (completely  new effect  that  arises  as  a  result  of 
the coming together of two eternal elements of the Self and 
inanimate  matter;  also  known  as  vishesh  parinaam)  upon 
encountering circumstances. That is why worldly life comes 
into being. If you were to store gold for a hundred thousand 
years,  there  would  still  not  be  any  change  in  its  swabhaav 
parinaam  (resultant  state;  effective  inherent  nature).  Every 
eternal element continues to simply dwell in its own inherent 
nature.  Viparinaam  means  vishesh  parinaam,  not  viruddh 
parinaam (an effect that is contrary to the effect as the Self)! 

When  an  eternal  element  is  alone,  then  it  is  in  its  own 
parinaam  (effect  or  individual  properties),  it  is  only  in 
swaparinaam  (its  own  individual  effect  or  properties). 
However, when two eternal elements come together, a vishesh 
parinaam arises. In fact, the five eternal elements are together 
with ‘It’ in the body, and therefore  due to illusion, the very 
moment the vishesh parinaam arises, the Pudgal acquires the 
authority.  Moreover,  there  is  no  choice  but  to  endure  its 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
174 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

effects. For milk to go bad is its inherent nature (swabhaav), 
but for it to become yogurt, that is it’s vishesh parinaam. 

It  is  due  to  the  circumstance  of  the  [other]  eternal 
elements that this viparinaam appears evident, and the people 
of the world become perplexed upon seeing the viparinaam. 
Just understand what ‘we’ are trying to say. There is no need 
to  work  hard.  Understand  Swaparinaam  and  understand 
vishesh parinaam. The Self has not become vibhaavik [in this 
context,  refer  to  vibhaavik  as  viruddhbhaavi,  meaning  one 
having a state contrary to the state as the Self]. This is in fact 
a vishesh parinaam, and truly speaking, the vishesh parinaam 
comes to an end. 

An eternal element is permanent (avinashi). Its effects or 
properties  (parinaam)  are  also  permanent.  Only  its  vishesh 
parinaam  are  temporary  (vinashi).  If  you  understand  this 
point, then the two [eternal elements] do not become a mixture 
[form].  Meaning  that,  both  dwell  in  their  own  individual 
properties or effect. 

For  ‘us’,  the  Self  remains  in  Atma  parinaam  (the 
properties  of  the  Self;  the  effect  as  the  Self),  and  the  mind 
remains in the properties of the mind or in the  effect  as the 
mind. The moment the developing I becomes engrossed in the 
mind,  the  vishesh  parinaam  arises.  When  the  Self  is  in 
Swaparinaam (the effect  as the Self),  It  is  the absolute Self 
(Parmatma)!  When  both  come  into  their  own  individual 
properties  or  effect  and  both  dwell  in  their  own  individual 
properties or effect, that is called moksha! 

When  the  developing  ‘I’  Knows,  ‘This  is  vishesh 
parinaam,’ that itself is Swaparinaam. There is no such thing 
as  ‘good’  or  ‘bad’  in  vishesh  parinaam.  ‘Freedom  from 
ignorance’ means that the developing ‘I’ understands, ‘This is 
My  own  parinaam  and  this  is  a  viparinaam.’  Both  are 
understood to be separate in this way. And moksha means that 

 
[1.11] When Vishesh Parinaam Comes to an End… 

175 

all  vishesh  parinaam  have  come  to  an  end!  Swabhaav 
parinaam is itself called moksha. 

Whether a donor is donating money, or a thief is stealing 
money,  they  are  both  dwelling  in  their  own  individual 
parinaam;  where  is  the  need  to  do  any  attachment  or 
abhorrence (raag-dwesh) in that? 

If the developing I takes on the visheshbhaav (an assumed 
identification  with  that  which  is  not  One’s  own),  then  he 
becomes a jeev (worldly being), whereas if He remains as the 
Knower  and  Seer  of  the  visheshbhaav,  it  gives  Him  eternal 
bliss (parmanand).  

What  happened  because  of  vishesh  parinaam?  The 
mechanical chetan (the self that is mechanical but appears to 
be living) arose, the pudgal arose, the one with puran (influx) 
and galan (outflux) arose. As long as that is your form, so long 
as you even have that belief, you cannot become free. 

The reason that pratikraman has to be done is that these 
circumstances  are  coming  together  due  to  your  viparinaam, 
and  through  pratikraman  that  [viparinaam]  is  erased. 
Actually,  a  true  scientist  has  no  need  for  pratikraman 
whatsoever. It is just that these people make mistakes, that’s 
why  [it  is  required].  A  true  scientist  would  never  stick  his 
finger [interfere] in it. The world is the science! 

Questioner: So then Dada, if two pudgals [here meaning 
two  eternal  elements]  having  independent  properties  come 
together  and  visheshbhaav  arises,  then  do  they  lose  their 
original independent properties?  

Dadashri:  No,  their  independent  properties  indeed 
remain  as  they  are,  but  vishesh  guna  (completely  new 
properties) arise. 

Questioner: Suppose there is milk, and that milk became 

yogurt. That indeed happened due to visheshbhaav, right? 

 
 
176 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Dadashri: Due to visheshbhaav. 

Questioner:  So  then,  that  is  a  property  of  milk,  an 
independent  property,  isn’t  it?  An  independent  property  of 
milk… 

Dadashri: Milk is not an eternal element. This is just an 
example at the gross level to help you understand, it is not the 
exact thing. An eternal element, along with its properties, is 
permanent. Milk cannot be considered an eternal element, can 
it?  Anything  in  this  world  that  is  visible  through  the  eyes, 
cannot be considered an eternal element. Anything that can be 
heard  cannot  be  considered  an  eternal  element.  An  eternal 
element should be eternal (shaashwat). 

Questioner: Is milk considered visheshbhaav? 

Dadashri:  Milk  can  certainly  not  be  considered  an 
eternal  element,  can  it!  The  six  eternal  elements  which  are 
permanent,  they  can  be  called  vastu  (eternal  elements). 
Whereas this milk is actually a phase. Therefore, among the 
six eternal elements, the moment these two eternal elements 
come together, vishesh parinaam arises. 

The One Who Knows Viparinaam Is in 
Swaparinaam 

Questioner: ‘When the developing ‘I’ Knows, ‘This is a 
vishesh  parinaam,’  that  itself  means  He  is  in  Swaparinaam 
(the  effect  as  the  Self).  There  is  no  such  thing  as  ‘good’  or 
‘bad’ in vishesh parinaam. The moment the vishesh parinaam 
come  to  an  end,  that  Swabhaav  parinaam  is  itself  called 
moksha.’  So  what  is  this  statement  trying  to  say,  can  You 
please explain all that? 

Dadashri:  [The  One  who  dwells  in]  Swaparinaam 
Knows,  ‘This  is  a  vishesh  parinaam.’  It  [the  vishesh 
parinaam]  causes  one  to  become  emotional.  All  things  one 
says such as, “This looks bad like this,” “It looks this way,” 

 
[1.11] When Vishesh Parinaam Comes to an End… 

177 

“He is worthless,” “He is like this,” “He is that,” is nothing 
but  vishesh  parinaam.  The  One  who  Knows,  ‘This  is  all 
nothing but vishesh parinaam,’ means He is in Swaparinaam. 

The pudgal is entirely under the authority of vyavasthit, 
and You are in Your own independent authority as the Self. 
To believe the properties and the phases of the pudgal to be 
Your own, that precisely is vibhaav. However, if You do not 
believe  the  phases  and  the  properties  of  the  pudgal  to  be 
Yours, then that is Swabhaav. 

The good and the bad that you see, they are the unnatural 
phases (vibhaavik avastha) of the pudgal. In those phases, do 
not  categorize,  ‘This  is  good  and  this  is  bad.’  Do  not 
specifically  categorize  as  ‘good’  and  ‘bad’.  ‘Good’  is  also 
vibhaavik and ‘bad’ is also vibhaavik. What’s next? 

Questioner: ‘There is no such thing as ‘good’ or ‘bad’ in 

vishesh parinaam.’ 

Dadashri: In vishesh parinaam, there is no such thing as, 
‘This  is  good  and  this  is  bad.’  People  believe  there  to  be 
‘good’ and ‘bad’ in vishesh parinaam. That is because they 
still have their past impressions, societal impressions. Do the 
cows and buffalos believe things to be ‘good’ and ‘bad’? Have 
they ever gone to court? Do they file claims? Worldly life has 
arisen from saying ‘good’ and ‘bad’. Actually, they are only 
effects. What is good or bad in that? It is like this, if yoghurt 
soup were to be served hot, then these people would complain, 
“It  is  hot,”  and  if  it  were  to  be  served  cold,  they  would 
complain,  “It  was  served  completely  cold.”  Whether  hot  or 
cold, the problem does not lie there, but the developing I has 
developed partiality in this way. 

Questioner:  A  partiality  for  hot  things  means  that  one 

does not prefer cold things. 

 
 
178 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Dadashri: But then again, he finds it too hot. Hey mortal 
one, it would indeed be hot, wouldn’t it! Cool it and then drink 
it. Does the tea tell you, ‘Drink me up very fast’? Once when 
the  train  started  to  move,  what  did  a  person  do?  The  man 
selling  the  tea  said,  “Hey,  give  me  the  cup  back.”  So  the 
person  thought  to  himself,  ‘If  I  pour  out  the  tea,  then  the 
money will go to waste, won’t it! So let me drink it.’ So he 
drank it quickly! He poured it [down his  throat]. Wise guy, 
wasn’t  he!  A  very  shrewd  man  like  you!  But  the  poor  man 
burnt himself. The poor man was done for! 

Questioner: He saved money. 

Dadashri: Yes, [he had the belief that] ‘money shouldn’t 
be wasted’. What good fate he must have had! Then, what is 
next? 

Questioner:  ‘Freedom  from  ignorance’  means  One 
understands  both,  ‘This  is  My  own  parinaam  and  this  is 
viparinaam.’  

Dadashri:  ‘Freedom  from  ignorance,’  now  what  have 
people understood that to mean? ‘Lo and behold, this Dada 
discovered that freedom can be attained through ignorance.’ 
Hey mortal one, it is not like that. ‘Freedom from ignorance’ 
means  that  you  will  become  free  from  ignorance,  whereas 
these  people  have  inferred  that  freedom  can  be  attained 
through  ignorance.  What  can  one  do  if  it  is  interpreted 
incorrectly? He, himself has ignorance, doesn’t he! Moreover, 
he interprets it in his own way.  

Questioner: All these three are continuous statements. 

Dadashri:  The  second  statement  actually  supports  the 
third statement. So its meaning is lost when this stands alone, 
as it says, ‘Freedom can be attained through ignorance.’ But 
other  people  do  not  believe  what  it  is  stating,  they  will 
certainly see the statement before and after it! 

 
[1.11] When Vishesh Parinaam Comes to an End… 

179 

Questioner: ‘Freedom from ignorance’ means that One 
understands  both,  ‘This  is  My  own  parinaam  and  this  is  a 
viparinaam.’ 

Dadashri:  This  is  My  parinaam  and  that  other  is  a 

vishesh parinaam. 

Questioner:  ‘This  is  My  parinaam  and  that  other  is  a 
that 

vishesh  parinaam’;  how  should  One  understand 
internally? 

Dadashri: The Knowing and Seeing that is taking place, 
all those parinaam are Mine, and all the rest belong to this one 
[the pudgal]; the division that is the doer. The knowing that 
the  intellect  does  is  not  Knowing.  In  fact,  the  knowing  and 
seeing being done by the intellect is itself a parparinaam (an 
effect of the non-Self), it is a vishesh parinaam.  

When one adds sugar to the tea, why does he not grind it 
before  adding  it!  It  is  because  sugar’s  very  nature  is  to 
dissolve,  that’s  why.  Similarly,  You  should  understand  that 
the Self’s very nature is urdhvagami (having the proclivity to 
ascend). It is eternal; each and every parinaam of the Self is 
permanent. And all other [parinaam] besides those of the Self 
are guru-laghu (such that they increase and decrease) by their 
inherent nature, they are vishesh parinaam. ‘You’ just have to 
Know  that,  ‘These  are  vishesh  parinaam,  whereas  I  am  the 
pure Soul.’ And amidst such vishesh parinaam, if You cannot 
remain separate as the pure parinaam, then decide, ‘These are 
all vishesh parinaam and they are temporary, whereas ‘I’ am 
with Swaparinaam like that of the eternal [the absolute Self].’  

Aham and Vibhaav 

What ‘we’ are saying dear fellow is that the Self has not 
changed at all. ‘It’ has remained exactly the same. It is simply 
your ego that has arisen in the visheshbhaav. The ahambhaav 
(the state as the ‘I’) has arisen in the visheshbhaav that, ‘I am 

 
 
180 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

the only one [present] right now, who else? There is no one 
else besides me. There is certainly no one else apart from me.’ 

Questioner: After the ego has been destroyed, does the 

visheshbhaav persist? 

Dadashri: No, thereafter the visheshbhaav is considered 

to have ended. 

Questioner: So then does it gradually decrease, or does 
the aham (the ‘I’) end on one side as the visheshbhaav ends 
on the other? 

Dadashri:  The  aham  is  first.  The  aham  begins  to  be 
destroyed  from  the  moment  One  attains  the  conviction 
(pratiti) that, ‘The aham is false knowledge.’ From that point 
on,  He  starts  going  towards  the  original  Self  (mool  Atma), 
towards Swabhaav  (the inherently natural  state  as  the Self). 
Instead  of  going  towards  visheshbhaav,  He  starts  going 
towards Swabhaav. 

Questioner:  Do  they  both  balance  each  other,  like  a 
counter  weight?  On  the  one  side,  as  the  conviction  that  the 
ahambhaav  is  wrong  increases,  on  the  other  side  does  the 
visheshbhaav become dull at the same time?  

Dadashri:  However  much  the  ahambhaav  dissolves  is 

the extent to which the visheshbhaav dissolves. 

Questioner:  And  what 

if 

the  ahambhaav  ends 

completely? 

Dadashri:  The  visheshbhaav  ends.  The  Swabhaav 
remains. The individual swabhaav of both persist; the Pudgal 
[Parmanu] remain in the inherent nature as the Pudgal and the 
Self  remains  in  the  inherent  nature  as  the  Self.  They  both 
become exactly the way they were.  

Questioner: So what about this mind, body, and speech 
that remains? The thoughts of the mind that remain, the speech 

 
[1.11] When Vishesh Parinaam Comes to an End… 

181 

that  remains,  this  conduct  that  remains;  all  that  and  the 
visheshbhaav, do they have any correlation? 

Dadashri: They have nothing to do with each other. The 
ego (ahamkaar) itself is the visheshbhaav. The ego meaning 
the ahambhaav, that itself is the visheshbhaav. Where One is 
not, there he does the ahambhaav that, ‘I am all this’, that is 
the  visheshbhaav.  So  when  He  understands  that  this 
ahambhaav  is  something  false  and  the  other  thing  is  true, 
when such conviction is established, that is when the original 
vishesh  parinaam  dissipates  and  thereafter  his  ahambhaav 
begins  to  dissolve.  From  there  on,  the  visheshbhaav 
[parparinaam;  the  effect  of  the  non-Self]  continues  to 
dissolve.  Once  the  ahambhaav  exhausts,  the  visheshbhaav 
ends, and the Swabhaav-bhaav (inherently natural state as the 
Self)  arises.  Until  then,  the  activities  (kriya)  carry  on,  the 
ahambhaav  continues  to  decrease  and  the  Swabhaav-bhaav 
continues  to  increase,  the  ahambhaav  continues  to  decrease 
and the Swabhaav-bhaav continues to increase. Until both do 
not  attain  completion,  this  continues.  On  one  side,  the 
ahambhaav  ends  completely,  and  on  the  other  side,  the 
Swabhaav-bhaav attains completion, such is their correlation. 
On the Akram path, the moment One attains Gnan, the original 
visheshbhaav,  the  one  that  was  arising  due  to  the  coming 
together of the two eternal elements, that comes to an end. But 
the vishesh parinaam of the [original] vishesh parinaam, they 
are parparinaam and they go away incrementally. 

Questioner:  So  does  this  vibhaav  leave  completely  or 

does it leave incrementally? 

incrementally 

Dadashri:  By  vibhaav  coming  to  an  end  it  means  it 
this  Swabhaav  blossoms 
leaves 
incrementally. Meaning that, however much the experience as 
the Self One gains, by that much It blossoms. The Swabhaav 
cannot blossom in just one day. 

and 

 
 
182 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Questioner:  ‘Through  the  awakened  awareness  as  the 
Self, One has reached the top; prevailing only as the Knower 
and Seer of the circumstances.’ 

Dadashri: The vibhaav ended. 

Questioner:  ‘Moksha  has  been  said  to  be  Your 
Swabhaav (inherently natural state as the Self). You have been 
entrapped  by  the  vibhaav.’  ‘As  the  vibhaav  exhausts,  You 
continue  to  blossom  in  Swabhaav  incrementally.’  However 
much of the  Swabhaav arises, do we thereafter refer to that 
vibhaav as Pragnya (the direct liberating light of the Self)? 

Dadashri: Pragnya is not vibhaav. The extent to which 
the visheshbhaav  has decreased and the extent to  which  the 
Swabhaav has arisen, has increased, the One who Knows all 
this is Pragnya. At that time, the One who Knows what the 
Self is, the One Knowing all that is the complete Pragnya. 

Questioner: But even Pragnya is such that It increases 

and decreases, does It not? 

Dadashri:  ‘It’  does  increase  and  decrease,  It  increases 
and  decreases.  ‘It’  becomes  guru-laghu,  because  eventually 
Swabhaav-bhaav  attains  completion  and  ahambhaav  ends; 
that  is  when  Pragnya  Itself  comes  to  an  end.  Until  then,  It 
functions. 

After Keval Gnan There Is No Vibhaav 

Questioner:  These  Tirthankars  and  Kevalis  (the  Ones 
who  have  absolute  Knowledge)  prevail  in  the  awakened 
awareness as the Self (jagruti) in each and every samay (the 
smallest,  most  indivisible  unit  of  Time).  What  kind  of 
awakened  awareness  must  They  have  at  that  time  such  that 
They  are  able  to  keep  Seeing  these  visheshbhaav  arising  in 
every samay as visheshbhaav?  

Dadashri: No, visheshbhaav do not arise at all for Them. 

 
[1.11] When Vishesh Parinaam Comes to an End… 

183 

Questioner:  So  have  They  come 

into  Swabhaav 

completely? 

Dadashri:  ‘They’  have  come  into  Swabhaav,  that  is 

indeed why it does not affect Them. 

Questioner:  What  is  to  be  Seen,  do  They  See  just  the 

pudgal? So then where does Their awakened awareness lie? 

Dadashri: In all the objects to be Known (gneya). 

Questioner: So do They naturally remain as the Knower 

and Seer of the object to be Known? 

Dadashri: Yes, that is all, nothing else. 

‘Absolute’  means  that  thoughts  of  worldly  life  have 
simply stopped! ‘One’ dwells in His own parinaam only! The 
talks of the scientist Gnani are scientific, aren’t they? 

Questioner: They are scientific. 

Dadashri:  Yes,  in  our  scriptures,  people  have  created 
confusion regarding the scientific talks. They have confused 
all this, and they have said whatever was possible to say, and 
then they left it at saying that It [the Self] is inexpressible and 
indescribable.  People  wrote,  ‘‘It’  is  inexpressible  and  It  is 
indescribable…’  Hey  mortal  one,  then  why  do  you  keep 
searching  for  It  in  there?  Why  don’t  you  look  for  It  on  the 
outside! All it is, is a sign board showing, ‘Go there.’ So does 
that mean you have to remain seated at that sign board?  

The vitaraag Lords, those who have become vitaraag in 
India, They knew all these talks; but the vitaraag Lords said 
all that could be said through words, but how could They say 
anything more? How can One describe ‘through words’ that 
which is beyond words; the Self (Atma) is beyond words, It is 
inexpressible and indescribable, how can It be described?  

Questioner: It can’t be. 

 
 
184 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Dadashri:  And  how  can  It  be  described  to  the  world, 
when there are no words at all to do so? So then, how can the 
world understand It? It is not as though this is some play of 
the intellect, is it? Is it possible for the intellect to comprehend 
It? This is a very subtle point. In fact, what ‘we’ are saying is 
at a gross level.  It will take a long time to even explain the 
details of what ‘we’ have Seen. There are simply no words of 
that language, are there! 

Questioner: No, but these scientific words of Yours that 
come forth, they are exact, giving a lot of clarity as they come 
forth. 

Dadashri: That would be so indeed, but that is because 
‘we’  have  Seen  It.  But  even  then,  It  cannot  be  explained 
exactly. Even that, to actually describe what ‘we’ have Seen, 
there are no words for that. In any which way, ‘we’ have to 
seek  out  the  words  and  speak  them.  ‘We’  have  to  find  the 
words to speak so that it can be understood in our language. 
Nevertheless,  this  speech  has  arisen  from  the  vyatirek  guna 
(completely new property).  

Questioner: So, is this speech a property (guna) without 

anger, pride, deceit and greed? 

Dadashri:  No,  no,  it  is  indeed  something  born  out  of 

anger, pride, deceit and greed. 

Questioner: But, it is speech of the highest quality, it is 

the most appropriate speech. 

Dadashri: It is the highest quality speech, yet it has been 
formed  from  this  only.  What  kind  of  speech  is  it?  It  is  not 
relative speech; it is Real-relative speech. 

Questioner: Dada, for us, this is something new that has 
come forth! Yes; there are many such things that one gets to 
hear when he is sitting alone with Dada. 

 
[1.11] When Vishesh Parinaam Comes to an End… 

185 

Dadashri: It is only when the time is right that it comes 
forth.  Otherwise,  it  will  not  come  forth,  will  it!  The 
circumstance  should  be  right,  the  time  should  be  right,  and 
similarly the place should be changing. How can it come forth 
by just staying seated in one place? It will come forth when 
the place changes [satsangs being held in different locations]! 

Questioner: So, the Real-relative speech arises from the 

vyatirek guna, is that so? 

Dadashri: As this is Real-relative, you will not find this 
combination  anywhere  else.  This  is  a  unique  combination. 
This speech, this interpretation, it is all unique, and it is such 
that it pacifies peoples’  intellect, it is  such that the intellect 
becomes at  ease. These answers are Real-relative. Whereas, 
in  the  relative,  the  intellect  gets  excited.  All  that  is  worth 
understanding. 

Questioner:  This  speech  has  originated  from  the  Real-

relative, meaning… 

Dadashri: It is relative, but what kind of relative speech 
is it? The answer is Real-relative. The other kind of speech is 
relative-relative. One is Real-relative, the second is relative, 
and  the  third  is  relative-relative.  These  are  the  three 
connecting levels. Of those, this discussion is at the first level. 
Man cannot reach the first level. If he does, then his speech 
would be a ‘taped’ record. 

Swakshetra Is the Gate to Siddha Kshetra 

Questioner: Dada, You look the same whenever we see 

You. There is no change. Why is that? 

Dadashri: Is this [body] some sort of a flower that it will 
wilt? Actually the absolute Self (Parmatma) in manifest form 
is  seated  within!  Otherwise,  this  [Dada’s  physical  body] 
would  look  decrepit!  Where  the  parbhaav  (the  state  as  the 
non-Self)  has  been  destroyed,  where  constant  awakened 

 
 
186 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

awareness  as  the  Self  prevails,  where  the  subtlest  liking 
(ruchi) towards parbhaav does not remain, even the slightest 
iota of subtlest liking does not remain, then what more does 
He need? 

When parbhaav comes to an end even greater bliss of the 
Self  is  experienced,  so  keep  Your  vision  towards  that  end. 
However much the parbhaav comes to an end, to that extent 
One becomes steady in  Swabhaav;  that is  all.  One needs to 
understand only that much, nothing else is worth doing.  As 
long  as  parbhaav  exists,  parkshetra  (the  realm  of  the  non-
Self) exists for that long. Once parbhaav ceases to exist, One 
remains in Swakshetra (the realm as the Self) for a little while 
and  thereafter  becomes  established  in  Siddha  Kshetra 
(location  at  the  crest  of  the  universe  where  all  absolutely 
liberated  Souls  reside).  Swakshetra  is  indeed  the  gate  to 
Siddha Kshetra! 

So how can one who is trapped become free? The answer 
is if he realizes His own Real form as the Self (Swaroop), then 
he  can  become  free,  and  if  He  goes  to  where  other  eternal 
elements  do  not  exist  at  all,  then  the  other  eternal  elements 
cannot  affect  Him  and  so  He  can  remain  free.  But  here,  as 
everything  is  present,  the  other  eternal  elements  will  not 
refrain from affecting him. Do you understand this point? All 
these discussions are very subtle. 

This is an effect brought on by another eternal element. 
Now,  without  that  effect  coming  to  an  end,  how  can  one 
become free? It is only when One Knows His own Real form 
as the Self and acquires a ‘safe-side’ [safeguard], that He can 
go over there. But because the other eternal elements are not 
present in Siddha Gati (the realm of the absolutely liberated 
Lords; also known as Siddhalok and Siddha Kshetra), He will 
remain there forever in an absolutely liberated state (Siddha 
sthiti). And it is so by natural law, it is not false. Absolutely 
as per the natural law. Just as in the numbers one to hundred, 

 
[1.11] When Vishesh Parinaam Comes to an End… 

187 

forty-eight  is  followed  by  forty-nine,  and  forty-nine  is 
followed  by  fifty.  There  is  not  the  slightest  of  falsehood  in 
that. 

So, after reaching Siddha Kshetra, One’s own form as the 
Self  (Swaswaroop)  doesn’t  leave.  In  order  to  go  to  Siddha 
Kshetra,  if  One  follows  the  Agnas  with  the  Gnan  that  the 
Gnani Purush has given, the light that He has given, and the 
Self  that  He  has  separated  for  One,  then  One  can  remain 
separate.  Therefore,  all  the  karma  come  to  an  end  and  then 
within  one  or  two  lifetimes,  One  will  attain  moksha. 
Thereafter, visheshbhaav will not arise there. 

There  is  only  aakash  (the  eternal  element  of  Space)  in 
alok (the region in the universe where there is only the eternal 
element of Space, and no other eternal element), and in Siddha 
Kshetra  there  are  no  other  objects  to  be  Known,  therefore 
nothing at all remains for the Knower, does it! 

Questioner: If there are no objects to be Known there, 
but don’t You say that after going to Siddha Kshetra, One only 
Knows and Sees. Does One Know and See that which is in 
this lok (universe; plane of existence)? 

Dadashri: That which is of the entire lok. When the two 
eternal elements are close to each other, then vibhaav happens 
to them. In the Siddha Kshetra, they are not close together at 
all! 

There is nothing else at all in Siddhalok, and therefore the 
Self does not have any samipyabhaav (the engrossment that 
arises when the two eternal elements, the Self and inanimate 
matter, are in close proximity). There is absolutely nothing at 
all over there. Whereas here, this is actually lok. In lok, there 
is close proximity with all the eternal elements. Therefore, it 
is because of becoming engrossed in another eternal element 
when  they  come  into  close  proximity  that  the  visheshbhaav 
arises. 

 
 
188 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Questioner: When the pure Soul enters Siddha Kshetra 

in the pure state, then where do those parmanu go?  

Dadashri: Which ones? 

Questioner: Those of the non-Self (achetan). 

Dadashri: They would have all exhausted, only then can 
the Self go, isn’t it! While in the fourteenth gunthana (spiritual 
stages of development), the few [parmanu] that remain, they 
will remain for a while, and once they exhaust, the Self goes 
up  to  Siddha  Kshetra.  Then  dharmastikaya  (the  eternal 
element that supports motion) places the Self up there. 

Questioner:  Thereafter  is  the  Self  never  affected;  can 

nothing ever affect It then? 

Dadashri: There isn’t any saiyog (the coming together of 
the  circumstances  and  the  Self)  at  all  over  there.  It  is  only 
when  the  saiyog  is  present  that  the  visheshbhaav  can  arise. 
When  there  is  no  saiyog  at  all,  then  how  can  there  be  any 
visheshbhaav?  

Questioner: And does that saiyog only  arise when one 

lives in worldly life? 

Dadashri: In this lok.  

Questioner: Vibhaav only arises when one exists in this 

lok. Does it not arise in the other lok? 

Dadashri: What ‘we’ refer to as alok, there is no vibhaav 

there.  

When One attains the awareness of One’s own Self, that 
is when He becomes free. That is when He goes there; where 
the  coming  together  of  other  eternal  elements  does  not 
happen. That is why changes do not occur over there anymore. 
There are no other eternal elements in Siddha Kshetra. All of 
this is in fact a spiritual Science (Vignan)! 



 
[12] 

The Awakened Awareness Towards the ‘I’ 

The Ego Arose in This Way… 

Questioner: Who is the one giving rise to the ego? 

Dadashri: There are six eternal elements in this world. 
Chetan (the Self),  Pudgal  (the eternal  element  of  inanimate 
matter),  gatisahayak  (the  eternal  element  that  supports 
motion),  sthitisahayak  (the  eternal  element  that  supports 
inertia), aakash (the eternal element of Space), and Kaal (the 
eternal element of Time). The Self is flowing across [through 
them]. ‘It’ is simply flowing along that course and due to the 
pressure  arising  from  these  five  eternal  elements,  the 
visheshbhaav arises and then the aham (the ‘I’) arises. As an 
effect  of  that,  this  ego  has  arisen.  It  is  only  scientific 
circumstantial evidence. This is the spiritual Science. 

Questioner: When a jeev (living being; embodied soul) 
came from nigod (the lowest form of life which is not yet in 
worldly  nomenclature),  at  that  time,  it  did  not  have  anger, 
pride,  deceit  and  greed  or  an  ego,  so  then  why  did  the  jeev 
become entrapped? Where did they [the  anger, pride, deceit 
and greed and ego] initially come from? For what reason did 
they emerge? How come there isn’t  a single  embodied soul 
without an ego?  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
190 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Dadashri: The ego is definitely there, anger, pride, deceit 

and greed are definitely there. 

Questioner: Why does the ego exist? 

Dadashri:  The  ego  already  exists  within  each  one;  in 
fact, in nigod there was only complete darkness [ignorance of 
the Self]. 

Questioner:  Ignorance  of  the  Self  (maya).  The  ego 

existed right from the beginning? 

Dadashri: When the Self looked this way [towards the 
relative], worldly life arose, ignorance of the Self and  ‘my-
ness’  (mamata)  arose,  and  when  the  Self  looked  that  way 
[towards  the  Self],  moksha  was  attained.  That  is  where  the 
Real form as the Self (Swaroop) exists. 

Questioner:  So,  agnan  (ignorance  of  the  Self)  didn’t 

exist before? 

Dadashri:  Agnan  was  certainly  there!  It  is  only  when 

Gnan is given, that Gnan can be attained.  

Questioner:  So  then,  did  Gnan  or  agnan  not  exist 

previously? 

Dadashri:  Agnan  does  exist  but  it  is  in  a  subtle  form; 
however, when external circumstances are encountered, that 
is when it becomes apparent, it expresses. 

‘I am Pure Soul’, Is That the Ego? 

Questioner: Even when we speak casually, we say, “My 
self (atma) says such and such,” but we do not say, “I am the 
Self.” So in this, who is ‘the I’ (hu) and who is ‘the Self’? 

Dadashri: ‘The I’ is the ego and ‘the Self’ is the original 

eternal element. 

Questioner: From where did the I begin? 

 
[1.12] The Awakened Awareness Towards the ‘I’ 

191 

Dadashri:  ‘You’  are  already  the  ‘I’  (Hu;  the  original 
Self). The ‘I’ is not to be removed. This ego is to be removed. 

How did the ego come to be? The Self within is already 
pure. Whereas this ego has arisen in  Its presence due to the 
vyatirek guna (a completely new properties of a third entity 
that arises when two eternal elements, the Self and inanimate 
matter, come together). 

Questioner: But is that ego natural? 

Dadashri: There is nothing natural in this whatsoever. In 
fact, these are things that are avasthit (absorbed in the effects 
of  a  temporary  state);  they  are  visheshbhaavi  (taken  on  a 
completely new form). They are not natural eternal elements. 
Natural eternal elements are always permanent, whereas those 
that are unnatural are temporary. 

[With the belief of,] ‘I indeed am the pure Soul,’ all those 
other  [wrong  beliefs]  are  relinquished,  therefore  the  ego 
departs. Until what point can it be considered the ego? As long 
as one is not aware of His own energy, as long as he is not 
aware  of  His  divinity  (aishwarya),  and  he  persistently 
envisions himself to be other things, until then the ego exists; 
it is a vishesh parinaam. If these two [eternal  elements] are 
separated,  then  they  both  become  free  [from  each  other], 
thereafter  nothing  remains  at  all.  However,  it  is  due  to 
samipyabhaav  (the  engrossment  that  arises  when  the  two 
eternal elements, the Self and inanimate matter, are in close 
proximity)  that  the  ego  has  arisen.  This  entire  duration  of 
worldly  life  is  such  that  samipyabhaav  persists  throughout. 
Whereas once One becomes aware of ‘who He really is,’ the 
ego does not remain thereafter. 

Questioner:  But  ‘I  am  pure  Soul’  is  actually  egoism 

(ahamkaar) as well, is it not?  

 
 
192 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Dadashri:  That  cannot  be  considered  as  egoism.  ‘I  am 
pure Soul’ is the awareness of One’s own Self, of One’s own 
vastutva (the Knowledge about what the Self is and what It is 
not). 

Questioner:  We  certainly  have  to  maintain  the  bhaav 

(inner intent) of, ‘I am pure Soul,’ do we not? 

Dadashri:  There  is  no  problem  in  maintaining  such  a 
bhaav.  It  is  a  bhaav  of  one  kind,  but  it  is  not  considered 
egoism.  Egoism  is  claiming  to  be  what  One  is  not;  that  is 
known as egoism. The developing ‘I’ Himself is not that, yet 
he  says,  “I  am  this.”  ‘He’  is  not  a  dehadhaari  (one  who 
possesses a physical body) and yet he says, “I am the one with 
the body.” ‘He’ is not a naamdhaari (the one who possesses a 
name) and yet he claims, “I am Chandubhai. I am a paternal 
uncle, a maternal uncle.” All of that is egoism. 

Questioner: So then, what about when One says, “I am 

pure Soul”; what is that? 

Dadashri: ‘One’ already has the awareness of One’s own 
existence  (astitva),  but  when  One  attains  the  experiential 
awareness  (bhaan)  of  ‘who  I  am’,  that  is  called  One’s  own 
vastutva. To Know ‘who I am’ means to Know [how exactly] 
‘I am the pure Soul’, and the moment the absolute state as the 
Self  (purnatva)  is  attained,  then  even  the  ‘I’  dissipates 
entirely. 

The Blind Ego, and on Top of That, It Has 
Spectacles! 

Questioner:  From  the  relative  viewpoint,  the  I  is 
Chandubhai, and from the Real viewpoint, the ‘I’ is the pure 
Soul; so is that ‘I’ one and the same? Do both have the ‘I’?  

Dadashri: The ‘I’ (Hu) is definitely the pure Soul. Then 
an  illusion  arose  for  It  that,  ‘Is  the  train  moving,  or  am  I 
moving?’ So It felt, ‘I am moving,’ and therefore the ‘I’ turned 

 
[1.12] The Awakened Awareness Towards the ‘I’ 

193 

into  the  ego  of,  ‘I  am  Chandubhai,  I  am  Maganbhai.’ 
Moreover, the ego was made blind, so it is made to wear the 
‘spectacles’  [of  dravyakarma;  subtle  discharge  karma]  on 
account  of  the  karma  brought  forth  from  the  past  life. 
Therefore, it now sees everything with blindfolds on and so it 
says, “It is certainly my wife who betrayed me.” That is what 
it shows him. 

Questioner:  Is  it  because  of  the  ‘spectacles’  that  it 

appears that way? 

Dadashri: Yes. In reality, it is not like that, but it appears 

that way to him because of the ‘spectacles’.  

Questioner: ‘He is doing this; he is indeed the one who 
did  it,’  does  all  of  this  appear  that  way  because  of  the 
‘spectacles’? 

Dadashri:  It  appears  that  way  due  to  the  ‘spectacles’. 
Similarly,  as  the  ego  has  ‘spectacles’,  that  is  why  everyone 
sees things as, ‘This is bad, this is good, etc.’ That is how it 
appears to them. 

For Whom Did the Ego Arise? 

Questioner: But had the ego not existed then how would 
the Self have been discovered? They are somehow related, are 
they not? 

Dadashri:  Whether  it  existed  or  not;  in  fact,  it  is  the 
nature of agnanta (ignorance of the Self) that without it, the 
ego cannot persist whatsoever. As long as agnanta prevailed 
[for ‘us’], even ‘we’ had an ego. 

Questioner: Where did the ego come from and for whom 

did it arise? 

Dadashri: From where it came and when is a different 
thing, but this one who is experiencing (bhogave; suffering) 
things, that is the ego. 

 
 
194 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Questioner: For whom did the ego arise? 

Dadashri: For the one who has the lack of understanding. 

Agnan acquired the ego.  

Questioner: Who has agnan? 

Dadashri: There are two things, agnan and Gnan. Gnan 
refers to the Self and agnan refers to the non-Self (anatma). 
So, the ego arose for it, for agnan. Therefore, it is because this 
ego came to be, that all this has arisen. Even though worries 
and externally-induced problems exist day and night, even if 
one does not like it in worldly life, he has to put up with it, 
doesn’t he? Where can he go? Is there any place that he can 
go? He has to stay put right there itself. So that is indeed why 
he has to keep lying on the bed, even if he can’t fall asleep! 

Questioner: From where did the ego arise? 

Dadashri: The ego is itself agnan, is it not? Agnan and 
Gnan,  they  are  two  different  things.  Say  a  prominent 
businessman  were  to  come  here  right  now.  He  normally 
speaks very well, however if someone were to give him 225ml 
of brandy to drink, then how would he speak? 

Questioner: Due to the circumstance of the brandy, he 

would speak differently. 

Dadashri: [Similarly] It is because these circumstances 
have come together that all this has arisen. That which is in 
the  Real  form  as  Knowledge  (Gnan  swaroop;  the  Self) 
encountered a circumstance and that is why this illusion arose. 
Just as that [drunk] businessman would say, ‘I am the prime 
minister, I am this, I am that…’ 

Questioner: Dada, then where did the Gnan arise from? 

Dadashri: Gnan never arises, does It! Gnan is something 
that is permanent. It is because of external things that agnan 
has  arisen,  just  like  for  the  businessman  who  drank  the 

 
[1.12] The Awakened Awareness Towards the ‘I’ 

195 

alcohol,  due  to  circumstances.  Therefore,  if  Gnan  separates 
from  all 
then  It  would  become 
completely free. 

these  circumstances, 

Questioner: When one makes a bhaav, does that mean 

he has encountered a circumstance with agnan? 

Dadashri: There is  no question about  the  bhaav. He is 
not  encountering  a  circumstance  with  agnan.  Other 
circumstances are being  encountered. He drank the alcohol, 
right? Agnanta is itself the ego. 

Questioner:  Fundamentally,  the  Self  is  illumination 
(prakash), It is full of infinite energy, so where did It acquire 
this ego from? 

Dadashri:  ‘It’  does  not  actually  acquire  it!  Agnanta  is 

itself the ego. 

Questioner: Even if a veil of ignorance were to form over 
It,  what  is  the  problem?  ‘It’  Itself  actually  Knows,  ‘I  am 
illumination,’ does It not!  

Dadashri: Nothing can be gained by that, can it! What 
benefit does the ego gain? As long as the ego does not ‘taste’ 
[experience]  the  sweetness,  it  cannot  say,  “This  is  sugar.” 
Therefore, the ego has to be brought to a final closure once 
and for all, the Self is already settled. 

Who Are We Ourselves? 

The thing is, regardless of your identity at present, what 
are You in reality in that entity? ‘You’ are not this form that 
has  a  name  (naam-roop),  ‘You’  are  not  this  form  that  is 
worldly (vyavahaar-roop), so then what are You really? The 
answer is, however much Gnan (Knowledge of the Self; Real 
Knowledge)  You  have  and  however  much  agnan  (relative 
knowledge; ignorance of the Self) you have, that is precisely 
what  You  are.  ‘You’  encounter  circumstances  according  to 

 
 
196 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

the Gnan You have. If there is agnan, then you will encounter 
circumstances  according 
that.  Circumstances  are 
to 
encountered based on the Gnan or the agnan. 

Questioner:  And  are  karma  bound  in  accordance  with 

that Gnan or agnan? 

Dadashri: Yes, karma are bound in accordance with that, 
and based on them, all these circumstances are encountered. 
The developing ‘I’ (pote) is not this name, it is not this ego, it 
is ‘this’ [a combination of Gnan or agnan]. 

Questioner: Dada, what does this pote mean? 

Dadashri: Gnan or agnan, that is precisely who pote is. 
That is indeed one’s upadaan (level of spiritual development), 
but because this cannot be understood [easily], that is why you 
end up  accepting its  representative,  the  ego [to  be who  you 
are]. This is a very subtle point. Even the saints do not know 
this. Even the Gnanis of the Kramik path do not know this. 

Questioner: Until now, we have been saying that the ego 

does all that. 

Dadashri:  It  is  actually  because  this  gentleman  came, 
that  this  concept  surfaced,  otherwise  such  a  subtle  concept 
would not have surfaced, would it? ‘We’ have indeed stated 
the concept. It is worth understanding this concept, it is subtle. 

So, karma are bound on the basis of Gnan or agnan. Call 
it upadaan, or call it the ego, call it whatever you want, that 
itself is the developing ‘I’. But, in reality, the ego is actually 
separate.  The  ego  can  be  Seen  as  separate,  whereas  the 
developing ‘I’ is actually the Gnan or the agnan, the light or 
the  darkness;  it  is  indeed  based  on  that,  that  the  ego  does 
anything. 

 
[1.12] The Awakened Awareness Towards the ‘I’ 

197 

Questioner: Yes, but what happens when there is Gnan 
and agnan, and there is no ego? Then karma cannot get bound, 
can they? 

Dadashri: The ego would definitely be present.  Where 
Gnan and agnan both exist at the same time, the ego would 
most definitely be present there. 

Questioner: If there is agnan, does that mean that the ego 

exists? 

Dadashri: It most certainly exists. When agnan comes to 
an end, the [charge] ego comes to an end. Until then,  Gnan 
and  agnan  will  remain  together.  That  is  referred  to  as 
kshayopksham (partial annihilation of karma). 

Questioner:  Then,  after  attaining  Gnan,  the  One  that 
becomes the Purush (the Self), which part is It considered to 
be? 

Dadashri:  The  Gnan  is  Itself  the  Purush;  there  is  no 
question of a part in this! Agnan is the prakruti (the relative 
self). The combined form of Gnan and agnan is the prakruti. 
The  Gnan  Itself  is  the  Purush,  It  Itself  is  the  absolute  Self 
(Parmatma).  The  Gnan  Itself  is  the  Self.  The  Gnan  that  is 
Vignan Swaroop (the Real form as Science; the Real form as 
absolute Knowledge; the absolute Self), that is the Self, that 
verily is the absolute Self. 

Questioner:  Now,  this  Gnan  and  agnan,  what  is  the 

beginning for both of them? 

Dadashri:  The  beginning  for  them  both  is  Vignan 
(Science;  absolute  Knowledge).  The  original  Self,  the 
Vignanmay  Atma  (the  Self  that  is  nothing  but  Science;  the 
absolute  Self).  From  It,  the  Gnan  and  the  agnan,  the 
‘sunshine’ and the ‘shade’, the two emerged. 

 
 
198 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

The Birth and Development of the Ego… 

Questioner: We used to believe that the aham (the ‘I’) 

itself was the ahamkaar (ego; egoism). 

Dadashri:  No,  there  is  actually  a  great  difference 

between the ahamkaar and the aham.  

Questioner:  Is  there  a  difference  between  them  too? 
What  is  the  difference  between  them?  Please  explain  it  in 
minute detail! 

Dadashri: The prevalence of the I (hupanu) is the aham, 
and the overt expression of that prevalence of the I [i.e. I am 
Chandubhai] is the ahamkaar. ‘I am the president,’ that is not 
considered as ahamkaar. It is just that people say, “He is an 
egoistic person (ahamkaari),” but actually, he is considered a 
pride-filled person (maani). The ahamkaar is actually where 
no  worldly  things  are  actually  connected  to  it,  rather  the 
developing I just believes ‘I am’ where He does not actually 
exist; that falls under the category of  the ahamkaar. It does 
not extend to other things. And the moment it extends to other 
things, it becomes pride (maan)! When one shows off, ‘I am 
the president,’ and all that, then we can understand that he is 
full of pride. 

Questioner:  What 

is  categorized  under 

‘overt 

expression’? 

Dadashri: It is to speak excessively about the prevalence 
of the I. The I already exists, the aham already exists in belief, 
but to show it off by boisterously saying, “This is right, and 
this is wrong,” that is called ahamkaar. But there is nothing 
else  in  it;  there  is  no  sense  of  ownership  (malikipanu)  in 
anything.  Once  a  sense  of  ownership  arises,  it  means  that 
maan (pride) has arisen. 

Questioner: Please give an example of ahamkaar. 

 
[1.12] The Awakened Awareness Towards the ‘I’ 

199 

Dadashri: There are many examples of ahamkaar, aren’t 

there! 

It is not limited to maan (pride) alone; then as the sense 
of  ownership  gradually  increases,  it  becomes  abhimaan 
(excessive  pride  due  to  material  possessions).  When  it  is 
confined  to  the  body,  he  is  considered  to  be  full  of  pride 
(maani), whereas, ‘This apartment is mine, this is mine,’ that 
[which  includes  ‘my-ness’;  mamata]  is  abhimaan.  Hence, 
from ahamkaar to maani to abhimaani (one having excessive 
pride with ‘my-ness’); all kinds of various phases tend to arise. 

The ahamkaar is not considered to be the same as what 
people understand it to be. What people refer to as ahamkaar 
is actually maan. Ahamkaar exists only in belief, it is not at 
the level of gnan (knowledge; conduct in this context). When 
it comes into gnan, it is called maan. Where One is not a doer, 
there he believes, ‘I am the one who is doing it,’ that is known 
as ahamkaar. 

Questioner: Now, explain that with an example. 

Dadashri:  When  we  say,  “I  came  downstairs,”  now  in 
coming down from upstairs, the developing I himself did not 
come down at all, it is in fact this body that came down. It is 
the  body  that  came  down,  but  the  developing  I  believes,  ‘I 
came.’ To have such a belief is ahamkaar, and then when he 
verbalizes it by saying, “I came,” that is called maan. Whereas 
people consider verbalizing “I came” to be the ahamkaar. 

Questioner:  Ahampanu  (the  sense  of  ‘I  am’)  and 
potapanu (‘I-ness’ that has come into conduct), are these two 
the same or different?  

Dadashri: There is a big difference.  

Questioner: What is the difference? 

 
 
200 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Dadashri:  The  aham  simply  prevails  in  one’s  belief, 
whereas  potapanu  prevails  in  conduct.  That  which  is  in 
conduct  persists  whereas  that  which  is  in  belief  goes  away. 
The hupanu (the prevalence of the I) that is in one’s belief, 
that  goes  away,  but  that  [prevalence  of  the  I]  which  is  in 
conduct persists, does it not!  

Questioner: Do our mahatmas have potapanu? 

Dadashri:  They  have  tremendous  potapanu.  The  one 

who is naïve has less of it. 

Questioner: Please explain more about the ‘I’! 

Dadashri:  The  ‘I’  is  adjustable  everywhere.  If  the  ‘I’ 
believes, ‘I am a son-in-law,’ then one becomes a son-in-law. 
If the ‘I’ believes, ‘I am a father-in-law,’ then one becomes 
that,  and  if  the  ‘I’  believes,  ‘I  am  the  pure  Soul,’  then  One 
even becomes a pure Soul. And if the ‘I’ believes, ‘I am the 
pudgal,’ then one even becomes the pudgal. 

The ‘I’ is adjustable everywhere, what a wonderful thing 
It  is!  Just  look,  the  ‘I’  was  Chandubhai  just  now,  and  two 
hours later, the ‘I’ became a pure Soul. The very same ‘I’. ‘It’ 
has not been cleansed or washed yet; It is the very same as It 
was  before.  Just  imagine,  that  ‘I’  does  not  become  impure 
either,  does  It!  The  ‘I’  that  existed  as  a  butcher,  becomes  a 
pure Soul. Before, he was a butcher, and if at that time you 
were  to  ask  him,  “Who  are  you?”  He  would  say,  “I  am  a 
butcher.” So after Gnan, the ‘I’ becomes a pure Soul. ‘It’ does 
not have to be cleansed or washed at all, whereas these people 
keep taking a bath daily and yet they have not improved at all. 
It is worth giving a thought to that ‘I’. What is It like! ‘It’ is 
adjustable everywhere! 

There is no overhauling needed in the ‘I’. There is not a 
single  spare  part  in  It.  ‘Its’  state  never  changes  throughout 
infinite lifetimes. 

 
[1.12] The Awakened Awareness Towards the ‘I’ 

201 

The  potapanu  cannot  adjust  everywhere.  The  potapanu 
can only adjust to  itself, it does not  adjust to  anything else. 
Therefore,  the  ‘I’  and  the  potapanu  are  two  very  different 
things.  ‘We’  do  not  have  any  potapanu.  For  You,  after 
attaining this Gnan, the potapanu has started to leave now. 

Questioner: Dada, in the state of ignorance of the Self, 
when we were doing religious worshipping, at that time, the 
potapanu was believed to be one’s attribute, wasn’t it? So then 
how could one ever become free from it? 

Dadashri: Who is the one who had believed that? 

Questioner: One himself.  

Dadashri: That one himself, that itself is the potapanu. 
The ego is the I [in belief], it is not the potapanu [the ‘I-ness’ 
that has come into conduct]. One himself is the potapanu. If a 
police  officer  were  to  ask  me,  “Why  did  you  turn  the  car 
around the wrong way like that? What is your name?” Then 
‘we’ would tell him, “Write, I am A. M. Patel.” [If he were to 
ask,] “Where are you from?” Then ‘we’ would say, “I am from 
Bhadran.” “What  cast  are  you  from?” [‘We’ would say,] “I 
am  a  Patel.”  What  else  would  ‘we’  say?  My  ‘I’  became 
adjustable, didn’t it! At present, the ‘I’ can also be considered 
as Dada Bhagwan, in certain situations where it is appropriate 
to say so; otherwise, ‘we’ can also say, “I am A.M. Patel.” Or 
else, ‘we’ even say, “I am a contractor.” And when ‘we’ go to 
Hiraba’s  [A.M.  Patel’s  wife]  village,  when  people  call  me 
‘uncle’, at that time, “I am an uncle.” Yes, that is fine. Right? 
Some  say  ‘uncle’,  some  say  ‘brother-in-law’,  some  say 
‘maternal  uncle’,  some  say  ‘paternal  uncle’.  Everywhere 
adjustable; how amazing this ‘I’ must be! And if one himself 
was  such  that  he  could  become  adjustable  then  it  would  be 
very good, wouldn’t it? However, one keeps doing potapanu 
everywhere else.  

 
 
202 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

As a result of not understanding the ‘I’, false attributions 
are made from this ‘I’ into other things. That is why the vikalp 
(the belief that ‘I am Chandubhai’ and all the relative ‘I-ness’ 
that stems from it) arose. So the entire solid entity of vikalp is 
called  potapanu.  The  entire  solid  entity  of  vikalp  came 
together. Vikalp from this side to vikalp from that side, that is 
all potapanu. In that, however less the vikalp one does, that 
many are reduced and however more the vikalp one does, they 
increase  by  that  much.  Nevertheless,  that  solid  entity 
continues to persist. 

That solid entity is very problematic. That solid entity is 
of  the  potapanu.  All  those  sitting  with  you  in  places  of 
worship, those doing devotional worship, their solid entities 
are  very  large.  In  general,  ‘we’  should  not  engage  in 
backbiting, but if you were to look at their solid entities, they 
are  very  large.  ‘We’  simply  cannot  imagine  when  they  will 
ever get rid of that solid entity.  

Questioner:  Dada,  is  it  because  of  the  ‘I’  that  one 
becomes  entrenched  in  this  potapanu?  The  ‘I’  that  You 
mentioned,  is  it  the  ‘I’  that  makes  one  have  this  belief  of 
potapanu? 

Dadashri: The ‘I’ is actually a different thing. When the 
‘I’ is falsely attributed in any place, when the ‘I’ is used in the 
wrong place, at that time, potapanu arises.  

Questioner: Is that when the vikalp arises? 

Dadashri: Yes, if the ‘I’ is used in another place [in the 
relative], then it is  vikalp. But  what  does the ‘I’ have to do 
with this? The ‘I’ remains completely pure. If you bring the 
‘I’ here [in the pure Soul] then It will stay here again. The ‘I’ 
is not of any concern to us. However, the potapanu that arises 
from the ‘I’, that is of concern to us. Did potapanu arise for 
you or not? 

 
[1.12] The Awakened Awareness Towards the ‘I’ 

203 

Questioner: Dada, please explain by giving an example! 
I  did  not  understand  how  the  ‘I’  and  the  potapanu  are 
different?  

Dadashri:  What  ‘we’  have  given  is  already  like  an 
example, is it not! The ‘I’ means… When you falsely attribute 
the ‘I’ in anything or in any place, such as, ‘I am this and I am 
that,’ even though You are not really that, yet you say, “I am 
this,”  thus,  a  false  attribution  is  made,  so  the  potapanu  has 
arisen  from  that.  Now  the  [original]  ‘I’  is  not  doing  this. 
Rather  as  the  false  attribution  of,  ‘I  am  this’  was  done, 
therefore the potapanu arises for the one who makes the false 
attribution. 

Questioner: Who makes this false attribution? 

Dadashri: The very one that is within. It is referred to as 
agnan  (ignorance  of  the  Self).  Now  what  is  agnan?  It  is 
something that arose even before the [vibhaavik] ‘I’; the very 
thing that makes the ‘I’ falsely attribute to something else is 
agnan,  and  if  the  ‘I’  lets  go  of  the  false  attribution  then 
everything  dissipates.  If  the  false  attribution  of  the  ‘I’  is 
relinquished,  the  ‘I’  becomes  the  pure  Soul;  and  for  such  a 
One, the ego comes to an end. 

Questioner: Did it  go  away because of  attaining Gnan 

from Dada? 

Dadashri: When the ‘I’ relinquishes the false attribution, 

then it is easy, isn’t it! How is that something difficult?  

Questioner:  So  when  You  impart  Gnan  to  us,  do  You 

make us relinquish that false attribution? 

Dadashri: Only then will it leave, otherwise it will not 
leave, will it! Thereafter when ‘we’ ask, “Hey, are You pure 
Soul  or  are  you  Chandubhai?”  Then  you  reply,  “I  am  pure 
Soul.”  At  that  time,  if  you  were  to  stick  to,  “I  am 
Chandubhai,” then ‘we’ would know that the false attribution 

 
 
204 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

has not left. But at that time, everyone says, “I am pure Soul,” 
isn’t it? 

Questioner:  Yes.  So  Dada,  the  false  attribution  of 
infinite lives comes to an end within an hour and the ‘I’ comes 
back to where It was, in Its original place. So that ‘I’ is very 
flexible, isn’t it! 

Dadashri: The ‘I’ is in fact adjustable everywhere. 

Questioner: But if, once and for all, the ‘I’ gets adjusted 
into ‘I am pure Soul,’ then It does not waver. ‘It’ then becomes 
established in that. 

Dadashri: ‘It’ would definitely do so, thereafter. 

Questioner: Why is that? 

Dadashri:  The  moment  the  ‘I’  gets  established  in  Its 
original  place,  that  would  certainly  happen,  wouldn’t  it! 
People also want to establish It in Its original place, but that 
does not happen, does it! How can It become established? It 
is actually when all the demerit karma are destroyed that One 
becomes  as  light  as  a  flower.  When  the  demerit  karma  are 
destroyed, that is when the ‘I’ gets established in Its original 
place. In fact, then It experiences the coolness! That is why It 
says, “I will only stay here.” Now It will not leave.  

Questioner: Dada, that hupanu (the prevalence of the I) 
separates  when  You  impart  Gnan,  but  the  Hupanu  (the 
prevalence of the ‘I’) that remains, does It persist according to 
how much jagruti (the awakened awareness as the Self) there 
is, or does It persist according to how little jagruti there is? 
Does jagruti actually play a role in that?  

Dadashri:  It  is  definitely  jagruti  at  work!  Due  to 
bhaavnidra (lack of awareness of who the Self is), the hupanu 
(prevalence of the I) is exercised in the wrong place and once 

 
[1.12] The Awakened Awareness Towards the ‘I’ 

205 

the  jagruti  arises,  the  Hupanu  (the  prevalence  of  the  ‘I’)  is 
exercised in the correct place, due to the jagruti.  

The Conduct of the ‘I’ Changes This Way… 

Questioner: Who becomes engrossed? 

Dadashri: The ego. Jagruti is what prevents You from 
becoming  engrossed  in  the  ego.  That  is  the  very  thing  that 
keeps  You  separate.  The  original  Self  does  not  become 
engrossed. It is because of ajagruti (lack of awareness as the 
Self) that You, the developing ‘I’, become engrossed, isn’t it! 

Questioner:  After  attaining  Gnan,  if  the  jagruti  is 
present,  then  does  the  pratishthit  atma  (relative  self)  not 
become engrossed? 

Dadashri:  Thereafter,  the  experiential  awareness  that 
prevails is a type of jagruti, and once the jagruti comes into 
Its inherent nature as the Self, then It [the awakened Self] will 
not become engrossed. It is simply because of the force of the 
karma from the past life that It becomes displaced. Once the 
force  decreases,  It  will  not  become  engrossed.  Whatever 
discharge there is, all of it is akin to ‘water in the tank,’ it is 
the filled stock of karma.  

Questioner: ‘You’ said that ‘once the jagruti arises, You 
do not become engrossed’; so how are we to understand that? 

Dadashri: What do you understand by the term ‘You’? 
‘It’  does  not  refer  to  the  original  Self.  The  ‘I’  still  persists. 
Before, the I used to exist as the pratishthit atma, now the ‘I’ 
exists as jagruti. That ‘I’ does not become engrossed. 

Questioner:  In  the  statement  ‘You  do  not  become 
engrossed,’ does that mean that the pratishthit atma does not 
become engrossed?  

Dadashri: No, who does ‘You’ refer to? ‘It’ refers to the 
One who is present at that time. The One who is in Your belief 

 
 
206 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

at that time. ‘You’ have not yet become the absolute pure Soul 
completely. Moreover, the original [charge] pratishthit atma 
has  gone.  Now,  there  is  the  awakened  Self  (jagrat  Atma), 
meaning the jagruti. The jagruti, that is the One that no longer 
becomes engrossed in the discharge effects that are arising. 

Questioner: After attaining Gnan, the pratishthit atma is 

still present; so what does it do? What is its state thereafter? 

Dadashri: It does not have any state thereafter; it is in the 
form  of  discharge,  meaning  that  it  is  nishchetan  chetan  (an 
energized  entity  that  appears  to  be  living  but  is  lifeless).  It 
remains  in  the  form  as  a  gneya  (an  object  to  be  Known). 
Thereafter, no matter what the gneya does or does not do, the 
jagruti is the Knower (Gnata) of that. 

Before  attaining  Gnan,  we  had  believed  the  pratishthit 
atma  itself  to  be  the  Knower.  After  attaining  Gnan,  that 
pratishthit atma itself becomes the object to be Known, and at 
the  same  time,  the  jagruti  Itself  becomes  the  Knower. 
Meaning  that,  previously,  the  I  was  established  as  the 
pratishthit  atma,  and  now  the  ‘I’  becomes  established  as 
jagruti, and the original Self continues to prevail even beyond 
that. The ‘I’ has become established as jagruti. When the ‘I’ 
becomes completely aware, It becomes one with the original 
Self.  As  long  as  It  is  not  completely  aware,  It  remains 
separate;  until  then  It  prevails  as the  Antaratma  (an interim 
state of the Self, beginning with the conviction of, ‘I am pure 
Soul’ and ending with the absolute experience). In that state, 
It has become free from the bahirmukhi pad (the state in which 
the I prevails as ‘I am Chandubhai’). When the interim state 
as the Self completes, the state as the absolute Self is attained.  

The Location of the ‘I’ in the Body 

Questioner:  The  ‘I’  which  everyone  refers  to,  where 

must It be residing? 

 
[1.12] The Awakened Awareness Towards the ‘I’ 

207 

Dadashri: In the entire body, wherever one can feel the 
prick of a needle, that is where the ‘I’ resides. With your eyes 
closed, you should touch the needle to yourself like this and 
then observe. Wherever the needle is felt, one automatically 
utters a sound, “Ooh,” doesn’t he? 

Questioner: He does. 

Dadashri: Therefore, that is where the ‘I’ resides. ‘It’ is 
not in the hair. When a person gets a haircut, he does not utter 
any sound. When he cut his nails, he does not utter a sound. 
Whenever the ‘I’ utters, “Ooh, ooh, ooh,” in all those places, 
the ‘I’ is indeed there. Where would the ‘I’ of a driver of a 
huge bus be? 

Questioner: In his body. 

Dadashri: No; [it would be spread] throughout the entire 
bus.  While  he  is  driving,  he  will  not  collide  into  anything 
whatsoever from that side. His I takes on the form of the entire 
bus. Wherever he is likely to collide, the I will not allow him 
to collide at all. Even if it is a large, hundred-foot long bus, 
the I will not let a collision occur, the mortal one. How would 
he know whether it will collide into that corner or not? It is 
because of the hupanu (prevalence of the I). He extends his 
hupanu that much; if he is sitting in the bus, it will extend to 
the length of the bus, and if he is in the car, then it will extend 
to  the length  of the  car. It  spreads  to  such an extent  that he 
does  not  collide  into  anything  whatsoever,  anywhere. 
Otherwise, truly speaking, it is only in this, only in this body. 
Wherever  you  touch  a  needle  to  the  body,  would  you  not 
realize it? Do you have to be informed? Even if a person is 
elderly, he will still realize it. 

Questioner:  Everyone  would  realize  it.  It  had  been 
mentioned, “The I has gone to sleep, the I is seeing, the I is 
listening”; so is that I the Self? Is it the prakruti? What is it? 

 
 
208 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Dadashri:  That  is  actually  the  ego.  [Wherever  there  is 

reference to ‘I am doing’, that is the ego.] 

Questioner: Yes, but does that fall under the category of 

the Self. 

Dadashri: No. 

Questioner: Then, is it in the prakruti? 

Dadashri: Hmm…  

Questioner: Doesn’t doership belong to the I? Is it really 

not the doer? 

Dadashri: It is really not the doer, it has simply come to 
believe, ‘I am doing this.’ Just as when a train is moving at the 
station,  one feels,  ‘I  am  moving.’ That  is  what  he comes to 
believe.  When  the  train  goes  this  way,  then  it  appears  as 
though he, himself, is moving the other way. So then, would 
you not realize that he has become disoriented. In the same 
way, it [the ego] believes that. 

Questioner:  So,  in  every  action,  it  [the  ego]  is  simply 
believing  that  to  be  the  case.  So  the  Seer  is  separate,  yet  it 
believes, ‘I am seeing.’ 

Dadashri: It [the ego] is not the Seer at all. 

Questioner: It isn’t? 

Dadashri: It is completely blind indeed. 

Questioner: Did You not just say, that very ‘I’, that ‘I’ 

indeed is the one seeing, the ‘I’ is the one hearing. 

Dadashri:  No,  it  is  actually  the  prakruti  within  that 
knows;  the  Self’s  energy  of  Knowing  has  entered  into  the 
prakruti;  Its  power  has  entered  into  the  prakruti.  By  filling 
power into something, One’s own power does not decrease, 
yet that other thing becomes filled with power.  

 
[1.12] The Awakened Awareness Towards the ‘I’ 

209 

Questioner:  So,  the  Self’s  power  has  entered  into  the 
prakruti? Is it based on that, that it can understand all of this 
Gnan?  Is  it  because  of  that,  that  this  knowing  and  hearing 
became possible? 

Dadashri: The intellect is able to know all of this on the 
basis of that [power filled in the prakruti]. Moreover, the ego 
says, ‘I am knowing it, and I am also the one doing it.’ Just 
say one of the two, that way, it can at least be solved. 

Questioner: I didn’t quite understand that. Did the power 

of the Self enter into the prakruti? 

Dadashri: When he says, “I am doing it,” at that time, 
the I is not really egoism.  It is the Self’s  vishesh parinaam. 
The ‘I’ is actually the Self, but now, it [the I as the vishesh 
parinaam] believes that, ‘I am this.’ One thing has arisen in 
the  middle,  outside  the  Self;  it  is  called  visheshbhaav  (an 
assumed identification with that which is not One’s own).  

Questioner: This I, is it a visheshbhaav entirely? 

Dadashri:  The  visheshbhaav  has  arisen.  It  is  not  the 
inherently natural state as the Self (Swabhaav-bhaav), rather 
a visheshbhaav that has come about. 

Questioner:  So  then  how  is  power  rendered  to  the 

prakruti? 

Dadashri:  [By  saying,]  “I  am  doing  it,”  power  is 
rendered to the prakruti. [By saying,] “I know it,” power is 
rendered to the prakruti. Whatever the ego says, due to that, 
power keeps on being rendered into the prakruti. 

Questioner: Does that mean that the I is able to do bhaav 

(inner intent; belief)? 

Dadashri: Bhaav is precisely what it does, isn’t it! It does 

a visheshbhaav. 

Questioner: Is it itself a visheshbhaav as well? 

 
 
210 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Dadashri: Yes. It is indeed a visheshbhaav. [Of the first 

level, the original visheshbhaav.] 

Questioner:  And 

furthermore, 

it 

does  more 

visheshbhaav? 

Dadashri: It keeps on doing visheshbhaav. [The second 

level of visheshbhaav.] 

Questioner: Is the prakruti due to that? 

Dadashri: The prakruti has arisen due to that. Moreover, 
that  prakruti  became  filled  with  life  energy.  It  is  actually 
nishchetan chetan, it is not really Chetan (the Self; having the 
property  to  Know  and  See),  however  it  appears  to  be  like 
Chetan. 

Questioner: An egoistic prakruti and a vikaari prakruti 
(a prakruti full of sexual impulses and passions), they seem to 
be  parallel  in  a  way;  meaning  that  there  is  some  belief  of 
doership  in  the  former  one,  and  there  is  some  belief  of 
pleasure  in  the  latter  one.  So,  is  there  actually  some 
connection like that or not? 

Dadashri: Egoism means that someone else is  doing it 
and  one  claims,  “I  am  doing  it.”  Even  in  things  where  ‘it 
happens’, there too one believes, ‘I am doing it’, that is all; 
that precisely is egoism! And in the case of sexuality (vikaar), 
it is when such circumstances come together that one becomes 
vikaari  (one  who  indulges  in  sexual  impulses).  If  favorable 
circumstances  [those  that  lead  towards  becoming  free  from 
sexual impulses] come together, then at that time, he becomes 
nirvikaari  (one  who  is  free  from  sexual  impulses  and 
passions).  Therefore,  it  does  not  have  anything  to  do  with 
being vikaari or nirvikaari. 

Questioner:  So,  is  it  the  developing  I  itself  that  either 

becomes vikaari or nirvikaari? 

 
[1.12] The Awakened Awareness Towards the ‘I’ 

211 

Dadashri: He himself will even say, “My inherent nature 
is to indulge in sexuality,” and he can also become free from 
sexual impulses, provided the circumstances come together. 

If  the  ego  were  not  present,  then  nothing  at  all  would 
happen. This sexuality would not arise at all, and furthermore, 
freedom  from  sexual  impulses  would  not  arise  either.  It  is 
because the ego is present that this happens. 

Questioner:  Isn’t  the  original  Self  free  from  sexual 

impulses indeed? 

Dadashri: There is no sexuality in It whatsoever. ‘It’ is 
beyond all attractions (anaasakt). ‘It’ is indeed without desire 
(akaami), It is indeed beyond all attractions, It is indeed free 
from sexual impulses! [If the ‘I’ envisions,] ‘I am pure Soul,’ 
then  It  becomes  pure,  whereas  if  it  envisions,  ‘I  am  full  of 
sexual 
the 
envisioning,]  ‘I  am  free  from  sexual  impulses,’  it  becomes 
nirvikaari. 
‘I  am  celibate 
the  envisioning,] 
(brahmachari),’ it becomes celibate. 

it  becomes  vikaari.  [With 

impulses’ 

[With 

then 

Questioner: He becomes whatever he envisions. 

Dadashri:  Yes,  whatever  he  envisions,  that  is  what  he 

becomes!  

That Is When the Ego Entrusts the Throne to the 
Original Self  

Questioner:  Who  is  the  One  that  Knows,  ‘I  am  pure 

Soul’? 

Dadashri: It is the ego that Knows that. ‘The ego’ means 
it is the ‘I’ that Knows. The one who says ‘I am Chandubhai,’ 
the Knowledge of that Chandubhai [the I that is sitting on the 
seat of Chandubhai, that ego] has changed, and has become ‘I 
am pure Soul’. And the ego is in fact always together with the 
intellect. Otherwise, the ego actually does not have any Gnan 

 
 
212 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

(Knowledge) at all. The intellect alone cannot Know the Self. 
The  intellect  can  Know  It  only  when  it  is  together  with  the 
ego. 

Questioner:  Does  that  mean  that  it  is  the  ego  that 

recognizes the Self? 

Dadashri: Then who else does it happen to? There is no 

other entity in this. 

Questioner: When Dada gives Gnan, He takes away the 

ego at that time. So who remains as the Knower after that? 

Dadashri: What use is there of that ego now? The degree 
to  which  the  ego  is  necessary,  the  discharge  ego,  that 
discharge [ego] will carry on with its work. What is left now? 
Without the ego, no worldly action can be carried out at all. 
However,  that  is  your  discharge  ego,  that  other,  the  charge 
ego, has come to an end. 

Questioner: ‘You’ had said, “Who is it that Knows the 
Self? It is the ego who recognizes the Self.” However, You 
have  taken  the  ego  away,  so  then  does  the  Knower  even 
remain?  

Dadashri:  No,  it  is  because  of  the  Knowing  that  took 
place on that day [the day of attaining Gnan], that It [the ‘I’] 
has become free of everything. ‘It’ became free after Knowing 
all that. ‘It’ let go of the prevalence of the I [in Chandubhai] 
and  It also  let  go of the ownership, and the [discharge]  ego 
became  separate  as  well.  Everything  ended  from  that  day 
onwards.  The  ‘living’  [charge]  ego  came  to  an  end;  this 
discharge ego remains. 

Questioner: So then who Knows this ego? 

Dadashri: The Self Knows it. When ‘we’ place this line 
of demarcation, the ego [meaning the I with Chandubhai; the 
charge ego] along with  the intellect  understands, ‘This  very 

 
[1.12] The Awakened Awareness Towards the ‘I’ 

213 

existence of mine is wrong.’ And it realizes what the pure Soul 
is, ‘This is indeed what It is.’ The One in the original state is 
the  pure  Soul,  therefore,  it  [the  charge  ego]  entrusts  [the 
throne]  to  It.  After  that,  everything  separates.  Where  can 
misunderstanding  arise  in  this?  It  [the  charge  ego]  would 
indeed realize the pure Soul, wouldn’t it; [however,] it cannot 
realize It just like that. All the scriptures have been placed for 
an  agnani  (one  who  has  not  attained  Self-realization)  to 
realize the Self. It is, in fact, when ‘we’ impart this Gnan that 
the pure Soul  is  realized, otherwise how can  It  be realized? 
And the day it [the charge ego] realizes It, its very existence 
comes  to  an  end.  When  the  [charge]  ego,  along  with  the 
intellect,  realizes  the  Self,  that  is  when  its  very  existence 
comes  to  an  end.  Hence,  this  statement  is  not  to  be  used 
outside [only to be used by those who follow Akram Vignan]. 
Be  careful, if this  discussion about  the Self is  used outside, 
then it will create a fiasco for people outside [those who do 
not  follow  Akram  Vignan].  You  are  right  in  saying,  “The 
[charge] ego realizes the Self,” but if you say that outside, then 
people  will  think,  ‘These  people  are  on  the  wrong  path.’ 
Otherwise, the ego can never realize the Self. It is only when 
the Gnani Purush imparts Gnan, at that time, the [charge] ego 
itself understands, ‘This is not my form. ‘This’ is indeed what 
the  Real  form  is;  I  am  in  the  middle,  unnecessarily.’  It 
dissolves its own existence. 

Questioner:  Thereafter,  that  Self  Sees  the  ego,  does  It 

not? 

Dadashri: The [original] Self was Seeing the ego right 
from the beginning. Even for worldly people (those without 
Self-realization), the Self is Seeing, ‘My ego has increased, it 
has  decreased.’  Would  It  not  Know  that?  Who  must  be  the 
Knower of that? ‘My intellect has increased, my intellect has 
gone astray, it is on the wrong track,’ who is the Knower of 
all that? 

 
 
214 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Questioner:  ‘The  ego  realizes  the  Self,’  I  didn’t  quite 

understand that properly. 

Dadashri: It does not realize It at all. This discussion is 
just in our [Akram Vignan] language, in Reality. This is not in 
terms of the language being used outside. When ‘we’ impart 
Gnan, it is only then that the [charge] ego leaves, until then it 
does not depart. When ‘we’ impart Gnan, then in that Gnan it 
realizes that, ‘What is my scope in this? What is is that belongs 
to  me  and  what  is  my  scope  in  this?’  At  that  time,  it 
understands the line of demarcation in this that, ‘This indeed 
is the pure Soul,’ and so it lets go of the prevalence of the I on 
its own. The ego itself lets go of it. It recognizes the Self that, 
‘This  indeed  is  the  Self;  This  indeed  is  the  [Real]  owner.’ 
Therefore, it immediately entrusts It the keys. Just as when the 
actual president comes, doesn’t the interim president have to 
relinquish his position? Or does the interim president create 
an uproar? 

Questioner: But the ego leaves because Gnan is attained, 

isn’t it? 

Dadashri:  The  Gnan  is  not  attained  first.  The  [charge] 
ego leaves first and then the Gnan is attained. What causes the 
ego to leave? It leaves due to the power and influence of the 
viraat Swaroop (the Real form of the One whose own ego has 
exhausted  and  can  take  away  the  ego  of  others;  the  Akram 
Gnani). 

Questioner:  When  the  ego  leaves,  You  said  that  the 
developing  ‘I’  becomes  established  as  the  original  Self. 
Therefore, we can also say that It had become separated from 
the original Self, can we not? 

Dadashri:  No.  There  is  nothing  like,  ‘It  had  become 
separate.’ It is not as though It had become separate and then 
It became bound. All these wrong beliefs which used to exist, 
they have dissolved. 

 
[1.12] The Awakened Awareness Towards the ‘I’ 

215 

Questioner: But Dada, can we not say that it was because 
the  ego  had  arisen,  that  this  One  [the  Self]  had  remained 
covered with veils?  

Dadashri: Yes, but one would not get any benefit of such 

a Self, would he! 

Questioner: Yes, that is because the veil of the ego was 
there  over  It,  otherwise,  It  Itself  is  indeed  prevailing  as 
illumination (prakash). 

Dadashri:  Yes,  it’s  like  this.  Just  because  a  [drunken] 
businessman  says,  “I  am  the  President  of  India,”  would  his 
state as a businessman actually go away? 

Questioner:  No,  it  would  not  go  away.  ‘You’  said,  “It 
[the ego] is  the one who suffers, and it is  also  the one who 
wants to go to moksha.” 

Dadashri:  Then  who  else  besides  it,  is  going  to  go? 

Moksha can only occur for the one who is bound! 

Questioner:  But  in  a  way,  if  we  look  at  it,  it  does  not 

have any existence whatsoever. 

Dadashri: It does not have an existence. Nevertheless, it 

has taken on the belief of the existence, hasn’t it? 

Questioner: So it is the one who realizes, ‘This is not my 

existence,’ that is why it attains moksha. 

Dadashri: All of this has dissipated for it. 

Questioner:  Who  is  the  one  that  has  taken  on  that 

[existence]? 

Dadashri: The [charge] ego, who else? The one together 

with the intellect. 

Questioner: Together with the intellect? 

 
 
216 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Dadashri: Meaning, that [charge] ego is always together 
with the entire antahkaran (the mind, intellect, chit and ego 
complex); it is not alone. 

Questioner:  So,  the  ego  that  is  together  with  the 
antahkaran,  that  precisely  is  the  one  who  has  the  desire  to 
realize the Self, right? 

Dadashri: No. No one has any desire to realize the Self. 
Why would it have the desire to realize the Self? What does it 
need the Self for? 

Questioner: You said that it wants to go to moksha. 

Dadashri: It wants happiness. [It wonders,] ‘Where did I 
lose my happiness?’ The answer is, ‘You have not lost it. Keep 
on  coming  here.’  Doesn’t  the  ego  say,  “I  have  become  so 
miserable.” 

Questioner: But then the ego is not actually going to go 

there [to moksha]. 

Dadashri: No, it is not going to go. When it [the charge 
ego] dissipates, it means that everything is comprised in that. 
The beliefs, the wrong beliefs that existed, they go away. 

Questioner: Even this illusion of pain and pleasure has 

arisen. 

Dadashri: We just have this illusion, that’s all. There is 
nothing else at all. It is an illusion; nonetheless, it is a relative 
truth. There are no worries in  a complete illusion. This  is  a 
relative truth. In an illusion, you would have a lot of fear and 
everything  would  appear  wrong;  all  that  would  happen,  but 
there would be no worries. Worries have arisen because you 
have believed this relative [truth] to be the [Real] truth. 

Questioner:  All  this  is  believed  to  be  ‘mine’,  is  that 

why… 

Dadashri: Imagine how concretely one has believed that! 

 
[1.12] The Awakened Awareness Towards the ‘I’ 

217 

What Belief? Whose Belief? 

After attaining Gnan, the developing ‘I’ has now acquired 
samyak drashti (the right belief of ‘I am pure Soul’). Before 
the developing  I had mithya drashti (the wrong belief of, ‘I 
am Chandubhai’). When these wrong beliefs are ‘fractured’, 
the  right  belief  gets  established.  The  right  belief  refers  to 
samyak  Darshan.  So  then,  the  belief  that,  ‘I  am  not 
Chandubhai, I am the pure Soul,’ becomes established. Both 
beliefs are of the ego itself. Through the first [wrong] belief, 
the developing I was seeing the objects to be Seen (drashya), 
the  worldly  things.  Whereas,  through  this  [right]  belief,  the 
developing  ‘I’  Sees  the  Self  (Chetan).  The  Self  is  the  Seer 
(Drashta),  whereas  everything  else  is  an  object  to  be  Seen. 
The  Self  has  two  properties,  that  of  Knowing  [being  the 
Knower] and Seeing [being the Seer]. 

Questioner:  Drashti  (seeing;  having  a  belief)  is  a 

function of the Seer isn’t it? 

Dadashri: No. 

Questioner: Then what is drashti? 

Dadashri: The ego is the one who has the drashti. The 
Self  does  not  have  any  drashti.  The  Self  naturally  and 
spontaneously continues to See everything within; everything 
gets  illuminated  within!  Everything  simply  gets  illuminated 
within the Self! 

Questioner: Then who is the Knower of the Self? Who 

is the one that attains the Knowledge of the Self?  

Dadashri:  That  [right]  belief  arises  for  the  ego. 
Previously,  it  had  the  wrong  belief,  but  instead  of  that,  it 
experienced  more  bliss  in  ‘this’  [the  belief  of  ‘I  am  pure 
Soul’], that is why that ego gradually starts to dissolve into the 
pure Soul. The moment the ego becomes pure, it dissolves into 
the pure Soul, that is all! Just like, when a piece of sugar is 

 
 
218 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

placed in oil it will not dissolve, but if it is placed in the water, 
it will dissolve; that is how this is. Therefore, once the belief 
3  of,  ‘I  am  pure  Soul’  is  attained,  everything  begins  to 
dissolve. Until then, the ego remains.  

That Is Not the Ego, but Rather the ‘I’! 

Questioner: So, it is indeed the ego that is speaking, isn’t 
it? The very one that had been going in the wrong direction, 
is that the very one that now says, ‘I am pure Soul’? 

Dadashri:  The  ‘I’;  the  ‘I’  [the  awakened  Self;  jagrat 
Atma] is saying this, the ego is not saying it. The ego remains 
separate. The ego does not say that. The ‘I’; the ‘I’ is indeed 
One’s own Real form as the Self (Swaroop). Now, the original 
Self  Itself  will  not  say  this,  however,  this  process  has  now 
turned  towards  becoming  It.  When  we  say  the  words  ‘pure 
Soul,’ even that pure Soul is Itself not a word, this process has 
now  turned  towards  becoming  It.  As  Your  faith  (shraddha) 
has  changed,  as  Your  belief  has  changed,  the  veils  of 
ignorance  over  the  Self  gradually  get  destroyed.  This  is 
something which destroys the veils. But the existence of the 
‘I’, ‘I am pure Soul’, that verily is the experiential awareness 
as the Self (bhaan). A change has occurred in the experiential 
awareness. If it were the ego, then it would not be of any use 
at  all,  would  it?  It  is  a  different  thing  altogether.  This  has 
nothing to do with the ego. In fact, it is only after the [charge] 
ego dissolves that One attains  the  experiential  awareness  of 
His own Real form as the Self. This is all considered to belong 
to the interim state. 

Questioner: Which one is the ego that  went the wrong 
way,  the  sajeev  (living;  charge)  one  or  the  nirjeev  (lifeless; 
discharge) one? 

3 For further reference on ‘belief’ refer Aptavani 3, 8, and 13. 

 
                                                 
[1.12] The Awakened Awareness Towards the ‘I’ 

219 

Dadashri: The living one. 

Questioner: ‘The wrong way’, meaning how can the ego 

go the wrong way? 

Dadashri: The moment  the developing  ‘I’ realizes that 
fact that it has  gone the  wrong way, when someone  tells  it, 
“This is the wrong path,” from the moment he turns around, 
the  ego  is  considered  lifeless.  Thereafter  the  developing  ‘I’ 
returns [to the original Self] through the lifeless ego.  

Questioner:  Ok.  But  the  returning  is  [through]  the 

lifeless ego? 

Dadashri:  When  someone  cautions  the  developing  ‘I’ 
saying, “This is the wrong path, why are you here? Hey mortal 
one, this will lead you there.” That is when he says, “Really, 
is that so?” Then, It turns back. So the developing ‘I’ will have 
to return through the lifeless ego. At that time, the living ego 
is not present. Then it comes across these other people, who 
then ask him, “Why are you returning? Go that way.” So then, 
it ends up going that way. Therefore, the ego becomes living 
once again. 

Questioner: How can one demarcate whether the ego is 

living or lifeless? 

Dadashri: You can know from the direction it is headed? 

Questioner: The one that goes the wrong way and takes 

a beating, is that considered the living one? 

Dadashri: It is indeed living. That ego is living indeed. 
When does it become lifeless? It  is  when someone tells  the 
developing  ‘I’,  “This  is  not  the [right] way. You  are on the 
wrong  path.  Your  belief  is  wrong.  Turn  back.”  When  It 
returns, at that time It is proceeding through the lifeless ego. 
Before, it was proceeding [in the wrong direction] through the 
living ego, whereas when It returns, it is through the lifeless 

 
 
220 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

ego. Even if It walks back 700 miles, it is through the lifeless 
ego. 

The Real Is of Use, the Relative Is to be Discharged... 

Questioner: Can the lifeless (nirjeev) ego be referred to 

as the purified ego (shuddha ahamkaar)? 

Dadashri: Yes, it can be referred to as the purified ego. 
The only difference between the two is that the purified ego 
[on the Kramik path] does not have any parmanu in it. There 
are no parmanu of anger, pride, deceit and greed, attachment 
or abhorrence in  it.  It has  been made pure by  getting rid of 
each  and  every  parmanu.  All  the  parmanu  have  been 
removed. And this  ‘removal’ is  itself the entire  experiment. 
Upon continuous removal of all the parmanu, the purified ego 
remains, which then merges into the Self. And the purified ego 
that remains is indeed lifeless. If you think about it, then even 
in this lifeless ego [specifically for those on the Akram path], 
all those parmanu are still there. 

Questioner:  The  parmanu  of  anger,  pride,  deceit  and 

greed, right? 

Dadashri:  Yes,  because  we  have  attained  this  [Self-

realization] along the way, haven’t we? 

Questioner: So, by subtracting the ‘my’, by separating 

the ‘my’, is the ‘I’ that remains referred to as the ego? 

Dadashri: That ‘I’ remains as the ‘I’, and when that ‘I’ 
is with ‘my’, it is referred to as the ego. If the ‘my’ does not 
get  mixed  with  the  ‘I’,  then  the  ‘I’  is  already  egoless 
(nirahamkaar),  It  is  considered  the  Self.  When  not  even  a 
single  iota  of  parmanu  of  ‘my’  remains,  then  that  is 
considered the Self. Otherwise, the ‘I’ with ‘my’ is known as 
the ego. 

 
[1.12] The Awakened Awareness Towards the ‘I’ 

221 

Questioner: ‘You’ have mentioned in an Aptasutra (an 
aphorism  procured  from  Dadashri’s  speech)  that,  on  the 
Kramik path, one has to keep purifying the ego, developing it 
to  a  state  whereby  It,  Itself,  becomes  the  form  as  God  [the 
absolute Self]. The ego, Itself, becomes God. 

Dadashri:  The  ego  becomes  purified.  The  unnatural 
characteristics  (vikruti)  that  were  in  the  ego  have  been 
removed entirely. Which unnatural characteristics? That is to 
say,  the  weaknesses  of  anger,  pride,  deceit  and  greed, 
attachment and abhorrence. Once each of those parmanu are 
removed,  the  purified  ego  remains.  When  the  ego  becomes 
purified, It becomes like the pure Soul. However, that is only 
when  the  ego  becomes  absolutely  purified.  Until  then,  it  is 
ninety percent pure and ten percent impure. 

Questioner: Dada, You said that the purified ego merges, 

when the Self and it merges, so who merges with whom? 

Dadashri:  No  one  merges  with  anyone.  The  ego  has 
become purified, and by becoming purified, it means that Its 
inherent nature matches the inherent nature of the Self. Their 
inherent natures have become one and the same. And as long 
as there is impure chetan (worldly-interacting self), as long as 
there is vibhaav, the inherent natures do not match. If there is 
a ten percent impurity and a ninety percent purity, even then 
it will not do. Until then, the Gnani [on the Kramik path] will 
say, “I am separate, and you, the disciple, are separate.” Until 
then, the Gnani may even become irritated. 

Questioner:  Yes,  but  You  say  that  the  ego  becomes 
purified, but it actually becomes Real from the relative. That 
has not been clarified at all. 

Dadashri: No, but once the ego becomes purified, then 
the  inherent  natures  of  the  two,  the  pure  Soul  and  the 
[purified] ego, match each other. This is because only the ‘I’ 
remains. Nothing else remains, that is a wonder, isn’t it! 

 
 
222 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Questioner: Does the ‘I’ remain at the ‘final step’ on the 

Kramik path? 

Dadashri: Only the ‘I’ remains. 

Questioner:  Now,  that  ‘I’  dissolves,  [but]  It  does  not 

dissolve on Its own, does It? 

Dadashri:  No,  but  where  indeed  would  the  ‘I’  sit?  ‘It’ 

becomes established in the pure Soul.  

Questioner:  Yes,  It  becomes  established  in  the  pure 
Soul; but doesn’t It need someone to explain to It that, as this 
‘I’ is established in another place, that is the reason why it has 
not met the pure Soul? 

Dadashri:  As  long  as  there  is  the  slightest  bit  of  other 
parmanu  in  the  ‘I’,  until  then  the  ‘I’  is  established  outside. 
And the moment the parmanu have been dissolved, once they 
have  discharged  (galan),  the  ‘I’  will  indeed  become 
established within [the Self], that itself is moksha, that indeed 
is the final lifetime. That is known as charam sharir (the final 
body  that  a  living  being  has  before  attaining  ultimate 
liberation). That body is such that it will not get cut even if 
one tries to do so. 

On  the  Kramik  path,  the  ego  exists  right  till  the  final 
lifetime. But what is that ego like? As the ego keeps getting 
purified  over  time,  the  parmanu  of  greed  go  away,  the 
parmanu of pride go away, the parmanu of anger go away, the 
parmanu of crookedness go away, the parmanu of deceit, all 
the parmanu keep going away… then finally, the completely 
pure ‘I’ that remains, that and the pure Soul, the two become 
one on their own; automatically. And that is called the Kramik 
path. 

There are three things in everyone; the prakruti (non-Self 
complex),  the  ahamkaar  (egoism)  and  the  pure  Soul 
(Shuddhatma). For You [mahatmas], the [living, charge] ego 

 
[1.12] The Awakened Awareness Towards the ‘I’ 

223 

has  been  eradicated.  Now  only  two  things  remain  for  You. 
One is the prakruti and the other is the pure Soul. 

Questioner: Now, this prakruti will discharge with the 
same  bhaav  (inner  intent;  belief)  that  it  was  ‘colored’ 
[charged], so does the ‘I’ not exist at that time? 

Dadashri: That is an effect, isn’t it! 

Questioner: Is it only the effects that remain?  

Dadashri: Yes. 

Questioner: So, is there no need for the ‘I’ in that? 

Dadashri: There is no need for the ‘I’. There is no need 
for anything in the effect. So the ‘I’ is indeed there, but it is in 
the form of an effect, it is in the form of discharge. 

Questioner: So, is the ‘I’ present for only as long as is 

necessary for the actions of the prakruti to come to an end? 

Dadashri: Yes, for just that long. 

Questioner: So, that prakruti will end if its signature is 

present, is that how it is?  

Dadashri:  No,  in  whatever  way 

the  drama  was 
‘rehearsed’ [charged in the past life], that is how it will have 
to be ‘acted out’ here. That drama had been ‘rehearsed’ in the 
state as a doer (kartabhaav), so it will have to played out in 
the same way, in the state as the sufferer (bhoktabhaav). Only 
then will the [discharge] ego become pure. It is the very same 
drama;  however,  one  is  in  the  state  as  the  sufferer.  By 
‘sufferer’, we mean that the ego is definitely present, but it is 
in discharge [form]; whereas, by ‘doer’ we mean that the ego 
is present, but it is in charge form. 

The I Remains in the Form of a Discharge Effect 

Questioner: Is it just the ‘I’ that has become the Knower 
and Seer in this? At present, It has acquired the awareness that 

 
 
224 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

‘I  am  actually  the  pure  Soul,’  then  is  it  that  very  ‘I’  who 
prevails in the Knower and Seer state? 

Dadashri: That is Pragnya (the direct liberating light of 

the Self).  

Questioner: So where is the ‘I’ at that time? 

Dadashri: The ‘I’ is in discharge karma. 

Questioner: Did the ‘I’ remain only in discharge karma? 

Dadashri: Yes. There is no problem with the ‘I’. There 
is an existence of the ‘I’, is there not? What is the problem in 
talking about the existence which is actually present? The ‘I’ 
speaks of Its own existence as, “I am the pure Soul.” Whereas, 
the former one [the charge ego] believes his existence to be 
where it actually is not. Where He Himself does not exist, he 
says, “I am Chandubhai.” How can You be Chandubhai? He 
will say, “My mother named me that.” Oh mortal one, your 
mother may have named you, as it has been given in writing! 
However, your mother may have asked a priest, “What should 
I  name  this  child?”  Everything  is  without  substance  in  the 
world. 

Attachment or abhorrence are not going to arise for You. 
That  no  longer  arises  for  You,  so  then  what  more  do  You 
need? If You delve deeper into it, it will be like scrubbing the 
bottom of a storage vessel and stirring up a thick layer of dirt 
[your efforts will be in vain]. After You have Known a little, 
it is not worth delving too deep into it. 

Questioner: Dada, so that [discharge] I is entirely in the 
form of an effect, isn’t it? So then, whose ‘effective’ form is 
it? 

Dadashri: It is the effect of the instillation (pratishtha) 
done in the past life. ‘I did this.’ It is the ‘effective’ [such that 
it takes on the effect and gives result] form of the pudgal. 

 
[1.12] The Awakened Awareness Towards the ‘I’ 

225 

Questioner: Then who was the doer in the past life? 

Dadashri: It is the very same I [the charge I]. 

Questioner: Yes, so that is a different one, isn’t it! 

Dadashri:  No,  it  lives  to  the  extent  where  it  brings 

another one [I] to life, and then it leaves. 

Questioner:  So  then,  what  is  the  connection  between 

Gnan-Darshan and the [discharge] I? 

Dadashri: None whatsoever. 

Questioner: None  whatsoever? Then wasn’t  it referred 
to as the wrong belief. It was referred to as belief, the wrong 
belief. 

Dadashri: The belief is referred to as Darshan.  

Questioner: Yes. So, the I arises from the wrong belief, 

isn’t that what You had said? 

Dadashri:  The  I  [of  the  charge  pratishthit  atma]  has 
arisen due to the [vibhaavik; charge] I indeed. [Therefore, it 
does not have a direct connection with Darshan].  

Questioner: The I [of the discharge pratishthit atma] has 

arisen due to the [vibhaavik; charge] I; how is that? 

Dadashri: The [charge] I brings another [discharge] I to 
life before it dies. It gives birth to the next one and then it dies. 

Questioner: Please clarify that a bit. What does it mean 

by, ‘It gives birth to the next one and then it itself leaves’? 

Dadashri:  This  one  [the  I  of  the  charging  pratishthit 
atma] keeps on doing the instillation (pratishtha). It keeps on 
feeding it [the discharge I for the next life]. It is sculpting its 
own ‘statue’. Then at the time of death, it immediately gives 
birth to the next one [the discharge I for the next life]. And 
then that other one starts functioning.  

 
 
226 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Questioner: So, is it the same one that remains for the 
duration of one lifetime, or does it arise and then come to an 
end during every situation (avastha)? ‘You’ had said that, it 
does the pratishtha, meaning it brings to life another one, and 
then it leaves; so, does that happen during every situation or 
is it the same one that lasts for the entire lifetime? 

Dadashri: The very same one for the entire lifetime. 

Questioner: There is only one, and for the next life… 

Dadashri:  That  is  a  different  one.  Then  that  one  also 

remains the very same one for the entire lifetime. 

Questioner: So, when You impart Gnan, does the effect 

reach it or whom does the effect of the Gnan reach?  

Dadashri: The pudgal [the charge I]. 

Questioner: Meaning that, the one that was giving life to 

another, does that one leave? 

Dadashri: It leaves; the moment the wrong belief leaves, 
it leaves. It becomes ‘alive’ due to the wrong belief. When the 
wrong belief goes away, it stops ‘living’. 

Questioner:  So  does  that  mean  that  ‘the  I  becomes 

‘alive’ due to the wrong belief’? 

Dadashri:  That  is  indeed  why  this  worldly  life  is 
persisting, due to the wrong belief! So not just one I, many I’s. 

Questioner: So that means that the I and Darshan have a 

connection, right? 

Dadashri: No connection at all. 

Questioner: Isn’t the I persisting due to the wrong belief 
(mithya darshan)! If it is not like that, then how is it? Then 
what is the reality about the I? 

Dadashri: It is a wrong belief. 

 
[1.12] The Awakened Awareness Towards the ‘I’ 

227 

Questioner: Because of a change in the former [wrong] 
belief, the  I seems  to  have dissolved.  In any situation, the  I 
[normally] happens to arise, whereas with the change in the 
belief, the I appears as if it has dissolved.  

Dadashri:  That  is  because,  when  the  right  belief  is 
established,  it  [the  charge  I]  goes  away.  Due  to  the  wrong 
belief, the I keeps arising constantly. [Darshan is a permanent 
property of the Self, whereas the [wrong] belief has arisen for 
the aham (the ‘I’) and that is temporary; that is why there is 
no relation between the two.] 

Questioner: Okay. 

Dadashri: Say you go to sleep at night, and if you had 
read  a  book  in  the  afternoon.  Suppose  you  had  read  about 
ghosts in the afternoon, and you are sleeping alone at night. 
Now, in the adjoining room if you were to hear the sound of 
cups  clinking  together,  you  would  immediately  wonder, 
‘There  is  no  one  in  that  room;  what  could  that  be…’ 
Immediately,  the  fear  of  a  ghost  would  seep  in.  Until  what 
time…. how long would it last? 

Questioner: Until the morning. Until day break. 

Dadashri:  It  would  remain  until  the  morning,  until  an 
explanation is found. Once the right belief is established, ‘No, 
this is a farce, there is nothing here,’ only then will it leave. In 
the  same  way,  due  to  this  wrong  belief,  the  effect  of  the 
‘ghost’  indeed  keeps  carrying  on  and  on.  Imagine,  after  so 
many lifetimes, that effect has now gone away for You [due 
to receiving this Gnan]. 

The One Who Comes to Recognize the I Becomes 
God 

Questioner: ‘You’ had once stated that, “If One were to 
recognize the ego then that can make Him God [the absolute 
Self].” So do we have to recognize the ego?  

 
 
228 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Dadashri: If One recognizes the ego then it is more than 

enough, isn’t it! No one can recognize the ego, can they!  

Questioner: I did not understand that. What does it mean 

to recognize the ego?  

Dadashri: ‘To recognize the ego’ means to recognize the 
entire pudgal (non-Self complex). If One really recognizes the 
one who is saying, “I”; if he has recognized the entire pudgal, 
then He has indeed become God!  

Questioner: That  I, meaning the entire  pudgal is to  be 

recognized, is that so?  

Dadashri: ‘The I’ precisely means the entire pudgal. The 
I does not refer to anything else. Therefore, this entire pudgal 
belongs  to  the  ego  alone.  The  One  who  recognizes  the  ego 
attains salvation. Everyone in fact exhibits egoism, but they 
do not recognize the ego, do they! 

Questioner: In this, what is the ego and who is the One 

who recognizes it? 

Dadashri: The One who recognizes it is verily God. 

Questioner: So now, the ego has been said to be in the 
form  as  the  pudgal,  and  moreover,  that  same  ego  becomes 
God too. 

Dadashri:  As  that  ego  continues  to  become  more  and 
more purified, when it becomes the [absolutely] purified ego, 
at that time, this God and ‘it’ both become one. The purified 
ego is Itself the pure Soul. The impure ego is the jeevatma (the 
self that possesses karma).  

Questioner:  Is  it  after  One  recognizes  the  form  of  the 

ego, that One goes towards the pure? 

Dadashri: Yes, of course, only then! But even then, One 
cannot recognize it completely. If it is recognized completely, 
One would become God. 

 
[1.12] The Awakened Awareness Towards the ‘I’ 

229 

Questioner: Now You said that the ego is the form as the 
pudgal, so then how can it become pure from that? How does 
it move towards purity from impurity?  

Dadashri: What is its bhajana (worship; to go nearer and 
nearer through the mind, speech and actions to that which is 
being worshipped) regarding? If the bhajana is of that which 
is pure then it becomes pure. If the bhajana is of ‘I am pure 
Soul,’ then it becomes pure. Or else if the bhajana is, ‘I am a 
king,’ then it becomes a king.  

The one who does the bhajana is none other than the ego. 
As  long  as  it  does  the  bhajana  of  the  impure,  it  becomes 
impure like this. If it does the bhajana of that which is pure, 
then  It  becomes  pure  like  that.  It  becomes  whatever  it 
envisions. How can the one who is stealing all day long do the 
bhajana of the pure Soul? His bhajana would continuously be 
of, ‘I am a thief indeed,’ wouldn’t it? And he would definitely 
become a thief.  

Questioner:  So,  does  that  mean  that  whatever  worldly 
interaction  one  does,  one  would  definitely  be  doing  the 
bhajana of that only?  

Dadashri:  The  bhajana  is  entirely  just  towards  the 
relative.  Depending  on  what  his  bhajana  is,  his  worldly 
interaction will be in accordance with that only, and whatever 
his worldly interaction is, his bhajana will be in accordance 
with  that.  It  is  only in  the last life after attaining  Gnan that 
both, the worldly interaction and the bhajana, differ. [When 
One  realizes 
that]  ‘The  relative  (vyavahaar;  worldly 
interaction) is useless and the Real (Nishchay; the Self) is of 
use,’  that  is  when  the  bhajana  will  go  towards,  ‘Now,  the 
worldly interaction needs to be settled once and for all.’ 

Questioner:  Then  who  is  the  one  surrendering  the 

relative? 

 
 
230 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Dadashri:  The  one  surrendering  is  this  very  same 
pudgal. It is the one who wants to merge, who else? The very 
same pudgal. 

You have to understand one thing, that your  vyavahaar 
atma  (worldly-interacting  self)  is  trying  to  join  with  the 
original  Self  (mool  Atma).  The  fundamental  thing  here  is, 
chetan  (the  worldly-interacting  self)  wants  to  merge  with 
Chetan (the original Self), and pudgal (discharging parmanu 
in this context) wants to merge with the Pudgal [Parmanu]. 

Do not contemplate too much on this. Do not delve deep 
into this; otherwise, all such madness will arise from within. 
For once, why don’t You simply follow only that which You 
have been told to follow!  

The One Searching for Liberation and the 
Embodiment of Liberation 

The original Self is the Self, always. The pure Soul is the 
original Self. But that other self [the developing I] progresses 
higher by continuing to develop, by continuing to become free 
from the veils of ignorance (avaran), whilst the original Self 
remains together with it at all times. 

Questioner: The I that arose from ignorance versus the 
original ‘I’, they have nothing to do with each other, do they? 

Dadashri:  They  have  nothing  to  do  with  one  another. 
However, the ‘I’ is indeed the ‘I’. The ‘I’ has not ‘fit’ [been 
established] here and it has ‘fit’ in another place. 

Questioner: But in the state of ignorance, the one who 
says, “I am doing it,” it is not the original ‘I’ who is saying 
that, is it? 

Dadashri: In that case, one definitely believes himself to 
be the original ‘I’, that, ‘I indeed am this.’ Therefore, when he 

 
[1.12] The Awakened Awareness Towards the ‘I’ 

231 

attains the experiential awareness of, ‘I am not that,’ that is 
when it [the charge ego] goes away. 

Questioner:  The  I  that  exists  in  the  state  of  ignorance 

believes, ‘I am doing it.’ That is not the original ‘I’, is it? 

Dadashri: No, from where can one bring the original ‘I’? 
It can never be the original ‘I’, can it? This is in fact the I that 
has arisen due to illusion. 

Questioner: Yes, it is the I that has arisen due to illusion. 
That is precisely why it is said that this I that has arisen due to 
illusion has taken the place of the original ‘I’. 

Dadashri: No, it is not that it has taken Its place. Initially, 
that I had entered into ‘I am Chandubhai,’ that is the problem. 
‘We’ are telling you this in order to ‘fracture’ that I. The I with 
the [wrong] beliefs goes away from there and the [awakened] 
‘I’ establishes in the [original] ‘I’. 

Questioner: Dada, don’t people on the Kramik path say 
that  the  Self  who  has  been  deluded  by  the  ego  is  the  one 
saying, “I am the doer.”? In reality, It is not the doer. It is in 
fact the aham (the ‘I’) that is saying this. Ignorance is saying 
that, the Self is not saying that. 

Dadashri:  It 
everything, isn’t it! 

is 

indeed 

ignorance 

that 

is  saying 

There are only two things here, there is no third thing at 
all. There is the one who was searching for liberation and the 
other  one  is  God,  the  One  who  is  the  embodiment  of 
liberation. 



 
 
 
Section 2 
Dravya – Guna – Paryay! 
[1] 

The Terminology Regarding Dravya-
Guna-Paryay!  

What Is Dravya? 

Questioner:  So  Dada,  what  does  the  term  ‘dravya’ 
mean? In the natural sense, what is the spiritual meaning of 
the term ‘dravya’? 

Dadashri:  The  meaning  of  ‘dravya’  is  eternal  element 
(vastu).  So,  there  are  six  eternal  elements  in  this  world,  of 
which,  the  Self  is  one  eternal  element.  In  reference  to  this 
entire Gnan, the term ‘dravya’ that is mentioned here refers to 
these  six  eternal  elements.  That  which  is  inclusive  of 
properties  (guna)  and phases  (paryay) is  considered to  be a 
dravya (eternal element). 

Questioner:  In  the  worldly  language,  doesn’t  a  drayva 
actually  have  gunadharma  (intrinsic  properties  that  have  a 
specific function)? 

Dadashri: The things that you are referring to as dravya, 
they are temporary (anitya) things, whereas this term ‘dravya’ 
is used for that which is eternal (nitya). Amongst those eternal 
elements,  which  one  has  form  (roopi)?  There  is  only  one 
eternal element (tattva), the one that is made of anu (atoms) 
indivisible  and 
and  Parmanu 

smallest,  most 

(the 

 
 
 
 
 
[2.1] The Terminology Regarding Dravya-Guna-Paryay! 

233 

indestructible  particle  of  inanimate  matter).  Everything  that 
we  can  see  with  our  eyes  belongs  to  only  that  one  eternal 
element. We cannot see the other eternal  elements, yet they 
are indeed hidden within. That is why ‘we’ refer to them as 
‘dravya’. 

What  is  included in dravya (the  elemental matter of an 
eternal  element);  do  you  know?  The  inherent  nature 
(swabhaav) of the eternal element and the properties (guna) 
of  the  eternal  element,  these  two  fall  under  dravya;  and 
everything else falls under paryay (phases). So, even the Self 
has phases. 

Questioner:  ‘The  elemental  matter,  properties,  and 
phases [of one eternal element] are not connected to the other 
eternal elements, however they cannot be separated [from the 
same  eternal  element].’  (‘Dravya-guna-paryayna  anyatva 
chhe pn pruthaktva nathi, bija dravyo saathe.’) Please explain 
this statement. 

Dadashri: They are disconnected from the other eternal 
elements;  there  is  absolutely  no  connection.  One  eternal 
element  neither  helps  another  eternal  element,  nor  does  it 
harm it.  

Questioner: And does the term ‘pruthaktva’ mean that it 

cannot be divided into parts? 

Dadashri:  No,  the  term  ‘pruthaktva’  (non-separability) 
is in reference to the elemental matter, properties, and phases; 
they do not have any separation amongst themselves. Whereas 
the term ‘anyatva’ (disconnection) is in reference to the other 
eternal  elements.  An  eternal  element  cannot  exist  without 
phases, and a phase cannot exist without an eternal element. 
When can it be called an eternal element? It can only be called 
an  eternal  element  when  it  has  properties  and  phases.  Only 
then  can  it  be  considered  an  eternal  element.  This  term 

 
234 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

‘pruthaktva’  has been used to  convey  that they do not  have 
any separation with each other. 

Any  eternal  element,  even  the  Pudgal  [Parmanu]  is 
inclusive of properties and phases too. And that which does 
not have properties and phases cannot be an eternal element 
at all. If phases do not exist, then properties cannot exist. If 
properties do not exist, then it cannot be an eternal element. 
And if properties exist, then phases should exist. As the sun 
has this property known as light (prakash), it means the rays 
[the phases] do exist. The rays may change but the light will 
remain. 

Questioner: Yes, that is true. Now I understand, Dada. 

Dadashri: And when the properties are functioning, they 
are  referred  to  as  phases.  [In  this  example,]  The  sun  is 
considered  an  eternal  element  (dravya;  vastu).  Light  is 
considered a property and the rays which project outward are 
considered the phases. Those phases get destroyed, whereas 
the property does not get destroyed, and the eternal element 
(vastu) does not get destroyed. 

Questioner: There cannot be any eternal element without 

properties and phases, can there? 

Dadashri: It cannot be a permanent eternal element.  

Questioner:  And  can  temporary  things  be  without 

properties and phases? 

Dadashri: 
contradictory, isn’t it! 

In 

temporary 

things, 

everything 

is 

Questioner:  But  they  also  have  properties  and  phases, 

don’t they? 

Dadashri:  Their  properties  are  not  permanent.  What  is 
considered to be a property? If it is permanent, then it can be 
referred  to  as  a  property.  However,  these  temporary  things, 

 
[2.1] The Terminology Regarding Dravya-Guna-Paryay! 

235 

themselves, do not last forever; why bother about them? What 
are considered to be properties? They are those which remain 
permanently, they constantly remain with the eternal element 
(anvay  guna),  they  last  forever.  In  fact,  when  something  is 
itself  not  permanent,  then  how  can  it  have  any  property? 
Nevertheless,  we  can  say,  “These  are  the  temporary  states 
(avastha) [of a thing].” They cannot be called phases. Phases 
are a very subtle thing, whereas the temporary states are overt. 
Just as an agnani (one who has not attained Self-realization) 
can  understand,  ‘My  temporary  state  has  changed.’  That  is 
also a form of a phase, but it is an overt form. 

The Difference Between a Phase and a Temporary 
State 

Questioner: What is the meaning of the term ‘phase’? 

Dadashri:  What  these  people  refer  to  as  ‘phase’  is  a 
different thing, and what the term ‘phase’ actually means is an 
altogether different thing. The term ‘phase’ is something that 
humans cannot understand! Humans can understand the term 
‘a temporary state’. 

Questioner: Call it a temporary state, or call it a phase; 

aren’t they both synonymous terms? 

Dadashri: They are not the same; they are different. A 
phase is a very different thing. It is in fact because the present-
day  people  have  not  understood  this,  that  they  consider  a 
phase and a temporary state to be the same, but a phase is a 
very different thing. That is a task for the Gnani Purush, it is 
not a task for anyone else. 

Amidst  the  temporary  state  that  we  can  see,  the 
completely smallest temporary state within that is known as a 
phase. A phase cannot be divided any further. 

Questioner: That which is an eternal element by the Real 

viewpoint, is it the doer of the phases?  

 
236 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Dadashri: No one is the doer. A phase means, just as the 
sun itself does not have to do anything to project its rays, it 
happens  naturally,  on  its  own.  Similarly,  a  phase  arises 
naturally. Therefore, no one has to do anything; no one is the 
doer. 

The  knowledge  regarding  the  temporary  states  is 
destructible  (nashvant).  Real  Knowledge  is  indestructible 
(avinashi). Just as the sun exists and it has rays, similarly, the 
Self  exists,  and  It  also  has  It’s  ‘rays’;  those  are  the  phases. 
This is in fact a very subtle point. 

Questioner:  Through  which  energy  do  the  temporary 

states of an eternal element change? 

Dadashri: Through the eternal element of Time; as the 

time changes, the temporary states keep on changing. 

The  Real  eternal  element  is  not  to  be  compared  with 
anything, only that can be referred to as an eternal element. 
To arise and to remain for a specific duration of time, and then 
to  come  to  an  end,  that  is  the  inherent  nature  of  temporary 
states. All human beings can only see the temporary states of 
the eternal elements. Apart from an absolute Gnani Purush, 
there is no one in this world who can See the eternal elements. 
Right now, ‘we’ Know all the eternal elements. ‘We’ Know 
absolutism, meaning ‘we’ Know keval. 

In actuality, the term ‘phase’ cannot be used in any other 
way, nevertheless, people do use it. The term ‘phase’ applies 
only to permanent things. [People believe] The term ‘phase’ 
is  synonymous to  the term  ‘temporary  state’, and so people 
have started to use the term ‘temporary state’ freely. 

Questioner: What is the difference between a phase and 

a temporary state; please give an example of it! 

Dadashri:  There  is  as  much  of  a  difference  as  there  is 
between  an  hour  and  a  split  second.  There  is  indeed  a 

 
[2.1] The Terminology Regarding Dravya-Guna-Paryay! 

237 

difference between the two. When referring to the final state, 
do  we  say  hours?  No,  here  in  worldly  interactions,  a  split 
second is considered as a final state. A phase is something as 
subtle as that. Nevertheless, there is no overtness like a split 
second, there is nothing gross in a phase. 

A temporary state can be seen through the eyes; it can be 
experienced; it is all at  a gross level. Whereas a phase is in 
fact very subtle. Take for example the night, night has phases 
which continue to change from samay to samay (the smallest, 
most  indivisible  unit  of  Time),  nevertheless,  it  appears  the 
same as before to us. At night, the phases are indeed going to 
keep  changing.  Even  for  all  people,  day  and  night,  all  their 
phases continue to  change, but  Chandubhai  appears just the 
same to us. Then, when he becomes old, we say, “Yes, now 
he has become old.” Hey you, he was indeed aging, he was 
becoming old all this time [old age is considered a temporary 
state].  Therefore,  there  is  this  much  difference  between  a 
temporary state and a phase. 

It so happened in one village. There were two brothers; 
the  younger  brother  lived  on  the  first  floor  and  the  older 
brother lived on the ground floor. Moreover, they had divided 
the property on the ground floor for sheltering their buffaloes, 
‘This  is  my  place,  and  this  is  your  place  to  shelter  the 
buffaloes.’ Now, the [younger brother’s] buffalo  had a calf, 
but  where  could  it be sheltered?  It  would freeze  to  death  at 
night  [if  left  outside].  Furthermore,  the  older  brother  would 
not  let  the  younger  brother  tie  his  calf  on  the  ground  floor 
[inside his house]. So then, the younger brother’s wife would 
have to pick up the calf and carry it upstairs every day. Now, 
she  kept  seeing  the  same  phase,  that  of  the  calf.  However, 
even though it had become a big female buffalo, she was still 
carrying it. As it had been becoming bigger gradually, she had 
not  realized  this  at  all.  It  appeared  the  very  same  to  her. 

 
238 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

However,  there  was  a  constant  change  happening  in  the 
temporary state of the calf. 

Hence, [the difference between] a phase and a temporary 
state.  Then  people  eventually  told  her,  “Hey,  why  are  you 
taking  such  a  big  female  buffalo  upstairs!”  Thereafter,  they 
thought about it and then they stopped doing that. They sold 
the female buffalo. So that is how it all is. 

Knowledge Is Itself the Self, in the Form as the 
Elemental Matter and the Property 

Questioner: In the fourth Aptavani (a series of fourteen 
volumes compiled from Dadashri’s speech), it is written that 
‘Knowledge is Itself the Self’; why is that? The Self is actually 
an  eternal  element  (dravya),  whereas  Knowledge  is  Its 
property (guna). 

Dadashri:  Knowledge  is  Itself  the  Self.  But  which 
Knowledge  are  we 
truly  speaking  about?  Absolute 
Knowledge  (keval  Gnan).  Absolute  means  that  there  is 
nothing else mixed in it. Only absolute Knowledge,  nothing 
but prakash (light; illumination) that is clean, pure (shuddha) 
light.  Right  now,  impure  light  is  coming  through.  Shubha 
(auspicious;  good)  and  ashubha  (inauspicious;  bad)  light  is 
coming  through.  One  has  to  take  a  beating  because  of  this 
shubha-ashubha (good and bad; auspicious and inauspicious) 
light. That other pure light is akin to a diamond; as per its own 
inherent nature, it is dazzling. 

Questioner:  Is  that  why  a  relationship  of  oneness  has 

been shown between Knowledge and the Self? 

Dadashri:  Yes,  the  Knowledge  is  Itself  the  Self.  And 
Knowledge is Its property, and when Knowledge is used, it is 
considered Its phase. This Knowledge is Itself the Self; when 
the Knowledge is absolute (keval), It is considered to be in the 
form as the dravya (elemental matter), and as long as It is not 

 
[2.1] The Terminology Regarding Dravya-Guna-Paryay! 

239 

absolute, that Knowledge is considered to be in the form as a 
property  (guna).  That  original  Self  is  also  in  the  form  as 
Knowledge only, but only when the Knowledge is pure, is It 
considered as dravya (elemental matter). And That verily is 
what  Knowledge  is.  Therefore,  discuss  only  about  attaining 
the Real form  as Knowledge (Gnan Swaroop), discuss only 
about the Knowledge of the Self (Gnan) alone, nothing else. 
The dravya (elemental matter) [of the Self] is nothing other 
than  being  something  that  is  full  of  certain  properties.  The 
eternal element that is full of all such properties as Knowledge 
(Gnan), Vision (Darshan), energy (shakti), bliss (sukh); from 
all of those, what is special about  the inherent nature of the 
Self?  ‘It’  has  the  inherent  nature  of  being  the  continuous 
Knower  (Gnayak  swabhaav);  meaning  It  has  the  inherent 
nature  of  Knowing.  ‘It’  can  Know  immediately,  It  can 
Understand  immediately;  that  is  the  kind  of  inseparable 
(avinabhaav) relationship It has.  

Questioner:  An 

inseparable 

relationship  between 

Knowledge and the elemental matter of the Self? 

Dadashri:  Yes,  the  elemental  matter  of  the  Self  and 
[absolute]  Knowledge  have  an  inseparable  relationship; 
however, Knowledge can only be considered as synonymous 
to the elemental matter of the Self in a certain aspect. As long 
as the Knowledge is incomplete, the Knowledge is considered 
to be separate. As long as there is only Knowledge of the Self 
(Atma  Gnan),  the  elemental  matter  of  the  Self  and  the 
Knowledge  exist  separately.  And  when  there  is  complete 
absolute Knowledge (keval Gnan), there, the elemental matter 
of the Self and the Knowledge indeed become one. 

The Total Count of the Properties of the Eternal 
Elements 

Questioner: From the perspective of the properties, from 
the perspective of the total count of the properties, there are as 

 
240 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

many  properties  in  the  Pudgal  Parmanu  as  there  are  in  the 
Self; is that true? 

Dadashri:  No,  It  [the  Self]  has  infinite  properties.  The 
Self  has  infinite  Knowledge.  In  that  other,  the  Pudgal 
Parmanu,  the  properties  are  of  a  different  sort.  All  of  them 
have properties; all the six eternal elements have properties. 
The eternal elements have their own individual properties, and 
their  own  individual  phases;  those  two  things  are  always 
present together. 

Questioner: But is there no relation between the eternal 
element and the total count of its properties? This one has a 
total count of this many properties and that one has that many 
properties; is there not something like that? 

Dadashri:  What  is  the  need  to  count  the  number  [of 
properties]  in  them?  Copper  has  these  properties,  gold  has 
these properties, brass has these properties; each one dwells 
within its very own properties.  

Questioner:  On  the  one  side  we  say,  ‘I  [the  Self]  am 
totally  and  completely  pure  even  with  respect  to  the 
properties,’ and on the other side we say that there are eight 
main properties of the Self; so, is that not a contradiction? 

Dadashri: No. All those eight properties of the Self are 
pure indeed. It is due to illusion that an impurity has arisen in 
that which was pure. This Gnanavaran karma (veils over the 
Knowledge of the Self) is a property [but of the relative self]; 
when that becomes pure [clears away], One attains Gnan (the 
Knowledge of the Self). Darshanavaran karma (veils over the 
Vision of the Self) is a property [of the relative self] and when 
that becomes pure, One attains the Darshan (right Vision as 
the  Self).  The  purified  properties  fall  under  the  category  of 
properties that are inherently natural [to the Self]. What are 
you trying to ask? 

 
[2.1] The Terminology Regarding Dravya-Guna-Paryay! 

241 

Questioner: ‘One’s own properties’ means that the Self 
in terms of Its own properties is indeed pure only, but even in 
their veiled form, they are still the properties of the Self, aren’t 
they? 

Dadashri:  No,  they  are  indeed  pure.  They  are  pure  by 

their very inherent nature. 

Questioner:  And  those  other  properties  that  we  talk 
about,  we  say  that  they  are  properties  in  the  form  of  veils, 
don’t we? 

Dadashri:  They  are  actually  properties  in  the  form  of 
veils. By their inherent nature they are indeed pure. ‘We’ are 
saying ‘veils’ in a certain context. In the absolute state, they 
are  indeed  pure.  [Infinite  Knowledge,  Vision,  energy,  bliss 
etc. However, ‘we’ are saying that the veils are the properties 
of the relative self.] 

Ghati Karma Arise From the Properties, Aghati 
Karma Arise From the Phases 

Questioner: Is a phase also an eternal (Sat) thing since 
time immemorial, or is it something that someone has given 
rise to?  

Dadashri: What is considered as eternal? That which has 
both,  properties  and  phases,  is  considered  eternal.  If  it  has 
properties but does not have phases, it cannot be considered 
eternal. 

Questioner: So then, who gave rise to the phases? 

Dadashri: They have not been given rise to, they exist by 

their inherent nature. 

Questioner: Through whose inherent nature? 

Dadashri:  The  thing  that  is  eternal,  its  very  inherent 
nature has properties and phases. In its inherent nature means 

 
242 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

that no one has to give rise to them. No one has yet been born 
who can give rise to them, and no one will ever give rise to 
them. This is not anything like that at all. 

Questioner:  So  then,  if  no  one  can  even  give  rise  to 

phases, then how can we accept this? 

Dadashri: No, but there is no need to give rise to them, 

is there! They exist by their inherent nature. 

Questioner: By whose inherent nature do they exist? 

Dadashri: For example, let’s take the sun, light is its own 
property.  And  these  rays  that  project  outwards,  they  are 
constantly changing. They are called phases. In the same way, 
Knowledge, Vision, energy and bliss, these are all properties 
of  the  Self.  Knowledge  [obscuring],  Vision  [obscuring], 
energy [deluding] and bliss [obstructing], those that are called 
ghati karma (karma that are destructive to the state as the Self; 
karma which veil or obscure the essential nature of the pure 
Self), they are all properties [of the relative self]. And which 
ones  are  the  phases?  Those  that  are  called  aghati  karma 
(karma that are not destructive to the state as the Self; karma 
that is  not  capable of obstructing or preventing the intrinsic 
properties  of  the  pure  Soul),  they  are  all  phases.  Therefore, 
vedaniya  karma  (pain  and  pleasure  inducing  karma),  naam 
karma (name-form determining  karma), gotra karma  (status 
determining  karma) 
(life-span 
determining karma), they all arise from the phases. 

and  ayushya  karma 

Therefore,  the Siddha  Lords  (absolutely liberated  Souls 
who have become completely free from the cycle of birth and 
death)  who  are  sitting  in  Siddha  gati  (the  realm  of  the 
absolutely liberated Souls), remain constantly in nothing but 
Their inherent nature as the Self, in bliss. ‘They’ have Their 
own properties of Knowledge, Vision, bliss; all of those are 
present. ‘They’ Themselves prevail as the Knower and Seer. 
Meaning,  They  See  every  single  living  being  of  the  world. 

 
[2.1] The Terminology Regarding Dravya-Guna-Paryay! 

243 

Since  They  are  the  Knower  and  Seer,  since  that  is  Their 
property, They are able to See everyone constantly. That, too, 
They  do  not  See  externally,  They  can  See  that  within 
Themselves. Just as one can see in the mirror, in the same way, 
They  can  See  everything  in  Their  own  dravya  (elemental 
matter).  Everything  illuminates  within  for  Them.  Now  it 
illuminates within like this: Say early in the morning, at four 
o’ clock, no one is awake, so They can See that everyone is 
still sleeping. Then at five o’ clock, They can See a little bit 
of movement. Then at six o’clock, They can See more going 
on.  By  eight  or  nine  o’  clock,  everything  is  hustling  and 
bustling; They can See crowds of people running around. 

Questioner: The changes keep taking place. 

Dadashri: The changes taking place in people, those are 
Their  phases.  ‘They’  [the  Siddha  Lords]  can  See  those 
changes over there. So, when I raise my hand, that becomes a 
phase in Their Knowledge. The Knowledge is permanent; it is 
just that all these phases keep changing. Therefore, the  Self 
has Its own elemental matter, properties and phases. Then, the 
Pudgal (eternal element of inanimate matter) also has Its own 
elemental matter, properties and phases.  

Questioner: This elemental matter and the properties that 

exist, are they visible within the Self or in the phases? 

Dadashri: A property is an eternal element’s permanent 
inherent nature. What does the term ‘property’ mean? It is that 
which remains constantly with the eternal element. 

Questioner:  Now,  the  property  does  not  have  to  do 

anything, does it?  

Dadashri: It does not have to do anything.  

Questioner: There is  one part of the Self, which is  the 
phase, that keeps changing, it has to ‘do’ something, doesn’t 
it? 

 
244 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Dadashri:  No  one  actually  has  to  ‘do’  anything  at  all. 
Take  for  example  this  gold,  the  gunadharma  (intrinsic 
properties that have a specific function) of gold never change. 
However, a ring  or something else  can be made from  it, all 
kinds of jewelry can be made from it. All kinds of temporary 
states are created, all of those keep on changing, but the gold 
with them remains the same. 

Questioner: Now, the Atma Darshan (the realization that 
the Self is distinct from the body) that happens, that actually 
happens in the phase, doesn’t it? Where else does it happen?  

Dadashri:  No,  first  ‘it’  [the  vibhaavik  I;  the  I  that  has 
deviated from its inherent nature] attains the right Vision. The 
conviction establishes for it. The conviction that, ‘I am this,’ 
is attained. Thereafter, the experience of that is attained. So, 
initially there were impure phases, which have now become 
pure phases.  

Questioner:  Now,  shouldn’t  We  be  able  to  experience 
that the elemental matter and the properties of the Self are like 
this?  Only  then  can  it  be  said  that  We  have  attained  the 
experience of the Self, right? 

Dadashri:  That  is  correct.  The  experience  is  the  main 

thing! All You need is that these veils get destroyed. 

Questioner: This experience that happens, it happens to 

the phases, right? 

Dadashri:  Fundamentally,  the  collective  experience  of 
the elemental matter, the properties and the phases happens to 
the  ‘I’;  it  does  not  happen  just  to  the  phase.  They  are  all 
present together. Phases can never exist without properties. If 
phases do not exist, then properties also cannot be there. They 
are all inseparable, and so they will be experienced together. 

 
[2.1] The Terminology Regarding Dravya-Guna-Paryay! 

245 

The Pure Chit Is as a Phase, the Pure Soul Is as the 
Elemental Matter and Properties 

Questioner: The Self is in this body, and It has phases. 
So  then  what  is  the  relation  between  impure  chit  (subtle 
component of vision and knowledge in the inner functioning 
instrument called antahkaran), Pragnya (the direct liberating 
light of the Self) and the phases of the Self? 

Dadashri: The phases of the [original] Self are pure. The 

properties are also pure and the phases are pure too. 

Questioner: So at present, is all this the function of the 

chit? Is it the function of Pragnya? 

Dadashri: Yes, actually if all the properties and phases 
become pure, then One attains absolute Knowledge. So, until 
then, Pragnya remains separate.  

Questioner: Exactly. So, at that time, the phases of the 

Self exist, don’t they? 

Dadashri: Yes, but it is only if the phases [which have 
arisen once the relative self has come into effect] become pure 
and  the  properties  also  become  pure,  that  One  can  attain 
absolute  Knowledge.  Therefore,  because  all  of  that  is 
remaining, all these exist as separate entities. 

Questioner:  Okay.  So,  the  properties  are  pure  indeed, 

aren’t they? Do the properties also remain to become pure? 

Dadashri: Even the properties need to become pure. 

Questioner: How is that? 

Dadashri: When all the discharge karma are cleared with 
the pure applied awareness as the Self (shuddha upayog), that 
is when the properties of the Self will give off a pure result, 
otherwise they  will not.  Only then can absolute  Knowledge 

 
246 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

manifest, otherwise  It  cannot.  Right  now, the properties are 
with veils. 

From  the  perspective  of  the  elemental  matter  and 
properties, the [worldly-interacting] self of all people is pure 
indeed, but from the perspective of the phases, it has become 
impure.  In  this,  once  the  phases  become  purified,  One  will 
have become the absolute pure Soul. 

Questioner:  What  relationship  does  impure  chit  have 

with the phases of the Self? 

Dadashri:  The  intellect  (buddhi)  and  the  chit  are 
considered to belong to the pratishthit atma (the developing I; 
the  relative  self),  because  the  intellect  is  full  of  designs 
(aashayyukt). This Knowledge and Vision, They are abundant 
in terms of the properties, but in terms of the temporary state, 
they  are  limited.  This  chit  is  a  phase  of  the  intellect.  Those 
phases  have  become  impure.  The  chit  is  a  phase  of  impure 
knowledge and vision. Impure knowledge and vision are the 
temporary states of the intellect; they are the phases. When the 
limit  of  the  intellect  is  over,  that  is  when  the  chit  works  in 
accordance with  the intellect.  The decision that  the intellect 
gives  is  indeed  in  accordance  with  vyavasthit  (the  result  of 
scientific circumstantial evidences). However much the light 
of the intellect there is, there are those many phases of the chit. 

The pure chit is in the form as a phase, and the pure Soul 
is  in  the  form  as  the  elemental  matter  and  properties,  but 
ultimately, they are all one and the same! 

 
[2.1] The Terminology Regarding Dravya-Guna-Paryay! 

247 

Only the Phases Change, Not the Knowledge and 
Vision! 

Questioner:  Amongst 

the 
properties, and the phases, is the phase considered a property 
(guna) of the Self or is it It’s temporary state (avastha)?4 

the  elemental  matter, 

Dadashri: If it is a property, then it would be  included 
within the properties. A phase is a kind of temporary state; and 
that,  too,  it  is  a  temporary  state  of  the  property.  It  is  not  a 
temporary  state  of  the  Self;  it  is  a  temporary  state  of  the 
property. For example, the sun has this property of emitting 
light, does it not? So, when the sun rises, it becomes bright. 

It’s  like  this,  an  electric  bulb  is  called  the  dravya  (the 
elemental matter), and the energy to emit light is considered 
to  be  its  property.  [Similarly,]  Knowledge  and  Vision  are 
considered to be the properties [of the Self], and the Seeing 
and Knowing of all the objects in the Light, are considered as 
the  phases.  All  these  objects  that  are  Seen  and  Known  are 
called drashya (objects to be Seen) and gneya (objects to be 
Known). The elemental matter and the properties do not take 
on the form as the gneya. The phases take on the form as the 
gneya, whereas the ‘electric bulb’ [the Self; the Light] remains 
in the very same place.  

Questioner: The phases keep changing from one samay 

to the next, don’t they? 

Dadashri: Yes, they keep changing. The properties of an 
eternal element remain the same, the phases keep changing. 
The phases are … 

Questioner:  But  sometimes  do  good  phases  arise,  and 

sometimes do bad ones arise? 

4 For more detail about the elemental matter, properties and phases of the 
Self, refer to Aptavani 3, chapter 6. 

 
                                                 
248 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Dadashri:  No,  it  is  not  like  that.  The  phases  of 
Knowledge, they all keep on changing, and as the objects [to 
be  Seen  and  Known]  keep  on  changing,  the  phases  of 
Knowledge  also  change  on  the  other  end.  Auspicious  and 
inauspicious [bhaav; activities; karma] are not considered to 
be a part of phases, they are actually considered as udaykarma 
(the unfolding of karma).  

Questioner:  Are  they  considered  as  the  unfolding  of 

karma? 

Dadashri: Yes. The phases actually belong to the eternal 

element, to the original eternal element. 

Questioner: Do the phases of the Self denote a change in 
the temporary state? Just as a child is born, then he grows up, 
then he becomes a youth, then he grows old; are those referred 
to as phases? 

Dadashri: Those cannot be called phases. Those are all 
temporary states (avastha). A phase is very subtle. People of 
the  world  cannot  understand  phases  at  all,  they  understand 
these temporary states. A phase applies to the original eternal 
element. Now there are six original eternal elements. One is 
Chetan (the  eternal  element  of the  Self), the second is  anu-
Parmanu (jada; the eternal element of inanimate matter), then 
there  is  dharmastikaya  (the  eternal  element  that  supports 
motion),  adharmastikaya  (the  eternal  element  that  supports 
inertia),  Kaal  (Time)  and  aakash  (Space).  These  ones  have 
phases; everything else does not have phases. All the original 
eternal  elements  have  phases.  So,  in  actuality,  the  original 
eternal elements have properties, and it is those properties that 
have phases; the original eternal elements do not have phases. 
Only the properties of the eternal elements have phases. 

The properties remain together [with the eternal element] 
constantly, and they will always remain together with Them. 
No  change  takes  place  in  the  properties  and  the  elemental 

 
[2.1] The Terminology Regarding Dravya-Guna-Paryay! 

249 

matter of the eternal element; it is just that the phases keep on 
changing. 

The  developing  ‘I’  prevails  permanently  in  the  original 
elemental form as the Self, and the phases arise and then they 
come to an end. Just as the moon exists in phases; there is the 
third  day,  the  fourth  day,  the  fifth  day  etc.,  of  the  lunar 
fortnight,  but  the  moon  actually  exists  in  its  original  form. 
Those other are just the phases of the moon that arise based 
on  circumstances.  ‘You’  [the  ‘I’;  although  being  the  Self] 
believe ‘I am Chandubhai’, and that is why you have taken on 
the form as the phase. 

Questioner:  A  human  being  is  himself  a  part  of  the 
mishrachetan (the I with wrong belief that arises as when the 
eternal elements of the Self and inanimate matter come into 
close proximity with each other), is that why he is in the form 
as a phase [the form as a temporary state]? 

Dadashri: No, if he were a part of the mishrachetan, then 
that  would  have  been  his  original  form.  Humans  are  in  the 
form as a phase. As the developing I has the wrong belief of, 
‘I am Chandubhai,’ his conduct is wrong, and his knowledge 
is  wrong.  The  One  who  has  the  belief,  Conduct  and 
Knowledge which are ‘fact’ [Real], cannot be considered as 
being  the  form  as  a  phase,  that  would  be  considered  as  the 
original Real form. 

Just as there are phases of the moon, there are phases of 
the Self, and those verily are the paryay. When those phases 
come to an end, the ‘full moon’ state [absolute Knowledge] 
manifests. 

Shunya as the Eternal Element, Complete as the 
Phase 

Questioner:  ‘The  self  is  complete  (purna)  from  the 
perspective  of  phases  and  is  shunya  (zero)  from  the 

 
250 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

perspective  of  Its  inherent  nature.’  How  is  that?  I  want  to 
understand that. 

Dadashri: From the perspective of the paudgalik paryay 
(worldly phases; the phases as the non-Self complex), the self 
is complete, and from the perspective of Its inherent nature, It 
is  without  any  sankalp-vikalp  (all  the  relative  ‘I-ness’  and 
‘my-ness’ that stem from the belief that ‘I am Chandubhai); 
[so] from the perspective of Its inherent nature, It is shunya. 

Questioner:  Yes,  but  how  does  the  discussion  of  the 
pudgal (non-Self complex) enter into this? Is it because in the 
phases of the Self, It Sees the non-Self complex by prevailing 
as the Knower and Seer? 

Dadashri: Here, the term ‘phases’ applies to the pudgal 
(non-Self complex), because the term ‘inherent nature’ comes 
later.  When  the  Self  is  in  Its  inherent  nature,  everything  is 
shunya; meaning that There, the [worldly] phases and the like, 
all of them are shunya. 

The resultant  effect  of becoming the form  as the  gneya 
(object to be Known) is  considered  a phase;  with respect to 
that,  it  is  complete,  and  from  the  perspective  of  the  eternal 
element, it is shunya. From infinite objects to be Known arise 
infinite  phases;  It  is  complete  in  Knowing  these  infinite 
phases,  but  that  happens  only  when  absolute  Knowledge 
(keval Gnan) manifests.  

It is shunya from the perspective of the eternal element, 
and it is complete from the perspective of the phases. Here, 
the term ‘phases’ refers to the phases that extend across the 
entire universe. From the perspective of worldly phases, the 
extent of the entire universe is reached. [There are so many 
phases such that they can illuminate the entire universe]. 

Questioner: The self is shunya from the perspective of 
the elemental matter (dravya) and it is entirely complete from 

 
[2.1] The Terminology Regarding Dravya-Guna-Paryay! 

251 

the perspective of the phases. Please explain which self that 
is. 

(worldly-interacting  self).  From 

Dadashri:  This  is  referring  to  the  belief  self,  the 
vyavahaar  atma 
the 
perspective of the elemental matter, in the form as the original 
eternal element, it is shunya, there is nothing at all. Whereas 
the  phases  are  such  that  they  illuminate  the  entire  universe. 
With respect to those phases, it is entirely complete. 

It is in relation to the relative self. This is regarding the 
relative. For the Real [Self], there is no such thing as shunya 
or complete. 

The Difference Between Phases of the Real Self and 
the Relative Self 

Questioner:  So  these  phases  of  the  Self,  is  that 
discussion with reference to the pratishthit atma (the relative 
self) or the Real Self? 

Dadashri: They will arise for the Real Self and they will 
arise for the relative self as well, they will certainly arise for 
them all. 

Questioner: The phases that arise for the relative self and 
the phases that arise for the Real Self, what is the difference 
between those two? 

Dadashri: Those latter ones are pure whereas the former 
ones  are  impure.  The  former  ones  are  paudgalik  (worldly; 
belong to the non-Self complex), and the latter ones, the ones 
that belong to the pure Soul, to Chetan, are pure.  

Questioner: So are You referring to the temporary states 

of the Self as phases? 

Dadashri: What else? Those temporary states mean that 
phases keep on changing; they keep arising and dissipating. 
What You Saw just now, You Saw it through the energy of 

 
252 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

the  Self,  You  became  the  Seer  (Drashta).  The  moment  the 
object to be Seen (drashya) changes, it [the phase of Seeing 
the previous object] dissipates, and then a new phase arises. 
All that keeps going on constantly, doesn’t it! 

Questioner: But that is a phase, isn’t it! Should that be 
called a temporary state or a phase? That is a direct phase of 
the Self, isn’t it? Does the temporary state arise first and then 
the phase? 

Dadashri:  The  temporary  state  is  itself  the  phase.  The 
phases are constantly there. Any eternal element  that exists, 
will  certainly  have  phases,  otherwise  it  cannot  be  called  an 
eternal element at all. 

Questioner: But if we look at it scientifically, then there 
is a big difference between the phases of the pudgal (non-Self 
complex)  and  the  phases  of  the  Self.  The  two  cannot  be 
compared. 

Dadashri:  These  are  Chetan  (of  the  Self;  having  the 
property  of  Knowing  and  Seeing)  whereas  those  are  jada 
(lifeless; of inanimate matter). 

Questioner:  Now  in  comparison  to  the  phases  of 
inanimate matter, these phases of the Self, of what kind are 
they and how would their effects be felt? 

Dadashri:  No  effects  are  felt  at  all.  The  phases  of 
inanimate matter are as an object to be Seen and the phases of 
the Self are as the Seer; they are of their own individual kind. 
The  phases  of  the  former  are  as  an  object  to  be  Known 
(gneya),  and  the  phases  of  the  latter  are  as  the  Knower 
(Gnata). That which appears in the film belongs to inanimate 
matter, whereas the Seer is the Self. So the object is one only, 
and the ‘effects’ [phases] that arise in both jada and Chetan 
are of their own individual kind! If the phases of the Self were 
not changing, then how would the ‘I’ become the Knower and 

 
[2.1] The Terminology Regarding Dravya-Guna-Paryay! 

253 

Seer? It is because the object to be Seen keeps on changing, 
that the phases of the Self change. 

Questioner: Are the phases of the Self and the temporary 

states of the Self both considered to be the same? 

Dadashri: That is all the same. A temporary state means 
that a change has occurred. A change will happen in the Seer 
based on the object to be Seen, meaning that the function of 
Seeing (jovapanu) of the Self will keep changing. If another 
object to be Seen has appeared over there, then the Self Sees 
that other object to be Seen. The object to be Known changes, 
and a change occurs in the Knower too. 

Questioner: So can the phases of the Self be considered 

as temporary states? 

Dadashri: The term ‘temporary state’ should not be used 
here  at  all.  Actually  these  are  all  phases,  but  because  you 
cannot understand what a phase is, that is why ‘we’ have to 
say the term ‘temporary state’.  

Questioner:  So,  is  the  term  ‘temporary  state’  a  totally 

incorrect word?  

Dadashri: No, no, ‘we’ have to use the term ‘temporary 
state’ so that you can understand in a broad sense. You would 
not understand the term ‘phase’. Even when ‘we’ tell you what 
a phase is, you are not able to understand it. It is in fact a very 
profound, a very subtle concept. 

Questioner: Dada, please explain it a little bit, so that we 

can understand. 

Dadashri: No, it is not something that can be grasped by 
the intellect. That is why ‘we’ tell you to understand as much 
as you can through the intellect. 

Questioner: But are the phases of the Self considered as 

Nijavastha (the state as the Self)? 

 
254 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Dadashri: No, no, how can a phase alone be considered 
the state as the Self? It is considered the state as the Self only 
when the properties, the elemental matter, and the phases, all 
three exist along with It. If they are not along with It, then it 
cannot  be  considered  an  eternal  element  whatsoever.  For 
every  eternal  element,  these  three  are  present  along  with  it. 
The eternal element of inanimate matter, the eternal element 
of the Self, all of them have these three, otherwise they cannot 
be  called  an  eternal  element  at  all.  Therefore,  every  eternal 
element  is  temporary  by  the  relative  viewpoint,  and  by  the 
Real viewpoint, they are all permanent. 

So, this is all a very subtle concept. Instead of delving too 
deep into it, for now, You should remain as the Knower and 
Seer as Dada has said. What should You be the Knower and 
Seer of? The answer is to keep Seeing whatever is going on 
for ‘Chandubhai’. You will get lost in trying to over-analyze. 
So it is better that You follow the broad method that has been 
taught.  [Remain  as]  The  Knower  and  Seer;  the  moment  an 
object to be Known appears, the Knower arises. The moment 
an  object  to  be  Seen  appears,  the  Seer  arises.  There  are 
numerous objects to be Known and Seen. The objects to be 
Known and Seen continue to change, one after another. Even 
dharmastikaya, also known as gatisahayak tattva (the eternal 
element that supports motion) keeps on changing. Even those 
other eternal elements, they keep on changing. Every eternal 
element  keeps  on  changing  constantly.  In  trying  to  delve 
deeper  into  this  through  one’s  intellect,  if  one  actually 
mistakenly enters into the false notion of ‘I am Chandubhai’, 
then on the contrary he would become soiled, he would get 
stained. Instead of that, remain in the Agnas. 

Questioner: Yes, that is correct. That point is true. 

Dadashri:  ‘We’  have  given  You  the  same  Knowledge 
that  Arjun  had  attained;  kshayak  samkit  (the  permanent 
conviction  of  the  right  belief  of  ‘I  am  pure  Soul’).  So,  this 

 
[2.1] The Terminology Regarding Dravya-Guna-Paryay! 

255 

conviction (pratiti) that has been established on the Self, it can 
never  be  displaced  at  all.  As  You  follow  ‘our’  Agnas,  the 
conviction  remains.  Then  from  that,  the  Science  (Vignan; 
absolute Knowledge in this case) will manifest, and through 
that, mukti (freedom from the cycle of birth and death) will 
come about. This is how everything continues to happen, one 
after another. 

The Phases of Both, the Sangdosh and the Absolute, 
Are Different 

Questioner: The first phase that arose that We were able 
to See, the phase which is in the form as the effect of karma, 
when was that karma bound? 

Dadashri: Where is  the question of karma? A phase is 
not karma. What can be considered as eternal? Anything that 
is  eternal  must  have  properties  within  it.  The  properties  are 
permanent  and  the  phases  are  temporary.  This  is  how  this 
world has arisen. 

Questioner:  Is  that  what  people  have  used  the  term 

‘absolute’ for? 

Dadashri:  That  absolute  eternal  element  is  something 
different, and that which is absolute, It also has phases. But 
then, Its phases are different, and these phases are different. 
These are phases of sangdosh (the fault of association with the 
non-Self). These phases actually exist because of the fault of 
association with the non-Self. The moment this association is 
separated, those phases [of the Self] remain pure; they remain 
clear. 

Now,  this  man  is  asking,  “On  what  basis  is  all  of  this 
functioning?” The answer is, on the basis of niyati (the natural 
progression  of  evolution  of  a  soul).  The  track  of  niyati  is 
flowing just like a stream flows, moreover this track has been 

 
256 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

flowing  since  time  immemorial.  Now  how  can  the  intellect 
work in this situation? 

There  are  infinite  Souls  and  the  Pudgal,  meaning  the 
Parmanu  are  infinite  too,  and  as  such  they  are  constantly 
revolving  around  each  other,  bringing  about  a  change 
(samsaran). Therefore, as the two came into close proximity, 
the fault of association with the non-Self was incurred by the 
Self. It is due to this fault of association with the non-Self that 
this has arisen. Now, the association definitely exists; from Its 
very  existence,  the  fault  of  association  with  the  non-Self 
exists. Hence, the eternal does not have a beginning. 

Questioner: Did You not just say that it has arisen? 

Dadashri:  The  words  have  to  be  said  for  you  to 
understand,  ‘On  what  basis  it  is  that  You  are  able  to  See?’ 
When the sun rises over here in the morning, people here will 
say, “It has risen over here and it has set over there.” Now is 
that a fact? 

Questioner: No, it appears that way. 

Dadashri:  Can  you  See  that  in  your  understanding  or 
not? That is indeed how this is. ‘We’ can See everything as it 
is, that all this is not like that at all. Whereas for some people, 
they only see that the sun rose and it set. Therefore, for such 
people,  that  is  correct;  they  say  whatever  they  are  seeing. 
Would the sun be seeing it that way? What would the sun be 
seeing? 

Questioner: If one were to go to where the sun is and see 
from there, then the answer that would come back is, “It has 
neither arisen, nor has it set,” wouldn’t it? 

Dadashri: Yes.  It has neither arisen, nor set. There are 
many things that are beyond one’s vision; they are beyond this 
intellect. 

 
[2.1] The Terminology Regarding Dravya-Guna-Paryay! 

257 

Questioner:  Hence 

[the 

terms], 

‘beginning-less’, 

‘endless’; these two words? 

Dadashri: Endless, that is all. However, this concept is 

worth understanding. 

Questioner: No, I want inner satisfaction and resolution 

regarding this law of infinity. 

Dadashri: Every law has a resolution. But the resolution 
regarding the law should be brought about by understanding 
it  systematically.  Like  in  the  case  of  the  sun,  everyone  is 
saying, “It rose and it set.” 

There are such properties in the Self, and there are also 
such properties in the non-Self. Even though they [the phases 
of the properties] arise and dissipate, yet they [the properties] 
do  not  let  go  of  their  permanence.  There  are  also  such 
properties in the eternal element of Time. [The phases of the 
properties  of]  Time,  also  arise  and  dissipate,  yet  they  [the 
properties] do not let go of their permanence. Even Space has 
such properties. In Space, [the phases of its properties] arise 
and dissipate, yet they [the properties] do not let go of their 
permanence. 



 
 
[2] 

The Connection of the Properties and the 
Phases With the Objects to Be Seen 

The Difference Between Seeing Through the Intellect 
and Seeing Through Pragnya 

Questioner: Even when I am trying to See as the Knower 
and Seer (Gnata-Drashta), I feel as if the seeing is happening 
through the intellect. 

Dadashri: What you are saying is correct. It is indeed the 
intellect that is seeing. The [Real] Knower and Seer actually 
begins from where even the intellect cannot reach. 

The  Knower  and  Seer  of  all  these  gneya  (objects  to  be 
Known)  does  not  seem  to  be  the  ‘I’,  but  it  seems  to  be  the 
intellect.  But  who  is  the  Knower  and  Seer  of  this  intellect? 
The Self. When You feel ‘it seems that way’, You are Seeing 
as the Seer and when You ‘come to Know it’, then You have 
Known it as the Knower. 

Questioner: Does that mean that in this activity of seeing 
that happens all day long, the one who was doing the seeing, 
there is another Seer over this seer? Then who is the first seer? 

Dadashri:  Whether  you  call  it  upadaan  (the  level  of 
one’s spiritual development), or the intellect, or the ego, but 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[2.2] The Connection of the Properties and the Phases With … 

259 

the Seer of even that, is the Self. ‘It’ Knows even the seer [the 
ego; the intellect]. 

Questioner:  So,  where  does  Pragnya  (the  direct 

liberating light of the original Self) come into this? 

Dadashri:  That  Itself  is  Pragnya!  The  original  Self  is 

indeed the original Self. 

Questioner:  How  can  one  become  aware  of  the 
demarcation  that  ‘this’  knowing  and  seeing  is  through  the 
intellect  and  ‘this  other’  Knowing  and  Seeing  is  that  of  the 
Self? 

Dadashri:  The  intellect  can  only  know  and  see  that 
which can be seen through the eyes, or else that which can be 
heard  through  the  ears  or  that  which  can  be  tasted  by  the 
tongue; all that is [knowing and seeing through] the intellect. 

Questioner:  So  that  covers  things  related  to  the  sense 
organs,  but  there  are  other  things  that  are  going  on  within, 
which the intellect can see such as, ‘He is biased, he is like 
this, he is like that.’ It is also the intellect that sees all that, 
isn’t it? 

Dadashri: When all such things are seen, it is indeed of 
the intellect. Whereas the Knowledge and Vision of the Self 
is actual Knowing and Seeing; that is something different. To 
Know and See the eternal elements, to Know their properties, 
to Knows their phases, to Know and See all that, that is the 
Self. Or else, It Knows all the phases of the mind. The intellect 
is able to see the phases of the mind only up to a certain extent, 
whereas the Self actually Knows all the phases of the mind. 
‘It’ Knows the intellect and It Knows the situation. ‘It’ Knows 
the phases of the ego; It Knows everything indeed. Where the 
intellect cannot reach, that is where the Knowing as the Self 
begins. 

 
260 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Questioner: And that which sees Chandubhai, is that the 

intellect? 

Dadashri: The intellect sees him, and the One Seeing the 
intellect is the Self. What the intellect is doing, what the mind 
is doing, what the ego is doing, the Knower of all that is the 
Self. Beyond the state as the Self is the state as the absolute 
Self.  The  One  who  has  become  a  pure  Soul,  goes  towards 
becoming  the  absolute  Self,  and  the  One  who  becomes  the 
absolute Self, for Him, absolute Knowledge will manifest. Or 
else the moment absolute Knowledge manifests for Him, He 
will  have  become  the  absolute  Self.  He  will  have  become 
‘full’ [complete]; He will have become worthy of attaining the 
state  of  nirvana  (final  liberation).  Therefore,  You  should 
maintain  the  applied  awareness  as  the  Self  (upayog)  of 
Knowing and Seeing, all day long. 

Questioner: All this activity of Seeing everything that is 
of the pudgal, is that an activity of the intellect (buddhi kriya) 
or is it Gnan kriya (the activity of the Self to Know and See)? 

Dadashri:  That  actually  falls  under  the  section  of 
Pragnya  indeed!  A  little  bit  can  be  understood  through  the 
activities  of  the  ego  and  the  intellect,  but  for  the  most  part, 
without  [the  Knowing  and  Seeing  through]  Pragnya,  One 
cannot understand everything. 

Questioner: You say, “When ‘we’ give the Knowledge 
of the Self, ‘we’ separate the Self and the body for you.” So 
who is the One Seeing the one separating these two? 

Dadashri: There are two entities that do the seeing. One 
of them is Pragnya, and after the work of Pragnya is over, the 
[absolute] Self is the Seer. The [absolute] Self remains as the 
continuous Knower (Gnayak). The [state as the] Seer begins 
from  Pragnya  and  goes  all  the  way  to  the  [absolute]  Self. 
When the work of Pragnya is over, the [absolute] Self Itself 
becomes the continuous Knower. 

 
[2.2] The Connection of the Properties and the Phases With … 

261 

Questioner: So this Knowing and Seeing of the Self that 
has  been  mentioned,  does  the  Self  Know  the  eternal 
elements?  

Dadashri: Yes! 

Questioner: How does It Know the eternal elements, the 
gunadharma  (intrinsic  properties 
that  have  a  specific 
function) of the eternal element and the phases of the eternal 
element? What exactly can It See regarding them? Please give 
an exact example of that! 

Dadashri: ‘It’ Knows all things such as to whom these 
gunadharma belong. Whether they belong to Pudgal (eternal 
element  of  inanimate  matter)  or  whether  they  belong  to  the 
Self (Chetan). Then, It also Knows all the gunadharma of the 
other  eternal  elements.  ‘It’  Knows  which  ones  are  the 
gunadharma of Space (aakash). Then It Knows  which ones 
are the gunadharma of Time (Kaal). 

The Difference Between Pragnya and a Phase 

Questioner: Please show us through an example what the 
phase  of  the  Self  is,  so  that  we  can  understand  that  this  is 
referred to as a phase of the Self. 

Dadashri:  ‘You’  do  end  up  Seeing  Chandubhai’s 

mistake, don’t You? Do You then See that mistake again? 

Questioner: No, it is not Seen thereafter. 

Dadashri: It is not Seen thereafter, so that is referred to 
as a phase. That which remains permanently with the Self is 
Knowledge;  that  is  considered  a  guna  (property).  And  that 
which lasts for as long as the temporary state (avastha) lasts, 
that  which  lasts  only  momentarily,  is  called  a  phase.  The 
Knowledge  that  shows  one  his  own  mistakes,  is  not 
Knowledge, it is a phase of the Knowledge. 

Questioner: Is Pragnya considered a phase? 

 
262 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Dadashri:  No,  Pragnya  is  a  different  thing  altogether. 
‘It’ is not a phase. A phase is something that comes and leaves 
immediately; its state [of existence] is very short. 

The  Self  is  in  the  Real  form  as  Knowledge  (Gnan 
swaroop).  However, 
illumination  arises  from  It,  and 
everything that is visible through that illumination, those are 
all temporary states. ‘You’ Saw this, You Saw that, You keep 
Seeing  everything,  but  after  Seeing  one  thing,  when  that  is 
over, You See another, You See a third one. What are those 
temporary states [of existence] like? They arise, they last for 
a  short  time.  [Here  the  term  ‘to  last’  is  not  in  the  sense  of 
permanence,  because  even  while  the  temporary  state  is  in 
existence,  at  a  subtle  level,  it  is  constantly  undergoing 
change.] And then again, they come to an end. They arise, they 
last for a short while and then they come to an end. And the 
moment  one  temporary  state  comes  to  an  end,  another 
temporary state arises. This will keep going on constantly; it 
is  the  same  for  the  Pudgal  as  well.  ‘You’  can  See  all  the 
phases of the Pudgal. Those others [the phases of the Self], 
You  may  not  be  able  to  understand  them  very  easily. Right 
now, whatever the [vibhaavik] self is seeing externally, those 
are  all  phases.  It’s  [the  vibhaavik  self’s]  properties  exist 
permanently; it’s phases are temporary. 

Questioner: But aren’t there endless phases of the Self, 

innumerable phases? 

Dadashri:  Not  innumerable,  there  are  nothing  but 
infinite phases of the Self. They cannot be counted, can they? 

The Existence of the Self Cannot Be Without Phases 

Questioner:  But  the  individual  phases  of  the  Self,  are 
they  completely  different,  or  are  they  actually  connected  to 
this pudgal? 

 
[2.2] The Connection of the Properties and the Phases With … 

263 

Dadashri: They are in sync with the inherent nature [of 

the Self]. 

Questioner: Yes, but those phases of the Self; please give 
us an example of that, so that we can understand, ‘This is what 
a phase of the Self is.’ 

Dadashri: Where the term ‘phase’ appears, it is still not 
considered as a phase of the Swabhaav (the inherently natural 
state as the Self), but rather a phase of the vibhaav (the state 
as the relative self). 

Questioner:  But  what  are  the  phases  of  the  Swabhaav 

like? 

Dadashri:  The  phases  of  the  Swabhaav  are  altogether 

pure. 

Questioner: Yes,  but  is  there any diversity in  them,  or 

are they of the same kind? 

Dadashri: There is no vikalp bhaav (wrong belief of ‘I 
am Chandubhai’, ‘I am the doer’, ‘I am the sufferer’) at all in 
them!  Those  [wrong]  beliefs  do  not  exist  there!  The  [pure] 
phases exist naturally, whereas these are all [wrong] beliefs, 
they are all vikalp (the false notion of ‘I am this’). Sankalp-
vikalp (all the relative ‘I-ness’ and ‘my-ness’ that stem from 
the belief that ‘I am Chandubhai’). [All of these exist in the 
phases of the state as the relative self.] 

Questioner: I can understand the phases of the pudgal, 
but  what  are  the  phases  of  the  Self  like?  Please  can  You 
explain that with an example. 

Dadashri:  The  property  that  the  sun  has  of  light,  of 
illuminating; that [light] is considered a property of the sun. 
The rays are  the phases  of the light.  The sun’s property [of 
light] remains permanently, whereas these phases [the rays of 

 
264 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

light], they are such that they dissipate later on. The phases 
are temporary. 

Questioner: But in the case of the sun, the rays are of the 
light, but what are the phases of the Knowledge and Vision of 
the Self like? 

is  prakash 

Dadashri:  That  Knowledge 

(light; 
illumination), and to Know through that Knowledge, that is a 
phase. To Know and See, those are all phases. The original 
inherent nature prevails permanently, whereas the phases keep 
changing. The Knowing and Seeing that keeps changing, that 
is called a phase. 

Questioner:  But  the  object  which  is  to  be  Known  and 
Seen, that is made up of the non-Self (paudgalik), so in that 
case, how can it be considered a phase of the Self? 

Dadashri: But in this case, it is the Knowledge that has a 
phase. Through the phase of the Knowledge, You are able to 
Know the object to be Known. That phase then comes to an 
end,  whereas  the  Knowledge  remains  permanently;  that 
Knowledge is a property of the Self. Knowledge and Vision, 
these two are the permanent properties of the Self. There are 
many other such properties that are permanent. 

Questioner:  I  have  actually  understood  the  phases  that 
arise  with  reference  to  the  pudgal,  but  does  the  Self  really 
have  Its  own  independent  phases  that  are  not  related  to  the 
pudgal at all? 

Dadashri: The Self cannot exist without Its independent 

phases. 

Questioner:  If  the  pudgal  were  to  not  exist,  then  the 

phases of the Self would not exist at all, would they? 

Dadashri:  That  is  to  say,  the  Self  always  has  Its 
properties and Its phases, otherwise the Self Itself would not 

 
[2.2] The Connection of the Properties and the Phases With … 

265 

exist. Moreover, that belief itself is entirely wrong. Where is 
it written like that? Such a question should not be there at all. 
What do you mean by ‘if the pudgal were to not exist’? If there 
were no pudgal, then there would be something else, but this 
activity of Knowing and Seeing, these properties that exists, 
they cannot refrain from being used; they are constantly being 
used.  Even  in  Siddha  Kshetra  (location  at  the  crest  of  the 
universe  where  all  absolutely  liberated  Souls  reside),  they 
keep  getting  used  constantly;  throughout  the  twenty-four 
hours.  Having  faith  in  such  a  Self  is  beneficial  to  You, 
otherwise if you think that there are no phases in the Self, then 
that  faith  is  misplaced.  The  Self  is  always  inclusive  of  the 
elemental matter, the properties and the phases. 

Questioner:  So,  do  phases  really  exist  even  in  Siddha 

Kshetra? 

Dadashri:  The  phases  exist  everywhere.  Wherever  the 
Self  exists,  there  both  the  properties  and  the  phases,  are 
together with It. 

Questioner: Which phases are the independent phases of 

the Self, the ones that are not related to the pudgal at all? 

Dadashri: They exist; all the phases are like that indeed! 

Questioner: Can You give an example? 

Dadashri: There are all kinds of examples, for sure! The 
phases  exist,  these  phases  cannot  refrain  from  Seeing  the 
pudgal. Besides the pudgal, It can See other things. And an 
eternal  element  cannot  exist  without  Its  own  phases.  One 
cannot  say,  “It  is  not  possible  for  the  Self  to  have  Its  own 
independent phases.” If the Self were to not have phases, then 
the Self Itself would not exist. Then, that would be the end of 
It.  It is not the pudgal alone that functions in this, there are 
many other things too. But for now, if You just See only this 
pudgal  alone,  based  on  that,  You  will  be  able  to  See  many 

 
266 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

things. The main property of the Self is verily that of Knowing 
and Seeing.  And  Its business  is  verily that  of Knowing  and 
Seeing,  constantly,  all  day  long.  Therefore,  Its  phases  are 
always there, all the time. 

Two Kinds of Seers And Two Kinds of Objects to Be 
Seen... 

There are four divisions; two of the Seer (Drashta) and 

two of the object to be Seen (drashya).5  

Questioner: Dada, what are the two divisions of the Seer 

and what are the two divisions of the object to be Seen? 

Dadashri: The Seer which prevails in the original form, 
It 
is  vitaraag  (absolutely  free  from  attachment  and 
abhorrence) as the [original] Seer, and the other seer is the I, 
the intellect sees ‘this’ [the activities of the pratishthit atma or 
the relative self]. The first object to be Seen is the pratishthit 
atma, and the second object to be Seen is its activities. Hence, 
there  are  two  kinds  of  objects  to  be  Seen  and  two  kinds  of 
Seers.  

There are two kinds of Knowers and two kinds of gneya 
(objects to be Known)! Meaning that the Self [Pragnya; the 
pure Soul] and the phases of the [vibhaavik] self [which is the 
intellect] [are the two kinds of Knowers]. And this pratishthit 
atma and its phases, these two are the objects to be Known. 
Nothing  happens  to  God  [the  original  eternal  element;  the 
original  Self],  however,  the  Seeing  happens  through  the 
phases. 

Questioner: Dada, of the two Seers that You mentioned, 

is the Real Self (darasal Atma) the main Seer in this? 

5 For more satsang refer to Aptavani 13 (P), Chapter 7 - The Seer-Knower 
and the Knower of That Seer-Knower! 

 
                                                 
[2.2] The Connection of the Properties and the Phases With … 

267 

Dadashri: The pure Soul. 

Questioner: The pure Soul. And the other seer, is it the 

phases of the self? 

Dadashri:  It  is  the  phases  that  arise  of  the  [vibhaavik] 

self.  

The phases of the [vibhaavik] self, whose phases are they 
seeing? The original Self (mool Atma) does not See the phases 
of  the  pratishthit  atma.  ‘It’  is  not  interested  in  that,  It  is 
vitaraag! 

Questioner: ‘It’ is vitaraag? 

Dadashri: Yes. Even these [the phases of the vibhaavik 
self] are  vitaraag;  the ones that Know, ‘This  is  attachment’ 
and  ‘This  is  abhorrence.’  Whereas  God  [the  original  Self] 
Himself  remains  vitaraag;  He  has  neither  attachment  nor 
abhorrence in that.  

Questioner: The first Seer is the Real Self; what does It 

See? 

Dadashri: ‘It’ only Sees the vitaraagata (a state where 
there is a total absence of attachment and abhorrence). How 
can It See attachment or abhorrence? There is no attachment 
or abhorrence in It, there is no such thing in It. All It has to do 
is  keep  Seeing  everything  that  is  subject  to  the  unfolding 
karma. For It, there is no such thing as good or bad.  

Questioner:  So  does  It  keep  Seeing  everything  in  the 

elemental form (tattva swaroop)? 

Dadashri: ‘It’ Sees not only the elemental form, but also 
that which is atattva (the non-elemental form; that which is in 
the form of causes). 

Questioner: Does It even See that which is atattva? 

Dadashri: ‘It’ Sees both, but It is vitaraag. 

 
268 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Questioner: And who is the second seer? 

Dadashri: It is Its phases. 

Questioner: The phases of the original Self, do they also 

remain as the Seer only? 

Dadashri:  They  remain  as  the  Seer,  they  are  also 
vitaraag, but as long as they know that ‘This is bad’ and ‘This 
is  good’,  they  are  considered  phases  of  the  intellect.  [After 
attaining the Knowledge of the Self, the ego does not remain, 
that  is  why  the  intellect  Sees,  and  as  the  ego  is  no  longer 
present,  attachment  or  abhorrence  do  not  occur.]  Even  the 
phases  of  the  original  Self  are  pure.  The  Knowledge  of  the 
original Self is pure, Its phases are pure and this Knowledge 
[of the vibhaavik self in state as the Gnani] is pure, [but] Its 
phases are not pure.  

Questioner: The Knowledge is pure, and Its phases are 

not pure, yet It Sees and Knows? 

Dadashri: Yes. That which prevails for this Dada, that is 
vitaraagata. Attachment or abhorrence do not arise, even in 
the  phases.  However,  He  will  still  Know  that  ‘this  is  good’ 
and ‘this is bad’. In a state lower than that, a state like that of 
the intellect exists, which is considered to be paudgalik (of the 
non-Self complex). In that state, attachment and abhorrence 
can definitely arise. [This is because in whatever the intellect 
knows  and  sees,  if  the  ego  is  engrossed  in  that,  then 
attachment  and  abhorrence  do  occur.]  And  what  are  these 
drashya (objects to be Seen)? Well, it is better to make four 
divisions. The first being a Seer, the second being a Seer, the 
third being an object to be Seen and the fourth being an object 
to be Seen.  

Questioner:  Then  You  also  said  that  there  is  a  second 
object to be Known and a second Knower, and a first Knower 
and a first object to be Known, did You not? 

 
[2.2] The Connection of the Properties and the Phases With … 

269 

Dadashri: Yes, the Knower and the Seer, They are both 

together. 

Questioner:  So,  the  Knower  and  the  Seer  exist  in  two 
forms;  the  object  to  be  Known  exists  in  two  forms  and  the 
object to be Seen exists in two forms. 

Dadashri:  That  is  correct.  The  moment  One  attains 
purity  with  regard  to  the  object  to  be  Known  [as  the 
developing ‘I’ does not become engrossed in the object to be 
Known, as He becomes separate from the object to be Known, 
as He prevails as the Knower of the object to be Known, with 
vitaraagata, He attains purity with regard to the objects to be 
Known], He returns to His original form. 

Questioner: Please can You say that once again. 

Dadashri:  When  purity  with  regard  to  the  object  to  be 
Known  is  attained,  it  means  that  the  developing  ‘I’  has 
become  completely  pure,  with  regard  to  the  phase  and  the 
object to be Known. Think it over, this is a very subtle point. 

Questioner: ‘You’ had once said, “There are two kinds 
of objects to be Known which are in the form as a temporary 
state  (avastha),  and  there  is  one  kind  of  the  object  to  be 
Known which is in the elemental form (tattva swaroop).” 

Dadashri: Well, ‘we’ actually calculated that; however, 
we  can  only  really  consider,  two  plus  two,  four.  The 
Knowledge of the Self, It’s inherent nature does not get spoilt. 
The  Knowledge  always  remains  vitaraag.  It  is  the  phases 
alone that spoil. This is because the Knowledge is permanent, 
It  is  indestructible;  whereas  the  phases  are  the  temporary 
states  [of  the  Knowledge],  they  are  destructible.  The 
knowledge  that  is  in  the  form  as  a  temporary  state  is 
considered as the intellect, and that too is destructible. It is in 
this destructible part that all this is seen. 

 
270 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Questioner:  Now,  You  said  that  the  first  object  to  be 
Seen is the pratishthit atma, and the second object to be Seen 
is the activities of the pratishthit atma. So, the One who can 
See the pure, in Seeing the pure…  

Dadashri: Both, both. 

Questioner:  Do  both  continue  to  be  Seen?  The 
pratishthit atma and its activities? ‘You’ had said that there 
are two Seers and there are two objects to be Seen, so You had 
said that the first Seer is Seeing the pratishthit atma.  

Dadashri: Which atma? 

Questioner: The first Seer is Seeing the pratishthit atma, 
so the pratishthit atma is the first object to be Seen. And the 
activities of the pratishthit atma, that is the second object to 
be Seen. And this second object to be Seen is being Seen by 
the second Seer, meaning the phases [of Knowledge, namely 
the intellect]?  

Dadashri:  Yes.  And  the  first  Seer  is  Seeing  the 

pratishthit atma.  

Questioner: So, when the pure state arises, does It have 

both these objects to be Seen? 

Dadashri: There is only one object to be Seen. 

Questioner: Which one? 

Dadashri:  The  pure  one  only.  The  pure  and 
indestructible one. That which is pure cannot be destructible. 
That which is pure is always indestructible. Therefore, It Sees 
that which is pure and all such indestructible things, all the six 
eternal elements. 

The vibhaavik self is destructible with respect to the form 
as a phase, and with respect to the form as Knowledge , It is 
indestructible.  After  absolute  Knowledge  (keval  Gnan) 

 
[2.2] The Connection of the Properties and the Phases With … 

271 

[manifests],  the  unnatural  phases  (vibhaavik  paryay)  do  not 
exist. 

The developing ‘I’ is destructible in the form as a phase, 
and  in  the  form  as  Knowledge,  It  is  indestructible.  After 
absolute Knowledge [manifests], the developing ‘I’ does not 
exist in the form as a phase. Are you able to understand some 
of this? 

Questioner: Dada, I can understand a little. 

Dadashri: ‘We’ do not know how to say it. 

Questioner:  No,  but  Dada,  do  not  stress  yourself  right 

now. 

Dadashri:  Yes,  that  is  not  a  problem.  But  complete 
clarification should definitely come out. The speech that came 
forth, such speech will not come forth again. The Self cannot 
be considered destructible, can It! However, as Its phases are 
destructible,  therefore  that  comes  under  the  intellect.  The 
phases have been considered as the intellect. And it is through 
this  intellect  that  this  is  being  seen;  from  where  did  this 
intellect arise? The answer is, it has come through as a phase 
of the [vibhaavik] self. The intellect is destructible, whereas 
there is nothing destructible present in the original form [the 
original  Self].  Actually,  when  You  can  See  the  pure  even 
through the phases, that is when You are considered to have 
become  the  original  pure  Soul.  How  should  things  be  Seen 
through the phases? 

Questioner: They should be Seen as pure. But at the time 
of Seeing the pure, One can even See ‘this is right’ and ‘this 
is wrong’, can He not? 

Dadashri: No. 

Questioner: No? Is it considered impure until then? 

 
272 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Dadashri: It’s like ‘we’ said [earlier], “In this, however 
much the shortcomings ‘we’ have [in the state as the Gnani], 
only those many phases of ‘ours’ are spoilt. Once those many 
phases become pure, then the phases of ‘our’ Knowledge will 
become  completely  pure.”  Is  it  not  something  that  can  be 
understood? What is the problem? 

This is a very subtle point. Such a point would never be 
brought up. This is no ordinary talk. This point is something 
that ‘we’ alone have to Know. ‘We’ Know that ‘the phases are 
impure to this extent’.  

Questioner:  ‘You’  said  that  these  many  phases  of  the 
Knowledge  are  impure;  so,  on  what  is  that  impurity  based? 
Meaning, what impurity is in them? 

Dadashri: ‘Our’ state [as the Gnani] is not yet complete 
(sampurna);  that  of  being  completely  vitaraag.  Even  the 
phases have to be vitaraag and the Knowledge also has to be 
vitaraag. 

Questioner:  When  would  vitaraagata  arise  in  the 

phases? 

Dadashri: When they become pure. When all the karma 
have been cleared. Moreover, what kind of karma are they? 
‘One’ [as the Self] may have become pure internally first, then 
after a long time, the purity is reflected on the outside. ‘We’ 
do say, “With respect to the Self, ‘we’ are completely pure, 
with respect to the Knowledge, ‘we’ are completely pure, with 
respect to the phases ‘we’ are impure,” don’t ‘we’? 

Questioner: Does that mean that when that karma comes 
to unfold, that is when the purity comes into effect; is that how 
it works? Until then, that balance will remain, it will remain 
pending. 

 
[2.2] The Connection of the Properties and the Phases With … 

273 

Dadashri: Yes, as long as they remain there, it [the purity 
on  the  outside]  will  not  arise.  After  that  [the  stock  of  filled 
karma] empties out, the phases become pure. 

Questioner: And as We [the Self] See those phases, do 

they become pure? 

Dadashri:  Yes,  after  that,  they  remain  pure  indeed. 
Nothing else is seen. No impurity is seen. The restlessness in 
the phases comes to an end. Do you understand a little? 

In  this  way,  the  form  as  the  phase  separates  [becomes 
pure]. Now, what does the Real form as the Self consist of? 
‘Knowledge’ and Its phases. 

Questioner:  The  Real  form  as  the  Self  consists  of 

Knowledge and Its phases? 

Dadashri: That’s all. 

Questioner: Is that considered as the Real Self’s form? 

Dadashri: The inherent nature of Knowledge is that It is 
permanent and the inherent nature of the phase is that it Sees 
the object to be Seen exactly as it appears. 

Questioner: Is it in the form of a temporary state? Is the 
function of the phase to See the form that is a temporary state? 

Dadashri:  It  Sees  the  form  that  is  a  temporary  state. 
However  much  the  Gnanantaray  karma  (karma  obstructing 
the Knowledge of the Self) remain, in those many situations, 
One  Sees  through  the  phases.  And  when  the  developing  ‘I’ 
Sees  through  His  Knowledge,  at  that  time,  nothing  but  the 
entire Real form as absolute Knowledge is Seen. 

Questioner:  In  the  part  where  the  obstruction  to  the 
Knowledge  of  the  Self  remains,  for  that  much,  One  Sees 
through the form as a phase. Please explain this once more. 

 
274 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Dadashri: Absolute Knowledge is not in the form as  a 
phase. This ‘Knowledge’ [of the Self] has been referred to as 
a property of the Self from the context of worldly life, with 
regard  to  the  inherent  nature  of  worldly  life.  The  original 
property  of  [Knowledge  of]  the  Self  extends  all  the  way  to 
Vignan (Science; absolute Knowledge). This is because, in the 
Self which is indestructible, there can never be any state that 
is destructible. Do you understand? 

Questioner: Yes. 

Dadashri: Where does the term ‘Knowledge’ have to be 
used? The term ‘Knowledge’ has to be used for people who 
are  existing  in  the  form  as  a  phase  [as  the  relative  self]. 
Otherwise,  in  the  original  form,  the  Self  is  absolute 
Knowledge only. 

When  there  is  oneness  with  respect  to  the  elemental 
matter, the properties, and the phases, when these three have 
become  pure,  for  such  a  One,  He  will  have  become  the 
absolute pure Soul. However, due to this era of the time cycle, 
absolute Knowledge cannot be attained in  Its entirety. Even 
for ‘us’, It has remained incomplete at 356 degrees, hasn’t It! 

The Intellect, Is It Inanimate or Living? 

People  from  every  other  religious  background  have 
referred  to  the  intellect  as  being  jada  (inanimate;  lifeless), 
whereas the Jain religion has referred to it as chetan (animate; 
living). Have you ever heard that? That the Jain religion has 
referred to the intellect as chetan? 

Questioner: That  intellect  is  what  they have put in  the 
category of matiGnan (Knowledge regarding the Self that has 
been digested and is in experience), isn’t it? 

Dadashri: It definitely cannot be considered as being a 

part of Knowledge of the Self! 

 
[2.2] The Connection of the Properties and the Phases With … 

275 

Questioner: Can it be considered as matiGnan? 

Dadashri: 

knowledge 
(ahamkaari  gnan)  and  the  phase  as  the  [unnatural]  self  is 
egoistic knowledge.  

Intellect  means 

egoistic 

Questioner: The phase  as  the unnatural  self is  egoistic 

knowledge? 

Dadashri:  Yes.  And  with  respect  to  the  phase  as  the 
inherently  natural  Self  (Swabhaavik  paryay),  the  Self  is  a 
different thing altogether. This is a very profound point. ‘We’ 
should not mention it right now. Other people who hear this 
over here will then keep over analyzing it. [They will think,] 
‘The  scripture  writers  have  said,  “The  tools  that  illuminate, 
the phases of Knowledge and Vision, they are indescribable 
(Prakash sadhanone niruchaarya, Gnan-Darshan paryaye).” 
But wow, what is this? Dada has said no to phases!’ That is 
why ‘we’ do not talk about it. People take away with them just 
what  ‘we’  have  said  [without  understanding  it]!  Someone 
would most likely oppose that! There are many such  points 
that ‘we’ do not mention; points that are harmful to the world 
[if misunderstood]. It is for ‘us’ alone to understand, and when 
you see it in the books, in the Jain scriptures, that is when you 
will realize that, the intellect has been referred to as jada by 
the  Vedants  as  well  as  these  others,  but  the  Jain  scriptures 
have referred to it as chetan.  

Questioner:  So,  Dada,  is  this  the  same  chetan  that  we 
refer to as nishchetan chetan (energized entity that appears to 
be living but is in fact lifeless)? 

Dadashri: Yes, that verily is the nishchetan chetan.  

It is not what ‘we’ refer to as Nishchay Chetan (the Real 
Self). Do ‘we’ not speak about the Nishchay Chetan! That is 
actually  when  You  prevail  as  the  Self;  that  is  actually 
considered as Knowledge. The  Real Self does not  interfere; 

 
276 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

there is no interference in the Real (Nishchay). If it is referred 
to as Nishchay Chetan, then it would have to be considered as 
Nishchay buddhi (the intellect that does not interfere), but that 
is not the case. 

In the State as Pure Knowledge, Saw Only the Pure!  

You have to understand that the phase is destructible, and 
the  Knowledge  is  indestructible.  The  phase  cannot  see 
destructible  things  [as  being  temporary].  [It  believes  the 
temporary  relationships  to  be  real,  to  be  permanent.]  If  the 
destructible phase [the relative self; the intellect] can develop 
the energy to See the destructible form, then It is referred to 
as Knowledge of the Self. Secondly, One has to See that which 
is  there  in  the  form  that  it  actually  is,  to  See  the  pudgal, 
nothing  else.  Pudgal  here  means  the  unnatural  (vikrut) 
parmanu.  

Questioner:  To  See  the  form  as  the  pudgal  [the  vikrut 
parmanu], meaning to See it as being temporary, in that sense, 
isn’t it? 

Dadashri: Yes, in that sense. 

Questioner: But, One does not See it in a specific sense, 

One Sees it in a general sense, is that how it is? 

Dadashri: The original  One, the pure Soul,  It does not 
care  about  Seeing  it  that  way!  [‘It’  prevails  as]  Absolute 
Knowledge only and that too, It is indestructible. And that is 
why ‘we’ say, “The world is faultless (nirdosh),” that is ‘our’ 
pure Vision. That should come into pure Knowledge. 

Questioner:  And  what  happens  when  that  comes  into 

pure Knowledge? 

Dadashri: [‘One’  becomes] Sarvagnya  (the omniscient 
One; the Knower of all the eternal elements); thereafter, there 
is no reason to make any claims, is there! 

 
[2.2] The Connection of the Properties and the Phases With … 

277 

Questioner:  And  when  One  comes  into  the  pure 
Knowledge that ‘the world is faultless’, at that time, how do 
the objects to be Known and the objects to be Seen appear to 
Him? 

Dadashri:  They  will  all  appear  as  completely  pure  to 
Him. It is because of the phase, the intellect, that they appear 
this way [impure]. At the end of the day, they are definitely 
pure! 

Purity Helps One Attain the Absolute State 

Questioner: We say that ‘With respect to the elemental 
matter,  I  am  completely  and  totally  pure.  With  respect  to 
Knowledge, Vision and all other properties, I am completely 
and totally pure and even with respect to the phases, meaning, 
with respect to the resulting states that arise in Knowing the 
[infinite] objects to be Known; what I am asking is that even 
with respect to the phase, are ‘we’ [the Self] completely and 
totally pure? 

Dadashri:  ‘We’  are  pure  indeed,  with  respect  to  the 

phase. 

Questioner: We say that ‘we’ are pure even with respect 
to the phase, yet we also say that the phase also remains to be 
purified. How can both situations exist? 

Dadashri: To what extent are the phases pure? Until It 
[the vibhaavik Self, the vibhaavik ‘I’; the developing ‘I’; the 
awakened  Self]  becomes  [completely]  pure,  the  [vibhaavik; 
unnatural] phases remain. Thereafter, the vibhaavik phases do 
not remain at all, however the natural (swabhaavik) phases are 
always present. 

Questioner:  So,  until  the  developing  ‘I’  becomes 

[completely] pure, the [unnatural] phases will be there? 

Dadashri: Yes. Thereafter, there is only Knowledge. 

 
278 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Questioner:  And  once  the  [unnatural]  phases  become 
pure,  then  the  developing  ‘I’  will  have  become  the  form  as 
Knowledge? 

Dadashri:  As  long  as  even  one  [unnatural]  phase 

remains, absolute Knowledge cannot manifest. 

The  Self  means  ‘a  [pure;  natural]  phase  of  Knowledge 
and Vision’. The phase of Knowledge and Vision equates to 
the  Self.  With  respect  to  the  form  as  the  elemental  matter 
(dravya  swaroop),  It  is  indeed considered the Self. And the 
other  one  is  the  one  being  referred  to  as  the  worldly  self 
(sansaari atma). Because in the original Self, there cannot be 
any [unnatural] phases at all, can there! Only natural phases 
exist there.  

Questioner: Yes,  [unnatural]  phases  are  not  present  in 

the Real Self. 

Dadashri: There cannot be anything destructible in that 

which is indestructible. They [the phases] exist naturally.  

Questioner: Therefore, what all these people have talked 
about is actually the phases of the [vibhaavik] self. No one has 
ever  talked  about  the  [phases  of  the]  Real  Self,  have  they 
Dada? 

Dadashri: And  how  can  they?  They  cannot  understand 
this. These so-called highly spiritually elevated Gnanis have 
not understood even a word of this. 

People do not even have the thought arising that, ‘If the 
Self is permanent, and even the Knowledge is permanent, then 
Its phases would be…’ 

Questioner: The phases are temporary. 

Dadashri: That is when ‘we’ said that the Self is in the 
form as a phase of Knowledge and Vision. That phase is pure, 
what  has  been  said  is  not  incorrect.  As  long  as  all  the 

 
[2.2] The Connection of the Properties and the Phases With … 

279 

[unnatural] phases do not become completely pure, until then 
the  phase  [the  intellect]  exists.  Thereafter,  the  [unnatural] 
phases  leave.  And,  when  ‘our’  [unnatural]  phases  become 
completely [pure], then ‘we’ will prevail in Knowledge only, 
in absolute Knowledge, that is it. There will be no [unnatural] 
phases;  absolute  means  there  is  nothing  else  whatsoever 
[besides pure Knowledge]. 

Questioner:  There  is  nothing  else  besides  [pure] 

Knowledge. 

Dadashri:  Hence,  the  term  ‘phase’  has  been  given  in 

reference to worldly life context. Did you understand? 

Questioner: In the context of the worldly self, is that so?  

there 

is  no  need  for 

Dadashri:  Afterwards, 

the 
[unnatural] phase at all, is there! [Unnatural] Phases exist only 
here. Absolute Knowledge does not have [unnatural] phases. 
Once  the  intellect  comes  to  an  end,  the  [unnatural]  phases 
come to an end. ‘We’ do say that ‘our’ intellect has come to 
an  end,  although  it  has  not  come  to  an  end  in  every  sense; 
however, ‘we’ say this for people to understand. ‘We’ say this 
to  reduce  the  arrogance  of  the  one  who  is  feeling  arrogant 
about his intellect. In fact, the four degrees that ‘we’ are short 
of [in attaining the absolute state], it is verily  because those 
phases are impure; that indeed is why ‘we’ have this state. 

Questioner: So, after the phases become pure, does the 
mind exist? Would the speech and the body exist? The body 
would definitely be there, wouldn’t it? 

Dadashri:  It  is  in  its  own  inherent  nature;  that  is  a 
different thing altogether. The original Self that is within, It 
does not understand the phases. Actually, as long as the body 
exists, It lives. However, if that One [the developing ‘I’] is in 
the  form  as  absolute  Knowledge,  there  is  no  ‘touch’ 
[impurity], whereas for this one [the I in the ignorant state], 

 
280 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

there is one hundred percent ‘touch’. In That [form as absolute 
Knowledge], there is no ‘touch’. 

Questioner: So then, in That no ‘touch’ state, the pudgal 
that remains, One would be Seeing the phases of that pudgal, 
isn’t that so? 

Dadashri:  Well,  absolute  Knowledge  indeed  Sees 
everything,  but  there  is  no  attachment  or  abhorrence.  That 
which  Sees  the  pudgal  with  vitaraagata,  that  can  only  be 
Knowledge alone, nothing else whatsoever. Moreover,  ‘we’ 
would  understand  that  this  is  pure  Knowledge.  ‘We’  have 
given You the pure Soul, therefore for You, It [the Knowledge 
at  the  understanding  level]  has  become  pure,  so  what  else 
remains? The answer is, the phases that are there, they remain 
to be purified! 

Questioner:  ‘You’  said  that  the  original  Self  is  pure 
indeed,  so  then,  whose  phases  have  become  spoilt?  Whose 
phases remain impure? 

Dadashri:  The  impure  phases  actually…  The  moment 
the belief of the ‘I’ [the first level of vibhaav] became impure, 
it became the pratishthit atma. From that very moment on, the 
phases  became  impure.  The  one  who  believes  the  impure 
phase to be his own, that ‘I am this’, those very phases are his. 
This worldly self remains in the form as a phase until absolute 
Knowledge manifests. 

Questioner:  Until  absolute  Knowledge  manifests,  the 

developing ‘I’ exists in the form as a phase? 

Dadashri: Yes, as both, as Knowledge and Vision and as 

a phase. 

Questioner: But how can the interpretation be made of 
the pure and the impure? How can one interpret whether the 
developing ‘I’ has become the pure phase form, or whether it 
is still in the form as an impure phase? 

 
[2.2] The Connection of the Properties and the Phases With … 

281 

Dadashri: [The presence of]  Kashay (inner enemies  of 

anger, pride, deceit and greed) and akashay (kashay free). 

Questioner:  Can  the  developing  ‘I’  be  in  a  form  as  a 

phase even if It is in a kashay free state? 

Dadashri: No. 

Questioner:  So  then,  does  It  become  the  form  as 

Knowledge when It is in the kashay free state? 

Dadashri: In the form as absolute Knowledge! 

Questioner:  So  then,  can  it  be  said  that  It  no  longer 

remains in the form as a phase at that time? 

Dadashri: Yes. 

Questioner:  In  going  from  the  state  of  kashay  to  the 

kashay free state, there are all these phases in between. 

Dadashri: There are phases. 

Questioner: Therefore, as long as It has become the form 
as Knowledge to a certain degree only, until then the form as 
a phase exists. 

Dadashri: Until then, the form as a phase exists. 

Questioner:  So,  until  then,  would  It  still  have  the 

[wrong] beliefs, in Its filled stock? 

Dadashri:  Until  then,  however  many  phases  have 
become  pure,  that  much  is  considered  as  It’s  upadaan,  It’s 
level of spiritual development!  

Questioner:  If  those  many  phases  have  become  pure, 

what happens at that time? 

Dadashri: However much has become pure, that much is 
considered It’s [the developing ‘I’s] upadaan, based on ‘our’ 
[Akram] Knowledge. That [Kramik] Knowledge understands 
upadaan differently. Here [on the Akram path], ‘we’ say it as 

 
282 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

it  is,  do  ‘we’  not!  As  long  as  absolute  Knowledge  is  not 
attained,  upadaan  exists.  As  the  Self,  One  is  pure;  as 
Knowledge,  One  is  pure;  as  a  phase,  the  ‘I’  is  developing 
spiritually.  

Questioner: And thereafter, how will the phase continue 
to  be  purified?  However  much  the  awakened  awareness 
increases, does the phase become purified by that much?  

Dadashri: However much the vitaraagata that prevails, 
for that much, no new karma are bound. By however much the 
upadaan  [the  developing  ‘I’]  remains  vitaraag,  those  many 
phases will be purified. 

Questioner:  Purification.  So,  the  Purusharth  (the  Real 
spiritual effort to prevail as the Self) remains to be done in this 
way, in the interim? 

Dadashri:  [Vitaraagata]  That  itself  is  the  Purusharth, 
otherwise [if there was attachment and abhorrence] one would 
be  binding  karma.  That  [vitaraagata]  is  indeed  what  It 
[Purusharth] is referred to as.  

Even the Absolutely Liberated Souls Have Phases! 

Questioner:  Do  our  mahatmas  [those  who  have  taken 

Gnan] continue to have the experience of phases? 

Dadashri: They undergo all kinds of experiences. They 
have such an experience of the properties [of Knowing  and 
Seeing]  and  they  experience  bliss.  All  sorts  of  experiences 
happen; they understand the Knowledge. 

Questioner:  Then  do  the  Siddha  Lords  have  elemental 

matter, properties and phases? 

Dadashri: Everyone does. 

Questioner: But for Them, all the phases are pure, so all 

that remains for Them is to See and Know. 

 
[2.2] The Connection of the Properties and the Phases With … 

283 

Dadashri: That is all. ‘Their’ phases are pure, whereas 
for  ‘this  one’  [the  developing  ‘I’]  here,  the  phases  have 
become impure, they are adulterated. 

Questioner: I had actually understood that when the pure 
Soul  becomes  still  in  Siddha  Kshetra,  It  does  not  have 
anything else at all over there; that It has no such thing as a 
phase or anything else. That is the understanding I had. 

Dadashri:  No,  then  the  pure  Soul  cannot  indeed  be 
considered an eternal element (vastu), can It! That is not so; It 
does  have  phases.  Even  now,  the  Siddha  Lords  do  have 
phases.  In  Knowing  the  infinite  objects  to  be  Known,  the 
phases are involved. Even the Siddha Lords have to constantly 
See  the  temporary  states;  there  is  no  ‘sleeping’  [remaining 
unaware] there. 

Jada (inanimate matter) has phases of inanimate matter, 
pudgal  (the  non-Self  complex)  has  phases  of  the  non-Self 
complex,  Chetan  (the  Self)  has  phases  of  Knowing  and 
Seeing; all of them have phases. Say You [the developing ‘I’] 
saw  a  small  pomegranate  plant.  ‘You’  can  Know  that  the 
pomegranate  plant  is  actually  something  that  is  being  seen 
through the physical eyes, but ‘How did it arise? What is its 
original  source? From  what  did  it  arise?  How  did  it  arise?’ 
When all such things are Seen, that too is not a property of the 
Self.  That  knowledge  is  not  the  property  of  Gnan  prakash 
(illumination as Knowledge of the Self), but it is a phase of 
the [vibhaavik] self, it is a phase of knowledge [namely, the 
intellect].  Therefore,  only  the  [vibhaavik;  unnatural]  phase 
can see anything external to the Self. The property does not 
separate from the elemental matter. Such is their relationship 
with  each  other.  The  ones  that  remain  with  the  elemental 
matter are the properties; the phases undergo changes. 

The  phases  are  destructible.  You  saw  one  mango,  after 
having seen that, another mango is seen. One [phase of seeing] 

 
284 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

came  to  an  end,  and  another  came  into  being.  For  a  certain 
period  of  time,  the  phase  of  seeing  remained  constant. 
Thereafter a third mango is seen.6 

The Temporary States Are of the Self and the 
Pudgal Imitates Them! 

Questioner:  But  Dada,  all  these  temporary  states  are 
arising  due  to  the  coming  together  of  jada  and  Chetan,  are 
they not? 

Dadashri:  No,  it  is  only  when  the  temporary  states 
[phases in this context] are prevailing constantly, that It can 
be called the Self, isn’t it! The temporary states will always 
be there.  

Questioner:  So,  if  jada  and  Chetan  were  to  not  come 

together, then the temporary states would not arise, right? 

Dadashri:  No,  no.  They  will  still  arise.  The  temporary 
state is actually the inherent nature of the Self. It is not that 
the temporary state exists because the Self comes into close 
proximity  with  jada.  The  temporary  states  that  are  overtly 
visible, they are of the pudgal (non-Self complex of input and 
output). The temporary states that  you are referring to, they 
are  of  the  pudgal.  The  temporary  states  of  the  Self  are 
different; the Self has  temporary states  as the Self, whereas 
this pudgal has temporary states as the pudgal! ‘Yours’ is the 
temporary state as the Self, instead you believe the temporary 
state as the pudgal to be your own. The temporary states as 
the Self keep changing, they keep changing in the form as the 
Self. The temporary states change within the boundary of the 
Self, and based on those temporary states, this Pudgal imitates 

6  Specific  details  about  The  Self  -  Its  Elemental  Matter,  Properties  and 
Phases can be found in Aptavani 3 

 
                                                 
[2.2] The Connection of the Properties and the Phases With … 

285 

them.  Hence  the  temporary  state  of  the  pudgal  keeps 
changing. You believe these temporary states of the pudgal to 
be yours such that, ‘I am this’. If this belief were to dissipate, 
then there would be no problem. 

Questioner:  So,  as  the  temporary  states  of  the  Self 

change, this Pudgal imitates them? 

Dadashri: Yes, because they have come into very close 

proximity with each other. 

Questioner:  ‘You’  referred  to  that  as  ‘samipyabhaav’ 
(the engrossment  that arises when the two eternal elements, 
the Self and inanimate matter, are in close proximity). Even 
then, the kshetra (the space that is occupied) of the two have 
indeed remained different? 

Dadashri: Moreover, their kshetra are different. 

Questioner: The temporary states of the pudgal, are they 

these 8,400,000 yoni (lifeforms) that have been mentioned?  

Dadashri: Yes. 

Questioner: So then, what are the temporary states of the 

Self? 

Dadashri: When the Self Sees the pudgal, that [Seeing] 
becomes  Its  temporary  state,  yet  It  remains  within  Its  own 
inherent nature. 

Questioner: So how does it change, Dada? 

Dadashri: It is only the belief alone that changes. As the 
temporary state of the pudgal changes, you [as the vibhaavik 
self] believe, ‘It is I who is changing’, and so you become [one 
with] that. That is why ‘we’ have said that when samkit (the 
right belief of ‘I am pure Soul’) is attained, the moment the 
right  belief  becomes  established,  it  [the  wrong  belief;  the 
vibhaavik self] dissipates immediately. 

 
286 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Questioner:  Does  that  Pudgal  imitate  the  Self  in 

accordance with the temporary state of the Self? 

Dadashri: ‘We’ use the words ‘to imitate’ so that you can 

understand. 

Questioner:  Do  the  temporary  states  of  the  pudgal 
change  due  to  the  evidence  (nimit)  of  the  Self,  or  is  there 
nothing like that? 

Dadashri: All the evidences are indeed there; the entire 
basis is of the evidence. The Self came into close proximity, 
due to that evidence, everything keeps happening. 

Questioner: So, does the temporary state first change in 

the Self? 

Dadashri: The temporary states do not change at all, each 
one is dwelling within its own inherent nature. It is just that, 
with the coming together of the two, due to the engrossment 
arising out of close proximity with each other, these vyatirek 
guna [the vibhaav] arise automatically, and if these vyatirek 
guna are present, then the temporary states of the pudgal will 
keep on changing. 

The phases of the Self, the phases of that which is Chetan 
(the  Self)  are  Chetan  (having  the  property  of  Knowing  and 
Seeing) and the phases of that which is inanimate (jada) are 
inanimate.  The  phases  of  the  two  are  completely  different. 
These people talk about everything, but it’s like how the parrot 
keeps  saying,  “Rama,  Rama.”  [They  repeat  meaninglessly 
from memory.]  

One  [the  developing  ‘I’]  may  ask  about  ‘Mumbai’  [the 
absolute  Self]  every  day,  but  he  will  not  grasp  the  original 
point unless he has personally seen ‘Mumbai’. One may ask 
every day, “How can I get to Bhuleshwar? By which road can 
one get there?” 

 
[2.2] The Connection of the Properties and the Phases With … 

287 

Questioner: But does that help? 

Dadashri: That definitely helps, but it does not give rise 

to satisfaction. 

Questioner: Dada, by doing so, will he gradually reach 

‘Mumbai’ one day?  

Dadashri: Yes, that will happen. 

Questioner: Wherever he is standing currently, it is not 

‘Mumbai’; he is sure about that, isn’t he? 

Dadashri: Yes, he is sure about that. 

Questioner: That is indeed why he continues the efforts 

to keep going towards ‘Mumbai’! 

Dadashri: Yes, so eventually he will be able to see it, he 

will be able to see some of ‘Mumbai’. 

The Illusory State and the Worldly State 

Questioner: So, are we to understand that the ego and the 

Self are eternal elements that do not have a beginning? 

Dadashri: Not eternal elements without a beginning. 

Questioner: This is because, it is only in that which does 
not have a beginning that the cause of the action is the effect, 
isn’t it?  

Dadashri: No, it may seem like that. However, that [the 

ego] is not a part of the eternal. It is a part of the relative. 

Questioner:  Is  it  a  part  of  that  which  is  constantly 

changing (parivartansheel)? 

Dadashri: No, it is a part of the relative. 

Questioner: That is not the meaning of the English word. 

Dadashri: Relative means it is destructible. 

 
288 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Questioner:  But  Dada,  nothing  ever  gets  destroyed, 

everything is undergoing change. 

Dadashri:  Yes,  undergoing  change,  but  the  phases  are 
destructible whereas the permanent elements, they are eternal. 
No  one  can  do  anything  to  them.  All  these  relatives  are 
temporary adjustments, and You [the Self] are permanent; so 
how can they be in the same category?  

Questioner: Dada, You had said that the ego has arisen 
as a phase of the Self, and the Self became trapped, so the ego 
would  be  considered  a  paudgalik  bhaav  (a  worldly  state), 
wouldn’t it? 

Dadashri:  First,  it  is  referred  to  as  a  bhrant  bhaav  (an 
illusory  state;  the  first  level  of  vibhaav),  and  thereafter  it 
becomes paudgalik bhaav.  

Questioner: But Dada, did the illusion arise in the pure 

Soul? Who acquires the bhrant bhaav? 

Dadashri: The phase of [Vision of] the pure Soul; that 
temporary state surely feels  the pressure!  If  you were under 
pressure right now, then would your mind go haywire or not? 

Questioner: It would go haywire. 

Dadashri: It is like that! 

What Is Necessary, the Phase or the Five Agnas? 

If this man did not understand the discussion on ‘phases’, 

does that mean he will not go to moksha? 

Questioner: Of course, he will. 

Dadashri: The answer is, it is not possible for this, ‘he 
will not go to moksha’ to happen; because one has to  go  to 
moksha after having come under the shelter (aashray) of the 
Gnani  Purush!  On  the  contrary,  if  he  [one  who  has  not 
attained  Self-realization]  were  to  try  and  understand  it  [by 

 
[2.2] The Connection of the Properties and the Phases With … 

289 

himself], he may even ruin it for himself by making indiscreet 
remarks. Instead, it is better to have remained ignorant about 
it. He [a mahatma] has understood at least this much. He has 
understood because of all those sentences [of Knowledge] that 
have been placed [in the Charan Vidhi]; it is on the basis of 
those sentences that he has understood. 

You should definitely ask, so that you can think on it. 

Questioner:  What  effect  do  the  inanimate  phases 

(achetan paryay) cause? 

Dadashri:  Well,  they  actually  give  off  two  kinds  of 
effects. Inanimate phases do not affect the Gnani whatsoever, 
whereas they affect the agnani (the one who has not attained 
Self-realization). 

Questioner: Do they make the agnani bind karma? 

Dadashri: Yes, they make him bind karma; this world is 
functioning verily because of that only! It is functioning verily 
due to the inanimate phases. 

This [phase] is actually a concept that is as profound as 
the  ocean.  ‘We’  have  given  it  to  you  in  brief.  You  have  to 
bring about a solution quickly. However, you can understand 
samrambh (origin; the cause), samaarambh (implementing in 
action; bringing it into effect) and aarambh (beginning of any 
action; the beginning of the effect). That is at the gross level. 
This is actually the subtlest of the subtle, very subtle! 

Questioner: It  is  something  that  cannot  be  explained 
using words. But, it is through the words that we are trying to 
identify this. 

Dadashri: The word ‘phase’ is being used in worldly life. 
The word should not be used like that, however people have 
actually done just that. The word ‘phase’ applies only to that 
which is eternal (Sat), only to that which is indestructible. The 

 
290 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

word ‘phase’ does not apply anywhere else. In spite of that, 
just  look  at  how  the  word  ‘phase’  is  used  in  this  scientific 
language of yours! 

It is just that the word ‘phase’ is spoken, that is all. But it 
is very difficult to grasp it. It is fine to understand it [broadly], 
but do not delve deep into this word ‘phase’. It is a very subtle 
thing. If you try to understand it, then some day you will feel, 
‘I have understood it.’ Otherwise, it is not something that can 
come into Your Darshan (Vision). 

Questioner: I am just asking for the sake of it, there is no 

other motive behind this. 

Dadashri: No, there is no problem. But many things that 
‘we’  try  to  explain,  they  will  not  even  come  into  Your 
Darshan. 

Questioner: Yes, that point makes sense, it is true. 

Dadashri: First, we look at it in the broad sense, so it is 
called a ‘spinning mill’. Then we will be able to see about the 
‘weaving’  [the  finer  details].  A  phase  is  a  very  exalted 
concept. The saints and ascetics, the aacharyas (Self-realized 
masters), all of them cannot understand it. The entire world 
has become perplexed due to the phases of the pudgal alone. 
Those  which  are  visible  overtly,  they  are  all  phases  of  the 
pudgal. It is better to look at it in the broad sense, do not delve 
too much into the details. It is more than enough if You remain 
in  the  five  Agnas.  It  is  not  possible  to  traverse  across  the 
Science of the vitaraag Lords [quickly]. It is a very profound 
Science! What is the hurry in traversing that right now itself! 
It may take one or two more lifetimes, but sooner or later, You 
are going to have to traverse that, isn’t it? Sooner or later, You 
will have no choice but to Know it. It may not be possible for 
You  to  understand  it  this  very  instant,  right?  How  can  You 
grasp  it?  Would  You  be  able  to  grasp  it?  It  is  a  difficult 
concept to grasp. And You may actually be able to understand 

 
[2.2] The Connection of the Properties and the Phases With … 

291 

samaarambh  (implementing  in  action),  but  it  is  not  easy  to 
understand these phases.  

The phases of the Self are Chetan (having the property of 
Knowing and Seeing) indeed. Then no matter who it is, even 
for an agnani (one who has not attained Self-realization), his 
phases  of  the  Self  are  Chetan  indeed,  and  the  phases  of 
inanimate matter are achetan (inanimate; lifeless). 

Look, ‘we’ have indeed investigated this! ‘You’ do want 
to reach up to the phases of the Self, don’t You! Many people 
outside [of Akram Vignan] are also talking about this! 

You [mahatmas] should say that You [the Self] are pure 
with  respect  to  the  elemental  matter,  the  properties  and  the 
phases; nonetheless, You may not even fully understand what 
the elemental matter is, what the properties are and what the 
phases are. If You were to understand them, then [it means] 
You will have come into the form as absolute Knowledge! 



 
 
[3] 

The Beginning and the End of a 
Temporary State 

The Terminology Regarding Phases 

The Self is Sat (eternal); Sat means that It is Itself in the 
form  as  an  eternal  element  (vastu),  It  is  in  the  form  as  a 
property  (guna),  It  has  phases  (paryay)  and  It  is  Itself 
independent. 

Questioner:  Dada,  the  words  ‘nirantar  parivartan’ 
(constantly  bringing  about  a  change)  have  been  used;  does 
that mean it is without an end? 

Dadashri:  It  does  not  stop;  it  is  continuous.  Samsaran 
means to constantly bring about a change, it does not pause 
even  for  a  moment.  That  is  utpaat  (genesis;  beginning; 
creation),  vyay  (dissipation;  coming  to  an  end;  destruction), 
dhruv  (permanence)...  one  avastha  (temporary  state)  arises, 
the dissipation of one temporary state leads to the arising of a 
second one. Those temporary states keep on arising. 

So  now,  the  temporary  states  of  the  Self  are  all 
destructible (vinashi), they are referred to as phase. What is a 
phase?  Take  for  example  the  sun,  it  has  [the  property  of] 
illumination  (prakash;  to  give  off  light)  within  it.  To 
illuminate is its inherent nature (swabhaav). Now through that 
[property  of]  illumination,  what  all  are  we  able  to  see  over 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[2.3] The Beginning and the End of a Temporary State   

293 

here? The rays [of light] are the phases. The phases keep on 
changing continuously, whereas the [property of] illumination 
remains the very same. The phases of the Self keep changing 
while  remaining  in  their  own  pradesh  (region;  location); 
however,  nothing  can  affect  the  phases.  Currently,  the  Self 
[that  is  in  Its  inherently  natural  state]  within  is  immiscible 
(tankotkirna), It is the same as ever, It is pure indeed. 

The Particles of Karma Adhere Due to Bhrantiras 

The  Pudgal  has  temporary  states  and  the  Self  has 
temporary states. After combining the temporary states of the 
two , the developing I labors in vain. If the temporary states 
of this world were to not exist, then the eternal elements would 
never have existed. The Self is an independent eternal element 
that  has  the  property  of  Knowing  and  Seeing,  similarly  the 
Pudgal is an eternal element that has form. Upon the coming 
together of these two, worldly life arose, and the ‘business’ 
started. Only if the temporary states exist can it be considered 
an eternal element (tattva); otherwise, it is considered atattva 
(a non-elemental form).  

An  eternal  element  can  never  be  destructible. 
Nonetheless,  that which is  visible, all of that is  avastu  (that 
which  is  not  an  eternal  element).  They  are  not  illusory 
(mithya), they are relative forms. 

Questioner: But these clusters of karmic particles (karma 

vargana) that adhere, do they adhere to the phase? 

Dadashri: No, nothing at all adheres. Karma is actually 
considered  as  pudgal.  To  adhere  would  be  considered  as 
having interfered. 

Questioner: It is indeed because these clusters of karmic 
particles adhere that the illusion of the worldly life exists, isn’t 
it? 

 
294 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Dadashri: Yes, but they do not adhere to the Self. They 
do  not  adhere  to  the  phase,  they  do  not  adhere  to  the 
properties, they do not adhere to anything at all. 

Questioner:  The  Self  exists  with  Its  elemental  matter, 
properties and phases (dravya-guna-paryay). Now, how does 
the process of the karmic particles adhering on the Self take 
place? 

Dadashri: They do not adhere to It [the Self]. 

Questioner: They do not adhere to the elemental matter 

(dravya), but they do adhere to the phase, don’t they? 

Dadashri: No, they do not adhere to the phase either. All 
these beliefs are just completely wrong. If they were to adhere 
to the phase, then they would never detach afterwards. 

Questioner:  So  then  how  does  the  binding  of  karma 

occur? 

Dadashri: That is precisely what one has to understand; 
that indeed is what is known as Atma Gnan (Knowledge of the 
Self)! Otherwise, one is in fact setting this through the intellect 
[by thinking], ‘It got stuck to the phase and this happened and 
that happened.’ 

Questioner: Nothing whatsoever can adhere to the phase 

of the Self, isn’t it Dada? 

Dadashri: Yes, nothing happens to the phase of the Self, 
and  neither  does  anything  happen  to  the  phase  of  this  one 
[jada; inanimate matter]. 

This  is  a  completely  different  thing.  Had  people 
understood this, then they would all have definitely become 
free,  wouldn’t  they!  Instead,  they  have  kept  evaluating  this 
through  the  intellect.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  nothing  at  all  has 
adhered  in  this,  nothing  at  all  has  happened.  How  much 
adherence  is  there?  It  is  just  this  much;  through  bhrantiras 

 
[2.3] The Beginning and the End of a Temporary State   

295 

(the wrong belief of ‘I am Chandubhai’ that perpetuates the 
illusion that, ‘This is mine, and I am the doer’) one says, “I 
did this.” That is when the ras (the engrossment in the illusory 
belief that, ‘Whatever file one is doing, I am doing that’), the 
bhrantiras  of  ‘I  did  this,’  sets  in  between  those  two  eternal 
elements.  The  adherence  is  simply  due  to  that,  that  is  all. 
Nothing else has adhered at all. With these two [beliefs of], ‘I 
did  it  and  this  is  mine,’  the  bhrantiras  arises  and  the 
bhrantiras then sets in between the eternal element of the Self 
and  the  eternal  element  of  the  Pudgal.  Whereas,  with  [the 
belief  of,]  ‘I  have  not  done  it  and  this  is  not  mine’,  the 
bhrantiras does not set in at that time, and so they separate. 
Therefore,  the  Gnani  Purush  dissolves  that  bhrantiras  [for 
us], thereafter the eternal elements separate. 

The Eternal Elements Are Indestructible, the 
Temporary States Are Destructible 

When a temporary state comes to unfold, it is bound to 
come to an end. The original eternal elements neither have a 
beginning nor an end. Phases  have a beginning and an end. 
The prevalence as a human being will come to unfold and it 
too, will come to an end. The state as a female buffalo will 
come  to  unfold  and  the  prevalence  as  a  female  buffalo  will 
inevitably come to an end. The prevalence as a human being 
is a phase of the self. [The prevalence as] A donkey is a phase 
of the self. The second day, the third day or the fifteenth day 
[full moon]  of the lunar calendar,  they  are  all  phases of the 
moon. The [life-form as a] donkey actually tends to arise from 
the  human  life-form.  [In  the  current  life,]  That  person  has 
undoubtedly developed one attribute of a donkey, that is why 
based on the circumstantial evidence of that attribute, he will 
take on the form as a donkey [in the next life]. One’s next life-
form  will  certainly  be  based  on  the  attribute  which  one  has 
developed to a specific extent in this life-form as a human. 

 
296 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Every  single  living  being  has  been  wandering  around 
since  infinite  lifetimes.  One  has  wandered  through  various 
temporary  states.  One  has  definitely  wandered  through  all 
these temporary states; that of a dog, a donkey, a cow, a horse, 
a female buffalo, an ox, a human, a woman, a bird. One has to 
come into Swasthata (the state of dwelling steadfastly as the 
Self) from [dwelling in] the avastha (temporary states) [of the 
self]. 

Questioner: If we were to cut a branch of a tree and plant 
it elsewhere, then another tree would grow there. Similarly, 
do two souls arise from one soul? 

Dadashri: There are millions and millions of souls in a 
potato, within just a single potato. There are so many living 
beings in these cacti. Even if just a small piece of this cactus 
were to be put in the ground, it would grow. 

Questioner:  Dada,  so  some  of  these  Souls,  the  Ones 
which neither have a beginning nor an end, there surely must 
be  a  certain  quantity  of  them,  isn’t  it?  Is  there  never  an 
increment or decrement in that quantity? 

Dadashri: No, as far as quantity is concerned, whatever 
eternal element that exists in this world, be it the Self or be it 
the Parmanu, there is no decrement or increment in them. 

Questioner:  Do  they  continue  to  change;  do  they 

continue to go from one [life] form to another? 

Dadashri: They continue to change form, [but] they do 
not decrease or increase. Moreover, for the Self, there is no 
decrement or increment. There is no decrement or increment 
in the Parmanu or in any other eternal element. You may feel 
that this  [dead body] has been burnt, and  all this was done, 
[but] they  all individually  change into other formations; the 
avastha (temporary states) tend to change. 

Questioner: Does avastha mean situation? 

 
[2.3] The Beginning and the End of a Temporary State   

297 

that  are  decreasing,  nothing  else 

Dadashri:  It  is  referred  to  as  phases.  It  is  just  the 
temporary  states 
is 
happening.  Moreover,  the  Parmanu  that  exist,  all  the  other 
eternal elements, they are exactly the same. No other changes 
are taking place [in them]. The transformation is taking place 
in the temporary states; the phases keep on changing. 

Just  like,  if  we  were  to  heat  water,  its  temporary  state 
changes to that of water vapor. Subsequently, the water vapor 
turns  into  clouds,  and  then  the  clouds  turn  into  water  once 
again. All these temporary states are constantly coming to an 
end,  but  there  is  no  decrease  or  increase  with  regard  to  the 
eternal  elements.  Since  infinite  lifetimes,  You  [as  the  Self] 
have  certainly  existed,  and  I  [as  the  Self]  too  have  existed. 
However, in some lifetimes we may have been men, in some 
lifetimes we may have been women, in some lifetimes we may 
have been four-legged beings, in some lifetimes we may have 
been twelve-legged beings. Thus, we have wandered on and 
on  for  infinite  lifetimes.  The  temporary  states  all  keep 
changing constantly, but in the form as the Self, You are the 
very same. Now, if You realize that Self, who You really are, 
then You will become free from that [incessant cycle of birth 
and  death  in  various  life  forms],  otherwise  You  cannot 
become free. 

The Difference Between the Five Elements and the 
Six Eternal Elements... 

Questioner: In Hinduism, it is said that the entire world 
is made up of the panch mahabhoot (the five elements namely 
earth,  water,  fire,  air  and  space).  Lord  Mahavir  has  talked 
about  the  six  eternal  elements  (tattva).  They  both  seem 
correct, but I cannot demarcate between the two. 

Dadashri: To say that this [world] is made up of the five 
elements is an incomplete understanding. The five elements 

 
298 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

are encompassed within two of the six eternal elements that 
Lord Mahavir has talked about. 

Questioner: So, within which two eternal elements are 

these five elements encompassed? 

Dadashri: These people have divided the eternal element 
of Pudgal Parmanu into four parts, and the fifth one, which 
they have mentioned as Space (aakash), that is independent. 
That is actually an eternal element itself. 

What people can see with their eyes is a packing of one 
kind  only,  that  of  the  anatma  (non-Self)  only.  There  are 
actually five things filled within the packing, it is made up of 
the five elements. The packing is made up of which elements? 

Questioner:  Earth,  water,  fire,  air  and  space;  the  five 

elements. 

Dadashri:  The  five  elements,  that  is  actually  an 
explanation; amongst those, when these four: earth, water, fire 
and air come together, they make up one eternal element. Now 
tell  me,  if  we  were  to  refer  to  all  [four  of]  those  as  eternal 
elements, then would it be misleading or not? 

Questioner: But these five elements that you mentioned, 
fire, earth, air…, actually it has been proven that they too are 
fundamentally considered to be a form of one energy. 

Dadashri:  But  fire,  earth,  all  of  those  are  not  eternal 
elements at all. That is simply a play of the intellect. Even the 
world  says,  “I  have  acquired  the  five  elements,  the  five 
elements  have  separated.”  However,  they  are  not  eternal 
elements at all, are they! Now if we were to put water over a 
fire right now, it would be put out; so how can it be called an 
eternal element? These four, they are parts of just one eternal 
element. Therefore, by referring to them as eternal elements, 
people  can  be  misled.  They  have  considered  these  four  as 
eternal  elements,  and  the  fifth  one,  Space,  as  an  eternal 

 
[2.3] The Beginning and the End of a Temporary State   

299 

element. Hence, they have believed these five to be the eternal 
elements. That understanding is completely wrong. 

Whatever the scriptures say is not wrong. What can the 
poor scriptures do if a mistake occurs in your understanding? 
When they mention earth, air, water, space, and fire, that is an 
incomplete concept. [The statement,] ‘Humans are made up 
of these five eternal elements,’ is proven wrong. What makes 
one walk? If he walks, then what is it that makes him steady? 

Questioner: Is it not due to gravity? 

Dadashri:  The  concept  cannot  be  understood  through 
[the  answer]  gravity.  When  one  gets  up,  sits  down,  moves, 
wanders around, does all that happen due to gravity? 

Oxygen Is Not an Original Eternal Element 

in 

Questioner:  In  water,  there  is  hydrogen  and  oxygen; 
when  these  two  are  separated,  at  that  time,  the  oxygen  is 
released 
the  environment.  Scientists  have  recently 
discovered that that oxygen decreases a little. Now, there is no 
oxygen  in  that  space  [the  environment],  so  where  does  that 
oxygen actually go? So, this belief that we have of, ‘There is 
no  decrement  or  increment  in  the  original  eternal  element,’ 
should we now understand that belief to be wrong? 

Dadashri: This oxygen is not an original eternal element. 
An original eternal element is in fact permanent. What can be 
considered as an original eternal element? It is that which does 
not decrease or increase. No change happens in it. Oxygen is 
not  an  original  eternal  element,  hydrogen  is  not  an  original 
eternal element, even water is not an original eternal element. 

Everything  else  certainly  continues  to  increase  or 
decrease. Except for the original eternal elements, everything 
else increases or decreases, they are guru-laghu, whereas the 
original eternal elements are aguru-laghu (never increase or 
decrease). 

 
300 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Water is a temporary state of the original eternal element, 
fire  is  also  a  temporary  state,  air  and  earth,  they  too  are 
temporary states of the original eternal element. They are the 
four temporary states of just one eternal element, the eternal 
element  of  inanimate  matter  (jada  tattva).  So,  one  has  to 
understand this, does he not! Falsehood will not do in the face 
of  Science  (Vignan).  The  world  cannot  understand  this.  It 
would take them a very long time to understand this. 

If  this  concept  is  understood  correctly,  then  there  is  a 
solution; otherwise, if one will try to insist [by saying,] “I am 
right,” a solution will never come about. The concept should 
be such that the other person’s Self should accept it, otherwise 
it is not worth accepting it.  

There Are Four Other Eternal Elements in the Ego... 

Questioner:  Earth,  water,  fire,  air  and  space;  which 

attributes arise from these five elements? 

Dadashri:  This  entire  body  is  made  of  these  five 
elements. The entire body itself, then the mind, egoism, all of 
that too, is made up of these five elements only. 

If  someone  were  to  ask,  “Why  has  this  man  become 
weak?”  So  the  answer  is,  “What  is  the  ego  made  of?”  It  is 
made of this air, this water and this earth. How long does it 
take for air or water to be dissolved? If one has diarrhea, then 
he  will  have  to  run  back  and  forth,  back  and  forth  [to  the 
lavatory]. So, where did your ego go then? At least, see what 
the ego is made of. It is made of air, water, fire and this earth. 
The ego which is made up of temporary things, is bound to 
come  to  an  end!  Nevertheless,  in  the  ego,  the  permanent 
eternal elements are also present. All the eternal elements are 
indeed mixed in this, even the permanent ones, aren’t they? 
The  eternal  elements  of  Space,  gatisahayak  (the  eternal 
element  that  supports  motion),  sthitisahayak  (the  eternal 
element that supports inertia), and Time are mixed in it. Only 

 
[2.3] The Beginning and the End of a Temporary State   

301 

this Chetan (the Self) is not mixed in it, [rather] Its influence 
falls upon it. 

Questioner:  From  one-sensed  living  beings  to  five-
sensed  living  beings,  are  all  their  pudgals  (bodies  in  this 
context) made up of the five elements? 

Dadashri:  Of  the  five  elements.  Even  a  mustard  seed 
contains the five elements, even other things like wheat, rice, 
etc.,  they  all  contain  the  five  elements.  If  you  were  to  put 
something to dry in the sun over here, the space within that 
thing will go away; hence that item will then last. A certain 
part  of  it  shrivels  up  and  only  a  little  remains.  Even  water 
actually contains the five other elements. 

Questioner: Which ones, Dada? What is the proportion 

of each one? 

Dadashri: In water, fifty percent is water, and the rest are 

comprised in the other fifty percent. 

Questioner: What is the reason for that, Dada? 

Dadashri:  It  is  because  it  is  water.  Primarily  there  is 

more water, however the other elements are also present. 

Questioner: Is it different in every thing? 

Dadashri:  In  grains,  [the  element  of]  earth  represents 

fifty percent and the rest make up the other fifty percent. 

Questioner: And within us? 

Dadashri: It is similar in us. They may be present in a 
lesser or greater amount. They may not represent fifty percent. 
As everyone is not the same, so they [the elements] are present 
to a greater or lesser amount. 

Questioner: Dada, of these five elements, fifty  percent 
has been assigned to that element, which is physical, the earth. 

 
302 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

The other four; water, air, space, and fire, represent twelve and 
a half percent. Is that how it is? 

Dadashri: This [the body] will remain standing only if it 
[the earth element] represents fifty percent, isn’t it! Otherwise, 
how can it remain standing? There is definitely more of the 
physical [element] in it. 

Imbalance of the Five in Humans! 

The proportion of the five elements has become altered in 

human beings. It has become above and below normal. 

Questioner: Is that imbalance the cause of diseases? 

Dadashri: That is the cause indeed. 

Questioner:  Moreover,  is  diet  the  cause  for  the 
imbalance?  Is  the  diet  we  take  such  that  it  causes  an 
imbalance? 

Dadashri: Due to the unfolding of karma, one eats more 
or  less  food,  which  then  inevitably  creates  an  imbalance. 
Thereafter, disease sets in. 

Questioner: Do the five elements [earth, water, fire, air 
and space] refer to a corpse or a living human being? Is a body 
that has a Soul considered as the five elements, or is it just the 
pudgal (body) that is considered as the five elements? 

Dadashri:  Both  can  be  referred  as  that.  The  pudgal  is 
also the five elements, the pudgal alone. So then, even if it is 
a corpse, it is still considered as the five elements.  

Questioner: Is it only the body that is considered as the 

five elements, or any other thing? 

Dadashri: Only the body. 

Questioner:  And  what  about  other  things?  Would  this 
not be considered so? This [tape recorder] is also considered 
pudgal, isn’t it? So, is this not considered so? 

 
[2.3] The Beginning and the End of a Temporary State   

303 

Dadashri: What ‘we’ are saying is that, not all of them 
are in the tape recorder; only some, not all the five elements, 
but certain elements are present. However, the body is literally 
made of the five elements. In the tape recorder, only certain 
ones have come together. 

Questioner: Will all the elements remain? 

Dadashri: All of them. 

Questioner: Are they going to get burnt? 

Dadashri:  Even  after  the  Soul  leaves,  the  corpse 

comprising of the five elements remains. 

Questioner: Then what about after it has been cremated? 

Dadashri:  When  it  is  cremated,  all  the  five  elements 
dissipate;  they  separate.  Space  merges  with  space,  earth 
merges  with  earth,  and  water  merges  with  water.  They  all 
separate. 

Questioner: This body is made of the five elements, and 
yet why does it have to  be surrendered to only this element 
alone, to [the element of] fire? 

Dadashri:  If  you  bury  it  in  the  ground,  it  [the 
disintegration] would happen in the soil too. If you place it in 
water, then it will rot away, it will spoil; but fire disintegrates 
it quickly, that is why it is placed in the fire. Furthermore, we 
can  see  it.  It  happens  in  front  of  you,  it  gets  destroyed 
immediately. Fire separates all the five elements. Nonetheless, 
even if it were to be placed in dirt, it would still disintegrate, 
and even in water, they [the elements] will separate. Hey, even 
air would do that. But in this element [fire], it is visible. This 
process  of  burning  [the  body],  we  return  immediately  after 
finishing  it,  don’t  we!  The  next  day  we  go  to  collect  the 
remains. 

 
304 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Since  time  immemorial,  the  mortal  ones  have  been 
laboring  in  vain  about  this.  Although  you  have  repeatedly 
labored in vain with this very same ‘earth’ again and again, 
yet you have still not gained any satisfaction? At least think 
about it, in the mess of these four elements, at least find out 
what lies where! 

In That Lie Innumerable Living Beings! 

There is only one visible eternal element, it is made up of 
Parmanu; air, water, fire, all of them. These flames of the fire 
that are felt, that blaze, those flames are not just flames, they 
are all living beings. That part which is visible, the visible part 
where both the blue and red come together, that is where all 
the living beings reside. The flames do not happen just like 
that. Teukaya living beings, they have bodies in the form as 
fire.  They  are  so  hot,  filled  with  so  much  heat,  that  we  get 
burned. 

They  are  all  nothing  but  living  beings.  This  earth  is 
nothing but living beings. This air is nothing but living beings. 
The very form of the living beings is that of air. Its body is air. 
That one’s body is that of water, the other one’s body is that 
of earth, and that other one’s body is that of fire. 

Questioner:  Does  that  mean  that  all  of  them  contain 

living beings? 

Dadashri:  This  world  is  filled  with  nothing  but  living 

beings indeed. 

Questioner:  Isn’t  there  anything  independent  which  is 

completely non-living, which is lifeless?  

Dadashri: There is; that is all Pudgal (the eternal element 
of  inanimate  matter).  Living  beings  are  just  one  eternal 
element.  Lord  Mahavir  has  mentioned  the  six  eternal 
elements;  of  those  six  eternal  elements,  living  beings 
represent just one eternal element, the other five are all non-

 
[2.3] The Beginning and the End of a Temporary State   

305 

living, and it is from those [six] that this Ramleela [dramatized 
representation of Lord Rama’s life story] has arisen. He was 
just one individual, but just look at the drama that unfolded, it 
was  so  colossal!  Similarly,  the  Self  (Atma),  Chetan,  was 
alone, yet look at all this, so much has come to unfold! 

The Transformation Is Caused by Time 

Have you ever seen the genesis of the world? 

Questioner:  I  have  not  seen  that,  nevertheless,  the 

transformation keeps on happening, doesn’t it! 

Dadashri: Transformation itself means that it forms, and 
it dissipates, hence the transformation keeps happening. For 
an  eternal  element,  there  is  neither  genesis  nor  dissipation, 
none of that happens. The transformation keeps happening in 
the temporary states. 

Questioner:  Is  the  energy  of  the  Self  an  instrumental 

cause (naimittik karan) in that or not? 

Dadashri:  The  Self  has  nothing  to  do  with  that 

[transformation]. What does the Self have to do with that? 

Questioner: Is the Self not needed in that? 

Dadashri: Time ‘eats away’ at everything. Time makes 
everything old and it also makes everything new once again. 
All  of 
is 
in 
transformation? It is to arise, to be destroyed, and to last for a 
short time. 

transformation.  What 

included 

that 

is 

An  eternal  element  (tattva)  does  not  have  genesis,  its 
properties  do  not  have  genesis.  Just  as  the  eternal  element 
remains  steady  (sthir),  in  the  same  way,  its  properties  also 
remain steady, its phases keep changing. 

 
306 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Those Which Arise and Dissipate Are Phases 

Questioner:  The  three  pronouncements  of  genesis, 
dissipation and permanence (tripadi) of the Jain belief are: the 
eternal  element in the form as the elemental matter remains 
constant, the phases are ever changing, amidst that One does 
not waver from the state as the Self. These three things which 
are in the foundation require discussion. Now please discuss 
these three, one at a time. 

Dadashri:  To  arise,  to  remain  steady,  and  then  to 
dissipate. To remain steady is from the perspective of One’s 
inherent  nature.  To  arise  and  to  dissipate  is  from  the 
perspective of the phase.  

Questioner: It was this simple! What I am saying is, it 

was this simple! 

Dadashri: Yes, it was in fact simple. To not waver from 
One’s  state  as  the  Self,  that  is  known  as  maintaining 
permanence (dhruv). 

Questioner:  Let us  take an  example;  first  of inanimate 

matter and then of the Self. 

Dadashri: ‘You’ Yourself are the pure Soul, that is in the 
form of permanence. Meaning that You Know about Yourself 
that, ‘I am permanent.’ However, these temporary states that 
are  arising  here,  they  are  circumstances  (saiyog)  that  are 
coming together. Those circumstances are prone to dissipation 
together  of 
by 
circumstances is a phase, and their dissipation is also a phase. 
That  which  is  prone  to  dissipation  will  give  its  effect  and 
depart; that is what that statement means. To arise, to dissipate 
whilst remaining steady. ‘One’ Himself remains steady while 
all this keeps going on.  

inherent  nature.  The  coming 

their 

Questioner: So, does the Self remain steady? 

 
[2.3] The Beginning and the End of a Temporary State   

307 

Dadashri:  Yes,  the  Self  [the  developing  ‘I’,  the  pure 

Soul] remains steady. 

Genesis, Dissipation, Permanence 

Questioner:  It  has  been  said  that  the  moment  Lord 
Mahavir  gave  Gautam  Swami  the  Knowledge  of  the  three 
pronouncements  [genesis,  dissipation  and  permanence], 
Gautam Swami immediately attained Atma Gnan (Knowledge 
of the Self), right? 

Dadashri:  No,  no,  not  immediately.  It  was  by  staying 
with  Lord  Mahavir  that  the  Knowledge  gradually  started  to 
manifest  within  him.  The  Knowledge  started  to  manifest  in 
him based on what the Lord said. Moreover, it was after the 
Lord  departed 
that  Gautam  Swami  attained  absolute 
Knowledge.  That  is  why  the  three  pronouncements  are 
explained right in the beginning. Genesis (utpaat), dissipation 
(vyay), and permanence (dhruv); that is the real form of this 
world. ‘All the eternal elements have genesis, dissipation and 
permanence,’ is what is explained; and this entire problem is 
precisely due to that. [It has been wrongly believed that] To 
arise,  to  dissipate,  and  to  persist  for  a  while,  that  is  indeed 
Their [the eternal elements’] very form.  

Questioner: Utpanneva, vighneva and dhruveva. 

these 

after  Knowing 

Dadashri:  Yes, 

three 
pronouncements, what remains to be Known in this world? It 
arises, it dissipates, whilst still maintaining permanence. If it 
were  to  not  dissipate,  then  another  one  would  not  arise. 
Therefore,  as  one  dissipates,  [another]  one  arises.  Then, 
despite the dissipation and genesis going on continuously, the 
eternal element is permanent. That is what  Lord Mahavir is 
trying to explain regarding the three pronouncements. 

Questioner: An eternal element has permanence whereas 
its phases keep on arising and dissipating. So, do the phases 

 
308 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

of  the  eternal  element  also  arise,  have  permanence,  and 
dissipate? 

Dadashri: No, the phases do not have permanence, they 
arise and they dissipate. Whereas the eternal element remains 
forever, it has permanence. Despite the eternal element itself 
having permanence, its phases arise and dissipate. The word 
‘dhruv’ cannot be used for a phase, can it! The word ‘dhruv’ 
does not have adjectives like arising and dissipating. The word 
‘dhruv’ means permanent. 

Questioner: So, the same has been said about phases too, 
has it not! The phases of the eternal element arise, they last 
for a short while, and then they dissipate. So then, about the 
fact that it lasts, what is that? 

Dadashri:  The  fact  that  it  lasts,  well  it  may  last  for  a 
longer time, or it may last for a shorter time, that has nothing 
to  do  with  it  [permanence].  Everything  that  increases  and 
decreases is included in that which is temporary, it cannot be 
included in permanence.  

Questioner: Does  permanence not  have any relation at 

all to phases? 

Dadashri: Permanence shows the inherent nature of the 
eternal  element.  Despite  the  eternal  element  itself  being 
permanent,  with  respect  to  the  phases,  the  genesis  and 
dissipation keeps going on. 

Questioner: In order to Know a temporary state, can it 
be Known only through the Swabhaav (the inherently natural 
state as the Self)? 

Dadashri: To what extent can all these temporary states 
be  Known  [overtly]?  To  the  extent  that  they  are  at  a  gross 
level.  Then the rest  [the phases] can be Known through the 
state as the Self. A temporary states arises, it dissipates, whilst 
permanence is maintained [by the eternal element]. 

 
[2.3] The Beginning and the End of a Temporary State   

309 

Questioner: Can they be Seen only through the state as 

the Self? 

Dadashri: Only through the state as the Self. To See is a 
property of the Self, whereas that which arises and dissipates 
is Its phase. ‘It’ is able to See Its own phases. 

Therefore, these temporary states [of the Self] they have 
written  about,  they  are  not  referring  to  the  gross  temporary 
states, they are referring to the phases. Whereas in this, in the 
temporary states [of the pudgal; of the relative self], those that 
are at a gross level are also included. The temporary states at 
the gross level can be understood simply through the intellect. 
The fact that one lives, one wanders about, all of that can be 
understood [by the intellect]. 

The Exact Subtle Insights of the Gita… 

Questioner:  In  the  Gita  [also  known  as  the  Bhagavad 
Gita; a 700 verse Hindu scripture in Sanskrit that is part of the 
ancient Indian epic Mahabharata], Lord Krishna has said, “I 
am the creator of the universe, I maintain it, and I also destroy 
it.” 

Dadashri:  That  is  correct,  however  its  meaning  is 
actually different. You are not able to understand what He is 
trying  to  convey.  You  are  not  able  to  understand  genesis 
(utpaat), dissipation (vyay) and permanence (dhruv). It is the 
inherent nature of a kind that belongs to the Self; to arise, to 
maintain  permanence,  and  to  dissipate.  That  is  the  inherent 
nature of every eternal element. That is the very reason why 
the  Lord  has  said,  “This  Gita  that  I  am  speaking,  from  the 
thousands of people who read it, only one person will attain 
its  meaning  at  the  gross  level,  and  from  a  thousand  such 
people,  only  one  will  attain  its  subtle  meaning,  and  from  a 
thousand such people, one will attain its subtler meaning, and 
from a thousand such people, one will understand what I mean 
to  say  at  the  subtlest  level.”  Hence,  how  is  it  possible  to 

 
310 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

understand what the Lord had said? So, what did Lord Krishna 
say?  He  said,  “The  Gnani  is  My  very  own  Soul  and  that  is 
indeed who I Myself am.” So, if a Gnani Purush is around, 
then  freedom  [from  the  cycle  of  birth  and  death]  can  be 
attained, otherwise it cannot. 

Questioner: ‘You’  said  that this  universe neither has  a 
beginning nor does it have an end, but this is what I had read 
in the Gita regarding the universe, ‘In the beginning it is in the 
unmanifest state, in the middle, it manifests, and at the end, it 
is in the unmanifest state.’ 

is  considered  as 

Dadashri:  Yes,  so  genesis 

the 
unmanifest  state.  Then  permanence  is  considered  as  the 
manifest state and dissipation is the unmanifest state. Genesis, 
dissipation  and  permanence.  So,  initially  a  man  was 
considered to be in the unmanifest state; when he is born here, 
he moves from the unmanifest [state] to the manifest [state]; 
so, in the middle, he is considered to be in the manifest state. 
And  after  he  dies,  he  is  considered  to  be  in  the  unmanifest 
state. From that state, he comes back into the manifest state 
once again. That is all, this cycle keeps going on. 

Questioner: So, Dada, what is its original state? What is 

its state before genesis? 

Dadashri: No, there is no state before its  genesis. This 
genesis,  well  that  which  arises  keeps  on  dissipating.  And 
permanence means that it is seen to have permanence, we can 
see that it is in the manifest state. So, what is before genesis? 
The answer is, since dissipation took place, so from that, there 
was genesis. Thereafter, that which has arisen, it remained in 
the manifest state. That cycle carries on continuously. 

Questioner: Is there or is there not an end to this process, 

or will it continue to carry on? 

 
[2.3] The Beginning and the End of a Temporary State   

311 

Dadashri: It does not have an end whatsoever. It cannot 
let go of its inherent nature, can it! The inherent nature of that 
which is an eternal element (dravya) cannot go away, can it! 
When will this [cycle] come to an end? It happens after Dada 
separates these two eternal elements [the Self and inanimate 
matter]  that  are  together.  Thereafter,  the  Self  remains 
separate. So, then It does not feel any pain, nothing affects It. 

Questioner:  So,  is  moksha  (liberation)  actually  a  state 

where It is separate from these other [eternal elements]? 

Dadashri:  ‘It’  is  separate  from  all  these  other  [eternal 
elements].  To  remain  separate  from  all  these  other  [eternal 
elements] is moksha. And the One who remains separate from 
all these other [eternal elements] is known as the Self (Atma). 
In this worldly life, it is all nothing but the temporary states of 
the self [in the ignorant state] and its phases. 

Those Are Metaphors… 

Questioner: The word ‘God’ has been explained as G-O-
D:  Generator,  Operator,  and  Destroyer;  whereas  in  the 
concept  of Brahma (the  creator), Vishnu (the  sustainer) and 
Mahesh (the destroyer), one is the sustainer, one is the creator, 
and one is the destroyer. Is there any similarity between these 
two? Between these concepts? 

Dadashri: The original eternal element is the Self. Now, 
It has own original properties, besides that, It has phases that 
arise and come to an end, whilst the Self Itself has permanence 
by Its inherent nature. Hence, this is how these three things 
have  been  set.  This  pudgal  (non-Self  complex  of  input  and 
output) that exists, it arises and comes to an end; whereas the 
eternal  element  of  inanimate  matter  (jada;  Pudgal)  itself  is 
permanent by its inherent nature. Hence, it is on this basis that 
everything has been set. 

 
312 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

What is this concept of Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesh? So, 
the  state  where  the  genesis  is  taking  place,  where  creation 
takes place, there these people have set Brahma. Then where 
there is destruction, where things come to an end, there they 
have set Mahesh. And where permanence remains, there they 
have  set  Vishnu.  Thus  Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Mahesh.  With 
this setting, the idols were established, and thereafter, people 
took it as far as saying, “Worship these idols, as they represent 
these three attributes within us; pitta (bilious), vayu (gaseous), 
and  kapha  (with  phlegm)  [the  attributes  of  sattva  or  being 
virtuous,  rajas  or  being  passionate,  tamas  or  being  dark  or 
wicked, respectively]. They have been set very scientifically. 
This has not been set haphazardly; this arrangement has been 
set very meaningfully. 

But after that, they jumbled everything up! If you were to 
search for Brahma, then where would you find him? Would 
you find Brahma anywhere in the world? Go and find Vishnu. 
Would you find Vishnu? And what about Mahesh! You may 
ask, “What are their occupations? What business do they do?” 
They  answer,  “Brahma  creates,  Vishnu  sustains  all  this, 
nurtures it, and that destroyer, Mahesh, destroys everything.” 
Hey, you! Should anyone ever pay obeisance to a destroyer! 

Questioner:  But  Dada,  imagine  what  an  imaginary 
concept was created and established, that it has been carrying 
on for so many years! 

Dadashri: The fundamental truth had not been revealed. 
So, after I discovered it, I have now started to inculcate it in 
people! 

It is like this, of the six eternal elements that are there in 
the  world,  the  arising  and  the  dissipation  is  from  the 
perspective  of  the  temporary  states,  whereas  permanence  is 
from the perspective of the inherent nature. This verily is the 
inherent nature of the eternal elements; however, people have 

 
[2.3] The Beginning and the End of a Temporary State   

313 

actually set a metaphor for it. There was a good intent behind 
doing that. They tried to do something good, but then after a 
long time, it would eventually go wrong, wouldn’t it? So then, 
who would be able to help you set the facts right? 

By  the  two  eternal  elements  coming  together,  the 
visheshbhaav  (an  assumed  identification  with  that  which  is 
not One’s own) arose, which in turn gave rise to this world. 
Neither has Brahma ever existed, nor has anyone created [the 
universe], nor has there been a need to create it. Imagine the 
extent  to  which  this  falsehood  has  reached!  In  fact,  people 
have  gone  millions  of  miles  away  from  the  fundamental 
concept!  Therefore,  as  soon  as  One  enters  [the  spiritual] 
college,  the  Real  understanding  about  the  eternal  elements 
begins  as  to,  ‘What  the  fact  is,  what  the  reality  about  this 
world  is?’  Those  books  [the  scriptures]  will  have  to  be  put 
aside, after that everything will fall into place. 

There is a need for this, the world is asking for this. It is 
asking  for  something  new.  The  books  [scriptures]  are  not 
wrong. People have found the books difficult to understand, 
and so that did not work. But at least one good thing happened, 
this  new  kind  of  generation  has  emerged,  the  kind  that  has 
gotten  rid of the ‘seed’  entirely, they  have  gotten rid of the 
[incorrect]  faith  entirely,  [by  understanding,]  ‘This  is  all 
nothing but blind faith, it is wrong.’  It is better to cut it off 
entirely; say it is going rancid from here, then cut it off from 
there itself, so that it stops from spreading further. 

If You want to attain liberation, then You have to Know 
and understand the eternal elements and their properties. Or 
else, as long as You have to remain in this worldly life, You 
should  Know  and  understand  the  function  (dharma),  the 
phases  (paryay)  and  the  temporary  states  (avastha)  of  the 
eternal elements. 

 
314 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

The Rule Behind the Decreasing and the Increasing 

Questioner: What  is  the difference between  a property 

and its function? 

Dadashri: The function always keeps changing whereas 
the  property  does  not  change.  The  properties  that  are 
inherently natural to the eternal elements do not change.  

Questioner:  We  say  that  an  eternal  element  has 

properties, functions, and phases. 

Dadashri: The function is itself the phase. The original 
Self  has  Its  fundamental  properties.  Neither  does  the  Self 
change,  nor  does  Its  properties  change,  but  the  function  [of 
those properties] keep changing. What keeps changing? The 
answer  is,  this  specific  function  as  the  Knower  and  Seer 
(Gnata-Drashtapanu). In this, how does it begin? It starts with 
anant  bhaag  vruddhi  (the  least  divisional  increase).  Then 
next,  the  increase  is  asankhyaat  bhaag  vruddhi  (a  small 
divisional increase) … 

Now,  asankhyaat  bhaag  vruddhi  means  that  for  any 
particular thing, only a very small division of it increases, the 
increase is similar to the portion a hair represents. Next, what 
does  sankhyaat  mean?  It  means  that  part  increases  by  the 
greatest division. It was increasing by the least division (anant 
bhaag vruddhi), then when it moved to asankhyaat, it means 
that  there  was  a  small  increase  in  that  divisional  increase. 
Compared to anant bhaag, asankhyaat is actually a lot larger. 
And  then  when  it  becomes  sankhyaat,  it  has  become 
extremely large. 

Then there is sankhyaat guna vruddhi (an increase by a 
big factor). Then what is the step beyond that? It is asankhyaat 
guna  vruddhi  (an  increase  by  an  even  greater  factor).  And 
what  about  the  one  after  that?  It  is  anant  guna  vruddhi  (an 
increase by the  greatest  factor).  Now, the Self is in  Its  own 

 
[2.3] The Beginning and the End of a Temporary State   

315 

realm as the Self (Swakshetra), and within It, the temporary 
states  keep  changing  constantly  in  this  way.  What  are  the 
changes that occur in the temporary states like? Suppose there 
is a mirror here, and if one of you come [to stand in front of 
it], then you alone will be seen [in the mirror]. If two of you 
come, then two will be seen. If four come, then… 

Questioner: All four will be seen. 

Dadashri: Now, would all these temporary states change 

or not? 

Questioner: They would change. 

Dadashri: Its [The mirror’s] function [of showing one, 
two  or  four]  keeps  changing  but  its  property  [of  reflecting] 
does  not  change.  Similarly,  the  entire  world  is  illuminated 
within the Soul of the Siddha Lord (absolutely liberated Soul 
who have become completely free from the cycle of birth and 
death), and He Sees any movement that takes place amongst 
those who are asleep. So, when it is early in the morning, at 
three to four o’clock, there is anant bhaag vruddhi (the least 
divisional increase), meaning that only a few people are Seen 
to be moving around in the morning. Then there is asankhyaat 
bhaag  vruddhi  (a  small  divisional  increase).  Then  there  is 
sankhyaat  bhaag  vruddhi  (the  greatest  divisional  increase). 
Then there is sankhyaat  guna vruddhi (an increase by a big 
factor). Then there is  asankhyaat guna vruddhi (an increase 
by an even greater factor) and it becomes anant guna vruddhi 
(an  increase  by  the  greatest  factor)  and  at  twelve  in  the 
afternoon, there are crowds and crowds [of people], all of this 
is illuminated within the Soul Itself. 

Thereafter, first will come anant guna haani (a decrease 
by the greatest factor). Then comes asankhyaat guna haani (a 
decrease  by  a  small  factor).  Then  comes  sankhyaat  guna 
haani (a decrease by the least factor). Then comes sankhyaat 
bhaag  haani  (the  greatest  divisional  decrease),  followed  by 

 
316 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

asankhyaat bhaag haani (a smaller divisional decrease) and 
anant bhaag haani (the least divisional decrease).7 These are 
the  gunadharma  (intrinsic  property  that  has  a  specific 
function) of the property [of Seeing]. They [the gunadharma] 
continue  to  change,  constantly  nothing  but  this,  that’s  all. 
Nothing remains for One to ‘do’ at all. It is only the function 
[of the property of Knowing and Seeing] that keeps changing. 
That  is  illuminated  within  the  Soul  [of  the  Siddha  Lords]. 
There is no burden. Would a mirror have any burden? 

Questioner: No. 

Dadashri:  If  you  make  silly  gestures  in  front  of  the 
mirror,  would  it  harm  the  mirror,  or  would  it  harm  you? 
Would the mirror be considered to have incurred a loss? This 
is worth understanding. 



7 An example has been placed in the Introduction of this chapter for better 
understanding. 

 
 
                                                 
[4] 

The Developing ‘I’ Is the Seer of the 
Temporary States 

The Entanglement Is Simply Due to Wrong Belief! 

The  samsaran  marg  (path  of  natural  and  spiritual 
evolution)  is  indeed  such  that  one  keeps  ‘roasting’  as  he 
moves  ahead.  Just  as  in  the  past,  when  one  went  to  Africa, 
they  used  to  put  one  to  ‘roast’,  but  he  would  understand, 
‘There is the roasting and there is I.’ Similarly, the self has to 
pass  through  the  ‘roasting’,  through  various  kinds  of 
processes, on the path of natural spiritual evolution. As one 
moves along the path of natural spiritual evolution, due to the 
factors on the path, the temporary states tend to arise. In this, 
nothing  happens  to  the  [original]  Self  at  all,  but  it  [the 
developing I; the relative self] simply believes, ‘I am that form 
which  is  roasting.’  Whichever  process  [temporary  states]  it 
passes through, it believes itself to be that indeed, and that is 
how, in that illusion, it becomes what it envisions itself to be. 
If  One  were  to  realize  One’s  Real  form  as  the  original  Self 
(mool Swaroop), then there would be no problem at all. The 
illusion is also a kind of experiential awareness (bhaan). From 
the  moment  one  comes  into  vyavahaar  rashi  (worldly 
nomenclature) up until  the  vyavahaar rashi  gets over, there 
are nothing but temporary states. 

However, the ego is the one that arises within, and it is 
verily the one who suffers (vede) the pain. It not only enjoys 

 
 
 
 
 
 
318 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

the  pleasure,  but  it  also  suffers  the  pain.  It  is  through  such 
vedan (suffering of pain or pleasure) that all this has arisen, 
the wrong belief has arisen. The Self has not changed. With 
respect to Its properties, with respect to Its elemental matter, 
the Self has not become spoilt in the least, and it is the phases 
that have been affected; this has happened due to wrong belief. 

The entire world is made up of the eternal elements, of 
the six eternal elements. This one [the aham; the ‘I’] believes 
the temporary states of these eternal  elements  to  be its  own 
[form]. 

One, himself, is prevailing as the temporary state, and all 
that  which  is  visible,  they  are  all  temporary  states,  and  the 
temporary states are entangling him. In reality, the temporary 
states are not the ones causing the entanglement. By believing 
the temporary state to be Your inherent nature; this belief of 
yours is the reason for the entanglement. One believes these 
temporary  states  themselves  to  be  His  inherent  nature, 
meaning the state as the Self. ‘Swabhaav’ means the state as 
the Self. Hence, that Swabhaav is permanent, whereas these 
temporary states are destructible.  

The Real eternal element is the Self and It has temporary 
states; one refers to those as, “I am indeed that.” Meaning that, 
he is sowing seeds for the next life. The Self remains within 
Its inherent nature only. When a fire is seen [by Chandubhai], 
the developing I will say, “I was looking at it.” That is where 
karma are being bound. Truly speaking, the inherent nature of 
the Self is verily to See and Know. ‘You’ keep Seeing those 
temporary states. Those temporary states are all destructible, 
whereas the eternal elements are indestructible.  

All  the  temporary  states  are  entwined  in  ignorance  and 

subsequently one [as the relative self] remains as he was. 

The  temporary  states  are  all  temporary,  and  people  are 
dwelling in the temporary, they are seeing the temporary, and 

 
[2.4] The Developing ‘I’ Is the Seer of the Temporary States 

319 

they talk about the temporary. They are no longer dwelling in 
the permanent, they do not Know the permanent, and they do 
not  talk  about  the  permanent.  These  are  all  temporary 
adjustments. 

temporary  states.  There  are 

No matter where you go in the world, you will not find 
infinite 
anything  besides 
temporary states of even the temporary states, and temporary 
states of  even those  also,  which people have believed to be 
their  own  Real  form.  Fundamentally,  One’s  own  elemental 
form (tattva swaroop) is permanent, It is indestructible. ‘You’ 
Yourself are God [the absolute Self] indeed. 

Questioner: If I want to become this permanent eternal 

element, then what should I do? 

Dadashri:  ‘You’  have  to  become  permanent.  How  can 
you  say,  “[I  am]  permanent,”  whilst  prevailing  as  the 
temporary state?  

Questioner: No, but I want to become permanent. 

Dadashri:  Yes,  then  come  to  ‘us’,  ‘we’  will  make  it 
happen  for  you.  Once  You  become  permanent,  You  cannot 
become  temporary.  So  be  forewarned  from  the  start,  if  you 
will. 

Questioner:  What  is  the  danger  in  it;  after  becoming 

permanent? 

Dadashri:  Thereafter,  this  pleasure  that  you  have  in 
eating jalebi (an Indian sweet dish) and all the other pleasures 
of eating and drinking, they will no longer remain. Then You 
will attain the bliss of the Self, the Self’s own bliss! Eternal 
bliss,  everlasting  bliss!!  This  [worldly  happiness]  cannot  be 
[considered  as  Real]  happiness  at  all.  This  is  merely 
imaginary. 

 
320 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

This  is  a  temporary  state  with  the  name  ‘Chandubhai’. 
One has ‘died’ [as the Self] for so many lifetimes by saying, 
“This is mine, this is mine.” 

There  is  only  one  thing  that  is  worth  asking  for  in  this 
world, and that is, ‘Please free me from this illusion.’ Whether 
the  effects  felt  in  the  world  are  bitter  or  sweet,  they  are  all 
nothing but an illusion. A feeling of dislike (abhaav) should 
not  arise  towards  the  temporary  states.  Even  if  someone 
provokes  you,  a  feeling  of  dislike  should  not  arise  towards 
him.  This  is  because  the  temporary  states  are  nothing  but  a 
natural occurrence (avastha matra kudrati rachna chhe). 

The State Is Temporary, the Eternal Element Is 
Unchanging 

The temporary states keep on changing. The people of the 
world see those temporary states and they feel, ‘Wow! This 
looks so beautiful!’ And some people look at those temporary 
states  and  feel  scared.  If  there  is  nothing  but  thick  fog 
everywhere, they will say, “I can’t even see my son, he was 
just with me!” Hey mortal one, the fog is simply a temporary 
state,  it  will  clear  up  just  now.  Doesn’t  it  all  clear  up? 
[However,]  One  believes 
to  be 
the 
unchanging  (nitya).  By  believing  that  which  is  temporary 
(anitya) to be unchanging, one continues to be miserable. So, 
if the developing ‘I’ were to realize the the Self, then He can 
become  free,  He  can  go  beyond  the  temporary  states. 
Otherwise,  until  then,  he  prevails  as  the  temporary.  That  is 
indeed why the entire world is unable to surpass the temporary 
states. The Gnanis alone are able to surpass them. No one else 
is even capable of that! Humans are able to see the temporary 
states. When a person is able to See the original Self, He is 
considered a Gnani. 

temporary  state 

The six eternal elements that exist, they are permanent. 
When ‘we’ give you Gnan, ‘we’ explain to you that You are 

 
[2.4] The Developing ‘I’ Is the Seer of the Temporary States 

321 

the pure Self (shuddha Chetan), and so You begin to See the 
Self.  ‘You’  are  then  considered  to  have  attained  Your 
permanent state.  

Everything that is  visible  in  the world, they are  all  just 
temporary  states  of  one  eternal  element  alone,  the  eternal 
element which has form [the Pudgal Parmanu]. The formless 
eternal  element  [the Self]  can be Seen only  once the  Gnani 
makes You realize the pure Soul.  

It is like this, in this world, whatever you can see with the 
eyes, hear through the ears, taste with the tongue, smell with 
the nose, and whatever you can feel with your touch, what are 
those  things?  They  are  not  eternal  elements;  they  are  the 
temporary  states  of  the  eternal  element.  Whatever  you  are 
seeing, they are all temporary states that you are seeing. The 
temporary states of the eternal elements; the temporary states 
of  the  eternal  element  of  inanimate  matter,  the  temporary 
states of the eternal element of the Self, the temporary states 
of [the eternal element of] Time too. Those are all temporary 
states of the eternal elements that you are seeing. If everything 
were to be Seen in its fundamental elemental form, then One 
would attain salvation. 

Tattva Drashti, Avastha Drashti 

As long as one has avastha drashti (the wrong belief of ‘I 
am  Chandubhai’;  the  relative  viewpoint),  he  will  see  the 
world, and when He attains tattva drashti (the right belief of 
‘I am pure Soul’; the Real viewpoint), He will be able to See 
the eternal element (tattva). The temporary states will still be 
Seen, but He will not believe the temporary states to be His 
own. After attaining this  Gnan, You have attained the right 
belief of ‘I am pure Soul’, and so You have learnt to See the 
eternal  element  [the  Self],  and  You  are  able  to  See  the 
temporary states, but the temporary states are not Your form. 
‘You’  are  the  Knower  of  the  fact  that  those  states  are 

 
322 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

temporary, they  are relative. ‘You’  are able to  See both  the 
relative  and  the  Real,  aren’t  You!  The  temporary  states  are 
relative whereas the eternal element [the Self] is Real. 

Questioner:  Dada,  the  Self  can  only  See  the  eternal 
elements alone, isn’t it? The Self Sees only the eternal element 
of the Self, doesn’t It? ‘It’ doesn’t See the phases, right? 

Dadashri: As long as the worldly self exists, it sees each 
and every thing, and if It is not the worldly self, meaning that 
It is not relative, but It is Real, then that Self Sees the Self; It 
Sees only the permanent things. 

The Gnani Purush very distinctly separates the Self and 
the non-Self. Only thereafter can You demarcate, ‘This is the 
Self and that is the non-Self.’ ‘You’ can clearly recognize that 
‘this one’ is the elemental form and ‘that one’ is the temporary 
form. 

After having attained Gnan, sometimes if the Gnan was 
to get engrossed in an object to be Known (gneya), even then 
through the right belief of ‘I am pure Soul’, You will feel that, 
‘This is actually of Chandubhai, this is not mine.’ An eternal 
element  has  infinite  temporary  states;  the  presence  of  the 
temporary  states  ‘radiates’  through.  It  is  similar  to  the 
situation  where  the  sun  is  behind  the  clouds,  yet  you  can 
ascertain  the  presence  of  its  temporary  state  by  the  rays  of 
sunlight  radiating through [the clouds].  It  is  indeed because 
we  are  seeing  people  through  the  wrong  belief  of  ‘I  am 
Chandubhai’ that we are influenced by them. Attraction and 
repulsion  exist  verily  because  of  this  wrong  belief  of  ‘I  am 
Chandubhai’,  not  because  of  the  right  belief  of  ‘I  am  pure 
Soul’. In a temporary state, as soon as one believes ‘I am that’, 
a magnetic property immediately arises within and attraction 
begins.  Tattva  drashti  (the  right  belief  of  ‘I  am  pure  Soul’) 
means  it  is  a  complete  perspective  (sampurna  drashti). 
Nishchay drashti (the Real viewpoint; right belief of ‘I am the 

 
[2.4] The Developing ‘I’ Is the Seer of the Temporary States 

323 

Self’)  refers  to  the  eternal  element,  whereas,  vyavahaar 
[drashti]  (the  relative  viewpoint;  wrong  belief  of  ‘I  am 
Chandubhai’) refers to the temporary state. 

If you see through the wrong belief of ‘I am Chandubhai’, 
then attraction and repulsion will occur, whereas if You See 
through  the  right  belief  of  ‘I  am  pure  Soul’,  then  You  will 
attain liberation. If You See someone through the right belief 
of  ‘I  am  pure  Soul’,  then  You  [as  the  Self]  will  benefit, 
whereas if you see someone through the wrong belief of ‘I am 
Chandubhai’, then you will become lost in precisely that. The 
entire world has become lost by seeing through the physical 
eyes. With the right belief of ‘I am pure Soul’, You can See 
the Self in others. Hence, in the scriptures, the following has 
been written for this tattva drashti (Real viewpoint), ‘Oil can 
be extracted from sesame seeds, ghee (clarified butter) can be 
extracted  from  milk,  meaning  that  whatever  One  Knows 
through  the  Real  viewpoint,  that  is  precisely  what  He  can 
extract.’ When one sees a buffalo as a buffalo, when one sees 
a cow as a cow, that is avastha drashti (relative viewpoint). 
Whereas our mahatmas See [the Self within them] through the 
Real viewpoint. The One who has realized the eternal element 
[the Self] is able to See It through the Real viewpoint. How 
can those who have not realized It, be able to See It through 
the Real viewpoint? 

Through the Real viewpoint, the value of the temporary 
state dissipates. It is only if the Real viewpoint is attained, that 
the eternal  element  (vastu;  the Self) can  be Seen, otherwise 
with  the  relative  viewpoint,  intoxication  of  the  ego  (kef) 
arises. 

Om means the Real viewpoint. The Real viewpoint has 
not  manifested  for  anyone,  has  it!  The  entire  world  is 
prevailing in the relative viewpoint. 

 
324 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Someone  asked,  “[It  has  been  said,]  ‘The  activity  of 
Knowing  and  Seeing  as  the  Self  leads  to  liberation  (Gnan 
kriya  bhyam  moksha).’  We  are  in  fact  doing  not  only  the 
[ritualistic] activities but also applying the knowledge, so is 
there  no  liberation  for  us?”  [The  answer  is,]  No.  This  is 
because you are referring to the temporary state as the gnan 
kriya  (ritualistic  activities  deemed  to  be  helping  towards 
liberation).  The  gnan  kriya  done  whilst  prevailing  as  the 
temporary  state  is  all  considered  as  ignorance  of  the  Self 
(agnan).  With  that,  you  will  actually  be  rewarded  with 
‘golden shackles’ [merit karma]. Gnan kriya bhyam moksha 
can  be  considered  as  true  only  after  attaining  the  Real 
viewpoint. It is an activity that is formless (aroopi).  

The  world  is  speaking  from  the  perspective  as  a 
temporary  state,  whereas  ‘we’  are  speaking  from  the 
perspective as the eternal element. ‘We’ are Seeing through 
the Real  viewpoint;  the world  is  seeing through  the  relative 
viewpoint. It is just that one believes the temporary state to be 
His  Real  form,  and  these  miseries  [they  refer  to]  are  not 
miseries  in  the  true  sense.  Everywhere  you  see,  these  are 
actually  miseries  simply  due  to  lack  of  understanding. 
Moreover, one has indeed invited them on his own. 

Throughout all of Vadodara [a city in Gujarat], there must 
be good conduct as well as bad conduct taking place, but go 
inquire in the municipality  whether they have any record of 
that? So why get stuck on something that no record is being 
made of? Since You have attained the Real viewpoint, those 
[good or bad conduct] are all nothing but temporary states. 

The World, Without Substance! 

One remains engrossed in whichever phase of the self that 
arises. If one was a man in the past life and he has become a 
woman in this life, and if ‘we’ were to tell her this as it is, if 
‘we’ were to give her the understanding that, ‘You were a man 

 
[2.4] The Developing ‘I’ Is the Seer of the Temporary States 

325 

in the past life,’ even then she would not be ashamed of having 
become a woman, because she is immersed in that phase [as a 
woman]. That  is  how the world  is.  ‘We’  can See all this  in 
‘our’ Gnan. The kinds of effects people go through, ‘we’ can 
See all of those. 

Whichever  temporary  state  arises,  in  accordance  with 
that, a name is given. When one’s leg fractures, he is called 
lame. It is not as though his name is really ‘lame’! When one 
types,  one  is  called  a  typist.  These  temporary  states  are 
actually like a house made of cards; they collapse into nothing. 
Everybody tends to establish themselves in these temporary 
states. 

In whichever temporary state one gets involved, he keeps 
protecting that temporary state. One may have been free his 
entire life, but if he is put in prison in the last six months of 
his life, then he will claim, “I have become a prisoner, I am a 
prisoner.”  When  a  woman  gets  married,  she  prevails  in  the 
pleasure  of  being  a  happily  married  woman,  and  when  she 
becomes a widow, the miseries of being a widow arise. She 
will  claim,  “I  am  widowed.”  Hey  mortal  one,  you  had  also 
become  a  widow  in  your  past  life,  and  yet  you  became  a 
happily married woman again [in this life], did you not! You 
were a widow and then you became a happily married woman 
again.” Oh mortal  one, if this is  not  interference, then what 
else is it? 

The temporary states  change;  the Self remains  the very 
same  form  as  It  is.  No  changes  take  place  in  the  Self. 
Moreover,  they  [people]  even  forget.  The  quarrels  that  had 
taken place a day before are forgotten, and furthermore, today 
they  go  to  watch  a  movie.  You  would  know  that,  ‘Just 
yesterday, when I had gone there, the quarrel between the two 
was settled.’ And yet, today they have gone to see a movie! 

 
326 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

The entire world is without substance (polumpol). Yet it 
is correct, it is correct by the relative [viewpoint], whereas the 
Self is correct by the Real [viewpoint]. In this world, all the 
eternal elements are correct by the Real [viewpoint], and all 
the temporary states of the eternal elements are correct by the 
relative [viewpoint]. 

As Declared in Absolute Knowledge… 

The  relative  can  never  become  Real,  and  that  which  is 
Real  can  never  become  relative.  That  which  is  Real  is 
permanent and that which is relative is temporary; the two are 
simply not compatible. 

Questioner:  Dada,  this  entire  relative  form  that  has 
arisen,  the  one  we  call  ‘Chandubhai’,  it  arises  based  on  the 
temporary state within, does it not? 

Dadashri: Yes. Of course, it is nothing but a temporary 
state. What did you say? It is based on the temporary state? 
No, it is not like that. On the contrary, Chandubhai himself is 
a temporary state! This state has arisen out of ignorance. It has 
arisen  out  of  ignorance  of  the  Self,  out  of  vishesh  gnan 
(relative knowledge that has arisen due to the coming together 
of the two eternal elements of the Self and inanimate matter). 
It  will  go  away  with  nirvishesh  Gnan  (Knowledge  that  is 
beyond adjectives; the Self).  

The clarification that has not been able to be made since 
time immemorial as to, ‘What is without a beginning or an end 
(anaadi anant)?’; this clarification that has not been given so 
far, that ‘The world is without a beginning or an end,’ ‘we’ 
had to give that clarity. The original Real form as the Self is 
without a beginning or an end. The form as the living being 
lives  and  dies;  that  form  is  a  temporary  state.  The  one  that 
lives,  he  has  a  beginning  and  an  end  (aadi  ant).  The  state 
without  duality  [the  state  as  the  original  Self]  is  without  a 
beginning or an end. The state with duality (dwandva avastha; 

 
[2.4] The Developing ‘I’ Is the Seer of the Temporary States 

327 

dvait avastha) is the temporary state as a living being, and it 
has  a  beginning  and  an  end.  When  it  is  born,  that  is  the 
beginning (aadi) and when it dies, that is the end (ant), this is 
what ‘we’ have Seen and declared in ‘our’ keval Gnan. 

The temporary state of the self has been referred to as a 
living being, whereas that which is permanent is the Self. That 
which  lives  and  dies  is  a  living  being!  The  one  with  the 
awareness, ‘I want to live,’ also has the awareness, ‘I will die.’ 
That state is referred to as a living being. 

[Hence,] In the elemental form, a living being is without 
a  beginning  or  an  end.  In  the  non-elemental  form,  it  has  a 
beginning  and  an  end.  From  the  perspective  of  phases 
[temporary  states],  it  is  with  a  beginning  and  an  end.  Non-
elemental means from the perspective of phases. What are the 
states of a living being? Based on the kind of false attribution 
the developing I makes in a temporary state, that gives rise to 
another  temporary  state.  As  long  as  the  ego  exists,  it  is 
certainly going to falsely attribute itself. 

These  people  with  [relative]  viewpoints  take  on  false 
attributions for each and every one of their temporary states. 

The one who lives and dies is a living being, and the One 
who attains the immortal state is the Atma. The Atma is the 
Self, while a living being is the relative self. A living being is 
actually a temporary state.  

Ultimately, the Temporary State Comes to an End... 

Death  and  birth,  they  are  both  seen  due  to  illusion. 
[Actually] One is not seeing that; he is simply believing that. 
One  simply  believes,  ‘I  died’  and  ‘I  was  born’  and  ‘I  got 
married.’ Actually, in reality, it is not like that. In reality, He 
Himself is  in  the form  as  the Self.  But  it is  just that he has 
become entangled in the wrong belief of, ‘I am this’.  

 
328 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

An eternal element does not arise nor does it dissipate. It 
is  the  temporary  states  of  the  eternal  element  that  arise  and 
dissipate. When childhood prevails, at that time a senior age 
does not prevail. Once the youth age is reached, it means that 
it  is  no  longer  childhood.  All  the  temporary  states  keep 
changing. The temporary states keep changing constantly, but 
they  are  not  the  eternal  elements,  they  are  the  [temporary] 
states of the eternal elements. And this body that forms, it is 
indeed because of the illusion that prevails for you, that you 
believe, ‘This is my body.’ And the moment You become free 
of  this  illusion,  even  though  You  will  no  longer  receive  a 
[new]  body,  however,  the  temporary  states  will  definitely 
arise  after  that.  Meaning  that  the  phases  of  Knowledge  and 
Vision will arise. The moment something is Seen, the phases 
[of Knowing and Seeing] arise. When that thing leaves, the 
phases [of Knowing and Seeing that] diminish once again. So, 
the arising and the dissipation, all of that definitely continues 
happening. 

It is all those temporary states that ‘die’ [come to an end]. 
Will  winter  ‘die’  or  not?  Then,  summer  will  be  ‘born’. 
Similarly, the temporary states continue to arise and dissipate. 

The Language of the Lord Is Unique... 

The one who lives, is the one who dies; life is a temporary 
state, death is a temporary state. In the language of the Gnanis, 
be  it  the  anatma  (Pudgal;  inanimate  matter)  or  the  Self 
(Atma), neither of them ever dies. It is [simply] the temporary 
states that undergo dissipation. 

In  the  language  of  the  [common]  people,  one  suffers 
greatly  and  dies.  In  the  Lord’s  language,  no  one  ever  dies. 
What  must  the  Lord  be  Seeing  that  does  not  die?  All  these 
people  who  see  [others]  dying,  they  are  looking  at  the 
temporary state. A temporary state is always destructible, and 

 
[2.4] The Developing ‘I’ Is the Seer of the Temporary States 

329 

the Lord does not See the temporary state, He Sees the eternal 
element. 

There is no telling what  will happen tomorrow, so how 
can even a single minute be wasted in such a world? The body 
keeps  changing  from  one  moment  to  the  next,  [however] 
One’s Real form as the Self (Swaroop) does not change.  

For all those people who refer to the phase itself as ‘This 
is I’, for them, they should say that the self is the doer as well 
as the sufferer of karma. The One who Knows the phase [is 
the  Self],  such  that  ‘The  phase  is  underdeveloped,  he  is 
developed,  he  is  cunning,  he  has  bad  habits,  he  has  good 
habits, he is an agnani’; even if He is a Gnani, He Himself is 
a phase. The Self is not a Gnani; even the [state as a] Gnani is 
a phase. 

A saint prevails in the phase as a saint, an ascetic prevails 
in the phase as an ascetic, sages prevail in the phase as a sage, 
and a mahatma prevails in the phase as a mahatma.  

This is the Knowledge in the ocean of ignorance. Keep 

Seeing what sort of skills the phase possesses. 

Questioner: The virtues and the vices one has, they are 
effects. They are the effects of the causes that were brought 
forth [from the past life]. So then, this point had come up that 
these innumerable properties that the Self has, do they really 
have causes, or not? 

Dadashri:  No,  they  do  not  have  causes.  Where 
something is going to arise and come to an end, that is where 
causes  and  effects  are  applicable.  Causes  and  effects  are 
applicable to the temporary states, and they are not applicable 
to the eternal element. 

 
330 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Steadiness Attained Simply Upon Seeing That Which 
Is Steady! 

Questioner:  All  things  undergo  change;  what  do  ‘all 
things’ mean? Would it be considered to hold true if that thing 
remains the same in all three timespans [the past, the present 
and the future]? 

Dadashri: If the thing were to remain the very same, then 
you would get really fed up of it. Have you ever actually held 
onto one and the same thing? If one himself were to remain 
the very same [state all the time], then he would get fed up. If 
one’s wife were to remain the very same [state at all times], 
then he would get fed up. No matter what it is, one would get 
fed up if it were to remain the same [state at all times]. ‘The 
exact same thing will give happiness over and over again,’ on 
what  basis  has  this  been  said?  Each  and  everything  in  this 
world is constantly changing by its very nature. So how will 
you find the same exact thing in that? How will you seek out 
something that is always steady (sthir)?  

Questioner: I have asked You this question in order to 

seek out that which is steady. 

Dadashri: No, but where every eternal element indeed is 

constantly undergoing change, there … 

Questioner: The Self is steady, is It not? 

Dadashri: No, how can that ever be? Even it is constantly 
changing.  From  the  perspective  of  an  eternal  element,  It  is 
steady;  from  the  perspective  of  a  temporary  state,  it  is 
constantly  changing.  When  you  see  a  temporary  state,  you 
become startled, and when You see the eternal element [the 
Self], steadiness manifests. 

The  developing  I  itself  is  with  temporary  states, 
moreover those states are destructible. One keeps wandering 

 
[2.4] The Developing ‘I’ Is the Seer of the Temporary States 

331 

again and again in them. It is only after He Sees the original 
eternal element [the Self], that He becomes permanent.  

The intellect tries to make You believe that the temporary 
state is the Real form as the Self. So, at that time, if You recall 
Dada and say, “I am vitaraag (absolutely free of attachment 
and abhorrence),” then ‘Mrs. Intellect’ will back off. 

When the I (hu) falsely attributes a temporary state to be 
his own, it is like a mudstone falling [in water], which in turn 
gives rise to waves, ripples.  

What remains after attaining the pure Knowledge as the 
Self (Atma Gnan)? The answer is, to separate the temporary 
states and Know them. This temporary state [of the object to 
be Known] belongs to the eternal element that is not the Self 
(pardravya),  to  the  eternal  element  of  inanimate  matter, 
whereas  that  temporary  state  [of  Knowing]  belongs  to  Real 
Knowledge  [the  Self].  The  proportion  of  the  state  of 
illumination of the Knowledge is always in accordance with 
the  temporary  state  of  the  object  to  be  Known  (gneya). 
However, a demarcation between these two temporary states 
should  be  made.  In  this,  the  only  right  that  You  have  is  to 
simply Know the relationship of the Knower and the object to 
be Known (Gnata-gneya). Every single thought the [worldly-
interacting] self has had due to illusion, will go away only by 
Knowing  it  through  the  relationship  of  the  Knower  and  the 
object  to  be Known; otherwise, it will not.  That  is  because, 
that  thought  has  arisen  due  to  illusion;  nevertheless,  that 
thought has been ‘stamped’ [charged] in the presence of the 
[worldly-interacting] self. 

Dwell Steadfastly as the Self, Restless as the 
Temporary State… 

The entire world is dwelling steadfastly in the temporary 
states. If one goes to a lawyer, the lawyer will tell him, “You 
are my client.” So, he starts dwelling in the temporary state as 

 
332 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

the  client.  Oh,  mortal  one!  Dwell  steadfastly  as  the  Self 
(Swastha)! How can one who becomes avasthit (absorbed in 
the effects of a temporary state) ever dwell steadfastly as the 
Self?  

From  the  moment  one  enters  the  womb,  he  is  in  a 
temporary state. The moment one dwells as the I (hu), he is 
considered  a  temporary  state,  and  if  He  were  to  dwell 
steadfastly  as  the  Self,  then  He  is  the  absolute  Self 
simply  natural 
(Parmatma).  Temporary 
occurrences, which do not have a higher authority as a doer. 
‘We’ alone Know what those ‘natural occurrences’ are.  

states 

are 

If a mountain were to be reflected in a mirror, then would 
the mirror feel the weight of the mountain? In the same way, 
the Gnanis  are not  at  all affected by any temporary state of 
worldly life.  

That  which Knows, ‘All that which is  temporary is  not 
mine,’  is  Knowledge  (Gnan).  Once  all  the  phases  become 
completely  purified,  It  is  considered  as  infinite  Knowledge 
(anant  Gnan).  The  subtle  circumstances  are  all  nothing  but 
infinite  phases.  The  moment  they  become  purified,  One  is 
considered  to  be  an  anant  Gnani  (One  who  has  infinite 
Knowledge). 

If One were to try to Know all the phases, then how will 
there ever be an end to that? Instead, by Knowing only this 
much, ‘I am this and all these are phases,’ the [spiritual] work 
will definitely get done. 

With  respect  to  the  temporary  state  as  the  relative  self 
(vibhaavik  avastha),  attachment  and  abhorrence  exist  and 
with  respect  to  Its  inherently  natural  state  as  the  Real  Self 
(Swabhaavik  avastha),  It  is  vitaraag  (absolutely  free  of 
attachment and abhorrence). 

 
[2.4] The Developing ‘I’ Is the Seer of the Temporary States 

333 

Where Are ‘You’ Dwelling? 

By  becoming  established  in  a  temporary  state,  one 
becomes aswastha (in a state of restlessness; not steadfast as 
the  Self),  and  by  prevailing  in  One’s  own  Real  form  as  the 
Self (Swaroop), meaning by prevailing in the permanent, He 
becomes  steadfast  as  the  Self  (Swastha).  Have  you  seen 
restlessness? As long as you were Chandubhai, until then the 
restlessness definitely existed, and now You have come into 
the [state as the] pure Soul, meaning that You prevail as the 
Self, so there is steadfastness as the Self. 

As long as [you have the belief,] ‘I am Chandubhai,’ that 
is considered a temporary state. ‘I am a Patel’ is a temporary 
state,  ‘I  am  fifty  years  old,’  is  a  temporary  state,  ‘I  am  an 
executive  engineer,’  is  a  temporary  state;  these  are  all 
temporary states. One cannot dwell steadfastly [as the Self] in 
those temporary states. When people ask, “You are poised, are 
you not?” One would say,  “No, how can  I  be  poised?  I  am 
restless.” How would the one who has become established in 
a  temporary  state  be?  He  would  be  restless.  Constantly, 
without  even  missing  a  moment.  Whereas  if  One  were  to 
dwell as the Self (vastu), then He would remain steadfast as 
the  Self.  Whether  one  is  a  Prime  Minister  or  a  President, 
whoever he may be, he will be restless, constantly! 

Questioner:  Dada,  the  thing  is  that  no  effort  has  to  be 
made in order to remain in the restless state. We go towards 
dwelling  steadfastly  [as  the  Self],  we  remain  there  for  a 
moment, and then we revert to being in the restless state once 
again. This is the problem. 

Dadashri: Where is the problem in that? What is wrong 

with the restlessness? 

Questioner:  No,  we  want  to  go  towards  dwelling 

steadfastly [as the Self], we want to dwell there longer. 

 
334 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Dadashri: Well, for that, from the moment You firmly 
resolve to do so, You will be able to dwell steadfastly [as the 
Self]. 

in 

However  much  you  become  established 

these 
temporary states of the mind, speech and body, by that much 
you will remain restless; the inner suffering will constantly be 
burning. And if You were to dwell as the Self, as the elemental 
eternal form, then You will be able to dwell steadfastly [as the 
Self]. The temporary states are actually constantly  evolving; 
they are constantly flowing ahead. They come, they stay, and 
they leave. How can there be happiness and peace in them? 
Even  in  these  temporary  states,  You  actually  are  in  the 
elemental eternal form. Establish Yourself wherever You feel 
it  to  be  appropriate.  Any  living  being  cannot  be  without 
temporary states, not even for a moment. It is due to illusion 
that  the  developing  I  tends  to  believe  that  he  himself  is  the 
temporary state. The fact that a temporary state even arises is 
due to the mistakes [made in the past life]. 

People who are bound by the temporary states are unable 
to  even  enjoy  worldly  pleasures.  If  the  chit  had  become 
engrossed in some temporary state an hour ago, then the chit 
would remain there. Hence, the one bound by that temporary 
state feels that burden, and so, at the time of drinking tea, he 
ends up drinking it with that burden. 

People care more about that which is outside of the phase 
of  the  Self.  That  is  why  they  keep  wandering  around  in 
moorchha (a state of gross unawareness arising from illusory 
attachment). From those, some have developed [spiritually], 
and that is why they do not like to be in moorchha, but on the 
other hand, they are unable to realize the Self. So, day-by-day, 
the  phase  [as  the  non-Self]  becomes  thinner,  it  becomes 
subtle. As soon as the phase [as the non-Self] becomes thin, 
the  developing  I  is  no  longer  able  to  tolerate  it.  So  many 
thoughts will arise in him within just one hour! However, he 

 
[2.4] The Developing ‘I’ Is the Seer of the Temporary States 

335 

is  hung  in  limbo.  ‘We’  would  tell  him,  “Hey,  go  back,  get 
involved in the moha (illusory attachment) and dwell in  the 
thick phases [as the non-Self].” Those with thick phases are 
able  to  sleep  peacefully,  snoring  away,  whereas  those  with 
thin phases are not be able to sleep at all. 

People dwell in the temporary state itself. Meaning that, 
they have believed the ‘foreign’ [non-Self] to be the ‘home’ 
[Self],  and  that  is  the  cause  of  this  misery.  If  they  were  to 
believe the ‘home’ as home and the ‘foreign’ as foreign, then 
there would be no misery at all. 

Whichever temporary state one is in at any given time, he 
tends to believe that temporary state to be permanent (nitya) 
and  the  truth  (satya);  and  he  continues  to  be  entangled. 
Unnecessary entanglements, entanglements, entanglements. 

Those who are not worshipping (bhajana) the temporary 
state,  how  many  of  those  are  there?  The  monks,  the 
renunciates, all of them are worshipping none other than the 
temporary state. 

Even a Blink Is an Avastha! 

From the time one gets up in the morning until he goes to 
sleep at night, every activity is nothing but a temporary state. 
Every activity that takes place from birth to death, of the one 
who  possesses  a  physical  body  (dehadhaari),  [even]  those 
activities  that  we  cannot  see  and  even  those  that  we  do  not 
believe happen  due to  circumstantial  evidences,  all of those 
are temporary states indeed. 

However many [activities that] have a beginning and an 
end,  they  are  all  temporary  states.  There  is  no  telling  how 
many times they will take place. Even the blink of an eye is a 
temporary state. If you had to blink your eyes by yourself, then 
what would become of you? You would end up blinking two 
hundred times instead of sixty, that is how it is.  

 
336 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Questioner: What is the difference between a temporary 

state and an incident? 

Dadashri: Temporary states can be encompassed within 
an  incident,  but  temporary  states  cannot  encompass  an 
incident. 

[In  reality]  No  one  is  doing  anything.  When  someone 
showers  you with  flowers,  that is  your temporary state, and 
when  someone  throws  a  stone  [at  you],  that  too,  is  your 
temporary  state.  When  the  parmanu  of  flowers  come  forth 
from within, at that very instant, externally, the flowers will 
come and fall on you. And when the parmanu which are like 
stones come forth from within, then the stones will come and 
fall on you, even from outside. It will happen at the exact time. 

Is the Aham Temporary? 

The  moment  you 

like  a 

temporary  state, 

the 

circumstances (saiyog) will then come together.  

All  the  temporary  states  keep  changing,  no  temporary 
state  lasts  forever.  This  is  because  they  are  [subject  to] 
circumstances.  Moreover,  the  circumstances  are  such  that 
they dissipate by their inherent nature. 

When it comes together, it is a circumstance and when it 
dissipates,  it  is  discharge  (galan;  outflux).  The  eternal 
elements  cannot  be  seen  with  these  eyes,  [however]  all  the 
temporary states can be  seen. One does not  Know His own 
tattva  (eternal  element;  the  Self),  he  knows  the  temporary 
state. All temporary states come to an end. 

People’s  shape  may  change,  their  appearance  may 
change,  everything  may  change,  however,  nothing  new  is 
going to form, it is simply the temporary states that change. 
The temporary state and the developing I (pote) are not Seen 
as separate. The thoughts and the one thinking are not Seen as 
separate. As long as Knowledge of the Self is not attained, you 

 
[2.4] The Developing ‘I’ Is the Seer of the Temporary States 

337 

will  see  them  as  one  in  everyone.  The  Self  is  definitely 
separate. If the temporary states did not change, then it would 
not be known as worldly life at all. 

Questioner: Dada, You said that by the coming together 
of  the  eternal  elements,  all  the  temporary  states  keep 
changing.  So,  the  ‘I’  (aham)  that  arises  because  of  those 
temporary states, that ‘I’ must also be changing, right? Would 
it be greater or lesser in some people, at that time? 

Dadashri: It is like this; those temporary states that arise, 
they in fact dissipate immediately. Whereas the ‘I’ and the rest 
that have arisen, the vyatirek guna, they have actually arisen 
due to the coming together of these two eternal elements [of 
the Self and inanimate matter]. Those in turn give rise to the 
ego  [the  aham,  the  ‘I’,  which  then  remains  until  absolute 
Knowledge manifests].  

The Temporary States Keep Changing From One 
Moment to the Next! 

The Self is trikaalvarti (prevails in all three time periods: 
the  past,  the  present,  and  the  future).  The  bhaav  is  not 
trikaalvarti,  it  is  avasthavarti  (prevails  for  as  long  as  the 
temporary  state  lasts).  That  which  prevails  as  long  as  the 
temporary state lasts is not Chetan (the Self). That which is 
not avasthavarti is Chetan. 

Even if you do not let go of these cars, houses, land, right 
now, you will eventually have to let go of them one day, when 
you leave [die]. It is only worth doing Sat Chit Anand. [It is 
worth  letting  go  of  the  illusory  attachment  for  temporary 
things and instead worship the Self.] 

The  properties  do  not  change,  the  phases  change.  The 
milk  may taste sweet [today], but  it will taste sour the next 
day. After that, you will not even like the smell of it. Each and 
every parmanu keeps changing from one moment to the next. 

 
338 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

When the cottonseed plant that one planted sprouts two 
leaves,  he  becomes  excited.  But  until  it  is  sold,  there  are 
infinite temporary states that will arise for it, whether good or 
bad. Ultimately, it may even yield a very good crop, or snow 
may even fall. Similarly, every moment in this worldly life is 
full of temporary states. The temporary states keep changing 
from one moment to the next. 

This boy is sleeping. If he were to be insulted in front of 
everyone  in  this  temporary  state,  he  would  not  have  any 
problem, and the other temporary state in  which there is no 
problem  with being insulted is  the Self-realized  state. What 
remain are the temporary states in between these two states. 
The entire interference is only in the sense-oriented temporary 
states.  As  it  shows  [the  divisiveness  between]  ‘mine’  and 
‘yours’, so the moment someone insults you in the slightest, a 
problem arises. 

Nothing at all happens outside of the temporary states of 
the mind, speech, and body. The one who suffers the effect is 
the one who has to understand. The temporary state should be 
cleared with equanimity.  

In the same way, if a sticky temporary state arises, then 
You should get out of it quickly. A temporary state is a non-
living  entity  (nishchetan  chetan).  ‘You’  are  the  pure  Self 
(shuddha Chetan). ‘You’ are to See the temporary state. It is 
because  you  get  attached  to  the  temporary  state  that  you 
become  miserable.  And  that  is  why  you  do  not  experience 
bliss. 

At night, when you are about to sleep, you visualize your 
business, so you are in turn giving rise to problems. When you 
give  rise  to  problems,  they  are  all  nothing  but  temporary 
states. 

Addition and subtraction continues to occur on its own, 
naturally. So in that, mortal one, why are you accumulating? 

 
[2.4] The Developing ‘I’ Is the Seer of the Temporary States 

339 

Anything  beyond  the  normal  necessities  should  not  be 
accumulated. The sense organs are temporary states, and they 
are  a  result  of  the  eternal  elements  coming  together.  The 
eternal  elements  cannot  be  Seen  through  them.  Whatever 
‘mile’ [of spiritual development] he has arrived at, that is what 
he  can  see.  That  ‘mile’  is  his  temporary  state.  This  entire 
world  is  nothing  but  simple  ‘mathematics’  [additions  and 
subtractions], there is no ‘mathematics’ in the Self. 

The natural law is that no temporary state will last longer 
than forty-eight minutes. The minute hand of the clock will 
keep turning from minute to minute, that is not the clock, but 
it  is  its  temporary  state.  This  world  is  such  that  it  is  not 
possible  to  remain  in  one  temporary  state  for  longer  than 
forty-seven  minutes  and  fifty-nine  seconds.  By  dwelling  in 
these temporary states, what would manifest as an effect? It 
would result entirely in a life-form in the human realm, or the 
celestial  realm,  or  the  animal  or  plant  realm,  or  the  hellish 
realm.  It  is  only  if  One  has  Knowledge  of  the  Self,  that  a 
solution [liberation] can come about. If there is even just one 
percent discrepancy in the Knowledge of the Self, there is no 
telling where one may be ‘cast away’. ‘We’ [mahatmas] are 
actually  here  to  nikaal  (clear  with  equanimity)  the  prakrut 
swabhaav (state as the non-Self complex), whereas the world 
is referring to the prakrut swabhaav as, “This is mine, this is 
mine.”  On  the  contrary,  We  [mahatmas]  prevail  as  the 
Knower and Seer of that. 

‘We’ Have Experienced the Temporary States of the 
Entire World 

The  Lord  had  said  to  dwell  steadfastly  as  the  Self,  but 
instead these poor people have become restless by dwelling in 
the temporary states. The entire world is taking delight in the 
temporary states and are remaining engrossed only in them. 
That is why they have to wander around in 8.4 million life-

 
340 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

forms (yoni) to ‘suffer’ [experience] those temporary states. 
The  renunciates,  the  ascetics,  those  who  have  renounced 
worldly life and live off alms, the monks and nuns, the high-
ranking  Jain  monks  and  preachers,  as  well  as  the  scripture 
writers, all of them indeed remain engrossed in the temporary 
state. 

‘We’ have ‘tasted’ [experienced] all the temporary states. 
Not  a  single  one  remains  to  be  ‘tasted’.  ‘We’  have  even 
wandered  about  as  an  elephant,  intoxicated  with  pride 
(madamast).  Moreover,  the  intoxicated  pride  (mada)  would 
‘drip’ down. Additionally, the elephant’s offspring is called a 
‘Madaniyo’ [In Gujarati]. I have seen its offspring. I thought, 
‘How large can its offspring be!’ When we [humans] have a 
baby,  it  is  so  small,  whereas  an  elephant’s  offspring  is  so 
large!  A  baby  elephant!  Hey  Mandanbhai,  where  do  I  even 
begin speaking about  you? A baby elephant! I even went to 
the extent of checking that life-form out, a baby elephant. At 
that time, I thought, ‘Let me at least go and check it out. The 
one who is greedy for this world will not go to this extent on 
account of his greed. However, ‘we’ do not have greed, so let 
‘us’  at  least  go  and  check  it  out.’  The  world  should  be 
explored, should it not! 

‘Our’ honour is  in  ‘our’ realm (lok). ‘Our’ realm is  the 
permanent  realm  [of  the  Self].  These  people  are  actually 
dwelling in temporary states. These people do not have ‘our’ 
honour. ‘We’ do not dwell in any temporary state. The people 
of the world are actually such that they dwell in the temporary 
state as a body, in the temporary state as a prakruti. 

If  one  becomes  engrossed  in  a  temporary  state  that  he 
likes, then he binds [karma of] that which he likes. And if he 
does  not  become  engrossed  in  a  temporary  state  that  he 
dislikes, then he still binds [karma of] that which he dislikes 
[for those who do not have Self-realization]. 

 
[2.4] The Developing ‘I’ Is the Seer of the Temporary States 

341 

In spite of dwelling in the temporary state, if one becomes 
engrossed in worshipping ‘us’, he will still get his [spiritual] 
work done, and he will attain salvation. 

‘One’ can give liberation to others only if He has become 

liberated from each and every temporary state.  

As long as the Gnani Purush does not put His stamp on 
it, this state [as the Self] cannot arise. This state as the Self 
will  result  in  the  Siddha  avastha  (the  state  as  an  absolutely 
liberated  Soul).  Otherwise,  one  would  end  up  doing  things 
contrary to the Self all day long. 

The Chit Gets Stuck in the Temporary State… 

Whichever  temporary  state  that  is  destroyed  by  being 
offered in the ‘sacrificial fire’ cannot cause any ‘wounds’ [that 
which the chit goes to repeatedly]. How are ‘wounds’ caused? 
It  is  through  the  awakened  awareness  (laksh).  Therefore,  in 
whichever temporary state your awakened awareness delves, 
there a ‘wound’ will be inflicted, and the temporary state in 
which  your  awakened  awareness  does  not  delve,  that 
temporary state is obliterated in the yagna (a Hindu ritual in 
which things are offered into a sacrificial fire) of awakened 
awareness  as  the  Self  (jagruti).  The  rule  of  awakened 
awareness is such that, wherever the awakened awareness gets 
established, it keeps going to the same place again and again. 
Everything may change, but the awakened awareness will not 
change. After ‘we’ instill in You the awakened awareness as 
the  Self  (alakhnu  laksh;  the  awakened  awareness  of  that 
which is very difficult to attain), then the awakened awareness 
no longer remains in the temporary state and so, it gets cleared 
with equanimity (nikaal). The more the ‘wounds’ one incurs, 
that very same temporary state will hover around you over and 
over  again,  like  a  housefly.  One  may  ask,  “Why  am  I  not 
experiencing that [the awakened awareness as the Self]?” The 
answer is, the number of ‘wounds’ inflicted by the awakened 

 
342 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

awareness [delving in temporary states], they have not healed 
yet.  These  ‘wounds’  are  subtle  wounds  in  the  language  of 
Gnan. Many ‘wounds’ are such that pus keeps oozing out of 
them. As all those ‘wounds’ start to heal, You will gain the 
experience  [of  the  awakened  awareness  as  the  Self].  In  the 
relative, it is such that for one ‘wound’ to heal, the awakened 
awareness  has  to  be  lifted  from  there  and  established  in 
another place, then that ‘wound’ will start to heal. However, a 
new ‘wound’ will be inflicted where the awakened awareness 
has been re-established. 

In  whichever  phases  you  have  greatly  suffered  pain  or 
pleasure  (vedan)  in  the  past  life,  those  will  come  in  greater 
amounts in this life; at that time, the chit (subtle component of 
vision  and  knowledge  in  the  inner  functioning  instrument 
called  antahkaran) remains  stuck there.  It  remains there for 
hours on end, several gunthana (a period of 48 minutes) can 
go by. For the phases that have become thin, the chit will not 
remain stuck in  such phases for very long.  It  gets stuck but 
then the separation arises [quickly].  

If  thoughts  are  arising  such  that  the  chit  is  remaining 
stuck in a particular temporary state, then You should say to 
them, ‘Your relation and my relation is just that of an object 
to be Known and a Knower. I no longer want to get ‘married’ 
to you.’ The moment You say that, that temporary state, those 
thoughts, will leave. 

One gets ‘married’ [becomes engrossed] out of his own 
wrong understanding, and that is why he has to endure it. The 
moment  one becomes engrossed, worldly life sticks to  him. 
Only certain temporary states cause  the chit to get stuck [in 
them]. When both, bitter or sweet temporary states cause the 
chit  to  get  stuck,  at  that  time  You  should  remain  in  Your 
awakened awareness [as the Self] and say, ‘This [temporary 
state] can never be mine,’ so then it will go away.  

 
[2.4] The Developing ‘I’ Is the Seer of the Temporary States 

343 

In 

for 

[obtaining] 

liberation,  no 
the  certificate 
consideration  is  given  to  any  activity  being  done.  The  only 
consideration is vitaraagata (a state in which there is a total 
absence  of  attachment  and  abhorrence).  What  is  dakho 
(interference)? In any temporary state that arises right now, if 
the  chit  gets  stuck  in  that  for  a  little  while,  that  is  an 
interference.  No  matter  what  kind  of  temporary  states  have 
arisen during this jatra (pilgrimage), ‘we’ have never become 
stuck in any of them. ‘We’ do not let the temporary state last. 
If ‘we’ were to let it last for three minutes, then there would 
be a queue of all of them. Do you understand this? For ‘our’ 
mahatmas,  vitaraagata  prevails,  but  it  does  not  prevail  in 
exactness. 

Each and Every Temporary State, Offered in the 
Sacrificial Fire… 

In  the  entire  world,  not  a  single  temporary  state  leaves 
after being destroyed, rather it leaves after sowing a ‘seed’ [a 
cause].  And  the  karmic  account  of  all  the  ‘seeds’  that  have 
been sown are considered during the last forty-five minutes 
[of life] that remain and depending on the type of ‘seed’ that 
has been sown the most, one will go there in the next life. 

People  of  the  world  sow  about  a  hundred  thousand 
‘seeds’ in every temporary state, be it of the mind, the speech 
or the body. In that, about 3,000 are of ‘wheat’ [valuable], and 
the  rest  are  of  ‘weeds’  [unhelpful].  Whenever  a  temporary 
state arises, a ‘seed’ is definitely sown, but after One attains 
Gnan,  the  temporary  states  keep  getting  cleared  away  with 
equanimity  (nikaal),  they  continue  to  be  obliterated  in  the 
‘sacrificial fire’.  

The  temporary  states  will  continue  to  discharge.  ‘You’ 
have to make sure that the charging does not take place. The 
Lord says, “Prevail in the temporary state that has come about 

 
344 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

at that moment, and do not worry about the temporary state 
that has arisen and gone.” 

The poor temporary states are naïve. When it arrives, tell 
it, ‘Madam, you have come? Now you may leave and let the 
next one come.’ 

When  someone  hurls  abuse  at  you,  then  the  temporary 
state within spoils. If the Self were to Know that temporary 
state  [as  separate],  then  that  temporary  state  would  be 
destroyed. However many temporary states are Known, those 
many  are  destroyed.  However  many  remain,  those  many 
would have to be erased later. If the mind has spoilt, then You 
can tell the mind once again, ‘Do pratikraman and erase it.’ 
Whatever is written in a letter can be erased as long as it has 
not been posted out. 

The temporary states are in fact changing from moment 
to  moment!  In  the  state  of  ignorance  of  the  Self,  ‘seeds’ 
continue  to  be  sown  in  each  and  every  temporary  state. 
Whereas with Gnan, in the state of awakened awareness, each 
and  every  temporary  state  is  destroyed.  Worldly  life  is  not 
bound again. 

This Gnan of ‘ours’ is such that it purges sexuality. When 
a  [sexual]  thought  arises  within,  or  when  such  a  temporary 
state arises, then it is immediately offered [in the ‘sacrificial 
fire’ of awakened awareness]. 

This is because One will definitely seek out the culprit for 
his  own  temporary  state.  Each  and  every  temporary  state  is 
destroyed  by  being  offered  [in  the  ‘sacrificial  fire’  of 
awakened awareness]; this is the ultimate spiritual yagna. To 
‘obliterate’ means it is burnt off completely. As one became 
engrossed happily and willingly in a temporary state, it means 
that  an  interference  took  place,  which  in  turn  causes  new 
designs and sows new seeds. If you accuse anyone even in the 

 
[2.4] The Developing ‘I’ Is the Seer of the Temporary States 

345 

slightest,  then  you  will  have  to  face  its  consequences.  The 
consequences of accusing anyone are very grave. 

To clear with equanimity (sambhaave nikaal) means that 
the temporary states have to be offered [in the ‘sacrificial fire’ 
of awakened awareness]. This is the ultimate grand yagna. 

If You remain constantly aware of the temporary states of 
the  mind,  the  speech,  and  the  body  and  obliterate  them  [by 
offering  them]  into  the  grand  yagna  [by  remaining  as  the 
Knower and Seer], then the phases that are stuck to the Self 
will  begin  to  separate  and  the  developing  ‘I’  will  start 
becoming  the  Real  form  as  the  absolute  Self  (Parmatma 
swaroop) to that extent. 

Inner Satisfaction and Closure, Without a Shadow of 
Doubt, in Every Temporary State! 

All the temporary states of this world are infinite indeed, 
however  the  temporary  states  of  the  mind  are  infinite 
multiplied  by  infinite.  The  One  who  escapes  from  them 
becomes free, therefore the Knowledge that brings about inner 
satisfaction and closure to the mind [to the temporary states of 
the  mind],  that  Knowledge  is  authentic.  Such  spectacular 
Knowledge  has  emerged  that  would  make  even  time  feel 
abashed, and that too, It is scientific. This Knowledge is such 
that It will give inner satisfaction and closure even amidst the 
infinite  upon  infinite  temporary  states  of  the  mind.  People 
become perplexed in the temporary states of the mind, and so 
they say that God is confusing them. ‘Our’ Knowledge Itself 
is such that attachment and abhorrence never arise. 

Now,  those  temporary  states  [that  other  people  talk 
about], they  are not  resolvable. What  has been explained in 
‘our’ [Science]? ‘In each and every temporary state, there is 
inner  satisfaction  and  closure,  without  a  shadow  of  doubt.’ 
Meaning  that,  ‘our’  Knowledge  is  such  that  in  every 
temporary state, there is nothing besides inner satisfaction and 

 
346 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

closure, that too, without a shadow of doubt. What is it like in 
this  world?  The  moment  a  person’s  pocket  gets  picked,  he 
becomes  depressed;  inner  satisfaction  and  closure  do  not 
prevail.  And  if  someone  showers  him  with  flowers,  he 
becomes elevated. Depression and elevation continue to take 
place in all these temporary states. One would get elevated if 
he were to feel delighted. 

Questioner: In the absence of a vitaraag Purush (a Self-
realized  One  who  is  absolutely  free  from  attachment  and 
abhorrence), why is it that one becomes restless in temporary 
states?  If  You  are  not  present,  then  we  become  restless, 
whereas in Your presence, we are able to dwell steadfastly as 
the Self. 

Dadashri:  You  would  definitely  dwell  as  the  Self  in 
[‘our’]  presence.  When  you  are  restless,  it  is  actually  your 
intellect that stirs you up, and as long as the intellect is present, 
the ego also exists. It is this intellect which is with the ego that 
makes you restless. Once it comes to an end, there is no reason 
at  all  for  you  to  become  restless.  Or  else,  if  you  sit  with  a 
Gnani Purush all day long, then too, there no longer remains 
a reason for you to become restless. 

Questioner:  In  the  worldly  sense,  it  is  not  physically 

possible to do that, is it? 

Dadashri:  No,  even  if  it  is  not  possible,  yet  however 
much you can take advantage of that, it is good. Otherwise, by 
gradually clearing the temporary states with equanimity, when 
your  intellect  and  ego  come  to  an  end,  then  automatically, 
openly,  the  completely  pure  state  of  dwelling  steadfastly  as 
the  Self  (Swasthata)  alone  will  remain.  As  One  is  dwelling 
constantly in the state as the Self, hence Swasthata. 

To  dwell  steadfastly  in  a  temporary  state  is  itself 
aswasthatapanu; to dwell steadfastly in the state as the Self 
(Swa)  is  Itself  Swasthapanu.  Why  are  people  restless?  It  is 

 
[2.4] The Developing ‘I’ Is the Seer of the Temporary States 

347 

because they are constantly dwelling in the temporary state. 
These people believe these temporary states of ignorance of 
the Self to be their own. They perceive, ‘I am that indeed,’ in 
the temporary state. The Gnani Purush Sees and Knows the 
temporary state [to be separate from the Self].  

Questioner: Dada, if We are experiencing the bliss of the 
Self from within, then is that considered a thought or is that 
considered a temporary state? 

Dadashri: It is a temporary state. 

Questioner: So then should We hold on to that temporary 
state or should We let go of it and continue Seeing the other 
temporary states? 

Dadashri: That [temporary state] will in fact go away on 
its own. It will go away even if You try to hold on to it. It will 
go  away  even  if  You  do  not  hold  on  to  it.  Instead,  tell  that 
temporary state, “Do come again, and give us the benefit.” 

Hey, Get Your Spiritual Work Done! 

One has not at all Known the properties of the Self. The 
One who Knows all the properties of the Self is called a bhed 
Vignani  (a  spiritual  Scientist  who  has  the  experiential 
Knowledge  to  separate  the  Self  and  the  non-Self).  These 
properties of the Self, all of them have not been revealed to 
the public, [however] all of them have manifest in ‘us’. ‘We’ 
have been dwelling as the Self for the last twenty-eight years 
[since  attaining  spontaneous  Self-realization  in  1958].  ‘We’ 
are not the owner of this body. 

Questioner: Up until now, no one has ever said anything 

like this before. 

Dadashri:  Well,  this  is  actually  Akram  Vignan  (the 

spiritual Science of the stepless path to Self-realization)! 

 
348 

Aptavani-14 (Part 1) 

Questioner:  Everyone  is  attaining  all  sorts  of  levels 
[spiritually], however they have not reached this far [as You]. 

Dadashri: That is why it is worth getting Your [spiritual] 
work done. That is precisely why ‘we’ keep telling everyone, 
at the top of ‘our’ voice, “Get Your [spiritual] work done, get 
Your [spiritual] work done, get Your [spiritual] work done.” 



 
 
Spiritual Glossary 

Gujarati Word 

   English Translation 

aacharya 

-  high-ranking  Jain  monks;  Self-realized 

aadhaar 

aadi 

aadi ant 

aakash 

aarambh 

aaropit bhaav 

aartadhyan 

aashayyukt 

aashray 

abhaav  

abhimaan 

abhimaani 

achetan 

achetan paryay 

adharma 

adharmastikaya  

masters 

- 

support 

-  beginning 

-  with a beginning and an end  

- 

the eternal element of Space 

-  beginning of any action; the beginning of 

the effect 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

a  false  attribution  of  the  belief  ‘I  am 
Chandubhai’ 

adverse internal state of being that hurts 
the self 

full of designs  

shelter 

the belief of I dislike ‘something’; feeling 
of dislike 

excessive 
possessions 

pride 

due 

to  material 

-  one having excessive pride with my-ness 

- 

- 

- 

- 

the 

non-Self; 

inanimate  matter; 
inanimate; lifeless 

inanimate phases  

lack of rightful action 

the eternal element that supports inertia 

adhogami 

-  proclivity to descend or regress to a lower 

life-form 

adhogati 

- 

to regress to a lower life-form 

 
 
aghati karma 

Agna 

agnan 

agnani 

agnanta 

agnya 

aguru-laghu 

aham 

ahambhaav 

ahamkaar 

ahamkaari 

ahamkaari gnan 

ahampanu 

aishwarya 

ajagruti 

ajampo 

ajanma swabhaav 

akaami 

akarta 

akashay 

Akram Vignan 

akriya 

-  karma that are not destructive to the state 
as the Self;  karma that is  not capable of 
obstructing  or  preventing  the  intrinsic 
properties of the pure Soul 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

five  principles 
awareness as the Self in Akram Vignan  

that  preserve 

the 

ignorance of the Self; relative knowledge 

the  one  who  has  not  attained  Self-
realization 

ignorance of the Self 

the energy of ignorance 

to not increase or decrease  

the ‘I’ 

the state as the ‘I’ 

egoism; ego 

an egoistic person 

egoistic knowledge  

the sense of ‘I am’ 

-  divinity 

- 

- 

- 

lack of awakened awareness 

restlessness  

the  state  of  freedom  from  bondage  of 
rebirth  

-  without desire 

- 

- 

- 

a non-doer 

kashay free 

the spiritual Science of the step-less path 
to Self-realization 

-  without  activity;  disconnected  from  any 

activity; in the state as a non-doer 

 
 
akriyata 

alakhnu laksh 

alok 

amal 

-  being in the state as the non-doer 

- 

- 

the awakened awareness of that which is 
very difficult to attain 

the region in the universe  where there is 
only the eternal element of Space, and no 
other eternal elements 

- 

influence 

anaadi anant 

-  without a beginning or an end  

anaadi swabhaav 

- 

the inherent nature that is present forever, 
permanently, eternally 

anaasakt 

anand 

anant bhaag haani 

anant bhaag vruddhi 

anant Darshan 

anant Gnan 

anant Gnani  

anant guna haani  

anant guna vruddhi  

anatma 

anitya 

ant 

antahkaran  

Antaratma 

anu 

anupchaarik  

-  beyond all attractions 

-  bliss 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

the least divisional decrease 

the least divisional increase 

infinite Vision  

infinite Knowledge 

the One who has infinite Knowledge 

a decrease by the greatest factor 

an increase by the greatest factor 

the non-Self; the pudgal 

temporary 

end 

the mind, intellect, chit and ego complex 

the  interim  state  of  the  Self;  an  interim 
state  of  the  Self,  beginning  with  the 
conviction  of,  ‘I  am  pure  Soul’  and 
ending with the absolute experience 

an atom 

that which happens without any effort 

 
 
anupchaarik vyavahaar 

-  worldly interaction that happens without 

any effort 

anupcharit 

- 

that which happens without any effort 

anupcharit vyavahaar 

-  worldly interaction that happens without 

anvay guna 

anyatva 

Aptasutra 

Aptavani 

any effort 

- 

intrinsic  properties;  the  properties  that 
constantly 
the  eternal 
remain  with 
element 

-  disconnection 

- 

- 

an  aphorism  procured  from  Dadashri’s 
speech 

a  series  of  fourteen  volumes  compiled 
from Dadashri’s speech 

aroopi 

-  without form; formless 

aroopi tattva 

- 

the Self; the formless eternal element 

aruchi 

asang 

asangi 

asankhyaat bhaag haani 

asankhyaat bhaag 
vruddhi  

asankhyaat guna haani  

asankhyaat guna vruddhi  

ashubha  

-  disinclination 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

free of association with the mind, speech 
or body 

free from association with each other 

a smaller divisional decrease 

a small divisional increase 

a decrease by a small factor 

an increase by an even greater factor 

inauspicious; bad 

ashuddha chetan 

-  worldly self 

astitva 

aswabhaav-bhaav 

aswastha 

- 

- 

- 

existence 

intents that do not naturally belong to the 
Self 

in a state of restlessness; not steadfast as 
the Self 

 
 
aswasthatapanu 

atattva 

Atma 

atma 

Atma Darshan  

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

to dwell steadfastly in a temporary state 

the non-elemental form; that which is in 
the form of causes 

the Self; the Soul 

the relative self 

the  realization  that  the  Self  is  distinct 
from the body 

Atma Gnan 

-  Self-realization; Knowledge of the Self 

Atma parinaam 

avaran 

avastha 

avastha drashti  

- 

- 

- 

- 

the properties of the Self; the effect as the 
Self 

a veil of ignorance over the Self 

a  temporary  state;  a  circumstance;  a 
situation 

the  wrong  belief  of  ‘I  am  Chandubhai’; 
relative viewpoint 

avastha swaroop 

- 

the temporary form  

avasthavarti 

-  prevails for as long as the temporary state 

avasthit 

avastu 

avgaahanroop 

avinabhaav 

avinashi 

avyavahaar rashi  

ayushya karma 

bahirbhaav 

lasts  

absorbed  in  the  effects  of  a  temporary 
state 

that which is not an eternal element 

a form where they are living in the same 
space without becoming a compound 

inseparable 

indestructible; permanent 

a  state  of  uncategorized  souls  that  have 
not yet entered worldly interaction 

life-span determining karma 

a state that is not inherently One’s own; a 
state that is external to the Self 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

 
 
bahirmukhi atma 

bahirmukhi pad 

bahyakaran  

bebhaanpanu 

bhaan 

bhaav 

bhaav maran  

bhaavak 

bhaavkarma 

bhaavna 

bhaavnidra 

Bhagwan swaroop 

bhajana 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

the worldly-interacting self; the self that 
is going towards the relative 

the state in which the I prevails as ‘I am 
Chandubhai’ 

the  external  instruments  of  the  mind, 
speech, and body 

a state of gross unawareness 

experiential awareness; awareness as the 
Self 

inner  intent;  feelings;  sentience;  belief; 
state of being of the Self; the belief of I 
like ‘something’ 

the death of the natural  state  as the  Self 
and the birth of the extra intent of ‘I am 
Chandubhai’ 

that which causes bhaav to arise 

charging of karma; charge karma; karma 
which is charged through wrong belief 

intention; discharge intent 

lack of awareness of who the Self is 

the real form as God; an embodiment of 
divinity 

-  worship; to go nearer and nearer through 
the mind, speech and actions to that which 
is being worshipped; 

bhed Gnan 

-  Knowledge  that  separates  the  Self  from 

the non-Self  

bhed Vignan 

-  Science  that  separates  the  Self  from  the 

bhed Vignani  

non-Self 

- 

the 
a  spiritual  Scientist  who  has 
experiential  Knowledge  to  separate  the 
Self and the non-Self 

bhogavavu 

- 

experiencing 

 
 
bhogave 

bhokta 

bhoktabhaav 

bhrant bhaav 

bhrant purusharth  

bhranti 

bhrantiras 

bodha 

Brahma 

brahmachari 

Brahmin  

buddhi 

buddhi kriya 

Chaitanya 

Chaitanya shakti  

Chaitanyata 

chanchal 

charam sharir 

charam shariri 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

experiencing; suffering 

the sufferer  

the state as the sufferer 

an illusory state; the first level of vibhaav 

illusory effort; relative effort 

illusion 

the  wrong  belief  of  ‘I  am  Chandubhai’ 
that perpetuates the illusion that, ‘This is 
mine, and I am the doer’ 

sacred teaching or explanation 

the creator god of the Hindu sacred triad; 
the creator 

celibate 

a member of the highest-ranking caste in 
Hinduism 

intellect 

activity of the intellect  

the Self; the Knower and Seer 

the energy of Knowing and Seeing 

the property of Knowing and Seeing 

active 

the  final  body  that  a  living  being  has 
before attaining ultimate liberation 

the  One  having  a  final  body  before 
attaining ultimate liberation 

Charitra 

-  Conduct as the Self 

charitra moha 

-  discharge illusory attachment 

Chetan 

- 

the eternal element of the Self; pure Soul; 
the  property  to  Know  and  See;  the 
original Self 

 
 
chetan 

Chetan bhaav 

chetan bhaav 

Chetan tattva 

Chetandhara 

chit 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

living;  animate;  the  developing  I;  the 
worldly-interacting self 

the  state  as  the  Self;  to  prevail  as  the 
Knower and Seer 

the beliefs of, ‘I am Chandubhai,’ ‘This is 
mine,’  ‘I  am  the  doer,’  and  ‘I  am  the 
sufferer of pain and pleasure’ 

eternal element of the Self 

the track of the Self  

component  of 

subtle 
knowledge 
in 
instrument called antahkaran 

the 

vision 
and 
inner  functioning 

dakho 

- 

interference 

darasal Atma 

-  Real Self  

Darshan 

darshan 

-  belief;  understanding;  the  property  of 

Vision; right Vision as the Self 

-  wrong belief; wrong understanding 

Darshanavaran karma 

-  veils over the Vision of the Self; Vision 
obscuring veils; Vision obscuring karma 

dehadhaari 

dehadhyaas 

dharma 

dharmadhyan  

-  one who possesses a physical body 

- 

- 

the belief of ‘I am the body’ 

functional  properties;  rightful  action; 
religion; true nature of a thing; function 

-  virtuous  internal  state  of  being  that 
prevents  one  from  hurting  oneself  or 
others 

dharmastikaya  

- 

the eternal element that supports motion 

dhruv 

dhyan 

Dradhprahari 

-  permanence 

- 

- 

internal state of being  

a  barbaric  attacker  mentioned  in  the 
scriptures 

 
 
Drashta 

drashti 

drashya  

dravya 

dravya drashti 

dravya swaroop 

dravyakarma 

dukh 

Dushamkaal 

dvait avastha 

dwandva avastha 

dwesh 

galan 

gatisahayak 

ghati karma  

ghee 

Gnan 

gnan 

Gnan kriya 

gnan kriya 

Gnan prakash 

Gnan swaroop 

-  Seer 

-  belief;  vision;  viewpoint; seeing; having 

a belief; perspective 

-  object to be Seen 

- 

- 

- 

- 

elemental matter of an eternal element; an 
the 
element; 
eternal 
indestructible 
elemental form; physical evidences 

the perspective of the elemental matter 

the form as the elemental matter 

subtle discharging karma 

-  pain; misery 

- 

- 

- 

- 

aka Kaliyug, the current era of time cycle 
characterized by lack of unity in thought, 
speech and action 

the state with duality  

the state with duality  

abhorrence 

-  discharge; outflux 

- 

the eternal element that supports motion 

-  karma that are destructive to the state as 
the Self; karma which veil or obscure the 
essential nature of the pure Self 

- 

clarified butter 

-  Knowledge of the Self 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

relative knowledge 

the activity of the Self to Know and See 

ritualistic activities deemed to be helping 
towards liberation 

illumination as Knowledge of the Self 

the Real form as Knowledge; the Self 

 
 
Gnanantaray karma 

-  karma obstructing the Knowledge of the 

Gnanavaran 

Gnani 

Gnani Purush 

Gnata 

Gnata-Drashta 

Gnata-Drashtapanu 

Gnayak 

Gnayak swabhaav 

gneya 

gotra karma 

guna 

gunadharma 

gunthana 

guru-laghu 

hu 

Hu 

hupanu 

Hupanu 

jada 

Self  

-  Knowledge  obscuring  karma;  veils  over 
the  Knowledge  of  the  Self;  Knowledge 
obscuring veils 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

the  enlightened  One  who  can  enlighten 
others 

the  enlightened  One  who  can  enlighten 
others 

the Knower 

the Knower and Seer 

the function as the Knower-Seer 

the continuous Knower  

inherent  nature  of  being 

the 
continuous Knower 

the 

the object to be known  

status determining karma 

-  properties 

- 

intrinsic  properties  that  have  a  specific 
function 

-  one  of  the  fourteen  stages  of  spiritual 
development; a period of 48 minutes 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

to increase and decrease  

the I; the developing I 

the ‘I’; the original Self 

the  prevalence  of  the  I;  the  sense  of  ‘I-
ness’ 

the prevalence of the ‘I’ 

the  eternal  element  of  inanimate  matter; 
also  known  as  pardravya  or  Pudgal 
Parmanu; insentient; inanimate; lifeless  

 
 
jada kriya 

jada tattva 

jadadhara 

jagrat Atma 

jagruti 

jalebi 

janmajanma 

jatra 

jeev 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

the activities of the inanimate 

the eternal element of inanimate matter 

the track of inanimate matter 

the awakened Self 

the awakened awareness as the Self 

an Indian sweet dish 

incessant cycle of birth after birth 

-  pilgrimage 

- 

living  being;  embodied  soul;  worldly 
being 

jeevatma  

-  mortal  being;  the  self  that  possesses 

jovapanu 

kaal 

Kaal 

kapat 

kapha 

karans  

- 

- 

karma 

the function of Seeing  

time used in the relative; relative time 

the eternal element of Time; Real Time 

-  deceit 

-  with phlegm 

-  mechanisms; activities 

karma vargana 

-  karmic particles  

kartabhaav 

kartapanu 

kashay 

kef 

keval 

keval Gnan 

kevali 

khichdee  

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

the state as a doer 

the sense of doership 

inner enemies of anger, pride, deceit and 
greed 

intoxication of the ego  

absolute; absolutism 

absolute Knowledge 

the Ones who have absolute Knowledge 

a  staple Indian  dish  made  from rice  and 
lentils 

 
 
  
Kramik path 

kriya 

kriyakari 

kriyavaan 

krodh 

krodhak 

kshayak samkit 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

traditional step-by-step path to attain the 
Self 

activity 

‘effective’;  such  that  it  can  procure 
results on its own; such that it can take on 
the effect and give result 

to be active by its inherent nature 

anger 

that which causes one to get angry 

the  permanent  conviction  of  the  right 
belief, ‘I am pure Soul’ 

kshayopsham 

-  partial annihilation of karma 

kshetra 

lafru 

laksh 

lobh 

lobhak 

lok 

Lord Krishna 

Lord Mahavir 

maan 

maani 

mada 

madamast 

mahatmas 

- 

- 

location; space that is occupied 

something  that  possesses  a  person;  an 
affair 

- 

awakened awareness  

-  greed 

- 

- 

that which causes greed to arise 

the universe; plane of existence; realm 

-  one  of  the  most  widely  revered  of  all 
Indian  divinities,  He  has  evolved  from 
being  an  ordinary  human  into  becoming 
God [the absolute Self] 

- 

the 
the 
twenty-fourth  Tirthankar  of 
current half-cycle of time who introduced 
the five great vows, or Mahavrat 

-  pride 

- 

- 

- 

- 

a pride-filled person; full of pride 

intoxicated pride 

intoxicated with pride  

the Self-realized Ones in Akram Vignan 

 
 
malikipanu 

mamata 

marapanu 

matiGnan 

- 

- 

- 

a sense of ownership 

‘my-ness’ 

the sense of ‘my-ness’ 

-  Knowledge  regarding  the  Self  that  has 

been digested and is in experience 

maya 

-  deceit; ignorance of One’s  Real form as 

the Self; illusion 

mayajaal 

-  web of illusory attachment 

mechanical chetan 

-  mechanical 

self; 

the 

self 

that 

is 

mishrachetan 

mishrasa 

mechanical but appears to be living 

- 

- 

the I with wrong belief that arises as when 
the  eternal  elements  of  the  Self  and 
inanimate  matter  come 
into  close 
proximity with each other 

charged parmanu ready to give effect; the 
giving off effect of prayogsa 

mithya 

-  deluded; illusory 

mithya darshan 

- 

the wrong belief 

mithya drashti 

-  deluded vision; the wrong belief of ‘I am 

mithyatva  

mithyatva bhaan 

mithyatva darshan 

moha 

mohaniya 

mohaniya karma  

Chandubhai’ 

the wrong belief of ‘I am Chandubhai’ 

the deluded awareness of the belief of ‘I 
am Chandubhai’  

the deluded vision 

illusory attachment 

illusory attachment; intoxication 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

-  karma  that  induces  illusory  attachment; 
veils that induce illusory attachment 

moksha 

moksha swaroop 

- 

- 

liberation 

the Real form as liberation 

 
 
mokshadata 

mokshadata Purush 

- 

- 

the grantor of liberation 

the  One  who  has  come 
liberation 

to  bestow 

moodhatma 

-  deluded self; the one with the belief, ‘I am 

mool Atma 

mool bhaav 

mool Swaroop 

moorchha 

moorchhit  

mukta Purush 

mukti 

murti 

naam karma 

naamdhaari 

naam-roop 

naimittik 

naimittik bhaav  

naimittik karan 

nashvant 

nigod 

Nijavastha 

nikaal 

nimit  

Chandubhai’ 

- 

the original Self 

-  original inherent nature;  

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

the Real form as the original Self  

a state of gross unawareness arising from 
illusory attachment 

to be in a state of gross unawareness due 
to illusory attachment 

the liberated One 

freedom from the cycle of birth and death 

-  physical representation 

-  name-form determining karma 

-  one who possesses a name 

- 

- 

- 

- 

the form that has a name 

through evidences 

the state as an evidentiary doer 

the instrumental cause  

-  destructible 

- 

- 

- 

- 

the lowest form of life which is not yet in 
worldly nomenclature 

the state as the Self  

settle; clear 

an  evidentiary  doer;  the  one  who  is 
instrumental  in  the  process;  an  active 
evidence 

 
 
nimit-naimittik 

-  based on evidences that are instrumental 

nirahamkaar 

niralamb Atma 

nirantar parivartan 

nirdosh 

nirjeev 

nirlep 

nirvaasnik 

nirvana  

nirvikaari 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

in the process 

egoless 

the absolutely independent Self 

constantly bringing about a change 

flawless; faultless 

lifeless; discharge 

that  which  cannot  be  anointed;  non-
smearable; 
unaffected; 
absolutely 
unanointed 

-  desireless  

- 

- 

final liberation 

the one who is free from sexual impulses 
and passions 

nirvishesh Gnan  

-  Knowledge that is beyond adjectives; the 

Nishchay 

Nishchay Atma  

Nishchay buddhi  

Nishchay Chetan 

Nishchay drashti  

nishchetan chetan  

nitya 

niyati  

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

Self 

the Self; the Real 

the Real Self 

the intellect that does not interfere 

the Real Self 

the Real viewpoint; right belief of ‘I am 
the Self’ 

a  non-living  entity;  an  energized  entity 
that  appears  to  be  living  but  is  in  fact 
lifeless 

eternal; unchanging; permanent 

the natural progression of evolution of a 
soul; the level of spiritual development of 
a  soul  as  it  progresses  naturally  on  the 
track of evolution 

Om 

-  Real viewpoint 

 
 
paap 

-  demerit karma 

panch mahabhoot 

par 

par swabhaav 

par swabhaav-bhaav 

parbhaav 

pardravya 

parinaam 

parinaamik  

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

the  five  elements  namely  earth,  water, 
fire, air and space  

the non-Self 

the inherent nature that is of the non-Self  

the state as the non-Self 

the state as the non-Self; a state which is 
not one’s own; an intent that is not one’s 
own 

the eternal element that is not the Self 

effect; result; properties 

in the resultant state; ‘effective’ such that 
they will procure results on their own 

parivartansheel 

-  bringing  about  a  change;  constantly 

parkshetra 

parmanand 

Parmanu 

Parmatma 

Parmatma pad 

Parmatma swaroop 

parparinaam 

parparinati  

parsatta  

changing 

the realm of the non-Self 

eternal bliss 

indivisible  and 
smallest,  most 
the 
indestructible  particles  of 
inanimate 
matter;  the  eternal  element  of  inanimate 
matter 

the absolute Self 

the state as the absolute Self  

the Real form as the absolute Self  

the results of the non-Self; an effect of the 
non-Self 

to  believe  ‘I  am  doing’  in  what  are  the 
results of the non-Self 

the authority of another entity; subject to 
external circumstances 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

 
 
parupadhi 

-  problems 

that  have  been 

induced 

paryay 

paryay drashti 

paudgalik 

externally by the non-Self 

-  phase 

- 

the wrong belief; to believe that You [the 
Self] are the phase that has arisen 

-  of  the  non-Self;  worldly;  such  that  it 
undergoes puran-galan; belonging to the 
non-Self complex 

paudgalik bhaav  

paudgalik gnan  

paudgalik guna 

- 

- 

- 

a worldly state 

relative knowledge 

the attributes of the non-Self complex  

paudgalik paryay 

-  worldly  phases;  the  phases  as  the  non-

pitta 

polumpol 

potapanu 

pote 

power atma 

power chetan  

pradesh 

Pragnya 

prakash 

Self complex 

-  bilious 

-  without substance 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

the ‘I-ness’ that has come into conduct 

the developing I; the worldly-interacting 
self; a combination of Gnan and agnan 

the  relative  self  that  has  been  powered 
with  life  energy  in  the  presence  of  the 
Self;  meaning  the  developing  I;  the 
energized  self;  also  known  as  power 
chetan 

the  relative  self  that  has  been  powered 
with  life  energy  in  the  presence  of  the 
Self;  meaning  the  developing  I;  the 
energized self; also known as power atma 

region; location; spatial unit; the smallest 
amount  of  space  that  a  single  Parmanu 
occupies on the Self 

the direct liberating light of the Self 

light;  illumination;  to  give  off  light;  to 
illuminate 

 
 
prakrut swabhaav  

prakruti 

- 

- 

the state as the non-Self complex 

the non-Self complex 

prasavdharmi  

-  having  a  potential  to  give  rise  to  many 

pratikraman 

pratishtha 

pratishthit atma  

pratiti 

prayogsa 

pruthaktva 

pudgal 

Pudgal 

pudgal bhaav 

pudgal parinaam 

Pudgal Parmanu 

from one 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

a  three  step  process  of  reversal  from 
hurting  another  living  being  through 
thought,  speech  or  action  by  confessing 
the  mistake 
the  Lord  within 
(alochana),  asking  for  forgiveness  for  it 
(pratikraman) and resolving to not repeat 
that mistake (pratyakhyaan) 

to 

instillation; instillation of the life energy 
which in turn  gives rise to a  new causal 
body 

the relative self; the developing I 

conviction 

the  charging  phase  of  parmanu;  also 
known as vidharmi pudgal 

-  non-separability 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

the non-Self complex of input and output; 
body 

the eternal element of inanimate matter 

the inherent nature as the pudgal 

the effect as the non-Self 

the 
smallest,  most 
indestructible  particles  of 
matter 

indivisible  and 
inanimate 

punarjanma 

- 

rebirth  

punya 

puran 

puran-galan 

-  merit karma 

- 

- 

charging; influx  

charging  and  discharging;  influx  and 
outflux 

 
 
purna 

purnahuti 

purnatva 

purush 

Purush  

Purusharth  

raag 

raag parinaam 

raag-dwesh 

rajas 

Ramleela  

raudradhyan 

roopi 

ruchi 

Sadguru  

sadhan 

sahaj 

sahaj bhaav 

saiyog 

sajeev 

sakriya 

sakriyapanu 

samaarambh 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

complete 

the complete state; the absolute state 

the absolute state as the Self 

the relative self; the developing I 

the Self 

the Real spiritual effort to progress as the 
Self; the Real spiritual effort to prevail as 
the Self 

attachment 

the resulting attachment 

attachment and abhorrence 

the attribute of being passionate 

-  dramatized 

representation  of  Lord 

Rama’s life story 

- 

an  adverse  internal  state  of  being  that 
hurts the self and others 

-  having a form 

- 

inclination; subtlest liking 

-  Self-realized spiritual teacher 

- 

tools 

-  natural and spontaneous  

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

the natural state 

circumstances;  the  coming  together  of 
circumstances and the Self 

living; charge 

active 

activeness 

implementing  in  action;  bringing  it  into 
effect 

 
 
samadhan 

samadhi 

samay 

sambhaave nikaal 

samipya 

samipyabhaav 

samkit  

sampurna 

sampurna drashti 

sampurna prakash 

samrambh 

samsaran 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

closure and inner satisfaction 

a blissful state that comes about when one 
becomes  free  from  mental,  physical  and 
externally induced suffering 

the smallest, most indivisible unit of time 

to clear with equanimity  

close proximity 

the engrossment that arises when the two 
eternal  elements,  the  Self  and  inanimate 
matter, are in close proximity 

the right belief of ‘I am pure Soul’ 

complete 

complete perspective  

complete illumination 

-  origin; the cause 

- 

constantly  bringing  about  a  change; 
constantly undergoing change; constantly 
revolving around each other 

samsaran marg 

-  path of natural and spiritual evolution  

Samvarpurvak nirjara 

samyak 

samyak Darshan 

samyak drashti 

sangdosh 

sanjog 

sankalp-vikalp  

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

the  discharging  of  karma  goes  on 
constantly  without  the  inflow  of  new 
karmic matter 

right; towards the Real 

the understanding that takes one towards 
the  Real;  the  right  Vision  of  ‘I  am  pure 
Soul’ 

the right belief of ‘I am pure Soul’ 

the fault of association with the non-Self 

circumstances 

all the relative ‘I-ness’ and ‘my-ness’ that 
stem 
‘I  am 
the  belief 
from 
Chandubhai’ 

that 

 
 
sankhyaat bhaag haani  

sankhyaat bhaag vruddhi  

sankhyaat guna haani  

sankhyaat guna vruddhi  

sanmukh 

sansaar 

sansaar bhaav 

sansaari atma 

sansarg dosh 

sanskaar 

Sarvagnya 

Sat 

satsang 

satta 

sattva 

satya 

shakti 

shaashwat 

shraddha 

shubha 

shuddha 

shuddha ahamkaar 

shuddha Chetan 

shuddha upayog 

Shuddhatma 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

the greatest divisional decrease 

the greatest divisional increase 

to decrease by the least factor 

to increase by a big factor 

to prevail as the Self  

-  worldly life 

-  worldly state; the state as the worldly self 

- 

- 

the worldly self 

the fault of engrossment that arises when 
the  two  eternal  elements  coming  into 
close proximity with each other 

-  karmic impressions 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

the  Knower  of  all  eternal  elements;  the 
omniscient One  

eternal 

spiritual discourse 

authority 

the attribute of being virtuous 

truth 

energy 

eternal 

faith 

auspicious; good 

the pure; the Self 

the purified ego 

the pure Self; the pure Soul 

the pure applied awareness as the Self  

the pure Soul 

 
 
shukladhyan 

shunya 

Siddha 

Siddha avastha  

Siddha gati 

Siddha Kshetra  

Siddha Lords  

Siddha sthiti 

Siddhalok 

siddhant 

siddhant bodha 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

an internal state of being that renders the 
constant awareness of ‘I am pure Soul’ 

zero 

absolutely  liberated  Souls  who  have 
completely  ended  the  cycle  of  birth  and 
death; absolutely liberated state 

the state as an absolutely liberated Soul 

realm  of  the  absolutely  liberated  Souls; 
also  known  as  Siddhalok  and  Siddha 
Kshetra 

the  location  at  the  crest  of  the  universe 
where  all  absolutely 
liberated  Souls 
reside 

the  absolutely  liberated  Souls  who  have 
become completely free from the cycle of 
birth and death 

an absolutely liberated state 

the  realm  of  the  absolutely  liberated 
Lords;  also  known  as  Siddhagati  and 
Siddha Kshetra 

incontrovertible 
principle 
accomplishes the ultimate goal 

that 

the  sacred 
regarding the incontrovertible principle 

teaching  or  explanation 

siddhantik 

- 

irrefutably in principle  

siddhantik Gnan 

-  Knowledge  which 

is 

irrefutable 

in 

skandha 

sthir 

Sthitisahayak 

sukh 

Swa 

principle 

an aggregate of two or more Parmanu 

steady 

the eternal element that supports inertia 

- 

- 

- 

-  pleasure; bliss 

- 

state as the Self 

 
 
Swa swabhaav bhaav 

Swabhaav 

Swabhaav 

swabhaav parinaam 

Swabhaav-bhaav 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

the state as the inherently natural Self in 
which there is full manifestation of all Its 
properties  

inherent nature 

the inherently natural state as the Self 

effective  inherent  nature;  the  resultant 
state 

the  intents  that  naturally  belong  to  the 
Self; inherently natural state as the Self 

swabhaavik 

-  natural; naturalness 

Swabhaavik avastha 

Swabhaavik bhaav 

- 

- 

the  inherently  natural  state  as  the  Real 
Self 

the state that is inherently  natural to the 
Self 

swabhaavik dharma  

- 

the true nature of a thing 

swabhaavik Gnan 

-  Knowledge  in  its  inherent  nature;  the 
original  Knowledge;  Knowledge  of  the 
Self; Real Knowledge 

swabhaavik guna 

swabhaavik paryay 

- 

- 

the properties that are inherently natural 

a  natural  phase; 
inherently natural Self 

the  phase  as 

the 

swabhaavik Pudgal 

-  pure  Pudgal  Parmanu;  the  element  of 

inanimate matter 

swabhaavik sukh 

- 

the natural bliss of the Self  

Swabhaavmay  

swachchhand  

swadharma  

Swakshetra 

Swaparinaam  

Swaroop  

-  within Its own inherent nature 

- 

following one’s own intellect in spiritual 
matters 

-  one’s original individual function 

- 

- 

- 

the realm as the Self  

the  effect  as 
individual effect or properties 

the  Self;  One’s  own 

the Real form as the Self; One’s own form 
as the Self  

Swaroop jagruti 

- 

the awakened awareness as the Self 

 
 
Swastha 

Swasthapanu 

Swasthata 

swayam kriyakaari 
Vignan 

Tamas 

tankotkirna 

tanmayakaar  

tattva 

tattva drashti 

tattva Gnan 

tattva swaroop 

tattvik Vignan 

teukaya  

Tirthankar 

trikaalvarti 

tripadi 

udaseen bhaav 

udaykarma 

upadaan 

upadhi 

upadhi swabhaav 

- 

- 

- 

steadfast in the state as the Self  

to dwell steadfastly in the state as the Self  

the  state  of  dwelling  steadfastly  as  the 
Self  

- 

a Science that brings results on its own 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

the attribute of being dark or wicked 

immiscible 

engrossed 

eternal element; the Self 

the elemental Vision; the right belief of ‘I 
am pure Soul’; the Real viewpoint 

-  Knowledge of the eternal elements 

- 

- 

elemental form 

elemental Science 

-  one-sensed  mobile  or  immobile  living 
beings whose body is in the form as fire 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

the absolutely enlightened Lord who can 
liberate others 

that  which  prevails  in  all  three  time 
periods:  the  past,  the  present,  and  the 
future 

the  three  pronouncements  of  genesis, 
dissipation and permanence 

a state of neutrality  

the unfolding of karma 

the level of one’s spiritual development 

an  externally  induced  problem  and  its 
resultant suffering 

the  tendency  to  assume  that  which  has 
been induced externally to be One’s own 
state 

upadhi swaroop 

- 

to become the form as the sufferer 

 
 
upadhibhaav 

- 

the belief of ‘I am the sufferer’; to believe 
‘I am the sufferer’ of the effects arising in 
another  entity;  to  believe  that  which  is 
happening 
to  be 
happening to oneself 

to  another  entity 

upayog 

upchaar 

- 

applied awareness; applied awareness as 
the Self  

-  visible effort or planning 

upchaarik vyavahaar 

-  worldly  interactions  for  which  visible 

urdhvagami  

urdhvagati  

urja 

utpaat 

utpatti 

vaasna 

vastu 

vastutva 

vayu 

vedan 

vedana 

effort or planning is needed 

the proclivity to ascend or rise to a higher 
life-form 

to rise to a higher life-form 

energy 

- 

- 

- 

-  genesis; beginning; creation 

-  genesis 

-  desire  

- 

- 

eternal element; the Self 

the Knowledge about what the Self is and 
what It is not 

-  gaseous 

- 

- 

suffering of pain or pleasure 

sensation of pain  

vedaniya karma 

-  pain and pleasure inducing karma 

vede 

vibhaav 

- 

- 

to suffer  

third 

intent;  a 

extra 
identity  with 
completely new properties that arises due 
to  the  coming  together  of  the  eternal 
elements of the Self and inanimate matter; 
a  distinct  entity  with  its  own  properties; 
identification with that which is not one’s 
own;  same  as  vishesh  bhaav,  vibhaavik 
bhaav; deviated from its inherent nature; 
the  wrong  belief  of  ‘I  am  Chandubhai’; 
the state as the relative self 

 
 
vibhaav avastha  

- 

the  temporary  state  that  has  arisen  as  a 
result  of  the  two  eternal  elements  of  the 
inanimate  matter  coming 
Self  and 
together 

vibhaav dasha 

vibhaav gnan 

vibhaav karma 

-  unnatural state 

- 

- 

relative knowledge that has arisen due to 
together  of  two  eternal 
the  coming 
elements 

the karma that is not inherently natural to 
the Self 

vibhaav swaroop 

-  unnatural form 

vibhaav-bhaav 

vibhaavi 

vibhaavik 

vibhaavik avastha 

vibhaavik bhaav 

vibhaavik gnan 

vibhaavik guna 

- 

the  state  as  the  relative  self;  the  intent 
that, ‘I am Chandubhai’ 

-  unnatural 

-  not original or inherent,  but new arising 
out  of  proximity  with  another  element; 
deviated 
inherent  nature; 
its 
unnatural 

from 

-  unnatural 

phases; 
temporary state as the relative self 

unnatural 

state; 

- 

- 

- 

a  third  identity  with  completely  new 
properties  that  arises  due  to  the  coming 
together  of  the  eternal  elements  of  the 
Self and inanimate matter; also known as 
visheshbhaav, vibhaav 

specific  worldly  knowledge;  relative 
knowledge  that  has  arisen  due  to  the 
coming 
two  eternal 
elements of the Self and inanimate matter; 
also known as vishesh gnan 

together  of  the 

completely  new  properties  of  a  third 
entity that arises as a result of the coming 
together  of  two  eternal  elements  of  the 
Self and inanimate matter; also known as 
vyatirek guna 

 
 
vibhaavik parinaam  

vibhaavik paryay 

vibhaavik pudgal 

- 

- 

- 

completely  new  effect  of  a  third  entity 
that  arises  as  a  result  of  the  coming 
together  of  two  eternal  elements  of  the 
Self and inanimate matter 

an unnatural phase 

the non-Self complex of input and output 
that  arises  as  a  result  of  the  coming 
together of two eternal elements, the Self 
and  inanimate  matter;  same  as  mishrasa 
parmanu 

vibhaavik sukh  

-  pleasures that are not inherent to the Self 

vidharma 

vidharmi 

vidharmi pudgal 

vidhi 

Vignan  

Vignan swaroop 

Vignanmay Atma 

vikaar 

vikaari 

vikaari prakruti 

vikalp 

- 

- 

- 

an additional function; deviation from the 
original function 

to  display  an  additional  function;  to 
deviate from the original function 

charged  parmanu;  same  as  prayogsa 
parmanu  

-  prayers that increase the awareness of the 

Self 

-  Science  of  all  that  is  eternal;  spiritual 
Science;  Science;  absolute  Knowledge; 
the absolute Self 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

the Real form as Science; the Real form 
as absolute Knowledge; the absolute Self 

the  Self  that  is  nothing  but  Science;  the 
absolute Self 

sexuality 

abnormal; unnatural; one who indulges in 
sexual impulses 

a  prakruti  full  of  sexual  impulses  and 
passions 

the  belief  of  ‘I  am  Chandubhai’  and  all 
the relative ‘I-ness’ that stems from it; the 
false notion of ‘I am this’ 

vikalp bhaav  

- 

sense of the false notion that ‘I am this’ 

vikrut 

-  unnatural; distorted 

 
 
vikrut atma  

vikrut pudgal  

vikruti 

vimukhpanu 

vinash 

vinashi 

viparinaam 

viraat swaroop 

viruddh parinaam 

viruddhbhaav 

- 

the worldly-interacting self 

-  parmanu  that  have  deviated  from  their 
original  form;  same  as  vikaari  pudgal, 
vikaari parmanu, vibhaavik parmanu and 
vibhaavik pudgal 

-  unnatural characteristics 

-  prevalence in the state as the non-Self  

-  dissolution 

-  destructible; temporary 

- 

- 

- 

- 

a  completely  new  effect  that  arises  as  a 
result  of  the  coming  together  of  two 
eternal elements of the Self and inanimate 
matter; also known as vishesh parinaam, 
vibhaavik parinaam 

the real form of the One whose own ego 
has exhausted and can take away the ego 
of others; the Akram Gnani 

an effect that is contrary to the effect as 
the Self 

a state that is contrary to the state as the 
Self 

viruddhbhaavi 

-  one having a state contrary to the state as 

vishay 

vishesh 

vishesh dharma 

vishesh gnan 

vishesh guna 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

the Self 

sensual pleasures  

extra; additional; completely new 

an additional function 

specific  worldly  knowledge;  knowledge 
is  not  worth  knowing;  relative 
that 
knowledge  that  has  arisen  due  to  the 
coming 
two  eternal 
elements of the Self and inanimate matter; 
also known as vibhaavik gnan 

together  of  the 

a  completely  new  property  of  a  third 
entity that arises with the coming together 
of the two eternal elements of the Self and 
inanimate matter 

 
 
vishesh gunadharma 

vishesh parinaam 

vishesh swaroop 

visheshbhaav 

visheshbhaavi 

visheshbhaavi pudgal 

vishrasa 

vitaraag 

vitaraag dharma  

vitaraag Lords  

vitaraag Purush  

vitaraagata 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

completely  new  properties  with  specific 
functions 

a  completely  new  effect  that  arises  as  a 
result  of  the  coming  together  of  two 
eternal elements of the Self and inanimate 
matter;  also  known  as  viparinaam, 
vibhaavik parinaam 

a completely new form 

a  third  identity  with  completely  new 
properties  that  arises  due  to  the  coming 
together  of  the  eternal  elements  of  the 
Self  and  inanimate  matter;  an  assumed 
identification with that which is not One’s 
own;  assumed  identification  with  ‘I  am 
Chandubhai’;  also  known  as  vibhaav, 
vibhaavik bhaav 

taken on a completely new form 

the  pudgal  that  has  blood,  bones,  flesh 
etc.; the pudgal that has deviated from its 
original  inherent  nature;  the  non-Self 
complex of input and output 

-  Parmanu that exist in the pure phase 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

absolutely  free  from  attachment  and 
abhorrence 

the religion prescribed by the  absolutely 
detached Lords, which is at 360 degrees, 
is  impartial,  incorporates  all  viewpoints, 
and does not hurt anyone else’s viewpoint 
or religion 

enlightened  Ones 
the 
attachment and abhorrence 

free 

from 

a Self-realized One who is absolutely free 
from attachment and abhorrence 

a state in which there is a total absence of 
attachment and abhorrence 

vruddhi 

-  development 

 
 
vyatirek guna 

- 

completely  new  properties  of  the  self 
namely  anger,  pride,  deceit,  and  greed; 
completely  new  properties  of  the  third 
entity  which  arises  when  the  eternal 
elements of the Self and inanimate matter 
come  together;  also  known  as  vibhaavik 
guna 

vyavahaar  

-  worldly interaction; the relative 

vyavahaar atma 

-  worldly-interacting self 

vyavahaar drashti 

vyavahaar rashi  

vyavahaar-roop 

vyavasthit 

vyavasthit shakti 

vyay 

yagna 

yoni 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

the relative viewpoint; wrong belief of ‘I 
am Chandubhai’ 

a state where living beings have worldly 
into 
nomenclature  and  have  entered 
worldly 
worldly 
nomenclature 

interaction; 

the form that is worldly; the worldly form 

the 

regulator; 
scientific 
circumstantial  evidence;  to  revert  to  its 
natural form 

result  of 

the natural energy that brings together the 
scientific circumstantial evidences to give 
result 

-  dissipation; coming to an end; destruction 

- 

a Hindu ritual in which things are offered 
into a sacrificial fire 

- 

life-forms 



 
 
 
Akram Vignan Books of Dada Bhagwan in English

1.  Adjust Everywhere
2.  Anger
3.  Aptavani - 1
4.  Aptavani - 2
5.  Aptavani - 4
6.  Aptavani - 5
7.  Aptavani - 6
8.  Aptavani - 8
9.  Aptavani – 9
10.  Aptavani – 14 Part 1
11.  Aptavani – 14 Part 2
12.  Autobiography of Gnani Purush A.M.Patel
13.  Avoid Clashes
14.  Brahmacharya : Celibacy Attained With Understanding
15.  Death : Before, During and After...
16.  Flawless Vision
17.  Generation Gap
18.  Harmony in Marriage
19.	 Life	Without	Conflict
20.  Money
21.  Noble Use of Money
22.  Non-Violence
23.	 Pratikraman	:	The	Master	Key	That	Resolves	All	Conflicts

(Abridged & Big Volume)

24.  Pure Love
25.  Right Understanding to Help Others
26.  Science of Karma
27.  Science of Speech
28.  The Current Living Tirthankara Shree Simandhar Swami
29.	 Simple	and	Effective	Science	for	Self-Realization
30.  The Essence of All Religion
31.	 The	Fault	Is	of	the	Sufferer
32.  The Guru and the Disciple
33.  The Hidden Meaning of Truth and Untruth
34.  The Practice of Humanity
35.  Trimantra
36.  Whatever Has Happened Is Justice
37.  Who Am I?
38.  Worries
The monthly English ‘Dadavani’ magazine is available to download on
https://satsang.dadabhagwan.org/dadavani/

 
Contacts

Dada Bhagwan Foundation

India :
Adalaj 
(Main Center) 

:   Trimandir, Simandhar City, Ahmedabad-Kalol Highway,
    Adalaj, Dist.: Gandhinagar - 382421, Gujarat, India.
    Tel : + 91 79 35002100, +91 9328661166-77
    Email : info@dadabhagwan.org

Bangalore 
Delhi 
Kolkata 
Mumbai 

:  +91 95909 79099
:  +91 98100 98564
:  +91 98300 93230
:  +91 93235 28901

Other Countries :

Argentina 

:  Tel:  +54 9 11 58431163
  Email: info@dadabhagwan.ar

Australia 

:  Tel: +61 402179706
  Email: sydney@au.dadabhagwan.org

Brazil 

:  Tel: +55 11999828971
  Email: info@br.dadabhagwan.org

Germany 

:  Tel: +49 700 DADASHRI (32327474)
  Email: info@dadabhagwan.de

Kenya 

:  Tel: +254 79592 DADA (3232)
  Email: info@ke.dadabhagwan.org

New Zealand  :  Tel: +64  21 0376434

  Email: info@nz.dadabhagwan.org

Singapore 

:  Tel: + 65 91457800
  Email: info@sg.dadabhagwan.org

Spain 

UAE 

UK 

:  Tel: +34 922302706
  Email: info@dadabhagwan.es

:  Tel: +971 557316937
  Email: dubai@ae.dadabhagwan.org

:  Tel : +44 330-111-DADA (3232)
    Email : info@uk.dadabhagwan.org

USA-Canada :   Tel : +1 877-505-DADA (3232)

    Email : info@us.dadabhagwan.org

Website : www.dadabhagwan.org

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
